PART IV.  CONTEMPORARY AND APPLIED PERSPECTIVES 

Contents 

ix 

16. 

Central American Migration and the Shaping of Refugee Policy 

Maria Cristina Garcia 

347 

17.  Central American Transmigrants: 

Migratory Movement of Special Interest to Different Sectors 
within and outside Mexico 

Rodolfo Casillas-R. 

364 

Interrogating Managed Migration's Model: 

18.  A Counternarrative of Canada's Seasonal Agricultural Workers Program 

Kerry Preibisch 

377 

19.  1867 and All That ... : 

Teaching the American Survey as Continental North Amen can History 

. 

. 

Angelika Sauer and Catherine O'Donnell 

391 

About the Contributors 

399 

Index 

401 

viii  Contents 

6.  Independence and Interdependence: 

Caribbean-North American Migration in the Modern Era 

Melanie Shell-Weiss 

174 

7·  Migration to Mexico, Migration in Mexico: 

A Special Case on the North American Continent 

Delia Gonzalez de Reufels and Dirk Hoerder 

188 

8.  The Construction of Borders: 

Building North American Nations, Building a Continental 
Perimeter, 18gos-1920s 

Angelika E. Sauer 

210 

g.  The United States-Mexican Border as Material and Cultural Barrier 

Omar S.  Valerio-]imenez 

228 

PART HI. COMPLICATING  NARRATIVES 

10.  Migration and the Seasonal Round: 

An Odawa Family's Story 

Sus an E. Gray 

253 

11.  Market Interactions in a Borderland Setting: 

A Case Study of the Gila River Pima of Arizona, 1846-1862 

Dan Killoren 

264 

12.  Paying Attention to Moving Americans: 

Migration Knowledge in the Age of Internal Migration, 1930s-1970s 

james N. Gregory 

277 

13.  The Black Experience in Canada Revisited 

Sarah-jane (Saje) Mathieu 

297 

14.  Circumnavigating Controls: 

Transborder Migration of Asian-Origin Migrants 
during the Period of Exclusion 

Yukari Takai 

313 

15.  Migration and Capitalism: 

The Rise of the U.S.-Mexican Border 

John Mason Hart 

333 

cHAPTER  ONE 

Mexican Immigration from 

t02000 

Jaime R.  Aguila and Brian Gratton 

The study of Mexican immigration to the United States has been au courant 
since the start of the twentieth century, when government officials on both 
sides of the border, concerned about the status of labor conditions, began in(cid:173)
vestigating cross-border movements. Even at this early date, each nation rec(cid:173)
. ognized the growing interdependence. Economic and human exchange grew 
still more across the century, and the constant flow of Mexican immigration 
had more than economic effects, becoming part and parcel of domestic 

After a  brief review of contemporary immigration conditions within the 
United States, this chapter uses new research sources to study the period from 
late nineteenth century to the first half of the twentieth. It begins by ex(cid:173)
.v•<•uuu5 how Mexico became the primary sending nation of immigrants to the 
States and how this affected the demographic profile of the American 

Southwest. The Mexican perspective on these demographic events is then ana(cid:173)

a view often ignored in treatments of Mexican  immigration. Mexican 
public policy sought to address the causes of a massive exodus of the country's 
working-age population. Officials initially believed that the loss of a signifi(cid:173)
cant portion of its population had a negative impact on Mexico's strength as a 
nation. From the late 18oos to the 1930s officials tried to dissuade the exodus 
and to encourage the return of those already in the United States. Such objec(cid:173)
tives continue to manifest themselves in the twenty-first century as Mexican 
"''''"'PrQ  search for a way  to  manage the Mexican  migration stream. In con(cid:173)
cluding remarks the same issues are reviewed from the perspective ofU.S. im(cid:173)
migration policy and its relationship with evolving political, economic, and 
social factors. 

so  Aguila and Gratton 

The Current Scene 

Today Latin America is the largest sending area for immigrants to the 
States;  however,  the  size  of the Latino population represents just one 
ment of a complicated story of immigration and settlement. The U.S. 
Bureau estimates that there are 31 million Latin os (including all g-enejrat1on 
in the United States, about 11.2 percent of the national population.1 The 
sus concluded that this number exceeded that of African Americans for 
first time in 2002.2 The March 2000 Current Population Survey reported 
only two of five  Latinos were foreign  born and, given that a quarter of 
were naturalized, only 30 percent were not U.S. citizens. The geographical 
tribution of Latino groups remains true to the basic history of Latino 
ment: Almost half reside in California and Texas. However, one out of 
residents of Illinois is  Latino, and the most recent striking trend in 
settlement has been their arrival in regions in which they had not nr''"''''"" 
had a presence. 

Mexico is the most important source for both legal and illegal Latino 

migrants, a circumstance that has held true for nearly ninety years,  l'lr<mT1TIN 
Mexico's intimate linkage to the U.S.  labor force.  Undocumented 
tend to be concentrated in the working-age population and make up 
5 percent of the  labor force,  mostly in farming,  domestic  housework, 
construction. In 2006 Mexicans represented 30.8 percent of the documtmted 
foreign-born  population in the United States or over 11.5  million. 
no exact figures  for the undocumented exist,  estimates claim that ""''""'"'"''"' 
represent nearly 6o  percent of approximately 10.3  million persons.3 
quently, a conservative estimate of the total Mexican-born population in 
United States is 17.5 million; such a figure implies that a tenth of the popula(cid:173)
tion of Mexico lives in the United States.4 As the Mexican writer Car! os FnPni'"" 
stated in 2006,  "[w]hat  is  happening now with  the  Mexican  worker 
be called 'migration' anymore ... It is an exodus. Millions of our people 
leaving us ... Out of 120 million, so million are unemployed. Poverty 
them to emigrate."s 

The enduring relationship between the  Mexican  labor force  and the U.S. 
economy has not dampened controversy over the rights  of Mexicans in the 
United States and that society's responsibility for their social welfare. Since 
the first mass arrival in the early twentieth century, significant hostility to their 
presence has been evident in sporadic attempts to restrict their admission and 
to expel them. While much has been written about nativist reaction to Mexi(cid:173)
can immigrants, less attention has been given to the impact of Im,mJtgranon 
on the Mexican/Mexican American community itself, which has created sig~ 

Mirando atnis  51 

advantages and disadvantages for its members. The long duration of 
immigration separates the experience of this community from most 

ethnic groups in the United States.6  Although there was  a sharp inter(cid:173)

during the 1930s, immigration has refreshed the Mexicanidad of the 
regularly, in contrast to every other immigrant group.  Mrn""''"'"''r 
geographical concentration in areas of the Southwest is greater than the 
for most ethnic groups. As a result, foreign-born Mexicans coexist 
Mexican Americans who have lived in the United States for multiple gen-

about the Mexican population's foreignness appeared in the re(cid:173)

of many Americans  to  the  massive  pro-immigrant  demonstrations 

'""<u''"' the United States in 2006. These manifestations revealed the mag(cid:173)

of the population and its deep location within not simply the economy, 
Anner1c2m  society. The use of Mexican flags and the manifest demands for 
for persons who were neither citizens nor legally resident, but who were 

hard in its factories, hotels, and fields, provoked, instead of sympa(cid:173)

a negative reaction. This empowered anti-immigrant leaders who touted 
massive protests as additional proof that more stringent border 
required. The former Colorado congressman Tom Tancredo, nPrh<>nc 
prominent restrictionist,  stated:  "All  these folks  who  are here .... ,,.,-, .. .) 
they can protest brazenly. It's really a mockery of our immigration sys(cid:173)
Even moderates such as Senator John Cornyn of Texas believed that the 

would only inflame the issue.7 

he marches, like the recent reaction against anti-immigrant legislation in 

and other states, were just the most recent statement in the long de(cid:173)

over whether or not civil and social rights ought to extend to all people 
contribute and labor on behalf of our society,  regardless of their legal 
or citizenship. The debate over "what to do" with Mexican immigrants, 
y those who have arrived iJJegally, has been a vexing one for decades, 

a review of earlier periods reveals. 

1900t0 1930 

major crisis over Mexican immigration occurred in the early 1930s, when 
Great Depression led to public schemes to repatriate Mexicans, as well as 
~·w~"0'"'"voluntary repatriation on the part of Mexican immigrants. This crisis 

as its demographic foundation an equally massive and unprecedented im(cid:173)
mrgra:tlo'n  between 1900 and 1930. Before 1900 most growth in the Mexican(cid:173)

population in the United States had come from a natural increase in the 
long resident in the Southwest, such as the major centers of South 

3000-6999 
7000-14999 
15000-24999 
25000-34999 
35000-59863 

-

3000-6999 
7000-14999 
15000-24999 
25000-34999 
35000-193011 

-

Persons identified as Mexican by IPUMS,  1930 

Mirando atnis  53 

and Northern New Mexico. Map 1.1 shows the limited settlement areas 
all density of this ethnic group. 8 
by the turn of the century a powerful process was under way that led to a 
greater increase in the Mexican-origin population and its settlement in 
all sections of the Southwest. Immigration was the chief engine of this 
transformation. In the late nineteenth century fewer than five  thou(cid:173)

immigrants from Mexico arrived in the United States per year, 
ironically,  because of the lack of economic development in Mexico. As 
the case with Europe, immigrants tended to come from regions r.n"""" 
to transportation systems and economic opportunity. At  the turn of the 
mining, commercial agriculture, and the railroad networks needed to 
these enterprises had arisen simultaneously under the Porfirian regime 
Mexico  as well  as  in the southwestern United States, creating a 

economic system. Both sides of the border saw a dramatic rise in mi(cid:173)
as poor agricultural populations sought better income; substantially 
wages  in the  United  States  made the  northern  side  more alluring.9 
and informal mechanisms emerged to move labor across the 
quite like those for European immigrants to the United States.1° After 
annual immigration rates exceeded twenty thousand Mexicans per year 
during the First World War, regularly exceeded forty thousand per year. 
1.1 shows the modest level of immigration from Mexico in the late nine-
century, the clear upward trend after 1900, and the acceleration after 
1910.H 

the 1920s Mexicans became the largest foreign group still entering 
United States, with an average of about 57,000 per year from 1924 to 1929.12 
the Mexican Revolution had some effect in pushing workers north, even 
critical was the disruption of European immigration streams, first  by 
World War and next by the success of nativist restrictions, which pro-
most European sources while excepting Mexicans from the law.  Con(cid:173)

representing the economic system that had arisen in the Southwest 
their votes for European restriction so long as Mexicans were not af(cid:173)
Heavy immigration led to rapid increases in the Mexican-origin popu(cid:173)
and a strong shift toward foreign birth. In the late nineteenth century, 
of the growth in the Mexican origin population in the United States had 
by natural increase, but after 1900, immigration drove it. Between 1900 
1910 the population jumped from 400,000 to nearly 64o,ooo, and in 1920 
close to one million. In 1930 it was 1,789,000. The proportion born in 
rose from 32 percent in 1900 to 36 percent in 1910 and to so percent in 
This proportion fell  across the 1920s to about 35  percent, revealing, as 

be shown below, more permanent settlement patterns. 

56  Aguila and Gratton 

Mirando atnis  57 

Mexican government records.16 Alanis suggests that repatriation in the 
period between1930 and 1934 amounted to about 350,000. 

Few Mexicans, or immigrants of any nationality, entered the United 
in the remainder of the 1930s, and the Second World War interrupted 
gration again, save for the Bracero Program discussed earlier. This meant 
the resident Mexican-American population in the United States after 1930 
based largely upon the immigrants of the period 1900-1930 without 
quent replenishment from Mexico. As  Arturo Rosales has shown, the 
grant population of the early twentieth century, the Mexico Lindo gene 
differed strikingly from the original settlers in the nineteenth century, and 
fered as well from its children and grandchildren, who came of age in the 
and 196osY Many of the characteristics he identifies- such as intense 
ment to homeland and hoped for and achieved return to the homeland(cid:173)
the characteristics ofitalians, Poles, and other immigrants in the same 
But,  as  we  have  shown,  their children became  intensely American,  and 
tensely conscious of their rights and privileges as American citizens. 

Mexican Emigration 

Porfirio Diaz's thirty-five-year dictatorship, from 1876 to 1911, modernized 
disrupted traditional conditions and eventually provoked the Mexican 
lution. When the populist president Lazaro Cardenas peacefully 
power to his successor, Manuel Avila  Camacho, Mexico became a 
state. Mexican emigration public policy orientation reflected these major 
cial and political shifts. From 1876 to 1915  policies were inconsistent and 
active to economic and political conditions. After 1916 emigration policy 
came more assertive.  Mexican government officials  promoted the  ideals 
the post-Revolutionary state, but also hoped to exploit the resources of the 
patriate community and, when necessary, to protect that community, 
ing assisting in repatriation. 

Less than one year after coming to power in 1876, Diaz's regime '-'l"u'""'"' 
an interest in the social welfare  of the compatriots in the north, largely as 
way to expand the reach of the state.18 On October 2, 1877, the minister of 
eign relations, Ignacio Vallarta, critically reminded consuls along the 
that their duties included monthly updates about the social welfare of 
compatriots and that caring for  the interests of the Republic  required 
tecting its citizens. He was most concerned about his office's lack of 
tion concerning crimes against Mexican citizens and their property by 
cans.19 

Porfirian  officials  inconsistently discouraged  emigration  while  "uuu•""' 

encouraging plans intended to populate the sparse northern territo(cid:173)
the Republic. Although the primary objective of the Public Land Act 
was to survey public land in order to  facilitate  its transfer to private 

ownership, it included provisions for encouraging the repatria(cid:173)

settlement of emigrants  in  barren  regions. The  executive  branch 
the process, allocated the public land, encouraged the  purchase of 
tracts, and even furnished tools for colonizers. All Mexican citizens 

nited States were eligible. By 1910 a total of 198,327 colonists took ad(cid:173)
of this law, and of those, 31,658 were Mexican repatriates.20 
ocu'"'"''~ the lure  of high wages  in the  United States  increasingly at(cid:173)
emigrants despite  official  policy and considerable criticism  of emi(cid:173)
in newspapers and other popular media.21  The recession of 1907 led 
Mexicans in the United States to seek assistance from the Mexican state 
home. These petitioners included seasonal workers who normally re-
to Mexico after a few months' stay, but also some long-term residents 

found themselves in distress. This was the first government-assisted re(cid:173)
drive and foreshadowed future repatriation programs during simi(cid:173)
of economic crisis. 

December 1907  to  March 1908  more than two thousand Mexicans 
on trains, many aided by the same railroad companies that had em-
them.22 Antonio Lomeli, the El Paso consul for Mexico, advised the fed(cid:173)
ernment to distribute information about the declining employment 

._~ulutn:;" in the United States throughout the states of Zacatecas, Guana(cid:173)
Aguascalientes, Queretaro, Michoaca.n, and Jalisco, where the majority 
originated.23  As  would always  be the case, limited government 
could be applied to repatriation, but the more important factor in the 
permanent return was that seasonal workers simply returned the fol(cid:173)
year when the American economy again demanded their labor. In 1909 
Mexicans passed throughEl Paso into the United States, and in 1910, 
more emigrated.24 

the ascendance ofVenustiano Carranza to the presidency in 

of the Mexican Revolution prevented any significant policy reform 
None-
during the period 1910-15  two interim leaders,  Francisco I. Madero 
ictoriano  Huerta,  considered emigration policy.  After  his  election on 

1, 1911,  Madero blamed the exodus on the nation's limited labor op(cid:173)
' which he  believed the government could prevent with agricul(cid:173)
cooperatives for unemployed workers.25  In addition, socially conscien-

58  Aguila and Gratton 

Mirando atnis  59 

tious Maderistas such as Luis Cabrera, a member of the Chamber of 
supported the restitution of fjidos (communal village property) to prevent 
ther emigration.z6 

In November  1911  Madero  created  the  Department of Labor within 

Ministry of Development to improve working conditions. The unit 
data regarding labor conditions, arbitrated disputes between employers 
labor, and monitored wage agreements. According to Alan Knight, the 
ment "epitomized the Maderista concern for social cohesion, for  stable 
nomic development, and for progress." 27 The Department ofLabor 
national system of employment offices that matched employers' needs 
unemployed workers. Inspectors assessed national working conditions 
made recommendations. Another presidential mandate allowed workers 
quit their jobs when they wished arguing that such freedom would allow 
ceros (bracero,  Spanish for "arm," had become the generic term for 
workers in the United States) to migrate to areas with labor shortages 
the nation rather than to the United States.28 

Madero's administration was cut short byVictoriano Huerta's ""''rd'"''"'"''"'"'' 

lution, which resulted in the president's assassination on February 21, 
The coup renewed the social chaos of the revolution. Manuel Gamio 
that this period's violence not only increased the number of people 
but unlike  economic  factors,  also  prevented them from  returning 
ally. 29 While the effect of the revolution on increasing immigration has 
exaggerated, and John Womack found that the economy continued to 
despite the violence, it did add another factor during a crucial and 
era of Mexican immigration in the United States.30  Huerta's ""'""""'u'"L" 
considered emigration policies within the framework of violence and 
flight.  In September 1913  many families along the border between 
and Texas were in a  state of panic because of the fighting between 
troops and Venustiano Carranza's forces.  Nearly ten thousand refugees 
crossed into Eagle Pass, Texas, from Ciudad Porfirio Dfaz.31  Consular 
reported that the refugee flow showed no signs of dissipating and asked 
era! officials for additional assistance.32 Overwhelmed by the growing 
consular staff lamented the loss to their nation: "a valuable labor resource 
being denied our nation's agricultural sector where they were greatly ne,ea~ea., 
It also makes our job as consuls extremely difficult because on daily basis 
migrants ask for intervention with  their problems." 33  The Huerta "''"'-""-'""" 
tration's response was unimaginative and futile. The Ministry of State 
the governors of the major migrant-sending states to curtail emigration. 
there was little that state officials could accomplish, as the governor of 
cas commented: "Article 11 of the 1857 Constitution, among other rights, 

are understood, do not violate the 

the la borer contracts that are used, according to the terms in 
article of the same consti-
whose virtue this government is not able to do anything to ""~--'"''" 
as harmful as it is for the country's welfare." 34  Huerta's """.,'"q 
it contributed to his eventual 

curtail the emigration flow or 
On March 5,  1914, the consul in Del 

in Ciudad Porfirio  Diaz that many uu"u'·~-'"'' 
were joining Carranza's  forces  along the  border. 

miserable  condition 
that the only beneficiaries  of the 
arrancistas who persuaded them to take up arms on both sides of 
against the federal government. Military advisors recommended 
federal government intervene to alleviate the hardships of the rural 
nr.<>vf•nt  them from joining rebel armies.35  But such 
fell  in 

whether accurate or not, was irrelevant after Huerta's 

vtL!ut1sa.c•vu of the Mexican Constitution in 1917, and a measure 
Mexican public policy took on a  more proactive stance. Revolu· 
rested 
the 

were free to exit the nation when 

However, Articles 25 

the federal government to regulate the exit process, 

·  novation. On this basis 
the citizen had a valid contract outlining the 
scale. This new law aimed at the most common complaints of 

of State prohibited emigration un-
of employment and 

ow wages and failure to fulfill contracts.36 

"'-"·'v'"'-'• where 
used Mexicans as scabs to break railroad and "F.H'-'-'""'"'" strikes. 
unions  opposed  Mexican  braceros,  and they 
violent 
American employers violated labor contracts that braceros  had 
surfaced that the U.S. Army 

v.uuc•.ul'. braceros against their will causing some Mexican males to aban(cid:173)

in some cases, families  and return to Mexico.  In March 

Venustiano  Carranza  responded  by  breaching the  constitutional 

6o  Aguila and Gratton 

Mirando atras  61 

right of exit, prohibiting the issuing of passports to citizens seeking ~"'"-'-'~·v­
ment abroad, even if they had contracts. 37 

In trying to stop Mexicans from emigrating and urging their return, 
can officials resorted time after time to strategies producing no results.38 
fective as they were, the nationalistic characteristics of Carranza's auuuiw>Ln 
tion became an integral element of public policy and rhetoric in 
administrations, a recognition that the emigrant community was a "'o""'""' 
part of the Mexican body politic. 

The 1920s 

After 1920 Mexican administrations introduced more aggressive policies. 
cause of the political instability engendered by Carranza's violent 1920 
Adolfo de la Huerta's interim presidency could not fashion a useful response 
the 1920 postwar economic recession. Upon assuming office on December 
1920, Alvaro Obregon encouraged consulate offices to anticipate problems, 
panel protective services, and increase interaction with Mexican 
within their jurisdictions. By 1922 his office claimed to have repatriated 
than 150,000 Mexicans.39 Although officials may have overestimated the 
ber, Obregon recognized that conditions of the emigrant community in 
United States sparked public scrutiny in Mexico. An  editorial in El nxn:tsw. 
declared,  "since the Revolution forced  them to emigrate, it is  only just 
the government born out of this Revolution provide them with the rP<O<'>llrf',A~ 
to return to their homeland." 40 

On February 16, 1921, Obregon ordered consuls to repatriate "all those 

cans who were in a state of poverty or unemployed" and transferred ~:-~·~,vvv 
pesos to the  SRE.  Indeed, Obregon declared publicly that regardless  of 
cost, he was going to repatriate all Mexicans living in the United States. 
government spent 1,5oo,ooo pesos repatriating 1,500 Mexicans in the 
of 1921  alone.41  By  October  Obreg6n  considered  conditions  in  the 
States stable enough to end the emergency repatriation drive, and, as 
occur in the Great Depression, little consideration was given to rer>atJrial:es·· 
needs in Mexico.4 2 

Consuls were charged with and in many cases tried to inform Mexicans 

U.S.  immigration laws; they intervened in civil disputes, investigated 
advised workers about their labor contracts, and helped them obtain compen(cid:173)
sation for work-related injuries.  Fourteen of the fifty-nine  consulates 
about 8o percent of Mexican migrants, all but the Chicago agency located in 
the Southwest.43  In 1923  President Obregon created the Department of Rec 
patriation within the  SRE and made consulates directly responsible for 

requests. Federal officials lauded these reforms, although 
budgets were  only  modestly increased.  Obregon  also  created two 
organizations, the Comisiones Honor(ficas Mexicanas (Comisiones) 
Brigadas de  la  Cruz Azul Mexicana  (Brigadas),  which became formal 
between migrants and the consulates as well as tools for promoting 
nationalism among expatriate communities.44 

comisiones'  attachment to  the consulates extended the reach of the 
government and demonstrated to critics that it was  concerned for 

well-being. The  emerging stable  relationship  created a  rela(cid:173)

pensive and effective  means to expand protection services.  Some 
in Arizona had never before seen a representative of the Mexi(cid:173)

in person.45 The Comisiones were instrumental in organizing 
nu,n•c•~~ throughout the United States and aiding consular personnel into 

assuming the presidency in 1924, Plutarco Elias  Calles  inherited a 

stable nation and a more systematic program of emigrant aid than Obre(cid:173)

in 1920. However, the Mexican economy was still incapable of keeping 

at home. Government resources were insufficient and 
oad too alluring. By 1928  policymakers resorted to rhetorical 
media, a weak defense against the high wages and ready employment 
the border. Some protection could be offered to those who left through 
ports,  but those who  left illegally-violating both Mexican  and U.S. 

did so at their own risk, a problem that still plagues Mexico today. 

a speech before Congress on September 1,  1925, Calles described 
as a bane to the Republic, but also to the emigrants themselves: 
"were wickedly exploited and incapable of protecting themselves." Now 
peace had been restored,  it was  the duty of the Mexican leadership to 
their return and to keep  them from  leaving again.46  The Boletin 
an SRE publication, maintained in the mid-1920s that the only jobs 
available in the United States were low paying and limited to the build-
and upkeep of railroads. Mexicans obtained these jobs because Europeans 

mericans avoided them due to their dangerous nature and low payY 

Newly established migration offices in Torreon and Sa!tillo, Coahuila, two 
the busiest points  of departure  for the United States, limited the sale of 

passages, trying to compel emigrants to follow a procedure that pro(cid:173)

them information about U.S.  immigration laws,  their rights, and how 
,  "''-'-'L"''-" the nearest consulate.48  Furthermore, a law that became effective 

December 26,  1926,  required proof from  emigrants that they met the re(cid:173)

nation's minimum requirements for legal emigration, otherwise they 
be denied a passport.49 It required an identification card for both Mexi-

62  Aguila and Gratton 

cans and foreigners entering Mexico, which replaced the passports issued 
fore the promulgation of the Constitution of 1917. Consuls were  •·pc,nonci 
for issuing the identification abroad, and the Department of Migration 
the responsibility domestically. The card did not automatically permit 
departure; an emigrant still had to fulfill  other regulations such as 
valid work contract. 5° It also restricted immigration to Mexico: requiring 
and resources  that would benefit the  Republic,  making literacy and 
requirements more rigorous,  and preventing European and Asian 
from using Mexico for entry into the United States (see chapter 14).51 

After 1927 Calles's administration aggressively discouraged Mexicans 
leaving while  reducing government-sponsored repatriation, in concert 
a  plan to  lessen  the government's  role,  placing more  responsibility on 
individual who left for the United States. Migration offices enforcing the 
regulations found that limited financial  resourc~s and personnel resulted 
lengthy periods for processing paperwork and the emigrant's inability to 
all the requirements. Emigration without documents was more exr)edllerlt 
Calles's  administration  deregulated  the  system  for  protecting 
leaving only a rhetorical appeal to keep workers from leaving and 
them when they still left. Government critics lamented the loss of human 
tal and argued that the escalating antagonism to Mexicans within the 
States contributed to the abuse of Mexican emigrants: "The nation's 
affliction is the outpouring of its greatest energy source, its people .... 
Mexican government should not allow Americans to restrict Mexican 
from entering the United States, but should instead restrict its citizens 
leaving for the United States." 53 

The Mexican Response to the Great Depression 

Even as Calles reduced the Mexican government's role,  a storm rose on 
horizon  that  tested  that  government's  capacity  to  respond  to 
needs.  Calles,  who  had  demonstrated  keen  Machiavellian  tactics  with 
creation of the Partido Nacional Revolucionario 54  after the assassination 
President-elect Obreg6n, was  unprepared  for  the  severity of the  Great 
pression. By 1930 the Mexican consular system, including the Comisiones 
Brigadas, was instrumental in implementing an unprecedented re~>atJnaJ:lOit 
drive as the only means of protection available for their compatriots. 
nately, once in Mexico the repatriates found themselves without additional re· 
lief from their government. Many repatriates did not receive sufficient arable 
land or support such as agricultural credits that were absolutely necessary for 
their livelihood. 

Mirando atnis  63 

:hninii>trEttlo>n ofLazaro Cardenas (1934 -40) was committed to imple(cid:173)
goals of the Constitution of 1917 and sought to include the wel(cid:173)
in the United States as part of its developmental agenda. Ac(cid:173)

the plan Sexenal de Gobierno (1935), encouraging the 

States to return, would 
fulfill the objectives formulated at 
Convention. Ironically, policymakers determined that Mexico's 
population was one of its most significant problems. The plan called 

to relieve migrants of their misery abroad and for steps to pre(cid:173)
in the future. 55  Of course these goals were tied to the Carde(cid:173)

l<K""'U" reform program, which distributed 54 million acres ofland to 
uuuu.A~~ and villages.  However,  by the end of Cardenas's administra-
1940 it was  clear that the ejido  cooperatives such as that at Laguna 
henequen plantations in Yucatan were failures  because of their de-
production. Reasons were multiple and unfortunately not unfamiliar 

today: unresponsive bureaucracy, corrupt local officials, 

that were too small and infertile, and lack of modern technology and 

from the 1930s to the Present 

Great Depression was not the first economic crisis that precipitated im(cid:173)
troubles,  but it lasted  a  decade;  Mexican,  and secondarily Cana(cid:173)

immigrants felt its effects. Both had enjoyed free  access to the United 
even after the First World War and restrictive immigration legislation 
curtailed arrivals from Europe. The open doors of the 1920s had allowed 
to become more significant contributors to the U.S. economy and, at 

same time, their remittances became an essential component of the Mexi(cid:173)
economy. Because of the public's hostility toward immigrants, expressed 
1920s quota acts, those who used Mexican labor or countenanced their 
had to argue for their distinct traits. One of the common 
actually fit the basic intentions of most Mexican immigrants, was that 
were  birds of passage, relatively submissive and docile, and inclined to 
to Mexico rather than to settle permanently in the United States. 56 Their 

cycle of return was however often not seen as sufficient. """IJC:<-laH 

times of economic crisis, various patriotic groups such as  the Veterans of 

Foreign Wars and the American Legion led demands in some areas that Mexi(cid:173)

be "repatriated." The National Club of America for Americans called on 
Americans to pressure their government to deport all Mexicans and close 

64  Aguila and Gratton 

the border to all Latin Americans.57  However, such outrageous demands 
overly vocal fringe groups rarely had any real impact on public policy. 
Nonetheless,  as  unemployment rose  in  1929,  President  Herbert 

increased  consular  control  over  immigration  from  Mexico  and  the 
ber of visas for entry declined- he followed the same policy in Canada 
Europe. Although his administration, unlike that of his successor Franklin 
Roosevelt,  did not seek to end local repatriation efforts,  neither 
tion sought special laws to deport Mexicans or Canadians. The Great 
sion,  not public  policy,  minimized the  northbound migration.  1~'-uuull' 
may have driven many Mexicans and their Mexican American children 
but unemployment and dwindling economic opportunities were the 
causes of this mass exodus. 

The Bracero Program 

From 1942  to 1964  the United  States  and Mexico  engaged in a  series of 
lateral agreements allowing for  braceros  to temporarily work in the 
States for up to six months. Immediately following U.S.  entry into the 
World War,  agricultural  employers  throughout the Southwest claimed 
labor shortages threatened the war effort.  Mexican officials were initially 
luctant to take part in another temporary lab or program because of the 
treatment Mexicans faced in the United States during the Great 
particularly in Texas. Ultimately, the administration ofManuel Avila ~a.tuac.u~ 
seeking improved relations, foreign loans, and investments, agreed to 
another temporary worker initiative and, because it held the cards at the 
ginning of the arrangement, was able to shape early policy. After "u' '"''"'' 
about discrimination, for example, for a time it prohibited application of 
program in Texas. ss 

The Bracero Program experienced three phases with Public Law 45 
ing Phase I from August 1942 until December 1947· During this period 
braceros participated. Leaving aside the minority of guest workers from 
regions, such as the Caribbean (chapter 6), and those from Mexico 
for  railroad work only during the war,  the typical bracero was a single 
from rural west central Mexico who was either unemployed or severely 
employed, illiterate, and who spoke few words of English. Phase II, 
took place outside legal parameters as  local  officials,  employers, and 
can immigrants continued on despite the expiration of Public Law 45; 
was no legitimate program during these three years. Two-thirds of the 
can workers in the United States were originally undocumented workers, 
prehended by officials from the Immigration and Naturalization Service 

Mirando atnis  65 

transported to processing centers along the border. This phase was 

example of lax legal enforcement that directly benefited U.S.  em(cid:173)

it went unnoticed by the general public. A second agreement 
the two nations introduced Phase m in 1951, after the Korean War 
both governments to again formalize the process with Public Law 
this thirteen-year period 4.21 million braceros participated. These 
than the original cohort and more likely to have families. 59 After the 
Mexican government had much less influence over policy, since the 
did not face a war emergency labor shortage-instead those in 
the program faced considerable public and union opposition. Mexico 
however,  to continue both the income advantages of the wages and 
of braceros  and the political  release it gave  since these workers 

in fact be unemployed and discontent in Mexico. 

1950s  controlling the  border and  regulating the  undocumented im(cid:173)
process  evolved  into competing domestic  and foreign  policy ob-
for the first time since the 1930s. The Bracero Program encouraged 
flows  of both documented and undocumented migrants into the 
tates, which conditioned employers to depend on inexpensive field 
m  Mexico.60  Within the context of the Cold War, U.S.  policymakers 
ediate between employers' demands for continued access to Mexican 
and having to maintain the appearance of secure borders. Furthermore, 

within the Mexican American  community also  reflected  the  corn(cid:173)
of this struggle. According to David Gutierrez, "many Mexican Ameri(cid:173)

organizational spokesmen seemed to have succumbed to the increasingly 
cold war notion that communists were  somehow slipping into the 
with illegal aliens from Mexico and other Latin American nations." 61 
groups (including Mexican American organizations such as National 
u\..u!cu«:u Workers' Union) argued that Mexican immigrant labor lowered 

and created unfair competition for low-skilled employment. 

In 1951  President Truman complained to his Mexican counterpart about 
growing illegal immigration problem: "I am anxious to see progress made 

improving working conditions and living standards for our own citi(cid:173)

and for the contract workers from Mexico who are employed on our farms 
.. But if these things are to occur the governments of the United States and 
J.Vl<oAI'"'  must take steps to shut off the stream of Mexican citizens immigrat(cid:173)
ing illegally into the United States." 62  Truman's ability to secure the support 
President Miguel Aleman was partly based on the goodwill he had gained 

66 

andGratton 

helping settle a dispute between the U.S. Railroad Retirement Fund and 

Mexican 
During the Second World War 16o,ooo Mexican 
workers had contributed $6 million into the fund, and after the war 
officials requested that their workers' share be paid. "It took the direct 
vention of President Truman to return the money, with 3·5 percent intere 

Nonetheless, the Bracero Program had inadvertently reignited 

and  clandestine  border  crossers. 

comtJOileilts of the large-scale Mexican 
who  overstayed  their work 
policymakers failed to assess which offense was the more significant 
undocumented immigration, illicit 
gling. Still, public policy allowed the three components to coexist for the 
of the economic health of Southwestern 
labor and the political health 

hiring 

or labor 

As  is the case today, employers argued that 

able labor could damage the economy, particularly in the Southwest. 
wages and formal recognition of the undocumented 
would no 
cost effective. Truman and Eisenhower had to control the U.S.  border fro 
real or imagined potential communist threat, while simultaneously 
for an adequate labor 

for U.S. employers. 

uc;"IJ!L<C  attention to undocumented 

it did not figure 

in immigration policy. Playing on communist fears and on the continued 
of Americans to  immigrants and refugees,  Senator Pat McCarran 

Congressman Francis Waiter designed an act that continued the ""'u"·""'· 
biased  quota 
erected in the  1920s  for all  countries,  while  trying 
evade charges of racism by extending small quotas to Asian countries. 
and other Western Hemisphere countries continued to 
nation status in that there were no statutory limits on their immigration. 
act addressed illegal 
ing, transporting and harboring" undocumented immigrants became 
offenses, and the INS  could search private property, but not 
documented workers. 

by imposing draconian ~-''"·":uwc•>· 

for 

For employers the most 1mportamt provision was the Texas Proviso, 

pr<)te•ctee! them from prosecution for 
undocumented workers. The 
major initiative against Mexican undocumented workers was Operation 
back (1954),  which authorities  claimed 
mented immigrants." It is  doubtful such massive expulsion occurred, and 
is  highly probable that most of those  deported quickly returned.  But 
argue that its basic result was to cause fearful1mm1tgranrs 
est working conditions and lowest-paying jobs. 64 

over one million  une!04~U:" 

Mirando atnis  67 

Act terminated the racist quota system that had been in place 
replaced it with equal opportunity to persons from any country or 
prioritized family  reunification. The quota laws  had to be abol(cid:173)
ccorcu.ngto most commentators, because, as Senator Edward '""""'·"'-' 
had been "conceived in a period of bigotry and reaffirmed in the 
era." 65  But the new law's most critical provision for the creation of 

immigration was  that it established national and 

and an overall annual immigration level. Though Italians, for example, 
longer limited to 5,645 persons per year (as dictated by the revisions 
1952 of the 1921 quota bills), the Eastern Hemisphere could, in sum, 
only 170,000 and no  one  country more  than 20,000  of these.  Such 
not in fact have much effect on Italy, since by the 1960s few !tal(cid:173)
to immigrate to the United States. 

for Mexico these provisions made illegal immigration highly probable, 
it had never had a quota. Moreover, Mexican workers had just lost the 
to migrate as official guest workers. The struggle between growers 

this labor and union forces and their liberal allies over the Bracero Pro(cid:173)
ended in 1964 with the end of the program.66 At the time Mexican Amen-
workers  competed with these  braceros,  evidenced by  the  opposition of 
Chavez's  United  Farm Workers  (UFW)  to Mexican  immigration,  into 
This competitive condition would dissipate as Mexican Americans 
into higher-paying jobs-one result would be the decline in Mexican 

opposition to Mexican immigration. 

Bracero  Program's  termination,  the  Hart-Celler Act  and  its  country 
and ironically the success of Mexico in improving public health, evi-
in a  sharply rising population,  created  the  conditions of mass  illegal 
"!'."'"'·'v''· While the Mexican, economy had shown significant growth in 

id-twentieth century, Mexico's high birthrate ensured a rate of 
growth that exceeded job creation in the economy-as had happened in 
Quebec a century earlier. Wages remained four and five times higher 

of the border. These factors largely guaranteed that the number of per(cid:173)
strongly desiring to  enter the United  States would exceed the number 

allowed. 

While prioritizing family reunification, immigrants with exceptional abiH-
and labor for occupations with labor shortages, some provisions of Hart(cid:173)
had nonetheless  "proven  inadequate,  others  had  triggered  unantici(cid:173)
consequences, and new issues emerged with which the existing system 
unable to cope." 67 The U.S.  Border Patrol registered 110,371 apprehen-

68  Aguila and Gratton 

Mirando atnis  69 

sions in 1965 and 1,348,749 in 1985-the sixth year since 1977 that 
sions  exceed  one  million.68  Although  estimates for  the  size  of the 
mented migration stream are  difficult to verify,  some studies claim that 
every illegal immigrant captured, two  to three others enter successfully, 
majority being Mexican or Central American. 59 

As stated earlier, the law of 1968 placed a ceiling of 120,000 on ~~~-~~~··r..··~· 
from  the Western Hemisphere, and in 1976 an annual ceiling of 2o,ooo 
added for each Western Hemispheric nation. Given the characteristics 
before, Mexicans dominated the number of applicants for legal entry: in 
for example, 45,364 persons applied for legal entry. The numerical ceiling 
clearly out of touch with demand. In 1976 alone there were 300,000 av~..~w~rttJ 
per year and a  two-and-a-half-year backlog for approvaF° Consequently, 
the mid-1980s U.S.  policy had to once again realign immigration policy to 
dress the unexpected consequences of the current legislation while 
on protecting the health of the economy and addressing prevailing 
sentiment regarding race and ethnicity. 

The Immigration Reform and Control Act (1986) 

The Immigration Reform  and Control Act (IRCA),  which represents the 
major revision of the Immigration Act of 1965, contained three principal 
visions:  sanctions for  employers who knowingly hired or recruited 
mented workers, increased enforcement measures along the border, and 
amnesty program for undocumented workers who could prove that they 
completed at least ninety days of farm work in 1985-86 or for illegal aliens 
had continuously resided in the United States since 1982. For the 2.3 
Mexican immigrants who obtained legal status, IRCA was a success. For 
grants such as Apolonia Calderon of Palm Desert, California, amnesty 
her wages, protected her from abuse on the job and in the street, and 
her to obtain U.S. citizenship in May 2006.71 

Unfortunately  meA's  long-term  consequences  drastically  disrupted 

seasonal migration process, encouraging permanent residence in the 
States.72 The amnesty provision attracted further undocumented arrivals 
encouraged other Mexicans to think that further reprieves might be 
although to date it has been the only major amnesty. "Of the IRCA "'f>fJH,,au«> 
about 1.8 million were in the 245A program, and about 1.2 million were in 
SAW  (Special Agricultural Worker) program. While the numbers in the 
program were somewhat lower than predicted, those in the SAW program 
two and three times higher than expected." 73 Amnesty recipients and other 
documented immigrants who succeeded in obtaining papers had a 

than their own numbers. Over three-fourths of all U.S.  legal ad(cid:173)

are a product of the family reunification provisions stemming from 
Act: each legal immigrant had the right to sponsor immediate 
members, including spouses, children, and siblings. The multiplying 
to growth in the immigrant population based on the size of the 
to arrive,  in this  case Latinos  (largely Mexican)  and to a lesser 

Asians.  Employer sanctions in the 1986  act were never a!J;>-'u•ou--(cid:173)

clause was a powerful form of protection that employers made 
part of the act, since courts were unlikely to rule an employer guilty 
as its workers provided some form of legal identification. Employers 
have to verify the documents required to legally work in the United 
which in turn led to a large market for fraudulent documents. Even if 
the increased documentation demands, employers could and did 
to subcontractors to fulfil! their labor demands, allowing them to avoid 
for hiring undocumented workers. Moreover, neither Republican 
administrations devoted much attention or resources to inter-

despite the act's  rhetoric,  border enforcement actually fell  after 
(arrests along the border fell  from 1.6 million in 1986 to 
of 

in 1989). As  a result of the promise of amnesty and the 

for employers or for illegal arrival, seasonal migrants 

crossing back and forth, because the amnesty program required that 
in the United States while their legalization process was resolved and be(cid:173)
they were required to take English and civics classes. In the 1990s bar(cid:173)

enforcement began to constitute an actual threat to crossers (for example 
Operation Gatekeeper), and the "coyotes" who arranged clandestine trips 
charging higher fees. As a result, according to Jorge Durand, Douglass 
, and Emilio Parrado, seasonal migration fell sharply. They argue, and 
agree, that undocumented,immigrants simply tried repeatedly to cross 
they succeeded, and then did not risk a return. As a result, the population 
illegal immigrants began to rise, which also  meant a stronger 

for  women and family  members to  cross  and join men now corn(cid:173)

to the United States.74 

In addition to promoting the growth of the Mexican population, 

legalization programs also allowed undocumented workers to come out 
the shadows of work available to them and enter more lucrative economic 
Agricultural workers left the fields with their legalized status in hand 
pursued urban employment. Legalization meant that new opportunities 
the formerly undocumented created even greater labor shortages for corn(cid:173)
growers. This change in employment was another cause for more per-

70  Aguila and Gratton 

manent stays in the United States rather than seasonal migration. Urban 
seasonal jobs offered limited time for travel to Mexico, and even those 
remained in seasonal agricultural jobs were now eligible for  uu\Ou., 1.nvn 
compensation in the United States.75 

The politics of the 1986 act also proved the near complete shift away 

hostility  toward  a  welcoming  of  Mexican  immigrants-legal  or 
mented- among Mexican American leaders and organizations. Drawing 
on the civil rights agitation of the 1960s, especially by Chicano activists, 
on a subsequent broad identification of racial unity proclaimed by 
tions like La Raza Unida Council, the tenor of Mexican American commen 
immigration shifted toward acceptance of all Mexicans as co-ethnics and 
sequently to strong approval of amnesty programs. From this point 
such organizations would form a major political force in congressional 
in immigration, seeking tolerant immigration laws  and paths to 
for undocumented immigrants.76 

Condusicm 

During the twentieth century Mexican immigration to the United States 
came a fundamental component of the U.S. and Mexican economies. The 
mate relationship has transcended world  wars, governmental  changes, 
pression, economic policies, the Cold War,  and the rise of global terrorlstll 
The century has seen other developed nations confront mass immigration 
duced by similar factors:  sharp differences in average wages, foreign 
legacies  of colonial  periods,  globalization,  and refugees'  demands  have 
led to mass movements across national boundaries. But none of these 
ments possesses a tradition as  long as that between Mexico  and the 
States. Although the intake of large numbers of migrants has presented 
nificant challenges for receiving countries, their presence has also 
many benefits, most importantly inexpensive labor. Mexicans working in 
United States constitute one such example, which along with their 
finalized that contribution, becoming citizens of the United States and 
ing a large part of the population. 

As we have seen, Mexico's emigration is not primarily driven by a poor, 

developed economy. According to Durand and Massey,  "international 
gration does not arise from a lack of economic development, but from 
opment itself." 77 The origins of mass emigration from Mexico lie in the 
industrial and transportation development in Mexico in the late 
century, and it grew even during the era of the "Mexican Miracle," 
when the Mexican "economy grew at a rate of over 6 percent per year, a 

Mirando atnis  71 

all other Latin American countries except Brazil." 78 Mexicans con(cid:173)

to the United States as  temporary workers, undocumented 

legal immigrants. 

debates in the United States about illegal immigration from Mexico 
ignored the long history. While the volume of undocumented or 

is  the  result of particular conditions after 1965,  the  Mexi(cid:173)
migration, repatriation, and settlement have been 

of 
f both countries for more than a century. Current disputes often 
illegality or on segments of the U.S. or Mexican societies, rather 
structural issues such as shared histories, free  trade commit(cid:173)
international accords. The many Mexican-origin persons concen(cid:173)
e Southwest have become an integrated part of the region's popu(cid:173)

claimed this region from before the Mexican-American war, and 
been a formidable  part of its population since the early twentieth 
In the last third of the twentieth century Mexicans  settled in other 
the country and thus became ever more similar to other "''·"U'J'.' 
with a long history,  such as  Italians. Policy changes present but new 
in an old history. Hardly ever was the intense interchange between 
societies interrupted and, one imagines, the interchange will 

fter the pronounced economic downturn provoked by the financial col(cid:173)
of September 2008. 

.:: .•!"iasr.mnic' or 'Latino' refer to persons who trace their origin or descent to Western 
'.Jllemisnhere  countries colonized by Spain, where Spanish is the primary language. 
can be considered as the heritage, nationality group, lineage, or country of 
of the person or the person's ancestors. People who identify as  Hispanic or 
may be of any race."  "About the Hispanic Population of the United States," 

Census Bureau, http:ffwww.census.govf. 

Population Reaches All-Time High of 38.8 Million, New Census Bureau 

Estimates Show," U.S. Census Bureau News, June 18, 2003. http:ffwww.census.gov. 
~Statistical Portrait of the Foreign-Born Population in the United States, 2006;' Pew 
Hispanic  Center, http:ffpewhispanic.org, January 23,  2008,  table  3i  and Jeffrey S. 
, Passe!, "Unauthorized Migrants: Numbers and Characteristics," Pew Hispanic Cen-
ter, June 14, 2005, http:jjpewhispanic.orgj. 
CIA World Fact Book, June 22, 2007, https:ffwww.cia.gov. 
Jorge Ramos,  "The Mexican Election: A Talk with Carlos  Fuentes," July 12,  2006, 
http:ffwww.jorgeramos.com. 
Irish immigration has almost as long a history, beginning in the 1840s and persist(cid:173)
ing, though at a greatly diminished rate, into the early twentieth century. For Ger-

72  Aguila and Gratton 

Mirando atnis  73 

mans, the largest single ancestry group,  large-scale immigration lasted for 
fifty years, and for Italians, Poles, and others in the early twentieth century less 
thirty years. 

7  "Are the Immigration Protests Creating a Backlash?" Time, March 29, 2006. 
8  Maps  and  other data presented  in  this  section  are  Brian  Gratton's  ~"''"u'"lll 

from data drawn from the Integrated Public Use Samples of the United States 
suses (IPUMS ). Steven Ruggles, M a thew Sobek, Trent Alexander, Catherine A. 
Ronald Goeken, Patricia Kelly Hall, Miriam King, and Chad Ronnander, 
Public Use Microdata Series: Version 4.0 [machine-readable database] 
lis: Minnesota Population Center, 2008), http:ffusa.ipums.orgjusa. 

9  Daniel D. Arreola and James R. Curtis, The Mexican Border Cities: La.ndi;cape ,4mztai 

and Place Personality (Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1993). 

10  Gunther Peck, Reinventing Free Labor: Padrones and Immigrant Workers in the 
American West, 1880-1930 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000); F. 
man, "Sin Coyote Ni  Patron: Why the 'Migrant Network'  Fails  to Explain 
tional Migration," International Migration Review 39, no. 1 (2005), 4-44. 
11  Maps  and  figures  from  Myron  P.  Gutmann,  Robert  McCaa,  Rodolfo 

Montes, and Brian Gratton. "Los efectos demografios de la revoluci6n Mexicana 
Estados Unidos," Historia Mexicana  so, no. 3 (2ooo), 145-65. 

12  Ibid. 
13  Manuel Gamio, Mexican Immigration  to  the United States: A Study of Human 
tion  and Adjustment (Chicago:  University of Chicago Press, 1930). To  review 
maps go to http:fjnacts.asu.edufthe-north-american-migration-project. 

14  E.  K.  Merchant,  Brian Gratton,  and  Myron  P.  Gutmann,  "Race  and  ~,.,naua' 
Mexicans in the 1930 and 1940 Censuses"  (paper presented at Social Science 
tory Association, Miami, October 2008). 

15  Francisco E.  Balderrama and Raymond Rodriguez, Decade of Betrayal: Mexican 
patriation  in  the  1930s (Albuquerque:  University of New  Mexico  Press, 2006), 
states: "it is reasonable to estimate that the total number of repatriates was 
mately one million." 

16  Fernando Saul Alanis Enciso, "LCmintos fueron? La repatriaci6n de  n1l:xicaJt10l> 
!os  Estados  Unidos  durante  la  Gran  Depresi6n:  Una  interpretaci6n  ~:u;""'uL"'u 
1930-1934," Aztlcin: A journal ofChicano Studies 32, no.  2 (2007),  65-91, and 
queden alld: El gobierno de Mexico y la  repatriaci6n de mexicanos de Estados 
1934-1940 (Mexico: Colegio de la Frontera Norte, 2007). 

17  F.  Arturo  Rosales,  iPobre  Raza:  Violence,  justice,  and Mobilization  Among 
Lindo Immigrants, 1900-1936 (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1999), s-6. 

18  Diaz entered Mexico City on November 23, 1876, after defeating his last major 

sition at the battle ofTecoac. He was elected president on May s, 1877. 

19  Minister of Foreign Relations to Consuls on the Border, October 2,  1877, 

Hist6rico  de  la  Secretaria  de  Relaciones  Exteriores,  2-1-1785.F.  2-4, 
Moyano Pahissa, Protecci6n  consular a Mexicanos en  los Estados Unidos, 
(Mexico City: Archivo Hist6rico Diplomatico Mexicano, 1989), 137-38. 

,:c;,0nzaJezNavarro, Los extranjeros en Mexico y los mexicanos en el extranjero, 
3 vols.  (Mexico City:  El  Colegio de Mexico, 1994), 2:125;  and La  coloni(cid:173)
exico,  1877-1910 (Mexico  City: Talls.  de  Imp. de  Estampillas y Valores, 

replantear el programa de repatriaci6n humana," La Red del Norte, Novem(cid:173)

http:ffwww.masnoticias.netfid. pl ?id~10877&relax~&pub~Congreso%2o 

· and Arturo Renteria,  "Apoyan con trabajo a  90 repatria(cid:173)

MGmanu, November 30, 2008. http://www.elmanana.com. 

Katz,  The  Life  and  Times  of Pancho  Villa  (Stanford:  Stanford 

Navarro, Los extranjeros en Mexico,  2:380. 
Cardoso, Mexican Emigration to the United States, 1897-1931 (Tucson: Uni(cid:173)
f Arizona Press, 1980), 31; Francisco I.  Madero, La sucesci6n presidencial en 
d ed. (Mexico City: Editora Nacional, 1974), 211-21. 

The Mexican  Revolution: Poifirians, Liberals and Peasants,  vol.  1  (Lin(cid:173)

rr.iuPt'cit"ofNebraska Press, 1990), 433· 

Navarro, Los extranjeros en Mexico,  3 :So. 

Mexican Immigration to the United States, 159-69. 
omack, "The Mexican Economy during the Revolution, 1910-1920: Histori(cid:173)
and Analysis," Marxist Perspectives 1 (1978),  80-123. 

Negras. 

in Eagle Pass, Texas, to the Consulate Inspector in San Antonio, Texas, Sep-
30, 1913, Archivo Hist6rico de la Secretaria de Relaciones Exteriores LE-842, 
56;  and Consul in Eagle Pass, Texas, to the Consulate Inspector in San 
October 2, 1913, Archivo Hist6rico de la Secretaria de Relaciones Ex(cid:173)
LE-842, f. 113-R-13, 100, cited in Douglas Richmond, ed., La Frontera: Mexico(cid:173)
Unidos durante la epoca revolucionaria, 1910-1920 (Saltillo: Gobierno del Es-

de Coahuila, 1996), 23-24. 

)Secn~ta:rio de  Gobernaci6n to Secretario de  Fomento, October 3,  1913, Archivo 
de la Naci6n, Departemento de Trabajo (hereafter cited as AGN-DT), 1913-8-

Commander in Ciudad Porfirio Diaz to Governor of Coahuila, March 10, 

Archivo General del Estado de Coahuila, Saltillo LE-335, exp. 48, cited in Rich(cid:173)

La Frontera, 24. 
123  of the 1917  Constitution, "Proyecto de  Ley  Sobre Reforma del Articulo 

October 6, 1921, AGN-DT volume 322-exp. 4-6. 

Mayor SRE  to All  Migration Inspectors Along the Border,  March  20,  1918, 
of the Department of State (RDS)  812.111j36  (ooSo-81),  roll  107,  cited in 
Richmond, "Mexican Immigration and Border Strategy During the Revo!u-

1910-1920," New Mexico Historical Review 57, no. 3 (1982), 269-88, 276. 

74  Aguila and Gratton 

Mirando atnis  75 

38  Diario Oficial, March 21, 1918, circular no. 9, cited in Richmond, "Mexican 

tion," 279. 

39  Lawrence A.  Cardoso,  "La  repatriaci6n  de  braceros  en epoca  de  Obreg6n, 

1923," Historia Mexicana 26, no. 4 (1977), 576-95, 589. 

40  Linda B.  Hall,  '~lvaro Obreg6n and Mexican Migrant Labor to the United 
1920-1924," La ciudad y el campo en la historia de Mexico: Memoria de la VII 
de historiadores Mexicanos y Norteamericanos (Oaxaca: Universidad Nacional 
noma de Mexico, 1992), 764. 

41  Hall,  '~lvaro Obreg6n and Mexican  Migrant Labor,"  763;  Informe oficial a! 

dente Alvaro  Obreg6n, June 10,  1922, Archivo  General de la  Naci6n,  vol. 
M-30;  Informes de !as repatriaciones autorizadas en el  mes de enero de 
chivo Hist6rico de la Secretaria de Relaciones Exteriores 36-16-318. 

42  Manuel Gamio, Quantitative Estimates: Sources and Distribution of/VIP'YII:nn 

tion into the United States  (Mexico City: Talleres GrMicos Editorial and the 
Oficial," 1930 ), table III. 

43  Francisco  E.  Balderrama,  "Mexico  de  afuera y  Ios  consulados  mexicanos, 

1940," Revista Mexicana de Ciencias Politic as y Sociales 27 (1981), 104-5, 

44  Jesus Franco, El alma de la raza: Narraciones  historic as de episodios y la vida 

Mexicanos residentes in los Estados Unidos del Norte America: la repatriaci6n. 
y origen de !as Comisiones Honorificas Mexicanas y la CruzAzul Mexicana (El 
Patria, n.d.), 7· 

45  Memorandum from  Mexican  Consul  in Phoenix, Arizona,  Renato Cantu 

Consul General in El Paso, Texas, December 29, 1931, Archivo Hist6rico de la 
taria de Relaciones Exteriores IV-339-23. 

46  Diario de !os debates de la Cdmara de Diputados, September 1, 1925, cited in 

Gonzalez Navarro, Los extranjeros, 3:32-33. 

47  Boletin Comercial, April1o, 1925. 
48  Ibid. 
49  Secretaria de Gobernaci6n, Ley de Migraci6n de los Estados Unidos Mexicanos 

City: Talleres Graficos de la Naci6n, 1926), article 17. 

so  Ibid., articles 14-15. 
51  Ibid. 
52  El Universal, May 19, 1927. 
53  Ibid., May 16,1927. 
54  The Partido Nacional Revolucionario, founded in 1929, was the precursor to 

tido Revolucionario Institutional, the party name since 1946. 

,-,".;,;rrF•7  Walls and Mirrors: Mexican Americans, Mexican Immigrants, and 

of Ethnicity (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1995), 160. 

and  Feliciano Rivera,  Mexican Americans/American Mexicans: From 
to Chicanos (New York: Hill and Wang, 1993), 184. 
and David E.  Lorey, The  U.S.-Mexican Border into the Twenty-first Cen(cid:173)
Md.: Rowman and Littlefield, 2008), 118-19. 

Walls and Mirrors, 162. 
ruman to Miguel Aleman, July 14, 1951; Migratory Labor Folder 17, Mexi(cid:173)
' 1951 [3 of 4], Truman Papers, Truman Library. 
. MacLean to Harry S. Truman, July 19, 1946, Truman Library, official file 
in Stephen R.  Niblo, War Diplomacy and Development: The  United States 

1938-1954 (Wilmington, Del.: Scholarly Resources, 1995), 251. 

and Roger Daniels, Guarding the Golden Door: American Immigration Policy 

since 1882 (New York: Hill and Wang, 2004), 120-21. 

. Kennedy, "The Immigration Act of 1965," Annals of theAmericanAcademy 
and Social Science 367 (1966), 137-49, 137. 
iggs, Immigration Policy and the American Labor Force  (Baltimore: Johns 

Departnae11t of Justice, Statistical Yearbook  of the Immigration  and Naturaliza-

1996 (Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1997), 173. 

, House,  Committee  on Appropriations.  Subcommittee  on  Depart(cid:173)

of State, Justice, Commerce, the Judiciary, and Related Agencies 
for 1981, Hearings Before a Subcommittee of the Committee on Appropriations, 
ong., 2nd sess., 1980, 32, and Briggs, Immigration Policy, 134· 
Immigration Policy, 67. 

Frames Immigration Debate," Los Angeles Times, June 3, 2006. 

Immigration Policy, 61. 
orth, "Lessons Learned from the Legalization Program of the 1980s," Center 
Studies, January 2005, http:jjwww.cis.org; Philip 1. Martin, "Good 
Gone Awry: IRCA and US Agriculture," Annals of the American Academy of 

and Social Science 534 (1994), 44-57, 48-49. 
rand, Douglas S. Massey, and Emilio Parrado, "The New Era of Mexican Mi(cid:173)
to the United States," journal of American History  86,  no.  2 (1999),  518-36, 

55  Andres Landa y Pifia, Politic a demogrdfica estatuida en el Plan Sexenal (Mexico 

Walls and Mirrors, 181-82. 

1935), 3-4· 

56  Mae  M.  Ngai, Impossible Subjects: Illegal Aliens and the Making of Modem 

(Princeton:  Princeton University  Press,  2004),  so,  and  Camille 
Mexican  Workers  and American Dreams: Immigration,  Repatriation,  and 
Farm Labor, 1900-1939 (New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 1994), 

57  Balderrama and Rodriguez, Decade of Betrayal, 68. 

Durand  and  Douglas  S.  Massey,  "Borderline  Sanity," American  Prospect  12 
17, 28. 

W. Richmond, The Mexican Nation: Historical Continuity and Modern Change 
Saddle River, N.J.: Prentice Hall, 2002), 315. 

