 

Fachbereich 7: Sprach- und Literaturwissenschaft

Testing Reading Comprehension  

Seminar: Testing for Language Teachers 
Dozent: Prof. Dr. phil. Dirk Siepmann 

WS 2015/2016 

Osnabrück, 24.03.2016 

Referentinnen: 
Lara-Sophia Kratochvil 
Anna Milke 

 
1. Introduction 

During the seminar “Testing For Language Teachers” every group had to design vari-
ous  tests  for  different  competences  (e.g.  speaking,  listening,  lexico-grammar,  lan-
guage  awareness,  testing  for  young  learners  and  reading)  and  school  levels.  Our 
tests intend to measure the reading ability for students of secondary schools level II. 
 
The following paper is subdivided into the chapters: General information, Mul-
tiple-Choice, Test design and the Conclusion. In the beginning we sum up the infor-
mation about reading ability and the requirements for the test takers. Later on, the 
method of a multiple choice test is described, followed by the advantages and disad-
vantages of this testing method. After that the test design is explained, focusing on 
individual questions, distractors and specific demands. Closing up with problems, we 
explain what occurred to be the most difficult part of the test construction. 

2. General information 

Since our tests intend to measure reading ability, we firstly want to define the aspects 
of reading comprehension. Basically, test takers have to understand the lexical items 
and extract the meaning of unknown items. Furthermore, they need to comprehend 
“the  syntactical  patterns  and  morphological  forms  characteristic  of  the  written  lan-
guage.”  Additionally, test takers have to identify the central idea of the text and have 
to figure out the correct conclusion in order to answer the questions correctly.  2

1

As our tests are designed for students of grade 12 the level corresponds to the 
 
levels B1 and B2 of the Common European Framework (CEFR). The level B1 is defi-
ned as “I can understand texts that consist mainly of high frequency everyday or job- 
related language. I can understand the description of events, feelings and wishes in 
personal letters.”  Based on level B1, level B2 requires even deeper knowledge: “I 
can  read  articles  and  reports  concerned  with  contemporary  problems  in  which  the 
writers adopt particular attitudes or viewpoints. I can understand contemporary litera-
ry prose.”  Those levels form the basis for the Curriculum of Lower Saxony for level 
II. The Curriculum inserts the level B1+, which is an intermediate stage between B1 
and B2 form the CEFR: 

3

4

“Am Ende der Einführungsphase können die Schülerinnen und Schüler weit-
gehend  selbstständig  verschiedene  Texte  aus  Themenfeldern  ihres  Interes-
sen-  und  Erfahrungsbereiches  lesen  und  ver-  stehen.  In  diesen  Texten  wird 
eine weitgehend authentische Sprache verwendet, die auf einem er- weiterten 
Grundwortschatz basiert. (B1+)“   5

 Harris, David P.: Testing English as a Second Language. New York: McGraw-Hill Book, 
1
1969. Print. p. 59.

2

 cf.: Harris: Testing English as a Second Language. p. 59.

 Common European Framework of Reference for Languages: Learning, Teaching, Assess
-
3
ment. Web: <http://www.coe.int/t/dg4/ linguistic/Source/Framework_EN.pdf> [17.12.2015], p. 
26.

4
 Common European Framework of Reference for Languages: Learning, Teaching, Assess
-
ment. Web. p. 27.

5
 Niedersächsisches Kultusministerium: Kerncurriculum für das Gymnasium - gymnasiale 
Oberstufe, die Gesamtschule - gymnasiale Oberstufe, das Fachgymnasium, das Abendgym-
nasium, das Kolleg. Englisch. Hannover, 2009. p.13.

Other learning goals are among other things “Die Schülerinnen und Schüler können 
nach  entsprechender  Vorbereitung  Texte  außerhalb  eigener  Kenntnis-  und  Interes-
sengebiete, z. B. auch zu aktuellen Ereignissen und Problemen, weitgehend selbst-
ständig erschließen.“   6
 
our test items meet the requirements of the Curriculum and the CEFR.  

During designing the tests, we took these general aspects into account so that 

3. Multiple-Choice 

As  mentioned  above,  our  two  tests  are  designed  to  test  the  reading  ability  of  stu-
dents.  We  choose  the  test  question  type  multiple-choice  because  those  questions 
are the only method of testing someone’s reading ability. “The term validity refers to 
whether  or  not  the  test  measures  what  it  claims  to  measure”   which  is  one  of  the 
most important criteria of a test. Furthermore, the tests have to be reliable, so that a 
test taker would end up getting the same results at two different occasions.   8
 
Multiple-choice  test  items  have  various  advantages  and  therefore  are 
“regarded as being one of the most useful of all objective item types.”  If only one an
-
swer per question is correct, it is called single-choice question.
 That type has the 
advantage  that  it  is  very  simple  to  evaluate  and  to  score,  whereas  multiple-choice 
questions  are  difficult  to  evaluate  because  various  answers  can  be  correct.  To 
prevent that test takers mark every answer as correct to have the right answer mar-

10

 

7

9

6

 cf. ibid.

7
 Professional Testing Inc.: How Do You Determine If A Test Has Validity, Reliability, Fairness, 
And Legal Defensibility?. 2006, p.1. Web: <http://www.proftesting.com/test_topics/pdfs/tes-
t_quality.pdf>

 cf.: Professional Testing Inc.: How Do You Determine If A Test Has Validity, Reliability, Fair
8
ness, And Legal Defensibility?. 2006, p.1.

-

9
 Heaton, J.B.: Longman Handbooks for Language Teachers – Writing English Language 
Tests, London: Longman Group Limited, 1975, p.14 Print.

 cf.: Krüger, Marc: elsa – Erstellen und Bewerten von Multiple-Choice-Aufgaben. 

10
29.7.2013. Web: < https://www.uni-hannover.de/fileadmin/luh/content/elearning/practicalgui-
des2/didaktik/elsa_handreichung_zum_erstellen_und_bewerten_von_mc-fragen_2013.pdf>

12

17

 13

14

15

ked, false answers result in negative scoring.
 Another advantage is that the test de
-
11
signer can control the level difficulty by increasing or decreasing “the degree of simi-
larity among the options to the items.“
 Moreover, the guessing of correct answers is 
reduced.
 
Disadvantages  of  multiple-choice  tests  are  the  following:  Even  though 
 
multiple-choice tests are frequently used, they are one of the most difficult test types 
to  construct.
  In  addition  those  test  questions  are  very  time  consuming  to  design 
since you have to find at least three possible distractors. “The task of a distractor is to 
distract the majority of poor students (i.e. those who do not know the answer) from 
the correct option.”
 Besides that “[p]erformance on MC items can be influenced by 
student characteristics unrelated to the subject matter, such as reading ability, deduc-
tive reasoning, the use of context clues and risk-taking.“
 
After  listing  advantages  and  disadvantages  of  multiple-choice  items  a 
selection of guidelines for designing those items is listed below. Firstly, test designers 
have to find an adequate text and appropriate questions for the group being tested. 
Both,  the  text  and  the  questions,  should  not  be  too  short  or  too  long  because  the 
test’s reliability would not be proper.
 Secondly, the answers to the questions have to 
be comparable and parallel in form. Thirdly, the distractors have to be plausible as 
well as equally attractive to students who do not know the right answer.
 Forthly, the 
number of answer options should be among 3-5 items, “since it is often very difficult 
to  construct  items  with  even  five  options,  four  options  are  recommended  for  most 
classroom  tests.”
  Fifthly,  all  options  have  to  be  grammatically  consistent.  Sixthly, 
the questions have to have a definite answer. And lastly, the use of vocabulary has to 

 16

 

19

18

11

 cf.: ibid.

 University of Minnesota, The Office of Measurement Services: Writing Multiple-Choice 

12
Items. 2011. Web: < https://oms.umn.edu/fce/how_to_write/multiplechoice.php>

13

 cf.: ibid.

14

 cf.: Heaton: Writing English Language Tests, p.14.

15

 Heaton: Writing English Language Tests, p.15.

16

17

 University of Minnesota: Writing Multiple-Choice Items. Web.

 cf.: Heaton: Writing English Language Tests, p.14.

18

 cf.: University of Minnesota: Writing Multiple-Choice Items. Web.

19

 Heaton: Writing English Language Tests, p.14.

be correct and clear. Negative wording should be avoided as well as absolute lan-
guage like ‘never’, ‘always’.  
All these points, and even others, have to be taken into account while 
 
designing a multiple-choice or single-choice test. In the following chapter it is stated 
how we designed the tests and were problems occurred. 

 

4. Test design 

After  deciding  for  a  multiple  choice  test,  we  began  looking  for  appropriate  texts. 
Our requirements were a text length around thousand words, and a correct text level. 
Concerning the level we kept the Curriculum in mind, where it is said that a B1 to B2 
text  has  to  be  complex  but  also  authentic.
  Furthermore  the  Curriculum  demands 
different  reading  techniques,  such  as  ”skimming,  careful  /  detailed  reading, 
scanning”
 so we not only had to find enough questions, but also ones where the 
students need to apply those techniques. 

21

20

Hence we decided for the text The London Underground by Mike Pilewski, as it fits 
our requirements and also matches the prescribed thematic field of globalisation and 
global changes. In the Spotlight Magazine, it is described as an advanced level and 
therefore is compatible with class twelve. The questions are arranged in a chronolo-
gical order and begin with a simple question about historical data. In question num-
ber two students have to conclude the reason for the underground and as the verbs 
in the test items do not match the verbs in the text, they also have to develop the 
meaning  without  a  dictionary.  Throughout  the  test  students  need  to  read  carefully, 
otherwise they might tick the wrong answer as it also seems right. The last question 
meets  the  demand  of  the  Curriculum  of  a  ”wörterbuchunabhängige  Erschließungs-
techniken”

, a differentiation between infer and deduce meaning.  

22

The  text  Are  We  No  Longer  Embarrassed  About  Anything?  by  Nicola  Pearson 
came in question as it is about current events in nowadays society and the topic also 
affects todays youth. By replacing important words through synonyms, students have 

20

21

22

 cf.: Niedersächsisches Kultusministerium: Kerncurriculum für das Gymnasium. p.20.
 cf. ibid.
 cf. ibid.

to understand the author’s intention and statements. Several answer options seem 
justified but the right answer can only be found by reading the text in detail. Just as in 
the first text, the last question is about understanding unknown words without using a 
dictionary. 

Some  difficulties  occurred  when  we  constructed  the  tests.  As  we  are  trainee 
teachers for primary schools, we were not used to develop tests for level B1 to B2. 
Searching appropriate texts took much more time than expected, even if the text le-
vels in the Spotlight Magazine are tagged. The concrete formulation of questions was 
not that complicated, but it took a lot of time to come up with distractors. We always 
tried to keep the balance between an obviously wrong and possibly right answer.  

The  student’s  feedback  on  the  test  The  London  Underground  was  good,  even 
though there was a discussion on the test level in total, as some student’s found it 
too difficult. As some noticed, the tests are not large enough to stand on their own. 
But as it is not typical for a test in year twelve to only measure reading comprehensi-
on, we clarified that such tests like ours would be followed by additional tasks, such 
as interpretation and argumentation tasks which also measure reading ability. 

5. Conclusion 

To sum up, the presented tests are appropriate for measuring reading comprehensi-
on in year twelve, as we kept essential requirements in mind, such as the Curriculum 
and CEFR for levels B1 to B2. By choosing a multiple choice method the validity is 
guaranteed, as the task takers do not have to write the answer and the demand is 
clear. Moreover, reliability is ensured by an adequate text length. The test The Lon-
don Underground matches the topic globalisation which is one of the prescribed to-
pics in the Curriculum, whereas the test Are We No Longer Embarrassed About Any-
thing fits the interests and current happenings in today's youth. 

6. Bibliography 

Common European Framework of Reference for Languages: Learning, Teaching, 
Assessment.  
Web: <http://www.coe.int/t/dg4/linguistic/Source/Framework_EN.pdf> [17.12.2015] 

Heaton, J.B.: Longman Handbooks for Language Teachers – Writing English Lan-
guage Tests, London: Longman Group Limited, 1975, p.14 Print. 

Krüger, Marc: elsa – Erstellen und Bewerten von Multiple-Choice-Aufgaben. 
29.7.2013.  
Web: <https://www.uni-hannover.de/fileadmin/luh/content/elearning/practicalguides2/
didaktik/elsa_handreichung_zum_erstellen_und_bewerten_von_mc-
fragen_2013.pdf> [27.1.2016] 

Niedersächsisches Kultusministerium: Kerncurriculum für das Gymnasium - gymna-
siale Oberstufe, die Gesamtschule - gymnasiale Oberstufe, das Fachgymnasium, 
das Abendgymnasium, das Kolleg. Englisch. Hannover, 2009. Web: <http://db2.ni-
bis.de/1db/cuvo/datei/kc_englisch_go_i_2009.pdf> [17.12.2015] 

Pearson, Nicola: Are we no longer embarrassed about anything? In: The Times, Oct 
5, 2010. Web: <http://englischlehrer.de/texts/embarrassed.php> [20.01.2016] 

Pilewski, Mike: The London Underground. In: Spotlight Das Magazin für Englisch. 
1/2013. 

Professional Testing Inc.: How Do You Determine If A Test Has Validity, Reliability, 
Fairness, And Legal Defensibility?. 2006, p.1. Web: <http://www.proftesting.com/tes-
t_topics/pdfs/test_quality.pdf> [27.1.2016] 

University of Minnesota, The Office of Measurement Services: Writing Multiple-
Choice Items. 2011.  
Web: < https://oms.umn.edu/fce/how_to_write/multiplechoice.php> [27.1.2016] 

7. Appendix 

Test 1: 
Task: Read the text carefully and answer the single choice questions below. 

The London Underground 
Mike Pilewski (Spotlight. Das Magazin für Englisch 1/2013) 

 
What  we  think  of  today  as  a  wonder  of  the  modern  world,  The  Times  de-
scribed in 1862 as “an insult to common sense”: trains running beneath the streets of 
London. But what other alternative could there be to the overcrowded roads of the 
British capital? 
 
Passenger trains were a relatively new invention at that time. The first of them 
operated in 1830, but by the 1840s, they had become commonplace. By mid-century, 
central London was already so densely populated that there was no place for above-
ground  railway  lines.  They  ended  to  the  north  at  Paddington,  Euston  and  King’s 
Cross stations. What was needed was a way of connecting these stations.  
 
In 1845, solicitor Charles Pearson suggested that they could be linked under-
ground. He called it putting “trains in drains”, and in 1853, after several years of lob-
bying, he got parliament to agree to the idea. A few years later, he was able to get the 
City of London and private investors to pay for the cost. 
In 1860, construction began in Euston Road. Work was carried out from the 
 
top downwards: roads were torn up, big holes were dug and tracks were placed in 
them. Brick tunnels were then built to cover the lines, and the roads above them were 
reinstated. 
 
By 10 January 1863. Six kilometres of underground railway – called the Met-
ropolitan Line – opened between Paddington and a new station at Farringdon Street, 
just  beyond  King’s  Cross.  On  that  day,  150  years  ago  this  month,  30,000-40,000 
passengers rode in wooden carriages pulled by a steam-powered locomotive. In its 
first year, the train carried 11.8 million people. 
 
As the first such underground railway in the world, the Metropolitan Line was 
something  of  an  experiment.  The  smoke  from  the  locomotives  made  it  difficult  to 
breathe in the tunnels. Workers, however, loved the convenience. A special fare al-

lowed them to travel cheaply before 6 a.m. People with little money could, for the first 
time, consider living outside central London, where costs were lower. 
This was such an attractive idea that the population followed the trains into the 
 
outskirts. In 1864, the Metropolitan Line was extended west to the farming village of 
Hammersmith, and suddenly, people started to move there. Other villages, too, grew 
enormously when railway lines reached them. The ease of travel helped London to 
grow to its present dimensions. 
Because  the  Metropolitan  was  so  successful,  another  company  soon  built  a 
 
second line, the District Line, along the Victoria Embankment. This was opened late 
in 1868. The two railways were to be connected by a Circle Line, but disagreement 
between the rival owners took years to overcome. Even then, Metropolitan trains ran 
clockwise, while District Line trains ran anticlockwise. Each company refused to sell 
tickets  for  the  other,  so  that  passengers  might  have  had  to  travel  a  long  distance 
around the circle in one direction instead of a short distance in the other. 
By  1890,  further  competition  developed. The  “cut  and  cover”  method  of  dig-
 
ging  tunnels  close  to  the  surface,  which  had  meant  closing  roads,  was  no  longer 
necessary. Better machinery and electrified railway lines allowed tunnels to be dug 
quickly and at much greater depths. By 1907, the centre of London was criss-crossed 
by seven new “deep-level” lines, the round cross section of their tunnels inspiring the 
name “the Tube”. 
 
One  of  these  lines,  crossing  the  capital  from  west  to  east,  from  Shepherd’s 
Bush to Liverpool Street, was the Central Line. The route included a number of sud-
den turns, because the tunnels still followed the lines of the streets above. This was 
done to avoid having to pay property owners for the use of their land. Curved lines 
had to be built, such as those at Bank station, making it necessary to “mind the gap” 
between the trains and the platforms. But the route taken by the “Twopenny Tube” 
was the one on which 100,000 people a day wanted to travel. 
 
That  was  about  where  the  convenience  ended,  though.  Because  different 
companies  built  and  operated  different  underground  lines  without  central  planning, 
they were not well coordinated. Different tunnel heights meant that not all trains could 
run all lines. One stop might have two stations that were not connected to each other. 
Stations on competing routes could be very close to each other, making one of them 
unnecessary. For these reasons, the London Underground today has 40 such “ghost 
stations” that are no longer used. 

 
Around  1900, American  financier  Charles  Tyson  Yerkes  bought  most  of  the 
underground  lines.  His  successor  at  his  company,  Albert  Stanley  (later  known  as 
Lord Ashfield), combined the lines to form a single system. He worked closely with 
administrator  Frank  Pick  to  have  the  stations  labelled  with  the  name  Underground 
and a logo – a circle with a bar through it. The two men produced the first map show-
ing all the Underground lines together. 
 
More importantly, Stanley and Pick were able to hand over the privately fund-
ed – and unprofitable – London Underground to public finance in 1933. A new body 
took control of all railway, bus, tram and underground services in the capital. 
A consolidated system was useful during the Second World War, when a num-
 
ber of stations were used as bomb shelters. Prime Minister Winston Churchill even 
held a few cabinet meetings in one of the “ghost stations”, while part of the Piccadilly 
Line  was  closed  off  and  used  to  protect  valuable  artefacts  belonging  to  the  British 
Museum. 
 
Victoria Line in 1968, the Jubilee Line in 1979 and the Jubilee Extension in 1999. 
 
Today  the  London  Underground  carries  almost  as  many  passengers  as  the 
entire rail network in Britain. So in January, Transport for London is arranging a num-
ber of events to mark the Underground’s 150th anniversary. The first passenger jour-
ney  will  be  recreated,  using  specially  restored  trains,  including  a  steam  locomotive 
and  the  oldest  operational  Underground  carriage.  New  two-pound  coins  will  be  is-
sued, and poems, short stories about the individual Tube lines and an exhibition of 
historical poster art will be created. Theatrical performances will be given at the Ald-
wych “ghost station”, while films with a London Underground theme will be shown at 
others. 

The Underground, as we know it today, was completed with the addition of the 

The London Underground: 

1. How long did it take (from the 1830s) until the trains were widely spread around 
London? 

a.
b.
c.
d.

About ten years. 
About twenty years. 
About thirty years. 
About forty years. 

2. What was the reason for building the tracks underground? 

a.
b.
c.
d.

Avoiding conflicts with property owners. 
There was no room left for overground tracks due to overpopulation. 
The forces of nature do not influence underground tracks. 
The smoke of the locomotives does not harm people’s health. 

3. According to the text, why did many people move to the periphery? 

a.
b.
c.
d.

Living in Central London was oppressive. 
Living conditions in the periphery were better than in Central London. 
Costs for living in the periphery dropped rapidly.  
Costs for transportation were affordable. 

4. What was the main issue between the Metropolitan and the District Line? 

a.
b.
c.
d.

The two companies denied vending tickets for their competitor. 
The two lines were built on different levels. 
Both lines were united by another line. 
Both lines were built too close to the surface. 

5. What purpose was pursued in adapting the street pattern? 

a.
b.
c.
d.

It was easy to copy the street pattern. 
Technically it was the only option. 
No ownership was affected. 
London’s citizens could find orientation due to the familiar pattern. 

6. Which planning errors led to the so called “ghost stations”? 

a.
b.
c.
d.

Due to dissimilar tunnel heights certain stations were inaccessible. 
Some stations could not be maintained anymore. 
Many stations were built nearby and were therefore uneconomic 
The closure of those stations was cheaper than the demolition 

7. Who laid the foundation for a coordinated public underground system? 

a.
b.
c.
d.

Charles Tyson Yerkes 
Charles Pearson 
Albert Stanley 
Frank Pick 

8. The word “reinstate” (l. )is closest in meaning to… 

a.
b.
c.
d.

recover 
rearrange 
reshape 
rebuild 

Test 2: 

Task: Read the text carefully and answer the single choice questions below. 

Are We No Longer Embarrassed About Anything? 
Source: Pearson, Nicola: Are we no longer embarrassed about anything? The Times, 
Oct 5, 2010. Web.  
<http://englischlehrer.de/texts/embarrassed.php> 

As modern media tempt us to reveal lurid details that would make our parents blush, 
have we lost our sense of shame? 
Imagine my surprise when, a few days ago, walking home from the pub, I fell 
 
over two people having sex on the path. OK, it was quite secluded. But it was still 
next to the bus stop and they were definitely more irritated at being interrupted than 
they were embarrassed. Then, at a party the following night, a 20-something girl was 
giving assembled company full-on details about her impending boob-job — including 
invitations to prod and squeeze, and how her boyfriend felt about it sexually. It got me 
thinking — whatever happened to embarrassment? 
It’s probably not much consolation if you spend a lot of time blushing puce with 
 
mortification, but a certain amount of embarrassment is actually a good thing. Unlike 
shame our guilt, you don’t feel embarrassment when you’re on your own; it’s a social 
emotion,  a  public  self-consciousness  that  shows  you  care  what  other  people  think 
about  you  and  accept  certain  standards  of  behaviour.  As  a  form  of  self-editing,  it 
generally makes you a nicer person. Rowland Miller, a psychology professor at Sam 
Houston State University in Texas, has spent 30 years studying embarrassment and 
says that people like you more if you show signs of it. “Embarrassment is a good in-
dication of a person’s concern for social acceptance. We don’t tend to like or trust 
people  who  don’t  mind  what  we  think  of  them.  We  often  like  someone  more  after 
they’ve taken a pratfall.“ 
 
In  his  latest  research,  published  last  month  in  the  United  States,  Miller  con-
cludes  that  embarrassment  has  declined  rapidly  over  the  past  few  years  and  that 
technology is largely the cause. What tends to embarrass us are flaws in our own 
behaviour  —  temporary  stupidity  of  loss  of  control  —  that  ruin  our  social  image, 
things such as getting drunk and throwing up or forgetting someone’s name. Miller 
says that when we show we are embarrassed by blushing or pulling a face, it is an 

instant non-verbal apology. Seeing someone else embarrassed also triggers empa-
thy in most people and the common reaction to that is support. 
This  conciliatory  aspect  of  embarrassment  explains  why  gangs  of  loud 
 
teenage girls on the bus are so annoying. They’re showing they don’t give a damn 
what anyone thinks of them, and socially that’s very aggressive. 
 
Obviously  what  embarrasses  people  changes  over  time,  from  generation  to 
generation. My mother swore she never heard my father fart, nor knew how much 
her friends earned and certainly not how much sex they had. But Miller says that we 
have become so ”heedless of publicity“, so adept at baring every thought and emo-
tion on Twitter and Facebook, that we’re becoming desensitised. ”If you watch people 
making  complete  fools  of  themselves  on  Big  Brother  or  the  X  Factor  every  week,“ 
says Miller, ”what the hell have you got to be embarrassed about? And particularly if 
they’re making money from it, brazen becomes good.“ 
 
When I mention my recent discovery by the bus stop, Miller laughs and says 
he’ll now have to rethink his attitude to the British, but agrees such behaviour is part 
of  the  increasing  ”failures  of  privacy  regulation“.  ”In  the  past,  there  were  always 
things we didn't want our mothers to know we were doing; everyone behaves differ-
ently with their friends. But now there is no segregation of audience, a blurring of the 
line between who sees what, so a huge variety of people can get to know everything 
about us.“ 
 
Because teenagers use this media and technology the most, Miller agrees it’s 
their change in attitude that is most marked. ”It’s your parents who teach you a set of 
embarrassment codes, be it don’t pick your nose in public or laugh at someone’s dis-
figurement, but it’s only when you become a teenager that you have the socialisation 
skills and the cognitive abilities to understand the emotion. Combine that with being 
blind-sided by your new-found sexuality and most teenagers spend a lot of time crip-
pled  with  embarrassment.“  Now,  it’s  often  young  people  whose  don’t-care  attitude 
makes other people’s lives uncomfortable. There’s so little shame in social disappro-
bation: most recipients of ASBOs don’t seem overly concerned with them. 
 
Oliver  James,  the  psychologist  and  author  of Affluenza,  says  that  since  the 
1960s there has been a massive shift from a collective society to one based on indi-
vidualism.  Before  this  change  morals  were  underpinned  by  religion  and  externally 
imposed, and people were connected to and answerable to family and friends. In the 

current age ethics have become a personal choice and we are only accountable to 
ourselves. 
”Self-regulation  has  been  overtaken  by  a  greed-is-good,  pragmatic  mentality 
 
that  exploded  in  the  mid-1980s,  epitomised  by  Michael  Douglas’s  film  Wall  Street, 
that is all about ‘what suits me’,“ says James. ”Role models for young people become 
people who talk about themselves, which then becomes legitimised behaviour … and 
that also includes Diana, Princess of Wales’s extraordinary TV revelations in 1995, 
and the glut of autobiographies of the famous that reveal far too much information, in 
the misguided belief that because you’re saying it yourself, it puts you in control.“ 
So does it matter that people are becoming less bothered about what people 
 
think of them? ”Obviously,“ says Miller, ”you don’t want there to be so much embar-
rassment  in  society  that  teenagers  have  unprotected  sex  because  they  can’t  bring 
themselves to buy condoms, or it prevents young women from having health checks. 
Certainly worrying too much about what people think of you can make people moody, 
unhappy and eventually neurotic, but should you want to completely overcome em-
barrassment? No. On the whole, people seeking to avoid embarrassment are more 
considerate, careful and respectful.“ 
 
James argues that ”without embarrassment, we feel justified in behaving com-
pletely  without  restraint.  If  we  no  longer  share  a  universal  sense  of  politeness  and 
right  and  wrong,  we  all  become  more  callous  and  make  other  people’s  lives  less 
pleasurable.“ 
The  disappearance  of  a  collective  ethos  means  we’re  confronted  with  more 
 
annoyances and it becomes uncomfortable and occasionally dangerous to attempt to 
enforce  social  norms.  ”There  hasn't  been  masses  of  research  on  it,“  he  concedes, 
”but embarrassment is linkes to shame and shame is connected to more monumental 
transgressions. If the erosion of embarrassment leads to the erosion of a collective 
shame, then that has much stronger implications.“ 

Are We No Longer Embarrassed About Anything? 

1. What is positive about a certain amount of embarrassment? 

a.
b.
c.
d.

It shows empathy and that someone cares about social standards. 
It shows that someone is integrated within society. 
It proves someone’s self-confidence. 
It demonstrates someone’s humorous way. 

2. What usually causes embarrassment? 

a.
b.
c.
d.

Someone’s misbehaviour while being alone. 
Someone’s uncertainty. 
Someone’s misbehaviour in public. 
Someone’s miscommunication. 

3.  According  to  Miller,  the  decrease  of  embarrassment  during  the  last  years  was 
mostly initiated by… 

a.
b.
c.
d.

new parenting styles. 
different social standards. 
celebrities. 
technology. 

4. Which role do gestures and facial expression play? 

a.
b.
c.
d.

They are an expression of insecurity. 
They are an immediate excuse. 
They are used as red herrings. 
They are an expression of kindness. 

5. What kind of change occurred during the past 50 years? 

a.
b.
c.
d.

The church’s influence on social standards has diminished. 
Parents started to shape their children’s social standards. 
Social standards became a common choice. 
Social standards became an individual choice. 

6. Who acts as a role model for today’s youth, according to James? 

a.
b.
c.
d.

Famous people. 
Peers. 
Teachers. 
Parents. 

7. What happens if society does not share a common understanding of appropriate 
behaviour, as stated by James? 

a.
b.
c.
d.

Miscommunication happens more often. 
People behave numb. 
Society becomes more diverse. 
People behave tolerant. 

8. The word ‘callous’ (l. ) is closest in meaning to… 

a.
b.
c.
d.

unpleasant 
unkind 
insensitive 
impolite 

