Subject-specific English course for computer science students 

Overview of content, aims and topics 

Dr. Jörg Krywkow, Dr. Debbie Coetzee-Lachmann, Language Center, Osnabrück University 

December 2015 

1 

 

 

Unit 4: Discursive differences between academic English and German and common errors made in 
English 

 

A)  Aims  

In this unit, you will: 
  Be introduced to three important discursive differences between academic English and 

German. 

  Compile an online guide for fellow students identifying common problems occurring in their 

writing and offering advice on how to avoid these. 

 

B)  Discursive differences between academic English and German 

There are three major differences between English and German academic texts. English texts tend to reflect 
the features of a writer-responsible language. This means that it is the responsibility of the writer to make his 
or her text as easy as possible to read and follow. Formal written German, on the other hand, tends to reflect 
features of a reader-responsible language. This means that the reader is expected to be interested in what one 
has to say and to be willing to spend time and effort to engage with the text. 

English texts also tend to be more linear in their argumentation. This aspect was already introduced in Unit 2, 
when we looked at information packaging in an English sentence. A more linear form of argumentation entails 
that the argument follows quite a simple and straightforward line of development. This is supported by 
principles of information packaging prevalent in English sentences. The sentences tend to be kept short with 
only one or two pieces of information per sentence. Furthermore, the most important or new information is 
presented in the second part of the sentence. Look at these two examples. Notice how the second text seems 
to be more “English” than the first.  

Single mothers between the ages of 25 and 35 participated in the research. During the course of the study, all 
respondents lived in the Ruhr area. The product was reported to be used at least once by those who 
participated. In-home tests followed by one-on-one interviews, questionnaires and focus group discussions 
were used to determine their level of satisfaction with the new product. 

We conducted the research amongst single mothers between the ages of 25 and 35. All respondents lived in the 
Ruhr area during the course of the study. Those who participated all reported using the product at least once. 
Their level of satisfaction with the new product was determined by means of in-home tests followed by one-on-
one interviews, questionnaires and focus group discussions.  

Finally, English writers tend to sell their ideas and use strong forms of argumentation in order to persuade the 
reader of the quality of the ideas presented. In German texts, however, the approach is often to simply share  

 

2 

information in an ongoing discussion aimed at widening horizons, but not necessarily at persuading anyone to 
fully accept the view of the writer. The reader is left with more room to make up his or her mind. The different 
degrees of persuasiveness are achieved through differences in the use of hedging devices and persuasive 
language.  

 

C)  Common problems occurring in academic texts written in English by speakers of other 

languages 
Use the information below to compile a guide that your fellow students can use to improve their 
own writing. Consider using extracts from your own and other students’ texts to illustrate the 
problems. You can find examples of students’ writing here: https://www.informatik.uni-
osnabrueck.de/arbeitsgruppen/medieninformatik/abschlussarbeiten.html. 
 
Make sure that you structure the guide in a logical way that will make it easy for students to look 
up different aspects that academic writes may struggle with. The structure used below is one 
based on linguistic categories. You do not have to stick to it, if you do not find it helpful. Simply 
ensure that any alternative structure is suitable for the intended audience. 
 

Exercises on common grammar and punctuation errors 

Complete the following exercises. 

 

A)  Grammar 

 

1.  Position of participial and compound adjectives 

Sometimes we use the present and past participles of verbs to form adjectives, e.g. increasing 

numbers and continued interest. One can also use the present and past participles of verbs to form 

compound adjectives, such as a time-honoured tradition and life-enhancing measures. These are 

usually spelled with a hyphen. Whether to put a participial adjective before or rather after a noun is 

not always easy to predict. When in doubt, put it after the noun.  

 

a)  Correct the errors in the following sentences. Pay attention to the adjectives. Note that some 

sentences are correct. 

1.  The discussed theories have all led to breakthroughs in the field. 

2.  The desired effect can be achieved by carefully regulating the temperature.  

3.  This is a culture specific phenomenon. 

4.  The proposed method renders highly accurate measurements.   

3 

 

5.  The estimated amount is shown on a large screen.  

6.  The mentioned theories all provide a sound basis for the analysis of this phenomenon. 

7.  The discussed research offers some answers to the above posed questions. 

8.  The observed phenomena provide evidence of these changes. 

9.  The concerned study looks into the effects this type of treatment has on children. 

10. The encountered problems were dealt with by changing the setting. 

 

b)  Past participles that have to follow the noun: 

discussed, mentioned, used, analysed, provided, concerned, involved, studied, obtained, conferred, 
presented, covered, encountered, reached, produced. 

Here are a couple of sentences to illustrate the use of these past participles: 

1)  

“Pertaining to our previous correspondence, I would like to point out that the matters discussed did not 
include any decisions on the time frame for the project. When would you like us to start?”1 

 

2) 

“The methods used offer a very detailed insight into developments.”2 

3) 

“The data obtained through this method do not only reflect current trends, but also give some indication 
of future trends.”3  

4) 

“The problems encountered in collecting the data were addressed by means of the following 
measures:…”4 

                                                           
1 This sentence may appear in a formal mail in which you are negotiating about a project. 
2 This could come from the section in your paper or thesis pointing out the advantages of a specific methodology. 
3 The same as 3. 
4 This could come from a section in your paper or thesis reporting on the application of your methods, especially if 
you have to explain changes that had to be made to the planned methodology, due to unexpected obstacles in the 
collection of the data. Notice that in the previous sentence the past participles “planned” and “unexpected” 
precede the nouns “methodology” and “obstacles”. Doesn’t English sometimes just drive you crazy ;-)? Do not let 
this dishearten you, though. It simply proves to show that although language can generally be said to have 
structure and rules and logic, it is not 100% regulated and consistent. The sooner one realises that languages are 
systems of communication used by humans and that they are not perfectly predictable, the less unpleasant and 
unrealistic pressure one puts on oneself to use a particular language “perfectly”.  

 

c)  Past participles that precede the noun: 

4 

implied, required, prescribed, intended, desired, expected, labelled, added, perceived, printed, agreed, 
estimated, listed, observed, proposed, published, signed, projected, shared. 

Here are some sentences to illustrate the use of a number of these past participles: 

1) 

“The required information referred5 to above must be made available by the 3rd of May.”6 

2) 

“The added advantage of this method is that it takes a large number of variables into account.”7 

3) 

“The printed version of the questionnaire will be distributed through our local network. An estimated 
number of 500 respondents can be reached in this way.”8  

4) 

“The projected developments can be summarized as follows: …”9 

 

2.  The correct verb form  

 

2.1.  Verbs following prepositions 

Look at the following sentences. Which pattern do the verbs following the prepositions show? 

1. 

I look forward to hearing from you. 

2.  Researchers looked into assessing the phenomenon using computerised solutions. 

3.  They faced the challenge of quantifying large amounts of output in a short period of time. 

Can you formulate a rule about the form a verb takes when it follows a preposition? 

 

                                                           
5 Here the past participle “required” can precede the noun, but the past participle “referred”, must follow the 
noun.  
6 This sentence may appear in correspondence about a project to be started. 
7 This sentence could be part of a section in a proposal in which the reasons for using a specific methodology are 
explained.  
8 This sentence may appear in the section of a proposal in which the methodology is explained.  
9 This sentence may appear in the discussion section of a paper or thesis. 

 

2.2 

Verbs following verbs: Verb + infinitive or –ing form 

Some verbs are followed by the infinitives of other verbs,  

5 

e.g. The respondents reported that they wanted to know more about the product after they had been 
given a brief overview of its different uses. 

Some verbs, however, are followed by the –ing form of other verbs,  

e.g. Most respondents explained that they enjoyed drinking wine with a meal.  

Finally, some verbs can be followed by either the infinitive or the –ing form of other verbs, but then 
there are often important differences in meaning,  

e.g. When asked, most respondents answered that they did not remember drinking their first glass of 
wine. (thinking of something from the past) 

When asked, most respondents replied that they did not always remember to take their medicine. 
(something you have to do) 

How do you know whether a verb should be followed by the infinitive of another verb or by the –ing 
form? A good dictionary always shows you the patterns that can follow a verb. The verb pattern is 
presented in square brackets. Look for instance at the entry on the word “remember” in the Oxford 
Advanced Learner’s Dictionary.  

Correct the errors in the following sentences. 

1.1)  We recommend to include respondents from all groups mentioned above. 

………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

 

 

2.2) 

The analysis allows to identify the major causes of abuse occurring in prisons.  

………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

 

If you have a verb + verb+-ing construction, you can place a noun or pronoun between the two verbs 

and then use the second verb in the infinitive form, e.g. We recommend you to include respondents 

from the groups mentioned above.  

 

 

 

3) 

Nouns and articles 

6 

Nouns can either be countable or uncountable. Many nouns can be both countable and uncountable, 
depending on the meaning with which they are being used. The noun “research” for instance is an 
uncountable noun. “Analysis”, on the other hand, can be countable or uncountable. Used as a countable 
noun, one can say: “An analysis of the factors showed that…” and “Our analyses showed that…”. 
However, when the word is used in the field of psychoanalysis, it can only be used as an uncountable 
noun, e.g. “In analysis, the individual resolves difficult emotional conflicts.”. If a noun can be used as a 
countable and an uncountable noun, this is indicated in a dictionary through the use of the capital letter 
C and U following the noun and presented in square brackets, e.g. analysis [U,C]. If a noun is only seen as 
an uncountable concept, it is followed by a capital U in square brackets [U]. Nouns that only have a 
meaning as a countable concept, such as “respondent”, are not followed by either a C or a U.  

 

Whether a noun is countable or not has consequences for whether it can be used in the plural form and 
with the indefinite article “a/an” – which means “one”. The indefinite article can thus only be used with 
countable concepts. One can thus say: “an analysis”, “analyses”, “a research project”, “research 
projects”, but one cannot say “researches” or “a research”.10  

 

The definite article “the” signals that the speaker or writer assumes that the listener or reader is familiar 
with a concept and knows which concept he or she means. The definite article is therefore firstly used 
with concepts that are regarded to be unique in our everyday perception. This is for instance why we 
refer to “the sun” and “the moon”. Although there are many suns and moons in the universe, there is 
only one sun and only one moon in our everyday, non-scientific perspective. This is also why we refer to 
“the WWF” or “the UN”. There really is only one of each of these organisations.  

 

Secondly, in texts, concepts that are first referred to using an indefinite article can later be referred to 
using the definite article, because they are seen to be familiar. Look at the following examples: “A model 
that offers helpful insights into the possible causes of the problem is one that Gibbs introduced in 1984. 
The model, which was originally developed to explain the relation between …, is applied in this study to 
…” or “I had a sandwich and an apple for lunch. The sandwich was really good, but the apple was too 
sour.”  

 

Finally, the definite article can be used with concepts presented in the plural form, if the speaker or 
writer wants to point out that reference is made to a specific sub-group within a larger category, e.g. 
“Climate issues are high on the agenda at the moment. The climate issues addressed in this paper all 

                                                           
10 Remember that the noun “information” is an uncountable concept in English. It can thus not be used with the 
indefinite article or in the plural form.  

 

revolve around…” or “There are a number of problems that need to be discussed. The most urgent 
problems include: …” or “Dogs can make very good pets, provided that the right breed is chosen for the 
right circumstances. Even the most popular types of dogs can become aggressive, nervous or ill, if they 
are forced to live in conditions that do not suit their nature.  

7 

 

Coming back to countable and uncountable nouns now: Nouns that are countable are used with the 
quantifiers few and many and nouns that are uncountable are used with the quantifiers little and much, 
e.g. 

- Few people responded. 

- Many respondents failed to answer this question. 

- Little rain fell. 

- How much rain fell?A lot of can be used instead of many and of much. Notice that “much” is used in 
questions and “a lot of” in statements. 

- A lot of respondents failed to answer the question. 

- We had a lot of rain yesterday.  

- We had much rain yesterday.  

 

The determiners this, these, that and those need to be used correctly depending on whether one refers 
to a countable or an uncountable noun and whether one refers to a countable noun in the singular or 
the plural form.  

 

This and that are used with countable nouns in the singular form and with uncountable concepts: 

This group (countable noun in the singular form) of respondents tested negatively. 

This water (uncountable noun) is polluted.  

That group (countable noun in the singular form) of respondents tested negatively. 

That water (uncountable noun) was polluted.11  

 

These and those are used with countable nouns in the plural form: 

                                                           
11 “That” and “those” are used to refer to concepts perceived to be removed from the speaker or writer in time or 
space.  

8 

 

These groups tested negatively. 

Those groups tested negatively.  

a)  Which sentence is correct and why? 

  We have to do good planning. 

  We have to do a good planning. 

b)  What is the difference between the meanings of these two sentences? 

  There are good prospects for a new development in this neighbourhood. 

  There are good prospects for new development here. 

 

4) 

Compound nouns 

Unfortunately, compound nouns, like compounds in general (see the part under spelling and 
punctuation), present a somewhat difficult point in English grammar and spelling. Nouns can be 
combined in three ways in English: 

noun + noun, e.g. research report 

preposition structure, e.g. an analysis of the criteria 

possessive ‘s structure, e.g. consumers’ responses 

Usually, an idea can only be expressed in one of these three ways, but there are many exceptions and it 
is difficult to formulate watertight rules. One can only identify general tendencies. 

 

We use the noun + noun structure to name common kinds of things that often occur together. The first 
noun then rather acts like an adjective giving more detailed information about the second concept, e.g. 
interview length, interview question, telephone interview. These compounds are sometimes written as 
one word, sometimes as two and sometimes with a hyphen (see the part under spelling). 

 

The preposition structure is used to refer to concepts that do not go together that often or that are not 
seen as common, well-known, everyday occurrences, e.g. duration of an interview. 

 

The possessive ‘s structure is used to talk about something that belongs to a particular person, group, 
country or animal, e.g. the company’s sales policy.  

 

 

5) 

False parallelism 

9 

A common error occurring in complex sentences is that a required grammatical pattern is not used in 

both sentence parts. Look for instance at the following example. Can you identify the error? Think 

about the rule concerning grammatical patterns when a verb follows a preposition in this particular 

example.  

 

 

It was applied in many developing countries and a large part of the scientific discourse focused on 

making PES schemes more efficient and alleviate poverty at the same time. 

Here the collocation “focus on” is followed by the verbs “to make” and “to alleviate”. However, only 

the first verb was correctly changed into the –ing form. 

 

B)  Spelling and punctuation 

1)  Correct the punctuation errors in the following sentences and formulate a rule for each instance. 

a. 

It has been shown, that corporate social responsibility reporting has the potential to 

influence readers’ choices in various ways. 

b.  This offers the advantage that very subjective questions (e.g. „how happy are you?”) can 

now be objectively quantified. 

c.  Therefore we will first offer an overview of the current research on this topic. 

d.  After an introduction to the method an in-depth overview is given of three models widely 

discussed in the literature. 

e.  The Gibbs model which is an improved version of the Smith model was introduced in 1984.  

f.  This program is easy to use. It’s features are practical and it can be simply operated.  

 

2)  Compounds 

Compounds are two or more words that express one concept. They can be used as nouns, adjectives 

or verbs and can cause quite a lot of problems when it comes to spelling them correctly. This is due 

to two reasons. The first is that there are three different types of compounds:  

1) Open compounds, which are written as separate words, e.g.  

10 

  We did a round trip to Hamburg last weekend. (noun) 

  We played round robin. (noun) 

  You have to round off the corners with sandpaper. (verb) 

2) Hyphenated compounds, e.g.  

  They held a round-table discussion. (adjective) 

  Don’t look at me all round-eyed! I told you we will be leaving at eight! (adjective) 

 

3) Closed compounds that are written as one word, e.g.  

  The traffic accident happened at the roundabout. (noun) 

  Roundworms can be found in the stomachs of pigs, humans and some other animals. (noun) 

 

 

The second reason why compounds are problematic when it comes to spelling is that there is not 

always consistency in how they are used, since language constantly changes. Different dictionaries 

may therefore even give you different spellings. However, even if different dictionaries may give 

different options, consult a dictionary of your choice when you are uncertain about the spelling of a 

compound and then spell the compound in the same way throughout your text.  

Here is also helpful advice on the spelling of compounds taken from the whitesmoke.com website12. 

In their own words, WhiteSmoke “is an all-in-one English writing tool that provides grammar, spelling 

and style checks.”  

Cross out the compound that is incorrectly spelled.  

whole sale 

can not 

our selves 

data bases 

wholesale 

cannot 

ourselves 

databases 

                                                           
12 Taken from http://www.whitesmoke.com/using-hyphens on 21 December 2015. 

 

11 

 

 

C)  Vocabulary 

1)  Words that often get confused 

These words are often used incorrectly. Some of them cause confusion because they look and sound 

similar. Others cause confusion because their meanings are closely related. Make sure you know 

their right meanings and that you use them correctly. 

  effect – noun / to affect – verb 

  advice – noun / to advise – verb 

  economic (adjective) – related to the economy, e.g. “economic problems” / economical 

(adjective) – making effective use of money or resources, e.g. “an economical solution that 

saves time and money” 

 

12 

  measurements (noun) – dimensions or proportion of something / measures (noun) – 

actions, procedures, steps one takes to address a problem or respond to a situation requiring 

action 

 

consequence (noun) – a result of something – often (but not always) with a negative 

connotation / implication (noun) – a possible result of something / effect (noun) a result of 

something (neutral connotation – one can specify the nature of the effect by referring to 

positive and negative effects) / impact (noun) – the powerful effect that one thing has on 

another 

  effective (adjective) – producing a result that is wanted and intended / efficient (adjective) – 

doing something well and thoroughly without wasting time and resources. 

  at last (idiom) – finally, after a long delay / Lastly (adverb) – finally, used to present the final 

point you want to make.  

 

chapters (noun) – the parts of a book / sections (noun) – the parts of an article 

  personal (adjective) – your own, connected to or belonging to you / personnel (noun) - staff  

 

2)  Collocations 

Remember that words combine with one another in specific ways. We are limited in terms of the 

adjectives we can use with specific nouns, the adverbs we can use with specific verbs and the 

prepositions we can use with specific nouns and verbs. It is thus advisable to learn collocations 

rather than single words. Correct the following collocations: 

a)  a means for 

b)  offer training for 

c)  of interest for 

d)  in regard of 

e)  by help of 

f) 

receive relevance from 

g)  gives way for 

h)  in an early stage 

i)  an overview on 

j) 

increase awareness for 

k)  devoted on 

l)  barriers for change 

m)  insights on 

13 

 

n)  knowledge on 

o)  interest for 

p)  analysis on 

q)  likelihood for 

r) 

transition towards 

 

What is the difference between: 

 

Introduction into and introduction to? 

  A consequence of and a consequence for? 

  An example of and an example to? 

 

In comparison to/with and a comparison with? 

 

D)  Register and style 

1)  Consistency and clarity 

We covered some strategies academic writers use in order to establish coherence and cohesion in 
your texts in previous units. In addition to the linguistic means we use, there are also other strategies 
of a more technical nature. These include: 
a)  Choose one specific variety of English (British or American) and stick to it throughout your text. 
b)  Explain any acronyms you use and use them consistently. 
c)  Sometimes, subject-specific terms are spelled differently by different authors. Choose one 

spelling and stick to it throughout your text. 
 

Also remember to: 

d)  Write in a reader-oriented way. This entails using strategies to make your text as easy as possible 
to read, e.g. using meta-discourse to guide your reader through your text, using short sentences, 
using the active rather than the passive voice, using verbs rather than nouns etc.  

 

2)  Numbers, dates and amounts 

a)  Avoid starting sentences with numbers. 
b)  Write out numbers between 0 and 10 
c)  Decimals are said and written with a point (.) and not a comma (,), e.g. 79.3 – seventy-nine point 

three. 

d)  A comma – or in in British English also a space – is often used to divide large numbers into 

groups of three figures, e.g. 33,423 or 33 423 – thirty three thousand four hundred and twenty 

 

14 

three, or 2,768,941 – two million seven hundred and sixty-eight thousand nine hundred and 
forty-one  

e)  One million = 1,000,000; one billion = 1,000,000,000; one trillion = 1,000,000,000,000 (Billion auf 

Deutsch). 

f)  Here is a summary of how to say and write the date in British and American English. In American 

English, the month precedes the day. Except for the position of the month and the day that is 
rather fixed, quite a lot of variation is possible in the ways in which one can say and write the 
date in both British and American English.  

British English 

30 November13 2015 
30th November 2015 
The 30th of November 2015 

 

American English 

November 30, 2015 
November 30th, 2015 
One  rarely  uses  “of”  and  the  ordinal 
numbers  (adding  st,  nd,  rd)  are  used  less  in 
American  English.  One  does,  however, 
use a comma to separate the month from 
the day. 

30/11/2015 
Her birthday is on the thirtieth of 

11/30/2015 
 

November.14 

Her birthday is on November the thirtieth. 

Her birthday is November thirtieth. 

 
Insert the € before the amount, e.g. € 150 000,00. 

g) 
 

3)  Making texts more formal and eloquent through the correct word choice. 

Academic texts are written in a more formal style. The following list offers more formal alternatives 

to words that belong to a neutral register. Notice that the neutral variants tend to have a more 

general meaning and that they can be used with a larger range of other words. Alternate between 

formal and neutral variants, but make sure that the alternative you choose, collocates with the word 

with which you combine it!  

Consult McCarthy, M. and O‘Dell, F. 2008. Academic Vocabulary in Use. Cambridge: University Press, 

pp. 116 – 119 for a long list of neutral and formal variants of words regularly used in academic texts. 

 

 

 

 

 

                                                           
13 One can also put a comma before the year, e.g. 30 November, 2015. When one adds the name of the day, one 
writes: Monday, 30 November, 2015 or Monday, 30 November 2015. 
14 If you use “the“, you have to use “of“. 

 

a) 

 

Informal variant 

More formal alternatives 

15 

huge 

better 

typical of 

quite 

very 

mainly/mostly 

almost / more or less 

Adjectives 

significant  

improved / more effective / more efficient / 

faster 

characteristic of 

Adverbs 

rather 

highly 

primarily 

virtually 

in short / briefly / basically 

in sum / to sum up 

to get 

to show 

to give 

to try 

 

Verbs 

to obtain 

to illustrate / to demonstrate 

to provide 

to attempt 

b)  Do not start sentences with “and”, “but” and “because” in formal English texts.  

c)  Phrasal verbs (consisting of a verb and a preposition) belong to more informal registers. It is 

important not to overuse them. Consult a thesaurus to find the more formal variants and use them 

in your texts. Here are only a few examples of phrasal verbs and their more formal one-word 

variants that often occur in academic texts. 

Phrasal verbs 

More formal variant 

to look into 

to take apart 

to investigate 

to analyse / to dissect 

to put forward (an idea / view / theory / 

to present 

plan) 

to carry out (an experiment / research) 

to conduct 

to be made up of  

to make up 

to consist of 

to constitute 

 

 

d)  Consult a thesaurus to find different words with similar meanings in order to avoid using the same 

word repeatedly, e.g. different, various, diverse. 

16 

 
Resources 
Dictionaries and Thesauruses  

Online psychology dictionary by the American Psychological Association: 

http://psychologydictionary.org/ 

Oxford Collocations Dictionary for students of English 

Oxford Thesaurus 

Writing guides and exercise books 

Hacker, D. 2010.  A Pocket Style Manual. Bedford: St. Martin's 

Hacker, D. 2009.  A Writer’s Reference.  Bedford: St. Martin's 

Hamp-Lyons, L.  & Heasley, B. 2006. Study Writing: A Course in Written English for Academic Purposes. 

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 

McCarthy, M. and O‘Dell, F. 2008. Academic Vocabulary in Use. Cambridge: University Press 

Macgilchrist, F. 2014. Academic Writing.Paderborn: Ferdinand Schöningh 

Siepmann, D. 2012. Wissenschaftliche Texte auf Englisch schreiben. Leitfaden für die Praxis. Stuttgart: 

Ernst Klett Sprachen 

Siepmann, D., Gallagher, J.D., Hannay, M., Mackenzie, J.L. 2008. Writing in English: A Guide for Advanced 

Learners. Tübingen: A. Francke Verlag 

Swan, M. and Walter, C. 2002. How English works. A Grammar Exercise Book.  Oxford:  

University Press 

 

 

