The neuroscientific study of Altered States of 
Consciousness 
by Timo Torsten Schmidt 
 
Presentations 

(1)  The LSD-Driver’s License 

Literature: Metzinger, 2006 (article in GERMAN) 
Please shortly summarize the motivation behind the article: State what the discussion is about and 
make clear which pro and con arguments there are to give people access to psychedelic substances. 
Compare the situation with prescription drugs. Please present the idea of the LSD-Führerschein and 
what it is good for. Please discuss and critically evaluate problems that this approach solves and does 
not solve.  
Please choose how deep you want to go into details with each point and double-check with Timo that 
there is no to strong overlaps with the lecture – so you choose and the rest will be covered in the 
lecture. 
 

(2)  Harmfulness of Drugs: MDMA versus Horse riding  

Literature: Nutt, 2007 
In the Seminar session we will already discuss that drug laws are often not based on scientific 
evidence from the medical perspective. The motivation for the estimation of risks that go along with 
consuming drugs will therefore be motivated enough. In your presentation you should therefore focus 
on the details of David Nutt’s estimates of “harmfulness”. Please explain in detail how these scores are 
created and where the numbers for his calculations are derived from. Critically evaluate if this 
approach allows a fair comparison between such activities as horse riding and taking drugs. What are 
limitations of this approach and what implications does it have? 
 

(3)  Testable Hypotheses derived from the Predictive Coding framework  

Literature: Corlett&Frith, 2009  
The principle idea of the “Predictive Coding framework” will be introduced in the seminar session 
before your presentation. You should therefore only spend very short time on its introduction, and 
rather focus on how to apply it to hypotheses on particular drug effects. You can follow the arguments 
of the paper and finally end with an explanation of the summary table given in the paper. Can you make 
predictions for other drugs? What types of questions can one answer with such hypotheses? What do 
we learn from such principles and experiments? – Please communicate with the presenter of (4) to 
minimize the overlap between the presentations 
 

(4)  Sensory Deprivation: History and current research 

Literature: -  
There is a colorful history on research performed by people like Lilly dealing with sensory deprivation. 
Please summarize the motivation for those studies and the types of ASCs that are described. Present 
current techniques such as floating REST. As the previous presentation has been on the Predictive 
coding, please communicate with each other to minimize overlaps. Please derive some hypotheses on 
how the effects of floating can be explained in terms of brain function. Relate these to other research 
on e.g. mindfulness, meditation etc. 
 

(5)  Pekala’s Phenomenology of Consciousness Questionnaire 

Literature: Pekala-Book 
Please summarize the empirical approach that Pekala takes. Please describe the questionnaire that he 
as developed and summarize what type of ideas/concepts are reflected in the questionnaire. Critically 
evaluate in how far it can measure something “useful” and discuss in how far the dimensions/scales of 
the questionnaire might reflect basic aspects of consciousness, as claimed by Dittrich. 
 

(6)  Adolf Dittrich: Ethiology independent dimensions of consciousness  

Literature: Dittrich-Book 
Please summarize the idea by Adolf Dittrich of Ethiology independent dimensions of consciousness. 
Next describe the questionnaire and its structure. Please prepare a version of the questionnaire that 
everybody can get a copy. Please discuss in how far such a questionnaire can give valid results. 
Present example data from a research paper that applied the questionnaire and discuss in how far it 
allows to dissociate effects of e.g. Ketamine and Psilocybin 
 
 

(7)  LSD – history and current research  

Literature: Schmid et al. 2015 and many other sources 
There is plenty of literature on the history of LSD, including the Book “LSD mein Sorgenkind” by Albert 
Hofmann who discovered the substance. Please select reasonable sources and explain how it 
happened that LSD has been banned and no human research has been possible for decades. How do 
you evaluate the role of Timothy Leary in the complex interactions between governmental organs, 
threatening of the establishment, and Nixon’s war on drugs? Try of interpret why today some human 
LSD studies seem to become possible again? What changed from the 70th? 
 

(8)  Psilocybin – history and current research 

Literature: -  
There is plenty of literature and documentaries on the discovery of Psilocybin. Please tell the beautiful 
story how Gordon Wasson and Albert Hofman were meeting Maria Sabina and magic mushrooms 
made their way to the Western Culture. Where and what types of mushrooms contain Psilocybin? 
Shortly describe todays culture of mushroom consumption and discuss what is problematic about it 
and about underground therapeutic approaches with mushrooms. 
 

(9)  Yoga – an overview on methods 

Literature: -  
Give an overview on different Yoga techniques and discuss in how far they induce ASCs. Are the ASCs 
comparable to other induction methods? What are they used for? Do you think any of these techniques 
can be applied in neuroimaging experiments with EEG or fMRI? What can one learn from such 
experiments – are there such experiments yet? 
 

(10) Meditation – an overview on methods 

Literature: -  
Give an overview on different Meditation techniques and discuss in how far they induce ASCs. Are the 
ASCs comparable to other induction methods? What are they used for? Do you think any of these 
techniques can be applied in neuroimaging experiments with EEG or fMRI? What can one learn from 
such experiments – are there such experiments yet? 
 

(11) The Ganzfeld-Experiment 

Literature: -  
Explain what the Ganzfeld Experriment was initially used for. Explain the setup and the reported effects 
of ASCs. Give a predictive coding account for these effects and discuss what one can learn from the 
neuroscientific study of this experiment. 
 

(12) Holotropic Breathwork 

Literature: Books by Stanislav Grof 
After psychedelic substances have been banned due to the war on drugs, some people continued to 
use ASCs in kind of therapeutic sessions. Stanislav Grof, pushed to develop a standardized procedure 
of breathwork with which people can get into an ASC. Describe the technique and repot what type of 
subjective experiences people report. Is there literature on the systematic assessment of the 
subjective experiences? Discuss what clinical applications the technique might have and speculate on 
the underlying neuronal mechanisms that cause such severe effects. 
 

(13) Resting State fMRI and pharmacological neuroimaging 

Please present how resting state fMRI works, how is the experimental procedure, give an idea on the 
data analysis and what type of data (connectivity matrices, centrality maps) are the result. Why is 
resting state fMRI particularly suited for pharmacological imaging? Report about an example study of 
your choice and discuss its limitations. 
 

(14) Controlling confounding variables: Anterior Spin Labelling (ASL), Blood oxygenation 

Literature: Carhart-harris, 2015 + more 
Please communicate with the person doing presentation (13). Please explore a little further what 
possible confounding variables in pharmacological imaging might be. Explain what ASL is measuring 
and what confounder one can address with it. Discuss in how far a pulsoxymetry can help? 
 

(15) fMRI Studies on Psilocybin and LSD in London 

Literature: Carhart-Harris & Nutt 
Please perform a Pubmed-Search on the publications by Robin Carhart-Harris and Dabid Nutt. Give an 
overview on the studies that they have performed with Psilocybin and LSD. Without reading all of the 
papers you can summarize the topics that they were addressing and try to explain what the main 
claims and main outcomes look like. 
 

(16) PET and fMRI Studieis on Ketamine and Psilocybin performed in Zürich 

Literature: Vollenweider, 2010 
Franz X Vollenweider is a pioneer on the neuroscientific study of effects of psychedelic substances. 
Please perform a Pubmed-Search on his publications. Give an overview on the studies that he 
performed with PET and fMRI. Try to summarize the motivation for these studies, starting from the 
argument of model psychosis to potential therapeutic applications. How did they identify that it is 
mainly HT-2A receptors that mediate the psychedelic effects? Do you think that they really believe in 
the concept of a model-psychosis, or is it rather an argument for funding agencies? 
 

(17) Genetics and interactions with Qualitative experiences? 

Literature: -  
Depending on the genetic setup of a person, one might have different effects of different drugs. 
Summarize in how far genetic research has been successful in finding such correlations. Is there data 
on the effects of psychedelics in relation to the genetic setup (maybe 5HT-2A receptors) of people?  
 

(18) Ketamine: The study of “model psychosis” 

Literature: -  
The concept of a model psychosis will already be introduced in the sessions before your presentation. 
Please use your presentation to explain in how far the induced ASC of Ketamine appears to be most 
similar to psychoses in schizophrenia. How does it do better than LSD/Psilocybin? Explain Positive and 
Negative symptoms in Schizophrenia in this context and discuss what types of questions one can 
answer with this type of research. You might consider human and animal models if you want to. 
 

(19) MDMA: Clinical Trials for the treatment of PTSD 
Literature: Mithoefer 2013; Kupferschmidt, 2014 
In the seminar the basic setup of clinical trials will be introduced and the costs and politics behind it 
discussed. Please explain the role of MAPS and what they currently do to push the clinical trials. 
Please use the Kupferschmidt article to discuss if it is realistic that they reach their goal. Do you see 
additional potential in other diseases? Speculate about the neuronal and psychological mechanisms 
that might make these drugs help some people.  
 

(20) LSD/Psilocybin: Current clinical trials for psychotherapy  

Literature: Majic&Schmidt, 2015 
In the seminar the basic setup of clinical trials will be introduced and the costs and politics behind it 
discussed. Please use the given literature only as a reference and find information somewhere else on 
the current clinical trials that try to show that LSD and Psilocybin can be used as save and efficient 
tools to supplement specific types of psychotherapy. Do you see additional potential in other diseases? 
Speculate about the neuronal and psychological mechanisms that might make these drugs help some 
people.  

 
 

