West European Politics,
Vol. 31, Nos. 1–2, 195 – 210, January–March 2008

The Changing Politics of Organised
Interests

PHILIPPE C. SCHMITTER

Since the mid-1970s, Western European politics have undergone signiﬁcant changes –
and this has been particularly marked in the arena of ‘interest politics’. In this article I
list some apodictic statements about these changes and speculate about their potential
explanations. To the extent that these descriptive generalisations have some accuracy
and that the potential explanations have some validity, we can then conclude that the
hegemony of political parties is declining. This is not to say that parties will be replaced
by either associations or movements. These three forms of representation are not locked
into a zero-sum game. In the past, they have grown together and supported each other.
Nothing says that they cannot also decline together in the present. What we can say,
however, is that there has been a generalised loosening of the links between interests and
organisations.

‘Interests’ in West European Politics – in practice or in the journal – purport
to explain everything and, therefore, they do not explain anything. Scratch
the surface of almost any WEP article and you will ﬁnd that the answer to
‘why did he or she act politically?’ will usually be: ‘because it was in his or
her interest to do so’. Ask ‘why did he or she have such an interest in the ﬁrst
place?’ or, even worse, ‘why did he or she think that such an action or policy
would eventually lead to the satisfaction of that interest?’ and you will only
rarely get a convincing answer.

Albert Hirschman (1977) has meticulously traced the origins of this
concept and how it became such an omnipresent explanation for political
action – despite the recentness of its usage and the ambiguity of its meaning.
He argues that its rise in the political lexicon parallels the emergence of
capitalism and, hence, has impregnated political thinking with analogies of
market competition. It has become so commonplace that what used to be
called ‘greed’ and regarded as a despicable vice by the ancients has become a
universally expected and even benevolent motive among the moderns – so
much so that those who still seem to be acting in the name of its antithesis,

Correspondence Address: philippe.schmitter@eui.eu

ISSN 0140-2382 Print/1743-9655 Online ª 2008 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/01402380701834994

196 P. C. Schmitter

i.e. ‘passions’, are usually regarded as idiosyncratic and dangerous. National
patriotism, religious zeal, moral certainty, family honour, tribal loyalty,
personal glory and so forth are considered atavistic and more likely to lead
to irresolvable conﬂicts and perverse outcomes than good old, prosaic but
dependable, ‘interests’.

Just because so many political analysts rely so much upon a notion of
interests does not mean that they agree on how to deﬁne it. Following
Hirschman, there seem to be three elements in common. First, interests
are self-regarding in the sense that their pursuit is expected – rightly or
wrongly – to produce a diﬀerential and favourable net beneﬁt to the actor
involved, despite the fact that quite frequently arguments in favour of them
are phrased exclusively in terms of the beneﬁt they would bring to a wider
collectivity, e.g. the community, the nation, the public or the planet. Second,
interests are calculated by the actors themselves – again, rightly or wrongly –
to be of beneﬁt rather than pursued instinctually or un-reﬂexively due to
some prior and over-riding ethical indoctrination, social conditioning or
cultural conformity, even though these same actors may include in their
calculation the probability that others will react on such ethical, social or
cultural grounds. Third, interests are consciously recognised, which follows
from the previous two elements, in the sense that actors are aware of their
existence (if often anxious to disguise them behind collective labels) and
suﬃciently concerned about their satisfaction that they are willing to act
politically to obtain them (if also aware that it makes sense to ‘free-ride’ on
the actions of others).1

Up to this point, the presumption seems to have been that the actors
involved are exclusively individual human beings and, therefore, that a
political science founded primarily on the pursuit of interests and the
conﬂict among them has to be based on ‘methodological’ as well as
‘epistemological’ individualism. Not at all! ‘Actors’ as expressed above can
just as well be collectivities – admittedly composed of individuals and
dependent in varying degrees upon their contributions – but quite capable of
regarding their own collective self-interests, making calculations about these
interests and developing as well as inculcating interest consciousness in
others. Indeed, one could argue that individuals would be incapable of
recognising and evaluating their interests on their own, without
the
assistance of various collectivities in the workplace, social setting, cultural
milieu and political environment that provide them with the reference points
and identities that they need prior to making such an assessment. An
isolated individual would be helpless without groups based on functional,
territorial and/or symbolic identities.

Actual research on ‘the politics of interests’ as evidenced in WEP and the
political science literature on Western Europe in general has focused
overwhelmingly on organisations – permanently constituted and collectively
governed – as its basic unit of observation and analysis. Of course, there
exists a parallel literature on public opinion as formed by individual citizens

The Changing Politics of Organised Interests

197

and as measured by mass surveys, focus groups and media reports that
attempts to assess its impact upon policy choices and electoral outcomes,
but it would appear to be only of tangential relevance to the study of interest
politics. Indeed, one often hears the accusation that ‘special interests’ have
defeated or distorted some project that the public at large supports. What
seems to count most when it comes to explaining ‘who gets what, when and
how’ out of the competitive struggle in democratic polities depends on
organised interests: political parties and factions, trade unions, professional
and business associations, neighbourhood organisations, women’s groups,
environmental movements, advocacy groups, and so forth. Moreover, these
organisations form more comprehensive systems of interest intermediation
such that the inﬂuence of any one of them depends on its relationship with
others.

After World War II, students of Western European politics tended to take
their cues (and their premises) from such US scholars as Arthur Bentley and
David Truman who had already elaborated a ‘group theory of politics’ that
led to a natural conﬁguration they eventually called ‘pluralist’. These
pioneers in the study of what was then called ‘lobbying’ or ‘pressure group
politics’ such as Jean Meynaud, Allen Potter, Theodor Eschenbung, Henry
Ehrmann, Graham Wootton, Samuel Finer, Roy Macridis, Harry Eckstein,
Samuel Beer, Gerhard Braunthal and Joseph Lapalombara usually assumed
the following:

1. Membership in all forms of interest organisation was a matter of

voluntary choice by individuals.

2. These organisations were spontaneously formed and neither controlled,

3.

licensed nor sponsored by state agencies.
Interest associations and social movements would tend to be
independent of each other and of political parties.

4. All of these organisational forms were themselves composed of ‘interest
groups’ that coalesced and competed opportunistically in the formation
of public policy.

5. Economic development would increase the division of labour and,
hence, naturally lead to a multiplicity of autonomous and increasingly
specialised associations competing with each other to represent the same
interest category.

6. The predominant form of activity of these ‘interest groups’ was to exert
‘pressure’ on those in elective oﬃce – whether this was

external
accomplished in the ‘lobby’ of the parliament or elsewhere.

7. Whatever the existing diﬀerences, interest politics in the United States
was more advanced than in Europe and the latter would eventually
come to resemble the former.

As empirical research began to accumulate, these presumptions became
increasingly questionable and something like a distinctive Western

198 P. C. Schmitter

European perspective on organised interest politics began to emerge. During
the mid-1970s, this eventually took the form of a theoretical distinction
between pluralism and corporatism as contrasting ‘ideal-typical’ organisa-
tional conﬁgurations. Both were compatible with capitalist development and
liberal democracy, but each processed interests in quite diﬀerent ways with
quite diﬀerent implications for public policy. Scholars began to treat Europe
not as ‘backward’ but as ‘diﬀerent’ with regard to the politics of interest in
the United States.

According to the ‘WEP Model’ (not exclusively of the journal but of
the region as a whole), organised interests are especially crucial in this
part of the world since they were historically and uniquely embedded in
the civil societies of medieval city-states and since the later struggle for
mass political democracy revolved around them. No other part of the
world has developed such a dense network of class,
sectoral and
professional associations, such a variety of well-organised and disciplined
political parties and such a historical
social movements.
Moreover, these units had often created relatively stable and encom-
passing hierarchies of collective action among themselves and had
done so as the result of considerable intervention by state agencies.
Rather than pressure politicians and civil servants from the outside,
privileged and often monopolistic organisations were ﬁrmly entrenched
inside the making of public policies and even accorded a role in their
implementation.

legacy of

that

The ‘standard-revised’ version of Western European politics as set out by
Stein Rokkan and others presumes
these clusters of political
organisations correspond to a varying set of social cleavages at the national
level. Parties, associations and movements were composed of those who
found themselves on diﬀerent sides of these cleavages. The behaviour of
these individuals could be predicted by their respective structural positions
and, moreover, this behaviour of identity and loyalty tended to persist even
after the original conﬂicts that generated them had weakened. Periodic
compromises across these cleavages – often associated with war or
depression – failed to dissolve their organisational expressions, precisely
because they contributed so much to consolidating regimes of liberal
democracy.

Some Descriptive Generalisations

Since
the mid-1970s, Western European politics have undergone
signiﬁcant changes – and this has been particularly marked in the arena
of ‘interest politics’. Below, I will list 34 apodictic statements about these
changes. Not all of them have been necessarily well documented in WEP
(or in any other scholarly journal for that matter) and they are, for the
moment,
remain to be proven (or
explained).

speculative observations

that

The Changing Politics of Organised Interests

199

In presenting them, I will follow the conventional tripartite division into
parties, movements and associations, even if the boundaries between them
are fuzzy and changeable. Many political parties and interest associations
had (and new ones continue to have) their origin in social movements.
Many candidates nominated by parties have no chance of winning oﬃce
or even participating in governing coalitions and are only on the ballot to
attract attention to some corresponding movement. Associations make no
overt attempt to nominate candidates or occupy elected positions and,
thereby,
they
nevertheless may play a key role in the ‘after-election’ appointment process
in order to place ‘their people’ in these oﬃces. The key distinction between
interest associations and social movements is supposed to be the self-
regarding-ness of the former as they struggle to obtain selective goods only
for their members and the other-regarding-ness of the latter as they
promote the production of public goods that aﬀect everyone. Needless to
say, this analytical distinction may be of more rhetorical than practical
diﬀerence.

to accept political responsibility for their actions, but

While it is not inconceivable that individuals alone or spontaneous
aggregations of
individuals can aﬀect policies or even bring down
governments and regimes,
these three types of organisations have
become – certainly in Western Europe – the eﬀective ‘citizens’ of their
respective democracies. They oﬀer
for
inﬂuencing and holding accountable public authorities. The mix of their
roles may diﬀer across polities and over time, but together they constitute
the civil societies that are so essential to the functioning of ‘real-existing
democracies’ (REDs) – despite the fact that they are only rarely men-
tioned as such in their constitutions. As we shall now speculate, there is
evidence to suggest that these organisations for representing interests (and
passions) have changed a great deal
in the past 25 to 30 years. This
listing attempts to encompass the full variety of these changes.

the most

reliable

channels

Political Parties

1. Decline in membership in and identiﬁcation with political parties;
2. Decline in trust in parties and their politicians/leaders;
3. Decline in the role of parties in the process of forming governments;
4.
Increase in collusion between major parties and convergence in their
programmes;

5. Emergence of new parties at the fringe or take-over of pre-existing

parties;

6. Decrease in the margin of victory for winning parties or coalitions;
7.
8.
9. Rise in the importance of public funding;

Increase in the volatility of electoral choices by citizens;
Increase in the rapidity of turnover of parties in power;

10. Shift in organisational form from ‘mass’ to ‘cartel’ parties.

200 P. C. Schmitter

Social Movements

11.

Increase in the number, variety, resources and visibility of social
movements;

12. Attempts to convert some social movements into political parties, e.g.

Greens;

13. Some increased recognition and access of movements as ‘stakeholders’;
Increase in the role of contributors/subscribers over members/
14.
militants;
Increase over time in the role of bureaucratic/professional staﬀ;

15.
16. Cross-national subsidisation of movements, especially from West to

East;

17. Some shift in strategy from inﬂuencing public authorities to aﬀecting

the behaviour of private ﬁrms.

Interest Associations

18. Decline in membership of some traditional associations, especially

trade unions;

19. Severance of long-standing connections between associations and

‘sister’ parties;

20. Decline in the role/capacity of encompassing peak associations;
21. Decline in resort to mechanisms of comprehensive policy concertation;
22. Shift to lower levels of inter-associational bargaining, even to micro or

ﬁrm level;

23. Some increase in mergers between previously independent associa-

24.

tions;
Increase in the provision of services to members as key organisational
activity;

25. Steady level of membership in civil society organisations; but
26. Shift

forms of associability satisfying private

toward ‘apolitical’

interests; and

27. Shift away from ‘political’ forms oriented to inﬂuencing public policy

decisions;

28. Challenges to well-established state practices of subsidisation and

oﬃcial recognition.

All Forms of Representation of Interests or Passions

29.

Increase in trans-national connections between equivalent organisa-
tions;

30. Strong increase in formation of European-level associations and

movements; but

31. Only modest rise in party organisation at the European or global level;
32. Spread of ‘Western’ organisational forms to ‘Eastern’ neo-democracies;

The Changing Politics of Organised Interests

201

33.
Increase in the role of professional staﬀ/consultants and paid labour;
34. Persistently high level of ‘interest in politics’ (as measured by mass
surveys) coupled with persistently declining level of participation in
(electoral) politics.

An Inventory of Potential Explanations

Presuming that the observations are generally correct, what could have
caused such numerous and signiﬁcant changes? Even if only half of them
were found to be correct, that would still leave a lot to be explained. One is
tempted to claim that national civil societies in Western Europe have
undergone a ‘silent revolution’ since the mid-1970s which has aﬀected both
the attributes of individual organisations and the conﬁguration of their
respective systems of party competition, social mobilisation and interest
intermediation. And they have done this without regime discontinuity
(except, of course, in Eastern Europe), widespread recourse to violence or
enduring shift in the ideological orientation of governments.

Let us brieﬂy examine the most likely suspects:2

1.

Impact of exogenous shocks: The onset of the above-noted changes
does correspond roughly with the two successive oil shocks of the mid-
1970s. Together, they could have produced some major and lasting
changes in the relations between economic sectors, but why would they
have aﬀected Left–Right party competition and capital–labour
relations where most of the changes have taken place? The Southern
and Northern enlargements of the EU were hardly very ‘shocking’,
although the impact of the more recent (and much more signiﬁcant)
Eastern one has yet to be fully registered. The collapse of communist
rule and the Soviet empire at the very end of the 1980s was certainly
both unexpected and consequential. It helps to explain the convergence
in programmes and collusion in behaviour of political parties (Item 4)
and may have something to do with the proliferation of new ‘fringe’
parties (Item 5). But what might be the connection of this shock with
organised interests and passions? Did it weaken the power of trade
unions and of Social Democratic parties enough to bring about some
of the observed transformations (Items 18 and 19)? Did the elimination
of the ‘Communist Menace’ indirectly encourage the formation of
‘radical’ social movements, by freeing them of ‘guilt by association’
with real-existing communism (Item 11) and open up spaces on the
fringe for their attempted conversion into new papers (Item 12)?

2. Change in endogenous values: What about the inverse causality? Is it
plausible to sustain that a prior and gradual ‘silent revolution’ in
Western European mass public opinion toward so-called post-
materialist values – as documented by Ronald Inglehart and others –
could be responsible for at least some of the observed changes? Many

202 P. C. Schmitter

of the new parties on the fringe (Item 5) profess such values. Items 11,
12 and 13 all refer to the surge in social movement activity which could
be even more closely related to it – and, in a slightly more ‘stretched’
account so could the decline in membership in ‘materialistic’ self-
regarding trade unions and employer associations (Item 18). But what
about the shift towards services within associations and towards
apolitical associations in general? Or the decline in the level at which
bargaining between capital and labour takes place?

3. Globalisation/liberalisation: This is everyone’s favourite suspect these
days. The timing seems about right, although the process started long
before the mid-1970s and gathered momentum during the 1990s.
Removing political and technological barriers to the ﬂow of goods,
services, money, ideas and (to a lesser extent) people across previously
more protected national or regional borders had a profound eﬀect on
the relative power of classes in the production system and the relative
inﬂuence of ‘exposed’ as opposed to ‘sheltered’ sectors of the economy.
Globalisation’s ‘twin’ – the liberalisation of state ownership and
regulation of private enterprises – has
removed some highly
contentious matters from the public agenda and even projected the
image that no policy alternatives to it exist. This has repeatedly been
credited with causing programmatic convergence between major
parties (Item 4). Dialectically speaking, it could also be credited with
promoting the shift in strategy noted in Item 17, not to mention the
general rise in protest movements in response to the less regulated
behaviour of private businesses (Item 11). Without a doubt, the demise
of many macro-corporatist arrangements and the shift to lower level,
even ﬁrm, bargaining was due to the defection of capitalists in larger
multinational ﬁrms who had become more conﬁdent of their capacity
to act unilaterally in deﬁance of trade unions (Items 21 and 22). Item
21 on the increase in transnational connections between associations
and movements is a particularly direct result of globalisation, but it
may well be that the shift toward service provision within associations
is linked to processes of adaptation to greater competition and less
protection (Item 23).

just eliminating national barriers

4. Regional integration: Western Europe has been the site of the most
successful attempt at not
to
exchange, but also at generating common rules to regulate transna-
tional exchanges. Most observers have expressed surprise at its modest
impact upon national political parties. My hunch is that much of the
collusion among them (Item 4) and activity at the fringe (Item 5) can
be attributed to the behaviour of major parties which have deliberately
avoided making issues of European integration salient because these
issues tend to divide their traditional supporters. The acceleration
given to this process during the mid-1980s by the Single European Act
must have contributed something to Item 28 since many practices of

The Changing Politics of Organised Interests

203

business and professional associations violated the liberalising provi-
sions of this treaty and subsequent EU directives. Item 30 on the
formation of regional associations and movements was one clear and
continuing impact of the EU. The number of business and professional
interests with European representation in Brussels has reached the
1000s, although it should also be observed that direct representation of
larger ﬁrms has increased even more proportionately – hinting at a
process of circumvention of traditional ‘corporatist’ channels. The
increase of inter-organisational exchanges at the wider continental or
global level (Item 29) may also have been promoted by this variable, as
well as globalisation. Much of the diﬀusion process whereby ‘Western’
practices moved East was closely linked to EU assistance programmes
and the imperatives of adjusting to the acquis communautaire upon
entry into the club (Item 32).

5. Trans-continental migration: Another process that began to aﬀect
Western Europe as a whole during this period, accelerating to crisis
levels in recent years, is a massive increase in population ﬂows from
outside the region. EU treaties and directives had surprisingly little
impact on intra-European labour ﬂows. In fact, Southern enlargement
seems to have produced more return ﬂow than outﬂow and Northern
enlargement seems only to have aﬀected top-level professionals.
Needless to say, Eastern enlargement has just begun to take hold
and is already having a much more substantial eﬀect. But it is the ﬂows
from the Middle East, Africa and Asia that have captured the political
agenda and certainly stimulated the emergence of xenophobic fringe
parties (Item 5). The manifest impotence (or unwillingness) of national
governments to staunch these ﬂows seems to be related to the decline in
membership in governing parties and the prestige of governing
politicians (Items 1 and 2). It may even be related to electoral
volatility and frequency of turnover in power as citizens become more
ﬁckle in their perceptions of almost universally discredited politicians
(Items 7 and 8). Presumably, the availability of low-cost foreign labour
has some eﬀect on the ‘balance of class forces’, but the response at the
associational level is by no means obvious – and probably diﬀers from
one country to another. Macro-corporatism may be threatened (Items
20, 21 and 22) by such a shift in power, but not necessarily the other
changes in associational structure and behaviour.

6. Ageing population: Western Europeans have been getting proportio-
nately older during the past three decades, as birth rates and mortality
rates have plummeted. The eﬀect of
this on associations and
movements has received relatively little attention, but two aspects
seem obvious. Older people have sustained their habits of associability
and, indeed, have come to dominate speciﬁc organisational segments.
For example, many trade unions in Europe today have more retired
than active members, and the former demand more services (Item 24).

204 P. C. Schmitter

They also have more time to participate in recreational activities (Item
26). Moreover, associations catering to the aged have emerged and, in
the East, one occasionally ﬁnds a Pensioners’ Party or two. This may
help to explain why youths entering the labour market ﬁnd traditional
trade unions less attractive (Item 18) and tend to express their interests
(or, in some cases, their passions) more through social movements
(Item 11).

7. Lower economic growth: Compared to ‘Les Trente Glorieuses’
immediately after World War II, the last 30 years have been lean in
terms of economic performance – and especially so for young people.
The overall class and regional distribution of income in Western
European democracies has been relatively constant, but job opportu-
nities and salaries for those entering the labour market have been
persistently lower than in the past. Since much of the reluctance to join
established parties (Item 1) and the increase in electoral abstention
have occurred among young people, it is tempting to lay the blame
here. Stretching a bit further, the failure of governments of any of the
major competing parties to perform markedly better may have
something to do with narrowing the margins of victory (Item 6) and
the subsequent consequences in terms of electoral volatility and
turnover in oﬃce. Social movements have probably been boosted,
especially among young people, by the failure of parties to perform
when in oﬃce and by the appeal of ‘alternative’ solutions (Items 11, 12
and 17). High unemployment and downwardly ﬂexible wages tend to
reduce the incentives for capitalists to participate in policy concerta-
tion involving organised labour, especially at the macro-level (Items 20
and 21). They also give additional power to individual ﬁrms in the
labour market (Item 22).

8. Rapid pace of

technological

innovation: The diﬀusion of major
innovations, especially in information and communication technology,
has become massive, unpredictable and uncontrollable. Some have
originated within Western Europe; most have been thrust upon it from
abroad. By now, it seems safe to say that not a single organisation in
civil society has been unaﬀected by it – positively or negatively. Some
have tried to resist, but once competitors have adopted them, they may
have no choice but to conform. My suspicion is that most of its eﬀect
on parties, associations and movements shows up in their internal
organisational structures – feeding pre-existing trends toward profes-
sionalised management, fund-raising,
inﬂuence-peddling and voter-
appealing (Item 33). At the extreme (admittedly, yet to be reached in
Europe), political parties become little more than massive data-banks
manipulated by paid specialists promoting messages generated by
survey research or focus groups. Already the costs of campaigning
have gone up – beyond what is covered by public funding (Item 8) –
and this may have something to do with the replacement of voluntary

The Changing Politics of Organised Interests

205

with paid labour and the shift to cartel forms of organisation (Item 10).
Social movements have also used ICT more extensively and this seems
to be reﬂected in Items 14 and 15: greater dependence on ﬁnancial
donors than upon active members and increased role for professional
staﬀ. Some use computerised schedules and professionally elaborated
proposals to appeal for funds from individuals, corporations and
foundations that share their cause, but never meet together – much less
deliberate about the movement’s goals and strategies. Those that have
been recognised as bona ﬁde ‘stakeholders’ (Item 13) have become
even more reliant on technical expertise and data-gathering. Interest
associations increasingly become electronic purveyors of specialised
information and ‘selective goods’ to members who pay dues and fees
but do not participate in their policy process (Item 24).

9. Mediatisation: No one doubts that mass media (and television, in
particular) has become a much more important source of information
and opinion about politics than civil society itself. The time when a
citizen relied upon his or her party, trade union, neighbourhood
organisation or ‘social cause’ to anchor their expectations about what
public authorities should do seems gone. Survey evidence shows that,
however residual this may be among older citizens, these identities and
loyalties are not being passed on to sons and daughters. Each new
generation seems to be starting with a blank slate – and ﬁlling it with
the images and slogans it picks up from the media. Although it has
emerged as a major force relatively late in the period we are
considering, the use of the Internet as both a source of political
information and a resource for coordinating political action has
become pervasive. It is probably parties that have been most aﬀected –
negatively, in the sense of loss of members, trust and role in forming
governments (Items 1, 2 and 3), but also positively in terms of the
rising importance of public funding, the role of professional managers
and consultants and the shift
internal
organisation (Items 9, 10 and 33). Social movements have also learned
to exploit the media and to shift public attention away from ‘the main
ring of the electoral circus’ towards ‘the side rings of public corruption
and private malfeasance’. This has not only increased their visibility
(Item 11) and served to discredit parties and politicians (Item 2), but it
has also helped them gain recognition (Item 13) and to shift their
strategy to direct attempts to inﬂuence the behaviour of corporations.
Interest associations typically operate in the shadow of public opinion
and only rarely surface with ‘institutional advertising’ to promote the
image/interest of their category. It is not clear what is the cause and
eﬀect, but the rupture between trade unions and their respective ‘sister
parties’ has often been accompanied by a great deal of media attention
(Item 19). Media promotion may also have had something to do with
the shift
towards more ‘private-regarding’ organisations in civil

towards cartel

forms of

206 P. C. Schmitter

society,
just as well-publicised scandals may have discouraged
membership and activism in more ‘political-regarding’ ones (Items 26
and 27).

10. Declining capacity of the national state: Objectively, in the context of
globalisation and regionalisation, sovereign national states can no
longer carry out eﬀectively and autonomously the tasks assigned to
them by their respective constitutions and expected of them by their
respective citizens. Subjectively, the notion of sovereignty may still be
comforting (and some even regard it as indispensable for RED), but
many interests and passions can only be realised through cooperation
or integration with other polities. Parties are still among the most
‘national’ of political organisations and even European integration has
(so far) failed to aﬀect them very much (Item 31). Both social
movements and interest associations have ‘Europeanised’ themselves
with greater ease (Items 16, 29 and 30). The fact that some, more
specialised, class, sectoral and professional
interests have found it
easier to adapt to this trend has had a signiﬁcant impact on the
‘balance of socio-economic forces’ that has historically been closely
connected with the scope and level of collective bargaining (Items 20,
21 and 22).
Increased sense of insecurity: Much of the politics of immediate post-
war Western Europe was rooted in the quest for regional security –
ﬁrst, in relation to potential armed conﬂict between Germany and
France and, later, in relation to the threat of an invasion by the Soviet
Union. By the mid-1970s, the region had become what Karl Deutsch
called ‘a security community’ in which none of its members anticipated
using force to resolve conﬂicts or interests or passions. Presumably,
this helps
level of military
expenditures and higher level of social expenditures in this part of
the world when compared to other advanced industrial polities – and
this must have had an impact on all
interest
organisations (and, probably, diminished the importance of ‘passio-
nate’ nationalist, religious, class and moralistic organisations. It is
probably too early to judge how and how much the rise in collective
insecurity since 9/11 has aﬀected such causes. So far, contrary to the
United States, no speciﬁc political party has proﬁted from this event,
although it has given a boost to social movements advocating non-
intervention in Iraq and resistance to limitations on civil rights.
Individuation: I have left this for last because I am convinced that it will
have the longest lasting and most profound impact on the politics of
interests in the future. This somewhat obscure sociological term refers
to the trend for the individual to acquire – due to changes in working
conditions, living situations, family structures, personal mobility and
cultural contexts – a set of interests (or passions) that is increasingly
speciﬁc to that individual. When and where this occurs (and the

to explain the persistently lower

three forms of

11.

12.

The Changing Politics of Organised Interests

207

evidence for it is less than compelling, I admit), the citizen should ﬁnd
it increasingly diﬃcult to identify with those large collective categories
that went into structuring what I called above the ‘standard-revised
WEP Model’. Those cleavages between classes, sectors, religions,
ethno-linguistic groups, regions and nationalities that ‘made’ modern
Europe do not go away – they still have plenty of mental and
organisational residues left – but citizens ﬁnd the identities attached to
them by these cleavages much less convincing. Most importantly, they
are reluctant to accept one of them as dominant and, hence, capable of
exercising overarching control over all other interests or passions.
Nationality may still be the most signiﬁcant ‘marker’ in inter-state
relations and class may predominate among all of the sources of intra-
state conﬂict, but their invocation produces less predictable behaviour
at the individual level and the organisations built upon these cleavages
have declined in salience.

Another way of putting this point is that, in the past, what counted
in determining the outcome of political struggle was the cumulative or
cross-cutting distribution of interests and passions, and the emergence
of some overriding identity among those involved. In the future, what
will count is less the pluralism prevailing between collectivities within
the unit as a whole than the pluralism prevailing within individual
citizens – citizens who may grow increasingly indiﬀerent concerning
the identity of the unit as a whole and, hence, be willing to change one
for another.3 These pluralistic individuals will ﬁnd it more diﬃcult to
assess what their ‘real’ interest or passion is in a given context – and
they will be much less likely to rely on existing political parties,
encompassing interest associations or comprehensive social move-
ments to ﬁnd out. They are going to change their view of politics
frequently and shift their organisational allegiance more often. In the
party arena, Europeans will ﬁnally act as Anthony Downs predicted
long ago, switching indiﬀerently around some ‘mean’ position on a
uni-modal distribution of preferences depending on marginal appeals
to the centre or the personality of candidates. In the arena of ‘special
interests’ and ‘passionate causes’, the apposite model is pluralism. But
the pending question is whether this will lead to moderation and
compromise or, as I have suggested above, to populist mobilisation
and intransigence.

While I am convinced that individuation (if it occurs on a signiﬁcant
scale) will have a major impact on interest politics, I am less capable of
identifying the impact it has already had. One could blame it for
decline in party membership and identiﬁcation (Item 1) and trust in
parties and politicians (Item 3) which, in turn, might be contributing to
greater electoral volatility (Item 7), narrower margins of victory (Item
6) and greater turnover (Item 8). And why do parties depend
increasingly on public funds? Because their traditional clienteles

208 P. C. Schmitter

(Stammwa¨hler) have declined and others are no longer willing to
contribute voluntarily (Item 9). The proliferation of types of social
movements (Item 11) and the shift in their source of funding (Item 14)
ﬁts nicely within this line of reasoning. A lot of the movement among
forms of organisation within civil society could also be attributed to
individuation (Items 26 and 27), as could the increased resistance to
semi-public status and funding for ‘classic’ corporatist associations
(Item 28). But all of these are highly speculative connections – and
none of them can be traced exclusively to this variable.4

Some Elements for a Conclusion

Interests furnish the primary raw materials for WEP, and that has not
changed. Passions have not disappeared; indeed, there is some evidence that
emotion-based and other-regarding causes have contributed to a renewal in
the traditional role that social movements have played in the region. Parties,
associations and movements share the task of ‘processing’ these materials in
the REDs of Western Europe. Historically, parties with their capacity for
aggregating a wide range of them into comprehensive platforms have played
the predominant role. Movements may have played a role in their
formation; associations
sectoral and professional
interests may have been penetrated by their ideologies – but, according to
the standard revised model of WEP,
it was political parties that best
represented the cleavages, that formed the governments, that made the
compromises, that produced the states, that made the politics of Europe so
distinctive.

representing class,

If the descriptive generalisations in this article have some accuracy and if
the potential explanations drawn from contextual trends have some validity,
then the hegemony of political parties is declining – which is not to say that
they will be replaced by either associations or movements. The three forms
of representation are not locked into a zero-sum game. In the past they have
grown together and supported each other. Nothing says that they cannot
also decline together in the present.

This implies a generalised loosening of the links between interests and
organisations. Emile Durkheim (1997 [1883]) imagined something similar as
a potential consequence of modernisation and gave it a label: anomie. In his
scenario, the division of labour would advance more rapidly than the
capacity of existing organisations to integrate individuals and inculcate in
them stable identities and conceptions of interest. He envisaged serious
consequences at the level of individual behaviour (suicide being the most
dramatic), but said very little about its potential political implications.

My hunch is that it is something that we often label (and condemn) as
populism. Elsewhere, I have deﬁned this as ‘a political movement that draws
its support across or with disregard for the lines of cleavage that are
embodied in existing political formations and does so by focusing on the

The Changing Politics of Organised Interests

209

incompatible or

person of its leader who claims to be able to resolve a package of issues
previously believed to be unattainable,
excluded’
(Schmitter 2006: 2). Could this be the face of the future for WEP? Will
individuated citizens ﬁnd themselves adrift without clear hierarchies of
interest or passion and, therefore, choose their elected oﬃcials and interest
representatives on the basis of cross-cutting promises and candidate
personalities? Will they do so erratically on the basis of seemingly minor
shifts in context or momentary events? There are already abundant signs
of its emerging in EEP (Eastern European politics), but that could be
dismissed as the product of a diﬀerent point of departure where parties,
associations and movements were either discredited or non-existent.
Western Europe still has plenty of all three types of interest organisation,
but if they are evolving as I have suggested and if individuation is
such an inexorable ‘developmental’
then populist movements-
parties-associations could very well ﬁll in part of the gap between more
anomic citizens and less legitimate authorities.

trend,

‘interest’

regime

for any political

The clue concerning the future lies in the last Item (34). Survey research
seems to indicate that in Europe overall
in politics has not
declined – even among those young citizens who are least connected with
political organisations. Which raises the prospect, ﬁrst suggested by Alexis
de Tocqueville in his L’Ancien Re´gime et la Re´volution, that the most
vulnerable moment
exists when popular
expectations increase or remain stable at the same time that regime
performance (or, better, perception of regime performance) is in decline.
Typically, this happens when political leaders attempt to introduce reforms
that do not have immediate payoﬀs. This was later formalised by James
Davies (1962) as the ‘J-Curve’ and connected with the hypothesis that it
would produce increasingly violent collective action and, eventually,
revolution. For contemporary Europe this projection seems highly
exaggerated – either because the gap between expectations and perfor-
mance is not (yet) so great or is too demographically concentrated, or
because the capacity of social and economic institutions to absorb the
disparity remains so great. My prognosis is,
the periodic
eruption of populist ‘incidents’ that do not threaten democracy as such
and, in fact, may even have the benevolent eﬀect of dissolving partisan
collusions and oligarchic accumulations. As long as the electoral process
remains ‘free and fair’ and basic political rights are constitutionally
protected, the result of such incidents in Europe is quite predictable: the
populists will be defeated eventually because they will have promised too
much to too many – and failed to deliver even to those oppressed groups
that they pretend to favour. They will exit peacefully (if noisily) from
power probably leaving behind an economic mess and social confusion. It
will be the task of a new (and hopefully rejuvenated) set of political
interest organisations to reconnect citizens with their rulers and to hold
them accountable for their exercise of legitimate authority.

therefore,

210 P. C. Schmitter

Notes

1. Actually, some ambiguity with regard to this element has re-emerged in recent years.
Rational choice analysts prefer to talk about
‘preferences’, presumably mimicking
economists who have long used the concept of ‘revealed preferences’ in their theories.
These are not expressions of conscious interests (‘concerns’) that actors give when asked why
they acted or what they would like to gain from political action. Quite the contrary! These
are the motives for action that can be imputed to actors on the basis of prior assumptions by
theorists – regardless of whether the actors involved choose them in surveys, respond to them
in interviews or express them in the course of acting. Indeed, such consciously articulated
preferences are intrinsically suspect because actors have ‘rational’ reasons for not admitting
to their ‘true’ preferences – especially when it comes to public goods. All this reminds me of
an earlier debate over ‘false consciousness’, when Marxists – faced with identities and goals
of proletarians that were not suﬃciently revolutionary or even anti-capitalist – dismissed
them on the grounds that such underlings could not be expected to recognise what their ‘true’
interests were due to the deliberate manipulation or inherent hegemony of dominant classes.
2. Except for the ﬁrst two, the other variables come from an extensive list of trends in the
external context in which ‘real-existing’ European democracies have been functioning over
the last 30 years to be found in Schmitter and Trechsel (2004).

3. Consider what this could do to the so-called micro-foundations of the discipline. The
individual no longer becomes the irreducible unit of action or analysis with a presumed ﬁxed
hierarchy of preferences. The individual is now a ‘bundle’ of interests (and passions) and the
preference for any one of them depends on the context within which the choice is made.

4. One major change listed above (Item 10) that has passed under-explained (and un-deﬁned)
concerns internal party organisation, for which I plead lack of expertise. Richard Katz and
Peter Mair (1995; also Mair this volume) have argued convincingly that signiﬁcant changes
in this condition have occurred during this period in the process of the shift from mass to
cartel parties. Given the novelty of the concept, I have found it diﬃcult to distinguish its
causes, characteristics and eﬀects.

References

Davies, James C. (1962). ‘Towards a Theory of Revolution’, American Sociological Review,

27:1, 5–18.

Durkheim Emile (1997 [1983]). The Division of Labor in Society. New York: The Free Press,

originally published in 1893.

Hirshmann, Albert O. (1977). The Passions and the Interests. Princeton, NJ: Princeton

University Press.

Katz, Richard S., and Peter Mair (1995). ‘Changing Models of Party Organization and Party

Democracy: The Emergence of the Cartel Party’, Party Politics, 1:1, 5–28.

Schmitter, Philippe C. (2006). ‘A Balance Sheet of the Vices and Virtues of Populism’, EUI,
unpublished article, April 2006 [translated and published as ‘I populismi: vizi e virtu’,
Aspenia, 36 (2007), 71–9 and ‘Los vicios y virtues de los ‘‘populismos’’: un balance general’,
Revista Iberoamericana de Analisis Politico, 3:4/5 (Novembre 2006), 208–15].

Schmitter, Philippe C., and Alexander H. Trechsel, eds. (2004). The Future of Democracy in

Europe: Trends, Analyses and Reforms. Strasbourg: Council of Europe Publishing.

