SDI_38_1  2/16/07  12:11 PM  Page 71

Laying the Foundations of Democracy?
Reconsidering Security Sector Reform

Under UN Auspices in Kosovo 

IRENE BERNABÉU*

University of Granada, Spain

This article explores the relationship between security sector reform
(SSR) and democratic transition in post-conflict contexts, drawing on
Kosovo as a case. The study focuses in particular on the justice sector
in Kosovo, reviewing the ways in which security, the rule of law and
democracy have been intertwined. The article first outlines the context
of the international mission in Kosovo, before proceeding to consider
how  the  objectives,  needs  and  constraints  of  different  actors  have
influenced the reform of the security institutions and the democrati-
zation process. Thereafter, it discusses the concepts of SSR and demo-
cratic  transition,  briefly  reviewing  the  UN  discourse  and  record  in
SSR-related activities. Finally, it explores the interplay of these factors
in the Kosovo justice sector reform process. The main finding stem-
ming from this analysis is that not only do SSR and democratization
agendas  interfere  with  each  other,  but  measures  adopted  to  cope 
with security challenges related to the post-conflict context can also 
affect them both. Furthermore, this finding demonstrates that a well-
developed UN theoretical discourse is still not matched by the reality
of UN practices in the field.

Keywords
Nations • rule of law • Kosovo

security sector reform • democratic transition • United

OVER THE LAST TWO DECADES, United Nations peace operations

have increasingly broadened the scope of their activities to include a
strong justice, law and order component. In post-conflict situations,
where society may be highly polarized, violence rampant, and state institu-
tions near collapse, the aim of such activities is to guarantee the necessary 
stability and security so that peace and the political process are not jeopard-
ized. Accordingly, UN missions have become involved in the reform of secu-
rity institutions, alongside a variety of activities aimed at democratization.

© 2007 PRIO, www.prio.no

SAGE Publications, http://sdi.sagepub.com

Vol. 38(1): 71–92, DOI: 10.1177/0967010607075973

Downloaded from 

sdi.sagepub.com

 at UNIVERSITAET OSNABRUECK on April 18, 2016

SDI_38_1  2/16/07  12:11 PM  Page 72

72

Security Dialogue vol. 38, no. 1, March 2007

Drawing on Kosovo as a case, this article seeks to explore the relationship
between  security  sector  reform  (SSR)1 and  democratic  transition  in  post-
conflict  contexts.  The  study  will  focus  in  particular  on  Kosovo’s  justice 
system, reviewing the ways in which security, the rule of law and democracy
are  intertwined.  Security  institutions  are  central  to  state  authority,  and 
any  change  or  reform  involving  these  institutions  will  affect  institutional 
dynamics and political processes. Even so, decisions pertaining to the reform
of security institutions may be subordinated to the needs, objectives and con-
straints of different agents involved, and on some occasions marred by the
necessity of making progress in the political arena. As a result, the reform
agenda  may  suffer  from  lack  of  coherence  and  coordination,  and  become
subject  to  political  bargains.  Conversely,  in  such  an  extreme  scenario  as
Kosovo, the democratization process may be hampered by decisions related
to the security sector on the premise that some degree of security and order is
needed to make democratic developments feasible. However, the risk here is
that  actors  may  find  themselves  tempted  to  sidestep  the  democratization
agenda when trying to find shortcuts to deal with pressing threats to security
and public order.

Therefore, at the core of this study is the question of the delicate balance
between security, the rule of law and democracy, on the one hand, and the
needs, constraints and objectives of the different actors, on the other – at the
highly uncertain but decisive moment in which the foundations of a new order
are  being  laid  by  the  United  Nations  Interim  Administration  Mission  in
Kosovo (UNMIK). This question is highly relevant both to Kosovo and to the
UN itself – in view of future missions the latter may take on – for, as pointed
out by Shain & Linz (1995: 5), the behaviour of interim governments ‘may
define how successful new regimes will be in minimizing violence by chan-
nelling dissent into legally accepted means of dispute resolution, establishing
the  accountability  of  the  new  governments  and  their  organs,  producing  a 
culture of human rights, fostering reconciliation rather than confrontation,
and subordinating the military and the security forces’. If the aim is to build a
democratic security sector in Kosovo, it is not enough to restore a semblance of
order. This order should be achieved through legally recognized procedures.
If  a  democratic  culture  is  to  take  root,  the  gap  between  the  international
authorities’ democratic discourse and their behaviour should be minimized.
Thus, the article is introduced by an outline of the context of the interna-
tional  mission  in  Kosovo.  It  then  proceeds  to  consider  how  the  objectives,
needs  and  constraints  of  different  actors  may  influence  the  reform  of  the
security institutions and the democratization process. Thereafter, it will dis-

1 This article treats as SSR activities those that UNMIK and KFOR have carried out in order to rebuild new
local security institutions in the province, and not those that UNMIK and KFOR may have undertaken in
order to establish their own institutional infrastructure or with a view to maintaining security and the
rule of law in the province.

Downloaded from 

sdi.sagepub.com

 at UNIVERSITAET OSNABRUECK on April 18, 2016

SDI_38_1  2/16/07  12:11 PM  Page 73

Irene Bernabéu Rule of Law and Democracy in Kosovo

73

cuss the concepts of SSR and democratic transition, briefly reviewing the UN
discourse and record in SSR-related activities. Finally, the article will explore
the interplay of these variables in the Kosovo justice sector reform process. 

Mandates, Objectives and Outcomes

The Kosovo Context

In  June  1999,  after  NATO’s  78-day  airstrike  campaign  against  the  then
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, the United Nations Security Council issued
its Resolution 1244, authorizing the deployment of both an international civil
(UNMIK)  and  a  military  (KFOR)  presence  in  Kosovo.  The  resolution  pro-
vided that both these institutions would have responsibility for security in
the province (United Nations, 1999: paras 9, 11[i]). 

UNMIK was structured as four pillars led by different organizations under
the authority of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General (SRSG):
Pillar I ‘Law Enforcement and Justice’ (UN);2 Pillar II ‘Civil Administration’
(UN); Pillar III ‘Democratization and Institution Building’ (OSCE); and Pillar
IV  ‘Economic  Reconstruction’  (European  Union).  KFOR  is  currently  com-
posed  of  four  multinational  brigades  coordinated  at  a  central  level  by  the
KFOR Commander. Although KFOR is led by NATO, troops come from 36
NATO  and  non-NATO  countries.  According  to  Resolution  1244,  the  civil
administration  is  responsible  for  ‘maintaining  civil  law  and  order’  in  the
province,  which  corresponds  to  the  justice,  penal  and  police  sectors.  The
same resolution determines that the military part of the mission is respons-
ible for the overall security situation in the province, with the maintenance of
‘external security’ as its main role. However, the military force was tasked to
assume  domestic  law  and  order  responsibilities  while  the  civil  part  of  the
mission was unable to take on this task (United Nations, 1999: para. 9[d]). 

When the International Administration was established in Kosovo in June
1999, the province was in a state of power vacuum. Serbian military and police
forces had withdrawn, and many civil servants had fled. With the one excep-
tion  of  the  United  Nations  Transitional  Administration  in  East  Timor
(UNTAET), no other UN mission has ever had a mandate as extensive as this.
Both UNMIK and KFOR were faced with a daunting and unprecedented task:
to build from scratch all state institutions while simultaneously governing and
maintaining  the  rule  of  law  and  order  in  the  province.  However,  neither
UNMIK nor KFOR were ready to guarantee security and the rule of law in the
province  at  the  mission’s  outset.  While  it  took  months  to  deploy  UNMIK

2 Until June 2000, Pillar I was ‘Humanitarian Affairs’ led by UNHCR. The new pillar, ‘Law Enforcement and

Justice’, was established in May 2001. 

Downloaded from 

sdi.sagepub.com

 at UNIVERSITAET OSNABRUECK on April 18, 2016

SDI_38_1  2/16/07  12:11 PM  Page 74

74

Security Dialogue vol. 38, no. 1, March 2007

police officers, KFOR was ill-prepared to carry out policing tasks. It was at this
stage that the most virulent episodes of ethnic violence took place, leading
some 230,000 Kosovo Serbs to take refuge outside Kosovo.3 The violence went
on for several months; the province appeared to be sinking into a state of 
lawlessness in which the justice system was barely working.4 Even though 
the security situation improved during the following years, Serb and other
minority communities were confined to live within their enclave boundaries,
faced with the looming treat of ethnic violence. Though some analysts deemed
the security situation stable and suggested that minorities had no reason to be
so fearful, the violent events of 17 March 2004 revealed a dismal picture of the
security situation in the province. Within a few hours, KFOR, UNMIK Police
and the Kosovo Police Service had totally lost control of the security situation
in the province. As a result of the riot, 19 persons died, 954 were injured, and
there was widespread damage to property and infrastructure. This included
the damaging or destruction of 36 churches, monasteries and other places of
worship, as well as approximately 730 houses belonging to minorities, mostly
Kosovo Serbs (United Nations, 2004c: 3). The unresolved question of the status
of the province was one of the factors fuelling the animosity of Albanians
towards  those  communities  that  were  opposed  to  the  independence  of
Kosovo. At the time of writing (summer 2006), the status of Kosovo looks set to
be decided at talks mediated by UN Special Envoy Martti Ahtisaari in Vienna.5
The future responsibilities of KFOR, the EU and the OSCE will depend largely
on the outcome of the status talks.6

In the area of institution-building, many developments have taken place in
Kosovo in the seven years that have elapsed since the International Adminis-
tration was set up. On the one hand, both KFOR and UNMIK have been scal-
ing down their presence, as well as the number and scope of their activities.7
On the other hand, many competencies have been gradually transferred to
the provisional institutions of self-government (PISG), which are thoroughly
managed by the local population, legitimized by democratic elections, and
governed by democratic procedures set out in the Constitutional Framework
(UNMIK, 2001). The launch of the Kosovo Standards Implementation Plan
on 31 March 2004 provided the basic policy framework for UNMIK until the
present time.8

3 To date, the total number of returnees is estimated at 14,648 persons, 45% of whom are Serbs (United

4 According to UNMIK Police figures, 271 Serbs were killed and 650 went missing (Matic, 2003).
5 The talks started on 20 February 2006 after a comprehensive review of the situation in Kosovo was com-

Nations, 2006: para. 20).

pleted in October 2005. 

6 Under a Joint Action Plan, the European Commission and Council established on 10 April 2006 an EU

Planning Team (EUPT Kosovo), whose aim is to plan for a possible mission in the area of rule of law. 

7 Owing to the decrease in international funding for the period 2002–03, the transfer of responsibilities from
UNMIK to the PISG took place ahead of schedule, beginning in 2002; see United Nations (2002: para 62).
8 The eight standards related to the functioning of democratic institutions, rule of law, freedom of move-
ment,  safe  return  and  reintegration  of  internally  displaced  persons  and  refugees,  market  economy, 
property rights, dialogue with Belgrade, and the Kosovo Protection Corps.

Downloaded from 

sdi.sagepub.com

 at UNIVERSITAET OSNABRUECK on April 18, 2016

SDI_38_1  2/16/07  12:11 PM  Page 75

Irene Bernabéu Rule of Law and Democracy in Kosovo

75

In the field of rule of law, Kosovo can point to new institutions such as the
Kosovo Police Service, the Kosovo Judicial Institute, the Kosovo Law Centre
and the Criminal Defence Resource Centre. The creation and development of
these  organizations  has  been  facilitated  by  the  OSCE  Mission  in  Kosovo,
which is responsible for Pillar III, ‘Democratization and Institution Building’.
The OSCE’s Department of Human Rights and Rule of Law has also been in
charge of capacity-building for Kosovo’s legal community, and has in addi-
tion been monitoring and reporting on rule of law issues. There have been
further transfers of competencies in the area of rule of law from Pillar I, ‘Law
Enforcement and Justice’, to the PISG. Thus, these now include a ministry of
justice, a ministry of internal affairs and the Kosovo Judicial Council from
January 2006.9 Another key development in the province was the creation of
an  Advisory  Unit  for  Security  (AUS)  attached  to  UNMIK’s  Office  of  the
SRSG. This unit is responsible for developing the Kosovo Internal Security
Sector Review (ISSR), which constitutes the first attempt to create a security
policy for Kosovo that takes into account all stakeholders. In addition to this,
an Office of Public Safety (OPS) was established in 2004 within the Office of
the Prime Minister, tasked to assist with the SSR policy. This entire process
has  been  supported  by  the  United  Nations  Development  Programme
(UNDP) through the Support Project to the Security Sector and Rule of Law
(SRL), which has also provided assistance to the Judicial Inspection Unit.10
However, despite this significant progress, governance issues do not feature
prominently  in  the  SSR  agenda,  whose  focus  has  been  rather  technical  or
operational. Following this premise, not only has the AUS been understaffed;
it has also been dominated by technicians with little focus and expertise on
governance issues (Rees, 2006: 13), and little progress has been made to build
local capacity in the domain of supervision of the security sector. In fact, the
ISSR does not cover foreign and defence affairs, since these remain reserved
powers of the SRSG and KFOR. Consequently, a major challenge for SSR in
Kosovo continues to be that of building local capacity and ownership while
maintaining the role and authority of UNMIK and KFOR. As Edward Rees
(2006: 22) puts it, ‘the lack of attention to the role of participatory bodies such
as  transitional  or  sovereign  legislatures  creates  a  basic  and  fundamental
divide  between  the  peace  operations’  SSR  programme  and  the  very  con-
stituency it is attempting to assist’. 

Therefore,  despite  the  fact  that  it  has  a  democratically  elected  assembly 
and government, Kosovo is not yet fully democratic, ‘to the extent that its
most powerful collective decision makers are not selected through fair and
periodic  elections’  (Huntington,  1991:  7).  The  authority  of  KFOR  remains
undiminished  by  the  Constitutional  Framework,  and  so  unbound  by  any

9 These new ministries were included in the government elected by the Kosovo Assembly on 10 March 2006.
10 UNDP has been developing strategies for the transition in Kosovo, with a focus on security, among other

issues, since 2002.

Downloaded from 

sdi.sagepub.com

 at UNIVERSITAET OSNABRUECK on April 18, 2016

SDI_38_1  2/16/07  12:11 PM  Page 76

76

Security Dialogue vol. 38, no. 1, March 2007

civil  authority,  be  that  UNMIK  or  the  PISG  (UNMIK,  2001:  Chapter  13).
Moreover, although the Constitutional Framework gives wide competencies
to the institutions of self-government, it reserves the ultimate authority for
UNMIK (UNMIK, 2001: Chapter 12) and thus entitles the SRSG to override
any  decision  or  law  emanating  from  the  elected  institutions.  Furthermore,
the Kosovo Assembly is barred from taking part in the oversight of the secu-
rity sector, a task considered to be fundamental for any democratic assembly.
Although Kosovo for the above reasons cannot be described as a democracy,
steps are gradually being taken toward full democratic status. Consequently,
it is appropriate – and academically fruitful – to analyse Kosovo as a case of
democratic transition.11

As noted above, the mandates of UNMIK and KFOR, as well as the rela-
tionship between the two, are set out in Resolution 1244. No provision of this
resolution  specifies  that  the  civil  administration  has  authority  over  the 
military force. The only article that refers to the link between the two entities
is Section 9, which entrusts the military force with ‘supporting, as appropri-
ate, and coordinating closely with the work of the international civil pres-
ence’ (United Nations, 1999: para. 9[f]). Later, the May 2001 Constitutional
Framework would only confirm the authority and independence of KFOR. A
first analysis of this mandate raises two major issues in the light of its possi-
ble consequences on the democratic transition and the SSR agenda. First, the
fact that no civil institution has control over the military is hardly an optimal
model in the context of consolidating a democratic culture in the province.
Second, the duality of authority in the province raises concern about coordi-
nation  in  the  implementation  of  the  security  sector  agenda  as  well  as  its
underlying goals. While this situation is a result of the chain of events lead-
ing to the establishment of the international mission (NATO’s intervention
followed by Resolution 1244), it is far from ideal. Thus, a model similar to
that  of  the  international  administration  in  East  Timor  –  with  the  military
under SRSG authority – would seem more likely to promote a coherent inter-
national  effort  than  the  model  where  NATO,  together  with  the  individual
states  contributing  to  KFOR,  holds  operational  authority  over  the  military
part of the international mission.12

A closer examination of the mandates and conduct of KFOR and UNMIK
will shed some light onto the objectives and constraints under which these
institutions have been operating when developing the SSR agenda. 

11 This article will sometimes refer to the ‘democratic transition’ with the term ‘democratization process’. For
a definition of democratization, see, for example, O’Donnell & Schmitter (1986: 8). For a working defini-
tion of democracy, see Dahl (1971: Chapter 1). 

12 When the operational authority over these forces and personnel is transferred to the UN and vested in the
Secretary-General, these forces are called ‘Blue Helmets’. In this context, the UN is authorized to issue
operational directives within the limits of a specific mandate, a specific geographic area and an agreed
period of time (United Nations, 2003: 67–68).

Downloaded from 

sdi.sagepub.com

 at UNIVERSITAET OSNABRUECK on April 18, 2016

SDI_38_1  2/16/07  12:11 PM  Page 77

Irene Bernabéu Rule of Law and Democracy in Kosovo

77

UNMIK

UNMIK has been responsible for the provision of a wide range of essential
administrative functions and services covering areas such as law and order,
health  and  education,  banking  and  finance,  and  post  and  telecommunica-
tions.  UNMIK  also  has  overall  responsibility  for  democratization  in  the
province. However, the very institution in charge of leading the democratic
transition and SSR agenda possibly undermined its own work by breaking
rules that are supposed to constitute building blocks of both the democrati-
zation and the SSR processes. For instance, it ordered ‘executive detentions’,
making use of its unrestricted authority to bypass the local justice system and
the  law  in  force  in  the  province  (OSCE  Mission  in  Kosovo,  2000a).  Such
detentions were ordered by the SRSG without judicial sanction13 in order to
guarantee  the  security  of  the  population.  Whereas  such  actions  probably
would not find support in a mission where the UN mandate was limited to
assisting the local government with the development of the SSR agenda, in
the  Kosovo  case  they  have  to  be  understood  in  the  context  of  the  wider 
mandate given to UNMIK under Resolution 1244. 

Resolution 1244 specifies that one of the main responsibilities of the civil
administration is ‘organizing and overseeing the development of provisional
institutions for democratic and autonomous self-government pending a polit-
ical  settlement’  (United  Nations,  1999:  para.  11[c]).  Further  legal  reference 
to  the  democratization  task  is  made  in  the  Constitutional  Framework  for
Provisional Self-Government in Kosovo, where it is stated that ‘Kosovo shall
be governed democratically through legislative, executive, and judicial bodies
and  institutions  in  accordance  with  this  Constitutional  Framework  and
Resolution 1244 (1999)’ (UNMIK, 2001: Chapter 1). In its statement that ‘con-
sidering that gradual transfer of responsibilities to Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government  will,  through  parliamentary  democracy,  enhance  demo-
cratic governance and respect for the rule of law in Kosovo’, the preamble of
the Framework document goes further in linking democratic government of
the province with the maintenance of law and order. However, Resolution
1244  ranks  a  set  of  eleven  tasks  to  be  accomplished  by  UNMIK,  and  the 
development of democratic institutions is only one among them. 

In  this  respect,  it  is  noteworthy  that  the  Constitutional  Framework  for
Kosovo, which clearly laid the foundations for a democratic system in the
province, made an exception regarding the security sector, which remained
within the authority of the SRSG. Whereas UNMIK’s assessment was that the
population was ready to take upon itself the task of governing the province,
even at the risk of resulting discriminatory institutions and policies, UNMIK

13 To this effect, UNMIK issued Regulation 1999/26, ‘On the Extension of Periods of Pretrial Detention’,
which permitted the holding of a suspect for up to one year (UNMIK, 1999c). This regulation was heavi-
ly criticized by human rights organizations such as Amnesty International (2000).

Downloaded from 

sdi.sagepub.com

 at UNIVERSITAET OSNABRUECK on April 18, 2016

SDI_38_1  2/16/07  12:11 PM  Page 78

78

Security Dialogue vol. 38, no. 1, March 2007

was not ready to jeopardize the stability of the province by giving up direct
authority over the security institutions. This means that despite all the novel-
ties related to the International Administration in Kosovo, the fundamental
raison  d’être of  the  mission  remains  unchanged  with  respect  to  preceding
peacekeeping missions: it is the concrete response to a situation of threat to
international peace and security.14

If,  then,  the  promotion  of  democracy  may  not  be  the  top  priority  for

UNMIK, how does it feature in KFOR’s list of priorities? 

Other Actors in Kosovo’s Security Sector

Resolution 1244 made KFOR responsible for the overall security situation in
the province. Accordingly, KFOR has been involved in a variety of sectors
such  as  transportation,  mine  clearance,  border  security  and  fire  services.
However, there is nothing in the mandate provided by Resolution 1244 that
binds KFOR to conduct itself so that democratic values or institutions may be
established or promoted in the province. The only thing in Resolution 1244
that implies some sort of link between KFOR and the democratization task is
a general statement tasking the former to offer assistance to, and coordinate
with, UNMIK.

Therefore,  if  the  implementation  of  the  mandate  provided  by  Resolution
1244 were to be the sole criterion of success for the mission, KFOR would be
adding  nothing  to  its  own  performance  record  by  abiding  by  democratic 
procedures  or  trying  to  foster  them.  Obviously,  this  does  not  mean  that
KFOR is against the democratic development of the province. Still, in a situ-
ation where a choice must be made between taking the least operational risk
and achieving a hypothetical benefit for democratic development, KFOR will
have a ‘play it safe, follow standard procedures’ mind-set. An example of the
results of this can be seen in the ‘go-and-see visits’ organized by UNHCR in
order to give displaced families a chance to better assess the conditions under
which they might return to their municipality of origin. In these tours, secu-
rity is provided by both KFOR and the Kosovo Police Service (KPS). The one
key intended objective of such visits is to show a picture of normality to the
refugees, so that they can see that Kosovo is no longer in an emergency state
and that it possesses democratic institutions that are able to protect minority
rights. For this reason, UNHCR would rather KFOR played a low-profile role
during such tours, allowing the KPS to be at the forefront of action. However,
KFOR is not too eager to cooperate on such a strategy, because it is clearly
stated  in  KFOR’s  mandate  that  it  should  guarantee  the  safe  return  of  all
refugees and displaced people to their homes (United Nations, 1999: para.
9[c]). As one KFOR officer remarked, ‘it is very well with this normalization

14 Defined under Chapter VII, Article 39 of the UN Charter.

Downloaded from 

sdi.sagepub.com

 at UNIVERSITAET OSNABRUECK on April 18, 2016

SDI_38_1  2/16/07  12:11 PM  Page 79

Irene Bernabéu Rule of Law and Democracy in Kosovo

79

plan, but if something happened to these refugees, then KFOR would be in
the international newspaper headlines, not the KPS’.15

Another example of how security priorities may affect KFOR decisions is
provided by the force’s experience in policing the province. Until recently,
KFOR has been imprisoning individuals suspected of major offences for an
unlimited period of time without judicial mandate, trial or access to legal aid.
Such  illegal  activities  have  been  justified  on  the  grounds  of  the  ‘security
imperative’ (OSCE Mission in Kosovo, 2006a: 33). The issue is of particular
relevance, since KFOR personnel enjoy full immunity and cannot be legally
prosecuted in Kosovo. As a consequence, there is no fixed legal mechanism of
redress, judicial review or administrative complaint regarding KFOR activi-
ties in the province. While such expeditious practices may address immediate
security problems, the long-term consequences could be counterproductive. 
Indeed,  such  practices  undermine  UNMIK’s  efforts  towards  building 
new accountable and democratic security institutions by setting the wrong
pattern of acceptable behaviour in the quest for security. The restoration of
the  rule  of  law  goes  well  beyond  mere  institutional  constructions  and  the
imposition of order in a territory; it also relates to the means used to achieve
that goal. At a critical stage for the democratic transition, when institutional
and societal attitudes towards the rule of law and human rights are being
shaped, the example set by the authorities themselves is of critical relevance. 
Like UNMIK and KFOR, Kosovo’s newly born local political institutions
also  have  agendas  in  which  democratization  does  not  necessarily  feature 
as the top item. Other goals – in this case, independence from Serbia – are
principal in guiding behaviour. Even if these local institutions do not have
the authority to make decisions in the process of security sector reform, they
are  part  and  parcel  of  it.  These  security  institutions  are  the  Kosovo  Police
Service, the Kosovo Protection Corps, the Kosovo justice and penal systems,
the Assembly, and the ministries of Justice and Internal Affairs. The future of
the  security  sector  in  Kosovo  rests  with  these  institutions.  Given  that
Kosovo’s population is roughly 90% ethnically Albanian,16 these institutions
can be expected to be guided primarily by the objectives of the Albanian com-
munity.  It  is  no  secret  that  Kosovo  Albanians  want  independence  for  the
province, for which they fought a war. In this light, democracy or its achieve-
ment may come in a secondary position. This is not to say that Albanians are
not committed democrats, but – as will be discussed below – their readiness
to enforce ‘ethnicity-blind’ legislation may be put to a test in cases involving
ethnic Serbs. Thus the security sector, too, becomes an illustration of what

15 Author’s interview with a Spanish KFOR officer in Istok, Kosovo (November 2003).
16 In 2000, the Kosovo population was estimated at about 2 million, defined as 88% ethnic Albanian and 7%
Serbian, with other ethnic groups (Roma, Turks, Gorans, Ashkali, Egyptians, Bosniaks and Muslim Slavs)
together accounting for the remaining 5% (Ministry of Public Services, 2003: 3).

Downloaded from 

sdi.sagepub.com

 at UNIVERSITAET OSNABRUECK on April 18, 2016

SDI_38_1  2/16/07  12:11 PM  Page 80

80

Security Dialogue vol. 38, no. 1, March 2007

Ramsbotham (2000: 172–175) has called ‘Clausewitz in reverse’ – the contin-
uation of war by political means. In a selective democracy, the security sector
may become an arena of oppression.

In sum, the different actors involved in SSR undoubtedly share the goal of
making  Kosovo  a  full-fledged  democracy.  Problems  arise,  however,  when
each  one  has  to  face  operational  constraints,  competing  priorities  and  the
need to guarantee a minimum level of security. Developments in Kosovo’s
justice sector provide a number of illustrations of how this mismatch of ideals
and  actions  has  played  out  in  the  province.  To  better  frame  the  analysis 
of  this  issue,  the  concepts  of  SSR  and  democratic  transition  will  be  first 
discussed in the following section.

Linking Security Sector Reform and Democratic

Transition

Traditionally, the issue of state security was dealt with by the literature on
civil–military  relations  and  international  relations,  which  focused  on  one 
referent institution: the military (Huntington, 1957; Finer, 1962). However, as
the  concept  of  security  broadened  to  include  new  parameters  of  human 
security (Buzan, 1983; Buzan, Wæver & de Wilde, 1988), scholars and practi-
tioners also transformed their views on the state security apparatus. Thus,
today, a state’s security sector is widely seen as incorporating all the institu-
tions with a formal mandate to ensure the safety of the state and its citizens,
such as the armed forces, paramilitary forces, intelligence services and the
police.17 The security sector also refers to the elected and/or duly appointed
civil authorities responsible for control and oversight of these institutions (e.g.
parliament, the executive, defence ministries and civil society organizations).
Justice and law enforcement institutions belong to the security sector. Equally,
non-statutory security forces such as guerrillas or private security companies
are also part and parcel of the security sector (OECD/DAC, 2005: 20–21). 

The term ‘security sector reform’ refers to all undertakings to develop a more
effective and efficient security sector.18 This is intrinsically linked to the con-
cept of good governance, which brings civilian democratic accountability as
well as full respect for human rights to security institutions. As highlighted by
Forster  (2005:  138),  ‘one  of  the  major  conceptual  developments  in  conflict,
security  and  development  debates  is  the  shift  from  an  exclusive  focus  on 

17 ‘Security sector’ has been defined in several different ways. Some definitions are narrower than the one
employed in this article, for instance encompassing only security forces and civilian management and
oversight bodies (Hänggi, 2004: 3). 

18 For a good overview of the history and evolution of the concept of security sector reform, see (Smith, 2001:

5–19).

Downloaded from 

sdi.sagepub.com

 at UNIVERSITAET OSNABRUECK on April 18, 2016

SDI_38_1  2/16/07  12:11 PM  Page 81

Irene Bernabéu Rule of Law and Democracy in Kosovo

81

“governments” to “governance”’. This has been defined as of vital importance
in post-conflict settings, because it has an impact on the security roles and
responsibilities of the whole range of actors implicated in the security sector,
and thus ensures that the governance of the sector contributes to building 
sustainable peace, not to undermining it (Bryden, Donais & Hänggi, 2005: 2).
Thus, SSR may cover a large variety of activities, ranging from the training of
security  institution  staff  and  the  demobilization  of  military  and  guerrilla
members,  to  the  rationalization  of  security  institutions’  procedures,  or  the
reshaping of their very legal basis and structure. UN involvement in SSR has
expanded  from  fields  such  as  demobilization  of  militias  or  demining,  to
include the training and support of police services and justice systems. Police
reform  initiatives  were  developed  under  the  SMART  concept  (supporting,
monitoring, advising, reporting and training), starting in Namibia in 1989 and
continuing throughout the 1990s in El Salvador and Cambodia. Later in that
decade, the UN set up missions with mandates exclusively focused on police
institution-building, such as the UN Civilian Police Mission in Haiti and the
UN Police Support Group in Eastern Slavonia (Hartz, 2000: 49). More recent
operations in Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia and Haiti have included a strong rule of
law and justice component. Indeed, it is now widely recognized that SSR is a
cornerstone  of  post-conflict  institution-building.  Without  security,  efforts
towards democracy, development and peace have little chance of succeeding,
because these are interdependent variables (United Nations, 2005: para. 14;
OECD/DAC, 2005: 21). The interdependency of these variables is well recog-
nized by the UN, which has recently been debating how to develop ‘integrat-
ed missions’ that can cope with highly complex situations that require the
involvement of a myriad of actors and programmes, including those related to
SSR (Eide et al., 2005). However, in contrast to other entities like the European
Commission, the European Council or the OECD,19 the UN still has to adopt a
unified definition of what generally is known as SSR. Thus, whereas UNDP
refers to ‘justice and security sector reform’, other agencies and bodies, such as
the UN’s Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO), normally use the
term ‘SSR’, and this with a narrow focus on military issues. When referring to
activities related to the justice or police sectors, these bodies will use the term
‘rule of law’ activities (United Nations, 2001: para. 182; United Nations, 2003:
83; United Nations, 2004b: para. 229).

A democratic transition is a process of great uncertainty, where conflict is
likely to increase rather than decrease. This affects the strategies of political
actors who struggle to advance their interests and impose their vision on the
institutional landscape that is being shaped. Thus, the configuration of new
state institutions becomes subject to bargaining among these actors, which in
turn  may  affect  the  process  of  security  sector  reform.  In  the  same  way,

19 The OECD uses the term ‘security system reform’ instead of SSR, but it basically underpins the same con-

cepts and activities as those generally included in the SSR term.

Downloaded from 

sdi.sagepub.com

 at UNIVERSITAET OSNABRUECK on April 18, 2016

SDI_38_1  2/16/07  12:11 PM  Page 82

82

Security Dialogue vol. 38, no. 1, March 2007

because  security  sector  reform  has  an  impact  not  only  on  the  governance,
structure and efficacy of the security institutions, but also on the relationship
between the state and its citizens and the conditions under which the people
can develop economic and social activities, these reforms also unavoidably
have an impact on wider political processes, such as a democratic transition.
The  questions  that  follow  from  this  are  what  the  nature  of  the  interplay
between the SSR process and a democratic transition might be. And, what
might  that  imply  for  both  the  security  sector  reform  and  the  democratic 
transition in Kosovo? 

Scholars  working  on  security  sector  reform  have  discussed  the  specific
problems that such reform faces in developing countries or countries under-
going political transitions (Born, Caparini & Fluri, 2002; Nathan, 2004; Ball,
2004;  Wulf,  2004).  However,  the  focus  has  typically  been  on  the  potential
opportunities and pitfalls for the reform to be achieved or how to democra-
tize the security sector, rather than on what such reform entails for the wider
process of democratic transition. The scholarly literature, both on democratic
transition  and  on  civil–military  relations,  has  traditionally  been  concerned
with  military  interference  in  politics,  as  well  as  civilian  control  over  the 
military, and references to other institutions of the security sector are rare
and not fully developed (O’Donnell & Schmitter, 1986; Shain & Linz, 1995;
Linz  &  Stepan,  1996;  Huntington,  1957;  Finer,  1962).  Scholars  working  on
post-conflict scenarios and peacebuilding processes have brought into light
the issue of demobilization of warring parties, the dangers of societies over-
flowing with small weapons, and the importance of the restoration of the rule
of  law  and  human  rights  in  the  aftermath  of  conflict  (Kumar,  1997;  Pugh,
2000; Newman & Schnabel, 2002). Still, this literature is lacking more concrete
reference  to  the  relationship  between  such  issues  and  democratization
processes.  Finally,  the  literature  focusing  on  development  has  highlighted
the  problems  derived  from  lack  of  efficacy,  efficiency  and  transparency  of
security  sector  institutions  (Ball,  2002;  Hendrickson,  2002;  Brzoska,  2003;
OECD/DAC, 2005). Although democratic procedures and governance of the
security sector feature prominently in this literature, the fact is that there has
been little progress in linking these factors with democratic transitions.

The salience of these problems during a democratic transition changes not
only  from  context  to  context,  but  also  over  time.  Thus,  on  the  one  hand, 
particularities of the history of the territory in question may make reforms of
the military, the judiciary or the police more or less sensitive depending, for
example, on their role in the former regime and the various degrees of insti-
tutional  resistance  against  change.  On  the  other  hand,  the  weight  of  these
problems will vary during the political transition; for instance, it is crucial to
demobilize warring parties and control private security agents at the very
outset of a post-conflict context, whereas the reform and training of bodies
involved  in  oversight  of  the  security  sector  will  probably  require  a  more 

Downloaded from 

sdi.sagepub.com

 at UNIVERSITAET OSNABRUECK on April 18, 2016

SDI_38_1  2/16/07  12:11 PM  Page 83

Irene Bernabéu Rule of Law and Democracy in Kosovo

83

prolonged approach. Finally, transitologists have often called attention to the
fact that the ‘window of opportunity’ for institutional reform of the justice
system may be almost exclusively limited to such transitional periods, as the
judiciary tends to show strong resistance to change once the period of transi-
tion is over. As we shall see, each of these caveats is highly relevant to the
Kosovo case. 

Besides, in Kosovo there is one more factor to take into account: the com-
plex role of the international administration in monitoring and deciding on
these  processes.  On  the  one  hand,  the  international  administration  may 
guarantee a certain degree of stability to the overall political process. The role
it  plays  as  mediator  between  local  factions,  together  with  its  authority  to
implement the decisions it makes, can contribute to an image of fairness in
the  transformation  of  the  institutional  landscape  and  the  political  process.
Moreover,  the  fact  that  the  international  administration  does  not  have  to
answer  to  constituencies  after  implementing  its  policies  allows  it  to  carry
through  unpopular  reforms,  albeit  at  the  risk  that  the  legitimacy  of  these
reforms could be contested in the future. On the other hand, though, UNMIK
is also a stakeholder with its own institutional constraints, logics and objec-
tives, and its policies towards democratization or SSR also risk being inade-
quately implemented or coordinated, or lacking in coherence internally or 
in  relation  to  other  policies.  The  picture  becomes  yet  more  complex  when 
taking into account the other actors participating in the SSR and democratic
transition of the province: KFOR and local stakeholders. 

Reforming the Justice System

In post-conflict societies, re-establishing the rule of law is generally a com-
plex  and  frustrating  task.  In  a  race  against  time,  needs  are  enormous  and
means scant. The legitimacy of and public confidence in state institutions are
often  eroded;  domestic  technical  capacity  and  resources  are  depleted;  the 
territory may suffer under widespread violence and a lack of security; and
the population may be both traumatized and polarized. All of these condi-
tions were present in Kosovo when UNMIK set out to restore the rule of law
in the territory. The term ‘rule of law’ itself encompasses a number of issues
that stand out as critical for Kosovo after 1999. The following is a definition
employed by the United Nations (2004a: 6), which defines the ‘rule of law’ as
a  principle  of  governance  in  which  all  persons,  institutions  and  entities,  public  and 
private, including the State itself, are accountable to laws that are publicly promulgated,
equally enforced and independently adjudicated, and which are consistent with inter-
national  human  rights  norms  and  standards.  It  requires,  as  well,  measures  to  ensure
adherence to the principles of supremacy of law, equality before the law, accountability

Downloaded from 

sdi.sagepub.com

 at UNIVERSITAET OSNABRUECK on April 18, 2016

SDI_38_1  2/16/07  12:11 PM  Page 84

84

Security Dialogue vol. 38, no. 1, March 2007

to the law, fairness in the application of the law, separation of powers, participation in
decision-making,  legal  certainty,  avoidance  of  arbitrariness  and  procedural  and  legal
transparency.

UNMIK’s record in bringing the justice system closer to the definition of ‘rule
of law’ has been rather mixed. On the one hand, UNMIK was very ambitious
in  its  recognition  of  the  validity  of  all  human  rights  conventions  in  the
Kosovo Constitutional Framework (UNMIK, 2001: Chapter 3). On the other
hand, given the powers reserved for the SRSG (UNMIK, 2001: Chapter 12)
and the special immunities enjoyed by the international staff, the fact is that
the  guarantees  recognized  by  these  conventions  came  to  be  of  little  value.
This  has  drawn  repeated  criticism  from  the  Kosovo  Ombudsperson,  who
considers that this situation ‘leads to continuing violations of human rights
and abuses of authority by UNMIK, reflecting its indifference to the rule of
law  by  which  the  rest  of  Europe  is  bound’  (Ombudsperson  Institution  in
Kosovo, 2003: 3).

In order to restore the rule of law, it was essential to re-establish – where
possible – or build – where necessary – the justice system. For this, the first
obvious step was to decide on the applicable law in Kosovo. In July 1999,
UNMIK  decided  that  this  would  be  the  law  enforced  in  the  territory  as  it
existed on 24 March 1999, provided such law was consistent with Resolution
1244  and  internationally  recognized  human  rights  standards  (UNMIK,
1999a: Articles 2–3). Apparently, UNMIK at this time was under diplomatic
pressure from Russia not to take any steps to further weaken Serbia’s author-
ity  in  the  territory,  authority  that  had  also  been  sanctioned  by  Resolution
1244. However, the Albanians, who by that time constituted the majority of
the  judiciary  in  Kosovo,  refused  to  comply  with  UNMIK’s  decision  and
enforced instead the law applicable in the province prior to 22 March 1989.
Together with Kosovo’s autonomy, this law had been illegally abolished by
the Serbian authorities. Therefore, even though the law from 1999 contained
no  provisions  specifically  discriminating  against  Albanians,  the  latter  con-
sidered the 1999 legal framework as representing Serbian repression. While
this legal dispute was playing out, the SRSG was striving to reach a deal with
Albanians  so  that  they  would  agree  to  participate  in  the  Joint  Interim
Administrative Structures (JIAS). The JIAS were meant to put an end both to
Ibrahim Rugova’s pretensions about a supposed Republic of Kosovo and to
the Albanian parallel administrative structures controlled by Hashim Thaçi.
Finally, in December 1999, UNMIK ceded to Albanian demands and declared
that the 1989 law would apply in the territory (UNMIK, 1999b). Agreement
was reached with the Albanians, and in January UNMIK issued the regula-
tion establishing the JIAS (UNMIK, 2000).

UNMIK’s back-pedalling on the issue of applicable law had both political
and practical consequences. First, the initial decision to adopt the 1999 law
had contributed to politicizing the issue of justice. Even though as early as

Downloaded from 

sdi.sagepub.com

 at UNIVERSITAET OSNABRUECK on April 18, 2016

SDI_38_1  2/16/07  12:11 PM  Page 85

Irene Bernabéu Rule of Law and Democracy in Kosovo

85

September  several  KFOR  lawyers  and  UNMIK  officials  were  urging  the
adoption  of  a  model  penal  code  as  the  provisionally  applicable  criminal
statute for Kosovo, this option was ruled out (O’Neill, 2002: 80). It is true that
the  initial  decision  was  made  under  diplomatic  constraints  and  a  certain
desire to allow for continuity in the justice systems, and thus to contribute a
measure of legitimacy, but in the highly inflammatory post-conflict situation
where the majority of the population was emerging from a decade of oppres-
sion, this may nevertheless not have been the best choice. In addition, to make
matters worse, the reversal of this decision and the adoption of the 1989 law
further politicized the justice question. This step may have been important in
securing Albanian participation in the JIAS and thus consolidating UNMIK
control of the province, as well as bringing the law into line with the actual
practices of the judiciary. However, it had a major negative impact on both
UNMIK’s  authority  and  the  image  of  the  justice  system.  Because  the  1989 
law was less developed, lacking provisions about drug-trafficking and war
crimes, and since the 1999 law contained no provisions specifically discrimi-
nating against minorities, this change could only have been made for political
reasons. In this context, the political transition and its imperatives weighed
more than technical considerations related to reform of the justice system.
Generating a situation where justice may be perceived as subject to political
bargaining, especially when the ‘bargain’ does not involve all parties, could
only contribute to eroding the credibility of Kosovo’s justice system.

Second, there is a negative practical dimension to the decisions adopted by
UNMIK, because these created uncertainty as to the ‘applicable law’ in the
province. Thus, given that Albanian judges would only apply the 1989 law
between  August  and  December  1999,  during  that  period  there  was  a 
difference between the law officially in force in the province and that actually
applied  in  court.  This  situation  produced  significant  uncertainty  as  to  the
validity of the trials conducted at that time. Moreover, the final adoption of
the 1989 law also contributed to the creation of an ambiguous legal situation
in the province, because the very regulation that authorized the return to the
law of 1989 also permitted the use of the 1999 legal framework whenever the
former  did  not  cover  a  given  situation.20 All  this  created  both  trouble  and
uncertainty about what in fact was the law in force, further complicating the
tasks of UNMIK Police and KFOR. 

The issue of the applicable law as laid out so far may be seen as an example
of  how  the  process  of  democratic  transition  affects  SSR.  However,  the 
influence of one reform agenda on another may also travel in the opposite
direction. One important example to this effect relates to UNMIK’s attempts
to recruit Serbs to staff the judiciary.

20 Thus, the criminal procedure code of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, the Serbian criminal code, the

Yugoslav criminal code and the Kosovo criminal code were all legally in force.

Downloaded from 

sdi.sagepub.com

 at UNIVERSITAET OSNABRUECK on April 18, 2016

SDI_38_1  2/16/07  12:11 PM  Page 86

86

Security Dialogue vol. 38, no. 1, March 2007

Many Serbian judges, who formed the majority of the Kosovo judiciary up
to  1999,  left  the  province  before  the  establishment  of  UNMIK.  Those  who
remained found it very difficult to resume their work, because of serious con-
cerns about their own physical security. Therefore, former Albanian judges
and lawyers who had been fired from their jobs during the decade of Serbian
repression  were  hired,  despite  the  fact  that  they  were  on  many  occasions
poorly trained and there was a serious risk that their conduct in trials would
not  be  impartial.  Though  this  decision  may  have  been  a  response  to  the
urgent need to re-establish a working justice system, it failed to take appro-
priate measures to guarantee that the new system would in fact serve to con-
solidate a sense of restoration of the rule of law in the province. Indeed, as
documented  by  successive  OSCE  reports,  from  August  1999  until  January
2000, when international judges were brought in, cases in which members of
the  Serb  minority  were  the  accused  parties  were  frequently  fraught  with
irregularities.  Such  cases  resulted  in  longer  preventive  detentions,  harder
punishments or downright injustice when convictions were made even when
evidence was feeble or non-existent. On the other hand, the judiciary would
be strikingly lenient with Albanian offenders. Not only were their penalties
systematically  lesser  than  those  imposed  on  Serbs,  they  would  often  be
released without being charged when the victim was a Kosovo Serb (OSCE
Mission in Kosovo, 2000b).21 This happened even when offenders had been
caught  red-handed  by  KFOR,  UNMIK  Police  or  the  KPS,  which  in  turn
caused substantial frustration among officers from those bodies and prob-
ably  did  not  encourage  them  to  perform  at  their  best.  As  illustrated  in  a
report by UNDP (2004: 25), 

Police  Officers  had  complained  that  the  lack  of  support  from  the  counterpart  justice
organizations impacts negatively upon their effectiveness, and consequently public per-
ception of it. Not only is the judicial/legal system viewed as sclerotic and inefficient, it
also viewed by officers as too lenient, thereby minimizing the fear of incarceration as a
deterrent. 

This  situation  created  a  widespread  sense  of  impunity  in  the  province, 
fertilizing  the  ground  for  criminal  organizations  and  fostering  a  wave  of
rampant  violence  and  revenge  against  Serbs  and  other  minorities.  Severe
damage was done to the image of the judiciary and the rule of law at an early
stage of the international mission, which is still struggling with the persist-
ence  of  serious  and  organized  crime,  financial  and  economic  crime,  and 
trafficking in the province (United Nations, 2006: para. 42). Unfortunately, as
the  OSCE  Mission  in  Kosovo  (2006a:  68)  puts  the  matter,  six  years  ‘after
UNMIK  started  administering  Kosovo,  there  is  no  shortage  of  problems;
breaches of human rights norms occur daily’.

21 However, the Judicial Inspection Unit of the Department of Justice at UNMIK has not addressed a single
case related to allegations of ethnic bias against judges on the Kosovo Judicial and Prosecutorial Council
(OSCE Mission in Kosovo, 2006a: 29).

Downloaded from 

sdi.sagepub.com

 at UNIVERSITAET OSNABRUECK on April 18, 2016

SDI_38_1  2/16/07  12:11 PM  Page 87

Irene Bernabéu Rule of Law and Democracy in Kosovo

87

In  January  2000,  the  first  international  judge  arrived  to  assist  in  the
Mitrovica municipality. Since then, participation by international judges has
continued to increase, along with the competencies of such judges. Though
the incorporation of international judges is not a panacea for all problems,22 it
certainly would have mitigated the situation if it had been carried out from
the  beginning  of  the  mission.  A  sober  analysis  of  the  capacities  of  judges
available at the time and their recent background as victims of oppression
might have pointed to such a necessity. At least, when OSCE reports increas-
ingly documented irregularities, measures could have been taken faster. As
this situation went on, the political process also continued along its course,
with UNMIK demanding that the Serbs give up on parallel administrative
structures,  including  a  parallel  justice  system,  and  join  the  JIAS.  It  is  not 
surprising that under such circumstances Serbs would be reluctant to give up
their own institutions and participate in an institutional process that offered
so little in terms of guarantees for them. Kosovo Serb participation in gover-
nance  structures,  particularly  at  a  central  level,  remains  marginal  (United
Nations,  2006:  para.  8).  Furthermore,  the  apparent  inability  of  the  justice 
system to bring those responsible for violent acts during the events of March
2004  to  account  has  severely  affected  the  confidence  of  minorities  in  the 
justice  system,  the  PISG  and  the  whole  institution-building  process.  As
described by the OSCE Mission in Kosovo (2005: 4) in a special report on the
response to the March events, 

the justice system failed to send out a clear message to the population condemning this
type of violence. Such a response does not serve as a sufficient deterrent from engaging
in public disorder on a similar massive scale and therefore does not fulfil the full poten-
tial of the preventive function of the justice system.

It is of paramount importance in a post-conflict situation that the population,
or sections of it, does not perceive security institutions as partial – that is, 
acting  according  to  the  same  fault  lines  that  defined  the  conflict.  Security
institutions are critical to the legitimacy of the state, and any ethnic bias in
their operation may bring great damage to the building of democratic insti-
tutions. If the security institutions under reform fail to present themselves as
guarantors of the rights and security of the whole population, regardless of
their ethnic background or former faction during the conflict, they will only
contribute  to  marginalizing  parts  of  the  population.  In  turn,  these  groups
may seek alternative sources for protection – as the Serbs did in this case by
maintaining their parallel institutions and refusing to join the Joint Interim
Administrative Structure (JIAS). This pattern of behaviour was detrimental

22 Both international and local judges would experience difficulties in cases involving former members of the
Kosovo Liberation Army, mafia, drugs- and human-trafficking. These judges would often admit to con-
cerns  about  their  personal  security  when  involved  in  ‘sensitive  cases’;  see  OSCE  Mission  in  Kosovo
(2006b: 45–46). Also, both international and local judges and prosecutors regularly breach applicable law,
including human rights provisions (OSCE Mission in Kosovo, 2006a: 43).

Downloaded from 

sdi.sagepub.com

 at UNIVERSITAET OSNABRUECK on April 18, 2016

SDI_38_1  2/16/07  12:11 PM  Page 88

88

Security Dialogue vol. 38, no. 1, March 2007

to the consolidation of the new democratic institutions inasmuch as it con-
tested  their  legitimacy.  The  connection  between  democratic  transition  and
security sector reform had come full circle.

Conclusions

Over  the  last  20  years,  the  nature  of  UN  peacekeeping  and  peacebuilding
missions has evolved and become more complex. UN missions involve an
increasingly wide range of actors and are multifunctional in nature. Besides
the traditional role of guaranteeing a ceasefire, missions engage to various
extents in democratization and the establishment or reform of state institu-
tions.  In  so  doing,  missions  have  taken  on  activities  in  the  law  and  order
arena,  ranging  from  training  of  local  police  to  assisting  in  the  reform  of 
justice  systems.  These  activities  fall  within  the  scope  of  what  is  known  as
security sector reform, the aim of which being to apply the standards of good
governance to state security institutions. Focusing on the reform of the justice
system  in  Kosovo,  the  main  argument  of  the  present  article  has  been  that
undertakings in SSR and the wider process of democratization influence each
other, and not always for the better. In an ideal setting, efforts in one of these
fields would reinforce the other, as for both the ultimate goal is to establish an
institutional framework in line with democratic principles. However, in the
context of post-conflict Kosovo, decisions and actions made on the ground by
different actors towards that goal may be marred by a variety of operational
constraints, distinct institutional logics and competing priorities. As a result,
not  only  may  SSR  and  democratization  agendas  interfere  with  each  other;
measures  adopted  to  cope  with  security  challenges  related  to  the  post-
conflict context may also affect them both. 

In this way, on the one hand, the article has demonstrated how decisions
adopted in the reform of the justice system, exemplified by the appointment
of the judiciary at the beginning of the mission, affected the democratization
process. Thus, the appointment of Albanian judges who failed to apply the
law  fairly  in  cases  involving  the  Serbian  minority  did  not  encourage  the 
latter to give up their parallel structures. In turn, these structures came to
constitute one of the major hindrances to the institution-building process and
normalization of the political transition. Equally, the inability of the justice
system to put an end to violence and organized crime resulted in a wide-
spread sense of impunity and lawlessness in the province, which also was
detrimental to the political process. Yet, on the other hand, the democratiza-
tion process also has an influence on justice reform, which can become the
subject of political bargaining in the interest of moving the transition process
forward.  An  example  to  this  effect  is  the  decision  on  applicable  law  in

Downloaded from 

sdi.sagepub.com

 at UNIVERSITAET OSNABRUECK on April 18, 2016

SDI_38_1  2/16/07  12:11 PM  Page 89

Irene Bernabéu Rule of Law and Democracy in Kosovo

89

Kosovo. Even though the 1989 law was technically less advanced than the
1999 law, and the latter contained no provisions that discriminated against
minority  groups,  the  final  adoption  of  the  1989  legal  framework  entailed
more  confusion  as  to  the  enforceable  law  in  the  province  and  created  a
blurred  ‘legal  situation’  concerning  trials  conducted  during  the  first  six
months of the mission. Finally, the article has also demonstrated how tension
may arise between the need for an immediate restoration of security and a
sense of stability, and the broader achievement of security through full recog-
nition  and  respect  of  human  rights  and  democratic  procedures.  In  highly
volatile and violent scenarios, such as Kosovo after the withdrawal of Serbian
forces in 1999, security sector priorities are quickly set: security first! There
are several reasons for this, but the most evident is that in the face of chaos
and violence, a first priority must be to re-establish order and avoid a relapse
into  armed  conflict.  However,  the  way  such  security  challenges  are
addressed may have a long-lasting effect on the security sector institutions in
particular and on society in general. This is closely related to the old demo-
cratic dilemma between substantive and procedural justice. In this dilemma,
the international community in Kosovo clearly represents the familiar argu-
ment that ‘procedures should not be allowed to stand in the way of justice’.
However, as argued by Dahl (1989: 164), ‘it is a mistake to think that proce-
dures are somehow devoid of moral significance. Justice is procedural as well
as substantive’. 

Although the UN has recognized in a variety of ways the inextricable link
between peace, security, democracy and the rule of law (Boutros-Ghali, 1992:
paras 55, 59; Boutros-Ghali, 1996: para. 16; United Nations, 2004a: paras 21,
25;  United  Nations,  2005:  paras  128,  150),  the  way  in  which  UN  missions 
handle these issues may be contradictory, and thus remains a challenge on
the ground. In fact, the UN’s lack of capacity to address adequately the needs
of countries in transition from war to peace has already been acknowledged
by the organization itself (United Nations, 2004b, para. 261). Furthermore,
while  asserting  that  ‘effective  national  legal  and  judicial  institutions  are
essential to the success of all our efforts to help societies emerge from a vio-
lent past’, the UN recognizes that it remains ‘ill-equipped to provide support
for such institutions’ (United Nations, 2005: para. 137). However, the recent
creation  of  a  Peacebuilding  Commission  may  contribute  to  bridging  the 
gap between lessons learned and deeds. Getting it right is important in any
democratic transition, but even more crucial in a post-conflict setting, where
both democracy and peace are at stake.

*  Irene  Bernabéu  is  preparing  a  doctoral  thesis  on  security  sector  reform  in  the
Mediterranean  Arab  states  at  the  Department  of  Political  Science  and  Public
Administration  of  the  University  of  Granada.  She  is  currently  guest  researcher  at  the
Centre d’Etudes et de Recherche Stratégique in the Université Saint-Joseph de Beyrouth.
The  author  would  like  to  thank  both  the  Norwegian  Institute  of  International  Affairs

Downloaded from 

sdi.sagepub.com

 at UNIVERSITAET OSNABRUECK on April 18, 2016

SDI_38_1  2/16/07  12:11 PM  Page 90

90

Security Dialogue vol. 38, no. 1, March 2007

(NUPI) and the Political Science Department of the University of Tromsø for hosting her
while she was working on this article, as well as the Norwegian Research Council for its
generous funding. Finally, she expresses her gratitude to Marcus Buck, Tore Gustavsson,
Kari  M.  Osland,  Sven  Gunnar  Simonsen  and  four  anonymous  reviewers  for  Security
Dialogue for their insightful comments and encouragement. E-mail: bernabeu@ugr.es.

References

Amnesty International, 2000. ‘Amnesty International’s Recommendations to UNMIK on
the  Judicial  System’,  February;  available  at  http://www.web.amnesty.org/library/
Index/ENGEUR700062000?open&of=ENG-2U5.

Ball, Nicole, 2002. Enhancing Security Sector Governance: A Conceptual Framework for UNDP.

New York: United Nations Development Programme.

Ball,  Nicole.  2004.  ‘Reforming  Security  Sector  Governance’,  Conflict,  Security  and

Development 4(3): 509–527.

Born,  Hans;  Marina  Caparini  &  Philipp  Fluri,  eds,  2002.  Security  Sector  Reform  and

Democracy in Transitional Societies. Baden-Baden: Nomos Verlagsgesellschaft.

Boutros-Ghali, Boutros, 1992. An Agenda for Peace: Preventive Diplomacy, Peacemaking and

Peace-Keeping, A/47/277–S/24111. New York: United Nations.

Boutros-Ghali, Boutros, 1996. An Agenda for Democratization, A/51/761. New York: United

Nations.

Brzoska, Michael. 2003. Development Donors and the Concept of Security Sector Reform, Occa-
sional Paper 4. Geneva: Geneva Centre for the Democratic Control of the Armed Forces.
Bryden,  Alan;  Timothy  Donais  &  Heiner  Hänggi,  2005.  Shaping  a  Security  Governance
Agenda  in  Post-Conflict  Peacebuilding. Geneva:  Geneva  Centre  for  the  Democratic
Control of Armed Forces.

Buzan,  Barry,  1983.  People,  States  and  Fear:  The  National  Security  Problem  in  International

Relations. Hemel Hempstead: Wheatsheaf.

Buzan, Barry; Ole Wæver & Jaap de Wilde, 1988. Security: A New Framework for Analysis.

Dahl,  Robert  A.,  1989.  Democracy  and  its  Critics. New  Haven,  CT  &  London:  Yale

Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner.

University Press.

Eide, Espen Barth; Anja T. Kaspersen, Randolph Kent & Karin von Hippel, 2005. Report on
Integrated Missions: Practical Perspectives and Recommendations, Independent Study for
the  Expanded  UN  ECHA  Core  Group;  available  at  http://pbpu.unlb.org/pbpu/
library/Report%20on%20Integrated%20Missions%20May%202005%20Final%202.pdf.
Finer, Sammy, 1962. The Men on Horseback: The Role of the Military in Politics. London: Pall

Mall.

Forster,  Anthony,  2005.  ‘Security  and  Governance  in  an  Uncertain  World’,  Conflict,

Security and Development 5(2): 137–140.

Hänggi,  Heiner,  2004.  ‘Conceptualising  Security  Sector  Reform  and  Reconstruction’,  in
Alan  Bryden  &  Heiner  Hänggi,  eds,  Reform  and  Reconstruction  of  the  Security  Sector.
Münster: Lit Verlag; available at http://www.dcaf.ch/_docs/bm_ssr_yearbook2004_
1.pdf.

Hartz, Halvor, 2000. ‘CIVPOL, the UN Instrument for Police Reform’, in Tor Tanke Holm

& Espen Barth Eide, eds, Peacebuilding and Police Reform. London: Frank Cass (27–42).

Hendrickson, Dylan, 2002. Understanding and Supporting Security Sector Reform. London:

Department for International Development (DFID).

Downloaded from 

sdi.sagepub.com

 at UNIVERSITAET OSNABRUECK on April 18, 2016

SDI_38_1  2/16/07  12:11 PM  Page 91

Irene Bernabéu Rule of Law and Democracy in Kosovo

91

Huntington, Samuel P., 1957. The Soldier and the State. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of

Harvard University Press.

Huntington, Samuel P., 1991. The Third Wave: Democratization in the Late Twentieth Century.

Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press. 

Kumar, Krishna, ed., 1997. Rebuilding Societies After Civil War: Critical Roles for International

Assistance. Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner.

Linz,  Juan  J.  &  Alfred  Stepan,  1996.  Problems  of  Democratic  Transition  and  Consolidation:
Southern Europe, South America, and Post-Communist Europe. Baltimore, MD & London:
Johns Hopkins University Press.

Matic,  Tanja,  2003.  ‘Kosovo:  Crimes  Against  Serbs  Investigated’,  Institute  for  War  and
Peace Reporting, 13 November; available at http://www.globalpolicy.org/security/
issues/kosovo1/2003/1113serbs.htm

Ministry of Public Services, Statistical Office of Kosovo, 2003. Kosovo and Its Population: A

Brief Description (Revised Version), Pristina, 5 June.

Nathan, Laurie, 2004. ‘Obstacles to Security Sector Reform in New Democracies’, in Clem
McCartney, Martina Fischer & Oliver Wills, eds, Security Sector Reform: Potentials and
Challenges for Conflict Transformation. Berlin: Berghof Research Center for Constructive
Conflict Management (29–33).

Newman, Edward & Albrecht Schnabel, 2002. Recovering from Civil Conflict: Reconciliation,

Peace and Development. London & Portland, OR: Frank Cass.

O’Donnell, Guillermo & Philippe C. Schmitter, 1986. Transitions from Authoritarian Rule:
Tentative  Conclusions  About  Uncertain  Democracies.  Baltimore,  MD:  John  Hopkins
University Press.

Ombudsperson Institution In Kosovo, 2003. Third Annual Report 2002–2003, Pristina, 10

July; available at http://www.ombudspersonkosovo.org/.

OECD/DAC, 2005. Security System Reform and Governance, DAC Guidelines and Reference

Series. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.

O’Neill, William G., 2002. Kosovo: An Unfinished Peace, Occasional Papers Series. Boulder,

CO: Lynne Rienner.

OSCE Mission in Kosovo, 2000a. Extension of Custody Time Limits and the Rights of Detainees:

The Unlawfulness of Regulation 1999/26, Report 6, Pristina.

OSCE  Mission  in  Kosovo,  2000b.  The  Treatment  of  Minorities  by  the  Judicial  System,

Background Report 5, Pristina. 

OSCE Mission in Kosovo, 2005. Kosovo: The Response of the Justice System to the March 2004

OSCE Mission in Kosovo, 2006a. Kosovo: Review of the Criminal Justice System 1999–2005,

Riots, Pristina.

Pristina, May.

OSCE Mission in Kosovo, 2006b. First Review of the Civil Justice System, Pristina, June.
Pugh, Michael, 2000. Regeneration of War-Torn Societies. London: Macmillan.
Ramsbotham,  Oliver,  2000.  ‘Reflections  on  UN  Post-Settlement  Peacebuilding’,  Inter-

national Peacekeeping 7(1): 169–189.

Rees,  Edward,  2006.  Security  Sector  Reform  and  Peace  Operations:  ‘Improvisation  and
Confusion’  from  the  Field  –  External  Study.  New  York:  Department  of  Peacekeeping
Operations of the United Nations.

Shain,  Yossi  &  Linz,  Juan  J.,  1995.  Between  States:  Interim  Governments  and  Democratic

Transitions. New York: Cambridge University Press. 

Smith, Chris, 2001. ‘Security-Sector Reform: Development Breakthrough or Institutional

Engineering?’, Journal of Conflict, Security and Development 1(1): 5–19.

United  Nations,  1999.  United  Nations  Security  Council  Resolution  1244,  S/RES/1244,

New York, 10 June.

United  Nations,  2001.  Implementation  of  the  Recommendations  of  the  Special  Committee  on

Downloaded from 

sdi.sagepub.com

 at UNIVERSITAET OSNABRUECK on April 18, 2016

SDI_38_1  2/16/07  12:11 PM  Page 92

92

Security Dialogue vol. 38, no. 1, March 2007

Peacekeeping Operations and the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations, A/55/977, New
York, 1 June.

United  Nations,  2002.  Report  of  the  Secretary-General  on  the  United  Nations  Interim

Administration Mission in Kosovo, S/2002/779, New York, 17 July.

United Nations, 2003. Handbook on United Nations Multidimensional Peacekeeping Operations.
New York: Peacekeeping Best Practices Unit, Department of Peacekeeping Operations. 
United Nations, 2004a. The Rule of Law and Transitional Justice in Conflict and Post-Conflict

Societies, S/2004/616, New York, 23 August.

United Nations, 2004b. A More Secure World: Our Shared Responsibility –Report of the High-

Level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change, A/59/565, New York, 2 December.

United  Nations,  2004c.  Report  of  the  Secretary-General  on  the  United  Nations  Interim

Administration Mission in Kosovo, S/2004/348, New York, 30 April. 

United Nations, 2005. In Larger Freedom: Towards Development, Security and Human Rights

for All, A/59/2005/Add.2, New York, 21 March.

United  Nations,  2006.  Report  of  the  Secretary-General  on  the  United  Nations  Interim

Administration Mission in Kosovo, S/2006/361, New York, 5 June.

United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), 2004. ‘Light Blue’: Public Perceptions of

Security and Police Performance in Kosovo, Pristina, June.

UNMIK, 1999a. ‘On the Authority of the Interim Administration in Kosovo’, Regulation

UNMIK,  1999b.  ‘On  the  Law  Applicable  In  Kosovo’,  Regulation  1999/24,  Pristina,  12

1999/1, Pristina, 25 July.

December.

Pristina, 22 December.

2000/1’, Pristina, 14 January.

UNMIK, 1999c. ‘On the Extension of Periods of Pretrial Detention’, Regulation 1999/26,

UNMIK,  2000.  ‘On  the  Kosovo  Joint  Interim  Administrative  Structure,  Regulation

UNMIK,  2001.  ‘On  a  Constitutional  Framework  for  Provisional  Self-Government  in

Kosovo’, Regulation 2001/9, Pristina, 15 May.

Wulf, Herbert, 2004. ‘Security Sector Reform in Developing and Transitional Countries’, in
Clem McCartney, Martina Fischer & Oliver Wills, eds, Security Sector Reform: Potentials
and  Challenges  for  Conflict  Transformation. Berlin:  Berghof  Research  Center  for
Constructive Conflict Management (9–27).

Downloaded from 

sdi.sagepub.com

 at UNIVERSITAET OSNABRUECK on April 18, 2016

