<circular	email,	March	14,	2016>	
	Dear	students,	
	[Apologies	for	largely	identical	messages	to	those	enrolled	in	both	my	classes.	Please	
read	carefully	nonetheless.]	
You	are	receiving	this	email	because	you	are	enrolled	in	the	seminar	class	on	
semantics	in	the	summer	term	of	2016,	which	I	will	have	the	privilege	of	teaching.	
Today,	I	want	to	briefly	introduce	myself,	but	more	importantly,	address	some	
organizational	details.	
As	for	the	former:	My	name	is	Axel	Bohmann,	and	I	am	a	doctoral	candidate	in	
English	language	and	linguistics	at	the	University	of	Texas	at	Austin.	One	of	the	
projects	I	am	involved	in	is	a	joint	research	endeavor	between	groups	from	Austin	
and	Osnabrück,	which	is	the	connection	that	brings	me	to	your	classroom	this	
coming	semester.	I	look	forward	to	meeting	you	all.	
And	now	for	the	organizational	elements:	
•  As	you	are	no	doubt	aware,	the	seminar	will	take	place	entirely	in	April,	in	
two	dense	blocks.	Thus	the	workload	will	be	heavily	front-ended.	In	other	
words:	you	will	be	very	busy	between	now	and	the	end	of	April,	but	will	have	
the	perk	of	being	a	whole	lot	less	busy	during	the	rest	of	the	semester.	This,	
however,	will	only	work	if	you	are	willing	and	able	to	crunch	down	now,	do	a	
good	deal	of	reading	ahead	of	the	semester’s	start,	and	stay	focused	
throughout	April.	If	this	will	be	a	problem,	the	present	class	may	not	be	for	
you.	Please	get	in	touch	with	me	if	you	have	any	questions	or	concerns	about	
this.	
•  To	concretize	the	above:	it	is	vital	that	you	buy	the	course	book	as	soon	as	
possible.	For	our	first	session	on	April	7,	I	expect	you	to	have	read	and	be	
able	to	discuss	chapter	1	of	Riemer’s	introduction.	Hint:	if	you	are	itching	to	
start	reading	right	now,	try	googling	“internet	archive	riemer	semantics.”	
•  Even	with	the	first	chapter	read	by	everyone,	we	will	need	to	cover	more	
ground	during	the	first	block	of	the	seminar.	I	do	not	want	to	overburden	you	
with	reading,	so	the	Saturday	(April	9)	will	be	a	highly	interactive	session	
taught	in	large	part	by	student	expert	groups.	The	details	will	follow	shortly,	
but	if	anyone	is	particularly	interested	in	one	of	the	following	chapters	in	
Riemer,	feel	free	to	let	me	know	now	already:	ch.	2	(meaning	and	definition),	
ch.	3	(external	context),	ch.	4	(interpersonal	context),	ch.	5	(analyzing	and	
distinguishing	meanings).	
•  Finally,	I	would	like	to	ask	you	to	fill	in	the	following	doodle	to	let	me	know	
whether	you	will	need	to	receive	2	LPs	or	4	LPs	for	the	class:	
http://doodle.com/poll/8yym795p89fsvems	.	FYI:	the	extra	assignment	for	
the	4	LP	people	will	be	a	final	exam	(those	concerned	about	not	being	able	to	
study	for	a	final	in	the	limited	time	frame	of	the	class:	I	am	willing	to	work	
with	you	on	alternatives;	please	get	in	touch	with	me).	

If	some	of	the	above	sounds	a	bit	intimidating,	do	not	let	this	put	you	off.	I	merely	
wanted	to	stress	in	advance	that	a	little	effort	on	your	part	is	required	to	make	this	
class	work;	but	once	we	get	the	ball	rolling,	there	is	a	lot	of	fun	to	be	had.	
	Looking	forward	to	meeting	all	of	you	in	person	
Axel	Bohmann	
	<circular	email,	21	March,	2016>	
	Dear	students,	
	We	are	getting	closer	to	April	and	I	bet	you	are	at	least	as	excited	as	I	am	for	a	month	
packed	with	semantics	shenanigans.	A	couple	of	additional	things	need	to	be	
addressed,	so	here	is	my	weekly	newsletter	for	y’all:	
Textbook:	Since	some	of	you	have	asked,	the	full	publication	info	for	the	Riemer	
textbook	is	in	the	course	description	on	StudIP.	See	also	the	link	I	included	in	my	
earlier	email.	I	expect	you	to	have	the	entirety	of	the	book	with	you	for	all	class	
sessions,	but	if	you	want	to	go	with	an	electronic	version,	that	will	be	fine	with	me.	
Attendance:	However	many	LPs	you	are	attending	the	class	for,	attendance	is	a	
mandatory	requirement	to	receive	credit.	The	IfAA’s	general	policy	is	that	you	are	
allowed	to	miss	up	to	80%	of	class	time.	In	the	case	of	this	course’s	format,	that	
amounts	to	one	session	of	up	to	5	hrs	(i.e.	the	Friday	session).	All	absences	beyond	
that	will	prevent	you	from	passing	the	class.	
Final	exam:	Those	of	you	attending	the	class	for	4	LPs	will	take	the	final	exam	
during	the	last	class	session	in	late	April.	I	am	aware	that	this	requires	you	to	handle	
a	lot	of	material	in	a	relatively	short	time.	Exam	preparation	will	be	handled	
accordingly	to	offer	everyone	a	fair	shot	at	the	grade	they	deserve.	If	some	of	you	
are	seriously	concerned	about	not	being	able	to	study	efficiently	in	such	a	short	
time,	we	can	discuss	further	details	in	the	first	session	of	the	class.	
Student	expert	groups:	As	mentioned	in	my	previous	email,	we	will	have	a	
student-taught	session	on	April	09.	Attached	are	guidelines	for	the	expert	groups	in	
order	to	start	preparing	for	those.	What	I	need	from	all	of	you	(and	yes,	this	is	a	
requirement	no	matter	the	amount	of	LPs	you	need	–	think	of	it	as	distributed	
reading	of	course	texts,	not	as	extra	work)	is	an	indication	of	your	order	of	
preferences	for	the	topics	we	need	to	cover	during	this	session.	Please	write	me	an	
email	in	which	you	rank	the	following	topics	in	the	order	of	your	preference,	with	1	
being	the	MOST	preferred	and	4	being	the	LEAST	preferred:	
a)	Meaning	and	definition	
b)	External	context	
c)	Interpersonal	context	
d)	Analyzing	and	distinguishing	meanings	
You	may	also	indicate	who	you	want	to	work	in	the	same	group	with,	if	you	already	
have	preferences	in	this	regard.	I	will	assign	topics	so	as	to	accommodate	everyone's	
wishes.	However,	should	tie	breakers	prove	to	be	necessary,	they	will	be	done	on	a	

first	come,	first	served	basis.	Please	submit	all	this	info	by	this	Friday,	March	25,	
so	we	can	get	the	organization	sorted	out	soon.	
Finally,	the	Texas	English	Linguistics	Lab,	which	I	am	a	part	of,	has	just	released	a	
blog	post	analyzing	Donald	Trump’s	and	Bernie	Sanders’	use	of	some	stereotypical	
features	of	New	York	City	English.	It	really	has	very	little	to	do	with	our	class	topic,	
but	I	wanted	to	use	the	opportunity	for	some	shameless	self-promotion	nonetheless.	
	See	you	all	in	Osnabrück	in	April	
Axel	Bohmann	
			<circular	email,	March	29,	2016>	
	Dear	students,	
	Based	on	the	(few)	responses	I	have	received	to	my	previous	message,	I	have	
divvied	up	the	expert	groups	for	our	first	weekend	marathon	meeting	as	follows:	
Nouns	and	NPs:	Jaschke,	Watermeyer,	Wenninger,	Kloppmann,	Raabe,	Hotz,	Ceylan,	
Schmieder,	Jedraszczak,	Jerke,	Türk	
Adjectives	and	Adverbs:	Jahn,	Lohmann,	Filter,	Meyer	zu	Bergsten,	Harms,	
Backhaus,	Banik,	Barchanski,	Bardy,	Beinke	
Prepositions	and	PPs:	Berger,	Brill,	Dasenbrook-Hannemann,	Derks,	Dickel,	Dwuzet,	
Gerhardts,	Grabietz,	Graeber,	Jansen	
Clause	Types:	Kleinert,	Lambertus,	Lührmann,	Nykamp,	Pohlenz,	Schäfer,	
Schoemaker,	Taubken,	Zöllner,	Vennemann	
	It	is	now	incumbent	upon	you	to	get	in	touch	with	each	other	and	prepare	according	
to	the	directions	given	in	my	previous	email.	If	individual	group	members	turn	out	
to	be	unresponsive,	I'd	appreciate	a	quick	notification	-	not	to	penalize	anybody,	but	
to	ensure	effective	communication	and	coordination.	
	Also,	given	that	a	lot	of	you	did	not	reply	and	that	I	have	a	significant	number	of	
students	enrolled	in	both	my	classes	who	only	listed	preferences	for	one,	I	am	
getting	a	little	suspicious	about	who	is	or	is	not	planning	to	actually	take	the	class.	I	
do	not	know	how	the	IfAA	handles	drop-outs	etc.,	but	as	far	as	I	am	concerned,	it	
would	be	an	immense	help	to	know	as	soon	as	possible	if	and	when	people	have	
decided	not	to	take	the	class.	So,	if	you	are	currently	enrolled	but	already	know	you	
will	not	attend,	please	shoot	me	a	quick,	informal	notification	email.	
	Sunny	greetings	from	Freiburg	
	Axel	Bohmann	

