C H A P T E R  2 3 

Emotions  in  the  Wild 

The  Situated  Perspective  on  Emotion 

Paul Griffiths and Andrea Scarantino 

x.  Introduction 

Many  theoretical  traditions  have  contrib-
uted  to  the  scientific  elucidation  of emotion, 
but  philosophers  facing  the  question,  W h a t 
is  an  emotion?  h a v e  concentrated  on  t w o 
in  particular. 1  Philosophical  cog-
of  these 
nitivism  is  inspired  by  the  appraisal  tradi-
tion  in  p s y c h o l o g y  (e.g.,  Arnold,  i960,  1970; 
Scherer,  1999),  T h e  alternative  neo-Jamesian 
approach  is  inspired  by  the  somatic  marker 
hypothesis  in  a f f e c t i v e  neuroscience  ( D a m a -
sio,  1996;  Panksepp,  1998).  Cognitivists  iden-
tify  emotions  w i t h  representations  of  the 
stimulus  situation,  or  evaluative  judgments 
(Solomon,  1976,  1993).  Neo-Jamesians  iden-
tify  emotions  w i t h  states  of  bodily  arousal, 
which  are  detected  by  the  brain  as  affect 
(Prinz,  2004b).  Both  these  views  of  emo-
tion  parallel  t h e  v i e w  of  cognition  that  has 
been  called  into  question  by  situated  cog-
nition  research  (Smith,  1999;  Clark,  1997). 
In  both  theories,  emotions  are  conceived 
as  internal  states  or  processes  and  the  role 
of  the  e n v i r o n m e n t 
is  confined  to  pro-
viding  stimuli  and  receiving  actions.  Thus, 
although  Prinz  advocates  embodied  emo-

tions  (Prinz,  2004a),  his  contribution  does 
not  emphasize  the  role  of the  environment, 
assimilating  emoting  to  perceiving  actual  or 
as-if  changes  of  one's  own  body  (Damasio, 
1999).  In  a  further  parallel  with  traditional 
views  of  cognition,  both  cognitivists  and 
neo-Jamesians  focus  on  the  contributions 
that  emotions  make  to  the  organism's  inter-
nal  psychological  economy.  T h e  primary 
function  of  emotions,  on  both  accounts,  is 
to  provide  the  organism's  decision-making 
systems  with  information  about  the  signifi-
cance  of  a  stimulus  situation. 

This  chapter  describes  a  very  different 
perspective  on  emotion,  according  to  w h i c h 
emotions  are  the  following: 

2. 

1.  Designed to function  in  a  social  context: 
an emotion  is  often  an  act of relationship 
reconfiguration  brought  about  by  deliv-
ering  a  social  signal; 
Forms  of  skillful  engagement  with  t h e 
world that  need not  be  mediated by  con-
ceptual  thought; 
Scaffolded  by  the  environment,  b o t h 
synchronically, 
in  the  unfolding  of  a 
particular  emotional  p e r f o r m a n c e ,  and 

3. 

4 3 7 

paul  g r i f f i t h s  a n d  a n d r e a  s c a r a n t i n o 

diachronicallv,  in  the  acquisition  of  an 
emotional  repertoire; 

4.  Dynamically  coupled  to  an  environ-
ment  that  both  influences  and  is  influ-
enced  by the  unfolding  of the  emotion. 

We  draw  heavily  on  transactional  accounts 
of emotion proposed by some contemporary 
psychologists  (Fridlund, 
1994;  Parkinson, 
1995;  Parkinson,  Fischer,  &  Manstead,  2005; 
Russell  &  Fernandez-Dols,  1997).  Although 
these authors do not, to our knowledge, con-
ceive  of their  work  as  a  contribution  to  the 
situationist  literature  that  is  the  focus  of 
this  volume,  we  contend  that  their  propos-
als constitute  a  fairly exact,  affective paral-
lel to situationist ideas about cognition.  The 
primary  aim  of  this  chapter  is  to  demon-
strate  that  a  situated  approach  to  emotion 
already  exists and is backed by  a substantial 
experimental literature.  This body of theory 
and  data  could  make  a  major  contribution 
to  fleshing  out  the  general  situationist  per-
spective on the mind. 

We  emphasize  that  adopting  the  situa-
tionist  perspective  does  not  require  deny-
ing  the  results  produced  by  other  theoret-
ical  traditions  in  psychology,  such  as  the 
affect-program tradition, or even the heuris-
tic  value  of  alternative  theoretical  perspec-
tives.  Instead, the situated perspective shifts 
our  theoretical  focus  to  neglected  phenom-
ena  and  questions.  The  situated  approach 
to  emotion  is  at  its  most  compelling  when 
applied to exemplars  like  anger in  a  marital 
quarrel  or  embarrassment  while  delivering 
a  song  to  an  audience.  These  are  cases  in 
which  the  emotion  has  a  temporal  course 
of  development  and  involves  an  ongoing 
exchange  of  emotional  signals  (e.g.,  facial 
actions,  tones  of voice).  This  switch  in  the 
focus of emotion theory parallels the way  in 
which  situated  cognition  research  switches 
the  focus  of  cognitive  science  from  exem-
plars like  theorem  proving to  engaged,  real-
time exemplars like navigation in a cluttered 
environment. 

Finally,  the  situated  perspective  on  emo-
tion has some points in common with active-
vision accounts of situated perception  (Noe, 
2004).  In  traditional  models  of  emotional 

appraisal,  the  organism  receives  information 
from  the  environment  and  uses  it  to  deter-
mine  the  emotional  significance  of  the  sit-
uation  that  confronts  it.  In  contrast,  the 
situated  perspective  envisages  organisms 
probing  their  environment  through  initial 
emotional  responses  and  monitoring  the 
responses  of  other  organisms  to  determine 
how  the  emotion  will  evolve  (see  section  5). 

2.  Social  Situatedness 

A  situated  perspective  on  the  mind  recog-
nizes  that  it  is  designed  to  function  in  an 
environmental  context  and  that  aspects  of 
the  environment  m a y be  causal  components 
of  mental  mechanisms  (Clark  &  Chalmers, 
1998).  Research  on  situated  cognition  has 
often emphasized the reliable physical prop-
erties  of  the  environment,  properties  that 
can be exploited to  reduce cognitive load. In 
contrast,  a  situated  perspective  on  emotion 
emphasizes  the  role  of social  context  in  the 
production  and  management  of an  emotion, 
and  the  reciprocal  influence  of  emotion  on 
the  evolving  social  context.  Behaviors  that 
have  traditionally  been  viewed  as  involun-
tary  expressions  of  the  organism's  psycho-
logical  state  are  instead  viewed  as  signals 
designed  to  influence  the  behavior  of other 
organisms,  or  as  strategic  moves  in  an  ongo-
ing  transaction  between  organisms.2 

One  of  the  most  important  experimen-
tal  paradigms  for  a  situated  perspective  on 
emotion  is  the  study  of  audience  effects  -
differences  in  emotional  response  to  a  con-
stant  stimulus  which  reflect  differences  in 
the  expected  recipient(s)  of  the  emotion. 
Among  the  most  dramatic  effects  are  those 
obtained  for  the  production  of the  so-called 
Duchenne  smile  -  the  pattern  of  move-
ment  of mouth  and  eyes  generally  accepted 
as  a  pancultural  expression  of  happiness 
(Ekman,  1972).  Ten-pin bowlers  are presum-
ably  happiest  w h e n  they  make  a  full  strike 
and  less  happy  w h e n  they  knock  down  a 
few  pins.  However,  bowlers  rarely  smile 
after  making  a  full  strike  when  facing  away 
from  their  bowling  companions  and  smile 
very  often  after  knocking  down  a  few  pins 

e m o t i o n s  i n  t h e  wii.d 

439 

when  they  face  their  companions  (Kraut  & 
Johnston,  1979)-  Spanish  soccer  fans  show 
a  similar  pattern  in  their  facial  response 
to  goals  and  issue  Duchenne  smiles  only 
when  facing  one  another  (Fernandez-Dols 
&  Ruiz-Belda,  1997).  Fernandez-Dols  and 
Ruiz-Belda  also  demonstrate  that  at the  1992 
Barcelona  Olympics,  although  gold  medal-
ists  produced  many  signs  of  emotion  dur-
ing  the  medal  ceremony,  they  produced 
Duchenne  smiles  almost  exclusively  when 
interacting  with  the  audience  and  officials. 

These  results  suggest  that  smiles  are  not 
outpourings  of  happiness  that  are  merely 
witnessed by other people but affiliative ges-
tures  made  by  one  person  to  another  with 
respect to something good that has occurred. 
This  fits  the  model  of emotions  as  strategic 
moves  in  the  context  of a  social  transaction. 
Obviously,  people  do  smile  and  produce 
other  classical  emotional  expressions  when 
they  are  alone,  but  studies  suggest that  they 
do  so  far  less  often  than  one  might  expect. 
Even  such  apparently  reflexive  displays  as 
facial  expressions  produced  in  response  to 
tastes  and  smells  appear  to  be  facilitated  by 
an  appropriate  social  setting,  and  the  same 
appears  to  be  the  case  for  pain  expressions 
(Russell,  Bachorowski,  &  Fernandez-Dols, 
2003).  Furthermore,  it  would  be  a  mistake 
to conclude  that  audience  effects  are  absent 
when  a  physical  audience  is  absent.  Solitary 
subjects  who  mentally  picture  taking  part 
in  a  social  interaction  produce  more  emo-
tional  facial  signals  than  subjects  who  focus 
on the  emotional  stimulus without  an  imag-
ined  audience.  Fridlund  (1994;  Fridlund  et 
al.,  1990) has described this as implicit social-
ity  and remarked that  his  experimental  sub-
jects  display  to  the  audience  in  their  heads. 

The  sensitivity  to  social  context  mani-
fested  in  audience  effects  can  be  imple-
mented  by  very  simple  mental  mechanisms, 
as  is  evident  from  the  prevalence  of  audi-
ence  effects  in  animals.  This  is  important 
because  it  helps  to  explain  how  the  emo-
tions  can  be  produced  strategically  with-
out  becoming  mere  pretences  of  emotion 
(see  also  Griffiths,  1997,  chap.  6;  2004b). 
Male  Golden  Sebright  chickens,  for  exam-
ple, make a fuss when they find and consume 

a  valuable  morsel  of  food,  but  only  if  there 
are female chickens in the vicinity (Marler & 
Evans,  1997).  There  is,  presumably,  no point 
in  demonstrating  foraging  ability  to  other 
males!  Results  like  these  suggest  that  the 
social  situatedness  of  emotion  is  not  a  spe-
cial  human  achievement  mediated  by  con-
ceptual thought but a  fundamental  aspect of 
emotion  (see  section  3). 

Socially  situated  emotions  have  a  strate-
gic  aspect  neglected  in  cognitivist  and  neo-
Jamesian  accounts  of  emotion.  Emotions 
have  been  seen  as  more  or  less  accurate 
responses  to  how  things  are,  but  they  are 
also,  and  perhaps  primarily,  more  or  less 
effective goal-oriented responses.  For exam-
ple,  one  study  in  which  people  were  asked 
to  describe  situations  in  which  they  had 
become  angry  found  that  the  prospect  of 
obtaining  compensation  is  a  significant  fac-
tor  determining  whether  a  loss  elicits  anger 
or  sadness  (Stein,  Trabasso,  &  Li wag, 1993). 
This  is  puzzling if anger is merely  a response 
to  having  been  wronged,  but  makes  good 
sense  if anger  is  a  strategy  to  obtain  restitu-
tion. 

Embarrassment  is  an  emotion  that  wears 
its  social  situatedness  on  its  face,  as  most 
theories  of  embarrassment  acknowledge 
(Parkinson  et  al.,  2005,  pp.  188-192).  The 
finding  that  observers  evaluate  people  who 
behave  in  a  socially  inappropriate  manner 
more  favorably  if they  show  embarrassment 
suggests that one function of embarrassment 
may  be  to  indicate  knowledge  of a  violated 
norm and acceptance of its validity (for more 
on  embarrassment  elicitors,  see  section  3). 
In  a  study  in  which  subjects  were  asked 
to  record  a  karaoke-style  performance  of 
a  notoriously  embarrassing  love  song,  the 
singer's  subsequent  level  of  embarrassment 
was  reduced  if  he  or  she  was  given  rea-
son  to  believe  that  the  experimenter  knew 
the  subject  was  embarrassed  by  the  per-
formance  (Leary,  Landel,  &  Patton,  1996). 
The  authors  take  this  result  to  suggest  that 
embarrassment  functioned  as  a  signal:  the 
singer needed to  convey to the audience that 
he or she had a low opinion of the song,  thus 
confirming  the  singer's  knowledge  of,  and 
desire  to  conform  to,  community standards. 

4 4 ° 

p a u l  g r i f f i t h s  a n d  a n d r e a  s c a r a n t 1 n o 

Some  emotional  behavior  simply  cries 
out  for  a  transactional  analysis.  Sulking  is 
normally  thought  of  as  a  manifestation  of 
emotion,  but  traditional  theories  of  emo-
tion do little to illuminate it. This is perhaps 
why  there  has  been  so  little  research  on  a 
phenomenon of such obvious importance to 
human relationship dynamics. Sulking sabo-
tages mutually rewarding social transactions 
and  rejects  attempts  at  reconciliation.  Tra-
ditional appraisal theory can identify sulking 
as  a  manifestation  of anger,  but  does  noth-
ing to explain the specifics of sulking, which 
must  be  handed  off to  a  separate  theory of 
emotion  management or emotion  coping.  It 
is  also  implausible  that  all  (or  even  most) 
people who sulk sincerely judge themselves 
to have been wronged, so an ancillary theory 
of self-deceit is  needed  as well.  In  contrast, 
viewing  an  emotion  as  a  strategy  of  rela-
tionship reconfiguration (Parkinson,  1995, p. 
295)  provides  a  compelling  perspective  on 
sulking.  Sulking  is  a  behavioral  strategy  for 
seeking  a  better  deal  in  a  relationship  -  an 
emotional  game  of chicken  in  which  trans-
actions that benefit both parties are rejected 
until  appropriate  concessions  are  obtained. 
The question  confronting an agent deciding 
whether to  become upset in  this way is  not 
whether they have been slighted simpliciter, 
but  whether  taking  what  has  happened  as 
a  slight  and  withdrawing  cooperation  will 
give them  leverage.  Once again,  this  strate-
gic appraisal of the situation may be realized 
by a relatively simple mental mechanism. 

The situated perspective on  emotion  can 
be seen  as  an  attempt to  refocus  discussion 
on a new set of examples. Rather than taking 
the  meeting between  a  man  and  a  bear in  a 
lonely wood as a paradigm of fear,  attention 
is focused on  displays  of fear produced by  a 
child when  her  caregiver is  at hand.  Rather 
than  taking righteous  anger  at the  injustices 
of the  world  to  be  the  paradigm  of  anger, 
anger  is  studied  in  the  context  of its  devel-
opment in a marital confrontation.  The  aim 
of this  refocusing is twofold: first, to  illumi-
nate  the  aspects  of  emotional  life  that  are 
arguably most  relevant to practical  issues  of 
emotion management;  second,  to  reveal the 
social  aspects  of many  other  emotions  that 

are overlooked when  they  are  assimilated to 
the  traditional  exemplar  cases. 

3.  N o n c o n c e p t u a l  Emotional  Content 

Most situationist  literature  opposes  the idea 
that  the  primary  medium  of  cognition  is 
conceptual  thought.  Although  not  denying 
that  conceptual  thought  exists,  situationists 
see it as only the  icing on the cognitive cake. 
Other forms of cognition explain most of the 
practical  abilities  of  organisms  to  negotiate 
their  environments  (Smith,  1999;  Cussins 
1992).  In  this  section  we  explore  a  similar 
perspective  on  emotional  content. 

To  be  credited  with  conceptual  thought 
a  creature  must fulfill  requirements of max-
imal  inferential  promiscuity  with  respect 
to  its  thought  contents  (Hurley,  2003).  A 
popular  way  to  state  this  requirement  is 
Evans's  (1982)  generality  constraint,  accord-
ing  to  which  a  mental  state  qualifies  as  a 
"thought that  a is  F" just in  case it is possible 
for the  subject  to  decompose  that state  into 
recombinable 
ingredients  and  form  with 
such  ingredients  mental  states  of two  sorts: 
states  that  predicate  of  "a"  any  property  G 
the  subject  can  conceive  of,  and  states  that 
predicate  F  of  any  object  "b"  the  subject 
can  conceive  of.  T h e  ability  to  entertain the 
thought  "a  is  F"  is  therefore  "a  joint  exer-
cise  of  two  abilities"  (Evans,  1982,  p.  104), 
namely,  the  ability  to  have  the  concept of a 
particular  object  "a"  and  the  ability  to  have 
the concept of a particular property F.  These 
abilities  underlie  the  higher-order  ability to 
think productively  and systematically,  sensu 
Fodor  (1975  and  elsewhere). 

Situationists  argue  that  skillful  activities 
such  as  navigating  an  environment  or cook-
ing  a  meal  can  be  conducted  without  con-
ceptual  thought  in  this  sense,  and that these 
abilities  are  at  least  as  important  a  part 
of  cognition  as  abilities  that  require  con-
ceptual  thought  (Smith,  1999).  In  a  sim-
ilar  fashion,  the  situated  perspective  on 
emotion  views  emotions  as  forms  of  skill-
ful  engagement  with  the  world  and  resists 
the  view  that  they  either  are  or  essentially 
involve  conceptual  thought.  The  ability  to 

EMOTIONS  IN  THE  WILD 

44» 

emote  is  not  to  be  explained  in  terms  of 
prepositional attitudes and their use in prac-
tical  and theoretical  inferences.  Instead,  the 
contentfulness  of  emotions  emerges  from 
the  fact  that  they  enable  dexterous  inter-
actions  with  the  environment.  Importantly, 
when  ascribing  this  form  of emotional  con-
tent  to  an  organism,  we  are  entitled  to  use 
concepts not possessed by the organism hav-
ing  the  emotion,  a  standard  condition  for 
labeling  a  form  of  mental  content  as  non-
conceptual  (Bermúdez,  2003).' 

Although there is  no  room  here to  elabo-
rate  on  the  specifics  of nonconceptual  emo-
tional  representation,  what  appears  to  be 
crucial is that it is an action-oriented form of 
representation  (Griffiths,  2004b;  Scarantino, 
2005).  Emotional  content  has  a  fundamen-
tally pragmatic  dimension,  in  the  sense that 
the  environment  is  represented  in  terms  of 
what  it  affords  to  the  emoter  in  the  way 
of  skillful  engagement  with  it.  To  get  a 
more  vivid  intuitive  grip  on  this,  imagine 
the world-as-perceived  (Ümwelt)  of an ante-
lope  suddenly  confronted  by  a  lion.  The 
dominant elements  of the  antelope's  Ümwelt 
are escape affordances (Scarantino, 2003),  as 
all  of its  cognitive,  perceptual,  and  motoric 
abilities  are  recruited  to  discover  and  exe-
cute  an  action  sequence  that  evades  the 
predator.  This  representation  of  the  world 
in  goal-oriented  terms  is  required  by  the 
urgency  of  the  situation,  which  demands 
selectively  transforming  inputs  into  oppor-
tunities  for  life-saving  output  rather  than 
generating  a  multipurpose  representation  of 
the  environment. 

content 

A  situationist,  action-oriented  approach 
to  emotional 
is  diametrically 
opposed  to  classic  cognitivist  theories  of 
emotions,  which  take  emotions  to  be  eval-
uative judgments  or  combinations  of beliefs 
and  desires  (Marks,  1982;  Nussbaum,  2001; 
Solomon, 
1993).  Although  this  approach 
may give  an  accurate  account of some forms 
of sophisticated human emotionality,  it falls 
short  as  a  general  theory  of  emotions.  In 
particular,  the  assumption  that  conceptual 
thought  is  essential  for emotion  prevents  us 
from  making  sense  of  emotions  in  infants 
and animals.  This not only is wildly counter-

intuitive  (monkeys  are  never  really  afraid) 
but also deprives us of two of the most  fruit-
ful  avenues  for  the  study  of emotions:  com-
parative  animal  studies  and  the  exploration 
of ontogenetic  emotional  development.  It  is 
also  inconsistent  with  the  phenomenon  of 
affective  primacy  (Ohman,  1999),  in  which 
emotion  systems  display  some  of the  prop-
erties  of  a  Fodorian  module  (Fodor,  1983): 
they are fast,  mandatory,  cognitively impen-
etrable,  and  have  limited  central  accessi-
bility.  The  case  of  phobias  is  exemplary 
in  this  respect,  as  a  phobic  can  reconcile 
the  conceptual  thought  that  the  object  of 
their  phobia  is  completely  harmless  with 
utter  terror  toward  it.  The  traditional  cog-
nitivist  must  assimilate  phobias  either  to 
inconsistent  beliefs  or  to  self-deceit.  In  the 
case  of  fear  at  least,  there  is  good  scien-
tific  reason  to  believe  that  phobias  result 
neither  from  logical  error  nor  from  self-
deceit,  but  from  the  neural  architecture  of 
the  emotion  system.  By  means  of ingenious 
lesion  studies,  LeDoux  (1993)  has  demon-
strated  that fear  can  be  elicited  in  a  reflex-
like  fashion  through  a  neural  low  road  that 
projects along a subcortical pathway directly 
to  the  amygdala  and  bypasses  the  neocor-
tex.  Because full-blown  conceptual  thought 
is  generally  assumed  to  involve  the  neocor-
tex,  this  appears  to  be  strong  evidence  that 
conceptual thought is not essential for fear.4 
The biggest hurdle for a situated perspec-
tive  on  emotions  is  constituted  by  the  so-
called  higher  cognitive  emotions  (for  skep-
ticism  about this label,  see section 6).  Guilt, 
shame,  resentment,  envy,  and  embarrass-
ment,  for example,  seem connected by their 
very  definitions  to  a  range  of  sophisticated 
conceptual  abilities. This perspective is sup-
ported  by  the  psychological  literature  on 
emotional appraisal. The influential  account 
of  Lazarus  (1991)  suggests  that  each  emo-
tion  is  caused  by  an  appraisal  whose  con-
tent  can  be  captured  by  a  core  relational 
theme.  Guilt is caused by  the  appraisal  that 
one has transgressed a moral imperative  and 
shame  by  the  appraisal  that  one  has  failed 
to  live  up  to  an  ego  ideal.  These  appear 
to  be  paradigmatically  conceptual  thoughts, 
which  demand  possession  of concepts  such 

4 4 ° paul g r i f f i t h s a n d a n d r e a s c a r a n t 1 n o 

as  moral  imperative,  self,  and  ideal.  Con-
ventional  appraisal  theory  thus seems to  tie 
these  emotions  to  conceptual  thought.  But 
this not only would imply that emotions like 
guilt,  shame,  and  even  anger  cannot  con-
ceivably  occur  in  children  and  animals,  it 
would  also  be  inconsistent  with  the  appar-
ent  occurrence  of emotions  such  as  victim 
guilt  (Parkinson  et  al.,  2005,  and  see  next 
paragraph)  or  shame  generated  by  merely 
interacting with a higher-ranking member of 
the community  (Fessier,  1999).5  Confronted 
by these and other difficulties, appraisal the-
orists  have  come  to  accept  that  even  such 
apparendy  conceptually  complex  appraisals 
as  Lazarus's  core  relational  themes  can  be 
made  (1)  without  the  information  evalu-
ated  being  available  to  other  cognitive  pro-
cesses,  (2)  before  perceptual  processing  of 
the  stimulus  has  been  completed,  and  (3) 
using only simple sensory cues to define the 
property that has to be identified. The resul-
tant multilevel  appraisal  theories  (Teasdale, 
1999)  suggest  that  the  same  content  can  be 
possessed  at  different  levels  of  appraisal,  a 
view consistent with the idea that some lev-
els  of appraisal  involve  nonconceptual  con-
tent. 

The  situated  perspective  on  emotions 
identifies  emotions  like  guilt  and  shame  in 
a  way  that leaves  open  the  extent to which 
they involve conceptual thought.  The ques-
tion becomes whether the social transaction 
corresponding  to  the  emotion  can  occur  in 
the  absence  of  the  appropriate  conceptual 
thoughts. Parkinson et al. (2005) offer us rea-
sons  to  think  that  this  is  indeed  the  case 
for  many  higher  cognitive  emotions.  They 
report  a  study  by  Kroon  (1988)  in  which 
only  28  percent  of  experimental  subjects 
reporting  guilt  experiences  deemed  them-
selves causally related to the event that pro-
voked  their  guilt.  Parkinson  (1999)  further 
supports  the  view  that  it  is  not  necessary 
to  engage  in  thoughts  of  moral  transgres-
sion to feel guilty by documenting instances 
of  guilt  generated  by  unwarranted  accusa-
tions  from  relevant  others.  These  forms  of 
guilt  can  be  explained  from  a  transaction-
alist  perspective  if guilt  is  a  form  of skillful 
social  engagement  aimed  at  reconciliation. 

When  someone  we  care  about  accuses  us 
even  unjustly,  a  need  to  repair the  relation-
ship  emerges.  Guilt  is  often  a  good strategy 
to meet this need,  because it conveys a mes-
sage  of sympathetic  suffering  and the  inten-
tion  to  avoid future  involvement in harmful 
events  affecting  the  accuser. 

The  transactionalist  perspective  makes 
sense  of  many  otherwise  mysterious  forms 
of  higher  cognitive  emotion.  For  example 
although  embarrassment  has  usually  been 
associated  with  the  recognition  of personal 
failure  with  respect  to  relatively  unimpor-
tant  norms  of  conduct,  embarrassment  can 
be  elicited  simply  by  being  pointed  at  in 
public  (Lewis,  2000)  or  being  deservedly 
praised  in  public  (Parrott  8c  Smith,  1991). 
Parkinson  et  al.  (2005)  interpret this  as evi-
dence  that  embarrassment  can  be  a  simple 
response to public attention, which does not 
presuppose negative self-evaluation.  Embar-
rassment  can  thus  occur  as  a  result  of mere 
unwanted  attention,  which  may  or  may not 
be the result of having committed a faux pas. 
From  this  perspective,  embarrassment  may 
be  available to  prelinguistic  children.  Reddy 
(2000)  reports the combination of coy smiles 
and gaze aversion  in two-month-old infants, 
which  suggests  the  possibility that primitive 
forms  of embarrassment  may  emerge  much 
earlier  than  the  cognitive  capacities  gener-
ally  assumed to  underlie  them:  "the dynam-
ics  of interpersonal  interaction  may produce 
emotion  without  the  internal  cognitive rep-
resentation  of  those  dynamics.  All  that  is 
required  is  a  basic  perception  of self in rela-
tion to others,  which may well be present at 
a  very  early  age"  (Parkinson  et  al.,  2005,  p. 
210).  This  idea  will  be  enlarged  upon  in the 
next  section. 

4.  C u l t u r a l  S c a f f o l d i n g 

The  concept  of  environmental  scaffold-
ing  has  been  central  to  situated  cogni-
tion  research:  intelligent  behavior  is  guided 
and  supported  by  the  context  in  which  it 
unfolds.  The  emphasis  here  is  on  the  active 
contribution  of the  environment to the cog-
nitive  process  (Clark  8c  Chalmers,  1998). 

EMOTIONS  IN  THE  WII.D 

443 

To  disregard  the  enabling  properties  of  the 
environment  is  to  lose  sight  of  the  fact 
that  the  causal  structure  underlying  a  great 
many  cognitive  achievements  projects  into 
the  relational  space  between  cognizer  and 
environment. 

A  situated  perspective  on  emotion  recog-
nizes  that  the  environment  plays  an  active 
role  in  structuring  and  enabling  emotional 
engagements,  which  like  cognitive  engage-
ments  are  scaffolded  by  their  natural  con-
text  of  occurrence.6  T h e  environment  scaf-
folds  emotion  in  two  ways.  Synchronically, 
the  environment  supports  particular  emo-
tional  performances  -  particular  episodes 
of,  say,  anger  or  sadness  (see  section  5). 
Diachronically,  the  environment  supports 
the  development  of  an  emotional  phe-
notype  or  repertoire  of  emotional  abili-
ties.  Thus,  the  provision  of  confessionals 
in  churches  enables  certain  kinds  of  emo-
tional performance  (synchronic scaffolding), 
and  the  broader  Catholic  culture  supports 
the  development  of  the  ability  to  engage 
in  the  emotional  engagements  of confession 
(diachronic  scaffolding).  Synchronic  scaf-
folding  has  received  more  attention  than 
diachronic  scaffolding  in  the  literature  on 
situated  cognition  (but  see  Thelen  &  Smith, 
1994).  In  contrast,  there  is  more  research 
on  the  diachronic,  developmental  role  of 
affective  culture than  on its  synchronic role. 
This  is  a  by-product  of  the  longstanding 
debate  over  nature  versus  nurture  in  emo-
tion  theory. 

To  appreciate  the  potential  interest  of 
the  extensive  body  of  research  on  emo-
tional  development,  we  need  to  diffuse  the 
heated  but  ultimately  sterile  debate  over 
nature  and  nurture.  Situated  perspectives 
on  emotion  have  traditionally  been  aligned 
with  social  constructionism  because  of  the 
simplistic  view  that  evolved  features  of  the 
mind  must  develop  in  ways  that  are  insen-
sitive  to  the  social  environment  —  they 
are  programmed  in  the  genes  (e.g.,  Rat-
ner,  1989).  Fortunately,  it is  increasingly rec-
ognized  that  evolution  does  not  construct 
genetic  homunculi  but  developmental  sys-
tems  designed  to  function  in  a  develop-
mental  context  that,  in  a  species  like  ours, 

includes  socialization  and  exposure  to  all 
those  factors  that  make  up  a  culture  (Cos-
mides,  Tooby,  &  Barkow,  1992).  Hence  a 
feature  of the  emotional  phenotype  may  be 
both  a  (phylogenetic)  product  of evolution 
and  an  (ontogenetic)  product  of a  rich  con-
text  of socialization.  A  fully  adequate  reso-
lution  of  the  nature-versus-nurture  debate, 
however,  requires  the  additional  recogni-
tion  that the  role  of the  developmental  con-
text  is  not  restricted  to  activating  alterna-
tive  outcomes  prefigured  in  a  disjunctive 
genetic  program  (Griffiths,  1997;  Griffiths 
&  Stotz,  2000).  Developmental  systems  are 
usually competent to  produce viable pheno-
types  outside  the  specific  parameter  ranges 
in  which  they  have  historically  operated. 
This  may  even  be  an  important  source  of 
evolutionary  novelty  (Schlichting  &  Pigli-
ucci,  1998;  West-Eberhard,  2003). 

In  our  view,  an  adequate  perspective 
on  the  relationship  between  evolution  and 
social  construction  must  recognize  (1)  that 
the  way  developing  humans  respond  to 
inputs  from  the  social  environment  and 
the  fact  that  the  social  environments  pro-
vide  those  inputs  may  both  be  subject  to 
evolutionary  explanation,  and  (2)  that  the 
biological  endowment  of  a  healthy  human 
infant  determines  a  norm  of  reaction  that 
includes  a  large  range  of  emotional  pheno-
types,  not  all  of  which  have  been  specifi-
cally  selected  for  nor  need  to  have  occurred 
before  in  human  history  (for  similar  per-
spectives,  see  Bjorklund  &  Pellegrini,  2002; 
Parkinson,  forthcoming).  That said,  we hope 
that  we  can  go  on  to  discuss  the  role  of 
the  environment  in  the  genesis  of emotions 
without  being  accused  of ignoring  biology. 
Parkinson  et  al.  (2005,  p.  224)  formu-
late  a  useful  framework  for  the  study  of 
the  environment's  many  roles.  They  dis-
cuss  both  how  the  development  of an  emo-
tional  repertoire  is  diachronically scaffolded 
by  the  cultural  context  in  which  an  indi-
vidual  grows  up  and  how  specific  emo-
tional  performances  are  synchronically  scaf-
folded  by  the  social  and  cultural  context 
in  which  they  occur.  They  explore  the 
potential social influences on  emotion under 
the  two  broad  areas  of  ideational  factors 

4+4 

TAI IT  GRIFFITHS  AND ANDREA SCARANT1NO 

and material (actors,  offering an  adaptation 
of  Markus  and  Kitavama's  (1994)  model. 
Ideational  factors  include  normative  stan-
dards about when emotions should be expe-
rienced  or  expressed  (e.g.,  American  wed-
ding guests are normatively required both to 
be happy for the couple and to convey their 
happiness), emotion scripts (shared internal-
ized  understandings  of the  standard unfold-
ing of an emotional episode),  and ethnothe-
ories  (culture-specific  belief systems  about 
the nature  and value of emotions).  Material 
factors  include  emotional  capital  (e.g.,  the 
emotional  resources  associated  with  having 
a specific social status,  gender,  etc.),  venues 
in which certain emotional performances are 
favored  (e.g.,  a  confessional,  a  stadium,  a 
temple),  and a range of emotional technolo-
gies  for the  management of emotions,  from 
prayer beads to Prozac. 

Parkinson  et  al.  (2005)  draw  on  exist-
ing  work  on  emotional  development  to 
construct  a  model  of  the  development  of 
a  culturally  situated  emotional  phenotype 
(pp.  235-248).  They  distinguish  three  main 
ontogenetic  stages:  primary  intersubjectiv-
ity,  secondary intersubjectivity,  and cultural 
articulation. 

Primary  intersubjectivity  emerges  in  the 
first  few months  of a child's  life,  when  pat-
terns  of  attraction  and  aversion  are  estab-
lished with objects and relevant others, most 
prominently  caregivers.  One  form  of  emo-
tional  engagement  emerging  at  this  stage 
involves  struggling  in  response  to  a  tight 
embrace  (Camras,  Campos,  Oster,  Miyake, 
&  Bradshaw,  1992).  Parkinson,  Fischer,  and 
Manstead  identify  this  as  the  ontogeneti-
cally  earliest  form  of anger,  despite  the  fact 
that  the  concepts  that  make  up  the  core 
relational  theme  of  anger  are  not  available 
at  this  point.  This  identification  is  made 
possible  by  thinking  of  anger  as  a  type  of 
social transaction rather than as a conceptual 
thought embodying  a  core  relational  theme 
(see  section  3).  The  primary  anger  reac-
tion  in  infants  is  developmentally  continu-
ous  with  episodes  of  adult  anger  in  which 
the core relational theme is not instantiated, 
such  as  anger elicited  by  repeated  failure  to 
open  a jammed door. 

When  the  child  is  about  one  year  old 
Parkinson  et  al.  (2005)  envisage  the  emer-
gence  of secondary  intersubjectivity,  charac-
terized by the  recognition  not only of people 
and  objects  but  also  of the  relations  existing 
between  them.  A  classic  example  of  emo-
tional  engagement  emerging  at  this  stage is 
social  referencing.  Infants  learn  to  engage 
objects  emotionally  in  light  of  the  emo-
tional  responses  other  people  have to them. 
For  example,  if toddlers  observe  a  disgusted 
expression on their mother's face when they 
are  handling  a  toy,  they  are  less  inclined to 
play  with  it  (Hornik,  Risenhoover,  8t  Gun-
nar,  1987). 

Finally,  infants  articulate  their  emotions 
with  the  help  of  their  emerging  concep-
tual  resources  (cultural  articulation).  Draw-
ing  on  symbolic  resources  in  the  surround-
ing  culture,  most  important  those  afforded 
by  language,  the  child  organizes  its  experi-
ence  of  emotional  transactions  in  concep-
tual  form.7  It  is  at  this  stage  that  ideational 
factors,  such  as  emotion  scripts  and  display 
rules, and material factors, such as emotional 
capital  and  emotional  technologies,  have 
their  greatest  impact  on  emotional  develop-
ment. 

It  is  in  their  understanding  of  cultural 
articulation  that  Parkinson  et  al.  (2005) 
depart  from  traditional  social  construction-
ism.  Articulation  does  not  simply  cause 
emotions  to  take  on  the  form  suggested 
by  the  local  affective  culture.  While  the 
articulated,  concept-mediated  emotion  is  a 
real  component  of  the  emotion  system,  it 
is  superimposed  on  an  existing  emotional 
repertoire  grounded  in  primary  and  sec-
ondary  intersubjectivity:  "We  don't  learn to 
get  angry  in  the  first  place  by  following cul-
tural  rules,  even  if those  rules  are  applied to 
our  anger  after  the  fact"  (Parkinson  et  al., 
2005,  p.  247).  T h e  conceptual  articulation 
of  the  emotion  allows  for  the  emergence 
of tensions  between  emotional  engagements 
reflecting  different  ontogenetic  stages  (e.g., 
some  episodes  of  anger  may  not  fit  norma-
tive rules for their  appropriate elicitation, as 
in  the  case  of  the  j a m m e d  door).  In  such 
cases  the  subject  will  often  struggle to inter-
pret a spontaneous emotional response so as 

e m o t i o n s  i n  t h e  w i l d 

445 

to  fit  the  cultural  articulation  of  an  appro-
priate  emotion. 

Parkinson  et  al.'s 

(2005)  account  of 
the  ontogeny  of  emotion  allows  individ-
uals  raised  in  different  affective  cultures 
to  develop  different  emotional  phenotypes. 
This  could  happen  in  either  of  two  ways. 
First,  individuals do conform  to  a significant 
degree  with  the  norms  and  scripts  that they 
have  internalized.  Second,  all  sorts  of  cul-
tural  differences  -  physical  child-care  prac-
tices,  common  toys,  and  so  forth  -  may 
affect  emotional  development.  It  is  worth 
noting,  however,  that  these  latter  influ-
ences  need  not  necessarily  increase  the  fit 
between  emotion  as  experienced  and  emo-
tion  as  articulated.  It  is  perfectly  conceiv-
able  that  some  element  of the  upbringing  of 
children  in  an  affective  culture  might  make 
it  harder  for  them  to  conform  to  its  norms 
as  adults  than  would  otherwise  be  the  case. 
In  any  case,  even  when  cultural  articulation 
has had its full effect on the development of 
the emotional repertoire,  a gap  remains that 
allows  emotions  to  occur  in  the  absence  of 
the  conceptual  conditions  taken  to  define 
them. 

We  now  turn  from  the  cultural  scaffold-
ing  of  emotional  development  (diachronic 
scaffolding)  to  the  cultural  scaffolding  of 
emotional  performances  (synchronic  scaf-
folding).  For  society  to  function  smoothly, 
individuals  must  have  the  right  emotions  at 
the right times,  and it is not left to individual 
psychological  processes  to  ensure  that  this 
occurs.  It  is  hardly  necessary to  describe  the 
emotional  technologies  used  to  ensure  that 
soldiers  hate  the  enemy,  feel  loyalty to  their 
unit,  and  are  not  overwhelmed  by  fear  in 
combat.  Parkinson et al.  (2005)  use the more 
cheerful  example  of the  wedding  ceremony, 
in  which  ritual,  music,  and  setting  scaffold 
participants'  performances  of their  comple-
mentary  affective  roles.  It  is  not  left  to 
chance  to  make  a  wedding  a  big  day  for  all 
concerned.  Such real-time socialization is an 
alternative to inducing conformity with local 
affective  norms  via  diachronic  socialization 
(Parkinson  et  al.,  2005,  p.  226). 

Another  real-time  process  inducing  con-
social 

to  emotional  norms 

formity 

is 

appraisal,  in  which  an  individual's  appraisal 
of a  situation  is  linked to that of others.  The 
most famous  experiment  on  social  appraisal 
(more  precisely,  social  referencing)  demon-
strated  that  the  willingness  of  infants  to 
crawl  over  a  visual  cliff  reflected  whether 
their  waiting  mother  produced  a  positive 
or  negative  facial  expression  (Sorce,  Emde, 
Campos,  & Klinnert,  1985). Similar processes 
occur  in  adults.  A  tactless  remark  can  be 
shrugged  off  when  the  other  members  of 
a  social  gathering  treat  it  as  a  nonevent,  or 
when  they  laugh  it  off,  whereas  it  may  be 
appraised  as  a  deadly  insult  if  bystanders 
meet it with silence or with a sharp intake of 
breath.  Such  distributed  appraisal  provides 
an  emotional  correlate  to  distributed  cogni-
tion  (e.g.,  Hutchins,  1995). 

Real-time  socialization  is  perhaps  the 
closest  parallel  in  emotion  research  to  the 
forms of scaffolding that have been the focus 
of  much  philosophical  discussion  of  situa-
tionism,  such  as  the  notorious  notebook  of 
Clark  and  Chalmers  (1998).  In  our  view, 
too  much  attention  has  been  devoted  to 
whether  such  cognitive  aids  imply that cog-
nition  is  literally  spread out  into  the  world. 
Similar  claims  have  been  made  in  the  liter-
ature  on  the  emotions,  with  emotions  said 
to  exist  in  the  social  space  between  trans-
actants,  and  so  forth,  but  we  believe  it 
would  be  a  mistake  to  focus  on  these  ques-
tions,  which  are  largely  semantic.  The  real 
interest  of  situationist  accounts  of  emotion 
lies in their methodological prescriptions for 
future  psychological  study  of the  emotions. 
We will return to this theme in  section  6. 

5.  Dynamic  Coupling 

A situated perspective on cognition  includes 
the  realization that  cognition  is  dynamically 
shaped  by  the  context  in  which  a  cognitive 
episode  takes  place.  This  context  changes 
over  time,  sometimes  as  a  consequence 
of  the  cognitive  activity.  Context  depen-
dence  generates  a  system  of reciprocal  cau-
sation  that  classic  approaches  to  the  mind 
tend  to  neglect,  as  they  abstract  from  the 
local  properties  of the  environment  (Smith, 

PAUL  GRIFFITHS  AND  ANDREA  SCARANTINO 

1999).  A  situated  perspective  on  emotion 
explores  some  of  the  same  themes,  focus-
ing  on  the  temporal  dynamics  of  skillful 
emotional  engagement,  exploring  the  way 
in  which  the  emotional  episode  shapes  the 
context  of  its  development  and  is  in  turn 
shaped  by  it.  Because  the  context  of  emo-
tional  episodes  is  largely social,  understand-
ing  the  dynamic  coupling  between  emoter 
and  environment  amounts  to  understanding 
how  the  unfolding  of  an  emotion  episode 
affects the behaviors  of other organisms  and 
is in turn  shaped by their behavior.  Emotion 
is  a  form  of  skillful  engagement  with  the 
social  environment  that  involves  a  dynamic 
process  of negotiation  mediated  by  recipro-
cal  feedback  between  emoter  and  interac-
tants.  This  feedback  is  provided  by  recipro-
cal  emotional  signals. 

Researchers  on  situated  cognition  have 
been  strongly  influenced  by  the  dynami-
cal  cognitive  science  approach  featured  in 
the  collection  Mind  as  Motion  [Port  &  van 
Gelder,  1995).  The  dynamicist  ideas  pre-
sented  here  have  a  rather  different  pedi-
gree,  as  they  are  primarily  grounded  in  the 
study of relationship  dynamics  (Hinde,  1979, 
1981).  This large body of work on  topics  such 
as  infant  attachment  and  romantic  relation-
ships  starts  from  the  premise  that  relation-
ships  are  not  an  immediate  function  of the 
properties  that  individuals  bring  to  a  rela-
tionship,  but  emerge  as  a  result  of specific 
interactions  between  those  individuals  and 
inputs  from  a  changing  environment. 

The  ethologist  Robert  Hinde 

(1985a, 
1985b)  was  the  first  to  articulate  the  idea 
that  emotional  behavior  can  be  a  form  of 
negotiation.  He  noticed  that  several  kinds 
of  emotional  expressions,  in  both  humans 
and  animals,  are  issued  only  when  a  recip-
ient  is  there  to  be  influenced  by  them,  and 
that  it  is  the  responses  of the  recipient  that 
determine  the  subsequent  behavior  of  the 
individual  exhibiting  the  initial  emotional 
behavior  rather than  the  presumed  emotion 
expressed  by  that  behavior.  Hinde  noted 
that  birds  often  flee  after  having  issued  a 
threat  expression.  Indeed,  the  threat  dis-
play  may  be  a  better  predictor  of  flight 
than  of  attack.  His  interpretation  was  that 

threat  displays  " w e r e  given  when  the  bird 
was  uncertain  w h a t  to  do"  and  that  "which 
of  the  several  possible  responses  it  showed 
next  depended  on  the  behavior  of the  rival." 
Hence  threat  expressions  should  be  under-
stood  as  "signals  in  a  process  of negotiation 
between  individuals"  (Hinde,  1985a,  p.  109) 
Hinde  cast  d o u b t  on  the  assumption  that 
"emotional  behavior  is  the  outward  expres-
sion  of an emotional  state,  and  that there is a 
one-to-one  correspondence  between  them  " 
an  assumption  he  associated  with  Darwin 
(1872).  He  also  noted  that  the  assumption of 
a  one-to-one  correspondence  between  emo-
tional  states  and  emotional  behaviors  does 
not  make  evolutionary  sense,  as  it  may  be 
adaptive  for  an  organism  to  mislead  others 
about  its  motivational  state.  Natural  selec-
tion  will  o f t e n  f a v o r  sending  nonveridical 
or  ambiguous  messages,  a  point  that  has 
also 
impressed  transactional  psychologists 
(Fridlund,  1994,1997).  H i n d e  acknowledged, 
however,  that  signals  do  not  always  serve 
negotiating  purposes.  His  conclusion  was 
that  we  should  e x p e c t  emotional  behaviors 
to  lie  on  a  c o n t i n u u m  b e t w e e n  expressing 
and  negotiating: 

Such considerations suggest the view that 
emotional  behavior  may  lie  along a  con-
tinuum  from  behaviour  that  is  more  or 
less purely  expressive  to  behaviours  con-
cerned primarily with  a process of negoti-
ation  between  individuals....  In  animals, 
bird  songs  lie  nearer  the  expressive  end, 
threat postures nearer the negotiation end. 
In  man,  spontaneous  and solitary  laugh-
ter are primarily expressive, the ingratiat-
ing smile primarily  negotiating.  However 
most emotional expressions involve both. 
(Hinde,  1985b,  p.  989} 

this  an 

important 

insight. 
We  consider 
Hinde's  suggestion  is  that  many  emotional 
expressions  have  a  nonarbitrary  relation  to 
the organism's motivational states,  but at the 
same  time  are  a i m e d  to  m a k e  a  move  in  a 
negotiation  w h o s e  o u t c o m e  is  open  ended 
and  crucially  d e p e n d e n t  on  the  recipient's 
responses. 

T h e  first  thing  that  is  left  open  by  an 
expressive  action 
is  w h e t h e r  the  emoter 
will  manifest  the  action  tendency  associated 

EMOTIONS IN THE WILD 

447 

with  that emotion. This will  depend on  what 
affordances  are  available  to  the  emoter  in 
the  local  context  in  which  the  emotional 
episode  unfolds.  Notably,  neither  the  avail-
able  affordances  nor  the  emoter's  intention 
to  act  on  a  particular  one  of  them  are  pre-
ordained  at  the  beginning  of  the  episode, 
but  instead  are  partially  determined  by  the 
interactant's  responses,  which  are  in  turn 
influenced by  the  ongoing  emotional  signals 
received.  Consider,  for  example,  an  episode 
of  anger  in  the  context  of  a  marital  con-
frontation,  and  assume  that  an  action  ten-
dency of retribution  is  associated with  anger. 
There  are  many  ways  in  which  the  retribu-
tive  action  tendency  could  be  manifested: 
sulking,  insulting,  leaving  the  house,  ask-
ing  for  a  divorce,  and  so  on.  Conversely, 
the  retributive  tendency  could  be  inhibited. 
Anger  can  be  diffused  by  emotion  manage-
ment  techniques  or  redirected  at  another 
object  (e.g.,  the  poverty  that  may  be  the 
external  driver  of  marital  discord),  or  the 
aroused  state  of either  party  could  facilitate 
the emergence of another emotion  (e.g.,  fear 
of  losing  one's  partner).  This  flexibility  is 
one  of  the  trademark  properties  of  a  large 
class  of emotions,  which  distinguishes  them 
from  reflexlike  responses  like  startle,  and 
perhaps  affect  programs,  whose  behavioral 
consequences  are  relatively  indefeasible. 

What  determines  how 

a  particular 
episode of anger unfolds  is  a  feedback mech-
anism  that  involves  the  reciprocal  exchange 
of signals  delivered  by  expressions  and  other 
behavior  in  the  course  of time.  The  currency 
of this  communication  includes  fixed  stares, 
loud  and  high-pitched  tones,  brisk  gestures, 
a confrontational demeanor,  tears,  firm dec-
larations, 
forceful  movements,  and  their 
strategic  opposites  (e.g.,  amicable  stares, 
low-pitched  tones,  smiles)  that  will  deter-
mine  if and  how  anger  manifests. 

This is where the  metaphor of negotiation 
comes to full fruition,  as the anger episode is 
not  exhausted  by  the  interactant's  reception 
of  a  one-shot  message,  but  is  dynamically 
shaped  by  how  the 
interactant  responds 
to  the  initial  message,  by  how  the  emoter 
responds  to  the  interactant's  response,  and 
so  on.  This  context  dependence  is  entirely 

if  anger 

lost 
is  understood  only  as  a 
response  to  a  certain  class  of  stimulus  sit-
uations,  ignoring  the  temporal  dynamics  of 
its unfolding  and  the strategy of relationship 
reconfiguration  it  embodies. 

An  emotional  expression  may  also  be 
open  ended  in  a  more  radical  way:  in  some 
cases  the  identity  of  the  initial  emotion  is 
shaped  by  the  ongoing  process  of  negotia-
tion.  We  are  accustomed  to  think  of  anger 
as  brought  about  by  the  appraisal  of  being 
slighted,  and  this  is  certainly  what  hap-
pens  in  many  cases  of  anger.  But  on  occa-
sion  this  appraisal  is  best  understood  as 
the  outcome  of  negotiation  in  an  episode 
that  already  has  the  marks  of the  emotional 
(e.g.,  physiological  arousal,  focused  atten-
tion,  an urgent tendency to realign one's role 
in  the  context  of  a  relationship).  What  is 
left  partially  undetermined  and  in  need  of 
context-dependent  disambiguation  is  what 
exact  emotion  one  is  experiencing.  Many 
marital  quarrels  begin  from  small  matters 
of  contention,  which  engage  the  partners 
emotionally,  but  that  general  emotionality 
can  develop  into  a  variety  of  distinct  emo-
tions.  This  idea  of  emotional  uncertainty 
echoes  some  of the  dynamics  of threat  dis-
plays described by Hinde  (1985a,  1985b). The 
bird's confrontation with  a rival  activates an 
emotional engagement that is open ended in 
the sense that at the beginning of the process 
of  negotiation  it  is  undetermined  whether 
the  bird  is  angry  or  afraid.  The  identity  of 
the  emotion  will  be  shaped  through  time 
by  the  responses  received  to  the  threat  dis-
play.  The  appraisal  that  type  identifies  the 
emotion  does  not  occur  at  the  beginning 
of the  emotional  episode  but  in  the  course 
of it,  depending  on  whether  the  interaction 
affords  the  advantageous  manifestation  of 
one  emotion  rather  than  the  other. 

At  first  blush,  a  situated  perspective  on 
in  tension  with  the  affect-
emotions  is 
program  conception  of  emotions 
in  the 
Darwin-Tomkins-Ekman  tradition  (Darwin, 
1872;  Ekman,  1972;  Tomkins,  1962).  In  this 
theoretical  tradition,  a  low-level  (modular) 
appraisal occurs on exposure to certain stim-
uli  and is followed by a  cascade of responses, 
including  physiological,  expressive, 
and 

PAUL  GRIFFITHS  AND  ANDREA  SCARANTINO 

behavioral  ones,  which  follow  the  appraisal 
quickly and automatically. A specific expres-
sion  is  associated  with  each  basic  emotion 
and  consequendy  carries  veridical  informa-
tion  about  what  emotion  is  unfolding.  The 
apparent  conflict  between  affect-program 
theory  and  a  situated  approach,  however, 
can  be  at  least  partly  defused  by  noticing 
that  the  two  approaches  operate  on  differ-
ent  temporal  scales.  The  situated  approach 
focuses  on  longer  emotional  episodes  that 
may  comprise  the  activation  of  affect  pro-
grams as proper parts. For example,  a young 
man  who  is  suddenly  poked  in  the  back 
while  standing  in  a  line  will  automatically 
undergo  affect  program  anger,  manifested 
in a reflexlike fashion through forceful turn-
ing  around,  baring  of  the  teeth,  and  an 
aggressive  action  tendency.  But  there  is  no 
obstacle  to  conceiving  of  this  execution 
of  the  anger  affect  program  as  part  of  a 
longer  episode,  which  includes  what  hap-
pens  after  the  identity  of  the  offender  has 
been  determined.  It  is  at  this  stage  that 
the  idea  of  negotiation  acquires  explana-
tory  purchase.  If  the  offender  is  a  good-
looking young woman who profusely  apolo-
gizes,  the  agonistic  action tendency is  likely 
to  be  prompdy  substituted  by  an  affiliative 
action  tendency.  If the  offender  is  another 
young  male,  however,  a  different  dynamic 
emerges,  which  may  lead to  an  exchange  of 
anger displays and ultimately escalate  into  a 
physical fight. 

Moreover,  a  situated  approach  is  not 
committed  to  the  view  that  all  things  we 
call emotions in ordinary language  are social 
engagements  with  a  negotiating  dimension. 
What we  have  described  are  emotions lying 
toward  the  negotiating  end  of  the  contin-
uum  discussed  by  Hinde,  and  the  vernacu-
lar emotion domain  contains states  and pro-
cesses  on  which  a  situated  approach  sheds 
no light,  as we discuss subsequently. 

6. What Is the Value of the Situated 
Perspective on Emotion? 

In  this  final  section,  we  illustrate  what  we 
take  to  be  the  theoretical  payoff  of  a  sit-

uated  perspective  and  try  to  diffuse  some 
possible  misunderstandings.  Let  us  begin 
with  what  we  are  not  saying.  We  are  not 
claiming  that,  because  the  social  environ-
ment  provides  dynamic  scaffolding  for  the 
unfolding  of  emotional  episodes,  an  emo-
tion  literally  extends  into  the  environment. 
This  sort  of  ontological  claim  may  be  inter-
esting  in  principle,  but  we  do  not  think that 
its  possible  heuristic  value  for  the  psychol-
ogy  of  emotion  is  likely  to  be  worth  the 
fuss  it  causes.  An  extended-emotion  thesis 
potentially  confuses  the  claim  that the  envi-
ronment  makes  a  causal  contribution  to  a 
mental  process  with  the  more  ontologically 
demanding  claim  that  it  is  a  constituent 
part  of  it  (see  A d a m s  &  Aizawa,  this  vol-
ume).  Therefore,  until  it  proves  impossible 
to  phrase  the  substance  of the  situated  per-
spective  in  any  other  way,  we  will  remain 
neutral  on  the  extended-emotion  thesis. 

There  are  other  potentially  interesting 
questions  we  wish  to  remain  neutral  about, 
because  we  do  not  think  the  value  of  the 
situated  perspective  on  emotions  hinges  on 
how  we  answer  them.  For  example,  it  may 
be  debated  what  sort  of  externalism  about 
emotions  is  supported  by  the  data  and  the-
ory  we  have  presented,  or  whether  group 
emotions  arising  through  mutual  social  ref-
erencing  challenge  methodological  individ-
ualism  in  the  psychology  of  emotion.  We 
leave  it  to  others  to  take  definitive  positions 
on  these  issues. 

It  may  forestall  another  misunderstand-
ing  if we  state  explicitly  that  the  plausibility 
of the  perspective  we  propose  is  not  hostage 
to  the  success  of the  wider  situationist  pro-
gram.  The  situated  perspective  on  emotion 
is  supported,  in  so  far  as  it  is  currently  sup-
ported,  by experimental  data  and theoretical 
considerations  about  the  emotions. 

T h e  real  theoretical  payoff  of  the  situ-
ated  perspective  on  emotions  is  method-
ological.  By  shifting  theoretical  focus  from 
the  intrapsychic  to  the  interpersonal,  from 
the unbidden to  the  strategic,  from the short 
lived  to  the  long  lived,  from  the  context 
independent to the context dependent,  from 
the  static  to  the  dynamic,  the  situated  per-
spective  points  the  attention  of the  research 

e m o t i o n s  i n  t h e  w i l d 

449 

community  to  aspects  of emotions  that  have 
been  unduly  neglected  and  that  may  hold 
the  key  to  understanding  the  nature  and 
function  of  a  large  class  of  emotions.  These 
aspects  of  emotion  have  not  been  entirely 
ignored,  of  course  (e.g.,  Frijda,  1986,  and 
elsewhere;  Solomon,  1998),  but  we  think 
they  would  have  become  more  central  if 
a  broader  perspective  on  the  mind  suit-
able  to  encourage  them  had  been  available. 
We  believe  that  the  situated  approach  can 
offer such  a  perspective:  the  aspects  of emo-
tion  we  have  highlighted  as  worthy  of  the-
oretical  exploration  largely  correspond  to 
those  the  situationist  movement  has  sin-
gled  out  as  neglected  in  classical  cognitive 
science. 

We  emphasize  once  again  that  the  sit-
uationist  perspective  is  not, 
in  principle, 
incompatible  with  other  existing  theoretical 
approaches  (e.g.,  neo-Jamesianism,  affect-
program  theory).  In  part  this  is  a  matter 
of temporal  scale  of  resolution,  as  outlined 
in  section  5.  More  importantly,  we  believe, 
and  have  argued  extensively  in  earlier work, 
that  the  plurality  of states  and processes  that 
form  the  domain  of  emotion  leave  emotion 
theorists  with  no  viable  alternative  to  theo-
retical  pluralism.  Griffiths  (1997,  2004a)  has 
argued  that  it  is  unlikely  that  all  the psycho-
logical  states  and  processes  that  fall  under 
the  vernacular  category  of emotion  are  suffi-
ciently  similar  to  one  another to  allow  a uni-
fied  scientific  psychology  of  the  emotions. 
The  psychological,  neuroscientific,  and  bio-
logical  theories  that  best  explain  any  partic-
ular  subset  of  emotions  will  not  adequately 
explain  all  emotions.  In  a  slogan,  emotion 
is  not  a  natural  kind.  Scarantino  (2005)  has 
argued  that  the  scientific  project  of answer-
ing  questions  of the  form,  What  is  an  emo-
tion?  or W h a t is  anger?  is best understood as 
a project  of explication.  Explication  involves 
offering  a  theoretically  motivated  precisifi-
cation  of  an  existing  concept.  Explications 
are  not  good  or  bad  simpliciter  but  relative 
to  the  theoretical  objectives  that  motivate 
them.  Where  there  is  more  than  one  sen-
sible  theoretical  objective,  quarreling  about 
which  explication  should  replace  the  origi-
nal concept is simply not to  have understood 

the  ground  rules  of  the  activity  of  explicat-
ing. 

it  seems  almost 

We  have  suggested  that  the  situated  per-
spective  on  emotions  affords  new  theoret-
ical  leads  for  the  explication  of  the  so-
called  higher  cognitive  emotions  (e.g.,  guilt, 
shame,  embarrassment).  Although  these  are 
the  emotions involved in  phenomena  we  are 
most eager to understand  (e.g.,  morality,  art, 
mental  disorders,  daily  emotional  manage-
ment),  they  are  also  among  the  most  com-
plex  and  challenging  of  emotional  states. 
Although  one  of  us  made  extensive  use  of 
the  phrase  "higher  cognitive  emotions"  in 
earlier work  (Griffiths,  1997),  we now regard 
it as potentially confusing  (Griffiths,  2004a). 
First,  it suggests  that the  occurrence of these 
emotions  necessarily 
involves  conceptual 
thought,  a  view  we  have  strongly  ques-
tioned.  Second, 
irre-
sistible  to  align  the  distinction  between 
basic  emotions  and  higher  cognitive  emo-
tions  with  a  distinction  between  two  sets 
of  vernacular  emotion  categories  -  anger, 
disgust,  and  surprise  being  paradigmatically 
basic,  and  guilt,  shame,  and  embarrassment 
being  paradigmatically  higher.  We  believe, 
however,  that there is as much need for plu-
ralism  in  the  theoretical  treatment  of subor-
dinate categories of emotion as there is in the 
treatment  of  the  superordinate  category  of 
emotion:  some instances of anger,  disgust,  or 
surprise may be  adequately  accounted for  in 
the  affect  program  framework,  but  others 
may  require  other  theoretical  perspectives, 
and  the  same  holds  for  episodes  of  guilt, 
shame,  or embarrassment.  The  situated per-
spective  on  emotion,  and  the  transactional 
psychology  on  which  we  have  drawn  in 
describing  it,  is  just  one  of these  theoretical 
approaches,  and it is meant to  cut across the 
dichotomy  between  basic  and  higher  cogni-
tive  emotions  as  generally  understood. 

In a nutshell, the situated perspective sug-
gests  that  certain  forms  of  emotion  cannot 
be  understood  without  expanding  our  field 
of view.  By  confining  our  attention  to  neu-
ral  circuitry  or  conceptual  thought  alone, 
we  risk  focusing  on  the  proverbial  tail  of 
the  emotional  elephant.  Its  trunk  and  body 
in  the  social  and 
may  lie  further  afield, 

PAUL  GRIFFITHS  AND  ANDREA  SC AR ANTINO 

cultural  environment  in  which  emotional 
episodes  untold  and  emotional  phenotypes 
develop. 

Acknowledgments 

Authors'  names  are  in  alphabetical  order.  We 
thank  Franco  and  Adriana  Scarantino  for  their 
hospitality  at  Pinetina  while  this  chapter  was 
written.  Griffiths's  work  was  supported  by  an 
Australian  Research  Council  Federation  Fellow-
ship. Edouard Machery provided useful feedback 
on an earlier draft. 

shame  in  the  culture  he  studied,  was  fre-
quently  manifested  under 
these  circum-
stances. 

6  The  term  engagement  has  been  previously 
used  to  characterize  emotions,  for  example 
by  Parkinson  (forthcoming)  and  by  Solomon 
(2004).  This  similarity  may  be  explained  by 
the  presence  in  Solomon's  cognitivism  of 
a  social  constructionist  strand,  related  to 
Sartre's  theory  of  emotions,  which  empha-
sizes the  active side of emotions along broadly 
transactionalist  lines. 

7  There is an evident parallel here with Annette 
Karmiloff-Smith's  (1992)  theory  of represen-
tational  redescription. 

Notes 

References 

1  For  the  breadth  of  current  psychological 
research,  see  Dalgleish  and  Power,  1999; 
Ekman  and  Davidson,  1994;  and  Lewis  and 
Haviland-Jones,  2000.  Recent  philosophical 
work  on  emotion  is  surveyed  in  Griffiths 
(2003) and collected in Solomon  (2004). 

2  The  strategic  role  of the  emotions  has  long 
been  noticed  by  economists  [Frank,  1988; 
Hirshleifer,  1987).  Until  recently,  however, 
this  recognition  was  not  linked  to  a  new 
account of the nature of emotions themselves 
(but see  Ross  &  Dumouchel,  2004).  Not  sur-
prisingly, behavioral ecologists have also been 
sensitive  to  the  strategic  role  of emotions  in 
social interaction (e.g., Fessler & Haley, 2003). 
3  The  nonconceptual  content  literature  has 
so  far  focused  primarily  on  nonconceptual 
perceptual  states,  nonconceptual  subdoxas-
tic  states,  and  nonconceptual  representa-
tional  states  of  creatures  without  language 
(Bermudez,  2003).  We  think emotional  phe-
nomena constitute a representational domain 
of  their  own,  which  embodies  a  yet-to-be-
understood  brand  of nonconceptual  content 
(Griffiths, 2004a, 2004b; Scarantino, 2005). 

f  The  view  that  emotions  are  evaluative judg-
ments  has  been  extensively  criticized  for 
these  reasons.  Its  defenders  have  replied 
that  judgment  need  not  involve  full-blown 
conceptual  thought  (Nussbaum,  2001,  2004). 
This  risks  collapsing  cognitivism  into  the 
uncontroversial  view  that  emotions  are  in 
some  sense  or  other  directed  at  the  world 
(Scarantino,  2005). 

Arnold,  M.  B.  (i960).  Emotion  and  personality. 

New  York:  Columbia  University  Press. 

Arnold,  M.  B.  (Ed.).  (1970).  Feelings and emotions. 

San  Diego,  C A :  Academic  Press. 

Bermudez, J.  (2003).  Nonconceptual  mental con-
tent.  In  E.  N.  Zalta  (Ed.),  Stanford  encyclope-
dia  of philosophy.  Accessed  July  9,  2005,  from 
http://plato.stanford.edu 

Bjorklund,  D.  F.,  &  Pellegrini,  A.  D.  (2002).  The 
origins  of  human  nature:  Evolutionary  develop-
mental  psychology.  Washington,  D C :  Ameri-
can  Psychological  Association. 

Camras,  L.  A.,  Campos,  J.  J.,  Oster,  H.,  Miyake, 
K.,  &  Bradshaw,  D. 
(1992).  Japanese  and 
American  infants'  responses  to  arm  restraint. 
Developmental  Psychology,  28,  578-583. 

Clark,  A.  (1997).  Being  there:  Putting  brain,  body, 
together  again.  Cambridge,  MA: 

and  world 
MIT  Press. 

Clark,  A.,  &  Chalmers,  D.  (1998).  The  extended 

mind.  Analysis,  58,  7-19. 

Cosmides,  L.,  Tooby,  J.,  &.  Barkow,  J.  H.  (1992). 
Introduction:  Evolutionary  psychology  and 
conceptual  integration.  In  J.  H.  Barkow,  L. 
Cosmides,  &  J.  T o o b y  (Eds.),  The  adapted 
mind:  Evolutionary  psychology  and  the  genera-
tion  of culture  (pp.  3-15).  Oxford:  Oxford Uni-
versity  Press. 

Cussins,  A.  (1992).  Content,  embodiment  and 
objectivity:  T h e  theory  of  cognitive  trails. 
Mind,  101,  651-688. 

Dalgleish,  T.,  &  Power,  M.  J.  (Eds.).  (1999). 
emotion.  Chi-

cognition 

and 

Handbook 
chester,  UK:  John  Wiley. 

of 

Fessler  (1999)  reports  that  malu,  the  emo-
tion  most  closely  corresponding  to  Western 

Damasio,  A.  R. 

(1996).  T h e  somatic  marker 
hypothesis  and  the  possible  functions  of the 

EMOTIONS  IN  THE  WILD 

4 5 j 

prefrontal  cortex.  Philosophical  Transactions  of 
the  Royal  Society  of  London  B,  351(1346),  1413-
1420. 

Damasio,  A.  R.  (1999).  The  feeling  of  what  hap-
pens:  Body  and  emotion  in  the  making  of  con-
sciousness.  New  York:  Harcourt  Brace. 

Darwin,  C.  (1872).  The  expression  of  the  emotions 
in  man  and  animals.  N e w  York:  Philosophical 
Library. 

Ekman,  P.  (1972).  Emotion  in  the  human face.  New 

York:  Pergamon  Press. 

Ekman,  P.,  &  Davidson,  R.  J.  (Eds.).  (1994).  The 
nature  of emotion:  Fundamental  questions.  New 
York:  Oxford  University  Press. 

Evans,  G.  (1982).  The varieties of reference. Oxford: 

Oxford  University  Press. 

Fernändez-Dols, 

J.  M.,  &  Ruiz-Belda,  M.-A. 
(1997).  Spontaneous  facial  behavior  during 
intense  emotional  episodes:  Artistic  truth 
and  optical  truth.  In  J.  A.  Russell  81  J.  M. 
Fernändez-Dols  (Eds.),  The psychology  of facial 
expression  (pp.  255-294).  Cambridge:  Cam-
bridge  University  Press. 

Fessler,  D.  M.  T.  (1999).  Toward  an  under-
standing  of  the  universality  of  second-order 
emotions.  In  A.  L.  Hinton  (Ed.),  Biocultural 
approaches  to  emotions  (pp.  74-116).  Cam-
bridge:  Cambridge  University  Press. 

Fessler,  D.  M.  T.,  8c  Haley,  K.  J.  (2003).  The 
strategy  of  affect:  Emotions  in  human  coop-
eration.  In  P.  Hammerstein  (Ed.),  The genetic 
and  cultural  evolution  of cooperation  (pp.  7-36). 
Cambridge,  M A :  M I T  Press. 

Fodor,  J.  A.  (1975).  The  language  of thought.  New 

York:  Crowell. 

Fodor,  J.  A.  (1983).  The  modularity  of  mind:  An 
essay  in  faculty  psychology.  Cambridge,  MA: 
Bradford  Books/MIT  Press. 

Frank,  R.  H.  (1988).  Passions  within  reason:  The 
strategic role  of the  emotions.  N e w  York:  W.  W. 
Norton. 

Fridlund,  A.  J.  (1994).  Human  facial  expression: 
An  evolutionary  view.  San  Diego,  C A :  Aca-
demic  Press. 

Fridlund,  A.  J.  (1997).  The  new  ethology  of 
human  facial  expressions.  In  J.  A.  Russell  81 
J.  M.  Fernändez-Dols  (Eds.),  The  psychology 
of facial  expression  (pp.  103-129).  Cambridge: 
Cambridge  University  Press. 

Fridlund,  A.  J.,  Schaut,  J.  A.,  Sabini,  J.  P., 
Shenker,  J.  I.,  Hedlund,  L.  E.,  81 Knauer,  M. J. 
(1990).  Audience  effects  on  solitary  faces  dur-
ing  imagery:  Displaying  to  the  people  in  your 
head. 
14(2), 
113-137. 

Journal  of  Nonverbal  Behaviour, 

Frijda,  N.  H.  (1986).  The  emotions.  Cambridge: 

Cambridge  University  Press. 

Griffiths,  P.  E.  (1997).  What  emotions  really 
are:  The  problem  of  psychological  categories. 
Chicago:  University  of Chicago  Press. 

Griffiths,  P.  E.  (2003).  Emotions.  In  S.  Stich  & 
T.  Warfield  (Eds.),  The  Blackwell  guide  to  the 
philosophy  of mind  (pp.  288-308).  Oxford  and 
New  York:  Blackwell. 

Griffiths, P. E. (2004a). Is emotion a natural kind? 
In  R.  C.  Solomon  (Ed.),  Thinking about feeling: 
Contemporary  philosophers  on  emotions  (pp. 
233-249).  Oxford:  Oxford  University  Press. 

Griffiths,  P.  E.  (2004b). Towards a  Machiavellian 
theory  of emotional  appraisal.  In  P.  Cruse  & 
D.  Evans  (Eds.),  Emotion,  evolution,  and ratio-
nality (pp. 89-105). Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 

Griffiths, P. E., 8c Stotz, K. (2000). How the mind 
grows:  A  developmental  perspective  on  the 
biology  of cognition.  Synthese,  122(1-2),  29-51. 
Hinde,  R.  A.  (1979).  Towards  understanding rela-

tionships.  London:  Academic  Press. 

Hinde,  R.  A.  (1981).  The  bases  of  a  science  of 
interpersonal  relationships.  In  S.  W.  Duck  & 
R.  Gilmour  (Eds.),  Personal  relationships  1; 
Studyingpersonal  relationships  (pp.  1-22).  Lon-
don:  Academic  Press. 

Hinde,  R. A.  (1985a).  Expression and negotiation. 
In  G.  Zivin  (Ed.),  The development of expressive 
behavior  (pp.  103-116).  New  York:  Academic 
Press. 

Hinde,  R.  A.  (1985b).  Was  "the  expression  of 
emotions"  a misleading phrase? Animal Behav-
ior,  33,  985-992. 

Hirshleifer,  J.  (1987).  On  the  emotions  as  guar-
antors  of  threats  and  promises.  In  J.  Dupre 
(Ed.),  The  latest on  the best.  Cambridge,  MA: 
Bradford  Books/MIT  Press. 

Hornik,  R.,  Risenhoover,  N.,  8c  Gunnar,  M.  R. 
(1987).  The  effects  of maternal  positive,  neu-
tral and negative affective communications on 
infants'  responses  to  new  toys.  Child  Develop-
ment,  58, 937-944. 

Hurley,  S.  (2003).  Animal actions in the space of 

reasons.  Mind and language,  18(3),  231-256. 

Hutchins,  E.  (1995).  Cognition  in  the  wild.  Cam-

bridge,  MA:  MIT Press. 

Karmiloff-Smith,  A.  (1992).  Beyond modularity: A 
developmental  perspective  on  cognitive  science. 
Cambridge,  MA:  MIT  Press. 

Kraut,  R.  E.,  & Johnston,  R.  E.  (1979).  Social and 
emotional  messages  of  smiling:  An  ethologi-
cal  approach.  Journal  of Personality and Social 
Psychology,  37,1539-1553. 

4 + 4 T a I I T g r i f f i t h s a n d a n d r e a s c a r a n t 1 n o 

Kroon,  R.  M.  (1988).  Aanleidingen  en  structuur 
van schtddgn<oel. Unpublished master's thesis, 
University of Amsterdam,  Amsterdam. 

Lazarus,  R.  S.  (1991)-  Emotion  and  adaptation. 

New York:  Oxford  University  Press. 

Lean,  M.  R.,  Landel,  J.  L.,  &  Patton,  K. 
M 
(1996).  The  motivated  expression  of 
embarrassment following a self-presentational 
predicament. Journal of Personality, 64(3), 619-
636. 

LeDoux,  J.  E.  (1993).  Emotional  networks  in 
the  brain.  In  M.  Lewis  &  J.  M.  Haviland 
(Eds.), Handbook of emotions (pp. 109-118). 
New York: Guilford Press. 

Lewis, M.  (2000). The emergence of human emo-
tions.  In  M.  Lewis  &  J.  M.  Haviland-Jones 
(Eds.), Handbook of emotions (2nd ed., pp. 265-
280).  New York:  Guilford Press. 

Lewis, M.j & Haviland-Jones, J. M. (Eds.). (2000). 
Handbook of emotions (2nd ed.). New York: 
Gudford Press. 

Marks, J. (1982). A theory of emotions. Philosoph-

ical Studies, 42, 227-242. 

Markus,  H.  R.,  &  Kitayama,  S.  (1994).  The  cul-
tural  construction  of self and  emotion:  Impli-
cations  for  self and  behavior.  In  S.  Kitayama 
& H. R. Markus (Eds.), Emotion and culture: 
Empirical studies of mutual influence (pp. 89-
130).  Washington,  DC:  American  Psychologi-
cal Association. 

Marler,  P.,  &  Evans,  C.  (1997).  Animal  sounds 
and  human  faces:  Do  they  have  anything  in 
common?  In J.  A.  Russell  & J.  M.  Femindez-
Dols (Eds.), The psychology of facial expression 
(pp.  133-226). Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity  Press. 

Noe, A. (2004). Action in perception. Cambridge, 

MA.  MIT Press. 

Nussbaum,  M.  C.  (2001).  Upheavals of thought: 

The intelligence of emotions. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge  University  Press. 

Nussbaum,  M. C.  (2004).  Emotions as judgments 
of value  and  importance.  In  R.  C.  Solomon 
(Ed.), Thinking about feeling: Contemporary 
philosophers on emotions (pp. 183-199). Oxford: 
Oxford  University Press. 

Ohman,  A.  (1999).  Distinguishing  unconscious 
from  conscious emotional processes: Method-
ological  considerations  and  theoretical  impli-
cations.  In T.  Dalgleish  &  M.  J.  Power  (Eds.), 
Handbook of emotion and cognition (pp. 321-
352).  Chichester,  UK:  John  Wiley. 

Panksepp,  J.  (1998).  Affective  neuroscience:  The 
foundations of human and animal emotions. 
Oxford:  Oxford  University  Press. 

Parkinson, B. (1995). Ideas and realities of emotion 

London:  Routledge. 

Parkinson,  B.  (1999).  Relations  and  dissociations 
between  appraisal  and  emotion  ratings of rea-
sonable  and  unreasonable  anger  and  guilt 
Cognition and Emotion, 13, 347-385. 

Parkinson, B. (forthcoming). The heart of emotion. 

Unpublished  manuscript. 

Parkinson,  B.,  Fischer,  A.  H.,  &  Manstead,  A.  S. 

R. (2005). Emotions in social relations: Cultural 
group, and interpersonal processes. New York: 
Psychology  Press. 

Parrott,  W.  G.,  &  Smith,  S.  F.  (1991).  Embarrass-
ment: Actual vs. typical cases, classical vs. pro-
totypical representations. Cognition and Emo-
tion, 5, 467-488. 

Port,  R.  F.,  & van Gelder,  T.  (Eds.).  (1995).  Mind 
as motion: Explorations in the dynamics of cog-
nition.  Cambridge,  MA:  MIT Press. 

Prinz,  J.  (2004a).  Embodied  emotions.  In  R.  C. 
Solomon  (Ed.),  Thinking about feeling:  Con-
temporary philosophers on emotions (pp. 44-59). 
Oxford:  Oxford  University  Press. 

Prinz, J.  (2004b).  Gut reactions: A perceptual the-
ory  of  emotion.  Oxford:  Oxford  University 
Press. 

Ratner,  C.  (1989).  A  social  constructionist  cri-
tique  of  the  naturalistic  theory  of  emotion. 
Journal  of Mind and  Behavior,  10(3),  211-230. 
Reddy, V. (2000). Coyness in early infancy. Devel-

opmental Science, 3, 186-192. 

Ross,  D.,  &  Dumouchel,  P.  (2004).  Emotions  as 
strategic signals. Rationality and Society, 16(3), 
251-286. 

Russell,  J.  A.,  Bachorowski,  J.-A.,  &  Fernández-
Dols, J.  M.  (2003).  Facial and vocal expressions 
of emotions.  Annual  Review  of Psychology,  54, 
349-359-

Russell,  J.  A.,  &  Femández-Dols,  J.  M.  (1997). 
The psychology of facial expression. Cambridge: 
Cambridge  University  Press. 

Scarantino,  A.  (2003).  Affbrdances  explained. 

Philosophy of Science, 70, 949-961. 

Scarantino,  A. 

(2005).  Explicating  emotions. 
Unpublished  Ph.D.  dissertation,  University of 
Pittsburgh,  Pittsburgh. 

Scherer,  K.  R.  (1999).  Appraisal theory.  In T.  Dal-
gleish 81M. J.  Power (Eds.),  Handbook of emo-
tion  and  cognition  (pp.  637-663).  Chichester, 
UK:  John  Wiley. 

Schlichting,  C.  D.,  &  Pigliucci,  M.  (1998).  Phe-
notypic evolution: A reaction norm perspective. 
Sunderland,  M A :  Sinauer. 

Smith,  B.  C.  (1999).  Situatedness/embededness. 
In  R.  A.  Wilson  &  F.  C.  Keil  (Eds.),  The  MIT 

EMOTIONS IN THE WILD 

4 » 

encyclopedia  of the  cognitive  sciences  (pp.  769-
771).  Cambridge,  MA:  MIT  Press. 

Solomon,  R.  C.  (1976).  The  passions.  New  York: 

Doubleday. 

Solomon,  R.  C.  (1993).  The  passions  (2nd  ed.). 

New  York:  Hackett. 

Solomon,  R.  C.  (1998).  The  politics  of emotion. 
In P.  A.  French & H.  K. Wettstein  (Eds.), Mid-
west  Studies  in  Philosophy,  22,1-20. 

Solomon,  R.  C.  (Ed.).  (2004).  Thinking about feel-
ing:  Contemporary  philosophers  on  emotions. 
Oxford:  Oxford  University  Press. 

Sorce,  J.  F.,  Emde,  R.  N.,  Campos,  J.  J.,  &  Klin-
nert,  M.  D.  (1985).  Maternal  emotional  sig-
nalling:  Its  effect  on  the  visual  cliff behaviour 
of  1  year  olds.  Developmental  Psycholog,  21, 
195-200. 

Stein,  N.  L.,  Trabasso,  T.,  8c  Liwag,  M.  (1993). 

The  representation  and  organization  of emo-
tional  experience;  Unfolding  the  emotion 
episode.  In  M.  Lewis & J, M.  Haviland (Eds ), 
Handbook  of  emotions  (pp.  279-300).  New 
York:  Guilford Press. 

Teasdale,  J.  D.  (1999).  Multi-level  theories  of 
cognition-emotion relations. InT. Dalgleish 8c 
M. J. Power (Eds.), Handbook of cognition and 
emotion  (pp.  665-681).  Chichester,  UK:  John 
Wiley. 

Thelen, E., 8c Smith, L. (1994). A dynamic systems 
approach to the development of cognition and 
action. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 

Tomkins,  S.  S.  (1962).  Affect,  imagery,  and con-

sciousness. New York: Springer. 

West-Eberhard, M. J. (2003). Developmental plas-
ticity and evolution. Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press. 

