 
 
 
 

 

This paper can be downloaded without charge at:  

http://www.bu.edu/law/faculty/scholarship/workingpapers/2009.html  

THE ETHICS OF POVERTY TOURISM 

Boston University School of Law Working Paper No. 09-29 

(June 2, 2009) 

Evan Selinger and Kevin Outterson 

 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

The Ethics of Poverty Tourism 
Evan Selinger and Kevin Outterson 

 
Abstract 
 
Poverty tours—actual visits as well as literary and cinematic versions—are characterized as 
morally controversial trips and condemned in the press as voyeuristic endeavors.  In this 
collaborative essay, we draw from personal experience, legal expertise, and phenomenological 
philosophy and introduce a conceptual taxonomy that clarifies the circumstances in which 
observing others has been construed as an immoral use of the gaze.  We appeal to this taxonomy 
to determine which observational circumstances are relevant to the poverty tourism debate.  
While we do not defend all or even most poverty tourism practices, we do conclude that 
categorical condemnation of poverty tourism is unjustified.  
 
Introduction 
 

Reality tourism in impoverished areas goes by several names; critics call it “poorism;” a 

more neutral term is “poverty tourism.”i  Articles in The New York Times, Smithsonian 

Magazine, Newsweek, The Wall Street Journal, The Huffington Post, and other popular media 

characterize these as trips as morally controversial.ii  Critics attack not just actual visits, but also 

virtual poverty tourism through film.iii  In the film Slumdog Millionaire, the protagonist is an 

orphan from Mumbai’s Dharavi slum.  Shyamal Sengupta, a film professor at the Whistling 

Woods International Institute in Mumbai, condemns the film for being a poverty tour.iv  In the 

month before it won the Oscar for Best Picture, Slumdog Millionaire was derided as “poverty 

porn” in the pages of the London Times.v National Public Radio even ran a lively episode of 

“Talk of the Nation” devoted to the topic called “‘Poverty Porn’: Education or Exploitation?”.  

Are poverty tours really the moral equivalent of pedophiliac tourism in Southeast Asia?vi 

Far from being a trendy and short-lived topic of conversation, the debate over poverty 

tourism reaches back at least to Victorian London, where “slumming” was both vilified and 

celebrated, fueling both prostitution and significant social welfare institutions.vii  In all 

likelihood, poverty tourism is much older than critics acknowledge.    

 

Since most of the criticisms of poverty tourism occur in journalistic contexts, the leading 

arguments espouse personal convictions that fall short of the criteria that typifies scholarly 

debate.  Indeed, most of the contributors to poverty tourism discourse do not reconstruct 

opposing views charitably.  Perpetuating one-sided polemics, they fail to satisfy the demands of 

communal justification.  Furthermore, most contributors to poverty tourism discourse do not 

comment on whether other people already have advanced similar, if not identical, views.  Given 

these problems of subjectivism and redundancy, the poverty tourism debate requires 

reorientation if it is to become a topic of mature deliberation.  

 

With the hope of moving beyond the impediments just outlined, the purpose of this essay 

is to reconstruct and assess core moral issues surrounding poverty tourism, giving special 

emphasis to the most frequently cited problem, voyeurism.viii  Not only should this 

reconstruction and assessment benefit the general public, but it should be of special interest to 

readers of Environmental Philosophy.  The debates about poverty tourism concern judgments 

about conduct that takes place in a distinctive environment.  Were that environment to lose its 

defining characteristics, the conduct would cease. 

 

This collaboratively written essay draws from different academic backgrounds and 

personal experiences.  One author, Boston University law professor Kevin Outterson, has taken 

graduate students to Brazilian favelas.  He has also taken religiously sponsored trips to colonias 

and garbage dumps in Mexico, and impoverished religious minority communities in Egypt.  

While journalistic coverage reduces Outterson’s views to titillating talking points, people who 

read articles that quote him are given less restrictive opportunities to judge his conduct and 

values.  For example, The NY Times provided an online discussion board for readers respond to 

“Slum Visits: Tourism or Voyeurism,” an article that quoted Outterson.ix  By addressing some of 

the central points that were posted there, we are introducing overdue parity. 

 

 

The other author, Evan Selinger, is a philosopher.  His training in phenomenology—the 

branch of philosophy that analyzes embodied first-person experience—enables him to discern 

ambiguity and nuance in ethical dilemmas that mainstream discussions fail to detect.  While 

Selinger has not gone on a poverty tour, his expertise in phenomenology can: (1) enhance our 

understanding of experiences that Outterson and others share, and (2) clarify how the poverty 

tourism debates revolve around phenomenological concepts that have been subject to more 

sophisticated analysis in academic literatures than public editorials.x  

 

Our essay is organized as follows.  First, we describe Outterson’s experience of preparing 

law students to visit favelas, and account for the significant interactions that transpired while 

there.  Second, we address the charge the debate about poverty tourism is a journalistic red 

herring that distracts the public’s attention from more pressing issues.  Third, we reconstruct and 

assess the leading moral criticisms of poverty tourists that center on the allegation of voyeurism. 

 

As a caveat, we should note that while we will be pursuing a deflationary agenda, what 

follows does not amount of a moral defense of most poverty tours that currently are being 

conducted.  To the contrary, we acknowledge that many of the current tours are, in fact, morally 

questionable.  When we defend poverty tourism, we do so with an eye towards a minority of 

actual of actual practices that are structured around fairly robust educational ideals and reflexive 

moral considerations.  

1. What Happens During a Favela Tour?  Professor Outterson’s Experience 
 
 

The students were nervous about the favela.  Most came from middle class backgrounds 

from one of the poorest states in the United States.  We were in Brazil for a three-week foreign 

study trip sponsored by the West Virginia University College of Law.  The program was co-

directed with a colleague, Professor andre cummings.  For some of these students, this was their 

first trip outside the U.S.  Our pedagogical goal for the foreign study program was to expose the 

students to Brazilian legal culture, forcing them to think more deeply about the relationship 

between law and society.  Before we left, we spent two semesters exploring Brazilian history and 

culture, using both critical and conventional materials, assisted by Brazilian graduate students at 

WVU.   While in Brazil, we attended classes with students at two Brazilian law schools (in Rio 

de Janeiro and in Vitória, Espírito Santo).  Most of the classes were comparative in focus and we 

enjoyed extensive discussions with our colleagues.   

A favela tour was not part of the original syllabus.  But a unique teaching moment 

emerged.  We were staying in Ipanema, an energetic beachfront neighborhood in Rio.  Ipanema 

is an expensive place to live, more residential and less touristy than nearby Copacabana.  One 

key to Ipanema is the access to cheap labor from nearby Rocinha, a large hillside favela in Rio.  

It is an incomplete picture of Brazil to enjoy Ipanema’s beautiful beaches, hotels and restaurants 

without seeing the poor people who make it all possible: the people who swept the streets at 

dawn, who cooked the food, cleaned the rooms, and sold things on the beach.  The danger of 

voyeurism and reinforcing stereotypes concerned me, but our students were well prepared for 

this experience, and we would have ample academic time to process the experience critically and 

personally. 

We asked for a few student volunteers to come into the Rocinha favela with a local 

operator of a poverty tour.  We chose this tour because he did not offer a “safari” experience 

from a tour bus, but led small groups, on foot, with some connection to the community.  We 

began with a van ride from Ipanema to Rocinha, a short 15-minute ride across a gaping social 

gulf.  Rocinha is a hillside favela, home to perhaps 200,000 people.  We ascended to the top of 

Rocinha using “motoboys” – small motorcycle taxis driven by young men.  From the top, we 

walked down very small pedestrian streets for the next three hours, with the guide explaining his 

view on how the favela worked.  We saw small shops, ate sonhas from a bakery, walked past 

tidy homes, bars, and impromptu laundries.  The longest stops were at an artists’ studio and a 

community center that some donors have supported.  We have returned several times over the 

years, and have seen the growth of the community center and its programs.  The guide has built 

some financial relationships with the people along the route.  All undoubtedly enjoy the tourist 

money, but we also experienced something more personal.     

The guide paused several times to explain how Rocinha operates with very little 

government assistance.  Basic public health facilities are modest; sewage runs in open gutters; 

water is piped in plastic pipes above ground; he reports that even the postal service stops at the 

road and residents have to pay extra for delivery to their homes.  For law students, many 

interesting questions follow – Do the residents own their homes?  (Yes, in a practical sense.)  Do 

they have legal title? (Not really, but the local community association functions as a semi-formal 

real property registry.)   Is there much robbery or rape? (Not really, the drug gangs keep the 

peace unless a rival gang or the police enter the favela.)  After three hours, we emerged at the 

bottom and caught vans back to Ipanema.  For many students, it was the highlight of their time in 

Brazil.   

 

We debriefed the students afterwards, to help process the experience.  Students 

consistently noted that their expectations were challenged.  They were nervous about poverty, 

crime, and despair and expected to encounter things they had seen on film.  What they saw 

instead was community, homes, and dignity in the midst of poverty.  They interacted with real 

people, instead of images in a movie like City of God.  They also improved their understanding 

of the connection between rich and poor communities, both as a local process and in the context 

of globalization.  The long-term effect on the students is still unknown, but the post-tour 

seminars we held with our students were some of the best discussions we had in law school.  

Many students appear to be deeply affected by the experience and report the experience as 

valuable.  

   

The West Virginia program is primarily educational, and therefore may not be 

representative of poverty tourism in general.  The program certainly can be improved.  Others in 

Rocinha criticize the tour we took, and we have modest abilities to confirm many of the 

statements offered as “facts” along the tour without deeper ties to residents of Rocinha.  It is 

possible to imagine ways to improve this experience for all concerned, especially for the 

residents of Rocinha.  One can also find other forms of poverty tourism that would be easier to 

attack, such as “Ugly American” tours on a safari bus.  We deliberately avoided those models.  

 

A second, briefer example is in Mazatlan, Mexico, another tourist destination.  The poor 

of Mazatlan live in colonias.  I have visited nearly a dozen different colonias, which range from 

working poor to extremely poor.  The poorest colonia was at the base of the city’s garbage dump, 

until the local government evicted them in 2008.  These visits were not academic, but were 

sponsored by the La Viña church, a Protestant church with ties to many U.S. and Canadian 

churches.  Church-sponsored mission trips are a huge undertaking in the U.S.  Tens of thousands 

of churches send small teams out each year, generally to less affluent communities for a week or 

two.  Some destinations are foreign such as Mazatlan; others are domestic, like rebuilding 

projects in New Orleans.  Some focus on evangelism; others on service projects.  At La Viña, 

service and evangelism are seen as two sides of the same coin: serve and love, following the 

example of Jesus.  In Mazatlan, some teams focus on primary care medical clinics; others work 

with children and adults; Bible studies and prayer ministry occurs in an open shed while other 

volunteers prepare meals for colonia feeding centers established by the church.  Everything is 

done in the name of Jesus.   

 

The Mazatlan church itself is an interesting partnership, with two congregations meeting 

in the same building.  The English-speaking members are generally snowbirds, retired Canadians 

and U.S. citizens with some money who spend the winter in Mazatlan.  They hail from many 

church backgrounds or no particular church, but winter at La Viña.  The Mexican-speaking 

congregation is made up of local people, generally with less wealth.  These two groups partner 

together in the outreach efforts to the colonias, supported by the mission trip teams from the U.S. 

and Canada. 

Certainly these trips are also open to critique.  Christianity Today, a leading evangelical 

magazine, asks whether some mission trips are “religious tourism.”  In our context, perhaps we 

should evaluate them as a subset of poverty tourism.   

 

2. Is the Debate About Poverty Tourism Unseemly? 
 

Some see the debate about poverty tourism as unseemly.  These critics allege that the 

debate diverts attention away from more significant moral and political issues, and even 

encourages the people who think about it to turn a blind eye to the injustices that affluent 

Western countries have committed against developing countries in the past, and continue to 

commit in the present.  One of the readers who posted a response to “Slum Visits: Tourism or 

Voyeurism” makes this case in especially stark terms.xi  The reader alleges that because debates 

about poverty tourism focus exclusively on the current behavior of a few individuals who are 

engaged in unusual activity, they: (i) obscure the relevant large-scale issues concerning how 

European and the United States policies have been and continue to be responsible for creating 

global inequality, and (ii) obscure the rationalizations that Europeans and Americans come up to 

justify why they are not willing to further global justice by accepting a lower standard of living.xii  

 

We acknowledge the importance of questions concerning what obligations are entailed by 

“backwards” (e.g., potentially rectification) and “forwards” (e.g., potentially compensation) 

looking dimensions of justice at the large-scale.  Nevertheless, we suggest that debates about 

poverty tourism actually enrich discussions about global ethics.   Globalization reduces the 

difficulty and cost for tourists to travel the world—in both virtual (e.g., via Internet and film) and 

more robustly corporeal (e.g., via air and ground transportation) ways.  If we take global tourism 

as a given, then it becomes increasingly important to determine which values and ideals should 

guide a traveler’s conduct.  The importance of providing careful ethical reflection on tourist 

conduct is heightened by the fact that the present is marked by the growth of “tourism 

reflexivity,” a concept that sociologist John Urry defines as “the set of disciplines, procedures, 

and criteria that enable each…place to monitor, evaluate, and develop its ‘tourism potential’ 

within the emerging patterns of global tourism.”xiii  The combination of ease of travel, enhanced 

tourism reflexivity, persistence of differences in cultural practices, and changes in material 

culture make it likely that the foreseeable future will be plagued by normative concerns related to 

tourism, especially as it relates to matters of poverty, indigenous rights, natural resource use, and 

biodiversity.  Comprehensive analysis of global justice requires analyzing poverty tourism.xiv     

 

In anticipation of possible objections, let us note that we would be willing to withdraw 

our claim about the merits of poverty tourism discourse if someone were to establish that: (1) the 

public is capable of cognitively processing only a single debate about global justice at a time, or 

(2) debating poverty tourism diminishes how the public addresses pressing matters of global 

justice.  

 

With respect to (1), no empirical evidence exists that validates the patronizing charge that 

discussions of poverty tourism detrimentally monopolize public attention.  To be sure, good 

reasons exist for being skeptical about how informed the general populace is on a number of 

issues that are central to social welfare.  Nevertheless, such skepticism only validates the 

argument being made by sociologist Harry Collins who insists that better tools need to be 

developed for analyzing the role that technical expertise should play in policy formation.xv That 

is, while the public can entertain multiple policy issues, the level of technical detail surrounding 

any one of them may be beyond the scope of what the average person can grasp. 

 

Likewise, no compelling logical, conceptual, or causal relation has been established that 

validates (2).  Now, a bias may very well exist that inclines the general public to view 

responsibility primarily as a matter of assessing individual conduct, and not judging institutional 

structures and collective behavior.  Anthropologist Allan Hanson makes a compelling case that 

this bias exists because assumptions related to “methodological individualism” have informed 

historical conceptions of responsibility.xvi  But even if such bias is pervasive, partisans can 

enhance discussions of responsibility by framing the debate over poverty tourism as an issue that 

remains contentious largely because large-scale issues of global justice have not been 

satisfactorily addressed.     

 

3. The Charge of Voyeurism 
 

Poverty tourists regularly are denounced as immoral voyeurs, and the charge of 

voyeurism has fueled the recent debate over audience response to Slumdog Millionaire.  As 

mentioned in the Introduction, critics like Shyamal Sengupta condemn the film for being a 

poverty tour; Alice Miles labeled it “poverty porn.”  Are state universities and church groups 

engaged in the global pornography business?   

 

Since critics presuppose different meanings when they use the term “voyeur,” it can be 

difficult to assess which of their appraisals, if any, are valid.  Moreover, inadequately formulated 

theses tend to accompany the prevalent linguistic impression.  To overcome these impediments, 

we proceed by: (i) providing a taxonomy of the circumstances in which observing others has 

been construed as an immoral use of the gaze; and (ii) appealing to this taxonomy to clarify 

which observational circumstances should be deemed relevant to the poverty tourism debate.         

3a. Taxonomy of Voyeurism 

 

No one argues that it is inherently demeaning to look at others.  That view would be so 

extreme as to be the expression of deep pathology.  However, some contexts of observation are 

seen as morally troubling.  Claims about immoral behavior have been leveled at the following 

scenarios:      

1.  Immoral voyeurism occurs when undetected glances invade other people’s privacy and 

2.  Immoral voyeurism occurs in some instances where people perceive that they are being 

3.  Immoral voyeurism occurs when observers are motivated to look at others to further 

take advantage of their vulnerability. 
 

observed for demeaning purposes. 
 

demeaning ends. 
 

reasons for observing others. 
 

4.  Immoral voyeurism occurs in some instance where observers are dishonest about their 

5.  Immoral voyeurism occurs in some instances where the mere presence of a distinctive 
group of observers makes people who are observed and not members of that group feel 
demeaned. 
 

6.  Immoral voyeurism occurs in some instances where members of a privileged group 

misrepresent the values and beliefs of an underprivileged group on the basis of 

selective observations of their lives. 
 

7.  Immoral voyeurism occurs when people view inappropriate events and images. 

 
In the next three sections we clarify what each of these contexts entails and discuss whether they 

apply to the poverty tourism debates. 

3b. Voyeurism and the Undetected Glance 
 

Let us start by examining the first charge that immoral voyeurism occurs when 

undetected glances invade other people’s privacy and take advantage of their vulnerability.  The 

tradition of existential phenomenology provides us with some insight into this issue, especially a 

frequently cited passage of Being and Nothingness (1943) in which Jean-Paul Sartre describes 

his experience of being startled by a walker’s approaching footsteps as he covertly peeps at 

someone through a keyhole in a door.  Sartre emphasizes feeling shame, and suggests that the 

emotion is triggered by recognition that his gaze took advantage of another’s vulnerability: “It is 

shame which reveals to me the Other’s look and myself at the end of that look.  It is 

shame…which makes me live, not know the situation of being looked at” (p. 352).xvii  In 

characterizing the situation of shame as one that is “lived” and not “known,” Sartre makes the 

anti-intellectualist point that his recognition of harm does not occur via an inner monologue that 

is expressed in propositional form.  Rather, the recognition occurs in the visceral experience of a 

stinging emotional state.   

 

In identifying emotional experience with moral awareness, Sartre appears to be 

suggesting that non-pathological people inevitably will feel deserved shame if they find 

themselves caught (or on the verge of being caught) being “Peeping Toms.”  However, at the 

time that Being and Nothingness was written, Sartre had not yet fully clarified the moral 

dimensions of existentialism.  One way to attribute a moral interpretation to Sartre’s description 

of voyeurism is to follow a line of thinking that Leon Kass, a contemporary bioethicist, 

advances.  In Life, Liberty, and the Defense of Dignity (2002) Kass refers to emotional 

expressions of a distinct class of moral judgments as the “wisdom of repugnance.”  As Kass sees 

it, certain negative emotional responses offer evidence that an action or characteristic is 

intrinsically bad.  In differentiating the evidentiary statuses of reasoned and emotional responses 

to moral harm in “crucial cases,” he goes so far as to privilege emotional attunement: “In crucial 

cases...repugnance is the emotional expression of deep wisdom, beyond reason’s power fully to 

articulate it” (p. 150). 

 

Deep debate exists as to whether intuitive moral judgments of the sort designated by Kass 

are objective, or whether they merely reflect the contingent values that subjects internalize 

through cultural discipline.  We will return to this issue in the next section.  For now it suffices to 

note that the context under review does not apply to the poverty tourism debates.  If poverty 

tourists are guilty of any moral infractions, these infractions occur in contexts where poor people 

realize that they are being observed.  No one is accusing poverty tourists of engaging in 

surreptitious peeping.         

         

3c. Voyeurism and Demeaning Ends 
 

We turn now to second and third contexts in which voyeurism has been seen as immoral: 

instances where people perceive that they are being observed for demeaning purposes, and 

instances where observers are motivated to look at others to further demeaning ends.  The 

following reader comments on “Slum Visits: Tourism or Voyeurism” are illustrative examples of 

how critics see both of these contexts as applicable to the poverty tourism debates:  

•  “[Poverty tourism] is simply the racist Othering of post-colonial societies by a 

metropolitan elite.  It treats individuals as objects in a zoo, not as empowered agents.”xviii 
 

•  “I lived in Mumbai in 2003, close to the world trade center in a large and beautiful 

residential tower.  It was only a couple of streets away from the nearest slum and the 
people that lived there were essentially the ‘support staff’ of the wealthy who lived in the 
towers.  They were cleaners, cooks, garbage collectors, elevator operators and street 
sweepers, keeping the district and its wealthy residents in tip top shape.  I was always 
fascinated with the slums of Mumbai and would walk my shirts down to the local ironing 
men, on the edge of the slum to have them pressed.  One day, my curiosity got the better 
of me and instead of handing over the clothes and turning back, I headed in, winding my 
way through the tiny lanes.  I hadn’t been walking for two minutes when a young man 
stopped me—and in halting English asked me what I was doing there.  I said I was just 
walking and looking.  He looked at me, then at the ground and replied, madam, you not 
see this.  In an instant I was looking at the ground.  I apologized, turned on my heel and 
left.  My curiosity got the better of me, I wanted to see inside those homes, look through 
the doorways, see what ‘they’ did in there.  I didn’t think about their dignity, that these 
shacks were someone's home.  I would never walk through a neighborhood in the US to 
see how the people lived, to look through their doors, to see what ‘they’ did in there. That 
young man taught me something about myself that day, I thank him for it, and I will 
never forget him.”xix 
 

In “Shocked by Slumdog’s Poverty Porn,” Times Online columnist Alice Miles clarifies how the 

third context extends beyond the initial poverty tourism debates to other contexts of where 

poverty is observed. 

“As the film [Slumdog Millionaire] revels in the violence, degradation and horror, it 
invites you, the Westerner, to enjoy it, too.  Will they find it such fun in Mumbai?  Like 
the bestselling novel by the Americanised Afghan Khaled Hosseini, A Thousand Splendid 
Suns, Slumdog Millionaire is not a million miles away from a form of pornographic 
voyeurism.  A Thousand Splendid Suns is obsessed with rape and violence against 
women, the reader asked to pore over every last horrible detail.  Slumdog Millionaire is 
poverty porn.”xx   
 
Many people suggest that poverty tourists treat poor people as “as objects in a zoo, not as 

 

empowered agents.”xxi  Unfortunately, most of these denunciations fail to clarify whether they 

are stating that poverty tourists intend to demean poor people, or whether poor people feel 

demeaned when observed by tourists.  There is an important difference between the two 

scenarios.  In the first scenario, the problem lies with the tourists’ intentions, and we note our 

agreement with those who believe it is immoral for tourists to go on poverty tours in order to 

demean the poor.  An elaborate justification of this condemnation is not necessary, given how 

easily different moral theories justify condemning the intention to demean marginalized people.  

However, we would add that no evidence exists that all poverty tourists or even a high 

percentage of poverty tourists have such despicable motivations.  Crucially, it is an open 

empirical question as to how frequently such ill intentions exist.  Critics thus are not justified in 

equating the practice of poverty tourism with immoral intention.   

 

A problem similar to the confusion of likely with inevitable intentions plagues Miles’s 

denunciation of Slumdog Millionaire and A Thousand Splendid Suns.  Miles presumes that since 

these artworks graphically depict violence against poor people, well-off audiences will be 

inclined to experience them with a sense of Schadenfreude.  Now, Miles correctly recognizes 

that information often is structured in a non-neutral manner that “invites” viewers to respond in 

patterned ways.  Recently, this thesis about constrained intentionality has extended beyond 

philosophical circles—where debates occur about Don Ihde’s phenomenological conception of 

“technological mediation”—to mainstream understanding through the widespread reception of 

Cass Sunstein and Richard Thaler’s jointly authored book Nudge: Improving Decisions About 

Health, Wealth, and Happiness (2008).  In this text, the legal scholar and behavioral economist 

appeal to such concepts as “choice architecture” and “default settings” to challenge readers to 

think about how design configurations interact with our perceptual and cognitive systems so as to 

“nudge” us in biased directions.  They make their point by discussing a range of provocative 

examples, including ranging from fly-etched urinals in the men’s restrooms at Schiphol Airport 

(that minimize spillage) to strategically arranged cafeteria displays (that incline kids to select 

healthy food).  They also feature insightful studies about how the format in which information is 

presented influences people’s decisions, including which mortgages and medical insurances they 

select, how much money they save, and which investments they target. 

  

The problem, here, is that Miles’ cinematic and literary examples bear little resemblance 

to the instances of informational “nudging” that Sunstein and Thaler emphasize.  By 

characterizing Slumdog Millionaire and A Thousand Splendid Suns as “poverty porn,” Miles 

implies that the depictions of violence against poor people there are so sensationalized as to 

likely arouse the vile viewer/reader response of enjoying the depicted miseries.  Contrary to this 

view, we contend that neither logical nor empirical necessity supports such a cynical link 

between the content of violent media (of this kind) and the perceptions of those who view violent 

media (of this kind).  The only response that can be reasonably inferred to follow from exposure 

to such emotionally powerful content is an emotionally powerful response.  Of course, it could 

be argued that in a culture typified by widespread sadism, those emotions readily are readily 

expressed as pleasure in the other people’s pain.  But while some cultural critics identify U.S. 

culture with a sadist sensibility, we find that that such a sweeping generalization is too reductive 

to be informative.  It is more useful to posit that while some people will, in fact, feel better about 

their privileged lives as a result of being exposed to these stories, others will feel sympathy for 

the victims that these stories portray.  Knowing that sympathetic viewers of these media do exist, 

the well-respected non-profit organization Save the Children is using Slumdog Millionaire as an 

educational tool to raise awareness of global poverty.  In short, then, Miles does not provide 

good reasons for assuming the perverse response.  

 

The second scenario concerning how poor people respond to being observed suffers from 

the same problem as the first.  It also conflates possible with actual intentions by presuming that 

poor people necessarily must feel demeaned when observed by tourists.  As the reader’s 

comment about visiting Mumbai in 2003 establishes, some poor people do feel that being 

observed demeans their existence.  Nevertheless, it is presumptuous to assume that all poor 

people necessarily must feel demeaned when observed by or interacting with tourists.  Such 

presumptuousness is ironic because it actually deprives poor people of the very “agency” that it 

intends to safeguard.  To this end, one of the readers of “Slum Visits: Tourism or Voyeurism” 

leveled moral accusations at the author, journalist Eric Weiner, and commentators who 

condemned poverty tourists as immoral voyeurs without actually consulting with the poor people 

who were observed and supposedly harmed.  The following response is illustrative: 

“Here's a really novel idea. To New York Times reporters like Eric Weiner, the tourists, 
tour organizers and all you fine folks who are commenting.  Why not ask the residents 
themselves?  This article appeared not to interview a single resident to ask their opinion 
on tourism vs. voyeurism.  Nor has anyone in the commentary suggested that the article 
should have done so.  Even those who are arguing for residents’ dignity.  Failing to grant 
residents’ the agency of making that choice is the greatest transgression.  Shame on all of 
you.”xxii 
 
Having agreed that it is immoral for people to go on poverty tours with the intent of 

 

 

demeaning others, having rejected the thesis that one can make valid a priori assumptions about 

the intentions of poverty tourists and readers of poverty media, and having rejected the thesis that 

one can make valid a priori assumptions about how poor people feel about being observed, we 

now have to address the matter of what judgments are appropriate to the cases where poor people 

do feel demeaned by being observed.  Should tourists in this circumstance feel the shameful 

“wisdom of repugnance” akin to the experience had by person who looked at the ground in 

shame after realizing that a poor person felt it was inappropriate of him/her to be in slums of 

Mumbai?  Does it matter, morally speaking, that he/she did not intend to be demeaning? 

 

Both effect and intention should matter, in different ways.  Some people will feel 

demeaned by some poverty tourists, while others will not.  This is an empirical question, but to 

the extent people do not actually feel demeaned, the objection fails.  For those who do feel 

demeaned, we might ask whether all poverty tourists would elicit the same response to the same 

degree.  Perhaps the objection is not to poverty tours as such, but only badly executed poverty 

tours, just as some tourism has a much larger carbon footprint than others.  This is a helpful 

exercise, as it makes us ask what aspects of poverty tourism elicit the strongest negative 

reactions from the residents, or does the greatest harm to everyone involved.  The next question 

then becomes how the tours could be modified to reduce or eliminate the harm. 

 

As for intention, few would defend a tourist who was intentionally demeaning another 

person.  We will assume that the remainder either have good intentions (the road-paving kind) or 

perhaps are clueless.  Either way, when confronted with the unintended demeaning effect of their 

actions, these tourists and tour operators will have an opportunity.  They can continue to act in 

the face of what is now a known harm (and become an intentionally demeaning tourist) or they 

can modify their behavior with the intention to reduce the harm.  Whether they are successful in 

the latter is again an empirical question, which might trigger an iterative action/reaction process.   

This process is a path to ethical improvement in tourism practices, if well executed. 

 

One troubling assumption in this discussion is that the communities are homogeneous in 

their reaction to poverty tourism.  Perhaps most residents of Rocinha are indifferent about the 

tourists; some are obviously pleased to see them.  But what if one person is terribly upset by it?  

Is that enough to veto the visit?  What if just one person is mildly annoyed by the tour?   

 

At this point, we look for individual answers in contract, and community answers in 

democratic consent.  Certainly, if the residents have made a bargain (a sale, as in the artists’ 

studio in Rocinha), some of the objections fall away.  No one forced them to sell goods or 

services to the tourists, but having done so, they are not well positioned to complain that they 

feel demeaned by the transaction.  Some might say that the concept of consent is invalid in the 

context of gross inequality, that residents who sell to tourists are coerced by the extreme wealth 

gap into a transaction that demeans them.  Such arguments are leveled at consensual sex 

workers, and capitalism in many contexts.  We acknowledge this argument, but will not address 

it here, as it applies in many contexts well beyond poverty tourism.  In any event, the vast 

majority of Rocinha residents do not consent by contract to poverty tourism, nor do they benefit 

directly.   

Perhaps consent (or the absence of dissent) derived from the community through 

customary or democratic processes can bridge the gap.  If a tour has permission from the 

community’s legitimate leaders, or is otherwise permitted under local law and custom, then we 

might overlook the mild annoyance of the solitary objector.  That person’s difficulties have been 

weighed in the balance and found wanting; not by an external value system or neocolonial 

power, but by the legitimate and internal governance system in the community itself.  And if that 

is true for the mildly annoyed, it is also true of the deeply disturbed minority, so long as the 

legitimacy of the leadership structure can bear the weight of the aggrieved minority.   

 

In short, the consent of the community matters greatly, and complaints and suggestions 

from residents and their leaders should shape poverty tour practices.  The absence of formal 

consent should not hinder tourism, so long as the community is not objecting.  A legitimate 

community decision to ban tourists should be respected, and a visit in violation of that ban would 

be unethical.  Identifying a “legitimate” decision is more difficult.  

Democratic structures have the capacity to evaluate the relative merits of restrictions on 

travel and tourism.  In the United States, those opposed to freedom of travel bear a heavy burden 

to justify restricting such a fundamental right, which encourages us to operate with the 

presumption that consent is not needed until objections are voiced.  As Gregory Hartch stated, 

“the right to travel has been recognized by American courts for more than 150 years.”xxiii It was 

the first fundamental right recognized under the Fourteenth Amendment.xxiv The right to travel is 

fundamental to our national conception of freedom:  “The rule of open travel on the roads was 

viewed as superior to freedom of speech, freedom of religion, and freedom of press throughout 

the late 1800s.”xxv “[T]he constitutional right to travel from one State to another ... occupies a 

position fundamental to the concept of our Federal Union.... A right so elementary was 

conceived from the beginning to be a necessary concomitant of the stronger Union the 

Constitution created.”xxvi  The right to travel is an important component of personal autonomy.  

While the consent and participation of the community are ethically valuable, the mere absence of 

formal consent should not block the right to travel until legitimate objections are raised.   

In the context of Rocinha, we have serious concerns about community consent, given the 

quasi-governmental role played by the drug traffic gangs, together with their erstwhile allies, the 

residents’ associations.  These institutions suffer significant democracy deficits, and yet one 

would be hard pressed to point to alternative institutions in a better position to govern Rocinha.  

In any event, the tours occur only because the gangs and the residents’ associations tacitly allow 

them to continue.   

     

3e. Voyeurism: Contexts 4-7 

There is not much to say about the fourth context in which immoral voyeurism is said to occur.  

If poverty tourists are dishonest about their intentions, they deserve moral rebuke.  For example, 

we should consider a tourist to be morally reprehensible if they proclaim motivation to learn 

more about poverty, but in fact their guiding intention is to acquire life experience that will make 

for interesting party stories, or to make a profit (using the funds only for personal benefit) by 

selling pictures of suffering people once home.  Because this judgment can be justified by a 

variety of moral outlooks, it does not require elaborate justification. 

 

The next context, however, calls for more nuanced considerations.  It is quite possible 

that the mere presence of tourists will make poor people feel demeaned, even if the tourists have 

good intentions.  This issue might tilt the balance towards virtual poverty tourism, especially 

through film, if the primary harm is the demeaning presence.  In Rocinha, several tour operators 

lead small tour groups every day.  With a documentary film, the intrusion would occur just once.  

Of course, documentary films are exactly what send some tourists to the favela, sometimes with 

false impressions.  Likewise, the New York Times article will undoubtedly spur some interest in 

these tours; some will go with inaccurate expectations. 

 

Leaving the question of virtual versus physical tourism unresolved for the moment, let us 

consider the underlying claim about demeaning presence.  The following responses to “Slum 

Visits: Tourism or Voyeurism” defend the thesis that tourist’s gaze demeans the dignity of the 

poor people who are observed because poor people are a marginalized group. 

“Why a rich person would pay someone to drive them around my neighborhood is 
beyond me. Imagining a red double-decker tour bus circling Hunts Point and surrounding 
neighborhoods would be more an oddity first, and after a while, anger.  It would make me 
angry, if while I’m walking to the market with my children, to buy what groceries I can 
afford this week with my ever decreasing food stamp allotment, to see a group of wind 
tousled, pastel wearing tourists with cameras slung about their necks.”xxvii 

“This kind of ‘tourism’ of poverty is disgusting in its reliance on power differentials.  If 
you visit rich neighborhoods and gawk at the people living there, chances are they have 
the means (if not the desire) to gawk at you.  Day tours into the poorest places of the 
world, whatever country, appall me.  ‘Mission’ trips—teenagers spending $1,000 to go 
put in a few days work in exchange for a resume-booster—are no better.” 

“Are these privileged people really so unimaginative and shallow that they have to see 
poverty to know that it exists?  And do they really think that their ‘changed’ perspective 
justifies the damage done by their travel (because foreign poor people are generally so 
much hipper than the ones under the bridge when you drive home from work)?” 

 

 

 

 

The guiding idea in these responses is that poverty tourism is an unacceptable form of 

voyeurism because it displays an asymmetric presence that reinforces social stratification.  The 

following sociological features are relevant to this issue: poor people cannot take a comparable 

tour of a rich neighborhood; poor people who work in resorts are instructed not to make eye 

contact with rich guests; despite the legality of free-association, poor people have been rounded 

up by the police for being in neighborhoods they do not “belong” in; and the conspicuous 

consumption of rich tourists can serve as a painful reminder of how much better off others are.  

For the reasons expressed in the previous section, no one is justified in assuming, a priori, that 

the presence of tourists must induce the harm and resentment that these quotes detail.  However, 

it is empirically possible that poor people will feel this way about being observed, regardless of 

the tourist’s intentions.   

In the context of Rocinha, some of these concerns may not be well grounded.  The theory 

of asymmetric presence as a damaging force loses power if you spend a few days watching 

television in Rocinha.  Brazilian television is ubiquitous in favelas, and wealth is prominently on 

display.  If it is harmful for Rocinha residents to be confronted with wealth and inequality, 

poverty tours are not the primary cause.  Likewise, the assumption that Rocinha residents cannot 

take a comparable tour of wealthy areas does not fit well with the Brazilian context.  Many of the 

residents of Rocinha work in the homes and businesses of Ipanema.  They travel by public transit 

every day to the homes and workplaces of very wealthy people.  We are not defending the 

income inequality in Brazil, but merely stating the obvious:  income inequality is not news to 

Brazilian favela residents.  Nor would a Hollywood-style tour of the homes of the rich and 

famous do much to restore the moral balance. 

Perhaps the argument is that Rocinha is a refuge for the poor, and should be protected as 

a safe haven from social difference.  This is a plausible argument.  In other contexts, such as 

Native Americans, certain areas are preserved for the tribal members from external intrusions.  If 

Rocinha’s community leadership took such a position, then it would be entitled to respect.  But 

the mere presence of inequality (absent other compelling circumstances) should not create a zone 

of non-autonomy around the poor and their communities, preventing other people from 

exercising their autonomy, including the right to travel. 

 

The sixth context in which immoral voyeurism is said to occur are instances where 

members of a privileged group misrepresent the values and beliefs of an underprivileged group 

on the basis of selective observations of their lives.  The phenomenological tradition presents 

rich insights into this issue, and we can gain clear sense of its basic parameters by reflecting on a 

summary presentation of the concepts of the “male gaze” and the “racial gaze”.   

 

In her feminist classic The Second Sex (1949), Simone de Beauvoir—Sartre’s 

longstanding partner and collaborator—argues that women are defined as inferior “others” in 

male dominated cultures and socially disciplined to accept their second-class status as a natural 

state of affairs.  By extending de Beauvoir’s insights into the social construction of gendered 

identity, feminist scholars learned how to analyze a range of representations—including 

photography, cinema, painting, and even the history of philosophy itself—as manifestations of a 

“male gaze”.  This reductivist gaze is defined by its tendency to view women not as subjects, but 

eroticized and fetishized objects; it is identified a leading cause underlying degrading depictions 

of women’s lives, beliefs, and values—depictions that unduly demean political, moral, aesthetic, 

and worth, and which disregard the adverse psychological and social consequences that result 

from such abjection.  By the 1980s, Laura Mulvey’s conception of “Woman as Image, Man as 

Bearer of the Look”—a section title found in her frequently cited essay “Visual Pleasure and 

Narrative Cinema” (1975)—became an organizing principle of much feminist and cultural 

studies scholarship.  

 

In his seminal Black Skin and White Masks (1952), Franz Fanon offers a forceful 

articulation of the idea of a “racial gaze”.  This idea is so powerful that in the Preface Sartre 

himself writes: “The Third World finds itself and speaks to itself through his [Fanon’s] voice.”   

 

Fanon explored the concept of the “racial gaze” by examining how “the black person is 

not only burdened by geography, history, and place” but also “most particularly saddled with the 

heavy weight of difference, difference exacted by the idea of race.”xxviii  Fanon contends that 

white people routinely look at black people with a gaze that emerges from a dangerous “double 

consciousness”.  According to Fanon, the white racist who condemns black skin and African 

cultures simultaneously “secretly desires their black bodies and ways of doing things.”xxix  Fanon 

insists that when black people begin to understand this paradox of desire and repulsion, they take 

a crucial step in developing an emancipatory psychology rooted in black pride. 

 

This is a potentially damaging critique of poverty tourism, especially if the visits are 

superficial and poorly rooted in context – the “safari bus” rides again, now saddled with the 

“bourgeois gaze.”   Agencies serving the homeless in the U.S. are frequently inundated with 

requests for groups to provide dinner on Thanksgiving Day, but a dearth of volunteers in other 

months.  Many challenge these holiday efforts as shallow and transient. 

Poverty tours are certainly exposed to the real possibility of superficiality and reinforcing 

of stereotypes.  But all superficial experiences are not equally problematic.  In the United States, 

many Native American tribes host gambling casinos, legally permitted because the tribes have 

some autonomous legal authority.  At some of these casinos, one will occasionally find a 

performance, replete with Native dancing and dress.  In Boston, one can view an exhibition of 

Irish step dancing; in Houston, a rodeo; colonial re-enactments in Williamsburg; in Harlem, jazz 

and blues on Saturday night and Black gospel choirs on Sunday morning.   Perhaps some of 

these are performances and not authentic cultural expressions.  But if they are just images 

designed for consumption, that does not make them unethical.  They are what they are: 

entertainment for the tourist and perhaps a small dose of culture or education.  This point 

emphasizes the value of linking quality teaching (e.g., reflexive inquiry into the conditions under 

which identities and stereotypes are constructed) and tourism, rather than abandoning either 

teaching or tourism altogether.  Also important are the consent of the observed, as discussed 

above.   

 

   

Finally, the last context listed in our taxonomy of voyeurism is instances in which people 

conceive of certain events or images as inherently objectionable to observe.  Outside of the 

tourism context, many examples meet this criterion.  For example, some people consider 

pornography to be inherently immoral, other people consider public executions to be inherently 

immoral, and, as the recent controversy over the Danish political cartoon of the prophet 

Muhammad demonstrated, some cultures consider depictions of certain religious imagery to be 

profane.  

 

In the tourism context, several examples are germane.  To pick but a single salient one, 

we can note that according to a BBC News article, some Jewish settlers have offered special 

“terror tours” of the West Bank and Gaza where tourists receive training in hand-to-hand combat 

and weapon use, view Palestinian “terror enclaves” from a helicopter and suicide bomber belts 

that the Israeli army seized, and, finally, engage in a paintball fight in a simulated Arab village 

containing simulated Arab terrorists.xxx  Not only does this practice raise questions about how 

tourism can exacerbate prejudices, but it also prompts us to consider whether it is inherently 

objectionable for people who are not journalists or soldiers to take a “tourist” attitude towards 

warfare.  But why are actual preparations for real events acceptable, but mock preparations for 

the same events are condemned?  People with money and time can put themselves through 

training camps as if they were minor league baseball players, racecar drivers, jungle mercenaries, 

or astronauts.  Why not Jewish West Bank settlers?  Beyond this extreme example, many Israeli 

kibbutzes offer short term visits as a way to experience “real kibbutz life.”   Undoubtedly, some 

of that experience includes anti-terrorism training, formal or informal.  If the underlying practice 

is defended solely on a ground of strict necessity, then the tourist may be acting unethically 

absent such necessity.  But in most cases, necessity is not the explicit or implicit justification, 

and the ethical distinction between tourist and participant fades.   

 

Conclusion 

 

We do not defend all or even most poverty tourism practices.  As noted in the 

Introduction, empirical work may find that most poverty tours are ethically objectionable as 

voyeuristic experiences.  Our delimited task has been to bring some taxonomic order to the 

debate, and to resist categorical condemnation of poverty tours.  Hopefully the structure and 

insights expressed in this collaborative paper will help the debates over tourism transition to a 

mature discourse. 

 

 

Additionally, we hope that our essay will advance inquiry into the following 

question—a question that is broader in scope than poverty tourism, but which has been central to 

the present discussion.  In the context of domestic and global travel, who has the right to enter 

another community?  Certainly a fire fighter or ambulance does when it responds to an 

emergency call.  Perhaps the President does when touring a disaster area; this visit can be a 

public act of solidarity, not tourism.  But what of journalists, social workers, artists, 

documentarians, and students?  If students are permitted, what possible difference could 

academic credit provide as an ethical justification?  Indeed, it would seem that if the backpacker 

in Rio wants equal access to favela tours, he or she should not be afforded less liberty than U.S. 

law students.  Such interrogatives and observations ultimately prompt the following question: If 

ethical considerations are insufficient to warrant suspending the right to travel, do they amount to 

little more than reflexive reminders to maintain vigilant awareness of the complexity and 

ambiguity that attends to unequally structured social encounters?  

   

 

 

 

  

 

 

   

 

  

 

 
  
Acknowledgments: We would like to thank David Lyons and Kyle Powys Whyte for their 
valuable assistance during the drafting phase of this essay.  
                                                 
i The term “poorism” evokes group-oriented oppression, the kind associated with “sexism” and “racism”.  Since 
debates about poverty should take place on fair terms, we recommend that future discussions of the practice of 
visiting impoverished areas revolve around the phrases “poverty tours” and “reality tours”.   If a convincing case can 
be made that poverty tours necessarily discriminate against poor people, then, and only then, does justification arise 
for using the term “poorism” to designate assessment of the practice.  Unfortunately, present journalistic writing 
incites biased evaluations by using “poorism” to designate negative assessment of poverty tours as well as the 
practice itself.  We recognize that the phrase “reality tours” can seem naïve, especially given the range of 
preconceptions about culture, class, and race that influence what tourists perceive and how tourists act during any 
kind of a tour.  To minimize the likelihood of being misinterpreted, we concede that tourism is a value-laden 
experience, and that generally speaking, experience of any kind is value-laden. Our point is that it is not 
contradictory to (i) endorse a value-laden conception of experience while (ii) defending the appropriateness of 

                                                                                                                                                             
conceiving of visits to impoverished areas as “reality tours,” because (iii) our preferred designation is a comparative 
description.  Outterson finds that when he brings students to a favela, they experience aspects of globalization and 
Brazilian culture that traditional vacation itineraries render invisible.  To be sure, what students perceive and learn 
while visiting a favela is mediated by a variety of factors, including: their background preparation, their personalities 
and interests, and the types of exchanges that transpire during the tour.  Furthermore, although the “reality” of the 
experience is constrained by the limited time span of the tour (i.e., it is not immersive like a year of study abroad), it 
also is heightened by visceral immediacy (i.e., it is not a distanced encounter with poverty, such as would be 
obtained through such media as books, newspapers, television, the Internet, etc.).  None of these mediating features, 
however, detract from our claim about comparative realism. 
ii See infra note vii. 
iii A feedback loop appears to be currently linking the virtual and the real.  On February 19, 2009, USA Today ran a 
story aptly titled, “‘Slumdog Millionaire’ boosts Mumbai tourism.” That story quotes Chris Way, co-founder of 
Reality Tours, who proclaims that his business has increased 25% since Slumdog’s release.  
iv Shyamal Sengupta’s views appear in a Los Angeles Times article by Mark Magnier called “Indians Don’t Feel 
Good About ‘Slumdog Millionaire’”, Jan. 24, 2009. (This is the name of the article that appeared on LA Times 
website.  In the newspaper it was titled “‘Slumdog’ doesn’t feel good in India” on page 1.) 
v Alice Miles, “Shocked by Slumdog’s poverty porn:  Danny Boyle’s film is sweeping up awards, but it’s wrong to 
revel in the misery of India’s children.”  The Times (London), Jan. 14, 2009. 
vi James Asa High, Jr., “The basis for jurisdiction over U.S. sex tourists:  an examination of the case against Michael 
Clark, U.C. Davis J. Int’l L. & Pol’y (2005);11:343. 
vii Seth Koven, Slumming:  Sexual and Social Politics in Victorian London (Princeton:  Princeton University Press, 
2004). 
viii The relevant essays are: Eric Weiner, “Slum Visits: Tourism or Voyeurism” (NY Times) Mar. 9, 2008, pg. 1;  
John Lancaster, “Next Stop, Squalor” (Smithsonian Magazine) Mar. 1, 2007, pg. 96; Roxana Popescu, “A Boom in 
Poorism” (Newsweek) Oct. 15, 2007, pg. 12;  Robin Moroney, “‘Poorism’ Comes to Mumbai” (The Wall Street 
Journal) Mar. 15, 2007; Amelia Gentleman, “Slum Tours: A Day Trip Too Far” (The Guardian) May 7, 2006; and 
Sally Kohn, “Poorism? What is Inequality Coming to?” (The Huffington Post) Mar. 11, 2008. 
ix Although Outterson could have entered comments on The NY Times message board, we should keep in mind the 
fact the forum is called “Readers’ Comments”.  
x In drawing explicit connections between the history of phenomenology and contemporary debates about poverty 
tourism, this essay demonstrates how phenomenologists can make positive contributions to the multi-disciplinary 
field “tourist studies”.   
xi The respondent writes: “So we go into countries (Africa, India, South/Central America...) and colonize them: 
extracting the natural resources for export back to England, Spain, Portugal, US, where we process them and sell 
them back to the colonies (Mercantilism=Exploitation). This goes on for several hundred years, during which time 
the colonial presence becomes entrenched in the colonized countries politically, economically, and culturally. Then, 
after the ‘West’ has fueled their industrializations with the wealth and sweat from the colonized countries--after they 
have become rich--they all of a sudden start to become socially progressive in their views of race, equality, 
autonomy/sovereignty, and allow some of these countries to kick them out, to nationalize, and to try and make it on 
their own. But they can't because their growth has been stunted by centuries of colonial presence; they can't compete 
in the world market. So the West ‘helps’ them out with loans via the World Bank and the International Monetary 
Fund, but in the early 1980’s there is a worldwide recession that foments the ‘3rd World Debt Crisis’, and so we 
‘help’ them out again with more loans, only now--to receive the loans--they have to de-nationalize their companies 
and sell them to corporations from the West, remove tariffs, reduce environmental standards, and accommodate the 
manufacturing presence and needs of the West. (So we’re back to neocolonialism). Then after this phase--after the 
West has once again enriched themselves off the sweat and resources of the poorer countries--we become 
progressive again and offer loans without strings, and the forgiveness of debts.  So what does all this mean? It means 
that we in the West got the head start on industrialization, technology, and weapons manufacture, we used this 
advantage to exploit the countries we colonized, and most of these countries have never been able to recover. They 
are like dogs at their master's table--looking for whatever crumbs they can get (tourism for instance). And now, we 
like to have trite discussions about whether some type of tourism is ‘ethical’ or not. Please. The only reason we care 
is because of the affluence bubble in which we live, and this is/was subsidized by the very barrios/colonias/slum 
conditions that this discussion is about. In other words, if it weren't for these conditions, we wouldn't be having this 
discussion. Those slums have given us what we have. The point? If you take away our wealth and comfort, we don't 

                                                                                                                                                             
care anymore about things like this. Donations? Contributions? What's that going to do? How about all Americans 
becoming amenable to lower standards of living so that some of these other countries have a chance to get ahead. 
How about the American corporations all of a sudden become altruistic and giving?  If white, upper-middle and 
upper-class Americans had to significantly reduce their standard of living all hell would break lose, and a discussion 
like this--luxury that it is--would be utterly insignificant” [sic] (spelling corrected). 
xii Such a view resonates with claims that political philosopher Thomas Pogge advances in the context of articulating 
his “negative duties” approach to human rights.   Pogge defines “negative duties” as “duties not to expose people to 
life threatening poverty and duties to shield them from harms which we would be actively responsible” (p.6). 
Specifically, Pogge identifies two attitudes as root causes of why worldwide poverty has not been eradicated, even 
though the “problem is hardly unsolvable” (p.1). The first attitude is that “citizens of rich countries are…conditioned 
to downplay the severity and persistence of world poverty” (p.1).  The second attitude is that most people think of 
world poverty “as an occasion for minor charitable assistance” (p.1).  Pogge contends that cultural conditioning 
reinforces these attitudes, including biased economic perspectives that circulate throughout public sphere discourse. 
Crucially, Pogge insists that leading voices in Europe and America promote the message that “severe poverty and its 
persistence are due exclusively to local causes” while obscuring the truth that “severe poverty is an ongoing harm 
we inflict upon the global poor” (p.1).  From Pogge’s perspective, much of the prosperity that wealthy nations 
currently enjoy came about through violent histories of destruction, oppression, and colonialism.  While Pogge does 
not believe that citizens should be blamed for the conduct of their ancestors, he does maintain that nobody is entitled 
to profit from the “fruits of [our forefathers’] sins,” especially as concerns the “huge advantages” that some 
countries have over the global poor (pp. 2-3).  Ultimately, Pogge’s argument in favor of restitution for unjust 
enrichment remains contentious because it is not endorsed by those who favor the widely-purveyed notion that 
governments have an overriding moral obligation to serve the “national interest”.  Adherence to Realpolitik tends to 
discourage the development of an adequate commitment to rectify global inequities.    Thomas Pogge, “World 
poverty and human rights,” Ethics & International Affairs, vol. 19 issue 1 (2005).  
xiii John Urry, “Globalizing the Tourist Gaze,” (2001) p.2. 
xiv Sensitized to the disciplining power of technology, Urry’s analyses of tourism include fascinating observations 
about how access to different technologies can change the very “nature” of what he calls the “tourist’s gaze”.  For 
example, Urry approvingly cites 19th century German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche’s observation that the 
development of the mobile railway “annihilated space” by encouraging traveler’s to view landscapes through 
“panoramic perception” in which sights are meant to taken in quickly and not “lingered over, sketched or painted or 
in any way captured”; this experience is also conducive to perceiving an “enormous sense of vastness, of scale, size 
and domination of the landscape” (p.4).  Urry further shows how other modes of transportation likewise discipline 
perception, as does access to different media for recording travel experiences.  In the spirit of Urry’s analysis of 
technological mediation, we can note that because contemporary tourists often travel with digital cameras that 
enable them to take voluminous amounts of pictures without worrying about financial costs (as was the case when 
analogue photographs had to be chemically processed to be seen), the very technology of representation encourages 
tourists to take up distinctive attitudes towards representation 
xv See Harry Collins and Robert Evans, Rethinking Expertise (University of Chicago Press, 2007). 
xvi See F. Allan Hanson, “The anachronism of moral individualism and the responsibility of extended agency,” 
Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, vol. 7 no. 3 (2008) pp. 415-424.  We acknowledge that many 
philosophers would not endorse the present appeal to “methodological individualism.”  Specifically, they would take 
issue with the claim that institutional structures are not always value-neutral, and that these structures sometimes are 
capable of exerting causal influence that inclines people to enact certain forms of behavior.  But as David Lyons—a 
philosopher who rejects the causal claim—notes, the decisive evidentiary standard is a well-grounded explanatory 
framework within social psychology supplemented by relevant data.  Lacking that framework, and finding the 
relevant data to subject to conflicting interpretations, Selinger affirms Hanson’s argument as the basis of his 
endorsement of this claim.    
xvii Jean-Paul Sartre, Being and Nothingness, tr. Hazel E. Barnes (New York: Washing Square Press, 1966). 
xviii We corrected the misspellings found in the original text. 
xix We made some minor formatting changes in the original text. 
xx See supra note iv. 
xxi See Weiner supra note vii. 
xxii This caveat about the dangers of elites representing marginalized people is a longstanding concern in postcolonial 
studies, and one of us has even written about it in the context of discussions of the Indian Dalit (Ray and Selinger 
2008). 

                                                                                                                                                             
xxiii Hartch, Gregory B., Wrong Turns: A Critique of the Supreme Court’s Right to Travel Cases, WM. MITCHELL L. 
REV. 21:457, 459 (1995). 
xxiv Roots, Roger I., The Orphaned Right: The Right to Travel by Automobile, 1890-1950, OKLA. CITY U.L. REV. 
30:245, 249 (2005) (citing Crandall v. Nevada, 73 U.S. (6 Wall.) 35 (1867)).  
xxv Roots, Roger I., The Orphaned Right: The Right to Travel by Automobile, 1890-1950, OKLA. CITY U.L. REV. 
30:245, 249 (2005).  
xxvi United States v. Guest, 383 U.S. 745, 757-58 (1966).  
xxvii We made small stylistic changes to this quote. 
xxviii Theodoros Kiros, “Franze Fanon,” A Companion to African Philosophy (Blackwell Publishing 2006) pp. 216-
217. 
xxix Theodoros Kiros, “Franze Fanon,” A Companion to African Philosophy (Blackwell Publishing 2006) p. 218. 
xxx To avoid any potential confusion, we would like to note that in appealing to this example, we are not taking any 
side in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.  Rather, we simply are claiming that if ethical criticism is being leveled at 
simulations of conflicts, they are missing the mark.  If the conflicts themselves are morally questionable, then so too 
are the simulations, but only because they perpetuate aspects of conflict, which is the proper subject of moral 
critique.  In other words, the moral problem lies in the conflict itself, not in the incorrect claim that the simulation 
(tour) demeans the brutality of warfare because it is a simulation (tour). 

