Psychon Bull Rev (2012) 19:647–653
DOI 10.3758/s13423-012-0245-7

BRIEF REPORT

Does media multitasking always hurt? A positive correlation
between multitasking and multisensory integration

Kelvin F. H. Lui & Alan C.-N. Wong

Published online: 12 April 2012
# Psychonomic Society, Inc. 2012

Abstract Heavy media multitaskers have been found to per-
form poorly in certain cognitive tasks involving task switch-
ing, selective attention, and working memory. An account for
this is that with a breadth-biased style of cognitive control,
multitaskers tend to pay attention to various information
available in the environment, without sufficient focus on the
information most relevant to the task at hand. This cognitive
style, however, may not cause a general deficit in all kinds of
tasks. We tested the hypothesis that heavy media multitaskers
would perform better in a multisensory integration task than
would others, due to their extensive experience in integrating
information from different modalities. Sixty-three participants
filled out a questionnaire about their media usage and com-
pleted a visual search task with and without synchronous
tones (pip-and-pop paradigm). It was found that a higher
degree of media multitasking was correlated with better mul-
tisensory integration. The fact that heavy media multitaskers
are not deficient in all kinds of cognitive tasks suggests that
media multitasking does not always hurt.

Keywords Attention . Media multitasking

Introduction

Humans often engage in multitasking—that is, performing
more than one task simultaneously or in rapid alternation.
We can effortlessly talk to each other while walking and watch
television while eating. Certain multitasking situations are
K. F. H. Lui (*) : A. C.-N. Wong
Department of Psychology,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
362A Sino Building,
Shatin, NT, Hong Kong
e-mail: f2a8kelvin@yahoo.com.hk

more challenging because the tasks involved are more difficult
or they concurrently engage overlapping processes and, thus,
interfere with each other more. Talking on cell phones while
driving is a good example (e.g., Nunes & Recarte, 2002;
Strayer & Johnston, 2001). Sometimes, such difficulties can
have serious consequences.

One way that modern technology has transformed human
living styles is through the invention and popularization of
various media of communication and interaction, including
radio, television, telephone and text messaging, video games,
computers, and the Internet. Media multitasking has thus
grown into a popular phenomenon and even a way of life,
especially among young people (Roberts, Foehr, & Rideout,
2005). The high accessibility of computers, in particular, has
cultivated obsessive multitasking, due to the ease of switching
between instant messaging, music, Web surfing, e-mail,
online videos, computer-based games, computer-based appli-
cations, and so forth (Foehr, 2006).

The immediate effects of media multitasking on one’s
memory, learning, and other cognitive functions have been a
focus of recent research. It was found that watching TV while
doing homework decreased participants’ performance on the
recognition of TV content (Zhang, Jeong, & Fishbein,
2010). Besides, Furnham and Bradley (1997) found detrimen-
tal effects of background music on participants’ performance in
various cognitive tasks. Armstrong and Chung (2000) showed
a negative effect of background television during science article
reading on subsequent recall and recognition. Similarly, reading
and watching video simultaneously impaired participants’ per-
formance on the reading task (Lin, Robertson, & Lee, 2009).
Moreover, Hembrooke and Gay (2003) found that opening
laptops and engaging in media multitasking behaviors during
a lecture impaired students’ memory for lecture contents.

Research also has examined the chronic effects of media
multitasking. Kirschner and Karpinski (2010) found that heavy

648

Psychon Bull Rev (2012) 19:647–653

Facebook users reported having lower grade point averages
(GPAs) and suggested the possible deleterious effect of simul-
taneously using Facebook with other activities. Besides, the
amount of time spent on instant messaging was found to be
negatively correlated both with cognitive performance in lab
tasks and with GPA (Fox, Rosen, & Crawford, 2009). While
these two studies assumed that Facebook usage and instant
messaging often co-occur with other activities and, thus, rep-
resent multimedia usage, they did not, however, exclude the
simpler possibility that Facebook usage and instant messaging
simply occupy the time that could be used for studying.

A recent large-scale study (Ophir, Nass, & Wagner, 2009)
compared the way in which heavy media multitaskers process
information differently from those who do not. Participants
completed a self-report questionnaire in their study to indicate
their level of media multitasking. It was found that heavy
media multitaskers performed worse than light media multi-
taskers in several cognitive tasks that involved working mem-
ory, selective attention to task-relevant information in visual
search, and surprisingly, task switching. It was suggested that
heavy media multitaskers have developed the habit of simul-
taneously consuming information from multiple media and,
thus, “breadth-biased cognitive control.” As a result, heavy
media multitaskers could not precisely differentiate between
important information and distractors. They readily spread
their attention to different sources of information regardless
of whether they were relevant to the primary task at hand. This
is why they were inferior to light media multitaskers in tasks
that required one to disregard irrelevant information in the
environment and in memory.

An intriguing possibility, however, is that their breadth-
biased cognitive control will lead to better performance if a
task contains some unexpected information that is important
to the task at hand. When a media multitasker reads, for
example, he or she may more readily detect an SMS ringtone
from a mobile phone, although the ringtone does not carry
information useful for the primary task of reading. In fact,
situations like that may actually be more representative of
what happens in real life (Lin, 2009).

In this study, our aim was to measure the potential dif-
ference between high and low media multitaskers in this
tendency to capture information from seemingly irrelevant
sources. Specifically, we accessed how much one can inte-
grate visual and auditory information automatically, using a
visual search task in the pip-and-pop paradigm (Van der
Burg, Olivers, Bronkhorst, & Theeuwes, 2008). In this
paradigm, participants made speeded responses to indicate
which of a horizontal or vertical line segment was present
among a number of oblique line segments of various orienta-
tions. Both target and distractor lines in the display changed
color between red and green continuously. Participants per-
formed the same search task on both tone-absent (baseline)
and tone-present trials, but only in tone-present trials was each

target color change accompanied by a short auditory tone
(the pip). Although the tone did not contain any information
about the target color, location, or orientation, its synchrony
did make the target pop out from the cluttered display, leading
to better performance in the tone-present than in the tone-
absent condition. Interestingly, as was shown in Van der Burg
et al., this pip-and-pop effect is largely bottom-up and auto-
matic, occurring even when the pip is rather uninformative
(i.e., synchronous with the target only 20% of the time). These
features render the pip-and-pop effect a good tool for investi-
gating the association between media multitasking experience
and one’s tendency to automatically attend to and integrate
seemingly task-irrelevant, unexpected sources of information.

Method

Participants

Sixty-three participants (34 females), from 19 to 28 years of
age, participated in the experiment, with monetary compensa-
tion. All had normal hearing and normal or corrected vision.

Apparatus

A media multitasking questionnaire identical to the one in
Ophir et al. (2009) was introduced to all participants. Part
one asks about the number of hours one spends each week in
using 11 primary media, including print media, television,
computer-based video, music, nonmusic audio, video or com-
puter games, telephone and mobile phone voice calls, instant
messaging, text messaging, e-mail, Web surfing, and other
computer-based applications. Part two requires the participant
to fill in a media multitasking matrix with the number 0, 1, 2, or
3 to indicate how often one uses each of the other media at the
same time with a primary medium. A formula was used to
calculate, for each participant, a media multitasking index that
indicated the mean number of media the participant was
engaged in concurrently. For details of the media multitasking
index formula, please refer to Ophir et al.

A personal computer with E-Prime version 1.2 and a head-
phone were used to run the visual search task. The program
was modified from the one used in Van der Burg et al.’s (2008)
Experiment 1, with a few changes made to the set size and
number of trials.

Procedure

All participants first filled out the media use questionnaire and
then completed the search task. They were seated approxi-
mately 80 cm away from the screen and wore headphones
during the search task. Each trial began with a fixation dot
presented at the center of the screen that lasted for 1,000 ms,

Psychon Bull Rev (2012) 19:647–653

649

followed by a target line and 47 distractor lines. Participants
were asked to fixate on the dot during their search for the
target (a horizontal or a vertical line segment). Figure 1
shows an example of the visual display used in this study.
The 48 line segments were in various orientations and
changed color between red and green at random intervals
varied among 50, 100, and 150 ms. The target also changed
its color, at an average frequency of 1.11 Hz, but the change
was asynchronous to other line segments, which meant that
the other line segments never changed their colors at the
same time as the target. Participants were asked to press the
“m” or “z” button as quickly and accurately as possible to
indicate whether a horizontal or a vertical target, respec-
tively, had been presented.

There were four blocks of 30 trials each, with the first and
third being tone-absent blocks in which no sound was pre-
sented. The second and final blocks were tone-present
blocks in which each target color change was accompanied
by a short auditory pip without time lag. The pip contained
no information about the visual target’s location or orienta-
tion but indicated the change instant of the target line seg-
ment. Participants were not informed of the meaning of the
tone and were not told to attend to the tone. Feedback about
their overall mean accuracy and reaction time (RT) was pro-
vided after each block. Two short practice blocks of 10 trials
each, including one tone-absent block and one tone-present
block, were introduced at the beginning of the task.

Results

The distribution of the media multitasking index (MMI) is
shown in Fig. 2. The mean MMI was 3.82, while its standard
deviation was 1.54.

For the search task, trials with an RT three standard devia-
tions over the mean for each participant were excluded for

Fig. 1 An example of the visual search display used in the present study

analysis. Also, the data for 3 participants were discarded
because their overall accuracies were more than three standard
deviations below the mean for the other participants. In cal-
culating the mean RT, only trials with correct responses were
included. The mean RTs and accuracy in the tone-absent and
tone-present conditions are shown in Fig. 3. Consistent with
Van der Burg et al.’s (2008) findings, performance was better
in the tone-present than in the tone-absent condition, with
shorter RTs, t(59) 0 4.695, p < .001, and higher accuracy,
t(59) 0 −1.929, p 0 .059.

We also examined the relationship between the degree of
media multitasking, as indicated by the MMI, and multisen-
sory integration performance, as indicated by the facilitation
of the tone in the visual task in terms of RT [(RT_no-tone −
RT_tone)/RT_no-tone] and accuracy [(AC_tone − AC_no-
tone)/AC_no-tone]. Pearson product correlation analyses
were conducted between the two measures, with three out-
liers excluded in RT analysis and one in accuracy analysis
due to a deviation of over three standard deviations away
from the average for all participants. A positive correlation
was found between the MMI and multisensory integration
index in terms of accuracy, r(57) 0 .292, p < .05 (Fig. 4a).
The correlation was not significant for RT, r(55) 0 −.091,
p 0 .50. Overall, participants with a stronger media multi-
tasking habit did show a larger multisensory integration
effect as shown in the pip-and-pop paradigm. It should be
noted that the overall media consumption hours was not
correlated with the multisensory integration index in terms of
accuracy, r(57) 0 −.042, p 0 .751, and RT, r(55) 0 .017, p 0 .898.
Apart from the correlation analyses, we further tested
whether there was a difference in the multisensory integration
effect between extreme groups of media multitaskers. Partic-
ipants whose media multitasking index was one standard
deviation or more above the mean were regarded as heavy
media multitaskers, while those with an index one standard
deviation or more below the mean were regarded as light
media multitaskers. Results were consistent with the correla-
tion analyses (Fig. 4b), with heavy media multitaskers (N 0
10, M 0 3.86%) having a larger multisensory integration effect
in terms of accuracy than did light media multitaskers (N 0 9,
M 0 −0.21%), t(17) 0 2.132, p < .05. No group difference was
found in terms of the improvement of RT (heavy vs. light
media multitasks, 21.25% vs. 23.22%, t < 1).

Since the multisensory integration index was calculated
by dividing the difference in performance between the tone-
present and tone-absent conditions by the baseline perfor-
mance in the tone-absent condition, one might question
whether the difference in baseline performance between
heavy media multitaskers and light media multitaskers was
the primary cause of the present finding. Although it was
found that the heavy media multitaskers tended to be less
accurate in the tone-absent condition than the light media
multitaskers, r(57) 0 −.369, p < .01 (Fig. 5a), such a base

650

Fig. 2 Distribution of the
media multitasking
index (MMI) among
participants

Psychon Bull Rev (2012) 19:647–653

rate difference was unlikely to have been the cause of their
larger percentage of improvement across the conditions.
When the multisensory integration index was calculated
without dividing by the baseline performance, similar results
were obtained, both in terms of the positive correlation be-
tween the MMI and the multisensory integration index in
accuracy, r(57) 0 .284, p < .05, and in terms of the larger
multisensory integration effect for the heavy media multi-
taskers in the between-group analyses, t(17) 0 2.123, p < .05.

Participants’ average accuracy in the tone-absent condition
was quite high (>95%); as a result, ceiling effect could be a
concern in the present study. Figure 5a–c shows the original
correlation between participants’ MMI and their accuracy in the
tone-absent condition, in the tone-present condition, and on the
multisensory integration index, respectively. In the tone-absent
condition (Fig. 5a), heavy media multitaskers performed signif-
icantly worse than light media multitaskers in the visual search
task, while in the tone-present condition (Fig. 5b), such a

Fig. 3 Participants’ mean
reaction times and accuracy
in the pip-and-pop task. Error
bars indicate standard errors
of the means

Psychon Bull Rev (2012) 19:647–653

Fig. 4 a Scatterplot between
the multisensory integration
index for accuracy and
the media multitasking index. b
Multisensory integration
indices for light and heavy
media multitaskers. Error bars
indicate standard errors
of the means

651

difference disappeared. It appears that heavy media multi-
taskers’ poorer performance in the tone-absent condition was
compensated for by their better multisensory integration per-
formance (Fig. 5c). One may argue that, since the light media
multitaskers performed better in the tone-absent condition,
they might have suffered more from the ceiling effect and,
hence, had little room to improve with the presence of a
tone.

In order to test whether the ceiling effect was the primary
cause of the present finding, we excluded data from participants
(N 0 43) whose accuracy was 95% or above in the tone-absent
condition and conducted the correlation analyses again. If the
ceiling performance for low media multitaskers was really the
driving force of the effect, the positive correlation would be
eliminated. Figure 5d–f shows the results after excluding data

from the participants whose accuracy was 95% or above in the
tone-absent condition. The overall pattern of results was similar,
with heavy media multitaskers performing worse only in the
tone-absent condition, but not in the tone-present condition, and
there was a trend toward a positive correlation between the
MMI and multitasking integration index. Although the trend
did not reach significance, this was mainly due to the small
sample size (16). Therefore, we believe that the ceiling effect
was not the primary cause of the present finding.

Discussion

Research so far has revealed the detrimental aspects of
media multitasking, demonstrating impairments in different

Psychon Bull Rev (2012) 19:647–653

652

Fig. 5 Scatterplots between
participants’ media
multitasking index and their
performance in terms of
accuracy in the tone-absent
condition, the tone-present
condition, and the overall
pip-and-pop task (multisensory
integration index), before
(a, b, c) and after (d, e, f) 43
participants whose accuracy
was 95% or above in the
tone-absent condition were
excluded

cognitive tasks in laboratories and real-world settings. This
is certainly bad news for the younger generation, which
embraces this multitasking lifestyle. The average MMI in
the present study was 3.82, meaning that an average under-
graduate may receive information from almost four media at
the same time. However, while their breadth-biased process-
ing style may have weakened their ability to focus on
information relevant to the task on hand, it may actually
be beneficial in certain situations. While, in many laboratory
tasks,
information is often well
defined, in reality, unexpected environmental stimuli may
carry important information, which may be better captured
by individuals biased toward receiving information from many
different channels, rather than processing information deeply
from a single channel.

the source of relevant

The pip-and-pop paradigm used in the presenst study
represents an attempt to mimic such real-world circumstan-
ces. Observers in this visual search task do not need to
attend to the tones, since they are not informed of their
importance in the instructions; in fact, the tones carry no
information about the location, color, or orientation of the
target but simply synchronize with its color changes. Yet
one typically finds it easier to find the target when the tones
are present, since the tones apparently are integrated with
the visual target, causing the latter to pop out from the busy
display. In the present study, heavy media multitaskers
performed worse than light media multitaskers in the visual
search task without the presence of a tone. This is consistent
with the understanding that they had a bias toward breadth
in their cognitive control, leading to higher difficulty in

Psychon Bull Rev (2012) 19:647–653

653

handling the 47 distractor line segments in the display while
searching for the target. Their breadth bias, however, may
have made it easier for them to utilize the unexpected
auditory signal in the tone-present condition, leading to a
large improvement in the presence of a tone.

One may argue that multisensory experience is not re-
stricted to multimedia experience. Some media, such as
television and the computer, offer large amounts of visual
and auditory information, and one may expect improvement
in multisensory integration performance as a function of
experience with a single medium. It should be noted, how-
ever, that the visual and auditory information from a single
medium are usually correlated (e.g., the lip movement and
the speech from a character in a TV show). Information from
different media (e.g., the magazine one is reading and the
alert tone from a Web messenger software) usually serve
different purposes and are, thus, much less often correlated.
The present study focused on this aspect of multisensory
integration, where one is engaged with a primary task and
does not expect or even know of the utility of information
coming from another channel. Future research will tell
whether media multitasking experience is also associated
with the ability to integrate multisensory information that is
clearly relevant to the task at hand.

The use of a questionnaire to measure media multitasking
is limited for a number of reasons. First, self-reports may not
be an objective and accurate measure (e.g., Greenberg et al.,
2005; Podsakoff & Organ, 1986). Second, the questionnaire
was concerned only with an overall quantitative measure of
the extent of media multitasking, but not with more detailed
measures of the different aspects involved, including the ac-
tive effort involved, the overlap of task demands, the number
of task switches, and so forth. A single number does not
capture the potentially different types of media multitasking
either. Playing background music while playing computer
games, for example, may be very different from reading a
textbook while searching for information on the Internet.

Although the correlation between media multitasking and
multisensory integration is intriguing and we believe that
media multitasking is the cause of the better multisensory
integration performance, the present finding did not imply
any causal relationships. Further studies may build on this
finding and examine the effects of training regimens involving
different types and the extent of media multitasking experi-
ence. In any case, though, the present study has highlighted an
interesting possibility of the effect of media multitasking and
the sensitivity of the pip-and-pop paradigm to individual
differences in multisensory integration. We should consider
more the possibility that multitasking may not always hurt.

Acknowledgments The authors wish to thank Dr. Erik Van der Burg
for providing us with the pip-and-pop paradigm. We also thank Crystal
Yuen for her assistance in data collection.

References

Armstrong, G. B., & Chung, L. (2000). Background television and reading
memory in context: Assessing TV interference and facilitative con-
text effects on encoding versus retrieval processes. Communication
Research, 27, 327–352.

Foehr, U. G. (2006). Media multitasking among American youth:
Prevalence, predictors and pairings. Menlo Park, CA: Kaiser
Family Foundation.

Fox, A. B., Rosen, J., & Crawford, M. (2009). Distractions, distractions:
Does instant messaging affect college students’ performance on a
concurrent reading comprehension task? Cyberpsychology and
Behavior, 12, 51–53.

Furnham, A., & Bradley, A. (1997). Music while you work: The
differential distraction of background music on the cognitive
test performance of introverts and extraverts. Applied Cognitive
Psychology, 11, 445–455.

Greenberg, B. S., Eastin, M. S., Skalski, P., Cooper, L., Levy, M., &
Lachlan, K. (2005). Comparing survey and diary measures of
Internet and traditional media use. Communication Reports, 18,
1–8.

Hembrooke, H., & Gay, G. (2003). The laptop and the lecture: The effects
of multitasking in learning environments. Journal of Computing in
Higher Education, 15, 46–64.

Kirschner, P. A., & Karpinski, A. C.

(2010). Facebook and
academic performance. Computers in Human Behavior, 26,
1237–1245.

Lin, L. (2009). Breadth-biased versus focused cognitive control in media
multitasking behaviors. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 106, 15521–15522.

Lin, L., Robertson, T., & Lee, J. (2009). Reading performances between
novices and experts in different media multitasking environments.
Computers in the School, 26, 169–186.

Nunes, L. M., & Recarte, M. A. (2002). Cognitive demands of hands-
free-phone conversation while driving. Transportation Research,
5, 133–144.

Ophir, E., Nass, C., & Wagner, A. D. (2009). Cognitive control in
media multitaskers. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 106, 15583–15587.

Podsakoff, P. M., & Organ, D. W. (1986). Self-reports in organizational
research: Problems and prospects. Journal of Management, 12, 531–544.
Roberts, D. F., Foehr, U. G., & Rideout, V. (2005). Generation M:
Media in the lives of 8–18 year-olds. Washington, DC: Henry J.
Kaiser Family Foundation.

Strayer, D. L., & Johnston, W. A. (2001). Driven to distraction: Dual-task
studies of simulated driving and conversing on a cellular telephone.
Psychological Science, 12, 462–466.

Van der Burg, E., Olivers, C. N., Bronkhorst, A. W., & Theeuwes, J.
(2008). Pip and pop: Nonspatial auditory signals improve spatial
visual search. Journal of Experimental Psychology. Human Percep-
tion and Performance, 34, 1053–1065.

Zhang, W., Jeong, S., & Fishbein, M. (2010). Situational factors
competing for attention: The interaction effect of multitasking
and sexually explicit content on TV recognition. Journal of Media
Psychology, 22, 2–13.

