 

 

THE DEVELOPMENT OF ASYLUM POLICY IN BRAZIL: AN ANALYSIS OF 

NGO PARTICIPATION 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Master Thesis in the Master Program 

International Migration and Intercultural Relations (IMIB): 

Erasmus Mundus Master in International Migration  

and Social Cohesion (MISOCO) 

 
 
 
 

By 

 

Camila Fonseca Mathias 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Supervisors: 

 

Prof. Dr. Ulrich Schneckener (University of Osnabrück) 

 

Assist. Prof. Dr. Sébastien Chauvin (University of Amsterdam) 

Assist. Prof. Joana Abrisketa Uriarte (University of Deusto) 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Date of Submission: 02 May 2013 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

To Tia Lalá, com saudade. 

 

Preface 

 

This  thesis  represents  the  end  of  another  important  cycle.  Not  only  a  cycle  of 

intense  academic  learning,  but,  above  all,  of  rich  life  experiences.  The  past  two  years 

have  been  nothing  short  of  a  rollercoaster  ride.  Different  countries,  different  faces, 

different languages, different emotions. And I guess it is safe to say that this ride would 

not  have been the same  without the encouragement  of some very special people  I met 

along the way. 

 

First, I would like to thank those that never let the distance become an issue. My 

parents, for the unconditional love and daily motivational talks through Skype. Bobi, for 

simply  being  the  best  brother  anyone  can  have.  And  my  friends,  for  the  laughs, 

memories, comforting hugs, and inspiration.  

 

To my fellow MISOCOs, who shared with me every moment of this experience, 

I  would  like  to  say  thanks  for  making  it  an  unforgettable  one.  To  Emilie,  Laura,  and 

Petra, for organizing every little detail and always greeting us with a smile.   

My gratitude also goes to all of those that assisted me during the writing process. 

Cyntia and Daniel, for the valuable comments on the draft versions of this text. Prof. Dr. 

Andreas  Pott,  Christine  Lang  and  Mert  Peksen,  for  the  exchange  of  ideas  in  our 

colloquiums. And to my academic supervisors, Prof. Dr. Ulrich Schneckener, Prof. Dr. 

Sébastien Chauvin and Prof. Dr. Joana Abrisketa, for the continuous support, guidance 

and constructive criticism. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

“It was when I realized I had a new nationality: I was in exile. 

I am an adulterous resident:  

When I am in one city, I am dreaming of the other. 

I am an exile; citizen of the country of longing” 

(Suketu Mehta) 

 

 

Abstract 

This  research  focuses  on  the  participation  of  non-governmental  organizations  (NGOs) 

in the development of asylum policy in Brazil.  The topic is contextualized in regards to 

the broader theoretical literature on governance, which discusses how governing styles 

have  transformed  to  include  non-state  actors  and  provides  tools  to  analyze  the 

opportunities  and  constraints  to  their  engagement  in  policy-making  processes.  The 

thesis  presents  an overview of the historical  events  leading to  the establishment of the 

Brazilian  legislation  on  asylum,  followed  by  a  more  in-depth  analysis  of  the 

participation of NGOs in two different dimensions of the policy: intake, or the refugee 

eligibility  procedures,  and  integration,  in  the  form  of  direct  assistance  services.  By 

pointing  to  the  strategies  and  means  of  political  access  made  available  to  NGOs  at 

different stages of the process and at different levels of the governmental structure, the 

study  seeks  to  understand  the  functioning  of  Brazilian  asylum  policy  arrangements  in 

relation to the broader socio-political and institutional environment.       

 

 

 

 

Table of Contents 

1 

Introduction ............................................................................................................... 1 

2  NGOs in the Context of Governance Processes: A Theoretical Framework ............ 9 

2.1  The Role of NGOs ........................................................................................... 15 

2.2  Policy Engagement: Strategies and Access ..................................................... 18 

2.3  Contextualizing Participation: A Set of Factors .............................................. 23 

2.3.1  Political and institutional setting .............................................................. 24 

2.3.2  Issue or policy in question ........................................................................ 25 

2.3.3  Organizational characteristics................................................................... 26 

3  The Development of Asylum Policy in Brazil ........................................................ 28 

3.1  Historical Background ..................................................................................... 28 

3.2  The Elaboration of the National Legislation on Refugees ............................... 34 

3.3  The Central Aspects of the National Legislation ............................................. 38 

3.4  Basic Data on Refugees in Brazil .................................................................... 41 

4  Analyzing the Role of NGOs within Brazilian Asylum Policy .............................. 44 

4.1  Participating in Eligibility Decisions: Refugee Status Determination ............. 45 

4.2  Participating in the Integration Process: Partnerships and Policies ................. 49 

4.2.1  Engagement at the national level .............................................................. 53 

4.2.2  Engagement at the local level ................................................................... 56 

4.3  Networks and Governance: Building a Common Voice ................................. 58 

5  Conclusion ............................................................................................................... 62 

6  References ............................................................................................................... 67 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1 

Introduction 

Migration  and  asylum  policies  constitute  a  relatively  recent  topic  in  academic 

research.  This  growing  academic  attention  was  the  result  of  the  diversification  of 

migration  flows  themselves.  Although  migration  is  not  a  recent  phenomenon,  the 

improvement  of  communication  and  transport  technologies  and  the  crescent  economic 

interconnectedness  between  different  parts  of  the  world,  especially  in  the  last  few 

decades,  have  transformed  its  shape  and  scope.  As  migration  increased,  nation-states 

grew more concerned with the management of population flows, creating new policies 

to  regulate  the  conditions  of  entry,  residence,  access  to  citizenship  and  integration  of 

newcomers.  

 

In the light of the magnitude and the diversity of these movements, scholars had 

a wide array of subjects to analyze: the volume, direction and composition of flows; the 

motivations to flee; the formation of social networks; the strategies of incorporation in 

the  country  of  destination,  among  many  others.  In  regards  to  policymaking,  scholarly 

research  investigates  the  content  of  migration,  citizenship  and  asylum  policies  (with 

assimilative or multicultural inclinations, for example), but might also focus on the very 

process of their formulation, deliberation and implementation. This body of work adopts 

a broader approach, taking into consideration the institutional and political backgrounds 

in  which  policies  are  developed.  That  is,  accounting  for  the  specific  power  relations, 

conflicts and actor interactions that bear an influence on the operationalization of social 

into policy issues. 

 

According  to  Zincone  and  Caponio  (2004),  studies  that  emphasize  the  policy-

making aspect of migration can be categorized as a “fourth generation research topic” in 

the field:  

 

1 

First  generation  studies  were  essentially  concerned  with  the  demographic 

composition and evolution of migration flows into and immigrant stocks within 

European  countries.  Second  generation  research  has  focused  primarily  on 

immigrants’  economic  integration  and  their  social  behaviors.  The  third 

generation has dealt mainly with integration policies and political participation. 

Lastly,  the  fourth  generation  has  tackled  the  problem  of  understanding  how 

immigrant  and immigration policies are decided upon and carried out  (Zincone 

& Caponio, 2004, p.2).  

 

In  reality,  of  course,  the  authors  point  out  that  these  research  stages  have 

developed  at  different  paces  in  each  country,  according  to  their  particular  academic 

traditions  and  to  the  very  own  political  and  social  characteristics  of  migration  and 

migration  policy-making,  which,  in  different  contexts,  leads  to  the  visibility  of  certain 

specific issues in detriment of others (Zincone & Caponio, 2004). 

It is exactly with this “fourth generation” group of studies that this master thesis 

aims to contribute. More specifically, it tries to shed light on migration policy-making 

processes  through  the  broader  analytical  lenses  of  multi-level  governance.  The  term 

multi-level  governance  is  used  here  to  refer  to  an  increasing  political  trend  of 

transformation in the means of governing, that shifts upwards and downwards to include 

multiple  instances  and  actors  in  policy  decision  and  implementation.  These  shifts 

include  not  only  several  levels  of  government,  from  the  local  to  the  international 

spheres,  but  also  horizontal  exchanges  between  informal  and  formal  arenas,  between 

civil society actors and public institutions (Zincone & Caponio, 2004, p.7).      

In  this  analytical  context,  the  participation  of  non-governmental  organizations 

(NGOs) in the policy-making process is a significant point in focus. Not only have these 

organizations  grown  in  number  since  the  1980s,  but  they  have  also  developed  into 

 

2 

relevant  actors  with  an  often  strong  voice  in  agenda  setting  at  both  national  and 

international  levels.  In  several  countries  –  such  as  Germany,  Italy,  Switzerland,  the 

United Kingdom and Spain (Zincone, Penninx & Borkert, 2011), for example  – NGOs 

had  a  decisive  role  in  the  inclusion  of  migration  and  asylum  issues  in  the  political 

agenda  and  have  gradually  been  granted  an  important  role  in  the  delivery  of  various 

services  to  migrants  and  refugees.  It  is  in  this  framework  of  politically  and 

institutionally  embedded  policy  processes,  that  this  thesis  will  approach  the  case  of 

NGOs active in asylum policy in Brazil. 

The  establishment  of  multi-level  governance  arrangements  in  Brazil,  as  with 

many  other  countries  in  Latin  America,  is  strongly  connected  to  the  period  of 

democratic transition, during the 1980s (Brinkerhoff, 1999a). NGOs, which fulfilled an 

important  contestation  role  during  the  years  of  the  dictatorial  regime,  were  gradually 

given  the  room  to  express  their  voices  and  were  also  invited  to  contribute  to  the 

redemocratization process, operating “both independently and in collaboration with the 

state” (Brinkerhoff, 1999a, p.60).  

In the spirit of these collaborative efforts, the Brazilian government approved, in 

1997, Law 9.474/97, also known as the Refugee Act, through which a set of articulated 

legal procedures for the admissibility and integration of refugees in the national territory 

was officially adopted.  Law 9.474/97 was responsible for the creation of the Brazilian 

National  Committee for Refugees (Comitê Nacional  para Refugiados  – CONARE), an 

inter-ministerial  body  that  coordinates  and  promotes  refugee-related  policies  in  the 

country (Nogueira & Marques, 2008). The main particularity of CONARE is that it was 

structured as a tripartite entity, in which the implementation of asylum policy is carried 

out in a partnership between government representatives, civil society – through NGOs 

 

3 

involved  specifically  with  the  issue  –  and  the  United  Nations  High  Commissioner  for 

Refugees (UNHCR).  

Taking  this  specificity  into  account,  and  combining  it  with  the  broader 

theoretical perspective on the inclusion of non-state actors – and particularly NGOs – in 

the processes of governance, it is  possible to  define the main research interests of this 

thesis through three different, but interrelated, questions: 

1.  To  what  extent  are  NGOs  involved  in  the  development  of  refugee  policy  in 

Brazil? 

2.  Why are these NGOs included, in the first place? 

3.  What strategies do they use to participate? 

It has already been pointed out that civil society, through NGO representatives, 

has  been  given  a  recognized  space  in  the  formal  structure  of  the  Brazilian  National 

Committee for Refugees (CONARE), but what this inclusion actually means remains to 

be discussed. More specifically, how does this tripartite model function? What are the 

policy  inputs  that  NGOs  can  give  in  its  context  and  what  are  the  responses  and 

challenges they are faced with? 

With the purpose of producing a comprehensive and contextually articulated set 

of data to answer to the proposed questions, the empirical research relied primarily on 

two  qualitative  methods:  document  analysis  and  semi-structured  expert  interviews. 

Document analysis followed the previous stage of literature review, and encompassed a 

range  of  sources  –  legislation,  reports,  correspondence,  brochures  and  other  types  of 

material produced or collected by involved NGOs, including their websites.  

The interviews – conducted in the months of September 2012 and February and 

March  2013,  either  in  person  or  through  electronic  means  (Skype  and  additional 

contacts  by  e-mail)  –  complemented  the  data  obtained  through  document  analysis,  by 

 

4 

providing  a  more  detailed  insight  into  the  involvement  of  the  core  actors  in  the 

protection and assistance of refugees in Brazil. They were thought out to have a flexible 

structure, with the definition of some questions or issues to serve as a guideline, but also 

allowing for the conversation to flow and for new and unexpected topics to emerge from 

the  interviewees  own  narrative.  Central  issues  addressed  included  the  trajectory  of 

participation (in a more historical sense), involvement at different levels of government, 

establishment  of  partnerships,  type  of  activities  developed  by  the  organizations,  and 

personal perspective/evaluation of the tripartite model.  

In  regards  to  the  respondents,  contacts  were  arranged  with  representatives  of 

UNHCR and of NGOs. Unfortunately, it was not possible to meet with a governmental 

representative  of  CONARE.  During  the  period  of  the  fieldwork,  the  Committee  was 

holding  its  plenary  sessions,  which  restricted  availability  for  interviews.  In  regards  to 

the NGOs, I tried to reach organizations with diverse characteristics, in terms of scope 

(at  local,  regional  or  national  levels),  of  access  to  formal  decision-making  structures, 

and  of  engagement  activities  –  which  could  be  more  related  to  service  delivery, 

education and/or advocacy. The organizations contacted were:   

1.  Migration and Human Rights Institute (Instituto Migrações e Direitos Humanos 

–  IMDH):  founded  in  1999,  the  institute  is  associated  to  the  Congregation  of 

Scalabrinian  Missionary  Sisters,  and  provides  assistance  to  migrants  and 

refugees, with a focus on social integration and public policy. 

2.  Cáritas  Arquidiocesana  of  São  Paulo  (CASP):  organization  linked  to  the 

Catholic Church which coordinates the Center for Refugee Reception in the city 

of São Paulo and has been working in partnership with UNHCR since the end of 

the 1970s.  

 

5 

3.  Institute  for  the  Reintegration  of  Refugees  (Instituto  de  Reintegração  do 

Refugiado  –  Adus):  founded  in  2010,  works  towards  integration,  through 

partnerships  with  other  private  actors,  and  develops  projects  directed  at  the 

education of the general public. 

4.  Casa do Migrante: a  reception house for internal and international  migrants,  as 

well as refugees, which opened in 1978. It is part of a broader religious project, 

Missão Paz, also associated to the Scalabrinian Missionaries, which coordinates 

a  Center  for  Migration  Studies  since  1969  and  a  Pastoral  Center  for  Migrants 

since 1977.  

This  list  is,  needless  to  say,  far  from  being  exhaustive.  There  are  a  number  of 

other organizations with a significant role in refugee assistance in Brazil, being Cáritas 

Arquidiocesana of Rio de Janeiro (CARJ), the most evident omission. Time constraints 

and  the  geographical  dispersion  of  the  organizations  in  different  Brazilian  cities  were 

the main factors that played against the establishment of personal communications with 

more NGOs. This does not mean, however, that they were disregarded in this research, 

since  their  participation  was  also  contemplated  through  the  literature  review  and 

document analysis. 

Still  in  regards  to  the  interviews,  I  deem  important  to  mention  another 

complication encountered in the field. Most of the interviewees expressed a preference 

for  not  being  recorded.  In  this  sense,  the  interviews  took  the  shape  of  very  informal 

conversations  –  sometimes  more  critical,  sometimes  more  rhetorical  –  in  which  they 

shared  some  of  their  experiences  working  in  the  field  while  I  took  notes.  Given  these 

circumstances, I have opted, in this thesis, to present the data collected through a more 

indirect  speech,  in  which  the  issues  discussed  during  the  interviews  are  incorporated 

into the broader narrative of the text.  A few direct  mentions will be made and will be 

 

6 

signaled  as  (personal  communication,  date).  Even  though  not  ideal,  this  seemed  to  be 

the  most  appropriate  solution  for  the  presentation  of  the  case,  considering  the 

constraints that the fieldwork circumstances proposed.   

 

Last, but not least,  I would like to add a few words on the choice of this topic. 

Even  though  this  thesis  focuses  on  a  broader  issue  –  the  development  of  policies  in  a 

governance  context  that  includes  several  levels  and  actors  –  that  has  been  extensively 

debated by political science literature, it remains as a relatively under researched subject 

in  migration  studies,  as  it  has  been  previously  noted.  Moreover,  the  few  academic 

studies developed in  this  particular  field  have, to a large extent,  either  concentrated in 

the  analysis  of  migration  and  asylum  policies  in  European  and  North  American 

countries,  or  discussed  the  possibilities  for  global  governance  arrangements,  with  the 

formulation of an international migration regime. In this sense, the present text aims to 

bring  new  contributions  to  the  debate  with  its  specific  choice  of  case-study,  which 

emphasizes the making of asylum policy in the context of an emerging country, with its 

particular history of social, political and democratic developments.  

It is important to give room to new studies that reflect on the specific experience 

of countries that, like Brazil, have just recently began to receive a more expressive and 

continuous flow of asylum seekers and, as a result of that, incorporated the issue in the 

public agenda. Understanding how the policy came into being, as well as the role of the 

actors involved, in a context that, in many aspects, differs from that of the Global North 

(keeping in mind the vagueness of these definitions), can provide the literature with new 

insights and make a contribution in terms of the widening of analytical perspectives and 

diversification of cases studied. 

In  the  next  chapters  I  will  attempt  to  answer  to  the  questions  and  fulfill  the 

objectives here presented. The thesis is structured as follows: in the first chapter, I will 

 

7 

present  a  brief  literature  review  discussing  the  concept  of  governance  and  the 

participation  of  NGOs  in  policy-making  processes.  The  focus  is  on  showing  how  the 

idea of governing has transformed over the past few decades, with the inclusion of non-

state actors in new governance arrangements and with the perception that social issues 

can  be  more  effectively  addressed  in  cooperation  between  different  sets  of  actors,  at 

different levels. The two following chapters will concentrate on the specific case-study, 

drawing  from  the  data  collected  through  the  literature  review,  document  analysis  and 

interviews.  In  particular,  the  second  chapter  presents  a  historical  background  on  the 

development of the Brazilian Refugee Act, emphasizing the role played by NGOs, both 

in the inclusion of the topic in the public agenda and on the interactions established with 

government  authorities  in  an  attempt  to  contribute  to  the  elaboration  of  the  bill.  The 

third  chapter,  on  its  turn,  will  focus  on  the  participation  of  NGOs,  once  the  national 

legislation on asylum had been established. It will approach this participation in regards 

to  two  aspects  of  the  asylum  policy:  intake  and  integration,  analyzing  the  way  NGOs 

have  become  involved,  the  spaces  of  interaction  that  have  been  crated,  as  well  as  the 

challenges  and  limitations  they  are  faced  with.  Lastly,  the  conclusion  will  recapitulate 

the  core  ideas  discussed  in  the  main  text  and  will  present  final  considerations  on  the 

topic.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

8 

2  NGOs in the Context of Governance Processes: A Theoretical Framework 

The main focus of this research is the participation of NGOs in the development 

of asylum policy in the specific context of Brazil. To better grasp the potentialities and 

limitations  of  this  participation,  however,  it  is  first  necessary  to  take  a  step  back  and 

reflect  on  the  broader  setting  of  governance  processes  in  which  the  elaboration  and 

implementation  of  this  policy  is  embedded.  Sharing  with  Sending  and  Neumann’s 

(2006)  perspective,  this  thesis  starts  with  the  assumption  that  “an  attempt  to  grasp  the 

role  of  non-state  actors,  and  civil  society  organizations  in  particular,  requires  an 

approach that can theorize about the specific relations between state and non-state actors 

and about the logic of the processes of governance” (p.652).   

But first things first: what does the concept of governance actually refer to? The 

academic literature on governance is vast, and encompasses a variety of research fields 

within social sciences, including international relations, political science, sociology, and 

public  management,  among  several  others1  (Stoker,  1998,  p.18).  While 

this 

interdisciplinarity can be seen as a strong asset, since it allows for a greater debate and 

theoretical  exchange  between  different  academic  areas,  it  has  also  contributed,  on  a 

certain level, to the fuzziness of the concept (Betts, 2008). Indeed, the term governance 

has been used to describe an extensive range of processes, a few of which are: the idea 

of  good  governance  developed  by  the  World  Bank,  borrowing  from  an  economic 

perspective, to characterize new forms of efficient and accountable governing; the idea 

of corporate governance, which refers to the management of organizations; the idea of 

                                                           
1 Academic literature on governance is broad and complex, and goes a long way in discussing issues such 
as the blurring between public and private  sectors, the  welfare state,  new public  management, etc., also 
referring  to  different  sets  of  actors,  depending  on  the  approaches  adopted  and  on  the  specific  processes 
that it aims to describe. In this sense, this chapter only touches upon some of the ideas that are discussed 
by  this  literature,  focusing  on  the  aspects  that  are  central  to  contextualize  and  introduce  the  subject  of 
NGO participation in the development of public policies. For a more elaborate theoretical discussion on 
the topic, see the work of Kooiman, 1999; Rhodes, 1996; Rosenau, 1995; Stoker, 1998; and Weiss, 2000.    

9 

 

global  governance,  referring  to  the  transformations  on  power  relations  in  the 

international arena, with the inclusion of new actors; and the idea of governance as the 

activity  of  governments  in  “steering  not  rowing”  (Jordan,  Wurzel  &  Zito,  2005; 

Kooiman, 1999; Rosenau, 1995). According to Kooiman (1999): 

The  diversity  of  uses  and  the  various  definitions  present  a  problem  in 

understanding governance. If governance can mean so many things, does it still 

make  sense  to  speak  of  one  conception  of  governance?  Probably  not,  but  one 

way of making sense of these various uses and definitions may be to make them 

applicable to different levels of society (p.70).  

So,  for  instance,  corporate  governance  is  the  adopted  concept  when  discussing 

processes at the organizational level, but global governance is more appropriate to speak 

of transnational issues. Not only that, but it is still possible to identify certain common 

elements to the definition of governance at these various levels of use, which maintains 

the  validity  of  the  concept  as  a  relevant  analytical  tool.  Even  though  academic 

definitions are not always clear about how governance works and what exactly it aims 

to regulate, resting on a fairly abstract ground, they also highlight a few central aspects 

that can be put aside and analyzed as a “common denominator” for the understanding of 

the concept. Among the articles consulted in the preparation of this thesis, a handful of 

definitions could be found, such as: 

1.  Governance refers to “all these interactive arrangements in which public as well 

as  private  actors  participate,  aimed  at  solving  societal  problems,  or  creating 

societal  opportunities,  and  attending  to  the  institutions  within  which  these 

governing activities take place” (Kooiman, 1999, p.70). 

2.  “Governance  is  the  sum  of  the  many  ways  individuals  and  institutions,  public 

and  private,  manage  their  common  affairs.  It  is  a  continuing  process  through 

 

10 

which  conflicting  or  diverse  interests  may  be  accommodated  and  co-operative 

action  may  be  taken.  It  includes  formal  institutions  and  regimes  empowered  to 

enforce  compliance,  as  well  as  informal  arrangements  that  people  and 

institutions either have agreed to or perceive to be in their interest” (Commission 

on Global Governance, 1995 as cited in Weiss, 2000, p.797). 

3.  “The emphasis on governance stresses the role of citizens, both individually and 

organized  in  various  forms  of  associations,  in  the  policy  process;  from  issue 

identification, to  formation  implementation,  feedback and evaluation  of results. 

Governance  does  not  merely 

include 

the  actions  of  government,  but 

encompasses  how  groups  within  a  society  organize  to  make  and  implement 

decisions on matters of  general  concern, and how they  connect  with  the public 

sector” (Brinkerhoff, 1999b, p.125). 

4.  “Contemporary governance is multilayered. It includes important local, substate-

regional,  suprastate-regional,  and 

transworld  operations  alongside  and 

intertwined  with  national  arrangements.  Moreover,  governance  has  in  recent 

decades  increasingly  worked  through  private  as  well  as  public  instruments.  In 

this situation, regulatory authority has become considerably more decentralized 

and diffuse” (Scholte, 2002, p.288). 

5.  “Governance generally refers to the means for achieving direction, control, and 

coordination of wholly or partially  autonomous individuals or organizations on 

behalf  of  interests  to  which  they  jointly  contribute”  (Lynn,  Heinrich  &  Hill, 

2000, p.235). 

As one can see, in spite of the different academic backgrounds of the authors and 

the  specific  choices  of  wording,  all  of  these  definitions  share  a  number  of  common 

aspects in the characterization of governance. First of all, they refer to governance as a 

 

11 

shift  in  the  style  of  governing  (Stoker,  1998,  p.17).  Whereas  the  word  was  once  used 

interchangeably  with  the  concept  of  government,  it  was  between  the  1980s  and  1990s 

that  it  acquired  a  rather  distinct  and  critical  connotation  and  became  a  fixture  in  the 

academic and public policy lexicons (Weiss, 2000).  

As  Rhodes  (1996)  emphasizes,  “current  use  does  not  treat  governance  as  a 

synonym  of  government.  Rather,  governance  signifies  a  change  in  the  meaning  of 

government, referring to a new process of governing; or a changed condition of ordered 

rule;  or  the  new  method  by  which  society  is  governed”  (pp.652-653).  The  question 

remains, however, as to what changes are the authors talking about. Here, we focus on 

two sides of these transformations, also highlighted by the definitions presented above. 

 

On  the  one  hand,  there  is  the  conceptualization  of  governance  as  a  continuous 

process of negotiation – and, ideally, cooperation – around common affairs, matters of 

general  concern  or  societal  problems  (to  use  the  terminology  of  the  previous 

definitions). In the words of James Rosenau (1995): 

No  matter  how  institutionalized  rule  systems  may  be,  governance  is  not  a 

constant in these turbulent and disaggregated times. It is, rather, in a continuous 

process  of  evolution,  a  becoming  that  fluctuates  between  order  and  disorder  as 

conditions change and emergent properties consolidate and solidify (p.18).  

The  main  advantage  of  this  perspective  is  that  it  moves  from  a  rather  static 

understanding of power and institutionalized forms of governing and replaces it with a 

more  interactive  and  malleable  one,  which  shows  how  governance  mechanisms  can 

develop  from  bottom-up  processes  as  well  (Rosenau,  1995;  Taylor,  2007).  The 

analytical  strength  of  governance  studies,  as  Sending  and  Neumann  (2006)  point  out,  

relies  on  “its  ability  to  move  beyond  state-centric  analyses  to  include  a  focus  on  the 

process  of  governance,  to  highlight  the  power  of  non-state  actors  and  to  identify  and 

 

12 

theorize  about  the  changing  forms  and  institutionalization  of  political  authority” 

(pp.651-652).  

Therefore,  the  other  side  of  the  transformation  in  the  modes  of  governing, 

intrinsically  associated  to  this  processual  perspective,  is  the  “diffusion  or  de-

centralization of political authority” (Sending & Neumann, 2006, p.653). This diffusion 

can  be  identified  both  in  respect  to  downward  and  upward  vertical  shifts,  to  include 

multiple levels of government, and of horizontal shifts, that lead to the inclusion of non-

state actors in  the processes of governance (Kersbergen &  Waarden, 2004;  Zincone & 

Caponio, 2004). The multi-level character has to do with understanding that governance 

encompasses  much  more  than  the  politics  at  the  national  level.  Governance  crosses 

boundaries and involves a range of different actors, whether institutionalized or not, at 

local,  regional  and international  levels,  emphasizing how they  can relate and mutually 

influence one another. Moreover, it also acknowledges that:  

These  interactions  are  based…  on  the  recognition  of  (inter)dependencies.  No 

single  actor,  public  or  private,  has  all  knowledge  and  information  required  to 

solve  complex,  dynamic  and  diversified  problems;  no  actor  has  sufficient 

overview  to  make  the  application  of  needed  instruments  effective;  no  single 

actor  has  sufficient  action  potential  to  dominate  unilaterally  in  a  particular 

governing model (Kooiman, 1993 as cited in Rhodes, 1996, p.657).   

One,  if  not  the  most  important,  implication  of  this  particular  way  of 

conceptualizing  governance as a multi-level  process  is  that it “challenges much of our 

traditional understanding of how the state operates, what determines its capacities, what 

its contingencies are, and ultimately of the organization of democratic  and accountable 

government”  (Peters  &  Pierre,  2001,  p.131).  Nonetheless,  as  Kooiman  (1999) 

highlights, we are talking about shifting roles rather than shrinking roles of government. 

 

13 

This perspective tries to go beyond the limitations of a zero-sum conception of power in 

institutional relations, in which the inclusion of non-state actors is necessarily seen as a 

loss of power by the state, and, instead, tries to understand these interactions in the light 

of  complex,  multi-level  networks  of  governance  (Peters  &  Pierre,  2001):  “it  moves 

away from fixed ideas about power as a commodity rooted in particular institutions to 

more fluid ideas of power developed and negotiated between partners”2 (Taylor, 2007, 

pp.299-300).  

By  reflex,  this  also  translates  into  a  reconceptualization  of  state-civil  society 

interactions, in which the participation of non-state actors is seen as an “expression of a 

changing logic or rationality of government by which civil society is  redefined from a 

passive object of government to be acted upon into an entity that is both an object and a 

subject  of  government”  (Sending  & Neumann, 2006, p.651).  In this sense, “governing 

increasingly  operated  through  affected  individuals  rather  than  on  them  as  they  were 

increasingly  conceptualized  as  key  actors  to  ensure  both  effectiveness  in  program-

delivery  and  to  confer  legitimacy  to  governmental  practices”  (Sending  &  Neumann, 

2006,  p.661).  Civil  society,  then,  forms  part  of  these  networks  of  governance,  be  it 

through  the  participation  of  individual  citizens  themselves  or  through  the  different 

movements  and  organizations,  more  or 

less  formalized,  created 

to  represent 

constituencies in regards to certain issues or demands and which engage in this “process 

of  negotiation  and  debate  about  the  character  of  the  rules”  (Kaldor,  2002  as  cited  in 

Corry, 2010, p.17).  

The impact, the access and  the designated role of  this  potential range of  actors 

may vary between distinct issue-areas, but, nonetheless, the conceptual advancement of 

the  governance  perspective  was  recognizing  that  “the  proliferation  of  non-state  actors 

                                                           
2  In  more  analytical  terms,  it  also  means  shifting  the  units  of  analysis  from  the  single  actors  to  the 
interrelationships between them (Hanf & Scharf, 1978 as cited in Casey, 1998, p.32).  

14 

 

and their growing importance and power is a distinctive feature of contemporary world-

affairs” (Weiss, 2000, p.806). The next sections of this chapter will concentrate on the 

participation of non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in policy-making processes in 

the backdrop of this multi-level governance perspective.  

 

2.1  The Role of NGOs 

 

As  with  the  concept  of  governance,  the  definition  of  NGOs  remains  highly 

controversial  and  debated  in  both  academic  and  policy  spheres.  Not  only  do  NGOs 

compose a very heterogeneous group in terms of  the size, the organizational structure, 

and the activities they develop, but also in terms of the nature of their relationship with 

governments,  with  international  organizations  and  among  themselves.  Whereas  some 

NGOs  receive  an  expressive  amount  of  funding  from  the  government,  others  rely 

mostly on donations. Whereas some NGOs are engaged at the international level, others 

remain  very  limited  in  terms  of  size,  scope  and  resources.  Whereas  some  focus  on 

diverse social issues, others focus on specific groups and demands.  

Given this diversity, the very term is challenged by a range of other overlapping 

nomenclatures,  such  as  QUANGOs  –  to  refer  to  quasi-nongovernmental  NGOs;  and 

TNGOs – to refer to transnational NGOs. Besides that, NGOs are also seen as part of a 

broader  range  of  civil  society  organizations  (CSOs)  or  third  sector  organizations 

(TSOs),  which  encompass  a  diversity  of  actors,  from  charities,  community-based 

organizations  and  religious  institutions  to  migrant  associations,  cooperatives  and  trade 

unions,  “varying  in  their  degree  of  formality,  autonomy  and  power”  (Centre  for  Civil 

Society,  2009  as  cited  in  Corry,  2010,  p.14).  The  term  NGO  itself  was  created  in  the 

context of the founding of the United Nations (UN) in 1945, to refer to the category of 

organizational entities, which were not public, and were to be included in the processes 

 

15 

of  intergovernmental  debates  at  the  international  level  (United  Nations  Research 

Institute for Social Development, 1997, p.11).  

 

In  spite  of  the  multiple  –  and  at  times  vague  –  theorizations  and  conceptual 

definitions  applied  to  NGOs,  “the  reality  of  the  monster  is  rarely  denied”,  which 

“suggests  that  these  entities,  however  diverse,  together  make  up  a  coherent  whole  –  a 

sector with its own distinct types of social form and practical logic” (Corry, 2010, p.11). 

The  biggest  challenge,  then,  is  to  go  beyond  the  purely  privative  definitions  and 

terminologies,  which  describe  what  these  organizations  are  not  –  non-governmental, 

non-state, non-profit – and, instead, look for the common characteristics that allow us to 

refer  to  NGOs  as  a  coherent  analytical  category.  “Without  further  criteria”,  as  Corry 

(2010)  explains,  “a  purely  residual  category  remains  dependent  for  conceptual 

coherence on the primary categories they ‘tidy up’ for” (p.13). In this thesis, therefore, 

the term NGO will refer to a specific set of defining organizational characteristics: they 

are formal, non-profit, self-organizing groups with an institutional reality, separate from 

government, which have their own set of constitutional arrangements and are equipped 

to  control  their  own  activities  in  regards  to  particular  social  issues  or  functions 

(Gordenker & Weiss, 1995; Salamon & Anheier, 1997 as cited in Corry, 2010, p.13).             

Especially  since  the  1980s,  NGOs  have  exponentially  grown  in  number,  a 

process that was also followed by an increase in the participation of these organizations 

in  regards  to  policy-making  (Casey,  2002).  At  both  domestic  and  international  levels, 

NGOs  gradually  acquired  more  expressive  recognition  as  relevant  actors,  becoming 

involved  in  a  range  of  policy  debates  in  different  issue-areas.  Not  coincidentally,  this 

process  was  mutually  a  reflex  of  and  influential  to  the  development  of  the  multi-level 

governance  perspective.  Whereas  previous  decades  had  seen  a  predominantly 

conflictual relationship – or no relationship at all – between government, state agencies 

 

16 

and  NGOs,  the  1980s  marked  a  gradual  transformation  in  the  shape  of  these 

interactions,  which  started  to  shift  towards  a  more  collaborative  one3,  with  the 

understanding that no single actor had all the necessary expertise and resources to tackle 

social issues and elaborate policies:  

The  process  of  consultations  with 

the  concerned  parties, 

including 

representatives  of  NGOs,  prior  to  the  taking  of  any  political  decision  or  the 

adoption  of  a  normative  act,  won  recognition  as  a  functioning  mechanism 

leading  to  a  higher  quality  of  the  adopted  acts  and  of  the  legitimacy  of  the 

decisions and governance as a whole (Bulgarian Center for Not-for-Profit Law, 

2009, p.3).    

Particularly  in  the  case  of  Latin  American  countries,  for  instance,  the 

relationships between governments and NGOs remained tense during most of the 1970s 

and  1980s  (Clarke,  1998).  The  dictatorial  regimes  in  several  of  the  region’s  countries 

had closed doors to any type of civil society participation and NGOs became a relevant 

channel  through  which  social  movements  could  organize  and  express  their  voice. 

Following  the  redemocratization  period,  towards  the  end  of  the  1980s  and  throughout 

the 1990s, NGOs were, then, recognized for their role and became included into the new 

governance arrangements (Brinkerhoff, 1999a, p.60). Their inclusion was perceived as a 

                                                           
3 John Casey (2002) refers to different eras in the development of NGO participation  within policy and 
governance  processes  in  Western  countries  during  the  last  few  decades.  The  period  of  approximately 
between  1970  and  1985  was  mainly  characterized  by  conflictual  relationships,  in  which  “formerly 
unstructured  social  movements  gave  rise  to  new  social  movement  organizations  and  NGOs.  (…)  The 
more  common  view  in  the  1970s  was  that  the  political  activism  by  NGOs  was  superfluous  to  the 
democratic  process  and  that  these  organizations  were  in  conflict  with  democratic  institutions”  (pp.2-3). 
By the beginning of the 1980s perspectives started to change. The increasing number and reach of NGOs 
could  no  longer  be  ignored,  which  led  to  the  establishment  of  consultative  processes  and  to  the 
“expansion of advisory and liaison committees as a  way of formalizing  the relationship  between NGOs 
and policy makers” (p.3). In the 1990s, the third phase, which developed form the consultative processes, 
led to a more interdependent relationship between the actors, including “partnerships, compacts,  accords 
and service agreements, all of which seek to include NGOs as key collaborators in the delivery of public 
services”  (p.3).  According  to  Casey  (2002),  the  dates  assigned  to  these  different  eras  are  approximate, 
since  these  transformations  are  unevenly  paced  according  to  the  specific  circumstances  of  each  socio-
political context, and they also “overlap to indicate that while a new role was being accepted the earlier 
role was still very much present” (p.2).     

17 

 

way to mitigate operational gaps, through the improvement of service delivery, but also 

to  “address  concerns  about  the  ‘democratic  deficit’  through  re-engaging  citizens  with 

the institutions of government” (Taylor, 2007, p.300). 

 

2.2  Policy Engagement: Strategies and Access 

To  understand  the  role  played  by  NGOs  in  governance  processes,  it  is  vital  to 

delve  into  the  strategies  they  use  to  interact  (and  cooperate  with)  the  other  actors 

involved  with  policy-making,  as  well  as  the  responses  they  get  from  it.    NGOs  have 

been recognized for their hands-on, practical experience and for their expert knowledge 

on certain issue-areas, which allowed them to engage in an extensive range of activities, 

from  awareness  raising  to  implementation  and  monitoring.  For  Banulescu-Bogdan 

(2011),  “at  a  time  when  governmental  institutions  have  made  explicit  rhetorical 

commitments  to  involve  civil  society  in  policy-making,  the  question  is  no  longer 

whether  to  engage  but  how”  (p.3).  Depending  on  the  type  of  activity  to  which  they 

dedicate  more  to,  NGOs  can  have  a  more  direct  or  indirect  participation:  as  Casey 

(2002)  points  out,  they  might  be  directly  involved  with  formal  negotiations  or  “make 

other indirect contributions (…) through the building of social capital and an informed 

citizenry,  as  well  as  through  their  influence  on  social  discourses  and  policy-related 

beliefs”  (p.1).  In  this  sense,  NGOs’  engagement  can,  for  example,  adopt  a  more 

operational, educational or advocacy/lobbying character (Gordenker & Weiss, 1995).  

In the first case, NGOs are especially involved with service delivery – providing 

technical  assistance,  facilitating  access  and  evaluating  outcomes  –  be  it  through  their 

own projects or in partnerships with other governmental or international organizations. 

In  the  second  case,  NGOs  focus  on  disseminating  information,  raising  awareness  and 

shaping  the  public  opinion.  They  might  either  work  to  reinforce  or  create  awareness 

 

18 

around an existing norm or project or to demand for changes in the dominant structures, 

by fueling debate. Vehicles for disseminating information are various, and can include 

the preparation and distribution of print and online materials, interviews, press releases 

and opinion articles in  different media outlets,  etc. (Casey, 2011).  Finally, in  the third 

case,  NGOs  aim  at  influencing  policy-making  processes  and  decision-makers  more 

directly  at  legislative  and  administrative  levels,  “working  primarily  in  the  corridors  of 

governments and intergovernmental organizations” (Gordenker & Weiss, 1995, p.378). 

These NGOs can make use of formal consultative statuses or rather informal strategies, 

through  interpersonal  connections,  discussions,  letter  campaigns,  the  presentation  of 

research results, the drafting of proposals, among others (Casey, 2011). 

 

These  three  participatory  strategies  are,  by  no  means,  mutually  exclusive  or 

incompatible  with  one  another.  Studies  have  shown  that  NGOs  “maintain  a  range  of 

government relationships simultaneously. This range includes simultaneous cooperative 

and  adversarial  relations,  in  pursuit  of  one  or  more  concurrent  objectives  related  to 

service  delivery,  policy  advocacy  and  community  empowerment”  (Brinkerhoff  & 

Brinkerhoff,  2002,  p.16).  Individual  NGOs  can,  for  instance,  engage  in  educational 

awareness  activities  and,  at  the  same  time,  participate  in  the  provision  of  services  as 

partners of state agencies4. Casey (2011) also adds that there is an extensive repertoire 

of possible means of participation and that: 

                                                           
4 The combination of advocacy and service  delivery functions – either contracted or in partnership with 
governments – is slightly more problematic and extensively debated by scholars and NGO activists. If, on 
the one hand, they might foster important cooperation, bringing material contributions and expanding the 
reach of the activities developed by the NGOs, they  might, on the other,  lead to the dilemma of “biting 
the  hand  that  feeds”,  creating  pressures  that  compromise  NGOs’  ideological  and  operational  autonomy 
and diverging them from the demands  of their constituencies (Casey, 2002; Gordenker & Weiss, 1995). 
Even though the discourse of NGOs as partners  in service  delivery  is often  seen as a product of a neo-
liberal project, Casey (2002) highlights that this involvement was actually the result of  pressures coming 
from both sides of the political discussion: “while the conservatives pushed for privatization, progressives 
pushed  for  community  organizations  to  have  a  greater  role  in  service  delivery  in  order  to  provide  more 
responsive  services”  (p.3).  Even  though  there  seems  to  be,  indeed,  a  challenge  between  the  balance  of 
“nonprofits’  government-sanctioned  service  delivery  roles  and  their  traditional  political  roles” 
(Brinkerhoff & Brinkerhoff, 2002, p.8), a few studies have shown that both activities are not necessarily 
incompatible.  They  point  to  the  fact  that,  in  general,  larger  NGOs  tend  to  be  the  ones  with  service-

19 

 

The  definition  of  what  constitutes  advocacy,  the  preferred  strategies  and  the 

methods  used,  and  the  desired  outcomes,  vary  greatly  issue  to  issue,  and  even 

within  a  single  issue  will  evolve  considerably  over  time  in  response  to  the 

changing power dynamics between actors (p.3).        

 

With  the  changing  attitude  of  governments  in  relation  to  the  involvement  of 

NGOs  and  other  types  of  actors,  and  the  increasing  intertwinement  between  them,  the 

author goes on to argue that “the tendency has been to move away from confrontational 

approaches and to focus more on negotiating changes to policy” (Casey, 2011, p.4). 

In  this  regard,  it  is  interesting  to  highlight  the  responses  of  institutional 

arrangements to the growing participation of NGOs and other non-state actors. Not only 

the  type  of  activities  that  NGOs  engage  with  vary  in  a  range  of  informal  and  formal 

mechanisms,  but  also  the  structures  created  by  governments  and  state  agencies  to 

incorporate  these  new  actors  (Banulescu-Bogdan,  2011).  Indeed,  the  spaces  made 

available to the participation of NGOs are highly versatile in terms of formalization and 

degree of access, also translating in the different institutional statuses that are granted to 

these  organizations5.  Banulescu-Bogdan  (2011)  has  attempted  to  cover  some  of  the 

                                                                                                                                                                          
delivery contracts, and they also have enough resources and organizational stability to maintain advocacy 
roles  (Casey,  2002).  Moreover,  “once  selected  for  contracted  services,  the  associations  tend  to  become 
more  involved  in  policy  dialogues.  Here,  they  participate  in  formal  decision-making  processes  with 
respect  to  specific  programmes  and  policies.  Through  this  engagement,  association  representatives  may 
cultivate  personal  relationships  with  government  officials,  enabling  them  to  informally  lobby  as  well” 
(Brinkerhoff & Brinkerhoff, 2002, pp.12-13).     
5  It  is  interesting  to  point  out  that  access  is  defined  by  both  governments  and  organizations  (Maloney, 
Jordan  &  McLaughlin,  1994).  On  the  one  side,  “ultimately,  the  state  determines  what  political 
opportunities are available; therefore, civil society’s ability to engage in contingent upon the willingness 
of  government  to  include  them  in  decision-making  processes”  (Banulescu-Bogdan,  2011,  p.6).  On  the 
other, however, it has become clear that, in many cases, governments cannot ignore NGOs either, since 
they  have  paved  their  way  in  on  the  basis  of  the  expertise  and  resources  that  state  agencies  would  not 
have  access  to  otherwise,  also  contributing  to  the  legitimization  of  policy  decisions  (Casey,  2004; 
Maloney, Jordan & McLaughlin 1994). Moreover, even if, at the limit, governments are the ones to create 
the  available  institutional  spaces,  NGOs,  nonetheless,  still  have  the  choice  of  taking  part  in  these 
arrangements or not, according to their own perspectives and strategies of participation. In this sense, it is 
also  possible  to  build  on  the  distinction  between  insider  and  outsider  groups,  (rather  as  oscillating  than 
clear-cut categories), both in terms of being granted with the access and in terms of the different interests 
in participating more formally and directly in the governance processes. Whereas there might be potential 
for conflict, with NGOs disputing for the available  – and often limited space – Taylor (2007) highlights 
that there is also room for collaboration: “insiders benefited from the fact that outsiders were continually 

20 

 

possible  means  of  access  and  statuses  given  to  NGOs  in  government  agencies  and 

policy-making  instances  in  general,  developing  a  spectrum  that  goes  from  rather 

discretionary  engagement  to  more  formal,  institutionalized  participation.  According  to 

the author: 

Engagement can be viewed as a process, from ad hoc consultations all the way 

to true multi-stakeholder governance. On one end of the spectrum are “shadow” 

processes – usually held on the margins of official state-led processes to which 

non-governmental actors do not have access  – in which civil society actors can 

assume  a  lead  role.  (…)  On  the  other  end  of  the  spectrum  is  creating  a  formal 

role  for  civil  society  within  an  official  governance  framework  –  for  example, 

making  them  formal  (even  if  nonvoting)  participants,  or  granting  official 

consultations (p.7).  

These categorizations are summed up in Table 1 presented below: 

 

Table 1. Spectrum of Policy Engagement 

External Actor  Not  involved  in  government-led  policy  processes:  may  be  leading 

or involved in parallel processes 

Observer 

Informal participation in processes: may participate in discretionary 

consultations 

Participant 

Formal participation in  processes: participation is institutionalized, 

but  may  be  nonvoting,  or  otherwise  not  equal  to  that  of 

governments 

Constituent 

Involved  in  core  governance  structure:  civil  society  as  one  of  the 

formal constituents of governance structure 

Source: Directly quoted from Banulescu-Bogdan (2011), p.7   

 

                                                                                                                                                                          
placing  items  and  arguments  on  the  agenda;  outsiders  benefited  from  the  fact  that  there  were  insiders 
prepared to follow issues that do get onto the political agenda” (p.310).   

21 

 

As external actors, NGOs might be able to work more independently, but, at the 

same  time,  it  might  also  lead  to  isolation,  since  “investing  in  these  parallel  endeavors 

does  not  necessarily  open  a  conduit  for  ideas  to  filter  into  government  deliberations” 

(Banulescu-Bogdan,  2011,  p.7).  However,  even  if  the  acquisition  of  formal  statuses 

within  policy  and  decision-making  structures  gives  a  more  tangible  reality  to  the 

participation  of  these  organizations,  there  are  also  no  automatic  guarantees  that  their 

inputs  and  recommendations  will  reflect  into  policy  (re)formulations:  “the  act  of 

creating  mechanisms  for  consultation  (‘the  form’)  is  meaningless  unless  it  is 

underpinned  by  a  genuine  will  to  cooperate  –  on  both  sides  (‘the  function’)” 

(Banulescu-Bogdan,  2011,  p.11).  One  particularly  salient  concern  of  scholars  and 

practitioners is the extent to which engagement and access actually translate into shared, 

cooperative governance arrangements between the actors: “Does participation in formal 

advisory  and  collaborative  processes  translate  into  greater  influence  in  shaping  future 

policy,  or  is  it  falling  into  the  trap  of  participating  in  and  legitimizing  trivial  rituals 

concocted by governments seeking to sell their pre-determined policies?” (Casey, 2011, 

p.17).  

In other words, as relevant as being recognized with a “seat at the table”, is the 

degree  of  responsiveness  of  decision-making  instances  to  the  involvement  of  civil 

society  representatives  and,  particularly,  of  NGOs  –  access  alone  is  not  enough 

(Spencer,  2006).  In  this  sense,  one  needs  to  consider  the  perceived  legitimacy  of  the 

new  actors  included  in  the  institutional  policy-making  arrangements:  “the  extent  to 

which policy-makers perceive an NGO to be a legitimate source of opinion or evidence 

affects the extent to which they are receptive to its views” (Spencer, 2006, p.43). In the 

case of NGOs,  for example, the legitimacy of their views might  be supported by their 

expert and practical knowledge and experiences in service delivery (Spencer, 2006). In 

 

22 

addition,  the  contextual  factors  referring  to  the  specific  decision-making  environment 

are equally important variables to understand the conditions of participation that will be 

made available to NGOs, both in regards to the strategies adopted and to the access and 

responses they will get from the government.   

 

2.3  Contextualizing Participation: A Set of Factors 

  

The  previous  sections  have  briefly  outlined  the  complex  and  intricate  web  of 

possibilities and ways of interaction among NGOs and between these organizations and 

the  other  actors  –  focusing  mainly  on  governmental  agencies  and  institutions  –  in  the 

context  of  multi-level  governance  arrangements.  These  interactions,  however,  do  not 

take place in a vacuum: the strategies adopted, the paths chosen, the outcomes achieved, 

the challenges faced – all of these need to be perceived in the light of the broader social, 

political, institutional and organizational environments in which decisions are made. Put 

differently, this means taking into account “the specifics of power, history and context” 

(Lewis  &  Opoku-Mensah,  2006,  p.670):  “rather  than  assume  that  NGOs  have 

universally  intrinsic  qualities,  it  is  more  fruitful  to  assume  that  they  will  reflect  the 

socio-historical conditions of the locale in which they operate” (Igoe & Kelsall, 2005 as 

cited  in  Lewis  &  Opoku-Mensah,  2006,  p.670).  “By  embedding  research  on  the  NGO 

phenomenon  more  tightly  within  these  wider  aspects  of  institutional  systems,  policy 

discourses  and  organizational  politics”,  Lewis  and  Opoku-Mensah  (2006)  argue,  it  is 

possible to achieve “more nuanced understandings of NGO agency” (p.671).   

Several authors have referred to this contextual aspect and applied different sets 

of variables and dimensions to understand the different opportunities and constraints in 

the participation of non-state actors, and NGOs more specifically (Brinkerhoff, 1999a; 

Casey, 2004; May & Nugent,  1982 as cited in Maloney, Jordan & McLaughlin, 1994; 

 

23 

Spencer, 2006). Based on the common aspects suggested in the theorizations of each of 

these authors, I would like, here, to call the attention to the following set of factors: the 

broader  political  and  institutional  setting;  the  issue  or  policy  in  question;  and  the 

organizational characteristics of the NGOs themselves.  

  

2.3.1  Political and institutional setting 

According  to  Casey  (2004),  the  political  and  socioeconomic  environment  in 

which  NGOs  operate  “provides  the  primary  framework  for  their  participation  in  the 

policy process” (p.243). The dominant political discourses and culture and the existing 

legislation  “translate  into  a  number  of  key  structural  elements  regarding  the  formal 

distribution of public authority and the structure of decision-making processes through 

government  institutions”  (Casey,  2004,  p.247).  Knill  and  Lehmkuhl  (2002)  also 

recognize that: 

Legal  rules,  rights  and  conventions  structure  institutional  opportunities  for 

strategic choices and interaction. By affecting the cost/benefit calculations of the 

actors  involved  and  by  defining  a  certain  distribution  of  powers  and  resources 

between them, the existing institutional  structures have an important  impact  on 

the  capacity  for  governance  by  public  or  private  actors.  This  way,  institutions 

influence the strategies actors employ to achieve their preferences (p.47).     

 

So,  for  instance,  it  is  relevant  to  learn  about  the  division  of  powers  between 

different  governmental  organs  and  the  degree  of  centralization  and  decentralization  of 

policy-making  processes  –  “which  set  the  parameters  of  central-local  government 

responsibility and authority” (Brinkerhoff, 1999a, p.75) – to understand the possibilities 

of access available to NGOs and other non-state actors, as well as the strategies that can 

be more effectively employed to  reach those instances (Casey, 2004;  Maloney, Jordan 

 

24 

& McLaughlin, 1994). Besides the legal framework that regulates the functioning of the 

public sector itself, several  countries have also elaborated specific legislation applying 

to  NGOs,  in  regards  to  their  legal  form,  access  to  public  funding,  establishment  of 

service  partnerships  and  formal  consultation  mechanisms  (Casey,  2004;  Brinkerhoff, 

1999a). 

 

The central  idea, then, is  that  interactions take place in  an institutional context, 

which  has  both  a  stable  and  a  volatile  dimension  (Casey,  2004).  “The  institutions 

created within each polity are important because they are the current ‘peace treaties’ of 

past battles (Richardson, 1993) and the pressure game must be played out in the arenas 

created by these existing structures and processes” (Casey, 2004, p.247). In the field of 

migration  policy,  authors  recognize  the  influence  of  this  context  and  refer  to  path-

dependency to explain the role of policy legacy (Zincone & Caponio, 2004). That does 

not mean, however, being hopelessly dependent on existing structures, as considerations 

on agency theory try to emphasize. In this sense, NGOs can also be recognized by their 

social  productivity  role:  organizations  are  structured  by  their  geographic  and 

institutional  environment,  and,  in  turn,  also  structure  them  (McQuarrie  &  Marwell, 

2009, p.247).      

 

2.3.2  Issue or policy in question 

 

In  addition  to  the  political  and  institutional  context,  the  nature  of  the  specific 

policy issue at hand is also an essential factor of analysis to understand the possibilities 

of  NGO  participation.  Governments  are  not  monolithic  (Coston,  1998  as  cited  by 

Brinkerhoff,  1999b,  p.73)  and  neither  are  policies  and  issue-areas.  As  Spencer  (2006) 

puts it: 

 

25 

The  relative  influence  of  politicians,  bureaucrats  and  interest  groups  differ 

depending on the context of the issue  – whether it is transport or education for 

instance – each operating within a different set of opportunities and constraints, 

and  a  different  balance  of  interest  groups.  The  ways  in  which  decisions  are 

taken,  and  the  extent  to  which  the  actors  cooperate  in  that  process,  can  vary 

significantly,  notwithstanding  that  they  are  operating  within  a  single  unitary 

State (p.6).  

 

“Policies  vary  in  terms  of  the  degree  of  technical  expertise  required,  the  time 

frame within which results and impacts occur, the array of interests affected, and their 

distributive  consequences”  (Brinkerhoff,  1999a,  p.76)  and  these  factors  also  help  to 

determine the priority, the level of access and the roles that will be assigned to each of 

the  involved  actors  in  the  policy-making  process.  Whereas  certain  issues  or  policies 

might  be  considered  off-limits  to  the  participation  of  NGOs,  others  might  be  more 

easily  accessed. Depending on the phase of the policy cycle  – which  encompasses the 

stages of agenda setting, formulation, decision-making, implementation and evaluation 

– NGOs might also have different options of engagement. A number of authors suggest 

that,  even  with  the  transformations  in  governance  patterns,  NGOs  remain  “more 

successful in influencing public opinion and in bringing problems to the public agenda 

than  in  determining  the  form  of  public  policies  or  in  the  functioning  of  public 

administrations” (Jenkins, 1987 as cited in Casey, 2004, p.249). 

 

2.3.3  Organizational characteristics 

 

Last, but not least, the particular organizational characteristics of the NGOs also 

matters.  This  refers  not  only  to  the  individual  characteristics  of  the  organizations  –  in 

terms of size, scope, resources, reach, goals and internal norms (May & Nugent, 1982 as 

 

26 

cited  in  Maloney,  Jordan  &  McLaughlin  1994,  pp.33-34)    –  but  to  the  way  that  they 

organize among themselves and network with other interlocutors as well. Casey (2004) 

points  to  three  critical  organizational  factors  that  help  to  shape  NGOs’  participation: 

first, as it has been previously mentioned, they can choose whether to participate or not; 

second, they also have a choice in regards to the specific strategies that can be applied 

to engage with the process; and third, “they must have the organizational skills and the 

resource  capacity  to  bear  the  transaction  costs  of  their  choices  and  to  ensure  their 

legitimacy  to  carry  out  their  activities”  (p.250).  As  Banulescu-Bogdan  (2011)  states, 

“the  very  act  of  engaging  in  bureaucratic  processes  requires  financial  resources, 

manpower, and policy savvy, including a deep understanding of government processes 

and  insights  into  how  and  when  to  get  involved”  (p.7).  Finally,  in  regards  to 

networking, the engagement of NGOs with other actors, as well as the character of these 

relationships, is one of the keys to understand their participation (Casey, 2004).      

It is important to point out that none of the variables described above are static. 

On the contrary, as it has been previously mentioned, governance is a process, subject to 

change,  and  the  main  advantage  of  this  perspective  is  to  shed  light  on  the  multi-level 

character  of  policy  enactment,  both  in  institutional  and  informal  spheres  and  with  the 

participation of several actors. Having presented the main theoretical concepts – which 

give a brief account of the multiplicity of NGOs’ governance roles and activities, within 

a  varied  set  of  organizational,  political  and  policy  environments  (Lewis  &  Opoku-

Mensah, 2006) – the challenge of the following chapters is to apply them as analytical 

tools to better-grasp the process of asylum policy-making in Brazil. 

 

 

 

 

27 

3  The Development of Asylum Policy in Brazil6 

3.1  Historical Background 

Even  though  the  establishment  of  an  official  Brazilian  national  policy 

specifically  directed  at  the  protection  of  refugees  is  relatively  recent,  dating  from  the 

last  decade  of  the  1990s,  the  involvement  of  the  country  with  the  consolidation  of  an 

international  refugee  regime  can  be  traced  back  to  several  decades  before  that7.  This 

involvement was, however, deeply dependent on the domestic political environment  in 

Brazil, which means that, throughout the turbulent political times faced by the country 

during the second half of the twentieth century, the efforts of the Brazilian government 
                                                           
6  Before  starting  the  exposition  on  the  historical  process  that  led  to  the  formulation  of  the  Brazilian 
Refugee Act, I would like to make a brief but important observation on the specific connotations that the 
terminology relating to forced migration has in Latin America. Whereas “asylum” and “refuge” are two 
terms used interchangeably in most countries – the asylum seeker, once recognized, acquires the refugee 
status, and the policies relating to this population are referred to as either asylum or refugee policies  – in 
the specific context of Latin America they have developed different operational and juridical meanings. In 
Latin  America,  asylum  (asilo)  is  a  legal  condition  which  has  been  established  in  several  regional 
instruments,  dating  as  far  back  as  the  end  of  the  nineteenth  century,  when  it  was  first  mentioned  in  the 
1889 Montevideo Treaty on International Penal Law (Andrade, 1998, p.398). Even though it also refers to 
the  protection  of  persecuted  individuals,  it  holds  a  series  of  specific  definitional  characteristics  that 
distinguish it  from the refugee concept currently applied by  the 1951 Convention and other instruments 
on the matter. In its regional, Latin American application,   asilo: may be granted outside the territory of 
the  country  to  which  it  is  requested  (diplomatic  asylum);  covers  exclusively  political  persecution;  does 
not have a specific governmental organ or established procedure to process the requests; has a constitutive 
juridical nature, meaning that it is granted to an individual by the state in the exercise of its discretionary 
powers  (whereas,  on  the  other  hand,  the  acquisition  of  refugee  status  is  a  declaratory  act,  in  which  the 
individual  has  a  right  to  protection,  which  is    then  recognized  by  the  state)  (Andrade,  1998,  p.399). 
Therefore,  as  it  is  possible  to  see,  the  definition  of  asilo  has  a  much  narrower  meaning,  and  its 
determination  has  a  strong  political  character.  Even  though  similar  uses  of  this  category  have  been 
sporadically applied by other countries, the particularity of the Latin American context is that it became a 
consolidated  legal  category;  it  converted  into  a  tool  largely  resorted  to  by  the  countries  in  the  region, 
probably  due  to  the  political  instability  faced  by  many  of  them  during  several  decades  (Jubilut,  2006, 
p.29).  Nowadays,  with  the  developments  of  refugee  policy  in  several  of  the  countries  in  the  region,  the 
concept  of  asilo  has  fallen  slightly  in  disuse  (Barreto,  2010).  However,  given  its  historical  relevance, 
especially to understand the developments on refugee assistance during the years of the dictatorial regime 
in Brazil, as will be described in this chapter, it  was an important aspect to clarify. To avoid confusion, 
and  maintaining  the  current  usage  in  the  English  language,  the  terms  “asylum  policy”  and  “refugee 
policy”  will  be  here  used  interchangeably.  Hereafter,  specific  mentions  to  the  regional  category  will  be 
referred to by using the original term in Portuguese and Spanish, asilo.       
7  Even  before  the  establishment  of  UNHCR,  Brazil  had  signed  specific  bilateral  agreements  with  the 
International Refugee Organization (IRO), and, as a result, received about 29,000 refugees fleeing  from 
different  countries  in  Eastern  Europe. They  were,  however,  not  given  an  official  status  as  refugees,  but 
rather  accepted  into  the  national  territory  as  regular  migrants  (Andrade  &  Marcolini,  2002,  p.37).  It  is 
interesting to point out that, besides the humanitarian reasons, Brazil sealed these agreements with a very 
specific political interest in receiving a certain profile of refugees, which could contribute to the economic 
development  of  the  country.  The  short-life  of  IRO  and  a  series  of  bureaucratic  and  diplomatic 
mishandlings constrained the full achievement of the resettlement goals predicted by the agreements. For 
a deeper analysis of the Brazilian participation within IRO, see Andrade (2005).  

28 

 

towards  refugee  protection  were  also  considerably  unstable  –  and,  at  times, 

contradictory. Following the end of Second World War, Brazil had an active role in the 

preparatory conferences held by the United Nations (UN) to discuss the content and the 

text  of  what  would  become  the  1951  Refugee  Convention  and  was  one  of  the  fifteen 

elected  members  of  the  Consultative  Committee  of  the  United  Nations  High 

Commissioner for Refugees  (UNHCR)8. The Convention was ratified  by the Brazilian 

government  in  1960  and  the  1967  Additional  Protocol  in  1972,  maintaining, 

nonetheless,  its  adherence  to  the  clause  of  geographic  limitation9  in  internal  legal 

practices.  According  to  Andrade  and  Marcolini  (2002),  the  maintenance  of  the 

geographic  limitation  had  a  clear  political  motivation,  since  “during  the  1970s  the 

Brazilian military dictatorship had little inclination to protect left-wing asylum seekers 

persecuted in other Latin American countries” (p.37). 

Indeed, in the period comprised by the dictatorial regime – between the years of 

1964  and  1985  –  there  was  an  expressive  setback  in  regards  to  the  development  and 

commitment  to  human  rights  and  asylum  policy  in  Brazil,  as  well  as  in  several  other 

Latin American countries, which were also under the rule of authoritarian regimes. State 

policies were mainly executed under the strict perspective of national security and, due 

to  the  political  proximity  and  cooperation  between  the  dictatorships  in  the  region, 

individuals that entered Brazil in an attempt to escape persecution in their own countries 

were  not  granted  with  formal  support  and  protection  from  the  government:  they  were 

not  recognized  as  refugees,  since  the  Brazilian  government  used  the  geographic 

                                                           
8  The  Consultative  Committee  has,  since  then,  been  replaced  by  the  Executive  Committee  (ExCom),  to 
which Brazil is also a member.  
9 The geographical limitation determined that would be considered refugees only those who “as a result of 
events occurring in Europe before 1 January 1951 and owing to well-founded fear of being persecuted for 
reasons  of  race,  religion,  nationality,  membership  of  a  particular  social  group  or  political  opinion,  is 
outside the country of his nationality and is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to avail himself to 
the protection of that country; or who, not having a nationality and being outside the country of his former 
habitual residence as a result of such events, is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to return to it” 
(Geneva Convention, Article 1, section B1 (a)). 

29 

 

limitation as a legal justification, and were also not conceded  asilo, given the political 

interests  and interconnections between  the  Brazilian authorities and the  regimes in  the 

neighboring  countries.  Instead,  they  had  to  rely  solely  on  services  provided  by  civil 

society, especially through the initiatives promoted by Cáritas, an organization of social 

aid associated to the Catholic Church10.    

The  branch  of  Cáritas  in  Rio  de  Janeiro  (Cáritas  Arquidiocesana  of  Rio  de 

Janeiro  –  CARJ)  had  been  working  sporadically  in  the  assistance  of  Latin  Americans 

that  were  fleeing  from  persecution  since  1975.  The  final  motivation  for  the 

establishment  of  an  organized  reception  service  came  in  1976,  when  five  Chilean 

refugees arrived at Cáritas, bearing a letter from the Chilean Solidarity Vicariate11 with 

a formal request for assistance. In an interview conceded in 2002, Dr. Cândido Feliciano 

da  Ponte  Neto,  director  of  CARJ  at  the  time,  talks  about  the  consolidation  of  this 

initiative: 

I  thought  at  that  time,  in  that  moment,  in  which  we  had  been  sporadically 

providing assistance for one year, either financial help or finding a place to sleep 

for two or three nights, I thought it was time that we had a more organized work. 

The  problem  at  that  time  was  not  really  the  geographic  limitation,  it  was  that 

Brazil  was  also  a  dictatorship  and  the  refugees,  the  kind  of  people  that  was 

looking  for  refuge,  was  as  subversive  as  they  said  the  Brazilians  looking  for 

refuge  were.  Because  all  the  dictatorships  communicated,  there  was  an 

organized symphony between them, their police  worked together.  It  is  a  reality 

that has now been proved. So sheltering these people here would be difficult, we 

                                                           
10  In  Latin  America,  traditionally,  organizations  connected  to  the  Catholic  Church  have  maintained  an 
important role in the provision of services to the population. During the 1970s, the Church was one of the 
major  forces  behind  the  growth  in  the  number  of  NGOs  in  different  Latin  American  countries  (Clarke, 
1998; Pinto, 2006). Cáritas, more specifically, started operating in Brazil in 1956, and is connected to a 
broader international network – Caritas Internationalis – active in 165 countries and territories.     
11 The Solidarity Vicariate was an institution from the Archdiocese of Santiago which, during the years of 
the  dictatorial  regime  in  the  country,  worked  alongside  other  social  movements  and  organizations 
contrary to the regime.  

30 

 

knew that, before organizing the work, that it would not be easy, that we could 

be under risk, risk for the people that were arriving. So I brought this subject to 

the Cardinal [Dom Eugênio de Araújo Sales], told him what I was already doing 

and  told  him  that  the  idea  was  that  Cáritas  did  an  organized  job  because  there 

was  an  increasing  number  of  requests  and  now  I  had  in  my  hands  a  document 

from  another  church,  which  was  also  suffering  through  the  dictatorial  process 

(Ponte Neto, 2002 as cited in Sprandel & Milesi, 2003, pp.119-120). 

 

With  the  support  of  the  Cardinal,  the  initiative  was  then  formalized.  In  1977, 

taking  notice  of  the  work  that  was  being  developed  by  the  organization,  UNHCR 

opened  its  first  office  in  Brazil,  in  the  city  of  Rio  de  Janeiro12.  The  office  was  not 

recognized  by  the  Brazilian  government  and,  therefore,  UNHCR  did  not  hold  the 

official  status  enjoyed  by  other  international  organizations  (Andrade  &  Marcolini, 

2002).  Together  with  CARJ  –  and,  a  few  months  later,  also  with  the  aid  of  Cáritas’ 

branch in São Paulo (Cáritas Arquidiocesana of São Paulo – CASP) – UNHCR started 

developing  a  strategy  for  the  assistance  of  the  Latin  American  asylum  seekers  that 

arrived to the country. Since they were only granted with a tourist visa by the Brazilian 

government,  and  given  the  particularly  tense  political  situation,  UNHCR  had  to  work 

rather  fast  to  find  a  resettlement  alternative.  It  is  estimated  that  around  20,000  Latin 

Americans – fleeing mostly from Chile, Bolivia, Argentina and Uruguay  – were given 

refugee status and resettled to countries in Europe and North America, besides Australia 

and  New  Zealand13  (Andrade  &  Marcolini,  2002;  Moreira,  2010).  Coordinated  action 

between  UNHCR  and  these  organizations  continued  to  develop  and  consolidate  in  the 

following years, with no involvement from the Brazilian authorities: “this resulted in a 

                                                           
12 UNHCR works in partnership with Cáritas in other countries as well.  
13 In 1979, on an exceptional basis, UNHCR managed to intervene on behalf of 150 Vietnamese refugees 
that had been rescued by Brazilian ships, organizing for their stay in Brazil, in spite of the terms of the 
geographic limitation. These refugees, however, were recognized on the basis of regular migratory status 
(Andrade & Marcolini, 2002; Moreira, 2010). 

31 

 

very strong bond between Brazilian civil society  and UNHCR and in the development 

of  an  expertise  in  refugee  protection  encompassing  both  the  international  community 

and the internal civil society” (Jubilut & Apolinário, 2008, p.30).  

 

UNHCR’s  office  was  only  officially  recognized  in  1982,  pointing  towards  the 

gradual change in the positioning of the Brazilian government and towards the broader 

process of regime change in Brazil. In 1986, under the supervision of UNHCR, Brazil 

also  agrees  with  the  resettlement  of  50  families  of  the  Baha’i  faith  that  had  been 

persecuted  in  Iran  (Sprandel  &  Milesi,  2003).  According  to  Moreira  (2010),  the 

redemocratization  process  saw  a  combination  of  domestic  and  international  political 

events  that  contributed  to  the  inclusion  of  refugee  issues  in  the  Brazilian  political 

agenda  under  a  more  favorable  light,  associated  to  the  debates  on  human  rights.  The 

new Federal Constitution14, adopted in 1988, established the main legal and institutional 

basis  for  the  future  developments  on  migration  and  asylum  policies,  emphasizing  the 

duty to protect human rights and indicating, in its fifth article, that “all are equal before 

the  law,  without  discrimination  of  any  kind,  guaranteeing  to  both  Brazilians  and 

foreigners  residing  in  the  country,  the  inviolability  of  the  rights  to  life,  freedom, 

equality, safety and property” (Federal Constitution, 1988, Title II, Chapter I, Article 5). 

In the interpretation of Jubilut (2006): 

These  principles  and  rules  form,  albeit  indirectly,  the  legal  foundations  of  the 

institution of refuge in the Brazilian juridical system. Refuge is thus understood 

to be a protection of human dignity based upon non-discrimination, as a branch 

of human rights and as a form of asylum (p.27).  

                                                           
14  Pressures  made  by  the  new  social  movements,  trade  unions  and  non-governmental  organizations  that 
had  developed  during  the  dictatorship  period  were  fundamental  to  the  definition  of  the  character  of  the 
Constitution, which also opened more vehicles for citizen participation in public administration and in the 
conduction of governmental policies (Pinto, 2006).  

32 

 

In  this  sense,  in  1989,  through  Decree  98.602,  Brazil  revoked  (now  both 

formally  and  in  practice)  the  clause  of  geographic  limitation  of  the  1951  Refugee 

Convention, and, one year later, through Decree 99.757, lifted the reservations that had 

been  previously  made  in  regards  to  articles  15  and  17  of  the  same  Convention,  which 

entitled  refugees  with  the  right  of  association  and  paid  employment  (Andrade  & 

Marcolini,  2002).  Also  in  1989,  the  office  of  UNHCR  was  transferred  to  Brasília,  the 

capital  of  the  country,  marking  the  start  of  a  new  phase  in  the  diplomatic  relations 

between the Brazilian government and the international organization15. Finally, in 1991, 

with  Inter-Ministry  Rule  n.  394,  Brazil  made  its  first  efforts  towards  an  internal 

regulation  of  refugee  status  determination  (Jubilut  &  Apolinário,  2008).  Even  though 

the  Rule  maintained  the  prominent  role  of  UNHCR  in  the  evaluation  of  each  of  the 

individual  asylum  requests,  the  final  decision  was  to  be  made  by  the  government: 

UNHCR  appointed  the  recommended  cases  which  were  then  appreciated  by  the 

Ministry of Foreign Affairs and sent to the Ministry of Justice for final approval (Jubilut 

&  Apolinário,  2008,  p.30).  The  provision  of  assistance  and  responsibility  over 

integration remained in  the hands of Cáritas and  other NGOs, in  a continuation of the 

partnerships that had been previously established.  

Until that time, after the suspension of the geographic limitation, Brazil had not 

had to deal with expressive refugee flows. The first “test-run” came in the end of 1992, 

when the country received a large number of asylum seekers from Angola, as a result of 

the civil war that had taken over the African country. In only a few months, more than 

1,200  Angolans  arrived  in  Brazil  with  a  tourist  visa,  to  formally  make  the  request  for 

asylum16. This event was not only relevant in numerical terms, as the first large influx 

                                                           
15 Having more space to articulate strategies of assistance, UNHCR starts expanding its connections with 
organizations from civil society. 
16  It  is  interesting  to  point  out  how  several  factors  combined  to  explain  this  sudden  influx  of  asylum 
seekers from Angola to Brazil. One the one hand, with the beginning of the civil war, several European 

33 

 

of  recognized  refugees  to  Brazil,  but  also  because,  in  the  occasion,  the  Brazilian 

government applied a broader definition of refuge, going beyond the classical definition 

of the 1951 Convention and moving towards the more inclusive  perspective contained 

in the Cartagena Declaration17, which also created an important precedent for the future 

legislative  developments  regarding  asylum  policy  in  Brazil  (Andrade  &  Marcolini, 

2002). 

 

3.2  The Elaboration of the National Legislation on Refugees 

 

The  rapid  increase  in  the  number  of  asylum  requests  associated  with  the 

Angolan  experience  made  it  clear  that  it  was  necessary  to  have  more  than  an  Inter-

Ministry  Rule  to  coordinate  the  process  of  refugee  status  determination  and  to 

effectively  incorporate  the  content  of  the  relevant  international  instruments  into  the 

Brazilian legislation. The opportunity to emphasize the need for such a legislation was 

taken  by  NGOs  in  the  occasion  of  the  formulation  of  the  First  National  Program  on 

Human  Rights  (Primeiro  Programa  Nacional  de  Direitos  Humanos  –  PNDH  I,  in  the 

original  language).  PNDH18  was  a  project  developed  by  the  Brazilian  government,  in 

partnership  with  civil  society  organizations,  which  contained  a  series  of  proposals  to 

                                                                                                                                                                          
and North-American countries closed their representations in Angola, limiting the possibilities available 
(moreover,  many  Western  countries,  especially  in  Europe,  were  beginning  to  adopt  closed-border 
policies, which intended to further the barriers to the admission of migrants and asylum seekers). On the 
other hand, the Brazilian consulate remained open and had no quotas for refugees, in addition to the fact 
that it offered the prospect of being in country with language and cultural proximity to Angola (Sprandel 
& Milesi, 2003).    
17  The  Cartagena  Declaration  dates  from  1984,  and  was  established  as  a  regional  instrument  for  the 
protection of refugees, in response to the various armed conflicts that burst in Central America throughout 
the  1970s  and  1980s.  The  Cartagena  Declaration  provides  a  broader  definition  of  refuge,  which  is  not 
limited to the idea of individual persecution: “the definition or concept of a refugee to be recommended 
for use in the region is one which, in addition to containing the elements of the 1951 Convention and the 
1967 Protocol, includes among refugees persons who have fled their country because their lives, safety or 
freedom  have  been  threatened  by  generalized  violence,  foreign  aggression,  internal  conflicts,  massive 
violation of human rights or other circumstances which have seriously disturbed public order” (Cartagena 
Declaration, 1984 as cited in Andrade, 1998, p.401). This regional instrument was not meant to be legally 
binding, but, “nevertheless, throughout the years and because of its acceptance and application by several 
States, the 1984 Cartagena Declaration has achieved significant persuasive force” (Andrade, 1998, p.402).  
18 The first version of PNDH was officially adopted in 1996. Since then, two follow-ups to the initial plan 
have been developed, respectively in 2002 and 2010. 

34 

 

consolidate  the  protection  of  human  rights  in  Brazil.  It  was  formulated  under  the 

supervision  of  the  Ministry  of  Justice  and  counted  with  the  input  of  several  NGOs, 

which  participated  in  the  national  workshops  organized  to  discuss  the  content  of  the 

program. Through this window of access, and through formal communications with the 

National  Secretariat  for  Human  Rights,  the  organizations  that  had  been  involved  with 

refugee protection in the previous decades pressured for the inclusion of migration and 

asylum  issues  in  the  proposals  of  PNDH.  The  demand  was  achieved  and,  among  the 

short  term  goals  established  by  the  program,  was  the  elaboration  of  an  internal 

legislation to regulate refugee status and integration in Brazil (Moreira, 2010; Milesi & 

Andrade, 2010). 

 

Already  in  the  end  of  1995,  UNHCR  received  a  request  from  the  national 

government  to  prepare  a  document  with  guidelines  to  be  taken  into  account  in  the 

formulation of the  new law. This  document presented, among other recommendations, 

the adoption of a broader refugee definition, provisions on durable solutions – voluntary 

repatriation,  resettlement  and  local  integration  –  and  on  the  guarantee  of  non-

refoulement19, and the creation of a specific governmental body to process the requests 

of  asylum  (Milesi  &  Andrade,  2010).  From  that  moment  on,  a  dynamic  network 

between  the  different  actors  that  had  been  involved  with  refugee  assistance  began  to 

take shape. Cáritas and several other organizations spread across Brazil20 came together 

in  a  collective  effort  –  under  the  main  coordination  of  the  Department  of  Citizenship 

and  Law  of  the  Scalabrinian  Center  of  Migration  Studies  (Departamento  de  Direito  e 

                                                           
19 The principle of non-refoulement, as stated in the 1951 Convention, establishes that a refugee shall not 
be expelled or returned “in any manner whatsoever to the frontiers of territories where his life or freedom 
would be threatened on account of his race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group 
or political opinion” (Chapter V, Article 33).  
20 Registries point to the involvement of more than forty organizations, including the National Secretariat 
of  Cáritas  (besides  CARJ  and  CASP);  the  National  Movement  in  the  Defense  of  Human  Rights;  the 
Center  for  Migrant  Support  of  Porto  Velho  (in  the  state  of  Rondônia);  the  Office  of  Justice  and 
Citizenship Defense (in the state of São Paulo); the Migrant’s Pastoral of the Archdiocese of Fortaleza (in 
the state of Ceará); among many others (Milesi & Andrade, 2010, p.36).    

35 

 

Cidadania  do  Centro  Scalabriniano  de  Estudos  Migratórios  –  DDC/CSEM)21  –  to 

advocate  for an inclusive and updated legislation:  “the established partnerships guided 

the  entire  process,  in  the  provision  of  expert  knowledge,  in  the  elaboration  of  the 

preliminary drafts of the bill and in accompanying, step by step, the development of the 

debates in the National Congress” (Milesi & Andrade, 2010, p.30). 

 

One  of  the  main  strategies  adopted  by  these  organizations  was  that  of  letter 

campaigning, an effective vehicle through which they could reach and formally address 

the  responsible  government  actors  and,  in  addition,  present  their  own  suggestions  and 

concerns regarding the content of the bill. Throughout the period in which the bill was 

being developed by the Executive power, a number of different organizations forwarded 

letters to the Ministries of Justice and Foreign Affairs, requesting special attention to the 

topic22.  The  support  that  these  NGOs  received  from  the  Brazilian  Bar  Association 

(Ordem dos Advogados do Brasil – OAB) and by the National Conference of Bishops 

of  Brazil  (Conferência  Nacional  dos  Bispos  do  Brasil  –  CNBB),  two  traditional  and 

respected social actors, with a strong voice in the political arena, was also an important 

addition to reinforce the recommendations they were putting forward. 

 

Moreover, documents show that contacts  had also been made with members of 

the  National  Congress  since  the  beginning  of  1996,  building  a  particularly  relevant 

bridge with the deputies that composed the Commission of Human Rights (Comissão de 

                                                           
21 The Center also had been involved with the reception of migrants and refugees since 1989 and was the 
basis for the creation of IMDH, a few years later.  
22  In  a  letter  addressed  to  the  Ministry  of  Justice,  in  April  of  1996,  for  example,  the  director  of 
DDC/CSEM, Ir. Rosita Milesi, writing in the name of this network of institutions, expresses concern with 
the restrictive refugee concept that had been included in the preliminary drafts of the bill and urges for the 
adoption  of  a  broader  definition,  in  the  model  of  the  Cartagena  Declaration.  Among  other  justifications 
for this alteration, the letter recalls the fact that, in practice, the Brazilian government had already applied 
a broader definition  when  granting  the refugee  status to the  Angolans  that  were  fleeing the civil  war in 
their home country. Not contemplating a broad definition would, therefore, “be a retrocession in regards 
to  the  customary  law  that  had  already  been  applied  and  accepted  by  the  Government,  an  unjustified 
proposition,  and,  moreover,  contradictory,  if  confronted  with  the  positioning  in  favor  of  human  rights” 
(Archive of IMDH. Letter sent by Ir. Rosita Milesi to the Minister of Justice, Nelson Azevedo Jobim, on 
02 April 1996).  

36 

 

Direitos Humanos – CDH). This motivated the President of the Commission to organize 

a  public  hearing,  on  08  May  1996,  to  discuss  the  developments  of  the  bill  with 

representatives of the involved NGOs (Milesi & Andrade, 2010, p.38). A few days later, 

on  13  May  1996,  Bill  1936/96  was  officially  forwarded  to  the  National  Congress  and 

submitted to the appreciation of its members.  

In  general,  the contents  of the bill  were not  subject  to  heated dispute and there 

was a manifest tendency towards consensus, even in regards to the composition and the 

attributions of the organ that was to be created to supervise refugee status determination 

and  other  related  issues  (Milesi  &  Andrade,  2010,  p.40).  The  main  exception  was  the 

definition  of  refugee,  which  proved  to  be  a  much  controverted  aspect23  during  the 

debates in the National Congress. The preliminary version of the bill, as elaborated by 

the  Executive  power,  had  not  included  the  broad  definition  of  refugee,  and,  in  this 

sense,  the  connections  that  had  been  previously  established  with  CDH  proved  to  be  a 

fundamental  step  for  the  reviewing  of  the  project  and  for  the  incorporation  of  civil 

society’s recommendations in the final version of the bill. In the end, in spite of a few 

disagreements,  the  suggestions  presented  by  CDH,  in  consonance  with  the  proposals 

that had been made by NGOs, were adopted, with minor alterations in the composition 

of the text (Milesi & Andrade, 2010, p.41). 

 

The  bill,  which  went  through  a  process  of  relatively  fast  consideration  by  the 

National Congress24 - due to the social and political pressure of the interested groups in 

civil  society  and  international  organizations,  which  accompanied  the  process  from  up 

                                                           
23  The  Commission  on  Foreign  Affairs  and  National  Defense  (Comissão  de  Relações  Exteriores  e  de 
Defesa Nacional – CREDN) from the Chamber of Deputies, for instance, positioned against the inclusion 
of a broader refugee concept, pointing to the fact that Brazil had not signed any international documents 
that bound the country to the application of such a definition. Moreover, they argued that it could lead to a 
rapid  increase  in  the  number  of  asylum  seekers,  creating  operational  difficulties  and  having  an 
unpredictable impact on the internal labor market (Milesi & Andrade, 2010, p.41).    
24  The  Brazilian  National  Congress  is  composed  by  the  Senate  and  the  Chamber  of  Deputies,  which, 
together,  form  the  federal  legislature.  Bill  1936/96  was  debated  and  approved  by  the  Chamber  on  20 
March 1997 and received the final pass from the Senate on 15 July 1997.   

37 

 

close  –  was  finally  sanctioned  by  the  Brazilian  Presidency,  at  that  time  occupied  by 

Fernando Henrique Cardoso, on 22 July 1997, and published in the official government 

gazette (Diário Oficial da União) on 23 July 1997, as Law 9474/97. 

 

3.3  The Central Aspects of the National Legislation 

With  the  approval  of  Law  9474/97,  also  known  as  the  National  Refugee  Act, 

Brazil became the first country in South America to incorporate a comprehensive set of 

articulated legal procedures for the admission and integration of refugees in its internal 

legislation25  (Moreira,  2010;  Soares,  2012).  The  Refugee  Act  not  only  translated  the 

main  protection  clauses  contained  in  international  instruments  –  namely,  the  1951 

Convention and its Protocol – into  the national legal  system, but  also  brought  forward 

important resolutions that shape, until today, the main procedures of asylum seeking in 

Brazil.  

As it has been pointed out, in the light of the debates that preceded the approval 

of the bill, Law 9474/97 expanded the available protection with the adoption of a broad 

definition for the determination of refugee status, which contemplates both the classical 

reasons  for  eligibility,  as  specified  in  the  1951  Convention,  and  also  the  more 

encompassing  terms  convened  in  other  documents,  such  as  the  1984  Cartagena 

Declaration.  In Title  I,  Chapter  I, Article 1, the  Act  defines that an individual shall be 

recognized as a refugee if: 

I  –  Due  to  well-founded  fears  of  persecution  for  reasons  of  race,  religion, 

nationality,  social  group  or  political  opinions,  he  or  she  is  out  of  his  or  her 

                                                           
25 Nowadays, most of the countries in South America which have ratified the 1951 Convention and/or the 
1967 Protocol have also developed internal regulations for the eligibility and protection of refugees, such 
as Peru, in 2002; Paraguay, in 2002; Argentina, in 2006; and Chile, in 2010 (Soares, 2012).   

38 

 

country  of  nationality  and  cannot  or  does  not  wish  to  rely  on  the  protection  of 

such country; 

II  –  Having  no  nationality  and  being  out  of  the  country  where  he  or  she  had 

previously  retained  permanent  residence,  cannot  or  does  not  wish  to  return  to 

such country based on circumstances mentioned in item I above; 

III  –  Due  to  severe  and  generalized  violation  of  human  rights,  he  or  she  is 

compelled to leave his or her country of nationality to seek refuge in a different 

country.  

 

In regards to several issues, the National Refugee Act followed the prescriptions 

that had been made by the 1951 Convention, as, for instance, in the clauses that refer to 

the  exclusion  or  the  termination  of  the  condition  of  refugee.  The  Act  confers  the 

possibility  to  extend  refugee  status  to  other  family  members  and  also  contains 

provisions on the rights and duties of refugees and asylum seekers, who “shall enjoy the 

rights and be subject to the duties related to foreigners in Brazil, the provisions of this 

law,  the  1951  Convention  relating  to  the  Status  of  Refugees,  and  the  1967  Protocol 

relating  to  the  Status  of  Refugees”  (Title  I,  Chapter  II,  Article  5).  It  reinforces  the 

commitment  of  the  Brazilian  government  to  the  principle  of  non-refoulement  and 

establishes that “any irregular entrance into national territory shall not be an impediment 

for a foreigner to request refuge before competent authorities” (Title II, Article 8). Any 

administrative or criminal charge resulting from  irregular entry is suspended while the 

request  for  asylum  is  under  analysis  (Title  II,  Article  10).  Moreover,  under  Title  VII, 

Chapters I, II and III, the Act lists the durable solutions for refugees, also in accordance 

with the provisions of the 1951 Convention: voluntary repatriation, local integration and 

resettlement26. 

                                                           
26 In 1999, the Brazilian  government signed a Macro Agreement  for the  Resettlement of  Refugees  with 
UNHCR.  The  initial  commitment  was  to  receive  a  small  number  of  families,  who  would  be  settled  in 

39 

 

 

Last,  but  not  least,  Law  9474/97  defined  the  administrative  procedures  to  be 

followed  in  the  determination  of  refugee  status  and  created  a  specific  governmental 

body – the National Committee for Refugees (CONARE) – that would be in charge of 

the  analysis  of  the  asylum  requests  (as  well  as  decide  on  the  cancellation  or  loss  of 

refugee  status);  of  the  promotion  of  refugee-related  policies  in  the  country;  and  of  the 

elaboration  of  any  normative  resolutions  that  are  deemed  necessary  to  clarify  and 

facilitate the enactment of the dispositions contained in the law27. According to Jubilut 

and  Apolinário  (2008),  this  represented  a  significant  change  in  regards  to  previous 

arrangements, since the responsibility for the procedure of refugee status determination 

was  now  fully  transferred  to  the  Brazilian  government,  with  UNHCR  maintaining  a 

supervisory role and providing technical assistance28 (p.31).    

CONARE  was  established  as  an  inter-ministerial  body,  composed  by  one 

representative  of:  the  Ministry  of  Justice  (who  is  the  president  of  the  Committee);  the 

Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs  (who  is  the  vice-president);  the  Ministry  of  Labor;  the 

Ministry  of  Health;  the  Ministry  of  Education;  the  Federal  Police  Department;  and  a 

non-governmental  organization  involved  in  assistance  and  protection  of  refugees  in 

Brazil29. The Act provides that each of the members is to be appointed by the Brazilian 

President,  according  to  the  nominations  made  by  the  respective  Ministries  and 

organizations, and is entitled to one vote. The Committee shall meet with a quorum of 

                                                                                                                                                                          
small and medium sized cities outside the main Rio de Janeiro-São Paulo axis. In 2004, in the occasion of 
the twentieth anniversary of the Cartagena Declaration, several Latin American countries came together 
to  discuss  the  enhancement  of  refugee  protection  in  the  region.  Brazil  furthered  its  commitment  as  a 
resettlement  country  with  the  proposal  of  the  Solidarity  Resettlement  Program,  which  would  work  as  a 
burden-sharing  tool  to  alleviate  the  pressures  on  countries,  such  as  Ecuador  and  Costa  Rica,  which 
received large influxes of refugees from Colombia (Jubilut, 2006, pp.37-38; Moreira, 2010).    
27 So far, CONARE has adopted fourteen normative resolutions.  
28  UNHCR  actually  dissolved  its  representation  in  the  country  in  1998,  leaving  partnerships  under  the 
supervision of the regional UNHCR office located in Buenos Aires. In 2004, however, the international 
organization decided to re-open the office in Brasília.  
29  This  position  is  occupied  by  Cáritas,  with  CARJ  and  CASP  alternating  in  the  roles  of  main 
representative and substitute representative. IMDH also participates with a special status as a consultative 
member.  This  reflects  the  choice  for  organizations  with  consolidated  historical  and  operational 
experience. However, it was not made very clear how titularity was defined.     

40 

 

four  members  and  deliberations  are  made  by  simple  majority.  In  the  case  of  a  tie,  the 

president of CONARE shall have the decisive vote (Title III, Chapter II, Articles 14 to 

16).  In  addition,  UNHCR  is  included  as  an  invited  member,  with  an  observer  status, 

holding the right of voice, but no vote. The Committee also counts with the support of a 

general  coordinator,  responsible  for  preparing  the  agenda  of  the  meetings  and  for 

organizing the administrative formalities associated to the procedures of asylum request, 

“such as the expedition  of status  declarations, travel  authorizations, and authorizations 

for the issuance of identification documents” (Jubilut & Apolinário, 2008, p.32). 

The  main  particularity  of  CONARE  is  its  encompassing  structure,  which 

attempts  to  include  the  most  relevant  governmental  organs  that  have  an  impact,  either 

directly  or  indirectly,  in  the  assistance  and  integration  or  refugees  in  Brazil  (Jubilut, 

2006). Not only that, but the Committee also has a tripartite character, in which asylum 

policy is carried out in a partnership between government representatives, civil society 

and UNHCR. The inclusion of one NGO representative, entitled to direct participation, 

was the result of a long historical process, in a clear recognition of the pioneering role 

that these organizations had in  the protection of  refugees during the previous  decades. 

The practical expertise that they acquired in years of service delivery working alongside 

UNHCR  stimulated  and  legitimized  their  inclusion  in  CONARE’s  formal  institutional 

structure.  

 

3.4  Basic Data on Refugees in Brazil 

 

According  to  data  provided  by  CONARE,  as  of  April  2013,  there  were  4,794 

refugees living in Brazil, of more than 70 different nationalities: 4,262 had Brazil as the 

first  country  of  asylum  and  532  were  resettled.  As  Table  2  shows,  the  majority  of 

refugees  came  from  Angola,  Colombia,  the  Democratic  Republic  of  the  Congo,  Iraq, 

 

41 

Liberia  and  Syria30.  This  number  is  relatively  small,  taking  into  account  the 

demographic and territorial dimensions of Brazil. However, it is interesting to note that 

the number of asylum seekers is rising significantly. In 2012, the country received 2,008 

requests, which corresponds to  a 254% increase,  if compared to  the numbers of 2010, 

when 566 asylum requests were registered. 

 

Table 2. Refugees Recognized in Brazil 

Nationality 

Angola 

Colombia 

Number of Refugees 

1060 

738 

Democratic Republic of the Congo  570 

Iraq 

Liberia 

Syria 

Others 

Total 

214 

211 

138 

1331 

4262 

Source: Own elaboration, based on data from CONARE (2013) 

 

Reflecting the increase in the number of requests, CONARE’s productivity also 

saw a marked growth: 823 individual cases were analyzed in 2012, compared to 426 in 

2011. From that total, 199 cases had a positive decision. Nationals from Colombia, from 

the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and from Syria had the highest eligibility rates, 

with 53, 39 and 37 recognized refugees, respectively.  

Last,  but  not  least,  the  data  points  towards  a  geographical  concentration  of 

asylum requests. Most of them were filed in the state of São Paulo (45%), followed by 

Rio de Janeiro and the Federal District. The number of requests in the Northern region 

                                                           
30 On 01 June 2012, the Brazilian government implemented a cessation clause that applies to the refugees 
from  Angola  and  Liberia,  following  a  recommendation  from  UNHCR.    The  refugees  can  opt  for 
permanent  residence  in  Brazil.  Subtracting  these  two  groups  from  the  statistics,  the  total  number  of 
recognized refugees in Brazil falls to 2,991.   

42 

 

of Brazil, encompassing the Amazon borders, was also significant, representing 11% of 

the total.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

43 

4  Analyzing the Role of NGOs within Brazilian Asylum Policy 

The  previous  chapter  has  attempted  to  show  how  the  Brazilian  Refugee  Act 

came  into  being,  as  the  legal  result  of  the  interactions  –  and,  at  times,  tensions  – 

between  different  social  actors  involved  with  the  issue.  In  this  sense,  Law  9474/97 

reflected  not  only  the  specific  historical  developments  in  refugee  protection  in  Brazil, 

but also a broader political shift, with a repositioning of the government in its attitudes 

towards NGOs and other civil society actors. The process of redemocratization brought 

along  new  perspectives  on  governance  arrangements,  and  the  antagonism  that  had 

prevailed in government-NGO relationships during the 1970s slowly gave room to more 

cooperative  interactions  throughout  the  1990s.  The  tripartite  character  conferred  to 

CONARE,  the  organ  responsible  for  asylum  policy,  which  counts  with  the  direct 

participation of NGOs, is a prime example of this transformation. 

However, even though the inclusion of the topic in the political agenda and the 

access to formal decision-making structures consist in important developments, they are 

not the end in itself. As it has been previously pointed out in the theoretical discussion, 

the  constitution  of  multi-level  governance  arrangements  depends  on  more  than  just 

access:  participation  also  requires  responses  and  policy  inputs  need  to  be  met  with  an 

environment  of  more  than  cosmetic  exchange  between  the  actors.  Moreover,  it  is  also 

important  to  reflect  on  the  way  that  NGOs  articulate  between  themselves,  in  order  to 

engage,  and  potentially  enhance  their  voices,  in  the  policy  process.  It  is  through  this 

lenses that this thesis will now reflect on the functioning of the tripartite structure that 

characterizes  asylum  policy  in  Brazil.  The  analysis  will  concentrate  on  two  different, 

but deeply interrelated, dimensions of asylum policy, pointing to both the potentialities 

and  constraints  in  NGO  participation  in  each  of  them.  The  first  dimension  refers  to 

intake,  or,  in  other  words,  to  the  process  of  refugee  status  determination.  The  second 

 

44 

dimension refers to integration, accounting for the programs and policies developed to 

facilitate refugees’ integration in the local community.  

 

 

4.1  Participating in Eligibility Decisions: Refugee Status Determination 

 

Although the 1951 Refugee Convention establishes a set of minimum standards 

that  countries  should  follow  in  the  treatment  of  the  refugee  population  –  securing  the 

right  of  non-refoulement,  for  example  –  it  does  not  contain  any  provisions  on  the 

administrative procedures that should be adopted in the determination of refugee status. 

Each  country,  in  the  exercise  of  its  authority  and  taking  into  account  its  own 

organizational  structure,  develops  specific  procedures.  In  the  case  of  Brazil,  the 

procedure  for  refugee  status  determination  involves  several  actors  from  government 

agencies, from UNHCR and from NGOs31. 

 

The  procedure  begins  with  the  placing  of  the  formal  request  by  the  asylum 

seeker at the Federal Police Department, which is responsible for border control32. The 

asylum  seeker  fills  out  a  Declaration  Term,  containing  his/her  personal  identification 

data  as  well  as  a  brief  description  of  the  events  that  motivated  the  asylum  request  in 

Brazil.  After  formally  initiating  the  process  with  the  Declaration  Term,  the  asylum 

                                                           
31 The procedures described here refer to the process of refugee status determination  when Brazil is the 
first country of asylum. Specific administrative procedures are in place for the evaluation of resettlement 
requests, including a fast track alternative for emergency cases. Moreover, it is also important to point out 
that  the  status  recognition  process  in  Brazil  is  based  on  the  analysis  of  individual  requests  (Jubilut  & 
Apolinário, 2008). This had not been a reason for concern until very recently, since the number of asylum 
seekers in the country is relatively small. However, in the past few years, Brazil became one of the main 
destinations for many Haitians, fleeing from the consequences of the natural disasters that left their home 
country  in  precarious  social  and  economic  conditions.  Even  though  most  of  them  do  not  qualify  for 
asylum  in  the  terms  defined  by  the  Brazilian  law  (there  is  a  debate  on  the  definition  of  environmental 
refugees that this thesis does not address), the number of requests has, nonetheless, increased, which puts 
pressure  on  the  functioning  of  the  current  decision-making  structure.  In  cases  that  do  not  fulfill  the 
eligibility  criteria  for  asylum,  CONARE  has  the  option  of  forwarding  the  requests  to  the  National 
Immigration Council (Conselho Nacional de Imigração  – CNIg), which can allow for legal residence in 
the country on the basis of humanitarian reasons. This particular situation has called the attention to the 
necessity to develop special procedures for cases of massive influx of asylum seekers.       
32  The  National  Refugee  Act  does  not  establish  a  deadline  for  the  submission  of  the  asylum  request. 
Therefore, an asylum seeker may claim refugee status upon arrival but is also allowed to do so even after 
he/she has already been in Brazil for some time.  

45 

 

seeker  has  to  complete  a  more  detailed  questionnaire,  which  can  be  filled  out  at  the 

refugee centers directed by Cáritas in the cities of Rio de Janeiro and São Paulo, or at 

the Federal Police Department, in case the asylum seeker in not located in either of the 

two cities mentioned above. The questionnaire is sent to CONARE and is the basis for 

the  issuing  of  the  Provisional  Protocol33,  which  works  as  the  applicants’  provisory 

identification document throughout the procedure and also gives the asylum seeker the 

right to obtain a temporary work permit and a Brazilian tax number (Cadastro de Pessoa 

Física – CPF).  

In  the  next  step,  the  asylum  seeker  has  to  go  through  two  interviews.  The  first 

one  is  conducted  by  lawyers  of  the  refugee  centers  coordinated  by  NGOs34.  They  are 

responsible  for  elaborating  a  legal  opinion  on  eligibility,  the  equivalent  of  a  second 

opinion  on  the  concrete  cases,  which  will  assist  in  the  final  decision35.  The  second 

interview is conducted by a trained officer of CONARE. In both cases, professionals are 

bound  by  a  confidentiality  term  and  may  dispose  of  the  aid  of  an  interpreter  when 

necessary.  

Once  the  interviews  are  complete,  each  individual  case  is  assessed  by  a 

Preliminary  Analysis  Group  (Grupo  de  Estudos  Prévios  –  GEP).  This  group  was 

established  as  the  result  of  practical  experience,  once  it  became  clear  that  it  was  not 

possible to submit all asylum requests to careful consideration  at the plenary meetings 

of CONARE, held every two months (Jubilut & Apolinário, 2008). GEP, therefore, was 

created  with  the  central  purpose  of  providing  this  necessary  in-depth  analysis.  The 

                                                           
33  The  Provisional  Protocol  is  valid  for  ninety  days  and  is  renewable  for  as  long  as  the  refugee  status 
determination process takes.  
34 Until recently, these interviews were conducted exclusively by lawyers from CARJ and CASP. Since 
2011,  and  more  expressively  in  2012,  IMDH,  located  in  Brasília,  also  started  to  provide  this  service, 
expanding  the  access  of  asylum  seekers  who  do  not  reside  in  São  Paulo  or  Rio  de  Janeiro  to  the 
interviews.  In  2012,  for  example,  the  institute  conducted  121  interviews  (Data  provided  by  IMDH 
through personal communication).  
35 The NGO interviews also serve the purpose of identifying the central needs of the applicant, in terms of 
financial assistance and health treatments, for example (Jubilut, 2006).  

46 

 

group usually meets one week before CONARE’s plenary session, and counts with the 

participation  of  the  general  coordinator,  the  representative  of  the  Ministry  of  Foreign 

Affairs,  the  representative  of  the  Federal  Police  Department,  representatives  of  NGOs 

(lawyers from CARJ, CASP and IMDH), CONARE’s eligibility officers and UNHCR. 

In short, GEP works with the comparison of the legal opinions provided by the NGOs 

and  by  the  eligibility  officers,  devoting  special  attention  to  the  cases  that  receive 

divergent recommendations from the two interviewers36. 

The last step of the process is the deliberation of the requests by the members of 

CONARE  at  the  plenary  meeting.  As  it  has  been  previously  noted,  each  member  is 

entitled to one vote and decisions are made by simple majority.  In the case of positive 

decision, the asylum seeker is recognized as a refugee. In the cases of denial of refugee 

status,  on  the  other  hand,  the  asylum  seeker  has  the  right,  within  fifteen  days  after 

receiving  the  notification  with  CONARE’s  decision,  to  file  an  appeal,  which  is  to  be 

analyzed by the Ministry of Justice. NGOs also provide juridical assistance to refugees 

filing the appeal. Having been granted with refugee status37, the applicant must register 

with  the  Federal  Police  Department,  where  he/she  will  sign  a  Responsibility  Term, 

stating  his/her  rights  and  duties,  and  receive  an  official  residence  permit,  the  National 

Register of Foreigners (Registro Nacional de Estrangeiros – RNE). 

As this exposition shows, NGOs have a particularly relevant participation in the 

procedures  of  refugee  status  determination,  being  involved  in  different  stages  of  the 

                                                           
36 One of the organizations highlights that it is easily perceptible that the legal opinions have an impact in 
the  decisions.  When  the  legal  opinion  of  the  lawyers  from  civil  society  is  different  from  that  of  the 
eligibility officers of CONARE, there tends to be a broader discussion. At times, the opinions are read out 
loud during the meetings, falling under the attention of all the participants of GEP or of the members of 
CONARE  at  the  plenary  sessions.  Moreover,  the  discussions  often  go  beyond  the  consideration  of  the 
individual cases, leading to a continuous re-evaluation of the format of the refugee  status determination 
procedures (IMDH, n.d., unpublished manuscript).   
37  In  the  case  of  final  negative  decision,  the  applicant  is  subject  to  the  national  immigration  law  (Law 
6815/80).  This  law  also  been  the  object  of  discussion  between  many  civil  society  organizations  and 
government  agencies,  since  it  was  developed  during  the  military  regime,  in  1980,  and  is  considered 
outdated.  A  new  immigration  bill  has  been  forwarded  to  the  National  Congress  in  2009,  but  remains 
under debate and has yet to be approved.    

47 

 

process.  A  very  innovative  aspect  is  the  inclusion  of  one  NGO  representative,  with 

voting rights, as a full member of the Committee, giving these organizations a say in the 

formal  decision-making  process  relating  to  the  admission  of  refugees  in  Brazil38. 

Whereas NGOs  are more often  granted with  an  observer or  consultative  status,  in  this 

case,  to  borrow  from  the  terminology  of  Banulescu-Bogdan  (2011),  they  are  a 

constituent  part  of  CONARE.  This  is  not  to  say,  however,  that  NGOs  do  not  face 

limitations  in  their  engagement  in  the  decision-making  process.  The  first  and  more 

visible  constraint  is  of  a  numeric  imbalance:  final  decisions  are  taken  with  the  votes 

from  the  members  of  the  Committee,  which  include  representatives  of  six  different 

governmental organs and only one NGO representative. Moreover, participation in the 

several stages of the refugee status determination process is limited to NGOs that have 

access to the formal structure of CONARE. 

Another source of potential instability, and which, ultimately, can also constrain 

participation,  is  the  lack  of  legal  provisions  regarding  the  role  of  NGOs.  Besides 

appointing one NGO representative as a member  of CONARE,  Law 9474/97  does not 

provide  any  further  dispositions  on  the  specific  involvement  that  these  organizations 

shall have in  the administrative procedures of asylum  request. Even though one of the 

established  functions  of  CONARE  is  the  approval  of  instructions  that  clarify  the 

execution  of  the  Law,  so  far,  some  of  the  most  relevant  aspects  of  the  refugee  status 

determination procedures have not been formalized (Jubilut & Apolinário, 2008).  

For  instance,  while  the  Committee  has  approved  normative  resolutions  that 

dispose about the standardization of the terms and questionnaires that have to be filled 

                                                           
38 The presence of a NGO, as a full member, with voting rights, in the institutional decision-making body 
responsible  for  the  analysis  of  refugee  eligibility,  was  only  adopted  by  two  other  countries  in  South 
America: Bolivia, in 2005; and Uruguay, in 2006 (Soares, 2012, p.104).   

48 

 

by  the  asylum  seekers  throughout  the  process39,  no  particular  resolutions  have  been 

made in regards to the inclusion of NGO interviews as a formal part of the procedures. 

The  interviews  and  the  legal  opinions  provided  by  NGO  lawyers  are  considered  as  a 

form of complementary support: they are consolidated practices, but not a requirement. 

In  other  words,  this  means  that  an  asylum  request  can  be  decided  without  necessarily 

containing a legal opinion on eligibility by the lawyers of the refugee centers40.  

Whereas  this  might  allow  for  more  flexibility  in  the  adaptation  of  procedures, 

according  to  available  or  changing  circumstances,  it  also  creates  the  risk  of 

discontinuation  of  practices  that  may  bring  relevant  contributions  to  the  decision-

making  process.  According  to  Jubilut  and  Apolinário  (2008),  “it  seems  important  to 

have the most transparent system possible and to have the most protective guarantees in 

place,  regularized  by  law  so  that  they  cannot  be  withdrawn  due  to  political  shifts” 

(p.37). 

 

4.2  Participating in the Integration Process: Partnerships and Policies 

 

If  the  participation  of  NGOs  in  the  procedures  of  refugee  status  determination 

has  not  been  formalized  in  all  its  different  dimensions  –  even  though  strongly 

consolidated  in  practice  –,  the  structure  of  tripartite  cooperation  in  the  integration 

process  is  of  an  even  more  general  character41.  As  Jubilut  and  Apolinário  (2008) 

                                                           
39 These resolutions were important since they presented a step towards the harmonization of procedures 
throughout the country.  
40 In this regard, NGOs also face the challenge of the geographical dispersion of asylum seekers in Brazil, 
which, at times, also plays against the inclusion of their legal opinions in the analysis of all the submitted 
requests. One of the strategies adopted to minimize the problem is the conduction of interviews upon the 
first visit of the asylum seekers to the refugee centers and, in other cases, through Skype, which, although 
not  ideal,  is  still  considered  a  preferable  alternative  than  not  providing  any  legal  opinion  from  the  civil 
society lawyers at all (IMDH, n.d., unpublished manuscript). 
41  As  Brinkerhoff  (1999a)  suggests,  these  less  structured  governance  arrangements  are  usually 
characteristic  of  situations  in  which  the  actors  are  still  making  a  first  approach  towards  official  policy 
dialogues,  which  would  allow  for  a  “testing  of  the  waters  of  cooperation  by  both  sides  without 
committing  either  one  to  a  formalized  path  until  trust  and  agreed-upon  modes  of  interaction  could  be 
developed”  (p.77).  It  is  interesting  to  point  out  that,  in  spite  of  this  lack  of  normative  provisions 

49 

 

highlight,  the  Brazilian  Refugee  Act  is  a  comprehensive  legislation  in  terms  of  its 

content, touching upon a broad range of issues that go beyond the criteria of eligibility, 

and equally include provisions in regards to durable solutions – voluntary repatriation, 

local  integration  and  resettlement.  However,  this  encompassing  character  is  partially 

undermined  by  the  lack  of  clarity  in  regards  to  certain  provisions,  as  well  as  to  the 

imprecise definition of implementing arrangements.  

In the specific chapter on local integration, for example, Law 9474/97 addresses 

the  importance  of  facilitating  the  submission  of  documents  and  the  recognition  of 

certificates and diplomas, given the atypical circumstances that force refugees to leave 

their countries (Title VII, Chapter II), but no articulated action plans have been put into 

practice.  Similarly,  it  also  determines  that  CONARE,  as  the  responsible  body  for 

asylum-related issues, shall “provide guidelines and coordinate the actions necessary to 

the efficiency of protection, assistance and legal support to refugees” (Title III, Chapter 

I. Article 12), but has not been met with a detailed framework specifying the roles of the 

different  actors  involved  with  asylum  policy  in  Brazil,  and  how  they  articulate  in  the 

process of integration42.  

In  this  sense,  the  configuration  of  the  tripartite  enterprise  derived,  to  a  large 

extent,  from  the  arrangements  that  had  already  been  consolidating,  through  practical 

experience, in  the decades before.  In other words, this means that NGOs maintained a 

large responsibility  for the provision of direct  assistance to  refugees, in  a continuation 

                                                                                                                                                                          
regulating specific arrangements, the interdependency between the involved actors  – with each bringing 
an important asset to the table – often appeared in the discourse as a guarantee for continued cooperation, 
which would balance concerns with formalization. As it was mentioned in one of the interviews, maybe 
there  are  no  normative  guarantees,  but  not  continuing  with  collaboration  “would  also  be  their  [the 
government] loss” (personal communication A, 22 February 2013). The downside, on the other hand, is 
that  it  also  raises  difficulties  on  accountability  and  creates  the  risk  of  delegation  of  responsibilities. 
Moreover,  interpersonal  links  are  overemphasized  as  a  basis  for  access  and  for  participation  in  the 
governance arrangements.   
42 The exception is the Resettlement Program, which, through a normative resolution of December 2011, 
had the roles and the terms of cooperation between the Brazilian government, UNHCR and NGOs more 
precisely defined.  

50 

 

of  their  historical  role,  when  they  took  on  the  delivery  of  services  through  their  own 

initiative. The inclusion of NGOs is considered important, since, besides their practical 

expertise,  they  are  in  a  privileged  position  to  access  the  population  and  have  more 

flexibility  to  respond  to  the  specific  needs  encountered  at  the  local  levels.  “Civil 

society”,  as  Cooke  and  Spencer  (2006)  point  out,  “is  uniquely  positioned  to  take  a 

holistic, person centered approach to the question of integration” (p.14).  

Nowadays, there are a number of organizations that provide specific services to 

asylum seekers and refugees in Brazil, both during the period of analysis of their request 

and after official recognition. These services are  financed  with  the organizations’ own 

resources,  obtained  through  donations  and  campaigns,  and,  in  addition,  with  the 

collaboration  of  UNHCR,  which  provides  funding,  and  technical  orientation,  for  the 

activities  developed  by  its  implementation  partners43.  More  recently,  the  Brazilian 

government  has  also  become  more  involved,  establishing  formal  contracts  with  a  few 

NGOs, through CONARE and the Ministry of Justice, to fund integration initiatives44. 

Depending  on  their  size,  scope  and  access  to  funding,  NGOs  might  offer  a 

different  range  of  services.  Assistance  can  include  juridical  support  –  with  documents 

and  registrations  –  and  several  other  aspects  of  social  integration,  such  as  housing 
                                                           
43  UNHCR  has,  at  the  moment,  six  implementation  partners  in  Brazil:  CARJ,  CASP,  IMDH,  Cáritas 
Arquidiocesana of Manaus (CAM), the Center for the Defense of Human Rights in Guarulhos (Centro de 
Defesa dos Direitos Humanos – CDDH) and the Antônio Vieira Association (Associação Antônio Vieira 
– ASAV). These are formal, official partnerships, which include the formulation of specific contracts for 
funding,  renewed  annually,  and  which  require  the  fulfillment  of  certain  administrative,  operational  and 
accountability  criteria  on  the  part  of  the  NGOs.  The  international  organization  also  provides  more 
informal support to other projects. UNHCR has a limited amount of resources for funding in Brazil, and, 
due  to  the  large  demand,  has  to  make  a  selection  between  the  NGOs.  It  is  interesting  to  note  how  the 
partnerships have developed and changed throughout the years, responding to the specific circumstances 
of  refugee  reception  in  Brazil.  With  the  establishment  of  the  Resettlement  Program,  for  example,  there 
was a diversification in the number of cities and NGOs involved, which also led to the diversification of 
UNHCR partnerships. Similarly, the rapid increase in the influx of asylum seekers through the Amazon 
borders stimulated the partnership with Cáritas in Manaus.        
44  Partnerships  with  the  Brazilian  government  began  to  take  shape  between  2004  and  2005,  when 
CONARE started receiving a specific budget. Until then, the Committee did not have financial autonomy, 
depending  on  the  resources  of  the  Foreigners  Department  of  the  Ministry  of  Justice  (Soares,  2012).  In 
2004,  CASP  also  established  an  agreement  with  the  Human  Rights  Secretariat  of  the  Presidency  of  the 
Republic  (Secretaria  Especial  de  Direitos  Humanos  da  Presidência  da  República  –  SEDH/PR)  which 
provided resources for the expansion of refugee reception and information centers to other cities, as was 
the case of Brasília, in collaboration with IMDH. Government funding is, however, still restricted.    

51 

 

(shelters maintained by the organizations or by partner guesthouses), language courses, 

health  care,  educational  and  professional  capacitation  programs,  and  recreational 

activities, among others. In certain cases, organizations can also provide direct financial 

aid to asylum seekers and refugees.  

Nonetheless, however important the efforts and the projects developed by these 

organizations, they have a limited reach and  are  not  substitutive of the public services 

offered  by  the  government.  The  assistance  and  integration  services  and  partnerships 

provided  by  NGOs  remain  largely  dependent  on  their  budget  and  organizational 

capacity,  and,  moreover,  often  rely  on  personal  connections  and  individual  political 

will, which does not guarantee their maintenance in the long run (Jubilut & Apolinário, 

2008).  NGOs  themselves  recognize  these  limits  and  signal  that  whether  through  the 

inclusion of refugees in  existing public policies  or through the development  of others, 

specifically directed towards this group, the Brazilian government has remained distant, 

if not negligent, delegating the task to civil society and abstaining from its share in the 

responsibility  for  integration  (Milesi  &  Carlet,  2006  as  cited  in  Bógus  &  Rodrigues, 

2011, p.109).    

Given  the  difficulties  faced  by  refugees  in  accessing  public  services  and  social 

programs  promoted  by  the  government  –  especially  in  regards  to  housing,  health  care 

and  the  labor  market  –  several  NGOs  have  also  attempted  to  incorporate  an  advocacy 

dimension  to  their  activities.  According  to  Casey  (1998),  “NGOs  have,  on  one  hand, 

been  the  frontline  in  responding  to  the  need  of  immigrant  communities,  and  on  the 

other,  constitute  a  lobby  pushing  for  more  services  and  demanding  that  governments 

take more responsibility” (p.108).    

Indeed,  brochures,  websites  and  other  informative  material  produced  by  all  of 

the  organizations  contacted  for  this  research,  for  example,  specified,  among  their 

 

52 

objectives,  a  commitment  to  policy-making  processes,  with  the  aim  of  advocating  for 

and  helping  to  elaborate  appropriate  instruments  and  mechanisms  that  improve  the 

access of asylum seekers and refugees to public services, in respect to the rights that are 

guaranteed by the Constitution and by the Refugee Act45. The strategies listed to make 

this  contribution  varied  between  monitoring  and  evaluation,  research  –  which  raises 

awareness and can provide an evidence base for future policy developments – and direct 

engagement  in  different  institutional  spaces.  The  next  subsections  will  approach  this 

topic,  trying  to  understand  the  means  of  access  and  the  possibilities  of  interaction 

provided by these spaces.  

   

4.2.1  Engagement at the national level 

 

One  of  the  main  implications  of  the  tripartite  model,  with  the  creation  of  an 

institutional space that granted access to NGOs, was that these organizations would, at 

least  in  theory,  have  a  vehicle  to  exert  pressure  on  the  government,  demand  for 

resources, and intervene in the elaboration of legal instruments and public policies. To 

borrow  from  the  expression  used  by  one  NGO  representative,  when  describing  this 

involvement, this is the stage of invisible work: once policies are into place, people tend 

to take them for granted, but there is a whole lot of articulation, debate and negotiation, 

that goes on behind the scenes, until they adopt their final shape. As another interviewee 

described,  this  is  a  dynamic  process,  in  which  alliances  are  formed,  actors  agree  and 

disagree  and  positions  constantly  shift:  “You  have  to  deal  with  an  issue  here,  solve  a 

problem  there,  go  to  meetings…  It  is  a  continuous,  everyday  work”  (personal 

communication B, 22 February 2013).  

                                                           
45  Comprehensive  information  can  be  found  at:  http://www.migrante.org.br  (IMDH’s  website); 
http://www.adus.org.br (Adus’ website) and http://www.missaonspaz.org (Casa do Migrante’s website).  

53 

 

 

To  engage  at  the  national  level,  NGOs  make  use  of  the  spaces  available  at 

CONARE, both at the plenary sessions and at training and evaluative meetings, and, in 

addition,  try  to  approach  Ministries  and  other  public  organs,  through  participation  in 

reunions and debates, and research collaboration. The spreading of advocacy activities 

towards  different  spheres  derives  from  the  fact  that,  even  though  prime  responsibility 

for asylum relies with CONARE, other Ministries and governmental agencies also bear 

responsibility for several other policy issues that directly interfere with integration. The 

very broad  composition of CONARE reflects  the recognition  of this interdisciplinarity 

and  attempts  to  facilitate  the  circulation  of  ideas  to  the  respective  Ministries,  so  that 

constructive  integration  policies  and  practices  are  embedded  into  broader  social  and 

economic programs (Cooke & Spencer, 2006). 

However,  even  though  NGO  proposals  and  demands  are  passed  on  to 

government  authorities  –  be  it  through  letters,  presentations,  formal  documents  or 

research findings  – it does not  always mean that they  get  a response.  The  inclusion of 

asylum and integration issues in the political agenda of these different public organs has 

proven  particularly  difficult  given  two  main  sets  of  constraints.  First  is  the  lack  of 

information among policy makers themselves. Asylum seekers and refugees compose a 

very small group and, therefore, do not have a lot of visibility in the broader social and 

political contexts – which, as a consequence, does not favor the centrality of the issue in 

the public agenda. Second, as it has already been noted by the literature, governments 

are not monolithic. This implies that  the proposals put forward by NGOs are met with 

variable responses, depending on the priorities of each department, which reflect “their 

responsibilities and the pressures to which they are responding”, as well as the dominant 

political  view  –  and  will  –  of  the  concerned  Ministries  and  implementation  agencies 

(Spencer, 2006, p.29). Whereas some might be more responsive to the demands, others 

 

54 

might  give preference to one-off, punctual solutions to address pressing needs, instead 

of  promoting  more  permanent,  structural  transformations.  As  it  was  noted  by  one 

organization: “Negotiations can be very long. You have to take the broader context into 

account” (personal communication A, 22 February 2013).   

Therefore, advancements are made, at different paces, in different governmental 

organs  and  in  regards  to  different  policy  issues.  By  way  of  example,  it  is  possible  to 

mention two important achievements that have been made so far in regards to the legal 

condition  of  refugees  in  Brazil.  The  first  one  refers  to  the  request  for  revision  of  the 

Normative  Resolution  n.  06  of  the  National  Immigration  Council  (CNIg),  which 

established  that  a  refugee  could  apply  for  permanent  residence  after  six  years  in  the 

country.  It  was  proposed  that  the  stated  limit  should  be  reduced  to  four  years, 

considering,  among  other  reasons,  that  it  would  curtail  costs  with  the  emission  of 

temporary documents and facilitate the process of integration of refugees in Brazil. The 

issue,  which  had  been  discussed  at  previous  occasions46,  was  formally  presented  by 

IMDH  at  a  plenary  meeting  of  CONARE,  held  on  08  October  2010,  receiving  full 

support from the members of the Committee. The petition was forwarded to CNIg and 

entered  into  force  in  November  of  that  same  year.  Another  successful  advocacy 

initiative  was  achieved  through  the  Ministry  of  Labor,  which  agreed  with  the 

substitution of the term “refugee”, stamped in the work permits (Carteira de Trabalho e 

Previdência  Social  –  CTPS),  by  the  more  neutral  “foreigner  according  to  Law 

9474/97”47.  Moreover,  the  Ministry  has  organized  workshops,  in  cities  with  larger 

concentration  of  refugees,  to  discuss  employment,  rights  and  difficulties  faced  by  the 

group in accessing the labor market.  

                                                           
46 The idea was presented both at a meeting for the evaluation of the Resettlement Program, organized by 
CONARE,  and  at  national  meeting  of  NGOs  that  work  with  migrants  and  refugees.  More  information 
about this NGO network will be provided in another section.   
47  This  alteration  was  motivated  by  the  practical  experience  of  many  refugees,  who  had  difficulties 
finding a job due to the lack of information of employers regarding the meaning of refugee status.   

55 

 

 

On  the  other  hand,  in  reference  to  the  access  to  social  policies  and  programs, 

government agencies seem to be providing a slower response. One case in point, which 

has  been  under  debate,  is  that  of  access  to  the  Continuous  Cash  Benefit  Program48 

(Benefício  de  Prestação  Continuada  –  BPC).  Even  though,  according  to  the 

Constitution, the benefit should be equally available to nationals and foreigner residents, 

a  decree  from  the  National  Social  Security  Institute  (Instituto  Nacional  de  Seguridade 

Social  –  INSS),  the  responsible  organ  for  operationalization,  has  restricted  access  to 

foreigners that have acquired Brazilian nationality.  NGOs have presented research and 

juridical  arguments  against  this  limitation,  but,  up  to  the  moment,  no  resolutions  have 

been made. 

 

4.2.2  Engagement at the local level 

Another  alternative  for  engagement  relies  at  the  local  level,  with  the  recent 

creation of committees in a few of the Brazilian states with the largest concentration of 

refugees. São Paulo was the first one to adhere to the initiative, installing, in 2008, the 

State  Committee  for  Refugees  (Comitê  Estadual  para  Refugiados  –  CER).  Rio  de 

Janeiro  followed  the  example  and,  in  the  end  of  2009,  created  the  Intersectoral  State 

Committee for Refugee Policies (Comitê Intersetorial Estadual de Políticas de Atenção 

aos Refugiados – CEIPAR). Even more recently, in 2012, the states of Paraná and Rio 

Grande  do  Sul  also  established  specific  organs  to  promote  refugee  protection  and 

policies, in a growing tendency towards local involvement.  

These new deliberative spaces reflect the understanding that the participation of 

states,  municipalities  and  other  local  actors  is  essential  for  the  integration  of  refugees. 

                                                           
48 The BPC Program is a constitutionally-ensured benefit that has been in effect in Brazil since 1993. The 
benefit is provided to individuals over 65 years of age or persons with disabilities, whose household per 
capita income is less than one quarter of the minimum wage. Through BPC, they are entitled to receive a 
monthly cash transfer equivalent to one minimum wage (Medeiros, Diniz & Squinca, 2006).  

56 

 

CONARE’s  mandate  over  the  eligibility  process  consumes  much  of  its  organizational 

capacity,  which  limits  the  time  and  space  actually  devoted  to  discuss  integration  and 

public  policies.  The  State  Committees,  on  the  other  hand,  focus  solely  on  this  aspect, 

and have the benefit of  providing, at  least  in  theory,  a more personalized approach, in 

touch with the specific local needs of the refugee population.  

The 

interdisciplinary, 

tripartite  model  adopted  by  CONARE  was  also 

reproduced in the local committees, which all count with representatives of government 

bodies, NGOs and UNHCR. Also similarly, the inclusion of NGOs was a direct result of 

their practical expertise and assistance role, which consists in an important asset since, 

to a large extent, civil servants and public managers still lack more in-depth knowledge 

on the situation of refugees. In the case of São Paulo, for example, the State Committee 

includes two NGO representatives in its official structure, and, moreover, has developed 

working groups around five different priority areas – housing, health care, labor, social 

vulnerability,  and  education  and  culture  –  that  are  open  to  the  participation  of  other 

organizations.  In  this  sense,  State  Committees  can  provide  more  bridges  for  the 

participation  of  local  NGOs,  also  facilitating  the  link  between  these  organizations  and 

other state organs.  

According  to  Pinto  (2011),  given  the  fact  that  these  committees  have  just 

recently been established, “it remains to be seen whether, with their attributed structures 

and  functions,  they  will  be  able  to  develop  effective  actions,  occupying  a  new, 

unexplored  space,  and  strengthening  new  dynamics  and  articulations”  (p.193). 

Resorting again to the example of São Paulo’s committee, it is possible to see that a few 

actions have already been taken, regarding specific demands on the health care system 

and  on  the  inclusion  of  refugees  in  work  programs,  but  with  limited  visibility.  As 

highlighted by Jubilut  (2010), “it is  important  that  the Committee has started to  act  in 

 

57 

specific  cases  that  were  brought  to  its  attention  but  it  is  essential  that  broader  public 

policy issues be its main concern in future actions” (p.47).  

In this respect, the elaboration and monitoring of action plans appears as one of 

the main contributions that the committees can make, not only in the sense of creating 

the  conditions  for  the  integration  of  refugees,  but  also  of  setting  up  a  more  precise 

framework  for  the  collaboration  between  governmental  and  non-governmental  actors, 

which  could  help  prevent  problems  with  the  delegation  of  responsibility  and  with  the 

overcharge of NGOs’ service delivery role.  

For that to  happen, however, it is  necessary that  the State Committees work as 

forum of critical representation and debate – otherwise, it incurs in the risk of becoming 

a  rhetorical,  cosmetic  structure:  as  Pinto  (2011)  emphasizes,  “the  ‘face’  and  the 

dimension of these organs, which lack resources and a specific normative detailing, will 

depend  a  lot  on  the  creativity,  involvement  and  commitment  of  each  one  of  the 

members” (pp.197-198). 

 

4.3  Networks and Governance: Building a Common Voice 

 

The final point presented above calls the attention to one last, but very relevant 

aspect,  of  NGO  participation.  It  has  already  been  shown  that  the  establishment  of 

venues of access, although essential, is not enough on its own. That is, the establishment 

of  dialogue  structures  needs  to  be  met  with  a  responsive  environment.  If,  on  the  one 

hand,  these  responses  depend  on  the  general  government  attitude  that  NGOs  are 

received  with  –  varying  according  to  the  dominant  political  perspectives,  to  the 

perceived centrality of the issue, to the willingness of departmental representatives, etc. 

–  they  can  also  be  influenced  by  the  internal  organization  and  articulation  of  NGOs 

themselves. More precisely: the organizational capacity of NGOs affects the weight of 

 

58 

the voice that they carry into policy-making forums and, therefore, can also interfere in 

the responses they get, as participants in the governance process.   

Even 

though 

this  organizational  capacity  can  refer 

to 

the 

individual 

characteristics  of  NGOs49,  I  would  like  to  approach  the  topic  here  under  a  more 

encompassing  light,  focusing  on  the  collective  organization  and  articulation  among 

NGOs. More specifically, I will call the attention to a particular initiative that has been 

developed  between  NGOs  in  Brazil:  the  Solidary  Network  for  Migrants  and  Refugees 

(Rede Solidária para Migrantes e Refugiados). 

 

This  network  was  articulated  in  2004,  by  initiative  of  IMDH  and  with  the 

support  of  UNHCR,  and  includes  more  than  forty  organizations  spread  across  the 

country50.  The  initial  goal  was  to  bring  NGOs  closer,  to  promote  the  exchange  of 

information  and  practices  and  to  provide  mutual  support,  improving,  therefore,  the 

assistance  given  to  migrants  and  refugees.  In  the  period  between  2004  and  2012,  the 

network  has  organized  eight  national  meetings,  in  which  NGOs,  as  well  as  invited 

members  from  CONARE,  UNHCR  and  other  relevant  governmental  bodies,  come 

together  to  discuss  different  topics  of  concern,  develop  capacitation  activities  and 

articulate proposals.  

When discussing about networks, Keck and Sikkink (1998) propose that one of 

their  most  valuable  currencies  is  precisely  the  exchange  of  information  and  services 

between  participant  organizations.  They  define  networks  as  “forms  of  organization 

characterized  by  voluntary,  reciprocal  and  horizontal  patterns  of  communication  and 

exchange”  (p.8),  which  can  provide  information  and  establish  links  that  would  not  be 
                                                           
49 First and foremost, these organizational aspects refer to the internal structure of NGOs  – their human 
and financial resources, operational capacity, interpersonal contacts and, in the case of a country with the 
spatial dimensions of Brazil, even geographic location. Indeed, as it has become apparent throughout the 
exposition, there are a few organizations that have achieved privileged access to decision-making arenas, 
as a result of the historical ties and partnerships developed with UNHCR and other governmental actors 
and of their own practical experience and expertise.   
50  The  network  had  already  begun  to  take  shape,  however,  since  the  beginning  of  the  1990s,  in  the 
backdrop of the process of political redemocratization and of elaboration of the National Refugee Act.  

59 

 

available otherwise.  The experience of the NGO network in Brazil seems point towards 

this direction. As it was noted in one interview: “The Network is very important, it has a 

local presence. It is important to articulate quick responses” (personal communication 

B, 22 February 2012). Given the broad geographical reach established by the network, it 

has  become  an  important  tool  in  the  generation  of  accurate  and  updated  information, 

helping  to  identify  new  migratory  patterns  (as  was  the  case,  for  example,  with  the 

increasing influx of Haitians through the Northern borders of the country), as well as the 

specific needs of migrants and refugees in each local context.  

In this sense, the Solidary Network can provide the space and the opportunity for 

NGOs to not only exchange experiences, but to capitalize on their strategic resources – 

access to information, local reach – and build a stronger collective voice. Since not all 

of the organizations have formal access to the high-level decision-making arenas, these 

are  spaces  where  they  can  present  their  concerns  and  make  suggestions  that  will  be 

forwarded  to  the  competent  authorities  by  those  that  have  the  institutional  leverage. 

Therefore,  these  networks  have  the  potential  to  work  as  an  advocacy  tool,  helping  to 

build  a  common  platform  and  providing  governments  with  an  interface51  (Banulescu-

Bogdan,  2011).  This  is  an  angle  of  action  that,  although  still  incipient  and  not  fully 

explored, can be approached by NGOs with the aim of articulating a common discourse 

and enhancing their capacity of political mobilization. 

 

In sum, the initiatives described along the chapter indicate that there are several 

venues for NGO participation, but  they are still not  consolidated arrangements. NGOs 

have  achieved  recognition  for  their  expertise  and  historical  role,  but  a  more  detailed 

                                                           
51 A proposal was made for the creation of a more formal structure that would congregate the NGOs, the 
Brazilian  Council  for  Refugees  (Conselho  Brasileiro  para Refugiados).  This  proposal,  however,  has  not 
been put into effect and seemed to attract diverging opinions. On the one hand, it was argued that it could 
strengthen  efforts  towards  the  improvement  of  policies,  the  demand  for  resources  and  the  exchange  of 
information,  creating  a  more  solid  basis  for  the  participation  of  NGOs.  On  the  other,  it  raised  concerns 
about the effects that a more formal, top-down structure could have on the work  that was already being 
developed by the organizations, limiting the fluidity of the sector rather than enhancing their voices.       

60 

 

framework for cooperation with the government still needs to be designed, with a more 

transparent character, especially in regards to the integration process. This is, in part, a 

reflex of the still very  recent political  transformations in  Brazil:  both  civil  society  and 

government  are  still  gaining  and  building  governance  experience.  NGOs,  on  the  one 

hand,  are  maturing  in  their  role  as  political  actors.  The  Brazilian  government,  on  the 

other, is maturing in its administrative capacity. And both, on their turn, develop in the 

broader  social,  political,  legal  and  institutional  contexts  that  create  the  setting  for  this 

engagement. As it has been pointed out, governance is a process and, therefore, subject 

to  constant transformation, not  only  as circumstances change, but  also  as the involved 

actors gain more experience. In the specific case of asylum policy, a tripartite model has 

been envisaged. Now, the focus relies on testing the possible collaborative mechanisms 

in search for the best ways to guarantee the protection of refugees. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

61 

5  Conclusion 

 

The main purpose of this study was to  shed light  on the involvement  of NGOs 

with asylum policy in Brazil, understanding the extent to which they are included – and 

can actively engage – in the existing governance arrangements, as well as the potential 

constraints  they  might  be  faced  with.  In  the  first  chapter,  I  attempted  to  contextualize 

this topic in the backdrop of a broader theoretical  debate that discusses the concept  of 

governance  and,  more  particularly,  the  role  of  NGOs  in  the  policy  process.  This 

literature  emphasizes  a  tendency,  made  more  visible  over  the  past  three  decades,  of 

transformation  in  the  styles  and  modes  of  governing,  towards  multi-level  interactive 

models  that  not  only  work  at  different  spheres  of  government,  but  also  have  come  to 

include non-state actors. Central  to  this  perspective is  the idea that no single  actor has 

sufficient expertise to tackle social issues independently and, therefore, collaboration is 

a  necessary  effort.  It  also  implies  a  reformulation  of  state-civil  society  interactions,  in 

which  the  latter  acquires  a  more  active  role,  as  participant  of  the  governance  process, 

and not merely as an object of it. This participation, on its turn, can take make shapes, 

either  through  the  individual  action  of  citizens,  social  movements  or  more  formal 

organizations, such as NGOs. 

 

NGOs,  in  particular,  have  presented  a  significant  numeric  growth  since  the 

1980s,  while  at  the  same  time,  consolidating  their  position  as  relevant  stakeholders  in 

different issue-areas. Indeed, they have become engaged in a range of activities relating 

to policy-making processes, such as service delivery, awareness raising and more direct 

advocacy  strategies.  The  literature  review  has  also  attempted  to  show,  however,  that 

engagement can be met with different responses and thus needs to be contextualized in 

regards to the broader political and institutional settings, to the specific issue or policy 

under  consideration,  and  to  the  organizational  characteristics  of  the  actors  –  both  in 

 

62 

terms  of  their  operational  capacity  and  of  their  interconnections.  It  is  argued  that  a 

historical,  more  situational  approach,  allows  for  a  nuanced  understanding  of  NGO 

agency,  taking  into  account  the  opportunities  and  constraints  characteristic  of  each 

setting (Lewis & Opoku-Mensah, 2006).  

 

With this framework in mind, the next two chapters approached the specific case 

of  asylum  policy  in  Brazil,  making  use  of  the  material  obtained  through  document 

analysis  and  complemented  by  the  interviews.  I  have  tried  to  show  how  the 

development  of  asylum  policy  in  the  country  was  the  result  of  the  social  interactions 

and  tensions  between  different  actors  at  different  points  in  time,  pointing  towards  the 

active  role  played  by  NGOs  in  several  stages  of  the  process,  from  agenda  setting,  to 

formulation  and  implementation.  The  historical  background  clearly  points  to  a  shift  in 

the  relationship  between  the  Brazilian  government  and  NGOs,  going  from  a  more 

confrontational one, during the dictatorship – when NGOs started to provide assistance 

to Latin American refugees in spite of the political restrictions imposed by the regime – 

to the more collaborative initiatives of the redemocratization period. Starting at the end 

of  the  1980s,  in the  light  of  the  newly  created  opportunities  for  political  participation, 

NGOs  used  the  practical  expertise  acquired  in  the  decades  before  to  approach 

government  authorities, advocate for the inclusion of the asylum issue in the domestic 

agenda, and attempt to intervene in the process of elaboration of the Brazilian Refugee 

Act. 

 

The national legislation on the topic was finally approved in 1997, and not only 

established the main conditions and procedures of refugee eligibility in Brazil, but also 

created an specific organ – CONARE – which was to be responsible for asylum policy 

in  the  country.  The  main  innovation  of  this  governmental  body  was  its  tripartite 

structure,  which counts  with  the direct  participation of one NGO representative  – as a 

 

63 

full  member,  with  voting  rights  –  and  of  UNHCR,  with  observer  status,  providing 

technical  assistance  to  the  decisions  of  the  Committee.  According  to  this  model,  all 

three actors – government, NGOs and UNHCR – shall work together in the protection, 

assistance  and  integration  of  refugees  in  Brazil.  Therefore,  taking  this  principle  into 

account,  the third chapter tried to  analyze the involvement of NGOs in  regards to  two 

aspects of asylum policy: intake and integration. 

 

As for the dimension of intake, the analysis attempted to show that NGOs have 

become  involved  with  several  different  stages  of  the  refugee  status  determination 

process. Besides the inclusion of one NGO representative in the decision-making sphere 

of CONARE, they are also engaged in several of the intermediary stages of individual 

case analysis that lead to the final decision on eligibility. They collaborate, for example, 

in  the conduction of interviews with  asylum seekers, providing a second legal  opinion 

on  the  submitted  cases,  and  have  an  active  role  in  the  aforementioned  preliminary 

analysis group, which also contributes in the evaluation of eligibility.  

However, as it was also  noted, NGOs face limitations in  regards to  the lack of 

formalization  of  their  participation  in  these  intermediary  procedures,  which  does  not 

provide  them  with  a  guarantee  of  continuation  in  the  long  run.  Similarly,  the  data 

collected  seems  to  show  that  the  main  challenge  in  respect  to  the  dimension  of 

integration is the lack of more detailed and transparent frameworks specifying how the 

tripartite structure works, with a clear definition and division of responsibilities between 

the involved actors. 

In  this  sense,  it  is  possible  to  visualize  a  tendency  towards  path-dependency, 

with  the  assistance  provided  to  refugees  being,  to  a  large  extent,  a  continuation  of  the 

work developed by NGOs in the years previous to the establishment of the Refugee Act. 

The  Brazilian  government,  which  was  mainly  focused  on  the  aspects  related  to 

 

64 

eligibility,  started,  only  recently,  to  pay  more  attention  to  direct  assistance  and  to  the 

integration  process,  providing  financial  resources  to  the  organizations  through  the 

establishment of annual, renewable agreements. 

The option for these less formalized, malleable governance arrangements brings 

both  opportunities  and  risks.  On  the  one  hand,  they  allow  for  more  flexibility  and 

adaptability to changing circumstances, both in respect to the eligibility procedures and 

to  direct  assistance.  Starting  in  2012,  for  example,  with  the  increase  in  the  number  of 

asylum  seekers,  CONARE  has  been  trying  to  develop  new  strategies  to  accelerate  the 

analysis  of  requests  and  avoid  that  the  cases  accumulate,  without  a  final  decision,  for 

long periods of time. In the case of assistance services, it could also be argued that this 

model  keeps  NGOs  more  independent,  since,  in  the  first  place,  it  was  exactly  the 

position  of  the  sector  –  being  closer  to  the  local  level  and  having  the  expertise  and 

“ability to respond to changing needs on the ground” (Cooke & Spencer, 2006, p.14) – 

that was considered one of their main assets on the negotiation table. 

On the other hand, however, the lack of formal arrangements can as easily lead 

to risks regarding the delegation of responsibilities and difficulties with accountability. 

As Stoker (1998) points out: 

The  dilemma  suggested  by  the  blurring  of  responsibilities  is  that  it  creates  an 

ambiguity  and  uncertainty  in  the  minds  of  the  policy-makers  and  public  about 

who is responsible and can lead to government actors passing off responsibility 

to privatized providers when things go wrong (pp.21-22). 

 

The difficulties, in this case, affect not only the organizations involved, but can 

also have a broader impact for the asylum seekers and refugees themselves, to whom it 

might not always be clear how the tripartite enterprise works and who is responsible for 

what (Jubilut & Apolinário, 2008). 

 

65 

Therefore,  the  central  question  of  asylum  policy  in  Brazil  does  not  seem  to  be 

whether to engage with non-state actors, but how to engage. It is visible that NGOs have 

several means and possibilities of access, but, at the same time, the existing governance 

arrangements are still not consolidated. It is valid to point out that, although this thesis 

has  focused  on  the  government-NGO  interface,  it  would  be  equally  interesting  to 

conduct further research on other facets of interaction, such as that established between 

NGOs and refugees themselves, or directly between refugees and governmental actors, 

if there are any venues for such participation.  

Moreover, this thesis has briefly touched upon the issue of articulation between 

NGOs, as a potential strategy to build a common platform and enhance their voices in 

the policy process. It would also be relevant do delve deeper in that direction, not only 

in  the  sense  of  identifying  collaborative  initiatives  under  way,  but,  perhaps,  potential 

divergences  that  might  arise  regarding  issues  of  access  and  representativeness  internal 

to the organizations.   

 

 

      

     

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

               

 

   

 

66 

6 

  References 

Andrade,  J.  H.  F.  (1998).  Regional  policy  approaches  and  harmonization:  a  Latin 

American  perspective.  International  Journal  of  Refugee  Law,  10(3),  pp.389-

409). 

Andrade,  J,  H.  F.  (2005).  O  Brasil  e  a  organização  internacional  para  os  Refugiados 

(1946-1952). Revista Brasileira de Política Internacional, 48(1), pp.60-96. 

Andrade,  J.  H.  F.  &  Marcolini,  A.  (2002).  Brazil’s  Refugee  Act:  a  model  refugee  law 

for Latin America? Forced Migration Review, 12, pp.37-39.    

Banulescu-Bogdan,  N.  (2011).  The  role  of  civil  society  in  EU  migration  policy:   

Perspectives  on  the  European  Union’s  engagement  in  its  neighborhood. 

Washington,  DC:  Migration 

Policy 

Institute. 

Retrieved 

from 

http://www.migrationpolicy.org/pubs/eucivilsociety.pdf 

Barreto,  L.  P.  T.  F.  (org.)  (2010).  Refúgio  no  Brasil:  a  proteção  brasileira  aos 

refugiados e seu impacto nas Américas. Brasília: ACNUR, Ministério da Justiça.   

Betts, A. (2008). Global migration governance. GEG Working Paper 2008/43. Oxford: 

Department  of  Politics  and 

international  Relations.  Retrieved 

from 

http://www.globaleconomicgovernance.org/wp-

content/uploads/BettsIntroductionGEGWorkingPaperFinal.pdf 

Bógus, L. M. M. & Rodrigues V. M. (2011). Os refugiados e as políticas de proteção e 

acolhimento no Brasil: História e perspectivas. Dimensões, 27, pp.101-114. 

Brinkerhoff,  D.  W.  (1999a).  Exploring  state-civil  society  collaboration:  policy 

partnerships in developing countries. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 

28(59), pp.59-86.  

Brinkerhoff,  D.W.  (1999b).  State-civil  society  networks  for  policy  implementation  in 

developing countries, Policy Studies Review, 16(1), pp.123-147. 

 

67 

Brinkerhoff,  J.  M.  &  Brinkerhoff,  D.  W.  (2002).  Government-nonprofit  relations  in 

comparative  perspective:  evolution, 

themes  and  new  directions.  Public 

Administration and Development, 22, pp.3-18. doi:10.1002/pad.202 

Bulgarian Center for Not-for-Profit  Law (2009).  Participation of NGOs in the process 

of policy and law making: Comparative analysis. Retrieved from 

http://www.icnl.org/research/resources/ngogovcoop/partngo.pdf 

Casey,  J.  (1998).  Non-government  organizations  as  policy  actors:  the  case  of 

immigration  policies  in  Spain  (Doctoral  dissertation,  Universitat  Autònoma  de 

Barcelona, Spain). Retrieved from 

http://www.baruch.cuny.edu/spa/facultystaff/facultydirectory/documents/Doctor

alThesisComplete_NonGovtOrgsasPolicyActors.pdf  

Casey,  J.  (2002).  Leading  actors  or  just  ‘extras’?:  The  factors  that  determine  whether 

NGOs  are  key  players  in  public  policymaking.  In  Proceeding  from  Council  of 

Europe  Citizen’s  Forum  “NGOs  –  key  players  in  democratic  governance”, 

Strasbourg, 4-5 November. Retrieved from 

http://www.baruch.cuny.edu/spa/facultystaff/facultydirectory/documents/Leadin

gActorsorExtras.pdf 

Casey,  J.  (2004).  Third  sector  participation  in  the  policy  process:  a  framework  for 

comparative analysis. Policy & Politics, 32(2), pp.241-257. 

Casey,  J.  (2011).  Understanding  advocacy:  a  primer  on  the  policy  making  role  of 

nonprofit organizations. Working Paper Series. New York: Center for Nonprofit 

Strategy and Management. Retrieved from 

http://www.baruch.cuny.edu/spa/researchcenters/nonprofitstrategy/documents/C

asey_UnderstandingAdvocacyaPrimeronthePolicyMakingRoleofNonoprofitOrga

nizations.pdf 

 

68 

Clarke,  G.  (1998).  Non-governmental  organizations  (NGOs)  and  politics  in  the 

developing world. Political Studies, XLVI, pp.36-52. 

CONARE (2013). Novo perfil do refúgio no Brasil [PowerPoint slides]. Retrieved from 

http://www.acnur.org/t3/fileadmin/scripts/doc.php?file=t3/fileadmin/Documento

s/portugues/Estatisticas/Novo_perfil_do_Refugio_no_Brasil_Abril_2013 

Constituição  da  República  Federativa  do  Brasil  de  1988  (1988).  Brasília.  Retrieved 

from http://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/constituicao/constituicao.htm 

Convention  Relating  to  the  Status  of  Refugees  (1951).  Geneva.  Retrieved  from 

http://www.unhcr.org/pages/49da0e466.html 

Cooke,  S.  &  Spencer,  S.  (2006).  The  contribution  of  the  voluntary  sector  to  migrant 

integration  in  Europe.  Oxford:  Centre  on  Migration,  Policy  and  Society. 

Retrieved from 

http://www.compas.ox.ac.uk/fileadmin/files/Publications/Reports/BCT-KBF-

Report-Mar06.pdf 

Corry,  O.  (2010).  Defining  and  theorizing  the  third  sector.  In:  R.  Taylor  (ed.),  Third 

Sector Research (pp.1-20). New York: Springer. 

Gordenker,  L.  &  Weiss,  T.  G.  (1995).  Pluralizing  global  governance:  analytical 

approaches and dimensions. Third World Quarterly, 16(3), pp.357-387. 

IMDH (n.d.) A ação do IMDH com Refugiados e refugiadas. Unpublished manuscript.  

Jordan, A., Wurzel, R. K. W. & Zito, A. (2005). The rise of ‘new’ policy instruments in 

comparative  perspective:  has  governance  eclipsed  government?  Political 

Studies, 53, pp.477-496. 

Jubilut, L. L. (2006). Refugee law and protection in Brazil: a model in South America? 

Journal of Refugee Studies, 19(1), pp.22-44. doi:10.1093/jrs/fej006 

 

69 

Jubilut, L. L. (2010). Enhancing refugees’ integration: new initiatives in Brazil. Forced 

Migration review, 35, pp.46-47.   

Jubilut, L. L. & Apolinário, S. M. O. S. (2008). Refugee status determination in Brazil: 

a tripartite enterprise. Refuge, 25(2), pp.29-40. 

Keck,  M.  E.  &  Sikkink,  K.  (1998).  Activists  beyond  borders:  advocacy  networks  in 

international politics (pp.1-38). New York: Cornell University Press.  

Kersbergen,  K.  van  &  Waarden,  F.  van  (2004).  ‘Governance’  as  a  bridge  between 

disciplines:  cross-disciplinary  inspiration  regarding  shifts  in  governance  and 

problems  of  governability,  accountability  and  legitimacy.  European  Journal  of 

Political Research, 43, pp.143-171. 

Knill, C. & Lehmkuhl, D. (2002). Private actors and the state: Internationalization and 

changing patterns of governance. Governance, 5(1), 41-64. 

Kooiman, J. (1999). Social-Political Governance. Public Management: An International 

Journal of Research and Theory, 1(1), 67-92. 

Law No. 9474 of 22 July 1997, establishing arrangements for the implementation of the 

1951  Status  of  Refugees  and  related  provisions  (1997)  [English  version]. 

Brasília. Retrieved from  

http://www.refworld.org/cgi-bin/texis/vtx/rwmain?docid=3f4dfb134  

Lewis,  D.  &  Opoku-Mensah,  P.  (2006).  Moving  forward  research  agendas  on 

international  NGOs:  Theory,  agency  and  context.  Journal  of  International 

Development, 18, pp.665-675. doi:10.1002/jid.1306 

Lynn,  L.  E.,  Heinrich  C.  J.  &  Hill,  C.  J.  (2000).  Studying  governance  and  public 

management:  challenges  and  prospects.  Journal  of  Public  Administration 

Research and Theory, 10(2), pp.233-262.  

 

70 

Maloney,  W.  A.,  Jordan,  G.  &  McLaughlin,  A.  M.  (1994).  Interest  groups  and  public 

policy:  the  insider/outsider  model  revisited.  Journal  of  Public  Policy,  14(1), 

pp.17-38.  

McQuarrie,  M.  &  Marwell,  N.  P.  (2009).  The  missing  organizational  dimension  in 

urban sociology. City & Community, 8(3), pp.247-268. 

Medeiros,  M.,  Diniz,  D.  &  Squinca,  F.  (2006).  Cash  benefits  to  disabled  persons  in 

Brazil: an analysis of the BPC – Continuous Cash Benefit Programme. Working 

Paper  n.  16.  Brasília:  United  Nations  Development  Programme,  International 

Poverty Centre. Retrieved from  

http://www.ipc-undp.org/pub/IPCWorkingPaper16.pdf     

Milesi, R. & Andrade, W. C. (2010). Atores e ações por uma lei de refugiados no Brasil. 

In: L. P. T. F. Barreto (org.) (2010). Refúgio no Brasil: a proteção brasileira aos 

refugiados  e  seu  impacto  nas  Américas  (pp.22-47).  Brasília:  ACNUR, 

Ministério da Justiça.  

Moreira, J. B. (2010). Redemocratização e direitos humanos: a política para refugiados 

no Brasil. Revista Brasileira de Política Internacional, 53(1), 111-129. 

Nogueira,  M.  B.  &  Marques,  C.  C.  (2008).  Brazil:  Ten  Years  of  Refugee  Protection. 

Forced Migration Review, 30, pp.57-58. 

Peters, B. G. & Pierre, J. (2001). Developments in intergovernmental relations: towards 

multi-level governance. Policy & Politics, 29(2), pp.131-135. 

Pinto, C. R. J. (2006). As ONGs a política no Brasil: presença de novos atores. DADOS 

– Revista de Ciências Sociais, 49(3), pp.651-670). 

Pinto,  B.  G.  C.  (2011).  O  papel  dos  Comitês  Estaduais  de  políticas  de  atenção  aos 

refugiados no Brasil.  In: A. C. Ramos,  G. Rodrigues &  G. A. Almeida  (orgs.), 

 

71 

60  anos  de  ACNUR:  Perspectivas  de  futuro  (pp.179-199).  São  Paulo:  Editora 

CL-A Cultural. 

Rhodes,  R.  A.  W.  (1996).  The  new  governance:  governing  without  government. 

Political Studies, XLIV, pp.652-667. 

Rosenau, J. M. (1995). Governance in the Twenty-first Century. Global Governance, 1, 

pp.13-43. 

Scholte,  J.  A.  (2002).  Civil  society  and  democracy  in  global  governance.  Global 

Governance, 8, pp.281-304. 

Sending,  O.  J.,  &  Neumann,  I.  B.  (2006).  Governance  to  governmentality:  analyzing 

NGOs, States, and power. International Studies Quarterly, 50, pp.651-672. 

Soares, C. O. (2012). O direito internacional dos refugiados e o ordenamento jurídico 

brasileiro:  análise  da  efetividade  da  proteção  nacional  (Master  thesis, 

Universidade  Federal  de  Alagoas,  Maceió,  Brasil).  Retrieved 

from 

http://www.acnur.org/t3/fileadmin/Documentos/portugues/eventos/O_direito_int

ernacional_dos_refugiados.pdf?view=1   

Spencer,  S.  (2006).  Migration  and  integration:  the  impact  of  NGOs  on  future  policy 

development  in  Ireland.  Oxford:  Centre  on  Migration,  Policy  and  Society. 

Retrieved 

from  http://www.compas.ox.ac.uk/publications/reports-and-other-

publications/ngos-ireland/  

Sprandel, M. A. & Milesi, R. (2003). O acolhimento a refugiados no Brasil: Histórico, 

dados  e  reflexões.  In:  R.  Milesi  (org.),  Refugiados:  Realidade  e  perspectivas 

(pp.113-134). Brasília: CSEM/IMDH, Edições Loyola. 

Stoker, G. (1998). Governance as theory: five propositions. International Social Science 

Journal, 50(155), pp.17-28.  

 

72 

Taylor, M. (2007). Community participation in the real world: opportunities and pitfalls 

in new governance spaces. Urban Studies, 44(2), pp.297-317. 

doi:10.1080/00420980601074987 

United  Nations  Research  Institute  for  Social  development  (1997).  Globalization  and 

civil society: NGO influence in international decision-making. Discussion Paper 

n. 83. Retrieved from 

http://www.unrisd.org/80256B3C005BCCF9/(httpPublications)/87428A38D3E0403380

256B650043B768?OpenDocument 

UNHCR  &  IMDH  (orgs.)  (2012).  Lei  9474  e  coletânea  de  instrumentos  de  proteção 

internacional de refugiados e apátridas.  Brasília: Compasso Comunicação.  

Weiss, T. G. (2000). Governance, good governance and global governance: conceptual 

and actual challenges. Third World Quarterly, 21(5), pp.795-814. 

Zincone, G. & Caponio, T. (2004). The multilevel governance of migration: state of the 

art  report  Cluster  C9.  In  IMISCOE  General  Conference,  Coimbra,  3-4 

December. Retrieved from http://dare.uva.nl/document/39847  

Zincone,  G.,  Penninx,  R.  &  Borkert,  M.  (Eds.)  (2011).  Migration  Policymaking  in 

Europe:  the  dynamics  of  actors  and  contexts  in  past  and  present.  Amsterdam: 

Amsterdam University Press. 

 

73 

