Phenomenology and 

Psychopathology

as presented by

Oliver Meister & Kim Gerbaulet

using the text with the same title

by Thomas Fuchs

Outline

1. Introduction and Names
2. Dimensions of Self-Experience
3. Embodiment
4. Temporality
5. Intersubjectivity
6. Conclusion and Discussion

Phenomenology

●

Is an android learning of a change if the interrelations of the sensors of its system of sensors are 
changed?

● Would *acting as if a well-studied object of science is conscious* be enough for it to be included in a 

community of phenomenological practicing of **?

science of studied form of or studied shape of conscious experience

https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Androide#/media/File:Robot-human-face-Lipstick.jpg

Psychopathology

● How is a psyche dying if a psyche is dying?
●

Is a self dying if a psyche is dying?

science of studied formally-/structurally-altered conscious experience

(edited)
http://hercules-xena.wikia.com/wiki/Old_Psyche?file=Old_Psyche.jpg

Word Definitions

1. Self-experience: what is experienced by one and the same self
2. Embodiment: living-with-the-body what is embodied
3. Temporality: time oneness
4. Intersubjectivity: behaving and interacting with others in the common life-world

Self Experience
Minimal self
● Implicit, prereflective self-awarness
● Present in every experience, don't need introspection
● Also called mineness or ipseity
● active even though autobiographic memory is lost or frontal cortex damage
● Involves self-affection, embodiment and temporality

Self Experience

● Bound to the background of feeling the body
● Involves a sensory-motor relation to the world
● The ecological self
● Implies a basic temporal continuity

Self Experience
Extended or narrative self
● Acquiring in the second year of life
● Reflective self-consciousness
● Self-transcendence
● Narrativity
● Self-concept

Self Experience

● Depends on autobiographical memory, concepts and language
● Fundamental structure: intersubjective and reciprocal
● Is the foundation of a number of self-reflective emotions
● Remains based on prereflective self-awareness

                  Embodiment

Disturbances of the Subject-Body

       subject-body: lived body

http://betterworldbooks.com/mixed-martial-arts-for-dummies-id-0470390719.aspx

       some subject-body disturbances:
● Disembodiment
● Hyperembodiment
● ¿Hypoembodiment?

Disembodiment

       from the text:
● ..disruption of the implicit functioning of the body in the dimensions of both 

perception and action..

● ..loosing one's habitual bodily performance..
“living like in a fog”, “feeling surrounded by invisible walls”

Hyperembodiment

       from the text:
● ..instead of transcending the physical body, she becomes completely 

identified with it..

Distrubances of the Body Image (Object Body)

Body Image is the explicit relation of the subject towards his or her body

● The body is perceived as an object

→ closer look to body dysmorphic disoders and the more complex disorder of
anorexia(involves a complex combination of affective, conceptual and social aspects Of the 
body image)

Body Dysmorphic Disorder

● Overvalued fears of an assumed ugliness or deformity of actually inconspiuous 

body
● parts
● Increased by the patients egocentristic and hyperreflexive stance
● Characteristics of patients are sensitive, dependent, ambitious or narcissistic
● tendencies
● Caused by a distrubance in their social relationships -- unaware for the patient
→ the lived body becomes as corporeal body and with it, the patient’s thinking 
constantly revolves around the body part

Anorexia Nervosa

● the dialectic between being a body subject and having one's body as an 

object becomes the core of the disorder

● body becomes an alienated, repulsive object that may even arouse disgust
● patient tries to gain independence from the body and turning it into an object 

of control and mastery

● implicit sense of bodily ownership is replaced by an explicit appropriation of 

the body aimed at perfect control and maximal suppression of need and 
desire

Anorexia Nervosa

● seeking to compensate for a lacking sense of identity and autonomy - patients 

gain a feeling of accomplishment by rigorously subjugating and modelling 
their body

● body expresses a particular disturbance of the patient relationship
● being in control over the body becomes synonymous with being in control of 

her life

Temporality

● temporality: time oneness (for example in: time treated as a oneness)
● temporal continuity: completeness of unity of time
● implicit basic temporality: passive synthesis (with retentions and protentions) 

of impressional presents, a presence of 'becoming'

● explicit temporality, coherence of autobiographical identity, narrativity

       ¿continuity?

Temporality - 

              - a model made by me?

Disturbances of Temporality

       dysfunctioning of (some or all parts of) the intentional arc:

       failure of protention-functioning:

synthesized impressional present unfit for agency and intending of actions

       failure of retention-functioning:

impaired sense of agency
failure of retention-functioning and failure of protention-functioning:
destruction of the intentional arc & seizing of the emergence of the basic temporality

Disturbances of Temporality

       William S. Borroughs using the cut up technique for the creation of Naked Lunch (not part of the

photography)
explicitly intended disturbance of autobiographical temporal
narrativity-continuity?

http://2.bp.blogspot.com/-RWrUJRl-ynQ/TtyeLwmciyI/AAAAAAAAAvA/qOTd0WRuw-A/s1600/david-bowie-y-william-borroughs.jpg

Intersubjectivity

● Freedom of behaving and interacting with others in the common life-world
● Phenomenological view: based on prereflective immediate relationship of self 

and other

Intersubjectivity – Primary Intersubjectivity

● Develops in the first year
● Imitation of others
● Familiar patterns of interaction and affect attunement start
● Recognition of expressing intentions but not more
● Primary intercorporeality

Intersubjectivity – Secondary Intersubjectivity

● Infants begin to perceive others as inentional agents whose actions and 

mutual interactions are meaningful in pragmatic context

● They are also perceived as intentional agents
● Gain a view of the world that there is more than just themselves

Disturbance of Primary Intersubjectivity

● Includes disturbances of sensory motor integration, imitation and affect 

attunement, holistic perception

● Sensory motor integration: disturbed in early life. Close relation between 

intermodal integration and social attunement

● Imitation and affect attunement: sensory motor involves in imitation
● Holistic perception: establishing perceptual and situational coherence

Disturbances of Secondary Intesubjectivity

● Problems with one's own intention to think or act → delusions of alien control
● Disturbances of basic self-awareness and social attunement
● Transitivism
● Shared representation
● Ipseity can be disturbed
● May be caused by a withdrawal from the threatening intersubjective sphere
● Delusion might help to cope with other's intentionality

Phenomenology       and       Psychopathology

Critique, Questions and Discussion

