Principles, Deﬁ nitions and  
Model Rules of 
European Private Law

Draft Common Frame of Reference (DCFR)
Outline Edition

Prepared by the
Study Group on a European Civil Code
and the
Research Group on EC Private Law (Acquis Group)
Based in part on a revised version of the Principles of 
European Contract Law

Edited by
Christian von Bar, Eric Clive and Hans Schulte-Nölke
and
Hugh Beale, Johnny Herre, Jérôme Huet, Matthias Storme, 
Stephen Swann, Paul Varul, Anna Veneziano and Fryderyk Zoll

More texts by the Study Group and the Acquis Group are available 
at www.law-net.eu.

The print of this edition was supported by the Dieter Fuchs Stiftung 
in Dissen (Germany).

ISBN  978-3-86653-097-3

The Deutsche Nationalbibliothek lists this publication in the Deutsche 
Nationalbibliograﬁ e; detailed bibliographic data are available on the 
Internet at http://dnb.d-nb.de.

© 2009 by sellier. european law publishers GmbH, Munich.

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, trans-
lated, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted, in any form or by any means, 
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without prior 
permission of the publisher.

The Index was prepared by Rechtsanwältin Dr. Martina Schulz, Pohlheim.

Design: Sandra Sellier, Munich. Production: Karina Hack, Munich. 
Typesetting: ﬁ dus Publikations-Service GmbH, Augsburg. Typeface: Goudy 
Old Style and Goudy Sans from Linotype. Printing and binding: 
Friedrich Pustet KG, Regensburg. Printed on acid-free, non-ageing paper. 
Printed in Germany.

Table of contents

Introduction

Academic contributors and funders

Principles

Table of Destinations

Table of Derivations

Model Rules

Book I

General provisions

Book II

Contracts and other juridical acts

Book III Obligations and corresponding rights

Book IV Specific contracts and the rights and

obligations arising from them

Book V

Benevolent intervention in another’s affairs

Book VI Non-contractual liability arising out of

damage caused to another

Book VII Unjustified enrichment

Book VIII Acquisition and loss of ownership of goods

1

47

57

101

113

131

177

183

229

277

391

395

413

421

V

Table of contents

Book IX Proprietary security rights in movable assets

Book X

Trusts

Annex

Definitions

Index

447

501

545

571

Book X
Trusts

Chapter 1:
Fundamental provisions
Section 1:
Scope and relation to other rules

X. – 1:101: Trusts to which this Book applies
(1) This Book applies to trusts created under Chapter 2 (Constitution of

trusts).

(2) With appropriate modifications this Book also applies to trusts:

(a) constituted by:

(i) a declaration to that effect set out in an enactment; or
(ii) a court order with prospective effect; or

(b) arising by operation of law set out in an enactment relating to a

matter not determined by these rules.

(3) In this Book, “court” includes a public officer or body, if authorised to
act under the applicable national law, but does not include an arbitral
tribunal.

X. – 1:102: Priority of the law of proprietary securities
In relation to trusts for security purposes, this Book is subject to the ap-
plication of the rules in Book IX (Proprietary security in movable assets).

Section 2:
Definition, special legal effects and parties

X. – 1:201: Definition of a trust
A trust is a legal relationship in which a trustee is obliged to administer or
dispose of one or more assets (the trust fund) in accordance with the terms
governing the relationship (trust terms) to benefit a beneficiary or advance
public benefit purposes.

501

X. – 1:202

Book X

X. – 1:202: Special legal effects of a trust
(1) A trust takes effect in accordance with the rules in Chapter 10 (Rela-
tions to third parties) with the effect that the trust fund is to be regar-
ded as a patrimony distinct from the personal patrimony of the trustee
and any other patrimonies vested in or managed by the trustee.

(2) In particular (and except for some reason other than merely that the

trust fund is vested in the trustee):
(a) the personal creditors of the trustee may not have recourse to the
trust fund, whether by execution or by means of insolvency pro-
ceedings;

(b) the trust fund is not subject to rules allocating property rights on

the basis of matrimonial or family relationships; and

(c) the trustee’s successors are not entitled to benefit from the trust

fund on the trustee’s death.

X. – 1:203: Parties to a trust
(1) The truster is a person who constitutes or intends to constitute a trust

by juridical act.

(2) The trustee is the person in whom the trust fund becomes or remains
vested when the trust is created or subsequently on or after appoint-
ment and who has the obligation set out in X. – 1:201 (Definition of a
trust).

(3) A beneficiary is a person who, according to the trust terms, has either a

right to benefit or an eligibility for benefit from the trust fund.

(4) A trust auxiliary is a person who, according to the trust terms, has a
power to appoint or remove a trustee or to consent to a trustee’s res-
ignation.

(5) Except as otherwise provided for by this Book:

(a) a truster may also be a trustee or a beneficiary;
(b) a trustee may also be a beneficiary; and
(c) any of those parties to a trust may also be a trust auxiliary.

(6) In this Book a person’s “successor” is the heir or representative who
under the law of succession becomes entitled to that person’s personal
patrimony on that person’s death. Where the context permits, a refer-
ence to a party (or former party) to a trust is a reference to that person’s
successor if that person has died.

502

Chapter 1:Fundamental provisions

X. – 1:206

X. – 1:204: Plurality of trustees
(1) Where there are several trustees, the trust is solidary.
(2) Where trust assets are vested in several trustees together, their co-own-

ership is joint.

X. – 1:205: Persons entitled to enforce
performance of trustee’s obligations
(1) A beneficiary has a right to performance of the trustee’s obligations so
far as they relate to that beneficiary’s right to benefit or eligibility for
benefit.

(2) The persons who may enforce performance of the trustee’s obligations

under a trust to advance public benefit purposes are:
(a) any public officer or body having that function; and
(b) any other person having sufficient interest in the performance of

the obligations.

(3) A trustee may enforce performance of the obligations of a co-trustee.

X. – 1:206: Right to benefit and eligibility for benefit
(1) A person has a right to benefit if the trust terms require the trustee in
given circumstances to dispose of all or part of the trust fund so as to
confer a benefit on that person.

(2) A person has an eligibility for benefit if the trust terms permit the trus-
tee in given circumstances to dispose of all or part of the trust fund so
as to confer a benefit on that person, but whether or not that person is
to obtain a benefit depends on an exercise of discretion by the trustee
or another.

(3) A beneficiary’s eligibility for benefit becomes a right to benefit if the
trustee gives the beneficiary notice of a decision to confer benefit on
that beneficiary in accordance with the trust terms governing that elig-
ibility.

(4) In this Book “benefit” does not include the exercise by a trustee of a

right of recourse to the trust fund.

503

X. – 1:301

Book X

Section 3:
Modifications of and additions to general rules

X. – 1:301: Extended meaning of gratuitous
(1) In this Book “gratuitous” means done or provided without reward.
(2) A juridical act or a benefit is also regarded as gratuitous in this Book if,
considering the value of the rights created by the juridical act or the
benefit provided, the value of the reward is so trivial that fairness re-
quires it to be disregarded.

X. – 1:302: Notice
(1) Where this Book requires notice to be given to a person, but it is not

reasonably practical to do so, notice may be given instead to the court.

(2) Where there are several trustees, a requirement to give notice to the
trustees is satisfied by giving notice to any one of them, but a notice
relating to a change in trustees must be given to a trustee who will
continue to be a trustee after the change takes effect.

X. – 1:303: Mandatory nature of rules
The rules of this Book are mandatory, except as otherwise provided.

Chapter 2:
Constitution of trusts
Section 1:
Basic rules on constitution by juridical act

X. – 2:101: Requirements for constitution
A trust is constituted in relation to a fund vested in the truster, without any
further requirement, if:
(a) the truster declares an intention to constitute a trust in relation to that

fund;

(b) the declaration satisfies the requirements set out in X. – 2:201 (Re-

quirements for a declaration); and

(c) either X. – 2:102 (Constitution by transfer) or X. – 2:103 (Constitution

without transfer) applies.

504

Chapter 2:Constitution of trusts

X. – 2:201

X. – 2:102: Constitution by transfer
(1) If the other requirements for constitution are satisfied, a trust is con-
stituted when in implementation of the declaration the fund is trans-
ferred to a person who agrees to be a trustee or is identified in the
declaration as a person who is or is to be a trustee.

(2) The rules on contracts for donation apply analogously to an agreement
between truster and intended trustee for the transfer of the fund in the
truster’s lifetime.

(3) Where the truster has made a binding unilateral undertaking to con-
stitute a trust to a person who is intended to be a trustee of the fund,
that person is a trustee of the right to performance of the obligation
created by the undertaking, unless that right is rejected.

X. – 2:103: Constitution without transfer
(1) If the other requirements for constitution are satisfied, a trust is con-

stituted by the declaration alone, without a transfer, if:
(a) the declaration indicates that the truster is to be a sole trustee;
(b) the declaration is testamentary and does not provide for a trustee; or
the truster does all of the acts required of the truster to transfer
(c) (i)
the fund to the intended trustee,

(ii) the intended trustee does not or cannot accept the fund, and
(iii) the declaration does not provide otherwise.

(2) When a trust is constituted under paragraph (1), the truster becomes a

trustee.

Section 2:
Declaration

X. – 2:201: Requirements for a declaration
(1) The requirements referred to in Section 1 (Basic rules on constitution
by juridical act) for a declaration of an intention to constitute a trust are
that:
(a) the declaration is made by the truster or a person who has author-

ity to make it on the truster’s behalf; and

(b) the declaration complies with any requirement as to form set out in

X. – 2:203 (Formal requirements for declaration).

(2) No notice or publication of the declaration to any party is required.

505

X. – 2:202

Book X

X. – 2:202: Mode of declaration
(1) A person declares an intention to constitute a trust when that person by
statements or conduct indicates an intention that the person in whom
the fund is or is to be vested is to be legally bound as a trustee.

(2) In determining whether one or more statements contained in a testa-
mentary or other instrument determining rights over an asset amount
to a declaration of an intention to constitute a trust in relation to that
asset, an interpretation of those statements which gives effect to their
entirety is to be preferred.

X. – 2:203: Formal requirements for declaration
(1) Where the transfer of a fund requires the making of an instrument by
the transferor, the declaration of an intention to constitute a trust is of
no effect unless contained in the instrument of transfer or made in the
same or an equivalent form.

(2) A declaration that the truster is to be the sole trustee is of no effect

unless made in the same form as a unilateral undertaking to donate.

(3) Where the trust is to be created on the death of the maker of the de-
claration, the declaration is of no effect unless made by testamentary
instrument.

X. – 2:204: Revocation or variation of declaration
(1) The maker of a declaration may revoke or vary the declaration or a term

of the declaration at any time before the trust is constituted.

(2) A revocation or variation is of no effect unless it satisfies the formality

requirements, if any, which applied to the declaration.

(3) However, a declaration or term set out in an instrument may be revoked
by substantially destroying or defacing that instrument, so far as it
relates to that declaration or term, if the applicable national rules permit
a statement intended to have legal effect contained in such an instru-
ment to be revoked by that means.

X. – 2:205: Effects when declaration does not satisfy requirements
If the fund is transferred to the intended trustee in implementation of a
declaration which does not satisfy the requirements of X. – 2:201 (Require-
ments for a declaration), the transferee takes the fund on the terms of a
trust to re-transfer the fund to the truster.

506

Chapter 2:Constitution of trusts

X. – 2:401

Section 3:
Refusal of trust and rejection of right to benefit

X. – 2:301: Right of trustee to refuse the trust
(1) If a person has become a trustee without agreeing to act when a trust is
constituted, that person may refuse to act as a trustee by notice to:
(a) the truster; or
(b) any co-trustee who has full legal capacity and agrees to act as a

trustee.

(2) Refusal may take the form of either a rejection of all the rights which
have vested or a disclaimer of the whole trust, but operates as both a
rejection and a disclaimer.

(3) A refusal may not be revoked.
(4) Where a person reasonably incurs costs in order to refuse, that person
has a right to be reimbursed by any co-trustees who accept the trust
fund and agree to act or, if there are no such co-trustees, the truster.

(5) Where a sole trustee refuses or there is no co-trustee who accepts the
trust fund and agrees to act, the truster becomes a trustee of the fund in
accordance with X. – 2:103 (Constitution without transfer) paragraph
(1)(c), unless the declaration of the intention to constitute a trust pro-
vides otherwise.

(6) Subject to the previous paragraphs of this Article, the requirements for
a refusal and its effects are determined by the application or analogous
application of II. – 4:303 (Right or benefit may be rejected).

X. – 2:302: Rejection of right to benefit or eligibility for benefit
A beneficiary’s right under II. – 4:303 (Right or benefit may be rejected) to
reject a right to benefit or an eligibility for benefit is exercised by giving
notice to the trustees.

Section 4:
Additional rules for particular instances

X. – 2:401: Whether donation or trust
(1) Where a person transfers an asset to another gratuitously and it is
uncertain whether or to what extent the transferor intends to donate

507

X. – 2:402

Book X

the asset or to constitute a trust in respect of it for the benefit of the
transferor, it is presumed that the transferor intends:
(a) to donate to the transferee, if this would be consistent with the
relationship between the parties and past or concurrent dealings of
the transferor;

(b) in any other case, that the transferee be a trustee for the benefit of

the transferor.

(2) A presumption in paragraph (1) may be rebutted (and the alternative
intention in paragraph (1) established) by showing that at the time of
transfer the transferor did not or, as the case may be, did intend to
dispose of the asset for the exclusive benefit of the transferee.

(3) Paragraphs (1) and (2) apply correspondingly where the transfer is to
several transferees (including where the transfer is to the transferor and
another).

(4) Where it is shown or presumed that the transferor intends to dispose of
the fund for the benefit of a transferee only in part, or for the benefit of
one transferee, but not a co–transferee, the transferor is to be regarded
as intending to constitute a trust for the benefit of the transferee to that
extent.

X. – 2:402: Priority of rules of succession law
Where the trust is to take effect on the truster’s death, the trust is subject to
the prior application of those rules of succession law which determine:
(a) how the deceased’s estate is to be disposed of in satisfaction of the

funeral costs and debts of the deceased; and

(b) (i) whether the truster was free to dispose of any part of the fund,
(ii) whether any person has a claim in respect of any part of the fund
by reason of a family or other connection to the deceased, and

(iii) how such claims are to be satisfied.

X. – 2:403: Trust in respect of right to legacy pending
transfer of legacy
Where a truster declares that a legatee is to be a trustee in relation to a
legacy from the truster and that declaration satisfies the requirements set
out in X. – 2:201 (Requirements for a declaration), but the legacy has not
yet been transferred, the legatee is a trustee of the right against the truster’s
successor which arises in respect of the legacy on the truster’s death.

508

Chapter 3:Trust fund

X. – 3:103

Chapter 3:
Trust fund
Section 1:
Requirements for the initial trust fund

X. – 3:101: Trust fund
(1) Trust assets, whether or not of the same kind, form a single trust fund if

they are vested in the same trustees and either:
(a) the trust terms relating to the assets indicate that they form a single

fund or require them to be administered together; or

(b) separate trusts relating to the assets are merged in performance of

the obligations under those trusts.

(2) Where trusts are constituted at the same time, on the same terms, and
with the same trustees, the trust assets form a single trust fund unless
the trust terms provide otherwise.

(3) In this Book “part of the trust fund” means a share of the trust fund, a
specific asset or share of an asset in the fund, or a specific amount to
be provided out of the fund.

X. – 3:102: Permissible trust assets
Trust assets may consist of proprietary or other rights, so far as these are
transferable.

X. – 3:103: Ascertainability and segregation of the trust fund
(1) A trust is only created in relation to a fund in so far as, at the time the

trust is to come into effect,
(a) the fund is sufficiently defined in the trust terms or the assets

forming the fund are otherwise ascertainable; and

(b) the fund is segregated from other assets.

(2) A declaration of intention to create a trust in relation to an unsegre-
gated fund is to be regarded, so far as the other terms of the declaration
permit, as a declaration of an intention to create a trust of the entire
mixture containing the fund on the terms that:
(a) the trustee is obliged to segregate the intended trust fund; and
(b) until the fund is segregated, the rights and obligations envisaged
by the terms of the declaration apply in relation to a corresponding
part of the mixture.

509

X. – 3:201

Book X

Section 2:
Changes to the trust fund

X. – 3:201: Additions to the trust fund
(1) After a trust is created, an asset which is capable of being a trust asset

becomes part of the trust fund if it is acquired by a trustee:
(a) in performance of the obligations under the trust;
(b) as an addition to or by making use of the trust fund;
(c) by making use of information or an opportunity obtained in the
capacity of trustee, if the use is not in accordance with the terms of
the trust; or

(d) when or after the trustee disposed of that asset otherwise than in

accordance with the terms of the trust.

(2) Where there are several trustees, an asset may become part of the trust
fund in accordance with this Article without being acquired by all of
them.

X. – 3:202: Subtractions from the trust fund
(1) An asset ceases to be part of the trust fund when it ceases to be vested
in a person who is under the obligation set out in X. – 1:201 (Definition
of a trust).

(2) Where there are several trustees, an asset remains part of the trust fund
so long as it is vested in at least one of the trustees in that capacity.

X. – 3:203: Mixing of the trust fund with other assets
(1) If trust assets are mixed with other assets vested in the trustee in such a
way that the trust assets cease to be identifiable, a trust arises in re-
spect of the mixture and VIII. – 5:202 (Commingling) applies analo-
gously, as if each patrimony had a different owner, so as to determine
the share of the mixture which is to be administered and disposed of in
accordance with the original trust.

(2) If the other assets are the personal patrimony of the trustee, any di-
minution in the mixture is to be allocated to the trustee’s personal
share.

510

Chapter 4:Trust terms and invalidity

X. – 4:102

X. – 3:204: Loss or exhaustion of trust fund
(1) A trust ends when the trust fund has been completely disposed of in
performance of the obligations under the trust or for any other reason
there ceases to be a trust fund.

(2) Where the trustee is liable to reinstate the trust fund as a result of non-
performance of obligations under the trust, the trust revives if the trust
fund is reinstated.

Chapter 4:
Trust terms and invalidity
Section 1:
Trust terms

X. – 4:101: Interpretation
Without prejudice to the other rules on the interpretation of unilateral jur-
idical acts, if the meaning of a trust term cannot otherwise be established,
interpretations to be preferred are those which:
(a) give effect to the entirety of the words and expressions used;
(b) prevent reasonable conduct of a trustee from amounting to a non-per-

formance;

(c) prevent or best reduce any incompleteness in provision for disposal of

the trust fund; and

(d) confer on the truster a right to benefit or enlarge such right, if the trust
is constituted gratuitously in the truster’s lifetime and the truster has or
may have reserved such a right.

X. – 4:102: Incomplete disposal of the trust fund
(1) To the extent that the trust terms and the rules of this Book do not
otherwise dispose of the trust fund in circumstances which have aris-
en, the trust fund is to be disposed of for the benefit of the truster.

(2) However, if the incomplete disposal of the trust fund arises because
effect cannot be given to a trust for advancement of a public benefit
purpose or because performance of the obligations under such a trust
does not exhaust the trust fund, the trust fund is to be disposed of for
the advancement of the public benefit purpose which most closely
resembles the original purpose.

511

X. – 4:103

Book X

X. – 4:103: Ascertainability of beneficiaries
(1) A trust term which purports to confer a right to benefit is valid only if
the beneficiary is sufficiently identified by the truster or is otherwise
ascertainable at the time the benefit is due.

(2) A trust term which permits a trustee to benefit those members of a
class of persons which the trustee or a third person selects is valid only
if, at the time the selection is permitted, it can be determined with
reasonable certainty whether any given person is a member of that
class.

(3) A person may be a beneficiary notwithstanding that that person comes

into existence only after the trust is created.

X. – 4:104: Ascertainability of right to benefit or
eligibility for benefit
(1) A right to benefit or eligibility for benefit is valid only in so far as the
benefit is sufficiently defined in the trust terms or is otherwise ascer-
tainable at the time the benefit is due or to be conferred.

(2) If the benefit to be conferred is not ascertainable only because a third
party cannot or does not make a choice, the trustees may make that
choice unless the trust terms provide otherwise.

X. – 4:105: Trusts to pay creditors
A trust for the purpose of paying a debt, or for the benefit of a creditor as
such, takes effect as a trust to benefit the debtor by a performance of the
debtor’s obligation discharging the debtor.

Section 2:
Invalidity

X. – 4:201: Avoidance by the truster
Without prejudice to other necessary adaptations, Book II Chapter 7
(Grounds of invalidity) is modified as follows in its application to trusts
constituted gratuitously in the truster’s lifetime:
(a) the truster may avoid the trust or a trust term if the trust was consti-
tuted or the term included because of a mistake of fact or law, regard-
less of whether the requirements of II. – 7:201 (Mistake) paragraph
(1)(b) are satisfied;

512

Chapter 4:Trust terms and invalidity

X. – 4:202

(b) a truster who was dependent on, or was the more vulnerable party in a
relationship of trust with, a beneficiary may avoid the trust or a trust
term in so far as it provides for benefit to that beneficiary unless that
beneficiary proves that the beneficiary did not exploit the truster’s si-
tuation by taking an excessive benefit or grossly unfair advantage;

(c) the reasonable time for giving notice of avoidance (II. – 7:210 (Time))

does not commence so long as:
(i) the truster exercises an exclusive right to benefit from the income;

or

(ii) the trust fund consists of one or more rights to benefit which are

not yet due; and

(d) where sub-paragraph (c)(i) applies, acceptance of benefit is not to be

regarded as an implied confirmation of the trust.

X. – 4:202: Protection of trustees and third parties after avoidance
(1) The trustee’s title to the trust fund is unaffected by avoidance.
(2) Unless the trustee knew or could reasonably be expected to know that

the trust or trust term might be avoided:
(a) a trustee is not liable in respect of any administration or disposition
of the trust fund which was in accordance with the terms of the
trust before the trust was avoided;

(b) a trustee may invoke against the person entitled to benefit as a
result of avoidance defences which the trustee could have invoked
against the beneficiary who had a right to that benefit before
avoidance; and

(c) a trustee retains any right of recourse to the trust fund which arose

before avoidance.

(3) Avoidance of the trust does not affect the rights of a third party who
before avoidance acquired a beneficiary’s right to benefit, or a security
right or other limited right in that right to benefit, if:
(a) the third party neither knew nor had reason to know that the trust

or trust term could be avoided; and

(b) the disposition is not gratuitous.

513

X. – 4:203

Book X

X. – 4:203: Unenforceable trust purposes
(1) A trust which is for a purpose other than to benefit beneficiaries or to

advance public benefit purposes takes effect as a trust for the truster.

(2) The trustee has a revocable authority to dispose of the trust fund in
accordance with the original trust for the advancement of the unen-
forceable purpose in so far as:
(a) advancement of that purpose does not infringe a fundamental
principle or mandatory rule and is not contrary to the public inter-
est;

(b) it can be determined with reasonable certainty whether any given

disposal of the trust fund is or is not for its advancement; and

(c) the disposal is not manifestly disproportionate to any likely benefit

from that disposal.

Chapter 5:
Trustee decision-making and powers
Section 1:
Trustee decision-making

X. – 5:101: Trustee discretion
(1) Subject to the obligations of a trustee under this Book and exceptions
provided for by other rules, the trustees are free to determine whether,
when and how the exercise of their powers and discretions is best
suited to performing their obligations under the trust.

(2) Except in so far as the trust terms or other rules provide otherwise, the
trustees are not bound by, and are not to regard themselves as bound
by, any directions or wishes of any of the parties to the trust or other
persons.

(3) The trustees are not obliged to disclose the reasons for the exercise of
their discretion unless the trust is for the advancement of a public
benefit purpose or the trust terms provide otherwise.

X. – 5:102: Decision-making by several trustees
If there are several trustees, their powers and discretions are exercised by
simple majority decision unless the trust terms or other rules of this Book
provide otherwise.

514

Chapter 5:Trustee decision-making and powers

X. – 5:202

X. – 5:103: Conflict of interest in exercise of power or discretion
Unless the trust terms provide otherwise, a trustee may not participate in a
decision to exercise or not to exercise a power or discretion if the effect of
the decision is to confer, confirm, or enlarge a right to benefit or eligibility
for benefit in favour of the trustee.

Section 2:
Powers of a trustee
Sub-section 1:
General rules

X. – 5:201: Powers in general
(1) Except where restricted by the trust terms or other rules of this Book, a
trustee may do any act in performance of the obligations under the
trust which:
(a) an owner of the fund might lawfully do; or
(b) a person might be authorised to do on behalf of another.

(2) Subject to restrictions or modifications in the trust terms, the other
Articles of this Section provide for the powers of a trustee in particular
cases.

X. – 5:202: Restriction in case of minimum number of trustees
(1) Where there are fewer trustees than a minimum required by the trust

terms or these rules, the trustees may only exercise:
(a) a power to appoint trustees;
(b) the right to apply to court for assistance;
(c) a right under X. – 6:201 (Right of reimbursement and indemnifica-

tion out of the trust fund); and

(d) any other right or power of a trustee to the extent that its exercise

is:
(i) expressly provided for in the circumstances by the trust terms;
(ii) necessary for the preservation of the trust fund; or
(iii) necessary for the satisfaction of trust debts whose perform-

ance is due or impending.

(2) If the trust is constituted by a transfer to at least two trustees the mini-
mum number of trustees is two, unless the trust terms provide other-
wise.

515

X. – 5:203

Book X

Sub-section 2:
Particular powers of a trustee

X. – 5:203: Power to authorise agent
(1) The trustees may authorise an agent to act on behalf of the trustees
and, subject to the restrictions set out in the following Articles of this
Section, may entrust to another performance of obligations under the
trust.

(2) Several trustees may authorise one of them to act on their behalf.
(3) However, personal performance by a trustee is required for decisions as

to whether or how to exercise:
(a) a discretion to confer benefit on a beneficiary or to choose a public

benefit purpose to be advanced or its manner of advancement;

(b) a power to change the trustees; or
(c) a power to delegate performance of obligations under the trust.
(4) A person to whom performance of an obligation is entrusted has the
same obligations as a trustee, so far as they relate to that performance.
(5) A trustee is obliged not to conclude, without good reason, a contract of
mandate which is not in writing or which includes the following terms:
(a) a term conferring an irrevocable mandate;
(b) terms excluding the obligations of an agent set out in Book IV. D.,
Chapter 3, Section 1 (Main obligations of agent) or modifying
them to the detriment of the principal;

(c) a term permitting the agent to subcontract;
(d) terms permitting a conflict of interest on the part of the agent;
(e) a term excluding or restricting the agent’s liability to the principal

for non-performance.

(6) The trustees are obliged to keep the performance of the agent under
review and, if required in the circumstances, give a direction to the
agent or terminate the mandate relationship.

X. – 5:204: Power to transfer title to person
undertaking to be a trustee
(1) The trustees may transfer trust assets to a person who undertakes to be
a trustee in relation to the assets and to dispose of them as the original
trustees direct and in default of any such direction to transfer them
back to the original trustees on demand.

516

Chapter 5:Trustee decision-making and powers

X. – 5:208

(2) The recipient must be:

(a) a person who gives such undertakings in the course of business;
(b) a legal person controlled by the trustees; or
(c) a legal person designated in an enactment as eligible to carry out
such a trust obligation or satisfying requirements set out therein for
this purpose

(3) X. – 5:203 (Power to authorise agent) paragraphs (5) and (6) apply

correspondingly.

X. – 5:205: Power to transfer physical control to a storer
(1) The trustees may place trust assets and documents relating to those
assets in the physical control of a person who undertakes to keep the
trust assets safe and to deliver them back to the trustees on demand.

(2) X. – 5:204 (Power to transfer title to person undertaking to be a trus-

tee) paragraphs (2) and (3) apply correspondingly.

X. – 5:206: Power to delegate
A trustee may entrust to another the performance of any of the trustee’s
obligations under the trust and the exercise of any of the trustee’s powers,
including the exercise of a discretion, authority to dispose of trust assets
and the power to delegate, but remains responsible for performance in ac-
cordance with III. – 2:106 (Performance entrusted to another).

X. – 5:207: Power to select investments
In so far as the trustees are obliged to invest the trust fund, the trustees may
invest in any form of investment and determine the particular manner of
investment which is best suited to fulfil that obligation.

X. – 5:208: Power to submit trust accounts for audit
Where appropriate, a trustee may submit the trust accounts for an audit by
an independent and competent auditor.

517

X. – 6:101

Book X

Chapter 6:
Obligations and rights of trustees and trust auxiliaries
Section 1:
Obligations of a trustee
Sub-section 1:
General rules

X. – 6:101: General obligation of a trustee
(1) A trustee is obliged to administer the trust fund and exercise any power
to dispose of the fund as a prudent manager of another’s affairs for the
benefit of the beneficiaries or the advancement of the public benefit
purposes, in accordance with the law and the trust terms.

(2) In particular, a trustee is obliged to act with the required care and skill,

fairly and in good faith.

(3) Except in so far as the trust terms provide otherwise:

(a) these obligations include the particular obligations set out in X. –

6:102 (Required care and skill) and the following sub-section; and

(b) an administration or disposal of the trust fund is of benefit to a

beneficiary only if it is for that person’s economic benefit.

X. – 6:102: Required care and skill
(1) A trustee is required to act with the care and skill which can be ex-
pected of a reasonably competent and careful person managing an-
other’s affairs, having regard to whether the trustee has a right to re-
muneration.

(2) If the trustee is acting in the course of a profession, the trustee must act
with the care and skill that is expected of a member of that profession.

Sub-section 2:
Particular obligations of a trustee

X. – 6:103: Obligations to segregate, safeguard and insure
(1) A trustee is obliged to keep the trust fund segregated from other patri-

mony and to keep the trust assets safe.

(2) In particular, a trustee may not invest in assets which are especially at
risk of misappropriation unless particular care is taken for their safe-

518

Chapter 6:Obligations and rights of trustees and trust auxiliaries

X. – 6:106

keeping. Where the asset is a document embodying a right to a per-
formance which is owed to whoever is the holder of the document,
such care is taken if the document is placed in a storer’s safekeeping in
accordance with X. – 5:205 (Power to transfer physical control to a
storer).

(3) So far as it is possible and appropriate to do so, the trustee is obliged to

insure the trust assets against loss.

X. – 6:104: Obligation to inform and report
(1) A trustee is obliged to inform a beneficiary who has a right to benefit of

the existence of the trust and that beneficiary’s right.

(2) A trustee is obliged to make reasonable efforts to inform a beneficiary
who has an eligibility for benefit of the existence of the trust and that
beneficiary’s eligibility.

(3) In determining what efforts are reasonable for the purposes of para-

graph (2), regard is to be had to:
(a) whether the expense required is proportionate to the value of the

benefit which might be conferred on that beneficiary;

(b) whether the beneficiary is a member of a class whose members the

trustee is required to benefit; and

(c) the practicalities of identifying and communicating with the ben-

eficiary.

(4) So far as appropriate, a trustee is obliged to make available information
about the state and investment of the trust fund, trust debts, and dis-
posals of trust assets and their proceeds.

X. – 6:105: Obligation to keep trust accounts
A trustee is obliged to keep accounts in respect of the trust funds (trust
accounts).

X. – 6:106: Obligation to permit inspection and
copying of trust documents
(1) A trustee must permit a beneficiary or other person entitled to enforce
performance of the obligations under the trust to inspect the trust
documents and to make copies of them at that person’s own expense.

(2) Paragraph (1) does not apply to:

(a) the opinions of a legal adviser relating to actual or contemplated
legal proceedings by the trustees in that capacity against the per-

519

X. – 6:107

Book X

son seeking inspection; and evidence gathered for such proceed-
ings;

(b) communications between the trustees and other beneficiaries and
any other communications whose disclosure would result in a
breach of confidence owed by the trustees in that capacity to an-
other.

(3) The trustees may refuse inspection and copying of trust documents so
far as these relate to information which is confidential to the trustees in
that capacity if the beneficiary does not provide adequate assurance
that the confidentiality will be maintained.

(4) Unless the trust is for the advancement of public benefit purposes, the
trustees may also refuse inspection and copying of documents so far as
the documents disclose the reasons for the trustees’ decision to exer-
cise or not to exercise a discretion, the deliberations of the trustees
which preceded that decision, and material relevant to the delibera-
tions.

(5) The trust terms may enlarge the rights of inspection and copying which

are provided for by this Article.

(6) In this Book “trust documents” are:

(a) any documents containing the truster’s declaration of intentions
relating to the trust (whether or not intended to be binding) and
any juridical act or court order varying the trust terms;

(b) minutes of meetings of the trustees;
(c) records made and notices and other communications in writing
received by a trustee in that capacity, including the opinions of
a legal adviser engaged by a trustee at the trust fund’s expense;

(d) any documents containing juridical acts concluded or made by the

trustees;

(e) receipts for disposal of trust assets; and
(f) the trust accounts.

X. – 6:107: Obligation to invest
(1) A trustee is obliged to invest the trust fund, so far as available for in-

vestment, and in particular:
(a) to dispose of assets which ordinarily neither produce income nor

increase in value and to invest the proceeds;

520

Chapter 6:Obligations and rights of trustees and trust auxiliaries

X. – 6:108

(b) to take professional advice on investment of the fund, if the trus-
tees lack the expertise required for the efficient and prudent invest-
ment of funds of the size and nature of the trust fund;

(c) to make a spread of investments in which overall:

(i) the risks of failure or loss of particular investments are diver-

sified; and

(ii) the expected gain significantly outweighs the potential failure

or loss;

unless the trust fund is so small that a spread of investments is inappropri-
ate; and
(d) to review at appropriate intervals the suitableness of retaining or chan-

ging the investments.

(2) A trustee is not obliged to invest assets:

(a) which are imminently required for transfer to or use by a benefi-

ciary or for satisfaction of a trust debt; or

(b) whose investment would otherwise impede the trustees in carry-

ing out their other obligations under this Book.

(3) The obligation to invest does not authorise a trustee to dispose of trust
assets which according to the trust terms are to be retained by the
trustees or transferred in kind to a beneficiary.

X. – 6:108: Obligation not to acquire trust assets or
trust creditors’ rights
(1) A trustee is obliged not to purchase a trust asset or the right of a trust
creditor against the trustees, whether personally or by means of an
agent.

(2) A contract for the sale of a trust asset which is concluded as a result of
non-performance of this obligation may be avoided by any other party
to the trust or any person entitled to enforce performance of the ob-
ligations under the trust.

(3) The right to avoid is in addition to any remedy for non-performance.
(4) This Article applies with appropriate modifications to other contracts
for the acquisition or use of a trust asset or a right corresponding to a
trust debt.

521

X. – 6:109

Book X

X. – 6:109: Obligation not to obtain unauthorised
enrichment or advantage
(1) A trustee is obliged not to make use of the trust fund, or information or
an opportunity obtained in the capacity of trustee, to obtain an enrich-
ment unless that use is authorised by the trust terms.

(2) A trustee may not set off a right to performance from a beneficiary,
which is owed to the trustee in a personal capacity, against that ben-
eficiary’s right to benefit.

X. – 6:110: Obligations regarding co-trustees
A trustee is obliged to:
(a) cooperate with co-trustees in performing the obligations under the

trust; and

(b) take appropriate action if a trustee knows or has reason to suspect that:
(i) a co-trustee has failed to perform any obligation under, or arising

out of, the trust, or such non-performance is impending; and

(ii) the non-performance is likely to result or have resulted in loss to

the trust fund.

Section 2:
Rights of a trustee

X. – 6:201: Right to reimbursement and indemnification
out of the trust fund
A trustee has a right to reimbursement or indemnification out of the trust
fund in respect of expenditure and trust debts which the trustee incurs in
performance of the obligations under the trust.

X. – 6:202: Right to remuneration out of the trust fund
(1) A trustee has a right to such remuneration out of the trust fund as is

provided for by the trust terms.

(2) Unless this is inconsistent with the trust terms, a trustee who acts as a
trustee in the course of a profession has a right to reasonable remu-
neration out of the trust fund for work done in performance of the
obligations under the trust.

522

Chapter 6:Obligations and rights of trustees and trust auxiliaries

X. – 6:203

(3) Paragraph (2) does not apply if:

(a) the trustee, in the capacity of beneficiary, is entitled to significant

benefit from the trust fund; or

(b) the trust was created as a result of a contract between the trustee

and the truster; or

(c) the trust is for the advancement of public benefit purposes.

X. – 6:203: Rights in respect of unauthorised acquisitions
(1) This Article applies where:

(a) a trustee acquires an asset or other enrichment as a result of a non-

performance of an obligation under the trust; and

(b) the asset becomes part of the trust fund or the enrichment is added

to the trust fund in performance of an obligation to disgorge.

(2) The trustee has a right to reimbursement or indemnification for any
expenditure or obligation which it was necessary to incur to make the
acquisition. If the trustee previously satisfied in full or in part a liability
under X. – 7:201 (Liability of trustee to reinstate the trust fund), the
trustee has a right to reimbursement from the trust fund to the extent
that after the acquisition the trust fund is more than reinstated.

(3) The trustee also has a right to reasonable remuneration if:

(a) the acquisition was made in good faith to increase the trust fund;

and

(b) the trustee would be entitled to remuneration under X. – 6:202
(Right to remuneration out of the trust fund) paragraph (2)(b) if
the acquisition had been in performance of an obligation under the
trust.

(4) If the acquisition resulted from a non-performance of the obligation
under X. – 6:109 (Obligation not to obtain unauthorised enrichment or
advantage) to which a beneficiary validly consented, the trustee may
waive the rights under paragraphs (2) and (3) and take over the con-
senting beneficiary’s right to benefit from the acquisition.

(5) A trustee is not entitled under this Article to more than the value of the

acquisition.

523

X. – 6:204

Book X

X. – 6:204: Corresponding rights against beneficiaries
(1) Where the right of a trustee under X. – 6:201 (Right to reimbursement
and indemnification out of the trust fund) exceeds the trust fund, the
trustee may recover the excess from the beneficiaries.

(2) The liability of a beneficiary under paragraph (1) is:

(a) limited to the enrichment which that beneficiary has obtained in

accordance with the trust terms; and

(b) subject to the defence of disenrichment, VII. – 6:101 (Disenrich-

ment) applying with appropriate adaptations.

(3) The right to recover under paragraph (1) ends six months after the right

to reimbursement or indemnification has arisen.

X. – 6:205: Right to insure against personal liability
at trust fund’s expense
(1) A trustee has a right to reimbursement or indemnification out of the
trust fund in respect of expenditure or a debt which the trustee reason-
ably incurs to obtain insurance against liability under X. – 7:201 (Liabil-
ity of trustee to reinstate the trust fund).
(2) Paragraph (1) does not apply in so far as:

(a) the trustee has a right to remuneration for performing the obliga-

tions under the trust; or

(b) the insurance is against liability arising out of a non-performance

which is intentional or grossly negligent.

Section 3:
Obligations of a trust auxiliary

X. – 6:301: Obligations of a trust auxiliary
(1) A trust auxiliary is obliged to disclose the identity of the trustees if this
information is known to the trust auxiliary and is not otherwise appar-
ent.

(2) In deciding whether to exercise a power a trust auxiliary is obliged:

(a) to act in good faith; and
(b) not to obtain an enrichment which is not authorised by the trust

terms.

524

Chapter 7:Remedies for non-performance

X. – 7:103

Chapter 7:
Remedies for non-performance
Section 1:
Specific performance, judicial review and ancillary remedies

X. – 7:101: Specific performance
(1) The enforcement of specific performance of an obligation under the
trust includes the prevention of a trustee from disposing of or other-
wise dealing with a trust asset otherwise than in accordance with the
terms of the trust.

(2) Specific performance cannot be enforced if performance requires a trus-

tee to exercise a discretion.

X. – 7:102: Judicial review
(1) On the application of a party to the trust or a person entitled to enforce
performance of an obligation under the trust, a court may review a
decision of the trustees or a trust auxiliary whether or how to exercise
a power or discretion conferred on them by the trust terms or this Book.
(2) A former trustee who has been removed by the trustees or a trust aux-
iliary without the trustee’s consent has a corresponding right to judicial
review of that decision.

(3) A court may avoid a decision of the trustees or a trust auxiliary which is
irrational or grossly unreasonable, motivated by irrelevant or improper
considerations, or otherwise an abuse of power or outside the powers
of the trustees or the trust auxiliary.

X. – 7:103: Further remedies
Other rules may provide for:
(a) accounts and inquiries concerning the trust fund and its administration

and disposal, as directed by court order;

(b) payment or transfer into court of money or other assets in the trust fund;
(c) the appointment by court order of a receiver to administer a trust fund;
(d) the exercise of rights and powers of a trustee by a public officer or body,

in particular in relation to trusts to advance public benefit purposes;

(e) suspension of the rights and powers of the trustees to administer and

dispose of the fund;

in cases of actual or suspected non-performance of the obligations under
the trust.

525

X. – 7:201

Book X

Section 2:
Reparation and disgorgement of unauthorised enrichment

X. – 7:201: Liability of trustee to reinstate the trust fund
(1) A trustee is liable to reinstate the trust fund in respect of loss caused to
the trust fund by non-performance of any obligation under, or arising
out of, the trust, if the non-performance:
(a) is not excused; and
(b) results from the trustee’s failure to exercise the required care and

skill.

(2) However, a person is liable under paragraph (1) only if that person

knew, or it was manifest, that that person was a trustee.

(3) A trustee is not liable merely because a co-trustee, an agent or other
person entrusted with performance, or an authorised recipient of trust
assets has caused loss to the trust fund.

(4) Paragraph (3) does not prejudice any liability of the trustee arising:
(a) under paragraph (1) out of the trustee’s own non-performance of

an obligation under the trust, in particular:
(i) an obligation to act with the required care and skill when
choosing to appoint or engage that person and agreeing the
terms of the engagement; or

(ii) the obligation to keep the performance of that person under
review and, if required in the circumstances, to take measures
to protect the trust fund; or

(b) out of delegation of performance (X. – 5:206 (Power to delegate));
(c) under VI. – 3:201 (Accountability for damage caused by employees

and representatives); or

(d) because the trustee induced, assisted or collaborated in that per-

son’s non-performance.

(5) III. – 3:702 (General measure of damages) applies with appropriate

adaptations to determine the measure of reinstatement.

(6) The following rights of a trustee are suspended until the trustee has

completely reinstated the trust fund:
(a) any right of recourse to the trust fund; and
(b) any right to benefit which the trustee has in the capacity of ben-

eficiary.

(7) This Article is subject to the trust terms.

526

Chapter 7:Remedies for non-performance

X. – 7:301

X. – 7:202: Liability of trustee to compensate a beneficiary
(1) A trustee who is liable under X. – 7:201 (Liability of trustee to reinstate
the trust fund) is also obliged to compensate a beneficiary who, de-
spite reinstatement of the trust fund, does not obtain a benefit to
which that beneficiary was entitled or, if there had been no failure of
performance, would have been entitled under the trust terms.

(2) The beneficiary has the same right to compensation as arises from non-

performance of a contractual obligation.
(3) This Article is subject to the trust terms.

X. – 7:203: Disgorgement of unauthorised enrichment
Where a trustee obtains an enrichment as a result of non-performance of
the obligation under X. – 6:109 (Obligation not to obtain unauthorised
enrichment or advantage) and that enrichment does not become part of
the trust fund under X. – 3:201 (Additions to the trust fund), the trustee is
obliged to add the enrichment to the trust fund or, if that is not possible, to
add its monetary value.

Section 3:
Defences

X. – 7:301: Consent of beneficiary to non-performance
(1) A trustee has a defence to liability to the extent that reinstatement,
compensation or disgorgement would benefit a beneficiary who validly
consented to the non-performance.

(2) A beneficiary consents to a non-performance when that beneficiary
agrees to conduct of the trustee which amounts to a non-performance
and either:
(a) the beneficiary knew that such conduct would amount to a non-

performance; or

(b) it was manifest that such conduct would amount to a non-per-

formance.

(3) Paragraph (1) applies whether or not the non-performance enriched or

disadvantaged the beneficiary who consented.

(4) Where a beneficiary participates in the non-performance in the capa-
city of trustee, paragraph (1) applies in relation to any co-trustees who
are liable. A right of recourse between the solidary debtors as regards

527

X. – 7:302

Book X

any residual liability to reinstate the trust fund or compensate a ben-
eficiary is unaffected.

(5) A consent is not valid if it results from a mistake which was caused by
false information given by the trustee or the trustee’s non-performance
of an obligation to inform.

X. – 7:302: Prescription
The general period of prescription for a right to performance of an obliga-
tion under a trust does not begin to run against a beneficiary until benefit to
that beneficiary is due.

X. – 7:303 Protection of the trustee
(1) A trustee is discharged by performing to a person who, after reasonable

inquiry, appears to be entitled to the benefit conferred.

(2) The right of the beneficiary who was entitled to the benefit against the
recipient of the benefit arising under Book VII (Unjustified enrichment)
is unaffected.

Section 4:
Solidary liability and forfeiture

X. – 7:401: Solidary liability
(1) Where several trustees are liable in respect of the same non-perform-

ance, their liability is solidary.

(2) As between the solidary debtors themselves, the shares of liability are
in proportion to each debtor’s relative responsibility for the non-per-
formance, having regard to each debtor’s skills and experience as a
trustee.

(3) A debtor’s relative responsibility for a non-performance to which that
debtor consented is not reduced merely because that debtor took no
active part in bringing it about.

X. – 7:402: Forfeiture of collaborating beneficiary’s right to benefit
(1) Where a beneficiary collaborated in a trustee’s non-performance, a
court may order on the application of that trustee or another benefi-
ciary that the right to benefit of the beneficiary who collaborated be
forfeited.

528

Chapter 8:Change of trustees or trust auxiliary

X. – 8:102

(2) The right to benefit of a beneficiary who validly consented to the non-
performance, but did not collaborate in it, may be forfeited only to the
extent that the beneficiary has been enriched by the non-performance.

(3) To the extent that a beneficiary’s right to benefit is forfeited under this
Article, benefit which is otherwise due to that beneficiary is to be ap-
plied so as to satisfy the trustee’s liability until either the liability is
extinguished or the right to benefit is exhausted.

Chapter 8:
Change of trustees or trust auxiliary
Section 1:
General rules on change of trustees

X. – 8:101: Powers to change trustees in general
(1) After the creation of a trust, a person may be appointed a trustee and a

trustee may resign or be removed:
(a) in accordance with a power:
(i) under the trust terms or
(ii) conferred on the trustees by this Section; or

(b) by court order under this Section.

(2) The exercise of a power within paragraph (1)(a) is of no effect unless it
is in writing. The same applies to a binding direction to trustees re-
garding the exercise of such a power.

(3) An exercise of a power under the trust terms by a person who is not
also a continuing trustee does not take effect until notice is given to the
continuing trustees.

(4) The resignation or removal of a sole trustee is effective only if a sub-

stitute trustee is appointed at the same time.

X. – 8:102: Powers to change trustees conferred on trustees
(1) The powers conferred by this Section on trustees may only be exercised:

(a) by unanimous decision; and
(b) if in the circumstances a trust auxiliary does not have a corresponding
power or the trust auxiliary cannot or does not exercise such a power
within a reasonable period after a request to do so by the trustees.
(2) Subject to paragraph (1), the trustees are obliged to exercise their pow-
ers under this Section in accordance with any joint direction by the

529

X. – 8:201

Book X

beneficiaries if the beneficiaries have a joint right to terminate the trust
in respect of the whole fund.

(3) The trust terms may modify or exclude the powers conferred by this

Section on trustees.

Section 2:
Appointment of trustees

X. – 8:201: General restrictions on appointments
(1) An appointment of a person as trustee is of no effect if:

(a) it is manifest that the co-trustees would have power to remove that
person, if appointed, on grounds of that person’s inability, refusal
to act, or unsuitability;

(b) the person appointed does not agree to act as trustee; or
(c) the appointment exceeds a maximum number of trustees provided

for by the trust terms.

(2) A provision in the trust terms that there is to be only one trustee takes

effect as a maximum of two.

X. – 8:202: Appointment by trust auxiliary or trustees
(1) The trustees may appoint one or more additional trustees.
(2) The continuing trustees may appoint a substitute trustee for a person

who has ceased to be a trustee.

(3) Unless the trust terms provide otherwise, a self-appointment by a trust

auxiliary is of no effect.

X. – 8:203: Appointment by court order
On the application of any party to the trust or any person entitled to en-
force performance of an obligation under the trust, a court may appoint:
(a) a substitute trustee for a person who has ceased to be a trustee, or
(b) one or more additional trustees,

if in the circumstances:
(i) no one else is able and willing to exercise a power to appoint; and
(ii) the appointment is likely to promote the efficient and prudent admin-
istration and disposal of the trust fund in accordance with the trust
terms.

530

Chapter 8:Change of trustees or trust auxiliary

X. – 8:401

Section 3:
Resignation of trustees

X. – 8:301: Resignation with consent of trust auxiliary or
co-trustees
(1) A trust auxiliary who may appoint a substitute trustee in the event of

the trustee’s resignation may consent to a resignation.

(2) A trust auxiliary may consent to a resignation without the consent of
the continuing trustees only if a substitute trustee is appointed at the
same time.

(3) The continuing trustees may consent to a resignation.
(4) A trustee may only resign with the consent of a trust auxiliary or co-
trustees if after resignation there will be at least two continuing trustees
or a special trustee.

(5) Special trustees, for the purposes of this Book, are:

(a) any public officer or body having the function of acting as a trus-

tee; and

(b) any legal persons designated as such in an enactment or satisfying

requirements set out in an enactment for this purpose.

X. – 8:302: Resignation with approval of court
A court may approve the resignation of a trustee who cannot otherwise
resign if it is fair to release the trustee from obligations under the trust,
having regard in particular to whether after resignation an efficient and
prudent administration and disposal of the trust fund in accordance with
the trust terms can be secured.

Section 4:
Removal of trustees

X. – 8:401: Removal by trust auxiliary or co-trustees
(1) Where a court might remove a trustee on grounds of inability, refusal to

act, or unsuitability, the continuing trustees may remove that trustee.

(2) The removal of a trustee by a trust auxiliary or the trustees does not
take effect until notice of the removal is given to the trustee who is to
be removed.

531

X. – 8:402

Book X

X. – 8:402: Removal by court order
(1) On the application of any party to the trust, a court may remove a
trustee without that trustee’s consent and regardless of the trust terms
if it is inappropriate for the trustee to remain a trustee, in particular on
grounds of the trustee’s:
(a) inability;
(b) actual or anticipated material non-performance of any obligation

under, or arising out of, the trust;

(c) unsuitability;
(d) permanent or recurrent fundamental disagreement with co-trustees

on a matter requiring a unanimous decision of the trustees; or

(e) other interests which substantially conflict with performance of

the obligations under, or arising out of, the trust.

Section 5:
Effect of change of trustees

X. – 8:501: Effect on trustees’ obligations and rights
(1) A person who is appointed a trustee becomes bound by the trust and
acquires the corresponding rights and powers. Subject to the following
paragraphs of this Article, a trustee who resigns or is removed is re-
leased from the trust and loses those rights and powers.

(2) The obligation to cooperate with co-trustees does not end until the

expiry of a reasonable period after resignation or removal.

(3) A former trustee’s right of recourse to the trust fund takes effect as a
right against the continuing trustees. A right to reimbursement, indem-
nification or remuneration by a beneficiary is unaffected.

(4) A former trustee remains bound by:

(a) the obligation in X. – 6:109 (Obligation not to obtain unauthor-

ised enrichment or advantage);

(b) trust debts; and
(c) obligations arising from non-performance.

X. – 8:502: Vesting and divesting of trust assets
(1) Title to a trust asset vests in a person on appointment as a trustee,

without a court order to that effect, if that title is:

532

Chapter 8:Change of trustees or trust auxiliary

X. – 8:504

(a) capable of transfer by agreement between a transferor and a trans-
feree without the necessity for any further act of transfer or form-
ality; or

(b) regarded under the applicable national law as vested in the trustees

as a body.

(2) The vesting of an asset in a person who is appointed a trustee does not

divest any continuing trustees.

(3) A person who resigns or is removed as a trustee is divested correspond-

ingly.

X. – 8:503: Transmission of trust documents
A continuing or substitute trustee is entitled to the delivery up of trust
documents in the possession of a former trustee. The person in possession
has the right to make and retain copies at that person’s own expense.

X. – 8:504: Effect of death or dissolution of trustee
(1) Where one of several trustees dies or a corporate trustee is dissolved,
the trust fund remains vested in the continuing trustees. This applies to
the exclusion of any person succeeding to a deceased or dissolved
trustee’s other patrimony.

(2) Where a sole trustee dies, the deceased trustee’s successors become

trustees and accordingly:
(a) the trustee’s successors become subject to the trust and acquire

the corresponding rights and powers;

(b) the trustee’s successors become liable for trust debts incurred by
the deceased trustee to the extent of the deceased trustee’s estate;
and

(c) the trust fund vests in the trustee’s successors,
but the trustee’s successors may only exercise the powers set out in
X. – 5:202 (Restriction in case of minimum number of trustees) para-
graph (1), regardless of the number of successors.

(3) A trustee’s testamentary disposition of the trust fund is of no effect,
but the trust terms may confer a testamentary power to appoint a trus-
tee.

(4) Obligations arising from non-performance devolve on the deceased

trustee’s successor.

533

X. – 8:601

Book X

Section 6:
Death or dissolution of trust auxiliary

X. – 8:601: Effect of death or dissolution of trust auxiliary
A power of a trust auxiliary ends when the trust auxiliary dies or is dissolved,
but the trust terms may permit a testamentary exercise of the power.

Chapter 9:
Termination and variation of trusts and transfer
of rights to benefit
Section 1:
Termination
Sub-section 1:
General rules on termination

X. – 9:101: Modes of termination
A trust in respect of a fund or part of a fund may be terminated:
(a) by a truster or beneficiaries in accordance with a right provided for by

the trust terms;

(b) by a truster in accordance with X. – 9:103 (Right of truster to terminate

a gratuitous trust);

(c) by a beneficiary in accordance with X. – 9:104 (Right of beneficiaries to

terminate);

(d) by a trustee under X. – 9:108 (Termination by trustee);
(e) by merger of rights and obligations under X. – 9:109 (Merger of right

and obligation).

X. – 9:102: Effect of termination on trustee’s liabilities
(1) To the extent that the trust is terminated the trustee is discharged.
(2) Unless the parties concerned agree otherwise, termination of the trust

does not release a trustee from liability:
(a) to a beneficiary arising out of the trustee’s non-performance of any

obligation under, or arising out of, the trust; or

(b) to a trust creditor.

534

Chapter 9:Termination and variation of trusts and transfer of

X. – 9:105

Sub-section 2:
Termination by truster or beneficiaries

X. – 9:103: Right of truster to terminate a gratuitous trust
(1) Except as provided for by paragraphs (2) and (3), a truster has no im-
plied right to terminate a trust or a trust term merely because the trust
was constituted gratuitously, irrespective of whether:
(a) the trust was constituted without a transfer by the truster;
(b) the truster reserved a right to benefit during the truster’s lifetime.
(2) A truster may terminate a gratuitously constituted trust, or a term of
such a trust, which is for the benefit of a person who does not yet exist.
(3) A truster may terminate a gratuitously constituted trust for the benefit
of another to the same extent that the truster might have revoked a
donation to that beneficiary if the benefit had been conferred by way of
donation.

X. – 9:104: Right of beneficiaries to terminate
(1) A beneficiary of full legal capacity may terminate the trust in respect of
a fund or part of the fund which is for that beneficiary’s exclusive
benefit.

(2) If each is of full legal capacity, several beneficiaries have a correspond-
ing joint right to terminate the trust in respect of a fund or part of the
fund which is for the exclusive benefit of those beneficiaries.

(3) A trust may not be terminated in respect of part of the fund if this
would adversely affect the trust in respect of the rest of the fund for
the benefit of other beneficiaries or for the advancement of public ben-
efit purposes.

X. – 9:105: Meaning of “exclusive benefit”
(1) A fund or part of a fund is to be regarded as for a beneficiary’s exclusive
benefit if all of that capital and all of the future income from that capital
can only be disposed of in accordance with the trust terms for the
benefit of that beneficiary or that beneficiary’s estate.

(2) For the purposes of paragraph (1) the possibility that the beneficiary
might give a consent, or might fail to exercise a right adverse to that
beneficiary’s own benefit, is to be disregarded.

535

X. – 9:106

Book X

X. – 9:106: Notice of termination and its effects
(1) A truster or beneficiary exercises a right to terminate by giving notice in

writing to the trustees.

(2) A trust or part of a trust which is terminated by the truster takes effect

from that time as a trust for the benefit of the truster.

(3) Where a beneficiary, exercising a right to terminate, instructs the trus-
tee to transfer to someone other than the beneficiary, notice of termi-
nation vests in that person the right to benefit from the fund or part of
the fund which is to be transferred.

(4) Unless the transfer is impossible or unlawful, the trustee is obliged to
transfer the fund or part of the fund in accordance with the notice of
termination and without delay. The obligation to transfer supersedes
the obligation to administer and dispose of the fund or part in accord-
ance with the trust terms.

(5) If a transfer is impossible because it would require the grant of an un-
divided share in an asset for which undivided shares are not allowed,
the trustee is obliged:
(a) to divide the asset and transfer the divided share, so far as this is

possible and reasonable; and otherwise

(b) to sell the asset, if this is possible, and transfer the corresponding

share of the proceeds.

(5) The trust is terminated when and to the extent that the required trans-

fer is made.

X. – 9:107: Trustee’s right to withhold
(1) A trustee may withhold such part of the fund which is to be transferred

as is needed to satisfy:
(a) trust debts;
(b) the trustee’s accrued rights of recourse to the fund; and
(c) the costs of transfer and of any required division or sale of an asset,
so far as those debts, rights and costs are allocated to the part of the
fund which is to be transferred.

(2) The right to withhold ends if the person exercising the right to termi-
nate pays compensation for the debts, rights and costs allocated to the
part of the fund which is to be transferred.

536

Chapter 9:Termination and variation of trusts and transfer of

X. – 9:201

Sub-section 3:
Other modes of termination

X. – 9:108: Termination by trustee
(1) Where a beneficiary has a right to terminate a trust under X. – 9:104
(Right of beneficiaries to terminate) paragraph (1), a trustee may give a
notice to that beneficiary requiring that beneficiary to exercise that
right within a period of reasonable length fixed by the notice. If the
beneficiary fails to do so within that period, the trustee may terminate
the trust by a transfer to that beneficiary. The beneficiary is obliged to
accept the transfer.

(2) A trustee may also terminate the trust by payment of money or transfer
of other assets of the trust fund into court where other rules so provide.

X. – 9:109: Merger of right and obligation
(1) A trust ends when the sole trustee is also the sole beneficiary and the

trust fund is for that beneficiary’s exclusive benefit.

(2) Where there are several trustees, paragraph (1) applies correspondingly

only if they have a joint right to benefit.

(3) If a trust subsists in relation to the beneficiary’s right to benefit or the
right to benefit is encumbered with a security right or other limited
right, the trustee remains bound by that trust or encumbrance.

Section 2:
Variation

X. – 9:201: Variation by truster or beneficiary
(1) The trust terms may be varied by a truster or beneficiary in accordance

with:
(a) a right provided for by the trust terms;
(b) the right provided for by paragraph (2).

(2) A truster or beneficiary who has a right to terminate a trust has a cor-
responding right to vary the trust terms so far as they relate to the fund
or part of the fund in respect of which the trust might be terminated.

(3) The exercise by several beneficiaries of a joint right to vary the trust

terms requires their agreement to that effect.

537

X. – 9:202

Book X

(4) A variation which is to take effect from the death of the person exer-
cising the right to vary is of no effect unless it is made by testamentary
instrument.

(5) A variation does not take effect until notice in writing is given to the

trustees.

X. – 9:202: Variation by court order of administrative trust terms
(1) On the application of any party to the trust or any person entitled to
enforce performance of obligations under the trust, a court may vary a
trust term relating to the administration of the trust fund if the variation
is likely to promote a more efficient and prudent administration of the
fund.

(2) A variation under paragraph (1) may not significantly affect the opera-
tion of the trust terms governing its disposal unless the court also has
power to vary those terms under one of the following Articles.

X. – 9:203: Variation by court order of trusts for beneficiaries
(1) On the application of any party to the trust or any person who would
benefit if the term to be varied were removed, a court may vary a trust
term which confers a right to benefit or eligibility for benefit on a per-
son who:
(a) does not yet exist; or
(b) does not presently conform to a description, such as membership

of a class, on which the right depends.

(2) The same applies where the trust term confers a right to benefit or
eligibility for benefit at a remote time in the future or which is condi-
tional on the occurrence of an improbable event.

X. – 9:204: Variation by court order of trusts for
public benefit purposes
(1) On the application of any party to the trust or any person entitled to
enforce performance of obligations under the trust, a court may vary a
trust term which provides for the advancement of a public benefit pur-
pose if, as a result of a change of circumstances, the advancement of
the particular purpose provided for by the trust term cannot be regarded
as a suitable and effective use of resources.

(2) A variation under paragraph (2) must be in favour of such general or
particular public benefit purposes as the truster would probably have

538

Chapter 10:Relations to third parties

X.–10:102

chosen if the truster had constituted the trust after the change in cir-
cumstances.

Section 3:
Transfer of right to benefit

X. – 9:301: Transfer by juridical act of right to benefit
(1) Subject to the other paragraphs of this Article, the transfer by juridical
act of a right to benefit is governed by Book III Chapter 5 Section 1
(Assignment of rights).

(2) A gratuitous transfer is of no effect unless it is made in writing.
(3) A transfer which is to take effect on the death of the transferor takes

effect only in accordance with the applicable law of succession.

Chapter 10:
Relations to third parties
Section 1:
General provisions on creditors

X.–10:101: Basic rule on creditors
(1) A person to whom a trustee owes a trust debt (a trust creditor) may
satisfy that person’s right out of the trust fund (in accordance with
X. – 10:202 (Rights of trust creditors in relation to the trust fund)),
but other creditors may not except in so far as these rules provide
otherwise.

(2) Paragraph (1) does not affect any right of a creditor of a party to a trust

to invoke a right of that party relating to the trust fund.

X.–10:102: Definition of trust debt
(1) An obligation is a trust debt if it is incurred by the trustee:

(a) as the owner for the time being of a trust asset;
(b) for the purposes of, and in accordance with the terms of, the trust;
(c) in the capacity of trustee and by a contract or other juridical act
which is not gratuitous, unless the creditor knew or could reason-
ably be expected to know that the obligation was not incurred in
accordance with the terms of the trust;

539

X.–10:201

Book X

(d) as a result of an act or omission in the administration or disposition

of the trust fund or the performance of a trust debt; or

(e) otherwise materially in connection with the trust patrimony.

(2) The obligations of trustees to reimburse, indemnify or remunerate a
former trustee or an intended trustee who has exercised a right of re-
fusal are also trust debts.

(3) Other obligations of a trustee are not trust debts.

Section 2:
Trust creditors

X.–10:201: Rights of trust creditors against the trustee
(1) A trustee is personally liable to satisfy trust debts.
(2) Unless the trustee and the trust creditor agree otherwise:

(a) liability is not limited to the value of the trust fund at the time the

trust creditor’s right to performance is enforced; and

(b) subject to the rules on change of trustees, liability does not end if

the trust fund ceases to be vested in the trustee.

(3) A party to a contract is not to be treated as agreeing to exclude or limit
liability merely because the other party discloses that that other party is
concluding the contract in the capacity of trustee.

X.–10:202: Rights of trust creditors in relation to the trust fund
A trust creditor may satisfy a right out of the trust fund:
(a) to enforce performance of a trustee’s personal liability under X. –

10:201 (Rights of trust creditors against the trustee); or

(b) in the exercise of a security right in trust assets.

X.–10:203: Protection of the truster and beneficiaries
A truster or beneficiary is not in that capacity liable to a trust creditor.

540

Chapter 10:Relations to third parties

X.–10:401

Section 3:
Trust debtors

X.–10:301: Right to enforce performance of
trust debtor’s obligation
(1) Where a trustee has a right to performance and that right is a trust
asset, the right to enforce performance of the obligation of the debtor
(the trust debtor) accrues to the trustee.

(2) Paragraph (1) does not affect:

(a) a beneficiary’s right to performance by the trustee of obligations

under the trust in respect of the right against the trust debtor; or

(b) procedural rules which allow a beneficiary to be a party to legal
proceedings against the trust debtor to which the trustee is also a
party.

X.–10:302: Set-off
A trustee’s right against a trust debtor may only be set off against:
(a) a right corresponding to a trust debt; or
(b) a beneficiary’s right to benefit out of the trust fund.

X.–10:303: Discharge of trust debtor
The discharge of a trust debtor by a trustee is of no effect if:
(a) the discharge is not in performance of the trustee’s obligations under

the trust; and

(b) (i) the discharge is gratuitous; or

(ii) the debtor knows or has reason to know that the discharge is not in

performance of the trustee’s obligations under the trust.

Section 4:
Acquirers of trust assets and rights encumbering trust assets

X.–10:401: Liability of donees and bad faith acquirers
(1) Where a trustee transfers a trust asset to another and the transfer is not
in accordance with the terms of the trust, the transferee takes the asset
subject to the trust if:

541

X.–10:501

Book X

(a) the transfer is gratuitous; or
(b) the transferee knows or could reasonably be expected to know that
the transfer is by a trustee and is not in accordance with the terms
of the trust.

(2) A transferee on whom a trust is imposed under paragraph (1) has a

corresponding right to a return of any benefit conferred in exchange.

(3) The trust imposed under paragraph (1) is extinguished if:

(a) benefit which was provided by the transferee in exchange is dis-

posed of in performance of an obligation under the trust; or

(b) the trustee or a third party satisfies an obligation to reinstate the

trust fund.

(4) A transferee can reasonably be expected to know a matter if:

(a) it would have been apparent from a reasonably careful investiga-

tion; and

(b) having regard to the nature and value of the asset, the nature and
costs of such investigation, and commercial practice, it is fair and
reasonable to expect a transferee in the circumstances to make that
investigation.

(5) This Article applies correspondingly where a trustee creates a security

right or other limited right in a trust asset in favour of another.

Section 5:
Other rules on liability and protection of third parties

X.–10:501: Liability for inducing or assisting misapplication
of the trust fund
(1) Non–contractual liability arising out of damage caused to another by
virtue of VI. – 2:211 (Loss upon inducement of non-performance of
obligation) is modified as provided for by paragraph (2).

(2) A person who intentionally induces a trustee’s non-performance of an
obligation under the trust, or intentionally assists such non-perform-
ance, is solidarily liable with that trustee, if the trustee is liable to re-
instate the trust fund.

542

Chapter 10:Relations to third parties

X.–10:502

X.–10:502: Protection of third parties dealing with trustees
(1) A contract which a trustee concludes as a result of a non-performance
of an obligation under the trust with a person who is not a party to a
trust is not void or avoidable for that reason.

(2) In favour of a person who is not a party to the trust and as against a
trustee, a person who has no knowledge of the true facts may rely on
the apparent effect of a trust document and the truth of a statement
contained in it.

