Leading Edge

Review

Bacterial Genomics and Pathogen Evolution

David M. Raskin,1 Rekha Seshadri,2 Stefan U. Pukatzki,1 and John J. Mekalanos1,*
1 Department of Microbiology & Molecular Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA
2 The Institute for Genomic Research, 9712 Medical Center Drive, Rockville, MD 20850, USA
*Contact: jmekalanos@hms.harvard.edu
DOI 10.1016/j.cell.2006.02.002

The availability of hundreds of bacterial genome sequences has altered the study of bacte-
rial pathogenesis, affecting both design of experiments and analysis of results. Comparative
genomics and genomic tools have been used to identify virulence factors and genes in-
volved in environmental persistence of pathogens. However, a major stumbling block in
the genomics revolution has been the large number of genes with unknown function that
have been identiﬁed in every organism sequenced to date.

Introduction
Over 250 bacterial genome sequences are currently avail-
able in public databases, representing hundreds of spe-
cies as well as multiple strains of the same species. The
study of these genomes by both computational and exper-
imental approaches has signiﬁcantly advanced our under-
standing of the physiology and pathogenicity of many
microbes and provided insights into the mechanisms and
history of genome evolution. This review will discuss spe-
ciﬁc examples, with an emphasis on how ‘‘postgenomic’’
methods have been utilized to identify genes that are es-
sential for bacterial growth or pathogenesis. There are
two general categories of postgenomic studies—those
that are based primarily on analysis of sequence informa-
tion itself and those that require some use of genomic se-
quence information but not based on direct sequence
analysis. Direct sequence analysis has the advantage of
enabling genome-level analysis of pathogens that are dif-
ﬁcult to manipulate genetically and permitting examination
of small differences such as single nucleotide polymor-
phisms (SNPs). However, the accuracy of bioinformatic
genomic annotations remains unclear since there have
been no reported attempts to conﬁrm functional assign-
ments of genes on a genome-wide scale. It is imperative
not only to improve annotation quality but also to dovetail
computational approaches with empirical studies, espe-
cially those that seek to unravel the functions of the numer-
ous hypothetical genes still found in genomes.

Multiple genome-level empirical approaches have been
developed for investigating gene function. Some do not
require prior knowledge of genomic sequence, but this re-
view will focus on those strategies that do, including a va-
riety of microarray technologies, proteomic methods, and
certain types of molecular genetic studies (e.g., genetic
footprinting techniques). These strategies have the advan-
tage of possessing some intrinsic experimental validation,
even though data are collected on the genomic scale.

Pathogenic Species in the Bacterial Genomic Era
Through a combination of critical
insight and chance,
pathogenic bacterial species were the ﬁrst free-living
organisms to be sequenced and thus have occupied

a unique place in the history of the genomic era. The ge-
nome of a laboratory strain of Haemophilus inﬂuenzae
was the ﬁrst bacterium to be sequenced and was followed
by an isolate of Mycoplasma genitalium (Fleischmann
et al., 1995; Fraser et al., 1995). In each of these cases,
the genome sequences provided immediate insights into
the biology of these bacterial species but less about
pathogenicity in part because the strains selected were
attenuated laboratory strains that had likely lost many
virulence-related loci. Nonetheless,
the genomes did
provide some explanations for curious physiological prop-
erties. For instance, growth of H. inﬂuenzae in vitro re-
quires large amounts of glutamate. The genome sequence
showed the absence of three TCA cycle genes in this spe-
cies. Glutamate can be converted to a-ketoglutarate by
glutamate dehydrogenase and then shunted into the re-
maining TCA cycle pathway, explaining the dependence
on exogenously supplied glutamate. In the case of M. gen-
italium, the genomic sequence revealed an almost com-
plete lack of enzymes involved in amino acid synthesis,
de novo nucleotide biosynthesis, and fatty acid biosynthe-
sis, providing an explanation for some of the undeﬁned
fastidious growth requirements of this species. Because
both H. inﬂuenzae and M. genitalium grow in host tissues,
these two examples illustrate that either the host milieu
can be nutrient rich or the physiology of bacteria in vivo
is very different from what is observed under laboratory
growth conditions.

The ﬁeld of comparative genomics next addressed
questions that could only be approached after multiple ge-
nomes were available for analysis. For example, after the
ﬁrst two bacterial genomes were sequenced, Mushegian
and Koonin (1996) tried to determine the minimum number
of genes necessary for life by comparing them and deter-
mining which genes were present in both. M. genitalium
contains only 468 protein-coding genes, while H. inﬂuen-
zae contains 1703 protein-coding genes. They identiﬁed
240 M. genitalium genes with orthologs in H. inﬂuenzae
but found that there were still genes missing from several
basic metabolic pathways. Based on the hypothesis that
this could have resulted from nonorthologous gene dis-
placement, they identiﬁed an additional 16 M. genitalium

Cell 124, 703–714, February 24, 2006 ª2006 Elsevier Inc. 703

genes to cover necessary functions and concluded that
256 genes were the minimum gene content necessary.
More recently Gil et al. (2004) have used experimental
data sets to eliminate more dispensable genes, while re-
taining the key biochemical pathways predicted to be
essential for a free-living cell. They found 206 genes could
make up a minimal gene set. Both of these approaches
clearly vastly underestimate the number of genes required
for growth in the ‘‘real world’’ of the host where all nutrients
are seldom available and where host-mediated processes
demand the specialized survival genes that are essential
for pathogenicity.

The H. inﬂuenzae genome also provided the ﬁrst exam-
ple of how little we know about bacterial physiology. Of
a total of 1743 annotated H. inﬂuenzae genes, 736 were
of unknown function. Many of these hypothetical genes
are now known to exist as orthologs in other bacterial ge-
nomes that have since been sequenced. In many bacteria,
close to one-half of all putative genes have no known func-
tion. While the tools of comparative genomics can predict
that some highly conserved ‘‘hypothetical’’ genes are
likely to be important in microbial evolution, they cannot
ascribe function per se without usually more computa-
tional or experimental information. Annotation programs
can tell us whether the protein products of these genes
contain membrane-spanning or DNA binding domains,
nucleotide binding motifs, phosphorylation or kinase do-
mains, or other functional information. Thus, these com-
putational methods are essential ﬁrst steps in formulating
hypotheses about possible gene function across the
expanse of bacterial genomic information. However, the
integration of information obtained through genomic se-
quencing efforts, bioinformatics analysis, and experimen-
tal validation is still a signiﬁcant challenge when trying to
deﬁne virulence mechanisms in the post-genomic era.

Virulence Gene Discovery in the Pre- and
Postgenomic Eras
How has microbial genomics changed the way virulence
genes are discovered? In the pregenomic era, virulence
factors were typically identiﬁed either by biochemical ap-
proaches or through forward or reverse genetic screens.
For example, a toxin active on mammalian cells might
be puriﬁed and its gene then identiﬁed through its primary
amino acid sequence. A transposon insertion mutant
might be isolated that attenuated the replication of a path-
ogen in a given host (Leung and Finlay, 1991) or that
encoded a gene coordinately regulated with a known vir-
ulence gene (Taylor et al., 1987). A virulence phenotype
might be recapitulated by cloning a virulence gene into
a heterologous organism (Isberg et al., 1987). Bacterial
genomics has certainly facilitated these classical ap-
proaches but has also allowed virulence genes to be
identiﬁed through other strategies. These employ compu-
tational methods, genetic signatures, physical linkage to
accessory genetic elements, or biochemical and genetic
approaches that depend on comprehensive genome-

704 Cell 124, 703–714, February 24, 2006 ª2006 Elsevier Inc.

sequence information. Several examples of these are dis-
cussed below.
Computational Methods
The annotation phase of a genomic sequencing project
frequently reveals putative genes coding for virulence fac-
tors with sequence similarity to known genes. Targeted
genetic methods can then be used to inactivate the puta-
tive virulence gene and then develop an appropriate assay
for its biochemical activity (Lin et al., 1999). For organisms
that are not amenable to genetic manipulation, identifying
sequence similarity to known virulence genes is one of the
few available methods for understanding virulence, such
as the identiﬁcation of conserved type III secretion genes
in Chlamydia species (Kalman et al., 1999). Sequence sim-
ilarity to unique host proteins (e.g., tyrosine phosphatases)
or host functional motifs (e.g., RGD integrin binding se-
quences) might also be used to identify new putative viru-
lence genes. In some cases, the host-related protein re-
vealed by genome sequencing can be conﬁrmed to have
the predicted biochemical activity despite the fact that
a role in virulence cannot not be demonstrated with the
available animal models (Vance et al., 2004).
Genetic Signatures
Many virulence gene products are subject to positive se-
lection at the level of the host through, for example, es-
cape from protective immune responses, adaptive host-
range, or functional mutations. Thus, genomic sequence
information can identify putative virulence genes by iden-
tifying genetic signatures of such selective pressure. For
example, polynucleotide repeats have been shown in
Haemophilus, Bordetella, and Neisseria species to modu-
late the stochastic on or off expression of surface proteins
and lipopolysaccharide-modifying enzymes through slip
strand mutational events, a process important for phase
variation of immunogenic factors leading to increased
persistence in the host (van Belkum et al., 1999). Genome
sequences have revealed numerous likely virulence genes
that display evidence of slip strand control in their pro-
moter and coding sequences. Other stochastic genetic
mechanisms for alteration of gene expression (e.g., invert-
ible elements encoding promoters) or coding sequence
(e.g., retroelement diversity generating sequences) can
be revealed through genomic sequence analysis and
then used to implicate their associated genes in virulence
related processes (Doulatov et al., 2004). Unique paralo-
gous gene families that display high degrees of sequence
variation (particularly nonsynonymous amino acid substi-
tutions) are often revealed through genomic sequencing
and later shown to correspond to virulence gene products
(Fleischmann et al., 2002). Finally, the presence of predic-
tive DNA motifs (e.g., iron regulation mediated by Fur) in
the promoter region of a gene can be used to predict the
gene’s involvement in pathogenicity by coregulation with
known virulence factors.
Physical Linkage to Accessory Genetic Elements
Accessory genetic elements (plasmids, prophages, trans-
posons, and islands) are known to frequently encode
virulence factors. Such elements can exist as unlinked

replicons or as chromosomally integrated elements rec-
ognizable in part by the typical gene products they encode
(replicases, transposases, phage structural proteins, inte-
grases, etc.). These DNA elements also typically have
a GC content and codon usage that is distinctly different
from that of the rest of the genome, indicating their recent
acquisition by horizontal genetic transfer. Thus, putative
virulence genes can be recognized by looking for genes
encoding, for example, secreted proteins that are associ-
ated with such elements (Perna et al., 2001). Occasionally,
accessory elements are only recognized after compara-
tive genomic methods, such as genomic microarray hy-
bridization, reveal them as variable regions between dif-
ferent strains. Linkage of a hypothetical gene to a known
virulence gene in a typical operon structure within the con-
text of an accessory genetic element provides strong ev-
idence for the hypothetical product’s role in pathogenicity.
Biochemical and Genetic Approaches
for Identiﬁcation of Virulence Genes Facilitated
by Genome-Sequence Information
The completion of a genome sequence provides an
opportunity to employ postgenomic methods that can
dramatically augment traditional methods of virulence-
gene discovery. These include targeted genetic screens,
proteomic analysis, and microarray-based methods of
transcriptional analysis and mutant characterization. For
example, virulence genes are, by their nature, expressed
in vivo. A variety of methods have been described that
seek to deﬁne in vivo-expressed genes (Rediers et al.,
2005). Genomics has facilitated these studies and contrib-
uted the powerful methodologies such as gene chip or mi-
croarray technologies. Thus, genomic microarrays have
been used to deﬁne virulence-gene regulons either by an-
alyzing appropriate regulatory mutants (Bina et al., 2003;
Zhu and Mekalanos, 2003) or in vivo expression during in-
fection (Boyce et al., 2004; Merrell et al., 2002; Larocque
et al., 2005). Proteomic analysis can be used to deﬁne
all proteins produced by a pathogenic organism under
a given growth condition once genomic sequence analy-
sis has provided a database of all the peptides encoded
by the organism. When proteomic analysis is combined
with other genetic, biochemical, or immunological strate-
gies, the result can be the accelerated discovery of viru-
lence gene products (see below).

Genomics and Gene Essentiality In Vitro and In Vivo
A primary goal of genomics is to identify and deﬁne genes
that are essential for growth or virulence. The historical
distinction between these two categories is increasingly
blurred, since genes that are required for growth in vitro
are frequently required for growth inside a host. Indeed,
some bacterial pathogens cannot be cultured at all out-
side a host.

There are various approaches other than direct se-
quence analysis or comparison for identifying essential
or virulence genes. Prior to the availability of genome
sequences, screens to identify these classes of genes
were performed using methods such as isolating temper-

ature-sensitive mutants (Horowitz and Leupold, 1951),
insertion-duplication mutagenesis (Mejean et al., 1981),
in vivo expression technology (Mahan et al., 1993), signa-
ture-tagged transposon mutagenesis (Hensel et al., 1995),
and TnAraOut (Judson and Mekalanos, 2000). These
strategies are by now well known and will not be dis-
cussed further here. Genome sequencing has led to the
development of other ‘‘high-throughput’’ approaches to
deﬁning essentiality of genes on the genomic scale. These
include targeted genetic footprinting (Akerley et al., 1998;
Posfai et al., 1999), antisense RNA screening (Ji et al.,
2001), or saturating transposon mutagenesis (Hutchison
et al., 1999). Genomic DNA microarrays can also be
used in genetic footprinting techniques to deﬁne genes re-
quired for growth in vitro and in vivo (Sassetti et al., 2001;
Sassetti and Rubin, 2003; Chan et al., 2005; Salama et al.,
2004). A summary of a few examples of these approaches
follows.
Mycobacterium Tuberculosis
M. tuberculosis is a difﬁcult organism to study and its se-
quence has provided information about genes important
for virulence. A method of genetic footprinting termed
‘‘TraSH’’ (transposon site hybridization), has been a pow-
erful new tool to understand which genes of this organ-
isms are essential
in vitro and in vivo (Sassetti et al.,
2001; Sassetti and Rubin, 2003). TraSH uses transposon
mutagenesis to disrupt genes, and microarrays to com-
pare mutants isolated from a host to the original mutant
pool. Transposon mutants lost in the host are putatively
involved in virulence. TraSH has been used in vitro and
in macrophages. Perhaps unsurprisingly, the majority of
the genes found essential in vivo were genes of unknown
function. TraSH has been used to identify genes essential
for survival in murine macrophage, in combination with
transcriptional proﬁling to measure gene expression (Re-
ngarajan et al., 2004; Schnappinger et al., 2003). Genes in-
volved in lipid degradation were both upregulated in vivo
and essential, indicating that fatty acids are necessary
for a carbon source and for energy. Unknown genes in
most organisms are likely to be involved in adaptation to
different environments, and the environment of the host
represents perhaps the most complex milieu to under-
stand. For example, M. tuberculosis carries two slightly
different copies of the dnaE gene, coding for the major
replicative DNA polymerase. Boshoff et al. (2003) identi-
ﬁed that the second copy, dnaE2, was an error-prone
DNA polymerase involved in DNA repair. Further experi-
ments showed that DnaE2 provides M. tuberculosis the
ability to survive UV irradiation. Additionally, dnaE2
expression is upregulated in mice and is important for
survival in vivo. DnaE2 is now thought to be important
for inducible mutagenesis and the emergence of drug re-
sistance in M. tuberculosis.
Small and Large Genomes
P. aeruginosa is an opportunistic pathogen with a large
genome of over 6400 putative genes. The large number
of genes is thought to be important for the variety of envi-
ronments that P. aeruginosa can survive in, such as soil,

Cell 124, 703–714, February 24, 2006 ª2006 Elsevier Inc. 705

water, and many niches in a host organism. Presumably,
the large gene content is important for uptake of nutrients
or growth factors or to modify its environment through
production of virulence factors. Saturating transposon
mutagenesis was used to deﬁne all genes that could not
be inactivated by insertion and thus were putatively es-
sential in rich media (Jacobs et al., 2003). Six hundred se-
venty-eight genes were found to be essential, and these
included most of the expected genes involved in tran-
scription, translation, energy production, DNA replication,
cell division, secretion, etc. One of the most intriguing re-
sults was just how many hypothetical genes showed up in
this and other screens. After several decades of study by
traditional genetic and biochemical techniques, a signiﬁ-
cant fraction of genes necessary for growth and survival
on laboratory media is still not known. There were 261
genes of unknown function found to be essential, almost
40% of the total essential genes. Saturating screens for
essential genes have also been done on other organisms
and yielded numbers as low as 271 for B. subtilis to as high
as 600–700 range for S. aureus and E. coli (Forsyth et al.,
2002; Gerdes et al., 2003; Kobayashi et al., 2003). These
screens for essential genes seem to have produced rea-
sonable data; genes that were already known to be essen-
tial came up as essential
in these screens, and genes
known for virulence or pathogenesis functions did not
turn up. Obligate intracellular bacteria such as Chlamydia
or Rickettsia species have comparably small genomes
(about 800–1300 ORFs) and are thought to represent or-
ganisms that contain near-minimal gene sets for a viable
albeit not a free-living cell. The host environment may pro-
vide nutrients, growth factors, and other factors, and they
will still require uptake systems and systems that allow
survival and proliferation inside the host, making it likely
that some genes involved in pathogenesis are essential.
Therefore, a much higher percentage of their genomes
are likely to be essential, as they have small genomes
that have lost many of the genes that are dispensable.
Similarly, in the small genome bacterium M. gentialium,
80% of the protein-coding genes are essential
(Glass
et al., 2006).

Comparative Genomics and
Virulence-Gene Identiﬁcation
The goal of comparative genomics is to identify genetic
differences across entire genomes, to correlate those dif-
ferences to biological function, and to gain insight into se-
lective evolutionary pressures and patterns of gene trans-
fer or loss, particularly within the context of virulence in
pathogenic species. Analysis of genomes from closely re-
lated species can also accelerate functional annotation of
novel genes or other features (e.g., gene fusions, pseudo-
genes) that are apparent only in a comparative genomic
context. However,
identiﬁcation of virulence genes
through comparative genomics relies primarily on the
identiﬁcation of function of a gene in a given species or
other genetic signature or characteristics consistent with
a function in pathogenicity.

706 Cell 124, 703–714, February 24, 2006 ª2006 Elsevier Inc.

Comparisons can be performed either with sequence
information or by using microarray-based methods to
determine the presence or absence of speciﬁc genes con-
tained on the array. Since the latter are much easier to ap-
ply to a large number of strains (e.g., clinical isolates), it
has been more widely used than direct comparison of fully
sequenced genomes. However, microarray-based analy-
sis cannot detect genes that have not yet been identiﬁed
by sequencing. If a gene is present in an organism but is
not on the array, then no information can be gained about
that gene. Similarly, only direct comparison of whole ge-
nomes can detect SNPs.

While the utility of cross-species genome comparisons
depends on the evolutionary distance between the spe-
cies, comparisons of closely-related species have found
surprisingly high levels of diversity resulting from gross
chromosomal changes (e.g., Escherichia coli strains vary
in as much as 25% of their genome, and Salmonella enter-
ica serovars vary by 10%–12%). These variations occur in
the form of large genome islands that contribute to the ac-
quisition of virulence factors or antibiotic resistance. The
unexpectedly high degree of intraspecies diversity in these
cases suggests that a single genome sequence is not rep-
resentative of the genetic inventory of a given taxonomic
group but is rather a sampling of genes characterizing
members of a given population in the same gene pool. Mul-
tiple strains of Streptococcus agalactiae have led to the
concept of a pangenome, with each species consisting
of a core set of genes conserved in all strains, and a dis-
pensable genome, consisting of partially shared or unique,
strain-speciﬁc genes (Tettelin et al., 2005).

In other instances, genome differences are minimal and
subtle (e.g., Bacillus anthracis strains that vary by a few
SNPs or Listeria monocytogenes strains with extensive
SNPs). This suggests that these species rely on a relatively
small number of unique regions to generate variation
within the host or other ecologically relevant settings.
Without addressing the issues related to taxonomic dis-
crimination, we will present instances of genome compar-
isons of closely related as well as more divergent species
that have yielded interesting insights into their growth, vir-
ulence mechanisms, or evolution.

Methods for Computational Sequence Analysis
The rapidly expanding quantity of sequence data has ne-
cessitated the evolution of software resources from anal-
ysis and functional annotation of a single genome toward
simultaneous analysis of information across multiple ge-
nomes. Traditional genome annotation utilizes various
software packages that optimize identiﬁcation of pre-
dicted genes and intergenic regions (Chain et al., 2003;
Field et al., 2005).
Example 1: Comparison of Sequenced
Spirochete Species
Spirochetes comprise a monophyletic phylum that ex-
hibits overall structural similarity but great variability in
habitat, physiologic properties, and genome size and
organization. Comparisons of the divergent sequenced

Figure 1. Proposed Evolution of Spiro-
chete Species Deduced through Com-
parative Genomics
Comparison of T. denticola predicted ORFs
with other completed Spirochete genomes.
The circle in the inset represented T. denticola
ORFs that had no signiﬁcant matches (E <
10–5) in the other sequenced genomes. Td,
T. denticola; Tp, T. pallidum.

spirochete pathogens, Treponema denticola (periodontal
disease), T. pallidum (syphilis), Borrelia burgdorferi (Lyme
disease), and Leptospira interrogans (leptospirosis),
yielded insights into the basis for the differences and sim-
ilarities in spirochete physiology and pathogenic potential
(see Figure 1; Seshadri et al., 2004). Proteome compari-
son using BLASTP revealed that about one-fourth of the
predicted T. denticola genes (618 out of 2786) were con-
served in the other three spirochete genomes, consisting
of mostly housekeeping functions. A small subset of these
genes had no signiﬁcant matches in other phyla and was
predicted to relate to spirochete-speciﬁc properties, in-
cluding morphology and host-pathogen interactions.
These included characterized ﬂagellar components that
account for the unique internal periplasmically located ﬂa-
gellum and motility properties of spirochetes, allowing
them to penetrate through high-viscosity matrices that in-
hibit the motility of most other bacteria. Almost half of the
T. denticola genes had no signiﬁcant matches in any of the
other spirochete genomes. Of these, over half were hypo-
thetical genes, while the remainder included various mem-
brane proteins, ABC transporters, transcriptional regula-
tors, and enzymes involved in amino acid metabolism
and glycogen synthesis.

The T. pallidum and T. denticola genomes were found
to share limited nucleotide identity and essentially no syn-
teny, suggesting that their divergence from a common an-
cestor was an ancient event relative to the divergence of
bacterial groups such as the Brucella and Rickettsia spp.
and members of the Enterobacteriaceae. 1700 (60%)
T. denticola genes had no matches in T. pallidum, and
162 T. pallidum genes had no matches in T. denticola.
The proposed reasons for disparity in genome size and
predicted genes include (1) elimination of genes in one
genome (reductive evolution), (2) acquisition of genes via

lateral transfer, (3) lineage-speciﬁc expansions, all con-
tributing in varying degrees to the differences. About
one-sixth of the 1700 T. denticola-speciﬁc predicted
genes had their best matches to other T. denticola genes,
thus indicating recent duplication or expansions within the
T. denticola lineage. Many of these genes were implicated
in virulence, such as internalin-like proteins, bacteriocin
ABC transporters, and dipeptide YD-repeat proteins. Of
the 1700 T. denticola genes that lack T. pallidum homo-
logs, about one-sixth had homologs in B. burgdorferi or
L. interrogans, suggesting that these may have been lost
by gene reduction in the T. pallidum lineage. These corre-
sponded to various transport, biosynthetic, or regulatory
functions.

Of the 162 T. pallidum genes with no signiﬁcant match in
T. denticola, 106 were hypothetical proteins, and the re-
mainder included transporters, components of a V-type
ATPase, some proteases, and metabolic enzymes. A 12
member family (TprA–L) of putative membrane proteins
in T. pallidum with a predicted role in immune response
was speciﬁcally expanded in the T. pallidum lineage
(Fraser et al., 1998). T. denticola possessed only a single
gene related to this family.

Overall, genes lost due to reductive evolution appeared
to be largely involved in basic metabolic functions and
transport, while some genes that arose through lineage-
speciﬁc expansions were implicated in pathogenesis.
Genes acquired via horizontal gene transfer were phage-
related or of unknown function. These results emphasize
that the differing genome sizes of T. pallidum and T. den-
ticola are not solely due to reductive evolution of T. pal-
lidum. Like many other obligate parasites, T. pallidum
had undergone some reduction in metabolic capabil-
ities, indicating an increased dependence on the host for
nutrients. Lineage-speciﬁc expansions and lateral gene

Cell 124, 703–714, February 24, 2006 ª2006 Elsevier Inc. 707

reﬂect niche-speciﬁc adaptations and differ-

transfer
ences in pathogenic potential.
Example 2: Comparison of Sequenced
Staphylococci Species
Four strains of Staphylococcus aureus and two of Staph-
ylococcus epidermidis were compared to delineate fac-
tors that contribute to increased pathogenicity in
S. aureus, the evolution of S. epidermidis from a commen-
sal to a more aggressive pathogen, and to the evolution of
antibiotic resistance in these species (Gill et al., 2005).
Both species are the major cause of varied nosocomial in-
fections. Sequence comparisons revealed 454 species-
speciﬁc genes in S. aureus (strains COL, N315, Mu50,
and MW2) that were absent in S. epidermidis (RP62a or
ATCC 12228) and a total of 286 species-speciﬁc genes
in S. epidermidis strains not found in the S. aureus ge-
nomes. A total of 1681 genes were conserved among all
strains of both species. The majority of the unique genes
were found on prophage, genomic islands, and other mo-
bile regions.

integrated prophage,

Genome islands and Staphylococcus cassette chromo-
some-like elements,
insertion
sequence (IS) elements, composite transposons, and in-
tegrated plasmids were associated with virulence and an-
timicrobial resistance (Hiramatsu et al., 2001). Together,
these integrated genomic elements made up 7% of the
S. aureus COL genome and 9% of the S. epidermidis
RP62a genome. Other studies have found that integrated
elements comprised 10% in group A Streptococcus
(Beres et al., 2002) and as much as 24% in Enterococcus
faecalis strains (Paulsen et al., 2003), corresponding in the
latter case to increased virulence or vancomycin resis-
tance. Seven pathogenicity genomic islands speciﬁc to
S. aureus contained a variety of toxins or virulence factors
(enterotoxins, exotoxins, and leukotoxins, etc.), and allelic
variation of these genes may have contributed to the path-
ogenic potential of this species. Comparative analysis of
these S. aureus isolates suggested that some genomic is-
lands may have been mobilized by resident prophage into
other members of this species.

Integrated plasmids in S. epidermidis contained genes
with potential roles in virulence (e.g., species-speciﬁc sur-
face proteins with an LPXTG motif required for anchoring
to the cell wall envelope), and a genome island encoded
multiple virulence-associated modulin proteins (Vuong
et al., 2004). A family of small cytokine-stimulating pep-
tides may have expanded within a genome island in S. epi-
dermidis relative to the other staphylococci
(including
S. aureus). Acquisition of virulence factors may have also
resulted from plasmid-mediated gene transfer between
staphylococci and other low-GC-content gram-positive
pathogens. For example, the S. epidermidis RP62a and
ATCC 12228 genomes possessed a cap operon encod-
ing a polyglutamate capsule, a major virulence factor in
Bacillus anthracis (encoded on B. anthracis pX02 plasmid)
but in S. epidermidis may play a role in bioﬁlm formation.
Additional phenotypic differences may have arisen from
single nucleotide polymorphisms, given that 19,000–

708 Cell 124, 703–714, February 24, 2006 ª2006 Elsevier Inc.

22,000 SNPs were detected in S. aureus COL compared
to other strains of S. aureus. Similarly, 10,000 SNPs
were found in S. epidermidis ATCC 12228 compared to
RP62a. In both S. aureus and S. epidermidis, SNPs were
most numerous in cell envelope proteins and resulted in
nonsynonymous amino acid substitutions. This variation
in immunodominant cell envelope or surface proteins
may play a role in immune evasion.

These analyses illustrated the major role of gene trans-
fer in the evolution of Staphylococcal virulence. While the
Staphylococcal genomes were highly similar and syn-
tenic, integrated elements bearing genes for virulence
and resistance appear to have mediated a transition
from an opportunistic or commensal to a more aggressive
pathogenic lifecycle.

Microarray-Based Comparative Genomic
and Expression Studies
DNA microarrays are powerful tools that allow easy geno-
mic comparisons between different strains of the same or
similar species, allowing us to compare genomic se-
quence of unsequenced strains with a sequenced refer-
ence strain. Additionally, they are used for transcriptional
proﬁling, monitoring gene expression of every gene in
the genome, by determining levels or transcripts (Brown
and Botstein, 1999). The use of microarrays has enhanced
our understanding of evolution and pathogenesis by com-
paring genome content of pathogenic and nonpathogenic
strains. They have also been instrumental in understand-
ing virulence gene expression of pathogens during infec-
tion. However, there are drawbacks to these techniques.
Transcriptional proﬁling of a strain generally involves iso-
lating mRNA from a population of cells, so if a subpopula-
tion of cells has a different gene-expression pattern, this
critical subset of response will be missed. Genomic DNA
comparisons can only identify what is absent from a given
strain but cannot identify additional genes an organism
may have. SNPs cannot not be accurately analyzed using
most microarray-based techniques.
Helicobacter pylori
H. pylori causes gastritis and duodenal ulcers. Two strains
have been sequenced so far (J99 and 26695) and these
differ in approximately 100 genes which are localized in
deﬁned regions on the chromosome. Twenty-seven genes
were conﬁned to a 40 kb pathogenicity island and encode
a type IV-like secretion system (Censini et al., 1996) and its
substrate CagA (cytotoxin-associated gene A), which
upon translocation into the host cytosol affects signaling
pathways, cytoskeleton, and cell junctions of the infected
host cell (Rieder et al., 2005). CagA turns out to be a major
virulence determinant of H. pylori because strains that lack
the cagA-containing pathogenicity island exhibit a less-
aggressive gastroduodenal pathology (Nilsson et al., 2003).
Microarray analysis allowed researchers to study how
H. pylori adapts to the low-pH environment of the stomach.
It turns out that the expression of approximately 120 genes
is affected when cells are exposed to low pH (Merrell et al.,
2003). Major responses include increased motility and

decreased virulence, suggesting that the bacterium is
attempting to escape the low-pH environment to ﬁnd
a more suitable site for infection. Genomic analysis of in-
fections with multiple H. pylori strains revealed that differ-
ent strains colonize different parts of the stomach (Akada
et al., 2003) and that strains undergo genetic changes
during chronic infections (Israel et al., 2001). These ﬁnd-
ings suggest that H. pylori continuously evolves within its
cognate host to adapt to a deﬁned host environment.
Pseudomonas Aeruginosa
Wolfgang et al. (2003) compared 18 diverse clinical and
environmental isolates and made a surprising discovery.
All strains tested share 94% of their genes in common.
Of 18 strains from different locales and infections, 368
genes found in the sequence PA01 strain were missing
in at least one of the strains. These strain-speciﬁc genes
were found in 90 discrete locations in blocks of one to
four genes. Clearly, the genomic content does not deﬁne
specialized lifestyles. It seems more likely that the majority
of P. aeruginosa have the potential to occupy any niche
described for P. aeruginosa.

Goodman et al. (2004) identiﬁed a regulator of genes in-
volved in both acute infections as well as long-term persis-
tence of P. aeruginosa using transcriptional proﬁling. They
identiﬁed a response regulator, retS, that greatly induced
bioﬁlm formation. By comparing gene expression of the
mutant to a wild-type strain, they found that retS regulates
many virulence genes, including those involved in type III
secretion, type IV pili, and exopolysaccharide production.
Many transcriptional proﬁling studies have helped eluci-
date the role quorum sensing plays in virulence of P. aer-
uginosa (reviewed in Soberon-Chavez et al. [2005]). The
las and rhl quorum-sensing systems are known to play
a role in virulence, and transcriptional proﬁles were ob-
tained comparing mutants in these systems to wild-type
strains in the presence of quorum-sensing inducers. Hun-
dreds of genes are regulated by these systems, including
genes involved in motility, type II and type III secretion,
drug efﬂux, and bioﬁlm formation. Inhibitors of quorum
sensing inhibit virulence by lowering expression of viru-
lence factors, further stressing the importance of quorum
sensing in virulence.

The availability of the genome sequence for P. aerugi-
nosa has also been used to identify factors that may be
involved in modulating host defense (Vance et al., 2004).
The P. aeruginosa genome contained a predicted gene
that had high homology to eukaryotic lipoxygenases,
which are regulators of inﬂammation and host defense
in eukaryotes. Lipoxygenases generally are involved in
breaking down arachidonic acid into lipid mediators of
leukocytes. Most bacteria including P. aeruginosa lack
polyunsaturated fatty acids that these enzymes act on,
making lipoxygenases rare in bacteria. The putative
P. aeruginosa lipoxygenase was characterized and found
to be able to metabolize arachidonic acid, implicating lip-
oxygenase as an anti-inﬂammatory agent that may par-
tially explain the nonresolving chronic lung infection of
cystic ﬁbrosis patients caused by P. aeruginosa.

Staphylococcus aureus
Microarray-based comparative genomic analysis of 36
S. aureus strains suggested that approximately 78% of
the gene content is shared by all strains. Such genes are
referred to as core genes since they seem to be essential
to the life style of this bacterium. Twenty-two percent of
the genes identiﬁed in S. aureus strains were missing in
at least one of the strains examined. These genes are de-
ﬁned as accessory genes and are believed to be required
for functions that are unique to the lifestyle of a particular
strain and include virulence factors. Interestingly, acces-
sory genes are not scattered throughout the genome but
rather conﬁned to certain regions of the chromosome. In
S. aureus, 18 large regions of difference (called RD’s)
were identiﬁed and 10 of them carried putative virulence
factors like enterotoxins, hypervirulence genes, and the
methicillin-resistance gene mec. Phylogenetic analysis
of the different genes showed that the mec gene was ob-
tained by unrelated strains independently (Fitzgerald et al.,
2001). This disproved the hypothesis that the toxic-shock
syndrome epidemics in the 1970’s and 1980’s were
caused by a newly emerging methicillin-resistant and hy-
pervirulent strain, as mec was shown to have been intro-
duced into S. aureus on at least ﬁve separate occasions.
Neisseria meningitidis
Another pathogen that maintains a conserved genome is
N. meningitidis, which causes severe meningitis upon
passing the blood-brain barrier. Using DNA microarrays
from the commonly used laboratory strain Z2491, a viru-
lent strain originally isolated from the 1983 epidemic in
Gambia, 29 hyperinvasive strains and a clonal group of
20 strains not associated with human disease were com-
pared. Not a single gene could be found that was present
in all 29 invasive strains but missing in the noninvasive
strains. However, an 8 kb fragment is present in all inva-
sive strains but missing in 90% (18 of 20) of the noninva-
sive strains. It turns out that this island represents a ﬁla-
mentous phage that has the capacity to excise from the
chromosome to be secreted via the type IV pilin secretin.
Therefore, this element, by spreading among the popula-
tion, may promote the development of new epidemic
clones of N. meningitidis that are capable of breaking
the normal commensal relationship with humans and
causing invasive disease.
Escherichia coli and Related Species
To date, four E. coli strains have been sequenced and
made publicly available,
including three pathogenic
strains. Welch et al. (2002) compared the genomes of the
K12 strain MG1655 to the uropathogenic strain CFT073
and the enterohemorrhagic O157:H7 strain EDL933. They
found that there is an E. coli backbone containing only
about 40% of the total protein-coding gene content of
the three strains. Each of the three strains contains islands
not found in the others. Both nonpathogenic E. coli strains
as well as the enterohemorrhagic pathogens are able to
persist in the intestines. Extraintestinal strains, such as
the uropathogenic CFT073, are able to colonize and grow
elsewhere in the body. These differences are indicated in

Cell 124, 703–714, February 24, 2006 ª2006 Elsevier Inc. 709

Figure 2. Comparative Genomics-Based
Model
for the Evolution of Toxigenic
V. cholerae Strains
The wealth of genomic data available for differ-
ent V. cholerae strains suggests that toxigenic
V. cholerae originated from nonpathogenic
precursors by stepwise acquisition of virulence
genes through horizontal transfer (see text for
details). CTX, cholera toxin; TCP, toxin coregu-
lated pilus; O1, O139, O37, and O39, various O
antigen clusters; VSP-I, seventh pandemic is-
land; T3SS; type III secretion system; VAS
genes, virulence-associated secretion genes;
TLC, toxin-linked cryptic.

the genome sequences. CFT073 is very enriched in ﬁm-
brial adhesions, secreted autotransporters, and phase-
switch recombinases, allowing them to colonize and per-
sist in environments much different than the other two
strains. Only the enterohemorrhagic O157:H7 strain had
type III secretion systems, differentiating it
from the
nonpathogenic strain. Interestingly, both O157:H7 and
CFT073 strains contain about 1000 more genes than the
nonpathogenic MG1655; however, the strains have not
undergone much genome reduction of the backbone.
This is somewhat surprising given that E. coli have lived
as commensals in the animal gut for millions of years. The
animal gut presumably is a rich environment that could
have allowed bacteria to evolve with a reduced genome,
including the loss of metabolic genes.

The idea of E. coli having a backbone core of genes,
with individual strains containing islands of unique genes,
has been borne out using comparative microarray studies
(Dobrindt et al., 2003; Fukiya et al., 2004). A whole genome
microarray used the K12 isolate MG1655 as a reference
compared to many different E. coli strains, as well as sev-
eral strains of the closely related Shigella. There is a back-
bone of about 2800 genes, with a mosaic structure of in-
sertions and deletions throughout
the E. coli and
Shigella strains. Interestingly, it was found that the Shigella
strains tested grouped phylogenetically with dysentery
strains and enteroinvasive E. coli strains.
Vibrio cholerae
There have been eight identiﬁed pandemics of V. cholerae
since 1817. The ﬁrst six were caused by the classical bio-
type of O1 serogroup strains. The seventh pandemic was
caused by an O1 El Tor strain, which eventually replaced
the classical biotype not just as cause of cholera, but
in all environmental reservoirs worldwide. Another pan-
demic recently emerged, caused by strains of the O139
serogroup, and is occurring concurrently with the O1 El

710 Cell 124, 703–714, February 24, 2006 ª2006 Elsevier Inc.

Tor strains. Comparisons of the sixth, seventh, and eighth
pandemic strains, as well as nonpandemic El Tor strains
and environmental strains were performed (Dziejman
et al., 2002). A whole genome microarray of a seventh pan-
demic strain was used as a reference for comparison. All
strains tested were remarkably similar in gene content,
as each strain contained at least 99% of the genes in
the reference strain. It was found that O139 strains are
very similar to O1 El Tor strains and are probably clonally
derived from El Tor with changes only in the LPS structure.
A seventh pandemic island was also identiﬁed, found only
in pandemic El Tor strains and O139 strains, but not in
classical or prepandemic El Tor strains. It is speculated
that genes present in seventh pandemic strains but lack-
ing in sixth pandemic strains may be involved in persis-
tence in the environment, explaining the complete re-
placement of classical strains by El Tor strains. These
genes may allow seventh pandemic strains to undergo nu-
trient depletion or withstand other environmental stresses,
or they may be involved in interactions with nonhuman
aquatic hosts.

While O1 and O139 strains are the only serogroups known
to cause epidemic cholera, many non-O1, non-O139 strains
are present in the environment and sporadically cause dis-
ease outbreaks. Some of these outbreaks are caused by
strains lacking in the main V. cholerae virulence factors,
cholera toxin (CTX) and toxin coregulated pilus (TCP). This
led to a search for virulence factors present in these CTX,
TCP strains (Dziejman et al., 2005). A strain of the O39 se-
rogroup was sequenced, and a type III secretion system re-
lated to that of pandemic Vibrio parahaemolyticus was iden-
tiﬁed and found to be present in many environmental strains,
including some that contain CTX and TCP. This indicates
that the type III secretion system may be responsible for
nonepidemic cholera disease and perhaps may improve en-
vironmental ﬁtness as well. Further studies have shown how

pandemic strains originated from environmental
isolates
through acquisition of virulence elements (see Figure 2; Far-
uque and Mekalanos, 2003).

Many transcriptional proﬁling studies have been used to
identify genes important for V. cholerae virulence in vivo,
both in animal models and in humans (Larocque et al.,
2005; Merrell et al., 2002; Xu et al., 2003). Stool samples
from cholera epidemic patients were proﬁled, and it was
found that genes involved in amino acid synthesis, iron up-
take systems, and ribosomal proteins were upregulated.
V. cholerae from stool was found to be more virulent
than in vitro grown V. cholerae, possibly explaining the ep-
idemic nature of the disease. V. cholerae isolated from pa-
tients’ vomitus and stool were proﬁled to compare gene
expression in the upper digestive tract to that in the lower
digestive tract and differential expression of virulence reg-
ulators in the upper and lower digestive tract. It was found
that colonization factors are predominately expressed in
the upper digestive tract. To identify genes important for
growth inside a host, V. cholerae grown in vivo in rabbit il-
eal loops were proﬁled. It was found that genes involved in
virulence including motility, chemotaxis, and toxin pro-
duction are upregulated in vivo when compared to in vitro
cultures.

Proteomics-Based Methods of Virulence
Gene Discovery
Recently, proteomics was used in combination with ge-
nome-sequence analysis to deﬁne a new virulence-
associated protein-secretion pathway that functions in
V. cholerae strain V52. Mutants of V52 that are avirulent
toward Dictyostelium amoebae and mouse J744 macro-
phages were found to carry insertion mutations in a
gene cluster that included a homolog of icmF, a Legionella
gene involved in secretion of proteins through the type IV
secretion apparatus (Pukatzki et al., 2006). However, the
genomic sequence of V52 indicated that this strain lacked
other genes associated with type IV secretion. The gene
cluster responsible was designated Vas, for virulence-
associated secretion, because vas mutants were shown
to be defective in the secretion of four proteins when ana-
lyzed by mass spectrometry. One of these secreted pro-
teins was VgrG-1, a protein that previously had been re-
ported to encode an actin-crosslinking domain (Sheahan
et al., 2004). Recently, the cytotoxicity of strain V52 was
shown to be associated with VgrG-1-mediated actin
crosslinking in target cells demonstrating that the Vas sys-
tem likely encodes a ‘‘molecular syringe’’ as part of a type
VI secretion pathway to deliver effectors such as VgrG-1
to the cytosol of macrophages (S.U.P., A. Ma, and
J.J.M., unpublished data).

A proteomic screen has identiﬁed secreted factors
involved in virulence in M. tuberculosis. (Fortune et al.,
2005) The ESX-1 locus contains two secreted proteins,
ESAT-6 and CFP-10, as well as factors involved in their se-
cretion. Culture supernatants of a wild-type strain and an
ESX-1 deletion strain were compared, and a protein,
EspA, not linked to ESX-1 on the chromosome, was iden-

tiﬁed as missing in the mutant. Mutants in each of the three
secreted proteins blocked secretion of the other two pro-
teins, suggesting a mutually-dependent secretion system.
Additionally, both espA and ESX-1 deletions are attenu-
ated for virulence.

Conclusions
Genome sequencing has revolutionized how we approach
the problem of understanding bacterial pathogenesis. In
cases such as obligate intracellular bacteria and species
that cannot be cultured in vitro, genomics has provided
virtually the only path for efﬁcient discovery of virulence
genes. Genomics has also greatly beneﬁted research on
organisms that can be cultured by increasing the pace
of identiﬁcation and characterization of virulence factors.
Genomics empowers the use of highly parallel methodo-
gies that allow investigators to study all the genes or all
the proteins of a pathogen in the context of its host or un-
der various physiological or genetic states of interest.
These ‘‘postgenomic’’ methods (e.g., genomic microar-
ray-based methods and proteomics) have changed the
way investigators approach the classical questions asked
about the bacterial-host interaction. Which genes does
a bacterium express in vivo during infection? Which pro-
teins does this bacterium secrete? Which antigens of
this pathogen are recognized by the host? Which gene
products of this organism produce pathological changes
in the host? In the future, the answers to these questions
will not be for a single organism but rather for multiple spe-
cies as well as multiple genes and proteins. We are getting
closer to a time when vaccines will not be based on a sin-
gle protein from a single organism but rather from a collec-
tion of conserved proteins that together protect against
a group of organisms. Postgenomic studies have also
moved us closer to understanding which genes are essen-
tial for growth and survival in different environments, in-
cluding inside a host organism. Big challenges remain.
Why are so many genes conserved in primary sequence
yet have no known function? Which genes are essential
for growth, and what do they do? It is clear that the iden-
tiﬁcation of new antibiotic drug targets will be aided by
identiﬁcation of essential genes, particularly conserved
genes of unknown function. It is clear that bacterial geno-
mics will, in the end, drive a new era of therapeutic discov-
ery by combining high-throughput methods of chemistry
and screening with similarly high-throughput methods of
genetic analysis and target discovery.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Su Chiang for editing the manuscript. D.M.R. is an Ellison
Medical Foundation Fellow of the Life Sciences Research Foundation.

REFERENCES

Akada, J.K., Ogura, K., Dailidiene, D., Dailide, G., Cheverud, J.M., and
Berg, D.E. (2003). Helicobacter pylori tissue tropism: mouse-coloniz-
ing strains can target different gastric niches. Microbiol. 149, 1901–
1909.

Cell 124, 703–714, February 24, 2006 ª2006 Elsevier Inc. 711

Akerley, B.J., Rubin, E.J., Camilli, A., Lampe, D.J., Robertson, H.M.,
and Mekalanos, J.J. (1998). Systematic identiﬁcation of essential
genes by in vitro mariner mutagenesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
95, 8927–8932.

Beres, S.B., Sylva, G.L., Barbian, K.D., Lei, B., Hoff, J.S., Mammarella,
N.D., Liu, M.Y., Smoot, J.C., Porcella, S.F., Parkins, L.D., et al. (2002).
Genome sequence of a serotype M3 strain of group A Streptococcus:
phage-encoded toxins,
the high-virulence phenotype, and clone
emergence. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99, 10078–10083.

Bina, J., Zhu, J., Dziejman, M., Faruque, S., Calderwood, S., and Me-
kalanos, J. (2003). ToxR regulon of Vibrio cholerae and its expression
in vibrios shed by cholera patients. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100,
2801–2806.

Boshoff, H.I., Reed, M.B., Barry, C.E., 3rd, and Mizrahi, V. (2003).
DnaE2 polymerase contributes to in vivo survival and the emergence
of drug resistance in Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Cell 113, 183–193.

Boyce, J.D., Cullen, P.A., and Adler, B. (2004). Genomic-scale analysis
of bacterial gene and protein expression in the host. Emerg. Infect. Dis.
10, 1357–1362.

Brown, P.O., and Botstein, D. (1999). Exploring the new world of the
genome with DNA microarrays. Nat. Genet. 21, 33–37.

Censini, S., Lange, C., Xiang, Z., Crabtree, J.E., Ghiara, P., Borodov-
sky, M., Rappuoli, R., and Covacci, A. (1996). cag, a pathogenicity
island of Helicobacter pylori, encodes type I-speciﬁc and disease-
associated virulence factors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93, 14648–
14653.

Chain, P., Kurtz, S., Ohlebusch, E., and Slezak, T. (2003). An applica-
tions-focused review of comparative genomics tools: capabilities, lim-
itations and future challenges. Brief. Bioinform. 4, 105–123.

Chan, K., Kim, C.C., and Falkow, S. (2005). Microarray-based detec-
tion of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium transposon mutants
that cannot survive in macrophages and mice. Infect. Immun. 73,
5438–5449.

Dobrindt, U., Agerer, F., Michaelis, K., Janka, A., Buchrieser, C., Sa-
muelson, M., Svanborg, C., Gottschalk, G., Karch, H., and Hacker, J.
(2003). Analysis of genome plasticity in pathogenic and commensal
Escherichia coli
isolates by use of DNA arrays. J. Bacteriol. 185,
1831–1840.

Doulatov, S., Hodes, A., Dai, L., Mandhana, N., Liu, M., Deora, R., Si-
mons, R.W., Zimmerly, S., and Miller, J.F. (2004). Tropism switching in
Bordetella bacteriophage deﬁnes a family of diversity-generating ret-
roelements. Nature 431, 476–481.

Dziejman, M., Balon, E., Boyd, D., Fraser, C.M., Heidelberg, J.F., and
Mekalanos, J.J. (2002). Comparative genomic analysis of Vibrio chol-
erae: genes that correlate with cholera endemic and pandemic dis-
ease. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99, 1556–1561.

Dziejman, M., Serruto, D., Tam, V.C., Sturtevant, D., Diraphat, P., Far-
uque, S.M., Rahman, M.H., Heidelberg, J.F., Decker, J., Li, L., et al.
(2005). Genomic characterization of non-O1, non-O139 Vibrio chol-
erae reveals genes for a type III secretion system. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 102, 3465–3470.

Faruque, S.M., and Mekalanos, J.J. (2003). Pathogenicity islands and
phages in Vibrio cholerae evolution. Trends Microbiol. 11, 505–510.

Field, D., Feil, E.J., and Wilson, G.A. (2005). Databases and software
for the comparison of prokaryotic genomes. Microbiol. 151, 2125–
2132.

Fitzgerald, J.R., Sturdevant, D.E., Mackie, S.M., Gill, S.R., and Musser,
J.M. (2001). Evolutionary genomics of Staphylococcus aureus: in-
sights into the origin of methicillin-resistant strains and the toxic shock
system epidemic. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98, 8821–8826.

Fleischmann, R.D., Adams, M.D., White, O., Clayton, R.A., Kirkness,
E.F., Kerlavage, A.R., Bult, C.J., Tomb, J.F., Dougherty, B.A., Merrick,

712 Cell 124, 703–714, February 24, 2006 ª2006 Elsevier Inc.

J.M., et al. (1995). Whole-genome random sequencing and assembly
of Haemophilus inﬂuenzae Rd. Science 269, 496–512.

Fleischmann, R.D., Alland, D., Eisen, J.A., Carpenter, L., White, O., Pe-
terson, J., DeBoy, R., Dodson, R., Gwinn, M., Haft, D., et al. (2002).
Whole-genome comparison of Mycobacterium tuberculosis clinical
and laboratory strains. J. Bacteriol. 184, 5479–5490.

Forsyth, R.A., Haselbeck, R.J., Ohlsen, K.L., Yamamoto, R.T., Xu, H.,
Trawick, J.D., Wall, D., Wang, L., Brown-Driver, V., Froelich, J.M., et al.
(2002). A genome-wide strategy for the identiﬁcation of essential
genes in Staphylococcus aureus. Mol. Microbiol. 43, 1387–1400.

Fortune, S.M., Jaeger, A., Sarracino, D.A., Chase, M.R., Sassetti,
C.M., Sherman, D.R., Bloom, B.R., and Rubin, E.J. (2005). Mutually de-
pendent secretion of proteins required for mycobacterial virulence.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102, 10676–10681.

Fraser, C.M., Gocayne, J.D., White, O., Adams, M.D., Clayton, R.A.,
Fleischmann, R.D., Bult, C.J., Kerlavage, A.R., Sutton, G., Kelley,
J.M., et al. (1995). The minimal gene complement of Mycoplasma gen-
italium. Science 270, 397–403.

Fraser, C.M., Norris, S.J., Weinstock, G.M., White, O., Sutton, G.G.,
Dodson, R., Gwinn, M., Hickey, E.K., Clayton, R., Ketchum, K.A.,
et al. (1998). Complete genome sequence of Treponema pallidum,
the syphilis spirochete. Science 281, 375–388.

Fukiya, S., Mizoguchi, H., Tobe, T., and Mori, H. (2004). Extensive ge-
nomic diversity in pathogenic Escherichia coli and Shigella strains re-
vealed by comparative genomic hybridization microarray. J. Bacteriol.
186, 3911–3921.

Gerdes, S.Y., Scholle, M.D., Campbell, J.W., Balazsi, G., Ravasz, E.,
Daugherty, M.D., Somera, A.L., Kyrpides, N.C., Anderson, I., Gelfand,
M.S., et al. (2003). Experimental determination and system level anal-
ysis of essential genes in Escherichia coli MG1655. J. Bacteriol. 185,
5673–5684.

Gil, R., Silva, F.J., Pereto, J., and Moya, A. (2004). Determination of the
core of a minimal bacterial gene set. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 68, 518–
537.

Gill, S.R., Fouts, D.E., Archer, G.L., Mongodin, E.F., Deboy, R.T.,
Ravel, J., Paulsen, I.T., Kolonay, J.F., Brinkac, L., Beanan, M., et al.
(2005). Insights on evolution of virulence and resistance from the com-
plete genome analysis of an early methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
aureus strain and a bioﬁlm-producing methicillin-resistant Staphylo-
coccus epidermidis strain. J. Bacteriol. 187, 2426–2438.

Glass, J.I., Assad-Garcia, N., Alperovich, N., Yooseph, S., Lewis, M.R.,
Maruf, M., Hutchison, C.A., Smith, H.O., and Venter, J.C. (2006). Es-
sential genes of a minimal bacterium. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
103, 425–430.

Goodman, A.L., Kulasekara, B., Rietsch, A., Boyd, D., Smith, R.S., and
Lory, S. (2004). A signaling network reciprocally regulates genes asso-
ciated with acute infection and chronic persistence in Pseudomonas
aeruginosa. Dev. Cell 7, 745–754.

Hensel, M., Shea, J.E., Gleeson, C., Jones, M.D., Dalton, E., and
Holden, D.W. (1995). Simultaneous identiﬁcation of bacterial virulence
genes by negative selection. Science 269, 400–403.

Hiramatsu, K., Cui, L., Kuroda, M., and Ito, T. (2001). The emergence
and evolution of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. Trends
Microbiol. 9, 486–493.

Horowitz, N.H., and Leupold, U. (1951). Some recent studies bearing
on the one gene one enzyme hypothesis. Cold Spring Harb. Symp.
Quant. Biol. 16, 65–74.

Hutchison, C.A., Peterson, S.N., Gill, S.R., Cline, R.T., White, O.,
Fraser, C.M., Smith, H.O., and Venter, J.C. (1999). Global transposon
mutagenesis and a minimal Mycoplasma genome. Science 286, 2165–
2169.

Isberg, R.R., Voorhis, D.L., and Falkow, S. (1987). Identiﬁcation of in-
vasin: A protein that allows enteric bacteria to penetrate cultured mam-
malian cells. Cell 50, 769–778.

Israel, D.A., Salama, N., Krishna, U., Rieger, U.M., Atherton, J.C.,
Falkow, S., and Peek, R.M., Jr. (2001). Helicobacter pylori genetic
diversity within the gastric niche of a single human host. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98, 14625–14630.

Jacobs, M.A., Alwood, A., Thaipisuttikul, I., Spencer, D., Haugen, E.,
Ernst, S., Will, O., Kaul, R., Raymond, C., Levy, R., et al. (2003). Com-
prehensive transposon mutant library of Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100, 14339–14344.

Ji, Y., Zhang, B., Van Horn, S.F., Warren, P., Woodnutt, G., Burnham,
M.K., and Rosenberg, M. (2001). Identiﬁcation of critical staphylococ-
cal genes using conditional phenotypes generated by antisense RNA.
Science 293, 2266–2269.

Judson, N., and Mekalanos, J.J. (2000). TnAraOut, a transposon-
based approach to identify and characterize essential bacterial genes.
Nat. Biotechnol. 18, 740–745.

Kalman, S., Mitchell, W., Marathe, R., Lammel, C., Hyman, R.W., Ollin-
ger, L., Grimwood, J., Davis, R.W., and Stephens, R.S. (1999). Com-
parative genomes of Chlamydia pneumoniae and C. trachomatis.
Nat. Genet. 21, 385–389.

Kobayashi, K., Ehrlich, S.D., Albertini, A., Amati, G., Andersen, K.K.,
Arnaud, M., Asai, K., Ashikaga, S., Aymerich, S., Bessieres, P., et al.
(2003). Essential Bacillus subtilis genes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
100, 4678–4683.

Larocque, R.C., Harris, J.B., Dziejman, M., Li, X., Khan, A.I., Faruque,
A.S., Faruque, S.M., Nair, G.B., Ryan, E.T., Qadri, F., et al. (2005). Tran-
scriptional proﬁling of Vibrio cholerae recovered directly from patient
specimens during early and late stages of human infection. Infect. Im-
mun. 73, 4488–4493.

Leung, K.Y., and Finlay, B.B. (1991). Intracellular replication is essential
for the virulence of Salmonella typhimurium. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
88, 11470–11474.

Lin, W., Fullner, K.J., Clayton, R., Sexton, J.A., Rogers, M.B., Calia,
K.E., Calderwood, S.B., Fraser, C., and Mekalanos, J.J. (1999). Identi-
ﬁcation of a vibrio cholerae RTX toxin gene cluster that is tightly linked
to the cholera toxin prophage. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96, 1071–
1076.

Mahan, M.J., Slauch, J.M., and Mekalanos, J.J. (1993). Selection of
bacterial virulence genes that are speciﬁcally induced in host tissues.
Science 259, 686–688.

Mejean, V., Claverys, J.P., Vasseghi, H., and Sicard, A.M. (1981).
Rapid cloning of speciﬁc DNA fragments of Streptococcus pneumo-
niae by vector integration into the chromosome followed by endonu-
cleolytic excision. Gene 15, 289–293.

Merrell, D.S., Butler, S.M., Qadri, F., Dolganov, N.A., Alam, A., Cohen,
M.B., Calderwood, S.B., Schoolnik, G.K., and Camilli, A. (2002). Host-
induced epidemic spread of the cholera bacterium. Nature 417, 642–
645.

Merrell, D.S., Goodrich, M.L., Otto, G., Tompkins, L.S., and Falkow, S.
(2003). pH-regulated gene expression of the gastric pathogen Helico-
bacter pylori. Infect. Immun. 71, 3529–3539.

Mushegian, A.R., and Koonin, E.V. (1996). A minimal gene set for cel-
lular life derived by comparison of complete bacterial genomes. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93, 10268–10273.

Nilsson, C., Sillen, A., Eriksson, L., Strand, M.L., Enroth, H., Normark,
S., Falk, P., and Engstrand, L. (2003). Correlation between cag patho-
genicity island composition and Helicobacter pylori-associated gas-
troduodenal disease. Infect. Immun. 71, 6573–6581.

Paulsen, I.T., Banerjei, L., Myers, G.S., Nelson, K.E., Seshadri, R.,
Read, T.D., Fouts, D.E., Eisen, J.A., Gill, S.R., Heidelberg, J.F., et al.

(2003). Role of mobile DNA in the evolution of vancomycin-resistant
Enterococcus faecalis. Science 299, 2071–2074.

Perna, N.T., Plunkett, G., 3rd, Burland, V., Mau, B., Glasner, J.D.,
Rose, D.J., Mayhew, G.F., Evans, P.S., Gregor, J., Kirkpatrick, H.A.,
et al. (2001). Genome sequence of enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia
coli O157:H7. Nature 409, 529–533.

Posfai, G., Kolisnychenko, V., Bereczki, Z., and Blattner, F.R. (1999).
Markerless gene replacement in Escherichia coli stimulated by a dou-
ble-strand break in the chromosome. Nucleic Acids Res. 27, 4409–
4415.

Pukatzki, S., Ma, A.T., Sturtevant, D., Krastins, B., Sarracino, D., Nel-
son, W.C., Heidelberg, J.F., and Mekalanos, J.J. (2006). Identiﬁcation
of a conserved bacterial protein secretion system in Vibrio cholerae us-
ing the Dictyostelium host model system. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
103, 1528–1533.

Rediers, H., Rainey, P.B., Vanderleyden, J., and De Mot, R. (2005). Un-
raveling the secret lives of bacteria: use of in vivo expression technol-
ogy and differential ﬂuorescence induction promoter traps as tools for
exploring niche-speciﬁc gene expression. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev.
69, 217–261.

Rengarajan, J., Sassetti, C.M., Naroditskaya, V., Sloutsky, A., Bloom,
B.R., and Rubin, E.J. (2004). The folate pathway is a target for resis-
tance to the drug para-aminosalicylic acid (PAS) in mycobacteria.
Mol. Microbiol. 53, 275–282.

Rieder, G., Fischer, W., and Haas, R. (2005). Interaction of Helico-
bacter pylori with host cells: function of secreted and translocated
molecules. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 8, 67–73.

Salama, N.R., Shepherd, B., and Falkow, S. (2004). Global transposon
mutagenesis and essential gene analysis of Helicobacter pylori.
J. Bacteriol. 186, 7926–7935.

Sassetti, C.M., and Rubin, E.J. (2003). Genetic requirements for myco-
bacterial survival during infection. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100,
12989–12994.

Sassetti, C.M., Boyd, D.H., and Rubin, E.J. (2001). Comprehensive
identiﬁcation of conditionally essential genes in mycobacteria. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98, 12712–12717.

Schnappinger, D., Ehrt, S., Voskuil, M.I., Liu, Y., Mangan, J.A., Mona-
han, I.M., Dolganov, G., Efron, B., Butcher, P.D., Nathan, C., and
Schoolnik, G.K. (2003). Transcriptional adaptation of Mycobacterium
tuberculosis within macrophages: insights into the phagosomal envi-
ronment. J. Exp. Med. 198, 693–704.

Seshadri, R., Myers, G.S., Tettelin, H., Eisen, J.A., Heidelberg, J.F.,
Dodson, R.J., Davidsen, T.M., DeBoy, R.T., Fouts, D.E., Haft, D.H.,
et al. (2004). Comparison of the genome of the oral pathogen Trepo-
nema denticola with other spirochete genomes. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 101, 5646–5651.

Sheahan, K.L., Cordero, C.L., and Satchell, K.J. (2004). Identiﬁcation
of a domain within the multifunctional Vibrio cholerae RTX toxin that
covalently cross-links actin. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101, 9798–
9803.

Soberon-Chavez, G., Aguirre-Ramirez, M., and Ordonez, L. (2005). Is
Pseudomonas aeruginosa only ‘‘sensing quorum’’? Crit. Rev. Micro-
biol. 31, 171–182.

Taylor, R.K., Miller, V.L., Furlong, D.B., and Mekalanos, J.J. (1987).
Use of phoA gene fusions to identify a pilus colonization factor coordi-
nately regulated with cholera toxin. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 84,
2833–2837.

Tettelin, H., Masignani, V., Cieslewicz, M.J., Donati, C., Medini, D.,
Ward, N.L., Angiuoli, S.V., Crabtree, J., Jones, A.L., Durkin, A.S.,
et al. (2005). Genome analysis of multiple pathogenic isolates of Strep-
tococcus agalactiae: implications for the microbial ‘‘pan-genome’’.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102, 13950–13955.

Cell 124, 703–714, February 24, 2006 ª2006 Elsevier Inc. 713

van Belkum, A., van Leeuwen, W., Scherer, S., and Verbrugh, H.
(1999). Occurrence and structure-function relationship of pentameric
short sequence repeats in microbial genomes. Res. Microbiol. 150,
617–626.

Vance, R.E., Hong, S., Gronert, K., Serhan, C.N., and Mekalanos, J.J.
(2004). The opportunistic pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa carries
a secretable arachidonate 15-lipoxygenase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 101, 2135–2139.

Vuong, C., Durr, M., Carmody, A.B., Peschel, A., Klebanoff, S.J., and
Otto, M. (2004). Regulated expression of pathogen-associated molec-
ular pattern molecules in Staphylococcus epidermidis: quorum-sensing
determines pro-inﬂammatory capacity and production of phenol-
soluble modulins. Cell. Microbiol. 6, 753–759.

Welch, R.A., Burland, V., Plunkett, G., 3rd, Redford, P., Roesch, P.,
Rasko, D., Buckles, E.L., Liou, S.R., Boutin, A., Hackett, J., et al.

(2002). Extensive mosaic structure revealed by the complete genome
sequence of uropathogenic Escherichia coli. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 99, 17020–17024.

Wolfgang, M.C., Kulasekara, B.R., Liang, X., Boyd, D., Wu, K., Yang,
Q., Miyada, C.G., and Lory, S. (2003). Conservation of genome content
and virulence determinants among clinical and environmental isolates
of Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100, 8484–
8489.

Xu, Q., Dziejman, M., and Mekalanos, J.J. (2003). Determination of the
transcriptome of Vibrio cholerae during intraintestinal growth and
midexponential phase in vitro. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100,
1286–1291.

(2003). Quorum sensing-dependent
Zhu, J., and Mekalanos, J.J.
bioﬁlms enhance colonization in Vibrio cholerae. Dev. Cell 5,
647–656.

714 Cell 124, 703–714, February 24, 2006 ª2006 Elsevier Inc.

