 

Parties:   
Seller:  Glamour Clothing, Inc. (“Glamour”) manufactures clothing and accessories for 
women.  Buyer:  Her Place, Inc. (“Her Place”) is a retail clothing store that sells clothing and 
accessories for women. 
 
Chronology: 
1. 2005-2009 – Between 2005 and 2009, Glamour and Her Place entered into five contracts in 
which Glamour sold to Her Place clothing, purses and shoes.  These five contracts always 
contained the following terms: 

a. The full price is due and payable on each unit when Seller is ready for delivery of each unit 
of the described items. 

b. Buyer agrees to pay a late charge of $100, plus 1 1/2% interest per month on any amount 
not paid when due.   

2. 2005-2009 – For each of the five contracts entered into by the parties between 2005 and 
2009, Glamour would deliver within 2 weeks the items ordered under the contract at Her 
Place’s store location.  Her Place would mail full payment by check anywhere from 30 to 35 
days after delivery.  Glamour never charged Her Place a late fee or interest. 

3. On January 11, 2010, Her Place’s President called the CEO of Glamour and had the 
following exchange: 
 
Her Place:  Do you have the GoldTravel purses in stock? 
Glamour:  We have over 500 in stock and ready for delivery. 
Her Place:  Great.  We’ll order 100 for immediate delivery. We also want 100 of the 
MetalGrey purses and 100 matching shoes. Terms as usual.  
Glamour: Got it. 
 
4. On January 12, Glamour sent its standard form Quote, which identified the price of 100 
GoldTravel purses as $100 each, 100 MetalGrey purses as $100 each and 100 MetalGrey 
shoes as $200 each.  The Quote contained the following terms: 
 
a. This Quote shall be valid and remain firm for 30 days after the date of issue.   

b. The full price is due and payable on each unit when Seller is ready for delivery of each unit 
of the described items. 

c. Buyer agrees to pay a late charge of $100, plus 1 1/2% interest per month on any amount 
not paid when due. 

d. Seller agrees to replace or, at Seller’s option, repair any defective goods within a 
reasonable time. Buyer’s sole and exclusive remedy and Seller’s limit of liability for any and 
all loss or damage resulting from defective goods shall be for the purchase price of the 
particular delivery and materials with respect to which loss or damage is claimed, plus any 
transportation charges actually paid by the Buyer. THE FOREGOING WARRANTY IS 
EXCLUSIVE AND IS IN LIEU OF ALL OTHER WARRANTIES, WHETHER WRITTEN, 
ORAL, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED. 

 
 

1 

 

e. Buyer shall indemnify and hold harmless the Seller and their agents and employees from 
and against all claims, damages, losses and expenses, including attorney’s fees, , incurred in 
enforcement of this agreement by Seller, or arising out of this agreement or the described 
supply of labor or materials, provided that any such claim is attributable to bodily injury, 
sickness, disease or death or injury to or destruction of tangible property, including the loss 
of use resulting therefrom, only to the extent caused in whole or in part by any negligent act 
or omission of Buyer, any subcontractor, employee, agent, or anyone else directly or 
indirectly employed by any of them or by any third person, regardless of whether or not it has 
been also been caused in part by a party indemnified. 

5. On January 13, Her Place sent their standard Purchase Order to Glamour containing the 
following terms: 
 
a. By delivering the items identified in this Purchase Order, Seller agrees to the terms and 
conditions set forth herein. 
  
b. Seller shall deliver the items to Buyer immediately. Delinquency in delivery or otherwise 
unsatisfactory service will be considered cause for cancellation and/or rejection at no 
expense to the Buyer. 
 
b. Extra charges under this order will not be permitted except on specific authority of this 
office. If freight is chargeable, paid freight bill must accompany invoice. 
  
c. Seller will certify and warrant that the goods and/or services delivered pursuant to this 
purchase order were produced and/or performed in compliance with all applicable laws and 
regulations. 
 
d. Buyer takes exception to and hereby objects to all hold harmless and indemnity provisions, 
either express or implied, wherein Seller may seek to impose liability upon Buyer. 
 
e. This Agreement shall be governed, construed, and enforced in accordance with the laws of 
the State of New York, without regard to its conflict of laws rules. 
 
6. On January 25, Her Place called Glamour to inquire about delivery of the items ordered.  
They had this exchange: 
 
Her Place:  Are the purses and shoes we ordered ready for shipment? 
Glamour: We have a problem with the MetalGrey shoes.  They won’t be ready until next week. 
Her Place: That’s fine.  Ship the GoldTravel and MetalGrey purses now and the MetalGrey 
shoes next week. 
Glamour:  Ok. 
 
7. On January 30, Her Place received delivery of 100 GoldTravel Purses but no MetalGrey 
purses or shoes. 
 
8. On February 15, Her Place called Glamour and had the following exchange: 
 
Her Place:  We still have not received the MetalGrey purses and shoes. 
Glamour: We will deliver them when payment is received. 
Her Place: We’ll pay after we get delivery.  Get them to us immediately or we’ll sue you for 
breach of contract. 

 
 

2 

 

Glamour:  The contract requires payment before delivery, so if you want the items pay us 
now.  You’ve already incurred a late charge and interest on the purses we shipped last month. 
Her Place: Deliver it all by tomorrow or we’ll go somewhere else.  
 
9. On February 20, as Her Place was stocking the store with GoldTravel purses it discovered 
that many of the purses had been sewn incorrectly and did not zipper shut.  Her Place 
immediately wrote to Glamour notifying it of the defect and demanding immediate 
replacement of the purses. 
 
10.  On March 1, after Glamour had failed to deliver the MetalGrey purses and shoes and had 
failed to replace the defective GoldTravel purses, Her Place went to GoodEnough 
Accessories, Inc. and ordered replacement purses and shoes.  The purses cost $150 each and 
the shoes were $250 each. 
 
11.  Glamour sued Her Place for the money owed under the contract, plus late charges and 
interest.  Her Place counter-sued for breach of contract and breach of warranty. 
 
Questions to Consider: 

Does UCC Article 2 apply?  Why or why not?   

I. 
II.  What if contract involved purses and sales team to sell the purses in Her Place’s store? 
III.  What if contract involved a sale to a consumer? 
IV.  Was there a contract?  How was it formed and under what terms? 
V. 
VI.  Did either party breach the contract?  If so, how? 
VII. 
VIII.  Be prepared to answer additional questions, including thos with modifications of these 
facts. 

If there was a breach or breaches, what damages could be recovered? 

How were the parties obligated to perform?   

 
 

3 

