 

 
 
 

 

 Highlights of Changes from 

 
     DSM-IV-TR to DSM-5

Changes made to the DSM-5 diagnostic criteria and texts are outlined in this chapter in the same order 
in which they appear in the DSM-5 classification. This is not an exhaustive guide; minor changes in text 
or wording made for clarity are not described here. It should also be noted that Section I of DSM-5 con-
tains a description of changes pertaining to the chapter organization in DSM-5, the multiaxial system, 
and the introduction of dimensional assessments (in Section III).

Terminology
The phrase “general medical condition” is replaced in DSM-5 with “another medical condition” where 
relevant across all disorders.

Neurodevelopmental Disorders
Intellectual Disability (Intellectual Developmental Disorder)
Diagnostic criteria for intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder) emphasize the need 
for an assessment of both cognitive capacity (IQ) and adaptive functioning. Severity is determined by 
adaptive functioning rather than IQ score. The term mental retardation was used in DSM-IV. However, 
intellectual disability is the term that has come into common use over the past two decades among 
medical, educational, and other professionals, and by the lay public and advocacy groups. Moreover, a 
federal statue in the United States (Public Law 111-256, Rosa’s Law) replaces the term “mental retarda-
tion with intellectual disability. Despite the name change, the deficits in cognitive capacity beginning 
in the developmental period, with the accompanying diagnostic criteria, are considered to constitute a 
mental disorder. The term intellectual developmental disorder was placed in parentheses to reflect the 
World Health Organization’s classification system, which lists “disorders” in the International Classifica-
tion of Diseases (ICD; ICD-11 to be released in 2015) and bases all “disabilities” on the International 
Classification of Functioning, Disability, and Health (ICF). Because the ICD-11 will not be adopted for 
several years, intellectual disability was chosen as the current preferred term with the bridge term for 
the future in parentheses.
 
Communication Disorders
The DSM-5 communication disorders include language disorder (which combines DSM-IV expressive 
and mixed receptive-expressive language disorders), speech sound disorder (a new name for phono-
logical disorder), and childhood-onset fluency disorder (a new name for stuttering). Also included is 
social (pragmatic) communication disorder, a new condition for persistent difficulties in the social uses 
of verbal and nonverbal communication. Because social communication deficits are one component of 
autism spectrum disorder (ASD), it is important to note that social (pragmatic) communication disorder 
cannot be diagnosed in the presence of restricted repetitive behaviors, interests, and activities (the oth-
er component of ASD). The symptoms of some patients diagnosed with DSM-IV pervasive developmen-
tal disorder not otherwise specified may meet the DSM-5 criteria for social communication disorder.

Autism Spectrum Disorder
Autism spectrum disorder is a new DSM-5 name that reflects a scientific consensus that four previously 
separate disorders are actually a single condition with different levels of symptom severity in two core 

domains. ASD now encompasses the previous DSM-IV autistic disorder (autism), Asperger’s disorder, 
childhood disintegrative disorder, and pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified. ASD 
is characterized by 1) deficits in social communication and social interaction and 2) restricted repetitive 
behaviors, interests, and activities (RRBs). Because both components are required for diagnosis of ASD, 
social communication disorder is diagnosed if no RRBs are present.

Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder
The diagnostic criteria for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in DSM-5 are similar to those 
in DSM-IV. The same 18 symptoms are used as in DSM-IV, and continue to be divided into two symp-
tom domains (inattention and hyperactivity/impulsivity), of which at least six symptoms in one domain 
are required for diagnosis. However, several changes have been made in DSM-5: 1) examples have 
been added to the criterion items to facilitate application across the life span; 2) the cross-situational 
requirement has been strengthened to “several” symptoms in each setting; 3) the onset criterion has 
been changed from “symptoms that caused impairment were present before age 7 years” to “several 
inattentive or hyperactive-impulsive symptoms were present prior to age 12”; 4) subtypes have been 
replaced with presentation specifiers that map directly to the prior subtypes; 5) a comorbid diagnosis 
with autism spectrum disorder is now allowed; and 6) a symptom threshold change has been made for 
adults, to reflect their substantial evidence of clinically significant ADHD impairment, with the cutoff 
for ADHD of five symptoms, instead of six required for younger persons, both for inattention and for 
hyperactivity and impulsivity. Finally, ADHD was placed in the neurodevelopmental disorders chapter 
to reflect brain developmental correlates with ADHD and the DSM-5 decision to eliminate the DSM-IV 
chapter that includes all diagnoses usually first made in infancy, childhood, or adolescence.

Specific Learning Disorder
Specific learning disorder combines the DSM-IV diagnoses of reading disorder, mathematics disorder, 
disorder of written expression, and learning disorder not otherwise specified. Because learning deficits 
in the areas of reading, written expression, and mathematics commonly occur together, coded speci-
fiers for the deficit types in each area are included. The text acknowledges that specific types of read-
ing deficits are described internationally in various ways as dyslexia and specific types of mathematics 
deficits as dyscalculia.

Motor Disorders
The following motor disorders are included in the DSM-5 neurodevelopmental disorders chapter: devel-
opmental coordination disorder, stereotypic movement disorder, Tourette’s disorder, persistent (chron-
ic) motor or vocal tic disorder, provisional tic disorder, other specified tic disorder, and unspecified tic 
disorder. The tic criteria have been standardized across all of these disorders in this chapter. Stereotypic 
movement disorder has been more clearly differentiated from body-focused repetitive behavior disor-
ders that are in the DSM-5 obsessive-compulsive disorder chapter.

Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders
Schizophrenia
Two changes were made to DSM-IV Criterion A for schizophrenia. The first change is the elimination 
of the special attribution of bizarre delusions and Schneiderian first-rank auditory hallucinations (e.g., 
two or more voices conversing). In DSM-IV, only one such symptom was needed to meet the diagnostic 
requirement for Criterion A, instead of two of the other listed symptoms. This special attribution was 

2 • Highlights of Changes from DSM-IV-TR to DSM-5

removed due to the nonspecificity of Schneiderian symptoms and the poor reliability in distinguishing 
bizarre from nonbizarre delusions. Therefore, in DSM-5, two Criterion A symptoms are required for any 
diagnosis of schizophrenia. The second change is the addition of a requirement in Criterion A that the 
individual must have at least one of these three symptoms: delusions, hallucinations, and disorganized 
speech. At least one of these core “positive symptoms” is necessary for a reliable diagnosis of schizo-
phrenia.

Schizophrenia subtypes
The DSM-IV subtypes of schizophrenia (i.e., paranoid, disorganized, catatonic, undifferentiated, and 
residual types) are eliminated due to their limited diagnostic stability, low reliability, and poor validity. 
These subtypes also have not been shown to exhibit distinctive patterns of treatment response or lon-
gitudinal course. Instead, a dimensional approach to rating severity for the core symptoms of schizo-
phrenia is included in Section III to capture the important heterogeneity in symptom type and severity 
expressed across individuals with psychotic disorders.

Schizoaffective Disorder
The primary change to schizoaffective disorder is the requirement that a major mood episode be pres-
ent for a majority of the disorder’s total duration after Criterion A has been met. This change was made 
on both conceptual and psychometric grounds. It makes schizoaffective disorder a longitudinal instead 
of a cross-sectional diagnosis—more comparable to schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and major depres-
sive disorder, which are bridged by this condition. The change was also made to improve the reliability, 
diagnostic stability, and validity of this disorder, while recognizing that the characterization of patients 
with both psychotic and mood symptoms, either concurrently or at different points in their illness, has 
been a clinical challenge.

Delusional Disorder
Criterion A for delusional disorder no longer has the requirement that the delusions must be non-
bizarre. A specifier for bizarre type delusions provides continuity with DSM-IV. The demarcation of 
delusional disorder from psychotic variants of obsessive-compulsive disorder and body dysmorphic 
disorder is explicitly noted with a new exclusion criterion, which states that the symptoms must not be 
better explained by conditions such as obsessive-compulsive or body dysmorphic disorder with absent 
insight/delusional beliefs. DSM-5 no longer separates delusional disorder from shared delusional dis-
order. If criteria are met for delusional disorder then that diagnosis is made. If the diagnosis cannot be 
made but shared beliefs are present, then the diagnosis “other specified schizophrenia spectrum and 
other psychotic disorder” is used.

Catatonia
The same criteria are used to diagnose catatonia whether the context is a psychotic, bipolar, depres-
sive, or other medical disorder, or an unidentified medical condition. In DSM-IV, two out of five symp-
tom clusters were required if the context was a psychotic or mood disorder, whereas only one symp-
tom cluster was needed if the context was a general medical condition. In DSM-5, all contexts require 
three catatonic symptoms (from a total of 12 characteristic symptoms). In DSM-5, catatonia may be 
diagnosed as a specifier for depressive, bipolar, and psychotic disorders; as a separate diagnosis in the 
context of another medical condition; or as an other specified diagnosis.

Highlights of Changes from DSM-IV-TR to DSM-5 • 3

Bipolar and Related Disorders
Bipolar Disorders
To enhance the accuracy of diagnosis and facilitate earlier detection in clinical settings, Criterion A for 
manic and hypomanic episodes now includes an emphasis on changes in activity and energy as well as 
mood. The DSM-IV diagnosis of bipolar I disorder, mixed episode, requiring that the individual simulta-
neously meet full criteria for both mania and major depressive episode, has been removed. Instead, a 
new specifier, “with mixed features,” has been added that can be applied to episodes of mania or hy-
pomania when depressive features are present, and to episodes of depression in the context of major 
depressive disorder or bipolar disorder when features of mania/hypomania are present.

Other Specified Bipolar and Related Disorder
DSM-5 allows the specification of particular conditions for other specified bipolar and related disorder, 
including categorization for individuals with a past history of a major depressive disorder who meet all 
criteria for hypomania except the duration criterion (i.e., at least 4 consecutive days). A second condi-
tion constituting an other specified bipolar and related disorder is that too few symptoms of hypoma-
nia are present to meet criteria for the full bipolar II syndrome, although the duration is sufficient at 4 
or more days.

Anxious Distress Specifier
In the chapter on bipolar and related disorders and the chapter on depressive disorders, a specifier for 
anxious distress is delineated. This specifier is intended to identify patients with anxiety symptoms that 
are not part of the bipolar diagnostic criteria. 

Depressive Disorders
DSM-5 contains several new depressive disorders, including disruptive mood dysregulation disorder 
and premenstrual dysphoric disorder. To address concerns about potential overdiagnosis and overtreat-
ment of bipolar disorder in children, a new diagnosis, disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, is includ-
ed for children up to age 18 years who exhibit persistent irritability and frequent episodes of extreme 
behavioral dyscontrol. Based on strong scientific evidence, premenstrual dysphoric disorder has been 
moved from DSM-IV Appendix B, “Criteria Sets and Axes Provided for Further Study,” to the main body 
of DSM-5. Finally, DSM-5 conceptualizes chronic forms of depression in a somewhat modified way. 
What was referred to as dysthymia in DSM-IV now falls under the category of persistent depressive dis-
order, which includes both chronic major depressive disorder and the previous dysthymic disorder. An 
inability to find scientifically meaningful differences between these two conditions led to their combi-
nation with specifiers included to identify different pathways to the diagnosis and to provide continuity 
with DSM-IV. 

Major Depressive Disorder
Neither the core criterion symptoms applied to the diagnosis of major depressive episode nor the req-
uisite duration of at least 2 weeks has changed from DSM-IV. Criterion A for a major depressive episode 
in DSM-5 is identical to that of DSM-IV, as is the requirement for clinically significant distress or impair-
ment in social, occupational, or other important areas of life, although this is now listed as Criterion 
B rather than Criterion C. The coexistence within a major depressive episode of at least three manic 
symptoms (insufficient to satisfy criteria for a manic episode) is now acknowledged by the specifier 
“with mixed features.” The presence of mixed features in an episode of major depressive disorder in-
4 • Highlights of Changes from DSM-IV-TR to DSM-5

creases the likelihood that the illness exists in a bipolar spectrum; however, if the individual concerned 
has never met criteria for a manic or hypomanic episode, the diagnosis of major depressive disorder is 
retained. 

Bereavement Exclusion
In DSM-IV, there was an exclusion criterion for a major depressive episode that was applied to depres-
sive symptoms lasting less than 2 months following the death of a loved one (i.e., the bereavement 
exclusion). This exclusion is omitted in DSM-5 for several reasons. The first is to remove the implication 
that bereavement typically lasts only 2 months when both physicians and grief counselors recognize 
that the duration is more commonly 1–2 years. Second, bereavement is recognized as a severe psy-
chosocial stressor that can precipitate a major depressive episode in a vulnerable individual, generally 
beginning soon after the loss. When major depressive disorder occurs in the context of bereavement, it 
adds an additional risk for suffering, feelings of worthlessness, suicidal ideation, poorer somatic health, 
worse interpersonal and work functioning, and an increased risk for persistent complex bereavement 
disorder, which is now described with explicit criteria in Conditions for Further Study in DSM-5 Section 
III. Third, bereavement-related major depression is most likely to occur in individuals with past personal 
and family histories of major depressive episodes. It is genetically influenced and is associated with 
similar personality characteristics, patterns of comorbidity, and risks of chronicity and/or recurrence 
as non–bereavement-related major depressive episodes. Finally, the depressive symptoms associated 
with bereavement-related depression respond to the same psychosocial and medication treatments as 
non–bereavement-related depression. In the criteria for major depressive disorder, a detailed footnote 
has replaced the more simplistic DSM-IV exclusion to aid clinicians in making the critical distinction be-
tween the symptoms characteristic of bereavement and those of a major depressive episode. Thus, al-
though most people experiencing the loss of a loved one experience bereavement without developing 
a major depressive episode, evidence does not support the separation of loss of a loved one from other 
stressors in terms of its likelihood of precipitating a major depressive episode or the relative likelihood 
that the symptoms will remit spontaneously.

Specifiers for Depressive Disorders
Suicidality represents a critical concern in psychiatry. Thus, the clinician is given guidance on assess-
ment of suicidal thinking, plans, and the presence of other risk factors in order to make a determination 
of the prominence of suicide prevention in treatment planning for a given individual. A new specifier to 
indicate the presence of mixed symptoms has been added across both the bipolar and the depressive 
disorders, allowing for the possibility of manic features in individuals with a diagnosis of unipolar de-
pression. A substantial body of research conducted over the last two decades points to the importance 
of anxiety as relevant to prognosis and treatment decision making. The “with anxious distress” specifier 
gives the clinician an opportunity to rate the severity of anxious distress in all individuals with bipolar or 
depressive disorders.

Anxiety Disorders
The DSM-5 chapter on anxiety disorder no longer includes obsessive-compulsive disorder (which is 
included with the obsessive-compulsive and related disorders) or posttraumatic stress disorder and 
acute stress disorder (which is included with the trauma- and stressor-related disorders). However, the 
sequential order of these chapters in DSM-5 reflects the close relationships among them.

Highlights of Changes from DSM-IV-TR to DSM-5 • 5

Agoraphobia, Specific Phobia, and Social Anxiety Disorder (Social Phobia)
Changes in criteria for agoraphobia, specific phobia, and social anxiety disorder (social phobia) include 
deletion of the requirement that individuals over age 18 years recognize that their anxiety is excessive 
or unreasonable. This change is based on evidence that individuals with such disorders often overesti-
mate the danger in “phobic” situations and that older individuals often misattribute “phobic” fears to 
aging. Instead, the anxiety must be out of proportion to the actual danger or threat in the situation, af-
ter taking cultural contextual factors into account. In addition, the 6-month duration, which was limited 
to individuals under age 18 in DSM-IV, is now extended to all ages. This change is intended to minimize 
overdiagnosis of transient fears.

Panic Attack
The essential features of panic attacks remain unchanged, although the complicated DSM-IV terminol-
ogy for describing different types of panic attacks (i.e., situationally bound/cued, situationally predis-
posed, and unexpected/uncued) is replaced with the terms unexpected and expected panic attacks. 
Panic attacks function as a marker and prognostic factor for severity of diagnosis, course, and comor-
bidity across an array of disorders, including but not limited to anxiety disorders. Hence, panic attack 
can be listed as a specifier that is applicable to all DSM-5 disorders. 

Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia
Panic disorder and agoraphobia are unlinked in DSM-5. Thus, the former DSM-IV diagnoses of panic 
disorder with agoraphobia, panic disorder without agoraphobia, and agoraphobia without history of 
panic disorder are now replaced by two diagnoses, panic disorder and agoraphobia, each with separate 
criteria. The co-occurrence of panic disorder and agoraphobia is now coded with two diagnoses. This 
change recognizes that a substantial number of individuals with agoraphobia do not experience panic 
symptoms. The diagnostic criteria for agoraphobia are derived from the DSM-IV descriptors for agora-
phobia, although endorsement of fears from two or more agoraphobia situations is now required, be-
cause this is a robust means for distinguishing agoraphobia from specific phobias. Also, the criteria for 
agoraphobia are extended to be consistent with criteria sets for other anxiety disorders (e.g., clinician 
judgment of the fears as being out of proportion to the actual danger in the situation, with a typical 
duration of 6 months or more). 

Specific Phobia
The core features of specific phobia remain the same, but there is no longer a requirement that indi-
viduals over age 18 years must recognize that their fear and anxiety are excessive or unreasonable, and 
the duration requirement (“typically lasting for 6 months or more”) now applies to all ages. Although 
they are now referred to as specifiers, the different types of specific phobia have essentially remained 
unchanged. 

Social Anxiety Disorder (Social Phobia)
The essential features of social anxiety disorder (social phobia) (formerly called social phobia) remain 
the same. However, a number of changes have been made, including deletion of the requirement that 
individuals over age 18 years must recognize that their fear or anxiety is excessive or unreasonable, and 
duration criterion of “typically lasting for 6 months or more” is now required for all ages. A more sig-
nificant change is that the “generalized” specifier has been deleted and replaced with a “performance 
only” specifier. The DSM-IV generalized specifier was problematic in that “fears include most social situ-
ations” was difficult to operationalize. Individuals who fear only performance situations (i.e., speaking 
6 • Highlights of Changes from DSM-IV-TR to DSM-5

or performing in front of an audience) appear to represent a distinct subset of social anxiety disorder in 
terms of etiology, age at onset, physiological response, and treatment response. 

Separation Anxiety Disorder
Although in DSM-IV, separation anxiety disorder was classified in the section “Disorders Usually First 
Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence,” it is now classified as an anxiety disorder. The core 
features remain mostly unchanged, although the wording of the criteria has been modified to more 
adequately represent the expression of separation anxiety symptoms in adulthood. For example, at-
tachment figures may include the children of adults with separation anxiety disorder, and avoidance 
behaviors may occur in the workplace as well as at school. Also, in contrast to DSM-IV, the diagnostic 
criteria no longer specify that age at onset must be before 18 years, because a substantial number of 
adults report onset of separation anxiety after age 18. Also, a duration criterion—“typically lasting for 6 
months or more”—has been added for adults to minimize overdiagnosis of transient fears. 

Selective Mutism
In DSM-IV, selective mutism was classified in the section “Disorders Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, 
Childhood, or Adolescence.” It is now classified as an anxiety disorder, given that a large majority of 
children with selective mutism are anxious. The diagnostic criteria are largely unchanged from DSM-IV. 

Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders
The chapter on obsessive-compulsive and related disorders, which is new in DSM-5, reflects the in-
creasing evidence that these disorders are related to one another in terms of a range of diagnostic 
validators, as well as the clinical utility of grouping these disorders in the same chapter. New disorders 
include hoarding disorder, excoriation (skin-picking) disorder, substance-/medication-induced obses-
sive-compulsive and related disorder, and obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due to another 
medical condition. The DSM-IV diagnosis of trichotillomania is now termed trichotillomania (hair-pull-
ing disorder) and has been moved from a DSM-IV classification of impulse-control disorders not else-
where classified to obsessive-compulsive and related disorders in DSM-5.

Specifiers for Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders
The “with poor insight” specifier for obsessive-compulsive disorder has been refined in DSM-5 to allow 
a distinction between individuals with good or fair insight, poor insight, and “absent insight/delusional” 
obsessive-compulsive disorder beliefs (i.e., complete conviction that obsessive-compulsive disorder 
beliefs are true). Analogous “insight” specifiers have been included for body dysmorphic disorder and 
hoarding disorder. These specifiers are intended to improve differential diagnosis by emphasizing that 
individuals with these two disorders may present with a range of insight into their disorder-related be-
liefs, including absent insight/delusional symptoms. This change also emphasizes that the presence of 
absent insight/delusional beliefs warrants a diagnosis of the relevant obsessive-compulsive or related 
disorder, rather than a schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder. The “tic-related” specifier 
for obsessive-compulsive disorder reflects a growing literature on the diagnostic validity and clinical 
utility of identifying individuals with a current or past comorbid tic disorder, because this comorbidity 
may have important clinical implications. 

Body Dysmorphic Disorder
For DSM-5 body dysmorphic disorder, a diagnostic criterion describing repetitive behaviors or mental 

Highlights of Changes from DSM-IV-TR to DSM-5 • 7

acts in response to preoccupations with perceived defects or flaws in physical appearance has been 
added, consistent with data indicating the prevalence and importance of this symptom. A “with muscle 
dysmorphia” specifier has been added to reflect a growing literature on the diagnostic validity and clini-
cal utility of making this distinction in individuals with body dysmorphic disorder. The delusional vari-
ant of body dysmorphic disorder (which identifies individuals who are completely convinced that their 
perceived defects or flaws are truly abnormal appearing) is no longer coded as both delusional disor-
der, somatic type, and body dysmorphic disorder; in DSM-5 this presentation is designated only as body 
dysmorphic disorder with the absent insight/delusional beliefs specifier.

Hoarding Disorder
Hoarding disorder is a new diagnosis in DSM-5. DSM-IV lists hoarding as one of the possible symptoms 
of obsessive-compulsive personality disorder and notes that extreme hoarding may occur in obsessive-
compulsive disorder. However, available data do not indicate that hoarding is a variant of obsessive-
compulsive disorder or another mental disorder. Instead, there is evidence for the diagnostic validity 
and clinical utility of a separate diagnosis of hoarding disorder, which reflects persistent difficulty dis-
carding or parting with possessions due to a perceived need to save the items and distress associated 
with discarding them. Hoarding disorder may have unique neurobiological correlates, is associated with 
significant impairment, and may respond to clinical intervention.

Trichotillomania (Hair-Pulling Disorder)
Trichotillomania was included in DSM-IV, although “hair-pulling disorder” has been added parentheti-
cally to the disorder’s name in DSM-5.

Excoriation (Skin-Picking) Disorder
Excoriation (skin-picking) disorder is newly added to DSM-5, with strong evidence for its diagnostic 
validity and clinical utility. 

Substance/Medication-Induced Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorder and Obsessive-Compul-
sive and Related Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition
DSM-IV included a specifier “with obsessive-compulsive symptoms” in the diagnoses of anxiety disor-
ders due to a general medical condition and substance-induced anxiety disorders. Given that obses-
sive-compulsive and related disorders are now a distinct category, DSM-5 includes new categories for 
substance-/medication-induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder and for obsessive-compul-
sive and related disorder due to another medical condition. This change is consistent with the intent of 
DSM-IV, and it reflects the recognition that substances, medications, and medical conditions can pres-
ent with symptoms similar to primary obsessive-compulsive and related disorders.

Other Specified and Unspecified Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders
DSM-5 includes the diagnoses other specified obsessive-compulsive and related disorder, which can 
include conditions such as body-focused repetitive behavior disorder and obsessional jealousy, or 
unspecified obsessive-compulsive and related disorder. Body-focused repetitive behavior disorder is 
characterized by recurrent behaviors other than hair pulling and skin picking (e.g., nail biting, lip biting, 
cheek chewing) and repeated attempts to decrease or stop the behaviors. Obsessional jealousy is char-
acterized by nondelusional preoccupation with a partner’s perceived infidelity.

8 • Highlights of Changes from DSM-IV-TR to DSM-5

Trauma- and Stressor-Related Disorders
Acute Stress Disorder
In DSM-5, the stressor criterion (Criterion A) for acute stress disorder is changed from DSM-IV. The 
criterion requires being explicit as to whether qualifying traumatic events were experienced directly, 
witnessed, or experienced indirectly. Also, the DSM-IV Criterion A2 regarding the subjective reaction 
to the traumatic event (e.g., “the person’s response involved intense fear, helplessness, or horror”) has 
been eliminated. Based on evidence that acute posttraumatic reactions are very heterogeneous and 
that DSM-IV’s emphasis on dissociative symptoms is overly restrictive, individuals may meet diagnostic 
criteria in DSM-5 for acute stress disorder if they exhibit any 9 of 14 listed symptoms in these catego-
ries: intrusion, negative mood, dissociation, avoidance, and arousal.

Adjustment Disorders
In DSM-5, adjustment disorders are reconceptualized as a heterogeneous array of stress-response 
syndromes that occur after exposure to a distressing (traumatic or nontraumatic) event, rather than as 
a residual category for individuals who exhibit clinically significant distress without meeting criteria for 
a more discrete disorder (as in DSM-IV ). DSM-IV subtypes marked by depressed mood, anxious symp-
toms, or disturbances in conduct have been retained, unchanged. 

Posttraumatic Stress Disorder
DSM-5 criteria for posttraumatic stress disorder differ significantly from those in DSM-IV. As described 
previously for acute stress disorder, the stressor criterion (Criterion A) is more explicit with regard to 
how an individual experienced “traumatic” events. Also, Criterion A2 (subjective reaction) has been 
eliminated. Whereas there were three major symptom clusters in DSM-IV—reexperiencing, avoid-
ance/numbing, and arousal—there are now four symptom clusters in DSM-5, because the avoidance/
numbing cluster is divided into two distinct clusters: avoidance and persistent negative alterations in 
cognitions and mood. This latter category, which retains most of the DSM-IV numbing symptoms, also 
includes new or reconceptualized symptoms, such as persistent negative emotional states. The final 
cluster—alterations in arousal and reactivity—retains most of the DSM-IV arousal symptoms. It also 
includes irritable or aggressive behavior and reckless or self-destructive behavior. Posttraumatic stress 
disorder is now developmentally sensitive in that diagnostic thresholds have been lowered for children 
and adolescents. Furthermore, separate criteria have been added for children age 6 years or younger 
with this disorder.

Reactive Attachment Disorder
The DSM-IV childhood diagnosis reactive attachment disorder had two subtypes: emotionally with-
drawn/inhibited and indiscriminately social/disinhibited. In DSM-5, these subtypes are defined as 
distinct disorders: reactive attachment disorder and disinhibited social engagement disorder. Both of 
these disorders are the result of social neglect or other situations that limit a young child’s opportunity 
to form selective attachments. Although sharing this etiological pathway, the two disorders differ in 
important ways. Because of dampened positive affect, reactive attachment disorder more closely re-
sembles internalizing disorders; it is essentially equivalent to a lack of or incompletely formed preferred 
attachments to caregiving adults. In contrast, disinhibited social engagement disorder more closely 
resembles ADHD; it may occur in children who do not necessarily lack attachments and may have es-
tablished or even secure attachments. The two disorders differ in other important ways, including cor-
relates, course, and response to intervention, and for these reasons are considered separate disorders. 

Highlights of Changes from DSM-IV-TR to DSM-5 • 9

Dissociative Disorders
Major changes in dissociative disorders in DSM-5 include the following: 1) derealization is included in 
the name and symptom structure of what previously was called depersonalization disorder and is now 
called depersonalization/derealization disorder, 2) dissociative fugue is now a specifier of dissociative 
amnesia rather than a separate diagnosis, and 3) the criteria for dissociative identity disorder have 
been changed to indicate that symptoms of disruption of identity may be reported as well as observed, 
and that gaps in the recall of events may occur for everyday and not just traumatic events. Also, experi-
ences of pathological possession in some cultures are included in the description of identity disruption. 

Dissociative Identity Disorder
Several changes to the criteria for dissociative identity disorder have been made in DSM-5. First, Criterion 
A has been expanded to include certain possession-form phenomena and functional neurological symp-
toms to account for more diverse presentations of the disorder. Second, Criterion A now specifically states 
that transitions in identity may be observable by others or self-reported. Third, according to Criterion B, in-
dividuals with dissociative identity disorder may have recurrent gaps in recall for everyday events, not just 
for traumatic experiences. Other text modifications clarify the nature and course of identity disruptions.

Somatic Symptom and Related Disorders
In DSM-5, somatoform disorders are now referred to as somatic symptom and related disorders. In 
DSM-IV, there was significant overlap across the somatoform disorders and a lack of clarity about their 
boundaries. These disorders are primarily seen in medical settings, and nonpsychiatric physicians found 
the DSM-IV somatoform diagnoses problematic to use. The DSM-5 classification reduces the number 
of these disorders and subcategories to avoid problematic overlap. Diagnoses of somatization disorder, 
hypochondriasis, pain disorder, and undifferentiated somatoform disorder have been removed.

Somatic Symptom Disorder
DSM-5 better recognizes the complexity of the interface between psychiatry and medicine. Individu-
als with somatic symptoms plus abnormal thoughts, feelings, and behaviors may or may not have a 
diagnosed medical condition. The relationship between somatic symptoms and psychopathology exists 
along a spectrum, and the arbitrarily high symptom count required for DSM-IV somatization disorder 
did not accommodate this spectrum. The diagnosis of somatization disorder was essentially based on 
a long and complex symptom count of medically unexplained symptoms. Individuals previously diag-
nosed with somatization disorder will usually meet DSM-5 criteria for somatic symptom disorder, but 
only if they have the maladaptive thoughts, feelings, and behaviors that define the disorder, in addition 
to their somatic symptoms.

In DSM-IV, the diagnosis undifferentiated somatoform disorder had been created in recognition that 
somatization disorder would only describe a small minority of “somatizing” individuals, but this disor-
der did not prove to be a useful clinical diagnosis. Because the distinction between somatization disor-
der and undifferentiated somatoform disorder was arbitrary, they are merged in DSM-5 under somatic 
symptom disorder, and no specific number of somatic symptoms is required.

Medically Unexplained Symptoms
DSM-IV criteria overemphasized the importance of an absence of a medical explanation for the somatic 
symptoms. Unexplained symptoms are present to various degrees, particularly in conversion disorder, 
10 • Highlights of Changes from DSM-IV-TR to DSM-5

but somatic symptom disorders can also accompany diagnosed medical disorders. The reliability of 
medically unexplained symptoms is limited, and grounding a diagnosis on the absence of an explana-
tion is problematic and reinforces mind -body dualism. The DSM-5 classification defines disorders on 
the basis of positive symptoms (i.e., distressing somatic symptoms plus abnormal thoughts, feelings, 
and behaviors in response to these symptoms). Medically unexplained symptoms do remain a key fea-
ture in conversion disorder and pseudocyesis because it is possible to demonstrate definitively in such 
disorders that the symptoms are not consistent with medical pathophysiology.

Hypochondriasis and Illness Anxiety Disorder
Hypochondriasis has been eliminated as a disorder, in part because the name was perceived as pejora-
tive and not conducive to an effective therapeutic relationship. Most individuals who would previously 
have been diagnosed with hypochondriasis have significant somatic symptoms in addition to their high 
health anxiety, and would now receive a DSM-5 diagnosis of somatic symptom disorder. In DSM-5, indi-
viduals with high health anxiety without somatic symptoms would receive a diagnosis of illness anxiety 
disorder (unless their health anxiety was better explained by a primary anxiety disorder, such as gener-
alized anxiety disorder). 

Pain Disorder
DSM-5 takes a different approach to the important clinical realm of individuals with pain. In DSM-IV, the 
pain disorder diagnoses assume that some pains are associated solely with psychological factors, some 
with medical diseases or injuries, and some with both. There is a lack of evidence that such distinctions 
can be made with reliability and validity, and a large body of research has demonstrated that psycho-
logical factors influence all forms of pain. Most individuals with chronic pain attribute their pain to a 
combination of factors, including somatic, psychological, and environmental influences. In DSM-5, some 
individuals with chronic pain would be appropriately diagnosed as having somatic symptom disorder, 
with predominant pain. For others, psychological factors affecting other medical conditions or an ad-
justment disorder would be more appropriate.

Psychological Factors Affecting Other Medical Conditions and Factitious Disorder
Psychological factors affecting other medical conditions is a new mental disorder in DSM-5, having 
formerly been included in the DSM-IV chapter “Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Atten-
tion.” This disorder and factitious disorder are placed among the somatic symptom and related disor-
ders because somatic symptoms are predominant in both disorders, and both are most often encoun-
tered in medical settings. The variants of psychological factors affecting other medical conditions are 
removed in favor of the stem diagnosis. 

Conversion Disorder (Functional Neurological Symptom Disorder)
Criteria for conversion disorder (functional neurological symptom disorder) are modified to emphasize 
the essential importance of the neurological examination, and in recognition that relevant psychologi-
cal factors may not be demonstrable at the time of diagnosis. 

Feeding and Eating Disorders
In DSM-5, the feeding and eating disorders include several disorders included in DSM-IV as feeding and 
eating disorders of infancy or early childhood in the chapter “Disorders Usually First Diagnosed in In-
fancy, Childhood, or Adolescence.” In addition, brief descriptions and preliminary diagnostic criteria are 
provided for several conditions under other specified feeding and eating disorder; insufficient informa-
Highlights of Changes from DSM-IV-TR to DSM-5 • 11

tion about these conditions is currently available to document their clinical characteristics and validity 
or to provide definitive diagnostic criteria. 

Pica and Rumination Disorder
The DSM-IV criteria for pica and for rumination disorder have been revised for clarity and to indicate 
that the diagnoses can be made for individuals of any age. 

Avoidant/Restrictive Food Intake Disorder
DSM-IV feeding disorder of infancy or early childhood has been renamed avoidant/restrictive food 
intake disorder, and the criteria have been significantly expanded. The DSM-IV disorder was rarely used, 
and limited information is available on the characteristics, course, and outcome of children with this 
disorder. Additionally, a large number of individuals, primarily but not exclusively children and adoles-
cents, substantially restrict their food intake and experience significant associated physiological or psy-
chosocial problems but do not meet criteria for any DSM-IV eating disorder. Avoidant/restrictive food 
intake disorder is a broad category intended to capture this range of presentations. 

Anorexia Nervosa
The core diagnostic criteria for anorexia nervosa are conceptually unchanged from DSM-IV with one ex-
ception: the requirement for amenorrhea has been eliminated. In DSM-IV, this requirement was waived 
in a number of situations (e.g., for males, for females taking contraceptives). In addition, the clinical 
characteristics and course of females meeting all DSM-IV criteria for anorexia nervosa except amenor-
rhea closely resemble those of females meeting all DSM-IV criteria. As in DSM-IV, individuals with this 
disorder are required by Criterion A to be at a significantly low body weight for their developmental 
stage. The wording of the criterion has been changed for clarity, and guidance regarding how to judge 
whether an individual is at or below a significantly low weight is now provided in the text. In DSM-5, 
Criterion B is expanded to include not only overtly expressed fear of weight gain but also persistent 
behavior that interferes with weight gain. 

Bulimia Nervosa
The only change to the DSM-IV criteria for bulimia nervosa is a reduction in the required minimum 
average frequency of binge eating and inappropriate compensatory behavior frequency from twice to 
once weekly. The clinical characteristics and outcome of individuals meeting this slightly lower thresh-
old are similar to those meeting the DSM-IV criterion.

Binge-Eating Disorder
Extensive research followed the promulgation of preliminary criteria for binge eating disorder in Ap-
pendix B of DSM-IV, and findings supported the clinical utility and validity of binge-eating disorder. The 
only significant difference from the preliminary DSM-IV criteria is that the minimum average frequency 
of binge eating required for diagnosis has been changed from at least twice weekly for 6 months to at 
least once weekly over the last 3 months, which is identical to the DSM-5 frequency criterion for buli-
mia nervosa. 

Elimination Disorders
No significant changes have been made to the elimination disorders diagnostic class from DSM-IV to 
DSM-5. The disorders in this chapter were previously classified under disorders usually first diagnosed 
in infancy, childhood, or adolescence in DSM-IV and exist now as an independent classification in DSM-5.
12 • Highlights of Changes from DSM-IV-TR to DSM-5

Sleep-Wake Disorders
Because of the DSM-5 mandate for concurrent specification of coexisting conditions (medical and 
mental), sleep disorders related to another mental disorder and sleep disorder related to a general 
medical condition have been removed from DSM-5, and greater specification of coexisting conditions is 
provided for each sleep-wake disorder. This change underscores that the individual has a sleep disorder 
warranting independent clinical attention, in addition to any medical and mental disorders that are also 
present, and acknowledges the bidirectional and interactive effects between sleep disorders and coex-
isting medical and mental disorders. This reconceptualization reflects a paradigm shift that is widely ac-
cepted in the field of sleep disorders medicine. It moves away from making causal attributions between 
coexisting disorders. Any additional relevant information from the prior diagnostic categories of sleep 
disorder related to another mental disorder and sleep disorder related to another medical condition 
has been integrated into the other sleep-wake disorders where appropriate.
Consequently, in DSM-5, the diagnosis of primary insomnia has been renamed insomnia disorder to 
avoid the differentiation of primary and secondary insomnia. DSM-5 also distinguishes narcolepsy, 
which is now known to be associated with hypocretin deficiency, from other forms of hypersomno-
lence. These changes are warranted by neurobiological and genetic evidence validating this reorganiza-
tion. Finally, throughout the DSM-5 classification of sleep-wake disorders, pediatric and developmental 
criteria and text are integrated where existing science and considerations of clinical utility support such 
integration. This developmental perspective encompasses age-dependent variations in clinical presentation.

Breathing-Related Sleep Disorders
In DSM-5, breathing-related sleep disorders are divided into three relatively distinct disorders: obstruc-
tive sleep apnea hypopnea, central sleep apnea, and sleep-related hypoventilation. This change reflects 
the growing understanding of pathophysiology in the genesis of these disorders and, furthermore, has 
relevance to treatment planning. 

Circadian Rhythm Sleep-Wake Disorders
The subtypes of circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorders have been expanded to include advanced sleep 
phase syndrome, irregular sleep-wake type, and non-24-hour sleep-wake type, whereas the jet lag type 
has been removed.

Rapid Eye Movement Sleep Behavior Disorder and Restless Legs Syndrome
The use of DSM-IV “not otherwise specified” diagnoses has been reduced by designating rapid eye 
movement sleep behavior disorder and restless legs syndrome as independent disorders. In DSM-IV, 
both were included under dyssomnia not otherwise specified. Their full diagnostic status is supported 
by research evidence.

Sexual Dysfunctions
In DSM-IV, sexual dysfunctions referred to sexual pain or to a disturbance in one or more phases of the 
sexual response cycle. Research suggests that sexual response is not always a linear, uniform process 
and that the distinction between certain phases (e.g., desire and arousal) may be artificial. In DSM-5, 
gender-specific sexual dysfunctions have been added, and, for females, sexual desire and arousal disor-
ders have been combined into one disorder: female sexual interest/arousal disorder.

To improve precision regarding duration and severity criteria and to reduce the likelihood of overdiag-

Highlights of Changes from DSM-IV-TR to DSM-5 • 13

nosis, all of the DSM-5 sexual dysfunctions (except substance-/medication-induced sexual dysfunction) 
now require a minimum duration of approximately 6 months and more precise severity criteria. These 
changes provide useful thresholds for making a diagnosis and distinguish transient sexual difficulties 
from more persistent sexual dysfunction.

Genito-Pelvic Pain/Penetration Disorder
Genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder is new in DSM-5 and represents a merging of the DSM-IV cat-
egories of vaginismus and dyspareunia, which were highly comorbid and difficult to distinguish. The di-
agnosis of sexual aversion disorder has been removed due to rare use and lack of supporting research.

Subtypes
DSM-IV included the following subtypes for all sexual disorders: lifelong versus acquired, generalized 
versus situational, and due to psychological factors versus due to combined factors. DSM-5 includes 
only lifelong versus acquired and generalized versus situational subtypes. Sexual dysfunction due to a 
general medical condition and the subtype due to psychological versus combined factors have been 
deleted due to findings that the most frequent clinical presentation is one in which both psychological 
and biological factors contribute. To indicate the presence and degree of medical and other nonmedical 
correlates, the following associated features are described in the accompanying text: partner factors, 
relationship factors, individual vulnerability factors, cultural or religious factors, and medical factors.

Gender Dysphoria
Gender dysphoria is a new diagnostic class in DSM-5 and reflects a change in conceptualization of the 
disorder’s defining features by emphasizing the phenomenon of “gender incongruence” rather than 
cross-gender identification per se, as was the case in DSM-IV gender identity disorder. In DSM-IV, the 
chapter “Sexual and Gender Identity Disorders” included three relatively disparate diagnostic classes: 
gender identity disorders, sexual dysfunctions, and paraphilias. Gender identity disorder, however, is 
neither a sexual dysfunction nor a paraphilia. Gender dysphoria is a unique condition in that it is a di-
agnosis made by mental health care providers, although a large proportion of the treatment is endocri-
nological and surgical (at least for some adolescents and most adults). In contrast to the dichotomized 
DSM-IV gender identity disorder diagnosis, the type and severity of gender dysphoria can be inferred 
from the number and type of indicators and from the severity measures.

The experienced gender incongruence and resulting gender dysphoria may take many forms. Gender 
dysphoria thus is considered to be a multicategory concept rather than a dichotomy, and DSM-5 ac-
knowledges the wide variation of gender -incongruent conditions. Separate criteria sets are provided 
for gender dysphoria in children and in adolescents and adults. The adolescent and adult criteria 
include a more detailed and specific set of polythetic symptoms. The previous Criterion A (cross-gender 
identification) and Criterion B (aversion toward one’s gender) have been merged, because no support-
ing evidence from factor analytic studies supported keeping the two separate. In the wording of the 
criteria, “the other sex” is replaced by “some alternative gender.” Gender instead of sex is used system-
atically because the concept “sex” is inadequate when referring to individuals with a disorder of sex 
development. 

In the child criteria, “strong desire to be of the other gender” replaces the previous “repeatedly stated 
desire” to capture the situation of some children who, in a coercive environment, may not verbalize the 
desire to be of another gender. For children, Criterion A1 (“a strong desire to be of the other gender or 
14 • Highlights of Changes from DSM-IV-TR to DSM-5

an insistence that he or she is the other gender . . .)” is now necessary (but not sufficient), which makes 
the diagnosis more restrictive and conservative. 

Subtypes and Specifiers
The subtyping on the basis of sexual orientation has been removed because the distinction is not 
considered clinically useful. A posttransition specifier has been added because many individuals, after 
transition, no longer meet criteria for gender dysphoria; however, they continue to undergo various 
treatments to facilitate life in the desired gender. Although the concept of posttransition is modeled on 
the concept of full or partial remission, the term remission has implications in terms of symptom reduc-
tion that do not apply directly to gender dysphoria. 

Disruptive, Impulse-Control, and Conduct Disorders
The chapter on disruptive, impulse-control, and conduct disorders is new to DSM-5. It brings together 
disorders that were previously included in the chapter “Disorders Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, 
Childhood, or Adolescence” (i.e., oppositional defiant disorder; conduct disorder; and disruptive be-
havior disorder not otherwise specified, now categorized as other specified and unspecified disruptive, 
impulse-control, and conduct disorders) and the chapter “Impulse-Control Disorders Not Otherwise 
Specified” (i.e., intermittent explosive disorder, pyromania, and kleptomania). These disorders are all 
characterized by problems in emotional and behavioral self-control. Because of its close association 
with conduct disorder, antisocial personality disorder has dual listing in this chapter and in the chapter 
on personality disorders. Of note, ADHD is frequently comorbid with the disorders in this chapter but is 
listed with the neurodevelopmental disorders.

Oppositional Defiant Disorder
Four refinements have been made to the criteria for oppositional defiant disorder. First, symptoms are 
now grouped into three types: angry/irritable mood, argumentative/defiant behavior, and vindictive-
ness. This change highlights that the disorder reflects both emotional and behavioral symptomatology. 
Second, the exclusion criterion for conduct disorder has been removed. Third, given that many behav-
iors associated with symptoms of oppositional defiant disorder occur commonly in normally developing 
children and adolescents, a note has been added to the criteria to provide guidance on the frequency 
typically needed for a behavior to be considered symptomatic of the disorder. Fourth, a severity rating 
has been added to the criteria to reflect research showing that the degree of pervasiveness of symp-
toms across settings is an important indicator of severity. 

Conduct Disorder
The criteria for conduct disorder are largely unchanged from DSM-IV. A descriptive features specifier 
has been added for individuals who meet full criteria for the disorder but also present with limited pro-
social emotions. This specifier applies to those with conduct disorder who show a callous and unemo-
tional interpersonal style across multiple settings and relationships. The specifier is based on research 
showing that individuals with conduct disorder who meet criteria for the specifier tend to have a rela-
tively more severe form of the disorder and a different treatment response. 

Intermittent Explosive Disorder
The primary change in DSM-5 intermittent explosive disorder is the type of aggressive outbursts that 
should be considered: physical aggression was required in DSM-IV, whereas verbal aggression and non-
destructive/noninjurious physical aggression also meet criteria in DSM-5. DSM-5 also provides more 

Highlights of Changes from DSM-IV-TR to DSM-5 • 15

specific criteria defining frequency needed to meet criteria and specifies that the aggressive outbursts 
are impulsive and/or anger based in nature, and must cause marked distress, cause impairment in oc-
cupational or interpersonal functioning, or be associated with negative financial or legal consequences. 
Furthermore, because of the paucity of research on this disorder in young children and the potential 
difficulty of distinguishing these outbursts from normal temper tantrums in young children, a minimum 
age of 6 years (or equivalent developmental level) is now required. Finally, especially for youth, the 
relationship of this disorder to other disorders (e.g., ADHD, disruptive mood dysregulation disorder) has 
been further clarified.

Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
Gambling Disorder
An important departure from past diagnostic manuals is that the substance-related disorders chapter 
has been expanded to include gambling disorder. This change reflects the increasing and consistent 
evidence that some behaviors, such as gambling, activate the brain reward system with effects similar 
to those of drugs of abuse and that gambling disorder symptoms resemble substance use disorders to a 
certain extent. 

Criteria and Terminology
DSM-5 does not separate the diagnoses of substance abuse and dependence as in DSM-IV. Rather, cri-
teria are provided for substance use disorder, accompanied by criteria for intoxication, withdrawal, sub-
stance/medication-induced disorders, and unspecified substance-induced disorders, where relevant. 
The DSM-5 substance use disorder criteria are nearly identical to the DSM-IV substance abuse and de-
pendence criteria combined into a single list, with two exceptions. The DSM-IV recurrent legal problems 
criterion for substance abuse has been deleted from DSM-5, and a new criterion, craving or a strong 
desire or urge to use a substance, has been added. In addition, the threshold for substance use disorder 
diagnosis in DSM-5 is set at two or more criteria, in contrast to a threshold of one or more criteria for 
a diagnosis of DSM-IV substance abuse and three or more for DSM-IV substance dependence. Canna-
bis withdrawal is new for DSM-5, as is caffeine withdrawal (which was in DSM-IV Appendix B, “Criteria 
Sets and Axes Provided for Further Study”). Of note, the criteria for DSM-5 tobacco use disorder are 
the same as those for other substance use disorders. By contrast, DSM-IV did not have a category for 
tobacco abuse, so the criteria in DSM-5 that are from DSM-IV abuse are new for tobacco in DSM-5.
Severity of the DSM-5 substance use disorders is based on the number of criteria endorsed: 2–3 criteria 
indicate a mild disorder; 4–5 criteria, a moderate disorder; and 6 or more, a severe disorder. The DSM-
IV specifier for a physiological subtype has been eliminated in DSM-5, as has the DSM-IV diagnosis of 
polysubstance dependence. Early remission from a DSM-5 substance use disorder is defined as at least 
3 but less than 12 months without substance use disorder criteria (except craving), and sustained re-
mission is defined as at least 12 months without criteria (except craving). Additional new DSM-5 speci-
fiers include “in a controlled environment” and “on maintenance therapy” as the situation warrants.

Neurocognitive Disorders
Delirium
The criteria for delirium have been updated and clarified on the basis of currently available evidence. 

Major and Mild Neurocognitive Disorder
The DSM-IV diagnoses of dementia and amnestic disorder are subsumed under the newly named entity 

16 • Highlights of Changes from DSM-IV-TR to DSM-5

major neurocognitive disorder (NCD). The term dementia is not precluded from use in the etiological 
subtypes where that term is standard. Furthermore, DSM-5 now recognizes a less severe level of cogni-
tive impairment, mild NCD, which is a new disorder that permits the diagnosis of less disabling syn-
dromes that may nonetheless be the focus of concern and treatment. Diagnostic criteria are provided 
for both major NCD and mild NCD, followed by diagnostic criteria for the different etiological subtypes. 
An updated listing of neurocognitive domains is also provided in DSM-5, as these are necessary for 
establishing the presence of NCD, distinguishing between the major and mild levels of impairment, and 
differentiating among etiological subtypes. 

Although the threshold between mild NCD and major NCD is inherently arbitrary, there are important 
reasons to consider these two levels of impairment separately. The major NCD syndrome provides 
consistency with the rest of medicine and with prior DSM editions and necessarily remains distinct to 
capture the care needs for this group. Although the mild NCD syndrome is new to DSM-5, its presence 
is consistent with its use in other fields of medicine, where it is a significant focus of care and research, 
notably in individuals with Alzheimer’s disease, cerebrovascular disorders, HIV, and traumatic brain 
injury. 

Etiological Subtypes
In DSM-IV, individual criteria sets were designated for dementia of the Alzheimer’s type, vascular 
dementia, and substance-induced dementia, whereas the other neurodegenerative disorders were 
classified as dementia due to another medical condition, with HIV, head trauma, Parkinson’s disease, 
Huntington’s disease, Pick’s disease, Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, and other medical conditions specified. 
In DSM-5, major or mild vascular NCD and major or mild NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease have been re-
tained, whereas new separate criteria are now presented for major or mild NCD due to frontotemporal 
NCD, Lewy bodies, traumatic brain injury, Parkinson’s disease, HIV infection, Huntington’s disease, prion 
disease, another medical condition, and multiple etiologies. Substance/medication-induced NCD and 
unspecified NCD are also included as diagnoses.

Personality Disorders
The criteria for personality disorders in Section II of DSM-5 have not changed from those in DSM-IV. 
An alternative approach to the diagnosis of personality disorders was developed for DSM-5 for further 
study and can be found in Section III. For the general criteria for personality disorder presented in Sec-
tion III, a revised personality functioning criterion (Criterion A) has been developed based on a litera-
ture review of reliable clinical measures of core impairments central to personality pathology. Further-
more, the moderate level of impairment in personality functioning required for a personality disorder 
diagnosis in DSM-5 Section III was set empirically to maximize the ability of clinicians to identify per-
sonality disorder pathology accurately and efficiently. With a single assessment of level of personality 
functioning, a clinician can determine whether a full assessment for personality disorder is necessary. 
The diagnostic criteria for specific DSM-5 personality disorders in the alternative model are consis-
tently defined across disorders by typical impairments in personality functioning and by characteristic 
pathological personality traits that have been empirically determined to be related to the personality 
disorders they represent. Diagnostic thresholds for both Criterion A and Criterion B have been set em-
pirically to minimize change in disorder prevalence and overlap with other personality disorders and to 
maximize relations with psychosocial impairment. A diagnosis of personality disorder—trait specified, 
based on moderate or greater impairment in personality functioning and the presence of pathologi-
cal personality traits, replaces personality disorder not otherwise specified and provides a much more 
Highlights of Changes from DSM-IV-TR to DSM-5 • 17

informative diagnosis for patients who are not optimally described as having a specific personality dis-
order. A greater emphasis on personality functioning and trait-based criteria increases the stability and 
empirical bases of the disorders.

Personality functioning and personality traits also can be assessed whether or not an individual has a 
personality disorder, providing clinically useful information about all patients. The DSM-5 Section III ap-
proach provides a clear conceptual basis for all personality disorder pathology and an efficient assess-
ment approach with considerable clinical utility.

Paraphilic Disorders
Specifiers
An overarching change from DSM-IV is the addition of the course specifiers “in a controlled environ-
ment” and “in remission” to the diagnostic criteria sets for all the paraphilic disorders. These specifiers 
are added to indicate important changes in an individual’s status. There is no expert consensus about 
whether a long-standing paraphilia can entirely remit, but there is less argument that consequent psy-
chological distress, psychosocial impairment, or the propensity to do harm to others can be reduced to 
acceptable levels. Therefore, the “in remission” specifier has been added to indicate remission from a 
paraphilic disorder. The specifier is silent with regard to changes in the presence of the paraphilic inter-
est per se. The other course specifier, “in a controlled environment,” is included because the propensity 
of an individual to act on paraphilic urges may be more difficult to assess objectively when the individu-
al has no opportunity to act on such urges.

Change to Diagnostic Names
In DSM-5, paraphilias are not ipso facto mental disorders. There is a distinction between paraphilias 
and paraphilic disorders. A paraphilic disorder is a paraphilia that is currently causing distress or impair-
ment to the individual or a paraphilia whose satisfaction has entailed personal harm, or risk of harm, to 
others. A paraphilia is a necessary but not a sufficient condition for having a paraphilic disorder, and a 
paraphilia by itself does not automatically justify or require clinical intervention.

The distinction between paraphilias and paraphilic disorders was implemented without making any 
changes to the basic structure of the diagnostic criteria as they had existed since DSM-III-R. In the diag-
nostic criteria set for each of the listed paraphilic disorders, Criterion A specifies the qualitative nature 
of the paraphilia (e.g., an erotic focus on children or on exposing the genitals to strangers), and Crite-
rion B specifies the negative consequences of the paraphilia (distress, impairment, or harm—or risk of 
harm—to others). 

The change for DSM-5 is that individuals who meet both Criterion A and Criterion B would now be 
diagnosed as having a paraphilic disorder. A diagnosis would not be given to individuals whose symp-
toms meet Criterion A but not Criterion B—that is, to those individuals who have a paraphilia but not a 
paraphilic disorder.

The distinction between paraphilias and paraphilic disorders is one of the changes from DSM-IV that 
applies to all atypical erotic interests. This approach leaves intact the distinction between normative 
and nonnormative sexual behavior, which could be important to researchers or to persons who have 
nonnormative sexual preferences, but without automatically labeling nonnormative sexual behavior as 

18 • Highlights of Changes from DSM-IV-TR to DSM-5

psychopathological. This change in viewpoint is reflected in the diagnostic criteria sets by the addition 
of the word disorder to all the paraphilias. Thus, for example, DSM-IV pedophilia has become DSM-5 
pedophilic disorder.

DSM is the manual used by clinicians and researchers to diagnose and classify mental disorders. The American Psychiatric 
Association (APA) will publish DSM-5 in 2013, culminating a 14-year revision process. For more information, go to www.
DSM5.org. 

APA is a national medical specialty society whose more than 36,000 physician members specialize in the diagnosis, treat-
ment, prevention and research of mental illnesses, including substance use disorders. Visit the APA at www.psychiatry.org. 
For more information, please contact Eve Herold at 703-907-8640 or press@psych.org.

© 2013 American Psychiatric Association

 

Highlights of Changes from DSM-IV-TR to DSM-5 • 19

