DEGREE PROJECT IN URBAN AND REGIONAL PLANNING, 
ADVANCED CYCLE

	


	


	


Analyzing Stockholm’s Comprehensive Plan: 

In Search of an Ecofeminist Future 2050

SUSANNA FINDAHL

   

SoM EX 2014-35

___________________________________________

KUNGLIGA TEKNISKA HÖGSKOLAN

SCHOOL OF ARCHITECTURE AND THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT

Department of Urban Planning and Environment

Division of Urban and Regional Studies

                                                        

  

                                                        

”Sustainability and efﬁciency, Boyce (1995) concludes, are only compatible under conditions of true 
democracy and equity. Thus, if, as ecofeminism insists, the destruction of nature and social inequality 

are profoundly connected, so too are sustainability and social justice.” 1

1 McMahon, M. (1997) From the ground up: ecofeminism and ecological economics. Ecological Economics. 20. p. 
172

1

Analys av Stockholms Översiktsplan: 
På jakt efter en ekofeministisk framtid 2050

ABSTRACT
Denna studie hanterar miljödiskurser i den gällande översiktsplanen för Stockholm, Promenadstaden, 
och hur de kan utvecklas utefter ett ekofeministiskt ramverk. Med en grund i ett kritiskt perspektiv på 
samtida  urbaniseringsprocesser,  ekofeministisk  teori,  och  ett  intresse  i  den  potential  som  vilar  i 
utopiskt  tänkande,  avser detta arbete vara översiktsplanen behjälplig i att  hitta alternativa vägar att 
närma sig stadens utveckling, på jakt efter social och miljörättvisa genom ökat medborgardeltagande.
	

Ekofeminister  menar  att  ekonomisk  tillväst  villkoras  av  och  förstärker  koloniala  och 
patriarkala relationer mellan människor,  och mellan människor och naturen. Den nuvarande globala 
urbaniseringsprocessen är en grundläggande del i att upprätthålla ekonomisk tillväxt, vilket gör städer 
till ett viktigt område att hantera ifall nya relationer ska etableras. Hållbar utveckling har framhävts 
som ett sätt att minska det ekonomiska systemets negativa sociala och miljöeffekter, och har därför 
haft stort inﬂytande över policys för stadsutveckling. Policys,  som översiktsplaner,  formar hur våra 
städer utvecklas. Den huvudsakliga strategin i Stockholms gällande översiktsplan är ”hållbar tillväxt”. 
	

Denna studie analyserar de delar som formar strategin hållbar tillväxt för att förstå varför den 
är problematisk. Vidare ägnas  arbetet  åt  generering av  framtidsscenarier  med  deltagare  utifrån ett 
ekofeministiskt ramverk, för att ﬁnna nya idéer och spår för hållbar stadsutveckling i Stockholm. 
	

Slutsatserna  omfattar  den  positiva  uppfattningen  att  det  ﬁnns  goda  chanser  att  utveckla 
formuleringen av och strategierna för att nå hållbarhet genom workshops med deltagare. Även om den 
övergripande utvecklingsinriktningen i scenarierna ligger alltför långt ifrån vår nuvarande verklighet 
för att med lätthet implementeras  ﬁnns  det fortfarande  många  konkreta förslag  med god  potential 
redan idag. Vidare pekar resultaten ut viktiga riktningar för planens utveckling i ett längre perspektiv, 
vilka har att göra med en grundläggande omstrukturering av den politiska ekonomin i enlighet med en 
mer  socialt  och  miljömässigt  förnuftig  riktning,  där  mänsklighetens  och  naturens  ofrånkomliga 
sammanlänkning upphöjs. Det  är en omstrukturering som gör ekonomisk tillväxt  enligt nuvarande 
modell  omöjlig,  men som eftersträvar jämlikhet  mellan människor och ett långtgående miljöskydd. 
Det påpekas vidare i rapporten att nyttjandet av motstridiga scenarier i planering skulle bidra både till 
stadsutveckling och demokratiskt deltagande, där de konﬂikter planering präglas av blottläggs. 
KEY WORDS 
Comprehensive  planning,  environmental  discourse  analysis,  ecofeminism,  participatory  scenario 
generation, utopian thought.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Ulrika Gunnarsson-Östling, för att du handlett mig genom mitt exjobb, och för dina artiklar som varit 
till stor nytta. Din input har varit mycket värdefull, vid stunder av förvirring, men kanske framför allt i 
din ständiga uppmuntran. Tack!
Martina, och min familj, som har stått ut med min rastlöshet under dessa månader. 
Mormor. 

2

Analyzing Stockholm’s Comprehensive Plan: 
In Search of an Ecofeminist Sustainable Future in 2050

ABSTRACT
This report addresses the environmental discourse of the current comprehensive plan of Stockholm,  
The Walkable City, and in what ways it can be developed following an ecofeminist framework. With a 
foundation in a critical perspective on current processes of urbanization, ecofeminist theory,  and an 
interest  in the potential in utopian thought,  this  thesis attempts  to assist the comprehensive plan in 
ﬁnding alternative ways of approaching the urban development of the city,  in search for social and 
environmental justice through increased citizen participation. 
	

Ecofeminists  argue  that  economic  growth  is  conditioned  by  and  enforces  colonial  and 
patriarchal relations between humans, and between humans and nature. The current global process of 
urbanization is an integral part in sustaining the economic growth, making cities an important area to 
address in search of other relations. Sustainable development has been put forth as a way to relieve the 
negative  social and environmental  effects  of the  economic system,  and has  informed much urban 
policy-making. Urban policy, such as comprehensive plans, shape the path of urban development. The 
main strategy of the current comprehensive plan of Stockholm is ”sustainable growth”. 
	

This thesis analyses the components that make out the strategy of sustainable growth in order 
to understand why it is problematic. Further, it engages in participatory scenario generation using an 
ecofeminist  framework,  to  ﬁnd  new  ideas  and  paths  for  a  sustainable  urban  development  in 
Stockholm. 
	

The conclusions that are found comprise the positive notion that there are great chances to 
develop the notion and strategies for sustainability through workshops  with stakeholders. While the 
overall course of development of the scenarios may be too far from our current reality to be easily 
implemented,  there  are  several  suggestions  with  great  potential  even  in  our  current  context. 
Furthermore,  the  results  point  out  important  directions  in  which  to develop the  plan in  a  longer 
perspective, that concern a fundamental restructuring of the political economy along more socially and 
environmentally sound  lines  that  elevate  the  interconnectedness  of  humans  and  nature.  This  is  a 
restructuring that makes economic growth according to the current model impossible, but that aims for 
equality between humans  and far-reaching environmental  protection. It  is  also pointed out  that  the 
deployment  of  a  multitude  of  conﬂicting  scenarios  in  planning  would  beneﬁt  both  the  urban 
development and democratic participation.  

KEY WORDS 
Comprehensive  planning,  environmental  discourse  analysis,  ecofeminism,  participatory  scenario 
generation, utopian thought.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Ulrika Gunnarsson-Östling,  for supervising me throughout this thesis, and for your articles that have 
been of great use. Your input has been very valuable, at moments of confusion and disorientation, but 
maybe above all in your constant encouragements and reassurance. Thank you! 
Martina, and my family, who have put up with my restlessness during these months. 
Mormor.

3

Innehållsförteckning

 
 
 

1. 
1.1 
1.2 
1.3 
1.4 

Abstracts
Keywords
Acknowledgements

   
INLEDNING  
 
Bakgrund 
 
 
Forskningsproblem 
    
Syfte & Forskningsfrågor 
Begränsningar, Etiska Hänsynstaganden & Situering      

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

    
    

2.  

EKOFEMINISTISK TEORI

 

Teori & Metod för Diskursanalys 

3.  MILJÖDISKURSANALYS 
 
 
3.1 
3.2  Miljödiskursanalys av Översiktsplanen 
3.2.1  Grundenheter vilkas existens erkänns eller konstrueras 
3.2.2  Antaganden om naturliga förhållanden 
3.2.3  Agenter & deras motiv
3.2.4  Nyckelmetaforer & andra retoriska verktyg  
 
3.2.5 

Sammanfattning  

 
 

 

 

 

 

        
 

4.  WORKSHOP I EKOFEMINISTISK SCENARIOGENERERING 
4.1  Workshopmetod för generering av feministiska framtider med deltagare
4.2  Workshopresultat 
4.3 

Sammanfattning 

 
          

 

5.  UVÄRDERING AV ÖVERSIKTSPLANEN UTIFRÅN  
  WORKSHOPRESULTATEN 
5.1 
5.2 
5.3 

Inom-scenarier
Bortom-scenarier 
Sammanfattning 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

6.  DISKUSSION & SLUTSATSER 

7. 

REFERENSER 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4

 
 

 

         

 

7
9
18
20
21

25

31
31
37
40
45
49
53
56

59
59
63
70

71

71
78
83

85

95

Table of contents

 
 
 

1. 
1.1 
1.2 
1.3 
1.4 

Abstracts
Keywords
Acknowledgements

INTRODUCTION   
 
Background 
Research Problem 
 
Purpose & Research Questions 
Limitations, Ethical Considerations & Situatedness 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 

   
    
    
    
    

2.  

ECOFEMINIST THEORY

ENVIRONMENTAL DISCOURSE ANALYSIS 
Theory & Method for Discourse Analysis 
Environmental Discourse Analysis of the Comprehensive Plan 
Basic Entities whose Existence is Recognized or Constructed 

3. 
3.1 
3.2 
3.2.1 
3.2.2  Assumptions About Natural Relationships 
3.2.3  Agents & Their Motives
3.2.4  Key Metaphors & Other Rhetorical Devices  
 
3.2.5 

Summary 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

        

4.  WORKSHOP IN ECOFEMINIST SCENARIO GENERATION 
 
4.1  Workshop Method for participatory Generation of Feminist Futures
4.2  Workshop Results 
4.3 

Summary 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

          

ASSESSMENT OF THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN USING THE 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

         

5. 
  WORKSHOP RESULTS 
5.1  Within Scenarios
Beyond Scenarios 
5.2 
5.3 
Summary 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

6.  DISCUSSION & CONCLUSIONS 

7. 

REFERENCES 

 

 

 

7
9
18
20
21

25

31
31
37
40
45
49
53
56

59
59
63
70

71

71
78
83

85

95

5

6

1.	


INTRODUCTION

The  comprehensive plan of Stockholm, The Walkable  City, represents  a strategic  concretization  of  a 
future vision that aims for ”a world class city” through ”sustainable growth”. It has been formulated in 
a particular socio-cultural and political context that claims to be more or less feminist, and to favor a 
sustainable development that balances social justice, environmental protection and economic growth. 
	

Sustainability is  a contested concept generally, often reduced to  a label justifying business  as 
usual  without consideration to  social justice  or  environmental protection. Understanding economic 
growth  as  connected to  exploitation  of  social  and  environmental  values,  the  strategy  ”sustainable 
growth” suggests a fundamental contradiction seen through an ecofeminist lens. It is assumed that the 
comprehensive plan encourages economic growth and urban development of Stockholm in a manner 
that may impair the  chances of achieving an inclusive city where social and environmental  values are 
supported. 
	

This thesis  will  attempt to  clarify what  kind of social  and  environmental  relations the  plan 
supports and contributes  to, in order to assist the comprehensive plan in ﬁnding alternative  ways  of 
approaching the  urban development of the city, starting from an ecofeminist framework that aims at 
social  and  environmental  justice,  locally  and  globally. This  is  done  by  deploying  an  environmental 
discourse  analysis  of the  comprehensive  plan, followed  by  participatory  generation  of  ecofeminist 
futures scenarios in workshops. The workshops also aim  to investigate how comprehensive planning 
can be democratized, through the inclusion of stakeholders, and through a larger variety of images of 
the  future  in  search  for  an  antagonistic  kind  of  planning  that  recognizes  conﬂict  as  one  of  its 
fundamental  conditions. The  resulting workshop material  is  then used to assess  the comprehensive 
plan in a discussion about their compatibility.
	

The  thesis  concludes  that  participatory  scenario  generation  has  a  number  of  beneﬁts  in 
terms of sustaining the conﬂictual parts of planning, and thus allow for pluralistic discussion over both 
the  present state  and what future is  desirable  to move  toward. It is also  found that moving toward 
sustainability  requires a clear formulation of  what it implies, in which an ecofeminist understanding 
would  emphasize  the  reformulation  human-human  and  human-nature  relations  toward 
interdependence, beyond patriarchal  and colonial  patterns  of exploitation and oppression. Economy 
needs  to  be  rethought  and  oriented  away  from  surplus  production  toward  interconnected 
consumption  and production driven by  the  need for  subsistence. It  will  be  argued  that some  ﬁrst 
concrete  steps  toward  environmental  protection  and  social  justice  is  to  make  the  national 
environmental  quality  standards,  equality  objectives  and  human  rights  mandatory  targets  for 
comprehensive planning to work to achieve. 
	

The thesis  has 6 chapters. Chapter  1 provides the thesis with a background and context, its 
problem formulation, purpose, anticipated results, and limitations. The second chapter approaches the 
main theory that underpins  the  work, ecofeminism. Chapter  3 introduces  environmental  discourse 
analysis as theory and method, followed by the analysis of the discourse/s of the comprehensive plan. 
Chapter  4  is  dedicated to  a workshop  method for  participatory  scenario  generation, followed by 
reports  from  three workshops that were carried out in May 2014. In chapter 5 the comprehensive 
plan will  be assessed using the  futures scenarios resulting from the workshops. Chapter 6 contains a 
concluding  discussion  on  the  relevance  of  participatory  scenario  generation,  and  how  the 
comprehensive plan can be taken in a direction toward ecofeminist sustainability.  

7

8

1.1	
 Background

URBANIZATION IN THE GLOBAL CAPITALIST ECONOMY
Amin & Graham (1997, p. 413-421) describe how inner cities after a period of decay were the subject 
of  a  renaissance.  Attention  turned  to  cities  as  hot  pots  for  culture,  consumption,  centers  for 
communication and information,  characterized by diversity, difference and intersection. Building on 
Jane Jacobs, the favored form of urbanity was the new urbanist mixed-use dense structure that would 
live both day and night. This idea paralleled the theories concerning cities as motors for the national 
economy. As agglomerations of knowledge, culture, ideas, nodes in global networks of cities, besides 
an attractive environment and urban life, the cities provided a favorable basis for economic expansion. 
The city became an area for investments. Harvey introduces his Rebel cities: from the right to the city 
to the urban revolution (2013, p. 5) by stating that

”capitalism is perpetually  producing  the surplus  product  that  urbanization requires. The reverse 
relation  also holds. Capitalism needs urbanization to absorb the surplus products it perpetually 
produces.” 

The  capitalist economy rests  on some  fundamental  conditions: it needs  to produce  growth,  which 
needs to be invested in order to avoid devaluation and crisis. For the economy,  and growth, to keep 
expanding  it  depends  on a  constant  increase  in the  labor force,  alternatively  automatization,  new 
means of production,  increasing stress on nature through extraction of resources  and absorption of 
waste,  new  organizational  forms  and  methods  due  to constant  competition,  expansion of markets 
through  new  inventions  and  products  or  new  credit  instruments.  If  these  challenges  to  capital 
expansion cannot be overcome the result is crisis. Urbanization has become the main way to absorb 
surplus capital,  thus  being an integral  part in sustaining the growth of our current global economic 
system. (ibid, p. 6f)
	

intended  economic, 
Engagement 
technological,  industrial  and commercial  development,  is  suggested as a  broad solution to poverty 
alleviation  and  environmental  protection,  by  the  World  Bank,  the  Brundtland  Commission,  Our 
Common  Future and the  UNCED. It  is  assumed that the  free  market  brings  with it  an  increased 
standard of living, fulﬁlled human rights, global peace and environmental preservation. Ecofeminists 
Mies and Shiva (2014,  p. 70ff,  251,  268f) argue that the growth paradigm contains  a fundamental 
paradox,  referring to the increasing poverty and natural deterioration that follows  economic growth, 
particularly in the global South. Assuming that the high living standards of the global North can be 
universalized to all humans ignores that the process that generates wealth also produces poverty (ibid, 
p. 271),  and that the planet has environmental and natural  limits. Economic growth simply cannot 
assist the regeneration of the spheres that it exploits, which leads the authors to conclude (ibid, p. 270)

in  sustainable  development,  by  which  is  usually 

”nature shrinks as capital grows. The growth of the market cannot solve the crisis it creates".

In the urban context the World Bank recommends to support economic growth through deregulation of 
government  controlled land and property to limit  the state  intervention in the market,  and as  little 
urban, regional and spatial planning aiming for social justice and regional equality as possible. These 
kinds of deregulations,  paired with  limitations  to social  programs  has  been a  recurring method  to 
handle economic crises in the US and Europe, in effect resulting in the externalization of social and 
environmental costs (Harvey, 2013, p. 53, 86). The World Bank report never considers that there can 
be large  discrepancies  between the  economic state of a  city and the  state  of  its  environment  and 
population, which is why the belief in the free market’s ability to include all citizens has often proven 
faulty,  leading  Harvey to  conclude  that  ”[t]he  World Bank plainly  favors  speculative capital  over 
people” (ibid,  p.  29). The  irony in this  broadly  supported encouragement  to  engage  in economic 

9

growth is that the offered solution is exactly what caused the problems in the ﬁrst place (ibid; Mies & 
Shiva,  2014,  p.  268f):  poverty  and  environmental  destruction  to  be  alleviated  through economic 
development in the end leads to increased poverty and environmental destruction. The consequences 
of the deregulations  often display political and class conﬂicts,  as the already vulnerable populations 
end up disadvantaged through dispossession and dislocation,  limited service provision, exploited on 
the labor market through bad conditions. (Harvey,  2013, p. 54-57) These sharpening inequalities are 
also  often  gendered,  as  economic  restructuring,  especially  in  transition  countries,  often  relies  on 
women’s unpaid work to cover up for the services that are no longer provided by the state (Milojevic 
in Hurley et al., 2008, p. 390). Simultaneously,  the  bonuses on wall  street stay generous, which in 
practice  means  that  what  is  going  on  is  ”a  massive  transfer  of  wealth  from  the  poor  to  the 
rich” (Harvey, 2013, p. 54).
	

The  results  of  investments  in  urban  construction  for  the  urban  life  are  therefore  often 
disappointing,  as  the  increasing commoditization of urban spaces  has been followed by increasing 
social divides, often including ﬁlters such as gender,  race, class or other. (Amin & Graham,  1997, p. 
413-421) Inner city regeneration more often than not  entails  a process  of gentriﬁcation,  where  the 
former poorer inhabitants are dispossessed and displaced leaving space for more afﬂuent groups  to 
move into newly renovated centrally located dwellings. (Harvey,  2013,  ch. 1) According to Schmid 
(2012, p. 55) this commoditization encompasses the totality of the urban space,  including the people 
that  live  there  and the  relations  and  interactions  they produce,  and the  results  of  their economic 
activities. It  is  the  urban life  in itself that  is  the target  of  commoditization and valorization,  and 
eventually leads to a reconﬁguration of the entirety of urban life. (ibid, p. 55f) Harvey notes that this is 
not a singular event, but rather a continuously recurring process  in contexts where private property 
rights and economic growth are the drivers of urbanization. (Harvey,  2013, ch. 1) This process goes 
against  what Schmid (2012,  p. 57) understands  as the main potential  of the urban,  and contains a 
fundamental  contradiction:  the  great  asset  of  the  urban  context  to  facilitate  spontaneous  and 
unexpected social interaction is limited through the commoditization of the urban, in the end robbing 
the urban of one of its most important characteristics. 

QUESTIONABLE GROWTH
The longterm feasibility and desirability of this growth paradigm thus necessitates questioning. The 
much discussed global impact of climate change and environmental deterioration has yet to see any 
serious  attempts  at  addressing,  and Victor (2012,  p.  207) notes  that a reason  often given  for this 
insufﬁciency is the threat climate change mitigation may pose to economic growth. One undeniable 
aspect,  however, is the access to ﬁnite resources that the current course of development this far has 
taken  for  granted. It  has  been prognosticated that  the  cheap  supply of particularly fossil  fuel,  an 
hitherto fundamental condition for our economy,  will end in the early 21st century. (Victor, 2012, p. 
206) Apart  from  the  negative  bi-products  of  growth,  it  has  also  been found that  the  connection 
between an increasing standard of living and wellbeing is conspicuously weak, as noted by both Victor 
(2012, p. 206) and Mies & Shiva (2014, p. 322). This questions the desirability of letting the currently 
dominant path for development stand in the way of potentially more suitable ones. 
	

Folke & Rockström (2009,  p. 1) point out  that  our current  societies’ fragmented cycles  of 
production and consumption masks the environmental feedback of the whole system:

”A social–ecological system can avoid vulnerability at one time scale through the technology it has 
adopted.  Similarly,  resilience  at  one  spatial  extent  can  be  subsidized  from  a  broader  scale,  a 
common  pattern  in  human  cultural  evolution  and  often  exacerbated  by  technology,  capital 
markets and  ﬁnancial  transfers that  mask environmental  feedback. Losing  sight  of environmental 
feedback  in  the  shorter  term  by  exporting  them  to  regional  and  global  scales  and  by  using 
ecosystems  worldwide  seems  to  have  mentally  disconnected  many  people,  particularly  urban 
inhabitants, from biospheric  processes and made many illiterate about their ultimate dependence 

10

on the life-supporting  environment. Social–ecological systems are not just temporarily linked but 
are truly interdependent and co-evolving across many different spatial and temporal scales.”

The ongoing climate changes cannot be easily perceived by humans, but are nevertheless rapid when 
seen through lenses of the scale and history of the planet. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (IPCC) ﬁnds  that the  current global  warming  will  result  in an up to 6,4°C  rise in  global 
temperature by 2100 (2007,  p. 13). The human effect on ecosystems,  biodiversity and the  climate 
today is in fact large enough to talk about a new geological epoch, the ”Anthropocene”. (Hughes et al., 
2013, p. 389ff) Rockström (Dryzek, 2012, p. 34, Gunnarsson-Östling, 2014, p. 101) has worked out a 
division of  planetary  boundaries  into nine  vital  support  systems,  distinguishing  between safe  and 
transgressed/unsafe  operating space  for humanity. ”Boundaries”  in this  context  refers to the points 
where the consequences of our actions can no longer be foreseen, or threaten humanity. It stands clear 
that  the transgression of the tipping points will  produce major global environmental changes. One 
third of these boundaries, the climate system, biodiversity and the global nitrogen cycle have already 
been exceeded by humans. This means that the human inﬂuence on environmental processes for the 
ﬁrst  time  in  history  has  superseded  the  local  and  regional  scales  -  it  has  gone  global  (Folke  & 
Rocktröm, 2009, p. 1). 

SUSTAINABILITY

Environmental Discourses
The  slow  but  steady process  of climate change  has  produced a width of  discourses  conﬁrming or 
contesting the signiﬁcance of the human impact on the environment. A discourse can be described as 
”an ensemble of ideas, concepts ad categories through which meaning is given to social and physical 
phenomena, and which is produced and reproduced through an identiﬁable set of practices”  (Hajer & 
Versteeg,  2005,  p.  175). The  dominant  global  discourse  on  environmentalism,  sustainability,  was 
formulated in the Brundtland Commission report in 1987 as 

”the ability  to  [...]  meet  the  needs  of  the  present  without  compromising  the  ability  of  future 
generations to meet their own needs” (Dryzek, 2012, p. 147)

Sustainability has been furthered through two different paths, sustainable development and ecological 
modernization, which will be described brieﬂy below. 
Sustainable development
Sustainable development is built on the three parts economic efﬁciency, environmental protection and 
social justice. Originally intended for a balance, the economic dimension is  often seen as  the main 
priority, followed by environmental concerns and lastly social justice. That the concept originates from 
a  Third World  discourse  which  largely  excluded  growth makes  this  circumstance  slightly  ironic. 
(Dryzek, 2012, p. 147f) This kind of reduction however means that the success of one of its parts risks 
being carried  out at  the  expense  of  the other.  (Gunder,  2006,  p. 216ff) There  have been ongoing 
debates  over  the  exact  interpretation  of  ”sustainable  development”,  some  aiming  to  enhance  the 
concept’s  usability,  others  to  support  particular  interests.  Agenda  21  in  1992  followed  up  the 
Brundtland report,  and argued that the overconsumption and overproduction of the richer countries 
was the reason for the environmental problems, while simultaneously seeing economic growth for all 
as  the  solution.  The  emphasis  on  economic growth  has  over the  years  been stretched to  include 
globalization and free  trade,  and ultimately ”green growth”  through  the  World Bank. Sustainable 
development  has  had  a  certain  impact  on  national  levels,  however  often  oriented  toward  what 
economic  gains  can  be  made  from  the  growing  eco-economy.  The  reason  for  the  environmental 
problems as stated in Agenda 21 has been ignored. (Dryzek, 2012, p. 147-164)

11

	

Bradley, Gunnarsson-Östling & Isaksson (2008,  p. 70) conclude that the prevailing deﬁnition 
of sustainability promoted by the Swedish Government has its foundation in the Brundtland report, but 
furthermore that 

”[t]he overall message being communicated in the strategy  document is consensus and win-win 
solutions,  in  which  economic  development,  social  justice  and  environmental  protection  ﬁt 
smoothly together in the endeavor for green growth”. 

Green growth is however a questionable concept, according to Mies & Shiva (2014, p. 299f) merely 
opening  up  possibilities  for  new  markets  to  form,  in  the  name  of  green  growth,  ”greening  of 
capitalism, ”eco-marketing, or ”eco-sponsoring”. This market generally engages in quick ﬁxes, such as 
substitutions of toxic products, conversion of traditional farming to organic, but also encompasses how 
corporate funds are set aside for projects by environmental organizations, in turn reﬂecting positively 
on the funding corporation regardless of their effects on the environment. Economic growth and the 
relation  between  production  and  consumption  are  sustained,  just  like  the  exploitation  of  natural 
resources and the continuing simultaneous growth of wealth and poverty. 
	

Social  equity is  often understood  as  outside the technocratic  and  rational  approach that is 
deployed to meet economic efﬁciency and environmental protection, and is thus overlooked. Gunder 
(2006, p. 215) argues, that ”the market does not favor the disadvantaged”  as equity values are contrary 
to  market  values.  Sustainability  can,  but  does  not  necessarily,  contain  social  justice.  Gunder 
understands the lagging attention to social justice as a function of urban inequalities, homelessness and 
racism no longer being considered urban problems of concern to the urban institutions. Sustainability 
as  a  goal has  diffused  planning’s  traditional ideal and concern with social  justice,  and turned  the 
attention to the importance of limiting the ecological footprint of cities. (2006, p. 215-218) With this in 
mind,  the current attention to sustainable  growth becomes  troubling,  and suggests  there might  be 
problems in simply adding a strategy for sustainable development to the plan in its present form. The 
newly  adopted recency  examination  found  the  attention  to  sustainability  generally,  and  to social 
sustainability  particularly,  to  be  insufﬁcient  in the  current  comprehensive  plan  (Stockholms  stad, 
2014b). The comprehensive plan may in the end risk exactly what Gunder describes,  that particular 
parts of the sustainability concept remain inappropriately addressed as others are fulﬁlled.
Ecological Modernization
Regardless of their differing opinions, Arthur P.J. Mol (2000, p. 45),  Gert Spaargaren (2000,  p. 41), 
David Harvey and Marteen Hajer (Gunder, 2006, p. 214f) all agree that ”ecological modernization”  is 
the  dominant  theory  and  discourse  on  sustainability.  Emerging  as  a  theory  in  the  1980s  in 
environmental  sociology  on  how  the  modern  industrial  society  handles  the  environmental  crisis, 
ecological modernization was shaped through empirical examples showing how  material ﬂows could 
be decoupled from economic ﬂows (Mol, 2000, p. 45f). The origin of this decoupling is institutional 
changes and social practices, that eventually lead to structural transformations of the institutional order 
of industrial society, and result in the preservation of the resources industrial society requires. (Mol, 
2000, p. 45f) Among the differing strands within ecological modernization,  inﬂuential Joseph Huber 
focused  on  the  effects  of  modern  society  on  the  environment  through  capitalism  and  industry. 
Industrialism was understood as closely tied to environmental problems through its poorly designed 
organization  of production and  consumption,  whereas  capitalist  dynamics  showed no  such  direct 
connection. (Spaargaren, 2000, p. 48f) Spaargaren ﬁnds, in line with Huber’s argument, that 

”[w]hat counts for the dynamics of capitalism can also be maintained with regard to the industrial 
dimension of modern production and consumption. There is no principle or theoretical argument 
making a ‘modern’ organization of production and consumption and its technology antithetical to 
sustainability.” (ibid) 

Ecological  modernization  came  to  be  characterized  by  an  understanding  of  environmental 
deterioration as  a challenge to be countered by ”socio-technical and economic reforms”  rather than 

12

governmental reforms,  encouraging scientiﬁc and technological experimentation, alongside ascribing 
markets and supranational  levels  the responsibility for environmental reform.  (Mol,  2000,  p. 46; ; 
Buttel, 2000, p. 30) The assumption that environmental protection and economic growth formed two 
extreme poles on the political spectrum was disrupted. (Mol, 2000, p. 46). 
	

Among the critical voices concerning ecological modernization are Harvey and Hajer,  who 
claim  that  the  fundamental  paradox  of  named  discourse  is  that  the  supposedly  benign  forces  in 
economic  growth  are  the  ones  causing  poverty,  exploitation  and  degradation  of  peoples  and 
environments globally. What makes this version of sustainable development so attractive to planners, 
policymakers  and  politicians  is  that  it supports continued  economic growth,  and  gives  it equal  or 
higher value than social and environmental circumstances. In the end this means that no substantial 
change of our current societies or economies is needed. The broad support through planning agencies, 
markets, and politicians of this form of sustainability means that other versions are neglected, which 
has  the  consequence that  policies  and reforms  that  manage to meet  the  challenges  are  very  few. 
(Gunder, 2006, p. 214f) 
	

Unquestionable Sustainability
According to Gunder (2006, p. 213) sustainability has been turned into an unquestionable good, rising 
as  a Platonic idea with great  ideological  power that  practically everyone can agree  with. As  such 
anything that  is  associated  with sustainability will  also be  supported -  such as  sustainable  cities, 
sustainable development, or sustainable management - and sustainability has thus come to be referred 
to in situations  where its  content  is largely irrelevant,  but where  the ”universal acceptance” in the 
name of the common good becomes a useful tool for justiﬁcation. (ibid, p. 213f) Swyngedouw (2007, 
p. 14-23) agrees with that no one speaks against sustainability - rather, virtually everyone agrees on 
the importance  of it,  across  the  political  spectrum,  economic  activities  and  industries,  and socio-
environmental  contexts. But  while the  interest  and  engagement  in sustainability  is  high,  everyone 
carries on business as usual, signaling that the urgency of natural destruction is not urgent enough to 
carry out any larger changes. The beneﬁt of sticking to this universal good,  then, is to avoid asking 
fundamental questions about our capitalist socio-environmental relations and organization. Instead, we 
imagine that a ”fundamentally harmonious  Nature”  can be  reinstalled  by deploying technological, 
managerial  and  organizational  ﬁxes.  Disagreements  on  these  ﬁxes  are  allowed,  and  maybe  even 
necessary, to cover up for the forbidden questioning of the fundamental unsustainability of the current 
capitalist system. This limits sustainability to a post-political condition where the basic political issues 
cannot be discussed.

URBAN UTOPIANISM

Brief History of Urban Utopianism
”Utopia  usually  refers  to  an  imaginative  projection  of  an  ideal  society.”  (Pinder,  1992,  p.  945) 
Imagining an ideal society or state carrying social  and political content,  beyond problems  and ills, 
utopias have been unbounded by space, form and time. Whether concrete in the form of formal plans, 
a sudden cry for radical change, or alternative experiments to be applied in the present, utopias have a 
strong history in urban development. (ibid, p. 946) 
	

Utopianism was strong in the ﬁrst half of the 20th century, as an important tool for rethinking 
the present reality, and as a way to express critique, fears or hopes about an approaching or distant 
future. Cities were often the sites of the utopias, as they’ve historically been looked upon as a nexus of 
enlightenment, freedom and democracy, and as possible instruments for the implementation of a new 
society.  (ibid,  p. 946f) Utopianism has  also had a  most  practical  signiﬁcance,  e.g.,  in the Swedish 
”Million  Program”  from 1965-1974,  in which the  political  ideal  and  utopia  to establish  a  strong 
welfare state,  and a ”people’s  home”  (folkhem) built on equality,  solidarity and universalism,  was 
materialized. (Gunnarsson-Östling,  2014,  p. 102) Utopian thought lost its  former strong function as 
comment on the current state of society in the later half of the 20th century, as postmodernist critique 

13

rose  around  the  modernist  utopias’  failures  to  reach  their  intended  goals.  The  critique  against 
modernist  utopianism  reﬂected  negatively  on  utopianism  in  general.  As  liberal  democracy  and 
capitalism were understood as having triumphed after the fall of the socialist Soviet Union, the end of 
history had ﬁnally been reached and no further utopias were wanted or needed. (Pinder, 2002, p. 236) 
Zizek and Jameson (Tally, 2010, p. 109) conclude that the late 20th century made it ”easier to imagine 
the end of the world than [...] to imagine the end of capitalism”. 
Utopianism in later years lost its force,  especially in advanced capitalist countries where the 
	

reluctance to imagine a different future has lead to the turning away from urbanism and the problems 
of urban  areas.  Selective  regeneration ﬁnanced  by real  estate  developers  and  ﬁnance  capital  has 
beneﬁtted a minority of the urban populations at the expense of the majority, while all-encompassing 
neoliberal rhetorics, supported by big money interests and corporations, have managed to silence the 
very idea of other societies, or utopias. The result is a lack of critical reﬂection and imagination about 
the contemporary state, and about possible futures to move toward, which according to Pinder (2002, 
p. 230) ”has disturbing political  and cultural consequences,  not the least  of which is narrowing of 
critical  thought and a  moving away from the anticipatory moment  of critique”. What has kept  the 
debate about utopianism going is  that it  contains  a potential for critique,  rethinking and exploring 
beyond the present,  why it  could be an important  tool  for planning that  looks to support  societal 
change. 
Toward a Pluralist Feminist Utopianism
Pinder (2002, p. 237) ﬁnds critical social theory,  i. a., feminist theory, to hold a potential to forward 
urban utopianism. In its  inherent analysis  of the current  against a backdrop of human rights  and a 
livable world, social sciences provide an ”anticipatory-utopian element” with the potential of pointing 
toward better futures. Bergman et al. (2014, p. 65) also attend to feminist utopianism, emphasizing the 
possible simultaneous  critique and offer of other possibilities  and futures than the ones  commonly 
presented. Examining the preconceptions of the present is  key to imagining different  futures. This 
would  ideally  include  working  with  a  range  of feminist  futures  scenarios,  and different  kinds  of 
scenarios,  in  order  to  point  to  aspects  that  today  are  neglected,  while  also  emphasizing  the 
fundamental points of critique if the current society is to be projected into the future. Bergman et al. 
(2014, p. 67) claim that

”Describing  varied,  contradictory,  and  competing  feminist  futures  could  be  a  way  of  making 
temporal knowledge production  more tangible and  engaging, as well as a  way  of intensifying the 
debate about the future in politics and planning.” 

This kind of rethinking of what the utopian in urbanism could be turns utopianism away from ideal 
”endings”, toward open-ended,  pluralistic and oppositional processes that allow  for a transformative 
utopianism that stays close to our present realities without getting stuck on one set path. (Pinder, 2002, 
p. 237) Bateman in Hurley et al. (2008, p. 400) states that there cannot be one singular image,  rather 
plural images are needed to display the multiplicity of parallel gendered perspectives, reﬂecting the 
different aspirations, needs and experiences that people have simultaneously. More than a potential in 
parallel conﬂicting images, it is the only way to come together. There are several examples of efforts at 
working with plural images, such as ”planning for multiple publics”, Fainstein’s ”just city”, Young’s 
”ideal of city life as a vision that afﬁrms group difference”, or Sandercock’s challenge to build cities 
that appeals to everyone - to a common ”we”  (Gunnarsson-Östling, 2011, p. 1037). Plural images by 
force challenge the idea of a common good and consensus  as a  possibility. Instead,  it exposes  the 
political content of planning,  as it  opens up for discussion concerning the differing implications of 
different images and supports informed decisions on what kind of futures  we desire. (Gunnarsson-
Östling, 2014, p. 109) 
Feminist gender studies have often shown a great strength in analyzing and assessing works of 
	

futurists, and have in this way provided the basis for a rethinking of what has been taken for granted. 
(Bergman et al., 2014; Gunnarsson-Östling et al., 2012; Gunnarsson-Östling 2011) Both Bergman et 
al. (2014, p. 65), Gunnarsson-Östling (2011, p. 1036) and Hurley et al. (2008, p. 400ff) conclude that 

14

the Western male bias in futures studies is strong, in everything from topics; use of political categories; 
methods; insufﬁcient analyses of aspects  such as gender,  sexuality,  power, technology, time use and 
use of space; a lack of reﬂexivity; and the exclusion of women as agents. Gunnarsson-Östling (2011) 
also notes  that  feminist  envisioning or alternative futures  scenarios  are  often met  with ignorance. 
Nevertheless,  feminist  utopias  have  a  long  history  including,  e.g.,  Harriet  Taylor  (1869)  in  The 
Subjection of Women, Ellen Key (1908) in Lifslinjer II, the many works by Alexandra Kollontay, and 
Elin Wägner (1941) in Väckarklocka. Among the more recent can be found Haraway (1985) in her 
Cyborg  Manifesto,  and  Haug  (2000)  in  On  the  necessity  of  conceiving  the  utopian  in  a feminist 
fashion. Bergman et al. (2014, p. 63ff) emphasize that it is imperative that feminist studies not only 
engage in critique from an outside perspective, but get into the process of generating feminist futures 
scenarios. Unless this is done, the chances of achieving an equal future is very limited. The authors 
emphasize that working with futures forms another kind of critique,  one that is based on images that 
can scrutinize  the  current  state  while  simultaneously  pointing  out  better organizations  of  society. 
Feminist writers express a great desire for feminist utopias, according to Gunnarsson-Östling (2011, p. 
1037): for other futures  to balance  the  ”hegemonic,  Western,  white and male  futures”,  for images 
worth striving for and for a clariﬁcation of the steps that need to be taken to get there. This is not only 
a critique of the present images of the future, but also an encouragement to take better responsibility of 
our current society in relation to future generations.
Ecofeminist utopianism
Voicing both critique and the signiﬁcance of new paths of development,  Mellor (1995, p. 138) states 
that: 

”the male-dominated  / capitalist  economic  system  is  not  the only  alternative; it  is not  even  a 
feasible alternative. It is a utopian, ideological construct based on real relations of exploitation that 
are in danger of destroying us all” [italics added]

With a foundation in a critique of what is  understood to be an anti-ecological,  patriarchal,  colonial 
world system (Mies & Shiva, 2014, p. 2, 253) ecofeminists open up for new visions and ways aiming 
to solve the problems of environmental destruction and of poverty in the global South. Shiva and Mies 
(2014,  p. xx-xxi,  p. 297,  253) claim  that  a paradigm shift  away from the  current global capitalist 
economy  is  needed,  requiring  that  the  demand  for  economic  growth  by  means  of  free  trade, 
consumerism and competitiveness is left behind. The change must start in the rich part of the world, as 
that is where the profoundly unsustainable patterns of consumption are the strongest.
	

This change is already on the way in both the global North and the global South. One part of 
the shift is a change in consciousness concerning how to prevent our negative impact on the planet's 
biodiversity,  ecosystems  and  climate.  The  other  part,  the  ecological  shift,  implies  understanding 
humans  as  part of "the  Earth family"  where  our production and consumption must  be  carried out 
"within our share of ecological space" with respect to other species and generations. ”Planetary and 
human well-being”  are the new top priorities. (Shiva in Mies & Shiva, 2014, p. xx-xxi) Mies describes 
an  ecofeminist  vision  based  on  self-sustenance  in  non-patriarchal,  ecologically  sound,  non-
exploitative, just societies, cutting across the whole social class system. It is called the subsistence or 
survival  perspective,  and recognizes the interconnectedness of all  life. (2014,  p. 297) This  will  be 
described in closer detail in chapter 2.
Practicing Utopianism
Mouffe argues for ”the creation of a vibrant ‘agonistic’ public sphere of contestation where 
different hegemonic political projects can be confronted” (Gunnarsson-Östling, 2014, p. 104). 
This sphere is a necessary space for deliberation over and democratization of planning and 
utopian thought. The traditional effort to aim for rational and universal consensus in planning 
doesn’t  agree  with  democratic  thought,  as  it  rids  planning  of  its political,  and sometimes 
irrational and oppositional dimension. Participatory planning processes that have consensus as 

15

their aim will  end up having the same problems and in the end bring planning back to the 
rationalist unison common good. That is why participation per se will not ensure democratic 
processes or planning outcomes, as human interaction will always be informed by power play, 
differing abilities to participate,  and the participants’ individual experiences,  knowledge and 
perspectives that simply do not match. 
	

Albrechts (2010, p. 1117) advocates for what he labels transformative practices in planning, a 
proactive approach to planning that aims to design a desired future and how  to reach it rather than to 
react  to  recurring problems.  It focuses  on the  process  of change  rather  than  an end state,  and  is 
therefore an activity,  a process of ”becoming”, rather than substance,  and involves a broad range of 
stakeholders. The reason transformative practices through, e.g., strategic spatial planning is needed in 
the  ﬁrst  place  is  that  the  strategy up  until  now  (like  the  expansion of  the  market,  technological 
development,  or simply maintaining current discourses, concepts and practices) continuously fail to 
meet the great challenges we are faced with. What is needed is a change in relation to the natural and 
the  built  environment,  and  in  our  relations  with  others,  and  ”the  other”  in  particular.  Broad 
participation  is  necessary  to  avoid  manipulation  or  one-sidedness,  as  planning  is  always  already 
informed by positions of gender,  class,  age,  race etc. The desirables that underpin strategic spatial 
planning are all based on values, out of which planners need to make prioritizations, in search for a 
movement towards a future where something we lack today is fulﬁlled, e.g., sustainability or equality. 
The planners are in this situation faced with a great task of ﬁnding a multitude of images,  strategies 
and  visions,  where  the  inﬂuence  of  the  public  through  increased  participation  and  agonistic 
deliberation is an absolute necessity. (ibid, p. 1120-1125)

THE WALKABLE CITY
Urbanization as  the  main  means  of  absorbing surplus  production,  thus  keeping the wheels  of  the 
economic growth spinning,  makes  cities integral tools in the expansion of the economy and in the 
extended  use  of  human  and  natural  resources.  Cities  then,  are  a  likewise  integral  targets  for  a 
development that intends a sustainable direction. As a guiding document for the urban development, 
the comprehensive plan has an immensely important part to play in this equation, as this is where the 
strategy for urban development is shaped. 
The comprehensive plan
The  comprehensive  plan,  The Walkable City  (2010),  is a  strategic planning document that aims  to 
guide the use of land and water in the development of Stockholm. This is where the abstract political 
vision for the development of the city, Vision 2030, meets national public interests and a local context 
with particular conditions, experiences and needs, as a ﬁrst step toward physical form.
	

The comprehensive plan aims to achieve the primary goal of the vision: that Stockholm is to 
become ”a world class city” through ”sustainable growth”. It includes nine focus areas that represent 
those public interests that are seen as the most important ones by the city. Every focus area refers to 
recent  policy  and  planning  documents,  often  related  to  generally  expressed  and  geographically 
unspeciﬁed national  interests  (e.g.,  environmental  quality  standards).  Careful  consideration of  the 
public interests has resulted in a main strategy for urban development, a more dense and connected 
Stockholm, which is speciﬁed in four different sub-strategies. The model image is the dense, vivid and 
mixed structure  of  the  inner city,  applied in  accordance  with the  different  kinds  of contexts. The 
strategies are: to continue to strengthen the central Stockholm; invest in attractive centers; connect the 
different parts of the city; and promote a lively urban environment throughout the city. The plan also 
contains  particular areas  that  have  been named important  for  the  urban  development,  in currently 
ongoing and future projects. Lastly, it is shown how the plan is intended to be implemented. 
	

The  comprehensive  plan  is  not  legally  binding,  but  nevertheless  provides  guidance  in 
decisions  about  urban  development  broadly.  It  is  intended to ease  implementation,  and has  been 
coordinated with other policy documents, and points out what documents are important to consider 

16

when the plan is to be implemented through detailed planning and building permits. All committees 
and companies of the city, that are involved in urban development, are thus to deploy the plan in their 
work. It is also connected to the yearly budget. In the process of writing the plan a large number of 
stakeholders were involved, ofﬁcials from the city’s agencies as well as citizens. 
Sustainability
The  comprehensive  plan  mentions  the  difﬁculty  in  ﬁnding  a  cohesive  deﬁnition  of  ”sustainable 
development”  or ”sustainable growth”, as the deﬁnitions differ and also contain inner conﬂicts as to 
their targets. However, it is concluded that the deﬁnition of the plan corresponds with the that of the 
visionary document and the national strategy for sustainable development. Sustainability is understood 
as a process rather than an end state. It is important that all strategic decisions taken in the city council, 
committees and corporate governance aim to implement sustainable growth.
Recency Examination
The  comprehensive  plan has  newly been followed up in a  recency examination (Stockholms  stad, 
2014a). The  report,  Fokus  Promenadstaden  - uppföljning  av  Översiktsplan för  Stockholm (2014b) 
states the need to work through and advance sustainability. Sustainability aspects need to be enforced 
generally through a separate strategy in the plan, with particular emphasis on social sustainability. The 
problem is deﬁned as large social differences in health,  education,  participation,  youth employment 
and immigration. It is suggested to make use of the strategy for public and green spaces, Den Gröna 
Promenadstaden,  sustainable  renovation  and  to  create  mixed  housing  areas,  and  to  develop 
participatory processes and methods to work together with citizens (ibid, p. 13, 16f). The improvement 
work will likely be initiated in 2015. (Stockholms stad, 2014a)

17

1.2	
 Research Problem

The research problem of this thesis has a few different dimensions: the problem inherent in the current 
lack of urban utopianism,  the interconnection between economic growth and urbanization, economic 
growth that is dependent on exploitation of humans and nature along colonial and patriarchal lines, a 
sustainability concept that has become increasingly diluted until today where its application cannot be 
expected  to  lead  to  an  actual  sustainable  development,  and  male  bias  in  planning  that  risks 
contributing to the enforcement of existing inequalities. 
Consensus-driven Growth Target impedes Urban Utopianism
Firstly,  it notes that urban utopianism today is limited, stuck in a growth paradigm that dictates the 
way forward, with little space for other visions. It is driven by a consensus-striving ideal that excludes 
alternative interpretations and assumes a universalizing approach that supposes the in fact particular 
chosen picture is relevant for all. The lack of conﬂicting understandings leads to uniform ideas for 
societal development, and thus end up underpinning a likewise uniform planning that is geared toward 
consensus. Excluding conﬂict contributes to an undemocratic planning that is unable to consider other 
images,  ideas  and experiences  than the dominant. Efforts  at  democratic participation often end up 
focusing on how  to reach consensus rather than how  to sustain a dynamic pluralistic dialogue over 
different interpretations  of our  present  reality and possible  futures. There  is  a  need  to work  with 
several and conﬂicting scenarios and images of the future, for a democratic societal development to be 
supported. The utopia could function as an imaginative, but also most real, tool that opens up for other 
ideas than the most dominant. Comprehensive planning could be one level where this is addressed.  
Unsustainable Urbanization
Another problem is the consequences of today’s urban developments. Urban lifestyles are very energy 
and resource consuming,  and the  urbanization process  in itself is  a great  reason for the increasing 
exploitation of natural resources. Urbanization has become an integral part of a system that is based on 
the  idea  that  perpetual  economic  development  and  surplus  production  are  possible.  In  order  to 
continue the production of surplus, it needs to be invested, which has become an important function of 
urban areas  in  the  current  global  economy.  The  growth machine  does  however  not  consider  its 
simultaneous production of poverty and natural destruction, as these are costs that are seen as external 
to the surplus  production. This means  that growth relies  on exploitative relations,  to nature and to 
humans. Furthermore, this exploitation is unevenly distributed, as it tends to affect some parts of the 
world,  populations and individuals harder than others  in a pattern that largely follows a patriarchal 
colonial  structure. These problems  has  been brought into the spotlight through efforts aiming for a 
sustainable  balance  of  human,  environmental  and  economic  values.  This  brings  us  to  the  third 
problem.
Diluted Sustainability Concept
Sustainable development originated in a Third World context, and aimed for relations between social, 
environmental and economic factors beyond exploitation. Sustainability in 1992‘s Agenda 21 admitted 
to the poverty and natural destruction following in the path of economic growth,  but all  the  same 
encouraged growth as a means  to achieve social  and environmental justice. Disrupting the conﬂict 
between  economic  growth,  and  social  and  environmental  deterioration,  allowed  for  a  continued 
economic  growth  under  the guise  of  being the  ultimate  way to move toward social  equality and 
environmental  protection.  The  third  problem that  is  noted  in this  thesis  is  how  sustainability has 
become a way to allude to universal values of common goods in the search of expanded markets and 
economies,  while in practice resulting in continued exploitation of humans  and nature. Continuing 
along this track means that longterm sustainability will be made impossible. Thus, there is a need to 
address how  policy documents,  such as comprehensive plans, deal with issues of sustainability, and 

18

look  into  what  kind of developments  they  support  and  contribute  to.  Scrutinizing  the underlying 
motives for and understandings of sustainability leads to the fourth point of interest.
Biased Planning Contributes to Inequalities
Academicians in feminist theory and futures studies have often encountered a male bias in utopian 
thought and planning. Planning that does not scrutinize its fundamental assumptions in aspects that are 
related  to  structural  oppressions  risks  contributing  to  a  furthering  of  inequalities.  Ecofeminists 
emphasize that economic  growth in our current global capitalist economy not only depends on the 
exploitation  of  humans  and  nature,  but  that  this  exploitation  is  both  gendered  and  colonial. 
Accordingly,  planning  that  encourages  economic  growth,  but  does  not  pay  attention  to  its 
consequences in these aspects will most likely contribute to furthering or even reinforcing structural 
oppression. In order for another future, another economy and other relations to be possible, not only 
do we need to look for other ideas beyond the currently dominant growth paradigm, but we also need 
to see that environmental protection is intimately connected to social justice. Planning is an important 
tool in this process.

19

1.3	
 Purpose & Research Questions

PURPOSE
The  purpose  of  this  thesis  is  to  assess  how  the  comprehensive  plan  understands  environmental 
phenomena,  what  the  implications  of  this  understanding  are,  and  how  it  can be furthered  toward 
ecofeminist sustainability using participatory methods. 
	

It is assumed that the current path toward sustainability in the plan, ”sustainable growth”, may 
face difﬁculties in its strive toward a more sustainable society, as the focus on economic growth risks 
compromising social and environmental factors, in both a local and a global perspective. Ecofeminist 
theory emphasizes  the  need of  a  feminist  analysis  to appreciate  the  consequences  of  our  current 
growth  oriented  paradigm  on  both  the  environment  and  human  populations,  and  encourages  the 
development of a form of just sustainability that attempts to achieve its targets without compromising 
with either people or nature. 
	

The newly adopted report on the recency of the comprehensive plan (Stockholms stad, 2014b) 
has conﬁrmed the need for a strategy particularly focused on sustainability in the plan, especially its 
social dimension, and it is my hope that this thesis will contribute with input to that work. Assessing 
the comprehensive  plan from  an ecofeminist  framework would  potentially  suggest  other  ways  to 
address sustainability, and question what kind of sustainability is desirable. 
The thesis  follows  a number of steps. Initially,  the comprehensive plan will be analyzed in 
	

terms  of  what  environmental  discourse/s  it  relates  to,  following  Dryzek’s  (2012)  methodological 
elements  and categorizations. The  analysis  attempts  to clarify how  the comprehensive plan makes 
sense  of environmental  issues,  looking into  its  idea  of  nature  and  other  important  basic  entities, 
relevant agents for change, underpinning motives, and any possible metaphors. Particular attention is 
paid to mapping the deﬁnition of sustainability in the plan, potential problems in this deﬁnition, and 
the way it is deployed. 
	

The second part of the thesis aims at looking toward alternative futures for Stockholm beyond 
the comprehensive plan through a workshop with a number of stakeholders. The workshop is carried 
out with an ecofeminist  framework,  and follows  a method developed by Gunnarsson-Östling et al. 
(2012). In this way, the plan aims to support democratic participation in utopian thinking in planning 
along two lines: participatory methods in scenario generation, and to work with multiple scenarios as a 
basis  for discussions  over  what  urban  development  we  desire.  The  use  of  participatory scenario 
generation will  point  at the problems  of working with only one future  image,  as  the  only way of 
managing opposing positions (which is inescapable in planning) is to work with several scenarios.
	

The workshop scenarios will then be discussed in relation to the comprehensive plan, looking 
into their compatibility, points of conﬂict, and potentials for development of the comprehensive plan. 
In this  way,  the thesis  aims to approach how  comprehensive planning can open up to antagonistic 
processes  involving stakeholder  participation,  and  furthermore,  to contribute  to a  widening  of  the 
content of the plan concerning sustainability. 

RESEARCH QUESTIONS
- How  does  the  plan describe  and make  sense of environmental phenomenons,  and how  does  this 
affect its understanding of sustainability?
- How can participatory scenario generation contribute to the comprehensive plan? 
- How can the comprehensive plan’s notion of sustainability be rethought starting from an ecofeminist 
perspective?

20

1.4	
 Limitations, Ethical Considerations & Situatedness

LIMITATIONS

Overview of research ﬁeld
The  topic of this thesis  encompasses  a number of intersecting theories  and practices,  and it  could 
easily have been developed following other main strands than the ones that were chosen. The excluded 
literature,  which has  been found likewise  relevant  for the  topic in question and  would have been 
included had the framing of the project allowed for it will now be presented shortly. 
	

The  thesis  engages  in  ecofeminist  utopianism,  and  attempts  to  explore  what  kind  of 
sustainable futures scenarios this theoretical direction offers. Other possibilities would naturally have 
been  other  strands  of  feminism,  such  as  queer  feminism,  or  other  theories  that  look  into  the 
connections  between  environmental  exploitation and  economic  growth,  such as  deep  ecology  or 
ecological economics. Furthermore,  it would have been interesting to explore what kinds of futures 
scenarios  would  be  generated  from  a  no-growth  or  de-growth  point  of  view  using,  e.g.,  Björn 
Forsberg’s  (2012)  Omställningens  tid,  the  works  by  Kate  Raworth,  Peter  A.  Victor  or  Mikael 
Malméus. The ecofeminist attention to social inequalities combined with, i.a., Harvey’s (2013) critical 
perspective  on  urbanization  would ﬁt  well  together  with theories  on  urban justice,  through Susan 
Fainstein’s (2010) The Just City,  Margit Mayer’s work on urban social movements  or Lefèbvre and 
Harvey on the right to the city etc. In terms of analytical  tools,  the initial  idea was to engage in a 
critical policy analysis of the comprehensive plan following Bacchi’s (2009) method. This would have 
taken the analysis in the direction of gender biases in the plan. 
	

These are all areas that the thesis  in one way or another relates to,  and that would all have 
contributed to the work. Thus, they also form potential areas for the furthering of the project. 
Ecofeminist Theory
The particular focus on environmental discourses and sustainability is an important delimitation. The 
insufﬁciency  in  current  urban developments  to  handle  social  and environmental  issues  has  been 
conﬁrmed by many,  and thus  there  are  also many theoretical  orientations  that are  concerned  with 
social  equality  and  environmental  protection  in  both  local  and  global  settings.  The  choice  of 
ecofeminism as the main framework has three main reasons. Feminist theory has an obvious relevance 
when addressing social inequalities, as the very scope - most broadly speaking - is to uncover social 
inequalities  in order to take  the  ﬁrst steps  toward increased equality. Feminist  theory is then most 
useful to deploy in tasks that concern social  justice,  such as  sustainability. Given the topic  of this 
thesis and personal preference, ecofeminism was advised to me by my supervisor. In the multitude of 
feminist theories, ecofeminism is based in a materialist postcolonial perspective on local and global 
inequalities,  mainly starting from ”women” and ”the Other”  as  analytical categories. Furthermore, 
ecofeminism connects oppression of ”women”  and ”the Other”  with the exploitation of nature within 
the framework of industrial capitalism,  aiming at painting a full picture of the consequences of the 
global  economy  in  terms  of  structural  inequalities  and  environmental  destruction.  The  holistic 
character of theory and analysis, next to the particular topics of the theory, made ecofeminist theory an 
interesting framework to plunge into, and to test in relation to the comprehensive plan. 
The Walkable City
The focus  on the comprehensive plan,  The Walkable City,  positions  this  thesis contextually on the 
borderline  between ideologically  speciﬁc  political  envisioning and practical implementation in the 
materialization  in  our  physical  spaces.  While  lacking  the  power  of  political  decision-making  the 
comprehensive plan cannot  escape  its  political  effects  when implemented. The  plan  also mediates 
national interests, and the needs of a practical context regardless of the prevailing political majority. 
What makes the plan interesting then,  is how  it is  used as a mediator of all these demands,  and its 
function as a tool to work with practical scenarios to underpin the urban development. 

21

	

It would have been possible to look into other guiding documents for the urban development 
of  Stockholm,  such  as  the  Vision  2030,  Den  gröna  promenadstaden,  Arkitektur  Stockholm, 
Energiplanen or Bostadspotential Stockholm. Most of these documents should largely be possible to 
assess using the same perspectives as the ones deployed for the analysis of the comprehensive plan. 
The  vision  document,  that  is  superordinate  of  the  comprehensive plan,  has  however already been 
looked into in the project Stockholm 2030 - Another Guide to the Future. The rest of the documents 
are subordinated the comprehensive plan, why the plan was considered more relevant.  
	

Another reason for focusing on the comprehensive plan is the examination of its recency that 
was  concluded in the report Fokus  Promenadstaden - uppföljning av  Översiktsplan för  Stockholm 
(2014b). This analysis will be followed by an expansion and supplements of certain parts of the plan, 
among  those  sustainability.  Thus,  the  comprehensive  plan  is  for the  moment  very  topical,  as  are 
perspectives on sustainability. As part of a summer internship in 2013, I myself contributed to named 
recency  examination,  by  assessing  the  functionality  and  efﬁciency  of  the  strategies  of  the  plan. 
Finding this project to be very interesting to work with has naturally affected the selection. It should 
also be noted that the design of the project was informed by both academic relevance and practical 
usefulness through conversations with planners from the Stockholm City Planning Administration.
Environmental Discourse Analysis
The choice to perform an environmental discourse analysis according to Dryzek (2012) will shape the 
reading  and  understanding of  the  comprehensive  plan,  as  it  will  be continuously related to a  set 
framework. That means that the understanding of the comprehensive plan will follow certain layout, 
pointing out certain issues that would probably otherwise not be as clearly available, but at the risk of 
dimming  other  issues  or  understandings.  This  is  particularly  the  case  as  three  out  of  the  eight 
discourses of Dryzek will be of special focus. This implies a certain limitation of the scope and content 
of the analysis. 
Workshops
Using a  workshop method  that  needs  to be  applied  in  a  particular  way  has  meant  a  number  of 
delimitations,  among which the most important are the number of and groups of participants chosen. 
As  is  discussed more  lengthy in  ch.  3.1 the  invitations  were sent  to  certain  groups,  associations, 
students etc that were found particularly interesting to involve based on the topic of the thesis. This 
has  meant a  quite hard-drawn delimitation based on campaigns and activities,  outspoken aims and 
viewpoints,  areas  of study and work. The delimitation is problematic in the sense that the assumed 
proﬁle of a group, association, study program or workplace might not necessarily be reﬂected among 
its  members,  students  or  employees. Another  problematic  with  the  delimitation  is  of  course  the 
exclusion of  other  voices,  which  might  have  resulted  in less  dynamic  discussions  and  workshop 
results. The reason for the narrow  selection was an ambition to try to get as  far as possible in the 
workshops,  given the limited timeframe  and number of people that  could be ﬁt  in.  It  is  then also 
important to note that  the results of the workshops will be relevant within the set  framework. Any 
extrapolation beyond  this  may be  compromised  by a  limited  result,  due  to the  small  number  of 
workshops and participants,  and a limited volume and content that heavily relies on the background 
and views  of  the  participants. Thus,  the  result  cannot  be seen as  representative  generally,  but  can 
however  still  serve  as  examples  of  ecofeminist  utopian  thought,  and  be  used  as  an  input  for 
discussions concerning images of the future and participatory envisioning. 
	

There is also a complication in that I as a researcher will act as a ﬁlter between the participants 
and the workshop  outcomes. Since carrying out a  workshop and then analyzing its  outcomes  will 
always  contain some element  of interpretation there is a risk for misunderstandings. In an effort  to 
prevent such events,  the workshop will be documented partly by the participants themselves, partly 
together with the participants, and partly through sound recordings and photos. 

22

ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS 
The theoretical framework of this thesis by force positions the point of reference of analysis in another 
part  of  the  political  spectrum  than the  one  the  comprehensive  plan  is  inﬂuenced  by  through  its 
backbone in the vision document, Vision 2030. While engaging in a discursive analysis, the thesis in 
itself will thus display the contrasts and conﬂicts between differing discourses. This illustrates some 
fundamental  points. No knowledge is  neutral,  but  rather always  infested with political  ideologies. 
While the thesis  will  make dominant arguments following the  chosen ecofeminist  framework,  this 
attends to that beyond hard facts  (if even then) knowledge production has  maybe more to do with 
interpretation than truths. Thus,  as  the  thesis  will  be clearly situated within a particular theoretical 
discourse, following a certain strand of thought and attending to a particular problem formulation, it 
does  not  pretend to achieve  any  all-encompassing  results.  The  selection  moves  within  the  same 
discourse, and can therefore still be seen as internally valid.
	

Given  this  state  of affairs,  it  is  still  assumed  that  the  project  ought  to have  a  reasonable 
applicability. By taking its starting point  in an existing document,  the work aims  to open up for a 
broader analysis and discuss ideas for development concerning,  e.g., sustainability. Sustainability is 
already an important part  of the comprehensive plan,  and is  deemed to get an enlarged role in the 
future  due  to  the  conclusions  of the  fresh  recency  examination.  Thus,  alternative  perspectives  on 
sustainability should in all reason form a possible contribution to the plan, with differing extents of 
direct or indirect applicability.

SITUATEDNESS
Other important factors informing the project design, content and direction of this thesis regard my 
personal basic assumptions that underpin this work. My main assumptions regarding the need for an 
environmentally and socially sustainable development where economy is a means rather than an aim 
in itself, are based in my recent studies on the master program Sustainable Urban Planning and Design 
as well as courses in gender studies a few  years back. Participation in workshops,   conferences and 
seminars on urban regeneration and growth in Berlin, Istanbul, Cairo and Stockholm over the past year 
have further strengthened the assumption that the environment and populations of named cities and 
other-place are not served by an urban development that  puts economic growth as its  ﬁrst priority. 
Furthermore, globalization is a hard fact in today’s societies, and the global inequalities in social and 
economic terms can not be assumed to be a consequence of local actions alone. The same goes for 
environmental  deterioration,  an increasingly pressing fact  that  current  and future  societies  will  be 
forced to address. This has inspired me to try to understand how the comprehensive plan of Stockholm 
supports  a  sustainable  urban  development  or  conversely  unsustainable  development  in  terms  of 
environment and social equality, locally and globally. 
	

It  is  also  important  to  note  what  impact  my  personal  background  might  have,  being  a 
Caucasian atheist woman in my early 30s, from a middle class background with an academic tradition, 
and with a just-above-moderate interest in nature generally. My own direct negative experiences of, 
e.g.,  social  injustices  are  largely  limited  to  gender  and  sexual  preference,  why  my  intuitive 
understanding  for  racialized,  class-based,  religious  or  other  oppressions,  not  least  in  a  global 
perspective, is largely limited to the unease of being given unjust privileges. While my aim is to move 
beyond these potential limitations, it is likely that they affect the conclusions I come to. Furthermore, 
it can be expected that the workshops will be somewhat affected by, e.g., my way of interacting and 
presenting, and leader capabilities. 

23

24

2.	
 ECOFEMINIST THEORY

Ecofeminist  theory  started  in activist  practice  in  women's  movements,  and  grew  out  of  separate 
practical insights into a cohesive academic theory of a global gendered capitalist oppression of nature, 
women and "foreign" peoples. It builds on experiences, perspectives and analyses shared across races, 
ethnicities,  cultures  and  classes  on  a  global  scale.  ”Ecofeminists  see  the  origins  of  the  present 
ecological  crisis  as  lying  in the speciﬁc  material  and  cultural  developments  of the  North/West  as 
reﬂected in its socioeconomic structures,  science and technology,  philosophy and religion.”  (Mellor, 
2000, p. 110) Pointing out the inherent unsustainability of a system that takes the neoclassical concept 
of ’economic  man’ and ever-expanding markets  as its  starting point,  ecofeminism is  committed to 
social justice and an anti-colonial conviction. (McMahon, 1997, p. 163)
Analytical Categories of a Global Theory
Ecofeminism is concerned with structures of gendered colonial dominance that can be historically and 
contextually connected to the  technological,  industrial  and capitalist  development  of the European 
Enlightenment. Gender in a materialist ecofeminist perspectives draws on social constructivist notions 
that all humans are embodied and sexed into ”men”  or ”women”  in a combination of biological and 
social  factors.  While  ecofeminism  recognizes  the  problems  with  such  categories  -  the  internal 
inconsistencies and instabilities of the positions ”man”/”woman”, the differing connotations that these 
categories bear, the differing experiences and privileges these positions uphold - the categories are still 
recognized  as  valuable  for  structural  analysis  in  theory  and  practice.  (Mellor,  2000)  Similar 
problematics  surround  other  constructed  analytical  categories,  e.g.,  ”nature”,  ”Western”/”non-
Western”,  ”North”/”South”. Mies & Shiva (2014,  p. 2) defend the  concept of a global ecofeminist 
theory,  having experienced bottom-up movements world-wide expressing similar concerns about the 
current  growth  paradigm  and  its  consequences  for  the  planet,  humans  (particularly  women  and 
children) and other populations. The authors ﬁnd the relevance of articulating these structural power 
relations according to lines of woman - man, non-western - western, nature - human to supersede the 
simultaneous risks of silencing and excluding, as they are grounded in activist practice globally. This 
is conﬁrmed by practically all of the feminist futurists contributing to Hurley et al. (2008, p. 397-399), 
stating that the use of these concepts is important to clarify what challenges our current societies face. 
Salleh  (2008,  p.  201f)  argues  that  postmodern  feminist  critique  of  the  use  of  named  categories 
sabotages ”justice and sustainability as political goals”, and in the end leads to political conservatism. 
She writes that the focus on words and ideas diffuses attention away from global processes and ”the 
materiality of ecopolitical questions”, in this way making a poor political force.   
Ecofeminist  theory has been subject  to critique  for essentializing tendencies,  and there are 
	

indeed  ecofeminists  that  present  essentialist  and  spiritualist  arguments  concerning,  e.g.,  women’s 
relation to nature. These notions are however not a part of the theoretical framework of this thesis. 
Rather,  a materialist approach will be favored,  which recognizes women’s  stronger association with 
nature,  but refuses to slip into essentializing or naturalizing. It argues that all humanity is inherently 
internal to and conditioned by nature,  and that the association of women and nature resides in social 
circumstances  and  ”their  material  conditions 
the  materiality  of  human 
existence” (Mellor, 2000, p. 114).
Colonial Patriarchy from a Discursive Perspective
Ecofeminists and other feminists point out the fundamental binary,  hierarchizing and dichotomizing 
way of thinking in the modern science paradigm deriving from the Enlightenment. (Salleh in Mies & 
Shiva,  2014,  p. xi) Mellor (1995, p. 129f) presents the Greek dualist division of the free unlimited 
mind as opposed to the unfree death-limited body to describe the dualism between men and women of 
the  Western  society.  Nature-culture,  feminine-masculine,  emotional-rational,  backwards-modern, 

relation 

in 

to 

25

local-global, colored-white,  object-subject,  production-consumption etc are typical divisions that has 
informed Western patriarchal  knowledge  production  and its  methodologies,  where  separation and 
division is integral. Science was thought of as a means to liberate humanity - Man - from ignorance 
and his inevitable boundedness to nature - and women. This liberation, not of humanity but of Western 
males in particular, required the subjugation of nature, women and ”foreign” peoples,  and would not 
have been possible without the fundamental division of man - nature, man - woman, Western - other. 
In this  structure,  the  hierarchy  both explains  and justiﬁes  the  domination  of  one  over  the  other, 
relations that are then naturalized and understood as necessary. (Mies & Shiva, 2014, p. 5, 47) 
	

This framework underpins the neoclassical economic theory of economic man. The core of the 
theory is  the  separate,  autonomous,  self-contained,  self-interested individual  who engages  in trade 
with other individuals to achieve maximum utility on a market characterized by equality. McMahon 
(1997,  p.  165) ﬁnds three  main ways in which economic theory departs  from reality:  1. it applies 
abstract models in decision-making as if they were proper reﬂections  of reality,  2. economic theory 
promotes its own concept of market society and economic man through politics, and in this way helps 
to  produce  the  supposedly  independently given  world  it  studies,  3.  the  empirical  grounds  of  the 
neoclassical economic model only include certain people’s experiences, while suppressing others. This 
leads  to ”knowledge”  about  economy that  is  only partial,  and  suppresses  evidence against it - as 
opposed to its claimed universality and impartiality. McMahon (1997, p. 168) argues, 

”[t]he  [neoclassical]  model  [of the individual]  is  gender  biased  and anti-ecological  because it  is 
grounded in the denial of dependency and interdependency. That is, it disguises the ways in which 
the  market  and  economic  man are dependent  on unsustainable transfers  from nature and  from 
unpaid  work: they depend on expropriating and privatizing wealth from those parts of the social 
and  natural  world  that  lie  outside  the  market  sphere. Economic  man  and  his markets  rely  on 
hidden subsidies.” 

Concluding,  neoclassical  economics  build  on  a  historically  and  contextually  speciﬁc  idea  of  the 
individual that refuses to recognize its gender, class, race and anti-naturism. 
Colonial Patriarchy from a Materialist Perspective
Another analysis of the foundation and sustenance of our colonial and patriarchal economic relations 
refers to the sexual division of labor (Mellor, 1995; 2000). Writing from what she names a materialist 
ecofeminist perspective, Mellor (2000,  p. 111) argues that our fundamental sex/gender dualism is a 
result  of a relation of ”(re)production”,  an organization that rather than a philosophical  or cultural 
artifact  has  come  about  through  material  necessity.  All  human  societies  are  bound  by  natural 
constraints, and are forced to ﬁnd an organization within these constraints,  and this organization has 
thereon been enforced by the sexist and dualist structures and discourses of the Western society. (ibid) 
Women’s  work functions  as the mediator between the embodiedness of humanity and the socially 
constructed economic sphere. (Mellor, 1995, p. 131-136) The sex/gender division of labor has become 
one of the most important means for Western society to create itself against nature. Power is achieved 
through the autonomy that comes from transcending nature, embodiedness, ecological and biological 
time. This transcendence makes the sexual division of labor a crucial point: this labor is a necessary 
circumstance for human existence, and thus a fundamental material condition, but all the same needs 
to be transcended. Through the sexual division of labor,  transcendence is mainly reserved to certain 
individuals or groups. For women to enter the same kind of individuality as men they need to achieve 
autonomy, but as male domination is created and sustained through women’s function as mediators in 
human-nature  relations  this  possibility  is  very  limited.  This  has  largely  put  women  and  men  in 
different time cycles,  and explains  why the Western economic  system leaves  social  and ecological 
consequences aside as ”externalities”: these simply belong to a system that is external to the Western 
economy, culture and time cycle. (Mellor, 2000, p. 111-113) The justiﬁcation of this order rests on the 
assumed  possibility  to  extend  the  transcendence  of  nature  to  all,  while  simultaneously  such 
transcendence is made impossible because of ecological limitations. (ibid, p. 120) Women and nature 
suffer the same oppression, based on that both nature and women through the sexual division of labor 

26

are put in ”a material relation within male-dominated society”,  while still being kept external to its 
economic system. (Mellor, 1995, p. 131-136) 
A Colonial Patriarchal Economic System
Both materialist and discursive analyses read the practical implementation of patriarchal and colonial 
orders  of social,  natural and economic relations  in the current global capitalist economy. The  very 
function of the Western industrial model of progress geared toward economic growth is the allocation 
of resources  to some  locations  and poverty and environmental  deterioration to others,  through the 
conversion of social and environmental goods into commodities. (Mies & Shiva, 2014,  p. 251) This 
allocation of resources happens to coincide with, and thus contributes to sustain, the historical colonial 
relations between countries along the rough division of North and South, leading Rosa Luxemburg to 
argue, 

”colonialism  is  a  constant,  necessary  condition  for  capitalist  growth: without  colonies,  capital 
accumulation would grind to a halt” (ibid, p. 71). 

This model is conditioned by the externalization of the social and environmental costs that result from 
the commoditization and redistribution of resources. It would be impossible to go forth with a system 
that is directly connected to such negative consequences, which is why these consequences need to be 
understood  as  separate  entities  without  direct  connection  to  the  growth  loop.  It  is  a  question  of 
sustaining the model in itself. Following Mellor’s (1995; 2000) and McMahon’s (1997) arguments the 
separation of these costs from respectively the transcendence of nature and the concept of economic 
man is needed if individuality, autonomy and maximum utility is to be achieved. Only activities and 
processes that produce a surplus has a value, and places them within the transcended Western economy 
and market place, distinguished from the non-valued externalized costs. The externalizations are then 
needed as a negative to sustain a difference to the transcended, but furthermore, this kind of growth 
economy in certain parts of the world would not be possible if the costs were indeed internalized. The 
high living standards  of the rich countries  could never be maintained, based on the simple fact that 
proper prices on commodities (where externalities are internalized) would be afforded only by a small 
minority (Mies & Shiva, 2014, p 251).
	

The  inability  to  appreciate  work  and  processes  beyond  surplus  production  leads  to  the 
devaluation  of  the  reproductive  and  sustenance  work  of  subsistence  economies,  in  nature’s 
ecosystems,  and among humans (mainly women,  locally and globally). The lack of proﬁt entails a 
deﬁciency from a market economic point of view. This leads to that this work is excluded from the 
general  measurement  of  economic  growth,  GDP,  and  neglected  when  forced  to  compete  with 
”proﬁtable”  economic  activities  aiming  for  expanding  markets  through  increased  production  and 
extraction  of  resources.  (ibid  p.  xv,  268f)  With  Mellor  (1995;  2000),  the  transcendence  of  the 
boundedness  to  nature  is  the  reason  why  subsistence  economies  are  neglected.  In  order  for 
transcendence to be possible it has to deﬁne itself against the immanence of nature, and consequently 
subsistence economies. 
	

A practical  example of how  this  logic materializes in the global economy,  is that increased 
demand  for  resources  and  products  in  the  rich  world  dispossesses  and displaces  people  (mainly 
women) in poor parts of the world from their livelihoods through denied access to land, water, forest, 
seeds and biodiversity. (Mies & Shiva,  2014,  p. xvif) This  creates  a precarious  situation for local 
populations,  as  subsistence  economies  are  disrupted.  Nature  commoditized  into  resources  leaves 
ecosystems altered, disrupts natural balances and exploits ﬁnite environmental goods. The destructive 
consequences of economic growth are excluded from GDP - the externalized costs - which are then 
bourn locally through poverty and deterioration of nature (ibid, p. 70ff). 
	

The  justiﬁcation  for  the  current  economic  system  is  a  discursive  somersault,  where  it  is 
claimed that the level of development of the rich countries is possible to universalize. This is not the 
case,  given the ﬁnite character of the planet,  but is an important discursive support for the growth 
model. The World Bank, the Brundtland Report, Our Common Future and the UNCED all suggest to 
solve the problem of environmental destruction and poverty by engaging in technological,  industrial 

27

and economic development. The free market through globalization is assumed to produce global peace 
and universalize human rights, and thus claimed to be relevant for every person on this planet. What 
this calculation does not show  is how  today’s exchange of goods and services leads to poverty and 
natural destruction because it moves beyond humans’ and nature’s boundaries - ecology and survival 
have been overtrumped by economic growth. (ibid, p. 268f) This system of production only ends when 
the environmental conditions are deteriorated enough to affect the production causing them negatively 
(Mellor, 1995, p. 131), which conﬁrms McMahon’s (1997, p. 167) claim that ”[n]ature is the ultimate 
other”, reduced to a mere tool for the subject to enrich himself. 
	

Furthermore,  expansion of markets  often entails transformations  of the  local  economy and 
democratic processes, which generally beneﬁt the afﬂuent at the expense of the less afﬂuent. (Mies & 
Shiva, 2014,  p. xvi) To be neglected as an economic actor implies very limited power to voice one’s 
needs based on practical experiences (Mellor, 1995,  p. 130). This leads to what McMahon (1997, p. 
165) names as the third faulty principle of the economic model, that the market remains reserved for 
certain actors that continue to enforce a model that excludes other voices.
Decolonizing Economy toward Ecofeminist Sustainability
Mies & Shiva (2014, p. 252) argue that the only way to move away from exploitation and inequality, 
poverty  and  ecological  destruction,  is  to  transcend  the  global  industrial  growth  paradigm.  This 
transcendence  is  inevitable,  since  the  capitalist  economy  has  proven  unable  and  unﬁt  to  sustain 
humanity within  the  boundaries  of  the  ecological  system,  and  to fulﬁll  its  promise  of  happiness, 
freedom and peace through free trade - even to those that have beneﬁtted the most (ibid, p. 322). 
To move  beyond the  current  growth model,  and to  appreciate  the  connectedness  between 
	

humans and the natural world, it is necessary to overcome the conceptualization of self, society and 
nature provided by thoroughly anti-ecological and gender biased neoclassical economics (based on the 
autonomous individual). Transformation of the human-nature relation will not reach the target unless 
the foundation of these concepts is scrutinized. (McMahon, 1997, p. 163-172) Mellor (2000, p. 118f) 
assumes a similar approach, in her promotion of political action rooted in an analysis of the structures 
that have given rise to our current malfunctioning intra-human, and human-nature relations. In order to 
move toward sustainability for humans and nonhumans, she encourages an ecological holism in which 
”the  essentially  dialectical  nature  of the  relation  between hu(man)ity and the  dynamic  ecological 
whole”  is  recognized.  The  current  organization in colonial,  patriarchal  patterns  must  be  changed 
through a combination of ethical frameworks and material relations, since the basic Western dualism 
underpinning  the  organization  combines  the  material  with  the  cultural/ideological.  (ibid,  p.  120) 
Efforts to change this organization will have to engage in the three-way relationship that underpins this 
structure: human-human-nature. 
	

Mellor (2000, p. 121) states that it makes political sense to start in the experience of women, 
since this is where much of the mediation work between humans and nature takes place,  and where 
biological time is  masked and made invisible to the  beneﬁtting dominant transcending individuals. 
This would aim to reconnect economic systems to ”the physical reality of human existence”,  and to 
reestablish the  embeddedness  of  humanity in nature (Mellor,  1995,  p. 138). At the same  time,  an 
ecofeminist approach allows for the empowerment of the marginalized, according to McMahon,

”Ecofeminism proposes a grounds up approach to addressing  environmental degradation; one that 
starts from lived experience rather than an abstract model. In a world of pre-existing systematic 
inequalities, it argues, the ‘invisible hand’ cannot work to achieve efﬁciency, equity, or sustainability. 
Ecofeminism’s political centering of marginal voices and the ‘other’ allows it to theorize the social 
world from the ground up rather than the top down.” (McMahon, 1997, p. 172) 

The ecofeminist vision for a system that recognizes  the  interconnectedness  of all life is  called the 
subsistence perspective (Mies & Shiva, 2014,  p. 257, 297, 319ff). It is a system where production is 
synchronized with consumption needs, with smaller and decentralized economic units combined with 
a decentralized bureaucracy, and a general focus on the creation and recreation of life. All intra-human 
and human-nature relations are characterized by equality, and the sexual division of labor abolished. 

28

Everyone is  made part of decisions concerning economy,  technology and politics  in a demilitarized 
grass-roots democracy. Self-reliance and self-sufﬁciency are underpinning concepts for the use - but 
not  exploitation  of  local  and  regional  resources.  The  interconnectedness  of  all  life  is  respected. 
Commoditization and commercialization of commons is resisted, and a new paradigm of technology, 
science and knowledge will be established that is characterized by holistic knowledge,  participatory 
methods and subsistence. 

29

30

3.	
 ENVIRONMENTAL DISCOURSE ANALYSIS

3.1	
 Theory & Method for Environmental Discourse Analysis

Discourse can brieﬂy be described as a set of requirements concerning ideas, concepts and categories 
that  deﬁne  and  ascribe  meaning to our world. These are  produced and reproduced through social 
practices, including language, that as a means of making sense of the world will shape what is possible 
to think, our view of ourselves and the way in which we position ourselves.  Discourse analysis takes 
an interest  in understanding  the  underlying factors  of  a conception of reality,  including historical, 
cultural, political and other factors. The way in which we choose to make sense of the world is focused 
rather than discovering the world in itself,  and as part of a social constructionist tradition discourse 
analysis  takes  an interest  in  the  instability  of what  we  perceive  as  stabile.  It  is  anti-essentialist, 
meaning that it recognizes that there are several parallel socially constructed realities, and opposes the 
idea that discourses are the result of a natural evolution.(Dryzek 2012, p. 10f, Hajer & Versteeg 2005, 
p. 175) 
	

The reason for analyzing discourses is that they provide a framework for human interaction, in 
society, economy, politics, nature etc. They can have direct effects, e.g., on our institutions, and can in 
themselves become institutions, thus constituting a kind of guiding informal rules for social interaction 
that  can assume  the  same  power  as  formal  institutional  rules.  Discourses  can  also  make  up  the 
backbone for individuals and collectives to organize around a common idea,  such as separatist self-
sufﬁcient communities through green radicalism. Other effects of discourses can be social movements 
that  target  particular  popular  expressions  of,  e.g.,  inequalities,  or  general  ideas  belonging  to 
environmentalism that  has  changed people’s patterns  of consumption,  transportation and recycling. 
(Dryzek, 2012, p. 20)
	

Discourse analysis in environmental policy considers how  environmental  phenomenons are 
made sense  of by society,  and is  thus  a feasible way to try to make sense  of contested ideas  like 
sustainability. Discourse analysis builds on the assumption that language in a fundamental way shapes 
our worlds and realities  rather than just  mirror them. Investigating metaphors is  one way to try to 
disentangle how  language ascribes meaning,  and this  is important,  as  discourses  have material and 
factual consequences that shape our conditions, how we think of and position ourselves, what options 
we  ﬁnd  available to us  and  what  decisions  we  make. Language  and  its  meanings  are  channelled 
through rules and norms, and relate to particular practices. The actors of discourses are also important 
in promoting certain discourses rather than others, and in that way exercise power. (Hajer & Versteeg, 
2005, p. 175-179) When powerful actors see their discourse threatened by an opposing discourse, an 
effective strategy to go about business as usual is to assume the language of the other discourse. One 
example is the kind of ”sustainable development” that is closely connected to economic growth. This 
connection makes  ”sustainable  development”  an  easy concept  to deploy  and  identify  with -  most 
businesses,  and governments,  do  after  all  aim  for  economic  growth  -  regardless  of the  extent  of 
attention paid to environmental protection. In this way,  discourse is  also informed by and deployed 
according to interests and power. (Dryzek, 2012, p. 10) The effect of a discourse can be seen both in 
the  work  results  of  organizations,  institutions,  inﬂuential  individuals  or  collectives  that  adopt  its 
content, and in general changes in the language used by signiﬁcant numbers of people. (ibid, p. 44f)

31

ENVIRONMENTAL DISCOURSES
Four Discursive Elements
In order to better grasp the content of the discourses Dryzek (2012, p. 17ff) has established four basic 
elements as a framework for the analysis.
1. Basic entities whose existence is recognized or constructed refers  to the ontology of a discourse, 
which has to do with what basic issues, subjects or objects, activities and actions are assumed to be 
of importance. Most discourses will for example regard ”humans” as a useful category, some stating 
that further distinctions based on gender, race, religion, class or other are necessary. Humans can be 
understood as rational and egoistic,  or altruistic and emotional in a discourse - or might only be 
considered as  a ”population”. Some discourses  reject  natural  systems,  whereas  others imagine a 
global eco-system with a form of spirit or intelligence. 
2. Assumptions  about  natural  relationships  has  to  do with  what  is  assumed  to be  natural  in  the 
relations between the issues of the discourse. This concerns fundamental assumptions about,  e.g., 
human social systems, such as hierarchies and discriminatory systems (based on gender, expertise, 
political power, species, ecological sensibility, intellect, legal status, race, wealth etc),  competition 
or cooperation between individuals, nature or markets etc. 
3. Agents and their motives focus the agents of a discourse - mostly human (individuals, collectives or 
institutions) but also nonhuman (such as a  Gaia,  nature). It  also looks  into the motives  for their 
ignorance,  egoism,  shortsightedness,  enlightenment,  virtue,  forgiveness, 
actions,  such  as 
punishment etc. 
4. Key metaphors and other rhetorical devices. Metaphors are crucial rhetorical tools for a discourse 
to be communicated efﬁciently. Examples  are ”spaceship Earth”,  ”the tragedy of the commons”, 
nature  as  a  mechanical  and  predictable  machine,  war  on  nature,  intelligence  of  humans  and 
nonhuman (such as ecosystems), Mother Nature and other goddesses. Other tools are to relate the 
discourse  to  ”widely  accepted  practices  or  institutions,  such  as  established  rights,  freedoms, 
constitutions, and cultural traditions”  (ibid, p. 19). Speciecism will, e.g., stretch human rights to the 
rights of other species. The references can be anchored in the present or history, dreamy or concrete, 
positive as well as negative.

In order to assess the impact, plausibility,  and attractiveness of a discourse, Dryzek (2012, p. 21) is 
guided by six questions: 1. Politics associated with the discourse, 2. Effect on policies of governments, 
3. Effect on institutions, 4. Social and cultural impact, 5. Arguments of critics, 6. Flaws revealed by 
evidence and argument. 
A Selection
Dryzek  points  out  nine  main  discourses:  sustainable  development,  ecological  modernization, 
administrative  rationalism,  democratic  pragmatism,  economic  rationalism,  limits  and  survivalism, 
promethean,  green consciousness and green politics. Some of these discourses have already before 
hand been found to show greater similarities with the comprehensive plan than others. This has to do 
with, e.g., the kind of institutional setting the plan is produced in, what societal level it applies to, the 
process of creating the plan, what it aims to achieve, its fundamental assumptions, and what agents are 
of concern for the discourse. 
	

Green  radicalist  discourses,  green  politics  and  green  consciousness,  are  excluded  on 
practically all accounts  as they show  too large  differences  along all  four  discursive  elements. The 
comprehensive plan shares the Promethean attention to growth, but not at all as strongly or in the same 
simplistic manner. Limits and survival could potentially be read in the comprehensive plan through the 
public interests that the plan has to consider, and it could be argued that the plan then may be based on 
discourses  that  reﬂect  ideas  of  the limits  and  survival  discourse. However,  it  never  assumes  that 
framing itself, which is why the two limits and survival discourses are excluded as well. Lastly,  the 
problem  solving  democratic  pragmatism  and  economic  rationalism  are  excluded.  Economic 
rationalism has  had some  inﬂuence  in  Swedish environmental  discourse,  through a growing eco-

32

economy and green taxes. However, the discourse in its entirety has a too strong market oriented and 
individualistic  approach,  that  excludes  governmental  management  of  environmental  issues.  This 
simply  disagrees  with  the  plan,  which  takes  for  granted  certain  governmental  management. 
Democratic  pragmatism  mainly  concerns  the  work  carried  out  in  environmental  administrations, 
which would be what partly underpins the plan. It however means that democratic pragmatism mainly 
concerns another institutional setting and level of decision-making. 
The three remaining discourses that are of particular interest are administrative rationalism, 
	

ecological  modernization,  and  sustainable  development  due  to  the  larger  similarities  in  terms  of 
Dryzek’s  four elements. Why this  is  the  case will  be discussed in further detail in the  analysis  in 
chapter  3.2.  The  following  part  describes  the  discursive  elements  of  sustainable  development, 
ecological modernization and administrative rationalism.

33

Greener Growth: Sustainable Development
Sustainable  development  is,  as  discussed  in  chapter  1,  the  currently  dominant  environmental 
discourse,  that  aims  for a  socially,  environmentally and  economically balanced  development  that 
considers the needs of both present ant future generations. The fuzziness of the concept has allowed 
for multiple interpretations, but nevertheless contain certain aspects, presented according to Dryzek’s 
four elements below. 
1. Basic entities whose existence is recognized or constructed

2. Assumptions about natural relationships

Sustainable development stretches from an analysis of the stress  on global ecosystems down to 
regional and local levels  to ﬁnd solutions. It deals with nested systems,  in both biological and 
social respects. Humanity exists within the natural systems, with the exception of some resources 
and systems. Limits are handled ambiguously: certain ecological constraints are recognized, but as 
long as they are respected there is  no limit to growth. The capitalist economy is seen as given, 
while political systems are in need of adaptation to better answer to the challenge of sustainability. 
Enlarged international and grassroots inﬂuence is suggested. 
The  most  important  relation  is  that  between  economic  growth,  environmental  protection, 
distributive justice and longterm sustainability, which are seen as mutually reinforcing one another 
in  a  positive  direction.  Sustainable  development  is  anthropocentric,  where  humans  manage 
environmental protection. The hierarchical relation between humans and nature is complemented 
by intra-human relations based on cooperation. This cooperation is however broken by the faith in 
the capitalist economy. 
3. Agents and their motives
National  governments  are  slightly  de-emphasized  as  agents, 
instead  highlighting  citizen 
participation  and 
(nongovernmental 
organizations),  IGOs  (intergovernmental organizations) and businesses. Relevant actors are thus 
found on several levels.  
Sustainable development  is  thoroughly progress oriented. Its basic  idea  of growth concerns  an 
increasingly  ”sensitive,  caring,  and  intelligent  political-economic  system” with  an  open  end. 
Improvement is essential, to be found in the very name of the concept - sustainable development. 
Nature in this discourse is  mainly thought of in economistic terms,  and how  it serves humans. 
There must  however be  a certain respect  for nature,  as  it provides  humanity with irreplaceable 
assets. Further,  the discourse contains reassurance,  as  it conﬁrms the possibility to have it all - 
perpetual  social  equality,  economic  growth  and  a  clean  environment.  There  is  no  threat  of 
fundamental, potentially uncomfortable, changes. (Dryzek, 2012, p. 147-164)

international  cooperation.  Other  agents  are  NGOs 

4. Key metaphors and other rhetorical devices

- Economic  growth,  environmental  protection, 
distributive  justice, and  long-term sustainability  go 
together

3. Agents and their motives
- Many  agents  at  different  levels,  transnational  and 
local  as well  as the state; motivated by  the  public 
good

4. Key metaphors and other rhetorical devices
- Organic growth

1. Basic entities recognized or constructed
- Nested  and  networked  social  and  ecological 

systems

- Capitalist economy
- Ambiguity concerning existence of limits

2. Assumptions about natural relationships
- Cooperation
- Nature subordinate

Figure 1. Discursive elements of sustainable development 

34

Industrial Society and Beyond: Ecological Modernization
Ecological modernization is  the second discourse that forms  part of Dryzek’s  sustainability cluster, 
and  is  a  systems  approach,  which  assumes  that  economic  growth  can  be  decoupled  from 
environmental degradation, thus arguing that economic growth can be organized in such a way that it 
produces  environmental protection. It is distinguished by its  outspoken ideas  of how  the capitalist 
political economy needs to change, and has become an important approach to climate governance at 
the global level. ”Green growth”  through partnerships between governments, businesses and NGOs is 
an important part of the discourse.
1. Basic entities whose existence is recognized or constructed

Ecological  modernization starts  from  the  system  of  the  interrelated  consumption,  production, 
resource depletion and pollution, advocating for a proactive preventive approach to environmental 
problems. Natural systems are however limited to natural resources and how they can contribute to 
the  human  economy.  The  capitalist  political  economy  is  taken  for  granted,  and  growth  is 
considered possible to perpetuate. In general, limits are ignored. 
Partnership is  the  main  relation between governments,  businesses,  some environmentalists  and 
scientists, when engaging in the restructuring of the capitalist political economy. Some would want 
ecological modernization to assume a hierarchy in terms of who manages the restructuring,  but 
there is however still room for more egalitarian political relationships. Ecological modernization is 
anthropocentric,  as nature is  clearly subordinate to humans. Another natural  relationship is  that 
between environmental protection and economic growth. 
The partners in charge of the restructuring process,  governments,  businesses,  environmentalists 
and scientists,  aim for the common good or public interest  - environmental conservation and a 
strong economy. However, in order to be implemented it requires a broad support. 
Ecological modernization uses ”the tidy household”, with references to the greek word oikos that 
is the foundation of the words ecology and economy, to promote the idea that a clean environment 
and economic growth go hand in hand. The word ”modernization” is associated with the positively 
connoted progress, and gives the reassurance - just like sustainable development - that no difﬁcult 
changes are needed, and that both a clean environment and perpetual growth are possible. (Dryzek, 
2012, p. 165-183)

4. Key metaphors and other rhetorical devices

2. Assumptions about natural relationships

3. Agents and their motives

1. Basic entities recognized or constructed
- Complex systems
- Nature as waste treatment plant
- Capitalist economy
- The state

2. Assumptions about natural relationships
- Partnership  encompassing  government,  business, 

environmentalists, scientists

- Subordination of nature

Figure 2. Discursive elements of ecological modernization

- Environmental  protection  and  economic 

prosperity go together

3. Agents and their motives
- Partners; motivated by public good

4. Key metaphors and other rhetorical devices
- Tidy household
- Connection to progress
- Reassurance

35

Leave it to the Experts: Administrative Rationalism
”As a problem solving discourse, administrative rationalism takes the political-economic status quo of 
liberal capitalism as given. It then puts scientiﬁc and technical expertise, organized into bureaucratic 
hierarchy, motivated by the public interest, to use in solving environmental problems without changing 
the structural status quo.”  (Dryzek,  2012, p. 90) Administrative rationalism is a reactive discourse of 
practical management that aims to prevent any further deterioration of the environment. It was quickly 
implemented in policies, institutions and methodologies, such as governmental resource management, 
pollution control agencies, environmental impact assessments, and strong top-down planning. Sweden 
was a pioneer by integrating ministers from areas with a great importance for the environment in the 
Delegation for Ecologically Sustainable Development.
1. Basic entities whose existence is recognized or constructed

Focusing  on  problem  solving,  liberal  capitalism  is  taken  as  given.  The  government  is  the 
administrative state, which makes governing a question of ”rational management in the service of 
a  clearly  deﬁned  public  interest,  informed  by  the  best  available  expertise”   without  any 
involvement  by  the  public (Dryzek,  2012,  p.  88). The  discourse lacks  clear point  of  view  on 
ecosystems, ﬁnite resources, population or energy.
Administrative rationalism subordinates nature to humans, and environmental problems to human 
problem  solving.  Human  society  has  two  main  hierarchies  according  to  the  administrative 
rationalism: the people is  subordinated to the state, and experts and managers assume dominant 
positions within the state based on their expertise. Politics are largely denied.
Agency pertains  to both collectives  and individuals,  but  the primary agent is  the  government. 
Above all technical experts and managers within the government are granted a large capacity to 
act. ”Motivations are treated as entirely public-spirited, and the public interest is conceptualized in 
unitary terms.”  (Dryzek, 2012, p. 89) This means that what is considered public interest, and the 
application of which, is very much a technical procedure, why the experts through their analyses 
know what is in the public interest better than the public itself. 
This discourse lacks vivid metaphors, but it could be said that the administrative state through its 
experts works as a ”unitary administrative mind” that is in control of the state. This idea assumes 
that  appropriate  steering  will  take  society  in  the  right  direction  away  from  environmental 
problems. (Dryzek, 2012, p. 75-95)

4. Key metaphors and other rhetorical devices

2. Assumptions about natural relationships

3. Agents and their motives

1. Basic entities recognized or constructed
- Liberal capitalism
- Administrative state
- Experts
- Managers

- Experts and managers control state
3. Agents and their motives
- Experts and managers
- Motivated  by  public  interests,  deﬁned  in  unitary 

terms

2. Assumptions about natural relationships
- Nature subordinate to human problem solving
- People subordinate to state
Figure 3. Discursive elements of administrative rationalism

4. Key metaphors and other rhetorical devices
- The administrative mind
- Navigating and steering

36

3.2	
 Environmental Discourse Analysis of the Comprehensive Plan

Rather than applying Dryzek’s method for discourse analysis this reading will deploy his  discursive 
categories and their respective elements in the analysis of the environmental discourse/s present in the 
comprehensive plan. This analysis will not go as deeply or reach as far as a proper discourse analysis, 
but will nevertheless attempt at clarifying the content of the plan using Dryzek’s discursive categories 
and elements as a backdrop. As previously mentioned, the focus will be on three discourses that have 
been  found to  share  certain characteristics  with  the  comprehensive plan.  These  are administrative 
rationalism,  ecological  modernization,  and sustainable development. The analysis  will  look into in 
what ways they are particularly relevant,  as well as when they depart from the plan. As a document 
that aims to bring together a number of national policies while still staying true to its locally rooted 
aim and conditions for implementation, the comprehensive plan can be expected to incorporate several 
kinds of environmental discourses. 
	

While this analysis  does not aspire or pretend to come to an exhaustive and complete ﬁnal 
result, it attempts to shed light on what kind of approach to environmental issues is offered through the 
comprehensive plan,  and some conditions and implications  of the found model. Following Dryzek 
(2012, p. 12f) the analysis does not aim to prove the current discourse/s wrong - as discourses merely 
answer to issues found important within the limits of the discourse itself. Rather, it aims to confront a 
number of discourses  with another,  in order to contribute  to an overall better understanding of the 
social and environmental issues at hand,  as well as the potential to solve these within the discursive 
frames  of  the  plan.  Dryzek  (2012,  p.  21)  notes  that  attention  to  comparison  between  opposing 
discourses is a good way to uncover their ﬂaws, limitations and inconsistencies. Such clariﬁcation is 
what I hope to contribute to through this analysis. 
	


All quotes and cited expressions are in my own translation.

SUMMARY OF THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
The population of Stockholm is growing with over 10,000 inhabitants  a year due to an increase in 
child  birth  and  national  and  international  migrants.  This  growth  is  appreciated  since  it  supports 
economic growth and gives the chance to increase welfare,  and it is also expected to continue. The 
longterm planning aims to support this growth, and assess the needs of the growing population while 
the city develops in an economically, socially and environmentally longterm sustainable manner. The 
competition for  land areas  is  deemed to become an important  issue,  as  different  interests  such as 
infrastructure,  play  grounds,  green  areas,  residential  areas,  and  technical  facilities,  are  likely  to 
conﬂict.  Another  important  matter  is  to  enforce  the  region  of  Stockholm  in  the  international 
competition, through inter-municipal cooperation and a mutual city branding strategy, as a globalizing 
economy means a larger dependence on other regions and also parts of the world. Good conditions for 
corporations must be supported for current and future establishment, in which an attractive city with 
good connections are important factors. (Stockholms stad, 2010, p. 6f) 
	

Global climate changes are conﬁrmed as one of the greatest challenges of our time,  and are 
since long addressed by reduction of green house gases. The city aims to be fossil free by 2050, and 
the most important means to get there are district  heating and increased public transportation. This 
requires an increased accessibility in the transportation system combined with minimized effects on 
the climate.  Technological  development  is  integral,  just  like  the  access  to alternative  fuels,  great 
expansion  of  the  public  transportation  and  the  promotion  of  biking  and  walking  in  the  urban 
environment. Other means to increase the energy efﬁciency of the city are smart urban planning and 
public procurement of services. (ibid, p. 7f) 	

	

Lastly, social inequalities is a big challenge in Stockholm, in which the city and region have 
proven  less  successful  than  others  in creating  an inclusive  labor  market. The  general  wealth has 

37

increased simultaneously as  social  and economic  differences. There  are  great  differences  between 
districts,  and between the inner and outer city. The population is segregated in different residential 
areas and typologies based on education,  income level and ethnicity. It has been found important to 
look into how  the  different parts of the city relate  to one  another,  and how  the labor  market  can 
become  more  integrated.  (ibid,  p.  8)  It  is  mentioned  that  economically  weak  inhabitants  are 
disadvantaged  on  the  housing  market,  and  it  has  proven  difﬁcult  to  push  prices  down  on  new 
apartments. Instead,  chains  of people moving houses are expected to be  created through providing 
attractive new housing. (ibid, p. 23)
	

The  comprehensive  plan  aims  to  achieve  ”a  world  class  city”  by  means  of  ”sustainable 
growth”. ”Longterm sustainable societal development” (ibid, p. 9) is found to have more to do with a 
process than a preferred end state, and aims for a strong cooperation between the city administrations, 
corporations and other actors. It appoints ”the city”  as the driver of this change, to be supported by the 
public. The plan however also shows more concrete efforts at implementing sustainability. Under the 
heading ”a growing and sustainable city” (ibdi, p. 5) it is said that

”an urban development of the central city  and in centers in the outer city, connecting these with 
new  public  transportation, more  coherent  urban  environments  and  more  attractive  park  and 
green areas will lead to an in every respect sustainable city”

The  main  expression  of  a  growing  and  sustainable  city  is  ”a  more  dense  and  more  connected 
Stockholm”   (ibid).  As  mentioned  above,  an  efﬁcient 
transportation  system  with  minimal 
environmental  effects  is seen as integral to combatting global  warming,  and is named as  a key to 
sustainable  growth by the Vision  2030. It  is  concluded  that  there  are  great  chances  to encourage 
sustainable transportation habits in the dense city, and ﬁnancial controls are seen as an important tool. 
(ibid, p. 20, 34) A rapid pace of housing production in order to accommodate the necessary workforce 
is another named condition for longterm sustainable growth. Good infrastructure for IT is another part, 
one of the reasons  being decreasing need for transportation. In the increasing competition between 
cities  and  regions  it  is  also found that  the cultural  historical values  must be  safeguarded,  as  they 
contribute to the identity and attraction of Stockholm (Stockholms  stad,  2010,  p. 22,  25,  26). The 
development  of  Norra  Djurgårdsstaden  and  Västra Liljeholmen/Lövholmen,  using  the  experiences 
from Hammarby Sjöstad,  are  important  parts  in building a  sustainable  city,  and also function  as 
testbeds  for new  technology,  transportation,  energy use,  recycling and lifestyle  issues  (Stockholms 
stad, 2010, p. 8, 34, 51, 58).

38

Term

Times 
used

67

39
21

61
11
3

265
78
13
30

269
80
13
9
8
2

Growth:
- sustainable growth

Sustainable
- sustainable traveling
- socially, economically & 

Development:
- urban development
- development strategies
- development areas

Environment:
- urban environment
- environmental quality standard
- cultural environment
- street environment
- environmental problem

SHORT TEXT ANALYSIS
Before getting into the discursive elements of Dryzek, 
this part aims to clarify how  the comprehensive plan 
is written in a brief text analysis, as the use of phrases 
is one aspect on the framing and content of the text. 
A  quick  word  search  of  a  pdf-format  of 
the 
comprehensive plan has lead to the result in ﬁgure 4 
below.  Some of the  phrases  will be  explained a  bit 
more in detail. 
Frequent Terminology
A frequent use of the word ”development”  is hardly 
surprising,  given  that  the  document  speciﬁcally 
concerns  how  to  handle  the  urban  development  of 
Stockholm.  Consequently,  the  term  is  used  in  a 
number of different contexts, the most frequent being 
”urban  development”,  referring  to  the  strategies  for 
development,  to  the  particular  areas  to  which  the 
strategies  apply,  to  potential  for  development  in 
particular  areas,  and  to  urban  development  as  a 
general  process  that  concerns  every part  of the  city 
and every stockholmer. 
	

”Attractiveness”  among other things refers to 
the city’s ability to attract immigrants and businesses, 
and compete internationally. It is a natural part of the 
aim of the comprehensive plan, in becoming a world 
class  city  (Stockholms  stad,  2010,  p.  2),  and  it  is 
assumed  that  ”a  larger  and  stronger  region  will 
increase the power of attraction of Stockholm” (ibid, 
p. 6). Another dimension concerns  parks  and green 
areas, in terms of their uses, accessibility, and quality. 
Attractiveness 
to  describe  urban 
environments, boroughs,  public transportation,  roads, 
meeting places, recreation, housing, and is in general 
connected to a dense urban structure. 
	

”Growth” is another frequent term in the plan, 
often used together with ”sustainable”, ”economic”  or 
”longterm”.  Sometimes  exchanged  for another most 
recurrent term, development, it generally refers to the 
growth  of  the  population,  the  economy  and  business  sector  in  general.  Growth  is  consistently 
positively  connoted,  and in fact  the  most  important  task  that  the  comprehensive  planning  faces. 
Population  growth  is  named  ”a  prerequisite  for  a  positive  economic  development  and  increased 
welfare”  (ibid, p. 6). Growth is the ﬁrst condition when engaging in the urban development of the city, 
and accommodating a growing population and thus sustaining a  continued economic growth is  the 
basic underpinning argument.
	

”Future”, just like ”development”  has a natural position in the document, as it quite simply is 
concerned  with  the  future  development  of  the  city.  It  is  used  together  with,  e.g.,  ”challenges”, 
”development”, ”uncertainty”, ”images”  and ”need”, or simply as another time and place that is yet to 
be known for us. ”Vision”  mainly refers  to the vision document of the city and thus to the idea of 
Stockholm as a world class city, but also to more speciﬁc visions for certain areas that are pointed out 
in the comprehensive plan.

Justice / just
Figure 4. Word search

A world class city/Stockholm

is  also  used 

environmentally sustainable

Gender equality / equal

90

42

12

25

11

Future

Vision

Social

Ecological

Equality / equal

Attractive

0

0

0

39

3.2.1	
Basic Entities whose Existence is Recognized or Constructed

The Discursive Setting: A Public Policy for Sustainable Growth
This comprehensive plan, forming the synthesis of the Planning and Building Act, national strategies 
and targets for sustainable development, national public interests, and the political vision of the city, is 
in itself a public policy. It is directed toward all administrations and corporations of the city, and other 
actors involved in the development of Stockholm, as well as interested citizens. It was produced by the 
City Planning Administration,  and is  directly linked to detailed planning in Stockholm. (Stockholm, 
2010)
The Capitalist Economy
The much appreciated population growth of Stockholm provides the city with the labor force needed 
for its economy to grow,  but also to support  the extension of the welfare. The comprehensive plan 
states (2010, p. 6), ”[t]he tasks for the longterm planning of the city is to further a continued growth 
and to analyze how  the  needs  of a rapidly growing population can best be met”. This  reﬂects  an 
approach  to  urban  development  that  is  based  on  growth,  a  basic  prerequisite  that  sorts  the 
comprehensive plan into the prosaic group of discourses  that  take the capitalist  political-economic 
conditions as given,  whether to label it a capitalist political economy,  or liberal capitalism (Dryzek, 
2012, p. 14f). 
Unlimited ”Sustainable Growth”
The comprehensive plan emphasizes ”sustainable growth”  as the favored means  of development for 
the city, which is based on the national strategy for sustainable development and on the political vision 
for the city,  Vision 2030 - A Guide to the Future. While ascribing certain frames  to how  growth is 
supposed  to  come  about,  such  as  support  of  environmental  technologies  and  renewable  energy 
production,  there is  no notion on any upper limit  to growth. Climate  changes  are  conﬁrmed,  even 
named ”one of the biggest challenges of our time”  (Stockholms stad, 2010,  p. 7),  and the plan thus 
admits that there are problems  with our current society that need to be handled. However,  the plan 
does  not  directly  connect  economic  growth  to  environmental  destruction,  but  rather  intends  that 
environmental problems can be solved within the growth paradigm. Typically, the plan refers to the 
successes  Stockholm  has  seen in limiting the  environmental  impact  when compared  to other  big 
European  cities,  with  examples  including  district  heating,  ”attractive  public  transportation”,  and 
”supporting efﬁcient  energy use through well thought through urban planning”  (ibid,  p. 8) Further 
encouraged action is directed toward continued investigation into how the technical systems of the city 
can be  secured in case of,  e.g.,  sea level rise,  the management  of gray water,  energy potentiation, 
enlargement of the public transportation and the goal of a fossil fuel free city in 2050 (ibid, p. 7f, 24, 
29). The new  redevelopment areas with an environmental proﬁle,  Norra Djurgårdsstaden and Västra 
Liljeholmen, serve as proof of combined investments in urban growth and sustainability (ibid, p. 51). 
The investments  might take on a slightly different form and shape in the named cases compared to 
traditional  urban developments,  but  nonetheless  supposedly show  that  environmental  protection is 
indeed compatible with and can be included in capitalist economic growth. 
”The City”: Governing Administration vs Object for Development 
”The city”  ﬁgures, quite naturally, as a prominent basic entity in the plan. This entity bears a number 
of meanings. On page 79 (Stockholms stad,  2010) ”the city” is  referred to as a subject: ”[t]he plan 
concurrently clariﬁes the city’s view  on the future development for stockholmers, agencies and other 
stakeholders. In this way, they can get an idea of where the city stands in future claims on change in 
the urban environment. [...] The experience of the city...”  [italics added]. However, on the same page 
”the city”  shifts into an object: ”The comprehensive plan is a general policy document for the boards 
and  corporations  within  the  city  of  Stockholm,  that  are  responsible  for  different  parts  of  the 
development  of  the  city.” These  quotes  uncover  the  two main roles  that  ”the  city”  is  given:  the 

40

live  in  Stockholm  are  often  referred 

subjective agent,  as the  political and practical  driver  for the intended change  and development  of 
Stockholm; and the objective entity that is to be developed. ”The city”  does however not refer to the 
inhabitants  of the city,  as can be noted in the following quote:  ”[H]owever,  substantial  efforts  are 
required from the city and from everyone that lives and operates in Stockholm, in order to reach the 
ambitious target of a fossil fuel free city until the year 2050” (ibid, p. 7f). 
Diverse naming of people aggregates
to  as  ”population”,  ”inhabitants”, 
The  people  that 
”Stockholmers”,  ”dwellers”,  different  kinds  of  road-users,  ”different  groups”,  ”labor  power”, 
”consumers of dwellings”,  ”clients”  etc. A quick analysis would suggest that people are referred to 
according to their collective function for the particular topic, but there doesn’t seem to be any cohesive 
point of view on deﬁnitions. It could be noted that ”citizen” is used only once. 
	

Furthermore, there are references to ”kids”, ”youngsters”, ”women”  and ”elderly”, but not one 
reference  to  ”men”.  These  labels  are  often  referred  to  when  describing  certain  experiences, 
problematics or needs,  one  example  being,  ”[m]any,  particularly elderly and women,  worry about 
being exposed to crime or feel insecure after nightfall”  (Stockholms stad, 2010, p. 16). This potentially 
points toward normative assumptions  in the plan, in four main ways: 1. it assumes that the label is 
functional  and valid in itself,  in terms  of inner  cohesion,  2.  it  assumes  that  a certain labeling  is 
connected to particular experiences, needs or problematics, 3. it gives the impression that the labeled 
categories  represent  side  interest,  particularities,  often implicitly understood as  minority positions 
given the need to be distinguished from the unnamed normative position, and 4. it silences any similar 
experiences that arise in other categories since the focus is on the named category rather than on the 
experience regardless  of by whom it is made. Given the general critique of male biases  in futures 
studies, discussed in ch. 1.1, and the absence of ”men”  as a category, chances are there is a male bias 
in the comprehensive plan. 
	

Regardless of potential bias however - the second labeling is based on assumed experiences, 
problematics and needs  of a collective rather than the function this collective  holds  in a particular 
matter. In either way, the labels can be used for easy referencing in the comprehensive plan.
Nature as a resource at humans’ disposal
Nature is  present in the comprehensive plan in a number of different ways, referred to as  ”parks”, 
”nature”,  ”green areas”,  ”ﬂora and fauna”,  ”beaches”  and ”water” etc. These expressions  are  often 
accompanied by references to its ”value”, ”attractiveness”, ”accessibility” and ”quality”, how it can be 
developed, improved and managed (Stockholms stad, 2010, p. 12f, 18f). It can be noted that nature is 
referred to as a collection of separate entities,  rather than interconnected ecosystems with their own 
logic. There are expressions of appreciation of environmental values in the plan as it encourages some 
extent of environmental protection, e.g., actions to ensure improved conditions for the ﬂora and fauna. 
The plan also notes that the environment of the green beaches ”have a great value for the stockholmers 
and for the ﬂora and fauna” (ibid, p. 12). This protection is often related to national interests (ibid, p. 
18). 
	

Among general references  to the  importance  of protecting ecological values,  such as  clean 
water,  ecologically sensitive  areas,  and  the  regional green  wedges  (ibid,  p. 18f),  the main way of 
addressing nature is in terms of how it can be useful to or used by the people of Stockholm as shown 
in the following quote: ”[a] broad perspective is  required if the urban development will be able to 
contribute to managing and developing the qualities of the water for dwellers,  visitors and workers, 
not  least  when  it  comes  to  recreation.”  (ibid,  p.  12)  Apart  from  the  momentary  attention  to 
environmental  values,  nature is rarely discussed as  something with a value in and for itself,  but is 
rather  ascribed  a  value  in  terms  of  how  it  can  be  used  as  a  resource  for  humans  and  urban 
development.

41

SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT, ADMINISTRATIVE RATIONALISM OR ECOLOGICAL MODERNIZATION?

The Discursive Setting: A Public Policy
Administrative rationalism occurs mainly in environmental or resource management administrations, 
aiming to ﬁnd solutions to particular environmental problems. The dominant way of countering the 
issues  in question is from a  natural  science  point  of  view,  through expert driven problem solving. 
Planning is one of the means through which administrative rationalism has become known, however 
that  is through a strongly top-down technicist kind of planning,  in which environmental issues  are 
often sidelined when colliding with economic interests. (Dryzek, 2012, p. 75-88) While several of the 
issues and the tools from administrative rationalism can be recognized in the planning of Stockholm, 
such as environmental impact assessment,  there are differences in terms of its organizational setting 
and  the  level  and  content  of  policy  making.  The  comprehensive  plan  is  not  limited  to  any 
environmental administration or pollution control agency, but rather that work is one of the aspects the 
plan needs to mediate. It then meets the political vision and a practical context, which are all part of 
the particular discourse of the plan. Thus, administrative rationalism will underpin the plan,  but may 
not be the main discourse the plan follows.
	

Ecological  modernization  moves  on a  slightly  different  level,  focusing broad  cooperation 
between public and private stakeholders, aiming for the decoupling of environmental deterioration and 
economic growth. Ecological modernization does not favor governmental solutions or public policy, 
instead  focusing  market  oriented  solutions  through  business 
incentives  and  investments  in 
environmentally  sound  practices.  The  comprehensive  plan  aims  to  ﬁnd  broad  agreements  across 
societal sectors,  and pays a lot of attention to how  the best possible conditions for the industry and 
commerce of the city can be created. Nevertheless, the plan is a public policy, but it has to be noted 
that it is one that emphasizes ﬂexibility and simpliﬁed implementation.
	

Sustainable  development  ﬁgures  far  above  and  way below  the  comprehensive  plan,  as  it 
attempts  to stretch  from  global  level  down to  the  local  community.  With  the  aim  of  combining 
environmental protection, social justice and economic growth in a mutually reinforcing development 
process, its principle is unbound to contexts or institutions. Rather, it encourages experimentation and 
a  multi-layered approach. As  such,  this  discourse  lacks  an outspoken  discursive  setting,  why  the 
afﬁliation of the comprehensive plan with this discourse will have to be read through its content rather 
than its outer frames. 
The Capitalist Economy
As the comprehensive plan accepts the general framework of our current society, however in need of 
some alterations,  it agrees with Dryzek’s reformist group of discourses,  among which can be found 
administrative  rationalism,  ecological  modernization  and sustainable  development  (2012,  p.  14f). 
While presenting differing ideas about how to handle environmental issues,  all three discourses take 
the capitalist economy as a common point of departure.
Unlimited ”Sustainable Growth”
 The plan shows no sign of potential limitations to economic growth, beyond the sustainable manner in 
which it is supposed to take place. In terms  of phrasing this agrees  with ecological modernization, 
which assumes the possibility to perpetuate growth given that it occurs in a way that does not pose a 
threat  to  the  environment,  or  that  is  simply  based  on  environmental  protection.  Ecological 
modernization  actively  aims  at  a  structural  change  of  the  economy  away  from  environmentally 
degrading activities, the fulﬁllment of which allows for perpetual growth. While supporting the idea of 
”sustainable growth”  the plan however does little to assure that unsustainable growth is hindered. Part 
of the argument for this lies in the very concept ”sustainable growth”, which rather than a restructuring 
in favor of environmental protection, concerns how  to coordinate and streamline the implementation 
of the plan when there are many actors  involved (Stockholms stad,  2010,  p. 9). The economic and 
urban development of Stockholm is partly intended to follow environmentally benign tracks, by means 
of  increased  energy  efﬁciency,  limited  pollution  and  emissions,  cleaner  water,  investments  in 

42

environmental  technologies,  and a less  energy intensive transportation system. The growth that  the 
plan supports is however not conditioned by such factors, meaning that it does not exclude economic 
activity that is carried out in an unsustainable manner. It seems then that the plan assumes parts of the 
strategy of ecological modernization, without necessarily pulling it all the way through. Nevertheless, 
this is the discourse that bears most resemblances with the comprehensive plan in this respect. 
	

Administrative rationalism does not deal with growth at all. Sustainable development is more 
ambiguous when it comes to growth, as some parts of the discourse denies the value of growth per se, 
while others encourage what is labeled ”green growth”, which sees no limit to growth given certain 
ecological  constraints  are  respected.  In  terms  of  the  latter,  there  are  certainly  parallels  between 
sustainable development and the comprehensive plan. Generally however, growth is treated in a more 
complex  manner  in  sustainable  development  than  what  can be  found  in the  comprehensive plan, 
requiring a combined effort  at economic  growth,  environmental protection and distributive  justice. 
This  idea of growth is  mentioned  in the plan,  with references  to social,  ecological  and economic 
factors (ibid, p. 9), but is not the prominent version of growth in the document. 
”The City”: Governing Administration vs Object for Development 
In terms of basic entities that refer to governance, the state ﬁgures in both administrative rationalism 
and ecological modernization. This will be the main point of reference for analyzing the role of the 
city as a governing administration. 
	

Administrative  rationalism makes  governance through the administrative  state,  and experts 
and managers  an issue of ”rational  management in the service of a clearly deﬁned public interest, 
informed by the best available expertise”  (Dryzek, 2012, p. 88). This places the experts and managers 
on an equal level with the administrative state. The city,  in the contexts mentioned above referring to 
the administrations that work on behalf of the municipal politicians, has an executive role to play, and 
thus  are rather set to abide by top-down directions. The city however also holds a mediating task, 
navigating between politics, national interests and a practical context. In this respect, the city holds a 
certain level of expertise. The city however also opens up for cooperation with other actors,  why all 
the while being a strong subject, it is certainly not the only one. The comprehensive plan thus barely 
resembles administrative rationalism in this respect. 
The  state  in the  view  of  ecological  modernization  is  the  representative  of  governmental 
	

politics and policy-making, which according to ecological modernization should be limited. As just 
discussed,  the city works on behalf of the city’s politicians,  why it  has to be understood as having 
more of a managing and executive role than one of political governance. Furthermore, the plan partly 
opens up this management to different city administrations, corporations and other actors with a role to 
play  in  urban  development,  in  search  for  an  efﬁcient  implementation.  The  role  of  the  city  then 
compares  badly with the ecological  modernization perspective  on the  state,  but  on the  other hand 
could  be  related  to  the  driver  of  cooperative  processes  that  is  indeed  favored  by  ecological 
modernization. In this sense,  the city assumes the leadership for the urban development of the city, 
while keeping good relations with its partners. Even though the institutional setting may conﬂict with 
the ecological modernization and its  take  on leadership,  the role that the city assumes  can still  be 
related to its partnership with slight hierarchical ingredients. (More on this in 3.2.2.) 
The sustainable development discourse lacks any particular notion on entities of this character, 
	

why it doesn’t easily compare with the comprehensive plan.
Diverse naming of people aggregates
None  of  the  three  discourses  has  any  particular  notion  on  aggregates  of  people.  Sustainable 
development  ascribes  signiﬁcance to all  members  of society,  down to collectives  and  individuals. 
While the whole population is included,  there are descriptions  or naming of particular parts of the 
population. 
	

Ecological  modernization  promotes  management  with  a  broad  support  from  the  public, 
however  without  ascribing the  public any particular role in  management  or  further  description  in 
general. The discourse in this respect seems to describe a passively supportive population. The plan 

43

does  attend  to the public  support of the  plan,  through references  to  the  dialogues  with groups  of 
stockholmers  that  informed the work with the comprehensive plan (Stockholms stad,  2010,  p. 78). 
Apart from this however, there is no particular importance paid to the public. It seems then as if the 
comprehensive plan largely agrees with ecological modernization on a  general  attitude  toward the 
public. 
Nature as a resource at humans’ disposal
Nature acquires  respect  in the sense that  it needs  a  certain protection,  to safeguard some  level  of 
biodiversity and other ecological values. The protection is related to the national interest,  which has 
contributed to the establishment of a number of natural reserves (Stockholms stad, 2010, p. 18). These 
cases can be read as examples of an administrative rationalist approach to problem solving, where the 
city acts  on the  orders  of the  administrative  state  and experts. Administrative rationalism  lacks  a 
deﬁnition or valuation of nature, but concludes that it is in need of expert management. However, the 
attention to nature as a set of separate entities clearly points toward a problem solving approach, where 
nature is given the shape of well deﬁned separate objects that inspire the idea that they can be handled 
independently of one  another. Thus,  the  basic perspective on nature in  the  comprehensive plan is 
underpinned by the anthropocentric managerial approach of administrative rationalism. 
	

The plan however goes further, presenting a perspective that largely agrees  with ecological 
modernization, as it addresses nature mainly in terms of the values it supplies to the stockholmers. Just 
like ecological modernization, the wellbeing of nature is also given an overtly economic potential, in 
connecting a clean environment with happier and healthier workers and an improved attractiveness of 
the city, which in the long run may support the continued growth of the city. It could then be said that 
the comprehensive plan is based in notions on nature that belong to administrative rationalism through 
its  executive function in the management of national interests,  but develops an interpretation of its 
own that rather draws on ecological modernization. 
The idea of complex ecosystems  with their own internal  logic that humans  themselves are 
	

immersed in as in the sustainable development discourse is completely absent.

44

3.2.2	
Assumptions About Natural Relationships

Hierarchical Cooperation
The comprehensive plan ultimately aims at establishing clarity around the central aim of developing 
Stockholm in the direction of ”a world class  city” and to coordinate the actors concerned with the 
urban development of Stockholm in a common effort. This is the road toward both urban development 
and  sustainable  growth.  On  several  occasions  the  plan  emphasizes  the  importance  of a  common 
approach to urban development of the city, in which all concerned actors move in the same direction. 
(Stockholms stad, 2010, p. 9) When discussing its conception of sustainable growth, it is repeated that 
cooperation is the key to a successful result and efﬁcient implementation: 

”[l]ongterm  sustainable  development  to a  large  part  concerns  a  process  rather  than  a  future 
desirable  state. The  ongoing  cooperation between the  administrations  and  corporations  of the 
city, and  many other actors gives a  basis for long-sightedness and that  different perspectives and 
interests can be satisﬁed and balanced against one another. The broad dialogue during the public 
consultation has also been valuable. This increases the possibilities to implement the intentions of 
the plan, and to deepen the dialogue” (ibid, p. 9). 

Cooperation  is  a  fundamental  part  of  the  relation  between  the  actors  concerned  with  urban 
development. It stands clear however that there is also a certain hierarchy, as ”the city”  is referred to as 
the main agent  in urban development throughout the  document  (more  about  this  in the following 
section 3.2.3). Thus,  broad cooperations are sought and encouraged, but it remains clear that the city 
has a privileged position. 
	

In  terms  of  hierarchical,  though  cooperative,  relations  it  can  also  be  noted  that  the 
stockholmers remain a remote and slightly indeﬁnite group (as discussed in the previous section). The 
participatory aspects of the planning process point toward the broad commitment to the plan that is 
sought through dialogues, a commitment that is required for the plan to be implemented in an efﬁcient 
manner.  It could be  discussed what  this  participation means  in practice. There  is  a great contrast 
between  participation  that  aims  to  ease  the  implementation  of  already  decided  on  proposals,  or 
participation that  aims  to create  optimal  chances  for the  public  opinion  to inﬂuence the  planning 
process. It could certainly be questioned what voice the stockholmers are in fact given in this plan. 
The  previous  section’s  attention to  population  aggregates  holding  different  functions  suggests  an 
image of the stockholmers as passive masses, at the bottom of the hierarchy. 
 	

The plan is  in itself a sign of the effort at extended cooperation. It is an attempt at a more 
ﬂexible,  less  detailed  plan,  that  eases  implementation.  The  answer  is  a  strategic  plan  that  is 
coordinated with other policy documents,  produced in a process of dialogue with a number of city 
administrations and corporations, the Stockholm County Council, and groups of stockholmers. (ibid, 
p. 2-11) ”The city”  mediates political and national against local and business interests, but sustains its 
rank. 
Anthropocentrism
As discussed in the previous  section,  nature is  often referred to in terms of how  it  can beneﬁt  the 
stockholmers, 
the  urban  development  and  sustainable  growth.  The  sociotopic  map  of  the 
stockholmers’ estimation and use of the green areas around Stockholm (Stockholms stad, 2010, p. 18), 
which forms an important base to the planning of green areas, is one manifestation of this relation. In 
one section the plan reads: 

”[t]he qualities and connections of the ecological infrastructure, in the shape of core areas, zones 
for  reproduction  and  buffer  zones, shall  be  protected  and  developed  in  such  a  way  that  the 
stockholmers’  need  of  recreation  ﬁlled  with  experiences  is  not  compromised  or  that 
indispensable ecological values go to waste.” (ibid, p. 19) 

45

This  phrasing relates  to the national interests in the green wedges around Stockholm,  and certainly 
attends  to natural  values  and  environmental  protection. It  is  however paired with the recreational 
interest  that  stockholmers  might  have in these same  areas. While  the  recreational functions  of the 
green wedges do not at all have to conﬂict with the ecological values,  it must still be noted that the 
phrasing contains an effort at balancing the recreational interests and the environmental. It means that 
in a potential conﬂict it is not necessarily the case that the environmental values will be seen as the 
most important to consider, which in a sense means that environmental protection at least to a certain 
extent depends on what kind of resource a particular area provides  the stockholmers with. Another 
paragraph mentions the park program, stating that 

”[i]n  order  to achieve the  aims  of the  park program of  the  city  while the  city  grows and  gets 
denser,  a  good  maintenance  such  as  an  active  park planning  to  renew  and  recreate  parks  and 
nature, enhance the qualities and increase the accessibility is required. Park planning  has a  great 
impact on whether the urban development will be longterm sustainable or not.” (ibid, p. 19) 

This case points toward how a particularly shaped nature is considered to be a valuable resource to the 
urban development  of Stockholm,  and maybe even deciding its  very potential to achieve longterm 
sustainability. Furthermore,  the quote contains  a description of the interaction between humans and 
nature. As if the establishment of nature as a resource at the disposal of humans wasn’t enough,  the 
quote  in  fact  describes  the  very  recreation  of  nature.  This  displays  in  a  very  efﬁcient  way  the 
anthropocentricity that  characterizes the relation between humans and nature,  where humans  are in 
effect placed outside of and even turned into the creators of nature. 
”The Good City”, Environmental Values and Growth
Some  basic  concepts  with naturalized interrelations  are  population growth,  economic  growth and 
increased welfare. Concerning the starting point for the situation of the city and its planners, the plan 
states, that

”[t]he  starting  point  is  that  population  growth  constitutes  a  basic  condition  for  a  positive 
economic development and increased welfare.” (Stockholms stad, 2010, p. 6)

As mentioned previously,  this population growth is considered one of the main task of planners  to 
accommodate, in order for the economy and welfare of the city to keep on growing. In terms of the 
ongoing globalization process the plan argues, that

”[t]he most important issues are to satisfy the needs of competent labor power of the industry 
and  commerce and improved communications. Another  prioritized  task is to brand  and  develop 
the good city with a high quality of life so that the labor power of the future will want to live and 
work in Stockholm.” (ibid, p. 7)  

In this quote, an urban development that promotes the idea of ”the good city”  in a global context will 
be  an integral  part  in  attracting  the  new  population  that  is  needed  to  sustain  the  growth  of  the 
population,  and  consequently of  the  economy  and  welfare.  Drawing on  the  quote  used above  to 
describe  the  relation  between  humans  and nature,  it  can  be  concluded  that  nature  is  seen as  an 
important  resource  to  the  urban  development.  With  the  comprehensive  plan’s  understanding  of 
sustainability it can be deduced that nature and parks of a high quality, maintenance and accessibility 
directly  affect  the  economic  growth and urban development  of  the  city,  and  are  therefore  highly 
estimated. In this way,  there  are intimate relations between ”the good city”,  environmental values, 
population growth, economic growth, and increased welfare. 

46

SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT, ADMINISTRATIVE RATIONALISM OR ECOLOGICAL MODERNIZATION?

Hierarchical Cooperation
Ecological  modernization  clearly  highlights  the  cooperative  relations  between  the  actors  of  the 
discourse,  where broad partnership is  seen as  a given. Some  hierarchy is  accepted in this  relation 
concerning the management of the process, since this is to the beneﬁt of all involved. It makes sense 
that the public is given a limited role, as its main contribution is to support rather than to contribute to 
the process. The relations between the actors of ecological modernization completely reﬂect those of 
the comprehensive plan. 
	

Administrative  rationalism  has  less  parallels  to  the  comprehensive  plan,  as  it  emphasizes 
completely  hierarchical  relations  between  the administrative  state,  experts  and  managers,  and  the 
people, without any form interdependency. While it can be discussed what room for disagreements on 
the part  of  the  public  that  the plan allows  for,  it  is  still  clear that  the support  of  the  public  is  an 
important dimension in the comprehensive plan. This is not recognized by administrative rationalism, 
why the plan cannot be seen as reﬂecting this discourse in this regard. 
	

Sustainable development,  ﬁnally,  largely assumes equal relations  between the agents  of the 
discourse. This discourse operates on several levels,  from global to local, and requires multi-layered 
actions and broad participation in order to be fulﬁlled, and favors relations that are based on broad 
cooperation. Sustainable development, then, ascribes a much larger role to the public than the previous 
two discourses, and furthermore denies the hierarchical relation character of ecological modernization 
and  administrative  rationalism.  The  resemblance  between  sustainable  development  and  the 
comprehensive plan is in this respect very small. 
Anthropocentrism	

Dryzek ﬁnds  nature to be put  in a subordinate position to humans in the major part of his  named 
discourses,  i.e.,  in all of the problem solving and sustainability discourses. The distinction between 
nature and humanity is strong in the comprehensive plan, largely placing humans outside of natural 
ecosystems and turning nature into a resource. Administrative rationalism displays a clearcut idea of 
nature’s  subordination  to  humans,  recognizable  also  in  the  comprehensive  plan.  Administrative 
rationalism does not ascribe any particular value to nature, but rather reduces it to a problem with clear 
contours for experts to solve. While it  can be recognized that the comprehensive plan as well cuts 
nature into well deﬁned pieces, it does ascribe a considerable value to nature. 
	

In this aspect,  the plan has more in common with ecological modernization, where nature is 
thought of as an important resource that can serve humans and by extension the economy in a positive 
manner. However,  as ecological modernization argues for a wholesale restructuring of the economy 
that  aims  to make environmental protection the source of economic growth, it deﬁnitely ascribes a 
higher value to nature than the comprehensive plan. The comprehensive plan sees  nature as a great 
asset for the development of the city, but without it being an underpinning condition. Nevertheless, the 
attitude is clearly anthropocentric. 
	

The disconnection of humans from the ecosystems means the comprehensive plan has even 
less in common with sustainable development than the other discourses. Sustainable development does 
contain an element of anthropocentrism,  due to a partial subordination of nature. At the same time 
however,  there is a strong emphasis  on the interconnectedness  of social and natural  system,  which 
largely places humanity within nature. 
”The Good City”, Environmental Values and Growth
Ecological modernization draws strong connections between environmental protection and economic 
growth where the current capitalist economy is seen as missing out on potential proﬁts that could be 
made from environmental protection, both by means of new technologies, products and processes, and 
that  a  clean  environment  produces  happier  workers.  The  discourse  argues  that  the  decoupling  of 
environmental degradation and economic growth is  both possible and desirable,  why environmental 
protection is intimately connected to growth. While the comprehensive plan does appreciate the value 

47

Apart 

from  connecting  environmental  protection 

of nature in terms of creating an attractive city, and thus contributing to the growth of the population 
and economy, it does not share the ambition of ecological modernization. The plan does not intend any 
wholesale  reorientation of  the  urban economy,  even  though there  is  certain encouragement  of  the 
development of environmental technologies, energy efﬁciency and improved transportation. 
	

to  economic  growth,  sustainable 
development adds distributive justice and longterm sustainability to the equation. These four concepts 
are  seen  as  mutually  enforcing  one  another.  Since  the  World  Bank  formulated  the  solution  to 
sustainable development as  ”green growth”  this discourse has become more prominent on national 
levels. This kind of growth focuses on the ”eco-economy”, thus showing resemblances with ecological 
modernization. The  green growth  rhetoric  can  be  noted  in  the  comprehensive  plan’s  attention  to 
”sustainable growth”. However, in spite of the use of the term ”sustainability”, with some references 
to its ecological, social and economic dimensions (Stockholms stad,  2010, p. 9), the plan in general 
pays little attention to matters of distributive justice, locally or globally. The interconnectedness that 
characterizes sustainable development is simply absent. 
Administrative  rationalism  lacks  any  connection  between  environmental  protection  and 
	

growth, why this discourse in this matter is disqualiﬁed.

48

3.2.3	
Agents & Their Motives

The City and its Partners
The main actor or agent that is recurrently referred to in the comprehensive plan is ”the city”. Other 
actors that are mentioned throughout the document are the city administrations and corporations, and 
sometimes also actors afﬁliated with urban development generally. (Stockholms stad, 2010, p. 9) Apart 
from  a  few  exceptional  cases,  e.g.,  when  referring  to  how  ”everyone  that  lives  and operates  in 
Stockholm”  must make an effort if the aim of a fossil free city in 2050 is to be achieved (ibid, p. 7f), 
actors such as citizens or the public are barely mentioned. This does not mean that the stockholmers do 
not have any agency to act, in fact they do have a responsibility in, e.g., their choice of transportation 
as  shown above. However,  they are not  counted as  any main actor for the implementation of  the 
comprehensive plan. It is hardly surprising that this kind of document targets ”the city” as the main 
agent, as it is concerned with the longterm and detailed planning on which the municipality has the 
monopoly. Assuming  a  strategy  that  encourages  strong cooperation across  administrations,  public 
corporations, and all actors that are engaged in urban development is likewise logical. 
The Public Interest 
The comprehensive plan is obliged to account for a number of public interests that are derived from 
the Planning and Building Act  (Plan- och Bygglagen). These encompass,  among others,  economic 
growth,  natural  and  cultural  values,  good  environmental  conditions,  and  communication  routes. 
(Stockholms stad, 2010, p 11) Out of these a selection and evaluation has been made, that is based on 
which interests are the most relevant to address in the plan when considering the vision document and 
the  contemporary  challenges  that  face  the  urban  development  of  Stockholm.  The  selection  is 
summarized  in  a  number  of  focus  areas  in  the  plan  that  are  to  guide  the  following planning  of 
Stockholm. These focus areas, together with the vision document, Vision 2030, lay out the foundation 
for the urban planning strategy of the city: ”a more dense and more connected Stockholm”. (ibid, p. 2, 
5) The plan is thus  intended to safeguard matters  of national interest to the extent possible,  while 
however not being legally binding. The public interest is then one out of two main motives for setting 
up the plan. 
A World Class City through Sustainable Growth
The aim of the strategy proposed by the comprehensive plan is established on page one (Stockholms 
stad, 2010, p. 1), that Stockholm is to become ”a world class city”: 

”Stockholm today faces the challenge to grow in a wise manner where more inhabitants than ever 
before in history  will live and  prosper in a city  with new attractive dwellings, a  dynamic industry 
and  commerce, a  knowledge  focused  education  system,  qualitative  welfare,  a  rich  offering  of 
experiences and an exceptionally good environment. In short, a world class Stockholm.” 

This aim derives from the vision document, Vision 2030 - A Guide to the Future, which the plan is set 
to follow  and concretize (ibid, p. 2,  9). Population growth is named ”a precondition for a positive 
economic development and increased welfare” (ibid, p. 6) in Stockholm. The plan goes on to state that 

”[t]he tasks for the longterm urban  planning of the city  is to promote a  continued growth  and 
analyze how the needs of a rapidly growing population can best be met” (ibid). 

As discussed previously, the population growth is intimately connected to the economic growth of the 
city, meaning that an increasing population entails a chance at continued economic growth. Thus, the 
aim of becoming a world class city is  synonymous to the furthering of a city that will continue to 
attract new inhabitants - and continue to grow economically. This then forms the second out of two 

49

main motives of the plan, and concerns in what direction to take the urban development of Stockholm: 
to sustain and increase the growth in the population and simultaneously the economy. 
Agents in Environmental Management
The comprehensive plan contains a few  different approaches to how environmental issues should be 
handled.  ”Sustainable  growth”  is  named  the  general  frame  for  how  the  urban  development  and 
economic  growth  of  the  city  is  to  take  place.  This  largely  refers  to  a  cooperative  process  of 
implementation of the  plan,  where a number of actors  are involved. Recognizing the fuzziness  of 
”sustainability”  generally,  the  plan  aims  for  an  interpretation  that  goes  along  with  the  political 
deﬁnition, and national strategy for sustainability. (Stockholms stad, 2010, p. 9)
Referring to ”sustainable growth”, or ”sustainable development”  the plan addresses particular 
	

areas of importance. One such issue is environmental quality standards: 

”Actions in order to fulﬁll the environmental quality standards for particles and nitrogen dioxide 
should above all  have a  general  character and  be  directed toward  limiting  the pollution at  the 
source.  Improved  exhaust  emission  control  and  decreased  use  of studded  tires are  important 
measures, but which the city has little chances at inﬂuencing. The planning can further a  land  use 
and a trafﬁc system that lowers the need for car transports. The shaping of the built environment 
affects the local air quality to some extent, but has a very limited effect on the situation in the city 
as a whole.” (ibid, p. 28f)

The environment is  also met through attention to national interests in,  e.g.,  protection of the green 
wedges, or of areas important to secure good conditions for the ﬂora and fauna (ibid, p. 18f). 

SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT, ADMINISTRATIVE RATIONALISM OR ECOLOGICAL MODERNIZATION?

The City and its Partners
At  a quick  glance the comprehensive  plan  could potentially  fulﬁll  all  three  discourses,  ecological 
modernization, administrative rationalism and sustainable development, in terms of agents. 
Administrative  rationalism  aims  for  expert  driven  solutions  when  facing  environmental 
	

problems. It speaks from a natural science point of view, in a clearly top-down manner. It is clear that 
”the  city”  through  its  planners,  other  administrations  and  corporations,  assumes  some  kind  of 
expertise. ”The city”  is the mediator between national interests, political vision and a practical context, 
the initiator of urban development, the driver of the change process. ”The city”  also makes the priority 
of public interests, and decides on a strategy for how to fulﬁll them. This could be said to agree with 
how administrative rationalism deﬁnes their experts and managers. 
	

The plan however mentions other agents as well, which leads attention away from the strongly 
top-down  structured  administrative  rationalism.  Ecological  modernization  emphasizes  broad 
cooperation  between  public  and  private  spheres,  which  based  on  governmental  standards  and 
incentives move toward a common goal. This is an orientation that is easily recognized in the plan. As 
discussed in chapter 3.2.2, the plan seeks a certain approval for its implementation from the public, 
which can again be related to ecological modernization. 
	

Sustainable  development  has  a  much  less  hierarchical  take  on  the  agents  of  urban 
development, as the initiative for change can erupt on any societal level - from the global to the local. 
The city and its partners are then highly relevant agents, but no more so than any other. There is then 
no set order of command, but a broad networked cooperative governance in which all have agency. All 
are able to take part and also encouraged to take part, regardless of positions or levels of society. This 
is  a  completely different  understanding of  cooperation  in comparison  to the  comprehensive plan, 
which is  directed toward a  minor  group of managers  as  agents  with a hierarchical  relation to the 
supporting public. The exclusion of the stockholmers as agents in the comprehensive plan does not 
agree  well  with  sustainable  development.  Likewise,  the  effort  to  streamline  one  concept  for 
development,  to  be  supported  by  all  involved actors,  infringes  on  the  idea  of  letting  agents  act 

50

according to their own  understanding  of how  sustainability should  best  be  practiced. Sustainable 
development thus seems to have less in common with the comprehensive plan in this respect than the 
other discourses. 
The Public Interest
As with the initial correspondence across discourses in the case of agents, the public interest or the 
public good ﬁgures as an important motive in all three discourses. 
	

The  public  good  in  the  interpretation  of  administrative  rationalism  has  to do  with expert 
analyses,  the result of which is assumed to be generalized as a unitary public interest. The expert is 
supposedly motivated by the common good, and knows what is in the public interest better than the 
public itself. This practically altruistic and self-evident reasoning may be recognized in certain parts of 
the plan, maybe most spelled out in efforts at environmental protection (Stockholms stad, 2010, p. 18). 
The strong connection between the expert as  decision-maker concerning the particular relevance of 
certain  public  interests  over  others  means  that  the  comprehensive  plan  certainly  resembles 
administrative rationalism in this respect. 
	

Ecological  modernization  aims  for a  common  good  that  is  deﬁned  by  the  decoupling  of 
environmental  destruction from economic growth - the  public  interest is economic growth through 
environmental conservation. While the plan shows strands of this way of thinking, it is still far from as 
ambitious  as  ecological  modernization.  Rather,  if  environmental  protection  and  economic  growth 
would in fact coincide, then this is highly favorable. It must also be said that the plan’s take on public 
interests supersedes that of ecological modernization, as it is not deﬁned in such a unitary manner. In 
that sense, the comprehensive plan is closer to administrative rationalism. 
	

The  public  good  in  the  interpretation  of  sustainable  development  again  refers  to  the 
experimental  approach  to  sustainability.  Motivations  exist  on  multiple  levels,  and  are  ultimately 
connected to the common good residing in a socially,  environmentally and economically balanced 
world. The public good informs anyone who feels urged to take action. This perspective does not have 
much in common with the comprehensive plan, partly due to the plan’s exclusion of a broad range of 
agents in the ﬁrst place, and partly due to the formulation of a motive that does not apply to the broad 
range of agents  that  ﬁgures  in sustainable  development. Furthermore,  the  plan’s  understanding of 
sustainability is far too limited.  
A World Class city through Sustainable Growth
Sustainable growth in the direction of a world class city as a motive does not necessarily go that well 
together with any of the named discourses. Ecological modernization has similarities in terms of both 
rhetorics  and concrete solutions,  while the extent  of the ambition differs  considerably. The favored 
means of growth,  ”sustainable growth”, may give the impression of ﬁrm limits to how  growth is to 
take  place,  but does  in fact  not have that much to do with either sustainability or environmentally 
benign growth at all. The parallels are then limited to use of language,  and a number of suggested 
direct  interventions  toward increased energy efﬁciency,  promotion  of  environmental  technologies, 
improved public transportation etc.
	

Administrative rationalism lacks any clear notion on growth, not to speak of ”a world class 
city”. ”Sustainable development”  does make up a national strategy for development, why ”sustainable 
growth”  could hold some relevance as a form of public interest. This would deﬁnitely be the case if 
related to the discourse sustainable development, but would then have to consider what understanding 
of sustainability the plan carries. Such an inquiry would most likely result in disappointment, since the 
comprehensive  plan  does  not  live  up  to  the  mutually  reinforcing  social  justice,  environmental 
protection and economic growth of sustainable development. 
	

Concluding,  the  ”world  class  city  through  sustainable  growth”  would  hold  the  greatest 
relevance to administrative rationalism,  if seen as a public interest in line with the national strategy. 
The relevance from an ecological modernization point of view  would mainly be partial, while in the 
case of sustainable development it is likely to be a disappointment. 

51

Agents in Environmental Management
Ecological  modernization,  aiming  for  environmental  protection  paired  with  economic  growth,  
emphasizes  the market forces together with the government as  the main agents  of change,  but also 
includes their dependence on the public. In fact, there needs to be a wholesale understanding in every 
part of society if the intended adjustments are to happen. Administrative rationalism on the other hand 
rests  on  a  hierarchical  structure  where  experts  and  an  administrative  state,  driven by  the  public 
interest,  governs.  In  this  setting,  environmental  issues  are  approached  in  terms  of  well  deﬁned 
problems, which the experts,  managers and the state are responsible of ﬁnding solutions to. (Dryzek, 
2012,  p. 75-88,  165-183) Both of these patterns can be read in the comprehensive plan, in slightly 
different ways. The problem solving approach to environmental issues of the plan can be noted in its 
particular interventions into issues of, e.g., limiting emissions and pollution. Some of these issues rest 
on national interests  or environmental quality standards. In these cases the structure of governance 
largely  resembles  that  of  administrative  rationalism,  as  neither  the  city  nor  inhabitants  have  any 
inﬂuence on the issue. These issues form a part of the plan not because the city has made the decision 
to regulate air quality,  but because the city is obliged by the state to include the regulation. The city 
above all bears responsibility for the execution of the already decided agenda in these cases, and thus 
puts the administrative state and experts at the top of the hierarchy with no notion of the people. 
	

However, in the case of the new development areas or in the strive toward sustainable growth 
of the city according to the strategy set by the city it is possible to read the plan according to another 
discursive structure. In Norra Djurgårdsstaden the city intends  to test methods for lifestyle changes 
(Stockholms  stad,  2010,  p. 34),  requiring a wholesale  support by all  engaged agents  if it  is  to be 
implemented,  and furthermore engages  the inhabitants themselves to become personally involved in 
the  implementation.  This  clearly  resembles  ecological  modernization,  in  which  a  wholesale 
commitment from the entire society is required to achieve the aim. Thus, the plan opens up for other 
important actors beyond the state to take part in the common strive. It should however be noted that 
while the public support is considered important for the implementation, the plan generally pays little 
attention to the people of Stockholm, which again is typical for ecological modernization. 
	

Sustainable development adopts  a holistic approach to environmental problems. Sustainable 
development attends to ecosystems, and thus assumes a structural approach to environmental problem 
solving,  where humanity is seen as  immersed into the natural systems. This  discourse ascribes  the 
ability to  act  in favor  of  a  sustainable  development  to all,  regardless  of  positions,  hierarchies  or 
societal levels.  It  could be said that  traces  of  this  approach  can be read in the above  mentioned 
development  project,  where  the full  implementation  in fact  does  depend on the  individual  effort. 
However, the incentive to carry out the needed efforts is top-down oriented, which opposes the equal 
relations  and  free  initiative  of  sustainable  development.  Furthermore,  sustainable  development 
assumes  that  a  joint  multi-layered  effort  from  local  to  global  level  is  necessary.  While  the 
comprehensive  plan tries  to  bring  the  national,  regional  and  local  efforts  in  the  same  direction, 
sustainable development’s networked systems for action as governing principle, which includes every 
individual that is intent to act, is completely absent.

52

3.2.4	
Key Metaphors & Other Rhetorical Devices

Progress & Reassurance
As  noted in the  introductory text analysis in this  chapter,  the comprehensive plan recurrently uses 
phrases such as ”attractiveness”,  ”growth”, and ”development”. Other concepts  with a high rate are 
”future”  and ”vision”. These  are  all  positively  connoted terms,  related  to an  overarching  idea  of 
progress  and of moving from the  current  state  into  a future better one. ”Vision”  and ”future”  are 
likewise positively connoted, as they look forward, to something partly unknown, but anticipated and 
exciting. 
	

It could be said that the comprehensive plan in its full implementation suggests quite a few, 
and large,  changes  to Stockholm. This  could to some parts of the population come  across  as  less 
desirable or even unwanted. The suggested developments are however presented in a manner and in a 
language that gives a certain sense of security. The aim and strategy of the comprehensive plan does 
not come across as extreme or very different from the current track of Stockholm, and when dressed in 
the kind of language discussed above, the picture that is painted of the future of the city seems quite 
positive. The fact that the plan stays away from major systematic changes, while giving reasonable 
descriptions and arguments concerning the possible consequences of the changes, gives little reason to 
fear unforeseen negative consequences of its implementation. Concerning the development of a lively 
urban environment in the whole city, the plan notes, that: 

”A step-by-step development of the built  environment  always brings consequences for the ones 
that live and  work in the area in question. These consequences are normally increased trafﬁc, an 
altered parking situation, the claiming  of spaces that are not  developed, new light conditions and 
changed views in the nearby area. In a growing city this type of changes for the local area normally 
need  to  be  accepted  if  the  orientation  toward  a  safe  and  lively  urban  environment  is  to  be 
reached.” (Stockholm, 2010, p. 45)

Thus, any changes in the stockholmers’ local communities that can be perceived as negative are also in 
the end said to bring positive changes. The quote also simultaneously establishes the goal of the city as 
a higher priority than the individual stockholmer’s love for their closest home environment, and that 
living in a city by force entails to have to put up with top-down controlled interventions.
A World Class City
The image of the vision for the city,  derived from Vision 2030 is Stockholm as ”a world class city”, 
which  aims  to  describe  what  the  efforts  in urban  development  lead  up  to. ”A  world  class  city” 
concerns a city that is ”manifold and rich in experiences, innovative and growing,  and a city for the 
citizens”  (Stockholms stad, 2010, p. 9). As discussed in chapters 3.2.2 and 3.2.3, the image of this city 
is closely connected to attractiveness,  growth in the population and economy,  a strong force in the 
international competition - shortly, an economically strong and internationally renowned city offering 
a high quality of life. 
Sustainability & Sustainable Growth
”Sustainable”  is  of course  another  important  rhetorical  device,  a  label  with  positive  connotations 
generally  associated  with  building  a  society  that  combines  economic  growth  with  environmental 
preservation and social equality. A closer reading of the plan shows  that  the actual  perspective on 
sustainability is another,  but nevertheless,  the plan can beneﬁt from using the term. ”Sustainable”  is 
rarely used without connections to growth,  but in the cases  where this  is done relates to,  e.g.,  park 
planning (Stockholms stad, 2010, p. 18f), cultural historical values (ibid, p. 26), environmental quality 
standards (ibid, p. 28f), urban density (ibid,  p. 34ff), sustainable integrated urban environments (ibid, 
p. 41),  sustainable urban development (ibid,  p. 34,  51),  sustainable urban construction (ibid, p. 60), 
sustainable transportation or traveling (ibid,  p. 20,  34,  42,  70), a longterm sustainable layout of the 

53

railroad (ibid, p. 85). ”Sustainable transportation/traveling”  is the major part of these examples. It can 
be noted that the use of ”a socially, ecologically and economically sustainable development”  is quite 
limited.
	

The shape the growth of the city is supposed to assume is ”sustainable growth”  (ibid,  p. 9), 
and this concept largely frames all the measures the plan encourages. ”Sustainable growth” is thus an 
important part of both the  aim and the main strategy of the plan. The concept is  derived from the 
political vision document for the future of Stockholm,  Vision 2030, and also relates to the national 
strategy  for  sustainable  development.  It  is  noted  that  ”sustainable  growth”   or  ”sustainable 
development”  are  disputed  concepts,  with  fuzzy  deﬁnitions  and  conﬂicting  targets,  but  that  do 
nonetheless  intend to achieve an  ecologically,  socially and economically benevolent  development. 
(ibid, p. 9) The implication of ”sustainable growth” however has more ingredients. The comprehensive 
plan ﬁnds that ”longterm sustainable societal development” (ibid, p. 9) has more to do with a process 
than  a preferred end state,  and thus  directs  attention  to the path and organization of  this process. 
Strong collaboration between the city administrations and corporations and other actors is found to be 
integral, in order to ease implementation and to support a dialogue that is open to new  perspectives 
and interests. This ends up shaping the very meaning of ”sustainable growth”:  

”A sustainable growth  and development toward  a  world class Stockholm is based  on a holistic 
perspective and that  the strategic decisions that are taken by  the city council, the boards of the 
city and boards of governors do not depart from one another. Thus, the comprehensive plan must 
be  coordinated  with  the  general  governance  and  monitoring  within  the  city  and  give  a 
comprehensive foundation for the short term priorities of the city council.” (ibid)

”Sustainable growth” in this  sense refers  to a  process  of  unison  decision making and cooperation 
toward a mutual aim,  in which the  comprehensive  plan is  the common point  of departure,  and an 
important guide to how this sustainable growth is to be achieved.
Apart from the accounts on strategy, ”sustainable growth”  is referred to when describing why 
	

a good maintenance and planning of green areas and parks is important (ibid p. 18), the relevance of a 
modern transportation system (ibid, p. 20), serves as an argument for intensiﬁed housing construction 
(ibid, p. 22), and preserving cultural historical values as a part of increasing the attractiveness of the 
city in the international competition (ibid, p. 26).
	

The plan does not point out any particular threats in search for its justiﬁcation. It does however 
express an urgency to engage in the suggested development.  

SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT, ADMINISTRATIVE RATIONALISM OR ECOLOGICAL MODERNIZATION?

Progress & Reassurance
The use of a terminology that relates to progress in the comprehensive plan follows certain parts of 
sustainable development and ecological modernization. Both discourses are devoted to progress, and 
development as a move toward improvement. The conﬁrmation of this  lies in the very labels of the 
discourses,  ”modernization” and ”development”,  which both lead the thought to a promising open-
ended future. The comprehensive plan shows  a vivid use of concepts alluding to progress,  such as 
”attractiveness”  and ”development”, and in particular the aim to become ”a world class city”  through 
”sustainable  growth.  The  way  this  progress  is  described  however  differs  slightly.  Sustainable 
development refers  to a  ”sensitive,  caring,  and intelligent political-economic system”,  whereas  the 
ecological  modernization has  to be  seen as  more  pragmatic and straight-forward  - as  long  as  the 
fundamental conditions  of decoupled environmental destruction from growth is  fulﬁlled then all  is 
well.  The  comprehensive  plan  shows  a  basic  pragmatic  attitude  in  its  attention  to  easing  the 
implementation process,  and  keeping  the  plan ﬂexible  in  order to  better  respond  to the  needs  of 
different actors. This progress is however,  as has been discussed previously,  less circumscribed than 
the one promoted through ecological modernization.

54

	

Just like the two mentioned discourses, the comprehensive plan also contains an element of 
reassurance,  through which the stockholmers can be assured that whatever development needs to be 
carried out does not have to be painful. Rather,  the plan describes  the intended changes  in positive 
words, improvements. If it ends up inﬂicting trouble, then the stockholmers can rest assured that it is 
all done in their best interest. In this latter sense, it could be argued that there are some similarities 
with administrative rationalism’s  idea  of ”an administrative  mind”   that steers  society in   the best 
direction, guided by public interests. Generally, there are however few similarities with the rhetorical 
devices of administrative rationalism. 
A World Class City
The world class city as the label on the vision for Stockholm alludes to above mentioned progress and 
reassurance,  and provides  a  concept  that  is  more easily grasped than  a comprehensive  plan in its 
entirety. It could be understood as a kind of metaphor, to ease the communication of the aim of the 
development. With its pertaining positive connotations it is also a concept that  might  not be easily 
criticized for the  average reader.  In this  way,  it provides  the  comprehensive  plan with an efﬁcient 
concept for the communication of the plan. This concept is too particular, reﬂecting a certain context 
with its own conditions, to be related directly to any of the three discourses. 
Sustainability & Sustainable Growth
As has been discussed at several points throughout this analysis, sustainability is in the interpretation 
of the comprehensive plan intimately connected to growth, more so than anything else. Its connection 
to the sustainable development discourse, regardless of the use of terminology, is therefore weak, as it 
presents  a  version  that  practically  lacks  the  balance  that  is  fundamental  for  the  sustainable 
development discourse. The plan has similar problems in relation to ecological modernization,  as it 
does  not  prescribe  any  certain  conditions  to  growth.  While  there  are  some  notions  on  how 
environmental protection can serve the urban economy, the plan remains ﬂexible in relation to growth 
potentials. Again,  administrative rationalism is  largely lacking any input in this respect. Out of the 
three  discourses,  ecological  modernization  nevertheless  comes  across  as  the discourse  bearing  the 
most similarities with the comprehensive plan. 

55

3.2.5	
Summary

Basic Entities whose Existence is Recognized or Constructed
In short,  the comprehensive plan shows  strands of mainly administrative rationalism and ecological 
modernization in terms of basic entities, but in different ways. As a document that combines national 
public interests  with a  local  political  agenda  for sustainable  growth it  includes  both  binding state 
orders and a cooperative strategy for development. The analysis above has found that those parts that 
are related to the national level show traces of an administrative rationalist discourse, while the plan as 
a  local  strategy bears  a  resemblance  with  ecological  modernization. The  capitalist  economy  as  a 
starting  point  is  something  the  plan  has  in  common  with  all  the  three  discourses,  sustainable 
development,  ecological modernization and administrative rationalism. In terms  of how  growth and 
nature are handled the plan mainly agrees with ecological modernization. Generally, in this section the 
plan shows the least similarities with sustainable development.
Assumptions about Natural Relationships
The relational character between the agents of the comprehensive plan is close to that of ecological 
modernization. It combines hierarchy and cooperation,  as the plan seeks broad coordinated common 
efforts while maintaining the city as the driver of the process. The stockholmers provide support, but 
are largely sidelined. The relation to nature in the comprehensive plan is thoroughly anthropocentric, 
where humans are placed outside of natural ecosystems, and made into managers of separated entities 
of nature. This agrees with both administrative rationalism and ecological modernization. The value 
that  is  ascribed  to  nature  places  the  plan  closer  to  ecological  modernization,  however  also 
accompanied by administrative rationalism concerning national interests in environmental protection. 
The  strong connection between growth in the population and the economy,  the  attractive city and 
environmental  values  is  not  mirrored  completely  by  any  of  the  three  discourses.  The  closest  is 
ecological  modernization,  making  a  strong  connection  between  environmental  protection  and 
economic growth. The equality that characterizes  the relations of sustainable development does not 
exist. 
Agents & Their Motives
The  investigations  into  the  comprehensive plan’s  agents  and their  underpinning motives  lead to a 
somewhat incoherent result. The way in which ”the City”  is named the main agent of the plan agrees 
with both administrative rationalism and ecological modernization,  for its role as an expert and for 
leading a process of broad cooperation supported by the public. From a sustainability perspective the 
city can  surely be  understood  as  an agent,  but its  exclusion of the stockholmers  and streamlined 
concept for development rhymes badly with this discourse. The public interest is a general motive for 
the three  discourses  and for the comprehensive  plan,  in which it  is  found that  the plan’s  superior 
positioning  as  the  work  of  experts  places  it  close  to  administrative  rationalism.  Its  attention  to 
”sustainable growth”  has some parallels with ecological modernization,  but maybe even more with 
administrative rationalism if it is seen as related to the national interest of sustainable development. 
Regardless  of the use of the word ”sustainable”  the plan in this  respect has little in common with 
sustainable development, as the content of the idea differs considerably.
Key Metaphors & Other Rhetorical Devices
The plan deploys a terminology that has strong positive connotations of progress and development, a 
forward-looking way of describing how to best move toward the vision of ”a world class city”. While 
this bright  future may result in unease  for some during the implementation phase,  the  plan largely 
assures the stockholmers of the simultaneous necessity and high value of the development. This focus 
relates  to  both  sustainable  development  and  ecological  modernization,  but  not  to  administrative 
rationalism. ”A world class city” is an important metaphor for the communication of the plan, but is 
not  recognized  in  the  three  discourses.  Sustainability  and  sustainable  development  are  ascribed 

56

meanings in the plan that disagree in several or all respects compared to ecological modernization and 
sustainable development, and it could be argued that a better deﬁnition of the means of development 
would be ”sustained growth, and a bit of environmental protection”.
Conclusions
Given the kind of document a comprehensive plan represents, it seems logical that several discourses - 
even within the particular frame of environmentalism - are represented. As discussed, the plan weights 
national  interests  to political  visions  and  a practical  context,  and  it  makes sense that a wholesale 
dedication to one concept is difﬁcult - or maybe not even desirable. The comprehensive plan has to be 
a kind of a compromise, not least given the sometimes conﬂicting wishes and needs it must consider. 
Mediating and ﬁnding compromises becomes a basic task of comprehensive planning, which will then 
also be reﬂected in what discourses it  relates to. It is  then not surprising that the analysis  shows a 
mixture  of  three  discourses,  and  even  moments  where  none  of  the  three  discourses  match  the 
comprehensive plan. 
In  terms  of  dominance  of  discourses  the  overall  emphasis  leans  toward  administrative 
	

rationalism and ecological modernization,  in some main respects. The plan shows characteristics of 
administrative rationalism in its attention to certain public interests, where it is as if the discourse has 
been inherited from other institutions in the administrative hierarchy. The plan adopts the supposedly 
neutral expert’s position when managing public interests, and thus not only makes space for top-down 
directives to be immediately implemented,  but in itself acts in line with an administrative rationalist 
approach. An impression is that the administrative  rationalism above all  ﬁgures in formulating the 
foundation of the plan, referring to the weighting of public interests, politics and practical context. 
	

Regarding the aim of the plan and how  it is to come about, the main reference is ecological 
modernization. This has to do with the favored ”sustainable growth”, the agents that are pointed out by 
the plan, and the emphasis on cooperative relations with the city as the leading subject. While being 
underpinned by administrative rationalism, and in certain ways also showing strong resemblance with 
the discourse, ecological modernization arises as the plan’s own discourse, due to its political aim, and 
to the effort at easing implementation and partnerships in line with the aim. The relation to nature is 
informed by a mixture of administrative rationalism and ecological modernization,  where the former 
represents the approach to problem solving, and the latter to the valuing of nature as a resource for 
economic growth. It must however be said that the comprehensive plan lacks the fundamental effort at 
a restructuring of the economy, which is an integral part of ecological modernization. 
	

Apart  from rhetorical  similarities,  the  plan is  generally far from the  discourse sustainable 
development.  The  strategy  ”sustainable  growth”   does  not  do  much  to  advance  sustainable 
development in line with the deﬁnition of the discourse.
 

57

58

4.	
 WORKSHOP IN ECOFEMINIST SCENARIO GENERATION

4.1	
 Workshop  Method  for  Participatory  Generation  of  Feminist 
	


Futures

Workshop methods aim at creating a platform where invited participants are able to speak freely and 
discuss the issues at hand. The idea is to open up for dialogues, thoughts and opinions, preferably in an 
allowing setting that encourages creative expression, where multiple interests and experiences can be 
voiced. Accordingly, it is common to strive for participants with different backgrounds, professions, 
genders,  age  etc  to support  a  manifold discussion.  This  open climate  can potentially increase  the 
acceptance among the participants for out-of-the-box-reasoning and decision-making, thus making it a 
good way to collect information,  data and ideas  to inform further work. (Börjesson et  al.,  p.  731; 
Carlsson-Kanyama et al.,  2003) Other beneﬁts are a process of mutual learning and negotiations,  a 
chance to create knowledge that is socially robust and connected to a concrete reality, and a support 
for democratic principles. The manifold discussions and topics a successful workshop can contain also 
points to the imperative that there is not one perspective,  experience or interpretation that out-rules 
another.  Instead,  plurality can be encouraged among participants  as  well as  in results. In terms  of 
images of the future this emphasizes the value of having several images, as only one vision can hardly 
answer to the experiences,  needs and aspirations of all. (Gunnarsson-Östling et al., 2012,  p. 915) It 
also deals with the power aspect in the privilege of shaping images of the future.
The workshop method that will be deployed in this work has been developed by Gunnarsson-
	

Östling  et  al.  (2012),  and  particularly  concerns  participatory  generation  of  feminist  futures.  The 
workshop includes  a number  of  exercises,  to be  carried out  individually,  in small  groups,  and all 
together,  with the  aim  to create  comprehensive  images  of the  future  in a  long  term perspective. 
Usually lasting one day,  the  workshops  will  in this  case  stretch two  to three hours. The  relation 
between the workshop leader and participants is intended to be largely equalized, striving for mutual 
sharing of knowledge. 
	

There will be two slightly different setups for the workshops that ﬁt the exercises into different 
time  frames.  Early  on  there  were  indications  from  the  invited  institution  the  City  Planning 
Administration that a workshop exceeding two hours would have difﬁculties recruiting participants. 
This has inﬂuenced the setup time wise, while the content of the workshop remains the same. 
	

The  workshops  will  not  engage  in analysis  of the  present  state  of urban  development  in 
Stockholm or in the comprehensive plan. The particular interest is instead what aspects are considered 
important to reach the  set target  of  an ecofeminist future,  and what this  future  might  look like or 
function. The focus is thus on the future society - though naturally starting in the current situation - as 
this is where the workshops can contribute the most to this thesis. 
The questions in the exercises of the workshop are all closely tied to ecofeminist theory, which 
	

is expected to steer the results in a certain direction. This limitation is supported by the outspoken aim 
of the thesis,  but could mean a conﬂict in terms of how  other feminist perspectives can ﬁt  into the 
workshop. One way of opening for other perspectives would be to include intra-feminist critique of 
ecofeminism  in  the  initial  presentation.  There  is  however  support  for  introducing  a  particular 
framework when engaging  participants  in  a workshop.  The  elaboration on workshop  methods  by 
Gunnarsson-Östling et al. (2012) contained an effort to guide the workshop groups in a few different 
particular  feminist  theoretical  directions.  Furthermore,  in  Bradley  &  Hedrén  (2014,  p.  110) 
Gunnarsson-Östling draws on experiences of workshops where the participants had difﬁculties putting 
together  images  of  the future when there  was  no  clear  starting point,  whereas  a  solid framework 
facilitated to develop more detailed images. She also notes that there is no direct connection between a 

59

future scenario from a particular perspective and aim, and a desired scenario. Rather, using a particular 
framework can help clarify what would not be desirable with that theoretical basis.

WORKSHOP SETUP & EXERCISES
The workshops will be carried out according to the following steps: 
1. Short presentation: thesis, ecofeminism and workshop method
2. Time travel: creativity enhancing exercise where the participants are given time for silent personal 
reﬂection and optional pottering on an ecofeminist Stockholm in 2050. A small text to spark ideas 
and images will be read. 
3. Brainstorm  of  aspects:  short individual  brainstorming session starting from the question ”What 
aspects are important in order to achieve a sustainable and ecofeminist future?”  Aspects are to be 
written on individual post-its.
4. Cluster aspects: the post-its are collected and clustered by the workshop leader together with the 
participants. There will be room for explanations, and new aspects can be added.  
5. Generation of images of the future answering the questions:
Q1: ”How can an ecofeminist future be reached within the current system?” 
Q2: ”How can an ecofeminist future be reached beyond the current system?”
The participants are divided into groups,  and work with the clusters  to fulﬁll the targets  of the 
guiding questions. Each group gets a table to ﬁll out with the clusters and the way they need to be 
altered in order to achieve the aim. Halfway through the exercise the groups will be asked to move 
over to the second question. 

6. Presentation of the generated ideas, to be recorded.
7. Evaluation: individual note with three short questions (”What did I learn?”, ”What was good?”,  

”What was bad?”) 

SCENARIO TYPES & TECHNIQUES
Börjesson et al. (2006) write that before engaging in scenario creation it is  useful to consider what 
type of scenario the expected outcome might belong to. Clarifying the worldview  of me as the one 
deciding the direction of the study, the character of the study and its aim can support the forthcoming 
work with scenarios  when it  comes  to methods,  framing of the study (time  perspective,  involved 
participants,  the approach to and content of workshop),  expected outcomes and how  to optimize the 
very work. The very possibility of predicting the future also inﬂuences the feasibility of the scenario, 
and thus what kind of scenario type might be appropriate to engage in. 
	

Considering there is a predeﬁned goal in the scenario generation of this thesis  (i.e.,  how  to 
achieve an ecofeminist future in a longterm perspective) these scenarios will be of a normative kind, 
according to the scenario descriptions provided by Börjesson et al. (2006). Reaching the goal ”within 
the current  system”  would imply  a  preserving scenario,  i.e.,  a  scenario  that  aims  to optimize  the 
prevailing system structure in order to reach a target. However, to move ”beyond the current system” 
would imply a transformative scenario, by which is intended a scenario that looks to achieve a target 
beyond  prevailing  structures  since  the  structures  themselves  make  necessary  changes  impossible. 
(ibid, p 728f) 
	

The scenario generation techniques that are advised for normative scenarios are surveys and 
workshops, and in the transformative scenario also the backcasting Delphi method. The authors note a 
tendency to involve stakeholders in the process of scenario generation, which is the main reason for 
choosing the workshop method (ibid,  p.731ff). The Delphi method could have been applied, had this 
thesis  been  planned  differently.  For reasons  of  limited  time  and feasibility,  aim and content,  this 
method was never considered. Surveys could have been a part of the project. However,  the aim was 
for the participants themselves to both ﬁnd important factors and create images of the future starting 

60

from named factors, rather than contributing with information that would then be put together separate 
from the participants. As previously mentioned, the beneﬁt of workshops lie in the possibility to ﬁnd 
several  parallel ideas,  images  or  interpretations  rather than one single  version,  worked out  by one 
person. In this way a richer material can be collected, while at the same time engaging in a mutual 
process of exchange and dialogue with the potential to enrich all involved. Furthermore, the workshop 
format  is  very feasible,  as  it  does  not  require  a  long  list  of contacts  to be taken,  broad or deep 
knowledge in particular issues among the participants, and can be managed within a short timeframe.
	

As  for  the  advises  by  Börjesson  et  al.  (2006)  concerning  integration  techniques  and 
consistency analysis, these are simply found irrelevant to this thesis. Modeling as a way of testing the 
outcomes of a large and varied input of hard data simply does not apply to either the potentially too 
limited amount of information or the kind of qualitative rather than quantitative results the workshops 
may result in. Further, the time frame and resources of this thesis are estimated to be insufﬁcient, and 
it is also assumed that complying with the suggested techniques would have implied another layout of 
the thesis and would thus have been too big an inﬂuence on the intentions of this project. 

RECRUITING PARTICIPANTS
The results of the workshop will depend heavily on the background and knowledge of the participants, 
why the selection of participants is of great importance. The selection followed three main principles 
according to the types of participants suggested in Gunnarsson-Östling et al. (2012): partisan,  non-
partisan and expert. People organized in activist, political or other groups are by the authors described 
as partisans,  defending a  particular point of view,  sets  of values  or core issues,  while the students 
would represent non-partisans,  lacking an outspoken motive or a deep knowledge in the matters of 
concern.  The  last  group,  the  planners  of  the  strategic  section  of  the  Stockholm  City  Planning 
Administration,  would  represent  experts  in  the  sense  that  they  are  the  ones  working  with  the 
comprehensive plan that this thesis relates to.
The three categories of invited participants according to the deﬁnition above:
1. Partisans:  Persons  involved  in  some  kind  of  feminist  analysis,  discussion,  politics,  work  or 
activism  related  to  questions  of  the  built  environment,  invited  through  the  organizations: 
Megafonen, Alby är inte till salu (campaign rather than organization: the initiators were invited), 
Linje 17, Kulturhuset Cyklopen, Konsthall C, Kvinnors Byggforum and Feministiskt Initiativ (f!)
2. Non-partisans: Students  of the master program Sustainable Urban Planning and Design at KTH, 
and members of the study circle ”Feminist Utopias” at ABF Stockholm.
3. Experts: Strategic planners at the Stockholm City Planning Administration.
However questionable the representation might be when based on outer  attributes  or belonging to 
certain  groups,  the  intention  with this  selection  is  to get  a broad range  of  participants  within  the 
framework that is relevant for this workshop: ecofeminist utopianism. 
	

Inviting  partisans  is  an  effort  to  engage  people  that  already  have  some  knowledge  or 
experience of feminist analyses and/or critical perspectives on the urban development of Stockholm. 
Some of the invited persons engage actively in feminist utopianism, while others are ofﬁcial members 
of the  political  party Feministiskt  Initiativ  (f!),  which  is  working actively to  promote  a  feminist 
society. While the main framework of this  work is  ecofeminist,  other feminisms  would and could 
enrich the discussion and point  at  other solutions,  inconsistencies  or insufﬁciencies. As  mentioned 
before, while having chosen a particular feminist framework for this work, there is a need for multiple 
images of the future. As feminist perspectives differ both in objectives, analysis and methods a variety 
in this sense could potentially be very enriching for the outcomes of the workshops. Further, a number 
of students from respectively KTH and ABF were invited as non-partisans,  the reasons  for which 
being a certain level of knowledge in sustainable  longterm planning and future  studies  or feminist 
utopian thinking respectively. An early idea was that students would be easier to engage in a process 

61

that  would last  slightly longer  than  what  can  be  asked  of neither  professionals  nor  volunteering 
activists.  Further,  the  experience  expressed  by  Gunnarsson-Östling  et  al.  (2012)  about  achieving 
particularly vivid results when working with students certainly informed this selection. The ambition 
of this thesis to assess the current comprehensive plan supports the idea to involve the very planners 
that are working with the plan. These persons would be invited as experts, based on their expertise in 
strategic comprehensive planning in Stockholm. 
Whether these categorizations are valid or applicable can be discussed, as the workshop is a 
	

voluntary activity outside of any curriculum, with a particular topic which altogether can be expected 
to lead to some kind of selection based on personal preference. It might well be that the labeling of 
categories  based on groups proves faulty,  particularly concerning students. The ABF  group can be 
expected to show a big interest in feminism in general, and as such likely to represent certain opinions 
and perspectives. Thus, they could be sliding toward the partisan label. The students of SUPD would 
in some cases be expected to choose to participate based on personal convictions, which might mean 
their  participation would have  more  of a partisan than non-partisan character. However,  when not 
having an outspoken agenda they can still be considered non-partisan, which obviously applies to all 
the students. While the labeling of the groups might not be correct it is still likely that the individual 
participants will be both partisan and non-partisan.

62

4.2	
 Workshop Results

THREE WORKSHOPS

Workshop 1
This  ﬁrst  workshop  was  directed  only  to  the  planners  at  the  City  Planning  Administration  of 
Stockholm,  and also took place at  the ofﬁce in question in order to facilitate their engagement. It 
gathered eight participants,  out of which half work in strategic planning,  three in detailed planning, 
and one intern. As can be seen in ﬁgure 1 the age distribution was even between 23-65, whereas the 
gender  distribution  was  75%  women and 25%  men. All  the  participants  were  employees.  In  the 
scenario generation the participants formed two groups, groups 1 and 2. 

Gender Age

Postal address Occupation

F

M

F

M

F

F

F

40

32

53

46

65

62

23

Svedmyra

Stockholm

Hägersten

Stockholm

strategic planner

strategic planner

strategic planner

strategic planner

Björkhagen

urban planner

Bromma

Bromma

urban planner

intern

35-40

urban planner

F
Unknown
Figure 5. Participants workshop 1
The  outcomes  of  the  workshop  were  very  broad.  With  a  great  knowledge  in  strategic  and 
comprehensive planning, the group navigated on systematic and structural level down to the personal 
and  how  to  handle  everyday  life  issues  -  from  global  to  local,  covering  politics,  economics, 
organizational issues, production and consumption, and basic ethics and morals. When working with 
the clusters,  sufﬁciency was found as  an important  key to some comprehensive changes needed in 
order to alter  the  current  global  and local  condition.  The  tools  were  a  more responsible ﬁnancial 
system, shaping consumption and life patterns, education, a new common ethics, equality, distribution 
of  power,  access  to  resources  etc.  In  a  Stockholm  perspective  the  group  discussed  the  role  of 
institutions and how  to organize, e.g.,  collective transportation, food production and resources. ”The 
local” covered how  to create local neighborhoods with integrated food production and services, and 
how to localize democratic processes. ”The social network”  was related to the local, and dealt with the 
imperative of integration and exchange of experiences across ages. What set this group aside from the 
other  ones  was  their  attention  to  ”The  network  society”,  in  terms  of  the  use  of  technique, 
communication systems and digital tools. While emphasizing the need for ”correct”  use of technique, 
they also brought up ”a renaissance for the knowledge of the hand”.

63

Workshop 2
The second workshop assembled participants from the master program Sustainable Urban Planning 
and Design at The Royal  Institute of Technology (KTH),  students  from the study circle  ”Feminist 
Utopias”  at ABF,  members of Kvinnors Byggforum, and members of the political party Feministiskt 
Initiativ  (F!). As can be seen in ﬁgure 2 the participants were quite young,  between 25-34, with a 
majority of women,  students,  and  residents  of  Stockholm. The  workshop took  place  at  the  KTH 
campus. In the scenario generation the participants formed three groups, groups 3-5. 

Gender Age

Postal address

Invited through Occupation

F

F

M

M

K

K

O

K

25

29

32

25

26

31

26

34

Skärholmen

SUPD / ABF

student (SUPD)

Farsta

Stockholm

Stockholm

Stockholm

Stockholm

Stockholm

Stockholm

SUPD

SUPD

F!

SUPD / Kvinnors 
Byggforum

Kvinnors 
Byggforum

ABF

Kvinnors 
Byggforum

student (SUPD)

student (SUPD)

student 
(architecture)

student (SUPD)

architect

unemployed

architect

Figure 6. Participants workshop 2
The participants  showed differing knowledge in planning, architecture and/or feminist perspectives,  
some of which in one and others in several areas. This might have affected the quite disparate strands 
of thought  that came up during the workshop. The  clusters  concerned overarching principles of a 
holistic  thinking  and  a  reorganized  system  of  production  and  consumption,  equality  locally  and 
globally, stronger local communities and local food production, and changes in physical infrastructure. 
Ideologically, the group suggested a faith in collectivism, communication and cooperation paired with 
individual responsibility, attention to situated knowledge and encouragement of personal freedom of 
expression.  The  responsibility  of  bearing  the  consequences  of  our  societal  organization  must  be 
balanced,  and the use of technique should start from ”the heart”. Structurally,  there was a plead for 
leaving  the  growth  paradigm  behind,  to  overturn  the  idea  of  success  =  money,  to  ﬁnd  a  new 
organization of labor and ownership,  to limit working hours,  achieve a more equal use of resources, 
and  equality  across  ages.  On  a  local  level,  democratization  of  public  and  private  spaces,  local 
production of food and energy,  and a larger variety in residency was  voiced. Infrastructure changes 
were suggested, with more meeting places  and an equal transportation system for both humans and 
goods. 

64

Workshop 3
The  last  workshop ended up being quite intimate,  with only three participants  due to last  minute 
cancellations. The group was quite homogeneous (see ﬁgure 3),  as the participants were all women 
from Kvinnors Byggforum, all architects (practicing or students) and close to 30. The exercises were 
carried out individually and all together, referred to as group 6 in the scenarios. 

Gender Age

Postal address

Invited through Occupation

F

F

F

35

28

31

Stockholm

Hägersten

Stockholm

Kvinnors 
Byggforum

Kvinnors 
Byggforum

Kvinnors 
Byggforum

architect

student 
(architecture), 
intern

architect

Figure 7. Participants workshop 3
What distinguished this group from the others was  a more local and practical  approach,  while still 
relating to the structures of global reach that the local is inscribed in. A core strand in their discussions 
was the importance of making working life, and life in general, less fragmented and move towards a 
greater richness and diversity in possibilities and responsibilities in a holistic manner. Another main 
strand  was  localization  and  collectivization:  of  production,  reproduction  and  democracy.  Thirdly, 
education and awareness - both through knowledge and in our built environments - was emphasized. 
The built environment was discussed in terms of sustained biodiversity, meeting places, human scale 
and public  transportation. Lastly,  use  of resources  has  to be smarter,  and working days  should be 
shortened.  

Figures 8-9. Pictures from workshop 3

65

WITHIN SCENARIOS
Group 1 
Group 1 suggested comprehensive changes starting from the concept of ”sufﬁciency”. For starters a 
tax switching policy was suggested, where energy and resources become more expensive, while the 
subsidies for unsustainable activities and products are removed. Basic income is to be implemented, 
and the working life needs to become more just. Politics should be used to actively steer consumption 
patterns  toward  sustainable  consumption,  and  unsustainable  activities  should  be  made  illegal.  A 
question is how politics can inﬂuence TNC’s and MNC’s, and what actors might be able to exert that 
inﬂuence. 
In terms  of institutions  and organizations  the group stated the  need to disrupt segregation, 
	

through removal of the school election system and a powerful extension of the public transportation 
network. They pointed out some different sides to segregation, e.g., class, ethnicity and age. Through 
schools and preschools children will early on learn another take on gender and global justice than the 
current. 
	

Further,  the  social network and urban spaces  and places  need to be developed to  support 
integration across  ages. Concerning ”the local”  the  group discussed local food production,  and the 
need for municipalities to better steer their own consumption patterns in terms of food. 
	

On a personal level parental leave is to be split between the caregivers, and a generally altered 
use of time and limited working hours in particular. 
Group 2 
Group 2 emphasized changes  in  the  current  economic system,  e.g.,  that environmental  and social 
values  must  be  given an economic value  and be  included in all  calculations. Giving a  product  or 
service its actual price will contribute to a responsible growth beyond exploitation. The  individual 
responsibility stretches from the personal level,  such as  identities built on environmental awareness 
and responsibility, to political responsibility to force large companies to change their ways of business. 
Like the ﬁrst group, removed subsidies on unsustainable production and consumption was suggested. 
The  group  further  suggested  smaller  economic  systems  and  actors  on  the  market.  This  would 
contribute to a better understanding and survey of processes of production that today have become too 
large and simultaneously obscure. The consequences of the activities of companies need to be made 
visible. 
	

Existing local organizations and associations are to be supported, and cooperation in between 
these  needs  to  increase.  Local  production of  food  was  suggested,  just  like  the  right  use  of  new 
technique. Micro-credits are seen as a good way of supporting self-sufﬁciency in poor countries. 
Group 3
Group 3  pointed  out  ”doing together”,  collaboration and humbleness  as  integral  to  changing our 
current system in a ecofeminist direction. A basic issue is to take society as a starting point rather than 
individuals striving to fulﬁll their separate needs. The common good and the ”we”  out-rules the ”ego”. 
A large part of this is that the privileged need to give up some of their beneﬁts, according to the idea 
that short term losses will beneﬁt the long term development. Meeting places are seen as important 
arenas for sharing knowledge and resources,  dialogue and mediation. This also means  that current 
patterns of consumption need to change. 
Group 4
Group 4  emphasized  the  great  chances  of  altering the  current  system,  as  it  is  a  structure  that  is 
produced and reproduced by us ourselves. The Swedish society has created a lot of tools to achieve 
change, such as tax regulations and laws. New visions can be included, and trickle down to practice. In 
order for this to work it would be necessary to reevaluate current tools and how they are used. This 
goes for infrastructure,  organization etc. There would also be a chance to punish actors that claim to 
work towards the said goal but in fact fail or ignore it. Accordingly, political decision-making is an 

66

important tool. The vision must be present in all decision-making, and in the ﬁnal stage it is important 
that it is materialized. On an individual level popular adult education,  citizen engagement and active 
(conscious) consumerism is suggested. A personal responsibility is required. 
Group 5
Group  5  suggested  tax-switching  policies  to  support  ”climate  smart”  solutions,  and  raised  the 
importance of paying the proper price for products. However,  the power of the consumer is limited, 
since it disappears  when the consumer stops consuming. Thus,  in order to achieve change political 
governance should support new legislation and policies that aim for a sustainable society. Inequalities 
should be met  by another organization of work,  including shorter working days,  equal accessibility 
through developed infrastructure, and rental apartments should be subsidized through taxes. Last but 
not  least,  the  group  emphasized  the  importance  of  including  the  ”non-normative”  in  planning 
processes in order to make our physical environments more inclusive. 
Group 6
The group pointed out how  education must be used to increase the knowledge of sustainability and 
equality early on, as  an important part in raising awareness. Segregation in schools must be fought 
since it contributes to homogenization and inequalities,  and teaching pedagogy and material must be 
permeated by basic human rights such as democracy and equality. Visual display of sustainably built 
structures or activities are positive for raising awareness.
	

A shift in basic attitudes from the individual to the collective ”we”  is needed in order to make 
it  less  interesting  to  earn  at  someone  else’s  expense.  This  concerns  the  use  and  distribution  of 
resources. Collectivism needs to be supported in,  i.a.,  the offer of apartments,  why the city needs to 
build  bigger  apartments,  the  politics  surrounding  rental  apartments  need  to change,  and forms  of 
ownership and tenure rethought. The city as landowner needs to be better at using its power to steer 
the urban development. The city’s  biodiversity needs  to be  protected. ”The local”,  is  an important 
focus for local  food production,  an enlarged offer  of services and public non-commercial  meeting 
places,  e.g., green spaces. Limited transportation has to be combined with good local accessibility to 
goods and services. An enforced ”locality” would also support the local social network. 
A limitation to working hours is needed in order to make time for other activities and break off 
	

from a system of increasing unemployment where fragmented specialized individuals have no insight 
in the larger processes they are inscribed. Efﬁciency is over-valued. The conclusion is that less work -
> less money -> less consumption -> more time for other things. This opens up for the individual to 
engage in other activities and to become more complex but at the same time more complete persons.

Figure 10. Picture from workshop 2.

67

BEYOND SCENARIOS
Group 1 
Group 1  turned  their  attention  to  the  implications  of  a  developed network  society,  and how  the 
extremely global meets  the  extremely local. One  conclusion was  that  an appropriate survey of the 
trafﬁc in this system is integral to its development, uses and potentials. Overall,  how to manage the 
very local with the very global was an issue that the group dealt with in several aspects, promoting a 
democratic  system  with  a  localized  democracy  (which  itself  needs  to  be  developed  through  an 
increased local democracy) combined with a ”wise” and democratic global community. The network 
society offers  possibilities  in  information sharing,  and  the  question is  what  the  most  sustainable 
solution will  be. ”Sufﬁciency” must  be  the  new  aim for both living and production,  which would 
imply  a  very  big  change.  ”Rewards”  such  as  salaries  against  a  working  effort  will  have  to  be 
rethought, and basic income is suggested. Working life needs a structural change. 
Group 2 
Group 2 thought it difﬁcult to imagine a system beyond the current, but concluded that the survival of 
the earth and humans  will be integral. Today global growth can be seen as the main principle that 
inﬂuences all decisions, and the group considered what would happen if the survival of the earth and 
the wellbeing of all humans would replace this aim. They pointed out that ”bloody revolutions”  would 
not be the way to come about change, but that it needs to come about in a more sensible and conscious 
way.  
Group 3
In the next task group 3 pointed out wide ranging conditions in order to achieve an ecofeminist future. 
The group suggested new forms of organization, such as a kind of global governance that is stronger 
than the UN and free from overt or secret manipulation by ﬁnancial powers. There should be some 
kind  of  representative  global  democracy,  despite  its  inherent  problems.  Local  sustainability  was 
thought of as a way to counter, e.g.,  economic crashes,  in an organization that is more adaptable to 
such major changes. The imperative of the collective instead of the ego was repeated in the phrases 
”stop the blaming game”. Instead of ﬁghting against one another there is a need for cooperation and 
solidarity. There is a need to relieve people around the world from stress, anxiety and oppression by 
making sure every human being is kept safe from homelessness and starvation. A democratic society 
and the ability to speak one’s mind starts  with eliminating anxieties concerning basic human needs. 
Connected to this is a need for ”real”  education that is separated from propaganda. The group raised 
that  politics  and  democracy  have  been  commercialized  and  thus  lost  its  idealist  and  visionary 
potential. Further, corporate social responsibility (CSR) was seen as a borderline area with potential 
for working within and beyond the current system.
Group 4
”It is so difﬁcult not to have anything to start from.” Group 4 had difﬁculties engaging in the second 
scenario development,  and ended up talking about  basic  values in which the group refrained from 
hierarchies  and structures  and looked toward equal  distribution of power.  Organizationally society 
should be less hierarchical and more accessible. ”Love”  was found to be the core value and starting 
point for the development of all areas of society. 
Group 5 
Group 5 returned to their principle of inclusion of the non-normative in planning,  with the aim of 
being reﬂected everywhere in our built environment,  from highways to dwellings. There needs to be 
(physical)  space  for  everyone.  Organizationally,  resources  should  be  seen  as  collectively  owned, 
whereby access to resources must relate to a need. The system where a few owns the most, which the 
others  have  to  pay  for  is  not  sustainable.  Further,  resources  must  be  valued  higher.  The  global 
economy needs to be altered in such a way that colonialism is put to a halt. This does not imply any 

68

complete stop to global exchange of goods,  but rather refers  to equal terms in trade and production 
where local adequacy meets global justice. This also concerns the national scale. 
Group 6
Group 6 focused a lot on collective organization of labor, through a mandatory society service, and 
collectively managed  reproductive labor. Shorter working days  should  be  combined with  a  larger 
variation in tasks and activities, and strive for gender equality. The capitalist focus on labor leads to 
severe consequences over time for those unable to work, thus an unsustainable organization. 
	

The global capitalism contributes  to cultural imperialism,  why local knowledge, history and 
tradition based on local particular conditions must be revalued. Valuing the speciﬁc and local identities 
contributes to pride, and this to protection of the speciﬁc. 
	

Education  should  work  critically  with  norms  and  attitudes  concerning  gender  roles. 
Consumption and sustainability must be dealt  with in several stages: 1. ecological consumption,  2. 
critique  of  the  inadequacy  of  ecological  consumption,  3.  ecologically  and  socially  ecofeminist 
sustainable consumption. Resource is  to be  characterized by equality locally and globally,  with an 
extraction  of  resources  beyond  patriarchy and colonialism.  Food production and  trade  need to  be 
localized, and respect seasons and limits,  to reestablish actually existing limits. Global exchange of 
goods  is  good within reasonable limits,  but  global  supply mustn’t  be taken for granted in a  local 
context. This will lead to a larger respect for what we have, appreciation for what we get, and a better 
way of living. Consumer power is  useful in minor fast  changes but  limited to active  consumption. 
Slower and big political processes are integral for thorough changes. 
Information technology could work as  a democratic  tool through knowledge exchange and 
	

global social networks. This is connected to the elimination of property rights, where the societal good 
is seen as a greater beneﬁt than individual gain. Sharing is more practical, with more and better results. 
We need new  forms of organization to beneﬁt everyone rather than limit and exclude through price 
tags  on goods and services. Collective  responsibility in society is imperative.  Public transportation 
should be free for everyone. Architects have a great responsibility in creating good conditions in the 
physical environment for other life styles. Build less, refraining to build and reuse!

Figure 11-12. Pictures from workshop 1. 

69

4.3	
 Summary

Within Scenarios
The  workshop results  for the  within  scenarios  display certain main  similarities  and differences  in 
between themselves. Most of the groups deployed a generally structural and top-down perspective in 
their suggestions for change. Groups 1, 2, 4 and 5 all paid a great deal of attention to national levels of 
governance, politics and policy-making. Group 4 and 5 mainly moved within a national framework, 
whereas groups 1 and in particular group 2 suggested changes stretching to include the global network 
the city is inscribed in through addressing the actions of multinational corporations. Group 1 and 2 
simultaneously handled the local and personal levels. The wide scope that characterized their work in 
particular may be related to the fact that the groups consisted of the planners from the City Planning 
Administration. Group 6 mainly focused the city, institutional and local level, and in this sense might 
have been the group that came closest to handling the context of relevance for the comprehensive plan 
speciﬁcally. All the participants of this group were architects, which may have been a reason for the 
slight  difference in perspective,  as  the  other groups  engaged  at least one planner. Group 3  had a 
thorough  ”speaking from  the  margins” perspective,  drawing attention to  the  elimination of unjust 
privileges. What  separates  this group from the  others  was  their  attention to basic values,  with the 
collective ”we”  as the highest organizational level. This group involved the only participant out of all 
the workshops that had no connection to planning or architecture. 
Beyond Scenarios
The beyond scenarios show  a larger range in their focus,  as the suggestions  range from a planetary 
level to the local community,  and ”love” as a driving force. All groups but number 4 discuss global 
levels of governance,  economy and use of resources. Groups 5 and 6 speciﬁcally point out resource 
use  beyond colonialism  and  exploitation.  Group 1  and  3 attend to  global  democratic governance 
combined with a localized democracy. Group 1 and 6 look into how the growing network society will 
bring the local and the global closer together, as a tool to move toward increased democracy,  at the 
same time suggesting the need for monitoring. Group 2 was the only group to focus nature and the 
planet,  setting  the  survival  of the  planet  and the wellbeing  of  all humans  as  the  ultimate  goal  to 
inﬂuence all  decision-making on all  levels. Group 6 attended to the strengthening of the local as a 
means  of improving global  relations. Group 4 talked of how  love  should be  the  starting point for 
development toward a society characterized by equality in power. Group 5 pinpointed that the non-
normative  must  be  given physical  space  in every  part  of  society.  It  seems  the more  imaginative 
scenario  opened up  for other  possibilities  than  the  ﬁrst  one,  as  it  can  be seen how  the range  of 
suggestions reach further, both spatially and conceptually, than the within scenarios.

70

5.	
 ASSESSMENT OF THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN USING THE 
	
W ORKSHOP RESULTS

Workshops  are  a  way  to  collect  information  on  an  issue,  in  an  effort  to  engage  in  cooperative 
processes  that  broaden  the  scope  and  focus  in  a  way  that  beneﬁts  from  the  participants’  own 
experiences and knowledge. The scope of the workshops  that were carried out as part of this thesis 
was to generate future visions of an ecofeminist Stockholm in 2050. The workshop outcomes will now 
be used to assess the current comprehensive plan, to clarify in what main respects they agree with and 
differ  from  one  another  in  order  to  ﬁnd  out  how  the  workshop  results  could  contribute  to  the 
comprehensive plan. The analysis will partly rest on the discursive categories by Dryzek that were 
deployed in the discourse analysis in chapter 3.2. The workshop results will be related to the plan in 
two steps, the ﬁrst one following the ”within”  scenarios,  and the second one following the ”beyond” 
scenarios. It is expected that the within scenarios will prove easier to incorporate into the plan in its 
current form, while the beyond scenarios require more thorough changes. 

5.1	
 Within Scenarios

1. BASIC ENTITIES WHOSE EXISTENCE IS RECOGNIZED OR CONSTRUCTED

The Capitalist Economy & Growth
Generally,  the  within scenarios  take  the  current  capitalist  political  economy  as  given. This  is  an 
important  basic  starting  point,  in  terms  of  the  possibility  to  relate  the  workshop  results  to  the 
comprehensive plan. The  workshops  then  direct  attention toward certain changes  to the capitalist 
system that are assumed to be needed if an ecofeminist reality is to be fulﬁlled. Largely relating to 
ecological modernization the comprehensive plan could potentially stretch to contain such changes, in 
particular if the aim is  to combine environmental protection with economic growth. This is  not the 
primary aim  of  the  workshop scenarios,  and growth named a main task for planners,  such as  the 
”sustainable growth” of the comprehensive plan, cannot be found in the workshop visions. However, 
this does not mean that growth in itself is fundamentally opposed in the workshops, but rather that the 
scenarios look into how that growth shall be managed, in the sense that growth needs to follow  other 
needs rather than being the primary task. As will be discussed below, there are possibilities to insert 
the suggested changes into the comprehensive plan without major changes, in spite of these somewhat 
conﬂicting aims.  
Nature 
Nature is largely handled in a similar way in the workshops as in the comprehensive plan. It is rarely 
speciﬁcally addressed, other than in terms of the opportunity to increase local food production (Groups 
1, 2,  6), and a certain notion on the need for the protection of biodiversity and enhanced local green 
spaces  (group 6).  Thus,  the  most  common  way  of  approaching nature  is  as  a  resource at  human 
disposal, alternatively as an entity to be managed by humans. 
Governance
Differing from the plan,  the workshop results attend to individuals  and collectives as  an important 
level  for  political,  social,  economic  and  organizational  change.  The  plan  mainly  addresses 

71

stockholmers in terms of their function for particular subject areas in an urban development managed 
by the city, where they largely lack any role in or agency for change. The workshops however point 
toward  on  the  one  hand  strong  top-down  governance,  and  on  the  other  development  from  the 
grassroots with the support of the authorities. This means a partial devaluation of those market forces 
as important agents for change that are prominent in the comprehensive plan, and certainly lending an 
added value to the stockholmers. However,  the workshops emphasizes political power and decision-
making,  on  local,  national  and  international  levels.  Thus  they  overstep  the  borders  of  both 
comprehensive planning, and of the discourse the plan largely deploys - rather relating to the discourse 
of sustainable development. The attention to both higher and lower of governance than the city also 
implies that the city as such assumes a smaller importance than in the comprehensive plan. 

2. ASSUMPTIONS ABOUT NATURAL RELATIONSHIPS

The City as Mediator between Top-Down Politics & Strong Citizenry
By  putting  their  trust  in  a  combination of  multi-layered  top-down  politics  and  grassroots  driven 
development  the  workshop  outcomes  partly  disrupts  the  clearly  hierarchical  relational  structure 
derived  from the  comprehensive plan.  While  keeping  with a  strong state  there  is  conﬁdence  that 
individuals and collectives  have an important  role to play. Within these collectives and individuals 
cooperation, sharing and exchange is clearly favored. The relation between the local and, e.g., the city 
level needs to be characterized by respect and support, but at the same time politics are exercised in a 
most top-down fashion. Thus,  what is  seen is strong politics combined with a strong citizenry. This 
potentially emphasizes the city as  the mediator,  in a more direct and participatory manner than the 
current. The attention to multi-layered governance clearly resembles  sustainable development. The 
city as a mediator is partly practical reality in today’s comprehensive planning, however lacking the 
strong  emphasis  on  individuals  and  collectives  as  important  actors.  On  the  whole,  the  parallels 
between the workshop scenarios and the comprehensive plan are limited in this respect.
Anthropocentrism
The relation to nature is basically the same in the workshop scenarios  and the comprehensive plan. 
Nature is largely seen as a resource at human disposal,  alternatively as an entity to be managed by 
humans. This points toward a clear anthropocentric relation. However,  pertaining to the encouraged 
increase  in  urban  farming  for  social  purposes,  as  well  as  the  encouragement  of  local  systems  of 
production for better insight into the cycle of production and consumption, is an effort to learn from 
the cyclical character of nature. Thus,  there is a certain recognition of the nested character of social 
and  ecological  systems,  to  be  found  in  sustainable  development.  This  notion  is  absent  in  the 
comprehensive plan. The attention to protection of biodiversity is however a reﬂection of the existing 
intentions of the comprehensive plan. 

3. AGENTS & THEIR MOTIVES

Broad Range of Agents
In terms of agents, the workshop results show a broader range than the comprehensive plan’s focus on 
the city’s administrations and corporations, and others concerned with urban development. This has to 
do with a broader scope in terms of how  the problem our society is facing is conceived of,  and the 
aims  and means suggested in the workshops. To the workshops,  it is natural to work on numerous 
layers simultaneously, with a great emphasis on both a strong government,  and local democracy and 
collectives. The agency is  thus  redistributed from the city,  partly upwards  in  the  decision-making 
hierarchy,  and  partly  downwards  to  local  communities.  Furthermore,  the  workshops  speak  of 
democratic assemblies on global levels, and MNC’s and TNC’s as important agents given the extent of 
their  inﬂuence  that  often  surpasses  that  of  national  governments.  As  already  mentioned,  this 

72

organization has more to do with sustainable development than any other discourse,  and bears  very 
limited resemblance with the comprehensive plan. 
Integration, Equality & Justice
The agents in the workshop results are motivated by quite different objectives than the comprehensive 
plan. The workshops emphasize integration, intersectional equality and justice. There is an outspoken 
aim  to  end  the  capitalist  exploitation  of  social  and  environmental  goods,  to  ﬁght  unsustainable 
production  and  consumption,  and  to  strive  for  ”sufﬁciency”  instead  of  ”sustainable  growth”. 
Collectivity  is  emphasized  both  as  a  value  and  as  a  way  of  living.  There  is  also  a  notion  of 
humbleness, referring to intra-human relations, and indicating an emotional connection. 
These  ideas  are  not  excluded  from  the  plan,  rather  there  is  -  as  previously  mentioned  - 
	

attention to social  and  economic  inequalities,  and an  effort  to  achieve  a  more  integrated  society,  
socially  and  spatially.  The  main  motivation  for  the  comprehensive  plan  however  remains  a 
combination of public interests (i.a.,  land use and environmental quality standards) and the political 
vision of a world class Stockholm through ”sustainable growth”. The difference to the workshops is 
that  they  put  equality  and integration as  their  ﬁrst  goals,  just  as  uncompromising  as  sustainable 
growth. 
	

The previously referred notions on solving the  lack of affordable  dwellings,  and economic 
disparities in the population point out this difference. In the ﬁrst case it is noted that poorer households 
have a weak position on the housing market. It is also noted that it has proved difﬁcult to obtain low 
prices on newly built rental housing, why the solution that is found is to build for more afﬂuent groups 
with  the  hope  that  they  will  leave  more  affordable  housing  available  for  the  poorer  groups 
(Stockholms  stad,  2010,  p. 23). As  much as  this  may be a difﬁcult  case to solve  on  the  level  of 
comprehensive planning (maybe on, e.g., a state level the chances would have been better), it shows 
how projects that will primarily contribute to the growth of the city and its more afﬂuent parts of the 
population are seen as a solution to the lack of affordable dwellings. This equation depends on, and 
takes for granted, that the ones leaving their affordable apartments 1. have the means to move to more 
expensive housing,  2. think it is worth paying more for their housing than they previously have,  3. 
ignores the fact that cheap housing will always be attractive and thus meet a large interest, 4. takes for 
granted that the ones with the least means will automatically get access to the cheapest housing - there 
are  other  circumstances  that  affect  this  as  well,  e.g.,  time  in  the  rental  housing queue,  personal 
connections, or mutually enforcing discriminating systems (e.g., a person who is discriminated on the 
labor market will not  have enough  money to be  allowed to even apply for apartments).  Lastly,  it 
assumes  that the large increase in the population will not affect the conditions of the existing poor 
inhabitants. 
	

In the second case the argument starts in the failure to achieve equal chances in life for all 
inhabitants, particularly on the labor market:

”Alike  other  big  city  regions  there  are  substantial  social  and  economic  inequalities  in  the 
Stockholm-Mälar Region. The wealth has increased during many years, but so have the differences 
between different groups of society too. One of the biggest challenges of the region is to give all 
stockholmers equal life chances, not least on the labor market where Stockholm and Sweden has 
had less of success than many other regions. Everything points toward that it will  be completely 
necessary  to use this  labor  power  resource better  in  order to achieve  a  longterm sustainable 
growth.” (Stockholms stad, 2010, p. 8) 

In  this  paragraph  the  perspective  quickly  shifts,  where  marginalized  groups  is  turned into  mere 
resource for economic growth, pointing out the importance of deploying this resource in a better way 
for longterm sustainable growth to be achieved - not for the social inequalities to be diminished. The 
fundamental reason for addressing economic inequalities is not mainly that inequalities are considered 
to  be  bad  from  a  social  point  of  view,  but  because  they  hamper  economic  growth.  Addressing 
economic inequalities  thus  aims  to increase economic growth,  while the simultaneous  potential  of 
easing social inequalities is reduced to a positive side effect. This differs considerably from addressing 

73

economic inequalities as an important part of social inequalities, or from addressing social inequalities 
using the economy as a tool for leveling, which would be the focus of the workshops. This shows that 
there are great contrasts  in the underpinning motives for the comprehensive plan and the workshop 
scenarios. 
	

Sustainable  development’s  attention  to  balanced  intersecting  systems  of  environmental 
protection,  distributive  justice and economic growth lands  closer to the idea of the workshops,  in 
particular if this concerns the very ﬁrst notion on sustainability where growth was largely excluded, 
originating in Third World countries (Dryzek, 2012, p. 148). 

4. KEY METAPHORS AND OTHER RHETORICAL DEVICES

Sufﬁciency
It should be noted that the workshop scenarios were created during a short period of time, and thus 
that any rhetorical devices  or key metaphors may be more limited than those of the comprehensive 
plan. There are however a few examples worth mentioning. ”Sufﬁciency” is such a concept, intending 
an alternative direction to growth, by which production and consumption must aim to satisfy what we 
need rather than what we wish or are led to believe that we need. The ”collective”, the ”local”  and the 
”social network” are key concepts to the scenarios of the workshops. 
	

These concepts barely exist in the comprehensive plan. With the key to the plan residing in 
continued growth, without any particular limitations, sufﬁciency is simply not relevant. Collectives, or 
local networks are likewise irrelevant, as these levels of society are not seen as having any bearing on 
the growth of the economy or the city. 

COMPATIBILITY OF THE WITHIN SCENARIOS & THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN

Context & Levels of Governance
A general note in matters of governance is the limited direct reach of the comprehensive plan. The 
workshop results  show  numerous  examples  of  how  to steer  the use  of resources,  production and 
consumption in a direction toward proper pricing, consumer awareness, and an active encouragement 
of a more sustainable production and consumption overall. Some of these suggestions fall within the 
frames and reach of the comprehensive plan, while others have larger implications, making the direct 
insertion into the comprehensive plan more difﬁcult, as they would rather be a concern of corporate, 
national  or  international  levels  of  governance.  One  group  (group  4)  notes  the  great  chances  of 
changing society if we want to, given the vast amount of tools at our disposal. What is needed is a 
vision,  that  can  trickle  down  through  institutions  and  different  societal  levels.  This  pinpoints  the 
problem, namely the direct ability of the comprehensive plan to be that change. In several of the cases 
an active comprehensive planning could be a good support of a move in a certain direction,  if the 
political support for that move exists. The problem is when it doesn’t. 
”Sustainable growth”  from the comprehensive plan can serve as an example. When the plan 
	

focuses the ”sustainable growth”  of Stockholm per se, in competition with other urban regions in the 
world, the workshops look toward the local  and global repercussions that growth entangles. In this 
sense,  the workshops  lean toward a  larger change than the comprehensive plan,  as  they encourage 
structural and organizational changes way beyond the urban region of Stockholm. 
Supporting a more Sustainable Economy
There  are  however  other  proposals  from  the  workshops  that  are  closer  to  the  level  of  the 
comprehensive plan, and also proposals that would not necessarily contradict the plan in its current 
form. One such potential is the idea of ”sustainable growth”. While the idea of ”sustainable growth” 
represented in the plan focuses a smooth implementation process rather than the way social, ecological 
and economic resources are handled (see chapter 3.2.1, 3.2.2, 3.2.4), it could potentially be deployed 

74

in a more proactive manner,  where sustainable production,  consumption, use of resources and other 
activities  are actively - rather than passively - supported. As  an example,  the comprehensive plan 
recurrently  writes  about  Stockholm  as  internationally  strong  in  the  business  of  environmental 
technologies. The aim is to encourage continued development in this area, and it would seem logical if 
a wholesale support of businesses  that aim at sustainability - not only in the technological sector - 
would  be  supported  in their entirety.  The  plan also mentions  that  the  procurement  of  goods  and 
services should encourage ”environmentally efﬁcient technology” (Stockholms stad, 2010, p. 8). The 
effort to promote certain forms of economic activities would imply a disadvantage for those that do 
not follow, which could push the corporate development in whatever favored direction. 
	

Still complying to the idea of growth,  group 2 suggested the inclusion of environmental and 
social costs into pricing in the public procurement of goods and services, for the market to be adjusted 
to real values, and in the end to support a non-exploitative market economy. Another suggestion was to 
actively  steer  the  consumption  patterns  of  the  municipality  itself  (group  1).  Given  the  existing 
management  of  procurement  of  goods  and  services,  this  suggestion  should  seemingly  easily  be 
possible to include. 
	

In all, this would thus mean a large-scale form of consumer power, which in combination with 
the support of actors that aim at sustainable methods and goods could become a force to reckon with. 
The implication would be that the plan takes a clearer stand for supporting sustainable production and 
consumption, both in the city’s dependency on other parts of the world, and locally in terms of local 
businesses. Local food production could form a natural part of this strategy, suggested by groups 2 and 
6. The  localization  of  food  production,  and  the  open  support  of  small-scale  market  actors  could 
contribute  to  a  better  understanding  and  monitoring  of  production  processes  (group  2),  while 
simultaneously providing more sustainable  products  on the  market.  By setting  this  as  a  top-down 
standard the city could also provide support  for  individuals  in  engaging  in urban farming,  and  in 
taking their own consumption in a more sustainable direction.
A Localized Society
Just like the food production many of the workshop suggestions aim toward a more localized society, 
where the local social network,  local meeting places for exchange of knowledge and resources, and 
local provision of good and services are emphasized (groups 1, 3, 6). This is supported by the plan, 
through attention to how  to sustain local centers  and service provision,  local accessibility to good 
public spaces,  schools and culture, and to ”enforce the social perspective in planning”  (Stockholms 
stad, 2010, p. 17). It is however important to note that there may be a difference in the approaches to 
local development of the comprehensive plan and the workshops respectively. The workshop results 
favor local developments  that  start from the grassroots  with the support of the city,  while the  city 
seemingly intends a top-down approach to local developments, seeking support for its proposals. It has 
to do with what comes ﬁrst: the development proposal, or the local dialogue. 
Furthermore, the workshops have a number of suggestions that concern the individual level, 
	

such as active and conscious consumption (groups 2, 3, 4),  a personal political responsibility (group 
2), and identity formation that is based on respect for nature (group 2). There was also an emphasis on 
the collective level, where the social network (groups 1, 2), ”doing together”  (groups 3, 6), sharing of 
knowledge and resources in open dialogue and mediation (group 3), and collective housing (group 6) 
was brought up. While the very personal level is difﬁcult to target in comprehensive planning, it would 
still be possible to support a move in this direction, mentioned in the previous section. 
Equality & Integration in Practice
The  workshops  also focus  a great  deal of attention on public goods,  such as  public transportation 
(groups 1, 5), schools (1, 6) and cheap rental apartments (5). Enforcement of public transportation is 
supported in the  plan,  the  difference  in  this  matter  would  probably  fall  on  the  extension  of this 
enforcement.  Schools  are  addressed  for  extended  education  in  equality,  global  justice  and 
sustainability, and the elimination of the school election system. Another issue that is brought attention 
to is a basic income for all (group 1). Several groups encourage limited working hours (groups 1, 5, 6). 

75

Group 3 points  toward an evening out of privileges,  and the sharing of  knowledge and resources. 
Group 6  discusses  the  relation between  shorter working hours  resulting in diminished means  for 
consumption  while  gaining  time  for  personal  development  as  a  way  of  moving  away  from  the 
fragmented  individualism  of  today’s  society.  While  expressed  in  different  ways,  it  seems  these 
suggestion  point  in  a  similar  direction:  toward  decreased  economic  and  social  inequalities  and 
segregation,  and  relations  that  are  characterized  by  collectivism  and  cooperation.  Some  of  the 
suggestions hold high relevance for comprehensive planning, whereas  others  concern other societal 
levels for decision-making. 
	

The comprehensive plan conﬁrms large social and economic divides as a big challenge to the 
city (Stockholms stad, 2010,  p. 8) and does present efforts directed toward this goal,  often focusing 
how  to create urban environments,  connections,  transportation and public spaces  that bring people 
together rather than separate (ibid, p. 16f). However,  concerning the likewise concrete issue of cheap 
rental dwellings, indirectly relating to economic disparities, the plan is vague. As discussed above, the 
solution to cheap dwellings is to create more opportunities  for richer stockholmers  to move houses, 
thus leaving cheaper dwellings for others to occupy (ibid,  p. 23). In short,  it seems the efforts of the 
plan could be much more ambitious in its concrete measures to lay the ground for a more equal city. 
Human-nature Interaction	

The workshops deal with nature in a similar manner as the comprehensive plan, and the suggestions 
are also largely compatible. Protection of biodiversity as  well as  enhancing local  green spaces  are 
already present in the comprehensive plan,  while local food production on the other hand could be 
incorporated more clearly. The urban farming is  in the workshops  seen as a way to increase  self-
sufﬁciency, but also as a means to enforce the local social network. It is thus a proposal that more than 
nature has to do with local social organization. However, the plan’s effort to develop local cores, and 
to enhance the urban environments  throughout the whole city,  could potentially beneﬁt  from using 
urban farming as a tool.
Challenges
The suggestion to limit production and consumption in order to provide time and space for personal 
and collective development would theoretically speak against the plan’s aim,  sustainable growth, and 
would thus be impossible to implement. A limit on working hours falls into the same category, even if 
the implementation of the idea is  possible independently of the comprehensive plan. Generally,  the 
implementation of these ideas  is not impossible given our current reality,  but it also cannot receive 
direct support in the current form of the comprehensive plan.
	

Using the power of collectivism in local development could very well serve the purposes of 
the  comprehensive  plan  to  develop  local  cores,  but  it  would  potentially  conﬂict  with  how  this 
development takes place. As  mentioned before,  the local development  of the workshops  suggest a 
grassroots driven development that has the steady support of the city, whereas the city rather seems to 
favor a top-down driven process. 
The Stockholmers
The  workshops  point  toward  something  that  goes  beyond  separate  interventions,  displaying  a 
fundamental  contrast  to  the  comprehensive  plan.  This  regards  how  the  stockholmers  are  being 
described and  what  they are assumed to  be  capable of. The  workshop scenarios  assume but also 
require the inhabitants of the city to be capable, active and responsible in the coordinated development 
of the city. As discussed in the discursive analysis of the comprehensive plan (chapter 3.2), it does not 
picture  the  stockholmers  as  agents  in  the  development  of  the  city.  Rather,  they  are  described  as 
functions adjusting to the contexts in which they are mentioned. The workshops however speciﬁcally 
point  out  every  stockholmer  as  an  agent,  and  incorporates  values  and  view  of  man  focusing 
collectivism, grassroots development, local communities and democracy.
	

One reason for this may be that it belongs to another level of conversation - the political - and 
a different political framework than the plan. Thus, any easy insertion of this perspective into the plan 

76

cannot be expected. However, it points toward a potential for development of the plan. The inﬂuence 
could be twofold:  ﬁrst,  the very inclusion of the public as  capable agents  into processes of urban 
development, and second,  the basic idea of cooperation in collectives instead of parallel individuals, 
which has great implications for what kind of city we are trying to create and how we attempt to get 
there.  This  inclusion  would  however  require  a  redeﬁnition  of  agents,  of  the  process  of  urban 
development, and of the relation between the city and its inhabitants. 

77

5.2	
 Beyond Scenarios

1. BASIC ENTITIES WHOSE EXISTENCE IS RECOGNIZED OR CONSTRUCTED

The Capitalist Economy & Growth
The beyond scenarios of the workshops have different ways of handling the capitalist economy, where 
most depart from it while group 5 and 6 look into ideas on how to alter the current economy. Both the 
latter groups look toward production and consumption beyond exploitative structures, not necessarily 
beyond the capitalist economy. (However,  an ecofeminist analysis would likely conclude that growth 
will  be  impossible  if exploitation of  humanity  and nature  is  eliminated.)  Group  5  considers  the 
possibility to limit extraction of resources to mere need, which would abolish the opportunity to use it 
as a source to create surplus, which would lead to a fundamental change in the economic system that 
would  potentially imply  an  end  to  surplus  production.  Eliminating  exploitation  implies  to  move 
beyond colonialism, not as an end to trade, but an effort to combine local adequacy and global justice, 
locally and globally. It must be concluded however, that the imaginative (beyond) workshop scenarios 
largely depart from the capitalist economy,  as they do not take it as a given organization. This also 
applies to growth, which is even more down-prioritized than in the reformist (within) scenarios.  
The Global & the Local 
The relation between the global and the local arises as a core issue in the workshop results, when the 
world  is  seen  as  becoming  simultaneously  more  global  and  more  local  through  increasing  IT 
communication and growing needs for global governance (groups 1, 3, 6). The context of relevance 
thus expands relative to the within scenarios,  as the global dependence and repercussions and of our 
current societies is discussed. In search of a decolonized world the responsibility of the local reaches a 
global level, thus making the global integral to the beyond scenarios. 
The Local
The attention to the local can also be noted in the attention to revaluation of local knowledge, history 
and  tradition,  and  local  identities,  all  based  on  local  conditions,  in  an  effort  to  move  toward 
decolonized relations and identities (group 6). The comprehensive plan also attends to strengthening 
local identities, but in a slightly different manner. In the plan the identity of an area is often connected 
to its attractiveness (Stockholms stad, 2010, p. 12, 26,  34, 39f). This applies both to certain areas in 
Stockholm, but also to the whole city, and partly concerns the stockholmers’ well-being but above all 
how  this attractiveness contributes to the sustainable growth of the city. The strengthening of local 
identities is then ﬁrst and foremost directed to others than the inhabitants themselves, as the stronger 
identities above all aim to contribute to attracting new people and businesses. 
The Collective
The beyond scenarios of the workshops keep the collective as  an important  principle and entity in 
societal development. The collective is  an integral  part of the local,  and that having been ascribed 
maybe an even larger importance in these results  puts a great emphasis on the collective. Beyond a 
localized democracy (group1) shared resources, information and knowledge,  and labor (group6),  the 
collective in these scenarios becomes the manager of natural resources and knowledge or resources 
previously controlled through property rights (group 6). It is found that sharing will in every case be 
more practical and lead to better results,  which is  why knowledge and resources  that  are managed 
through  another  kind  of  organization  would  beneﬁt  everyone  (group  6).  The  collective  is  thus 
established as owner, manager, organizer, institution, political entity,  and principle for the interaction 
between people in a local setting. This kind of collective would be completely new to the plan. 

78

Nature 
Nature is thought of in two main ways in the scenarios: the planet as the ultimate entity that we all 
depend on (group 2), or as a set of resources with the planetary limits as its ultimate boundaries (group 
5). In either case our relation to nature has to become more respectful. Nature as a resource must be 
assigned  a  more appropriate  value,  it  should  be collectively  owned,  and  must  only  be used  in a 
sustainable manner that considers both local and global equality. Nature as a planet assumes a much 
larger importance however, forming the very basis of any decision-making or actions on all levels of 
all human societies. 

2. ASSUMPTIONS ABOUT NATURAL RELATIONSHIPS

The Global & the Local
The  connection between the  global  and the local is  a core issue generally (groups  1,2,3,5,6).  It  is 
concluded that the global to an even larger extent than today becomes local and the other way around, 
that the borders of our respective contexts become blurred. This new world will need other forms of 
management - monitoring of information exchange, but above all new  forms of democracy. The local 
democracy is extended to the global, and vice versa, a global inﬂuence on the local is expected. New 
global  forms  of  governance  beyond the  relatively  weak  UN  are  needed,  ones  that  are free  from 
manipulation by ﬁnancial  powers  (group 3). The relation between the local and the  global  is  thus 
expected  to  become  much  closer,  characterized  by  a  mutual  interdependency  in  a  political  and 
economic equality beyond normative systems, colonial and other discriminatory structures (group 4, 5, 
6). The equality ideal can also be recognized in the intra-human relations on the local level within 
collectives, which also rest on a great share of cooperation and shared responsibilities. 
Anthropocentrism & Survivalism
The relation to nature has two main strands, that are at the same time very different and quite similar. 
The  idea  of nature as  a  resource  stays  true  to an anthropocentric approach where  nature is  to be 
managed and distributed by and among humans. The planet as a starting point for all human activities 
assumes  that humanity is a  part of and inherently dependent  on nature,  why ”the survival planet” 
needs  to replace  ”growth”  as  the  foundation of  all  human  actions.  The  placing  of  humans  in  a 
subordinate position to the planet - frankly, humanity depends on the planet, but the planet will most 
likely  continue  to  exist  beyond  humanity  -  does  not  necessarily  disrupt  the  anthropocentric 
perspective. Admitting  to  the  impact  of  humans  on  the  well-being of  the  planet,  the  responsible 
response would be a change in management - thus the suggestion to make the survival of the planet 
the aim of all human activity. This  however still  conﬁrms  an anthropocentric idea of humanity as 
managers of the entity the planet, making humanity superior. As a comparison, other discourses would 
ascribe agency to the planet  itself,  or that all activities of the  planet  cannot be perfectly predicted. 
Rockström  (Dryzek,  2012,  p.  34,  Gunnarsson-Östling,  2014,  p.  101)  conﬁrms  the  troublesome 
trespassing of planetary boundaries, but all the same point out that there is no knowing what the exact 
consequences  will  be,  which  implies  that  the earth’s  processes  stand beyond human management. 
Such notions are excluded in named workshop scenarios. 

3. AGENTS & THEIR MOTIVES

The Global Institutions & Local Collectives
The named agents of the workshops focus on global and local levels, practically leaving a large chunk 
of the agents in between out of the picture. The new global-local reality will be in need of another kind 
of governance, according to group 3 something in line with but more powerful than the UN. While 
likely still relying on and using existing unions and organizations, this likely suggests the need for new 
kinds of global institutions in order to uphold this kind of extended democracy. On the local level there 

79

is  a  big  emphasis  on  collectives,  which  are  given  both  political,  economic  and  organizational 
responsibilities. The  suggested interventions  then largely put  other agents  in charge than the  ones 
approached in the comprehensive plan, going simultaneously more global and more local. Thus,  the 
city practically disappears,  as does national governments. CSR is mentioned as a possible tool in the 
process (group3), as are equal trade partners (group 5), pointing toward some - though limited - role 
for corporations to play in these new scenarios. This could be a bit surprising, given the large inﬂuence 
corporations have today,  but maybe this  is rather the point  to remember that the scenarios  have an 
imaginary character. Concluding, it must be said that the comprehensive plan and the workshops have 
little in common when it comes to agents that are concerned with the implementation of the respective 
scenarios. 
Sufﬁciency & Human Rights
Rather than growth or a capitalist economy, the workshop groups unanimously talk about a globalized 
local  reality  where  equality,  cooperation,  solidarity  and  sustainability  are  the  main  objectives. 
”Sufﬁciency”  ﬁgures as an aim in group 1, and group 4 mentions ”love”  as the fundamental common 
denominator. These ideals are reﬂected throughout the proposals,  and largely consist of more or less 
straightforward  human  rights  (United  Nations,  2014).  Apart  from  the  basic  ideals  two  practical 
examples  are housing provision and food for all of humanity (group 3). Thus, the motives in these 
scenarios are human rights and sustainability (based on social and environmental limits). 

4. KEY METAPHORS AND OTHER RHETORICAL DEVICES

The Survival of the Planet, Global Limits & Sufﬁciency
Two particular metaphors  arose in this  part of the workshops,  the survival of the planet and global 
limits (groups 2, 6). These are related to ecofeminist theorizing that emphasizes planetary boundaries 
as the limits for the survival of both natural ecosystems and humanity. Survival depends on the respect 
for these boundaries, why a consciously longterm sustainable human society must form within them. It 
is thus  not surprising that these metaphors are brought up in the generation of future scenarios  that 
move beyond our current (unsustainable) reality. The metaphors are also prominent in the discourse 
concerning limits and survival,  where the surpassing of boundaries is expected to result in planetary 
collapse. Ecofeminist theory rather focuses the destructive relations between humans and nature based 
on hierarchy and exploitation, which are the reason for the disrupted organic balance. While planetary 
boundaries and tipping points are a current and inﬂuential area through,  i.a.,  Rockström,  the general 
discourse has changed, and the talk of a threatening collapse is maybe not as prominent as in the early 
1970’s. 
	

Just  like  in the  previous  (within) scenarios  sufﬁciency  remains  an important  metaphor  or 
rhetorical  device,  which  can  be  related  to  the  comprehensive  plan’s  sustainable  growth.  The 
implications for the idea of sufﬁciency remain the same in these scenarios, if anything stretched to 
include every part of the production chain, and life itself (group 1).

COMPATIBILITY OF THE BEYOND SCENARIOS & THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
As a general note it must be said that the beyond scenarios of the workshops do not easily combine 
well with the comprehensive plan, as their starting points are very far apart. It must also be said that 
the workshop scenarios provide images that are not necessarily anchored in a world that looks like our 
current one. Rather, the very point with these scenarios is to look toward images of the future that are 
radically  different  than  the  ones  that  will  be  associated  with  our  current  situation.  Thus,  the 
compatibility of the workshop scenarios with the comprehensive plan is relatively low. However, there 
are general strands of thought in the workshop scenarios that could deﬁnitely serve a redevelopment of 

80

the plan, or a future comprehensive plan, well - if the aim were to move toward a more sustainable city 
in general, or an ecofeminist one in particular. 
The Global & The Local
The  global  in  the  comprehensive  plan  above  all  refers  to  the  global  interconnectedness  of  the 
economy, and the power of attraction of Stockholm in the international competition. However, it does 
not pay much attention to the city’s global dependence  in terms of resource use,  direct or indirect 
environmental  effects  or how  the  city by extension approaches social  justice in other parts  of  the 
world. The approach to environmental changes is clearly local,  all the while recognizing the global 
impact of climate changes (Stockholms stad, 2010,  p. 7f). Global governance in a local context can 
impossibly be dealt  with exclusively on the level of a  particular urban region. In this  respect  the 
comprehensive plan has its clear limits. However, looking into the global effects of Stockholm and its 
process  of urban development  in terms  of environmental  impact  and effect  on global in/equalities 
could certainly be a major point of development of the comprehensive plan. It could also form an 
important tool to scrutinize the local consequences of the plan using the same framework. Such an 
investigation would most likely have large implications for both strategies and how the public interests 
of the plan are met. 
	

Another point with potential for development would be to enforce the local,  in a manifold 
manner. As discussed above, this may conﬂict with the comprehensive plan, as the local aspirations do 
not necessarily coincide with the city’s. However, providing space for the local to develop would be 
one of the  ﬁrst steps to an increased interaction between the local and the global according to the 
intentions of the workshops. A proper anchoring in the local is one of the ﬁrst conditions for this to 
come about,  in which the comprehensive plan would be a possible level to provide a better starting 
point.
	

The strengthening of local identities could be an important discussion to conduct in areas that 
are  considered  for  renewal.  Stockholm  has  seen  several  examples  of  great  conﬂicts  following 
intentions and proposals to redevelop existing areas. The strengthening of the local in line with the 
workshops, focusing on re-evaluation based on local experiences and identities, could be one starting 
point for this kind of discussion.
Nature
The comprehensive plan and the workshops display a large gap in their view on nature, while all still 
keeping  to  an  anthropocentric  perspective.  The  fundamental  approach  to  nature,  and  our 
materialization of nature into resources, could nonetheless be beneﬁtted by a rethinking starting from 
the perspectives of the workshops. This  would however risk complicating the city’s  possibilities  to 
sustain its economic growth, as another take on nature would not allow  for the kind of exploitation 
that  the city most  likely beneﬁts from. Thus,  a  redeﬁnition in this  respect is not  easy,  and in fact 
conﬂicts with the fundamental strategy of the comprehensive plan - sustainable growth. 
Sufﬁciency & Human Rights
The  attention to human rights  that  has  been  voiced in  the  workshops  may  come across  as  lame, 
unprovocative and of disputed relevance. A general idea of the Swedish society is that it is  largely 
equal,  based on high results  in international  rankings  concerning,  e.g.,  gender equality,  and having 
ratiﬁed the Declaration of Human Rights apart from only a few protocols (Regeringskansliet,  2014). 
As  already  mentioned,  the  comprehensive  plan  admits  to  social  and  economic  differences  in 
Stockholm, and discrimination in general is a known fact in the Swedish society. Thus, this area is still 
relevant, and could contribute to the comprehensive plan. 
	

Several of the suggestions of the workshops have both a local and global dimension in this 
respect. As mentioned in connection to the within scenarios, the comprehensive plan should to some 
extent be able to look into its  effects in terms  of environmental deterioration and social  injustices 
locally as well as globally, and ﬁnd strategies toward sustainable local and global relations. In a more 
far-reaching ambition the human rights would be set as the ultimate aim of the plan. 

81

	

Sufﬁciency as an aim moves beyond the capitalist economy in search for what could largely 
be understood  as subsistence. This  disrupts  the  whole idea not  only of sustainable  growth,  but  of 
growth. Any compatibility with the current comprehensive plan is then out-ruled. Any development of 
the plan in this direction would require a wholesale change in the approach to politics, economy and 
society, on all levels. 

82

5.3	
 Summary

Compatibility of the Within Scenarios & the Comprehensive Plan
The context and level of governance the within scenarios apply to in several aspects surpass that of the 
comprehensive plan, which regardless of differences concerning aims and incitements complicates the 
relating  or  adoption  of  the  workshop  suggestions  into  the  plan.  Even  within  the  frame  of  the 
comprehensive  plan  there  are  a  number  of  contradictions,  which  will  be  discussed  further  on. 
However, many of the workshop suggestions are largely feasible to implement in the comprehensive 
plan  in its  current  state.  It  needs  to be noted  however,  that  the workshop results  in several  cases 
suggest another basic approach than what is implied in the comprehensive plan. 
	

Growth per se is not an expressed aim in the workshops. Rather, growth can be a used as a tool 
that can be directed in different ways depending on the aim. It must also be noted that several of the 
suggested changes of the workshops are likely to result in a move away from consumerism,  and thus 
also from economic growth. But rather than an outright aim, this is due to among other things a limit 
on working  hours  implying  less  money  to spend (group  6)  in  combination with  more  conscious 
consumption (groups 2, 3, 4), in an overall movement toward an enlarged subsistence economy. 
The  workshop  results  intend  a  development  of  the  industry  and  commerce  that  is  more 
	

circumscribed than the current. Not just any kind of business development is favored, rather there is a 
preference that aims for higher ambitions in terms of environmental protection and social equality than 
that  displayed in the comprehensive plan. In line with this,  the strategy ”sustainable growth”  could 
potentially  be  reformulated  and  implemented  in  a  more  ambitious  and  proactive  way,  where 
sustainable production,  consumption,  use of resources and other activities are actively - rather than 
passively - supported.
	

There is  a fundamental  difference  in how  local  development  is  to  come about. When the 
workshops favor a bottom-up approach, that of the comprehensive plan must largely be understood as 
top-down driven. Several areas in and around Stockholm have seen conﬂicts erupting following plans 
on redevelopment and renewal. It could be that the workshop results provide important input in this 
respect. 
	

The view  on the stockholmers displays an area of conﬂict between the workshop results and 
the comprehensive plan,  but also a  potential for development. While a thorough discursive change 
may be difﬁcult,  it  should be possible  to ascribe more agency to the stockholmers in processes  of 
urban development, and to support cooperation through collectives. 
Compatibility of the Beyond Scenarios & the Comprehensive Plan
The very idea with the beyond scenarios is that they look beyond the direct conditions of our current 
society,  why the compatibility between the present plan and the scenarios is limited. It can however 
provide valuable input in a redevelopment of the plan,  or a future plan, that aims to move toward a 
sustainable or ecofeminist future. 
	

The workshops direct attention to an increasing interconnectedness between the local and the 
global. While issues of global governance are out of reach for the comprehensive plan alone, attention 
to its  repercussions  concerning environmental deterioration and social inequalities  both locally and 
globally could certainly serve the plan. This would have large implications for the whole plan,  from 
analysis of public interests, overarching aim and strategies. 
The strengthening of local communities could beneﬁt local development,  but also be a good 
	

way to avoid later years’ conﬂicts following intentions and proposals to redevelop existing boroughs. 
(A re-evaluation based on local experiences and identities could be one starting point for this kind of 
discussion.)
	

While  maintaining an  anthropocentric  relation  to  nature,  the  workshop  scenarios  suggest 
taking  the  planetary  boundaries  as  the  starting  point  for  all  decision-making.  This  conﬂicts  with 
sustained economic growth, and not even thinkable in the present shape of the plan. The suggestion of 

83

a subsistence economy to replace our current growth orientation meets the same problem, and would 
require a complete reorientation of politics, economics and society generally on all levels.
The workshops make references to human rights as the ultimate aim of our societies,  to be 
	

reﬂected in the proposals. This is not irrelevant, given the inequalities that characterize the Swedish 
and likely most societies. Making human rights the aim of the comprehensive plan would have large 
effects  on  all  its  parts,  and  is  not  feasible  in  its  current  form,  but  nonetheless  a  potential  for 
development.
Conclusions
The compatibility of the workshop scenarios and the comprehensive plan is obviously shifting, where 
a general circumstance is  that the workshop results move beyond the context of the comprehensive 
plan.  In  general,  it  can be  seen that  the  workshops  attend  a lot  to  social  values  centered  around 
equality and collectivism, which arise as an end in itself that replaces the current focus on economic 
growth. The  economy is instead reshaped into a  tool that can be applied to achieve the aim. This 
change can be applied with different reach, ranging from public procurement of goods that supports 
ecological products, to practically making economic growth impossible. This means that while several 
suggestions  can  be  directly  incorporated  into  the  plan  in  its  current  state,  others  require  a 
reorganization of politics, economy and society. Without doubt, there are contributions to be made to 
the plan starting in the workshop results, centered around an increased social justice in Stockholm and 
elsewhere, and in increased sustainability. More on this in the following chapter.

84

6.	
 DISCUSSION & CONCLUSIONS

HOW DO THE WORKSHOP SCENARIOS RELATE TO ECOFEMINIST UTOPIANISM?

General Similarities
A ﬁrst general thought on the result is how close a lot of the material in the groups’ scenarios was to 
the theories of ecofeminism in terms of utopian thinking. This is interesting to note, since the short 
presentation of ecofeminism did not cover the speciﬁcally utopian side of the theory.
	

Among other things can be noted the concept ”sufﬁciency”  that was brought forth in the ﬁrst 
workshop. Sufﬁciency would refer to a production and consumption that is  limited to covering our 
needs, rather than striving to produce a surplus and accumulated resources. This can be related to the 
ecofeminist  idea  of ”subsistency”,  by  which is  intended a system  of  synchronized production and 
consumption beyond exploitative structures that is driven by reproductive needs and self-sustenance. 
While  the  aim  for  ”sufﬁciency”  does  not  necessarily  entail  that  the  aims  for  equality  and 
environmental  protection  that  are  outspoken  parts  of  subsistence  are  met,  but  there  are  certainly 
parallels to be drawn. 
	

The dedication to social justice and intersectional equality locally and globally has a strong 
presence  in  the  workshop  results.  Furthermore,  the  workshops  generally  express  a  need  for 
localization and collectivization,  in broad  terms.  Inherent  to this  is  an  understanding of how  our 
current  society  separates  us  into  independent  individuals,  which  blurs  our  nonetheless  existing 
interrelations and contributed to sustained hierarchies,  and that this  supports the mere possibility to 
exploit  other people/s and nature. A part of this is  the collectivization of currently privately owned 
property.  This  increased  emphasis  on  the  local  and  the  collective  also  goes  for  a  new  form  of 
democracy, where everyone becomes involved in and responsible for decisions in politics,  economy 
etc. Again, this relates strongly to ecofeminism. 
Problem of Context and Application
An obvious problematic in the workshop scenarios is the levels of governance they apply to. In many 
cases, the suggested solutions are not entirely relevant for the comprehensive plan as an instrument for 
change,  but rather apply to other societal institutions, to politics or beyond the national borders. As 
half of the scenarios have the direct intention of moving beyond the constraints of our current society, 
this concern mainly applies to the within scenarios, which are intended to look into changes of our 
current reality. There may be several reasons for this, but one in particular is worth mentioning - for 
the sake of the ethics of this thesis. Being myself involved in planning, having participants that were 
all  but  one  more  or  less  afﬁliated  with  urban  construction,  a  basic  level  of  knowledge  of  the 
comprehensive  plan  was  taken  for  granted.  A  general  idea  of  the  workshops  was  not  to  focus 
unnecessary attention on the comprehensive plan, but rather make use of the time during the scenario 
generation. It may be however that the plan’s content, conditions and task was handled too swiftly in 
the introductory presentation to the workshops. 
	

This  sliding  context  impedes  the  possibility  to  relate  the  workshop  results  to  the 
comprehensive  plan.  Now,  the  suggestions  from  the  workshops  can be  seen  in  several  ways,  as 
discussed in ch.  5 many of them could indeed be compatible with the plan regardless  of level  of 
governance. However, an appropriate level as the starting point of the scenario generation would likely 
have resulted in a larger number of relevant ideas. 
Ending Patriarchal Colonial Oppression, or Ending Growth?
There are a few  important divergences from the ecofeminist framework that need to be pointed out.  
How  attention is directed toward different forms of oppression is one such area. It has been seen that 
the workshop groups suggest that action is taken to limit inequalities based on gender. There is also 

85

some  notion  on  including  non-normative  perspectives  generally.  However,  there  is  no  particular 
attention paid to inequalities based on race, in spite of the fact that inequalities following a colonial 
pattern is an integral part of the intersectional analysis of ecofeminism. 
	

Moreover, in spite of the motive for action of the workshops to move toward a world that is 
more equal socially,  economically and environmentally, it could be questioned whether the solutions 
indeed are directed toward speciﬁc equality enhancing interventions based in a critique of patriarchal 
and  colonial  structures,  or  if  the  main  topic  is  rather  how  to  restructure  the  political  economy. 
Naturally, the economic system is, next to knowledge production, in ecofeminist theory seen as one of 
the greatest tools through which patriarchal and colonial patterns are sustained. One can not be easily 
separated from another,  and thus there is also some truth to that confronting the economic structure 
will also mean to confront structures of oppression. However, the difference in where the incentive to 
act comes from has consequences for its  potential for success. The strong connection that  is made 
between economic and technological development, and peace, freedom and equality has been proved 
wrong by Mies & Shiva (2014, p. 268f). In fact, it is one of the reasons ecofeminism as a perspective 
even exists, as experience has shown that this connection is faulty. Even though a move away from the 
capitalist economy toward another kind of organization may lead to a greater economic equality,  it 
does not necessarily entail an enforced equality in terms of gender,  race,  and other aspects. Thus, it 
could be argued that a stronger foundation in what oppressions are to be met through the economic 
restructuring would have been needed in the workshops. To spell it out: in the same way that economic 
growth is removed as a target, the new target has to be something beyond economic de-growth, where 
the economy is  in fact converted into a  tool to achieve change. This complicates the discussion of 
equality, as it asks in which aspects equality is supposed to be achieved, and in this respect it would 
potentially have  been  possible  to  ﬁnd  more  precise  suggestions,  immediately directed  to limiting 
patriarchal and colonial structures, in the workshops.  
	

However, it could also be argued that it is the very limitation of the present reality that puts the 
focus on economy, as it is such a dominant topic in today’s general discourse. Another reason could 
be,  again my own  inﬂuence  through the  presentation of ecofeminist  theory. The beyond scenarios 
however  serve  as  proof  of  what  the  moving  beyond  economy  opens  up  imagination  to,  where 
especially group 2 can be used as an example. It must be noted that there is more attention to matters 
of equality in the beyond scenarios than the within scenarios. 
Anthropocentric Relation to Nature
It must also be noted that the connotations  the workshops  ascribe  to nature do not  measure up to 
ecofeminist theory. The workshop results largely display an anthropocentric attitude to nature, where 
humans are made into managers to dispose over nature as a resource. Ecofeminism has an altogether 
much more ambitious approach, where nature is in some cases even ascribed agency itself. It disagrees 
with the idea that humans can be managers of something they are inherently part of themselves, and 
returns to the fact that the planet will manage very well even without humans, a relation which cannot 
be inverted.
	

The anthropocentrism of the workshop results could have some main reasons. It may be that 
our current discourses  are so anthropocentric that  it  becomes  difﬁcult  for us  to step  out of them. 
Another reason would be that our effect is too big for another perspective than the anthropocentric to 
be even possible - no matter how  we think about our effect on and relation to nature,  the situation 
today is such that the human impact is global and a change thus requires global efforts. In this line of 
thinking, global management of the planet becomes  necessary regardless of parallel perspectives on 
the immersion of humans into nature’s ecosystems. The third reason would, again, be my own effect 
on the  workshops  through  the  initial  presentation of  ecofeminist  theory.  It  may  be  that  my own 
understanding of  the  ecofeminist perspective on nature  is  insufﬁcient,  or that I  did not  manage  to 
convey its content in a correct manner. Whatever the reasons,  if the plan is to be assessed from an 
ecofeminist  point  of view,  some additional notes  must  be made in this  matter,  since the workshop 
results quite frankly did not measure up to the task in this respect. 

86

HOW DOES PARTICIPATORY SCENARIO GENERATION APPLY TO COMPREHENSIVE PLANNING?

Conﬂictual Aspects of Planning
A question that has been circulating during the work with this thesis is how pluralistic utopian thought 
connects to comprehensive planning. The comprehensive plan is a strategic document that is based on 
a political vision,  and must  remain politically relevant. The  work of the planners  is  however also 
informed by the national public interests and the speciﬁc conditions of the local context. This makes 
the planner at once a generalist, mediator and expert,  whose task it is to ﬁnd a way to balance these 
interests, in a future image that touches ground and becomes tangible. 
	

This  process  is  inevitably characterized by conﬂict. The comprehensive plan in its  current 
form accordingly points toward areas of conﬂict when striving to fulﬁll different public interests. The 
conﬂicts are described in connection to the four sub-strategies (Stockholms stad, 2010, p. 36, 40, 43, 
46, 80). These descriptions sometimes imply a favored prioritization of targets, but generally lack any 
outspoken notion on what should guide the decision-making for the urban development in these issues, 
or any evaluation of what target may be particularly important to reach - and why. In its last chapter, 
the plan concludes regarding conﬂicting interests and targets (ibid, p. 80):

”[f]or  the  aims  and  the  strategies  of  the  comprehensive  plan  to  be  carried  through, detailed 
geographical studies, program work and detailed  planning must be based  on a  holistic  approach. 
The  comprehensive plan  sets  out  a  position  on  fundamental  conﬂicts  between  objectives  and 
conﬂicts of interest regarding sustainable growth at the overall level. It is therefore important that 
the continuing process of balancing different interests and objectives is speciﬁed in more detailed 
planning.”

It can thus be assumed that the guiding principle for decision-making in conﬂicts will be ”sustainable 
growth”. As  has  been argued before  in this  thesis,  the  concept  of ”sustainable  growth”  carries  an 
inherent  contradiction,  if  the  ecofeminist,  and other,  analyses  are  trusted.  This  is  another  area  of 
contestation,  which presents the planners with a tricky task. How  can the expert/generalist longterm 
planners engage in the implementation of an aim that they know contains a fundamental conﬂict? 
	

Furthermore,  as  many futurists  have  reacted to,  futures  studies  and utopianism have  more 
often than not been characterized by a fundamental male bias. This bias would most likely be extended 
to other areas if aspects of other discriminatory systems were added to the chart. While the analysis of 
the comprehensive plan has not attended particularly to potential biases, it has nevertheless been noted 
in  ch.  3.2.1 that  the  plan contains  a  use  of  categories  that  may  be  problematic  from  a  feminist 
perspective. Drawing on Albrechts (2010,  p. 1120),  the planner can never be neutral,  but  is  rather 
permeated by positions of gender,  class,  age,  race, ethnicity,  religion etc. The decisions the planners 
take are informed by values, of a practical reality that is characterized by a range of different structures 
of oppression, of humans,  and of nature. This is logical,  after all planners are humans like all of us, 
with  physical  and  emotional  experiences,  feelings  and  understandings,  immersed  in  a  particular 
context  that  carries  particular political,  economic,  cultural and social ideas  and performances. The 
likelihood of incorporating, and furthermore enforce the structures of this context is strong, why any 
pertaining patterns of inequality are likely to be continued if they are not made aware. It could maybe 
even be said that  this  incorporation is  part  of  the  task,  as this  is  what  the practical reality in this 
particular  context  is.  However,  when  the  structures  we  live  in  conﬂict  with the  society we  have 
decided to move toward,  then what social,  economic,  political relations of discursive and practical 
power and exploitation informs the plan needs to be brought up. 
	

Regardless of the swiftness of this analysis  of conﬂicts in the plan,  these conﬂicts are most 
likely present. This has nothing to do with debating the eventual quality or success of the plan, rather, 
the particular form of the comprehensive plan is bound to display this kind of conﬂicts, as it attempts 
to ﬁnd one balanced solution to all its aspects of consideration. Opposing this effort, Gunder (2006, p. 
214) argues that ”universal acceptance of meaningful goals”  is nothing but a chimera, as ”[t]he urban 
problematic is constructed of conﬂicting positions and desires,  where one’s  gain is another’s loss”. 
This  points  out that forming one single  plan that  answers to all public interests,  political aims and 

87

contextual  problematics  will  be  difﬁcult,  even  illusory.  It  is  very  much  made  aware  that  the 
comprehensive plan cannot be all-inclusive, but all the while the plan is still presented in a singular 
all-inclusive version. But if it isn’t possible to have it all, then what do we choose, and how do we best 
display our alternatives?
Toward a Pluralist Planning
This  is  where  working with multiple scenarios  becomes  interesting,  as  it allows  for considering a 
limited range  of  parameters  at  a  time  in parallel  scenarios,  meaning that  conﬂicting interests  are 
allowed to exist side by side. Next to the compromise, an important task of the planner could be to 
expose the unresolvable conﬂicts. The different images of the future in this case form a chance to see 
what  happens  when the conﬂicts  step out  of abstract  politics  and regulations,  and reach  practice. 
Scenario  generating  workshops  with  stakeholders  show  how  multiple  scenarios  can  assist  in 
questioning,  providing other perspectives than the ones  directly available,  allow  for more detailed 
analyses,  and  be  used as  a  way to further discussions  on preferable futures  (Montgomery,  2008). 
Multiple scenarios could potentially form part of the generation of new comprehensive plans, but also 
when redevelopments of the plans  are  needed,  where attention could be directed toward particular 
issues  or  more  broadly.  Participatory  scenario  generation  could  then  be  a  method  that  strategic 
planners engage in, in order to investigate the public experience and opinion. The scenarios generated 
in the workshops of this thesis are to be understood as ecofeminist scenarios that attempt to challenge 
the currently dominant image of Stockholm’s future. Ecofeminism is only one possible framework, to 
be met by other frameworks that are found relevant for planning to address. Ecofeminism may, as this 
thesis has attempted to show, be relevant in order to develop how sustainability is to be thought of and 
met,  but it  may well  be that other perspectives would be found equally or more interesting. What 
perspectives that have a bearing would of course be based on, i.a., the issues that are to be addressed, 
recent  political  majority,  the  conditions  of  society  and  urban  development,  dominant  discourses, 
national and international agreements. 
	

Working with several perspectives would re-politicize urban development and open it up as 
just the arena for contestation and confrontation that it in fact already is, and make it broadly available. 
The comprehensive plan has a special potential in this respect: being the level where the conﬂicting 
interests are mediated, it could very well be used as an arena for debate over futures, as a platform for 
multiple conversations. As the comprehensive plan in its current form clearly refrains from deﬁning 
ultimate answers or exact implementations, while however staying close to the strategy ”sustainable 
growth”,  the ﬁrst  step toward being this platform has already been taken. As has  been noted in the 
analyses in chapter 3 and 4, the comprehensive plan does already in its current form open up for broad 
cooperations  between  different  public  administrations,  corporations  and  other  actors.  The 
comprehensive plan in a strategic,  partly abstract form is  a useful  orientation in order to keep the 
discussion concerning our future and the roads toward it open, as it requires constant reevaluation and 
interpretation. The sections describing conﬂicting targets discussed above,  which are also guided by 
sustainable growth, can likewise be understood from this perspective. The conﬂicts in themselves is a 
chance to open up for  a discussion that embraces  pluralistic  perspectives to try to answer to what 
development is really desirable.
The challenge however is to ﬁnd a middle ground between the need for a clearly formulated 
	

comprehensive plan, while still maintaining the debate. The scenario generation of this thesis showed 
how political discrepancy can be a great obstacle to the implementation of ideas. Just like any results 
of political processes, the comprehensive plan is shaped and adopted in a political climate that may not 
last longer than four years, while its validity is substantially longer. There is a need for ﬂexibility in 
the plan, room for reinterpretations, in order to be able to address changing conditions. Simultaneously 
it is  also required that  the plan is clear enough to be able to form just  that foundation for societal 
development that is intended. It is argued above that the plan leaves space for the interpretation of 
sustainable growth, which keeps close to the political aim, but is ﬂexible in terms of exact solution. A 
question that  arises  is  what  would happen if the ﬂexibility concerned the political direction,  while 
resting  heavier  on  national  public  interests,  and  the  conditions  and  needs  of  the  local  context, 

88

potentially leaving more space for bottom-up initiatives. Would it be possible to shape the plan in a 
way that  allows  for  a  larger  openness  in  terms  of  political  perspectives,  while  at  the  same  time 
managing to  keep a line  that  is  steady  enough to allow  for  a functioning urban development?  If 
following the ideas of the workshops it could be suggested that a change of how  planning works is 
needed, with a larger emphasis put on the local, including the citizens as actors in urban development. 
This  would in all reason give  comprehensive  planning an altered role,  that  while  still keeping an 
overarching responsibility and perspective  would have  to open  up to locally  developed ideas  and 
forces.  The  top-down  form  of  planning  that  we  see  today  would  shift  partly,  meaning  that  the 
comprehensive plan may not be able to present such a clear and comprehensive image of the urban 
future as the current. This potentially more ﬂexible form of planning may beneﬁt from working with 
several scenarios, as a way of containing and being prepared for larger contrasts across localities. In 
the practical planning document  this might take the shape of an appendix to complete a  dominant 
scenario, or as alternatives existing within an overarching outspoken direction to be weighted against 
one another. 
There is naturally a risk of enforced antagonism if opposing perspectives are given a larger 
	

space,  and furthermore it can be assumed that a change in line with the speculations above would 
inhibit large-scale development projects. On the other hand one must also recognize that we already 
experience antagonism in planning, expressed by, e.g., conﬂicting targets and interests in the plan, and 
citizens  that  experience  a lack of communication with the municipality and its planners. Would an 
open debate  be  able  to serve  as  a  way  of  channeling  the  conﬂicting positions  -  through,  e.g.,  a 
multitude of scenarios, participatory planning or bottom-up driven development? How can antagonism 
in planning be allowed space, and where does it go if it is not allowed space? The conﬂicts today that 
erupt around issues of urban development nonetheless show that the discrepancies of the plan are real 
and unavoidable. Whether a larger space would result in greater conﬂicts alone, or improved dialogues 
locally and in the relation between citizens and institutions is a question that remains open.  
Empowerment & Participation
While public support is sought to a certain degree in the plan, I would argue - in line with the analysis 
in  chapter 5  -  that  the  plan  could be  opened  up to  include  the  stockholmers  as  partners  in this 
discussion, as agents in the urban development. Scenario generating workshops is one tool to do so, 
that also points toward the initial notions on utopias as plural, and as a process rather than an end state. 
This effort has many dimensions, and refers both to the form, content, and the practices of the plan. 
The  attention to social  justice in its various  forms  in the workshops  must  be  seen as  an effort at 
empowerment of the stockholmers, and of people that are affected by the developments in Stockholm 
through the global network the city is inscribed in. The workshop results describe several suggestions 
to move toward an increased democracy in society in general,  with a greater opportunity but also 
responsibility to engage in decision-making. How our societies are to be shaped physically is a natural 
part of this. 
	

As has been noted already previously in the plan,  Stockholm has the past ten years seen a 
number  of  conﬂicts  of  differing  proportion  arising  in  areas  that  have  been  considered  for 
redevelopment,  and it is generally relatively common that  urban renewal spurs  conﬂicts.  Naturally 
there are several sides to this. The conﬂicts differ in character, background,  aims,  and sometimes the 
proposal for redevelopment may just amount to the factor that makes conﬂict erupt rather than being 
the main object  for the protests. Regardless  of this,  it  can be noted that some  of the development 
projects invoke emotions in the local inhabitants of being neglected, devalued in relation to potential 
new  inhabitants,  and ultimately ignored. This  split between urban developers and local populations 
will not decrease by excluding the stockholmers as potential agents in urban development, by limiting 
their  ability  to  express  themselves  in  planning  matters,  by neglecting  them  through  objectifying 
descriptions, or by an urban development that rather considers how to create an attractive city for the 
new  immigrating  population  than  the  local  inhabitants  that  are  already  there.  This  leads  to  the 
inevitable  question of who the city is  to be  developed for,  and why,  if it isn’t for the people who 
inhabit it. 

89

	

It makes sense that the ones that are directly affected by their local environments should in all 
reason be included in the process of shaping them, and as subjects with experiences and needs rather 
than as abstract resources or functions. To move toward futures that are desirable to a majority of the 
stockholmers,  independent  of  current  political  majority,  I  would  argue  that  the  inclusion  of  the 
stockholmers  themselves  into both the plan and process  of urban development is  needed. This also 
requires  a good look into how the plan is  written,  as  it is  simply not good enough to reduce local 
inhabitants  to  a  resource  to be  deployed by market  forces  in  order  to  produce  economic  growth 
(discussed on p. 41, 72f).

POTENTIALS TO CONSIDER FOR FURTHERING THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
The main points of interest for this discussion,  in line with the quote on the very ﬁrst page of this 
thesis,  is  how  the  comprehensive  plan  can  be  developed  toward  increased  social  justice  and 
sustainability. While in the original deﬁnition of ”sustainability”  social  justice would be seen as  an 
integral part, this discussion will be directed toward environmental issues on the one hand and social 
issues on the other. This split does not intend to undermine the interconnectedness of the two, but is 
merely done to facilitate the discussion.  
Sustainability
The  comprehensive  plan is  an important  document  to  guide  the  development  of  Stockholm in a 
coordinated manner toward a common goal. As  a broad strategy,  it will in its full reach include all 
actors in urban development. With this reach comes a great opportunity regarding sustainability. 
	

The ﬁrst step toward sustainability has to be to ﬁnd a clear deﬁnition of what sustainability 
entails. The comprehensive plan,  as has  been mentioned before,  expresses  the fuzziness  that  often 
characterizes  sustainability,  and after referring to  the  social,  ecological  and economic  dimensions 
settles with the deﬁnition of sustainable growth. As stated in the analysis in chapter 3.2.5, it would be 
more  honest  to  deﬁne  the  favored  means  of  development  as  ”sustained  growth,  and  a  bit  of 
environmental  protection”,  given  the  very  limited  similarities  between  the  plan’s  version  of 
”sustainability” and its original meaning.  
Approaching Ecofeminist Sustainability
As noted previously, there are several ideas on what sustainability entails, and different environmental 
discourses will point in different directions concerning problem formulation, what the aim is and how 
to  reach  it.  There  are  obviously  many  options  to  choose  from  here,  where  the  ecofeminist  take 
represents one dimension. It is a dimension that considers the social and environmental consequences 
of a growth oriented development that claims  that  growth in itself is  a problem as it is  thoroughly 
dependent  on  patriarchal  and  colonial  oppression.  Thus,  reoriented  growth,  such  as  ecological 
modernization’s decoupling of growth and environmental  destruction,  will not  be able to solve the 
problem, as colonial exploitation of both human and natural resources will be sustained. To provide 
some  examples,  the shift toward ecological  consumption of coffee in the  Western world will  still 
maintain colonial relations, as it means a continuation of a system of production that takes for granted 
that the land use and economic structure in the non-Western world should be adjusted to a Western 
demand. It does not end the use of previous rainforest land for (ecologically sound) plantations, or the 
displacement  of  local  populations  from their  sustenance  economies,  which  means  that  ecological 
modernization  still  risks  producing  both  environmental  degradation  and  poverty  as  externalized 
effects. A  sustainable  consumption  would in  this  case  rather be  connected  to,  e.g.,  an in  general 
decreased consumption of goods, or an adjustment of the consumption to the offer of a locally just and 
sustainable  production,  traded  on  a  market  characterized  by  equal  relations  and  environmental 
consideration, where all social and environmental costs are internalized. In a national perspective, the 
ecofeminist eye could turn toward how  the relation between Norrland and the rest of the country is 
characterized by a similar kind of colonialism,  used as  a resource by the rest  of the country while 

90

largely not beneﬁtting. Ecofeminist analysis in a local context could, e.g., resemble the analysis of the 
Dennis  Package  by  Bradley,  Gunnarsson-Östling  &  Isaksson  (2008,  p.  73),  where  the  negative 
consequences of the Package were found to hit those parts of the population hardest that were already 
underprivileged, and also unable to enjoy the project’s beneﬁts. 
	

A  basic  part  of  moving  toward  ecofeminist  sustainability  is  a  redeﬁned  relation  between 
humans and nature, in discourse and practice. This redeﬁnition depends on the revaluing of nature, and 
on the  understanding that  human societies  are  ultimately conditioned by nature. Regardless  of the 
global  effect humans now  have on nature’s ecosystems,  there is  no getting away from our ultimate 
dependence on nature. This dependence also points toward the interconnectedness of environmental 
and social issues. The ignorance of this dependence makes it possible to disconnect the interrelation 
between  environmental  deterioration  and  increasing  social  injustices  and  poverty.  It  is  therefore 
integral to reestablish this connection, if social justice and environmental protection is to be met. One 
of the implications of this is that it would become impossible to treat nature as a mere resource in the 
plan, void of agency, for humans to manage and even create. Rather, the plan would have to adopt a 
perspective that is characterized by respect for natural processes that cannot be fully comprehended by 
humans,  humility  in  terms  of  humanity’s  inferiority,  in  search  for  a  cyclical  relation  based  on 
cooperation. 
	

It  stands  quite  clear  that  a  change  in  discourse  according  to  an  ecofeminist  perspective 
requires massive efforts, and implies a change that in our current society is largely unthinkable. One of 
the reasons this change seems so insurmountable is of course that we are protected from seeing the 
actual consequences of our current reality. In practice, our society is greatly indebted to other parts of 
the world in order to sustain our wealth,  standard and level of ”development”. Folke & Rockström’s 
(2009) attention to how  the spatial  distance means  that we lose  sight  of short  term environmental 
feedback is one explanation to this, which is connected to Dryzek’s (2012, p. 27) notion that we tend 
to compensate for what the planetary ecosystem cannot support, through trade and aid. Mies & Shiva’s 
(2014,  p 268f) emphasize how  economic,  industrial and technological  development is  discursively 
connected to peace, freedom and afﬂuence, while its externalized social and environmental costs are 
obscured. Quite simply, it is possible to sustain our current disconnected societies because we are not 
confronted with its actual effects. This disconnection does however not remove our responsibility for 
the exploitation of environmental and social values. Thus,  the relevance of a changed relation still 
stands. 
	

How  this  change should come about remains to ﬁgure out. As the workshop results did not 
address this issue in its full signiﬁcance, this thesis in this respect partly falls short. This however also 
depends on how thorough a change we are aiming for. There is, e.g.,  a certain strive toward gender 
equality going on within the frames  of our current  societies. While  ecofeminism,  and many  other 
feminisms with it, would argue that this change will not change the fundamental problem, a discourse 
that  separates  and  hierarchizes,  there  are  still  efforts  at  quantitative  equality.  The  same  goes  for 
environmental  issues,  as  sustainability  in fact is  in its  basis  an effort  to  move  toward diminished 
environmental  degradation. Thus,  the  issue  could be  confronted on several  levels. In terms  of  the 
within-approach,  the  workshop results  still  have some suggestions for an increased  environmental 
protection, which also goes for increased equality.
Apart from the workshop suggestions, a few obvious efforts to take in order to move toward 
	

increased environmental protection and equality will be mentioned below. 
Mandatory Environmental Quality Standards
One very concrete effort that could be taken is to make the fulﬁllment of the environmental quality 
standards mandatory. These standards belong to the national public interests and are a concretization 
of  the  environmental  objectives,  which  ”describe  what  quality  and  state  of  the  environment  are 
sustainable in the long term”  (Naturvårdsverket, 2014) The environmental quality standards form the 
indicators  that  are  set  ”to  clarify  the  environmental  dimension  of  the  concept  sustainable 
development”  (ibid). The municipalities  have a  great responsibility and possibility to contribute  to 
reaching these standards. Consequently, they are a part of the basis of the plan. However, already upon 

91

the adoption of the plan,  concerns were expressed as to whether the plan would indeed pay enough 
consideration to the environmental quality standards. The audit opinion from the Stockholm County 
Council reads (Stockholms stad, 2010, p. 86), 

”According to chapter 4, §1 of the Planning and Building Act, the comprehensive plan shall express 
how  the  municipality  intends  to  follow  the  operative  environmental  quality  standards. The 
proposal for the comprehensive plan does not express this. The County Council is of the opinion 
that the comprehensive plan needs to be supplemented with the operative environmental quality 
standards and how they are followed.”

As a matter of fact,  the municipalities are obliged to fulﬁll certain tasks  in their planning,  and the 
environmental quality standards is one of these. The County Council even has the right to annul the 
decisions of the municipality if these tasks are left behind. An obvious suggestion for a ﬁrst general 
effort at approaching sustainability would be to make the environmental quality standards mandatory, 
and a main priority in conﬂict-ridden decision-making processes. 
Human Rights
The second part of moving toward ecofeminist sustainability, which has already been mentioned in the 
previous paragraph is a redeﬁned take on social values, and a strive toward equality in a broad sense of 
the word. In this respect the workshop results provided greater guidance for particular directions  to 
take. A considerable attention was directed toward aims that draw on human rights in the workshops. 
Apart from a few protocols Sweden has ratiﬁed the Declaration of Human Rights (Regeringskansliet, 
2014). This means that: 

”States  must  take  positive  action  to  facilitate  the  enjoyment  of  basic  human  rights. Through 
ratiﬁcation  of  international  human  rights  treaties,  Governments  undertake  to  put  into  place 
domestic  measures  and  legislation  compatible  with  their  treaty  obligations  and  duties. The 
domestic  legal  system,  therefore,  provides  the  principal  legal  protection  of  human  rights 
guaranteed under international law.” (United Nations, 2014)

The attention to human rights in the workshops could be said to be practically unprovocative, as few 
would argue against it. From the City Planning Administration it would also likely be argued that the 
comprehensive plan supports and aims to fulﬁll the human rights. The Swedish Government  (ibid) 
states, that:

”the task of strengthening  human  rights  and  respect  for them has high  priority. It  is  a  task we 
pursue both in our political endeavours in Sweden and in our foreign policy. Human rights issues 
pervade most of our policy areas.” 

However,  violations  of  human  rights  in  Sweden  have  been  well  documented,  in  terms  of,  e.g., 
discrimination and violence based on gender,  sexual preference,  ethnicity,  age,  religion,  class,  able-
bodiedness (Statistiska Centralbyrån, 2012). As noted previously, the social and economic inequalities 
of Stockholm are conﬁrmed by the comprehensive plan. Relying on ecofeminist theory concerning the 
relations between the global North and the global South would lead one to think that there may be 
problems in the Swedish foreign relations when seen from a human rights’ point of view. In this sense, 
the  attention to human  rights  that  has  been  voiced in the  workshops  still  holds  signiﬁcance. As 
discussed  above,  the  focus  of  the  workshops  has  both  a  local  and  a  global  side.  They  aim  for 
fulﬁllment of ideals of equality on all levels, from the local to the global through the links that tie the 
different levels together. This aim is easily recognized in the however summary description from the 
Swedish Government as well, and is also to be reﬂected in policy-making. Human rights should then 
in all reason be present in the comprehensive plan as well. It is often argued that free market forces 
will  take  us  closer  to  equality  in  an  automatic  manner.  Ecofeminist  and  other  theory,  next  to 
experience,  shows  that  this  is  not  the  case.  (Mies  & Shiva,  2014,  p.  268f)Thus,  not  addressing 
inequalities in the comprehensive plan means that there is a risk that these issues will be forgotten and 

92

potentially worsened in the process. So all the while the attention to human rights might come off as 
lame, they do have real importance, and could certainly contribute to the comprehensive plan.
Equality Objectives
As part of a national regulation, Sweden has adopted a number of objectives that aim to fulﬁll equality 
across genders and sexuality in a number of different aspects. The equality objectives were adopted in 
2006,  through proposition 2005/06:155 (Sverige,  Regeringen,  2006) with the intention to follow  up 
the work by creating a number of indicators that would concretize the aims and thus take them closer 
to implementation. Coinciding with a governmental  shift,  the indictors  were never worked out,  but 
there  are  independent  examples  of  efforts  at  implementation.  One  such  example  is  the  project 
Jämställdhetskartan (2014), which aims to connect municipalities that are working to implement the 
equality  objectives.  One  of  the  aspects  that  is  being  mapped  is  gender  equality  in  the  built 
environment. As has been noted throughout this thesis, in the workshops and the plan, drawing on the 
conclusions of the recency report, there is a strong possibility to handle this issue on the level of the 
comprehensive plan. 
	

Unlike the environmental quality standards, the equality objectives have not been turned into 
mandatory public  interests  for the comprehensive planning to consider. As  with the  environmental 
quality standards however,  it remains clear that the formulation of an outspoken target is more likely 
to be achieved. Naming the equality standards as a speciﬁc target would force planning to attend to 
inequalities, as opposed to the otherwise immediate risk that they are de-prioritized or even forgotten 
when  confronted  by  other,  allegedly  more  pressing,  matters.  However,  the  statistics  of  gender 
inequalities are solid (Statistiska Centralbyrån, 2012), meaning we already have the knowledge about 
how things look. What is yet to be done is to do something about it. 
	

The targets in this perspective contain a potential. Regardless of their not yet being made an 
ofﬁcial  public  interest  to fulﬁll  in  comprehensive  planning,  they have  still  been  adopted  by  the 
government,  which means  that  Sweden has  bound itself to fulﬁlling them. There  shouldn’t be any 
formal  obstacles stopping the City Planning Administration to work proactively in this  matter. The 
equality objectives  in their current  form can certainly be discussed,  and furthermore are limited to 
equality concerning particular factors. Fulﬁllment of these alone will not rid us of inequalities broadly, 
which is  why there needs to be an intersectional  analysis of oppressive  structures  that  manages  to 
consider the aggregate effects of oppressions along different lines. From an ecofeminist perspective, 
race and ethnicity would be considered particularly pressing. Nevertheless, the equality objectives can 
still serve as a tool to bring attention to gender inequalities in comprehensive planning. 
Ending Notes
The attention to governmentally decided objectives for the environment and gender equality discussed 
above does not make any illusions that their fulﬁllment will solve all our problems of this sort. It has 
to be noted that turning these objectives into mandatory parts of planning is not necessarily connected 
to their success, and furthermore, there is a critique toward at least the equality objectives regarding 
how  they are formulated which would argue that they are in themselves counterproductive. It must 
also be said that their implementation would occur within the frames of our present society, meaning 
that interconnected structures of unjust dominance may not necessarily be addressed. It is, put shortly, 
a  problem solving approach that  does not address  the problem  in its  entire  complexity. To ﬁnd a 
holistic approach would however require another thesis to be written.  

93

94

7.	
 REFERENCES

ALBRECHTS,  L. (2010). More of the same is  not  enough!  How  could strategic spatial  planning be 
instrumental  in  dealing  with  the  challenges  ahead?  Environment  and  Planning  B:  Planning  and 
Design. 37. p. 1115-1127.
AMIN,  A.  &  GRAHAM,  S.  (1997)  The  ordinary  city.  Transactions  of  the  Institute  of  British 
Geographers. (NS/22) p. 411-429.
BACCHI, C. (2009). Analysing Policy: What’s the problem represented to be? Australia: Pearson. 
BERGMAN  et  al. (2014)  What  about  the  Future? The Troubled  Relationship between Futures  and 
Feminism. NORA - Nordic Journal of Feminist and Gender Research. 22. (1). p. 63-69.
BRADLEY, K., GUNNARSSON-ÖSTLING, U. & ISAKSSON, K. (2008) Exploring environmental justice in 
Sweden -  how  to  improve  planning for  environmental  sustainability and social  equity in an ”eco-
friendly” context. MIT Journal of Planning. (vol 8). p. 68-81.
BRADLEY, K., HEDRÉN, J. (eds.) (2014) Green Utopianism: perspectives, politics and micro-practices. 
New York: Routledge.
BRENNER,  N.,  MARCUSE,  P. & MAYER,  M.  (2012)  Cities  for people, not  for  proﬁt. Critical  urban 
theory and the right to the city. Wiltshire: Routledge.
BUTTEL, F., H. (2000) Classical Theory and Contemporary Environmental Sociology: some reﬂections 
on the antecedents and prospects for reﬂexive modernization theories in the study of environment and 
society. In Spaargaren,  G.,  Mol, A.,  P.,  J.,  Buttel, F.,  H. (eds.). Environment and Global Modernity. 
Great Britain: SAGE Publications Ltd. 
BÖRJESON,  L. et al. (2006) Scenario types and techniques: Towards  a user’s guide. Futures. 38. p. 
723–739.
CARLSSON-KANYAMA, A. et al. (2008) Participative backcasting: A tool for involving stakeholders in 
local sustainability planning. Futures. 40. p. 34–46.
DRYZEK,  J.,  S. (2012) The  Politics  of the Earth.  Environmental  Discourses. Great Britain: Oxford 
University Press. 
FOLKE, C. & ROCKSTRÖM, J. (2009) Turbulent times. Global Environmental Change. 19. p. 1-3.
GUNDER,  M.  (2006)  Sustainability:  Planning’s  Saving  Grace  or  Road  to  Perdition?  Journal  of 
Planning Education and Research. 26. p. 208-221.
GUNNARSSON-ÖSTLING,  U.,  SVENFELT,  Å. & HÖJER,  M. (2012) Participatory methods for creating 
feminist futures. Futures. 44. p. 914–922. 
GUNNARSSON-ÖSTLING,  U. (2014) Politicizing Planning through Multiple Images  of the Future. In 
Bradley,  K. & Hedrén,  J. (eds.) Green Utopianism: perspectives, politics  and micro-practices. New 
York: Routledge.

95

GUNNARSSON-ÖSTLING, U. (2011) Gender in futures: A study of gender and feminist papers published 
in Futures, 1969-2009. Futures. 43. p. 1029-1039. 
HARVEY, D. (2013) Rebel cities: from the right to the city to the urban revolution. United Kingdom: 
Verso. 
HAJER,  M.  &  VERSTEEG,  W.  (2005)  A  decade  of  discourse  analysis  of  environmental  politics: 
achievements,  challenges,  perspectives.  Journal  of  Environmental  Policy  &  Planning.  7.  (3).  p. 
175-184.
HUGHES  et  al.  (2013)  Multiscale  regime  shifts  and  planetary  boundaries.  Trends  in  Ecology  & 
Evolution. 28. (7). p. 389-395.
IPCC. (2007) Summary for Policymakers [Online] Available from: http://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-
report/ar4/wg1/ar4-wg1-spm.pdf [Accessed 17 October 2014]
JÄMSTÄLLDHETSKARTAN  - TOJ,  Tillgänglighet  i det  fysiska rummet [Online] Avaliable from: http://
www.jamstalldhetskarta.se/begrepp-och-teori/tillgänglighet-i-det-fysiska-rummet.html [Accessed 13th 
October 2014]
MCMAHON,  M.  (1997)  From  the  ground up:  ecofeminism  and  ecological  economics.  Ecological 
Economics. 20. p. 163-173.
MELLOR,  M.  (1995)  Women,  nature  and  the  social  construction  of  ‘economic  man’.  Ecological 
Economics. 20. p.129-140. 
MELLOR,  M. (2000) Feminism and Environmental Ethics: A Materialist Perspective. Ethics and the 
Environment. 5 (1). p. 107-123.
MIES, M., SHIVA, V. (2014) Ecofeminism. Cornwall: Zed Books Ltd.
MOL, A., P., J. (2000) The environmental movement in an era of ecological modernisation. Geoforum. 
31. p. 45-56.
MONTGOMERY, A. (2008) US Families 2025: In search of future families. Futures. 40. p. 377-387.
NATURVÅRDSVERKET,  Kommunerna  [Online]  Available  from:  http://www.miljomal.nu/sv/Vem-gor-
vad/Kommunerna/ [Accessed: 15th October 2014] 
PINDER,  D.  (2002) In Defence of Utopian Urbanism:  Imagining Cities  after the ”End  of  Utopia.” 
Geograﬁska Annaler. 84B. (3-4). p. 229-241.

PINDER, D. (1992) Utopia. Hutchinson, R. (ed.) Encyclopedia of Urban Studies. p. 945–949.
REGERINGSKANSLIET,  Human Rights  [Online] Available  from:  http://www.government.se/sb/d/3085 
[Accessed: 2nd October 2014]
SALLEH,  A. (2008) The dystopia of technoscience: An ecofeminist  critique  of postmodern  reason. 
Futures. 41. p. 201-209.

96

SCHMID,  C. (2012) Henri Lefebvre,  the right to the city,  and the new  metropolitan mainstream. In 
Brenner, N., Marcuse, P. & Mayer, M. Cities for people, not for proﬁt. Critical urban theory and the 
right to the city. Wiltshire: Routledge. p. 42-61.
SPAARGAREN,  G., MOL, A., P.,  J., BUTTEL, F.,  H. (eds.) (2000) Environment and Global Modernity. 
Great Britain: SAGE Publications Ltd. 
SPAARGAREN,  G.  (2000)  Ecological  Modernization  Theory  and  the  Changing  Discourse  on 
Environment and Modernity. In Spaargaren, G., Mol, A., P., J., Buttel, F., H. (eds.). Environment and 
Global Modernity. Great Britain: SAGE Publications Ltd. 
STATISTISKA CENTRALBYRÅN (2012) På tal om  kvinnor och män, lathund om jämställdhet. Örebro: 
SCB-Tryck
STOCKHOLMS  STAD,  STADSBYGGNADSKONTORET (2014a)  Aktualitetsförklaring  av  Promenadstaden, 
Översiktsplan för Stockholm. Stockholm. (Dnr: 2012-15939)
STOCKHOLMS  STAD,  STADSBYGGNADSKONTORET  (2014b)  Fokus  promenadstaden  -  uppföljning  av 
Översiktsplan för Stockholm. Stockholm
STOCKHOLMS  STAD,  STADSBYGGNADSKONTORET  (2010)  Promenadstaden  -  Översiktsplan  för 
Stockholm. Stockholm: 08-tryck.
STOCKHOLMS  STAD,  Promenadstaden - översiktsplan för  Stockholm [Online] Available from: http://
www.stockholm.se/oversiktsplan [Accessed 21st September 2104] 
STOCKHOLMS  STAD,  Vad  händer  nu? [Online] Available  from  http://www.stockholm.se/Fristaende-
webbplatser/Fackforvaltningssajter/Stadsbyggnadskontoret/Oversiktsplan/Vad-hander-nu/ 
 [Accessed 
10th July 2014]
SVERIGE,  REGERINGEN. (2006) Regeringens proposition 2005/06:155. Makt att forma samhället och 
sitt  eget liv - nya mål i jämställdhetspolitiken. [Online] Available from: http://www.riksdagen.se/sv/
Dokument-Lagar/Forslag/Propositioner-och-skrivelser/Makt-att-forma-samhallet-och-s_GT03155/  
[Accessed: 13th October 2014]
SWYNGEDOUW, E. (2007) Impossible ”Sustainability” and the Postpolitical Condition. In Krueger, R. 
& Gibbs,  D. (eds.) The Sustainable Development  Paradox: Urban Political Economy in the United 
States and Europe. The U.S.: Guilford Press. p. 13-39.
TALLY Jr., R. T. (2010) Radical Alternatives: The Persistence of Utopia in the Postmodern. In: Drake, 
A. (ed.) New Essays on the Frankfurt School of Critical  Theory. Newcastle-upon-Tyne: Cambridge 
Scholars p. 109-121.
UNITED  NATIONS,  Universal  Declaration  of  Human  Rights  [Online]  Available  from:  http://
www.un.org/en/documents/udhr/ [Accessed: 2nd October 2014]
VICTOR,  P.,  A.  (2012)  Growth,  degrowth  and  climate  change:  A  scenario  analysis.  Ecological 
Economics. 84. p. 206-212.

97

