HTRC05.qxd  12/05/2006  12:32PM  Page 138

How to Read a Poem

Dubourgh to him was but a fool;
He played melodious without rule,
And sung the feats of Fin McCool,

The giant . . .

The rhyme scheme in the poem is a kind of comic ritual in itself. Dunkin
uses  some  deliberately  inept  rhymes  (‘scurvy’/‘topsy-turvy’,  ‘from  it’/
‘vomit’, ‘dead aunt’/‘pedant’), but the real comic effect is reaped from the
way the ﬁrst three lines of each verse (which are iambic tetrameters) set up
a rhythm which is suddenly disrupted by the ﬁnal, lamely tacked-on phrase.
These ﬁnal phrases come after a slight pause, during which the reader just
has  time  to  wonder  what  monstrously  over-ingenious  rhyme  is  about  to 
be  perpetrated.  The  ﬁnal  phrase,  with  its  brief  trisyllabic  lilt,  is  inevitably
bathetic:

Each blithesome damsel shews her shape,
Enough to burst her stays and tape,
And bangs the boards: the ﬁddlers scrape
Their cat-guts:

Brave C–, foe to popish dogs,
In boots, as cumbersome as clogs,
Displays his parts, and B––jogs

His fat guts.

The  ﬁnal  phrases,  almost  afterthoughts,  are  too  laconic  to  bear  the  em-
phasis which the verse throws on them, and this itself is a comic effect. The
phrases are necessary to round off the sense of each stanza, yet rhythmically
speaking they seem like feebly superﬂuous gestures. Each stanza thus seems
to  end  on  an  embarrassing  anti-climax,  as  the  speaking  voice  trails  away. 
It is as though the sense needs these phrases but the metre does not, since
it  and  its  trim,  triple  rhyme  are  already  complete  in  themselves.  This  ten-
sion  between  feeling  that  the  phrases  are  internal  to  the  verses,  yet  also 
pointlessly external to them, is a kind of wit.

5.11

Imagery

Finally,  a  word  about  imagery.  Just  as  rhyme,  metre  and  texture  involve 
an  interplay  of  difference  and  identity,  so  do  most  images.  Similes  and

138

HTRC05.qxd  12/05/2006  12:32PM  Page 139

How to Read a Poem

metaphors insist on afﬁnities between elements which we also acknowledge
to be different; and the more we attend to the kinship between the terms,
the larger the differences may loom. Metonymy links elements in a contiguous
way  (bird/sky,  for  example),  thus  also  creating  an  equivalence  between
things which we recognise to be disparate. Synecdoche substitutes a part for
a whole (wing for bird, for example, or crown for monarch), and parts and
wholes are both different and allied.

The term ‘image’ is in some ways misleading, since it suggests the visual,
and not all imagery is of this kind. Auden, for example, is famous for images
which yoke together the concrete and the abstract: ‘Anxiety receives them
like a Grand Hotel’; ‘And lie apart like epochs from each other’. Part of the
point of similes like this, which belong to an era in which the whole idea of
representation is in crisis, is that they bafﬂe any attempt to visualise them.
But this is true in a sense of all such equating of one thing with another. We
speak  of  similes  and  metaphors  as  images;  but  both  of  them  are  forms  of
comparison, and it is hard to see how a comparison can be a picture.6 We
can describe jealousy as a green-eyed monster, but this tends to mean that
we picture a green-eyed monster rather than jealousy. You can take a photo-
graph of a goat, but not of lechery. You can hold the two parts of the com-
parison together in language, just as in language you can have a purple-coloured
pain, a grin without a cat, a square circle, a person who is both dead and
alive, or a cathedral which is built entirely out of stone but also entirely out
of jelly. But it is not easy to portray any of these phenomena visually. What
image does ‘My love is like a red, red rose’ bring to mind? A rose with well-
plucked  eyebrows  and  dainty  legs?  It  is  language’s  lack  of  visualisability
which confers such enviable freedom upon it. Seeing language as no more
than an image or representation of reality is a way of restricting its liberty.
In  literary  history,  the  words  for  such  policing  of  the  signiﬁer  are  realism 
and naturalism – movements which, despite their exclusiveness, have been
immensely fertile and productive.

It is true that there are kinds of imagery which do not involve visualisa-
tion. We speak, for example, of aural or tactile imagery. Yet the word remains
more  deceptive  than  illuminating.  For  some  eighteenth-century  critics,
imagery referred to the power of poetry to make us ‘see’ objects, to feel as
if we were in their actual presence; but this implied, oddly, that the function
of poetic language was to efface itself before what it represented. Language
makes things vividly present to us, but to do so adequately it must cease to
interpose its own ungainly bulk between us and them. So poetic language

6 A point made by P. N. Furbank in his Reﬂections on the Word ‘Image’ (London, 1970), p. 1.

139

HTRC05.qxd  12/05/2006  12:32PM  Page 140

How to Read a Poem

attains its pitch of perfection when it ceases to be language at all. At its peak,
it transcends itself.

Images, on this theory, are representations so lucid that they cease to be
representations at all, and instead merge with the real thing. Which means,
logically speaking, that we are no longer dealing with poetry at all, which is
nothing if not a verbal phenomenon. F. R. Leavis writes of the kind of verse
which ‘has such life and body that we hardly seem to be reading arrangements
of words . . . The total effect is as if words as words withdrew themselves from
the focus of our attention and we were directly aware of a tissue of feelings
and perceptions.’7 It is ironic that on this view, poetry can create the impres-
sion of real things more powerfully than the visual arts. When we gaze at a
painting of a landscape, we know that what we are seeing is not the land-
scape itself, precisely because the painting is itself a visual object, one which
distinguishes itself from what it depicts in the very act of being faithful to it.
But when the medium of representation is not itself visual, as with poetry,
this is not so obvious.

The idea of the ‘image’, which ﬁrst emerges in its modern sense in the
late seventeenth century, arises from the suspicion of rhetoric felt by an Age
of Reason.8 Words are not to act as slippery ﬁgures of speech, but to behave
as ‘images’ or clear representations of things. It is ironic, then, that in some
later criticism ‘imagery’ and ‘ﬁgures of speech’ come to be more or less syn-
onymous. Modern movements like Imagism inherited this belief in clear rep-
resentations, as poets like H. D. and Ezra Pound, alarmed by a commercial
and bureaucratic language which seemed out of touch with concrete reality,
sought to yoke words and things more tightly together. The idea of the con-
crete springs to the fore when reality itself seems to have become abstract.
‘No  ideas  but  in  things’  became  William  Carlos  Williams’s  programmatic 
slogan. Language on this view is at its most trustworthy when it is thing-
like,  and  thus  not  language  at  all.  At  its  most  authentic,  it  ﬂips  over  into 
something else.

Imagery,  then,  did  not  originally  mean  such  devices  as  metaphor  and 
simile. In fact, it meant almost the opposite of them. The word harboured a
marked hostility to ﬁgurative language, rather than denoting certain familiar
uses of it. It was only with the Romantic movement, when it was accepted
that even the clearest perception of the world involves the creative imagination,

7 F.  R.  Leavis,  ‘Imagery  and  Movement:  Notes  in  the  Analysis  of  Poetry’, Scrutiny,
September 1945, p. 124.
8

See  R.  Frazer,  ‘The  Origin  of  the  Word  “Image”’,  in  English  Literary  History,  vol.  xxvii, 

pp. 149–61.

140

HTRC05.qxd  12/05/2006  12:32PM  Page 141

How to Read a Poem

that the two notions began to coalesce. What had started out as a matter of
clear  representations  now  touched  on  the  very  essence  of  the  poetic  ima-
gination, which combines, distinguishes, uniﬁes and transforms. Moreover,
if our knowledge of reality involved the imagination, then imagery was cog-
nitive,  not  merely  decorative.  It  could  no  longer  be  dismissed  as  so  much
superﬂuous  embellishment.  Instead,  it  lay  at  the  very  heart  of  the  poetic.
Rhetoric and reality were no longer at daggers drawn. Metaphor was now
more or less equivalent to the poetic as such. It was a supremely privileged
activity of the human spirit, not just a rhetorical device.

By the middle of the nineteenth century, ‘imagery’ had come to mean pretty
much what it means for us today. Yet what exactly does it mean? Some dic-
tionaries inform us that the term means ‘ﬁgurative language’, in the sense
of language which is non-literal. But similes are surely literal enough. There
is nothing ﬁgurative in claiming that your boyfriend looks like a toad, as opposed
to claiming that he is a toad. It is true that the word ‘literal’ is much abused
these days, as in ‘I literally fell through the ﬂoor in amazement’, where the
word ‘literal’ is itself ﬁgurative. But similes are quite literally literal. Nor is
everything we call a ﬁgure of speech a non-literal use of language. This is
true  enough  of  hyperbole  (exaggeration),  litotes  (understatement),  irony, 
personiﬁcation  and  so  on;  but  what  of  a  ﬁgure  like  chiasmus,  in  which  a 
pattern of words is repeated in reverse order? The Oxford English Dictionary
tells  us  that  chiasmus  is  a  ﬁgure,  yet  deﬁnes  ‘ﬁgure  of  speech’  as  a  non-
literal use of words. Are imagery and ﬁgures of speech the same thing, or is
the former conﬁned to simile and metaphor?

The theory of imagery, then, is in something of a mess. One critic informs
us  that  ‘Imagery  is  a  form  of  metaphor  or  ﬁgurative  speech,  a  kind  of 
picture  language.’9 Yet  on  some  theories,  metaphor,  ﬁgurative  speech  and 
picture  language  are  either  distinct  or  mutually  incompatible.  Another 
commentator, seeking perhaps to square the circle, deﬁnes imagery as any
concrete as opposed to abstract representation in poetry, whether literal or
ﬁgurative.10 One reason why the idea of the image looms so large in the post-
Romantic era is because of literature’s evolving love affair with the concrete.
As we have seen already, the cult of the concrete particular dates largely from
this period; and images are thought to be peculiarly solid, vivid and speciﬁc.
Yet this is a mistaken assumption. There are lots of similes and metaphors,
not least in, say, Elizabethan poetry, which are not at all sensuously particular.

9 Paul Haeffner, quoted in Furbank, Reﬂections, p. 56.
10

See Chris Baldick, The Concise Oxford Dictionary of Literary Terms (Oxford and New York,

1990), p. 106. Baldick’s book is an excellent guide to its subject.

141

HTRC05.qxd  12/05/2006  12:32PM  Page 142

How to Read a Poem

You can have hazy general images as well as grippingly speciﬁc ones. In any
case,  as  we  saw  in  discussing  Seamus  Heaney,  the  idea  that  some  uses  of 
language are more concrete than others needs to be handled with care. It is
true that an elaborately detailed verbal portrait of a green-eyed monster is
less abstract than the concept of jealousy; but the words ‘green-eyed monster’
are not less abstract than the word ‘jealousy’. No word – as opposed to an
idea – is more concrete or abstract than any other.

In any case, it is a mistake to equate concreteness with things. An indi-
vidual object is the unique phenomenon it is because it is caught up in a mesh
of  relations  with  other  objects.  It  is  this  web  of  relations  and  interactions, 
if  you  like,  which  is  ‘concrete’,  while  the  object  considered  in  isolation  is 
purely abstract. In his Grundrisse, Karl Marx sees the abstract not as a lofty,
esoteric notion, but as a kind of rough sketch of a thing. The notion of money,
for  example,  is  abstract  because  it  is  no  more  than  a  bare,  preliminary 
outline of the actual reality. It is only when we reinsert the idea of money
into  its  complex  social  context,  examining  its  relations  to  commodities,
exchange, production and the like, that we can construct a ‘concrete’ con-
cept of it, one which is adequate to its manifold substance. The Anglo-Saxon
empiricist tradition, by contrast, makes the mistake of supposing that the con-
crete is simple and the abstract is complex. In a similar way, a poem for Yury
Lotman is concrete precisely because it is the product of many interacting
systems. Like Imagist poetry, you can suppress a number of these systems
(grammar, syntax, metre and so on) to leave the imagery standing proudly
alone; but this is actually an abstraction of the imagery from its context, not
the concretion it appears to be. In modern poetics, the word ‘concrete’ has
done far more harm than good.

But enough of theory for the moment. It is time now to turn back to the

poems themselves, in a ﬁnal analysis of some well-known English verses.

142

