Presentation by Soraya Kresin, Maike Rosen, Laura Heuwes and Cara 
Symanzik 

TENSE / ASPECT VARIABLES 

Table of contents 

 1. Introduction 

 1.1. Grammaticalization 

 2. Future (going to) 

 2.1. Historical perspective 
 2.2. Change across varieties 
 2.3. Operationalizing Constraints on Grammaticalization 
 2.4. Constraint Ranking 
 2.5. Language hange in apparent time 
 2.6. Comparison between Inter- and Intra-variety 
 2.7. Summary 

 

 

 

 
 

 3. Perfect 

 3.1. Synchronic Patterns 

 3.2. Explanations for Variability in the Perfect 

 3.3. Historical Perspective 

 3.4. The Perfect in Samaná English 

 

 

Introduction 

 Difficult to study, because 

 there are often more than two variants. 

 the context is never clear cut. 

 there is more than one method for analyzing.  

 Useful for 

 exploring social factors. 

 tracking origins of dialect features.   

 Lexical forms develop grammatical meaning. 

Grammaticalization 

 Continues over long periods. 

 Change can be identified by layering and form / function asymmetry. 

 Extract each token for analyzing grammaticalization. 

 

 Methodological steps for studying tense / aspect features: 

1.

Find an area of the grammar that is undergoing grammatical change.  

2. Consult the literature for descriptive and analytic research on the system.  

3.

Identify the relevant constraints on the grammaticalization process.  

4. Perform an analysis. 

5.

Interpret the findings against the historical and social context. 

Future (going to) 

 “Will” and “‘ll” alternate with “going to” 

 Example: 

1. Music’s gonna evolve and change, so language will evolve and change 

too. 

2. You and I are going to be as smart as we’ve ever been and we ’ll march 

down to the back gate. 

 

Historical perspective 
 Historical record -> Pathway for grammaticalization of “going to”: 

 

 

 

 Early Old English: 

 The wee one comes tomorrow. 

 School starts next week. 

 Two verbs: sceal (sihall) and wille (will). 

 Construction of „going to“ emerged in the late 15th century. 

 By the 17th century „going to“ is still associated with „intention“ and „movement“. 

 „Will“ and „going to“ are semantically distinguished today. 

 

Change across varieties 

 Evolution of the “going to” future. 

1. Regionality – urban vs. rural 

2. Degree of integration – enclave vs. mainstream 

3. Ethnicity – African vs. British 

 

 

 Do all communities have vigorous variation between „gonna“, „will“ and 

„‘ll“? 

 Which is the mayority form for all communities? 

 Which form is most frequent in Ottawa? 

 What can we say about the urban community due to this? 

 All communities have vigorous variation between „gonna“, „will“ and „‘ll“. 

 Mayority form for all communities is „‘ll“ 

 „Gonna“ and „gointa“ are most frequent in Ottawa apart from the rest. 
 Urban community is more advanced in terms of the grammaticalization of the 

„going to“ future. 

Operationalizing Constraints on 
Grammaticalization 

 

 Many syntactic and lexical features are claimed to affect future 

expressions (in general) throughout the history of English 

 Observations found in literature: six (testable) constraints  

1. Point of reference 

 Past: 

(a) I foolishly thought I’ d get one at hospital, but I didn’t. 
(YRK/009) 

(b) I was sure that she just wasn’t gonna turn up. (YRK/004) 

 

 Speech time: 

(c) Look I ’ll relieve you of your embarassment. (YRK/087) 

(d) I was like, “Oh I’m gonna have scars!” (YRK/049 

2. Grammatical person 

 First: 

(a) I haven’t got hold of him yet, but I ’ll kill him when I do. 
(YRK/076) 

(b) We’ll not go any further into that. (YRK/030) 

3. Proximity in the future 

 Immediate: 
 (a) I knew I was gonna be finishing like within the hour. (YRK/034) 
 (b) It’s gointa rain today, I thought. (YRK/007) 
 (c) Oh yes he ’ll come in and stop in now if you like. (YRK/076) 
 (d) Don’t bother sitting down, it ’ll ring again in a minute. (YRK/030) 
 Nonimmediate: 
 (e) Yes, you can often spot the ones that you feel will always be a reserved type of 

person. (YRK/006) 

 (f) He’s gonna be like that for the rest of his life. (YRK/052) 
 (g) By the end of this century there’s gonna be a change in the staffing of the 

Churches. (YRK/063) 

 (h) Yeah. I ’ll be flying out there next week on a visit you-know ’cos you’ve got to 

haven’t you.  

(YRK/040) 

4. Lexical verb 

 Go: 
(a) Now we’ll go back to where we were before. (YRK/002) 
(b) He’s gonna go over there and there ’s gonna be no piano there. 
(YRK/079) 
(c) We’re going to get the bus and we’re gointa go in to see my 
Mam. (YRK/083) 
 Come: 
(d) Oh, great, there’s surely somebody gonna come past. 
(YRK/013) 
(e) He’s gonna come round here when I buy this house. (YRK/079) 
(f) I wonder how many’ll come back. (YRK/019) 

5. Type of clause 

 Subordinate: 

(a) And I was stuck to the back wondering what I would do. 
(YRK/024) 

(b) I don’t know whether she’s gointa teach the sheep yoga or 
what! (YRK/020) 

 Main: 

(a) It’s gonna chase the wire now. (YRK/058) 

(b) In York everyone will always know it as Rowntree. (YRK/067) 

6. Animacy 

 Human: 
(a) I’m going to be a policeman. (YRK/011) 
(b) That child isn’t going to have a very fair crack of the whip. (YRK/083) 
(c) The man is an idiot. He’ll destroy everything. (YRK/087) 
 Nonhuman: 
(e) I don’t think the world will ever be rid of war. (YRK/067) 
(f) The lock will cost like so much money. (YRK/049) 
(g) I think it’ll be pretty good. (YRK/004) 
 Existential: 
(h) There won’t be any problems after that. (YRK/014 

 Next step: applying these observations in a relevant context 

 

 How do these constraints operate? 

Constraint Ranking: 

Relative Strength of Factors 

 Point of reference one of the strongest constraints across all the 

varieties 

 Effects of other factors shift ( example: going to rarely occurs with a 

verb of motion) 

 

 Differences suggest that going to is more advanced in Ottawa, less 

advanced in the rural communities 

 Language spoken by isolated speakers has the constraints that were 

operative at an earlier stage of the English language -> now receding 
from mainstream varieties 

 How do we know that these intervariety differences are the result of 

language change happening at different rates? 

 

 Differences across varieties: support by the evidence from 

intracommunity differences  

  change in apparent time 

 Testing the same conditioning factors elsewhere 

Language Change in apparent time 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Next step: testing the hallmarks of grammaticalization underlying 

these features 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



constraints are shifting in ranking, strength and  

significance across age groups 



 point of reference one of the strongest constraints 

 York comparable to Ottawa 

1. Phonological reduction of going to increases incrementally from oldest to youngest 
speakers 
2. Restriction of going to to animate nouns in the oldest generation disappears in the 
younger generations 
3. The neutrality between first vs. other grammatical subjects in the oldest generation 
shifts to a statistically significant favoring effect of going to with first person subjects 
in 
the two younger generations. 

4. Specialization of going to in full NP subjects in the older generation changes to a 
significant increase in use with third person pronouns in the younger generations. 
5. Allocation of going to to immediate future reference is exhibited in the youngest 

Comparison between Inter-Variety and Intra-Variety 

 Youngest generation in Britain looks like the oldest in Canada 

 Oldest in Britain like the African American enclaves in NA 

 

 Grammatical change can be viewed in synchronic data 

 Details of the grammaticalizing form appear to be reflected in variable 

constraints on its grammatical distribution 

 Differences and similarities reflect different points in the pathway of 

change 

 Degree of grammaticalization may be related to different ecological and 

sociocultural circumstances 

Summary 

 Tense/aspect features are excellent channels to study grammatical change 

 

 Variable constraints on its grammatical distribution across different dialects and also 

across generations of the same community show the details of the lexical history 
 

 Cross-variety  perspective helpful 

 

 But questions remain: What aspects of grammaticalization are universal / idiosyncratic 

across varieties? Does phonetic coalescence happen early or late? 

 
 The internal measures reviewed here are not the only means – each form has particular 

collocation patterns that, in part, determine their linguistic pattern 

 Have they a significant effect on the overall system? 

Perfect (have) 

 The Standard English perfect construction is made up of two parts: 

 An auxiliary have/has 

 A past participle 

 

 

Functions of the present perfect 

1. Continuative 

2.

Experiential  

3. Resultative  

 

Synchronic Patterns 

Different constructions in Samaná English: 

 Standard preterite forms 

 Lone past participles 

 Pre verbal been 

 Pre verbal done 

 Auxiliary be 

 Verb stems  

 Preverbal ain‘t 

 Constructions with three verbs 

Explanation for Variability in the Perfect 

 Hypothesis: Lone past participles are simply preterites 

 E.g. seen for see and done for do 

 Lone past participles can also be the result of auxiliary deletion 

 Because they occur in contexts that also permit the present perfect 

 Hypothesis: the lone past participle is a generalized past time marker 

 Can be used to mean simple past, past perfect and present perfect 

 Extension of this hypothesis -> eventual loss of the perfect tense 

 Position of the perfect is in the history of many languages unstable  

Perfect contexts 

 Two frequently occuring forms are done and been 

 

 Occurance in Alabama and Newfoundland English 

 

 The “three verb cluster“ 

 

Historical Perspective 

 OE had only two tenses 

 Past 

 Nonpast 

 This two-tense verb system underwent substantial elboration during OE 

to ME 

 The most prominent expansion: development of present perfect and past 

perfect 

General overview of the history of the present 
perfect  

The Perfect in Samaná English 

 Evolution of the perfect in the history of English 

 Have/has + past participle construction developed in ME 

 “competition” of verb types: have and be competed as auxiliaries 

Have and be 

 Have occured with transitive verbs 

 Be occured with certain intransative verbs denoting the idea of 

becoming or turning or being transformed into something 

 Have gradually generalized to more and more verbs and eventually 

ousted be 

 

Does not tell us where perfect is variable with preterite ! 
 

Samaná English 

 More extensive alternation among competing forms 

 

 

 “Strange“ forms in perfect contexts in Samaná remnant of earlier 

stages 

Nova Scotia, Canada 

What linguistic patterns may underlie these forms? 

Perfect have not spread to all contexts! 
 

Principles of grammaticalization 

 1. The principle of layering 

     new forms co- existed with older ones 

 

 2.The principle of persistence 

    lexical meaning of forms constrained on grammatical distribution 

 

 3. The principle of specialization 

     reducing number of alternatives 

 

 

 

 

 

 

THE END 

