Vol. 145, No. 3  ·  Short contribution

The impact of mobile phones 
on knowledge access and transfer 
of small-scale horticultural farmers 
in Tanzania 

Madlen Krone1, Kim Philip Schumacher2, Peter Dannenberg1

1  Geographisches Institut der Universität zu Köln, Albertus-Magnus-Platz, 50923 Köln, Germany, mkrone@uni-koeln.de, p.dannenberg@uni-koeln.de
2  Institut für Strukturforschung und Planung in agrarischen Intensivgebieten, Universität Vechta, Universitätsstr. 5, 49377 Vechta, Germany, 

kim.schumacher@uni-vechta.de

Manuscript submitted:                 2014  /  Accepted for publication: 24 July 2014  /  Published online:       September 2014

Abstract
Agriculture is the main economic activity in Tanzania and the country´s largest employer, providing livelihood for at 
least 80 % of the economically active population. Many studies have identified key challenges facing the sector for Africa 
in general – among these lack of access to knowledge. For agricultural producers, access to knowledge is important for 
an improved productivity and competitiveness. The fast diffusion of information and communication technologies (ICT) 
such as mobile phones across Africa in the last years has resulted in an improved access and transfer of  agricultural 
knowledge. Studies have shown that rural actors like farmers in remote areas even use mobile phones for their farming 
business. Based on qualitative interviews in the Mwanza Region in northwestern Tanzania, this study aims to identify and 
categorise the different types of knowledge which are transferred via mobile phones. Our results show that mobile phones 
enlarge the ability of farmers to access business-relevant knowledge at an increasing spatial scale. However, the effects 
of the use depend on the type of knowledge and other factors. The results add to existing studies by deepening the under-
standing of the benefits of ICT on knowledge access and transfer for the context of rural small-scale framers in Tanzania.

Zusammenfassung

Die Landwirtschaft bildet für mindestens 80 % der Bevölkerung in Tansania die Lebensgrundlage, sie ist ein be-
deutender Wirtschaftssektor und der größte Arbeitsmarkt. Ein grundlegendes Problem jedoch für die Mehrheit 
der Produzenten stellt der fehlende Zugang zu Wissen dar. Der Zugang zu komplexem Wissen und Informationen 
ist vor allem für eine wettbewerbsfähige und hochwertige Produktion und Vermarktung notwendig. Die rasante 
Verbreitung moderner Informations- und Kommunikationstechnologie (ICT), wie z.B. Mobiltelefone, in Afrika in 
den letzten Jahren hat dazu geführt, dass Wissen schneller ausgetauscht werden kann. Studien zeigen, dass auch 
Kleinbauern zunehmend Mobiltelefone nutzen. Basierend auf qualitativen Interviews in der Mwanza Region im 
Nordwesten von Tansania identifiziert der vorliegende Beitrag verschiedene Typen von Wissen, die mit dem 
Mobilfunktelefon übertragen werden. Unsere Ergebnisse zeigen, dass die Nutzung von Handys den Zugang der 
Produzenten zu geschäftsrelevantem Wissen verbessert. Allerdings sind die Effekte der Nutzung abhängig von 
der Art des Wissens und weiteren Faktoren. Die Ergebnisse tragen zu einem tieferen Verständnis der Wirkung 
von ICTs hinsichtlich  Wissenszugang und -transfer im Entwicklungskontext bei. 
Keywords        ICT, knowledge access, agriculture, Tanzania
. 
Krone, Madlen, Kim Philip Schumacher and Peter Dannenberg 2014: The impact of mobile phones on knowledge access and transfer of small-
scale horticultural farmers in Tanzania. – DIE ERDE 145 (3):  
105

DOI: 

DIE ERDE · Vol. 145 · 3/2014DIE ERDEJournal of the Geographical Society of BerlinThe impact of mobile phones on knowledge access and transfer of small-scale horticultural farmers in Tanzania 

1. Introduction and general framework

In many developing countries like Tanzania, the agri-
cultural sector plays a significant role in the national 
economy (World Bank 2009). Particularly commer-
cial agriculture can contribute to the development of 
rural regions as it creates jobs and income. To produce 
for commercial buyers (e.g. supermarkets) it is impor-
tant to meet certain requirements (e.g. a certain level 
of produce quality within a certain period of time). 
Hence, to meet such requirements it is necessary to 
have the right information and knowledge on how 
to produce commercial crops. Furthermore, market-
relevant knowledge on perishable distribution chan-
nels and actual prices is needed. The current debate 
on ICT4D suggests that crucial knowledge for farmers 
and other businesses in developing countries can be 
accessed via ICT (in particular via mobile phones, e.g. 
World Bank 2011). In the last decades, mobile phones 
have become very popular in Sub-Saharan Africa and 
are already used in remote areas by farmers for a 
rapid transfer of agricultural knowledge (Dannenberg 
and Lakes 2013). However, so far, the ICT4D debate is 
mainly based on applied studies (often by donors or 
private companies) and a deeper understanding and 
studies on what kind of knowledge can be transferred 
and accessed is missing (Heeks 2014). 
Based on qualitative interviews in the Mwanza Re-
gion in northwestern Tanzania this study aims to 
identify and categorise the different types of knowl-
edge which are transferred via mobile phones. 
Over the past years mobile phone ownership and us-
age has also expanded in rural Tanzania, including use 
amongst small scale farmers. In 2010, 56 out of 100 
inhabitants in Tanzania subscribed to a mobile phone 
compared to 57 out of 100 inhabitants in entire Sub-
Saharan Africa (Kimura and Minges 2012: 206). A few 
studies have already been conducted in Tanzania ana-
lysing the usage of mobile phones of rural and urban 
communities in general (e.g. Molony 2008). However, 
knowledge transfer and access via mobile phones as 
such has only partly been analysed. 
This paper is concerned with how different types of 
knowledge are transferred via mobile phones. From 
this perspective, we follow Humphrey (2002) who di-
vided the impacts of e-commerce on marketing struc-
tures in 1. transaction and 2. information- orientated 
exchange. The latter can be further divided, according 
to Morgan and Murdoch (2000: 160) who applied the 
106

2.  Methodology

existing ideas on knowledge distribution to agricul-
tural networks. Based on Lundvall and Johnson (1994) 
they define simple information as information in 
terms of facts (“know-what”), while complex knowl-
edge includes different types of implicit knowledge 
that go beyond, such as “know-why” and “know-how”. 
Complex knowledge is important for the understand-
ing of production processes and involves e.g. trained 
skills, which are often implicit and therefore diffi-
cult to communicate. Yet, it is not clear which type of 
knowledge can be communicated to what extent via 
mobile phones. Therefore, this paper tries to bring 
both approaches together to examine the transactions 
and different types of knowledge that are transferred 
via mobile phones by horticultural farmers. 
This paper is based on results of a master’s thesis em-
bedded in an ongoing joint project of the University of 
Cologne, the University of Vechta and Saint Augustine 
University (Tanzania). It was partly funded by the 
German Federal Ministry of Education and Research. 
The focus of this empirical study, which was implemented 
between August and September 2013, is on small-scale 
farmers that produce horticultural products for com-
mercial use. With the help of local research assistants 
and the Agriculture Training Institute of the Ministry of 
Agriculture in Ukiriguru, 12 qualitative interviews with 
small-scale horticultural farmers were conducted. In ad-
dition, two expert interviews with local scientists were 
used to interpret and triangulate the results.
The interviews reveal actual exchange on all three differ-
ent forms (transactions, information and complex knowl-
edge). However, the extent to which this exchange takes 
place differs significantly between these various forms.  
Generally, our study shows that most farmers in the fo-
cal region have a mobile phone and use it for business 
purposes. In detail, we could distinguish the following 
different types of impact that mobile phones have:
a)  Transactions: Various transactions take place via 
mobile phones including mobile payment and the co-
ordination between buyers and suppliers. Payment 
transactions conducted via mobile phones between 

3.  Results

DIE ERDE · Vol. 145 · 3/2014The impact of mobile phones on knowledge access and transfer of small-scale horticultural farmers in Tanzania 

“[…] Now, I just call the buyer and we negotiate on 
the phone about the price, the time and the place for 
selling.  With  that  knowledge  I  am  able  to  prepare 
my farm to get the harvest and selling the products” 

buyers and suppliers are common practice among 
farmers as they reduce their reliance on cash in re-
mote areas, lower the costs that they otherwise would 
incur for financial services, i.e. transaction costs, and 
offer both parties increased flexibility. 
(Farmer #5).
According to the interviewed farmers, mobile phones 
increase efficiency, allowing them to save money by 
avoiding wasted travel and flexible marketing (see 
also Aker 2010). Loss of harvest can be reduced as the 
perishable products are sold faster. 
b) Simple knowledge: The main need of simple knowl-
edge includes knowledge on farm supplies, on mar-
ket information and considerations on the organisa-
tion of transport. This is accessed through a range 
of sources like other farmers, input suppliers, family 
members and buyers. According to the respondents, 
their access to simple knowledge is satisfied, primar-
ily by using the mobile phone.
phone we don´t work blindly anymore” (Farmer #4).
Using mobile phones for the exchange of simple knowl-
edge improves the marketing of produce by allowing 
the farmers to make better-informed decisions.
c)  Complex  knowledge: Complex knowledge comprises 
the knowledge required to identify pests and diseases, 
the right usage of pesticides as well as production tech-
niques. This kind of knowledge is usually transferred 
through technical assistance (e.g. NGOs, extension ser-
vices), observation and direct interactions. Also farmers 
provide complex knowledge to each other, for instance 
sharing experiences of treating certain diseases. Such 
kind of knowledge is mainly transferred via face-to-face 
as it is mainly tacit and not easy to transfer. 

“Before I had a phone I never knew the price of the pro-
duce I am selling before I went to the market. Some-
times I even had to go to different markets for com-
paring them despite having no contacts. […] With the 

“It’s easy to call somebody for a short question. But 
sometimes I have more complex problems on my farm 

4.  Conclusion and outlook

like  unexpected  problems  with  my  new  fertilizer. 
Then I call a farmer or an extension officers and or-

ganise a meeting” (Farmer #1).
With calls to arrange meetings, mobile phones pro-
vide the opportunity for farmers to access complex 
knowledge by enabling the personal communication 
process needed, but not for the knowledge exchange 
itself. To sum it up, complex knowledge is predomi-
nantly not transferred directly via mobile phones. 
However, mobile phones indirectly improve farm-
ers’ access to complex knowledge (see also Molony 
2008). According to the respondents, through using 
the phone the number of contacts increases as well 
as the spatial scale of interaction. This can result in 
a diversified knowledge network.
The increasing use of mobile phones results in 
positive contributions to the economic activities 
of horticultural farmers in the Mwanza region. 
This allows the farmers to access different types of 
knowledge at an increasing spatial scale. Frequent 
knowledge transfer between different actors in dif-
ferent regions has become easier. As a consequence, 
improved access to mobile phones facilitates a di-
versified knowledge access and leads to better- 
informed farmers. Additionally, this study shows 
that the usage of mobile phones depends on the kind 
of knowledge that is to be transferred. We could 
identify different forms of knowledge transfers and 
transactions using the phone. The mobile phone can 
be considered as an additional resource which will 
be used more where savings in time and money are 
high and where the added value of face-to-face con-
tact is low (e.g. simple, codified knowledge).   
In conclusion, this paper adds to existing studies by 
deepening the understanding of the benefits of mobile 
phones on knowledge access and transfer in the con-
text of rural small-scale farmers in Tanzania. It shows 
how the usage and the benefits of mobile phones can 
be differentiated by the types of knowledge that is 
transferred. Yet it is not clear to what extent farm-
ers and traders benefit from those connections in 
detail and how the organisation of value chains is af-
fected. Therefore we recommend conducting further 
research to investigate how mobile phones impact on 
the configuration of agricultural value chains through 
their increasing use among farmers. 
107

DIE ERDE · Vol. 145 · 3/2014The impact of mobile phones on knowledge access and transfer of small-scale horticultural farmers in Tanzania 

Moreover, as many studies promote ICT proliferation 
as a key element of development strategies, a closer 
look is suggested at limitations regarding the spread 
of ICT with respect to agricultural value chains. Pos-
sible negative outcomes (e.g. exclusion of those who 
do not have access to a phone) have to be considered 
more precisely (see Carmody 2012). 
In addition, from the point of view of social relations,   
investigations are worthwhile on how far social cate-
gories like gender or education influence stakeholders 
in using and benefitting from ICT and if the reduction 
of face-to-face contacts affects rural communities.
Aker,  J.C. 2010: Information from markets near and far: 
 Mobile phones and agricultural markets in Niger. – 
American Journal: Applied Economics 2 (3): 46-59 
Carmody,  P. 2012: A knowledge economy or an information 
 society in Africa? Thintegration and the mobile phone revolu-
tion. – Information Technology for Development 19 (1): 24-39 
Dannenberg, P. and T. Lakes 2013: The use of mobile phones 
by Kenyan export-orientated small-scale farmers: in-
sights from fruit and vegetable farming in the Mt. Kenya 
region. – Economia Agro-Alimentare 15 (3): 55-76
Heeks, R. 2014: Future priorities for development  informatics 
research from the post-2015 development agenda. – 

References

 Manchester Centre for Development Informatics Work-
ing Paper 57. – Manchester. – Online available at: http://
www.seed.manchester.ac.uk/medialibrary/IDPM/
working_papers/di/di_wp57.pdf, 23/07/2014 
Humphrey,  J. 2002: Business-to-business e-commerce and 
access to global markets: exclusive or inclusive out-
comes? Final draft. – Institute of Development Studies. – 
Brighton. – Online available at: https://www.ids.ac.uk/
files/jhb2bgvcfinal.pdf, 23/07/2014 
Kimura,  K. and  M.  Minges 2012: Data notes. – In: World 
Bank: Information and communications for develop-
ment 2012: maximizing mobile. – Washington D.C.: 
135-218. – Online available at: http://siteresources.
worldbank.org/EXTINFORMATIONANDCOMMUNICA-
TIONANDTECHNOLOGIES/Resources/IC4D-2012-Re-
port.pdf, 23/07/2014
Lundvall, B.-A. and B. Johnson 1994: The learning economy. – 
Journal of Industry Studies 1 (2): 23-42 
Molony, T. 2008: Running out of credit: the limitations of 
mobile telephony in a Tanzanian agricultural market-
ing system. – The Journal of Modern African Studies 46 
(4): 637-658
Morgan, K. and J. Murdoch 2000: Organic vs. conventional 
agriculture: knowledge, power and innovation in the 
food chain. – Geoforum 31 (2): 159-173
World Bank 2011: ICT in Agriculture: connecting small-
holders to knowledge, networks, and institutions. – 
Washington D.C.
World Bank 2009: Tanzania: country brief. – Washington D.C. 

108

DIE ERDE · Vol. 145 · 3/2014