DIRECTORS' "WIDER" RESPONSIBILITIES - PROBLEMS 

CONCEPTUAL, PRACTICAL AND PROCEDURAL? 

L. S .  SEALY* 

INTRODUCTION 

This is  a period  of  major change for company law.  The massive output 
of the legislators is ample testimony to this.  Less obviously,  but potentially 
every bit as far-reaching and fundamental, there are stirrings in the case-law 
too, as it slowly becomes apparent that the ancient rules and concepts which 
may have served their purpose well enough when the companies of the 1880s 
brought their disputes before the courts of the 1880s can no longer cope satis- 
factorily,  even with the same problems, a century further on. And of course, 
many of  the  problems  are new  too. 

We have been slow to recognise how different everything has become since 
that  formative  period  a  hundred  years  ago  when  Lord  Lindley  and  his 
brethren  laid  down  the  ground  rules  of  the  company  law  that  we  have 
inherited. The typical company has changed, but our perceived image of the 
notional  company that the law exists to serve has not.  The framework  of 
fundamentals on which  the more detailed rules  of company law are based 
has lost  some key  components; but we have been  slow to adjust.  Have we 
given proper thought to filling the vacuum left by the abolition of ultra vires, 
or to the adequacy of  the "maintenance  of  capital"  principle  to deal  with 
the ubiquitous two-dollar company? Judges (particularly in the wider world 
remote  from  London)  today  come  from  different  backgrounds  and bring 
different experiences to bear in their adjudication of corporate disputes. The 
language of nineteenth-centry  chancery is  imperfectly understood  by most 
lawyers and is inconsistently applied.  Concepts,  procedures,  remedies,  and 
above all,  fact-situations have not remained  static, and we must expect the 
law  to respond. 

I make this state of affairs my excuse to examine the law of directors' duties 
not simply as an analysis of the precedents  appears to show it  but,  rather 
more radically,  as I believe we ought to be beginning to see it.  In so far as 
writing de lege ferenda  allows one to ignore the more ew&mg3demands  of 
traditional  scholarship,  I  make apology in  advance. 

e  y.  .h- 

t Paper delivered at a plenary session of  the A.U.L.S.A.  conference, Monash  University,  25 
August  1987. 
* Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge University; Arthur Robinson and Heddenvicks' Visit- 
ing Professor  in Commercial  Law,  Melbourne  and  Monash  Universities,  1987. 

Directors'  "Wider" Responsibilities 

165 

BACKGROUND 

The pattern  of  the nineteenth-century  company was  so well  settled  that 
its essential  features could be assumed not only by  the judges,  but by  the 
Joint Stock Companies Acts themselves. This "model"  company would have 
corresponded roughly with the middle-sized public company of today, though 
it would have had a markedly different capital structure, fewer institutional 
shareholders and more of the human variety  - interested,  active and vocal 
- and a less professional directorate. In the heyday of laisez-faire,  it would 
unquestionably have been dedicated to the maximisation of profit,  in bank- 
ing, manufacturing,  the railways,  and all the manifestations of the Industri- 
al Revolution. 
Although theseparatepersonajity of the company was a_cknowledg_e_d-Long - 
before it gave immortality to Mr. Salomon in 1897, there is abundant evidence 
'7haTi^i  -the-Vict^ijt%rixfawyer3 eyles -=the company"  was  regarded  as  the 
associated members rather than the legal entity: the company was "they" and 
not "it".  We have,  of course,  left  this way of thinking behind  us long ago. 
It would be hard, anyway, to conceive of the one-person company, the wholly- 
owned subsidiary or many other typical  modern  incorporations  as "they", 
or indeed  as an association of  any kind. 

--- - 

Much of the law handed down to us reflects this Victorian  perception  of 
the company,  in particular  (for present  purposes),  the idea of  the director 
as trustee or agent  for his (or her)  constituents,  the company  in  the sense 
of the collective corporate membership.  It is they who have chosen him, warts 
and all;  they  who can remove  him;  they  who can ratify  his  acts in  excess 
of authority and forgive his sins;  even,  for many decades,  they who could 
dictate to him and his  co-directors how to run  the business.'  His duties  of 
care and skill can properly be assessed  by  subjective criteria,  since he  has 
been  elected  for whatever  qualities  he  has.  And  in  fixing his  duties  to the 
company it is right  to take account of the particular terms of the members' 
social contract (i.e.  the memorandum, including the objects clause, and the 
articles  of  associaton),  since all concerned are party  to it. 

The language of trust,  as Lord Lindley and his predecessors would have 
understood  and  used  it,  was  apt  to  meet  the  claims  of  the  day  against 
delinquent  directors.  One could abuse (or breach)  a "trust"  without  being 
formally constituted a trustee of particular property;  there could be a "fraud" 
on a discretionary power without any imputation of dishonesty;  the use of 
powers  for  an  improper  purpose was  not  a  "bona  fide"  exercise  of  those 
powers,  irrespective  of  any  question  of  motive;  and  one  could  be  held 
accountable  in  equity for  one's  wrongdoing without  bringing  into play  all 
the ramifications of the constructive trust as it is generally understood nowa- 

I See,  e.g.  Companies  Clauses Consolidation  Act  1845, s.90,  and  the judgment  of  Cotton 
L.J.  in Isle of  Wight Rly Co. v.  Tahourdin (1883) 25 Ch.D. 320, 329. The modern approach, 
which regards the board of directors and the general meeting as separate autonomous organs, 
was  first  judicially  recognised  in  Automatic  Self-Cleansing Filter  Syndicate  Co. Ltd.  v. 
Cuninghame  [I9061 2  Ch.  34. 

Monash  University Law  Review  [VOL. 13, SEPTEMBER '871 

days.  If the law on directors'  duties is to be re-stated  so as to make the best 
sense to us latterday twentieth-century lawyers, it might well be best to avoid 
old  terms  like these  which  contain the seeds  of  much  misconception. 

All  directors owe duties  of  a fiduciary  nature to their  company,  breach 

j  profits,  and so on.  It is not with  this aspect of  directors'  duties that we are 

1 of which may give rise to the avoidance of contracts, accountability for secret 
I concerned in this paper,  but with duties in the exercise of their p ~ w e r s , ~  and 

incidentally with their obligations of care and skill. These duties are conven- 
tionally  formulated  as follows. 
"Directors",  said  Lord GreeneM.R.,3 "must  exercise their  discretion bona 
fide . . . in the interests of the company, and not for any collateral purpose." 
This formula has been glossed in a succession of cases, particular in regard 
to the meaning of  the term "the  company",  in whose interests the directors 
must  act.  I  am grateful to adopt the exposition of  Professor  Ford.4 "The 
company"  is not "the abstract entity",  but "the members as a whole in their 
capacity as associated  persons."  However,  "the  members"  is the member- 
ship as a continuum:  directors are to "balance  a long term view against the 
short term interest  of  the present  members."  But that is  not  all,  for there 
are shareholders and  shareholders; membership of  B.H.P.  Ltd.  is  not the 
same thing as membership of a home-units company, and so the members' 
"capacity  as associated  persons"  requires their  particular  social contract  to 
be taken into account:  "the position in Australia  . . . is  that the company 
[is  the totality of members viewed in the light of their association and corporate 
I j  objects."  The directors'  duty to the company,  so conceived, has at various 

times  been  contrasted  with  their position vis-a-vis  its individual  members, 
or a section of  the membership, or its employees, or its creditors. Tows~rds 
each  of  these,  it  is  traditionally  asserted,  directors  owe  no  legal  duties 
whatever,  least  of  all  towards the company's  creditors. 

Before we move on from this classic statement of directors'  duties onf; or 

two comments  should  be  made. 
(a) The duty to act bona fide in the interests of the company and the duty 
to use powers  for proper  purposes  are treated in some books as distinct5 
and in others as being different ways of saying the same thing.6 I do not 
think that this question is important, at least  for the present  discussion: 

The common-law duty  is  codified  by  the  Companies Code (Aus.), s.229(1)  as follows: 

"An  officer  of  a  corporation  shall  at  all times  act honestly  in  the exercise of  his  powers 
and  the discharge of  the duties  in  his  office". 

Apart from the fact that the company's creditors are referred to for the purposes of s.229(l)(h), 
which fixes a higher criminal penalty in cases of fraud,  the section does not throw any I l s h ~  
one way  or the other  on the issues  considered in  this  paper. 
Re  Smith  and Fawcett  Ltd.  [I9421 Ch.  304,  306. 
H.A.J. Ford, Principles of Company Law (Sydney, Butterworths, 4th ed.  1986), para.  1507, 
(hereafter "Ford");  cf. P.D. Finn, Fiduciary Obligations (Sydney, Law Book Co., 1977) paras. 
136ff.,  esp.  139. 

5  E.g.,  L.C.B. Gower et al., Principles of Modern  Company Law (London, Stevens & Sons, 
4th ed.  1979), Chap. 24; Afterman, Company Directors and Controllers (Sydney, Law Book 
Co., 1970) at pp.  44,63; J.H. Farrar, Company Law (London, Butterworths,  1985) at pp.  309, 
- 
312 

6 E.g.,  Ford,  op.  cit.  para.  1503; Finn,  op.  cit.  paras  136ff. 

Directors'  "Wider" Responsibilities 

167 

even though there may be some advantage at tinies in looking at the two 
questions separately,  there is certainly  a large area of  common ground 
where the issues can be put interchangeably. What is  important is that 
a court should not be distracted from doing justice by giving too limited 
a meaning to a term  such as "bona  fide";  and if  this can be avoided  by 
recourse to the second formulation,  whether  as an additional test  or as 
an alternative wording,  that  is  all  to the good. 

(b) It has long been  accepted that the test  of "the interests of the company" 
is not an appropriate one where the only question is one of the relative 
rights  of  different  categories of  shareholders inter  se and the directors' 
decision must operate favourably to one class and adversely to the other. 
Here the law  can  only  impose a  duty to act "fairly".' 

(c)  Elsewhere  in  the text-books,s we  learn  that  there  is  also  an obligation 
to act "bona fide for the benefit of the company as a whole" when majority 
shareholders exercise their voting powers so as to bind minorities in such 
matters as altering articles of a~sociation.~ Whether  this rule is  in every 
respect  co-extensive  with  that  applied  to  directors (and,  in  particular, 
whether "the company"  is to be understood in the same sense) is a ques- 
tion which we cannot fully examine here,  although we shall not  be able 
to avoid  it  entirely.I0 

(d) In  some cases  the judges  speak  of  acts  in  abuse  of  the  powers  of  the 
company  rather  than  the powers  of  the directors."  Where  the acts in 
question  are those  of  the  directors,  the  former  is  surely  an unhelpful 
expression  - at  least  now  that  no question  of  corporate capacity  can 
arise,  following  the quietus administered  to ultra vires.  But  where  the 
acts being  challenged are those of the shareholders, there may be room 
for talk of "abuse of the powers of the company":  something of a novelty 
to which  we  shall  return  later.12 
The juridical  basis  on which  directors'  duties have traditionally been  en- 
forced  is  that  of  the  trust:I3 the  fact  that  all  the cases  were  heard  in  the 
Courts of  Chancery and the ready  parallel  which  could  be drawn  between 

I 

Mills  v.  Mills  (1938) 60 C.L.R.  150,  164; cf.  Finn,  op.  cit.  paras.  144ff. 
E.g.  Ford,  op.  cit.  paras.  1703ff. 
Allen  v.  Gold Reefs  of  West Africa,  Ltd.  [I9001  1  Ch.  656. 

I" If  the issue is put  in  the alternative  form, posing  a "proper  purposes"  test,  it  is  sometimes 
possible to throw a sharper light on the distinction. For example,  while it may not be proper 
to use  the directors"power  to allot  shares for the primary  purpose of keeping the directors 
themselves in office and their corporate policies alive, there is no reason why a shareholders' 
vote authorising or ratifying the same decision  should  be struck  down  as improper,  since 
the choice of directors (and the endorsement thereby of their policies) cannot be the concern 
of anyone but the company's shareholders  - a point  no!  taken in the leading case of  Winthrop 
Investments  Ltd.  v.  Winns Ltd.  (1975) 2  N.S.W.L.R.  666. 

' I  See, e.g., Rolled Steel Products (Holdings) Ltd. v. British Steel Corporation [I9861 Ch. 246, 

295ff.,  303ff. 
12  Infra,  p.  182. 
l 3   Ford, op. cit. para.  1502; F.  Dawson, "Acting  in the Best  Interests of the Company - For 
Whom  are Directors 'Trustees"'? 
(1984) l l  N.Z.U.L.R.  68, 78.  [As will  be apparent,  my 
debt to Dawson is immense, not only for the observations in this most  perceptive note,  but 
also for stimulating discussions  I have had with him both before and since its publication]. 

168 

Monash  University Law  Review  [VOL. 13, SEPTEMBER '871 

director  and trustee were sufficient to see to that.  Today,  we  would  more 
naturally speak of the principles of fiduciary obligation. There is no reason 
why the law of directors' duties should stay within this conceptual straitjacket, 
if  it is too restrictive or too uncongenial to deal with modem problems:  in 
appropriate situations agency, contract,  restitution,  tort and (increasingly) 
statute mav be called in  aid as well.  But trust law does have some advan- 
tages. By  setting high standards of loyalty and integrity it acts as a salutary 
prophylactic,  important  wherever people have  power  over other  people's 
property. The primary remedy sought is often not compensation or damages 
but the avoidance of a transaction and/or  the return of property: equitable 
remedies allow for full and detailed orders, providing for restitution, account- 
ing,  and so on,  and they can very readily reach  implicated third parties as 
well  as the immediate wrongdoers.14 

The language of trust and trusteeship, and its principles, fit the directors' 
situation well enough in relation both to property and powers:  directors as 
trustees of the corporate assets under their control,  directors as trustees of 
their constitutional powers. The earliest cases were mostly about property: 
it  was  a  "breach  of  trust"  or  "misfeasance"  for  directors  to  dispose  of 
corporate property in an ultra vires or illegal transaction or to return capital 
to shareholders - and, of course, to give it without authority to themselves. 
In the present century, there have been more cases concerned with powers: 
the directors' power  to  make calls,  to refuse registration of  a  transfer,  to 
create reserves, capitalise profits, allot shares - even to deal with corporate 
assets. It is this latter topic of "powers in trust" on which most of the present 
discussion is  centred. 

The test of "bona fide in the interests of the company" served well enough 
in the earlier cases: if  there was proof that an allotment of shares (say) had 
been  wrongfully  motivated  - e.g.  to  favour one faction  of  shareholders, 
or to spite another, or a fortiori  to benefit the directors themselves - it would 
be struck down, but in the absence of such proof the directors' decision would 
be upheld. An act which was in  fact discriminatory in  its effect  would  not 
necessarily be upset under this formula, however, if  it could be seen as con- 
sistent  with  bona  fides,  or  "fairness",  or  with  the  long-term  interests  of 
members generally; and the onus of proof to the contrary was on the object- 
ing shareholders. It was recognised that the "bona fides" test was not wholly 
subjective: a board of "amiable lunatics" could not be allowed to give away 
the company's  property  in  a manner  perfectly bona fide yet  perfectly irra- 
tional."  In  the last  two or three  decades,  the language of  bona fides  has 
been displaced by language of "proper purpose",  largely to meet cases where 

14  The leading case of Regal (Hustings) Ltd. v.  Gulliver (19671 2 A.C.  134n. was inexplicably 
presented  as a claim for money had and received,  with the  result that  this advantage was 
lost, only four of the six defendants being held severally liable, instead of all six jointly  and 
severally. 

I s   Hutton v.  West Cork Rly. Co. (1883) 23 Ch.D. 654,671; Pavlidesv. Jensen [I9561 Ch. 565, 
570. An objective threshold is also applied to the similar bona fides test applicable to share- 
holders'  decisions in  general  meeting:  see,  e.g.,  Re  Westbourne Galleries Ltd.  (19711 Ch. 
799,811 (reversed on other grounds, Ebrahimi v.  Westbourne Galleries Ltd. [I9731 A.C.  360). 

Directors'  "WiderJJ Responsibilities 

169 

the subjective good faith of the directors has been  acknowledged  but their 
decision has had implications for their own personal position - e.g. in throw- 
ing weight  behind  their  own supporters in  a  take-over  battle.16 Here,  it  is 
said, a power must be exercised substantially within the limits of the purposes 
for which it can properly be regarded as having been conferred on them by 
the corporate  constitution. 

The techniques just  described form quite a powerful array of weapons to 
keep directors'  conduct under control, though there are gaps and weaknesses. 
Experience  has proved  that they are not adequate to deal  with  inactive or 
incompetent directors or with those who take irresponsible business risks - 
assuming that this should be a concern of the law.  They are also subject to 
the potentially  serious flaw that all these breaches of duty (ultra vires, illegalit 
and "fraud""  apart) have always been  considered  capable of  being  ratifie 
or condoned by the shareholders (consistently with the trust principle on whic 
they are based),  so that the ultimate control does not rest  with  the courts. 
This has led to a breakdown in the effectiveness of the law in the many modern 
instances where there is substantial identity between directors and controllin 
shareholdsrs. 

It  is  to this  and similar  "modern  instances"  that  we  must  now turn.  In 
today's  world, Lord Lindley's  prototype company hardly has a place:  fewer 
than 0.5%  of the companies registered in Britain  are public companies,  in 
contrast, about 70%  are "close"  or "shareholder-managed".  No doubt the 
picture in Australia  is  much  the same.  The "group"  company,  the wholly- 
owned subsidiary, the joint venture company, the trading trust company and 
the small proprietary company dominate the scene, and if we are to reshape 
company law for the 1990s, these must be seen as its main subjects. Drafting 
refinements,  worked  out over  decades,  have produced  corporate constitu- 
tions that contain enabling powers and self-serving licences of a breadth and 
indulgence  which  our grandparents would  have  found unbelievable.  Most, 
of the companies which have featured in recent key cases have been under- 
capitalised - another modern phenomenon, whose use our legislatures have 
(I believe rightly) not sought to check. The take-over bid, the shelf company,  t 
the multinational  conglomerate,  the comfort  letter,  the offshore nominee, 
and so on did not complicate the picture in Victorian days, nor did the all- 
pervasive  intricacies  of  modern  tax law. 

THE TRADITIONAL VIEW  UNDER  CHALLENGE 

It  is  against  this  background  that  the traditional rules  and concepts of 
company law  regarding directors'  duties have come under  challenge.  This 
law, concentrated as it is on the interests of shareholders and no other group, 
is thought to be too narrowly  focused.  It is  contended on many sides that 

l 6   The leading case is Howard  Smith Ltd. v.  Amool  Petroleum Ltd.  119741 A.C.  821.  For  a 
recent  illustration,  see Pine  Vale Investments  i t d .  v.  McDonneN  and East  Ltd.  (1983)  1 
A.C.L.C.  1294. 

l 7   1.e. "fraud"  in  the equitable  sense recognised  in Daniels  v.  Daniels  [I9781 Ch. 406. 

170 

Monash  University Law  Review  [VOL. 13, SEPTEMBER '871 

the law ought  to allow,  or even require,  directors to have regard to other, 
wider,  considerations  and  interests.  There are demands for overt recogni- 
tion of the claims of the company's  workforce,  its customers and clientele, 
its suppliers and creditors, more broadly, the local community, the national 
interest,  exports,  welfare,  the environment. 

These issues have come to the surface at different times and in different 
contexts.  In the earliest group of cases, minority shareholders and liquidators 
challenged  "enlightened"  acts  of  ultruism,  such  as  paying  gratuities  and 
pensions to employees1* and donations to educational and other charities,Ig 
using primarily as a weapon of attack the still potent doctrine of ultra vires. 
With time, however, it has come to be seen as normal for directors to behave 
thus, consistently with the emerging notion of corporate "good  citizenship", 
and their acts have been upheld on the argument that such apparent largesse 
could be seen as having derivative benefits,  albeit perhaps long-term, for the 
shareholders. (The argument  falls through,  however,  when  the company is 
planning  to go  out  of  b ~ s i n e s s . ~ ~ )  With  changes  in  public  opinion,  more 
widely drafted objects clauses,  and ultimately  the demise of the ultra vires 
doctrine,  we  can now  regard  this  as one of  yesterday's  problems. 

The next challenge to orthodoxy was mounted mainly in fields outside the 
law,  and  has  filled  volumes  of  writing  in  political,  economic  and  social 
theory.21 It was inevitable that the shift away from nineteenth-century self- 
interest to modern theories of the business enterprise and the "responsible" 
corporation should lead to pressure  for some recognition  within  company 
law of the view that the providers of share capital are not the only contribu- 
tors to the wealth-making process; and in particular,  for explicit acknowledg- 
ment  of  the role of  the workforce,  But  despite the enthusiasm with  which 
this cause has been  taken up by  many influential authors,  the response has 
been lukewarm and it has found very little expression in company law.  The 
first opportunity came when  directors, in  a series of  take-over battles com- 
mencing with the bid for the Savoy Hotel in 1954, sought to justify  defensive 
measures  (which would,  incidentally,  secure the continuation of  their  own 
policies and, of course their own jobs)  by arguments based  on a concern to 
see that employees,  customers and others were  not  sold  down the river  by 
asset-strippers interested only in short-term profits. This argument,  as such, 
has  found no support in the judicial  rulings:  such issues are for the share- 
holders,  and  the  shareholders  alone,  to evaluate. 

More ambitiously, in Europe, attempts have been made to have the tradi- 
tional management structures of larger companies overthrown by legislative 
change,  introducing  compulsory  employee  representation  on  boards  of 

Humpson  V .  PriceS Patent  Candle Co. (1876) 45  L.J.  Ch. 437;  Hutton v.  West Cork Rly. 
CO. (1883) 23  Ch.D.  654;  Re  Lee,  Behrens  and  Co. [I9321 2  Ch. 46. 

l9  Evans  v.  Brunner Mond  Co. Lid.  119211 1 Ch.  359. 

Hutton v.  West Cork Rly. Co., (1 883) 23 Ch.D. 654; Parke v.  Daily News Lid. [I9621 Ch. 
927.  (These rulings have now been nullified by statute:  see e.g. Insolvency Act  1986 (U.K.), 
s.  187). 

2 '   For a  selection of  this writing,  see the many  references in  Lord Wedderburn,  "The  Social 

Responsibility  of  Companies"  (1985)  15 M.U.L.R.  4. 

Directors'  "Wider" Responsibilities 

171 

directors, perhaps using  the two-tier  German model with  a  supervisory as 
well  as an executive board.22 This will  inevitably find expression in a Fifth 
E.E.C.  Company  Law  Directive,  but  for  the moment  the negotiators are 
dragging their feet and what does emerge eventually will be a much watered- 
down series  of  options. 

Meantime,  perhaps in an attempt to appease the pressure for more com- 
prehensive reform, a Conservative government in 1980 enacted the provision 
which  is  now  the  Companies Act  1985 (U.K.),  section 309: 

"(1)  The matters to which the directors of a company are to have regard 
in the performance of their functions include the interests of the company's 
employees  in  general,  as well  as the interests  of  its  members. 
(2) Accordingly, the duty imposed by this section on the directors is owed 
by them  to the company (and the company alone) and is enforceable in 
the  same  way  as  any  other  fiduciary  duty  owed  to  a  company  by  its 
directors." 

What this apparently bold  new statement of principle really  amounts to in 
practical  terms  is  something we  must  debate later.23 

The latest development is to be seen in a series of judicial pronouncements, 
mainly in Australian  and New  Zealand cases,24 concerned with the position 
of  a  company's  creditors, particularly  in  the situation where it is  insolvent 
or nearly so. Most have carefully stopped short of suggesting that directors 
owe duties of any kind to creditors directly; rather, couched in language very 
similar  to section  309  of  the U.K.  Act  above,  they  declare  only  that  the 
directors'  duties to the company in  those circumstances include an obliga- 
tion to have regard to the interests of creditors; for breach of this duty they 
may  be  made  answerable  in  misfeasance   proceeding^.^^  Less  cautiously, 
Cooke J.26 has openly expressed a willingness to contemplate a duty directly 
owed to creditors, invoking the law of tort to rescue company law from its 
perceived  inadequacies. 

The  cases  in  question  have  a  number  of  features  in  common.  All  the 
companies were closely controlled, being either one-person companies, family 
companies,  incorporated  partnerships or group companies,  and the acts in 
question took place with the full knowledge of all the members.  All the com- 
panies were insolvent at the time proceedings were brought, the plaintiff suing 
as liquidator in the name of the company.  In each case the claim was to recoup 

22  Ford, para.  1761; Report of the Committee of Inquiry into Industrial Lkmocracy (the "Bullock 
report"),  Cmnd. 6706, 1977; T. Hadden,  Company Law and Capitalism (London: Weiden- 
feld & Nicholson,  2nd  ed.  1977), Chap.  13. 

23 Infra,  pp.  175-6. 
24  Infra,  p.  172. For similar dicta in English cases, see Charterbridge Corporation Ltd. v.  Lloyds 
Bank Ltd.  [I9701 Ch. 62, 74, per  Pennycuick  J.; Lonrho Ltd. v .  Shell Petroleum  Co. Ltd. 
[I9801 1 W.L.R.  627, 634,  per  Lord Diplock;  Winkworth v.  Edward  Baron Development 
Co. Ltd.  [I9871 1 All  E.R.  144,  118, per  Lord  Templeman. 

25  The leading statement is that of Mason J. in  Walker v.  Wimborne (1976) 137 C.L.R.  1, 7: 
". . . it  should  be emphasized that the directors of  a company in  discharging their  duty 
to the company must take account of the interest of its shareholders and its creditors.  Any 
failure by  the directors to take into account the interests  of  creditors will  have  adverse 
consequences  for the company as well  as for them". 

26  Nicholson v.  Permakraft  (N.Z.) Ltd.  119851 1 N.Z.L.R.  242, 249;  hereafter "Permakraft". 

172 

Monash  University Law  Review  [VOL. 13,  SEPTEMBER 
'871 

funds or property which allegedly had been diverted from the corporate estate 
in  favour of one or more of the controllers or someone closely associated, 
e.g.  another  group company.  To summarise the facts briefly: 

Re Day-Nite  Carriers Ltd.27 The defendant director during the last  days 
of the company "drew  from the company all the cash that was available 
to  him  [by  way  of  salary]  according  to  the  accounts  prepared  by  his 
accountant",  thus depriving it of  funds to meet a debt for which liability 
had been strenuously (but unsuccessfully) contested. The director was held 
liable  to refund  the  money. 
Walker v.  Wimb~rne.*~ The  company's  funds  had  been  moved  about 
between other companies in the group "as exigencies arose",  and also used 
to pay the salaries of employees of those other companies. Directors were 
held  liable  in  misfeasance. 
Re  Avon  Chambers  Ltd.29 Facts  were  very  similar  to  Re  Day-Nite 
Carriers Ltd.  (above),  except  that  the  sum  in  question  was  paid  out  as 
dividend.  Replayment  was  ordered. 
Ring  v. S~tton.~O Over a long period the company's  principal shareholder 
and director had borrowed sums of money from the company at less than 
current commercial interest rates. The liquidator successfully claimed the 
difference in  misfeasance proceedings. 
Nicholson v.  Perrnakraft (N.Z.) Ltd.3' A substantial capital dividend was 
paid  to  members  as  part  of  a  restructuring  scheme.  The  money  was 
immediately  reinvested  in  a  newly-formed  holding  company  and  for  a 
period the business returned to profitability. When insolvency later super- 
vened, the liquidator was successful at first instance in a misfeasance action 
brought  against  the directors,  but  the  decision  was  reversed  on appeal. 
Russell  Kinsela  Pty.  Ltd.  v.  K i n ~ e l a . ~ ~  
The  company  on  the  eve  of 
insolvency granted a lease of its freehold property to its principal director 
and  his  wife.  The court  set  aside the  lease. 

It  is not  so much  the decisions reached  in  these cases which  is  of  interest: 
all of them (with the exception of Ring  v.  Sutton, which is probably wrong 
on its reported facts) would almost certainly have been decided the same way 
at any period on the basis of a robust finding of mala fides or misfeasance. 
What makes the cases novel is the express reference by the judges to the con- 
cept of a duty towards creditors owed by the directors of a company when 
it  is  insolvent  or nearly  so. 

A  number  of  recent  English  cases are also of  interest. 
Re Halt  Garage (1964) Ltd.33 The company continued to pay  remunera- 
tion to its two directors, C .  and Mrs. C., even after the company had ceased 
to be profitable.  The payments to C .  were held to have been justified  but 
not the whole of the sums paid to his wife, since she had been ill and had 

27  [I9751  1  N.Z.L.R. 172 (White J.). 
28  (1976) 137  C.L.R. 1  (H.Ct.). 
29  [I9781 2  N.Z.L.R. 638 (Casey J.). 
'O  (1980) 5 A.C.L.R. 546. (C.A., N.S. W.); See also Grove v. Flavel(1986) 4 A.C. L.C. 654, 

esp.  660. 

" [I9851 1  N.Z.L.R.  242  (C.A., N.Z.); See also  David Neil  &  Co.  Ltd.  v.  Neil  (1986) 3 

N.Z.C.L.C. 658. 

32  (1986) 4 A.C.L.C. 215  (C.A., N.S.W.). 
" (1982) 3 All  E.R.  1016 (Oliver J.). 

Directors'  "Wider" Responsibilities 

173 

ceased to play an active part in the business.  The judge described the pay- 
ment  to her  as not  "genuine"  remuneration but  a "disguised  gift  out of 
capital". 
Re Horsley & Weight Ltd.34 A substantial sum was paid  to provide a pen- 
sion for a retiring director. The company was solvent at the time but went 
into insolvent  liquidation  a  year  later.  The payment  was  held  valid. 
Multinational Gas case.35 The directors of  a joint-venture  company set up 
by  three oil companies incurred losses of £1 14 million through  allegedly 
irresponsible trading which was entered into at the instigation of the three 
shareholding  companies.  It  was  held  that  the  company  had  no  action 
against  the directors. 

A  duty to have  regard  to the interests  of  employees and  a  similar  duty 
towards creditors raise quite different issues,  though there is some overlap. 
I propose to keep them distinct,  as far as I  can,  in the ensuing  discussion. 
But what goes for employees would probably  apply also to the case of any 
other interest group, such as local residents, customers, and so on. It should 
be stressed that the issue is not whether any of these "wider"  interests merits 
recognition dnd protection,  but whether  this can be satisfactorily achieved 
within the framework of company law as we know it, through the conceptual 
and remedial  vehicle  of  directors7 duties. 

SOME CONCEPTUAL  PROBLEMS 

The Company 

In the traditional model of the company as an object of directors'  duties, 
it  is perceived entirely in terms of the members,  present and future.36 I pro- 
pose to refer to this concept of the company as "the corporate membership". 
This simple model is inadequate when "wider"  interests have to be reckoned 
in. If directors are to be required to have a concern for (say) employees and 
creditors, it is no longer appropriate to regard the membership alone as the 
constituent body so as (for example) to entrust it with an unfettered  power 
to ratify and condone directors'  irregular acts; and surely an objective yard- 
stick ought to be used to measure directors'  standards of care and skill, since 
these  new  beneficiaries  of  that  care and skill  have had no say in choosing 
them.  Moreover,  while it  may be both  reasonable and proper  to bring the 
members'  associative contract into the picture when the law is treating the 
membership as the body corporate,  it is not  obvious that we  should do so 
when wider interests are affected  - indeed, with the abolition of the doctrine 
of  constructive notice of  the memorandum and articles,  there is no reason 
to suppose that non-members can have any knowledge of these documents. 
This would  have repercussions  in  a  case like Re Horsley  &  Weight Ltd.37 

34  119821 Ch.  442 (C.A., Eng.). 
35  Multinational  Gas and Petrochemical  Co. v. Multinational  Gas and Petrochemical  Services 

Ltd.  [I9831 Ch.  258  (C.A.  Eng.). 

3"upra, 
p.  166. 
3 7   [I9821 Ch.  442. 

174 

Monash  University Law  Review  [VOL.  13,  SEPTEMBER 
'871 

It  was crucial  to the decision  of the Court of Appeal  in  that case that  the 
granting of  pensions was  a substantive object of  the company,  i.e.  that  it 
was as much an object of the company to give money away as it was to make 
shop fittings. This reasoning is  all very well  so long as the directors are an- 
swerable  only  to  the  members,  who  are  by  statute  deemed  privy  to  the 
memorandum.  But how are creditors to know nowadays that they are deal- 
ing  with  a company  having  non-commercial  objects? 

All these  considerations suggest that  for the future it  may  be  necessary 
for the law to conceptualise "the  company"  not  as the corporate member- 
ship but as the corporate enterprise, as an aid to the formulation of new rules 
of directors'  duties in cases where  interests other than purely membership- 
interests are affected. A workable "proper purposes" rule could not any longer 
resolve disputes by reference simply to the interests of the shareholders. Such 
an approach would,  indeed,  more  accurately  reflect  the modern  directors' 
own attitudes:  of  course they are conscious that their  company has share- 
holders, but they are just  as keenly aware that it has customers, a workforce, 
goodwill, a product, a brand-name and logo, possibly  even a company flag 
and anthem. If disaster is threatening, their conscience stirs for the suppliers 
and other creditors who may be drawn in by the company's collapse. In fact, 
despite  the  time-honoured  formulations  to  the  contrary,  there  are  clear 
instances of this thinking already  in a good number of the decided cases  - 
cases where the interests of a section of  even the whole  of the membership 
have been  sacrificed for what  was considered the good of the enterprise as 
a  going  concern.38 To  rationalise  this  as  a  decision  in  the  "long-term" 
interests of the membership39 or by invoking the spectre of the "individual 
hypothetical  member"40 is  surely  a  far more artificial  exercise. 

Unfortunately,  to abandon the  old,  simple "trust  for the  membership" 
model is not to solve our problems at a stroke, but rather to open the door 
of additional new ones.41 But for the time being,  at least for 
to any 
the sake of the discussion which  follows, let us accept that it is possible  to 
envisage the company  as the corporate enterprise,  as an alternative to the 
corporate membership. 

It will be helpful also to have an expression for the company as a financial 
corpus:  let us call it "the corporate estate".  The old "trust"  of shareholders' 
money,  like the rules for the maintenance of capital,  cannot cope when the 
only significant capital is loan capital,  still less cope with a baknce sheet in 
deficit or with phantom concepts of property such as unexploited corporate 
opportunities  and potential  claims  to  claw back  voidable  preferences  in  a 

38  See,  e.g. Mutual  Life Insurance Co. of New  York v.  The Rank  Orgunisarion Ltd.  [I9851 
B.C.L.C. 11; Pine  Vale Investments Ltd. v. McDonnell& East  Ltd. (1983) 1 A.C.L.C. 1294; 
and cf. J.K.  Walsh,  "The Exercise  of Powers  in  the  Interests of a Company" (1967-68) 
8 U.W.A.L.R. 176,  188ff. 

39 Supra  p.  166; cf. Afterman,  op. cit. p. 45. 
40  A  suggestion of Lord Evershed M.R. in  Greenhalgh v. Arderne  Cinemas Ltd.  [I9511 Ch. 
286, 291,  which has proved troublesome in  later cases: see e.g., Clernens v. Clemens Bros. 
Ltd.  [I9761 2 All  E.R. 268. 

4'  Infra,  p.  175ff. 

Directors'  "Wider" Responsibilities 

l i q u i d a t i ~ n . ~ ~  
If  we  are to allow the notion  of  misfeasance to break  away 
from the technicalities of trust without departing from its values, (as we must 
if  we are to acknowledge the interests of creditors as an object of legal pro- 
tection) we  must get away altogether  from the idea that  "the  company"  is 
the associated membership, and think instead of a fund - all the sums under 
the directors'  control  for which  in  law  they are or may  be  accountable. 

Duty 

There are many problems with "duty":  a slippery word,  especially when 
it is transplanted from language of unfocused judicial stricture or exhortation 
in  one case into  a  supposed  legal rule  in  another. 

To have any significance for our purposes,  the duty which is formulated 
must  raise a justiciable  issue.  This is  clearly possible where the law  places 
a person under a duty to a single person or to a class of beneficiaries having 
similar or successive interests that  are consistent inter se.  It  is therefore in 
order to think  broadly  in terms of  a duty to all those (including creditors) 
having a financial interest  in a winding up  - to the company  as "the  cor- 
porate estate".  But where duties are owed to persons with potentially opposed 
interests,  the duty  bifurcates  and  fragments  so that  it amounts ultimately 
to no more than a vague obligation to be fair; and (however much we m 
delude ourselves) this kind of "fairness",  especially in a commercial contex 
is  not  a justiciable  issue.43 So it  is  pointless to seek  to impose  co-existin 
"duties"  towards  shareholders  and  employees, or  towards  preference  an 
ordinary shareholders, or towards the contributors of risk capital and future 
creditors, in any situation of actual or potential conflict. If the law does this, 
it  abandons  all effective control  over the  decision-maker. 

When Professor E. Merrick Dodd proposed in the Harvard Law Review 
over fifty years ago44 that company law should  regard  the "trusteeship"  of 
corporate managers  as  extending  to  embrace  the  interests  of  employees, 
customers  and  others,  his  colleague A. A.  Berle  was  quick  to point  out45 
that the legal difficulties involved would make the whole proposal  unwork- 
able:  "When  the  fiduciary  obligation  of  the  corporate  management  and 
'control'46 to stockholders is weakened or eliminated, the management and 
'control' become for all purposes absolute.  . . . The only thing that can come 

42  Even more mind-boggling is the notion that Mr. Sutton (in Ring v.  Sutton (1980) 5 A.C.L.R. 
546) should have been held liable to the company as a trustee of the notional extra interest 
that he had not charged  himself. But he was,  and was further held  liable to pay interest on 
that  interest:  (1980)  5 A.C.L.R.  546,  550-551. 

43  Cf. A.F. Conard, Corporations in Perspective(New York, Foundation Press,  1976), at para. 

99 
L I
.

 

44  "For Whom are Corporate Managers Trustees?" (1932) 45 Harv.L.R. 1145, written in response 
to A.A.  Berle,  Jnr.,  "Corporate  Powers as Powers  in  Trust"  (1931)  44 H0rv.L.R. 1049. 
45  "For whom Corporate Managers are Trustees: a Note" (1 932) 45 Harv.L.R. 1365. As Francis 
Dawson  (supra.  fn.  13) points out,  Dodd  ultimately  came to share Berle's  view:  see (1942) 
9  U.Chic.L.Rev. 538,  546-7.  See further  J.L.  Weiner,  "The  Berle-Dodd  Dialogue  on the 
Concept  of  the Corporation"  (1964)  64  Columbia  L. Rev.  1458. 

46  In  Berle's  own  words,  "Control  is  here  used  to  mean  that  individual or  small  group of 
individuals who are able to mobilize or cast sufficient votes to elect  the corporate manage- 
ment":  id.  1366. 

176 

Monash  University Law  Review  [VOL. 13, SEPTEMBER '871 

out of it, in any long view, is the massing of group after group to assert their 
private claims  by  force or threat.  . . . This  is  an invitation  not  to law or 
orderly government,  but  to a  process of  economic  civil  war."47 

Whether we  are are prepared to go as far as this or not,  it is plain that, 
without some system of legally ordered priorities between the different groups 
having claims to recognition  as part of the corporate enterprise, there is no 
way in  which  any one such claim  could  be  positively  enforced.  So long as 
the  acts  under  challenge  could  be  defended  as  being  consistent  with  the 
interests of any other group, there would be no basis to interfere. The concept 
of "the  enterprise" can,  in consequence,  come into the reckoning only in a 
negative sense, as part of the directors' or controllers' defence: that they were 
justified  in disregarding the traditionally exclusive claim of the membership 
out  of  regard  for  other  interests  in  the composite enterprise. 

In recognition  of  this,  company  law (at least  as it  stands,  but  probably 
in any form it could potentially take) must acknowledge that it has no mechan- 
ism  to  ensure  the  fulfilment  of  obligations  of  social  respon~ibility.~~ At 
most,  it  may  impose  disclosure   obligation^,^^  or  perhaps  require  the 
appointment of "social audit" watchdogs; but even these shadowy measures 
it cannot effectively police. The interests of consumers, the environment, wel- 
fare and the causes of equal opportunity, good race relations and so on can 
only be  furthered  by  positive  legislation  extraneous to company law. 

Duty  and Source 

The duty between director and company, statute apart, is based in the law 
of trust or, as we would more readily  say nowadays,  the law of fiduciaries. 
There is also a possible source of obligation  in contract,  particularly  in the 
case of salaried directors.  But there is no privity of contract between a com- 
pany's  creditors or its employees and its directors, and no fiduciary relation- 
ship. In particular,  creditors deal with  a  company as a  matter  of  bargain, 
not of trust,  and bargain  involves risk.  The law has rightly  looked  askance 
at attempts in  other  contexts to infer  a trust  in a situation which  is  purely 
one of  debt.  So it would  be unwise  to look to either  contract  or trust  if  it 
were proposed to think of duties directly owed by directors to these interests. 
It  is  tempting,  and  at first  glance easy  enough,  to find  the  source of  a 
director's  duty towards creditors in tort:  in the expanding tort of negligence 
and "now  pervasive  concept  of  duty  to a  neighbour",  as Cooke J.  hinted 
in Pern~akraft.~~ But there are many snags.  It is  not the director's  primary 
role to take care but to take risks. A duty of care and the liberty to embrace 
risk  are incompatible  bedfellow^.^'  Moreover,  it has recently  been affirmed 

4'  Id.  1367-1369. 
48  AS Berle himself observed in his own day: id.  1367. 
49  In the United Kingdom, the directors' report  has  become a favourite vehicle  for this kind 
of empty gesture: at different times, companies have been required to record matters as diverse 
as their  contribution to the  export drive and their policy in  regard to  the employment of 
the  disabled. 
[I9851 1  N.Z.L.R. 242,  249. 

5 1   The analogy with the sporting competitor in  Wooldridge v. Sumner  [I9631 2 Q.B. 43  is not 

altogether fanciful. 

Directors'  "Wider" Responsibilities 

177 

that directors have no liability to shareholders for the negligent, or even thef 
dishonest,  dissipation  of  corporation  assets  which  indirectly  causes  themi. 
loss.52 The relationship between directors and creditors is comparable, but' 
surely less "proximate"  by  any standards. There are also policy  arguments' 
against developing duties which could favour some categories of creditor at 't 
the expense of  others.53 

Duty  and Remedy 

A  supposed legal duty which is not matched by  a remedy  is a  nonsense. 
If, as most would accept, there is no room within the established framework 
of company law for a direct  remedy against directors to be sought by (say) 
a group of employees or creditors,  we have to think  of  a remedy  enforced 
through the company,  as in the formulations of the British legislatorss4 and 
the invariably cautious statements by judges  in this (southern) h e m i ~ p h e r e . ~ ~  
But even then, the arguments are flawed. In the case of employees, what could 
a  court  be  asked  to  do  for  them,  supposing  that  it  is  established  that 
insufficient regard has been had to their interests? At best, it might be possible 
to think of some woolly form of declaratory or injunctive relief which obliged 
the directors to reconsider their decision. (We are almost into the realms of 
administrative  law!  Even  so,  there  could  be  no question  of  requiring  the 
directors to give the employees'  case a hearing,  since shareholders have no 
similar  right.)  The emptiness  of  the U.K.'s  section 309 is thus  exposed.  It 
is either  one of  the most  incompetent or one of the most  cynical pieces of 
drafting on record. 

I 

To test  the point  further, let  us suppose facts the reverse  of  those in the 
celebrated United  States case,  Dodge  v.  Ford Motor  C O . ~ ~  
Ford  declares 
that  it  will  not  give  its employees any pay  rise  or  bonus,  or its customers 
any price cut,  because it  prefers to pay  extravagant  dividends to its share- 
holders.  Even  assuming  that a  court were bold  enough to claw back  some 
of  the dividend,  what  mechanism  is there in  company law,  or any branch 
of the law, to enforce the desired enrichment of these other interest-groups? 
In reality, these groups do not want the sort of remedy company law can give. 
Even the most modest of the proposed extensions of directors' traditional 
duties  - i.e.  an extension to include "existing  creditors"  - is not free from 
difficulties. Assume that the directors,  in disregard of the interests of  exist- 
ing creditors,  improperly pay a  sum of  money to a third  party.  When  the 
liquidator,  in the name of the company,  in the fullness of time recovers the 
sum in misfeasance proceedings,  it is unlikely that these creditors will reap 
the benefit:  many "existing"  creditors will have been  paid  off  and replaced 
by "future"  creditors,  and in any case the Taxation Department, the bank, 
etc. will come first, whether or not they themselves were "existing"  creditors 
at  the  crucial  time. 

52  Prudential Assurance  Co. Ltd.  v.  Newman  Industries  Ltd. (No. 2)  [I9821 Ch.  204. 
53 lnfra,  p.  185. 
54  Companies Act  1985 (U.K.), s.  309. 
5 5   See, e.g.,  the leading statement by Mason J. in  Walker v.  Wimborne (1976) 137 C.L.R. I, 7. 
56 204  Mich.  459;  170 N.W.  668  (1919). 

178 

Monash  University Law  Review  [VOL. 13, SEPTEMBER '871 

Creditors as  a Class 

Two points may be made. First,  in contrast with shareholders, there is no 
homogeneity as between different creditors: they differ in bargaining power, 
and this may be reflected both in the terms secured when their debt was created 
and in  the  pressure they  can bring  to have their  claim  paid.  Directors,  as 
a  matter  of  business  judgment,  may  have  to  choose  between  competing 
creditors,  preferring  some  to  others.  There  may  even  be  arguments  for 
favouring or relegating  the  claims  of some categories of  creditor  on what 
may broadly be regarded as moral grounds:  consumer prepayments,  arrears 
of wages and salaries, involuntary creditors (e.g.  tort victims,  the Taxation 
Department),  depositors,  intra-group  loans.  No simply formulated  "duty" 
can hope to deal  easily with  all the cross-currents of  argument latent here. 
Second, at what point  does the class of creditors crystallise? The dicta in 
the cases draw a sharp line between existing and future creditors,  with con- 
tinuing  creditors perhaps  forming a third  class.57 But,  as noted  above,  the 
proceeds of any misfeasance action go into the corporate estate, in total dis- 
regard of this kind of categorisation. The flaw in the reasoning is not, I would 
say,  related  to the remedy (which is  the only practicable  one available): it 
is  surely  in  the  perception  of  the  duty. 

The Relevance of  Insolvency 

It is tempting to think  of a duty that shifts its focus, or varies in content, 
as the financial  health  of  the company waxes and wanes:  a temptation  not 
resisted in most of the judgments  where the matter has been given thought. 
So  long  as  the  directors  are  playing  with  "shareholders'  money"  (so  the 
reasoning  goes),  they  may do more or less as they please;  and even  if  they 
cannot do so unaided,  the legal problem goes away if their acts have the share- 
holders'  express  or  tacit  approval.  They  may  therefore  pay  themselves 
emoluments which bear no resemblance to the value of the services rendered, 
as long as the corporate kitty is  in  surplus;5s but  once the financial  outlook 
becomes  shaky,  remuneration  must  be  "genuinely"  assessed  or  it  will  be 
d i s a l l o ~ e d . ~ ~  

In general, I do not think  that there is anything seriously wrong with this 
sort  of  reasoning,  provided  that  the  courts do not  allow  themselves  to  be 
distracted  by  the technicalities  of  company  law,  and  the  false assumption 
that they are directly relevant in this context. I do not see it as sfiictly material 
to bring into the discussion the question whether the company has "divisible 
profi.ts",  or whether  it  is making  a  return  of  "capital"  to its  shareholders, 
or whether proper provision is being made for a contingent  liability,  when 
that is not the issue before the court. (The risk is that the court will be deluded 
into thinking that  it  is.)  It  would  be  absurd,  in  any case,  to allow  a  body 
of rules to develop which allowed directors to do X when their company had 
divisible profits,  Y when there were profits which were not divisible, Z when 

5 7   AS suggested by  Cooke J .  in Permakraft  [I9851 1  N . Z . L . R .   242, 250. 
58 Re  Halt  Garage (1964) Ltd.  (19821 3 All  E.R.  1016,  1039,  1044. 
s9  Ibid. 

Directors'  "Wider" Responsibilities 

179 

there were no profits but the funds at risk  were notionally the shareholders' 
capital contributions, and something else again when what they were hazard- 
ing was "creditors'  money".  The question both for the directors at the time,;, 

and  for  the  court  sitting in  review,  is  whether  the  directors  are  behavin  : 9! 

responsibly or irresponsibly within the proper limits of business judgment;' 
the directors can  only look  at the matter  broadly,  even  intuitively,  and so 
should the court. 

In this regard,  neither the actual fact of solvency nor the definition by which 
it  is determined6" should be  a  decisive  factor.  Precision  on this,  as on the 
points mentioned in the previous paragraph, is neither desirable nor material. 
"Commercial"  insolvency,  in  the sense that  the company is  unable  to pay 
its debts as they  fall due, may make it improper  for directors to exercise a 
power  for  a  particular  purpose  even  though  the  company  is  solvent  on 
balance-sheet  terms,  and vice versa,  and quite often it  may be  proper  for 
them to exercise the power  regardless of  any questions of  insolvency.  For 
example,  to  vote  a  substantial  payment  by  way  of  salary to an  executive 
director could well be improper when the company's fortunes were in jeopardy 
and the services in question were routine,  but similar expenditure would  be 
justified  if  the director  in  question  was  a  corporate rescue expert  brought 
in  from outside in  an attempt  to avert  catastrophe. 

There  is  another  reason  for  not  seeking  to  determine  the  content  of 1 
directors' duties by reference to any precise definition of insolvency, and this  t 
i 
is that  in the course of  events a company's  financial position may fluctuate 4 
so that  technically it  moves  in and out  of  that  state. There could  be argu- 
ments not  only that the nature of  the duty changed  with the circumstances 
but  also that whenever  a company's  books were back  in the black  any past 
improprieties should be deemed cured  by  the turn of  events and expunged 
from the record.  Or it could be contended that a duty focused on "existing" 
creditors was discharged as soon as all the debts in question had  been  paid 
off. Directors' decisions are taken with reference to the company as an ongoing 
business concern and should be judged  by that broad standard, not be tech- 
nicalities  and  (perhaps fortuitous)  coincidences of  this  kind. 

There is, however,  a price to be paid,  if  the tests of "bona  fide"  and "the 
interests of the membership as a whole" are to be replaced by a more elaborate 
formulation. If directors'  conduct is to be judged  in the light of  factors and 
circumstances  such  as  those  we  have  been  discussing,  the  courts  have  no? 
option but to acknowledge that they must sit in review of business decisions.' 
There can no longer be recourse  to easy solutions like referring  the matter 
to the shareholders to decide by a "ratifying"  vote, for the members are now; 
I 

hn  In a  number  of judgments  "insolvency"  is understood  to mean  an excess of liabilities  over 
assets  - e.g.  by  Richardson J .  in Permakraft  [I9851 1  N.Z.L.R.  242, 254. In the same case 
Cooke J .  (at 249) thought it appropriate for directors to consider also "their  company's  practical 
ability to discharge promptly debts owed  to current and likely  continuing trade creditors". 
The court in Kinsela (1986) 4 A.C.L.C.  215, 223 "hestitate[d]"  to formulate "a  general test 
of the degree of financial instability which would impose on directors an obligation to consider 
the interests  of  creditors",  thinking that  this  might  differ  with  the nature of  the company 
and  its  business. 

180 

Monash  University Law  Review  [VOL. 13, SEPTEMBER '871 

only one of the constituent  interests that the directors serve, and the share- 
holders' vote, too, must be amenable to review on similar  consideration^.^' 
Although it would be a break with long-standing tradition for the courts 
to admit to this new role, there would be the distinct benefit that they would 
be obliged to articulate more clearly the true reasons for their rulings rather 
than merely invoke as shibboleths the dicta collected uncritically  from earli- 
er cases. Take Ring  v.  S ~ t t o n , ~ ~  
for instance,  and compare it with Re Halt 
Garage  (1964) Ltd.63 The tax  advantages  which  Mr.  Sutton procured  for 
himself by paying soft rates of interest on the loans from his company (rather 
than full commercial rates offset by a higher salary), during all the years when 
his  company  traded  successfully,  were  not  of  a  different  order  from  the 
inflated  remuneration  which  Mrs.  Charlesworth  drew  in  Halt  - and the 
arrangement surely made just  as much business  sense.  None of the reason- 
ing in the judgment  of the court in Ring v. Sutton was addressed to the realities 
of running a small business or showed any awareness of the fiscal folly implicit 
in  the "duty"  which  (with the benefit  of hindsight and a  solitary dictum as 
precedent)  was  retrospectively  imposed  on the  unfortunate director. 

Limited  Liability 

"The  recognition  of [directors']  duties to creditors,"  says Cooke J., "is 
justified  by the concept that limited liability  is a ~ r i v i l e g e " . ~ ~  Self-evidently, 
there are major conceptual leaps in this proposition,  but we need not be hyper- 
critical:  what  the  learned judge  is  elliptically  asserting is  a  down-to-earth 
truism.  This  is  that,  for  all  the  prominence  given  in  the  books  to  the 
phenomenon of "lifting the veil",  the one unassailable concept in our company 
law  appears to be  that of  limited  liability,  in  the sense of  making a  share- 
holder,  as such, liable for his company's debts. Statutory exceptions  apart, 
Salomon rules. Limited liability is sacrosanct. The only alternative target for 
a judge  is the director, qua director;  and, with  a little  fudged  reasoning  if 
needed, he is a soft target. "Fudged",  because so many of the recent key cases 
in which  directors have been  held  liable have featured small,  shareholder- 
/ /  $managed companies,  where the distinction  between  shareholder and direc- 
/tor is easily blurred: in effect, the question has not been whether the director 
broken a duty to anyone but where,  qua proprietor,  he should be per- 
mitted to look after himself  and his own interests behind the shield of limit- 
ed  liability  in  disregard  of  the expectations  of  creditors. 

61  In  ~ i n t h r o i  Investments  Ltd.  v.  Winns Ltd.  [I9751 2  N.S.W.L.R.  666, 698ff.,  Mahoney 
J.A.  raised,  but  did not  determine,  the question  whether  it  is  open to the shareholders  in 
general  meeting  to elect  to affirm  a transaction which  is  voidable because of the directors' 
collateral purposes notwithstanding  that the shareholders have the same collateral purpose. 
The Court of Appeal in Kinsela (1986) 4 A.C.L.C.  215,223 took the view that once the interests 
of creditors are at risk  the shareholders lose the competence to ratify.  This approach  may 
have been sufficient to dispose of the clear case of expropriation which was before the court 
on that occasion,  but  it  is  submitted  that  it  is too simplistic  to deal  with  all situations:  see 
the discussion  at  pp.  181-3 infra. 

62 (1980)  5 A.C.L.R.  546. 
63  [I9821 3 All.  E.R. 1016. 

Permakmft  [I9851  1 N.Z.L.R.  242,  250. 

Directors'  "Wider" Responsibilities 

181 

Limited  Liability  and Risk 

Any reformulation of directors' duties to take account of the interests of 
creditors and others has to accommodate the concept of risk,  and allow for 
the fact that directors must be free to take risks and to judge what risks their 
business should take. We must not lose sight of the fact that it is the principal 
function of the limited liability company, and of company law, to facilitate 
this risk-taking;  without  it,  the world's  railways  would  not have been  built 
and we would  have had no  Industrial Revolution,  no modern  technology. 
It is impossible to r w n c i l e  a duty of care towards creditors with this notion 
of r s - T h i s i s L a c i t ~ c o n c e d e d  by the repeated  statement in the cases that 
such  duty  as exists  is  owed  by  the  directors  only  to existing creditors  and 
not lo f z u r e  creditors; but the analysis is imperfect. All creditors give credit, 
or continue to allow credit, to a limited  company in the certain knowledge 
that  they  are running  a  business  risk,  perhaps  none  more  so than  banks, 
depositors and other providers of  loan capital. What the law has to ensure 
is that the risks which that company elects to embrace fall within  the range 
of  legitimate  business  risks,  consistently  with  the expectations  of  all those 
whose  interests are at  stake,  creditors  and members  alike.  Mr.  Salomon's 
company  became insolvent  running what  were (as the  court  found, to the 
knowledge  of  all ~ o n c e r n e d ~ ~ )  
acceptable business  risks  by  the commercial 
standards of  his day;  the joint  ventures in Multinational Gas,66 as a modern 
court  ruled,  had  done likewise.  There  is  no  room  in  this  context  for  any! 
concept of care: it  is a duty, which  we may conceive of  as owed to all those' 
who have any stake (actual or potential) in the corporate estate,  to use the 
powers to deal with  that estate for proper business purposes,  and risk  is an' 
inseparable  part  of  that  business. 

RatiJication 

With the simple traditional corporate model in which the members are the 
directors' sole constituents it is relatively easy to accommodate the questions 
of  authorising,  ratifying  and  condoning  acts  which  would  otherwise  be 
breaches of duty. The shareholders are plainly the appropriate organ to take 
corporate decisions for this purpose. Acceptance of  a more complex model 
in which other interests are represented requires some adjustment in our think- 
ing.  Despite the remarks to this effect in the Kinsela case,67 we  cannot con- 
clude that the shareholders are no longer competent to act, for they are the 
only  residual  organ  that  the  company  has.  There is  no room  in  company 
law to allow  for any possibility  of  ratification by the creditors,68 still less by 
any other  interest  group. The conclusion must  be  that  such  say as there  is 

'c 

hVncluding creditors: Salomon v.  Salomon and Co. Ltd. [I8971 A.C. 22, 53: "The unsecured 
creditors of A. Salomon and Company Limited, may be entitled to sympathy, but they have 
only themselves to blame for their  misfortunes  . . . They had  full notice that they were no 
longer  dealing  with  an  individual,  and  they  must  be  taken  to  have been  cognisant  of  the 
memorandum  and  the  articles  of  association"  (per  Lord  Macnaghten). 

" 619831  Ch. 258. 
" (1986) 4 A.C.L.C. 215. 

Apart,  of  course,  from  whatever  may  be  achieved  by  a  formal  scheme of  arrangement. 

182 

Monash  University Law  Review  [VOL.  13, SEPTEMBER 
'871 

still remains with the shareholders, but inescapably their  decisions must be 
more readily open to review by the courts,  and probably on more enlarged 
grounds than has previously  been accepted.  It will not be enough that the 
members either formally or informally knew and consented:  there must be 
room for an inquiry whether it was proper for them to do so in the interests 
of  our new  conception  of  the company. 

Company law has a long record of  precedents  for striking down phoney 
or self-serving votes by shareholders which have purportedly  authorised or 
ratified  directors'  breaches  of  duty:69 the books usually collect them under 
the head  of  "fraud  on the minority"  (or,  in  this  context,  more accurately 
"fraud  on  the  companyV7O). All  that  the  new  approach  outlined  in  the 
preceding  paragraph  would  call for would  be a  shift  in the interpretation 
of "fraud on the company" to embrace the enlarged constituency. The court 
in  the Kinsela case7' ruled,  in  effect,  that this is already the law;  the dicta 
in  earlier cases are rather more equivocal.72 It plainly ought to become the 
law:  a  perverse  or  self-serving  misappropriation  of  corporate  funds  by 
directors in disregard of the claims of creditors should not be capable of con- 
donation or release by the votes of shareholders who may themselves be no 
better  motivated,  or who  may  even be  the same persons  as the directors. 
Unhappily for the courts, this may at times call for an inquiry into the state 
of  mind  of  the individuals concerned.73 

Shareholder Misfeasance? 

If  this  development  is  seen  as  an  inevitable  concomitant  of  our  new 
perception of "the company",  the debate cannot stop at "secondary"  action 
by the shareholders (i.e.  authorising,  ratifying or condoning acts primarily 
performed  by the directors); we have to ask also whether the courts should 
assert  a  power  to  intervene and  declare  void,  in  a  similar  way,  primary 
decisions of the members themselves which are comparably perverse or self- 
serving.  Hitherto, it has probably been assumed that shareholders may act 
as wrongheadedly  or selfishly as they like, so long at least as a majority do 
not  oppress  a  minority,  and in  the last  resort  that  unanimity  will  excuse 
anything.  It now seems likely that if  the shareholders themselves misapply 

69  See, e.g.,  Cook v.  Deeks  [I9161  1  A.C.  554; Daniels  v.  Daniels  [I9781 Ch. 406. 
70 K.W.  Wedderburn, "Shareholders'  Rights and the Rule in Foss v. Harbottle", [I9571 C.L.J. 

194;  [I9581 C.L.J.  93. 
71  (1986) 4 A.C.L.C.  215. 
72 E.g.,  Re Hors!ey &  Weight Ltd. [I9821 Ch. 442,454,455,456; Multinational Gas case [I9831 

Ch. 258,  268-9,  280-2,  288ff.; Permakraft  [I9851 1  N.Z.L.R.  242,  250, 255. 

73  Ford, para.  1732, says of shareholder resolutions (in the context of decisions by a majority 
- t o  thwart a derivative action): "The test of validity would have to be an objective one since 
it would be impracticable  to review the purpose of  each member voting  at a meeting of  a 
large public company".  I  believe,  however, that the courts would and should  be willing to 
hear  and evaluate the evidence of the members in all cases where the company is so closely 
held as to make this feasible. This they already do in reviewing directors' decisions and have, 
in effect, done in some cases involving shareholder-managed companies.  The objective test 
should be seen as a  fall-back  or second-best  option,  consistently  with  the "no  reasonable 
majority:'  or "amiable  lunatics" criterion  applied elsewhere in company law:  supra,  fn.  15. 

Directors'  "Wider"  Responsibilities 

183 

"creditors'  money" in the face of insolvency, the courts must find jurisdiction 
to strike it down. In fact, this was the decision in Re Avon Chambers Ltd.,74 
and should have been its ratio; but the reasoning missed its mark by ascribing 
the wrongful act (declaring a dividend) to the director rather than the body 
competent to act, viz.,  the shareholders. Again, Oliver J. in Re Halt Garage 
(1964) Ltd.75 plainly  saw  the need  for a  new  remedy,  when  he  disallowed 
(as not "genuine")  a decision by the shareholders to pay remuneration  to a 
director which  had not been  properly earned. Unfortunately, he supported 
his decision by  repeated reference  to a  wrongful "return  of  capital"  to the 
shareholders which  was  neither  borne out  by  the facts76 nor  central to his 
legal  ruling.77 

However, it is not easy to find a juridical  basis for this new remedy without 
running into head-on  conflict  with  most  of  company  folklore.  We are,  in 
effect, drawing on the law of trust, in the teeth of a tradition which emphati- 
cally declares that  a  shareholder may  vote his  shares  as he likes  and owes 
no fiduciary or other  duty to anyone,  least of  all creditors.78 The explana- 
tion  is,  of  course,  that  we  are not  constituting the shareholders "trustees" 
of  the  company's  property  or  burdening  them  with  the  full  panoply  of 
fiduciary duties: we are simply acknowledging that the equitable jurisdiction 
to strike down a  fraud on a power  extends to the exercise by  shareholders 
of those few powers that the corporate constitution gives them.79 Hitherto, 
intervention on this ground has been restricted to decisions where majorities 
have improperly oppressed m i n ~ r i t i e s , ~ ~  
in accordance with  the traditional 
limited conceptual model of the company. Hereafter, it must extend to those 
business and quasi-business decisions like fixing directors' remuneration and 
declaring  dividends  which  may  affect the rights  of  creditors (and perhaps, 
in due course, others). The courts must be prepared to descend into the arena 
and ask whether  these properly come within  the range of  the business deci- 
sions that  they  purport  to be.81 

74  [I9781 2  N.Z.L.R.  638. 
75  [I9821 3 All  E.R. 1016. 
7"he 
capital  subscribed  by  the director  was  El;  the overpayment  to  her-was  some f2000. 
77  The reasoning  on which  Oliver  J .   relied  should have been  equally applicable whether  the 

director  in  question  happened  to hold  shares  or not. 
North- West Transportation Co. Ltd. v. Beatty (1887) 12 App. Cas. 589,600; Peters'American 
Delicacy  Co. Ltd.  v.  Heath (1939) 61 C.I..R. 457,  504; Multinational  Gas case [I9831 Ch. 
258,  269,  288. 

79  Under  the usual  form of  articles,  this will  not  include managing  the company's  business: 
see e.g.,  Companies Code (Aus.), Table A, art. 66.  But it  would  normally include declaring 
a dividend (art. 86) and determining the directors' remuneration (art. 63), so that the decisions 
in Re Avon Chambers Lld.  119781 2  N.Z.L.R. 638 and Re Day-Nite Carriers Ltd.  [I9751 1 
N.Z.L.R.  172 should properly  have been  seen as examples of the judicial  review of the share- 
holders',  and  not  the directors',  acts.  See above p.  172. 
I.e.,  in the traditional "fraud on the minority"  cases, alterations of articles,  and such apparently 
anomalous decisions as Clemens v.  Clemens Bros. Ltd.  [I9761 2 All E.R. 268 and PenneN 
Sutton  and Moraybell  Securities Ltd. v .  Venida Investments  Ltd. (1974,  unreported,  noted 
(1981) 44 M.L.R. 40).  See generally  Ford,  para.  1732. 

8'  As,  in effect,  was done by Oliver J. in ReHaN  Garage (1964) Ltd. [I9821 3 All.  E.R.  1016. 

184 

Monash  University  Law Review  [VOL.  13, SEPTEMBER '871 

PROCEDURE AND  REMEDIES 

It is settled at common law that a creditor of a company has no standingg2 
to take the company to court to have it made to comply with its obligations 
under company law or with the terms of its own constitution, and this would 
also be true of an employee.83 These considerations, coupled with  the lack 
of  any established  class action  on the American  pattern,  make it  virtually 
unthinkable  that  an  action  to  have  the  rights  or  interests  of  creditors, 
employees or other groups directly enforced  by  law would  be regarded as 
competently brought.  This is acknowledged  and, indeed, confirmed by  the 
U.K.  Act,  section 309(2),  which  stipulates that the duty to have regard to 
the interests of employees is "owed  to the company alone",  and is enforce- 
able "in  the same way  as any other fiduciary  duty owed  to a  company  by 
its directors." In practical terms,  this means a corporate action brought with 
the authority of  an organ of  the company,  a  derivative action  brought by 
a  minority  shareholder  (if  he  can  surmount  the  obstacle  of  Foss  v. 
Harbottles4),  or  an  action  by  a  liquidator  (or,  in  Australia,  any  other 
"prescribed  person"  authorised  under  section  542 of  the Code). 

It is very difficult to conceive of circumstances in which an action in any 
of  these  forms might  be  successfully  brought  to vindicate  the  employees' 
interests.  The suggestion  which  has most  often  been  made  with  regard  to 
U.K.  section 30985 is that an employee or a trade union  might acquire a few 
shares and thereby become qualified  to bring an action, either qua member 
to have the company observe the rules of company law and the terms of the 
corporate constitution,  or in derivative form as representing  the company. 
But the former could be met  by the objection that a personal action lies to 
enforce  only  rights  enjoyed qua member  and not  in  any other  capacity,86 
while the latter would  call  for an extension  of  the "fraud  on the minority" 
exception to the rule in Foss v. Harbotrle,  and the disowning of recent English 
rulings  that  effectively  bar  any  derivative  action  that  does  not  have  the 
approval of  a  majority  of  shareholders other  than those  who are defend- 

I ants.87 Further, a derivative action does not lie when a company is in liqui- 

dation,@ and  a  liquidator's  own brief  would  not  extend  to protecting  the 

RZ  Mills v. Northern Rly. of Buenos Ayres Co. (1870) 5 Ch. App. 621. There is a limited statutory 
exception to this rule,  confined  to breaches of the Code itself, in  s.  574 of  the Companies 
Code (Aus.). 
Cf. Forbes v. N.S. W. Trotting  Club Ltd. [I9771 2 N.S.W.L.R. 515 ("worker",  though  not 
strictly an employee). 

R4  (1843) 2  Hare 461;  67  E.R.  189. 
85  See,  e.g.,  supplement  to the fourth  edition  of  L.C.B.  Gower  et  al,  Principles  of  Modern 

Company Law  (1981),  note to  p. 579. 

86  Hickman v. Kent or Romney Marsh Sheep-Breeders' Assn.  [I 91 51 1 Ch. 88 1. (The enlarged 
wording  of  the  Companies  Code (Aus.),  s.  78  (as amended)  does  not  affect  the  present 
discussion). 
Taylor v.  N.U.M. (Derbyshire Area)  [I9851 B.C.L.C.  237; Smith  v.  Croft (No. 3)  (1987) 
3 B.C.C.  218;  following Prudential  Assurance  Co. Ltd.  v. Newman  Industries  Ltd.  (NO. 
2) [I9821 Ch.  204. 
Fczrgro  Ltd.  v.  Godfroy (1986) 2  B.C.C.  99,  167. 

Directors'  "Wider" Responsibilities 

185 

interests  of  employees  (otherwise  than  as creditors  for  any  remuneration 
outstanding). 

Creditors are more favourably placed,  in that they have a statutory class 
action available through their representative,  the liquidator; and it is almost 
certainly only in a liquidation that any claim in respect of their interests would 
arise. For the reasons discussed  above,89 any claim brought by a liquidator 
should be for the benefit of the liquidation assets generally, to be distributed 
among the creditors and members in accordance with  their  statutory rank- 
ing and entitlement. For this reason, it is probably unsound and a potential 
source of  erroneous reasoning  to formulate the directors'  duty with  refer- 
ence to any stated category of creditors (e.g.  existing  creditors):  the 
object  of  any duty,  as emphasised  above,  should be  the corporate  estate.' t, 
It would also run counter to established insolvency  policy considerations if; 
the law  were  to give remedial  advantages to particular  creditors.90 

Evidence 

Any review of corporate decisions based on a "proper  purpose"  test  must 
call  for  some evidence  of  the  state of  mind  of  tho~e'""F%~onsible for  the 
decision.  Chancery courts may in the past  have been  ill equipped to assess 
this sort of question (and this,  coupled with rules which put the onus of proof 
on the objectors,  probably meant that the courts intervened relatively infre- 
quently).  There are clear indications that the courts of  today are not reluc- 
tant to undertake an inquiry  of  this kind;9'  and they  will  be helped  by  theJ !' 
fact  that  in most  cases the controllers of  the company  will  be  very  few in 

number. There is also, of course, the objective threshold of unreasonableness ' ! 

to fall back  on, which  will  necessarily  have to be the test  when  the number 
of  votes  is  at  all  large.92 

i 

Policy  Considerations 

It is rare for a judge  in a company law case to make any reference to the 
policy implications of the ruling he is giving, or even to acknowledge an aware- 
ness  that  his  decision  may  be  helping  to  shape policy  for the  future.  One 
of the advantages of a test  for liability  which calls for an evaluation of the 
purposes for which  a given power may "properly"  be exercised may well be 
that thought will  be directed and expression be given to these policy issues. 
It  is  submitted  that  any  development  in  the  law  which  more  explicitly 
recognises  directors'  obligations towards creditors should reflect the funda- 
mental  principle  of  insolvency  law that  (statutory exceptions  apart)  it  is a 
class action for the benefit of creditors generally. A  duty which purports to 

Hy  Supra,  pp.  177-8. 
"' Infra,  p.  186. 
Y'  The directors were  heard  and cross-examined as their state of mind  in Mills  v.  Mills (1938) 
60 C.L.R.  150; Howard  Smirh Lrd.  v.  Anzpol Pefroleum Lld.  [I9741 A.C.  821; Pine  Vale 
Invesfrnenfs Lrd.  v.  McDonnell  and East  Lfd. (1983) 1  A.C.L.C.  1294; Permakraff I19851 
1 N.Z.L..R.  242;  and Kinsela (1986) 4 A.C.L.C.  21 5. See also Kelly  v.  Raymor (Illawarra) 
Ply.  Lfd. (1981) 6  A.C.I..R.  135 (interrogatories). 

9Z Supra,  fils.  IS,  73. 

Monash  University Law  Review  [VOL. 13, SEPTEMBER '871 

relate to existing creditors only, or any other section of creditors, or a remedy 
which  favours  some  creditors  at  the  potential  expense  of  others93 runs 
counter to this principle.  A  rule which  put  a  liquidator in  the position  of 
representing a section of the creditors only, or rival sections of the creditors 
competing against  each  other (as could  well happen  if  tort  were made the 
,basis of liability) would create impossible conflicts. And if individual creditors 
'tare put by the law into a position where they may use threats to sue directors 
personally  as a  form  of  pressure  to have  the  company  pay  their  debts in 
priority,  the  object  of  the  insolvency  law  is undermined. 

The Cork committee in its report  on the reform of U.K.  insolvency law94 
put  high  on its list  of the priorities when  a  company had become,  or was 
becoming, insolvent the salvage of the enterprise as a going concern. It makes 
economic and social sense to keep  plant  intact,  not  to destroy  established 
work teams, to avoid job redundancies and to preserve business connections. 
If existing debts have to be written off  or subordinated to new borrowings 
to help towards this end, this may often be a price worth  paying.  Some of 
the amendments to U.K.  insolvency legislation  in  1985 -86  have sought to 
pursue this objective. A  body of judge-made  law  which  showed solicitude 
primarily  for  a  company's  existing  creditors  would  undermine  such  a 

Power carries responsibility, and directors are rightly made answerable for 
)abusing it. But directors at large should not be exposed  to risk  of  personal 
j liability  without  good  cause  or,  as  experienced  in  some  countries  has 
*  shown,96 there is a risk that people with the necessary experience and ability 
to fill non-executive directorships will be reluctant to take office, and profes- 
sional corporate rescue experts will seek work in other jurisdictions.  The cost 
of liability insurance for directors is far from negligible: it must not be allowed 

5  to become prohibitive.  In the light of these considerations there should be 

some resistance to any extension of the traditional directors'  liability based 
j  in misfeasance and into more loosely conceived and potentially open-ended 

I 

+#  

areas of  liability. 

Cooke J ,  in the Permakraft case97 appeared to be willing to contemplate 
: a  broader  principle  of  directors'  liability to creditors  (or, at least,  existing 
B  and continuing  creditors) based  on the neighbour  principle  of tort.  It will 
$ 
-6%  be apparent from much  of  what I have said above that I believe  there are 

very  strong arguments against  any such  development. 

In my view, private law can accommodate only the limited degree of change 
which I have outlined above, while remaining inherently consistent. Legisla- 
tion, of course, can impose further liabilities on directors undeterred by any 
such  constraints,  and  there  are  many  examples  in  the  companies  and 

93  AS do Companies Code (Aus.),  ss.  556(1),  557(1). 
94  Insolvency  Law  and Practice.  Report  of  the Review  Committee:  Cmnd.  8558 (1982). 
95  It  might  also have  other undesirable  consequences  - e.g.  inducing  directors  to take  pre- 

payments  from consumers  and others in  an endeavour to boost  an ailing  cash-flow. 

96 Compare, for example, the recent history of the director-disqualification laws in Singapore. 
97  [I9851  1'N.Z.L.R.  242,  249. 

Directors'  "Wider" Responsibilities 

187 

insolvency  codes of the jurisdictions  we  are studying  of  provisions  which 
proscribe wrongful trading,98  preference^,^^ undervalue transactions,loO etc., 
in explicit terms and provide  for appropriate remedies  in such situations.I0' 
Most of the instances of irregular  conduct by directors in the key cases we 
have been  studying could have been dealt with under one or other of these 
statutory provisions had it been in force at the relevant place and time. Up 
to a point, therefore, the judicial  hints of a possible wider basis for directors' 
liability may be construed as signals that legislative change is overdue. Even 
so,  I  believe that there  is  a  creative role  for the common law  - or rather 
equity  - to play  here as well  as for statute, though if  legislation can deal 
specifically with  the worst  of the perceived  abuses that role need  only be a 
residual  one. 

SUMMARY 

(i) Under the traditional rules of company law, directors' duties are regarded 
as being owed to the company and to the company alone; and for this 
purpose the company's  interests  are equated  with  the interests  of  the 
members collectively.  Directors on this view are not  entitled,  still less 
bound, to consider the interests of other groups, such as the company's 
employees, creditors, customers and suppliers,  or to have any concern 
for  such  matters  as  the  community,  the  environment,  welfare  and 
charity, unless what they do has derivative benefits for their shareholders. 
(ii) The trust  principles  upon  which  the rules relating  to directors'  duties 
are based  can  be  made to accord  fairly  well  with  this concept  of  the 
company,  i.e.  the  collective  membership.  In  particular,  there  is  no 
difficulty in accommodating the view that irregular acts of the directors 
(short of  ultra vires or illegal acts) can be ratified  or condoned  by  the 
shareholders' own votes, and that  in voting on such an issue the share- 
holders are not  constrained  by  fiduciary  or other  duties. 

(iii) There are widely-held views that the law on directors' duties should now 
be  changed so as to recognise the role played  in  the modern  business 
by groups other than shareholders, and particularly by  its employees. 
The view has also been  expressed  in some recent cases that, at least  in 
a situation of insolvency or near-insolvency,  directors should be under 
a duty to have regard to the interests of the company's  creditors as well 
as its members. 

(iv) To extend directors'  duties so as to embrace the interests of employees 
and similar groups (and a fortiori  so as to include more general concerns 
such  as the environment) is to deny any effective role for the law  and 

08  See,e.g., Insolvency Act  1986 (U.K.), s. 214; and cf. Companies Code (Aus.), ss. 556, 557. 
'I"  See, e.g., Insolvency  Act  1986 (U.K.), s. 239; Companies Code (Aus.), s. 451; Companies 

Act  1955  (N.Z.), s.  309. 

I"'  See,  e.g., Insolvency  Act  1986 (U.K.), s. 238;  Companies Code (Aus.),  s.  453. 
In'  See also the  special  provlslons  dealing with "related companies" in  insolvency  proceedings 
in the Companies Act  1955 (N.Z.), ss. 315A-315C,  ~nserted by the Companies Amendment 
Act  1980,  s.  30. 

188 

Monash  University Law  Review  [VOL. 13, SEPTEMBER '871 

the courts. The concept of "duty"  ceases to be justiciable,  and company 
law lacks proper enforcement procedures. At best, these enlarged "duties" 
can  only provide  directors with  a  defence against  self-centred  claims 
brought  by  shareholders. 

(v) Company law can, however,  adjust to accept the notion of  a  duty to 
take account of creditors' interests in a situation of doubtful solvency. 
But this is only likely to be achieved if the courts are prepared to accept 
a  more  interventionist  role  than  has  been  traditional  and  to  review 
directors' commercial and policy decisions. Shareholders' resolutions can 
and should be subject to similar powers of review, whether these purport 
to be  ratifying  decisions or corporate  acts in  their  own right. 

i vi)  There are dangers in seeking to go further and base a new remedy on 

a duty owed directly by directors to creditors in tort. This would clash 
with  established  principles  of  company law  and  with  the  underlying 
policy  of  insolvency  law. 

(vii) Legislative changes may make the need for new common-law rules less 
urgent.  Nevertheless,  there will be  a  role for this developing case-law 
to play. 

