Noëlle LeRoy  
Carolin Schumacher 

“Causation and Mental Causation” 

by Kim (2007) 

 

But this does not rule out mental causation in general! 

 

 
[The Problem]  
How to account for the common-sense idea that intentional thoughts or intentional mental 
states are causes of intentional actions. The problem divides into several distinct sub-
problems:  Causal Exclusion | The Problem of Anomalism | The Problem of Exteranlism 
 
Donald Davidson 
Only physical events are relevant in causal relations - other mental events are causeless and 
effectless.  
 
Davidson’s argument for mental causation: 
Every causal relation has to have an “underlying” strict law and strict laws are purely 
physical. However, Davidson argues that this implies that the requirement for an individual 
mental event (token) to be involved in a causal relation is an appropriate physical description 
that instantiates a physical law.  
 
The Problem 
Davidson’s account is based on the claim 
that causation must instantiate strict laws. 
Kim objects why should that be the case?  
 
Jerry Fodor 

The Solution 
Either to abandon Davidson’s strict laws 
requirements or relax it by allowing non-
strict laws—”ceteris paribus” hedging 

Fodor’s approach does not need strict laws, he assumes 

1)  Ms are nomologically sufficient for Bs 
2)  Psychological laws are hedged  

→ Mental events can be causes 

Ms → Bs, ceteris paribus which can be rewritten as a strict law:  
Whenever C obtains, Ms → Bs               → Causation is identified as nomological regularity! 

Kim’s objections 

1)  Can we deduce causation from nomological regularity? 

Kim: correlation (regularity) ≠ causation 

 

Fodor: supervenience does not exclude 

causal relations 
 

A 

supervenes 
on 

 

 

causes 

B 

causes 

C 

supervenes 
on 

D 

2)  Do the psychological laws really play a role in causal relations or are the regularities 

based on the underlying physical, causal laws? 

 
David Lewis  

Counterfactual Dependence 

e is counterfactually dependent on c just in case if c had not occurred, e would not have 
occurred. 
 
Kim’s objections 
If we take a closer look, the counterfactual account relies on laws and regularities: 
Comparing the similarity of worlds includes a comparison of the world’s laws (regularities) 
→ As with nomological approach: not sure the regularities are causal relations! 
→ No advantage over the nomological approach 
Problems: overdetermination and preemption  
 
Ned Hall 

The productive or generative conception of causation 

cause  produces/generates its effects 
effect  derive existence/occurance from the cause 

3 characteristics: transitivity, locality, intrinsicness 

On locality: „causes are connected to their effects via spatial temparally contiunious 
sequences of causal intermediaries“ 

Jaegwon Kim  

Kim agrees with Ned Hall, that agency requires productive causation because counterfactual 
dependence cannot support the causal relation between “the natural course of events and the 
change to actualize what we desire and intend”. 

Kim also relates to Horgan, who says that the belief is a distinct state from its neural realizer 
and assuming this is having to deal with the problem of overdetermininaion, and the 
problems of epiphenomenalism. Additionally, Kim wants to reductively identify a particular 
mental state with its neural/physical realizer.  

He states that “the idea of causation as production and generation, or causation as requiring a 
‘real’ connection between cause and effect, can be applied to mentality as long as, and 
presumably only so long as, mental states have physical realizers. Whether an approach of 
this kind leads to reductionism, as I just claimed, or it is compatible with a nonreductive view 
of mentality is a further, currently much debated, issue.” 

