R E V I E W S

Organization and segregation of 
bacterial chromosomes

Xindan Wang*, Paula Montero Llopis* and David Z. Rudner

Abstract | The bacterial chromosome must be compacted more than 1,000‑fold to fit into the 
compartment in which it resides. How it is condensed, organized and ultimately segregated 
has been a puzzle for over half a century. Recent advances in live‑cell imaging and 
genome‑scale analyses have led to new insights into these problems. We argue that the key 
feature of compaction is the orderly folding of DNA along adjacent segments and that this 
organization provides easy and efficient access for protein–DNA transactions and has a 
central role in driving segregation. Similar principles and common proteins are used in 
eukaryotes to condense and to resolve sister chromatids at metaphase.

DNA transactions
Processes in the cell that act 
on DNA: for example, 
transcription, replication, 
recombination and repair.

Plectonemic loops
Also known as interwound 
loops, these are loops of DNA 
that are twisted together as a 
result of under- or over-winding 
the DNA duplex.

Harvard Medical School, 
Department of Microbiology 
and Immunobiology,  
HIM 1025, 77 Avenue Louis 
Pasteur, Boston, 
Massachusetts 02115, USA.
*These authors contributed 
equally to this work.
Correspondence to D.Z.R. 
e-mail:  
rudner@hms.harvard.edu
doi:10.1038/nrg3375
Published online  
12 February 2013

The visualization and characterization of the genetic 
material in bacteria has had a bumpy and controversial 
history. In eukaryotes, the orderly segregation of sister 
chromatids in mitosis was described in awe-inspiring 
detail in the 1880s1; by contrast, the bacterial chromo-
some, which tends to stain uniformly with basic dyes, 
was for many years believed to be unstructured. It was 
not until the 1930s that light microscopists using DNA 
dyes with acid-treated cells convincingly demonstrated 
that the bacterial chromosome was concentrated in 
discrete bodies with soft irregular outlines2,3 (FIG. 1A). 
These images changed the view of the bacterial chro-
mosome from a formless material to a defined structure 
that hinted at orderly and predictable behaviour4. These 
cloud-like nuclear bodies were named nucleoids.

Cryoelectron microscopy of vitreous sections of 
nucleoids revealed structures with features similar to 
those observed using DNA dyes (FIG. 1B) and showed 
irregular and dispersed morphologies that occupy about 
half of the intracellular space. Two striking features of 
these images were the presence of many coral-like projec-
tions that extended into the cytoplasm and the exclusion 
of the ribosomes from the nucleoid4. Similar compart-
mentalization has since been observed using fluores-
cence microscopy5 (FIG. 1C). These images still provoke 
our thinking about the bacterial chromosome. We envi-
sion a dynamic DNA surface that interacts with proteins 
in the cytoplasm. Although proteins can penetrate into 
and reside within the interior of the nucleoid, most DNA 
transactions are thought to occur at its periphery.

In the early 1970s, Pettijohn and colleagues6–9 devel-
oped methods to lyse Escherichia coli gently and to obtain 
nucleoids for direct electron microscopy visualization, 

providing an enduring image of the bacterial chromo-
some as a collection of plectonemic loops (that is, inter-
wound loops) emanating from a dense core (FIG. 1D) that 
is suggested to be organized by proteins and RNA6–8,10. 
The composition, organization and function (and even 
existence) of the core remain important and outstanding 
issues in the field. These studies led to the rosette model 
of the bacterial chromosome in which interwound loops 
are organized by a nucleoid scaffold (FIGS 1D,2a), creating 
a structure that resembles a bottlebrush. However, the 
molecular nature of this compact aggregate of DNA, its 
cellular localization and organization, and its local and 
global dynamics in living bacteria remained elusive.

Various technical advances (BOX 1) are providing 
new and exciting insights into bacterial chromosome 
organization and dynamics. These include fluorescence-
microscopy-based live-cell imaging to track multiple 
chromosomal loci in real time during cell division cycles, 
along with the development of genome-wide molecular 
and analytical approaches to study the conformations of 
chromosomes and the patterns of chromosome-associ-
ated proteins. In this Review, we draw on these recent 
studies to discuss our current understanding of two prob-
lems: how the chromosome is organized and compacted 
in the bacterial cell and how the replicated chromosomes 
are disentangled and segregated. We discuss these topics 
separately but, as you will see, they are intimately con-
nected. Our guiding premise is that the orderly folding 
of the chromosome, which occurs along adjacent DNA 
segments (called lengthwise condensation) in lockstep 
(that is, in synchrony) with its replication, generates its 
higher-order organization and functions as the driving 
force for bulk chromosome segregation. Throughout, 

NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS 

 VOLUME 14 | MARCH 2013 | 191

© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

R E V I E W S

A

Ba

Bb

D

Ca  Nucleoid

Cb  Ribosomes  Cc  Overlay 

Figure 1 | The bacterial nucleoid.  A | Bacillus subtilis nucleoid stained with Giemsa using acid‑treated cells.  
Nature Reviews | Genetics
B | The nucleoid of growing Escherichia coli in thin section after cryofixation followed by freeze substitution. Panels a 
and b show the same section; in the panel b, the ribosome‑free spaces were enhanced by colouring by hand.  
C | Nucleoid (a; stained with 4′,6‑diamidino‑2‑phenylindole (DAPI), coloured red) and ribosomes (b; labelled with 
RplA–GFP, coloured green) in live B. subtilis cells growing in rich media. Part c shows the overlay of the two images. 
Despite this commonly depicted cloud‑like appearance of the bacterial chromosome, the morphology of the nucleoid 
varies among bacteria and is influenced by growth rate and environmental conditions. For example, the nucleoid in 
Caulobacter crescentus, and in slow‑growing E. coli and B. subtilis, appears to be more diffuse and occupies a greater 
proportion of the cell cytoplasm (not shown). D | A gently isolated E. coli nucleoid bound by cytochrome C, spread on 
an electron microscope grid, stained with uranyl acetate and visualized by transmission electron microscopy. The 
length of E. coli and B. subtilis cells is 2–5 μm, whereas the nucleoid in panel D is approximately 20 μm in length. Parts A 
and B are reproduced, with permission, from REF. 4 © (1994) American Society of Microbiology. Part D is reproduced, 
with permission, from © Designergenes Posters Ltd; in memory of Dr Ruth Kavenoff 1944–1999.

we highlight which principles and molecular mecha-
nisms are shared with eukaryotes and which aspects are  
specific to the chromosomal dynamics of bacteria.

Chromosome compaction and organization
Most bacteria contain a single circular chromosome 
of 2–8 Mb in size that replicates bidirectionally from a 
unique origin (oriC). If stretched out, this DNA molecule 
would be >1 mm in length, whereas the space occupied 
by the nucleoid is <1 μm in diameter. Accordingly, the 
chromosome must be linearly compacted more than 
1,000-fold to fit inside the bacterial cell11,12. The DNA is 
condensed in an orderly and hierarchical fashion, and 
we describe this compaction and organization from its 
smallest unit to its largest domain.

Topological domains. The principal mechanism by 
which the bacterial chromosome is compacted is  
by negative DNA supercoiling. This under-winding 

of the DNA duplex generates plectonemic loops and 
branches like the ones observed by electron micros-
copy in the nucleoid spreads. Supercoiling condenses 
the chromosome, but it also draws DNA in on itself, 
pulling it away from non-contiguous DNA (such as 
replicated sister DNA). Unlike plasmids, which can be 
relaxed by one single-strand break, numerous nicks are 
required to relax the chromosome completely, suggest-
ing that chromosomal DNA is organized into super-
coiled domains that are topologically insulated from 
each other8. Elegant molecular experiments that exploit 
supercoiling-sensitive activities (such as transcription 
and recombination) suggest that independent topologi-
cal domains vary in size but are on average 10 kb13–15. 
Thus, a 4 Mb genome would have approximately 400 
topologically isolated domains. In the context of the 
highly schematized bottlebrush model for the nucleoid, 
these domains are the branched plectonemic loops that 
make up the bristles (FIGS 1D,2a). Although this model 

192 | MARCH 2013 | VOLUME 14 

 www.nature.com/reviews/genetics

© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

R E V I E W S

a

b  Nucleoid-associated proteins and SMC complexes

IHF

FIS

HU

H-NS

SMC

c  Replication and origin compaction

Origin region

Direction of replication

Positive supercoils

Replisome

Pre-catenanes

SMC

ParB

DNA gyrase

Topo IV

Newly replicated DNA

Origin region

Figure 2 | Topological organization of the bacterial chromosome.  a | Schematic 
Nature Reviews | Genetics
representation of the bottlebrush model of the nucleoid. This diagram depicts the 
interwound supercoiled loops emanating from a dense core. The topologically 
isolated domains are on average 10 kb and therefore are likely to encompass several 
branched plectonemic loops. The macrodomains discussed in the main text are not 
depicted in this model. b | Schematic representation of the small nucleoid‑associated 
proteins and the structural maintenance of chromosome (SMC) complexes.  
These proteins introduce DNA bends and also function in bridging chromosomal 
loci. c | The diagram depicts replication fork progression and compaction of the 
origin region. Replication generates positive supercoils ahead of the fork, which  
can diffuse behind the replisome, producing pre‑catenanes. Positive supercoils  
are removed by DNA gyrase and topoisomerase IV (Topo IV), and pre‑catenanes are 
unlinked by Topo IV. Newly replicated origin regions are thought to be compacted 
by the SMC complexes that are recruited to the origin by ParB and by the action of 
small nucleoid‑associated proteins (not shown).

of radial loops constitutes the simplest configuration, 
more complicated inter-segmented linkages are also 
possible. In addition to their role in condensing the  
chromosome,  these  topological  domains  protect  
the  chromosome  from  DNA  relaxation,  assist  in  
decatenation of chromosomal links and have been pro-
posed to aid in the repair of double-strand breaks by 
maintaining broken ends in close proximity14.

Decatenation
The act of unlinking interlocked 
(or catenated) rings.

For these interwound loops to be topologically insu-
lated, they need boundary elements (so-called domain-
ins) that restrict the free rotation of DNA. Domainins 
are thought to function by constraining loops and are 
likely to be concentrated at the nucleoid core. Many 
factors have been proposed to serve as domainins, 
including abundant, small nucleoid-associated pro-
teins, structural maintenance of chromosome (SMC) 
condensin complexes, topoisomerases, RNA polymerase 
and even RNA14,16,17 (FIG. 2b). Most of these factors and 
their roles in chromosome organization and compaction 
are discussed in greater detail below. Despite the image 
of a rosette with a static core that the nucleoid spreads 
evokes, the current view is that the interwound loops 
and their boundaries (and, by extension, the domain-
ins that define them) are highly dynamic, changing in 
response to DNA transactions that occur within and 
between them13,14,16. Consistent with this idea, chro-
mosomal loci display remarkable, albeit constrained, 
mobility within the nucleoid18–20. Thus, we envision a 
dynamic nucleoid core or scaffold composed of a loose 
assemblage of domainins. This fluid scaffold provides 
structure and organization to the supercoiled loops  
without imposing rigidity.

Supercoiling homeostasis is principally governed by 
the opposing actions of DNA gyrase, which introduces 
negative supercoils, and topoisomerase I (Topo I), 
which relaxes them21–23. Gyrase and Topo I localize and 
act throughout the chromosome24,25. However, gyrase 
and another topoisomerase (namely, Topo IV) are 
also enriched ahead of replication forks and transcrip-
tion bubbles, where they have key roles in alleviating  
the positive supercoils introduced by DNA unwinding26,27. 
Positive supercoils ahead of a replication fork that are not 
attended to can diffuse backwards, generating entangled 
sister strands (called pre-catenanes)28,29 (FIG. 2c). Topo IV 
is the principal enzyme responsible for removing these 
entanglements30–32 and, as such, it plays a central part in 
segregating the replicated chromosomes. In eukaryotes, 
Topo II has an analogous function to Topo IV, removing 
entanglements generated by DNA replication to resolve 
sister chromatids during the early stages of mitosis33–35.

Unconstrained supercoils alone cannot account 
for the degree of compaction exhibited by the bacte-
rial chromosome. Approximately half of the chromo-
some is thought to be constrained by small, abundant 
DNA-binding proteins36 (FIG. 2b). These proteins are the 
bacterial equivalent of eukaryotic histones. Instead of 
wrapping DNA into nucleosomes, they bind specifically 
and nonspecifically throughout the genome and facili-
tate chromosome compaction and organization by intro-
ducing bends in the DNA and by bridging chromosomal 
loci. Bending facilitates condensation of adjacent DNA 
segments, whereas bridging stabilizes DNA loops37–45. 
This bridging activity suggests that these proteins func-
tion as domainins36,41. In Escherichia coli, the principal 
histone-like proteins are HU, IHF, Fis and H-NS. Other 
bacteria (such as Bacillus subtilis and Caulobacter cres-
centus) have a subset of this class of proteins. Cells that 
lack these factors have defects in chromosome segre-
gation. However, the nucleoid does not appear to be 

NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS 

 VOLUME 14 | MARCH 2013 | 193

© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

R E V I E W S

dramatically decondensed in their absence, raising the 
possibility that other factors may have a more impor-
tant role in compaction and constraining supercoiled 
domains. Interestingly, as cells enter the stationary 
phase, a different set of nucleoid-associated proteins is 

induced45. These proteins remodel the bacterial chro-
mosome into a strikingly compact structure46. Similarly, 
during B. subtilis sporulation, a separate set of proteins 
remodels the spore chromosome into a compact toroidal 
structure in preparation for dormancy47.

Box 1 | Technical advances for studying bacterial chromosomes

Localizing individual loci
Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). Visualization		
of	individual	genetic	loci	using	fluorescently	labelled	
locus-specific	DNA	probes	in	fixed	and	permeabilized	cells		
(see	part	a	of	the	figure).
Fluorescently tagged DNA-binding proteins, including  
the fluorescence repressor–operator system (FROS). 
Visualization	of	the	localization	of	individual	genetic	loci		
in	live	cells	can	be	achieved	using	fluorescently	labelled	
DNA-binding	proteins	(see	part	b	of	the	figure).	For	FROS,		
this	involves	fusions	between	fluorescent	proteins	and	
repressor	proteins	(namely,	LacI,	TetR	or	lambdaCI),	which		
are	used	to	track	engineered	tandem	arrays	of	cognate	
operator	sequences	(such	as	lacO,	tetO	or	λOL1)	in	the	
chromosome69,70,75,154.	Alternatively,	fluorescent	fusions	to	
plasmid-encoded	ParB	proteins	can	be	used	to	track	bound	parS	
sites85.	As	plasmid	parS	sites	do	not	resemble	chromosomal		
parS	sites,	the	fluorescent	ParB	fusion	protein	does	not	bind		
to	or	interfere	with	the	native	partitioning	system.

Genome-wide methods
Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-based methods.  
These	approaches	allow	the	genome-wide	identification	of	
binding	sites	for	DNA-binding	proteins	(see	part	c	of	the	figure).	
Protein–DNA	complexes	are	crosslinked	and	isolated	by		
immunoprecipitation.	The	DNA	region	bound	by	the	protein		
of	interest	is	then	identified	by	hybridizing	to	a	microarray	(for	
ChIP–chip)	or	by	high-throughput	sequencing	(for	ChIP–seq).
Chromosome conformation capture methods. These	examine	
global	conformation	of	the	chromosome	by	assessing	the	
frequency	that	any	two	DNA	loci	are	in	close	proximity	and	
thus	can	be	crosslinked.	The	strategies	include	the	original	
chromosome	conformation	capture	(3C)	method	and	its	
higher-throughput	derivatives	chromosome	conformation	
capture	carbon	copy	(5C)	and	Hi-C81,155,156	(see	part	d	of		
the	figure).

a

b

Fluorescently labelled probe

DNA

DNA

LacI–GFP

(lacO)n

c

Crosslinking

Lyse and sonicate

Immunoprecipitation

Bead

Microarray or deep sequencing

t
n
e
m
h
c
i
r
n
e

 

l

d
o
F

DNA puriﬁcation

Genome position (Mb)

d

Crosslinking

Endonuclease cleavage

Ligation

PCR or sequencing

DNA puriﬁcation

Data processing
and modelling

e
m
o
n
e
G

n
o
i
t
i
s
o
p

Genome
position

Method
FISH

Fluorescent 
DNA‑binding proteins

Advantages
•	Direct and highly specific detection of 

chromosomal loci

•	Analysis can be carried out in wild‑type strains 

without the need to modify the genome

•	Live‑cell method
•	Provides dynamics of individual loci on short and 

long timescales

•	Labelling efficiency near 100%

Nature Reviews | Genetics
Nature Reviews | Genetics

Disadvantages
•	Requires fixed and permeabilized cells, which can alter the 

conformation of the chromosome and produce artefacts

•	Provides only a static picture of the chromosome
•	Technically challenging: labelling yield is less than 100%
•	Requires insertion of exogenous sequences into the genome
•	Tight binding of proteins to their target sequences can produce 

replication roadblocks

•	Interactions between the DNA‑binding proteins or fluorescent 

tags can artificially increase cohesion of genetic loci

ChIP‑based methods

•	Provides genome‑wide information
•	Reports on sequence‑specific and nonspecific 

protein–DNA interactions

•	Population‑based assay provides ensemble information only
•	Crosslinking efficiency and the quality of antibodies can result 

in false‑positive and false‑negative results

3C, 5C and Hi‑C

•	Provides a global three‑dimensional conformation 

•	Population‑based assay provides only ensemble information; 

of the chromosome inside the cell

•	Reports on short‑range and long‑range interactions

asynchronous cultures will complicate interactions and 
compromise the quality of the model

•	Technically challenging: optimization of several steps can be 

difficult and time‑consuming

194 | MARCH 2013 | VOLUME 14 

 www.nature.com/reviews/genetics

© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

R E V I E W S

The highly conserved SMC condensin complex is 
perhaps the best candidate to constrain plectonemic 
loops and to function as a dynamic nucleoid scaffold48,49 
(FIG. 2b). In eukaryotes, SMC complexes function in 
chromosome condensation, sister chromatid cohesion, 
recombination and X-chromosome dosage compensa-
tion50,51. The SMC complex in most bacteria is composed 
of the SMC protein, a kleisin (closure) subunit called 
ScpA and a third protein called ScpB52–55. Structural 
and functional analogues of this complex (called MukB, 
MukF and MukE) are found in E. coli56–58. Cells that lack 
any of the proteins in the condensin complex are inviable 
at 37 °C. At lower temperatures, bacteria survive without 
this complex, but they have decondensed nucleoids and 
severe defects in chromosome segregation52,54,55,59. The 
mechanism by which these large complexes organize 
and compact DNA has remained enigmatic and is the 
subject of intense research. Biochemical studies indi-
cate that SMC complexes or higher-order multimers 
can bridge and constrain DNA loops17,48,60,61. Our view 
is that this bridging activity works hand-in-hand with 
supercoiling and the small nucleoid-associated proteins 
to fold the chromosome along adjacent segments. If 
correct, then these complexes are likely to act locally on 
neighbouring stretches of DNA, despite their large size. 
Understanding how the condensin complex functions 
in vitro and in vivo lies at the heart of understanding how 
the bacterial chromosome is organized and compacted 
and how sisters are segregated.

Macrodomains. The nucleoid is further organized into 
higher-order structures called macrodomains. These 
large regions (800 kb–1 Mb in size) have been identi-
fied in E. coli, but we suspect that they are a common 
feature of many bacterial chromosomes. The higher-
order organization that defines a macrodomain does not  
appear to have a central role in the process of chromo-
some  segregation  but  refines  it  and  increases  its  
fidelity62 (see below). Organization of the chromosome 
into macrodomains was first recognized using fluores-
cence in situ hybridization (FISH)63 (BOX 1). Large regions 
of the genome spanning the origin (ori) and terminus (ter) 
exhibited spatially restricted localization patterns that 
were distinct from the rest of the chromosome, suggest-
ing that loci in these regions cluster. Interestingly, a genetic 
assay based on recombination to assess the frequency of 
random collisions between different sites on the chromo-
some identified the same ori and ter macrodomains. This 
assay further delineated two additional insulated domains 
flanking the ter macrodomain (called the left and right 
macrodomains) and two flexible or unstructured regions 
lying on either side of the ori macrodomain64. Consistent 
with the idea of structured macrodomains and unstruc-
tured flexible regions, time-lapse imaging revealed that 
chromosomal loci have different dynamic behaviours 
depending on their positions in the chromosome65. Loci 
in the unstructured regions displayed greater mobility 
than those within macrodomains.

The molecular mechanism underlying macrodomain  
organization is still unknown. However, recent evi-
dence suggests that sequence-specific DNA-binding 

proteins participate in this higher-order organization. 
Bioinformatics analysis identified the sequence motif 
matS, which was highly over-represented in the E. coli 
ter macrodomain and almost absent from the rest of the 
genome62. This sequence element facilitated the discov-
ery of the DNA-binding protein MatP, which binds all 23 
matS sites in vivo. Interestingly, MatP localizes as a focus  
that overlaps loci that are present in the ter macro-
domain, suggesting that it gathers or organizes matS 
sites. In this capacity, it could act as a site-specific 
domainin; alternatively, it could function in bundling 
interwound loops in the terminus region. In support of 
the idea that MatP is the ter macrodomain organizer, 
loci in this domain become more mobile in cells that 
lack MatP and more frequently recombine with neigh-
bouring domains. Recent structural determination of 
MatP bound to matS revealed a long tetrameric link-
age that would allow two MatP dimers to bridge two 
distant matS sites66. In vivo analysis of mutants that are 
unable to tetramerize suggests that DNA bridging has 
a crucial role in condensation of the ter macrodomain 
but is not required to define the terminus region as  
a macro domain. How MatP defines the ter macro-
domain, the identity of the proteins that specify the other 
macro domains in E. coli and whether similar domains 
exist in other bacteria are all active areas of investigation.
Recent  work  on  the  localization  of  nucleoid- 
associated protein H-NS and the DNA loci it interacts 
with suggests that this DNA bridging protein could 
impose a different type of organization on the E. coli 
chromo some. This study revealed that H-NS forms 1–4 
stable complexes at or near the nucleoid centre. Genes reg-
ulated by H-NS that are located in all four macro domains 
and in the two unstructured regions all appear to be  
present in these central H-NS complexes67,68. How these 
H-NS interaction centres influence and are influenced  
by the macrodomains described above is not yet clear.

Cellular organization of the chromosome. Thus far, we 
have considered the organization and compaction of the 
chromosome without the spatial reference of the bacte-
rial cell in which it resides. The development of meth-
ods to visualize individual chromosomal loci in live 
cells using fluorescence microscopy69–72 (BOX 1) revealed 
a degree of spatial organization that had not previously 
been appreciated72–76. This robust spatial organization 
reinforces our thinking about how the chromosome 
is compacted and informs our models for how newly  
replicated DNA is segregated.

The first cytological studies aimed at defining the 
subcellular localization of chromosomal loci were done 
in B. subtilis74. Analysis of a locus adjacent to the origin 
revealed that replication initiates at or near mid-cell 
and that newly replicated origins rapidly segregate to 
the outer edges of the nucleoid. The subcellular locali-
zation of four chromosomal positions suggests that, on 
completion of replication, the nucleoid adopts an organ-
ization in which the origins are present near opposite 
cell poles, the termini are at mid-cell, and the left and 
right chromosome arms lie between them73 (FIG. 3A). How 
and when the origin moves to mid-cell to initiate a new 

Topoisomerases
Enzymes that modify DNA 
topology. Some of these 
enzymes affect supercoiling  
by under- or over-winding  
the DNA, whereas others 
decatenate interlocked rings.

DNA gyrase
A topoisomerase that 
introduces negative supercoils 
into DNA. Often referred to as 
gyrase. This enzyme functions 
by cutting both strands of the 
DNA, passing a looped strand 
of DNA through the cut site 
followed by resealing.

Pre-catenanes
Interlocked rings that are 
generated during replication. 
Many of these rings are 
unlinked before the completion 
of replication. Those that 
remain after replication is 
complete are called catenanes.

Sporulation
The process by which a 
bacterial cell differentiates into 
a dormant and stress-resistant 
cell type called a spore.

Chromosome arms
The origin and terminus  
of replication divide the 
genome into separate 
replicated halves. Each half  
is referred to as a replichore  
or a chromosome arm.

NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS 

 VOLUME 14 | MARCH 2013 | 195

© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

R E V I E W S

A  B. subtilis growth and sporulation

Ba  C. crescentus

C  E. coli

L

R

Bb

L

R

L

R

L

L

R

L

R

R

Ori

Ter

Replisome

Left replication arm

Right replication arm

Newly replicated DNA

Figure 3 | Spatial organization of bacterial chromosomes.  Cellular organization of the chromosome in Bacillus 
Nature Reviews | Genetics
subtilis during growth and spore formation (A); slow‑growing Caulobacter crescentus (B) and Escherichia coli (C) during 
vegetative cell cycles. During sporulation in B. subtilis, an asymmetric division traps ~25% of the chromosome in the 
smaller spore compartment77,129. A DNA translocase (not shown) pumps the remaining 75% of the chromosome into  
the spore after cytokinesis140. Bb shows a model for the spatially separate but gently twisted arms of the C. crescentus 
chromosome on the basis of chromosome conformation capture81. The inset shows the plectonemic loops within one  
of the arms. This figure is adapted, with permission, from REF. 157 © (2012) US National Academy of Science.

round of replication and whether this movement affects 
the overall organization of the chromosome are ques-
tions that remain to be addressed. Interestingly, using 
an elegant genetic assay77, a similar ‘ori–ter ter–ori’ 
nucleoid layout was identified in sporulating B. subtilis 
cells (FIG. 3A). During sporulation, the replicated chro-
mosomes assemble into an elongated structure that 
extends from one cell pole to the other74,78,79. Within 
this serpentine-shaped structure, the replicated origins 
are located at opposite cell poles, and the termini reside 
at mid-cell.

Analysis of chromosome organization in C. cres-
centus and E. coli followed the early cytological studies 
in B. subtilis and benefited from improved fluorescent 
proteins, methods to track chromosomal loci and  
system-wide approaches. In C. crescentus, analysis of 
>100 separate loci revealed that the physical location 
of loci inside the cell recapitulates the genetic map76. In 
cells that have not yet initiated replication, the origin 
and terminus are present at opposite poles, and all other 

loci are organized along the long axis of the cell in an 
order that directly correlates with their position in the 
genome (FIG. 3B). Unlike the mid-cell initiation of repli-
cation in B. subtilis, replication initiates in C. crescentus 
at the origin-containing cell pole, and then one of the 
replicated origins rapidly moves to the opposite pole. 
Replicated loci on the left and right arms follow suit. 
Thus, when replication is complete, the sister chromo-
somes have an ori–ter, ter–ori organization (FIG. 3B). The 
linear organization of the chromosome arms suggests an 
orderly folding of adjacent DNA segments. However, the 
resolution of this cytological approach is not sufficient 
to assess whether or not the two chromosome arms are 
spatially resolved or entangled80.

Recent experiments in C. crescentus have used a high-
throughput chromosome conformation capture assay 
(called 5C; BOX 1) combined with computational mod-
elling to characterize long-range chromosomal interac-
tions. These studies have addressed the disposition of the 
two arms and have provided the first three-dimensional 

196 | MARCH 2013 | VOLUME 14 

 www.nature.com/reviews/genetics

© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

R E V I E W S

model of a bacterial chromosome81 (FIG. 3B). Consistent 
with the fluorescence microscopy studies, the model 
suggests that in C. crescentus the right and left arms of 
the chromosome are symmetric and linearly organized 
along the ori–ter axis (FIG. 3Ba). Importantly, the two arms 
are spatially separated, although they gently twist around 
each other approximately one and a half times (FIG. 3Bb). 
Thus, it appears that this bacterium condenses its chro-
mosome along its length, generating two bottlebrushes: 
one for each chromosome arm. This three-dimensional 
rendering of the C. crescentus chromosome is reminis-
cent of the twisted nucleoid structures observed by fluo-
rescence microscopy in B. subtilis82 and E. coli 83.

Similar systematic and genome-wide cytological 
analyses were carried out in E. coli using slow-growing 
cells with a eukaryote-like cell cycle, such that newborn 
progeny have a single copy of the chromosome (FIG. 3C). 
These studies revealed that the organization of the E. coli 
chromosome is strikingly different from C. crescentus. At 
birth, the origin localizes near mid-cell with the left and 
right chromosome arms in opposite cell halves84–86. To 
complete the circle, the terminus region spans the length  
of the cell to bridge the two arms. During the process of 
replication (and after its completion), the sister chromo-
somes are organized into a left–ori–right, left–ori–right 
conformation (FIG. 3C), such that cell division recapitu-
lates the original organization in the daughter cells. 
Despite the difference in global chromosome organi-
zation, much like the situation in C. crescentus the left 
and right chromosome arms are linearly organized and 
have approximately constant packing density84–86. The 
observed left–ori–right organization is consistent with 
the low frequency of recombination between loci in the  
left and right macrodomains. However, the role of  
the ter region as an extended connector of the left and 
right arms appears to be at odds with a structured  
and compact ter macrodomain65. How this macrodomain  
fits in the context of the cellular organization of the  
chromosome remains to be discovered. In summary, 
although there are fundamental differences in the 
arrangement of the chromosome in different bacteria, 
the emergent and unifying theme is that the DNA is 
linearly organized and condensed along its length with 
approximately constant packing density.

Chromosome segregation
The past two decades have revealed an amazing degree 
of spatial organization of the bacterial chromosome. 
Importantly, as we have discussed, this organization is 
generated in lockstep with replication and as a part of 
the segregation process. With this backdrop, we now 
turn our attention to how the replicated sisters are seg-
regated. Segregation of most bacterial chromosomes can 
be broken down into three discrete steps: separation of 
the newly replicated origins; bulk chromosome segre-
gation; and resolution and transport of the replication 
termini at the division septum. A surprisingly small set of 
highly conserved proteins has been implicated in these 
steps. We discuss each step separately and in the context 
of the patterns of nucleoid organization described above 
and their recreation in the next generation.

Septum
The structure generated during 
the division process that 
compartmentalizes a cell into 
two daughter cells.

Plasmid maintenance
The processes that ensure 
faithful inheritance of a  
plasmid in daughter cells.

Origin segregation
Unlike eukaryotic cells, which have temporally distinct 
phases for DNA replication, chromosome condensa-
tion and sister chromatid segregation, bacteria organize, 
compact and segregate their chromosomes progressively 
as the sister chromosomes are generated76,87,88 (with 
exceptions described below). Accordingly, much atten-
tion has been focused on how the origins are segregated, 
as origin repositioning provides a path and a destination 
for the rest of the chromosome.

The mechanism by which the newly replicated ori-
gins are segregated has been the subject of speculation 
and investigation for more than half a century. The 
origin attachment model proposed by Jacob, Brenner 
and Cuzin89 in 1963 was among the first and endured 
for more than three decades. This model posits that 
the two newly replicated origins are tethered to the 
cell envelope close to mid-cell and are separated by cell 
growth between them. It is now clear that cell elonga-
tion in rod-shaped bacteria is not restricted to zonal 
growth at mid-cell but occurs throughout the cell 
cylinder. Furthermore, the movement of the origins 
away from mid-cell is much faster than the rate of cell 
growth18,76,90,91. Thus, this attractively simple model  
cannot account for origin segregation.

As opposed to passive segregation embodied in the 
origin attachment model, active partitioning systems 
were first identified on plasmids in the 1980s92. These 
partitioning systems are essential for stable plasmid  
maintenance of low-copy-number plasmids93–97, and their 
molecular characterization continues to have an impor-
tant role in our understanding of how chromosomal 
origins are segregated. Remarkably, over 65% of all 
sequenced bacterial genomes contain a chromosomally  
encoded partitioning (par) locus98. These species include 
B. subtilis99,100, C. crescentus101 and Vibrio cholerae102. By 
contrast, E. coli and its close relatives do not possess 
this system. Chromosomal par loci (like their plasmid  
counterparts) consist of two genes, parA and parB, 
as well as a cis-acting DNA site called parS. This cen-
tromere-like DNA element is frequently present in 
multiple copies and is almost always located in close 
proximity to the replication origin98. Insertion of this 
three-component partitioning module onto an unstable 
plasmid improves plasmid maintenance even in unre-
lated host bacteria (including E. coli)95,103,104. Thus, this 
locus has all the information required to partition DNA 
harbouring the parS sequence.

For years, bacterial cell biologists have searched for a 
mitotic apparatus akin to the machinery used by eukary-
otes to segregate sister chromatids. The Par system is likely 
to be the closest bacterial counterpart. However, instead 
of segregating fully replicated sister chromatids, this sys-
tem helps to separate newly replicated origins (FIG. 4a). 
ParB is a DNA-binding protein that site-specifically  
binds to the parS sites, generating a large nucleopro-
tein complex adjacent to the origin100,105,106. ParA is an 
ATPase with nonspecific DNA-binding activity that 
acts on this centromeric complex96,107. Instead of micro-
tubules and motor proteins, the ParA motor uses the 
nucleoid (a veritable sea of nonspecific DNA) to pull  

NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS 

 VOLUME 14 | MARCH 2013 | 197

© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

R E V I E W S

a

c

b

PopZ

ParB

parS sequence
at the replication
origin

Nucleoid

ParA

Terminus

Direction of 
replication

Replisome

Direction of 
origin movement

Division 
machinery

FtsK hexamer

Direction of DNA 
translocation

Topo IV

XerCD

Origin of replication

Nucleoid-associated proteins

Replisome

SMC

Bulk of nucleoid

Newly replicated DNA

Nature Reviews | Genetics

Figure 4 | Chromosome segregation viewed in three steps.  a | Schematic model of partitioning (Par)‑system‑
mediated origin segregation in Caulobacter crescentus112–114. The origin region is tethered to the cell pole through 
interactions of parS‑bound ParB with the polar anchor PopZ. After initiation of replication at the cell pole with a 
stalk, one of the sister origins is pulled towards the opposite pole through interactions between parS‑bound ParB 
and ParA(ATP), which is bound nonspecifically to the nucleoid. These interactions trigger hydrolysis of ParA(ATP) and 
release of ParA(ADP) from the nucleoid. The ParB–parS complex then binds to neighbouring ParA(ATP) on the 
nucleoid (alternatively, another ParB in the nucleoprotein complex engages a nearby ParA(ATP) before release of 
the first). Repeated cycles of binding, hydrolysis and release results in movement of the ParB–parS complex 
towards the cell pole and a ParA‑free nucleoid in its wake. This so‑called diffusion–ratchet mechanism allows the 
ParB–parS complex to ‘surf’ on top of the nucleoid towards the pole108,110. In C. crescentus, an additional protein 
(called TipN) located at the cell pole is required for Par‑mediated segregation112,113 (not shown). TipN localizes to 
the new cell pole, where it probably functions to regenerate ParA(ATP), helping to set up a ParA(ATP) gradient  
on the nucleoid. In par‑containing bacteria that do not anchor their origins at the cell pole, the partitioning system 
helps to reposition the newly replicated origins at the polar edges of the nucleoid79. b | A schematic model of bulk 
chromosome segregation that may be conserved among various bacterial species. After newly replicated origins 
are separated, lengthwise condensation mediated by supercoiling, small nucleoid‑associated proteins and the 
structural maintenance of chromosome (SMC) complexes, in lockstep with replication, drive disentanglement and 
segregation of the sister chromosomes. c | A schematic of terminus segregation in Escherichia coli. The replicated 
terminus is translocated to appropriate daughter cell by the FtsK DNA translocase, whereas topoisomerase IV 
(Topo IV) and XerCD resolve catenanes and chromosome dimers, respectively. FtsK specifically localizes at the 
division septum, where it participates in cytokinesis and DNA segregation.

198 | MARCH 2013 | VOLUME 14 

 www.nature.com/reviews/genetics

© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

the newly replicated origins towards opposite cell poles108 
(FIG. 4a). Elegant biochemical and cytological analyses 
have begun to uncover the mechanistic underpinnings 
of this simple segregation system (FIG. 4a). We refer the  
interested reader to recent reviews on this topic96,109–111.
Interestingly, in some bacteria the Par system has 
a role in both establishing and maintaining the cellu-
lar organization of the chromosome. For example, in 
C. crescentus, after the origin is replicated at the cell 
pole, one of the ParB–parS–origin complexes is pulled 
to the opposite cell pole in a ParA-dependent man-
ner112–115. When it gets there, ParB-bound parS inter-
acts with a polar anchoring protein called PopZ116,117. 
Accordingly, the partitioning system together with 
PopZ helps to regenerate the ori–ter linear organization  
of the chromosome.

Par-independent origin segregation. Despite the high 
degree of conservation among par loci, many bacte-
ria, including E. coli, lack these partitioning modules. 
Nonetheless, the replicated origins in E. coli rapidly 
move away from mid-cell72,75,88. Moreover, when this par-
titioning locus is deleted from par-containing species, in 
most cases there are only modest defects in chromosome 
segregation, and the separation of replicated origins is 
impaired but not eliminated90,99,118–120. Accordingly, these 
modules function to refine origin segregation and to 
improve its efficiency but in most cases may not be the 
driver of it.

What then is the underlying mechanism by which 
origins are segregated? Orderly lengthwise condensa-
tion and resolution of the replicated origins (discussed 
below) could explain their separation, but it does not 
account for the faster rate of origin movement com-
pared to more distal chromosomal loci121. It is possible 
that factors that have yet to be discovered are responsible 
for origin repositioning. However, an intriguing alter-
native model proposed by Kleckner and colleagues122 
posits that origin regions are extruded towards the cell 
poles as a result of intranucleoid pushing forces. In this 
model, the replicated origins undergo condensation and 
resolution from each other but remain cohesed at spe-
cific origin-proximal sites (called snaps). Meanwhile, 
DNA replication and compaction continue unabated. 
The accumulation of these DNA bodies in the con-
fined space of the bacterial cell generates internal push-
ing forces. When these forces exceed the strength of 
the snaps, cohesion is lost, resulting in the abrupt and 
rapid extrusion of the condensed origin regions towards 
opposite poles. Because replication probably initiates 
at the nucleoid periphery, the newly replicated DNA 
is naturally compartmentalized from the unreplicated 
chromosome. This helps to prevent entanglements and 
provides an unimpeded path for the extruded origins. 
The molecular basis of the snaps is currently unknown. 
However, two closely spaced origin-proximal regions on 
the E. coli chromosome with snap-like properties have 
recently been described87,88,122. This model requires fur-
ther investigation and refinement but, if correct, could 
be broadly relevant both in bacteria that possess and in 
those that lack partitioning loci.

Anucleate cells
For bacteria, refers to cells 
lacking a chromosome.

R E V I E W S

Origin segregation must be more highly orchestrated 
and nuanced than this compelling model suggests. One 
observation that highlights this is the strong positional 
bias in the segregation of the leading and lagging strands 
of newly replicated DNA in E. coli 123. The chromosome 
arms generated by leading-strand synthesis are more 
frequently located at the outer edges of the nucleoid, 
whereas the lagging-strand-synthesized arms are pre-
sent on the opposite side of the origins close to mid-cell. 
How the leading and lagging strands are positioned on 
a particular side of the origin and whether this orienta-
tion is established before or after origin segregation is 
not known.

Bulk chromosome segregation
As highlighted throughout this Review, our guiding 
premise is that the orderly folding of the replicated sis-
ters along adjacent DNA segments serves as the principal 
driver of bulk chromosome segregation. This length-
wise condensation is mediated by the concerted action 
of supercoiling, small nucleoid-associated proteins 
and SMC condensin complexes (FIG. 4b). Compaction 
of neighbouring DNA segments draws replicated sis-
ters away from each other, makes the newly generated 
DNA stiffer and thicker and, with the help of Topo IV,  
eliminates pre-catenated entanglements32,124,125.

This model is consistent with the linear organiza-
tion of the bacterial chromosome within the cell and its 
almost uniform packing density76,86. It is also in line with 
time-lapse imaging of chromosomal loci during replica-
tion in E. coli, which shows that newly replicated sis-
ter loci are sequentially segregated and colocalize with 
neighbouring genetic loci, thus suggesting that conden-
sation and segregation proceed in a coupled manner. 
Finally, consistent with this condensation resolution 
scheme, bulk chromosome segregation is impaired 
when the proteins and processes that function in chro-
mosome compaction are compromised. Specifically, 
cells with defects in supercoiling or that lack the small 
nucleoid-associated proteins or components of the SMC 
complex have segregation defects that are character-
ized by the formation of anucleate cells52,57,59,126–129. This 
model intuitively makes sense but is also supported by 
mathematical modelling of two flexible polymer rings: 
compaction of catenated rings in an orderly and locally 
controlled manner along their lengths is sufficient to 
eliminate entanglements between them, providing that 
a mechanism (such as Topo IV-mediated decatenation) 
exists to unlink the rings124.

The folding of the chromosome in on itself prob-
ably initiates at the origin and is propagated outwards. 
Replicated DNA is then sequentially and progressively 
gathered into these condensed structures  (FIG.  4b). 
Intriguingly, SMC and MukB complexes are enriched 
at the origin of replication in E. coli, C. crescentus and 
B. subtilis58,129–131. The mechanism by which they are 
concentrated at this site in E. coli and C. crescentus  
is unknown. However, in B. subtilis, the SMC complex is 
recruited to the origin by ParB bound to origin-proximal  
parS sites129,131 and, like its eukaryotic counterpart, is 
enriched at the highly transcribed ribosomal RNA 

NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS 

 VOLUME 14 | MARCH 2013 | 199

© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

R E V I E W S

(rRNA) genes, most of which reside in close proxim-
ity to the origin132. Interestingly, the parS sites are prin-
cipally clustered to the left of the origin in B. subtilis, 
whereas the rRNA operons are present on the right arm. 
We imagine that origin-localized SMC has an important 
role in ‘seeding’ independent lengthwise condensation of 
the left and right chromosome arms.

A corollary to this model is that condensation seeded 
at the origin could also function to dictate the overall 
organization of the bacterial chromosome. We imag-
ine that recruitment of SMC to the left and right side  
of the origin leads to local lengthwise condensation along 
the two arms, generating more rigidified structures into 
which newly synthesized DNA is folded. In support of 
this idea, Danilova and colleagues58 found that E. coli 
MukB mutants that successfully inherit a chromo-
some switch from a left–ori–right organization to an 
ori–ter organization. The absence of origin-localized  
condensin complexes is thought to be responsible for 
this switch58,133. We suspect that SMC complexes work 
similarly in C. crescentus and sporulating B. subtilis.  
However, in these cases, the origin is anchored at the  
cell  pole.  Thus,  as  a  result  of  this  constraint  on  
the origin, the left and right arms lie side-by-side in 
separately condensed bodies rather than on opposite 
sides of the origin.

Recently, a model for bulk chromosome segregation 
based on conformational entropy was proposed134,135. In 
this model, segregation is driven by the tendency of con-
fined polymers to separate from each other in a cylindri-
cal container. We favour a model in which lengthwise 
folding of the replicated sisters drives their separation 
because it is consistent with the linear organization of 
the chromosome and the segregation defects observed in 
cells lacking compaction proteins, and it is applicable to 
all bacterial cells, regardless of their shape. However, we 
suspect that rod-shaped bacteria take advantage of their 
carefully constructed geometry, and in these organisms 
entropic sorting forces could facilitate the condensation 
resolution process discussed here.

Segregation of the terminus region
In principle, condensation resolution should be suffi-
cient to segregate replicated sister chromosomes before 
cytokinesis. However, bacteria have evolved a septum-
localized DNA translocase to ensure efficient segre-
gation of the terminus and to attend to the particular 
challenges of replicating a circular chromosome (FIG. 4c).
Replicating a circular chromosome generates two 
topological challenges: catenanes and dimeric chromo-
somes. When pre-catenanes are not removed by Topo IV 
during replication, the replicated sisters remain linked 
to each other, forming interlocked rings (catenanes)28,29. 
In addition, as a result of homologous recombination 
between sisters during replication repair and an uneven 
number of crossovers, ~15% of the population ends 
up with conjoined sister chromosomes as a single cir-
cular dimeric chromosome136. Thus, to complete sister 
chromosome segregation, Topo IV must remove the 
catenanes, and a recombinase (called XerCD in E. coli, 
and RipX and CodV in B. subtilis) must convert the 

Catenanes
Interlocked rings (of circular 
chromosomes or plasmids) 
that cannot be separated 
without breaking the  
covalent bonds in DNA.

Dimeric chromosomes
Sister chromosomes conjoined 
into a single circle. Dimeric 
chromosomes result from an 
uneven number of homologous 
recombination events between 
sisters during replication.

chromosome dimers into monomers137–139. Decatenation 
and dimer resolution are coordinated and facilitated by a 
DNA translocase (called FtsK in E. coli and C. crescentus, 
and SpoIIIE in B. subtilis). These membrane-anchored 
ATPases associate with the cell division apparatus at 
mid-cell and take advantage of strand-specific base 
composition skew in the DNA to translocate the chro-
mosome arms towards the replication termini and the 
site of dimer resolution (FIG. 4c). These translocases are 
used when DNA is present at the septum as a result 
of missegregation, chromosome dimers or catenanes. 
Interestingly, the B. subtilis DNA translocase is also used 
during sporulation to pump ~75% of the chromosome 
into the developing spore77,129,140 (FIG. 3A). Translocation 
during vegetative growth and sporulation brings the 
termini to mid-cell, where XerCD and Topo IV can 
catalyse their unlinking and complete the segregation 
process141–145 (FIG. 4c).

Concluding remarks and future directions
Live-cell  imaging  and  genome-scale  molecular 
approaches have taken the disembodied image of the 
bacterial nucleoid — plectonemes emanating from a 
central core — and provided a context in which to inter-
pret it. The linear organization of the chromosome with 
its uniform packing density and the ordered layering of 
chromosomal loci during replication provide a clearer 
picture of the nucleoid and suggest a plausible and  
compelling mechanism for its segregation.

Defining how origins are segregated with and with-
out a Par system and the mechanism by which SMC 
compacts DNA are outstanding issues that will be 
addressed in the near future. Defining SMC action will 
inform (and be informed by) studies on eukaryotic 
SMC complexes. However, an equally important and 
challenging question is how the different compaction 
and segregation factors interface during the replication–
segregation cycle. Intriguing hints of interconnections 
have been described over the past decade. In B. subtilis, 
the ParA protein appears to regulate replication initia-
tion146, whereas ParB bound to parS recruits SMC to 
the origin to facilitate compaction and segregation129,131. 
Moreover, the MukB component of the condensin com-
plex in E. coli has been found to interact with Topo IV 
and to stimulate its activity in vitro147. To round out 
this picture, the FtsK translocase also interacts with 
Topo IV148, facilitating terminus separation and cell 
division, and the ter macrodomain protein MatP has 
recently been shown to interact with cell-division pro-
tein ZapB149. Understanding how these factors (and oth-
ers) work together will provide a more complete picture  
of how the chromosome is organized and accurately 
segregated with such high fidelity.

The other major challenge for the future is to under-
stand how chromosome condensation and segregation 
are influenced by the physicochemical properties of 
the cell and basic cellular processes. We have touched 
on a possible role for confinement but have not men-
tioned the crowded and metabolically active cytoplasm 
in which the nucleoid resides. Molecular crowding can 
contribute to chromosome compaction directly by 

200 | MARCH 2013 | VOLUME 14 

 www.nature.com/reviews/genetics

© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

R E V I E W S

creating a phase separation between the DNA and the  
rest of the cytoplasm and indirectly by enhancing  
the interactions between the chromosome and DNA-
binding proteins150,151. How crowding and confinement 
influence organization and segregation remain to be 
elucidated. Additionally, the chromosome is constantly 
being pushed and bullied by the replication and tran-
scription machineries as well as recombination and 

repair proteins. These activities clearly influence chro-
mosome dynamics. Interestingly, inhibition of transcrip-
tion leads to a dramatic decondensation of the nucleoid, 
the molecular basis of which remains unknown152,153. 
Understanding the interplay between the condensa-
tion and segregation machineries in the context of the 
crowded and metabolically active cell is, of course, a long 
way off but is a goal that is worthy of our efforts.

1.  Baker, J. R. The cell-theory: a restatement, history, 

20.  Weber, S. C., Spakowitz, A. J. & Theriot, J. A. 

39.  Dame, R. T., Wyman, C. & Goosen, N. H-NS mediated 

Nonthermal ATP-dependent fluctuations contribute to 
the in vivo motion of chromosomal loci. Proc. Natl 
Acad. Sci. USA 109, 7338–7343 (2012).

compaction of DNA visualised by atomic force 
microscopy. Nucleic Acids Res. 28, 3504–3510 
(2000).

21.  Drlica, K. Control of bacterial DNA supercoiling.  

40.  Noom, M. C., Navarre, W. W., Oshima, T., Wuite, G. J. 

8.  Worcel, A. & Burgi, E. On the structure of the folded 

27.  Rovinskiy, N., Agbleke, A. A., Chesnokova, O., Pang, Z. 

and critique. Part V. The multiplication of nuclei. 
Q. J. Microsc. Sci. 96, 449–481 (1955).

2.  Piekarski, G. Zytologische Untersuchungen an 

Paratyphus und Coli Bakterien. Arch. Mikrobiol. 8, 
428–429 (in German) (1937).
Stille, B. Zytologische Untersuchungen an Bakterien 
mit Hilfe der feulgenschen Nuclealreaktion.  
Arch. Mikrobiol. 8, 124–148 (in German) (1937).

4.  Robinow, C. & Kellenberger, E. The bacterial nucleoid 

revisited. Microbiol. Rev. 58, 211–232 (1994).
This classic review describes the history of the 
bacterial nucleoid and discusses its anatomy after 
various treatments and fixations.
Lewis, P. J., Thaker, S. D. & Errington, J. 
Compartmentalization of transcription and 
translation in Bacillus subtilis. EMBO J. 19,  
710–718 (2000).

3. 

5. 

6.  Pettijohn, D. E. & Hecht, R. RNA molecules bound to 
the folded bacterial genome stabilize DNA folds and 
segregate domains of supercoiling. Cold Spring Harb. 
Symp. Quant. Biol. 38, 31–41 (1974).

7.  Delius, H. & Worcel, A. Electron microscopic 

visualization of the folded chromosome of Escherichia 
coli. J. Mol. Biol. 82, 107–109 (1974).

chromosome of Escherichia coli. J. Mol. Biol. 71, 
127–147 (1972).

9.  Kavenoff, R. & Ryder, O. A. Electron microscopy of 

membrane-associated folded chromosomes of 
Escherichia coli. Chromosoma 55, 13–25 (1976).
Using electron microscopy to visualize gently lysed 
bacterial cells, this study shows that the nucleoid is 
composed of supercoiled loops of DNA that 
radiate from a central core.

10.  Kavenoff, R. & Bowen, B. C. Electron microscopy of 

membrane-free folded chromosomes from Escherichia 
coli. Chromosoma 59, 89–101 (1976).

11.  Holmes, V. F. & Cozzarelli, N. R. Closing the ring: links 
between SMC proteins and chromosome partitioning, 
condensation, and supercoiling. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 
USA 97, 1322–1324 (2000).

12.  Trun, N. J. & Marko, J. F. Architecture of a bacterial 
chromosome. Am. Soc. Microbiol. News 6466, 276 
(1998).

13.  Higgins, N. P., Yang, X., Fu, Q. & Roth, J. R.  

Surveying a supercoil domain by using the gamma 
delta resolution system in Salmonella typhimurium. 
J. Bacteriol. 178, 2825–2835 (1996).

14.  Postow, L., Hardy, C. D., Arsuaga, J. & Cozzarelli, N. R. 

Topological domain structure of the Escherichia coli 
chromosome. Genes Dev. 18, 1766–1779 (2004).
This study investigates the organization and size  
of topological domains in E. coli and finds that 
domains have an average size of 10 kb with 
randomly placed barriers.

15.  Stein, R. A., Deng, S. & Higgins, N. P. Measuring 

chromosome dynamics on different time scales using 
resolvases with varying half-lives. Mol. Microbiol. 56, 
1049–1061 (2005).

16.  Deng, S., Stein, R. A. & Higgins, N. P.  

Organization of supercoil domains and their 
reorganization by transcription. Mol. Microbiol.  
57, 1511–1521 (2005).

17.  Cui, Y., Petrushenko, Z. M. & Rybenkov, V. V.  

MukB acts as a macromolecular clamp in DNA 
condensation. Nature Struct. Mol. Biol. 15,  
411–418 (2008).

18.  Fiebig, A., Keren, K. & Theriot, J. A. Fine-scale time-
lapse analysis of the biphasic, dynamic behaviour of 
the two Vibrio cholerae chromosomes. Mol. Microbiol. 
60, 1164–1178 (2006).

19.  Weber, S. C., Spakowitz, A. J. & Theriot, J. A.  

Bacterial chromosomal loci move subdiffusively 
through a viscoelastic cytoplasm. Phys. Rev. Lett. 
10466, 238102 (2010).

Mol. Microbiol. 6, 425–433 (1992).

22.  Luttinger, A. The twisted ‘life’ of DNA in the cell: 
bacterial topoisomerases. Mol. Microbiol. 15,  
601–606 (1995).

23.  Nollmann, M., Crisona, N. J. & Arimondo, P. B.  
Thirty years of Escherichia coli DNA gyrase: from  
in vivo function to single-molecule mechanism. 
Biochimie 89, 490–499 (2007).

24.  Hsu, Y. H., Chung, M. W. & Li, T. K. Distribution of 

gyrase and topoisomerase IV on bacterial nucleoid: 
implications for nucleoid organization. Nucleic Acids 
Res. 34, 3128–3138 (2006).

25.  Tadesse, S. & Graumann, P. L. Differential and 

dynamic localization of topoisomerases in Bacillus 
subtilis. J. Bacteriol. 188, 3002–3011 (2006).

26.  Crisona, N. J., Strick, T. R., Bensimon, D., 

Croquette, V. & Cozzarelli, N. R. Preferential relaxation 
of positively supercoiled DNA by E. coli topoisomerase 
IV in single-molecule and ensemble measurements. 
Genes Dev. 14, 2881–2892 (2000).

& Higgins, N. P. Rates of gyrase supercoiling and 
transcription elongation control supercoil density in a 
bacterial chromosome. PLoS Genet. 866, e1002845 
(2012).

28.  Khodursky, A. B. et al. Analysis of topoisomerase 
function in bacterial replication fork movement:  
use of DNA microarrays. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 97, 
9419–9424 (2000).

29.  Peter, B. J., Ullsperger, C., Hiasa, H., Marians, K. J. & 

Cozzarelli, N. R. The structure of supercoiled 
intermediates in DNA replication. Cell 94, 819–827 
(1998).

30.  Ullsperger, C. & Cozzarelli, N. R. Contrasting 

enzymatic activities of topoisomerase IV and DNA 
gyrase from Escherichia coli. J. Biol. Chem. 271, 
31549–31555 (1996).

31.  Zechiedrich, E. L., Khodursky, A. B. & Cozzarelli, N. R. 
Topoisomerase IV, not gyrase, decatenates products of 
site-specific recombination in Escherichia coli. Genes 
Dev. 11, 2580–2592 (1997).

32.  Rybenkov, V. V., Ullsperger, C., Vologodskii, A. V. & 

Cozzarelli, N. R. Simplification of DNA topology below 
equilibrium values by type II topoisomerases. Science 
277, 690–693 (1997).

33.  Shintomi, K. & Hirano, T. Sister chromatid resolution: 

a cohesin releasing network and beyond. Chromosoma 
119, 459–467 (2010).

X-ray structure reveals topoisomerase subunit 
dynamics and a potential mechanism for SUMO 
modulation of decatenation. J. Mol. Biol. 424,  
105–108 (2012).

35.  Wendorff, T. J., Schmidt, B. H., Heslop, P., 

Austin, C. A. & Berger, J. M. The structure of 
DNA-bound human topoisomerase II alpha: 
conformational mechanisms for coordinating  
inter-subunit interactions with DNA cleavage.  
J. Mol. Biol. 424, 109–124 (2012).

36.  Hardy, C. D. & Cozzarelli, N. R. A genetic selection  
for supercoiling mutants of Escherichia coli reveals 
proteins implicated in chromosome structure.  
Mol. Microbiol. 57, 1636–1652 (2005).

37.  Azam, T. A., Hiraga, S. & Ishihama, A. Two types of 
localization of the DNA-binding proteins within the 
Escherichia coli nucleoid. Genes Cells 5, 613–626 
(2000).

38.  Azam, T. A. & Ishihama, A. Twelve species of the 

nucleoid-associated protein from Escherichia coli. 
Sequence recognition specificity and DNA binding 
affinity. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 33105–33113 (1999).

& Dame, R. T. H-NS promotes looped domain 
formation in the bacterial chromosome. Curr. Biol. 17, 
R913–R914 (2007).

41.  Skoko, D. et al. Mechanism of chromosome compaction 
and looping by the Escherichia coli nucleoid protein Fis. 
J. Mol. Biol. 364, 777–798 (2006).

42.  Dame, R. T. The role of nucleoid-associated proteins in 

the organization and compaction of bacterial 
chromatin. Mol. Microbiol. 56, 858–870 (2005).

43.  Luijsterburg, M. S., Noom, M. C., Wuite, G. J. & 

Dame, R. T. The architectural role of nucleoid-
associated proteins in the organization of bacterial 
chromatin: a molecular perspective. J. Struct. Biol. 
156, 262–272 (2006).

44.  Luijsterburg, M. S., White, M. F., van Driel, R. & 
Dame, R. T. The major architects of chromatin: 
architectural proteins in bacteria, archaea and 
eukaryotes. Crit. Rev. Biochem. Mol. Biol. 43,  
393–418 (2008).

45.  Dillon, S. C. & Dorman, C. J. Bacterial nucleoid-

associated proteins, nucleoid structure and gene 
expression. Nature Rev. Microbiol. 8, 185–195 
(2010).

46.  Frenkiel-Krispin, D. et al. Nucleoid restructuring  
in stationary-state bacteria. Mol. Microbiol. 51,  
395–405 (2004).

47.  Frenkiel-Krispin, D. et al. Structure of the DNA–SspC 
complex: implications for DNA packaging, protection, 
and repair in bacterial spores. J. Bacteriol. 186, 
3525–3530 (2004).

48.  Hirano, M. & Hirano, T. Opening closed arms:  

long-distance activation of SMC ATPase by hinge-DNA 
interactions. Mol. Cell 21, 175–186 (2006).
49.  Hirano, T. At the heart of the chromosome:  

SMC proteins in action. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 7, 
311–322 (2006).

50.  Haering, C. H. & Nasmyth, K. Building and breaking 

bridges between sister chromatids. Bioessays 25, 
1178–1191 (2003).

51.  Nasmyth, K. & Haering, C. H. The structure and 

function of SMC and kleisin complexes. Annu. Rev. 
Biochem. 74, 595–648 (2005).
This comprehensive review of SMC complexes 
describes their discovery, structure and functions.

52.  Britton, R. A., Lin, D. C. & Grossman, A. D. 

Characterization of a prokaryotic SMC protein 
involved in chromosome partitioning. Genes Dev. 12, 
1254–1259 (1998).

regulation of SMC–DNA interactions by ATP and 
accessory proteins. EMBO J. 23, 2664–2673 (2004).

54.  Mascarenhas, J., Soppa, J., Strunnikov, A. V. & 

Graumann, P. L. Cell cycle-dependent localization of 
two novel prokaryotic chromosome segregation and 
condensation proteins in Bacillus subtilis that interact 
with SMC protein. EMBO J. 21, 3108–3118 (2002).

55.  Soppa, J. et al. Discovery of two novel families of 

proteins that are proposed to interact with prokaryotic 
SMC proteins, and characterization of the Bacillus 
subtilis family members ScpA and ScpB. Mol. Microbiol. 
45, 59–71 (2002).

56.  Hiraga, S. et al. Chromosome partitioning in 

Escherichia coli: novel mutants producing anucleate 
cells. J. Bacteriol. 171, 1496–1505 (1989).
This paper presents an elegant genetic screen  
for mutants that produce anucleate cells  
identifies MukB.

57.  Niki, H., Jaffe, A., Imamura, R., Ogura, T. & Hiraga, S. 

The new gene mukB codes for a 177 kd protein with 
coiled-coil domains involved in chromosome 
partitioning of E. coli. EMBO J. 10, 183–193 (1991).

34.  Higgins, N. P. A human TOP2A core DNA binding 

53.  Hirano, M. & Hirano, T. Positive and negative 

NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS 

 VOLUME 14 | MARCH 2013 | 201

© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

R E V I E W S

58.  Danilova, O., Reyes-Lamothe, R., Pinskaya, M., 

Sherratt, D. & Possoz, C. MukB colocalizes with the 
oriC region and is required for organization of the two 
Escherichia coli chromosome arms into separate cell 
halves. Mol. Microbiol. 65, 1485–1492 (2007).

59.  Jensen, R. B. & Shapiro, L. The Caulobacter 
crescentus smc gene is required for cell cycle 
progression and chromosome segregation. Proc. Natl 
Acad. Sci. USA 96, 10661–10666 (1999).

60.  Petrushenko, Z. M., Cui, Y., She, W. & Rybenkov, V. V. 

Mechanics of DNA bridging by bacterial condensin 
MukBEF in vitro and in singulo. EMBO J. 29,  
1126–1135 (2010).

61.  Badrinarayanan, A., Reyes-Lamothe, R., Uphoff, S., 

Leake, M. C. & Sherratt, D. J. In vivo architecture and 
action of bacterial structural maintenance of 
chromosome proteins. Science 338, 528–531 (2012).

62.  Mercier, R. et al. The MatP/matS site-specific system 

organizes the terminus region of the E. coli chromosome 
into a macrodomain. Cell 135, 475–485 (2008).
This paper describes the identification and 
characterization of the molecular basis underlying 
the ter macrodomain in E. coli.

63.  Niki, H., Yamaichi, Y. & Hiraga, S. Dynamic 

organization of chromosomal DNA in Escherichia coli. 
Genes Dev. 14, 212–223 (2000).

64.  Valens, M., Penaud, S., Rossignol, M., Cornet, F. & 

Boccard, F. Macrodomain organization of the 
Escherichia coli chromosome. EMBO J. 23,  
4330–4341 (2004).

65.  Espeli, O., Mercier, R. & Boccard, F. DNA dynamics 
vary according to macrodomain topography in the 
E. coli chromosome. Mol. Microbiol. 68, 1418–1427 
(2008).

66.  Dupaigne, P. et al. Molecular basis for a protein-

mediated DNA-bridging mechanism that functions in 
condensation of the E. coli chromosome. Mol. Cell 48, 
560–571 (2012).

67.  Wang, W., Li, G. W., Chen, C., Xie, X. S. & Zhuang, X. 
Chromosome organization by a nucleoid-associated 
protein in live bacteria. Science 333, 1445–1449 
(2011).

68.  Maaloe, O., Schaechter, M. & Kjeldgaard, N. O.  

in Control of Macromolecular Synthesis: A Study of 
DNA, RNA, and Protein Synthesis in Bacteria  
(eds Maaløe, O. & Kjeldgaard, N. O.) 188–197  
(W. A. Benjamin, 1966).

69.  Straight, A. F., Belmont, A. S., Robinett, C. C. & 

Murray, A. W. GFP tagging of budding yeast 
chromosomes reveals that protein–protein 
interactions can mediate sister chromatid cohesion. 
Curr. Biol. 6, 1599–1608 (1996).

70.  Michaelis, C., Ciosk, R. & Nasmyth, K. Cohesins: 

chromosomal proteins that prevent premature 
separation of sister chromatids. Cell 91, 35–45 (1997).

71.  Robinett, C. C. et al. In vivo localization of DNA 

sequences and visualization of large-scale chromatin 
organization using lac operator/repressor recognition. 
J. Cell Biol. 135, 1685–1700 (1996).

Escherichia coli origin and terminus of replication. 
Mol. Microbiol. 46, 985–996 (2002).

73.  Teleman, A. A., Graumann, P. L., Lin, D. C., 
Grossman, A. D. & Losick, R. Chromosome 
arrangement within a bacterium. Curr. Biol. 8,  
1102–1109 (1998).

74.  Webb, C. D. et al. Bipolar localization of the replication 

origin regions of chromosomes in vegetative and 
sporulating cells of B. subtilis. Cell 88, 667–674 
(1997).

75.  Lau, I. F. et al. Spatial and temporal organization  

of replicating Escherichia coli chromosomes.  
Mol. Microbiol. 49, 731–743 (2003).

76.  Viollier, P. H. et al. Rapid and sequential movement of 

individual chromosomal loci to specific subcellular 
locations during bacterial DNA replication. Proc. Natl 
Acad. Sci. USA 101, 9257–9262 (2004).
Systematic subcellular localization of over 100 
genetic loci reveals the linear organization of the 
C. crescentus chromosome.

77.  Wu, L. J. & Errington, J. Use of asymmetric cell 

division and spoIIIE mutants to probe chromosome 
orientation and organization in Bacillus subtilis. Mol. 
Microbiol. 27, 777–786 (1998).

78.  Ben-Yehuda, S., Rudner, D. Z. & Losick, R.  

RacA, a bacterial protein that anchors chromosomes 
to the cell poles. Science 299, 532–536 (2003).

79.  Lin, D. C., Levin, P. A. & Grossman, A. D.  

Bipolar localization of a chromosome partition 
protein in Bacillus subtilis. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 
94, 4721–4726 (1997).

72.  Li, Y., Sergueev, K. & Austin, S. The segregation of the 

92.  Abeles, A. L., Friedman, S. A. & Austin, S. J.  

80.  Breier, A. M. & Cozzarelli, N. R. Linear ordering and 
dynamic segregation of the bacterial chromosome. 
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 101, 9175–9176 (2004).

81.  Umbarger, M. A. et al. The three-dimensional 

architecture of a bacterial genome and its alteration 
by genetic perturbation. Mol. Cell 44, 252–264 
(2011).
This study uses a genome-wide chromatin 
conformation capture method (called 5C) to show 
that the two arms of the C. crescentus chromosome 
are spatially distinct.

82.  Berlatzky, I. A., Rouvinski, A. & Ben-Yehuda, S.  

Spatial organization of a replicating bacterial 
chromosome. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 105,  
14136–14140 (2008).

83.  Hadizadeh Yazdi, N., Guet, C. C., Johnson, R. C. & 

Marko, J. F. Variation of the folding and dynamics of 
the Escherichia coli chromosome with growth 
conditions. Mol. Microbiol. 86, 1318–1333 (2012).
84.  Wang, X., Liu, X., Possoz, C. & Sherratt, D. J. The two 
Escherichia coli chromosome arms locate to separate 
cell halves. Genes Dev. 20, 1727–1731 (2006).

85.  Nielsen, H. J., Ottesen, J. R., Youngren, B., 

Austin, S. J. & Hansen, F. G. The Escherichia coli 
chromosome is organized with the left and  
right chromosome arms in separate cell halves.  
Mol. Microbiol. 62, 331–338 (2006).
These two papers show that the two arms of  
the E. coli chromosome are located in opposite  
cell halves.

86.  Wiggins, P. A., Cheveralls, K. C., Martin, J. S., 
Lintner, R. & Kondev, J. Strong intranucleoid 
interactions organize the Escherichia coli chromosome 
into a nucleoid filament. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 
107, 4991–4995 (2010).

87.  Lesterlin, C., Gigant, E., Boccard, F. & Espeli, O.  

Sister chromatid interactions in bacteria revealed  
by a site-specific recombination assay. EMBO J. 31, 
3468–3479 (2012).

88.  Nielsen, H. J., Li, Y., Youngren, B., Hansen, F. G. & 

Austin, S. Progressive segregation of the  
Escherichia coli chromosome. Mol. Microbiol. 61, 
383–393 (2006).

89.  Jacob, F., Brenner, S. & Cuzin, F. On the regulation of 
DNA replication in bacteria. Cold Spring Harb. Symp. 
Quant. Biol. 28, 329–348 (1963).
This classic paper proposed the ‘replicon theory’, 
providing insight into the regulation of DNA 
synthesis and segregation of DNA into  
daughter cells.

90.  Webb, C. D. et al. Use of time-lapse microscopy to 
visualize rapid movement of the replication origin 
region of the chromosome during the cell cycle in 
Bacillus subtilis. Mol. Microbiol. 28, 883–892 
(1998).

91.  Wang, X. & Sherratt, D. J. Independent segregation of 
the two arms of the Escherichia coli ori region requires 
neither RNA synthesis nor MreB dynamics. 
J. Bacteriol. 192, 6143–6153 (2010).

100. Lin, D. C. & Grossman, A. D. Identification and 

characterization of a bacterial chromosome 
partitioning site. Cell 92, 675–685 (1998).

101. Mohl, D. A. & Gober, J. W. Cell cycle-dependent polar 

localization of chromosome partitioning proteins in 
Caulobacter crescentus. Cell 88, 675–684 (1997).

102. Heidelberg, J. F. et al. DNA sequence of both 

chromosomes of the cholera pathogen Vibrio cholerae. 
Nature 406, 477–483 (2000).

103. Yamaichi, Y. & Niki, H. Active segregation by the 

Bacillus subtilis partitioning system in Escherichia coli. 
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 97, 14656–14661 (2000).

104. Godfrin-Estevenon, A. M., Pasta, F. & Lane, D.  

The parAB gene products of Pseudomonas putida 
exhibit partition activity in both P. putida and 
Escherichia coli. Mol. Microbiol. 43, 39–49 (2002).
105. Murray, H., Ferreira, H. & Errington, J. The bacterial 

chromosome segregation protein Spo0J spreads along 
DNA from parS nucleation sites. Mol. Microbiol. 61, 
1352–1361 (2006).

106. Breier, A. M. & Grossman, A. D. Whole-genome 

analysis of the chromosome partitioning and 
sporulation protein Spo0J (ParB) reveals spreading 
and origin-distal sites on the Bacillus subtilis 
chromosome. Mol. Microbiol. 64, 703–718 (2007).

107. Leonard, T. A., Butler, P. J. & Lowe, J.  

Bacterial chromosome segregation: structure &  
DNA binding of the Soj dimer—a conserved biological 
switch. EMBO J. 24, 270–282 (2005).

108. Vecchiarelli, A. G. et al. ATP control of dynamic P1 
ParA–DNA interactions: a key role for the nucleoid 
in plasmid partition. Mol. Microbiol. 78, 78–91 
(2010).
This paper provides evidence for a reaction–
diffusion type mechanism for ParA-mediated 
segregation of ParB-bound DNA.

109. Mierzejewska, J. & Jagura-Burdzy, G. Prokaryotic 

ParA–ParB–parS system links bacterial chromosome 
segregation with the cell cycle. Plasmid 67, 1–14 
(2012).

110.  Szardenings, F., Guymer, D. & Gerdes, K.  

ParA ATPases can move and position DNA and 
subcellular structures. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 14, 
712–718 (2011).

111.  Vecchiarelli, A. G., Mizuuchi, K. & Funnell, B. E.  

Surfing biological surfaces: exploiting the nucleoid for 
partition and transport in bacteria. Mol. Microbiol. 
86, 513–523 (2012).

112. Ptacin, J. L. et al. A spindle-like apparatus guides 

bacterial chromosome segregation. Nature Cell Biol. 
12, 791–798 (2010).

113. Schofield, W. B., Lim, H. C. & Jacobs-Wagner, C.  
Cell cycle coordination and regulation of bacterial 
chromosome segregation dynamics by polarly 
localized proteins. EMBO J. 29, 3068–3081 (2010).
114. Shebelut, C. W., Guberman, J. M., van Teeffelen, S., 
Yakhnina, A. A. & Gitai, Z. Caulobacter chromosome 
segregation is an ordered multistep process.  
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 107, 14194–14198 (2010).

115.  Toro, E., Hong, S. H., McAdams, H. H. & Shapiro, L. 

Partition of unit-copy miniplasmids to daughter cells. 
III. The DNA sequence and functional organization of 
the P1 partition region. J. Mol. Biol. 185, 261–272 
(1985).

Caulobacter requires a dedicated mechanism to 
initiate chromosome segregation. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 
USA 105, 15435–15440 (2008).

116. Ebersbach, G., Briegel, A., Jensen, G. J. &  

93.  Ringgaard, S., van Zon, J., Howard, M. & Gerdes, K. 
Movement and equipositioning of plasmids by ParA 
filament disassembly. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 106, 
19369–19374 (2009).

94.  Sengupta, M., Nielsen, H. J., Youngren, B. & Austin, S. 

P1 plasmid segregation: accurate redistribution by 
dynamic plasmid pairing and separation. J. Bacteriol. 
192, 1175–1183 (2010).

95.  Ebersbach, G. et al. Regular cellular distribution of 
plasmids by oscillating and filament-forming ParA 
ATPase of plasmid pB171. Mol. Microbiol. 61,  
1428–1442 (2006).

96.  Gerdes, K., Howard, M. & Szardenings, F. Pushing and 

pulling in prokaryotic DNA segregation. Cell 141, 
927–942 (2010).

97.  Schumacher, M. A. Structural biology of plasmid 

partition: uncovering the molecular mechanisms of 
DNA segregation. Biochem. J. 412, 1–18 (2008).

98.  Livny, J., Yamaichi, Y. & Waldor, M. K. Distribution of 
centromere-like parS sites in bacteria: insights from 
comparative genomics. J. Bacteriol. 189, 8693–8703 
(2007).

99.  Ireton, K., Gunther, N. W. & Grossman, A. D.  

spo0J is required for normal chromosome 
segregation as well as the initiation of sporulation  
in Bacillus subtilis. J. Bacteriol. 176, 5320–5329 
(1994).

Jacobs-Wagner, C. A self-associating protein critical  
for chromosome attachment, division, and polar 
organization in caulobacter. Cell 134, 956–968 
(2008).

117. Bowman, G. R. et al. A polymeric protein anchors the 
chromosomal origin/ParB complex at a bacterial cell 
pole. Cell 134, 945–955 (2008).

118. Fogel, M. A. & Waldor, M. K. A dynamic, mitotic-like 
mechanism for bacterial chromosome segregation. 
Genes Dev. 20, 3269–3282 (2006).
This paper was the first to show ParA-mediated 
pulling of a ParB-bound origin from one cell pole to 
the other.

119. Kim, H. J., Calcutt, M. J., Schmidt, F. J. & Chater, K. F. 

Partitioning of the linear chromosome during 
sporulation of Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2) involves 
an oriC-linked parAB locus. J. Bacteriol. 182,  
1313–1320 (2000).

120. Lewis, R. A., Bignell, C. R., Zeng, W., Jones, A. C. & 

Thomas, C. M. Chromosome loss from par mutants of 
Pseudomonas putida depends on growth medium  
and phase of growth. Microbiology 148, 537–548 
(2002).

121. Bates, D. & Kleckner, N. Chromosome and replisome 

dynamics in E. coli: loss of sister cohesion triggers 
global chromosome movement and mediates 
chromosome segregation. Cell 121, 899–911 (2005).

202 | MARCH 2013 | VOLUME 14 

 www.nature.com/reviews/genetics

© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

R E V I E W S

134. Jun, S. & Mulder, B. Entropy-driven spatial 

organization of highly confined polymers: lessons for 
the bacterial chromosome. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 
103, 12388–12393 (2006).
This paper introduces the concept of entropy-driven 
DNA segregation.

135. Jun, S. & Wright, A. Entropy as the driver of 

chromosome segregation. Nature Rev. Micro 8,  
600–607 (2010).

136. Steiner, W. W. & Kuempel, P. L. Sister chromatid 

exchange frequencies in Escherichia coli analyzed by 
recombination at the dif resolvase site. J. Bacteriol. 
180, 6269–6275 (1998).

137. Lemon, K. P., Kurtser, I. & Grossman, A. D. Effects of 

replication termination mutants on chromosome 
partitioning in Bacillus subtilis. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 
USA 98, 212–217 (2001).

148. Espeli, O., Levine, C., Hassing, H. & Marians, K. J. 
Temporal regulation of topoisomerase IV activity in 
E. coli. Mol. Cell 11, 189–201 (2003).

149. Espeli, O. et al. A MatP–divisome interaction 

coordinates chromosome segregation with cell  
division in E. coli. EMBO J. 31, 3198–3211 (2012).

150. Zimmerman, S. B. Shape and compaction of 

Escherichia coli nucleoids. J. Struct. Biol. 156,  
255–261 (2006).

151. Zhou, H. X., Rivas, G. & Minton, A. P. Macromolecular 
crowding and confinement: biochemical, biophysical, 
and potential physiological consequences. Annu. Rev. 
Biophys. 37, 375–397 (2008).

152. Cabrera, J. E. & Jin, D. J. The distribution of RNA 

polymerase in Escherichia coli is dynamic and 
sensitive to environmental cues. Mol. Microbiol. 50, 
1493–1505 (2003).

138. Kaimer, C., Schenk, K. & Graumann, P. L. Two DNA 

153. Cagliero, C. & Jin, D. J. Dissociation and re-association 

translocases synergistically affect chromosome dimer 
resolution in Bacillus subtilis. J. Bacteriol. 193, 
1334–1340 (2011).

of RNA polymerase with DNA during osmotic stress 
response in Escherichia coli. Nucleic Acids Res. 41, 
315–326 (2013).

139. Cortez, D. et al. Evidence for a Xer/dif system for 

154. Fekete, R. A. & Chattoraj, D. K. A cis-acting sequence 

122. Joshi, M. C. et al. Escherichia coli sister  

chromosome separation includes an abrupt global 
transition with concomitant release of late-splitting 
intersister snaps. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 108, 
2765–2770 (2011).
This paper provides evidence for the model that 
intranucleoid pushing forces drive origin 
segregation.

123. White, M. A., Eykelenboom, J. K., Lopez-Vernaza, M. A., 

Wilson, E. & Leach, D. R. Non-random segregation of 
sister chromosomes in Escherichia coli. Nature 455, 
1248–1250 (2008).

124. Marko, J. F. Linking topology of tethered polymer 

rings with applications to chromosome segregation 
and estimation of the knotting length. Phys. Rev. E 79, 
051905 (2009).
Mathematical modelling of two flexible polymer 
rings suggests that lengthwise compaction is 
sufficient to drive chromosome segregation.

125. Yan, J., Magnasco, M. O. & Marko, J. F. A kinetic 

proofreading mechanism for disentanglement of DNA 
by topoisomerases. Nature 401, 932–935 (1999).

126. Painbeni, E., Caroff, M. & Rouviere-Yaniv, J. 

Alterations of the outer membrane composition in 
Escherichia coli lacking the histone-like protein HU. 
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 94, 6712–6717 (1997).
127. Moriya, S. et al. A Bacillus subtilis gene-encoding 

protein homologous to eukaryotic SMC motor protein 
is necessary for chromosome partition. Mol. 
Microbiol. 29, 179–187 (1998).

128. Schwartz, M. A. & Shapiro, L. An, S. M. C.  

ATPase mutant disrupts chromosome segregation in 
Caulobacter. Mol. Microbiol. 82, 1359–1374 (2011).

129. Sullivan, N. L., Marquis, K. A. & Rudner, D. Z. 

Recruitment of SMC by ParB–parS organizes the 
origin region and promotes efficient chromosome 
segregation. Cell 137, 697–707 (2009).

130. Jensen, R. B. & Shapiro, L. Cell-cycle-regulated 

chromosome resolution in archaea. PLoS Genet. 666, 
e1001166 (2010).

140. Wu, L. J. & Errington, J. Bacillus subtilis SpoIIIE protein 

required for DNA segregation during asymmetric cell 
division. Science 264, 572–575 (1994).

141. Duggin, I. G., Wake, R. G., Bell, S. D. & Hill, T. M.  

The replication fork trap and termination of 
chromosome replication. Mol. Microbiol. 70,  
1323–1333 (2008).

142. Grainge, I. et al. Unlinking chromosome catenanes  
in vivo by site-specific recombination. EMBO J. 26, 
4228–4238 (2007).

143. Grainge, I., Lesterlin, C. & Sherratt, D. J. Activation of 

XerCD–dif recombination by the FtsK DNA 
translocase. Nucleic Acids Res. 39, 5140–5148 
(2011).

involved in chromosome segregation in Escherichia 
coli. Mol. Microbiol. 55, 175–183 (2005).

155. Lieberman-Aiden, E. et al. Comprehensive mapping of 
long-range interactions reveals folding principles of the 
human genome. Science 326, 289–293 (2009).
156. Dekker, J., Rippe, K., Dekker, M. & Kleckner, N. 

Capturing chromosome conformation. Science 295, 
1306–1311 (2002).

157. Jackson, D., Wang, X. & Rudner, D. Z. Spatio-temporal 
organization of replication in bacteria and eukaryotes 
(nucleoids and nuclei). Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. 
Biol. 4, a010389 (2012).

Acknowledgements
We thank members of the Rudner laboratory for advice and 
encouragement, J. Marko and S. Jun for invaluable discus-
sions, N. Kleckner for sharing unpublished data, B. Ward for 
expert editing and the anonymous referees for insightful cri-
tiques. Support for this work comes from the US National 
Institutes of Health Grant GM086466. X.W. is a long-term 
fellow of the Human Frontier Science Program. P.M.L. is a 
Helen Hay Whitney fellow.

Competing interests statement
The authors declare no competing financial interests.

FURTHER INFORMATION
David Z. Rudner’s homepage: http://rudnerlab.med.harvard.edu

ALL LINKS ARE ACTIVE IN THE ONLINE PDF

expression and subcellular localization of the 
Caulobacter crescentus SMC chromosome structural 
protein. J. Bacteriol. 185, 3068–3075 (2003).

144. Sivanathan, V. et al. KOPS-guided DNA translocation 

by FtsK safeguards Escherichia coli chromosome 
segregation. Mol. Microbiol. 71, 1031–1042 (2009).

131. Gruber, S. & Errington, J. Recruitment of condensin to 

145. Steiner, W., Liu, G., Donachie, W. D. & Kuempel, P.  

replication origin regions by ParB/SpoOJ promotes 
chromosome segregation in B. subtilis. Cell 137, 
685–696 (2009).

132. Jarvis, E. D. et al. Chromosomal organization of  
rRNA operons in Bacillus subtilis. Genetics 120, 
625–635 (1988).

The cytoplasmic domain of FtsK protein is required for 
resolution of chromosome dimers. Mol. Microbiol. 31, 
579–583 (1999).

146. Murray, H. & Errington, J. Dynamic control of the DNA 

replication initiation protein DnaA by Soj/ParA. Cell 
135, 74–84 (2008).

133. Badrinarayanan, A., Lesterlin, C., Reyes-Lamothe, R. & 

147. Hayama, R. & Marians, K. J. Physical and functional 

Sherratt, D. The Escherichia coli SMC complex, 
MukBEF, shapes nucleoid organization independently 
of DNA replication. J. Bacteriol. 194, 4669–4676 
(2012).

interaction between the condensin MukB and the 
decatenase topoisomerase IV in Escherichia coli.  
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 107, 18826–18831 
(2010).

NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS 

 VOLUME 14 | MARCH 2013 | 203

© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

