CONTEMPORARY 
BRITISH THEATRE Session 12

TODAY‘S SESSION

Wrap-Up, Outlook, Feedback:

What did we do this semester?

Why did we do it?

How can we make use of it?

What did(n't) you like?

WRAP UP

Get together in 4 groups (Blasted, Shopping and Fucking, 
Jerusalem, Lovesong)

Reconsider your given play:
 What was the historical/generic context of the play?

 Think of context, language, themes, etc.

 Which aspects did we discuss in class?

 Which other aspects would you have liked to talk about?
 Was there anything you did not understand or you would like to

underline?

 What did/didn‘t you like about the play? Why?
 Come up with 3-4 term paper ideas focusing on the play!

BLASTED

1995, Sarah Kane

In-Yer-Face theatre

- characterised by violence in action and language, 

shocking contents, repulsion of audience

Themes: violence, war, sex, gender issues, ethics?

Other notable aspects: naturalism and experimental theatre, 
Jacobean traces, intertextuality, commentary on British society, 
controversy surrounding Kane‘s death

Ian: cunt cunt cunt cunt
cunt cunt cunt cunt cunt

„I am not a brand, I am a 

person“ (Sarah Kane)

SHOPPING AND
FUCKING

1996, Mark Ravenhill

IYF theatre

Themes: consumerism, love, relationships, connecting to

someone, isolation, drug abuse, sexual violence, 
meaning of life

Other notable aspects: comedic elements, referentiality to 90s 
youth and popular culture, depiction of homosexuality on stage
(= sex acts), materialism vs essentialism, masculinities

Brian: Money is

civilisation

Lulu: One day we will know what all this was 
for. All this suffering. There’ll be no more 
mysteries. But until then we have to carry on 
living. We must work. That’s all we can do.

JERUSALEM

2009, Jez Butterworth

State of the Nation play?
 State of the Nation plays ask: What does it mean to “be British?” What is the 

role of the UK in today’s world? What is contemporary British identity? 
(Joshua Abrams, “State of the Nation. New British Theatre”)

Themes: isolation and companionship, Englishness (traditions, 

contemporary issues), storytelling and mythmaking

Other notable aspects: intertextuality, references to English 
history and culture, theatre as a narrative medium

“Happy St George's Day. Now kiss my beggar 

arse, you Puritans!” 

LOVESONG

2011, Abi Morgan

Devised theatre in collaboration with Frantic Assembly
 Using methods of postdramatic theatre in the shared creation of the piece
 Postdramatic theatre: going beyond the limits of performance-after-text, 

collecting numerous influences, improvisation, mixed media, etc.

Themes: memory, age, love, couples in crisis

Other notable aspects: performance and music, dance, 
intermediality

“Time is linear. When we die. I think we die. But 
until we do...I want that time to be with you.” 

„OUR“ PLAYS AS NEW
WRITING

In how far do the discussed plays conform with Aleks
Sierz' „checklist“ for New Writing?

Distinctive and original: written in “singular, original voice” with “a very
particular vision, well expressed”

Relevant and resonant: embodies national identity, shows everyday
experiences, relates to current affairs

Form and content: form often reflects subject matter

Stimulating and provocative: challenge their audiences – rewrite images of
the nation through provocation

WHY STUDY THEATRE?

With your experience from this course, 

think about the following question:

Why is studying theatre „important“ or

„valuable“?

WHY THEATRE?

Interpretations of plays are generally rather predictable: audience 
needs to be able to follow

Predictability can also be interrupted: if audiences feel safe and 
can easily recognise the cultural assumptions presented on the 
stage, they can be easily shocked by surprising turns
 Defamiliarisation: making familiar things strange, forcing us to 

think about them in more detail

Drama as part of rather immediate cultural production

Focus on immersion of the audience, emotion, relatability, shock 
& disturbance

Mixed media, intriguingly complex communicative situation

WRAP-UP: GENERAL 
FEEDBACK

What will you take away from this seminar?

Did the seminar meet your expectations?

What did you think about the format? Were you happy with 
writing quizzes or would you have preferred presentations or 
forum entries?

Is there anything that you found particularly interesting?

Is there anything you would like to criticise?

THANK YOU!

