 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

APPLIED PSYCHOLOGY: AN INTERNATIONAL REVIEW, 2006, 

55

 (3), 303–332

553Original Article
IMMIGRANT YOUTH
BERRY ET AL.
Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Oxford, UK
APPSApplied Psychology: an International
0269-994X
© International Association for Applied Psychology, 2006
xxx 2006

Immigrant Youth: Acculturation, Identity, 

and Adaptation

John W. Berry*

Queen’s University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada 

Jean S. Phinney

California State University, Los Angeles, California, USA 

David L. Sam

University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway 

Paul Vedder

Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands 

C
et  article  présente  plusieurs  des  principaux  résultats  d’une  grande  étude
internationale sur l’acculturation et l’adaptation de jeunes immigrés (âgés de
13 à 18 ans) qui se sont implantés dans treize pays (
 = 5,366); il y est adjoint
 = 2,631).  La  recherche  s’appuyait  sur
un  échantillon  de  jeunes  nationaux  (

N

N

* Address for correspondence: John W. Berry, Department of Psychology, Queen’s Univer-

sity, Kingston, Ontario, Canada, K7L 3N6. Email: berryj@king.igs.net

The  ﬁndings  reported  in  this  paper  come  from  the  International  Comparative  Study  of
Ethnocultural Youth (ICSEY), carried out in 13 countries. Members of the project group are
(in alphabetical order of countries) C. Leung, R. Pe-Pua, R. Rooney, & D. Sang (Australia):
J.W.  Berry  &  K.  Kwak  (Canada);  K.  Liebkind  (Finland);  C.  Sabatier  (France);  P.  Schmitz
(Germany); G. Horenczyk (Israel); P. Vedder & F. van de Vijver (The Netherlands); C. Ward
(New Zealand); D.L. Sam (Norway); F. Neto (Portugal); E. Virta & C. Westin (Sweden);
L. Robinson (United Kingdom) and J.S. Phinney (United States). Members of the team con-
tributed to various aspects of the study, including its conceptualization, the development of
the instrument, and the collection of data in their respective countries.

An account of the ICSEY study can be found in J.W. Berry, J.S. Phinney, D.L. Sam, &
P. Vedder (Eds.) (2006). 
Immigrant youth in cultural transition: Acculturation, identity and adap-
tation across national contexts
. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Co-authors
of chapters in this book are (in alphabetical order): J.W. Berry, G. Horenczyk, K. Kwak,
K. Liebkind, J.S. Phinney, R. Rooney, D.L. Sam, D. Sang, F.J.R. van de Vijver, P. Vedder,
E. Virta, C. Ward, and C. Westin.

Other  papers  based  on  the  project  are  listed  on  the  project  website  http://www.ceifo.su.se/

icsey/icsey.html

©  2006  The  Authors.  Journal  compilation  ©  2006  International  Association  for  Applied
Psychology. Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ,
UK and 350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

 

 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 

304

BERRY ET AL.

trois questions centrales: comment les jeunes migrants gèrent-ils le processus
d’acculturation? Comment parviennent-ils à s’adapter? Et y a-t-il un lien manifeste
entre la forme d’acculturation et le succès de l’adaptation? L’analyse en clusters
déboucha sur quatre profils d’acculturation: intégrateur, ethnique, national et diffus.
L’analyse factorielle de cinq variables d’adaptation mit en évidence deux types
d’adaptation: psychologique et socioculturel. Il existe une forte relation entre la
façon dont les jeunes s’acculturent et leur adaptation: ceux qui présentent un profil
intégrateur bénéficient des meilleurs indicateurs d’adaptations psychologique
et socioculturelle alors que ceux souffrant d’un profil diffus ont les pires. Entre les
deux, le profil ethnique présente une adaptation psychologique relativement bonne
et une adaptation socioculturelle plutôt pauvre, tandis que le profil national a une
adaptation psychologique relativement pauvre et une adaptation socioculturelle
légèrement négative. Cette configuration de résultats fut en grande partie retrouvée
à  travers  une  modélisation  en  équation  structurelle.  Les  conséquences  pour
l’implantation des jeunes immigrés sont claires: ils devraient être encouragés à
préserver  l’appartenance  à  leur  culture  d’origine  tout  en  établissant  des  liens
étroits avec la société d’accueil.

N

N

how

, 

ethnic

, 

diffuse

national

,  and 

how well

how

 they acculturate and 

  =  2,631).  The  study  was  guided  by  three  core  questions: 

This paper reports some of the main ﬁndings from a large international study
of the acculturation and adaptation of immigrant youth (aged 13 to 18 years)
  =  5,366),  as  well  as  a  sample  of  national
who  are  settled  in  13  societies  (
youth  (
  do
 do they adapt;
immigrant youth deal with the process of acculturation; 
and are there important relationships between 
how
 they adapt? Cluster analysis produced four distinct acculturation proﬁles:
well
.  Factor  analysis  of  ﬁve  adaptation
integration
socio-
variables  revealed  two  distinct  forms  of  adaptation: 
cultural
. There were substantial relationships between how youth acculturate
and how well they adapt: those with an integration proﬁle had the best psy-
chological and sociocultural adaptation outcomes, while those with a diffuse
proﬁle had the worst; in between, those with an ethnic proﬁle had moderately
good psychological adaptation but poorer sociocultural adaptation, while those
with  a  national  proﬁle  had  moderately  poor  psychological  adaptation,  and
slightly negative sociocultural adaptation. This pattern of results was largely
replicated using structural equation modeling. Implications for the settlement
of  immigrant  youth  are  clear:  youth  should  be  encouraged  to  retain  both  a
sense of their own heritage cultural identity, while establishing close ties with
the larger national society.

psychological

  and 

INTRODUCTION

Immigration is a world-wide phenomenon, involving many millions of people
and  most  countries  (UN  Population  Report,  2002).  It  has  been  portrayed
as  both  a  source  of  problems  and  as  an  opportunity  for  individuals  and
societies  (Baubock,  Heller,  &  Zolberg,  1996).  Psychology,  in  addition  to
other social science disciplines, has begun to contribute to an understanding
of those factors that contribute to making the process a positive, rather than
a negative, factor in personal and societal development (Berry, 2001). Two
consequences of immigration are the experience of acculturation by groups

©  2006  The  Authors.  Journal  compilation  ©  2006  International  Association  for  Applied
Psychology.

 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

IMMIGRANT YOUTH

305

and individuals (Sam & Berry, 2006), and the emergence of culturally plural
societies (Kymlicka, 1995). In such societies, individuals and groups need to
work  out  how  to  live  together,  adopting  various  strategies  that  will  allow
them to achieve a reasonably successful adaptation to living interculturally.
Acculturation  is  the  process  of  cultural  and  psychological  change  that
follows intercultural contact (Berry, 2003). Cultural changes include altera-
tions in a group’s customs, and in their economic and political life. Psycho-
logical  changes  include  alterations  in  individuals’  attitudes  toward  the
acculturation  process,  their  cultural  identities  (Phinney,  2003),  and  their
social behaviors in relation to the groups in contact. The eventual adapta-
tions also have core psychological features, including a person’s well-being
and social skills that are needed to function in their culturally complex daily
world (Ward, Bochner, & Furnham, 2001).

Considerable research has been devoted to the understanding of immigra-
tion, acculturation, and adaptation of adults (Berry & Sam, 1997), but much
less has addressed these phenomena among youth (Aronowitz, 1984). This
lack  has  stimulated  a  number  of  recent  studies  (Fuligini,  2001;  Ghuman,
2003; Rumbaut & Portes, 2001), as well as the present study. A key issue is
whether the ﬁndings from research with adult immigrants can apply to youth.
In this paper, we use data from a large international study of immigrant
youth in 13 immigrant-receiving countries (Berry, Phinney, Sam, & Vedder,
 do immigrant youth live within
2006) to address three key issues. First, 
and  between  two  cultures?  These  cultures  are  usually  those  of  their  immi-
grant parents, families, and communities on the one hand, and those of their
peers  and  the  larger  society  on  the  other.  Second, 
  (in  personal,
social, and academic areas of their lives) do immigrant youth deal with their
intercultural  situation?  And,  third,  are  there  patterns  of  relationships
between 
how well
they adapt? If there are such patterns, we believe that they can be used to
guide the development of policies and programs that will enhance the expe-
rience of acculturation, so that the eventual adaptations of immigrant youth
will be directed toward more positive outcomes.

 adolescents engage in their intercultural relations and 

how  well

how

how

how

With respect to our ﬁrst question, 

 immigrant youth live in their new
intercultural  setting,  early  research  had  assumed  that  immigrants  would
inevitably  be  absorbed  into  the  receiving  society,  in  a  unilinear,  unidirec-
tional  process  (Gordon,  1964).  However,  beginning  in  the  1970s,  Berry
(1974,  1980)  proposed  that  there  are  two  independent  dimensions  under-
lying the process of acculturation: individuals’ links to their cultures of origin
and  to  their  societies  of  settlement.  These  links  can  be  manifested  in  a
number of ways, including preferences for involvement in the two cultures
(termed  acculturation  attitudes),  and  in  the  behaviors  that  they  engage  in
(for  example,  their  language  knowledge  and  use,  and  social  relationships).
A similar bidimensional proposal was made by Phinney (1990), who argued

©  2006  The  Authors.  Journal  compilation  ©  2006  International  Association  for  Applied
Psychology.

 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

306

BERRY ET AL.

how

 they are seeking to acculturate. 

Assimilation

that  there  were  two  independent  dimensions  underlying  people’s  cultural
identity;  individuals  may  have  independent  identities  with  respect  to  their
cultures  of  origin  and  to  their  societies  of  settlement.  This  bidimensional
conception has been presented frequently in the literature (e.g. Berry, 1997).
In this framework, two issues are raised: the degree to which people wish
to  maintain  their  heritage  culture  and  identity;  and  the  degree  to  which
people seek involvement with the larger society. When these two issues are
crossed,  an  acculturation  space  is  created  with  four  sectors  within  which
 is
individuals may express 
the way when there is little interest in cultural maintenance combined with
a  preference  for  interacting  with  the  larger  society. 
  is  the  way
when cultural maintenance is sought while avoiding involvement with others.
 exists when neither cultural maintenance nor interaction with
Marginalisation
others is sought. 
 is present when both cultural maintenance and
involvement with the larger society are sought. In sum, the ﬁrst goal of this study
was to seek evidence that 
 youth acculturate corresponds to this bidimen-
sional view, and to test the model that deﬁnes these four ways of acculturating.
 immigrant youth
are  adapting  to  their  acculturation  experience.  We  are  guided  by  the  view
developed  by  Ward  (1996)  that  there  are  two  distinct  ways  of  adapting  to
acculturation. The ﬁrst, termed 
, refers to personal
sociocultural  adaptation
,
well-being  and  good  mental  health.  The  second, 
refers  to  the  individuals’  social  competence  in  managing  their  daily  life  in
the intercultural setting. We expect to ﬁnd evidence to support this distinc-
tion between these two forms of adaptation. Moreover, we examine whether
immigrant and national youth differ in their levels of adaptation

The second goal of the study was to examine 

psychological adaptation

Integration

Separation

how

how well

how  well

Our third, and core, issue was whether the variable ways of acculturating
are  related  to  differing  levels  of  adaptation.  Previous  studies  (reviewed  by
Berry & Sam, 1997) concluded that there is a relationship between the 
how
and 
  questions.  Given  the  evidence  from  earlier  studies  (Berry,
1997;  Howard,  1998;  Phinney  &  Devich-Navarro,  1997),  we  expected  that
the  combined  involvement  with  both  the  national  and  the  ethnic  cultures,
rather than involvement with either one, would be the most adaptive mode
of acculturation and the most conducive to immigrants’ well-being. At the
same time we expected that orientation toward the ethnic culture would be
a better predictor of psychological adaptation than orientation toward the
national  culture,  whereas  the  latter  would  be  a  better  predictor  of  adoles-
cents’ sociocultural adaptation (cf. Oppedal, Røysamb, & Sam, 2004; Ward
et al., 2001).

Beyond these three issues, we explored the possible role of perceived dis-
crimination  in  guiding  the  choices  of  how  to  acculturate  and  in  limiting
successful  psychological  and  sociocultural  adaptation.  Studies  have  shown
that perceived discrimination is negatively related to immigrant adaptation

©  2006  The  Authors.  Journal  compilation  ©  2006  International  Association  for  Applied
Psychology.

 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 

IMMIGRANT YOUTH

307

(Liebkind & Jasinskaja-Lahti, 2000; Noh, Beiser, Kaspar, Hou, & Rummens,
1999);  thus  we  expected  this  factor  to  impact  negatively  on  immigrant
youths’ adaptation.

Acculturation is a process that takes place over time. Although we did not
have longitudinal data to examine changes with time, we were able to examine
differences among groups of immigrant youth with different lengths of residence
in the new society. We expected that with longer residence, youth would be
more likely to be integrated into their country of residence.

Finally, demographic factors may also play a role. Age, gender, religion,
and the socioeconomic status of the family have all been identiﬁed as pos-
sible sources of variation (Berry & Sam, 1997). There is also some evidence
that the ethnic composition of the immediate neighborhood may be important
in the ways immigrants acculturate and adapt (Galster, Metzger, & Waite,
1999; Myles & Hou, 2003; Neto, 2001).

METHOD

The immigrant youth came from 26 different cultural backgrounds and lived
in  13  countries  (see  Table  1).  We  distinguished  settler  societies  (Australia,
Canada,  Israel,  New  Zealand,  and  the  United  States  of  America)  from
countries with fewer and more recent immigrants. In each country we sam-
pled both national and immigrant youth. We attempted to sample the same
cultural group in as many societies as possible, but there is wide variation
in the groups studied because of the different immigrant groups that live in
each country.

Participants
Participants in the study were 7,997 adolescents, including 5,366 immigrant
youth and 2,631 national youth (ages 13 to 18; mean age = 15 years and
4 months for both groups). Given the relatively low numbers of members of
particular immigrant groups in the population, sampling took place in cities
or  clusters  of  cities  with  relatively  high  concentrations  of  particular  immi-
grant  groups.  Samples  of  the  national  groups  were  mostly  from  the  same
cities,  neighborhoods,  and  schools  as  the  immigrant  adolescents.  In  no
country did we have random samples.

The sample included both ﬁrst-generation (those who were born in coun-
try  of  origin  and  arrived  after  the  age  of  6;  34.7%)  and  second-generation
(born in receiving country, or arrived before the age of 7; 65.3%) immigrant
youth. Adolescents from some groups were predominately from one or the
other generation, so that generation and ethnic group could not be included
as  separate  variables  in  the  analyses.  For  this  reason  we  created  a  new
variable: proportion of life spent in the new country, which for those born

©  2006  The  Authors.  Journal  compilation  ©  2006  International  Association  for  Applied
Psychology.

 

 
 

308

BERRY ET AL.

Sample Characteristics by Country for Immigrant and National Youth

TABLE 1 

N

Age in 
years

% 

female

% 2nd 

generation

Prop. life 
in country

Parents’ 
occ. status

 

All

Immigrants
Nationals

5,366
2,631

15.35 (1.56)
15.32 (1.53)

Australia

Immigrants
Nationals

Canada

Immigrants
Nationals

Finland

Immigrants
Nationals

France

Immigrants
Nationals

Germany

Immigrants
Nationals

Israel

Immigrants
Nationals
Netherlands

Immigrants
Nationals

New Zealand
Immigrants
Nationals

Norway

Immigrants
Nationals

Portugal

Immigrants
Nationals

Sweden

Immigrants
Nationals

UK

Immigrants
Nationals

USA

Immigrants
Nationals

 

456
155 

15.22 (1.60)
15.06 (1.45)

257
139

442
346

517
151

295
249

461
214

354
101

256
243

484
207

426
355

829
214

120
120

472
137

15.87 (1.58)
15.49 (1.31)

15.30 (1.58)
14.97 (1.36)

15.61 (1.45)
15.52 (1.72)

16.36 (1.36)
16.61 (1.43)

16.31 (.90)
16.41 (.90)

14.87 (1.53)
14.74 (1.62)

15.70 (1.28)
15.08 (1.17)

15.24 (1.53)
15.09 (1.52)

14.79 (1.62)
14.44 (1.07)

15.11 (1.60)
15.86 (1.60)

15.18 (1.70)
15.49 (1.57)

14.60 (1.33)
14.54 (1.40)

53.4
49.4

60.7
59.4

55.6
55.4

50.1
43.4

57.5
58.0

52.7
56.5

41.0
39.7

49.7
60.4

54.2
33.7

50.1
47.8

62.6
46.3

51.0
51.9

45.0
50.0

60.7
65.0

65.3
—

69.3
—

49.7
—

23.5
—

94.5
—

—
—

13.2
—

88.9
—

67.6
—

68.7
—

—
—

81.2
—

95.8
—

69.6
—

.77 (.33)
.99 (.07)

1.87 (1.20)
2.71 (1.10)

.78 (.30)
.99 (.06)

2.45 (1.08)
3.19 (1.74)

.71 (.34)
1.00

2.89 (.99)
2.99 (.98)

.43 (.35)
1.00

1.78 (1.00)
2.45 (.95)

.95 (.16)
1.00 

1.73 (1.17)
2.56 (1.11)

.76 (.29)
1.00

2.22 (1.09)
3.27 (.79)

.40 (.28)
.96 (.13)

2.31 (1.27)
3.12 (1.04)

.93 (.20)
1.00

2.34 (.98)
3.48 (.73)

1.00
1.00

—
—

.83 (.27)
1.00

1.79 (1.03)
3.21 (.83)

.45 (.27)
1.00

1.13 (.65)
1.39 (.69)

.88 (.25)
1.00

1.83 (1.01)
2.79 (1.03)

.97 (.15)
1.00

2.23 (1.03)
 2.35 (.84)

.76 (.27)
1.00

2.25 (1.03)
3.19 (.95)

©  2006  The  Authors.  Journal  compilation  ©  2006  International  Association  for  Applied
Psychology.

 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

in the country of settlement equals one and for foreign born is the number
of years they have spent in the receiving country divided by their age.

IMMIGRANT YOUTH

309

Countries differed in the proportion of participating males and females.
Overall,  slightly  more  girls  (52.1%)  than  boys  participated  in  the  study.
Adolescents  reported  on  their  parents’  occupational  status,  deﬁned  as  the
highest level obtained by either parent: 1 (unskilled), 2 (skilled), 3 (white collar),
4  (professional).  In  every  country  parents  in  the  national  samples  had  a
signiﬁcantly higher occupational status than immigrant parents had (overall
t
(4618) = 22.08, 

 < .001; Cohen’s 

p

d

 .59).

Instruments and Procedure
Data  were  collected  in  all  countries  by  the  researchers  themselves  or  by
research  assistants  (usually  postgraduate  students  or  teachers  who  were
often  members  of  the  ethnocultural  group)  and  who  were  selected  and
trained  by  the  researchers  in  each  country.  Data  collection  involved  com-
pletion of a structured questionnaire. All participants were informed that
participation  was  voluntary,  and  that  responses  were  anonymous.  Most
questionnaires  were  group-administered  in  classrooms.  In  other  cases
adolescents were approached individually, and the questionnaire was ﬁlled
out  individually.  In  most  countries,  ethnic  language  versions  of  the  ques-
tionnaire were available, but adolescents generally preferred using the national
language version.

The questionnaire assessed a wide range of variables related to accultur-
ation  and  adaptation.  Measures  were  either  developed  for  the  project  or
taken  directly  or  with  some  modiﬁcation  from  existing  scales.  For  most
scales  response  options  ranged  from  “strongly  disagree”  (1)  to  “strongly
agree”  (5).  The  psychometric  properties  of  most  scales  were  established  in
the  present  study  and  are  reported  in  Table  2.  This  table  also  contains
information on the number and source of the items.

Acculturation Attitudes.

This  scale  assessed  four  acculturation  atti-
tudes: assimilation, integration, separation, and marginalisation. The items
concern ﬁve domains of life: cultural traditions, language, marriage, social
activities, and friends. For example, the items in the social activities domain
include four questions: “I prefer social activities which involve both [nationals]
and [my ethnic group]” (integration); “I prefer social activities which involve
[nationals]  only”  (assimilation);  “I  prefer  social  activities  which  involve
[members of my own ethnic group] only” (separation); and “I don’t want to
attend either [national] or [ethnic] social activities” (marginalisation).

Cultural Identity. Ethnic  identity

  was  measured  with  items  assessing
ethnic afﬁrmation (e.g. sense of belonging, positive feelings about being group

©  2006  The  Authors.  Journal  compilation  ©  2006  International  Association  for  Applied
Psychology.

 

 
 

310

BERRY ET AL.

Scales Used in the ICSEY Study; Number of Items, Source, and Reliability Based 

on Adolescent Data from Present Study

TABLE 2 

No. of
items Source

ICSEY and Berry, Kim,
Power, Young, & Bujaki
(1989)

Phinney (1992), Phinney &
Devich-Navarro (1997)

Kwak (1991)
Kwak (1991)
Kwak (1991)
ICSEY
ICSEY

Nguyen & Williams (1989),
Georgas (1989), Georgas,
Berry, Chrisakopoulou, 
& Mylonas (1996)

 

Scale 

Acculturation attitudes
Integration
Assimilation 
Separation 
Marginalisation
Cultural identity
Ethnic identity 
National identity 
Acculturation behaviors
Ethnic language prof. 
National language prof. 
Language use
Ethnic peer contacts 
National peer contacts

Family relationship values 
Family obligations 
Adolescents’ rights 

Perceived discrimination 
Psychological adaptation
Life satisfaction

Self-esteem
Psychological problems 

Sociocultural adaptation
School adjustment

Behavior problems

 

5
5
5
5

8
4

4
4
4
4
4

10
4

9

5

10
15

7

10

Mean Cronbach α (SD)

Immigrants Nationals

.48 (.126)
.58 (.109)
.64 (.070)
.55 (.107)

.82 (.095)
.84 (.053)

.85 (.068)
.88 (.056)
.71 (.163)
.79 (.056)
.78 (.070)

—
—
—
—

—

.69 (.304)

—
—
—

.82 (.054)
.70 (.102)

.72 (.069)
.78 (.112) 

.72 (.056)
.75 (.111)

ICSEY

.83 (.039)

—

.77 (.056)

.81 (.049)

.75 (.105)
.88 (.037)

.83 (.051)
.89 (.030)

Diener, Emmos, 
Larsen, & Grifﬁn (1985)
Rosenberg (1965)
Beiser & Flemming (1986), 
Kinzie, Manson, Vinh, 
Tolam, Anh, & Pho (1982), 
Kovacs (1980/1981), 
Mollica, Wyshak, Demarneffe, 
Khuan, & Lavelle (1987), 
Reynolds & Richmond (1985), 
Robinson, Shaver, & 
Wrightsman (1991)

Anderson (1982), Moos (1989), 
Sam (1994), Samdal (1998), 
Wold (1995)
Olweus (1989, 1994), 
Bendixen & Olweus (1999)

.65 (.100)

.68 (.061)

.80 (.077)

.82 (.058)

©  2006  The  Authors.  Journal  compilation  ©  2006  International  Association  for  Applied
Psychology.

 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

IMMIGRANT YOUTH

311

member).  A  sample  item  is  “I  feel  that  I  am  part  of  [ethnic]  culture.”
National identity
 was assessed with measures of national afﬁrmation and the
importance of one’s national identity. A sample item is: “I am happy that I
am [national].”

Language Proﬁciency and Language Use.

The scale for ethnic language
proﬁciency  inquired  about  a  person’s  abilities  to  understand,  speak,  read,
and write the ethnic language. An example: “How well do you speak [ethnic
language]?” Answers were given on a 5-point scale from 
very
  (5).  Proﬁciency  in  the  national  language  was  assessed  with  the  same
well
self-report  questions,  but  with  respect  to  the  national  language.  Language
use refers to the extent to which adolescents use either their ethnic language
or  the  national  language  when  talking  with  their  parents  or  their  siblings.
Their  communication  practices  were  measured  on  a  5-point  scale  running
from 
. Higher scores express a relatively more frequent
usage of the national language.

all the time

not at all

not at all

 (1) to 

 to 

Ethnic and National Peer Contact.

The two scales assessed the frequency
of interaction with peers from one’s own ethnic group, or from the national
group. An example is: “How often do you spend free time with peers from
your own ethnocultural group?” Participants responded on a scale ranging
from 

very often

 (1) to 

never

 (5).

Family Relationship Values.

This scale consisted of two subscales. Ten
family obli-
; e.g. “Children should obey their parents”). Four items assessed the
adoles-
 (e.g. “When a girl reaches the age of 16, it is all right for her to

items assessed attitudes towards parental authority (henceforth 
gations
extent  of  acceptance  of  children’s  autonomy,  which  we  refer  to  as 
cents’ rights
decide whom to date”).

Perceived Discrimination.

This  was  assessed  with  immigrant  youth
only.  The  scale  assessed  perceived  frequency  of  being  treated  unfairly  or
negatively  or  being  teased,  threatened,  or  feeling  unaccepted  because  of
one’s  ethnicity  (e.g.  “I  have  been  teased  or  insulted  because  of  my  ethnic
 (1) to
background”). Participants responded on a scale ranging from 
very often

never

 (5).

Psychological Adaptation.

Psychological adaptation was measured with
three  scales:  life  satisfaction,  self-esteem,  and  psychological  problems. Life
satisfaction was measured with a ﬁve-item scale which assessed the overall
degree of adolescents’ satisfaction with their lives. A sample item is: “I am
satisﬁed with my life.” The scale has been tested among diverse groups, such
as  adolescents  and  college  students,  and  has  shown  good  psychometric

©  2006  The  Authors.  Journal  compilation  ©  2006  International  Association  for  Applied
Psychology.

312

BERRY ET AL.

properties (see Diener, Emmons, Larsen, & Grifﬁn, 1985). Self-esteem was
measured using Rosenberg’s (1965) 10-item self-esteem inventory. A sample
item is “On the whole I am satisﬁed with myself.” The scale for psychological
problems  measured  depression,  anxiety,  and  psychosomatic  symptoms.  A
sample item is: “My thoughts are confused.”

Sociocultural Adaptation. Sociocultural  adaptation  was  assessed  using
scales for school adjustment and behavior problems. A sample item of the
scale  for  school  adjustment  is:  “I  feel  uneasy  about  going  to  school  in  the
morning.” Two sample items of the scale for behavior problems are: “Cursed
at a teacher” and “Purposely destroyed seats in a bus or a movie theatre”.
A  5-point  response  category  ranging  from  Never  to  Several  times  in  the
course of a 12-month period was used.

In the version of the questionnaire for national adolescents no questions
were  asked  with  respect  to  language  proﬁciency  and  language  use,  ethnic
identity, and perceived discrimination.

As can be seen in Table 2, most scales had satisfactory to good reliability.
The subscales for acculturation attitudes had slightly problematic reliabilities.
The  mean  Cronbach  alpha  scores  were  aggregated  across  countries  and
ethnocultural groups in the case of the immigrants and across countries in
the case of the nationals.

We examined whether the scales measured the same psychological constructs
in all cultural groups in all countries using a procedure described by Van de Vijver
and Leung (1997). All scales that we refer to in this paper were unidimensional
and we found very strong support for the structural equivalence of the measures
(for further information, see Vedder & Van de Vijver, 2006).

The questionnaire also sought information about a variety of demographic
variables. These included adolescents’ age, age of arrival in the country of
residence,  gender,  religious  afﬁliation  (with  individual  responses  grouped
into  four  broad  categories:  Judeo-Christian,  Muslim,  Eastern,  and  none),
parents’  occupational  status  (as  deﬁned  above),  ethnic  composition  of
neighborhood  (ﬁve  levels  ranging  from  “Almost  everyone  comes  from  an
ethnic  group  different  from  mine”  to  “Almost  all  the  people  are  from  my
ethnic group”). We constructed a length of residence variable, consisting of
three categories: 0–6 years, 6–12 years, and 12–18 years.

RESULTS

How do Immigrant Youth Acculturate?
Our bidimensional model of immigrant acculturation suggests four different
ways in which immigrant adolescents live in relation to both their culture of

©  2006  The  Authors.  Journal  compilation  ©  2006  International  Association  for  Applied
Psychology.

IMMIGRANT YOUTH

313

origin  and  their  society  of  settlement.  To  test  the  model  we  used  a  person
approach  (Bergman,  Magnusson,  &  El-Khouri,  2003)  rather  than  using  a
variable  approach.  In  contrast  to  a  variable  approach,  which  examines
statistical relations among variables across individuals, the person approach
describes  characteristic  patterns  of  variables  that  distinguish  among  indi-
viduals (Bergman et al., 2003). In the person approach, individuals are grouped
into categories on the basis of pattern similarity, such that each category has
a particular set of properties that differentiates it from other categories. In
this study, cluster analysis was used to identify patterns of acculturation.

Cluster analysis was carried out with all the variables associated with the
acculturation process: acculturation attitudes (integration, separation, assimila-
tion,  marginalisation),  ethnic  and  national  identities,  ethnic  and  national
language knowledge, language use (with high scores indicating greater national
language use), ethnic and national peer social contacts, and family relationship
values (family obligations and adolescents’ rights). The analyses were con-
ducted  using  scores  standardised  within  country  and  ethnic  groups,  using
the k-means method. Because this method is sensitive to decisions as to the
preferred number of clusters and the values for the initial cluster centers, we
ﬁrst  conducted  several  exploratory  analyses  with  20  per  cent  of  the  data
selected  at  random.  Based  on  the  ﬁt  with  the  dominant  theoretical  frame-
work guiding the study and on the interpretability of the resulting clusters,
we decided to use four clusters. We then replicated this four cluster solution
using all the data. We refer to the resulting clusters as acculturation proﬁles:
an ethnic proﬁle (including 22.5% of the sample), a national proﬁle (18.7%),
an integration proﬁle (36.4%), and a diffuse proﬁle (22.4%). All adolescents
for whom we had complete data (N = 4,334) ﬁt one of the four proﬁles.

The ethnic proﬁle (shown in Figure 1a) consisted of 975 adolescents who
showed a clear orientation toward their own ethnic group, with high ethnic
identity,  ethnic  language  proﬁciency  and  usage,  and  ethnic  peer  contacts.
They  endorsed  the  separation  attitude  and  scored  low  on  assimilation,
national  identity,  and  contacts  with  the  national  group.  Their  support  for
family relationship values was well above the average. They represent young
people  who  are  largely  embedded  within  their  own  culture  and  show  little
involvement with the larger society.

The  national  proﬁle  (shown  in  Figure  1b)  included  810  adolescents  who
showed  a  strong  orientation  toward  the  society  in  which  they  were  living.
As can be seen in the ﬁgure, their proﬁle is almost a mirror image of the ethnic
proﬁle. These adolescents were high on national identity and on assimilation
and  very  low  on  ethnic  identity.  They  were  proﬁcient  in  the  national  lan-
guage  and  used  it  predominantly.  Their  peer  contacts  were  largely  with
members  of  the  national  group,  and  they  showed  low  support  for  family
obligations. These adolescents appear to exemplify the idea of assimilation,
indicating a lack of retention of their ethnic culture and identity.

©  2006  The  Authors.  Journal  compilation  ©  2006  International  Association  for  Applied
Psychology.

314

BERRY ET AL.

FIGURE 1.
(a) Ethnic proﬁle, showing standardised scores on 13 intercultural 
variables. (Reproduced from Figure 4.15, Berry et al., 2006) (b) National proﬁle, 
showing standardised scores on 13 intercultural variables. (Reproduced from 
Figure 4.16, Berry et al., 2006)

The integration proﬁle (see Figure 2a) was the most frequently occurring
proﬁle.  It  consisted  of  1,576  adolescents  who  indicated  relatively  high
involvement  in  both  their  ethnic  and  national  cultures.  These  adolescents
were  high  on  both  ethnic  and  national  identities.  They  strongly  endorsed
integration and gave low endorsement to assimilation, separation, and mar-
ginalisation. They reported high national language proﬁciency and average
ethnic language proﬁciency; their language usage suggested balanced use of

©  2006  The  Authors.  Journal  compilation  ©  2006  International  Association  for  Applied
Psychology.

IMMIGRANT YOUTH

315

(a) Integration proﬁle, showing standardised scores on 

FIGURE 2.
13 intercultural variables. (Reproduced from Figure 4.14, Berry et al., 2006) 
(b) Diffuse proﬁle, showing standardised scores on 13 intercultural variables. 
(Reproduced from Figure 4.17, Berry et al., 2006)

both languages. They had peer contacts with both their own group and the
national  group.  They  were  near  the  mean  on  family  relationships  values.
These adolescents appear to be comfortable in both the ethnic and national
contexts, in terms of identity, language, peer contacts, and values.

©  2006  The  Authors.  Journal  compilation  ©  2006  International  Association  for  Applied
Psychology.

316

BERRY ET AL.

The ﬁnal proﬁle (shown in Figure 2b) is not as easily interpretable. These
973 youth reported high proﬁciency in, and usage of, the ethnic language,
but  also  reported  low  ethnic  identity.  They  had  low  proﬁciency  in  the
national  language,  and  they  reported  somewhat  low  national  identity  and
national  peer  contacts.  They  endorsed  three  contradictory  acculturation
attitudes:  assimilation,  marginalisation,  and  separation.  This  inconsistent
pattern suggests that these young people are uncertain about their place in
society,  perhaps  wanting  to  be  part  of  the  larger  society  but  lacking  the
skills  and  ability  to  make  contacts.  This  proﬁle  appears  similar  to  young
people described in the identity formation literature as “diffuse”, character-
ised  by  a  lack  of  commitment  to  a  direction  or  purpose  in  their  lives  and
often  socially  isolated  (Marcia,  1994).  Therefore  this  proﬁle  was  termed  a
diffuse proﬁle.

The proﬁles were analysed for differences in relation to some individual
characteristics. Because we do not have longitudinal data, we used length of
residence in the new society as a means of examining differences in proﬁles
over  time  following  immigration.  The  proﬁles  showed  a  clear  pattern  of
differences across the three length-of-residence categories, χ2 (6, N = 2,855)
=  383.56,  p  <  .001  (see  Figure  3a).  The  integration  and  national  proﬁles
were  more  frequent  among  those  with  longer  residence;  the  proportion  of
integration  and  national  proﬁles  among  those  born  in  the  new  society  or
with 12 years or more of residence was more than double that of those with
six years or less of residence. In contrast, the diffuse proﬁle was dramatically
less frequent in those with longer residence; over 45 per cent of those with
six years or less residence showed a diffuse proﬁle, while only about 12 per
cent  of  those  with  the  longest  residence  showed  this  proﬁle.  On  the  other
hand,  the  ethnic  proﬁle  was  almost  equally  frequent  in  all  length-of-
residence categories. Thus, as the ﬁgure shows, among the most recent arrivals,
the diffuse proﬁle dominated, while the national proﬁle was very low. For
those who lived in the society of settlement from birth or from their early
school years on, the integration proﬁle dominated, and the national proﬁle
was  second  in  frequency.  In  spite  of  these  differences,  a  substantial  group
of  adolescents,  20–25  per  cent,  showed  strong  and  enduring  involvement
with their ethnic culture regardless of length of residence.

We expected perceived discrimination to be negatively related to adoles-
cents’  involvement  in  the  larger  society,  that  is,  to  be  less  frequent  in  the
national  and  integration  proﬁles  (see  Figure  3b).  Analysis  of  variance
showed a signiﬁcant difference among the proﬁles in perceived discrimina-
tion,  F(3,  4314)  =  36.76,  p  <  .001,  η2  =  .03.  Post-hoc  tests  showed  that
signiﬁcantly  less  discrimination  was  reported  by  adolescents  with  the  inte-
gration proﬁle (standardised mean = −.17) and national proﬁles (standardised
mean = −.08) than the other two proﬁles. Those with the ethnic proﬁle had
a  mean  of  .09.  They  were  signiﬁcantly  higher  in  perceived  discrimination

©  2006  The  Authors.  Journal  compilation  ©  2006  International  Association  for  Applied
Psychology.

IMMIGRANT YOUTH

317

FIGURE 3.
(a) Acculturation proﬁles by length of residence. (Reproduced from 
Figure 4.18, Berry et al., 2006) (b) Perceived discrimination by acculturation proﬁle.

than those with the integration and national proﬁles. Adolescents with the
diffuse  proﬁle  reported  more  perceived  discrimination  (mean  =  .23)  than
those  in  the  other  three  proﬁles.  These  results  were  essentially  unchanged
when length of residence was included as a covariate.

Acculturation  proﬁles  were  signiﬁcantly  related  to  neighborhood
ethnic composition, χ2 (18, N = 4,190) = 65.79, p < .001 (see Figure 4a). The
integration  proﬁle  was  most  strongly  represented  in  all  neighborhoods
except  in  those  consisting  predominantly  of  one’s  own  group  in  the  latter
neighborhoods, the ethnic profile dominated. Neighborhoods with a larger
proportion of residents who were not from one’s own group tended to have
a  higher  proportion  of  national  proﬁles  than  those  with  more  same-group
residents.

©  2006  The  Authors.  Journal  compilation  ©  2006  International  Association  for  Applied
Psychology.

318

BERRY ET AL.

(a) Acculturation proﬁles by neighborhood ethnic composition. 

FIGURE 4.
(Reproduced from Figure 4.19, from Berry et al., 2006) (b) Religious afﬁliation 
by acculturation proﬁle.

We analysed differences in proﬁles in relation to adolescents’ self-report
of  their  religion  (see  Figure  4b).  A  chi-square  analysis  of  the  four  proﬁles
by the four broad categories of religion (Judeo-Christian, Muslim, Eastern,
and  none)  was  signiﬁcant  (χ2  (9,  N  =  3,708)  =  347.57,  p  =  .001).  The
integration  proﬁle  predominated  in  both  the  Judeo-Christian  and  Eastern
religion categories, with 40.6 per cent and 41.9 per cent, respectively. Fewer
Muslims  (32.4%)  and  non-religious  youth  (26.6%)  were  in  the  integration
proﬁle.  The  differences  were  more  dramatic  for  the  ethnic  proﬁle.  Among
Muslims, the ethnic category predominated, with 39.8 per cent; in contrast,
the other three religious groups had between 10 per cent and 19 per cent in
the ethnic proﬁle.

©  2006  The  Authors.  Journal  compilation  ©  2006  International  Association  for  Applied
Psychology.

IMMIGRANT YOUTH

319

The proportion of males and females differed signiﬁcantly across proﬁles
(χ2  (3,  N  =  4,321)  =  45.62,  p  <  .001),  with  girls  more  often  showing  the
integrated proﬁle and boys the diffuse proﬁle. Parental occupational status
showed only a modest relationship to the proﬁles; the national proﬁle was
more  common  among  those  whose  parents  had  higher  status  occupations
(χ2 (12, N = 3,574) = 92.49, p < .001).

At the country level, the proﬁles differed depending on whether the society
of settlement had been established largely by immigrants (“settler societies”
such as Australia, Canada, and the US) or whether immigration was a more
recent and less common phenomenon (e.g. European countries). In the settler
societies, over 50 per cent of the adolescents showed an integration proﬁle. The
integration proﬁle was generally less common in European countries, typically
between 30 per cent and 40 per cent. However, the proportion of proﬁles by
country is somewhat misleading, as proﬁle distribution varied widely across
immigrant groups within a given country (see Berry et al., 2006, for details).

How Well do Immigrant Youth Adapt?
We  expected  to  ﬁnd  a  distinction  between  psychological  and  sociocultural
adaptation. We conducted a principal component analysis to see if the ﬁve
adaptation  variables  (life  satisfaction,  self-esteem,  psychological  problems,
school adjustment, and behavior problems) could be grouped into two factors.
Two  factors  were  indeed  found:  the  ﬁrst  factor  included  life  satisfaction
(loading  of  .79),  self-esteem  (.84),  and  psychological  problems  (−.63),  all
measuring, as expected, psychological adaptation. The second factor (socio-
cultural  adaptation)  included  school  adjustment  (−.68)  and  behavior  prob-
lems  (−.89).  The  psychological  adaptation  factor  had  an  eigenvalue  of  2.23
and explained 44.51 per cent of the variance, and the sociocultural adaptation
factor had an eigenvalue of 1.03 and explained 20.51 per cent. Adaptation
varied with only one demographic variable: gender. Psychological adaptation
was weakly but signiﬁcantly related to gender, with immigrant boys having a
slightly better psychological adaptation score than immigrant girls. Immigrant
boys scored lower on sociocultural adaptation compared to immigrant girls.
No  relationships  were  found  between  adaptation  scores  on  the  one  hand
and  age,  length  of  residence,  neighborhood  ethnic  density,  and  parents’
occupational status on the other hand.

We also examined how well immigrant youth were adapting in compari-
son to national youth, using a MANOVA with the two adaptation factors
as dependent variables. We included immigrant versus national and gender
as ﬁxed factors and age as a covariate. The contrast that interested us most,
the comparison of national and immigrant youth, yielded no signiﬁcant effect.
Overall, national and immigrant youth had similar levels of both psychological
and  sociocultural  adaptation.  Among  national  youth,  we  again  found

©  2006  The  Authors.  Journal  compilation  ©  2006  International  Association  for  Applied
Psychology.

320

BERRY ET AL.

FIGURE 5. Psychological and sociocultural adaptation by acculturation proﬁle. 
(Reproduced from Figure 5.6, from Berry et al., 2006)

the  earlier  reported  effect  of  gender,  with  boys  having  higher  scores  for
psychological adaptation and lower for sociocultural adaptation than girls
(Wilks F(2,7786) = 165.60, p = .000, η2 = .04).

Is How Immigrant Youth Acculturate Related to How Well 
They Adapt?
We examined the relationship between how youth acculturate and how well
they  adapt  in  two  ways.  First,  we  report  the  levels  of  the  two  adaptation
scores in relation to the four acculturation proﬁles; and second, we present
these relationships using structural equation modeling.

Adaptation and Proﬁles. On  the  basis  of  previous  research  (see  Berry,
1997;  Berry  &  Sam,  1997),  we  expected  the  integration  proﬁle  to  have  the
best, and the diffuse proﬁle the worst, psychological and sociocultural adap-
tations.  As  can  be  seen  in  Figure  5  this  was  clearly  the  case.  Immigrant
youth in the integration proﬁle have both adaptation scores that are above
the  grand  mean,  while  those  with  the  diffuse  proﬁle  are  below  the  grand
mean. Results partially supported our expectation that an ethnic proﬁle would
contribute positively to psychological adaptation and a national orientation
would  positively  inﬂuence  sociocultural  adaptation.  Adolescents  with  a
national proﬁle had relatively poor psychological adaptation, whereas they
were  not  clearly  distinct  from  other  proﬁles  with  respect  to  sociocultural

©  2006  The  Authors.  Journal  compilation  ©  2006  International  Association  for  Applied
Psychology.

IMMIGRANT YOUTH

321

adaptation. In contrast, the ethnic proﬁle showed good psychological adap-
tation but poor sociocultural adaptation.

We also examined relationships between the two forms of adaptation and
two  other  variables.  First,  perceived  discrimination  was  negatively  and
signiﬁcantly (p < .001) related to both psychological (r = −.31) and socio-
cultural (r = −.30) adaptations. Second, we examined the two kinds of adap-
tation  in  relation  to  religion  in  order  to  determine  whether  immigrants
whose religions were different from the predominant Judeo-Christian beliefs
of  the  populations  of  the  societies  of  settlement  experienced  less  positive
adaptation. For psychological adaptation, we found the opposite to be the
case:  Muslims  had  the  highest  (standardised)  score  (+.20),  while  all  the
other  three  groups  had  slightly  negative  scores.  A  similar  tendency  was
found  for  sociocultural  adaptation:  Muslims  had  the  highest  (.05)  and  the
non-religious youth the lowest scores (−.10).

Adaptation and Structural Equation Model. The  second  approach  to
describing  the  relationship  between  how  youth  acculturate  and  how  well
they adapt was to factor analyse all the separate acculturation and adapta-
tion variables that we have used so far, and then use the factor scores in a
structural equation model. (See Vedder, Van de Vijver, and Liebkind, 2006,
for technical details.)

The exploratory factor analyses with the acculturation variables resulted
in  four  factors.  The  ethnic  orientation  factor  refers  to  various  aspects  of
relationships  or  identiﬁcation  with  an  immigrant  adolescent’s  own  ethnic
culture; higher scores mean a stronger orientation toward one’s own group.
The national orientation factor refers to various aspects of relationships or
identiﬁcation  with  the  national  culture;  higher  scores  mean  a  stronger  ori-
entation toward the national society. The integration factor combines attitudes
toward  both  the  ethnic  and  the  national  cultures;  higher  scores  indicate
positive  attitudes  to  both  cultures  (more  integration  and  less  marginalisa-
tion). The fourth factor involves ethnic behaviors; higher factor scores indi-
cate more contacts with ethnic peers and a higher proﬁciency in the ethnic
language, whereas lower scores indicate a stronger orientation toward friends
of the national group and a higher proﬁciency in the national language. These
four factors, which combine different variables, should not be confused with
the  four  acculturation  proﬁles  (integration,  ethnic,  national,  and  diffuse),
which combine different individuals. We also employed the two adaptation
factors: psychological and sociocultural adaptation.

In  the  model  that  was  tested,  these  four  acculturation  factors  were
assumed  to  precede  sociocultural  and  psychological  adaptation.  Perceived
discrimination  was  not  included  in  the  acculturation  factors,  since  it  was
considered to be basic to immigrants’ acculturation experiences. Like other
researchers (e.g. Sellers & Shelton, 2003), we treated perceived discrimination as

©  2006  The  Authors.  Journal  compilation  ©  2006  International  Association  for  Applied
Psychology.

322

BERRY ET AL.

an independent variable that contributes to the explanation of immigrants’
adaptation outcomes. While it is assumed here that perceived discrimination
is an antecedent variable, it obviously can also be considered to be an out-
come variable. Similarly, while we considered the four intercultural factors
to have an impact on the two adaptation variables, the relationship might
also be in the opposite direction. To obtain an acceptable ﬁt for the model, we
included a latent variable, termed ethnic contact, which reﬂected the strength of
orientation toward one’s ethnic group and away from the national group.
The empirical model generally provided support for our expectation that
a combined involvement in the national and the ethnic cultures is associated
with  more  positive  adaptation  outcomes  than  a  preference  for  either  the
national or the ethnic culture alone. In support of this same hypothesis, we
found  that  integration  had  a  positive  impact  on  both  adaptation  scores.
Contrary  to  our  expectation,  we  found  that  national  orientation  did  not
have a stronger impact on sociocultural adaptation than ethnic orientation.
Ethnic orientation, however, did have an effect on both types of adaptation
and, in support of our expectation, we found that the effect on psychologi-
cal adaptation was stronger than the one on sociocultural adaptation. The
ethnic behavior factor did not have a direct impact on adaptation outcomes,
but  did  have  an  indirect  effect,  via  ethnic  contact.  Ethnic  contact  had  a
signiﬁcant  impact  on  psychological  adaptation,  but  not  on  sociocultural
adaptation.  The  results  suggest  that  adolescents’  orientation  toward  their
own  group  is  more  important  for  their  psychological  well-being  than  for
their sociocultural adaptation.

Perceived  discrimination  showed  a  stronger  relationship  with  the  two
adaptation  outcome  variables  than  any  other  variable;  it  was  negatively
related to psychological adaptation and contributed to poorer sociocultural
adaptation.  It  also  had  a  strong  effect  on  ethnic  contact,  indicating  that
perceived discrimination increases immigrants’ orientation toward their own
group.

DISCUSSION

This article reports some of the central issues and ﬁndings that are covered
more fully in a recent book (Berry et al., 2006). Here, we highlighted three
of the main concerns facing researchers in the psychology of immigration,
acculturation,  and  adaptation.  First,  how  do  immigrant  youth  live  within
and between two cultures? Second, how well do immigrant youth deal with
their intercultural situation? And, third, are there patterns of relationships
between how adolescents engage in their intercultural relations and how well
they  adapt?  Employing  a  large  sample  of  immigrant  youth  settled  in  13
societies, as well as a comparison sample of national youth, we found that there
is  large  variability  in  both  acculturation  and  adaptation,  and  that  there  is

©  2006  The  Authors.  Journal  compilation  ©  2006  International  Association  for  Applied
Psychology.

indeed  a  substantial  relationship  between  them.  These  ﬁndings  permit
making some proposals for applications in the domains of public policy and for
offering personal assistance (information and guidance) to immigrant youth.

IMMIGRANT YOUTH

323

Ways of Acculturating
In addressing the ﬁrst issue, how immigrant youth acculturate, we tested the
bidimensional model of acculturation that has been proposed in the litera-
ture (Berry, 1974, 1997; Phinney, 1990; Rumbaut & Portes, 2001). A cluster
analysis  using  a  number  of  intercultural  variables,  all  with  a  two-culture
structure,  revealed  four  distinct  proﬁles  or  ways  of  acculturating  that  are
consistent with the bidimensional model. The largest number of youth (36.4%)
were classiﬁed in the integration proﬁle; they sought to acculturate by being
involved  with  both  their  heritage  culture  and  the  national  culture.  This
bicultural way of living includes various ways of engaging in both cultures:
preferences  (acculturation  attitudes),  cultural  identities  (both  ethnic  and
national), language behavior (ethnic and national language knowledge and
use), social engagements (with both ethnic and national peers), and relation-
ships with parents within their families (including acceptance of both obli-
gations  and  rights).  This  high  level  of  bicultural  or  double-engagement  of
youth  supports  many  earlier  ﬁndings  with  adult  immigrants  (reviewed  by
Berry & Sam, 1997).

The second largest group (22.5%) were in the ethnic proﬁle. They sought to
acculturate by being primarily oriented towards their own ethnic group, with
limited involvement with the national society. The size of this ethnic proﬁle
was  surprising  for  two  reasons:  ﬁrst,  previous  ﬁndings  with  adults  showed
that this separatist way was not usually accepted as a way of acculturating;
and second, there is a common belief that immigrant youth are likely to be
much more oriented to the culture of their national peers. Taken together,
the  integration  and  ethnic  proﬁles,  both  of  which  involve  links  to  one’s
heritage  culture,  provide  substantial  evidence  for  cultural  maintenance
during the process of acculturation.

In contrast, the national proﬁle was the smallest group (18.7%) among the
participants,  indicating  that  assimilation  tendencies  were  rather  limited
among  these  youth.  The  reason  for  this  is  not  entirely  clear.  Perhaps  in
seeking areas with sufﬁcient representation of immigrants, we unavoidably
drew  more  on  neighborhoods  with  fewer  members  of  the  national  society,
thus limiting the possibility of immigrant youth being oriented toward the
national society. However, as we have shown, we found a range in neighbor-
hood  ethnic  composition  across  our  samples,  thus  limiting  this  possible
interpretation.

Even  more  surprising  than  the  low  frequency  of  youth  with  a  national
orientation was the rather large size of the diffuse proﬁle (22.4%), representing

©  2006  The  Authors.  Journal  compilation  ©  2006  International  Association  for  Applied
Psychology.

324

BERRY ET AL.

the third largest group, almost equal to the ethnic proﬁle. These young people
lack a clear orientation and appear to be marginal and confused; they thus
represent a group in which, according to previous research, personal and social
problems are likely to appear. Thus there is potential for serious problems
in intercultural relations between these immigrant youth and others in their
society  of  settlement.  We  conclude  that  our  results  with  immigrant  youth
resemble those found for adult immigrants with respect to the preference for
integration, but diverge from them with respect to the relatively high numbers
in the ethnic and diffuse proﬁles, and low numbers with a national orientation.
These  patterns  were  linked  to  variations  in  a  number  of  personal  and
demographic variables. Perhaps most important is the relationship with the
length of residence; the longer youth are in the new culture, the more they
are  found  in  the  integration  proﬁle,  and  the  less  in  the  diffuse  proﬁle.
Because  both  psychological  and  sociocultural  adaptation  are  linked  to  the
integration and diffuse proﬁles, this difference suggests that with increasing
residence,  young  immigrants  will  experience  more  positive  outcomes,  and
avoid the more negative ones.

Of  similar  interest  is  the  fact  that  most  adolescents  in  the  integration
proﬁle and the fewest in the diffuse proﬁle live in ethnically mixed commu-
nities. Furthermore, there is evidence that the ethnic proﬁle predominates in
more  ethnically  homogeneous  neighborhoods,  while  more  of  those  in  the
national proﬁle are found in neighborhoods that are predominantly of other
than their own ethnic background. These results suggest that the local ecology
is important in inﬂuencing how young immigrants acculturate. In the case
of adults, it is possible to argue that they settle in neighborhoods that best ﬁt
their acculturation preferences, but this argument is not plausible for youth
who do not usually determine the neighborhood of residence of the family.
We found that religious preference was related to youth acculturation in
the 13 broadly Judeo-Christian societies of settlement. Integration predomin-
ated  for  the  Judeo-Christian  immigrant  youth;  however,  this  was  also  the
case for those with Eastern religions. This may be due to the long-standing
presence of western colonial inﬂuence in the societies where many of these
immigrants  originated  (India,  Pakistan,  Vietnam).  In  the  ethnic  proﬁle,
Muslims had much the largest presence, with others much lower. In sharp
contrast,  Muslims  were  minimally  present  in  the  national  proﬁle.  These
differences may be due to the large presence in European samples of Turks,
most  of  whom  arrived  as  guest  workers,  and  who  were  not  expected  to
establish links with the national society.

Adaptation of Immigrant Youth
With  respect  to  our  second  main  issue,  concerning  how  well  immigrant
youth  adapt,  we  found  two  distinct  forms  of  adaptation,  similar  to  those

©  2006  The  Authors.  Journal  compilation  ©  2006  International  Association  for  Applied
Psychology.

IMMIGRANT YOUTH

325

found  for  adult  immigrants  and  sojourners  by  Ward  (1996).  This  was  the
case, even though somewhat different variables were used to deﬁne psycho-
logical and sociocultural adaptation in our study than have been used with
adults.  This  suggests  that  the  basic  distinction  between  psychological  and
sociocultural  adaptation  is  a  robust  one  that  can  be  operationalised  using
different domains of life, depending on the samples being studied.

Adaptation varied according to gender; boys had slightly better psycho-
logical adaptation than girls, but had poorer sociocultural adaptation. These
ﬁndings support earlier ones that females may be more at psychological risk
for acculturation problems than males (Beiser, Wood, Barwick, Berry, deCosta,
Milne, Fantino, Ganesan, Lee, Tousignant, Naidoo, Prince, & Vela, 1988;
Carballo, 1994). In addition, studies have shown that women exhibit more
symptoms of psychological distress in terms of depression and anxiety while
men are more frequently diagnosed with behavioral and personality disorders;
these gender differences have been observed across cultures (Tanaka-Matsumi
& Draguns, 1997).

Recent  research  comparing  adaptation  among  immigrant  and  national
youth  (see  Garcia  Coll,  2005;  Hayes-Bautista,  2004;  Nguyen,  2006)  has
identiﬁed what has been termed the immigrant paradox, broadly deﬁned as
the counterintuitive ﬁnding that immigrants adapt just as well or better than
their  national  peers  despite  their  poorer  socioeconomic  conditions.  We
found  that  immigrant  youth  are  generally  doing  as  well  as  their  national
peers,  thus  providing  some  support  for  the  paradox.  However,  detailed
analyses (see Berry et al., 2006) show considerable variation across countries
and immigrant groups, providing limited support for such a paradox.

Acculturation and Adaptation
Our  third,  and  central,  issue  was  the  relationship  between  how  immigrant
youth acculturate and how well they adapt. In addressing this issue, we used
two different statistical approaches: we examined both forms of adaptation
for youth with each of the four acculturation proﬁles, and we carried out a
structural equation analysis. Both approaches provided a rather clear pat-
tern of relationships: being involved in both cultures (integration) served to
promote  better  psychological  and  sociocultural  adaptation,  while  being
involved in neither culture or being confused about one’s situation (diffuse)
undermined both forms of adaptation. This conclusion conforms to gener-
alisations  made  previously,  based  on  reviews  of  the  research  with  adult
immigrants (e.g. Berry, 1997; Berry & Sam, 1997).

In  between  these  two  strongly  contrasting  ways  to  acculturate  are  two
alternative ways, which we have termed ethnic and national. The two methods
of  analysing  the  data  are  consistent  in  showing  that  ethnic  involvement
promotes psychological well-being. However, for sociocultural adaptation,

©  2006  The  Authors.  Journal  compilation  ©  2006  International  Association  for  Applied
Psychology.

326

BERRY ET AL.

belonging to the ethnic proﬁle is associated with poorer sociocultural adap-
tation, while in the structural equation model an ethnic orientation promotes
sociocultural  adaptation.  Overall,  the  outcomes  of  the  two  approaches  to
the question of how acculturation and adaptation are related lead to similar
conclusions:  there  is  a  positive  role  for  integration  as  well  as  relatively
beneﬁcial consequences of a strong orientation toward one’s own ethnocultural
group  when  compared  to  a  preference  for  an  orientation  toward  the
national society.

With  respect  to  national  involvement,  being  in  the  national  proﬁle  is
associated with moderately poorer psychological and sociocultural adapta-
tion; however, in the structural equation model, national involvement pro-
motes both forms of adaptation. These seemingly different outcomes using
the two approaches may be confusing; it is necessary to keep in mind that they
are different in important respects. Findings with respect to a proﬁle always
include only a subsample of the adolescents (those that are characterised by
the particular proﬁle), while the structural equation model included all par-
ticipants,  so  that  the  reported  relationships  are  characteristic  of  the  whole
sample  of  immigrant  youth.  Given  this  difference  it  is  not  surprising  that
not all ﬁndings are identical. Moreover, structural equation modeling yields
information  about  the  relationship  between  any  two  variables  taking  all
other variables in the model into account. The ﬁnding about the contribution
of immigrant youth’s orientation toward the national group on their socio-
cultural adaptation has to be seen in combination with the contribution of
their ethnic orientation. Together the ﬁndings basically support the notion
that a combination of a strong ethnic and a strong national orientation is
conducive to immigrant youth’s positive adaptation.

The Role of Discrimination
In the social psychology of intergroup attitudes, there is a phenomenon of
reciprocity in which mutual likes or dislikes are reciprocated (Kalin & Berry,
1996). Our ﬁnding of a link between perceived discrimination and accultur-
ation  proﬁles  provides  further  evidence  for  this  reciprocity.  When  there  is
little perception of discrimination, young immigrants are most likely to be
found  in  the  integration  proﬁle,  and  to  a  lesser  extent  in  the  national
proﬁle;  however,  when  there  is  more  perceived  discrimination,  they  are
likely to be in the diffuse proﬁle, or to a lesser extent in the ethnic proﬁle.
We conclude that when individuals experience discrimination, they are likely
to reject close  involvement  with  the  national  society  and  be  more  oriented
to  their  own  group  (ethnic)  or  be  confused  or  ambivalent  (diffuse)  about
their involvement. However, when not discriminated against, they approach
the national society with the same degree of respect that has been accorded
to them.

©  2006  The  Authors.  Journal  compilation  ©  2006  International  Association  for  Applied
Psychology.

IMMIGRANT YOUTH

327

In  the  structural  equation  model,  we  found  that  the  strongest  relation-
ships are for the links between discrimination and poor adaptation. Taking
these two sets of ﬁndings together, we may conclude that while discrimina-
tion  affects  proﬁle  membership,  discrimination  may  also  inﬂuence  adapta-
tion  indirectly  through  membership  in  the  integration  versus  the  diffuse
proﬁle. And in the structural equation model, we have seen that discrimina-
tion inﬂuences adaptation directly. These results provide a coherent picture,
in  which  how  youth  acculturate  and  how  well  they  adapt  are  part  of  a
triangular network that includes the experience of discrimination. While the
cluster analysis cannot provide evidence regarding which comes ﬁrst (proﬁle
membership or discrimination), the structural equation model implicates the
prior role of discrimination in this network of relationships.

Implications
Applied psychology has branched out in recent years to incorporate many
areas of human behavior that were not earlier included; the study of immi-
gration  and  of  immigrants  is  one  of  these  newer  domains.  We  believe
that studies such as this one can contribute to the overall quality of life in
immigrant-receiving societies, for both the immigrants and the settled popu-
lations. While studies of adult immigrants have increased substantially, perhaps
because of their economic importance in relation to employment, productivity
and leadership issues, the study of immigrant youth has lagged behind.

Given  the  broad  international  sweep  of  our  study  and  the  coherence  of
many  of  the  results  across  immigrant  groups  and  receiving  societies,  we
believe that results of this study have some important implications for both
public and private areas of applied psychology. What do our results suggest
for  governments  and  their  agencies  (such  as  immigration  and  settlement
services) and institutions (such as schools and health care services), and for
individuals  who  are  navigating  their  way  through  the  complex  process  of
immigration,  acculturation,  and  adaptation?  Our  answer  depends  on  the
information and policy needs of each of these domains.

For governments in societies that are receiving immigrants, our ﬁndings
suggest that there should be support and encouragement for immigrants to
pursue  the  integration  path,  since  both  psychological  and  sociocultural
adaptation are more positive among those who orient themselves in this way.
Integration  involves  acceptance  of  two  kinds  of  attitudes  or  orientations,
among  both  the  immigrant  groups  and  the  larger  society.  First,  cultural
maintenance should be desired by the immigrant community, and permitted
(even  encouraged)  by  the  society  as  a  whole.  Second,  participation  and
inclusion in the life of the larger society should be sought by the immigrants,
and  permitted  and  supported  by  the  larger  society.  Given  these  features,
integration requires a number of initiatives. First, governments should consider

©  2006  The  Authors.  Journal  compilation  ©  2006  International  Association  for  Applied
Psychology.

328

BERRY ET AL.

providing support for immigrant and ethnocultural community organisations
so that cultural loss is limited or prevented, their ethnic identity is promoted,
and  their  way  of  life  is  allowed  to  be  maintained  and  to  thrive.  Second,
governments should seek to develop policies and programs to encourage the
participation of immigrants in the daily life of the national society, so that
they do not remain isolated in their own communities, or alienated from the
larger  society.  And  third,  governments  should  develop  policies  and  pro-
grams  for  the  general  population  to  encourage  their  acceptance  of  the
cultural diversity and the participation of diverse peoples in the life of the
larger  society.  Public  education  about  the  value  of  diversity,  and  anti-
discrimination and equity laws are appropriate vehicles for these initiatives.
The integration path appears to be generally the most beneﬁcial. However,
other  ways  of  acculturating,  particularly  the  ethnic  or  separation  orienta-
tion, can be beneﬁcial in some cases. The ethnic orientation contributes to
both types of adaptation, but to a lesser extent than integration. This implies
that a policy allowing immigrants to maintain separation if they wish to, for
example by allowing immigrants to settle within their own ethnic communi-
ties, is preferable to a policy that would push immigrants to assimilate, for
example  by  denying  ethnic  cultural  and  language  rights,  or  by  promoting
scattered settlement over wide areas of a country. Clearly, a policy of exclusion,
leading to the marginalisation of youth, has nothing to recommend it as a
public policy.

The legislation and policies installed and formulated by the governments
eventually are implemented by a variety of institutions. Public institutions,
such as schools and health care, tend to reﬂect the national policies that are
promoted by the dominant group. For example, when the assimilation path
is  pursued,  schools  tend  to  reﬂect  only  the  values  and  knowledge  of  the
dominant society. If the integration path is adopted as public policy, insti-
tutional change is required to reﬂect the joint goals of cultural diversity and
inclusion. In schooling, the multicultural education movement under way in
many societies has brought about curriculum change so that all peoples now
living in the society can ﬁnd themselves represented in the classroom, without
stereotyping or derogation, and with adequate portrayal of their way of life.
For  immigrant  youth  and  their  families,  our  results  have  clear  implica-
tions  for  the  promotion  of  successful  adaptation  following  migration.  In
keeping  with  the  recommendations  for  governments  and  institutions,  the
core message for individuals is to seek ways to follow the integrative path
as  much  as  possible.  However,  this  general  conclusion  may  need  to  be
qualiﬁed  in  differing  contexts.  For  example,  in  more  public  areas  of  life
(such as in school, and in the general community), a form of integration that
approaches assimilation may allow a better ﬁt with the larger society and its
institutions, especially when attitudes in the larger society are intolerant of
the  maintenance  of  heritage  cultural  practices  in  public.  Alternatively,  in

©  2006  The  Authors.  Journal  compilation  ©  2006  International  Association  for  Applied
Psychology.

IMMIGRANT YOUTH

329

more  private  contexts,  such  as  family  and  ethnocultural  communities,  a
form  of  integration  that  approaches  the  separation  orientation  may  allow
for a better ﬁt with co-ethnics in daily interactions. These variations in the
way of acculturating require some degree of ﬂexibility and the ability to mix
and match strategies. In our conceptualisation of integration, such blending
and merging are possible ways of obtaining the best of both worlds, espe-
cially when there are two or more worlds to be enjoyed and mastered.

The  results  also  provide  information  about  discrimination  and  its  nega-
tive effects on personal well-being. If public policy and institutional change
work toward the acceptance of diversity and equality, as we propose above,
then discrimination might decrease in the long term. However, discrimina-
tion is unlikely to disappear by itself, and individuals need to be aware of
its negative effects. Adolescents who are conﬁdent in their own ethnicity and
proud of their ethnic group may be better able to deal constructively with
discrimination, for example, by regarding it as the problem of the perpetra-
tor or by taking proactive steps to combat it. For those who are counseling
immigrant youth undergoing acculturation, our ﬁndings may help them to
better  understand  the  processes  and  problems  that  these  youth  are  experi-
encing. Teachers, therapists, and parents may all proﬁt from knowing that
the integrative way of acculturating is likely to lead these young people to
more satisfactory and successful transitions to adulthood in their culturally
diverse societies.

REFERENCES

Anderson, C. (1982). The search for school climate: A review of the research. Review

of Educational Research, 53, 368–420.

Aronowitz, M. (1984). The social and emotional adjustment of immigrant children:

A review of literature. International Migration Review, 18, 237–257.

Baubock,  R.,  Heller,  A.,  &  Zolberg,  A.  (Eds.)  (1996).  The  challenge  of  diversity:

Integration and pluralism in societies of immigration. Aldershot: Avebury.

Beiser,  M.,  &  Flemming,  J.A.E.  (1986).  Measuring  psychiatric  disorder  among

Southeast Asian refugees. Psychological Medicine, 16, 627–639.

Beiser, M., Wood, M., Barwick, C., Berry, J.W., deCosta, G., Milne, W., Fantino,
A.M., Ganesan, S., Lee, C., Tousignant, M., Naidoo, J., Prince, R., & Vela, E.
(1988). After the door has been opened: Mental health issues affecting immigrants
and refugees in Canada. Ottawa: Ministries of Multiculturalism and Citizenship,
and Health and Welfare.

Bendixen, M., & Olweus, D. (1999). Measurement of antisocial behaviour in early
adolescence  and  adolescence:  Psychometric  properties  and  substantive  ﬁndings.
Criminal Behaviour and Mental Health, 9, 323–354.

Bergman, L., Magnusson, D., & El-Khouri, B. (2003). Studying individual develop-
ment  in  an  interindividual  contex:  A  person-oriented  approach.  Mahwah,  NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.

©  2006  The  Authors.  Journal  compilation  ©  2006  International  Association  for  Applied
Psychology.

330

BERRY ET AL.

Berry, J.W. (1974). Psychological aspects of cultural pluralism. Culture Learning, 2,

17–22.

Berry,  J.W.  (1980).  Acculturation  as  varieties  of  adaptation.  In  A.  Padilla  (Ed.),
Acculturation:  Theory,  models  and  some  new  ﬁndings  (pp.  9–25).  Boulder,  CO:
Westview.

Berry, J.W. (1997). Immigration, acculturation and adaptation. Applied Psychology:

An International Review, 46, 5–68.

Berry, J.W. (2001). A psychology of immigration. Journal of Social Issues, 57, 611–627.
Berry, J.W. (2003). Conceptual approaches to acculturation. In K. Chun, P. Balls-
Organista,  &  G.  Marin  (Eds.),  Acculturation:  Advances  in  theory,  measurement
and applied research (pp. 17–37). Washington, DC: APA Press.

Berry, J.W., Kim, U., Power, S., Young, M., & Bujaki, M. (1989). Acculturation attitudes

in plural societies. Applied Psychology: An International Review, 38, 185–206.

Berry, J.W., Phinney, J.S., Sam, D.L., & Vedder, P. (Eds.) (2006). Immigrant youth
in  cultural  transition:  Acculturation,  identity  and  adaptation  across  national  con-
texts. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Berry, J.W., & Sam, D.L. (1997). Acculturation and adaptation. In J.W. Berry,
M.H. Segall, & C. Kagitcibasi (Eds.), Handbook of cross-cultural psychology, Vol. 3:
Social behaviour and applications (2nd edn.; pp. 291–326). Boston, MA: Allyn &
Bacon.

Carballo, M. (1994). Scientiﬁc consultation on the social and health impact of migra-
tion: Priorities for research. Final report. Geneva: International Organization for
Migration.

Diener, E., Emmons, R.A., Larsen, R.J., & Grifﬁn, A. (1985). The satisfaction with

life scale. Journal of Personality Assessment, 49, 71–75.

Fuligni,  A.  (2001).  A  comparative  longitudinal  approach  to  acculturation  among

children from immigrant families. Harvard Educational Review, 71, 566–578.

Galster,  G.C.,  Metzger,  K.,  &  Waite,  R.  (1999).  Neighborhood  opportunity  and
immigrants’ socioeconomic advancement. Journal of Housing Research, 10, 95–127.
Garcia Coll, C. (2005). The immigrant paradox: Critical factors in Cambodian stu-
dents’  success.  Paper  presented  at  the  2005  Biennial  meeting  of  the  Society  for
Research in Child Development. Atlanta, Georgia, 7–10 April 2005.

Georgas,  J.  (1989).  Changing  family  values  in  Greece:  From  collectivism  to  indi-

vidualism. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 20, 80–91.

Georgas,  J.,  Berry,  J.W.,  Shaw,  A.,  Christakopoulou,  S.,  &  Mylonas,  S.  (1996).
Acculturation of Greek family values. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 27,
329–338.

Ghuman,  P.  (2003).  Double  loyalties:  South  Asian  adolescents  in  the  west.  Cardiff:

University of Wales Press.

Gordon, M. (1964). Assimilation in American life. New York: Oxford.
Hayes-Bautista,  D.  (2004).  La  nueva  California:  Latinos  in  the  golden  state.  Los

Angeles, CA: University of California Press.

Howard, R. (1998). Being Canadian: Citizenship in Canada. Citizenship Studies, 2,

133–152.

Kalin,  R.,  &  Berry,  J.W.  (1996).  Interethnic  attitudes  in  Canada:  Ethnocentrism,
consensual  hierarchy  and  reciprocity.  Canadian  Journal  of  Behavioural  Science,
28, 253–261.

©  2006  The  Authors.  Journal  compilation  ©  2006  International  Association  for  Applied
Psychology.

IMMIGRANT YOUTH

331

Kinzie, J.D., Manson, S.M., Vinh, D.T., Tolan, N.T., Anh, B., & Pho, T.N. (1982).
Development  and  validation  of  a  Vietnamese-language  depression  rating  scale.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 139, 1276–1281.

Kovacs, M. (1980, 1981). Rating scales to assess depression in school-aged children.

Acta Paedopsychiatry, 46, 305–315.

Kwak, K. (1991). Second language learning in a multicultural society: A comparison
between the learning of a dominant language and a heritage. PhD thesis, Queen’s
University, Kingston, ON, Canada.

Kymlicka, W. (1995). Multicultural citizenship. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Liebkind, K., & Jasinskaja-Lahti, I. (2000). The inﬂuence of experiences of discrim-
ination on psychological stress: A comparison of seven immigrant groups. Jour-
nal of Community & Applied Social Psychology, 10, 1–16.

Marcia, J. (1994). The empirical study of ego identity. In H. Bosma, T. Graafsma,
H. Grotevant, & D. de Levita (Eds.), Identity and development: An interdiscipli-
nary approach (pp. 67–80). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Mollica,  R.,  Wyshak,  G.,  DeMarneffe,  D.,  Khuon,  F.,  &  Lavelle,  J.  (1987).  Indo-
chinese versions of the Hopkins Symptom Checklist-25: A screening instrument
for the psychiatric care of refugees. American Journal of Psychiatry, 144, 497–500.
Moos,  R.  (1989).  Evaluating  educational  environments.  San  Francisco,  CA:  Jossey-

Bass.

Myles, J., & Hou, F. (2003). Neighbourhood attainment and residential segregation
among  Toronto’s  visible  minorities;  http://www.statcan.ca/english/research/
11F0019MIE/11F0019MIE2003206.pdf (accessed 12 December 2005).

Neto, F. (2001). Satisfaction with life among adolescents from immigrant families in

Portugal. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 30, 53–67.

Nguyen, H.H. (2006). Acculturation in the United States. In D.L. Sam & J.W.
Berry  (Eds.),  Cambridge  handbook  of  acculturation  psychology  (pp.  311–330).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Nguyen,  N.,  &  Williams,  H.  (1989).  Transition  from  East  to  West:  Vietnamese
adolescents  and  their  parents.  Journal  of  the  American  Academy  of  Child  and
Adolescent Psychiatry, 28, 505–515.

Noh,  S.,  Beiser,  M.,  Kaspar,  V.,  Hou,  F.,  &  Rummens,  J.  (1999).  Perceived  racial
discrimination, depression and coping. Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 40,
193–207.

Olweus,  D.  (1989).  Prevalence  and  incidence  in  the  study  of  antisocial  behaviour:
Deﬁnition  and  measurement.  In  M.W.  Klein  (Ed.),  Cross-national  research  in
self-reported crime and delinquency (pp. 187–201). Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic.
Olweus, D. (1994). The revised Olweus bully/victim questionnaire. Bergen: Research

Center for Health Promotion, University of Bergen.

Oppedal,  B.,  Røysamb,  E.,  &  Sam,  D.L.  (2004).  The  effect  of  acculturation  and
social  support  on  change  in  mental  health  among  young  immigrants.  Inter-
national Journal of Behavioral Development, 28, 481–494.

Phinney, J. (1990). Ethnic identity in adolescents and adults: A review of research.

Psychological Bulletin, 108, 499–514.

Phinney,  J.  (1992).  The  Multigroup  Ethnic  Identity  Measure:  A  new  scale  for  use

with diverse groups. Journal of Adolescent Research, 7(2), 156–176.

Phinney, J. (2003). Ethnic identity and acculturation. In K. Chun, P. Organista, &

©  2006  The  Authors.  Journal  compilation  ©  2006  International  Association  for  Applied
Psychology.

332

BERRY ET AL.

G.  Marin  (Eds.),  Acculturation:  Advances  in  theory,  measurement,  and  applied
research (pp. 63–81). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.

Phinney,  J.,  &  Devich-Navarro,  M.  (1997).  Variations  in  bicultural  identiﬁcation
among  African  American  and  Mexican  American  adolescents.  Journal  of
Research on Adolescence, 7, 3–32.

Reynolds,  C.R.,  &  Richmond,  B.O.  (1985).  Revised  Children’s  Manifest  Anxiety

Scale (RCMAS): Manual. Los Angeles, CA: Western Psychological Services.

Robinson,  J.P.,  Shaver,  P.R.,  &  Wrightsman,  L.S.  (Eds.)  (1991).  Measures  of  per-
sonality and social psychological attitudes: Vol. 1. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Rosenberg, M. (1965). Society and the adolescent self-image. Princeton, NJ: Prince-

ton University Press.

Rumbaut,  R.,  &  Portes,  A.  (Eds.)  (2001).  Ethnicities:  Children  of  immigrants  in

America. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

Sam,  D.L.,  &  Berry,  J.W.  (Eds.)  (2006).  Cambridge  handbook  of  acculturation  psy-

chology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Sam,  D.L.  (1994).  School  adaptation  of  young  Vietnamese  refugees  in  Norway.
Migration: European Journal of International Migration and Ethnic Relations, 24,
219–242.

Samdal,  O.  (1998).  The  school  environment  as  a  risk  or  resource  for  students’
health-related behaviour and subjective well-being. PhD Dissertation, University
of Bergen.

Sellers,  R.,  &  Shelton,  J.  (2003).  The  role  of  racial  identity  in  perceived  racial  dis-

crimination. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84, 1079–1092.

Tanaka-Matsumi,  J.,  &  Draguns,  J.  (1997)  Culture  and  psychopathology.  In  J.W.
Berry, M.H. Segall, & C. Kagitcibasi (Eds.), Handbook of cross-cultural psycho-
logy,  2nd  edn.,  Vol.  3:  Social  behaviors  and  applications  (pp.  413–448).  Boston,
MA: Allyn & Bacon.

United Nations Population Division (2002). World immigration report. New York:

United Nations.

Van  de  Vijver,  F.J.R.,  &  Leung,  K.  (1997).  Methods  and  data  analysis  for  cross-

cultural research. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.

Vedder,  P.,  &  van  de  Vijver,  F.J.R.  (2006).  Methodological  aspects:  Studying
adolescents in thirteen countries. In J.W. Berry, J.S. Phinney, D.L. Sam, &
P. Vedder (Eds.) Immigrant youth in cultural transition: Acculturation, identity and
adaptation across national contexts. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Vedder,  P.,  Van  de  Vijver,  F.J.R.,  &  Liebkind,  K.  (2006).  Predicting  immigrant
youths’ adaptation across countries and ethnocultural groups. In J.W. Berry, J.S.
Phinney,  D.L.  Sam,  &  P.  Vedder  (Eds.),  Immigrant  youth  in  cultural  transition:
Acculturation,  identity  and  adaptation  across  national  contexts.  Mahwah,  NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Ward,  C.  (1996).  Acculturation.  In  D.  Landis  &  R.  Bhagat  (Eds.),  Handbook  of

intercultural training (2nd edn.; pp. 124–147). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Ward, C., Bochner, S., & Furnham, A. (2001) The psychology of culture shock. Hove:

Routledge.

Wold,  B.  (1995).  Health  behaviour  in  school-aged  children:  A  WHO  cross-national
survey  (HSCB).  Resource  package  of  questions,  1993–94.  Bergen:  Research
Center for Health Promotion, University of Bergen.

©  2006  The  Authors.  Journal  compilation  ©  2006  International  Association  for  Applied
Psychology.

