Journal of American Studies

http://journals.cambridge.org/AMS

Additional services for Journal of American
Studies:

Email alerts: Click here
Subscriptions: Click here
Commercial reprints: Click here
Terms of use : Click here

Retrospective Sex: Rewriting Intersexuality in
Jeffrey Eugenides's Middlesex

RACHEL CARROLL

Journal of American Studies / Volume 44 / Issue 01 / February 2010, pp 187 - 201
DOI: 10.1017/S0021875809990831, Published online: 24 December 2009

Link to this article: http://journals.cambridge.org/abstract_S0021875809990831

How to cite this article:
RACHEL CARROLL (2010). Retrospective Sex: Rewriting Intersexuality in Jeffrey
Eugenides's Middlesex. Journal of American Studies, 44, pp 187-201 doi:10.1017/
S0021875809990831

Request Permissions : Click here

Downloaded from http://journals.cambridge.org/AMS, IP address: 141.99.36.199 on 16 Mar 2015

Journal of American Studies, 44 (2010), 1, 187–201 f Cambridge University Press 2009
doi:10.1017/S0021875809990831
First published online 24 December 2009

Retrospective Sex : Rewriting
Intersexuality in Jeﬀrey
Eugenides’s Middlesex

R A C H E L C A R R O L L

This article examines the representation of intersexuality in Jeﬀrey Eugenides’s Pulitzer Prize-
winning 2002 novel Middlesex. It situates the depiction of intersexuality within the context of
current scholarship on sexed identity within the ﬁeld of gender and sexuality studies. It argues
that while a ﬁctional focus on ambiguously sexed identity might appear to be aligned with
queer critiques of ﬁxed categories of ‘‘ sex, ’’ Eugenides’s narrative remains implicated in
heteronormative assumptions. More speciﬁcally, it will explore the narrative strategies which
frame Calliope Stephanides’s intersexed body, focussing on the relationship between the
male-identiﬁed adult Cal,
‘‘ author ’’ of this ﬁctional autobiography, and his remembered
teenage girl self. It will suggest that the retrospective logic at work in this narrative is complicit
in a heteronormative temporality which reinforces the causal relationship between sex, gender
and sexuality which queer theorists have sought to interrogate.

The narrative of Jeﬀery Eugenides’s 2002 comic epic of Greek American
identity, Middlesex, journeys through time and space from Greco-Turkish
hostilities in Smyrna in 1912, to the 1967 ‘‘ race riots ’’ in Detroit, through to
post-uniﬁcation Berlin in 2001. However, this reconstructed family history is
also mapped against the narrator’s retrospective account of an ambiguously
sexed identity. Intersexuality demonstrates both the indeterminacy of ‘‘ sex ’’
as a category by which to deﬁne bodies and identities and the normative
violence to which deviant bodies are subject.1 Indeed, the medical and
surgical management of intersexed bodies can be considered symptomatic
of a heteronormative imperative ; as Alice Domurat Dreger has put it,

Teesside University.
1 See Cheryl Chase, ‘‘ Hermaphrodites with Attitude : Mapping the Emergence of Intersex
Political Activism, ’’ GLQ : Journal of Lesbian and Gay Studies, 4, 2 (1998), 189–211 ; Alice
Domurat Dreger, Hermaphrodites and the Medical Invention of Sex (Cambridge, MA and
London : Harvard University Press, 1998) ; Anne Fausto-Sterling, Sexing the Body : Gender
Politics and the Construction of Sexuality (New York : Basic Books, 2000) ; Suzanne J. Kessler,
Lessons from the Intersexed (New Brunswick ; NJ and London : Rutgers University Press,
1998) ; and Christine Matta, ‘‘ Ambiguous Bodies and Deviant Sexualities : Hermaphrodites,
Homosexuality, and Surgery in the United States, 1850–1904, ’’ Perspectives in Biology and
Medicine, 48, 1 (Winter 2005), 74–83.

http://journals.cambridge.org

Downloaded: 16 Mar 2015

IP address: 141.99.36.199

188 Rachel Carroll

‘‘ fail to conform to the gendered norms of cultural

‘‘ a signiﬁcant motivation for the biomedical treatments of hermaphrodites is
the desire to keep people straight. ’’2 The refusal of ‘‘ corrective ’’ surgery is
pivotal to the life history recounted in Middlesex. However, I will argue that
this act of apparent resistance to medical orthodoxy serves less to contest
the binary logic of sexed, gendered and sexual identities than to preserve a
normative sexed identity as male and sexual
identity as heterosexual.
Eugenides’s Pulitzer Prize-winning novel seems to be expressive of a
broader cultural and theoretical interest in the discontinuities of sex, gender
and sexuality ; Middlesex gives a memorable ﬁctional voice to one of ‘‘ those
‘ incoherent ’ or ‘ discontinuous ’ gendered beings ’’ who, as Judith Butler puts
intelligibility. ’’3
it,
However, this article will consider the ways in which a nominally trans-
gressive narrative can nevertheless remain captive to normative discourses.
Dreger describes ‘‘ hermaphrodite studies ’’ as a ‘‘ lively storytelling genre in
medicine ’’4 whose authors attracted a degree of celebrity on account of the
sensational case histories they published. More recently, the emergence of
advocacy movements campaigning for the rights of intersexed people has
inaugurated of a new genre of ‘‘ storytelling ’’ : the testimonies of intersexed
people, often recording traumatizing encounters with the medical establish-
ment. Hence this genre of life-writing has become the site of highly charged
claims for self-determination, authorship and agency. Storytelling is a
signiﬁcant motif in Eugenides’s acutely self-reﬂexive novel ; this article aims
to explore the narrative strategies within which Cal’s intersexed body is
framed. The intersexed body problematizes the notion of origin in relation
to sexed and hence gendered and sexual
identity. However, ﬁctions of
origin – whether cultural, generational or genetic – dominate the narrative of
Middlesex. I wish to interrogate the retrospective logic at work within
Middlesex and to explore the ways in which it serves to contain the con-
tingencies of sex, gender and sexuality suggested by the intersexed body.

BORDER CROSSINGS : CULTURAL AND SEXED HYBRIDITY

Cal Stephanides, the narrator and protagonist of Middlesex, is a third-gener-
ation Greek American whose cultural heritage provides ample opportunities
for the author to playfully evoke the mythological meanings of the ﬁgure of
the hermaphrodite. Self-reﬂexive allusions to classical mythology abound in

2 Dreger, 8.
3 Judith Butler, Gender Trouble : Feminism and the Subversion of Identity (New York and London :

Routledge, 1999) 23.

4 Ibid., 60.

http://journals.cambridge.org

Downloaded: 16 Mar 2015

IP address: 141.99.36.199

Retrospective Sex

189

this ebulliently metaﬁctional novel. Cal is conceived following her parents’
return from a theatrical production of The Minotaur, studies Ovid’s
Metamorphoses at school and is cast as Tiresias in a student production of
Antigone. Later, as a teenage runaway living amidst the sexual countercultures
of San Francisco, he re-enacts the myth of Salmacis and Hermaphroditus for
the titillation of the punters in Bob Presto’s club, the Sixty Niners.5 Cal is a
diminutive for Calliope, the muse of heroic epic, and indeed the narrator
claims, in a rather disingenuous apology, an epic status for his story : ‘‘ Sorry if
I get a little Homeric at times. That’s genetic too. ’’6 In this aside, cultural and
genetic constructions of heritage and inheritance are humorously conﬂated.
Indeed, parallels between the kinds of national, ethnic and racial border
crossings which Cal’s forebears undergo and the sexed and gendered border
crossings which Cal encounters as an intersexed person are a recurring motif
in this novel :

My grandparents had ﬂed their home because of a war. Now, some ﬁfty-two years
later, I was ﬂeeing myself _ A ship didn’t carry me across the ocean ; instead, a
series of cars conveyed me across a continent. I was becoming a new person, too,
just like Lefty and Desdemona, and I didn’t know what would happen to me in this
new world to which I’d come. (443)

This analogy is not without precedent, as Judith Halberstam has noted in
relation to transsexuality :
‘‘ Myths of travel and border crossings are
inevitable _ But they are also laden with the histories of other identity ne-
gotiations, and they carry the burden of national and colonial discursive
histories. ’’7 The crossing of borders is, of course, not in itself a subversive
act. Indeed, the Stephanides family’s American story charts an assimilationist
imperative which ﬁrst challenges but then compounds racial and ethnic
hierarchies. The fate of the family hot dog restaurant business – Hercules
Hot Dogs – is instructive here. Located within an African American neigh-
bourhood as a consequence of the segregationist eﬀects of urban housing
policy, it is the last white-owned business to be destroyed by ﬁre during the
1967 ‘‘ race riots ’’ in Detroit. However, the subsequent insurance settlement
enables the family to join the ‘‘ white ﬂight ’’ from the city and only accel-
erates their economic and social mobility, such that Cal’s parents are able to
place her in a private girls’ school and thereby evade the racial desegregation

5 My use of gendered pronouns reﬂects Cal’s sexed identiﬁcations at diﬀerent stages in his/

her life.

6 Jeﬀrey Eugenides, Middlesex (London : Bloomsbury, 2002) 4. Page references hereafter

given in text.

7 Judith Halberstam, Female Masculinity (Durham and London : Duke University Press, 1998),

165.

http://journals.cambridge.org

Downloaded: 16 Mar 2015

IP address: 141.99.36.199

190 Rachel Carroll

of the public school system. Middlesex Boulevard is the location of
Cal’s teenage family home. In this least desirable of the sought-after white
neighbourhoods in Grosse Point, the Stephanides live happily alongside an
orthodox Jewish family ; both are subject to the ‘‘ points system ’’ by which
real-estate agents police racial boundaries, but both enjoy the privileges of
a hard-won, if somewhat provisional, ‘‘ whiteness. ’’ The complex, contra-
dictory and contested nature of normative constructions of national and
racial identity is embodied in Middlesex as a location. Similar tensions are at
work in the narrative depiction of intersexed identity – the ‘‘ middle sex ’’ to
which the title more punningly refers.

The conﬂation of cultural and sexed hybridity in the border-crossing
analogy is reinforced when Cal reﬂects on his origins in this way : ‘‘ I’m the
descendant of a smuggling operation, too. Without their knowing, my
grandparents, on their way to America, were each carrying a single mutated
gene of the ﬁfth chromosome ’’ (71). His grandparents’s passage not only
allows them to undergo a transformation of national identity but also of
familial identity ; in 1912 they leave the burning shores of Smyrna brother
and sister, to dock in America husband and wife. This union is itself
implicated in ethnic and racial discourses given that it is attributed to, and
implicitly explained by,
the shortage of marriageable Greek women.
Desdemona and Lefty’s incestuous marriage is retrospectively identiﬁed by
Cal as the genetic cause of his intersexed state. This deduction is not simply
a reﬂection of one branch of medical opinion.8 It is also symptomatic of
a narrative logic which serves to ﬁx the indeterminacy of intersexed identity
by reference to a founding origin. Cal attributes his intersexed state to
their consanguineous union – and so establishes genetic determinism as the
driving force of his retrospective narrative, which is neatly reduced to the
‘‘ rollercoaster ride of a single gene through time ’’ (4). The generational
narrative acts as a carrier for a genetic narrative, whereby Cal’s identity is
destined to be determined by the past ; in this way his possible futures are
foreclosed by an inheritance which is written into his genes :

I’m quickly approaching the moment of discovery : of myself by myself, which was
something I knew all along and yet didn’t know _ the discovery of the mutated
gene that had lain buried in our bloodline for two hundred and ﬁfty years, biding its
time _ it started the chain of events that led to me, here, writing in Berlin. (361)

8 5-Alpha-reductase deﬁciency, the condition with which Cal is diagnosed, is thought to
‘‘ have a strong genetic component ’’ given its higher frequency in populations characterized
by isolation and intermarriage. Dreger, 40.

http://journals.cambridge.org

Downloaded: 16 Mar 2015

IP address: 141.99.36.199

In Middlesex, a theory of genetic inheritance – only one medical hypothesis
among many seeking to explain the incidence of intersexed births – serves as
the premise for a complex and compelling narrative strategy : one which
rewrites what Cal ‘‘ didn’t know ’’ into something ‘‘ known all along. ’’

Retrospective Sex

191

‘‘ FIRST ONE THING AND THEN THE OTHER ’’

The course of Cal’s life story is anticipated in the opening of the novel :

I was born twice : ﬁrst, as a baby girl, on a remarkably smogless Detroit day in
January of 1960 ; and then again, as a teenage boy,
in an emergency room in
Petoskey, Michigan, in August of 1974 _ But now, at the age of forty-one, I feel
another birth coming on. (3)

This arresting, proleptic prelude to the action of the narrative correctly raises
an anticipation that Cal’s identity will be medically mediated. However, the
process by which his identity is determined is much more protracted and
ambiguous than is suggested in this narrative sleight of hand. By focussing
on the process by which Cal ‘‘ becomes ’’ intersexed, I will explore how the
retrospective logic at work in this narrative is complicit in a heteronormative
temporality.

In his article ‘‘ ‘ The Glans Opens Like a Book ’ : Writing and Reading
the Intersexed Body, ’’ Iain Morland writes, ‘‘ Intersex bodies have genetic,
hormonal, and anatomical conﬁgurations that cannot be adequately appre-
hended by hegemonic discourses of sexual diﬀerence. ’’9 More speciﬁcally,
these bodies confound the binary logic of sexed identity. The cultural and
historical construction of gender has been compellingly demonstrated
over the decades by feminist and gender theorists. More recently, queer
theorists – and most prominently Judith Butler – have questioned the rhe-
torical manoeuvre by which this argument has sometimes been made,
namely the diﬀerentiation of gender, as culturally mediated, from sex, as
biologically ﬁxed.10 The cultural construction of ‘‘ sex ’’ is made all too ap-
parent in the medical management of intersex bodies. Intersex theorists have
noted how the birth of an intersexed infant is conventionally interpreted
as presenting a ‘‘ medical emergency ’’ ;11 the appearance of ambiguities in,
or discrepancies between, genetic, hormonal and anatomical deﬁnitions of
sex is deemed to warrant rapid and radical surgical intervention, even though
the intersexed condition does not necessarily in and of itself pose a threat to

9 Iain Morland, ‘‘ ‘ The Glans Opens Like a Book ’ : Writing and Reading the Intersexed

Body, ’’ Continuum : Journal of Media & Culture Studies, 19, 3 (2005), 335–48, 335.

10 See Butler.

11 Fausto-Sterling, 45.

http://journals.cambridge.org

Downloaded: 16 Mar 2015

IP address: 141.99.36.199

192 Rachel Carroll

the baby’s immediate or even future health. Such interventions pose im-
portant ethical questions given that they constitute medically unnecessary
cosmetic surgery on a subject unable to give consent, and given that such
initial surgeries are often a prelude to lifelong medical interventions, whose
side eﬀects can include irreversibly impaired sexual function. Cheryl Chase is
one of the most eloquent of theorists and activists who have articulated a
critique of this practice : ‘‘ Pediatric surgeries literalize what might otherwise
be considered a theoretical operation : the attempted production of norma-
tively sexed bodies and gendered subjects through constitutive acts of viol-
ence. ’’12 Indeed, advocates of intersex rights have made analogies between
female genital mutilation (FGM) and what they term infant genital mutilation
(IGM), some noting that while Western opposition to FGM sits comfortably
within latent colonial assumptions, acceptance of IGM within Western
medical practice reveals a very culturally entrenched commitment to nor-
mative constructions of sexed identity. The medical and surgical manage-
ment of intersexed bodies is, then, a highly charged issue within intersex
theory and activism. I will consider Cal’s refusal of ‘‘ corrective ’’ surgery as a
teenager in Eugenides’s novel in this context and question the extent to
which it can be aligned with a queer critique.13

Intersexed conditions are various and the particular

form which
Eugenides ﬁctionalizes oﬀers speciﬁc narrative opportunities. Many inter-
sexed conditions are apparent at birth in the form of ambiguous external
genitalia. However, Cal
is diagnosed as having a 5-Alpha-reductase de-
ﬁciency, a condition in which an individual’s genitals appear female at
birth but undergo an apparent male-to-female transformation at puberty.
A powerful motif in the life-writing of intersexed people is the discovery in
later life of a hidden sexed history, in the form of surgery performed in
infancy and concealed throughout childhood.14 By contrast, Cal’s condition
enables Eugenides to construct a narrative in which intersexed identity
is experienced within a temporal and teleological structure : as having a
‘‘ before ’’ and ‘‘ after, ’’ as departing from an origin to arrive at a given
destination, as crossing a border upheld by a binary logic. Or as Cal puts it, in

12 Chase, ‘‘ Hermaphrodites with Attitude, ’’ 189.
13 For a reading of Middlesex as ‘‘ reiterating and troubling scientiﬁc and cultural engagements
with sex, gender and desire ’’ see Zachary Sifuentes, ‘‘ Strange Anatomy, Strange Sexuality :
The Queer Body in Jeﬀrey Eugenides Middlesex, ’’ in Richard Fantina, ed., Straight Writ
Queer : Non-normative Expressions of Heterosexuality in Literature (McFarland & Company :
Jeﬀerson, North Carolina and London, 2006), 146.

14 See, for example, Cheryl Chase’s account of her discovery that she ‘‘ had been my parents’s

son for a year and a half. ’’ Chase, 194.

http://journals.cambridge.org

Downloaded: 16 Mar 2015

IP address: 141.99.36.199

Retrospective Sex

193

another knowingly classical reference, ‘‘ Like Tiresias, I was ﬁrst one thing
and then the other ’’ (3). This logic echoes the retrospective tendency which
intersex theorists have discovered in conventional medical discourses of
intersex. Its management is premised on the assumption that a true sexed
identity does exist – and that it must be restored. This restitution narrative, as
Dreger has described it (borrowing from Arthur Frank in The Wounded
Storyteller), informs the terms by which patients, or more often their parents,
are advised. Genitals are described as being ‘‘ unﬁnished ’’ or ‘‘ incomplete ’’
and surgery oﬀered as simply ﬁnishing a process of development begun in
the womb. Eugenides’s narrative strategies share the paradoxical relationship
to origin which Morland attributes to normalizing surgery, which ‘‘ purports
to reconstitute a sexed original which is somehow prior to the intersexed
original, prior to the origin and arrival in the world of the human subject, the
intersex individual. ’’15

The third birth to which Cal alludes in the opening of the novel refers in
one sense to his anticipated emergence as the author of a life history to rival
its historical antecedents : ‘‘ When this story goes out into the world, I may
become the most famous hermaphrodite in history ’’ (19). His aspiration
towards authorship arguably has its roots in his interviews with Dr. Luce, the
medical celebrity to whom Cal is referred following a routine emergency
room examination. Dr. Luce is not only the founder of a Sexual Disorders
and Gender Identity Clinic, but also the author of a column for Playboy
magazine, headed ‘‘ The Oracular Vulva, ’’ in which the said organ is ven-
triloquized to respond to readers’s enquiries and to oﬀer some educational
insights into erotic cultural history. Cal’s case history is destined to become
incorporated within the medical archive on which Luce founds his fame ; Cal
later identiﬁes his anonymized body in one of Luce’s publications : ‘‘ That’s
me on page 578, standing naked beside a height chart with a black
box covering my eyes ’’ (3). However, Luce also invites the teenage Cal to
write her own life history as an aid to his diagnosis. It is here that Cal’s
entanglements with the discourses of the normative – and his later struggle
to become the author of his own life – become most tense. The autobio-
graphical authority of Cal’s teenage life history implicitly competes with the
medical authority of Luce’s case notes ; however, it becomes evident that
both authors falsify reality in order to preserve a culturally constructed
‘‘ truth ’’ of sex.

15 Morland, 342.

http://journals.cambridge.org

Downloaded: 16 Mar 2015

IP address: 141.99.36.199

194 Rachel Carroll

Unaware of the hypotheses which Luce is testing, but rightly fearing the
kinds of intervention which the ‘‘ wrong ’’ response might prompt, Cal fakes
her life. This faking is not without precedent – Cal is already adept at a ruse
deployed to evade unwanted parental and professional scrutiny :

That summer – while the President’s lies were also getting more elaborate – I started
faking my period. With Nixonian cunning, Calliope unwrapped and ﬂushed away a
ﬂotilla of unused Tampax. I feigned symptoms from headache to fatigue. I did
cramps the way Meryl Streep did accents. (361)

Cal’s anxieties about the onset of menstruation, her dread of visiting a
gynaecologist and exposing herself to his invasive examination and her self-
consciousness in the presence of her more developed peers are recognizable
features of ‘‘ normal ’’ pubescent girlhood, especially given that the onset of
puberty is eﬀectively a prelude to a lifetime of gendered scrutiny. However,
in her self-authored life, Cal endeavours to convince Luce of the normality of
her gendered identity by concealing the truth of her emotional life as a
teenage girl ; principally, she conceals her attraction to other girls and her
sexual experiences with her female best friend. In this ﬁctionalized auto-
biography, the adult Cal remembers her ﬁrst foray into life-writing as
derivative and inauthentic, but also, crucially, as performative in that it serves
to produce an identity contingent on the needs of a speciﬁc moment :

the other half like a bad
Half the time I write like a bad George Eliot,
Salinger _ But on that Smith Corona I quickly discovered that telling the truth
wasn’t nearly as much fun as making things up. I also knew that I was writing for an
audience – Dr. Luce – and that if I seemed normal enough, he might send me back
home. (418)

This ploy is eﬀective in that Luce is convinced of Cal’s successful socializa-
tion as a girl. Luce studiously avoids gendered pronouns in his ﬁrst interviews
with Cal’s parents, but now pronounces Cal their ‘‘ daughter ’’ and delivers his
diagnosis ; concealing the reality of Cal’s intersexed body, he prescribes
‘‘ corrective ’’ surgery in order to align Cal’s genitals with her gender.

Simultaneously with Luce’s disclosure to Cal’s parents, however, is Cal’s
discovery of Luce’s case notes, which record the identiﬁcation of un-
descended testes and a hypospadic penis, mistaken to date for a generous
clitoris. The normative impulse at work in Luce’s decision, and its potentially
devastating eﬀects for Cal as a sexual being, are made clear in the notes which
Cal surreptitiously reads :

Though it is possible that the surgery may result in partial or total loss of erotosexual
sensation, sexual pleasure is only one factor in a happy life. The ability to marry and
pass as a normal woman in society are also important goals. (437)

http://journals.cambridge.org

Downloaded: 16 Mar 2015

IP address: 141.99.36.199

Retrospective Sex

195

Cal’s subterfuge – her attempt to pass as normal
in a heteronormative
culture – inadvertently licenses radical surgical intervention in the name of
restoring normalcy, or rather its appearance. As Cal herself puts it :

I had miscalculated with Luce. I thought that after talking to me he would decide
that I was normal and leave me alone. But I was beginning to understand something
about normality. Normality wasn’t normal. It couldn’t be. If normality were
normal, everybody could leave it alone. They could sit back and let normality
manifest itself. (446)

It is at this point that Cal takes ﬂight, leaving the clinic, his parents and
his home to protect his bodily integrity. This is without doubt an act
of deﬁance against the medical establishment and its management of
intersexed bodies. But on another level Cal remains hostage to its dis-
courses.

It is Luce’s case notes and their record of genitals palpated and examined
which forms the origin of Cal’s newly sexed identity, rather than his own
corporeal experience. Moreover, it is this medical history which inaugurates
the retrospective logic which dominates the text we read. The adult Cal lays
claim to an unequivocal maleness decreed by his hormonal constitution ;
in the earlier stages of the narrative, and in anticipation of events yet to
unfold, he asserts, ‘‘ To the extent that fetal hormones aﬀect brain chem-
istry and histology, I’ve got a male brain. But I was raised a girl ’’ (19).
Retelling his life for his imagined avid reader, Cal rewrites his past desires as
anticipating the male heterosexual destinations with which he later ident-
iﬁes. For example, remembering her locker room self-consciousness in the
presence of a schoolgirl elite at her single-sex prep school, Cal reﬂects, ‘‘ I
look back now (as Dr. Luce urged me to do) to see exactly what twelve-
year-old Calliope was feeling, watching the Charm Bracelets undress in
steamy light. Was there a shiver of arousal in her ? ’’ (297). However, Cal’s
desires are placed ﬁrmly within a heterosexual matrix. Cal attributes her
sexual attraction to girls to his belatedly discovered maleness in such a way
as to infer a direct, causal link between sex and sexuality, one which seems
to preclude, or at least refuse to acknowledge, the possibility of same-sex
desire. And yet whereas this matrix posits sex as the origin of gender and
sexuality, in Cal’s narrative sex becomes the rhetorical eﬀect of sexuality ; her
teenage sexual attraction to girls is retrospectively explained and legitimized
by the discovery of his ‘‘ true biological nature ’’ (327). Hence the retro-
spective narration recuperates the same-sex desire which Cal feels as a
teenage girl as a signiﬁer of an incipient heterosexuality, which is then
mobilized to authorize a sexed identity which follows rather than precedes
his desires.

http://journals.cambridge.org

Downloaded: 16 Mar 2015

IP address: 141.99.36.199

196 Rachel Carroll

THE MIDDLE PART : ADOLESCENCE AND INDETERMINACY

The retrospective narrative strategies employed by Eugenides in Middlesex
make it impossible for the reader to access Cal’s experience as a teenage girl
other than through the adult male Cal’s self-consciously knowing hindsight ;
Cal’s female adolescence is mediated by the adult Cal’s conviction in
his genetically sexed identity as male.16 By revisiting Cal’s adolescence as
experienced by her as a girl I aim to recover the discontinuities of sex, gender
and sexuality which the narrative seeks subsequently to contain.

Kenneth Millard has noted the ways in which contemporary ﬁctions of
adolescence situate formative experiences ‘‘ in relation to historical contexts
or points of origin by which individuals come to understand themselves as
having been conditioned. ’’17 In this way, adolescence is ﬁgured as sub-
jectively experienced but historically determined ; hence narratives of ado-
lescence can become narratives of historical, and perhaps especially national,
development. Middlesex could be read as exemplifying this trope, especially
where sexed hybridity is interpreted as a metaphor for cultural hybridity and
Cal’s inbetweenness as a cipher for the immigrant experience. However, the
emphasis on ‘‘ points of origin ’’ by which individuals ‘‘ come to understand
themselves as having been conditioned ’’18 reveals a retrospective logic by
which adolescent experience is subordinated to the adult identity which
supplants it. In the context of an analysis of representations of adolescence
and same-sex desire, Angus Gordon suggests that adolescence can be
understood as the ‘‘ the idea that a particular period of life is fundamentally
structured by its transitionality and indeterminacy. ’’19 Expressions of sexu-
ality and desire which depart from heterosexual norms are normalized so
long as the transition to adult heterosexuality is completed and the apparent
‘‘ indeterminacy ’’ resolved :

the meaning of adolescence is always understood to become apparent only in
hindsight ; it is structured throughout by a foreshadowed denouement, which is the
subject’s arrival at adulthood _ the discourse of adolescence typically recuperates

16 This is not the ﬁrst time that Eugenides has explored female adolescence through a male
perspective ; in his 1993 novel The Virgin Suicides, also set in Grosse Pointe, Michigan in the
1970s, the narrative voice represents the collective experience of a group of boys brought
together by their shared obsession with a family of teenage girls and their deaths by suicide.
17 Kenneth Millard, Coming of Age in Contemporary Fiction (Edinburgh : Edinburgh University

Press, 2007), 10.
19 Angus Gordon,

‘‘ The Retrospective Closet : Adolescence and Queer Prehistory, ’’

18 Ibid., emphasis added.

Australian Historical Studies, 36 (2005), 315–31, 321, emphasis added.

http://journals.cambridge.org

Downloaded: 16 Mar 2015

IP address: 141.99.36.199

Retrospective Sex

197

[same-sex desire or experience] as detours (even at times as necessary detours) on
the path to an eventual heterosexual consummation.20

In her 1996 book on sexuality and narrative, Come As You Are, Judith Roof
suggests that the middle part of the narrative is the structural location where
lesbian identity is permitted to become visible, but only as a detour, a
digression, a prelude to what follows : in her words, as ‘‘ the pretext for the
heteronormative’s spectacular return. ’’21 In a similar way I would suggest
that Middlesex has a kind of middle part – dedicated to teenage girlhood – in
which discontinuities of sex, gender and sexuality are given expression, but
that, ironically, their possibilities are closed down rather than opened up at
the point at which Cal becomes conscious of her intersexed identity. I aim to
explore tensions between normative narrative tendencies and queer textual
moments, by which I mean moments in which the binary logic of the hetero-
sexual matrix begins to fold in on itself.

Exactly what occurs between Cal and her teenage female lover remains
obscure in Middlesex ; just as the object of Cal’s passion strategically feigns
unconsciousness at what her body is experiencing, so Eugenides draws a
discreet narrative veil over the nature of her pleasure. While the desires
which inspire these encounters raise questions for Cal about her sexuality,
the acts which they prompt do not appear to raise questions about her sex.
The elaborately euphemistic terms with which Cal describes her own sexual
sensations is almost parodically evocative of the naturalizing metaphors
by which female sexuality and feminine sensibility have traditionally been
denoted : ‘‘ For that spring, while the crocuses bloomed, while the head-
mistress checked on the daﬀodil bulbs in the ﬂower beds, Calliope, too, felt
something budding _ A kind of crocus itself, just before ﬂowering ’’ (329).
The association between sexuality and fertility, the reference to enfolded
organic forms and the allusion to ‘‘ blooming ’’ and ‘‘ ﬂowering ’’ conspire to
suggest that female sexual arousal is integral to natural cycles of fertility, a
process by which the female is made receptive to a reproductive destiny.
However, this metaphor also allows for a signiﬁcant indeterminacy with
regard to its sexed referent :

A pink stem pushing up through new dark moss. But a strange kind of ﬂower
indeed, because it seemed to go through a number of seasons in a single day. It had
its dormant winter when it slept underground. Five minutes later, it stirred in a

20 Angus Gordon, ‘‘ Turning Back : Adolescence, Narrative and Queer Theory, ’’ GLQ : Journal

of Lesbian and Gay Studies, 5 (1991), 1–24, 3.

21 Judith Roof, Come As You Are : Sexuality and Narrative (New York : Columbia University

Press, 1996), xxxiv.

http://journals.cambridge.org

Downloaded: 16 Mar 2015

IP address: 141.99.36.199

198 Rachel Carroll

private springtime. Sitting in class with a book in my lap, or riding home in car pool,
I’d feel a thaw between my legs, the soil growing moist, a rich, peaty aroma arising,
and then – while I pretended to memorize Latin verbs – the sudden, squirming life
in the warm earth beneath my skirt. To the touch, the crocus sometimes felt soft and
slippery, like the ﬂesh of a worm. At other times it was as hard as a root. (330)

While the ‘‘ pushing ’’ and ‘‘ stirring ’’ of Cal’s ‘‘ pink stem ’’ could be placed
within the lexicon of euphemisms for male sexual sensation, the crocus
which can be both ‘‘ soft and slippery ’’ and ‘‘ hard as a root ’’ has qualities of
both male and female genitals. Indeed, Cal admits that ‘‘ I knew from per-
sonal experience that the Object had a crocus of her own. It swelled, too,
when touched ’’ (388) ; the crocus is here implicitly identiﬁed as, or at least
with, the clitoris. The only diﬀerence relates to its size :
‘‘ Mine was just
bigger, more eﬀusive in its feelings. My crocus wore its heart on its sleeve ’’
(388) ; and elsewhere : ‘‘ I worried at times that my crocus was too elaborate a
bloom, not a common perennial but a hothouse ﬂower, a hybrid named by
its originator like a rose ’’ (330).22 Such an eﬀusive bloom would seem to oﬀer
considerable potential in terms of sexual pleasure but Cal’s adolescent sexual
desires are principally played out in service to the pleasure of another ; as Cal
laconically concedes : ‘‘ It was never my turn with the Object ’’ (348). Cal’s
teenage lover is retrospectively named after Luis Bun˜uel’s 1977 ﬁlm That
Obscure Object of Desire ; this ruse is ostensibly to protect her identity but also
evokes the way in which her own identity is obscured and objectiﬁed by Cal’s
obsession. Cal refers to her ‘‘ crocus ’’ as ‘‘ An obscure object all her own ’’
(329) and indeed the elusive and enigmatic object of her aﬀections comes to
stand for the indeterminacy of her genitals. However, an indeterminacy of
agency and object is a recurring motif of Eugenides’s depiction of teenage
sexuality.

An unspoken pact develops between Cal and her friend, whereby the
Obscure Object feigns unconsciousness as Cal acts out her desires when they
share a companionable bed : ‘‘ Sometimes when I climbed on top of the
Object she would almost wake up. She would move to accommodate me,
spreading her legs or throwing an arm around my back. She swam to the
surface of consciousness before diving again ’’ (386). The Obscure Object’s
passivity, assuming that is a form of unspoken consent, can be understood as
a way of enjoying Cal’s attentions while disavowing the implications of their
intimacy : principally, the lesbian identity which it would seem to disclose. In

22 Judith Halberstam writes that in the nineteenth century the ‘‘ female hermaphrodite was
considered a freak of nature with an enlarged clitoris who desired to penetrate other
women who might be drawn to her ambiguity. ’’ Halberstam, Female Masculinity, 55.

http://journals.cambridge.org

Downloaded: 16 Mar 2015

IP address: 141.99.36.199

Retrospective Sex

199

terms of characterization, and from Cal’s perspective,
it also seems an
extension of a narcissistic sense of entitlement integral to the Object’s
privileged class and racial identity as a wealthy white girl. In other ways,
however, it could also be placed within the spectrum of normative female
heterosexuality and indeed it is a role which Cal herself reluctantly plays
when she ﬁnds herself cast in the sexual script pursued by the Obscure
Object’s brother, Jerome, and his friend Rex. Jerome strategically supports
Rex’s amorous ambitions with the Obscure Object, by engaging and
disarming Cal as a companion whose presence might otherwise become an
obstacle. Here Cal adopts a passivity which resembles that of the Object, but
where the Object’s passivity enables her to enjoy a sexual experience at odds
with her nominally heterosexual
identity, Cal’s passivity enables her to
endure a sexual experience compelled by the pressures of heteronormativity :
‘‘ I didn’t
remained completely still while he did his
thing _ Behind my impassive face my soul curled up into a ball, waiting
until the unpleasantness was over ’’ (373). Cal’s behaviour is within the
spectrum of normative female heterosexuality so long as female sexuality is
assumed to be innately passive and male sexuality innately active ; hence
heterosexuality becomes something which men ‘‘ do ’’ to women. Equally,
while Jerome is not forceful and certainly not violent, the distinction between
consensual and coercive sex is uneasily blurred in this scene.

stop him.

I

However, while reluctantly going through the motions of making out with
her best friend’s brother, Cal fantasizes about inhabiting the body of the
Obscure Object’s boyfriend Rex ; here the boundaries between same-sex and
heterosexual roles become blurred : ‘‘ And then, because I suddenly knew
that I could, I slipped into the body of Rex Reese. I entered him like a god so
that it was me, and not Rex, who kissed her ’’ (373). By assuming the fanta-
sized agency of a heterosexual boy, Cal is able to legitimize her own desires
for the Object, to make them meaningful and authentic in heteronormative
terms. As Cal writes, ‘‘ I saw [her breasts] ; I touched them ; and since it wasn’t
me who did this but Rex Reese I didn’t have to feel guilty, didn’t have to ask
myself if I was having unnatural desires ’’ (375). Just as the Obscure Object
acts out a feminine sexual passivity as a way of normalizing her same-sex
desires, here Cal acts out a masculine heterosexual activity in order to nor-
malize her desires. It is at the moment at which Cal deduces that Jerome is
‘‘ inside me ’’ (375) – signiﬁed by ‘‘ pain like a knife, pain like ﬁre ’’ (375) – that
Cal experiences a revelation :

We gaped at each other and I knew he knew. Jerome knew what I was, as suddenly
I did, too, for the ﬁrst time clearly understood that I wasn’t a girl but something in
between. I knew this from how natural it felt to enter Rex Reese’s body, how right it

http://journals.cambridge.org

Downloaded: 16 Mar 2015

IP address: 141.99.36.199

200 Rachel Carroll

felt, and I knew this from the shocked expression on Jerome’s face. (375, emphasis in
original)

From the retrospective vantage point of the adult Cal, this remembered
fantasy is enlisted to support his recuperative narrative, whereby a male
sexed identity is discovered as the cause of a sexuality which is retroactively
understood as heterosexual. Nevertheless, this is a rather queer textual mo-
ment. It is not so much the ‘‘ entry ’’ into her friend’s body that is emphasized
as the object of this exercise, as Cal’s entry into the body of a boy. Moreover,
Jerome’s response, apparently so pivotal to her own revelation, is quickly
revealed to be entirely her own projection : ‘‘ Reader, believe this if you can :
he hadn’t noticed a thing ’’ (376). Jerome’s unknowingness might be at-
tributed to his youthful inexperience or to a self-absorbed indiﬀerence to his
partner’s body ; however, it is also suggestive of an indeterminate sexuality
reminiscent, perhaps, of Cal’s earliest erotic sensations playing in the swim-
ming pool with her childhood friend Clementine : ‘‘ I fall between her legs,
I fall on top of her, we sink _ and then we’re twirling, spinning in the water,
me on top, then her, then me _ I’m not sure which hands are mine, which
legs ’’ (266). Hands and legs become interchangeable and agency blissfully
blurred. Similarly, in Cal’s encounters with the Object, ‘‘ What pressed on our
attention was that it was happening, sex was happening. That was the great
fact. How it happened exactly, what went where was secondary ’’ (386). What
has not happened in any of these scenes is phallic penetration, an act assumed
integral to normative deﬁnitions of heterosexuality ; what these scenes im-
agine is a sexuality whose bodily encounters defy binary categorization and
forms of sexual pleasure unencumbered by presumptions about ‘‘ what goes
where. ’’ I would suggest that the adult Cal’s much-lamented failure to es-
tablish enduring heterosexual relationships is attributable less to the fact of
his intersexed body than to his own renunciation of the kinds of sexual
indeterminacy which characterize the teenage Cal’s desires.

CONCLUSION : THE LAST STOP

The generational family narrative has acted as a productive ﬁctional
holding frame within which to explore the cultural hybridity of histories and
identities ; while the family provides a model of historical inheritance and
collective memory, its discontinuities – often acted out in motifs of inﬁdelity,
illegitimacy and estrangement – simultaneously subvert any aspirations
towards a familial form of ‘‘ grand narrative. ’’ However, while a ﬁctional
genealogy may allow a space within which to foreground the historical and
cultural contingencies of identity, in Middlesex it is arguably complicit with a

http://journals.cambridge.org

Downloaded: 16 Mar 2015

IP address: 141.99.36.199

Retrospective Sex

201

heteronormative matrix within which queer contingencies of identity are
contained. The heterosexual transgression which is posited as the cause of
Cal’s condition is normalized by structures of family and marriage, but
Cal’s body remains an anomalous ‘‘ last stop ’’ (184) in the family journey of
the Stephanides, rather than the prelude to a diﬀerently conceived way of
living.23

Despite his claim to an unequivocal maleness – ‘‘ I operate as a man ’’
(41) – the adult Cal lives what he calls a ‘‘ closeted ’’ (107) life, leaving the
country of his birth and undertaking an itinerant career as a member of the
Foreign Service as a means of escaping his body and its implications : ‘‘ After
college, I took a trip around the world. I tried to forget my body by keeping it
in motion ’’ (320). The narrative location of this retrospective life history is
post-uniﬁcation Berlin, where Cal works for the Foreign Service and lives
amongst a Turkish Gastarbeiter community. If the parallel between sexed and
cultural hybridity were to be pursued, this might seem a promising location
from which to explore a post-sexed identity : ‘‘ This once-divided city re-
minds me of myself. My struggle for uniﬁcation, for Einheit. Coming from a
city still cut in half by racial hatred, I feel hopeful here in Berlin ’’ (106).
Indeed, Cal’s reference to ‘‘ another birth ’’ (3) in the opening of the novel
might raise such an expectation. However, the indeterminacy of sexed,
gendered and sexual identity suggested by the intersexed body – and played
out in the ‘‘ middle ’’ part of the narrative – has been foreclosed by a per-
sistent investment in binary categories of identity. The possibility of living a
life beyond not only national but also sexed borders remains unimagined at
the end of the novel, which proves unable to fulﬁl its own reproductive
promise.

23 Cal’s tentative courtship of Julie Kikuchi, an expatriate Californian living in Berlin, fails to
deliver a solution to his single state. Julie’s wariness of romantic entanglements is attributed
to a series of ill-fated relationships with closeted gay men ; her reﬂections reveal the
problematic nature of the conﬂation of sexed and racialized borders : ‘‘ ‘ Asian chicks are
the last stop. If a guy’s in the closet, he goes for an Asian because their bodies are more like
boys ’ ’’ (184).

http://journals.cambridge.org

Downloaded: 16 Mar 2015

IP address: 141.99.36.199

