This article was downloaded by: [University of Hamburg]
On: 24 March 2014, At: 09:15
Publisher: Routledge
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House,
37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

Conflict, Security & Development
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/ccsd20
Security governance and the private military industry
in Europe and North America
Elke Krahmann a
a University of Bristol , Bristol
Published online: 19 Aug 2006.

To cite this article: Elke Krahmann (2005) Security governance and the private military industry in Europe and North America,
Conflict, Security & Development, 5:2, 247-268, DOI: 10.1080/14678800500170209

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14678800500170209

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the “Content”) contained
in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no
representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the
Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors, and
are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and
should be independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for
any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever
or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of
the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic
reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any
form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://
www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions

Conﬂict, Security & Development 5:2 August 2005

Analysis

Security governance and the
private military industry in
Europe and North America
Elke Krahmann

Even before Iraq, the grow ing use of private

separate developments: the failure of some

military contractors has been widely

developing states

to provide for

their

discussed in the academic and public

national security and the privatization of

literature. However,

the reasons

for the

military services in industrialized nations in

proliferation of private military companies

Europe and North America. This article

and

its

implications

are

frequently

focuses on the latter and argues

that

generalized due to a lack of

suitable

the concept of security governance can be

theoretical approaches for the analysis of

used as a theoretical

framework for

private means of violence in contemporary

understanding the distinct development,

security. Consequently, this article contends,

problems and solutions for the governance

the analysis of the growth of the private

of the private military industry in developed

military industry typically conﬂates

two

countries.

Introduction

Since the recent intervention in Iraq has highlighted the increasing role of private military

ﬁrms in international security, the proliferation of the ‘new mercenaries’ (Adams, 1999)

has been widely criticized. However, when offering an assessment of the private military

industry, many authors have tended to conﬂate the rise of the industry in Europe and

Dr Elke Krahmann is a lecturer in International Relations at the University of Bristol. She has published widely on

post-cold war foreign and security policy including New Threats and New Actors in International Security, (ed.),

2005; and Multilevel Networks in European Foreign Policy (2003). Her current USIP-funded research project

examines the growing role of private military companies in international security.

ISSN 1467-8802 print/ISSN 1478-1174 online/05/00247-22 q 2005 International Policy Institute
DOI: 10.1080/14678800500170209

Downloaded by [University of Hamburg] at 09:15 24 March 2014 248 Elke Krahmann

North America with that

in the Third World (e.g. Singer, 2003; Nossal, 2001).

Consequently, these studies frequently generalize the controversial involvement of now-

disbanded companies such as Executive Outcomes and Sandline International in regional

conﬂicts such as in Angola and Sierra Leone, while the primary growth of the private

security industry has been in Europe and North America where governments have pursued

the outsourcing of military services since the mid-1990s (Krahmann, 2005b). Thus by

2002, the UK had outsourced military services in excess of £1.4 billion and was considering

more than 90 new projects with an estimated value of £6 billion ranging from the training

of Royal Air Force pilots and Navy personnel to the provision of spare parts and logistics

(MoD, 2004a). Similarly, the US has progressively expanded its employment of private

military contractors for military and military support services since the 1990s (Markusen,

2003, pp. 474 – 477). Moreover, in addition to the outsourcing of national security,

countries in Europe and North America are increasingly using private companies in

international

interventions such as in the former Yugoslavia, Afghanistan and Iraq

(Isenberg, 2004; Spearin, 2003). In fact, the number of private military contractors

employed in overseas operations has increased from in the region of 1:100 in the ﬁrst Gulf

War to 1:10 in the current operation in Iraq (Spearin, 2003, p. 28).

Contending that the outsourcing of military services by governments in Europe and

North America needs to be distinguished from the use of mercenary ﬁrms in the

developing world, this article aims to provide a theoretically guided analysis and

explanation of the origins, problems and potential means of governance of military

outsourcing in the transatlantic region. It justiﬁes its focus on Europe and North America

with three arguments. First, most of the revenue of private military companies stems from

services provided to governments and private actors in the transatlantic region. Moreover,

industrialized nations appear to be the primary growth area for the private military

industry as these ﬁrms are increasingly viewed as legitimate actors in European and North

American security (Lilly, 2000, p. 7).

Second, the outsourcing of security services within the transatlantic community differs

in many respects from the use of private military ﬁrms in the Third World where it has

been associated with weak or ‘failed’ states (Aning, 2001; Holmqvist, 2005, pp. 11 –17).

This article proposes that the privatization of security in Europe and North America,

unlike that in developing countries, can be understood as part of the emergence of

a new system of

‘security governance’

in the post-Cold War era. The concept

of security governance explains the transformation of transatlantic security policy from

Downloaded by [University of Hamburg] at 09:15 24 March 2014 Private military industry in Europe and North America

249

the state-centred bias and bipolar structure of the Cold War towards a complex system of

functionally differentiated networks, which involve both public and private security

providers.

Third, the development, problems and options for the regulation of these ﬁrms in

Europe and North America are crucial for deﬁning the international role of private

military companies. Since most of these companies are based in industrialized countries,

they can be, even when contracted by Third World actors, subject to the legal and

normative restraints imposed by Western governments. Moreover, due to the large role of

European and North American governments in the provision of security and development

aid to Third World countries, Western governments are able to inﬂuence how private

military companies may be used in local operations. Fourth and ﬁnally, European and

North American governments determine which companies are considered for contracts in

international peacekeeping missions or by international organizations in which they are

members.

This article is structured in three parts. The ﬁrst part examines how the concept of

security governance can help to understand the growing use of private military contractors

by governments in Europe and North America. The second part discusses its contribution

to understanding the speciﬁc problems that have been linked to the outsourcing of

military functions to private companies in the transatlantic region. In addition, the third

part investigates how the concept of security governance can help to identify suitable

mechanisms for addressing these problems.

Security governance and the proliferation of private
military companies

While the use of private military companies in the Third World has been controversial but

limited, the employment of private military companies by governments in Europe and

North America has grown exponentially since the 1990s. Three main explanatory factors

have been proposed in the academic literature for the accelerated growth of these

companies over the past two decades. The ﬁrst factor is the increased demand generated by

the outbreak of small conﬂicts in the Third World where fragile regimes can no

longer count on the ﬁnancial and military support of one of the two superpowers

(Brooks, 2000, p. 132; Singer, 2003, p. 55). The second factor is a decreased willingness of

European and North American governments to engage in international peacekeeping

Downloaded by [University of Hamburg] at 09:15 24 March 2014 250 Elke Krahmann

operations unless their immediate security interests are concerned, following the failure of

missions such as in Somalia in the early 1990s (Brooks, 2000, p. 134; Taulbee, 2000, p. 434.;

Cleaver, 2000, p. 137; Singer, 2003, p. 58). The third factor is the reduction of defence

budgets and the rising cost of military technology and operations in particular after the

end of the Cold War (Arnold, 1999, p. 173; Singer, 2003, p. 67; Spearin, 2003, p. 28).

This article suggests that the above explanations for the growth of the private military

industry subsume two analytically distinct developments. The ﬁrst factor refers to the lack

of credible military forces, which is often linked to the notion of failed statehood in the

Third World. The latter two factors can be explained by the emergence of a system of

‘security governance’ in Europe and North America where states continue to uphold

substantial and sophisticated military forces, but choose to subcontract part of their

national or international security functions to private companies.

This trend from ‘government’ to ‘security governance’ in European and North America

is characterized by the fragmentation of security policy-making in seven key dimensions:

geography, function, and distribution of resources, interests, norms, decision-making and

policy implementation (Krahmann, 2003a). Each dimension can take a variety of forms

along a scale between the ideal notions of ‘government’ and ‘security governance’ as
deﬁned in Table 1.1

Obviously,

it is difﬁcult to specify which or how many dimensions have to be

fragmented for a policy-making structure to qualify as ‘governance’ rather than
‘government’.2 Most contemporary security policy-making arrangements would be placed

somewhere between these two ideal types.

Moreover, security arrangements in North America and Europe are constantly evolving,

although not all dimensions shift at the same speed. Changes in some dimensions are

promoting those in others in order to achieve internally consistent systems that are

suggested by the ideal types of ‘government’ and ‘security governance’. Combined with the

transformation of the international security environment, these changes can serve as

explanatory variables for the progressive shift from ‘government’ to ‘security governance’

(Krahmann, 2005a, pp. 27 – 28). Speciﬁcally, it can be argued that the replacement of

interstate war as the most important source of insecurity in Europe and North America by

military, political, social, economic and environmental

threats, such as terrorism,

proliferation and civil conﬂicts, is challenging the ability of sovereign nation states to

ensure the security of their citizens. Consequently, states within the transatlantic region

progressively recognize the resources and expertise of non-state actors such as

Downloaded by [University of Hamburg] at 09:15 24 March 2014 Private military industry in Europe and North America

251

Table 1. ‘Government’ and ‘security governance’ as ideal types

Dimensions

Government

Security governance

Geographical scope

State
Regional

Functional scope

Military

Distribution of resources

Centralized in states and
NATO/ WTO

Interests
Norms

Decision making

Implementation

Common
Sovereignty
‘One for all, all
for one’
Ideological priorities

Centralized
Consensus
Formal equality
Centralized
Authoritative

Sub-national
State
Regional
Global
Military
Political
Social
Environmental
Fragmented among public and
Private actors at different
levels: ﬁrms, charities, NGOs,
states, UN, NATO, EU,
OSCE
Differentiated
Limited sovereignty
‘Coalitions of the willing’

Cost-efﬁciency

Fragmented
Negotiation
Inequality
Fragmented
Voluntary

international organizations, which can help to improve their national and international

security. This shift is supported by a change in the norms underlying public policy-making

that consider efﬁciency and cost-effectiveness in security policy-making as more

important than state sovereignty and the maintenance of the state monopoly on the

legitimate use of force. In short, changes in three dimensions appear to be promoting the

transformation from ‘government’ to ‘security governance’: functional fragmentation due

to the rise of non-state security threats, resource fragmentation due to the diversity of skills

and capabilities required in dealing with these threats, and normative changes from

ideology and state sovereignty to cost-efﬁciency.

For the emergence of ‘security governance’, several hypotheses follow which suggest

that changes in the other dimensions can be linked to these transformations.

First, the diversiﬁcation of security threats and the differentiation of resources and

Downloaded by [University of Hamburg] at 09:15 24 March 2014 252 Elke Krahmann

capabilities among state and non-state actors suggest

the growing geographical

fragmentation of security policy-making among multiple and diverse sets of actors at the

sub-national, national, regional and global levels. Second, because of the non-state nature of

the new security challenges we are likely to observe the differentiation of security interests.

Owing to the decreased threat from interstate war, cooperation can proceed within more

ﬂexible coalitions of the willing which are more suited to accommodate the complex and

regionally differentiated impact and interests related to non-state security threats. Third, the

complexity of the new threats, the weakening of the state monopoly on the provision of

security and the rise of cost-efﬁciency as legitimizing mechanism promote changes in the

making and implementation of security policy-making. In particular, they encourage

functional specialization and differentiation among state and non-state actors, and lead to

fragmented and voluntary decision making and implementation arrangements, which

typically rely on negotiated forms of cooperation among multiple actors, such as contracts.

In the ﬁrst three dimensions, these changes appear to have well progressed towards

‘security governance’ through the broadening of the notion of security from military to

non-military threats and resource fragmentation. However, in the latter dimensions there

appears to be a slower development. The problems that arise from this for the internal

logic and functioning of these security arrangements and their consequences will be

discussed in more detail in the second part of this article. Nevertheless, it can be argued

that in the area of national and international security a transformation from ‘government’

to ‘security governance’ can be detected since the end of the Cold War (Krahmann, 2003a).

How can the proliferation of private military companies in Europe and North America

be explained by this transformation? The perceived increase in ‘new’ security threats, such

as ethnic war, international terrorism and transnational crime, has been one of the key

factors promoting the growing role of private security providers as it created new demand

for security services. Importantly, in Europe and North America this demand could only in

part be met by existing national armed forces that had just been cut back after the end of

the Cold War due to public calls for a peace dividend (Spearin, 2003, p. 28; Carver, 1992,

p. 155; Croft & Dunn, 1990). Following the widespread reduction of armed forces and

military support units in Europe and North America, these states were unprepared for the

new threats and more interventionist approaches to national and international security,

which were adopted after the break-up of Yugoslavia and September 11, 2001.

Consequently, governments have been induced to turn to private military companies,

which could be called upon on short notice, to supplement their forces.

Downloaded by [University of Hamburg] at 09:15 24 March 2014 Private military industry in Europe and North America

253

The second crucial factor contributing to the emergence of a private military industry in

Europe and North America has been the fragmentation of military resources and

capabilities between public and private actors. In addition to Cold War-related reductions

in defence spending, defence budgets have become strained due to the rising costs of

standing armies, professional

training, and armaments research and development

(Greenwood, 1991; Smith, 1993; Spearin, 2003, pp. 29 –30). Many Western governments

increasingly rely on public-private partnerships with private defence corporations in order

to fund new defence investments and military technologies (Gates & Robbert, 1998; Pint &

Hart, 2001; Krahmann, 2005b).

This shift from the centralization of resources through taxation and government

spending in national and international security to a fragmented mode is represented by

shift to Private Finance Initiatives (PFIs) as ‘ﬁrst choice method of funding new capital
projects’ by the British Ministry of Defence (MoD, 2004a).3 In these schemes private

companies bid not only for the servicing, but also the construction and maintenance of

military facilities. The investment into the building of such facilities is ﬁnanced by the

private sector in return for military service contracts which typically last between ten and

forty years and guarantee continuous income in the form of agreed fees. In addition, some

PFIs allow companies to generate ‘third party revenue’ from the sale of spare capacities to

private customers. Western industrialized countries increasingly prefer PFIs because they

spread the cost of a military project more evenly over the duration of the contract,

although the cumulative cost for the provision of these facilities will tend to be higher than

if they had been ﬁnanced by the government. This eliminates the difﬁculties of having to

secure parliamentary approval for projects with huge start-up costs in a particular budget

year. However, since the facilities are funded by the private sector, they remain in private

hands and thus further contribute to the fragmentation of military resources among

public and private actors.

The third critical

transformation has been in the weakening of

ideology and

national sovereignty as the central norm in national and international security policy

making in favour of economy and cost-efﬁciency (Spearin, 2003, p. 29). In contemporary

Europe and North America, the high defence spending which contributed to the

dissolution of the Soviet Union and placed signiﬁcant burdens on Western industrialized

nations is no longer acceptable. Instead, governments and the electorate are calling for

‘value for money’ in defence spending (Howe, 1998; Brooks, 2000, p. 131; Markusen, 2003,

pp. 477 – 478).

Downloaded by [University of Hamburg] at 09:15 24 March 2014 254 Elke Krahmann

Moreover, in an attempt to further increase efﬁciency, governments are allowing private

companies to take over functions which until recently were regarded as the monopoly of

the state. In Europe, this has led not only to the progressive privatization of national

defence industries, but also to the acceptance of transnational mergers in the armaments

and military service sectors. While during the Cold War, an independent national

deterrent was closely linked to the raison d’eˆtre of states like the UK and France, the 1990s

have seen the transnational integration of the defence sector across Europe and North

America (Bitzinger, 1994; Skoens & Wulf, 1994). Today large transnational defence

corporations and private military companies are increasingly dominating the international

market with ﬁrms such as Lockheed Martin, BAe Systems, EADS and Thales providing not

only the goods but frequently also the associated military services such as training and

maintenance.

One of the results of these changes is the progressive geographical fragmentation of

security policy-making. In the post-Cold War era, this development has resulted in two

trends: an ‘upward’ shift towards regional and global institutions of governance and a

‘sideways’ shift towards private security providers. The upward trend has been identiﬁed

with the geographical expansion of NATO and the EU as well as a growing number of

regional and sub-regional institutions (Cottey, 2000). The ‘sideways’ trend has ranged

from the privatization of the armaments industry (Lovering, 1998; James, 2000) to the

outsourcing of military services such as logistics, transport and training to private military

companies in Europe and North America (Matthew & Parker, 1999; Mandel, 2002;

Krahmann, 2005b).

Crucially, the use of private military companies within a geographically fragmented

security architecture, not only offers the prospect of decreased spending on military

services, but also enables European and North American governments to intervene

globally with greater ﬂexibility. In particular, the use or tacit approval of private military

companies operating in international conﬂicts or post-conﬂict reconstruction allows

Western democratic governments to circumvent public opposition against

foreign

interventions. Most recently, the governments of the UK and the US have been accused of

having withheld prior intelligence about the intended mercenary coup in Equatorial

Guinea, which was funded by British and South African backers including Sir Mark

Thatcher, the son of former UK Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher (Observer, 2004;

Guardian, 2004). In addition, the US has licensed a contract between the Virginia-based

private military company Military Professional Resources Inc. (MPRI) and the Croat

Downloaded by [University of Hamburg] at 09:15 24 March 2014 Private military industry in Europe and North America

255

government for the training of the newly formed Croat armed forces, which is alleged to

have contributed to the expulsion of ethnic Serbs from the Krajina region. Finally, the

British Foreign Ofﬁce has been accused of having implicitly approved the involvement of

London-based Sandline International in Sierra Leone (Sunday Times, 1998; Times, 1998;

Cleaver, 2000, pp.142 – 143).

A further consequence is the differentiation of security functions among state and non-

state security providers. In particular, the growing emphasis on non-traditional areas of

security combined with the limited expertise of governments in these areas and the

reduction in military personnel has strengthened the role of private actors in security

governance. The provision of humanitarian aid in complex emergencies such as the former

Yugoslavia, for instance, relied on a multitude of national and international non-

governmental organizations for the provision of basic security needs such as shelter, food,

water and health care. In addition, defence ministries in Europe and North America seek

to exploit the expertise of private companies through the outsourcing of support

functions, including base maintenance, estate management and logistics. In the military

sector, thus, a division of labour appears to emerge between combat, which so far remains

the exclusive domain of national armed forces in Western democracies, and non-combat

functions, which are progressively delegated to the private sector.

In addition to changes in the structure of security provision, the shift from ‘government’

to ‘security governance’

is fostering a transformation in how security interests are

perceived in the Cold War era, which helps to explain the increasing role of private military

companies in the transatlantic community. Speciﬁcally, there has been a growing

willingness to recognize the diverse security interests of states in Europe and North

America with regard to different types of threats ranging from ethnic conﬂicts to terrorism

and transnational crime. The creation of an independent European Common Security and

Defence Policy stands for the European aim to provide for its own security and create the

necessary capabilities. NATO, too, has progressed toward a more ﬂexible structure with the

development of the Combined Joint Task Forces, which allows the formation of ‘coalitions

of the willing’.

This trend towards a differentiation of interests directly contributes to the growing

demand for private military companies because they allow American and European

governments to act more independently in their provision of national and international

security (Spearin, 2003, p. 35). While during the Cold War Europe frequently depended

upon the US and the Atlantic Alliance for military support such as transport or logistics,

Downloaded by [University of Hamburg] at 09:15 24 March 2014 256 Elke Krahmann

private military companies are now offering these services on the international market.

Until the expected completion of the Future Large Transport Aircraft in 2009, the UK is

relying on private airlift capacity such as Antonov aeroplanes, which have been used

during the international intervention in Kosovo (NAO, 2000, p. 34; Airbus, 2005). Other

contracts for the private provision of military transport capabilities include the six roll-on-

roll-off ferries of the British Armed Forces which are chartered on a permanent or ad hoc

basis under a PFI scheme running until 2024 (MoD, 2003).

Finally, these changes are facilitating the transformation of security policy decision-

making and implementation in Europe and North America. While traditionally

governments and, especially, the military have heavily relied on hierarchical structures,

the introduction of new public management principles in order to increase cost-efﬁciency

and the growing reliance on the capabilities of private security companies have encouraged

the establishment of more horizontal relationships. Through public private partnerships

and private ﬁnance initiatives, these arrangements move away from decision making and

implementation structures in which the government directed private service suppliers to

cooperative relations in which private ﬁrms are involved as partners in deﬁning policies

and their implementation (MoD, 2004b).

Moreover, due to the above developments, the implementation of security policies in

Europe and North America is becoming more and more fragmented and allows for a

greater role of private military companies. Although most security policy decisions are still

taken in the ﬁnal instance by national governments and international organizations,

private companies not only implement these policies at the national level, but also,

increasingly abroad. Moreover, the partnership arrangements between public and private

actors give private military companies more freedom in the way they implement security

policies. In fact, the idea of public private partnerships is based on the assumption that

private companies will be able to operate the more cost-efﬁciently the less they are

impeded by governmental or contractual direction. This collaborative spirit, however,

presumes that private military companies will voluntarily operate in the best interest of the

government and will not exploit their freedom to increase proﬁts.

The preceding analysis has suggested that

the proliferation of private military

companies in Europe and North America can be explained by the shift from ‘government’

to ‘security governance’. As has been suggested, the degree of this shift can vary

considerably across different dimensions. Whereas it seems to have progressed most in

the geographical and functional

fragmentation of

security policy making, other

Downloaded by [University of Hamburg] at 09:15 24 March 2014 Private military industry in Europe and North America

257

dimensions such as decision-making and implementation are still in the process of

adapting to new modes of governance. The following section examines how these

differences can lead to governance failure.

Private military companies and governance failure

While the growing use of private military companies helps to lower the pressures on the

resources of governments and international organizations, it has also been linked to a

range of governance failures (Isenberg, 2004, p. 39 – 49; Taulbee, 2000, p. 436; Zarate, 1998,

p. 77). This section suggests that the shift from government to security governance can

help us understand why.

It proposes

that governance failures arise when the

transformation from a system of centralized ‘government’ to a fragmented system of

‘security governance’ in some of the identiﬁed seven dimensions is not matched by

congruent changes in the other dimensions. The results are internal inconsistencies, which

can lead to normative and practical tensions. Normative failures speciﬁcally arise when

changes in the policy process are not consistent with prevailing norms and beliefs.

Practical governance failures on the other hand emerge from mismatches across the non-

ideational dimensions of

‘government’ and ‘governance’ as ideal

types, such as

geographical and functional scope, resource distribution, and policy-making and

implementation. The following discusses three sets of governance failures in detail: lack of

transparency and accountability, loss of control, and decreased efﬁciency.

Transparency and accountability

Lack of transparency and public accountability are among the most frequently noted

problems in the governance of private military companies (Singer, 2003, p. 152 – 154;

Holmqvist, 2005, pp.28 –29; Grant 1998; Howe 1998; Silverstein 1997; Lovering 1998, p.

233; Edmonds, 1999, p. 126). Both are essentially normative concerns and can be explained

by the observation that the fragmentation of functions and resources among public and

private security providers clashes with persistent norms concerning responsible

‘government’ and democratic decision-making processes, which have been developed in

Europe and North America during the Cold War era.

One way in which the emergence of security governance is challenging established

norms and decision-making arrangements is the dissolution of clear lines of responsibility.

Downloaded by [University of Hamburg] at 09:15 24 March 2014 258 Elke Krahmann

While under ‘government’ political responsibility rests with the legislature and executive,

in ‘governance’

it is distributed among a multiplicity of public and private actors

(Krahmann, 2003b). Since these actors cooperate in the making and implementation of

security policies, no single actor can be held accountable for the outcomes of this process.

For instance, in Iraq, public accountability and oversight has been made more difﬁcult not

only by the employment of a large number of private military ﬁrms for services ranging

from the provision of military logistics and training to the interrogation of detainees in the

infamous Abu Ghraib prison, but also because these ﬁrms frequently use national and

local subcontractors (Isenberg, 2004, pp. 69 – 71; Spearin, 2003, pp. 39 – 40).

Moreover, governments and private military companies are accountable to different

actors. While governments are answerable to the electorate, private military companies are

responsible to their shareholders and customers (Edmonds, 1999, p. 126; Markusen, 2003,

p. 488). Only the former is accountable to the public and hence under the scrutiny of

parliamentary inquiries and the media. Although private armaments and security

companies make some data available to shareholders, detailed information on where

armaments and services are sold and for what purpose are not published for a broader

audience (Markusen 2003, p. 6). Even when governments employ private military

companies, the details of these contracts are rarely made public. Moreover, while there has

been increasing demand for the publication of data on national arms exports, the military

service industry has so far avoided calls for greater transparency.

It can thus be argued that the perceived loss of transparency and accountability due to

the outsourcing of security functions to private military companies is a consequence of

norms that have been developed and, so far, enforced within the context of centralized

structures of ‘government’ which are unsuited to the emerging system of ‘governance’.

Governmental control

The loss of governmental control over security policy is the second normative problem,

which can be explained by the shift from ‘government’ to ‘security governance’ (Grant,

1998, p. 2; Howe, 1998; Zarate, 1998, p. 146). Speciﬁcally, the progressive privatization and

internationalization of the security industry and the consequent fragmentation of security

policy making in terms of geography, function and distribution of resources contributes to

the reduction of immediate governmental control over national and international security.

However, while the fragmentation of political authority among multiple actors is not

Downloaded by [University of Hamburg] at 09:15 24 March 2014 Private military industry in Europe and North America

259

synonymous with governance failure in policy sectors such as education or the

environment, it is perceived as a problem in security because the loss of governmental

control contradicts persistent popular beliefs in European and North America according

to which the state should have the monopoly on the legitimate use of violence and be

sovereign in its provision of national security. Additional problems arise from the fact that

the interests of proﬁt-oriented private security companies are not necessarily congruent

with those of a government or the public (Markusen, 2003, p. 473).

The loss of governmental control over security governance primarily appears to be due

to two developments. The ﬁrst development is the ability of private security ﬁrms to evade

national controls. The second is the changing balance of power between the state and

private security companies. The internationalization of the private military industry has

contributed to both. In particular, it has enabled private military companies to exploit

weak controls over the private military service industry. The absence of strict and

comprehensive national and international regulation is due to the relatively recent and

exponential growth of private military companies that began in the 1990s. Governments

and international organizations in Europe have only been catching up with this

development in the last few years (Krahmann, 2005b; Krahmann, 2005c), while the United

States has required licences for the export of private military services for some time

(Nossal, 2001, p. 465; Taulbee, 2000, p.440; Zarate, 1998, p. 138).

In addition, the ability of Western governments to control the private military sector has

been reduced by changes in the relative power of public and private actors (Singer, 2003, p.

187). With the outsourcing of military functions to private military companies,

governments in Europe and North America are becoming more dependent upon private

actors for the provision of security. The expertise and information advantage of private

military companies and the simultaneous erosion of relevant expertise among public

agencies as the consequence of persistent outsourcing allow private ﬁrms to inﬂuence

governmental security policies (Markusen, 2003, p. 484; Spearin, 2003, p. 37). Today,

private military corporations are as much involved in the deﬁnition of security threats and

policies as in their implementation (Spearin, 2003, p. 35). Moreover, ﬂexible modern

contracts based on ‘indeﬁnite-delivery and indeﬁnite-quantity’ and ‘cost-plus award fee’

principles grant private security actors more freedom in how they implement security

tasks identiﬁed by the government (GAO, 2000).

Finally, the consolidation of the military equipment and service sectors into a decreasing

number of large corporations, such MPRI-L-3 Communications (acquired 2000), Vinnell-

Downloaded by [University of Hamburg] at 09:15 24 March 2014 260 Elke Krahmann

Northrop Gumman (2002), DynCorp-CSC (2003) and Group 4-Securior (2004), is

reducing the ability of governments to choose between competing private security

providers (SIPRI, 2005; Markusen, 2003, p. 478). Even where governments are dissatisﬁed

with the provision of services, they may have little choice but to continue contracts so as

not to endanger ongoing operations (Spearin, 2003, p. 37). A recent example of this

dilemma has thus resulted in the decision of the US government not to suspend payments

to Kellogg, Brown and Root (KBR) for overcharging for food provided to troops in Iraq

because KBR suggested that this might cause the ‘interruption of crucial support services

to the US military’ (New York Times, 2005a).

Lack of efﬁciency

Another governance failure that has been noted in Europe and North America is lack of

cost efﬁciency in the making and implementation of security policies. In particular,

Kellogg, Brown and Root has repeatedly been accused of overcharging the US armed forces

for services provided under its LOGCAP contract in Iraq. Thus, the US Defense Contract

Audit Agency found evidence that the company overcharged the government by $108

million for fuel imports (New York Times, 2005b). In addition, auditors have accused KBR

of excess charging the armed forces $160 million for meals in base camps all over Iraq

(GAO, 2004, pp. 26 – 27; New York Times, 2004a). Altogether, it is estimated that KBR has

overcharged the US government by an estimated $2 billion for contract work in Iraq

valued at $10 billion (New York Times, 2004b).

Already in the former Yugoslavia, KBR had been criticized by the US Government

Accounting Ofﬁce (GAO) for exploiting the ﬂexibility of its indeﬁnite-delivery, indeﬁnite-

quantity contract for support services to US operations in the region in order to increase

its proﬁts (GAO, 2000). Examples included the installing of a 100 per cent electricity

backup for US military bases in Kosovo, although only a few key functions such as the

military hospital needed such backups. Other cases of over-provision included the bases’

ﬁre ﬁghting services and the cleaning of military quarters for which KBR set much higher

standards than those used by the military itself.

That cost-efﬁciency can be a problem in security governance is especially interesting

because the main argument for the shift from public to private service providers is the

belief

that private companies can offer services at better value for money than

governmental agencies. However,

if viewed within the context of

the shift

from

Downloaded by [University of Hamburg] at 09:15 24 March 2014 Private military industry in Europe and North America

261

‘government’

to ‘security governance’,

it

is little surprising.

In particular,

these

inefﬁciencies can be attributed to the mismatch between changes in security policy-

making in terms of geography, function, resource distribution and interests on the one

hand, and traditional governmental decision-making and implementation arrangements

on the other.

In particular,

it can be argued that

these decision-making and

implementation structures will have to be adjusted to governance mechanisms because

the structure, interests and actions of private military companies are not necessarily

congruent with the policy imperatives of the governments that employ them or the states

in which they are based. Such governance mechanisms include the development of

oversight and control measures appropriate for dealing with fragmented and marketized

service provision (Markusen, 2003, p. 493; GAO, 2004).

While the shift from ‘government’ to ‘governance’ appears to be the cause of some

problems in the provision of national and international security since the end of the Cold

War, it can be argued that new modes of governance can also help to address these

problems. The next section discusses the utility of three types of governance mechanisms

in particular: self-regulation, contracts, and national and international legislation.

New modes of governance

Due to their focus on mercenaries and private military companies in weak or failing states

in the Third World, many analyses have been very sceptical about the possibility of

addressing the problems associated with the growth of the private military sector. This

section suggests that governance failures within the private military sectors in Europe and

North America can be explained by the shift from ‘government’ to ‘governance’, but that

these ideal types can also help to indicate how the private security sector in industrialized

countries might be governed. Speciﬁcally, they are a useful heuristic device that indicates

how to resolve the tensions inherent in the shift from ‘government’ to ‘governance’.

Theoretically, there appear to be three options to achieve this transition successfully. The

ﬁrst option would be to return those dimensions that have progressed most towards

‘governance’ to more centralized forms of security policy-making. The second option

would be to develop new mechanisms to overcome the differences between the dimensions

without changing their modes of policy-making. The third option would be to endorse

‘governance’ principles in all dimensions. This section will focus on three mechanisms in

particular: self-regulation, contractual obligation and regulation.

Downloaded by [University of Hamburg] at 09:15 24 March 2014 262 Elke Krahmann

Each of these mechanisms appears to embody to different degrees the three theoretical

options for dealing with governance failures that have been outlined above. Self-regulation

and contracts can be understood as strengthening fragmented ‘governance’ as the

overriding principle of policy-making. Increased governmental and intergovernmental

regulation of private military services on the other hand can be viewed as an attempt to

return control to centralized ‘government’. Examining each mechanism in turn, this

section discusses the effectiveness of these policies.

Self-regulation

Self-regulation typically

refers

to a number of mechanisms

that

can be

used either unilaterally or

in combination. They include the licensing of

individuals and companies,

the

setting of

training requirements, and the

establishment of minimum standards of

security and insurance, as well as

managerial, ethical and operative guidelines. By establishing these standards, self-

regulation cannot only increase the transparency and accountability of contractors, but

also their cost-efﬁciency.

In the private military sector, ﬁrst attempts at self-regulation have been made by the

International Peace Operations Association, which has designed a voluntary ‘Code of

Conduct’ to which major companies such as ArmorGroup, MPRI and Blackwater have

signed up (IPOA, 2005). Other companies have drawn up their own ethics codes, such as

Control Risk Group (CRG, 2005), or established company-wide training standards and

courses. Additional standards can be found among national security sector organizations

such as the British Security Industry Association, which requires ISO 9001 certiﬁcation

and has established standards of proper conduct to which member companies must

subscribe (BSIA, 2005).

In spite of these efforts, self-regulation of the private military and security industry has

so far been limited. On the one hand, few companies have signed up to voluntary national

or international standards, and on the other hand, many standards lack convincing

monitoring or enforcement structures. Moreover, while a licence by an industry

association can improve the public credibility of a private military or a security company,

it is not legally required. Customers may prefer cheaper, non-licensed ﬁrms. Finally,

transnational companies can evade the controls established by national associations

through registering or working abroad.

Downloaded by [University of Hamburg] at 09:15 24 March 2014 Private military industry in Europe and North America

263

In addition to the lack of, and problems affecting, the self-regulation of the private

military industry in practice, the theoretical framework proposed in this article suggests

that the ability of self-regulation to address normative governance failures, such as lack of

transparency, accountability and control,

is already in theory limited. Even if self-

regulation were effective, it will be considered insufﬁcient as long as popular norms

demand that elected governments are accountable and in control of the provision of

national and international security rather than private companies. It follows that for self-

regulation to be able to address the perceived lack of transparency, accountability, control

and efﬁciency in the private military sector, there will have to be a normative change from

‘government’ to ‘governance’ in security.

Contracts

In addition to self-regulation, contracts have been proposed as another mechanism for

improving the transparency, accountability, control and cost-efﬁciency of the security

industry. Contracts can place similar requirements on private military companies as self-

regulation. In particular, governments can ensure that contracts oblige private military

companies to publish data on contracts and operations, establish direct channels of

control, collaboration and communication between private contractors and the

responsible government agencies, and increase the efﬁciency of private ﬁrms by clearly

deﬁning tasks and including penalties for non-compliance (Isenberg, 2004, p. 40).

Moreover, contracts between governments and private military ﬁrms can overcome the

problem of private ﬁrms evading national controls because companies are under direct

contractual obligation to the government

for which they are operating—whether

nationally or abroad.

According to the theoretical framework used in the article, contracts are particularly

suited for overcoming governance failures created by the shift from ‘government’ to

‘governance’ because they involve neither a return to the former, nor demand the full-scale

adoption of norms associated with the latter, as does self-regulation. However, there are

inherent limitations to the contractual approach to governance. In particular, it can be

argued that contracts can only address normative concerns such as lack of transparency,

accountability and public control, when governments are outsourcing military functions

to private providers. Public accountability and transparency are not improved in contracts

between private military ﬁrms and private businesses, which form a growing pool of

Downloaded by [University of Hamburg] at 09:15 24 March 2014 264 Elke Krahmann

customers. In addition, practical experience from the former Yugoslavia and Iraq

illustrates that government agencies are frequently incapable of monitoring and punishing

failure to comply with the increasingly complex contracts for the provision of military

support services in open-ended international interventions (GAO, 2000; 2004). Some

authors even suggest that the ability of defence ministries to audit public-private contracts

will further decline as continued military outsourcing reduces government expertise in

these areas and creates long-term dependencies (Markusen, 2003, p. 479). In sum,

contracts can only be an effective means of resolving normative and practical issues related

to outsourcing if governments improve their capabilities in terms of managing and

monitoring long-term commercial relations with private military companies.

Regulation

National and international governmental regulation can apply the same standards as self-

regulation or contracts. Unlike the latter, however,

it can help to ensure public

transparency, accountability, control and efﬁciency not only when governments outsource

military services, but also when private military companies are employed by other private

actors at home or abroad. Moreover, because national and international regulation

represents a return to centralized ‘government’ as a governing principle, it can help to

resolve both the normative and practical governance failures previously examined.

As a result, national and international regulation of the private military sector has

become increasingly popular in Europe and North America. Among the member states of

the European Union, national regulations concerning private security services include

personal security and background checks, increasing levels of mandatory training and

requirements for the appropriate use and keeping of weapons (CoESS, 2004; Krahmann,

2005b). These regulations also apply to private military companies if they provide

support services such as security for military installations within these countries.

Moreover, legislation speciﬁcally directed at controlling private military companies is

being considered by countries such as the UK and Germany in order to control the export

of private security and military services abroad (Independent, 2004; CDU, 2004).

In addition to national controls, there has been the development of similar regulations

with regard to private military contractors operating in international interventions. In Iraq,

these include the vetting and training of personnel as well as the registration and safe

storing of company weapons that are only to be carried with government-issued licences

Downloaded by [University of Hamburg] at 09:15 24 March 2014 Private military industry in Europe and North America

265

(Isenberg, 2004, p. 41). These regulations are implemented by the Iraqi Ministries of

Trade and Interior for companies working in Iraq (CPA, 2004) or by the US Chief

of Mission in the case of private contractors employed by the US government or

the multinational forces in Iraq (USG, 2004), the latter thereby setting new standards

for the employment of private military contractors in international operations.

Conclusion

This article has sought to demonstrate that the rise of the private security industry in

Europe and North America is analytically distinct from the employment of military ﬁrms

in the Third World. It suggests that the shift from ‘government’ to ‘security governance’

can help to understand this difference in three ways. First, it puts the proliferation of

private security ﬁrms in Europe and North America into a theoretical context. This

context is very different from that of ‘failed’ statehood that has contributed to the use of

private military companies in developing countries. In the transatlantic region, the growth

of the private security industry is part of a general transformation towards ‘governance’ in

which policy sectors that had been centralized before and during the Cold War are being

(re)privatized. It suggests that the new role of private military companies in Europe and

North America is to a larger degree comparable with similar developments in policy

sectors, such as policing, transport and health, than with the emergence of mercenary

ﬁrms in developing countries that have never acquired centralized capabilities.

Second, the proposed theoretical framework explains why this development has led to a

perceived loss of transparency, accountability, control and efﬁciency. It argues that these

governance failures can be attributed to the internal tensions that emerge from the

transformation from a centralized system of ‘government’ to a fragmented system of

‘governance’. Although these problems are widely discussed in the literature, this article

helps to understand why they are considered failures in the ﬁrst place. Moreover, by

putting them within the context of ‘governance’, this article highlights the commonalities

of the problems encountered in the privatization of military services with other privatized

policy sectors.

Finally, this article explains why some attempts of resolving these governance failures,

notably self-regulation and contracts, may be considered insufﬁcient even if their

effectiveness is improved. It proposes that as long as popular norms in Europe and

Downloaded by [University of Hamburg] at 09:15 24 March 2014 266 Elke Krahmann

North America require that security is accountable and controllable through the state and

democratic government, private and market mechanisms for enhancing transparency and

oversight will not meet expected standards.

Acknowledgements

The author should like to acknowledge funding from the United States Institute of Peace

and the German Academic Exchange Service for this research.

Endnotes

1. The following will use apostrophes for ‘government’ and

Arnold, Guy, 1999. Mercenaries. The Scourge of the Third

‘governance’ when speaking of

these ideal

types as

World. Macmillan, Basingstoke.

examples of governing structures, whereas government

Bitzinger, Richard A., 1994. ‘The Globalization of the Arms

without apostrophes will refer to national executives and

Industry. The Next Proliferation Challenge’.

Inter-

their agencies.

national Security 19(2), 170 – 198.

2. Measures of de-governmentalization have been proposed

BSIA (British Security Industry Association), 2005, Joining

elsewhere, see for instance Klaus Dieter Wolf (2001)

the BSIA, http://www.bsia.co.uk/join.html (accessed 17

‘Private Actors and the Legitimacy of Governance Beyond

March 2005).

the State’, paper presented at

the ECPR workshop

‘Governance and Democratic Legitimacy’, Grenoble 6–

11 April, at http://www.essex.ac.uk/ECPR/events/joint-

sessions/paperarchive/grenoble/ws5/wolf.pdf (accessed 10

April 2005). However, a detailed assessment of the degree

of de-governmentalization is beyond the scope of this

article, which ﬁrst seeks to demonstrate the relevance of

the governance concept for the analysis of transatlantic

security.

3. More recently, statements argue that

‘[t]here is no

predisposition towards either public or private sector’ and

that the MoD is taking a ‘pragmatic’ approach. See ‘Public

Private Partnerships in the MoD’, at http://www.mod.uk

/business/ppp/intro.htm (accessed 6 June 2004).

References

Brooks, Doug, 2000. ‘Messiahs or Mercenaries? The Future of

International Military Services’.

International Peace-

keeping 7(4), 129 – 144.

Carver, Michael, 1992. Tightrope Walking: British Defence

Policy since 1945. Random Century, London.

CDU, 2004. ‘Antrag – Nichtstaatliche milita¨rische Sicher-

heitsunternehmen kontrollieren’ Deutscher Bundes-

tag—Drucksache 15/3808, 28 September, http://www.

ruprecht-polenz.de/presse04 /Antrag-Sicherheitsﬁr-

men.pdf (accessed 6 June 2004)

Cleaver, Gerry, 2000. ‘Subcontracting Military Power: The

Privatization of Security in Contemporary Sub-Saharan

Africa’. Crime, Law & Social Change 33(1– 2), 131 – 149.

CoESS (European Confederation of Security Services), 2004.

Panoramic Overview of Private Security Industry in the 25

Member States of the European Union, http://www.coess.

org/studies.htm (accessed 17 March 2005).

CRG (Control Risks Group) (2005), Ethics Code, http://

Adams, Thomas K., 1999. ‘The New Mercenaries and the

www.crg.com/html/service_level2.php?id=149 (accessed

Privatization of Conﬂict’. Parameters, Summer 103 –116.

17 March 2005).

Airbus, 2005. The A400M Programme, http://www.

Cottey, Andrew, 2000. ‘Europe’s New Subregionalism’. The

airbusmilitary.com/commitment.html# (accessed 17

Journal of Strategic Studies 23(2), 23 – 47.

March 2005).

CPA (Coalition Provisional Authority), 2004.

‘Status of

Aning, Emmanuel Kwesi, 2001. ‘Whither Africa’s Security in

the Coalition Provisional Authority, MNF—Iraq,

the New Millennium: State- or Mercenary-induced

Certain Missions and Personnel in Iraq’, Order Number

Stability?’. Global Society 15(2), 149 – 171.

17 (Revised), 27 June, http://www.iraqcoalition.org/

Downloaded by [University of Hamburg] at 09:15 24 March 2014 Private military industry in Europe and North America

267

regulations/20040627_CPAORD_17_Status_of_Coali-

Krahmann, Elke, 2003a. ‘Conceptualising Security Govern-

tion_Rev_with_Annex_A.pdf (accessed 17 March 2005).

ance’. Cooperation and Conﬂict 38(1), 5– 26.

Croft, Stuart and Dunn, David H., 1990. ‘The Impact of the

Krahmann, Elke, 2003b.

‘National, Regional and Global

Defence Budget on Arms Control Policy’, in Hoffmann,

Governance: One Phenomenon or Many?’. Global

M., (ed.), UK Arms Control Policy in the 1990s.

Governance 9(3), 323 –346.

Manchester University Press, Manchester, pp. 53– 69.

Krahmann, Elke, 2005a. ‘Security Governance and Networks:

Edmonds, Martin, 1999. ‘Defense Privatisation: From State

New Theoretical Perspectives in Transatlantic Security’.

Enterprise to Commercialism’. Cambridge Review of

Cambridge Review of International Affairs 18(1), 19– 34.

International Affairs 13(1), 114 – 129.

Krahmann, Elke,

forthcoming 2005b.

‘Private Military

GAO (United States Government Accounting Ofﬁce) 2000.

Services in the United Kingdom and Germany: Between

Contingency Operations. Army Should Do More to

Partnership and Regulation’. European Security 13(2).

Control Contract Cost in the Balkans. GAO, Washington.

Krahmann, Elke,

forthcoming 2005c.

‘Regulating Private

GAO (renamed: United States Government Accountability

Military Companies: What Role for the EU?’. Con-

Ofﬁce), 2004. Military Operations. DOD’s Extensive Use

temporary Security Policy 26(1), 1 – 23.

of Logistics Support Contracts Requires Strengthened

Lilly, Damian, 2000. The Privatization of Security and

Oversight. GAO, Washington.

Peacebuilding: A Framework for Action. International

Gates, Susan M. and Robbert, Albert A., 1998. Comparing the

Alert, London.

Cost of DoD Military and Civil Service Personnel

Lovering, John, 1998.

‘Rebuilding the European Defence

(RAND, MR-980-OSD), http://www.rand.org/publica-

Industry in a Competitive World: Intergovernmentalism

tions/MR/MR980/ (accessed 10 April 2005).

and the Leading Role Played by Companies’, in Kaldor,

Grant, Bruce D., 1998. U.S. Military Expertise for Sale: Private

M., Albrecht, U. and Schme´der, G., (eds), Restructuring

Military Consultants as a Tool of Foreign Policy. Strategy

the Global Military Sector. The End of Military Fordism.

Essay Competition Essay, Institute for National Strategic

Pinter, London, pp. 216 – 238.

Studies. http://www.ndu.edu/inss/books/essaysch4.html

Mandel, Robert, 2002. Armies without States: The Privatiza-

(accessed 17 March 2005).

tion of Security. Lynne Rienner, Boulder.

Greenwood, David, 1991. ‘Expenditure and Management’, in

Markusen, Ann R., 2003.

‘The Case Against Privatizing

Byrd Peter, (ed.), British Defence Policy: Thatcher and

National Security’. Governance 16(4), 471 – 501.

Beyond. Philip Allan, New York, pp. 36– 66.

Matthew, Ron and Parker, Judith, 1999. ‘Prime Contracting

Guardian 2004. ‘Pentagon Link to Guinea Coup Plot’, 27

in Major Defense Contracts’. Defense Analysis 15(1),

September. http://www.guardian.co.uk/international/

27– 42.

story/0,,1313344,00.html (accessed 10 April 2005).

MoD, 2003. ‘MoD takes delivery of full Ro-Ro ship service

Holmqvist, Caroline, 2005. Private Security Companies. The

twenty months early’, http://www.mod.uk/dpa/news/

Case for Regulation, SIPRI Policy Paper No. 9, SIPRI,

pn2003/jun03/roro.htm (accessed 17 March 2005).

Stockholm.

MoD, 2004a. ‘What Do You Know About. . .? The Private

Howe, Herbert, 1998. ‘Global Order and Security Privatiza-

Finance Initiative’ http://www.mod.uk/aboutus/key-

tion’. Strategic Forum 140(May), http://www.ndu.edu/

facts/factﬁles/pﬁ.htm (accessed 6 June 2004).

inss/strforum/forum140.html (accessed 17 March 2005).

MoD, 2004b. ‘PFI Guidelines: Case Studies’, http://www.mod.

Independent 2004. ‘No More Must They Cry Havoc and Let

uk/business/pﬁ/guidelines/case_studies.htm (accessed 6

Slip the Dogs of War’, 28 November.

June 2004).

IPOA (International Peace Operations Association), 2005.

NAO, 2000. Report by the Comptroller and Auditor General,

Code of Conduct, 31 March, http://www.ipoaonline.org/

Ministry of Defence, Kosovo: The Financial Manage-

code.htm (accessed 17 March 2005).

ment of Military Operations, HC530 Session 1999 –

Isenberg, David, 2004. A Fistful of Contractors. The Case for a

2000. The Stationery Ofﬁce, London.

Pragmatic Assessment of Private Military Companies in

New York Times, 2004a.

‘FBI

Interviews Halliburton

Iraq, Research Report 4, British America Security

Whistleblower’, 25 November, http://www.nytimes.

Information Council, London.

com/aponline/national/AP-Halliburton.html (accessed

James, Andrew D., 2000. The Place of the UK Defense Industry

17 March 2005).

in its National

Innovation System: Co-evolution of

New York Times, 2004b. ‘Pentagon Auditor Urges Army to

National,

Sectoral

and Technological

Systems.

Withhold Some Payments to Halliburton’, 25 November,

Peace Studies Program Occasional Paper 25, Cornell

http://www.nytimes.com/2004/11/25/politics/25halli-

University, Ithaca.

burton.html (accessed 17 March 2005).

Downloaded by [University of Hamburg] at 09:15 24 March 2014 268 Elke Krahmann

New York Times, 2005a. ‘US Army Won’t Withhold Payment

Skoens, Elisabeth and Wulf, Herbert, 1994. ‘The Internation-

to Halliburton’, 3 February, http://www.nytimes.com/

alization of

the Arms

Industry’. Annals of

the

reuters/business/business-iraq-halliburton.html

American Academy of Political and Social Science 535,

(accessed 17 March 2005).

43– 57.

New York Times, 2005b. ‘Excess Fuel Billing by Halliburton in

Smith, Ron, 1993. ‘Resources, Commitments and the Defence

Iraq Is Put at $108 Million’, 15 March 2005, http://www.

Industry’, in Clarke, M. and Sabin, P., (eds), British

nytimes.com/2005/03/15/politics/15halliburton.html

Defence Choices for the Twenty-First Century. Brassey’s,

(accessed 17 March 2005).

London, pp. 73 – 89.

Nossal, Kim Richard, 2001. ‘Global Governance and National

Spearin, Christopher, 2003. ‘American Hegemony Incorpor-

Interests: Regulating Transnational Security Corpor-

ated: The Importance and Implications of Military

ations in the Post-Cold War Era’. Melbourne Journal of

Contractors in Iraq’. Contemporary Security Policy 24(3),

International Law 2(2), 459 – 476.

26– 47.

Observer, 2004. ‘Revealed: How Britain Was Told Full Coup

Sunday Times, 1998. ‘Cook Snared in Arms for Coup Inquiry’

Plan’, 28 November, http://www.guardian.co.uk/equa-

3 May, http://www.times-archive.co.uk/news/pages/sti/

torialguinea/story/0,15013,1361342,00.html (accessed

98/05/03/stinwenws01026.html?1621558 (accessed 17

10 April 2005).

March 2005).

Pint, Ellen M. and Hart, Rachel, 2001. Public-Private

Taulbee, James Larry, 2000. ‘Mercenaries, Private Armies and

Partnerships: Proceedings of the U.S.–U.K. Conference

Security Companies in Contemporary Policy’. Inter-

on Military Installation Assets, Operations and Services

national Politics 37(4), 433 – 456.

(RAND, CF-164-A), http://www.rand.org/publica-

Times, 1998. ‘Cook Faces Commons Row over Arms Deal

tions/CF/CF164/ (accessed 10 April 2005).

Licences’, 4 May, http://www.times-archive.co.uk/news/

Silverstein, Ken, 1997. ‘Privatizing War. How Affairs of State Are

pages/tim/98/05/04/timfgnafr02002.html?1621558

Outsourced to Corporations Beyond Public Control’.

(accessed 17 March 2005).

National Magazine, 4 August, http//:faculty.lls.edu/-

USG (United States Government), 2004. ‘Interagency Policy

manheim/ns/priv_war.htm (accessed 17 March 2005).

Memorandum—Contractor Security in Iraq’, 30 June,

Singer, Peter W., 2003. Corporate Warriors The Rise of the

http://ipoaonline-iraq.org/archives/Joint%20DOS-

Privatized Military Industry. Cornell University Press,

DOD%20letter.doc (accessed 17 March 2005).

Ithaca NY.

Zarate, Juan Carlos, 1998. ‘The Emergence of a New Dog of

SIPRI, 2005.

‘Mergers, Acquisitions and Joint Ventures’,

War: Private International Security Companies, Inter-

http://www.sipri.org/contents/milap/milex/aprod/

national Law and the New World Disorder’. Stanford

m_and_a_jv.htm (accessed 10 April 2005).

Journal of International Law 34(1), 75 – 162.

Downloaded by [University of Hamburg] at 09:15 24 March 2014 