STUDY

Trade Unions in Germany
Organisation, Environment, Challenges

HEINER DRIBBUSCH AND PETER BIRKE
May 2012

n

n

n

n

n

n

The trade unions in Germany and the system of social partnership and codetermina-
tion have undergone a number of developments in recent years the upshot of which 
is that the workers’ side has been weakened.

At the end of 2010 only 19 per cent of employees were members of a trade union. 
This represents a decrease of around 5 per cent over 10 years.

This has affected wage development insofar as there has been no compensation 
for inflation since 2004. In most of the years in question, real income fell. In the EU, 
Germany brought up the rear with regard to real-wage development between 2000 
and 2009.

Nevertheless,  in  the  wake  of  the  economic  and  financial  crisis  various  collectively 
agreed and company-level instruments have contributed substantially to job security, 
more specifically collectively agreed and company-level measures involving flexible 
working time, company-level job security agreements and (further) financial conces-
sions on the part of employees.

The positive employment balance in the crisis applies more to core workforces than 
to  the  growing  number  of  precarious  employees.  Fixed-term  employees  in  many 
instances did not have their contracts renewed and many temporary workers soon 
lost their jobs.

Against this background, IG Metall in particular is focusing more strongly on tem-
porary workers. It achieved its first collective bargaining breakthrough in this regard 
in the steel industry in September 2010: for the first time, equal pay for temporary 
workers was laid down in an industry-wide agreement.

    International 
    Trade Union Policy

HEINER DRIBBUSCH & PETER BIRKE  |  TRADE UNIONS IN GERMANY

Contents

1.  The DGB and Its Affiliated Trade Unions  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . 2
 
1.1 The DGB Trade Unions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2
1.2 Political Orientation  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . 3
 
 
1.3 Membership Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3
1.4 Organisation and Member Recruitment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .4
 
 
1.5 Financing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .5
 
2.  Other Trade Unions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .5
2.1 CGB .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .6
 
 
2.2 Non-confederation Trade Unions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .6

3.  The Collective Agreements System and Wage Development  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . 7
 
3.1 Wage Development  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . 7
 
4.  Codetermination and the Right to Strike   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . 9
 
4.1 Works Councils  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . 9
4.2 Enterprise Codetermination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
 
 
4.3 A Restrictive Right to Strike . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11

5.  Social Partnership and Countervailing Power. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .12
 
5.1 Changes since the mid-1990s  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . 13
5.2 Crisis Management 2008   –  2010  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
 
 

1

HEINER DRIBBUSCH & PETER BIRKE  |  TRADE UNIONS IN GERMANY

The trade union systems in European countries differ in 
many  respects,  reflecting  different  political  traditions. 
While in Austria or Germany unified trade unions (Ein-
heitsgewerkschaften:  trade  unions  open  to  all  work-
ers  regardless  of  their  ideological  leanings  or  political 
convictions)  oriented  towards  the  Social  Democratic 
Party became dominant after 1945, in countries such as 
Italy and France trade unions with more concrete ideo- 
logical or party political links (Richtungsgewerkschaften), 
whether Christian or leftwing, have been important. In 
countries such as Portugal and Spain, but also in Cen-
tral and Eastern Europe – and in Poland in particular – 
the various political orientations developed only on the 
basis of the freedom to organise which emerged in the 
1970s or after 1989. Not only trade unions’ political tra-
ditions, but also their organisational principles differ. For 
example, sometimes professional associations and some- 
times industry trade unions organise whole sectors; and 
while in the Scandinavian countries trade unions provide 
social  security  benefits  and  services,  elsewhere  there 
are  trade  unions  that  do  not  have  such  organisational 
underpinning. 

Germany’s  Constitution  –  the  so-called  »Basic  Law«  – 
guarantees  freedom  of  association.  For  workers,  that 
means  the  right  to  organise  in  trade  unions.  No  one 
may  be  prevented  from  joining  a  trade  union.  At  the 
same  time,  trade  union  membership  is  voluntary:  no 
one may be compelled to join. In contrast to many other 
countries, German trade unions are not involved in dis-
bursing unemployment benefits or in pensions and pen-
sion  payments.  The  central  task  of  the  trade  unions  is 
collective bargaining.

of unaffiliated trade unions. Altogether, just under one 
in five employees were members of a trade union. Net 
union  density  –  that  is,  the  proportion  of  employees 
who  are  trade  union  members  –  was  around  19  per 
cent,  which  is  around  5  percentage  points  lower  than 
10 years previously.

By  far  the  biggest  trade  union  confederation  in  Ger-
many  is  the  German  Confederation  of  Trade  Unions 
(DGB),  founded  in  1949,  whose  eight  affiliated  trade 
unions  represented  around  6.2  million  members  at 
the end of 2011, more than three-quarters of all trade 
union  members  in  the  country.  The  DGB  represents 
the  general  interests  of  its  individual  trade  unions  in 
relation to political decision-makers and associations at 
federal,  Länder  and  local  government  level.  It  is  also 
formally responsible for mediation in the event of dis-
putes  between  its  member  trade  unions.  The  DGB  is 
financed  as  a  confederation  by  the  individual  trade 
unions. Workers are not members of the DGB as such, 
but of its affiliated trade unions, to which they pay their 
membership dues.

The confederation’s position in relation to its individual 
trade unions is relatively weak and is largely limited to 
representative  matters.  The  important  policy  decision-
making is carried out by the individual trade unions. As a 
rule, the DGB is not directly involved in negotiations with 
employers’ organisations and companies or in collective 
bargaining and industrial action.

1.1 The DGB Trade Unions

In what follows, we provide a brief overview of the or-
ganisation  of  German  trade  unions  and  of  the  institu-
tional  conditions  in  which  they  operate.  We  shall  also 
look briefly at wage development and the broad outlines 
of  industrial  relations.  Our  focus,  however,  is  the  Ger-
man Confederation of Trade Unions (Deutscher Gewerk-
schaftsbund or DGB) and its affiliated trade unions.

Within  the  DGB  the  principle  of  one  company,  one 
trade  union  applies.  The  eight  individual  trade  unions 
view themselves as industry trade unions, organising all 
employees in the branches, companies and departments 
within its organisational remit. Furthermore, large multi-
branch trade unions have emerged as a result of mergers 
and regroupings.

1. The DGB and Its Affiliated Trade Unions

As of the end of 2010, around 8.1 million people were 
members  of  trade  unions  in  Germany.  These  trade 
union  members  are  divided  into  three  large  and  com-
peting trade union confederations, as well as a number 

The restructuring of branches, dual responsibilities (for 
example,  in  the  education  and  training  sector)  or  the 
emergence of new industries (IT, solar and wind energy) 
have  increasingly  led  to  demarcation  problems  and 
conflicts  between  DGB  trade  unions  in  recent  years. 
Basically, however, the industry federation principle re-
mains dominant.

2

HEINER DRIBBUSCH & PETER BIRKE  |  TRADE UNIONS IN GERMANY

Table 1: Individual DGB trade unions 

Trade union 

Industriegewerkschaft Metall (IG Metall) – 
Metalworkers’ Union

Vereinte Dienstleistungsgewerkschaft (ver.di) – 
United Services Union

Industriegewerkschaft Bergbau, Chemie, Energie (IG BCE)

Industriegewerkschaft Bauen-Agrar-Umwelt (IG BAU)

Eisenbahn- und Verkehrsgewerkschaft (EVG)

Gewerkschaft Erziehung und Wissenschaft (GEW) – 
Education and Science Workers’ Union

Gewerkschaft Nahrung-Genuss-Gaststätten (NGG)

Gewerkschaft der Polizei (GdP) 

Around 20 per cent of the members of DGB trade unions 
are pensioners, around 7 per cent are unemployed and 
there are 463,000 civil servants (Beamte). The latter have 
a special status in Germany, although this is increasingly 
diminishing, both in quantitative terms and with regard 
to its privileges. Basically, civil servants enjoy job tenure. 
They  have  freedom  of  association,  but  their  pay  and 
working time are statutorily determined by Parliament. 
There is no collective bargaining. Under German law – at 
least as interpreted hitherto – that means that they do 
not have a right to strike.

1.2 Political Orientation

The  DGB  trade  unions  consider  themselves  to  be  so-
called »unified« trade unions (Einheitsgewerkschaften): 
in other words, they are not officially affiliated with or 
financed by any political party. Nevertheless, historically 
there have been very close relations with the Social De-
mocratic  Party  (SPD).  Even  today,  DGB  leader  Michael 
Sommer and almost all trade union leaders are members 
of  the  SPD.  An  exception  is  the  leader  of  ver.di,  Frank 
Bsirske,  who  is  a  member  of  Alliance  90 / The  Greens 
(Bündnis  90 / Die  Grünen).  Certainly,  relations  between 
the trade unions and the SPD have changed significantly 
over  the  past  10  years.  The  social  policy  of  the  Red-
Green  coalition  under  Chancellor  Gerhard  Schröder, 

Chemical industry, pharmaceutical industry, mining, energy 
utilities, etc.

Construction industry, industrial cleaning, agriculture

Railways, rail transport

Police

Key branches

Metal and electrical industry, steel industry, textiles and 
clothing, dry cleaning, wood working, automotive industry, 
electrical trade, joinery, plumbing, etc.

Civil service, trade, banks and insurance companies, health 
care, transport, ports, media, social and educational services, 
printing, private services, fire brigade, etc.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which introduced massive cuts in unemployment bene-
fits from 2003, in the teeth of DGB opposition, led to 
a certain estrangement between the DGB trade unions 
and the SPD. This estrangement was a contributory fac-
tor in the later founding of the party Die Linke (The Left), 
which  attracted  many  former  SPD  members.  The  Left 
has the support of a significant minority of members of 
ver.di and IG Metall, in particular.

Teachers, educators, higher education

Food industry, milling, pubs, restaurants

1.3 Membership Development

The biggest individual trade unions are the metalwork-
ers’  union  IG  Metall  and  ver.di,  the  United  Services 
Union.  Together  they  represent  almost  70  per  cent  of 
the members of all DGB trade unions. The majority of 
members of ver.di and, especially, GEW (education and 
science workers’ union) are women.

The DGB trade unions have lost a significant number of 
members in recent years (see Figure 1). There are many 
reasons for this. When most members of East Germany’s 
trade union confederation, the Free German Trade Union 
Confederation  (Freier  Deutscher  Gewerkschaftsbund, 
FDGB),  joined  DGB  trade  unions  in  1990/1991,  the 
DGB’s  total  membership  shot  up.  Shortly  thereafter, 
however, in the wake of the restructuring and deindus-
trialisation of eastern Germany’s economy, membership 

3

HEINER DRIBBUSCH & PETER BIRKE  |  TRADE UNIONS IN GERMANY

2011

2010

Ver.di

IG BCE

IG BAU

263.129

EVG*

GEW

NGG

672.195

314.568

220.704

305.775

205.637

260.297

232.485

675.606

205.646

IG Metall

2.245.760

2.070.990

2.094.455

2.239.588

Trade union

171.709
6.155.899

GdP
DGB total

Table 2: DGB trade unions: membership, 2010 – 2011
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note: Unemployed people and pensioners are also included in membership figures. 
 
Source: DGB and authors’ calculations. 
 
plummeted again. In western Germany, too, many jobs 
in well-organised sectors of industry were lost as a result 
of rationalisation, restructuring and relocation. Privatisa-
tion of the railways and the post office and the ensuing 
workforce cuts in these large former state-owned com-
panies also had an adverse effect on membership. Parti-
cular problems also arose because of massive outsourc-
ing in the construction industry. On top of all that, the 
DGB has not been able to gain a firm foothold and win 
new members in private service companies, which tend 
to be small-scale operations.

170.607
6.193.252

1.4 Organisation and Member Recruitment

Still  the  best  organised  workers  in  Germany  are  em-
ployees  in  the  metal  and  electrical  industry,  especially 
among  the  large  automotive  manufacturers.  Also  well 
organised are the now relatively small steel industry, par-
ticular areas of the civil service and parts of the formerly 
state-owned post office and railways. Unionisation varies 
considerably in the chemical industry, however, as well 
as in building and construction. Trade union representa-
tion in new companies in wind and solar energy remains 
below average. However, in recent years some progress 
has been made in establishing trade union structures.

In the public sector, public transport and waste dispo-
sal have traditionally been trade union strongholds, to-
gether with the railways and the post office. As a result 
of  privatisation  and  liberalisation  of  the  public  sector, 
however,  new  private  providers  have  emerged  in  all 
these areas, in which the trade unions are struggling to 

21,1

21,0

19,8

1,09

70,0

50,5

0,00

– 1,12

– 5,07

– 0,50

– 2,80

Difference 
2011–2010 in %
0,28

Proportion of 
women 2010 in %
17,7

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
establish  themselves.  In  private  services,  members  are 
particularly numerous in the retail trade. Since they are 
very  unevenly  distributed,  however,  the  proportion  of 
trade union members in this branch is on the low side. 
The  same  applies  to  banks  and  insurance  companies. 
Also poorly organised are hotels and restaurants and se-
curity firms. Finally, craft trades also have below average 
trade union organisation.

0,65
– 0,60

22,3
32,4

40,6

In  general,  membership  recruitment  is  much  easier  in 
large  enterprises.  In  contrast,  the  trade  unions  find  it 
very difficult to establish a foothold in small enterprises 
because it is particularly difficult to set up works councils 
there: where there are no works councils there are gen-
erally  also  few  trade  union  members.  The  increasing 
»precariatisation«  of  employment  is  also  posing  prob-
lems  for  the  trade  unions.  Many  employees  are  taken 
on only for fixed periods or as agency workers. Organis-
ing such workers requires a special effort. Furthermore, 
many companies, especially newly established ones, pur-
sue a deliberate strategy of keeping the trade unions out.

Since  the  mid-2000s  an  intense  debate  has  developed 
within  German  trade  unions,  but  also  among  trade 
union-affiliated academics concerning strategies for cop-
ing  with  organisational  problems.  Particular  reference 
has been made, among other things, to discussions and 
practices in the Anglo-Saxon trade unions which, under 
the heading of organising, strive to build up trade union 
organisations  which  can  not  only  deal  with  everyday 
conflicts, but also address employees’ individual concerns 
and their activation. To date, practical attempts to apply 
such strategies – for example, in the private security sec-

4

tor, commercial cleaning, the retail trade and hospitals – 
have shown mixed results. In some areas – especially the 
organisational departments of ver.di and IG Metall – vari-
ous strategies have been able to dramatically slow down 
and,  occasionally,  even  to  halt  falling  membership.  The 
link  between  trade  union  membership  and  conflicts  in 
the workplace established in some research studies offers 
a strong basis for the closer involvement or participation 
of members along the lines of this organisational model.

For many workers trade union membership is a kind of 
conflict  insurance.  What  they  want  most  of  all  is  sup-
port if problems arise in connection with employment. 
Important individual services include financial support in 
the case of strike action and lockouts, advice on social 
and labour law issues and support in the event of em-
ployment-related  conflicts.  Only  trade  union  members 
are entitled to such services, but non-union employees 
generally enjoy the same collectively agreed conditions 
as union members in enterprises with collective agree-
ments.  To  that  extent  workers  can  benefit  from  the 
collective agreements secured by trade unions without 
having to become trade union members themselves.

Figure 1: DGB membership development, 1951– 2010 (up to 1990 West Germany, afterwards Germany)

HEINER DRIBBUSCH & PETER BIRKE  |  TRADE UNIONS IN GERMANY

1.5 Financing

DGB  trade  unions  finance  themselves  exclusively  from 
member contributions and income from their assets. They 
receive neither state funding nor public subsidies. The en-
tire apparatus, all administrative staff and all full-time offi-
cials have to be paid for by the trade unions themselves.

The  monthly  contribution  at  most  DGB  trade  unions  is 
1 per cent of gross monthly income. As a rule, contribu-
tions are paid by direct debit and some trade unions au-
tomatically raise them in tandem with wage rises. A fall in 
membership means financial problems for trade unions.

2. Other Trade Unions

  Germany

The  second  largest  confederation  is  the  DBB  Beamten-
bund  und  Tarifunion  (German  Civil  Service  Federation), 
with  which  39  national  professional  trade  unions  and 
associations are affiliated, giving it a total membership of 
around 1,265,720 at the end of 2011, including 908,000 
civil  servants  (Beamte)  who,  as  already  mentioned,  are 
 
 
 
 
  West Germany
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Source: DGB.

5

HEINER DRIBBUSCH & PETER BIRKE  |  TRADE UNIONS IN GERMANY

excluded from collective bargaining and have no right to 
strike. The collective bargaining interests of the 358,000 
members of the DBB without civil servant status are re-
presented by the DBB Bargaining Union (Tarifunion). In 
contrast to the DGB trade unions the DBB has registered 
moderate membership growth in recent years. In 2010, 
however, one of its member trade unions from the rail-
ways sector – the Union of German Railway Workers or 
GDBA  –  switched  to  the  DGB  after  merging  with  the 
DGB union TRANSNET to form the Railway and Transport 
Union (Eisenbahn- und Verkehrsgewerkschaft – EVG).

The  German  Train  Drivers  Union  (Gewerkschaft  Deut-
scher Lokomotivführer – GDL) plays a special role. It has 
around  34,000  members,  mainly  train  drivers,  and  is 
affiliated to the DBB. It is the EVG’s fierce rival for the 
status  of  leading  railway  union.  The  GDL  has  made  a 
name for itself nationwide in recent years due to various 
strikes by train drivers and train crew.

The DBB also considers itself to be a party politically in-
dependent trade union confederation, although traditio-
nally it has good relations with the Christian Democratic 
Party (CDU). DBB president, Peter Heesen, is a member 
of the CDU.

In the civil service the DBB Bargaining Union forms a ne-
gotiating bloc with ver.di and other DGB trade unions. 
In other sectors, however, there is considerable rivalry in 
collective bargaining. Ver.di and the relevant DBB unions 
compete for the available mandates in elections to staff 
councils in the civil service.

2.1 CGB

The  third  and  by  far  the  smallest  confederation  is  the 
German  Christian  Trade  Union  Federation  (Christlicher 
Gewerkschaftsbund  Deutschlands  –  CGB).  It  reported 
the  membership  of  its  16  individual  trade  unions  as 
283,000 in 2010. The CGB considers itself, in contrast 
to  the  other  two  union  confederations,  as  a  Christian 
»Richtungsgewerkschaft«  (union  with  particular  ideo-
logical or party political links). Only some of its individual 
trade unions are active in collective bargaining.

The  CGB  trade  unions,  in  contrast  to  the,  in  some  in-
stances,  relatively  strong  Belgian  or  Dutch  Christian 
trade unions, are not really capable of strike action. Fur-

thermore, they are attractive to companies, mainly be-
cause they sign collective agreements that undercut the 
wage  and  working  conditions  agreed  with  DGB  trade 
unions. However, this occurs only where the DGB trade 
unions themselves have only a weak foothold and find 
it  difficult  to  enforce  their  own  collective  agreements. 
The CGB unions compete with the DGB unions in col-
lective bargaining mainly in individual craft and services 
branches, as well as in temporary employment. The DGB 
trade  unions  engage  with  the  CGB  on  an  adversarial 
basis. In several instances, DGB trade unions have been 
able to dispute the right of CGB trade unions to partici-
pate in collective bargaining in the courts, as a result of 
which these unions can no longer conclude valid collec-
tive agreements.

The CGB regards itself as non-partisan, but politically it 
is  close  to  the  Christian  Democratic  parties.  The  chair-
man, Matthäus Strebl, is a CSU (Christlich Soziale Union) 
MP.  However,  the  majority  of  trade  unionist  members 
of the CDU and the CSU support the DGB trade unions.

2.2 Non-confederation Trade Unions

Finally, there are a number of trade unions that do not 
belong  to  any  of  the  three  confederations,  in  most 
cases  organising  particular  occupational  groups.  Their 
total membership has been estimated by WSI at around 
270,000.  The  following  are  significant  with  regard  to 
collective bargaining.

The  Marburger  Bund,  the  association  of  privately  em-
ployed  and  state  employed  doctors  (MB),  is  by  far  the 
biggest  trade  union  for  salaried  medical  staff,  with 
around  108,000  members  in  2010.  Up  to  2005,  the 
union participated with the relevant DGB unions in wage 
negotiations concerning clinics. Since then, however, the 
MB has negotiated alone. On this basis a series of spec-
tacular strikes in 2006 enabled the MB to implement its 
own collective agreements for medical staff in clinics.

The German Journalists Association (DJV) is the largest 
trade  union  for  journalists  working  for  publishers  and 
newspapers. In 2010, it reported around 38,000 mem-
bers. Its rival is the German Union of Journalists (DJU), 
with  around  21,000  members,  which  is  part  of  ver.di. 
Neither trade union is strong enough to engage in col-
lective bargaining on its own and thus they do so jointly.

6

HEINER DRIBBUSCH & PETER BIRKE  |  TRADE UNIONS IN GERMANY

The Cockpit Association (Vereinigung Cockpit – VC), with 
around 8,300 members, is the most important trade union 
for pilots. Strike action in 2001 enabled it to assert collec-
tive bargaining autonomy with Germany’s biggest airline.

As  a  result  of  labour  market  and  employment  devel-
opments  smaller  trade  unions  outside  the  DGB  have  
gained in significance over the past few years. However, 
their memberships are far smaller than those of the uni-
fied trade unions. Nevertheless, the profile of the non-
DGB trade unions has been enhanced by the fact that 
individual occupational and professional groups – train 
drivers, air-traffic controllers, doctors – have conducted 
industrial action fairly successfully, based on their favour-
able negotiating positions.

3. The Collective Agreements System 
and Wage Development

In Germany, only trade unions have the right to nego-
tiate  collective  agreements,  whether  with  employers’ 
organisations  or  individual  enterprises.  Most  collective 
agreements are concluded by DGB trade unions.

National  collective  bargaining  in  Germany  is  dominated 
by  central  collective  agreements  (Flächentarifvertrag). 
These  central  collective  agreements  are  concluded  for 
whole  branches  or  subbranches  and  apply  regionally  or 
nationwide to all companies belonging to the employers’ 
organisations that are party to the agreement. Free collec-
tive bargaining plays a major role in this connection. It im-
plies that collective agreements are negotiated and signed 
without government or state interference. In contrast to 
other European countries – such as Scandinavia – in Ger-
many experiences with compulsory arbitration in the latter 
days of the Weimar Republic (1929–1933) mean that there 
is still no institutionalised possibility to have the results of 
collective bargaining rounds confirmed by the state.

That  being  the  case,  the  German  government  plays  a 
direct institutional role only in wage negotiations in the 
civil  service.  As  the  employer  of  civil  servants  it  takes 
part  in  collective  bargaining  itself  and  negotiates  with 
the civil service trade unions.

Apart from collective bargaining, there is relatively little 
legislative  intervention  in  matters  concerning  working 
conditions and remuneration in Germany, by European 

comparison. There is a statutory upper limit of 10 hours 
on  daily  working  time  (with  some  exceptions)  and  a  
statutory minimum four weeks’ holiday. Otherwise, the 
working  week  and  annual  holidays,  as  well  as  pay  are 
not subject to state regulation, but rather are the object 
of collective bargaining.

Furthermore, hitherto there has been no statutory mini- 
mum  wage  of  the  kind  found  in  a  number  of  other 
countries.  Previously,  most  DGB  trade  unions  have  re-
jected such a statutory minimum wage as interference 
in free collective bargaining. In the face of the growing 
low wage sector, however, there has been a rethink over 
the past decade or so. The DGB is now calling for the 
introduction of a statutory minimum wage of 8.5 euros. 
The employers’ organisations have largely rejected this 
out of hand, however. The employers’ organisations in 
various services branches and in construction are more 
open-minded about this and are at least willing to con-
sider minimum wages agreed in the course of collective 
bargaining.

The federal Minister of Labour, in agreement with the 
collective  bargaining  committee  (which  contains  an 
equal number of members from each side), can declare 
collective  agreements  generally  binding.  In  this  way  it 
becomes  valid  for  all  employers  and  employees  within 
the  scope  of  collective  bargaining  who  are  not  other-
wise bound by collective agreements. In some branches 
– especially building and construction – there are already 
generally  binding  minimum  wages  in  accordance  with 
the Posted Workers Act (Arbeitnehmer-Entsendegesetz 
–  AEntG).  These  also  apply  to  employees  whose  com-
pany is not based in Germany. Besides the building in-
dustry  such  minimum  wages  are  also  to  be  found  in, 
among others, industrial cleaning. Until a statutory mini-
mum  wage  is  introduced,  declaring  a  particular  wage 
generally binding is an important option in checking the 
growth of low wages.

3.1 Wage Development

In the past 10 years national-level trade unions in Ger-
many have generally been able to secure only moderate 
wage increases. At the same time, from 2002 there has 
been negative wage drift: in other words, increases in 
real wages have predominantly been below the average 
collectively agreed wage rises (see Figure 2).

7

HEINER DRIBBUSCH & PETER BIRKE  |  TRADE UNIONS IN GERMANY

If price development is also taken into account it turns 
out that since 2004 there has been no compensation for 
inflation:  instead,  in  most  years  real  income  has  fallen. 
This development also emerges from international com-
parison, such as an EU comparison of the development 
of average real gross incomes from 2000 to 2009 (see 
Figure  3).  While  in  Germany  the  gross  income  of  de-
pendent employees rose by only 1.3 per cent in real terms 
in the decade leading up to 2009, the average rise in the 
EU27 was 7.9 per cent and in France 8.9 per cent. With 
the 2009 crisis, wage stagnation in Germany continued.

There are many reasons for this negative real wage de-
velopment.  First  of  all,  for  a  considerable  time  not  all 
the 28 million employees or so who are liable for social 
security contributions have been covered by a collective 
agreement (see Table 3).

In this context, the lack of a statutory minimum wage in 
Germany is particularly glaring. It must be noted, however, 
that the mere existence of a collective agreement does not 
guarantee decent wages; the wage structure also depends 
on the relative strength or weakness of the negotiating 
partners.  The  trade  unions  are  particularly  constrained 
in those branches of the private service sector in which 
 
Figure 2: Collectively agreed and real wage increases, 2000   –  2010
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: Destatis, WSI-Tarifarchiv, as of: January 2011.

low wages are especially evident. In quite a few areas of 
the German economy there are currently collective agree-
ments in which the agreed wages are below the 8.5 euros 
per hour minimum wage demanded by the DGB. Another 
contributory  factor  in  the  negative  development  of  real 
wages in Germany is the replacement of full-time by part-
time working. According to the IAB (Instituts für Arbeits-
markt- und Berufsforschung), an independent institute of 
the Federal Employment Agency, the number of full-time 
employees fell from 25.5 million in 2001 to 23.6 million 
in 2010. The number of part-time employees grew from 
just under 10 million to 12.5 million over the same period. 
This  structural  change  in  employment  was  government 
policy  and  has  been  underpinned  with  various  tax  and 
social policy measures. This has led to the expansion of so- 
called  »precarious  employment«.  This  includes  in  parti-
cular so-called »minijobs«, for which maximum monthly 
pay is 400 euros. In December 2010, 7.4 million people 
had  a  minijob,  while  4.9  million  employees,  two-thirds 
of them women, were exclusively in precarious employ-
ment; 2.5 million people had precarious employment as a 
second job. In 2010, a further 260,000 people worked in 
so-called »1 euro-jobs«, for which they receive, in addition 
to the social minimum, no more than between 1 and 2.5 
euros per hour. These jobs officially count only as »em- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Real
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Collectively agreed

8

Ireland

Finland

Norway

Sweden

Denmark

Netherlands

United Kingdom

Figure 3: Increase in real wages, EU, 2000   –  2009* (index: 2000 = 100)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note: * Including employer social security contributions (estimated for 2009).
Source: AMECO database.

Germany 

Austria

Spain

France

EU 27

109,1

108,9

101,3

100,0

105,0

110,0

Italy

104,3

107,9

105,4

ployment opportunities« and not as regular employment, 
which  means  that  there  are  no  social  insurance  entitle-
ments attached and only limited labour law entitlements.

In addition, since 2003 temporary work has been almost 
entirely deregulated, leading to a sharp increase in low 
paid employment. The annual average number of tem-
porary  workers  for  2010  was  780,000,  in  contrast  to 
only 330,000 in 2003.

As a result of all these developments the low-wage seg-
ment – that is, the number of those who earn less than 
two-thirds  of  the  median  wage  –  expanded  between 
1995 and 2010 to more than 22 per cent or 6.6 million 
employees. The basis of this statistic is a low wage thres-
hold  of  9.5  euros  in  western  German  and  6.87  euros 
in  eastern  German  Länder.  In  fact,  2.1  million  workers 
received even less than 6 euros per hour.

In 2009, the very sharp increase in short-time working 
in  particular  adversely  affected  real  incomes.  Short-
time  working  designates  the  time-limited  reduction  of 
working  time.  During  such  periods,  instead  of  wages 
employees  receive  so-called  short-time  allowance  –  in  

HEINER DRIBBUSCH & PETER BIRKE  |  TRADE UNIONS IN GERMANY

129,4

125,2

118,6

118,4

114,6

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
114,0
 
112,8
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
115,0
 
 
 
the amount of unemployment benefit – for the cancel-
led working hours. It is important that they retain their 
employment  relationship  and  related  entitlements  at 
such times. During the crisis the government established 
the possibility of extending short-time working up to 24 
months. This extension of short-time working has been 
supported by the trade unions in order to avoid collective 
redundancies as a consequence of the economic crisis.

120,0

125,0

130,0

4. Codetermination 
and the Right to Strike

In broad outline, industrial relations in Germany are cha-
racterised by workplace codetermination in the form of 
works councils and by enterprise codetermination in the 
supervisory boards of larger corporations.

4.1 Works Councils

The  elected  members  of  the  works  council  (Betriebsrat) 
represent the interests of all employees in the enterprise 
or workplace. It is not a trade union body. However, co- 

9

HEINER DRIBBUSCH & PETER BIRKE  |  TRADE UNIONS IN GERMANY

agreement 

West   

34

56

West

2

7

East

3

13

Central collective 

agreement 

East
17

37

Enterprise collective 

East
80 (39)

51 (47)

West
64 (40)

37 (50)

No collective agreement 

Entreprises
Employees

(aligned with collective agreement)

 
(percentage share of companies and employees)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
leads to conflicts with the company. Some firms, espe-
cially in the private service sector, actively oppose them 
– for example, the large retail chain Lidl is notorious in 
this respect. There is a works council in only 10 per cent 
of all companies with five employees or more, although 
45 per cent of all employees work in such companies. In 
the western Länder the employees are represented by a 
works council in 90 per cent of all large companies with 
more than 500 employees. The eastern Länder are not 
far behind on 85 per cent (see Table 4).

Table 3: Covered by a collective agreement, western and eastern Germany, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: IAB Betriebspanel 2010.
 
operation between works councils and trade unions repre-
sented in a given workplace is expressly ensured by law. 
Works  councils  can  be  formed  in  all  private  enterprises 
with at least five employees and are elected by the entire 
workforce. Senior executives and senior management are 
not  represented  in  the  works  council.  All  legal-age  em-
ployees can put themselves up for election who have been 
employed  by  the  company  for  at  least  six  months.  The 
trade unions represented in the company can submit their 
own  nominations,  although  lists  of  candidates  who  are 
independent of the trade unions can also be submitted. 
At most, 50 signatures are needed for this. The number of 
works council members depends on the size of the com-
pany. In companies with more than 200 employees one 
member of the works council can be entirely released from 
his or her work duties to perform works council tasks.

Table 4: Works councils by branch, Germany, 2010 
(percentage of companies and employees) 

Works councils have a number of rights related to infor-
mation  (for  example,  hiring  new  employees,  classifica-
tion), consultation (for example, in the case of restructur-
ing)  and  codetermination  (for  example,  beginning  and 
end of working time). The works council can oppose dis-
missals, although ultimately they cannot prevent them. 
The  works  council  is  not  entitled  to  conduct  collective 
bargaining  or  call  for  strike  action.  It  can  only  reach 
agreements that do not conflict with existing collective 
agreements. Analogous to the Works Constitution Act, 
which regulates the activities, rights and duties of works 
councils,  the  activities  of  staff  councils  in  the  civil  ser-
vice  are  regulated  by  various  staff  representation  acts. 
But while the basic structure of representation rights in 
the  civil  service  is  the  same,  in  specific  instances  staff 
councils may be subject to diverging legal provisions.

The  establishment  of  works  councils  is  not  obligatory. 
In  companies  without  works  councils  the  trade  unions 
do,  however,  have  a  right  of  initiative  enabling  them 
to  instigate  a  procedure  to  bring  a  works  council  into 
being.  The  establishment  of  works  councils  frequently  

Branch

Companies 
with works 

council

Mining / energy

Manufacturing

Construction

Trade

Transport / haulage

Information /
communications

Financial services 

Hotels / restaurants and 
related services

Health care, care, 
education

Economic and research/ 
technical services

Total

41

16

3

10

14

15

29

4

11

8

10

Employees 
in companies 
with a works 

council 

81

66

21

31

47

47

73

15

44

33

44

Note: Private sector companies with at least five employees, not including 
agriculture and non-profit organisations. 
Source: IAB Betriebspanel 2010.

10

HEINER DRIBBUSCH & PETER BIRKE  |  TRADE UNIONS IN GERMANY

According  to  an  analysis  of  works  council  elections 
in  2010  commissioned  by  the  Hans-Böckler-Stiftung 
around 77 per cent of all works council members at that 
time were also members of a DGB trade union. Most of 
the other works council members did not belong to a 
trade union.

Works council members enjoy far-reaching employment 
protection, which means that works councils have now 
become a de facto institutional basis for a trade union 
presence in companies. As a rule, however, trade unions 
are strongly represented only where the works councils 
are largely trade union dominated.

4.2 Enterprise Codetermination

Besides workplace codetermination in the form of works 
and  staff  councils,  there  is  also  so-called  »enterprise  
codetermination«.  Historically,  this  is  based  on  the  de-
mand for enterprise democratisation, a key item on the 
trade union agenda in the wake of the Nazi period. The 
codetermination  in  the  coal  and  steel  industries  that 
came  into  force  in  1951  was  one  of  the  most  notable 
outcomes  of  this  demand.  In  1957  and  1976,  further  
important  codetermination  laws  were  enacted,  which 
dealt,  among  other  things,  with  the  question  of  the 
preservation of the coal and steel codetermination sys-
tem in the face of the crisis of the two industries. As a 
consequence  of  this  historical  development  concerning 
coal  and  steel  codetermination,  whose  importance  has 
declined  sharply  due  to  the  foreseeable  end  of  mining 
in Germany and steel industry contraction, all corpora-
tions  with  more  than  2,000  employees  are  subject  to  
so-called parity-based codetermination: in other words, 
both shareholders and employees have the same number 
of representatives in the enterprise supervisory board. On 
the employees’ side both enterprise and external trade 
union representatives can be elected, in a certain ratio. 
In case of conflict, the shareholders’ side, which as a rule 
appoints  the  chair,  has  a  casting  vote.  In  2008,  there 
were still 694 companies with parity-based codetermina-
tion. On top of this there are 30 companies in mining and 
steel in which coal and steel industry codetermination still 
exists, with somewhat extended codetermination rights. 
Finally,  there  is  so-called  »one-third  participation«  in 
around 1,100 to 1,200 corporations with more than 500 
employees.  This  means  that  one-third  of  the  seats  are 
reserved for employees’ and trade union representatives.

4.3 A Restrictive Right to Strike

Legislation on industrial action in Germany is compara-
tively restrictive. It does not have a statutory basis, but is 
rather staked out in the case law of the Federal Labour 
Court  (Bundesarbeitsgericht  –  BAG)  and  derived  from 
the freedom of association established in the Basic Law. 
The limitations set out in this case law apply not only to 
strikes but also to lockouts which are legal within these 
limits and can be employed as a weapon by both indivi-
dual companies and employers’ organisations.

There is no individual right to strike. The law permits only 
walkouts called for by a trade union. Works councils ex-
pressly  may  not  call  strikes.  Furthermore,  strike  action  is 
permitted only in pursuit of concluding a collective agree-
ment. In case of dispute, the courts decide what kinds of 
thing can be the object of collective bargaining. Although 
according to recent case law strike action is permissible in 
pursuit  of  a  collective  agreement  to  regulate  the  conse-
quences  of  collective  redundancies  and  workplace  clo-
sures,  it  remains  open  how  far  not  only  the  effects  but 
also the measures themselves can be the object of a strike. 
Solidarity and sympathy strikes are permissible under cer-
tain circumstances. There is an obligation to »keep the in-
dustrial peace« for the duration of a collective agreement: 
in  essence,  during  this  period  strikes  are  not  permitted 
concerning anything regulated in the collective agreement. 
Civil servants (Beamte) have no right to strike, according 
to current legal interpretation. In Germany, this strike ban 
affects  most  teachers,  the  police  and  large  parts  of  the 
public administration. The DGB trade unions are against 
this strike ban, while the Civil Servants’ Association, the 
DBB, expressly abjures a right to strike for civil servants.

In Germany, striking or locked-out trade union members 
usually receive substantial strike pay from their unions. 
This is a key trade union service associated with mem-
bership. The services union ver.di, for example, pays 2.5 
times the monthly contribution as strike pay for each day 
a worker remains on strike (based on working time of 
eight hours). Strike pay is paid only in the case of legal 
strikes organised by trade unions.

General strikes or political strikes, of the kind seen re-
cently in many other countries within the framework of 
protests against the crisis policies of European govern-
ments (Spain, Greece, Portugal and Italy) are not permis-
sible in law, according to the dominant legal interpreta-

11

HEINER DRIBBUSCH & PETER BIRKE  |  TRADE UNIONS IN GERMANY

tion. In principle, this includes all strikes directed against 
government measures or existing or planned legislation. 
Trade  unions  that  call  strikes  that  are  not  legally  war-
ranted are liable to pay compensation. There has been 
much controversy in DGB ranks for some years concern-
ing  whether  they  should  campaign  for  a  right  to  take 
political strike action.

A key characteristic of the German trade union movement 
is its pronounced legalism. The DGB trade unions consi-
der themselves guarantors of social peace. Strike action is 
generally taken only within the strict confines of the law. 
On top of this come experiences with the German courts 
which  sometimes  imposed  punitive  damages  on  trade 
unions for illegal strike action in the 1950s. For the most 
part, the trade unions reject any form of legal violation. 
Even street blockades are extremely rare. As a rule, trade 
union demonstrations virtually never, and strikes only in 
isolated instances, lead to clashes with the police.

Since the establishment of the Federal Republic, strikes 
have  occurred  most  frequently  in  the  metal  and  elec-
trical  industry,  not  in  the  civil  service.  In  recent  years, 
however, strikes have been increasing – sometimes fairly 
lengthy ones – in private and public services, including 
the health service and the railways.

Since  the  1970s,  the  commonest  form  of  trade  union 
strike  has  been  the  so-called  warning  strike,  designed 
to  demonstrate  to  the  employers  that  the  workers’ 
demands are serious. In the civil service and the metal 
industry  the  trade  unions  can  mobilise  hundreds  of 
thousands of workers for this purpose. In principle, strike 
action is the last resort, only to be taken if negotiations 
break down definitively.

At the workplace level many conflicts that in other countries 
result in strike action are absorbed by the works council. 
Even so, unofficial walkouts occur occasionally, mainly in 
the form of collective events at which the employees are 
informed about developments. So-called »wildcat strikes«, 
which take place against the will of the trade union or indi-
vidual trade union structures, were frequent into the 1970s 
and could be dramatic. In the past two decades, however, 
strike action taken against the express wishes of the trade 
union has been rare. An important reason for this is that 
employees  less  often  see  an  opportunity,  besides  trade 
union  wage  agreements,  to  obtain  further  wage  rises 
through workplace strikes than was previously the case.

5. Social Partnership 
and Countervailing Power

After the Second World War, against the background of 
the Cold War, the social partnership model of industrial 
relations developed in West Germany. According to this 
model, although companies and trade unions might have 
different  opinions  on  individual  issues  –  for  example, 
wage levels or working time – the two labour market part- 
ners essentially shared a common interest in the compe-
titiveness of the business. The social partnership model 
found  broad  acceptance  among  the  trade  unions  and 
broad segments of the workforce due to the economic 
boom of the post-war period, in which profits rose and 
people  became  more  affluent.  A  discernible  expansion 
of the welfare state rounded out this class compromise.

With the introduction of works councils and enterprise 
codetermination an institutional framework was created 
favouring  negotiations  between  the  social  partners. 
Both  workplace  codetermination  and  enterprise  code-
termination  promoted,  in  various  ways,  an  industrial 
relations culture based on negotiations and cooperation. 
Thus  many  workplace  conflicts  were  institutionalised, 
subject to negotiations between the works council and 
the management or channelled through the courts. Fur-
thermore, within the framework of the restrictive right 
to strike, as outlined above, labour conflicts were diffi-
cult outside this framework.

Partly in competition with, partly complementing social 
partnership the DGB trade unions have also harboured 
notions  of  »trade  unions  as  a  countervailing  power«. 
These  more  strongly  emphasise  the  in  principle  diver-
gent  interests  of  the  capital  side  and  the  employees. 
Whether trade unions tend towards a social partnership-
oriented or a more conflict-oriented direction depends 
on the prevailing circumstances. From time to time there 
have also been large-scale labour conflicts in Germany 
in  which  the  conflict  orientation  was  to  the  fore,  for 
example, in the conflict concerning the continued pay-
ment of wages during sickness in 1956/57, the metal-
workers’ wage strike in 1963, the wildcat strikes in Sep-
tember 1969, some industrial action in the 1970s or the 
conflict over the 35-hour week in 1984. All in all, both 
have exerted some influence in both enterprises and col-
lective bargaining, neither ever being entirely dominant 
and some sort of agreement has always been reached 
within the trade unions.

12

HEINER DRIBBUSCH & PETER BIRKE  |  TRADE UNIONS IN GERMANY

5.1 Changes since the mid-1990s

The dominant understanding of industrial relations in the 
period after 1949 became increasingly fragile as a result 
of  the  second  global  economic  crisis  at  the  beginning 
of the 1980s. The abovementioned trends of erosion of 
collective agreements, mass redundancies and the emer-
gence of new sectors began to pose new challenges for 
the trade unions and their prevailing ideas. After 1990 
the employers called the social compromise into ques-
tion as the international situation and the conditions of 
competitiveness changed.

conditions. In focus here were demands for a prolonga-
tion of the working week, flexibilisation of every variety 
and cuts in supplementary payments and income. This 
policy was accompanied at the workplace level by inces-
sant cost reduction programmes, outsourcing, closures 
and relocations or at least the threat of these things. Less 
and less account was taken of trade unions and works 
councils. A similar process took place in the civil service. 
The liberalisation and privatisation promoted by all Ger-
man governments in the 1990s and 2000s changed the 
public sector fundamentally. On top of this came a tax 
policy which was detrimental to the public budget, as a 
consequence of which increasingly jobs were lost, work-
ing time was prolonged and personnel costs were cut. 
These changes fostered a confrontational climate in the 
civil service which is still in place today. The once uniform 
collective bargaining landscape in the civil service is now 
largely fragmented and increasingly fraught with poten-
tial conflict.

After a brief boom due to unification the now expanded 
Federal Republic of Germany hit another economic crisis 
in 1992/93. The economic downturn was overlapped by 
economic  internationalisation  and  a  new  competitive-
ness with regard to production locations which accele-
rated with the end of the Cold War. One expression of 
the new pressures due to competitiveness, but also of a 
new self-confidence on the part of capital, was the »col-
lective  bargaining  turnaround«  pushed  by  employers’ 
organisations  in  the  second  half  of  the  1990s.  Its  aim 
was to compel radical revision of existing collective bar-
gaining  regulations  based  on  changes  in  competitive  
 
Figure 4:  Development of collective bargaining coverage of workers, western and eastern Germany, 1998–2010 (%)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: IAB.

All in all, since the mid-1990s there has been a decline in 
the coverage of collective agreements (see Figure 4). This 
development has been accompanied by a sharp increase 
in  opening  clauses  in  such  agreements,  permitting 
workplace-level deviations from centralised agreements.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

   Western Germany

   Eastern Germany

13

HEINER DRIBBUSCH & PETER BIRKE  |  TRADE UNIONS IN GERMANY

Sometimes  this  takes  the  form  of  a  company  agree-
ment, sometimes of an agreement between the works 
council  and  the  company.  However,  as  a  rule  these 
agreements  also  have  to  be  approved  by  the  relevant 
parties.  The  main  reason  for  such  deviations  was  eco-
nomic emergencies. Since the end of the 1990s, how-
ever, enterprises have increasingly demanded deviations 
from collective agreements in order to gain competitive 
advantages through cost cutting. In many cases works 
councils and workforces were pressurised by threats of 
production  relocation  or  closures  until  management 
obtained the concessions it was looking for with regard 
to labour costs.

Concessions were demanded with regard to remunera-
tion, especially supplementary payments, such as Christ-
mas  or  holiday  payments,  as  well  as  working  time.  In 
the wake of these developments the working week was 
strongly  flexibilised  so  that  actual  working  hours  were 
closely  tied  to  current  production  fluctuations.  Time-
limited  workplace  guarantees  were  given  in  return  for 
such and other concessions, which ruled out compulsory 
redundancies for a certain period. While many deviations 
were  negotiated  without  major  conflicts,  in  some  in- 
stances there were fierce clashes, for example, in 2004 at 
Daimler Benz when employees sought to defend them-
selves  against  the  company’s  far-reaching  demands. 
For  a  number  of  years  IG  Metall  has  attached  more 
and more importance to involving members in conflicts 
about deviations from collective agreements and delibe-
rately using such disputes for organisational purposes.

At  the  workplace  level  conflict-oriented  options  have 
become  increasingly  important  in  recent  times,  for 
example,  in  the  face  of  threats  of  company  closure, 
symbolised, for example, by the unofficial strike at Opel 
Bochum in October 2004 or the six-seek strike to keep 
open the AEG plant in Nuremburg at the beginning of 
2006. A conflict-orientation also plays an important role 
in  various  organisational  strategies  aimed  at  bringing 
about  a  turnaround  in  membership  development.  For 
example,  workplace  disputes  provide  opportunities  to 
establish works councils, while collective bargaining and 
industrial action can serve as occasions to step up orga-
nisational activities. National-level trade unions in Ger-
many  often  pursue  a  combination  of  cooperative  and 
conflict-oriented strategies. Approaches based on social 
partnership  can  be  superseded  by  notions  of  counter-
vailing  power,  and  vice  versa.  Also  playing  a  role  here 

are  various  trade  union  traditions,  the  attitude  of  ma-
nagements  to  trade  unions  and  the  balance  of  power 
between trade unions and enterprises.

5.2 Crisis Management 2008   – 2010

The global economic crisis which started to develop at 
the end of 2008 triggered a new dynamic in the interac-
tion of state, enterprises and trade unions. For example, 
when companies get into financial difficulties the trade 
unions support their demands for state bridging loans; 
however, at workplace level and in collective bargaining 
the unions face demands for wage restraint and conces-
sions. In relation to the crisis IG BCE and IG Metall, with 
varying emphases, have advocated state action to help 
the branches of industry which they organise. Services 
trade  union  ver.di  called  for  the  expansion  of  public 
services  with  the  help  of  extensive  economic  stimulus  
packages.  Such  varying  emphases  also  reflected  dif-
ferent experiences of the crisis on the part of individual 
trade unions. While the private and public services sec-
tors were only partially affected by the crisis in 2009 the 
coincidence of financial crisis and economic downturn in 
the automobile industry brought about a massive decline 
in production that impacted large parts of the metal and 
electrical industry, but also the chemical industry.

Germany’s national accounts have been as severely af-
fected by the global financial and economic crisis since 
the  fourth  quarter  of  2008  as  many  other  European 
countries (see Figure 5). Since 2010, a slight recovery can 
be detected, including renewed growth in key areas of 
export industry, which retain particular significance for 
trade unions in Germany. Given the debt crisis in some 
European  countries  and  the  related  risk  of  renewed 
recession throughout Europe, however, it must remain 
open whether this development will be maintained.

The  basic  political  situation  in  autumn  2008  was  con-
genial to the involvement of the trade unions in govern-
ment and industrial policy crisis management. The crisis 
affected  the  pillars  of  Germany’s  export  economy  and 
thus the metal and electrical industry, a branch in which 
IG Metall remains comparatively well embedded. At the 
end of 2008 the government was embroiled in the run 
up  to  the  parliamentary  elections  in  September  2009 
and could not remain indifferent to a massive increase 
in unemployment. The business sector was hoping for a  

14

HEINER DRIBBUSCH & PETER BIRKE  |  TRADE UNIONS IN GERMANY

1,1

2,6

-1,6

3,1

2,1
2,1

4,4

4,0

3,8

-1,9

2,0

0,0

6,0

4,0

- 6,0

- 4,0

- 2,0

Figure 5:  Germany’s GDP, 2007  –   2011 (price adjusted, chain-linked, change over the previous year)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: Statistisches Bundesamt, Wiesbaden, Destatis, Deutsche Wirtschaft, 2. Quarter 2011.
 
rapid end to the economic downswing and, influenced 
by the skills shortages it had complained about before 
the  crisis,  was  extremely  concerned  to  hang  on  to  its 
permanent staff at acceptable cost. In particular in 2009 
there  was  something  of  a  »renaissance  of  social  part-
nership« in important areas of the German economy.

8
0
0
2
 
r
e
t
r
a
u
Q

8
0
0
2
 
r
e
t
r
a
u
Q

8
0
0
2
 
r
e
t
r
a
u
Q

 
.

8
0
0
2
 
r
e
t
r
a
u
Q

 
.

9
0
0
2
 
r
e
t
r
a
u
Q

 
.

9
0
0
2
 
r
e
t
r
a
u
Q

 
.

9
0
0
2
 
r
e
t
r
a
u
Q

 
.

9
0
0
2
 
r
e
t
r
a
u
Q

 
.

0
1
0
2
 
r
e
t
r
a
u
Q

 
.

0
1
0
2
 
r
e
t
r
a
u
Q

 
.

0
1
0
2
 
r
e
t
r
a
u
Q

 
.

0
1
0
2
 
r
e
t
r
a
u
Q

 
.

1
1
0
2
 
r
e
t
r
a
u
Q

 
.

- 10,0

3

4

1

4

1

1

2

2

3

- 8,0

1

 
.

2

 
.

3

4

-6,5

-5,0

-7,4

5,0

2,8

1
1
0
2
 
r
e
t
r
a
u
Q

 
.

2

Measured by people’s fears at the beginning of the cri-
sis, both broad swathes of employees and also the trade 
unions,  which  have  been  affected  particularly  strongly, 
have  come  through  the  crisis  relatively  unscathed.  An 
important instrument for safeguarding employment was 
the  prolongation  of  short-time  working  permitted  by 
the government (see Figure 6). Employees were able to 
receive short-time allowances for up to 24 months in the 
amount of unemployment benefit and thus to maintain 
their employment and related entitlements. This enabled 
companies to massively reduce the regular working time 
of  hundreds  of  thousands  of  workers,  cushioned  by 
unemployment insurance benefits. Furthermore, the go-
vernment eased the cost of short-time working for com-
panies by waiving a certain portion of their social security 
contributions. In May 2009, there were almost 1.5 mil-
lion employees on short-time working, 902,000 of them  
(62 per cent) in the metal and electrical industry alone.

However,  enterprises  were  able  to  keep  going  during 
the crisis due to various options related to more flexible 
working  time.  These  had  been  agreed  before  the  cri-
sis, both in collective bargaining and in individual work-
places. They have proved to be key instruments, making 
it possible to cut working time in a cost-neutral manner. 
The time credits accumulated in the boom period were 
now reduced and all available options exhausted to put 
the onus on working time accounts. The extensive work-
ing time corridors whose introduction before the crisis 
was  regarded  by  the  trade  unions,  not  without  justifi-
cation, as a way of introducing working time increases 
that would be cost-efficient for employers and prevent 
employment growth now proved to be a simple way of 
closing  employment  gaps.  In  many  companies,  more-
over, existing job retention agreements were renegotia-
ted on new terms. Sometimes employees had to make 
further financial concessions to get the management to 
agree to continue to rule out layoffs, even in the crisis.

Finally,  the  so-called  »scrappage  premium«  in  the  au-
tomobile  industry  should  be  mentioned.  This  was  the 
government’s response to the demands of IG Metall and 
the industry to subsidise the purchase of new cars when 
older  cars  were  sent  to  be  scrapped.  The  ecological  

15

HEINER DRIBBUSCH & PETER BIRKE  |  TRADE UNIONS IN GERMANY

Figure 6: Monthly development of short-time working, whole economy and the metal and electrical industry, 
 

 October 2008    –   December 2010

  Economy as a whole 

 Metal and electrical industry

Source: Bundesagentur für Arbeit.

Figure 7:  Development of employment subject to social security contributions, June 2008  –  December 2010 

(’000)

Source: Bundesagentur für Arbeit, authors’ calculations.

16

HEINER DRIBBUSCH & PETER BIRKE  |  TRADE UNIONS IN GERMANY

Figure 8: Monthly development of temporary work, June 2008   –   December 2010 (‘000)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Source: Bundesagentur für Arbeit.

effect  of  this  large-scale  strategy  is  extremely  contro-
versial but it has helped to stabilise employment among 
regular  and  protected  employees  in  core  trade  union 
domains.  Furthermore,  agreements  were  concluded  in 
the metal industry pay round in 2010 which primarily in-
cluded provisions to safeguard employment in exchange 
for modest pay rises.

On the other hand, the rules on short-time working, but 
also »restraint« in collective bargaining mean that work-
ers  have  had  to  accept  continued  wage  stagnation  or 
even a fall in total wage volume, as in the years before 
2008.  The  WSI  estimates  for  2009  and  2010  a  collec- 
tively agreed annual wage rise of around 2 per cent, but 
with  major  differences  continuing  between  different 
branches.  The  gap  between  the  wages  of  different 
groups  which  was  already  developing  before  the  crisis 
has widened even further.

Whatever relief may have been experienced by part of 
the  core  workforce,  the  limits  and  dilemmas  of  crisis 
management were also manifest. Fixed-term employees  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
did  not  receive  a  new  contract  and  many  temporary 
workers  soon  lost  their  jobs  (see  Figure  8).  With  little 
legal protection, they represented a buffer for manage-
ment, but also for many works councils and permanent 
employees,  making  it  possible  to  externalise  the  crisis 
to  some  extent  and  to  avoid  layoffs  among  the  core 
workforce.  It  was  also  for  this  reason  that  personnel 
departments  at  first  relied  on  precarious  employment 
even in the employment upswing. IG Metall is making 
every effort to organise temporary workers even after 
the  crisis  and  to  achieve  financial  equality  for  tempo-
rary  workers  and  core  employees  by  means  of  enter-
prise  and  collective  agreements.  A  first  breakthrough 
in  collective  bargaining  came  in  September  2010  in 
the steel industry where for the first time equal pay for 
temporary workers was laid down in a central collective 
agreement.

Finally,  it  remains  open  how  far-reaching  the  budget 
consolidation measures will be in public service sectors 
at  federal,  state  and  municipal  level,  as  consolidation 
further intensifies in the wake of the »euro-crisis«.

17

HEINER DRIBBUSCH & PETER BIRKE  |  TRADE UNIONS IN GERMANY

Bibliography

Bispinck, Reinhard / Dribbusch, Heiner (2008): Tarifkonkurrenz der Gewerkschaften zwischen Über- und Unterbie-
tung, in: Sozialer Fortschritt Vol. 57 (6), S. 153  –163.

Bispinck,  Reinhard / Schulten,  Thorsten  (Hrsg.)  (2009):  Zukunft  der  Tarifautonomie.  60  Jahre  Tarifvertragsgesetz: 
Bilanz und Ausblick, Hamburg: VSA.

Birke, Peter (2007): Wilde Streiks im Wirtschaftswunder. Gewerkschaften, Arbeitskämpfe und Soziale Bewegungen in 
der Bundesrepublik und Dänemark, Frankfurt am Main: Campus.

Birke,  Peter  (2010):  Die  große  Wut  und  die  kleinen  Schritte.  Gewerkschaftliches  Organizing  zwischen  Protest  und 
Projekt, Hamburg / Berlin: Assoziation A.

Birke, Peter (2011): Widersprüche des Korporatismus. Gewerkschaften und aktuelle Arbeitskämpfe in Deutschland, 
ZÖSS discussion paper, Universität Hamburg; online at: http://www.wiso.uni-hamburg.de/fileadmin/sozialoekonomie/
zoess/DP_25_Birke.pdf.

Bogedan, Claudia / Brehmer, Wolfram / Herzog-Stein, Alexander (2009): Betriebliche Beschäftigungssicherung in 
der Krise. Eine Kurzauswertung der WSI-Betriebsrätebefragung 2009, in: WSI Report 01 (December 2009).

Dribbusch, Heiner (2009): 60 Jahre Arbeitskampf in der Bundesrepublik – ein Überblick, in: Bispinck, R. / Schulten, Th. 
(Hrsg.): Zukunft der Tarifautonomie, Hamburg: VSA.

Dribbusch, Heiner (2009): Konkurrierende Tarifpolitik: Herausforderung für DGB-Gewerkschaften, in: WSI-Mitteilungen, 
Vol. 62 (4), S. 193 – 200.

Dribbusch, Heiner (2009): Streik-Bewegungen, in: Forschungsjournal Neue Soziale Bewegungen, Vol. 22, H. 4.

Dribbusch, Heiner (2011): Organisieren am Konflikt: Zum Verhältnis von Streik und Mitgliederentwicklung, in: Haipe-
ter, Th. / Dörre, K. (Hrsg.): Gewerkschaftliche Modernisierung, Wiesbaden: VS-Verlag, S. 231–  263.

Herzog-Stein, Alexander / Seifert, Hartmut (2010): Der Arbeitsmarkt in der Großen Rezession – Bewährte Strategien 
in neuen Formen, in: WSI-Mitteilungen 11, S. 551–  559.

WSI-Tarifarchiv (2011): Statistisches Taschenbuch Tarifpolitik, Düsseldorf: Hans-Böckler-Stiftung; online at: http://www.
boeckler.de/wsi-tarifarchiv_4828.htm.

Web-Links:

www.boeckler.de

www.tarifarchiv.de

18

About the authors

Imprint

Dr.  Heiner  Dribbusch  is  a  senior  researcher  (industrial  rela-
tions / trade unions) at the Institute of Economic and Social Re-
search (WSI) within the Hans-Böckler-Stiftung.

Dr. Peter Birke is an historian at the faculty for social eco-
nomics,  University  of  Hamburg  and  editor  of  social  history 
online.

Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung | Central and Eastern Europe
Hiroshimastr . 28 | 10785 Berlin | Germany

Responsible:
Jörg Bergstermann, Coordinator for Trade Union Programs 
in Europe and North America

Phone: ++49-30-269-35-7744 | Fax: ++49-30-269-35-9250
http://www .fes .de/international/moe

To order publications:
info .moe@fes .de

The views expressed in this publication are not necessarily those 
of the Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung .

This publication is printed on paper from sustainable forestry .

ISBN 978-3-86498-155-5

