Dilemmas of Democratization in Latin America
Author(s): Terry Lynn Karl
Source: Comparative Politics, Vol. 23, No. 1, (Oct., 1990), pp. 1-21
Published by: Ph.D. Program in Political Science of the City University of New York
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/422302
Accessed: 28/04/2008 11:40

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.

Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=phd.

Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.

JSTOR is a not-for-profit organization founded in 1995 to build trusted digital archives for scholarship. We enable the
scholarly community to preserve their work and the materials they rely upon, and to build a common research platform that
promotes the discovery and use of these resources. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

http://www.jstor.org

Dilemmas of Democratization in Latin America 

Terry Lynn Karl 

The demise of  authoritarian rule in Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Ecuador, Peru, and 
Uruguay, when combined with efforts at political liberalization in Mexico and the recent 
election  of  civilian  presidents in  Guatemala, El  Salvador, Honduras, and  Nicaragua, 
represents a political watershed in Latin America. This wave of regime changes in the 1980s 
places a number of questions on the intellectual and political agenda for the continent. Will 
these  newly  emergent and  fragile  democracies in  South  America be  able  to  survive, 
especially  in  the  context  of  the  worst  economic  recession  since  the  1930s?  Can  the 
liberalization of  authoritarian rule in Central America and the possible prospect of  honest 
competitive elections in Mexico be transformed into genuine democratic transitions? Will 
previously consolidated political democracies such as Venezuela and Costa Rica be able to 
extend the basic principles of citizenship into economic and social realms, or will they be 
"deconsolidated" by this challenge and revert to a sole preoccupation with survivability?' 
Behind such questions lies a central concern expressed by Dankwart A.  Rustow almost 
twenty years ago: "What conditions make democracy possible and what conditions make it 
thrive?"2 This article addresses Rustow's query by arguing the following. First, the manner 
in  which  theorists of  comparative politics  have  sought  to  understand democracy in 
developing  countries has  changed  as  the  once-dominant search  for  prerequisites of 
democracy has given way to a more process-oriented emphasis on contingent choice. Having 
undergone this evolution, theorists should now develop an interactive approach that seeks 
explicitly to relate structural constraints to the shaping of contingent choice. Second, it is no 
longer adequate to examine regime transitions writ large, that is,  from the general category 
of authoritarian rule to that of democracy. Such broad-gauged efforts must be complemented 
by the identification of different types of democracy that emerge from distinctive modes of 
regime transition as well  as an analysis of  their potential political, economic,  and social 
consequences. Before these issues and their implications for the study of Latin America can 
be addressed, however, a definition of democracy must be established. 

Defining Democracy 

Defining democracy is no simple task because the resolution of a number of disputes over 
both its prospects and evaluation rests on  how  the term itself  is  operationalized. If,  for 
example, democracy is defined in a Schumpeterian manner as a polity that permits the choice 
between elites  by  citizens  voting  in  regular and competitive elections,  the  militarized 
countries of Central America could be classified as political democracies by many scholars, 
just as they are (with the exception of Sandinista Nicaragua) by U.S.  policymakers.3 But if 
the definition is  expanded to  include a wider range of  political conditions-from  lack of 

1 

Comparative Politics  October 1990 

restrictions on citizen expression, to the absence of discrimination against particular political 
parties, to freedom of association for all interests, to civilian control over the military-these 
same countries (with the exception of  Costa Rica) could scarcely be classified under this 
rubric. 

The  problem is  compounded when  a  number of  substantive properties-such  as  the 
predominance of institutions that faithfully translate individual preferences into public policy 
through majoritarian rule,  the  incorporation of  an  ever-increasing proportion of  the 
population into  the  process  of  decision  making,  and  the  continuous improvement of 
economic  equity  through the  actions of  governing institutions-are  included either as 
components  or  empirical  correlates  of  democratic  rule.4  Approaches  that  stipulate 
socioeconomic advances for  the  majority of  the  population and active  involvement by 
subordinate classes  united in  autonomous popular organizations as  defining  conditions 
intrinsic to democracy are hard-pressed to find "actual" democratic regimes to study. Often 
they are incapable of identifying significant, if incomplete, changes towards democratization 
in  the  political  realm.  Moreover, they  are  cut  off  from  investigating empirically the 
hypothetical relationship between competitive political forms and progressive economic 
outcomes because this important issue is  assumed away by the very definition of  regime 
type.  While these substantive properties are ethically desirable to  most democrats, such 
conceptual breadth renders the definition of  democracy virtually meaningless for practical 
application.5 

For these reasons, I will settle for a middle-range specification of democracy. It is defined 
as "a set of institutions that permits the entire adult population to act as citizens by choosing 
their leading decision makers in competitive, fair, and regularly scheduled elections which 
are held in  the context of  the rule of  law,  guarantees for political freedom, and limited 
military prerogatives." Specified in this manner, democracy is a political concept involving 
several dimensions: (1)  contestation over policy  and political competition for office;  (2) 
participation of the citizenry through partisan, associational, and other forms of collective 
action; (3) accountability of rulers to the ruled through mechanisms of representation and the 
rule of law; and (4) civilian control over the military. It is this latter dimension, so important 
in the Latin American context, which sets my definition apart from Robert Dahl's classic 
notion of a "procedural minimum."6 A middle-range definition of this sort avoids the Scylla 
of an overly narrow reliance on the mere presence of elections without concomitant changes 
in civil-military relations and the Charybdis of  an overly broad assumption of  social and 
economic equality. While perhaps less than fully satisfactory from a normative perspective, 
it has the advantage of permitting a systematic and objective investigation of the relationship 
between democratic political forms and the long-range pursuit of equity. 

The Futile Search for Democratic Preconditions 

If the questions raised by democratization remain relatively unchanged from the past, the 
answers that are offered today come  from a  different direction. This  becomes  evident 
through a brief comparison of the divergent theories about the origins of democratic regimes 
that have dominated the  study of  Latin America. The  scholarship that preceded the new 

2 

Terry Lynn Karl 

wave of democratization in the 1980s argued that a number of preconditions were necessary 
for the emergence of a stable democratic polity. 

First, a  certain degree of  wealth or,  better said,  level  of  capitalist development was 
considered a prerequisite of democracy. Market economies in themselves were not enough; 
a country had to cross (and remain beyond) a minimum threshold of economic performance 
before political competition could be  institutionalized. "The more well-to-do a  nation," 
Seymour Martin Lipset claimed, "the greater the chances that it will sustain democracy."7 A 
wealthy economy made possible higher levels of literacy, education, urbanization, and mass 
media exposure, or so the logic went, while also providing resources to mitigate the tensions 
produced by political conflict.8 

A  second set  of  preconditions that underlay traditional approaches to  democracy was 
derived from the concept of  political culture, that is,  the system of  beliefs and values in 
which political action is embedded and given meaning. The prevalence of certain values and 
beliefs over others was said to be more conducive to the emergence of democracy. Thus, for 
example, Protestantism allegedly enhanced the prospects for democracy in Europe while 
Catholicism, with its tradition of hierarchy and intolerance, was posited to have the opposite 
effect  in  Latin America.9 Although arguments based only  on  the link between different 
religious systems and experiences with democracy have been dismissed by most scholars, 
more sophisticated claims sought to identify political cultures characterized by a high degree 
of mutual trust among members of society, a willingness to tolerate diversity, and a tradition 
of accommodation or compromise because such cultures were considered necessary for the 
subsequent development of  democratic institutions. That a  "civic  culture" of  this  sort 
necessarily rested on a widely differentiated and articulated social structure with relatively 
autonomous social classes,  occupational sectors, and ethnic, religious, or regional groups 
was an unspoken assumption. In other words, a prodemocratic consensus and set of values 
was considered the main prerequisite of political democracy.'0 

Third,  specific  domestic  historical conditions  and  configurations were  said  to  be 
prerequisites of  democracy. Theorists of  "crises and sequences" argued that the order in 
which  various crises  of  modernization appeared and  were  settled  determined whether 
economic and social  transformations were conducive to  the development of  democracy. 
Democratic regimes were  more likely  to  emerge if  problems of  national identity were 
resolved prior to  the establishment of  a  central government and if  both of  these events 
preceded the formation of mass parties."l 

In a different, yet still historically grounded vein,  Barrington Moore, Jr. contended that 
democracies were more likely to appear where the social and economic power of the landed 
aristocracy was  in decline relative to  that of  the bourgeoisie and where labor-repressive 
agriculture was not the dominant mode of production. When this occurred as a result of the 
commercialization of agriculture that transformed a traditional peasantry into either a class 
of  small farmers or a rural proletariat, the prognosis for democracy was strong indeed.12  A 
version of Moore's approach has been used to explain the different political trajectories in 
Central America. Specifically, democracy is said to have emerged in Costa Rica due to the 
creation of a yeoman farmer class, while the persistence of authoritarian rule in Guatemala 
and El Salvador is attributed to the continued dominance of the landed aristocracy. 3 

Finally, some scholars treated external influences as another set of  preconditions on the 
grounds that these could be decisive in determining whether a polity became democratic or 

3 

Comparative Politics  October 1990 

authoritarian. Dependency theorists in Latin America and the United States contended that 
the  continent's particular insertion into  the  international market made  democratization 
especially problematic at more advanced stages of import-substituting capitalist development 
and even enhanced the necessity for authoritarian rule under specific circumstances. In a 
logic  that ran counter to  Lipset's  "optimistic equation," both Guillermo O'Donnell and 
Fernando Henrique Cardoso argued that, as dependent economies became more complex, 
more penetrated by  foreign capital and technology, and more reliant upon low  wages to 
maintain their competitive advantage in the international economy, professional militaries, 
technocrats, and state managers moved to  the forefront of  the decision-making process, 
forcibly  replacing unruly,  "populist" parties and  trade unions  in  order to  establish a 
supposedly more efficient form of rule.'4 

Inversely, using an argument based on external influences of a qualitatively different sort, 
proponents of an aggressive U.S.  foreign policy towards the region declared that the rise and 
decline of democracy was directly related to the rise and decline of the global power of the 
United States rather than to  market mechanisms or  accumulation processes.  In  Samuel 
Huntington's view,  the dramatic increase in authoritarian rule during the 1960s and 1970s 
was  a direct reflection of  the waning of  U.S.  influence. Specifically, it  was  due to  the 
decreased effectiveness of  efforts by U.S.  officials to promote democracy as a successful 
model of development. Concomitantly, he argued, the spate of democratic transitions in the 
1980s could be credited to the Reagan administration's renewed effort to "restore American 
power" through the rollback of  revolutions and the promotion of  electoral reforms. This 
position,  so  ideologically convenient for  policymakers, located the  roots of  democracy 
outside Latin America.'5 

The  experience  of  Latin  American countries in  the  1980s  challenged  all  of  these 
presumptions about  preconditions. The  hypothetical  association  between  wealth  and 
democracy might be called upon to "explain" the transition to democracy in Brazil after a 
protracted economic boom, but it could hardly account for the case of Peru, whose transition 
was  characterized by  stagnant growth rates, extreme foreign debt, persistent balance of 
payments problems, and a  regressive distribution of  income.  Nor  could  it  explain the 
anomaly of  Argentina, where relatively high  levels  of  per capita GDP were persistently 
accompanied by  authoritarian rule.  If  the political cultures of  Argentina, Uruguay, and 
Brazil all tolerated, admittedly to varying degrees, the practice of  official state terror and 
widespread violations  of  human rights,  how  could  they  suddenly become  sufficiently 
"civic" and "tolerant" to support a democratic outcome? As  the Catholic church took an 
increasingly active role in opposing authoritarian rule, especially in  Brazil, Chile,  Peru, 
Central America, and Panama, the argument about the so-called "anti-democratic bias" of 
Catholicism became increasingly implausible.'6 

The predictability of  approaches emphasizing the influence of  the international system 
fared little  better. While  the  manner of  a  country's insertion into  the  world capitalist 
economy is  now considered essential in explaining its subsequent political and economic 
development,  as  dependency theorists claimed,  criticisms  of  other  scholars  plus  the 
democratic transitions in Brazil and Chile demonstrated that there was no direct or inevitable 
correlation between capital deepening and authoritarian rule. 7 The general trends towards 
recession in export earnings, debt crises, diminishing U.S.  support for human rights, and the 
frequent resort to military instruments under the foreign policy of the Reagan administration 

4 

Terry Lynn Karl 

boded ill for the emergence of democracies in the 1980s, yet emerge they did. The pattern 
of  their  appearance presented an  undeniable challenge  to  Huntington's thesis  linking 
democratization with the rise of U.S.  power. In the southern cone, where influence from the 
north is  not especially high,  military rulers generally made way for civilian authority. In 
Central America, Panama, and Haiti, where the overriding historical role of  the U.S.  is 
indisputable, militaries either permitted elections  to  occur  without limiting  their own 
prerogatives, or they refused to leave power altogether. Indeed, where the decline in U.S. 
hegemony was greatest, democracy seemed to  appear even though dictatorship "should" 
have been the more appropriate response! 

These anomalies suggest the pressing need for important revisions, even reversals, in the 
way democratization in contemporary Latin America is understood. First, there may be no 
single precondition that is  sufficient to produce such an outcome. The search for causes 
rooted in economic, social, cultural/psychological, or international factors has not yielded a 
general law  of  democratization, nor is  it  likely  to  do  so  in  the  near future despite the 
proliferation of  new  cases.'8  Thus,  the search for a  set  of  identical conditions that can 
account for the presence or absence of democratic regimes should probably be abandoned 
and replaced by more modest efforts to derive a contextually bounded approach to the study 
of democratization. 

Second,  what  the  literature has  considered in  the  past  to  be  the  preconditions of 
democracy may be better conceived in the future as the outcomes of democracy. Patterns of 
greater economic growth and more equitable income distribution, higher levels of  literacy 
and education, and increases in social communication and media exposure may be better 
treated as the products of stable democratic processes rather than as the prerequisites of  its 
existence.  A  "civic"  political  culture characterized by  high  levels  of  mutual trust,  a 
willingness  to  tolerate diversity of  opinion,  and  a  propensity for  accommodation and 
compromise could be the result of the protracted functioning of democratic institutions that 
generate appropriate values and beliefs rather than a set of  cultural obstacles that must be 
initially overcome. There is evidence for this contention in the fact that most democracies in 
Europe and Latin America's oldest democracy in  Costa Rica have emerged from quite 
"uncivic" warfare. In other words, what have been emphasized as independent variables in 
the past might be more fruitfully conceived as dependent variables in the future. 

From Contingent Choice to Structured Contingency 

The  failure to  identify clear prerequisites, plus  the  hunch that much of  what had been 
thought to produce democracy should be considered as its product, has caused theorists of 
comparative politics to shift their attention to the strategic calculations, unfolding processes, 
and sequential patterns that are involved in moving from one type of  political regime to 
another, especially under conditions of nonviolence, gradualism, and social continuity. For 
Guillermo O'Donnell and Philippe Schmitter, democratization is understood as a historical 
process  with  analytically  distinct,  if  empirically  overlapping,  stages  of  transition, 
consolidation, persistence, and eventual deconsolidation.19  A variety of actors with different 
followings, preferences, calculations, resources, and time horizons come to the fore during 
these successive stages. For example, elite factions and social movements seem to play the 

5 

Comparative Politics  October 1990 

key roles in bringing about the demise of authoritarian rule; political parties move to center 
stage during the transition itself; and business associations, trade unions, and state agencies 
become major determinants of the type of democracy that is eventually consolidated.20 

What differentiates these stages above all, as Adam Przeworski points out, is the degree 
of  uncertainty which  prevails at  each  moment. During regime transitions, all  political 
calculations and interactions are highly uncertain. Actors find it difficult to know what their 
interests are,  who  their supporters will  be,  and  which  groups will  be  their allies  or 
opponents. The  armed forces and the civilian supporters of  the  incumbent authoritarian 
regime are characteristically divided between "hard-line" and "soft-line" factions. Political 
parties emerge as privileged in this context because, despite their divisions over strategies 
and their uncertainties about partisan identities, the logic  of  electoral competition focuses 
public attention on them and compels them to appeal to the widest possible clientele. The 
only  certainty is  that  "founding elections"  will  eliminate  those  who  make  important 
miscalculations. 

The absence of  predictable "rules of  the game" during a regime transition expands the 
boundaries of  contingent choice.  Indeed, the dynamics of  the  transition revolve  around 
strategic interactions and  tentative arrangements between  actors with  uncertain power 
resources aimed at defining who will legitimately be entitled to play in the political game, 
what criteria will determine the winners and losers, and what limits will be placed on the 
issues at stake. From this perspective, regime consolidation occurs when contending social 
classes  and  political  groups  come  to  accept  some  set  of  formal  rules  or  informal 
understandings that determine "who gets what, where, when, and how" from politics. In so 
doing, they settle into predictable positions and legitimate behaviors by competing according 
to mutually acceptable rules. Electoral outcomes may still be uncertain with regard to person 
or party, but in consolidated democracies they are firmly surrounded by normative limits and 
established patterns of power distribution. 

The notion of  contingency (meaning that outcomes depend less on objective conditions 
than subjective rules surrounding strategic choice) has the advantage of stressing collective 
decisions and political interactions that have largely been underemphasized in the search for 
preconditions. But  this  understanding of  democracy has  the  danger of  descending into 
excessive voluntarism if it is not explicitly placed within a framework of structural-historical 
constraints. Even  in  the  midst  of  the  tremendous uncertainty provoked by  a  regime 
transition, where constraints appear to be most relaxed and where a wide range of outcomes 
appears to be possible, the decisions made by various actors respond to and are conditioned 
by the types of socioeconomic structures and political institutions already present. These can 
be  decisive  in  that they may either restrict or enhance the  options available to  different 
political actors attempting to construct democracy. 

For example, certain social structures seem to make the emergence of political democracy 
highly  improbable; inversely, it  is  reasonable to  presume that their absence may  make 
accommodative strategies more viable  and reinforce the  position  of  democratic actors. 
Political democracies have lasted only  in countries where the landed class,  generally the 
most  recalcitrant of  interests, has  played a  secondary role  in  the  export economy,  for 
example Venezuela and Chile, or where non-labor-repressive agriculture has predominated, 
for  example  Costa  Rica,  Argentina, and  Uruguay. Thus  the  survivability of  political 
democracy does seem to depend on a structural space defined in part by the absence of  a 

6 

Terry Lynn Karl 

strong landowner elite  engaged  in  labor-repressive agriculture or  its  subordination to 
interests tied to other economic activities.2' 

The cases of Venezuela and Chile better make the point. In Venezuela, dependence upon 
petroleum as the leading source of foreign exchange had the (unintended) effect of hastening 
the decline of that country's already stagnant agriculture and, with it, the landowning elite. 
Faced with overvalued exchange rates that hurt agro-exports and abundant foreign reserves 
for  importing cheap  foodstuffs,  landowners sold  their property to  oil  companies and 
converted themselves into  a  commercial and financial urban bourgeoisie.  This  largely 
voluntary self-liquidation removed the incentive for them to commercialize rural areas, to 
subordinate the peasantry through repressive means, and eventually to maintain authoritarian 
rule.  It also  removed the  social base for an antisystem party of  the right. Thus,  actors 
designing pact-making strategies in Venezuela during the regime transition in  1958 did not 
face powerfully organized antidemocratic rural elites.22 Social dynamics in Chile,  though 
different, had the same effect. Conservative elements based in a system of labor-repressive 
agriculture eventually supported the expansion of the suffrage in the nineteenth century as a 
means of combating the rising power of  industrialists and capas medias, who were tied to 
the  state and supported by  revenues from copper.23 In effect,  the  social  impact of  the 
dominant presence of  mineral exports meant that, when compared to the cases of  Central 
America, both Venezuela and Chile were able to institutionalize democratic agreements with 
relative ease. 

These cases illustrate the limits, as well as the opportunities, that social structures place 
upon contingent choice.  If the focus in explaining the emergence of  democracy had been 
solely on the forging of institutional compromises, that is, conceptualizing the establishment 
of  democracy  as  only  the  product  of  strategic  interactions,  the  pact-making that 
characterized the Venezuelan transition and the gradual expansion of  the suffrage in Chile 
would appear to  be  simply the result of  skilful bargaining by  astute political leaders.24 
Instead, by focusing on the internal social dynamics produced by a mineral-based insertion 
into the international economy, it becomes evident how oil-  or copper-induced structural 
change makes such "statecraft" possible. This is not to argue that individual decisions made 
at particular points in time or all observable political outcomes can be specifically and neatly 
linked to preexisting structures, but it is claimed that historically created structures, while 
not determining which one of  a limited set of  alternatives political actors may choose,  are 
"confining conditions" that restrict or in some cases enhance the choices available to them. 
In  other words,  structural and  institutional constraints determine the  range of  options 
available to decision makers and may even predispose them to choose a specific option. 

What is  called  for,  then,  is  a  path-dependent approach which  clarifies how  broad 
structural changes  shape  particular regime  transitions in  ways  that may  be  especially 
conducive to (or especially obstructive of)  democratization. This needs to be combined with 
an analysis of  how such structural changes become embodied in political institutions and 
rules which subsequently mold the preferences and capacities of individuals during and after 
regime changes. In this way, it should be possible to demonstrate how the range of options 
available to decision makers at a given point in time is a function of structures put in place 
in an earlier period and, concomitantly, how such decisions are conditioned by institutions 
established in  the past. The advantages of  this method are evident when compared to  a 
structural approach alone,  which leads to excessively  deterministic conclusions about the 

7 

Comparative Politics  October 1990 

origins and prospects of  democracy, or to  a  sole  focus on  contingency, which produces 
overly voluntaristic interpretations.25 

Modes of Transition to Democracy 

Once the links between structures, institutions, and contingent choice  are articulated, it 
becomes  apparent that the  arrangements made by  key  political actors during a  regime 
transition establish new rules, roles, and behavioral patterns which may or may not represent 
an  important rupture with  the  past.  These,  in  turn, eventually become  the  institutions 
shaping the prospects for regime consolidation in the future. Electoral laws, once adopted, 
encourage some interests to enter the political arena and discourage others. Certain models 
of economic development, once initiated through some form of compromise between capital 
and labor, systematically favor some groups over others in patterns that become difficult to 
change. Accords between political parties and the armed forces set out the initial parameters 
of  civilian  and military spheres. Thus,  what at  the  time  may  appear to  be  temporary 
agreements often become persistent barriers to change, barriers that can even  scar a new 
regime with a permanent "birth defect." 

These observations have important implications for studying democracy in Latin America. 
Rather than engage in what may be a futile search for new preconditions, they suggest that 
scholars would do  well  to  concentrate on  several tasks: (1)  clarifying how  the mode of 
regime transition (itself conditioned by the breakdown of authoritarian rule) sets the context 
within which strategic interactions can take place; (2) examining how these interactions, in 
turn, help  to  determine whether political democracy will  emerge and survive; and (3) 
analyzing what type of democracy will eventually be institutionalized. 

Thus,  it  is  important to  begin to  distinguish between possible modes of  transition to 
democracy. First, we  can differentiate cases  in which democracies are the outcome of  a 
strategy based  primarily on  overt  force  from  those  in  which  democracies arise  from 
compromise. This has been displayed on the horizontal axis in Figure 1.  Second, we  can 
distinguish between transitions in which incumbent ruling groups, no matter how weakened, 
are still ascendant in relation to mass actors and those in which mass actors have gained the 
upper hand, even  temporarily, vis-a-vis  those dominant elites.  This can be  seen  on  the 
vertical axis in Figure 1. The cross tabulation of these distinctions produces four ideal types 
of democratic transition: reform, revolution, imposition, and pact. 

Latin America, at one time or another, has experienced all four modes of transition. To 
date, however, no stable political democracy has resulted from regime transitions in which 
mass actors have gained control, even momentarily, over traditional ruling classes. Efforts at 
reform from  below,  which  have  been  characterized by  unrestricted contestation and 
participation, have met with subversive opposition from unsuppressed traditional elites,  as 
the  cases  of  Argentina (1946-1951),  Guatemala (1946-1954),  and Chile  (1970-1973) 
demonstrate.26 Revolutions generally produce stable forms of  governance (Bolivia  is  an 
obvious exception), but such forms have not yet evolved into democratic patterns of  fair 
competition, unrestricted contestation, rotation in power, and free associability, although 
developments in Nicaragua and Mexico may soon challenge this assertion.27 

Thus far, the most frequently encountered types of  transition, and the ones which have 

8 

Figure  1  Modes of Transition to Democracy 

Terry Lynn Karl 

STRATEGIES  OF  TRANSITION 

Compromise 

Force 

Elite 

Ascendant 

PACT 

IMPOSITION 

RELATIVE 
ACTOR 
STRENGTH 

Mass  Ascendant 

REFORM 

REVOLUTION 

most  often  resulted  in  the  implantation  of  a  political  democracy,  are  "transitions  from 
above."  Here traditional rulers remain in  control,  even  if  pressured from below,  and 
successfully use strategies of either compromise or force -or  some mix of the two -  to retain 
at least part of their power. 

Of these two modes of transition, democratization by pure imposition is the least common 
in  Latin America-unless  we  incorporate cases  in  which force or the threat of  force  is 
applied by foreign as well as domestic actors. This is not the case for both Europe and Asia, 
where democratization through imposition often followed in the wake of World War II. In 
Figure 2, the cell labeled imposition includes Brazil and Ecuador, where the military used its 
dominant position to establish unilaterally the rules for civilian governance. Cases on the 
margin include Costa Rica  (where in  1948  an  opposition party militarily defeated the 
governing party but  then  participated in  pact-making to  lay  the  foundation for  stable 
democratic rule),  Venezuela (1945-48)  and Peru (where the  military's control over the 
timing and shape of the transition was strongly influenced by a mass popular movement),28 
and Chile (where the military's unilateralism was curbed somewhat by its defeat in the 1988 
plebiscite).29 

Where democracies that have endured for a respectable length of time appear to cluster is 
in the cell defined by relatively strong elite actors who engage in strategies of compromise, 
as  Figure 2  demonstrates. This cell  includes the cases  of  Venezuela (1958-),  Colombia 
(1958-),  the recent redemocratization in Uruguay (1984-),  and Chile (1932-1970).30 What 
unites all of these diverse cases, except Chile, is the presence of foundational pacts, that is, 
explicit (though not always public) agreements between contending actors, which define the 
rules of  governance on  the basis of  mutual guarantees for the  "vital interests" of  those 
involved. Chile appears to be an exception because there was no explicit pact or agreement 
among elites in  1932, when the democratic regime was simply "restored" on the basis of 
preexisting constitutional rules left over from the first democratic transition in 1874. While 

9 

Comparative Politics  October 1990 

Figure  2  Modes of Transition to Democracy in Latin America 

Compromise 

^-?, --. 

---------- 
--- 

. 

Force 

PACT 

IMPOSITION 

Venezuela 

(1958-) 

Costa  Rica 

(1948-) 

Brazil 

(1974-) 

Colombia 

(1958-) 

Uruguay 

(1984-) 

Ecuador 

(1976-) 

Mexico 

(1988-)* 

Chile 

(1932-1970) 

Chile 

(1988-) 

Argentina 

(1983-) 

REFORM 

Argentina 

(1946-1951l), 

Guatemala 

(1946-1954) 

Chile 

(1970-1973) 

** 

Guatemala 

(1984-)* 

El  Salvador 

(1982)* 

Peru 

(1978-) 

Venezuela 

(1945-48) 

REVOLUTION 

Mexico 

(1910-1929) 

* 

Bolivia 

(1952-) 

Nicaragua 

(1979-)* 

* 

** 

cases 

These 
definition 
in  periods 
modes  of 
See 

footnote 

used 
of 

transition 
26. 

cannot 
here. 

be 

considered 

They  are 

included 

and 

thus 

democracies 
because 

illustrate 

the 
are 

in 
they 
possible 

transformation 
the 

in 

future. 

the Chilean case suggests that elite-based democracies can be established in the absence of 
foundational pacts,  this  may  be  more  difficult  in  the  contemporary period,  which  is 
characterized by more developed organized interests, the presence of mass politics, stronger 
military capabilities, and a  tighter integration into the  international market. Under such 
conditions, pactismo may prove to be essential.3' 

Foundational pacts are well  exemplified by  the  case  of  Venezuela.  Here a  series of 
agreements negotiated by  the  military, economic,  and  party leaders rested on  explicit 

10 

Terry Lynn Karl 

institutional arrangements.32 The military agreed to leave power and to accept a new role as 
an "apolitical, obedient, and nondeliberative body" in exchange for an amnesty for abuses 
committed during authoritarian rule and a guaranteed improvement of the economic situation 
of  officers. Political parties agreed to respect the electoral process and share power in a 
manner commensurate with the voting results. They also accepted a  "prolonged political 
truce"  aimed  at  depersonalizing debate  and  facilitating  consultation  and  coalitions. 
Capitalists agreed to  accept legal trade unions and collective bargaining in exchange for 
significant state subsidies,  guarantees against expropriation or  socializing property, and 
promises of  labor peace from workers' representatives. This  arrangement changed what 
could  have  become  potentially  explosive  issues  of  national  debate  into  established 
parameters by removing them from the electoral arena. 

The  foundational pacts  underlying some  new  democracies  have  several  essential 
components.  First,  they  are  necessarily  comprehensive and  inclusive  of  virtually all 
politically significant actors. Indeed, because pacts are negotiated compromises in which 
contending forces agree to forego their capacity to harm each other by extending guarantees 
not to threaten each other's vital interests, they are successful only when they include all 
significantly threatening interests. Thus, the typical foundational pact is actually a series of 
agreements that are interlocking and dependent upon each other; it necessarily includes an 
agreement between the military and civilians over the conditions for establishing civilian 
rule, an agreement between political parties to compete under the new rules of governance, 
and a  "social contract" between state agencies,  business associations, and trade unions 
regarding property rights, market arrangements, and the distribution of benefits. 

Second,  while  such pacts are both substantive (about the  main tenets of  policy)  and 
procedural (about the rules of policymaking), they initially emphasize rulemaking because 
"bargaining about bargaining" is  the  first and most  important stage  in  the  process of 
compromise. Only after all contending forces have agreed to bargain over their differences 
can the power-sharing which leads to consensual governance result. This initial bargain can 
begin to lay the basis for mutual trust if only by building up reserves of familiarity between 
opposing groups. Subsequently, the very decision to enter into a pact can create a habit of 
pact making and an accommodative political style based on a "pact to make pacts." 

Such foundational pacts must be differentiated from smaller, more partial "managerial" 
accords.33 These  include  the  neofunctional arrangements frequently found  in  social 
democratic polities  in  Europe, for  example,  the  annual corporatist negotiations among 
capital, labor, and the state in postwar Austria for setting wages and social policy, as well as 
the  frequent mini-accords hammered out between political opponents in  Latin America. 
Unlike  foundational pacts,  managerial accords are  partial rather than  comprehensive, 
exclusionary rather than inclusionary, and substantively oriented rather than rule making in 
content. These characteristics of comprehensiveness, inclusion, and rule making are critical 
in  identifying the presence of  a  foundational pact. They help distinguish between basic 
agreements, like those present in Venezuela in 1958, and more transitory political deals, like 
the  Pact of  Apaneca which  was  forged in  El  Salvador in  1983  between the  Christian 
Democratic Party and ARENA.34 

Finally, these pacts serve to ensure survivability because, although they are inclusionary, 
they are simultaneously aimed at restricting the scope of representation in order to reassure 
traditional dominant classes that their vital interests will be respected. In essence, they are 

11 

Comparative Politics  October 1990 

antidemocratic mechanisms,  bargained by  elites,  which  seek  to  create  a  deliberate 
socioeconomic  and  political  contract  that  demobilizes  emerging  mass  actors  while 
delineating the extent to which all actors can participate or wield power in the future. They 
may accomplish this task by restricting contestation (as Colombian parties did in  1958 by 
agreeing to alternate in power regardless of  the outcome of  elections),  by restricting the 
policy agenda itself (as Venezuelan parties did in  1958 by agreeing to implement the same 
economic program), or by restricting the franchise (as Chilean elites did beginning with the 
electoral law of 1874). Regardless of which strategic option is chosen, the net effect of these 
options is  the  same: the  nature and parameters of  the  initial democracy that results is 
markedly circumscribed. 

Types of Democracies and Their Prospects in the Contemporary Period 

What are the implications of this excursus into preconditions and modes of transition for the 
prospects of democratization in contemporary Latin America? To begin with, the notion of 
unfolding processes and sequences from regime breakdown to transition to consolidation and 
persistence is fundamental in understanding the two concurrent realities of democratization 
in Latin America today. On the one hand, most of the newly emergent civilian or militarized 
civilian regimes-Argentina,  Chile, Peru, Ecuador, Guatemala, Honduras, El Salvador, and 
Nicaragua-face  the overwhelming problem of  sheer survivability. What threatens their 
survival is the omnipresent specter of  a military coup, a coup which may be provoked by 
intense partisan political disagreements, by the inability of  political parties to manage the 
current profound economic crisis of the region, by the actions of antisystem elites, by a mass 
mobilization of  labor, peasants, or the urban poor that escapes the control of  traditional 
dominant classes,  by  the actions of  a  foreign power, or by  threats to the vital corporate 
interests of the military itself. Significant uncertainty over the rules of the game still prevail 
in these fragile democracies. 

What becomes important in maintaining civilian rule is  to find mechanisms-other  than 
rigged or unpredictable elections-that  can limit this uncertainty, especially by  reducing 
incentives for civilians on the losing end to appeal to the military for salvation. This suggests 
that there are two critical tasks initially facing Latin American democratizers: first, to arrive 
at  a  sufficiently strong consensus  about the  rules  of  the  game  (including institutional 
formalities guaranteeing respect for certain crucial but minoritarian concerns) so  that no 
major elite is tempted to call upon the military to protect its vital interests and, second, to 
begin to design conscious strategies for the establishment of qualitatively new civil-military 
relations appropriate to future stable civilian rule. This is probably easier to accomplish in 
the  more developed regions of  the continent, where the  armed forces have  learned the 
importance of cooperating with capitalist and managerial elites, than in the less developed 
ones  (Bolivia,  Central America,  and  the  Caribbean), where  the  military still  retains 
relatively confident notions of its ability to manage the economy and polity or is simply too 
corrupt to worry about such matters.35 

On the other hand, other types of  democracies in the region-Venezuela,  Costa Rica, 
and, more recently, Brazil and Uruguay-are  relatively consolidated in that actors are not so 
preoccupied by  the  overriding concern  with  survivability. Rather,  the  challenge  that 

12 

Terry Lynn Karl 

confronts most of  these polities  (and that will  certainly confront newer democracies as 
preoccupation with mere survivability recedes) is providing some new and better resolution 
to  the  ancient question of  cui  bono.  This  issue  of  "who  benefits" from democracy is 
singularly problematic in  Latin  America,  where  the  pattern of  dependent capitalist 
development has  been  especially  ruthless in  its  historic patterns of  exploitation.36 This 
means that the extension of citizenship and equal political rights must take place in a context 
of extreme inequality, which is unparalleled even in Africa or Asia.37 It must also take place 
during la  decada perdida, that is  to  say, in the midst of  the most severe and prolonged 
economic crisis since the Depression.38 

The  relationship between  the  problematics of  survivability and  cui  bono  may  well 
represent the central dilemma of  democratization in Latin America. The choices taken by 
key political actors to ensure the survivability of a fragile democracy-the  compromises they 
make, the agreements they enter into-will  necessarily and even  irrevocably affect who 
gains  and who  loses  during the consolidation of  a  new  regime.  Subsequent "populist" 
decisions to redistribute gains without regard for losses  may affect the durability of  the 
regime itself,  regardless of  how  consolidated it  may  appear to  be.  At  the  same  time, 
decisions not to redistribute or inaction on this front may also influence regime durability 
because the  commitment to  democracy in  part rests on  the  widely  held  (if  sometimes 
inaccurate) conviction that economic benefits will be more fairly distributed or the welfare 
of the general population improved under this type of polity. Hence the current concern with 
both survivability and "who benefits" merely underlines the significance of  choices made 
during the founding moments of  democracies and highlights some potential relationships 
between political democracy and economic outcomes for future research. It also produces 
some not-so-promising scenarios for the emergence of different types of democracies. 

First, political democracy in Latin America may be rooted in a fundamental paradox: the 
very  modes  of  transition that  appear  to  enhance  initial  survivability  by  limiting 
unpredictability may preclude the future democratic self-transformation of the economy or 
polity further down the road. Ironically, the conditions that permit democracies to persist in 
the short run may constrain their potential for resolving the enormous problems of poverty 
and  inequality that continue to  characterize the  continent.  Indeed,  it  is  reasonable to 
hypothesize that what occurs in the phase of transition or early consolidation may involve a 
significant trade-off between some form of political democracy, on the one hand, and equity, 
on the other. Thus, even as these democracies guarantee a greater respect for law and human 
dignity when compared to their authoritarian predecessors, they may be unable to carry out 
substantive reforms that address the lot  of  their poorest citizens.  If  this scenario should 
occur, they would become the victims of their successful consolidation, and the democratic 
transitions of  the  1980s that survive could prove to  be  the  "frozen" democracies of  the 
1990s. 

Second,  while  this  may  be  the  central  dilemma  of  elite-ascendant processes  of 
democratization, there may be  important differences between countries like  Uruguay, a 
pacted  transition, and  Brazil,  a  unilaterally imposed  transition.  Pacted  democracies, 
whatever their defects, have been honed through compromise between at least two powerful 
contending  elites.  Thus,  their  institutions should  reflect  some  flexibility  for  future 
bargaining and revision over existing rules. In Uruguay, for example, while the agreed-upon 
rules made it very difficult to challenge agreements between the military and the parties on 

13 

Comparative Politics  October 1990 

the issue of  amnesty for crimes committed during authoritarian rule, the left opposition, 
excluded from this agreement, was nevertheless able to force the convocation of a plebiscite 
on this major issue, which it subsequently lost. It is difficult to imagine that anything similar 
could  occur  in  Brazil.  Because  the  military exerted almost complete control over  the 
transition, it never curtailed its own prerogatives nor fully agreed to the principle of civilian 
control, and it has not been compelled to adopt institutional rules reflecting the need for 
compromise. 

The contrast between the cases  of  Uruguay and Brazil raises a  hypothesis that merits 
investigation: to the extent that transitions are unilaterally imposed by armed forces who are 
not compelled to enter into compromises, they threaten to evolve into civilian governments 
controlled by  authoritarian elements who  are unlikely to  push for greater participation, 
accountability, or equity for the majority of their citizens. Paradoxically, in other words, the 
heritage left  by  "successful" authoritarian experiences,  that is,  those  characterized by 
relatively moderate levels of  repression and economic success which has left the military 
establishment relatively intact, may prove to  be  the major obstacle to  future democratic 
self-transformation.39 This  danger exists,  albeit  to  a  lesser  extent,  in  civilian-directed 
unilateral transitions, for example, Mexico, because the institutional rules that are imposed 
are likely to favor incumbents and permit less scope for contestation. 

Third, the attempt to assess possible consequences of various modes of transition is most 
problematic  where  strong  elements  of 
imposition,  compromise,  and  reform  are 
simultaneously present, that is to say, where neither incumbent elites nor newly ascendant 
power contenders are clearly in control and where the armed forces are relatively intact. This 
is currently the case in Argentina and Peru, as Figure 2 demonstrates. Given the Argentinean 
military's defeat in the Falklands/Malvinas war, the high level of mass mobilization during 
the transition, and the absence of pacts between civilian authority and the armed forces, on 
the one hand, and trade unions and employers, on the other, Argentina combines elements 
of several modes of transition. Such a mixed scenario, while perhaps holding out the greatest 
hope for political democracy and economic equity, may render a consistent strategy of any 
type ineffectual and thus lead to the repetition of Argentina's persistent failure to consolidate 
any type of regime. The prospects for failure are even greater in Peru. Given the absence of 
explicit  agreements  between  the  leading  political  parties,  the  possibility  of  mass 
mobilizations in the midst of  economic depression, the presence of  an armed insurgency, 
and a unified military, Peru is currently the most fragile democracy in South America. 

Fourth,  because  political  democracies generally  arise  from  a  compromise between 
contending organized elites that are unable to impose their will unilaterally or the unilateral 
action of  one  dominant group, usually the  armed forces,  this  does  not  bode  well  for 
democratization in situations in which the armed forces are inextricably tied to the interests 
of a dominant (and antidemocratic) agrarian class. Guatemala and El Salvador in particular 
are  characterized by  a  landowning  elite  whose  privileged  position  is  based  on 
labor-repressive agriculture and on  a  virtual partnership with the armed forces,  thereby 
making it unlikely that their militaries (as currently constituted) will tolerate comprehensive 
political  competitiveness, civil  liberties,  or  accountability. Regardless of  the  profound 
differences between these two Central American countries, the extraordinary pressure of 
U.S.  intervention as well  as international diffusion means that, at minimum, they can be 
expected to adhere to "electoralism," meaning the regularized holding of elections, even as 

14 

Terry Lynn Karl 

they continue to restrict the other political rights and opportunities of  their citizens. This 
hybrid mix of  electoral forms and authoritarianism, which has been dubbed "electocratic 
rule" by one observer,40 is likely to emerge in other developing areas wherever the spread of 
elections under foreign inspiration either precedes or is intended to coopt strong domestic 
pressures for democratization. 

These observations can be distilled into types of democracies, which, at least initially, are 
largely shaped by the mode of  transition in Latin America, as  Figure 3  illustrates. They 
suggest that democratization by imposition is likely to yield conservative democracies that 
can not or will  not address equity issues.  To  the extent that imposition originates from 
outside, however, the result is likely to be some form of electoral authoritarian rule, which 
can not be considered democracy at all. Pacted transitions are likely to produce corporatist or 
consociational democracies in  which  party competition is  regulated to  varying degrees 
determined, in part, by the nature of  foundational bargains. Transition through reform is 
likely to bring about competitive democracies, whose political fragility paves the way for an 
eventual return to  authoritarianism. Finally,  revolutionary transitions tend  to  result  in 
one-party dominant democracies, where competition is  also  regulated. These  types  are 
characterized by different mixes and varying degrees of the chief dimensions of democracy: 
contestation, participation, accountability, and civilian control over the military. 

Such predictions are discouraging, but they may be offset by more hopeful observations 
that affect the contingent choices of contemporary democratizers. On the one hand, the Cold 
War features of the international system have changed remarkably, and this may offer new 
opportunities for the reformist mode of transition in Latin America. The failure of two of the 
three cases  cited  in  this category, Guatemala (1946-1954)  and Chile (1970-1973),  was 
profoundly affected  by  U.S.  intervention, motivated in  large  part by  the  ideological 
identification of  mass-based reforms with the  spread of  Soviet  influence in the  western 

Figure 3  Modes of Transition and Types of Democracy 

IMPOSITION 

External 
Internal 

_ 

CONDITIONS 

PACT 

CONSERVATIVE 

M Hulti-Party 
Multi-Party 

(Fictitious) 
(Restrictive) 

Multi-Party 

CORPORATIST 
(Collusive) 

VARIATIONS 

IN 

POLICY 

OUTCOMES 

DEMISE 

OF 

OF 

RUlLE 

AUTHORITARIAN 

REFORM 

COMPETITIVE 

Multi-Party 

(Competitive) 

REVOLUTION  ----- 

One-Party  Dominant 

15 

Comparative Politics  October 1990 

hemisphere. U.S.  intervention against peasant-based movements in  Central America has 
been justified in  the  same  manner. To  the extent that the global  state system loses  its 
"bipolarity," the credibility of  such accusations becomes increasingly difficult to  sustain, 
thus potentially creating more space for mass ascendant political movements. The fact that 
this mode of  transition failed in the past in Latin America does not mean that it will not 
succeed in the future.4' 

On the other hand, this discussion of  modes of  transition and varying probabilities for 
survival  has  not  presumed  that  democracies  will  benefit  from  superior  economic 
performance, which is fortunate given the state of contemporary Latin American economies. 
Most observers assume that crises in growth, employment, foreign exchange earnings, and 
debt repayments necessarily bode ill for the consolidation of democratic rule, and few would 
question the long-run value of  an increasing resource base for stability. But austerity may 
have some perverse advantages, at least for initial survivability. In the context of the terrible 
economic conditions of  the  1980s, the exhaustion of utopian ideologies and even  of rival 
policy prescriptions has become painfully evident. Neither the extreme right nor the extreme 
left has a plausible alternative system to offer-to  themselves or to mass publics. Though 
populism,  driven by  diffuse  popular expectations and desencanto with  the  rewards of 
compromised democracy, is  always a possibility-witness  the experience of  Peru and the 
recent elections in Argentina-it  can not deliver the immediate rewards that have been its 
sustenance in the past. 

To the extent that this situation diminishes both the expected benefits and rewards from 
antisystem activity, it enhances the likelihood of  democracies to endure. This suggests a 
possible hypothesis for future exploration. The relationship between democratization and 
economic performance, rather than rising or falling in tandem, may be parabolic. Conditions 
to strike bargains may be most favorable in the midst of protracted austerity, as well as in the 
midst  of  sustained plenty.  They  may  be  worse  when  the  economy  is  going  through 
stop-and-go cycles or being hit with sudden windfalls or scarcities. If true, this provides a 
ray of hope for the otherwise unpromising decade ahead. 

Finally, there is  no a priori reason why one type of  democracy can not be transformed 
into another, that is to say, why electoral authoritarian regimes, for example, can not evolve 
into  conservative  or  competitive  democracies,  or  corporatist democracies  into  more 
competitive ones. Given the frequency of pactismo and the gravity of the equity problem in 
Latin America, the latter scenario is especially important. While pacted transitions establish 
an improvisational institutional framework of governance that may become a semipermanent 
barrier to  change,  this framework is  subject to  further modification in  the  future. Such 
modification may  be  brought about  preemptively when  some  ruling  groups,  having 
experienced the advantages of democratic rule, become more inclined over time to seek to 
accommodate potential pressures from below rather than suppress them, or it may occur 
through the direct pressure of organized social groups.42 In either case, democratization can 
prove to be an ongoing process of renewal. 

The notion that one type of democracy may gradually evolve into a qualitatively different 
type suggests that the dynamics of democratic consolidation must differ in important ways 
from the transition if  "freezing" is  to  be  avoided.  Because  the  overriding goal  of  the 
transition is  to  reach some  broad social  consensus about the  goals  of  society  and the 
acceptable means to achieve them, successful transitions are necessarily characterized by 

16 

Terry Lynn Karl 

accommodation and compromise. But if  this emphasis on caution becomes an overriding 
political norm during consolidation, democracies may find it difficult to demonstrate that 
they  are  better than their predecessors at  resolving  fundamental social  and  economic 
problems.  Thus,  consolidation,  if  it  is  to  be  successful,  should  require  skills  and 
commitments from leading actors which are qualitatively different from those exhibited 
during the  transition. In  this  latter phase,  these  actors must demonstrate the  ability to 
differentiate political forces rather than to draw them all into a grand coalition, the capacity 
to  define  and channel competing political projects rather than seek  to  keep  potentially 
divisive  reforms off  the  agenda,  and  the  willingness  to  tackle  incremental reforms, 
especially in the domains of the economy and civil-military relations, rather than defer them 
to some later date. If the cycle of  regime change that has plagued Latin America is to be 
broken and replaced by an era of  protracted democratic rule, democratizers must learn to 
divide as well as to unite and to raise hopes as well as to dampen expectations. 

NOTES 

This article was originally presented at the Conference on Latin America at the Threshold of the 1990s, sponsored 
by the Institute of Latin America of  the Chinese Academy of  Social Sciences and the Ford Foundation and held in 
Beijing on  June 8-16,  1988.  The author wishes  to  thank Ken Erickson, Richard Fagen, Samuel Valenzuela, an 
anonymous reviewer, and, most especially, Philippe Schmitter. 

1.  These questions underlie a  number of  new  studies on  democracy. See,  for example, Guillermo O'Donnell, 
Philippe Schmitter, and Laurence Whitehead, eds.,  Transitions from Authoritarian Rule, 4 vols. (Baltimore: The Johns 
Hopkins University Press,  1986); Paul W.  Drake and Eduardo Silva,  eds.,  Elections and Democratization in Latin 
America, 1980-1985  (San Diego: Center for Iberian and Latin American Studies, University of  California, 1986); 
Enrique A.  Baloyra, Comparing New Democracies: Transition and Consolidation in Mediterranean Europe and the 
Southern Cone (Boulder: Westview Press,  1987); Carlos Huneeus, Para Vivir La Democracia (Santiago: Editorial 
Andante, 1987); and Larry Diamond, Juan J.  Linz,  and Seymour Martin Lipset, eds.,  Democracy in Developing 
Countries, 4 vols.  (Boulder: Lynne Rienner Publishers, 1988-90). 

2.  See Dankwart A.  Rustow, "Transitions to Democracy: Towards a Dynamic Model," Comparative Politics,  2 

(April 1970). 

3.  This  statement requires some  qualification. J.  A.  Schumpeter defines  democracy  as  "that  institutional 
arrangement for  arriving at  political decisions in  which  individuals acquire the power to  decide  by  means of  a 
competitive struggle for the people's vote" in Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy (London: Geo. Allen and Unwin, 
1943), p. 269.  Under this definition the competition for leadership through free elections is the distinctive feature of 
democracy. But Schumpeter, unlike Jeane Kirkpatrick and other U.S.  policymakers in the  1980s,  considered civil 
liberties a necessary condition for the operation of democracy. Thus, it can not be assumed that he would have shared 
the current emphasis on the mere presence of elections, which I have elsewhere referred to as "electoralism," that is, 
"the faith that merely holding elections will channel political action into peaceful contests among elites and accord 
public legitimacy to the winners in these contests." See Terry Lynn Karl, "Imposing Consent? Electoralism versus 
Democratization in El Salvador," in Drake and Silva, eds.  p. 34. 

4.  For  an  example  of  this  approach, see  Suzanne Jonas,  "Elections  and Transitions: The  Guatemalan and 
Nicaraguan Case," in John Booth and Mitchell Seligson, eds.,  Elections and Democracy in Central America (Chapel 
Hill: University of  North Carolina Press,  1989). Jonas and Stein argue against separating political democracy from 
socioeconomic equity and support "a broader view that meaningful 'transitions' to democracy' [in Central America] 
involve more sweeping social change on the scale of the major bourgeois and socialist revolutions historically." See 
Suzanne Jonas and Nancy Stein, "Democracy in Nicaragua," in Suzanne Jonas and Nancy Stein, eds.,  Democracy in 
Latin America (New York: Bergin and Garvey Publishers, 1990), p. 43. 

5.  In examining the problem of constructing institutions that can translate the preferences of majorities into public 
policy, for example, social choice theorists have demonstrated the difficulty of designing decision-making procedures 
that give  equal weight to  the preferences of  all citizens and that permit the aggregation of  these preferences into 

17 

Comparative Politics  October 1990 

governmental policies without violating any of the other basic tenets of democratic theory. See,  for example, William 
H.  Riker, Liberalism versus Populism: A Confrontation between the Theory of Democracy and the Theory of Social 
Choice (San Francisco: W.  H.  Freeman and Co.,  1982),  and the review by  Jules Coleman and John Ferejohn, 
"Democracy and Social Choice," Ethics, 97 (October 1986). Theorists of democracy have long grappled with other 
dilemmas involving notions of social justice and equity. See, for example, Peter Bachrach, The Theory of Democratic 
Elitism: A Critique (Washington, D.C.:  University Press of America, 1980); and Carole Pateman, Participation and 
Democratic Theory (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1970). 

6.  I  have  drawn the  first two  dimensions and,  to  some  extent,  the  third from Robert A.  Dahl,  Polyarchy: 
Participation and Opposition (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1971). But Dahl, like other democratic theorists, 
does  not  emphasize the  establishment of  civilian  control over  the  military through the  limitation of  military 
prerogatives. Indeed, this dimension often appears to be an assumed condition or even an unstated prerequisite in other 
definitions of  democracy. Alfred Stepan, Rethinking Military Politics:  Brazil and  the Southern Cone  (Princeton: 
Princeton University Press, 1988), is an important corrective in this regard. Stepan defines the military's institutional 
prerogatives as  "those areas where, whether challenged or not, the military as an institution assumes they have an 
acquired right or privilege, formal or informal, to exercise effective control over its internal governance, to play a role 
within extra-military areas within the state apparatus, or even to structure relationships between the state and political 
or civil society" (p.  93). The clear determination and limitation of these areas are a measure of civilian control and, in 
my view,  are also a measure of democratization. 

7.  This  formulation originally appeared in  Seymour Martin Lipset,  "Some  Social  Requisites of  Democracy: 

Economic Development and Political Legitimacy," American Political Science Review, 53 (March 1959). 

8.  Some proponents of this view often measured the prospects for democracy by per capita gross domestic product, 
leading the occasional political observer to await the moment when a particular country would cross "the threshold" 
into democracy. This supposed threshold has varied from country to country. Spain's Lopez Redo once predicted that 
his country would not become democratic until it reached a per capita income of  $2,000.  More recently, Mitchell 
Seligson has argued that Central America needs to  approach a per capita income of  $250  (in  1957 dollars) and a 
literacy rate of over 50 percent as a necessary precondition for democratization. See James M. Malloy and Mitchell A. 
Seligson,  eds.,  Authoritarians and  Democrats: Regime Transition in  Latin America (Pittsburgh: University of 
Pittsburgh Press,  1987), pp. 7-9. 

9.  For example, Howard Wiarda, "Toward a  Framework for the Study of  Political Change in the Iberic-Latin 
Tradition: The Corporative Model," in Howard Wiarda, ed.,  Corporatism and National Development in Latin America 
(Boulder: Westview, 1981), argued that Latin America possessed "a political culture and a sociopolitical order that at 
its core is  essentially two-class,  authoritarian, traditional, elitist,  patrimonial, Catholic, stratified, hierarchical and 
corporate." A similar argument can be found in Richard N.  Morse, "The Heritage of  Latin America," in Howard 
Wiarda, ed.,  Politics and Social Change in Latin America (Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1974). 

10.  The notion of  "civic  culture," first introduced by  Gabriel Almond and Sidney Verba in  The Civic Culture 
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1963),  sought to analyze the relationship between the political attitudes of  a 
population and the nature of its political system. It was the forerunner of the works on Latin America cited above. 
11.  This was the basic argument put forward by  Leonard Binder et  al.,  eds.,  Crises and Sequences in  Political 
Development (Princeton: Princeton University Press,  1971), and by Eric Nordlinger, "Political Development, Time 
Sequences and Rates of Change," in Jason L.  Finkle and Robert W.  Gable, eds.,  Political Development and Social 
Change, 2nd ed.  (New York: John Wiley,  1971). 
12.  See Barrington Moore, Jr., Social Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy (Boston: Beacon Press, 1966). 
13.  See  John Weeks,  "An Interpretation of  the  Central American Past," Latin American Research Review, 21 
(1986); Enrique Baloyra-Herp, "Reactionary Despotism in Central America," Journal of Latin American Studies, 15 
(1983);  and Jeffrey Paige,  "Coffee  and Politics  in  Central America,"  in  Richard Tardanico, ed.,  Crisis  in  the 
Caribbean Basin (Beverly Hills: Sage Publications, 1987).  In a more recent work, Paige seeks to  differentiate his 
argument from that of Moore. He correctly contends that there is no collision between an industrial bourgeoisie and a 
landed class  in  either Costa Rica,  El  Salvador, or  Nicaragua and that the agrarian aristocracy has  successfully 
transformed itself  into  a  modern capitalist class,  both conditions that belie  Moore's  argument. Nonetheless,  in 
Guatemala and El Salvador a landed class continues to exercise domination, and the commercialization of agriculture 
has not replaced a labor-repressive mode of production, thus providing some important confirmation of Moore. See 
Jeffrey Paige, "The Social Origins of Dictatorship, Democracy and Socialist Revolution in Central America," paper 
presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Sociological Association, San Francisco, August 8,  1989. 

14.  See  Guillermo  O'Donnell,  Modernization and  Bureaucratic-Authoritarianism (Berkeley:  University  of 

18 

Terry Lynn Karl 

California, Institute for  International Studies,  1973),  and  Fernando Henrique Cardoso,  "Associated-Dependent 
Development: Theoretical and Practical Implications," in Alfred Stepan, ed.,  Authoritarian Brazil (New Haven: Yale 
University Press, 1973), pp.  142-178. 
15.  See Samuel P. Huntington, "Will More Countries Become Democratic?," Political Science Quarterly, 99 (1984). 
16.  Furthermore, through the church's active promotion of  "base communities," it  could  even  be  argued that 
contemporary Catholicism contributes to the creation of a uniquely democratic culture by encouraging participation 
among previously unorganized groups of the urban and rural poor. See Philip Oxhorn, "Bringing the Base Back In: 
The Democratization of  Civil  Society under the Chilean Authoritarian Regime" (Ph.D.  diss.,  Harvard University, 
1989). 
17.  For criticism of the O'Donnell hypothesis linking capital deepening to authoritarian rule, see David Collier, ed., 
The New Authoritarianism in Latin America (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1979), and Karen Remmer and 
Gilbert Merkx, "Bureaucratic-Authoritarianism Revisited," Latin American Research Review, 17 (1982). 
18.  Albert Hirschman has  even  claimed  that this  search can  be  pernicious. In  his  view,  to  lay  down  strict 
preconditions for democracy-"dynamic growth must be resumed, income distribution must be improved, . . . political 
parties must show a cooperative spirit .  .  ."-may  actually encourage the deconsolidation of existing democracies. 
Hirschman argues that this will almost certainly obstruct constructive thinking about the ways in which democracies 
may be formed, survive, and even become stronger in the face of  and in spite of continuing adversity. See Albert 
Hirschman, "Dilemmas of Democratic Consolidation in Latin America," unpublished notes for the Sao Paulo Meeting 
on Democratic Consolidation in Latin America and Southern Europe, 1986. 
19.  See  especially  Guillermo O'Donnell  and  Philippe  C.  Schmitter, Tentative Conclusions about  Uncertain 
Transitions (Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1986), Adam Przeworski, "Some Problems in the Study 
of  the Transition to  Democracy," in O'Donnell,  Schmitter, and Whitehead, eds.,  vol.  3,  and Adam Przeworski, 
"Democracy as a Contingent Outcome of  Conflicts," in Rune Slagsted and Jon Elster, eds.,  Constitutionalism and 
Democracy (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1989). 
20.  See Philippe Schmitter, "Democratic Consolidation of Southern Europe," unpublished manuscript. 
21.  Evelyne Huber Stephens makes a similar observation in "Economic Development, Social Change and Political 
Contestation and Inclusion in  South America," paper prepared for the Latin American Studies Association, New 
Orleans, 1988. 
22.  See Terry Lynn Karl, The Paradox of Plenty: Oil Booms and Petro-States (Berkeley: University of California 
Press, forthcoming), and "Petroleum and Political Pacts: The Transition to Democracy in Venezuela," Latin American 
Research Review, 22 (1986). 
23.  See Arturo Valenzuela and Samuel Valenzuela, "Los Origines de la Democracia: Reflexiones Teoricas sobre el 
Caso de Chile," Estudios Publicos, 12 (Spring 1983). 
24.  This  is  the  general thrust of  Daniel Levine's  analysis of  Venezuela,  which attributes the  emergence of  a 
democratic regime primarily to  statecraft and the  ability of  political actors to  compromise. See  Daniel  Levine, 
"Venezuela since  1958: The Consolidation of  Democratic Politics,"  in Juan Linz  and Alfred Stepan, eds.,  The 
Breakdown of Democratic Regimes: Latin America (Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1978). 
25.  An approach of this sort treats regime changes as critical junctures and carries an implicit assumption of patterns 
of political change characterized by gradualism punctuated by sharp discontinuities. It has a long tradition in the study 
of politics, but it is especially important in recent work on the "new institutionalism." See, for example, J. G. March 
and J.  P.  Olson,  "The New  Institutionalism: Organizational Factors in Political Life,"  American Political  Science 
Review,  78  (September 1984),  734-749,  and Stephen D.  Krasner, "Sovereignty: An  Institutional Perspective," 
Comparative Political Studies, 21 (April 1988), 66-94.  Krasner, though emphasizing political institutions alone rather 
than the combination of social structures and institutions, also argues that institutions established in the past constrain 
present choices, that the preferences of individual actors are conditioned by institutional structures, and that historical 
trajectories are path-dependent. The most recent comparative analysis of  patterns of  South American and Mexican 
development adopts a similar framework. Ruth Berins Collier and David Collier, Shaping the Political Arena: Critical 
Junctures, the Labor Movement and Regime Dynamics in  Latin America (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 
forthcoming), is the most ambitious effort to utilize this sort of path-dependent approach. In their comparative analysis, 
they examine the different trajectories that result from the initial patterns of incorporation of the labor movement into 
political life. 
26.  Strictly speaking, the case of Chile from 1970 to 1973 is not an effort of regime transition from authoritarian rule 
in the sense considered here. Rather, it is better understood as an attempt to move from one type of democracy to 
another, that is, a move down the vertical scale of the classification scheme in Figure 1 towards a reformist democracy. 

19 

Comparative Politics  October 1990 

27.  There are interesting moves  in  this direction in  the processes taking place  in  both Nicaragua and Mexico. 
Nicaragua is the first revolutionary regime on the continent to hold national elections in which a number of political 
parties have been able to compete. In 1984, the traditional Liberal and Conservative parties and several small leftist 
parties competed with the FSLN and won almost 35 percent of the vote.  In 1990, the UNO, a coalition of fourteen 
anti-Sandinista parties, defeated the Sandinistas, who promised to respect the mandate of the electorate. In Mexico, the 
PRI  has  begun to  permit greater contestation at  the  municipal and regional level,  but  these  elections  are  still 
characterized by numerous restrictions, fraud, and localized violence. 
28.  There is little information on the dynamics of regime transition in Costa Rica. See Jacobo Schifter, Lafase oculta 
de la guerra civil en Costa Rica (San Jose: EDUCA,  1979), and Fabrice Edouard Lehoucq, "Explaining the Origins 
of Democratic Regimes: Costa Rica in Theoretical Perspective" (Ph.D. diss.,  Duke University, forthcoming), which 
applies the notion of democracy as a contingent institutional compromise to this case.  On the transition in Peru, see 
Cynthia Sanborn, "Social Democracy and the Persistence of  Populism in Peru" (Ph.D.  diss.,  Harvard University, 
forthcoming). 
29.  Even where the military retained control over the transition, however, it systematically engaged in a process of 
consultation with civilian parties. See Anita Isaacs, "The Obstacles to Democratic Consolidation in Ecuador," paper 
presented to  the  Latin American Studies Association,  San Juan, Puerto Rico,  September 21-23,  1989; Francis 
Hagopian and Scott Mainwaring, "Democracy in Brazil: Origins, Problems and Prospects," World Policy Journal 
(Summer 1987), 485-514;  and Manuel Antonio Garreton, "El Plebiscito de  1988 y  la transicion a la democracia" 
(Santiago: FLACSO, 1988). 
30.  On these cases, see Charles G. Gillespie, "Uruguay's Transition from Collegial Military-Technocratic Rule,"' in 
O'Donnell, Schmitter, and Whitehead, eds.; Jonathan Hartlyn, "Democracy in Colombia: The Politics of Violence and 
Accommodation," in  Diamond,  Linz,  and  Lipset,  eds.,  vol.  4;  Alexander W.  Wilde,  "Conversations among 
Gentlemen: Oligarchical Democracy in Colombia," in Linz and Stepan, eds., The Breakdown of Democratic Regimes; 
Karl, "Petroleum and Political Pacts.' 
31.  I am grateful to Samuel Valenzuela for this point. See Samuel Valenzuela, Democratizacion via Reforma: La 
Expansion del Sufragio en Chile (Buenos Aires: Ediciones IDES,  1985). 
32.  The roots of these arrangements can be found in the Pacto de Punto Fijo and the Declaracion de Principios y 
Programa Minimo de Gobierno, which were signed prior to the country's first elections by all contending presidential 
candidates. These agreements bound all signatories to the same basic political and economic program regardless of the 
electoral outcome. These pacts are described more fully in Karl, "Petroleum and Political Pacts." 
33.  This  distinction was  originally drawn by  Philippe Schmitter in  a  conference on  "Micro-Foundations of 
Democracy," University of Chicago, March 1988. 
34.  This agreement served primarily as a mechanism for partitioning state offices and establishing other temporary 
forms of  power-sharing. Because it excluded powerful, well-organized forces on  the left and was  never aimed at 
establishing permanent rules of the game, it does not meet the criteria for a foundational pact. 
35.  I am grateful to an anonymous reviewer for this observation. 
36.  Most observers locate the roots of this exploitation in colonial and postcolonial landholding patterns that, slowly 
or abruptly, concentrated property ownership and dispossessed the majority. Specific social processes not conducive to 
democratization accompanied these landholding patterns. For example, unlike the reciprocal forms of feudalism which 
developed in Europe and which may have eventually contributed to widespread norms of reciprocity and community at 
the local level,  the penetration of capitalism altered traditional clientelist relations between landlords and peasants in 
Latin America from a two-way to a one-way affair. As Paul Harrison, Inside the Third World: The Anatomy of Poverty 
(London: Penguin Books,  1979),  p.  105,  remarks, "in Latin America the peasant has only  duties, the landowner 
rights." Such social relations have left little residue of notions of mutual obligation or reciprocity between the rich and 
the poor. 
37.  I am referring to indicators of inequality here, not absolute poverty. While most of southern Asia and Africa is 
far poorer than Latin America, their colonial past, patterns of  land tenure, and relations of  production are quite 
different. Parts of  Asia  that have  experienced capitalist commercialization of  agriculture are now  beginning to 
approximate these same indicators of  inequality, but Asia in general has not reached the regional scale of inequality 
that marks Latin America. 
38.  One statistic eloquently demonstrates the depth of  the crisis.  By  1987,  Latin America's debt represented 46 
percent of the region's GNP and more than four times the value of its exports. See IDB, Economic and Social Progress 
in Latin America: 1988 Report (Washington: Inter-American Development Bank, 1988), p. 541. 
39.  The notion that especially "successful" authoritarian regimes paradoxically may pose  important obstacles for 

20 

Terry Lynn Karl 

democratization can be found in Anita Isaacs, "Dancing with the People: The Politics of Military Rule in Ecuador, 
1972-1979"  (Ph.D.  diss.,  Oxford University, 1986), and Guillermo O'Donnell,  "Challenges to Democratization in 
Brazil," World Policy Journal, 5 (Spring 1988), 281-300. 
40.  I am grateful to Charles Call for this label. 
41.  There are important differences here,  however,  between South America and the  Caribbean basin.  Military 
interventions, which have been confined to this latter region in the past, predated the Cold War and are likely to 
continue after its demise. As the case of Panama shows, the rationale may simply change. 
42.  Paul Cammack has argued that a ruling coalition might make strategic concessions in its own long-term interest 
to help sustain democracy, especially after having experienced the failure of militaries to act as reliable allies. See Paul 
Cammack, "Democratization: A Review of the Issues," Bulletin of Latin American Research, 4 (1985),  39-46.  There 
seems to be little evidence for this predicted behavior in the current period, however, and further democratization 
through mass pressure seems to be more likely. 

21 

