Overseas Development 

Institute

August 2011

    

Achieving pro-poor growth through 
investment in rural feeder roads:  
the role of impact evaluation

By Christian Kingombe

I mpact evaluation was high on the agenda at the 

recent  3rd  Global  Review  of  Aid-for-Trade  (AfT). 
Since the mid-2000s, interest in the analytically 
robust evaluation of the impact of projects, pro-
grammes and policies has increased amongst policy-
makers (Estache, 2010). With growing recognition of 
the links between high transport costs and poverty, 
this  trend  also  encompasses  an  increasing  interest 
in undertaking detailed evaluations of the impact of 
public investment in rural roads. This begs the ques-
tion: how do we identify what kind of public spending, 
including  AfT,  is  most  effective  in  reducing  poverty 
and generating equitable agricultural growth?

How,  for  example,  do  partner  countries  and 
donors  define  the  success  of  donor  investment  in 
rural  feeder  roads?  These  Aid-for-Trade  (AfT)  inter-
ventions  –  categorised  as  either  labour-based  or 
equipment-based rural transport infrastructure (RTI) 
– are engineered earth roads that connect rural areas 
to urban centres via the connection to secondary dis-
trict roads (Howe, 1984). Despite the large amounts 
spent on rural roads, there is remarkably little formal 
evidence on their benefits to households or to enter-
prises. What has been lacking is a general methodol-
ogy, using micro-data, to estimate these gains.

It  has  been  argued  that  RTI  and  provision  of  RTI 
services  –  including  rural  feeder  roads  –  could 
be  considered  pre-requisites  for  growth  and  the 
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals 
(MDGs). Improving access to markets, for example, 
can  lower  agricultural  input  prices  and  increase 
production (MDG1). Improving RTI and services can 

help children get to school (MDG2). But what actual  
impact  have  these  AfT  interventions  had  to  date? 
How could future research enhance this impact? And 
what  are  the  policy  implications?  This  Background 
Note  provides  suggestions  on  what  state-of-the-art 
AfT impact evaluations could look like, and why they 
should be part of a project’s design from the outset 
in order to improve policy conducive to achieving the 
MDGs.

The key issues
All countries are confronted with a range of growth 
constraints, however some of these are more severe 
and  visible  in  many  agriculture-based  low-income 
countries. Carrying out an analysis at the micro-level 
can help improve our growth diagnostics as well as 
our understanding of the transmission mechanisms 
that could lead to rural growth and poverty reduction. 
It  can,  therefore,  produce  policy-relevant  insights 
that go beyond what is known from the cross-country 
growth literature at the macro-level. 

The  general  practice  adopted  by  the  UN  Panel 
on Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) is that ex-post 
evaluations are designed as in-depth studies of the 
impact  of  an  intervention  and  are  usually  carried 
out every five to ten years after the completion of its 
funded implementation (Box 2, overleaf). 

A  good  example  following  these  guidelines  is 
Chen  et  al.  (2008),  who  revisit  the  site  of  a  large, 
World Bank-financed rural development programme 
in China ten years after it began and four years after 
disbursements  ended.  The  authors  collected  data 
on 2,000 randomly sampled households in project 

The  Overseas  Development  Institute  is  the  UK’s  leading  independent  think  tank  on  international  development  and  humanitarian  issues.  
ODI Background Notes provide a summary or snapshot of an issue or of an area of ODI work in progress. This and other Background Notes are 
available at www.odi.org.uk. 

advancing knowledge, shaping policy, inspiring practice

Background Note

Box 1: A snapshot of Aid for Trade (AfT) on the ground in Africa

A call for Aid for Trade (AfT) case stories was launched as part of the Third Global Review of Aid for Trade, to capture 
the wealth of experience accumulated by recipient countries and development partners since the AfT Initiative was 
launched at the Hong Kong Ministerial in 2005. The result of these efforts have been captured in Aid for Trade at a 
Glance (OECD and WTO, 2011), which compiles 269 AfT case stories received, including a total of 114 case stories on 
Africa.

When outlining the kind of contributions that may be submitted, the WTO categorised three types of case stories: 
(i) case stories on approaches; (ii) case stories on processes, and (iii) case stories on projects or programmes. The first 
category documents experiences of approaches that help identify binding constraints to trade, indicators which may 
help evaluate and monitor AfT, and formal empirical studies. However, this category is less represented in the African 
sample, with only one case story from a regional organisation, namely UNECA. Nonetheless, this single contribution 
documents the impact of AfT on binding trade constraints across the African continent, providing an overall picture of 
how AfT is helping overcome different constraints that reduce the competitiveness of African trade, and hence improve 
the continent’s ability to take advantage of multilateral trade liberalization.

Though several case stories deal with the ‘soft side’ of infrastructure under the AfT subcategory of trade facilitation, 
only one case story from the African sample covers trade-related infrastructure. Morocco’s experience with AfT relates 
to its National Programme of Rural Transport, aimed at reducing regional disparities, fighting poverty, promoting the 
inclusion of the rural sector and development of local resources, and finally, affording the rural population access to 
trade through the reduction of transport costs. The programme benefitted from the financial assistance of the African 
Development bank (AfDB) and the Agence Française de Développement (AFD) (through soft loans) for the first tranche. 
In total 7,950 km of rural roads were built during its first tranche and 7,550 km are envisaged for the second tranche, 
which still requires financing. Further, the rehabilitation of 1,000 km of rural roads was also undertaken thanks to the 
assistance of the Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development during the first tranche of the programme.

Source: UNECE (2011).

Box 2: Monitoring and evaluation of rural development

The UN Panel on Monitoring and Evaluation of the UN ACC Task Force on Rural Development has set out common 
principles and basic concepts of monitoring and evaluation in the various UN agencies and organisations. It refers to 
agricultural and rural development projects and programmes benefitting the poor and to programmes which are multi-
sectoral with health, nutrition, education, housing and similar components.

Ex-post evaluation was defined by the December 1976 Copenhagen Meeting organised by the World Bank as an 
analysis after completion of a project (or a distinct phase of it) of its effects and impact. Among other things it may 
draw  on  information  provided  by  monitoring  and  ongoing  evaluation,  though  supplementary  special  studies  may 
sometimes be needed. The purpose of ex-post evaluation is to provide policy-makers with information and analysis 
for future planning and/or to inform donors and the general public on project results. The depths of the analyses and 
the nature of the reporting will depend on its potential end-use and benefits.

In addition the UNECE, FAO, OECD, World Bank and Eurostat published the Wye Group handbook on Rural Household 
Livelihood and Well-Being – Statistics on Rural Development and Agriculture Household Income in 2007 , which is of 
special interest to those in the public sector responsible for setting targets and monitoring policies related to: the 
standard of living and well-being of rural households vis-à-vis urban and all households; and the standard of living 
and well-being of agricultural households vis-à-vis households of other socio-professional categories. 

(112  public  works  programme  (PWP)  villages)  and 
non-project  (86  non-PWP  villages)  areas,  spanning 
ten  years.1  The  1996-2000  and  2004/05  surveys 
included  community,  household  and  individual 
questionnaires.  The  community  schedule  collected 
data on natural conditions, infrastructure and access 
to services. The household survey collected data on 
(inter alia) incomes, consumptions and assets. The 
Individual questionnaire covered gender, age, edu-
cation and occupation. Another recent example of a 
similar approach can be found in Kingombe (2011). 
In terms of rural feeder roads, Van de Walle (2009) 

adds that it is useful to start by thinking about the 
nature of roads and the ways in which they may differ 
from other rural policy investments. To justify public 
sector investments in rural feeder roads it is vital to 
show that they have a more positive project impact 
(i.e.  a  change  in  standard  of  living  and  increased 
capacity for self-sustained development of a group of 
beneficiaries or communities resulting from immedi-
ate project objectives)2 when compared to available 
alternatives  (Roemer  and Stern,  1975). This  can  be 
shown  by  incorporating  the  construction  of  robust 
counterfactual scenarios to the analysis.

2

Background Note

Measuring the impact of rural feeder roads
Three  main  methods  are  used  most  commonly  to 
rank transport infrastructure investments, including 
trunk roads, district roads and primary rural feeder 
roads:  (1)  multi-criteria  analysis  (MCA);  (2)  cost-
effectiveness  analysis  (CEA);  and  (c)  cost-benefit 
analysis (CBA) (Van de Walle, 2002). 

According to Van de Walle (2009) a key difference 
between CBA and CEA calculations is that the latter 
work only in situations where total expenditures for 
a programme are fixed. Thus, although CBA and CEA 
both measure the ratio of benefits to cost, the ‘bene-
fit’ units are different. The author further argues that 
to put the CEA indicator in a broader context would 
require a comparable measure of the social value of 
the project outcomes.

A  number  of  projects  in  the  World  Bank  and 
elsewhere  have  turned  to  CEA  calculations  to  take 
account  of  a  broader  set  of  benefits  –  such  as 
potential health and education benefits – yet avoid 
the  problem  of  putting  a  monetary  value  on  them. 
This method is sometimes referred to as MCA (Cook 
and Cook, 1990), and has typically been used when 
traffic  volume  is  too  low  (<50  vehicles  per  day)  for 
conventional  consumer  surplus  measures  to  make 
sense, yet, it is strongly believed that there will be 
important  social  benefits.  In  general,  a  least-cost 
approach is adopted (Van de Walle, 2002).

It  is  evident,  however,  that  there  is  no  standard 
methodology  employed  in  these  studies  with  the 
exception  of  the  highly  criticised  CBA.  However, 
because  traditional  CBA  approaches  do  not  take 
account of many of the benefits of RTI investments, 
the extension of the CBA framework holds promise 
for improved analysis. In short, appraisal needs to be 
holistic in nature, in the sense that it needs to cover 
economic, social and environmental impacts of the 
project in a coherent and consistent manner (Institute 
for Transport Studies, 2003). Economic development 
from RTI investment can be measured either through 
the  real  effects  (changes  in  factor  productivity,  the 
location  of  households  and  firms,  in  production 
and  consumption  decisions  and  in  agglomeration 
economies)  or  through  the  capitalised  effects  of, 
for example, changes in relative accessibility. These 
effects, in turn, stimulate the so-called real effects. 
Accessibility  effects  are  further  capitalised  as  land 
rent and consumer surplus. 

Figure  1  (overleaf)  describes  possible  multiplier 
effects from further investment into the local econ-
omy (Banister and Berechman, 2000).

The  distinguishing  features  of  rural  roads  com-
pared to district and trunk roads suggest a number 
of  researchable  evaluation  questions,3  which  have 
important  implications  for  evaluation  design  and 
methods,  as  well  as  for  data  requirements.  These 

methods  can  be  applied  to  retrospective  project 
evaluations  to  explain  success  or  failure  (Van  de 
Walle, 2009).

There  is  little  in  the  literature  about  the  time  it 
takes for the full welfare impacts of an improved road 
to emerge. In contrast to interventions with relatively 
rapid impacts (such as cash transfer programmes), 
the welfare impacts of RTI are, in general, expected 
to take some time to appear. This creates problems 
for  an  impact  evaluation  that  does  not  allow  suffi-
cient time for the linkages to come into play (ibid.). 
In fact, very few of the many AfT-financed rural road 
projects have been subject to rigorous evaluations. 
According  to  Estache  (2010)  the  reason  is  simple: 
such  evaluations  are  too  hard  to  do  using  (quasi-) 
randomised evaluation techniques.

Three impact evaluation approaches
There has been a proliferation of employment inten-
sive investment programmes (EIIP) since the 1980s, 
especially in Asia and Africa. Many reviews of these 
public works programmes (PWPs) have been under-
taken (see Kingombe, 2011). The studies carried out 
by  the  International  Labour  Organization  (ILO)  and 
the World Bank since the 1970s have shown superior 
benefits accruing to the rural poor and higher finan-
cial  and  economic  (i.e.  actual  resource)  benefits 
through  the  adoption  of  labour-based,  compared 
to equipment-based, methods of road construction, 
rehabilitation, extension and maintenance. 

Lipton  (1996)  argues  that  the  long-term  effects 
of EIIPs are diverse and complex and doubts persist 
about the benefits to the poor of the assets created 
through  PWPs.  These  doubts  could,  according  to 
Van de Walle (2002), be because existing methods 
of  project  appraisal  for  rural  roads  do  not  properly 
reflect the potential benefits to the poor. 

In fact, most of these ILO studies on rural roads 
lack  a  proper  counterfactual  analysis,  limiting  the 
availability  of  evidence  on  the  impact  of  these 
investments  on  key  development  outcomes.  This 
is  shown  in  a  study  by  Chipika  (2005)  that,  draw-
ing  on  a  review  of  more  than  90  ILO  baseline  and 
impact  studies,  concluded  that  they  fail  to  classify 
the potential beneficiaries of EIIPs according to the 
status of their welfare and/or well-being. 

Instead, more rigorous evaluation studies under-
taken at the micro-economic level make it possible 
to  allow  for  differences  in  the  form  of  (unobserv-
able)  individual  (e.g.  regional)  effect,  which  are 
not  captured  by  single  cross-country  regressions. 
On  the  other  hand,  macro-level  evaluation  studies 
provide a source of inspiration for both the choice of 
regressors and the specification of the consumption 
growth models conducted at the micro-level (Dercon 

3

Background Note

Figure 1: The relationship between transport infrastructure investment and economic 
development

Infrastructure 
investment

Networks

Multiplier 

effect

Changes in network 

accessibility

Travel markets

Urban form and 

structure

Economic development

Equilibrium
Optimality
Dynamics

Output per capita

Employment

Private investment

Mode

Connectivity
O-D pattern

Time

Capacity

Location and real effect

Productivity

Location

Agglomeration

Production
Consumption
Employment
Environment

Social
Equity

Land rent  

(Producer surplus)
Consumer surplus

Note: O-D = Origin to Destination. Source: Banister and Berechman (2000:38).

Box 3: Case study: impact evaluation of Zambia’s Eastern Province feeder road project 

Zambia’s Fifth National Development Plan (2006-2011) identified two priority areas for public spending to accelerate 
and  broaden  economic  growth:  strengthening  the  relevant  economic  and  social  infrastructure;  and  enhancing 
agriculture and rural development.

Kingombe  (2011)  focuses  on  Zambia’s  experience  to  fill  the  gap  in  the  literature  on  how  labour-based-RTI 
investments in the medium to long term affect rural growth, poverty reduction, equity and trade. The analysis is based 
on a series of five micro-level studies of the ILO-executed Eastern Province Feeder Road Project (EPFRP) implemented 
in Zambia from 1996 to 2001. The success of the EPFRP has been substantial and it has had much influence on the 
design of other labour-based projects being implemented within and beyond Zambia. It relies on the analysis of data 
from, respectively, the post-harvest survey, rural household survey, community survey and transport survey. Each of 
the four core chapters in Kingombe (2011) present a different framework used to estimate the impact of rural road 
development, because reliance on any one technique is unlikely to be appropriate.

Kingombe  (2011)  suggests  a  non-robust  linkage  between  household  consumption  growth  and  feeder  road 
improvements in rural areas in Zambia’s Eastern Province. He also finds that the squared poverty gap for most districts 
in the Province was not reduced, which suggests that the changes experienced have not been relatively pro-poor. 
While inequality was higher in the pre-treatment region in 1998 compared to the control region, this is no longer the 
case in 2004 after the EPFRP treatment had occurred. 

On the other hand, through a more qualitative analysis using focus group interviews within communities, Kingombe 
(2011) finds that only 42% of the communities covered by his own primary survey had seen their quality of life go up 
because of the impacts associated with the EPFRP. However, in 63% of the reporting communities the life quality 
situation was considered better than before the start of the EPFRP. Amongst these communities, 45% considered that 
the major determinant was directly associated with feeder road rehabilitation. His regression results lend support to 
the qualitative findings, which leads him to conclude that the EPFRP treatment has an impact on poverty, which seems 
to have been sustained in the medium term after the completion of the project due to maintenance of the feeder 
roads.

4

Background Note

and Hoddinott, 2005; Kingombe, 2011).

Finally,  structural  form  models  such  as  ‘macro-
style’  simultaneous-equation  models  of  the  econ-
omy (Fan et al., 2004) identify impacts on the basis 
of  economic  assumptions  about  how  the  world 
works. The upside of these structural approaches is 
that  they  add  to  what  we  can  learn  as  long  as  the 
assumptions  are  valid.  In  contrast,  impact  evalu-
ation  is  a  highly  theoretical  and  basically  reduced 
form.  Nevertheless,  the  latter  two  approaches  are 
considered  to  be  complementary  (Van  de  Walle, 
2009).

Key results
Of  the  more  than  200  rigorous  impact  evaluation 
studies that have been catalogued in selected areas 
such  as  local  development,  only  a  few  focused  on 
rural feeder roads. The results of some of these stud-
ies show that:
•  markets in Viet Nam are more likely to develop as 
a result of road improvements where communities 
have  access  to  extended  networks  of  transport 
infrastructure (see Mu and van de Walle, 2007)

•  benefits from improving access to basic education 
in Uganda depend, for example, on complemen-
tary investments in infrastructure (see Deininger 
and Okidi, 2003)

•  road  improvements  in  Bangladesh,  for  exam-
ple, led to lower input and transportation costs, 
higher production, higher wages and higher out-
put prices (see Khandker et al., 2006)

•  access to roads in Nepal improves the productive 

capacity of poor households (see Jacoby, 2000)

•  road rehabilitation in Georgia increases the oppor-
tunities for off-farm and female wage employment 
(see Lokshin and Yemtsov, 2005)

•  rehabilitation  and  maintenance  of  roads  in  Peru 
improved some measures (access and attendance 
to  schools  and  child  health  centers)  but  had  no 
significant impact on others (agricultural produc-
tion,  income,  poverty)  (see  Escobal  and  Ponce, 
2003)

•  the  mean  distance  to  services  and  community 
assets  diminished  significantly  thanks  to  the 
rehabilitation of feeder roads in Zambia’s Eastern 
Province (see Kingombe, 2011). 

In summary, most of these studies highlight the 
importance of rural roads in promoting growth and 
development.  However,  only  a  few  of  them  pro-
vide  information  on  the  distributional  and  poverty 
impacts  of  road  investments  and,  in  most  of  their 
specifications,  many  studies  also  fail  to  take  into 
account road quality. 

Box 4: The relevance of the triangulation in 
impact evaluation 
Both  Chung  (2000)  and  Kingombe  (2011)  take  the 
position that all research paradigms are valid, even if 
they are distinct and philosophically irreconcilable (i.e. 
a paradigm of ‘pragmatism’). This philosophy suggests 
that quantitative and qualitative methods can, logically, 
be combined and that epistemological positions need 
not predetermine the choice of research method. 

Rigorous  empirical  evidence  is  needed  to  support 
the  underlying  economic  analysis  of  the  view  that 
investments  in  the  rehabilitation  and  maintenance  of 
rural  feeder  roads  are  beneficial  to  the  broad-based 
growth of the rural (farm and non-farm) economy and 
rural livelihoods. The approach to resolving this issue 
lies ‘outside’ the CBA framework and needs to be within 
realistic informational constraints (e.g. data availability 
and comparability across the potential treatment roads‘ 
zones) (Van de Walle, 2002; Banister and Berechman, 
2000).

Dercon  and  Hoddinott  (2005)  find  that, 

in 
Ethiopia, an increase of 10 km in the distance from 
the  rural  village  to  the  closest  market  town  has  a 
dramatic effect on the likelihood that the household 
purchases  inputs.  However,  they  get  mixed  results 
in terms of the likelihood of people engaging in vari-
ous  productive  activities  when  roads  of  poor  qual-
ity (accessible only to carts, animals or people) are 
replaced by good quality roads (reasonable access 
to any motorised vehicle). 

This finding is corroborated by a number of other 
studies.  One  IPFRI  study  by  Fan  and  Chan-Kang 
(2004)  for  example,  finds  that  low  quality  (mostly 
rural) roads have benefit/cost ratios for national GDP 
in  China  that  are  about  four  times  larger  than  the 
benefit/cost  ratios  for  high  quality  roads.  Another 
study  by  Minten  and  Kyle  (1999)  shows  that  road 
quality  in  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo  is  an 
important factor in transportation costs.

Which way forward
Export-oriented  growth  with  equity  depends  on 
macro-economic  policies  and  non-trade  policies, 
as well as trade policies. The so-called complemen-
tary non-trade policies are crucial, as they promote 
the  development  of  productive  capabilities.  Public 
Investment Programmes are, in general, considered 
as  public  policy  instruments.  They  present  one  of 
the  few  remaining  government  policy  instruments 
through which productive employment opportunities 
can be created and more economically and socially 
balanced development promoted. 

An  explicit  focus  on  the  distributional  impact  or 
the poverty dynamics of the government expenditure 

5

Background Note

Table 1: Summary of key impact evaluation studies 

 

Author

Country covered

Data

Method

Major Findings

Double difference and 
matching methods

Significant average impacts 
on the development of local 
markets

Mu and van de 
Walle (2007)

WB financed rural 
road rehabilitation 
project implemented 
in rural Vietnam 
between 1997 and 
2001 

The "Survey of impacts of rural 
roads in Vietnam" consists of a 
panel of 200 communes and 3,000 
households. The survey design 
implicitly takes the commune as 
the project’s zone of influence.

Deininger and 
Okidi (2003)

Uganda

Micro-level survey and panel-
data evidence of about 1,200 
households spanning 1992-2000

Khandker et al. 
(2006)

Bangladesh

Household-level panel data

Jacoby (2000)

Nepal

Nepal Living Standard Surveys

Escobal and 
Ponce (2003)

Peru

Using information from rural 
households living in some of the 
poorest districts of Peru

Proceed in three stages: i) 
estimating determinants 
of economic growth at 
the household level, ii) 
expanded to consider 
poverty reduction, and iii) 
perform simulations

Use a household fixed-
effects technique to 
estimate the returns to 
road investment in terms of 
impact on household per 
capita consumption

A method for non-
parametrically estimating the 
benefits from road projects 
at the household level

The propensity score 
matching methodology is 
used, after adapting it to the 
specific characteristics of the 
data used

An instrumental variables 
model using Generalised 
Methods of Moments and 
controlling for household 
fixed effects

Estimate a series of probit 
regressions. Fixed effect IV 
regression

Access to key public goods 
such as infrastructure, and the 
avoidance of civil strife has 
been a critical determinant 
of households’ ability to 
increase their income and 
reduce the risk of falling into 
poverty

Road investments are pro-
poor, meaning the gains are 
proportionately higher for the 
poor than for the non-poor

Large benefits from extending 
roads into remote rural areas, 
much of these gains going 
to poorer households. But 
rural road construction is not 
the magic bullet for poverty 
alleviation

Rehabilitated road 
accessibility can be related 
to changes in income 
sources, as these enhance 
non-agricultural income 
opportunities, especially from 
wage-employment sources

Plausible results regarding 
the size of welfare gains from 
a particular project at the 
village level and allows for 
differentiation of benefits 
between the poor and non-
poor

Access to all-weather 
roads: reduces poverty by 
6.9 percentage points and 
increases consumption 
growth by 16.3%. These 
results are robust to changes 
in model specification and 
estimation methods

An increase of 10 km in the 
distance from the rural village 
to the closest market town 
has a dramatic effect on the 
likelihood that the household 
purchases inputs, controlling 
for the effect of other factors. 
Increases in road quality have 
strong positive growth effects

Average treatment effects, 
differences-to-differences 
estimators, parametric and 
semi-parametric regression 
models, Tobit models, multi-
nominal logit

Improved accessibility led to 
changes in land allocation 
and in yields to the cash 
crop – cotton. Although, the 
mean cotton sales share 
of household income more 
than doubled, the estimation 
results only show small gains 
to mean consumption

Lokshin and 
Yemtsow (2005)

Georgia: Rural 
infrastructure 
rehabilitation 
projects for schools, 
roads and water 
supply systems 
between 1998 and 
2001

Community-level panel data 
from a regular household survey 
augmented with a special 
community module

Propensity score-matched 
difference-in-difference 
comparisons

Dercon et al. 
(2008)

15 Ethiopian villages, 
1994-2004

Making use of new longitudinal 
household survey data that were 
not used in earlier Dercon papers

Dercon and 
Hoddinott (2005)

15 Ethiopian villages

Kingombe (2011)

Zambia (Eastern 
Province)

Data taken from the Ethiopia 
Rural Household Survey (ERHS), 
a unique longitudinal household 
data set covering households in 
15 areas of rural Ethiopia. Data 
collection started in 1989 and 
the survey was expanded in 
1994 to yield a sample of 1,477 
households. An additional round 
was conducted in late 1994, with 
further rounds in 1995, 1997, 1999, 
and 2004

(Pseudo-panel) household 
surveys (LCMS), pooled repeated 
cross-section Post-Harvest 
Surveys (PHS), community survey, 
transport/firm survey

Source: Kingombe (2011)

6

Background Note

side of the budget is a suggestion that was first pro-
moted within the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper 
(PRSP) process. That is to know whether feeder road 
improvements through an AfT intervention will help 
the very poor, e.g. through the analysis of household 
consumption  patterns  (e.g.  expenditure  data  on 
the  household’s  use  of  RTI  related  public  services) 
(Levinsohn, 2003). 

A number of studies have shown that low quality 
feeder roads raise more poor people out of poverty 
for every dollar than high quality trunk roads, mak-
ing them a win-win strategy for growth and poverty 
alleviation (Dercon and Hoddinott, 2005). Transport 
is  an  important  contributor  in  the  development 
process,  and  investment  in  RTI  should  preferably 
be a response to demand from other economic and 
social  sectors.  One  example  is  the  requirement  for 
improved  RTI  as  a  result  of  higher  agricultural  pro-
duction (Kingombe, 2011).

The  lack  of  rigorous  impact  evaluations  is  par-
ticularly problematic in the current climate, as most 
OECD-DAC donors are mired in a sovereign debt cri-
sis,  which  potentially  could  put  a  lid  on  continued 
aid budget expansion. These donors need to know 

more about how benefits compare to costs in order 
to make an informed choice between investing in a 
rural road and, for example, an education interven-
tion. 

Estache (2010) concludes that not all ‘AfT’ infra-
structure interventions are suitable for impact evalu-
ations based on experiments or quasi-experiments 
in  order  to  increase  accountability  for  intervention 
selection, implementation and sustainability. 

Future research should, therefore, be devoted to: 
•  improving  the  rigorous  impact  evaluation  meth-
odology for rural road projects, together with its 
powerful complements of CBA, good M&E and the 
judicious use of indicators

•  discussing  how  ex-post  impact  evaluations  can 
best influence policy by drawing implications for 
the ex-ante evaluation of rural road investments.

Written by Christian Kingombe, ODI Research Officer, International 
Economic Development Group (c.kingombe@odi.org.uk).

Endnotes and references

Endnotes:
1  The original plan for the impact evaluation of PWP was to do 

Discussion Paper no. 344. Africa Region Series. Washington, DC.
Bigsten, A. and A. Shimeles (2003) Prospects for Pro-Poor Growth 

a baseline survey in 1995 and to only do follow-up surveys 
during the Bank’s disbursement period up to 2000. However, 
a decision was made to re-survey the original sampled 
households in 2004/05 to try to resolve issues about longer-
term impact.
 Increased production, higher crop yields, increased 
employment, more traffic, increased use of health services, 
higher attendance at schools etc.

2 

in Africa. Geneva: UNU WIDER.

Chen, S., Ren, M., and Ravallion, M. (2008) Are there lasting 

impacts of aid to poor areas ? Evidence from rural China. World 
Bank Policy Research Working Paper 4084. Washington, DC: 
World Bank.

Chipika, S. (2005) Study to Assess the Evidence Base and 

Methodologies for Poverty Reduction Impact Assessment in 
EIIP/ASIST- Africa Programme. Washington, DC: ILO.

3  Rural roads are often treated as the last link of the transport 

Chung, K. (2000) ‘Qualitative Data Collection Techniques’, Grosh, 

network. Despite this, they often form the most important link 
in terms of providing access for the rural population. Their 
permanent or seasonal absence will act as a crucial factor in 
terms of the access of rural communities to basic services such 
as education, primary health care, water supply, local markets 
and economic opportunities (Donnges et al., 2007).

M. And Glewwe, P. (eds), Designing Household Survey. 
Questionnaires for Developing Countries. Lessons From 15 
years of the Living Standards Measurement Study. Washington, 
DC: World Bank.

Cook, P., and Cook, C. (1990) ‘Methodological review of analyses 

of rural transportation impacts in developing countries’, 
Transportation Research Record, 1274: 167-178.

Deichmann, U. et al. (2002) Economic structure, productivity, and 

References:
Ali-Nejadfard, F. (2000) ‘Rural travel and transport and economic 

infrastructure quality in southern Mexico. Washington, DC: 
World Bank.

development: Problems and prospects - examples from 
Malawi and Zimbabwe’, P. Kaumbotho, R. A. Pearson and T. E. 
Simalenga (eds) ,Empowering Farmers with Animal Traction 
into the 21st Century. 

Banister, D. and J. Berechman (2000) Transport Investment and 

Economic Development. London: Routledge.

Deininger, K. and Okidi, J. (2003) ‘Growth and Poverty Reduction in 

Uganda, 1999-2000: Panel Data Evidence’. SSRN eLibrary.

Dercon, S., D. O. Gilliagan, et al. (2008) The Impact of Agricultural 

Extension and Roads on Poverty and Consumption Growth 
in Fifteen Ethiopian Villages. IPFRI Discussion Paper 
840(December). Washington, DC: IFPRI.

Banjo, G. A. (1999) Management and Financial Framework for 

Dercon, S. and Hoddinott, J. (2005) Livelihoods, growth, and links 

Rural Transport Infrastructure: A Tool for Poverty Reduction. The 
Food Chain in Sub-Saharan Africa. Geneva: Centre for Applied 
Studies in International Negotiations.

to market towns in 15 Ethiopian villages. FCND Discussion 
Paper 194. Washington, DC: IFPRI.

Donnges, C., Edmonds, G. and Johannessen, B. (2007) Rural Road 

Barwell, I. (1996) Transport and the village: Findings from African 
village-level travel and transport surveys and related studies.  

Maintenance. Sustaining the Benefits of Improved Access. 
International Labour Organization. Washington, DC: ILO.

7

Background Note

Escobal, J. and Ponce, C. (2003) ‘The benefits of rural roads. 

Enhancing income opportunities for the rural poor’. 
Documentos de Trabajo dt40b, Grupo de Análisis para el 
Desarrollo (GRADE): 56.

Estache, A. (2010) A Survey of Impact Evaluation of Infrastructure 
Projects, Programs and Policies. ECORE Discussion Paper No. 
2010/16. Brussells: ECORE.

Paper Approach: Good Marketing or Good Policy? G-24 
Discussion Paper Series 21. Geneva: UNCTAD.

Lipton, M. (1996) ‘Successes in anti-poverty’. Issues in 

Development Discussion Paper. Washington, DC: ILO.

Lokshin, M. and Yemtsov, R. (2005) ‘Has Rural Infrastructure 
Rehabilitation in Georgia Helped the Poor?’, World Bank 
Economic Review, vol. 19 (2): 311-333. 

Fan, S. and Chan-Kang, C. (2004) Road development, economic 

Malmberg-Calvo, C. (1998) ‘Options for Managing and Financing 

growth, and poverty reduction in China. DSGD discussion 
papers 12. Washington, DC: IFPRI.

Rural Transport Infrastructure’. Technical paper 411. 
Washington, DC: World Bank.

Fan, S. et al. (2000a) ‘Government spending, agricultural growth, 

McCord, A. and Slater, R. (2009) ‘Overview of Public Works 

and poverty in rural India’, American Journal of Agricultural 
Economics 82 (4): 1038-1051.

Fan, S. et al. (2004) ‘Public expenditure, growth and poverty 

reduction in rural Uganda’. IFPRI Research reports, 125, 81. 
Washington, DC: IFPRI.

Programmes in Sub-Saharan Africa’. London: ODI.

Mtisi, S. (2011) ‘Labour-based approaches to infrastructure 

building and maintenance’. London: ODI and ITAD. A 
Train4Dev/OECD DAC POVNET Joint Learning Event: Promoting 
Pro-Poor Growth. Policy Instrument Note # 6.

GoRZ (2005) The Fifth National Development plan (FNDP). Lusaka: 

Mu, R. and Van de Walle, D. (2007) Rural roads and poor area 

Ministry of Finance and Planning.

Howe, J. (1984) Rural Roads and Poverty Alleviation in Botswana. 

Rural Roads and Poverty Alleviation. Michigan: Westview Press.
Howe, J. (2001) Assessing the impact of transport infrastructure on 

poverty reduction. Manila: Asian Development Bank.

IFAD (2009) Practical Guide on Monitoring and Evaluation of Rural 

Development Projects. Rome: IFAD.

development in Vietnam. Policy Research Working Paper Series 
4340. Washingotn, DC: World Bank.

OECD and WTO (2011) Aid for Trade at a Glance. Paris: OECD and 

WTO.

Platteau, J.-P. (1996) ‘Physical Infrastructure as a Constraint on 
Agricultural Growth: The case of Sub-Saharan Africa’, Oxford 
Development Studies 24 (3): 189-219.

Institute for Transport Studies University of Leeds and I.T.T. Ltd. 

Ravallion, M. and Jalan, J. (1996) ‘Growth divergence due to spatial 

(2003) Toolkit for the economic evaluation of world bank 
transport projects. Final report. Washington, DC: World Bank 
and Leeds: University of Leeds.

Islam, N. (1995) ‘Growth Empirics: A panel data approach’, 

Quarterly Journal of Economics 110 (4): 1127-1170.

Jacoby, H. G. (2000) ‘Access to Markets and the Benefits of Rural 

Roads’, The Economic Journal 110: 713-737.

Jacoby, H. G. and Minten, B. (2009) ‘On Measuring the Benefits of 
Lower Transport Costs’, Journal of Development Economics 89: 
28-38.

Jalan, J. and Ravallion, M. (1996) Are There Dynamic Gains from a 
Poor-Area Development Programme? Policy Research Working 
Paper Series P. R. Department. Washington DC: World Bank.

Jalan, J. and Ravallion, M. (1997) Spatial Poverty Traps. D. R. Group. 

Washington, DC: World Bank.

externalities’, Economics Letters 53(1996): 227-232.

Roemer, M. and Stern, J. (1975) The Appraisal of Development 

Projects: A Practical Guide to Project Analysis with Case Studies 
and Solutions. New York: Praeger Publishers.

UN (1984) ‘Guiding principles for the design and use of monitoring 
and evaluation in rural development projects and programmes 
the United Nations ACC Task Force on Rural Development’, 
Panel on Monitoring and Evaluation, Rome, December 1984. 
Rome: ACC Task Force, Monitoring and Evaluation Publications. 

UNCTAD (1999) ‘UNCTAD’s contribution to the implementation 
of the United Nations new agenda for the development of 
Africa in the 1990s: African transport infrastructure, trade 
and competitiveness’. Trade and Development Board, 46th 
session. Geneva: UNCTAD.

UNCTAD (2002) The Least Developed Country Report 2002. 

Khandker, S. R. et al. (2006) The Poverty Impact of Rural Roads: 

Escaping the Poverty Trap. Geneva: UNCTAD.

Evidence from Bangladesh. World Bank Policy Research 
Working Paper 3875. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Kingombe, C. K. M. (2011) ‘An Enquiry into the Causes and Nature 

of the Transmission Mechanisms between Labour-Based 
Rural Roads, Sustainable Growth, and Agricultural Trade in 
Zambia’s Eastern Province’. PhD thesis. London: Center for 
Environmental Policy, Imperial College London & University of 
London.

UNECE (2011) Global Review of Aid for Trade 2011. African Case 
Stories. A Snapshop of Aid for Trade on the Ground in Africa. 
Geneva: UNECE.

UNECE, FAO, OECD, World Bank and Eurostat (2007) Rural 

Household Livelihood and Well-Being – Statistics on Rural 
Development and Agriculture Household Income. New York and 
Geneva: United Nations.

Van de Walle, D. (2002) ‘Choosing Rural Road Investments to Help 

Lebo, J. and Schelling, D. (2005) ‘Design and Appraisal of Rural 

Reduce Poverty’, World Development 30(4): 575-589.

Transport Infrastructure: Ensuring Basic Access for Rural 
Communities’, World Bank Technical Paper(496): 106.

Van de Walle, D. (2009) ‘Impact evaluation of rural road projects’, 

Journal of Development Effectiveness 1(1): 15-36.

Levinsohn, J. (2003) The World Bank’s Poverty Reduction Strategy 

Overseas  Development  Institute,  111  Westminster  Bridge  Road,  London  SE1  7JD,  Tel:  +44  (0)20  7922  0300,  
Email: publications@odi.org.uk. This and other ODI Background Notes are available from www.odi.org.uk. 

Readers are encouraged to quote or reproduce material from ODI Background Notes for their own publications, as long 
as they are not being sold commercially. As copyright holder, ODI requests due acknowledgement and a copy of the 
publication. The views presented in  this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of ODI. 
© Overseas Development Institute 2011.  ISSN 1756-7610.

