Moral Responsibility (Stanford Encyclopedia) 
First published Sat Jan 6, 2001; substantive revision Wed Mar 26, 2014 
 
When a person performs or fails to perform a morally significant action, we sometimes think 
that a particular kind of response is warranted. Praise and blame are perhaps the most obvious 
forms this reaction might take. For example, one who encounters a car accident may be 
regarded as worthy of praise for having saved a child from inside the burning car, or 
alternatively, one may be regarded as worthy of blame for not having used one's mobile phone 
to call for help. To regard such agents as worthy of one of these reactions is to regard them as 
responsible for what they have done or left undone. (These are examples of other-directed 
ascriptions of responsibility. The reaction might also be self-directed, e.g., one can recognize 
oneself to be blameworthy). Thus, to be morally responsible for something, say an action, is to 
be worthy of a particular kind of reaction—praise, blame, or something akin to these—for 
having performed it.[1] 
Though further elaboration and qualification of the above characterization of moral 
responsibility is called for and will be provided below, this is enough to distinguish concern 
about this form of responsibility from some others commonly referred to through use of the 
terms ‘responsibility’ or ‘responsible.’ To illustrate, we might say that higher than normal 
rainfall in the spring is responsible for an increase in the amount of vegetation or that it is the 
judge's responsibility to give instructions to the jury before they begin deliberating. In the first 
case, we mean to identify a causal connection between the earlier amount of rain and the later 
increased vegetation. In the second, we mean to say that when one assumes the role of judge, 
certain duties, or obligations, follow. Although these concepts are connected with the concept 
of moral responsibility discussed here, they are not the same, for in neither case are we directly 
concerned about whether it would be appropriate to react to some candidate (here, the rainfall 
or a particular judge) with something like praise or blame.[2] 
Philosophical reflection on moral responsibility has a long history. One reason for this persistent 
interest is the way the topic seems connected with our conception of ourselves as ‘persons.’[3] 
Many have held that one distinct feature of persons is their status as morally responsible agents, 
a status resting—some have proposed—on a special kind of control that only they can exercise. 
Many who view persons in this way have wondered whether their special status is threatened if 
certain other claims about our universe are true. For example, can a person be morally 
responsible for her behavior if that behavior can be explained solely by reference to physical 
states of the universe and the laws governing changes in those physical states, or solely by 
reference to the existence of a sovereign God who guides the world along a divinely ordained 
path? Concerns of this sort have often motivated reflection on moral responsibility. 
A comprehensive theory of moral responsibility would elucidate the following: (1) the concept, 
or idea, of moral responsibility itself; (2) the criteria for being a moral agent, i.e., one who 
qualifies generally as an agent open to responsibility ascriptions (e.g., only beings possessing the 

 

1 

general capacity to evaluate reasons for acting can be moral agents); (3) the conditions under 
which the concept of moral responsibility is properly applied, i.e., those conditions under which 
a moral agent is responsible for a particular something (e.g., a moral agent can be responsible 
for an action she has performed only if she performed it freely, where acting freely entails the 
ability to have done otherwise at the time of action); and finally 4) possible objects of 
responsibility ascriptions (e.g., actions, omissions, consequences, character traits, etc.). 
Although each of these will be touched upon in the discussion below (see, e.g., the brief sketch 
of Aristotle's account in the next section), the primary focus of this entry is on the first 
component—i.e., the concept of moral responsibility. The section immediately following this 
introduction is a discussion of the origin and history of Western reflection on moral 
responsibility. This is followed by an overview of recent work on the concept of moral 
responsibility. For further discussion of issues associated with moral responsibility, see the 
related entries below. 
 
Entry Contents 
•  1. Some Historical Background 
•  2. Recent Work on the Concept of Responsibility 
2.1 Strawson and the Reactive Attitudes 
◦ 
◦ 
2.2 Developments After Strawson 
•  Bibliography 
•  Academic Tools 
•  Other Internet Resources 
•  Related Entries 
 
1. Some Historical Background 
What follows in this section is a brief outline of the origins and trajectory of reflection on moral 
responsibility in the Western philosophical tradition. Against this background, a distinction will 
be drawn between two conceptions of moral responsibility that have exerted considerable 
influence on subsequent thinkers. 
An understanding of the concept of moral responsibility and its application is present implicitly 
in some of the earliest surviving Greek texts, i.e., the Homeric epics (circa 8th century BCE but 
no doubt informed by a much earlier oral tradition).[4] In these texts, both human and 
superhuman agents are often regarded as fair targets of praise and blame on the basis of how 
they have behaved, and at other times, an agent's behavior is excused because of the presence 
of some factor that has undermined his/her control (Irwin 1999: 225). Reflection on these 
factors gave rise to fatalism—the view that one's future or some aspect of it is predetermined, 
e.g., by the gods, or the stars, or simply some facts about truth and time—in such a way as to 
make one's particular deliberations, choices and actions irrelevant to whether that particular 
future is realized (recall, e.g., the plight of Oedipus). If some particular outcome is fated, then it 

 

2 

seems that the agent concerned could not be morally responsible for that outcome. Likewise, if 
fatalism were true with respect to all human futures, then it would seem that no human agent 
could be morally responsible for anything. Though this brand of fatalism has sometimes exerted 
significant historical influence, most philosophers have rejected it on the grounds that there is 
no good reason to think that our futures are fated in the sense that they will unfold no matter 
what particular deliberations we engage in, choices we make, or actions we perform. 
Aristotle (384–323 BCE) seems to have been the first to construct a theory of moral 
responsibility.[5] In the course of discussing human virtues and their corresponding vices, 
Aristotle pauses in Nicomachean Ethics III.1–5 to explore their underpinnings. He begins with a 
brief statement of the concept of moral responsibility—that it is sometimes appropriate to 
respond to an agent with praise or blame on the basis of her actions and/or dispositional traits 
of character (1109b30–35). A bit later, he clarifies that only a certain kind of agent qualifies as a 
moral agent and is thus properly subject to ascriptions of responsibility, namely, one who 
possess a capacity for decision. For Aristotle, a decision is a particular kind of desire resulting 
from deliberation, one that expresses the agent's conception of what is good (1111b5–1113b3). 
The remainder of Aristotle's discussion is devoted to spelling out the conditions under which it is 
appropriate to hold a moral agent blameworthy or praiseworthy for some particular action or 
trait. His general proposal  is that one is an apt candidate for praise or blame if and only if the 
action and/or disposition is voluntary. According to Aristotle, a voluntary action or trait has two 
distinctive features. First, there is a control condition: the action or trait must have its origin in 
the agent. That is, it must be up to the agent whether to perform that action or possess the 
trait—it cannot be compelled externally. Second, Aristotle proposes an epistemic condition: the 
agent must be aware of what it is she is doing or bringing about (1110a-1111b4).[6] 
There is an instructive ambiguity in Aristotle's account of responsibility, an ambiguity that has 
led to competing interpretations of his view. Aristotle aims to identify the conditions under 
which it is appropriate to praise or blame an agent, but it is not entirely clear how to understand 
the pivotal notion of appropriateness in his conception of responsibility. There are at least two 
possibilities: a) praise or blame is appropriate in the sense that the agent deserves such a 
response, given his behavior and/or traits of character; or b) praise or blame is appropriate in 
the sense that such a reaction is likely to bring about a desired consequence, namely an 
improvement in the agent's behavior and/or character. These two possibilities may be 
characterized in terms of two competing interpretations of the concept of moral responsibility: 
1) the merit-based view, according to which praise or blame would be an appropriate reaction 
toward the candidate if and only if she merits—in the sense of ‘deserves’—such a reaction; vs. 
2) the consequentialist view, according to which praise or blame would be appropriate if and 
only if a reaction of this sort would likely lead to a desired change in the agent and/or her 
behavior.[7] 
Scholars disagree about which of the above views Aristotle endorsed, but the importance of 
distinguishing between them grew as philosophers began to focus on a newly conceived threat 

 

3 

to moral responsibility. While Aristotle argued against a version of fatalism (On Interpretation, 
ch. 9), he may not have recognized the difference between it and the related possible threat of 
causal determinism. Causal determinism is the view that everything that happens or exists is 
caused by sufficient antecedent conditions, making it impossible for anything to happen or be 
other than it does or is. One variety of causal determinism, scientific determinism, identifies the 
relevant antecedent conditions as a combination of prior states of the universe and the laws of 
nature. Another, theological determinism, identifies those conditions as being the nature and 
will of God. It seems likely that theological determinism evolved out of the shift, both in Greek 
religion and in Ancient Mesopotamian religions, from polytheism to belief in one sovereign God, 
or at least one god who reigned over all others. The doctrine of scientific determinism can be 
traced back as far as the Presocratic Atomists (5th cent. BCE), but the difference between it and 
the earlier fatalistic view seems not to be clearly recognized until the development of Stoic 
philosophy (3rd. cent. BCE). Though fatalism, like causal determinism, might seem to threaten 
moral responsibility by threatening an agent's control, the two differ on the significance of 
human deliberation, choice, and action. If fatalism is true, then human deliberation, choice, and 
action are completely otiose, for what is fated will transpire no matter what one chooses to do. 
According to causal determinism, however, one's deliberations, choices, and actions will often 
be necessary links in the causal chain that brings something about. In other words, even though 
our deliberations, choices, and actions are themselves determined like everything else, it is still 
the case, according to causal determinism, that the occurrence or existence of yet other things 
depends upon our deliberating, choosing and acting in a certain way (Irwin 1999: 243–249; 
Meyer 1998: 225–227; and Pereboom 1997: ch. 2). 
Since the Stoics, the thesis of causal determinism, if true, and its ramifications, have taken 
center stage in theorizing about moral responsibility. During the Medieval period, especially in 
the work of Augustine (354–430) and Aquinas (1225–1274), reflection on freedom and 
responsibility was often generated by questions concerning versions of theological determinism, 
including most prominently: a) Does God's sovereignty entail that God is responsible for evil?; 
and b) Does God's foreknowledge entail that we are not free and morally responsible since it 
would seem that we cannot do anything other than what God foreknows we will do? During the 
Modern period, there was renewed interest in scientific determinism—a change attributable to 
the development of increasingly sophisticated mechanistic models of the universe culminating 
in the success of Newtonian physics. The possibility of giving a comprehensive explanation of 
every aspect of the universe—including human action—in terms of physical causes became 
much more plausible. Many thought that persons could not be free and morally responsible if 
such an explanation of human action turned out to be true. Others argued that freedom and 
responsibility would not be undermined by the truth of scientific determinism. In keeping with 
this focus on the ramifications of causal determinism for moral responsibility, thinkers may be 
classified as being one of two types: 1) an incompatibilist about causal determinism and moral 
responsibility—one who maintains that if causal determinism is true, then there is nothing for 

 

4 

which one can be morally responsible; or 2) a compatibilist—one who holds that a person can 
be morally responsible for some things, even if both who she is and what she does is causally 
determined.[8] In Ancient Greece, these positions were exemplified in the thought of Epicurus 
(341–270 BCE) and the Stoics, respectively. 
Above, an ambiguity in Aristotle's conception of moral responsibility was highlighted—that it 
was not clear whether he endorsed a merit-based vs. a consequentialist conception of moral 
responsibility. The history of reflection on moral responsibility demonstrates that how one 
interprets the concept of moral responsibility strongly influences one's overall account of moral 
responsibility. For example, those who accept the merit-based conception of moral 
responsibility have tended to be incompatibilists. That is, most have thought that if an agent 
were to genuinely merit praise or blame for something, then he would need to exercise a 
special form of control over that thing (e.g., the ability at the time of action to both perform or 
not perform the action) that is incompatible with one's being causally determined. In addition to 
Epicurus, we can cite early Augustine, Thomas Reid (1710–1796), and Immanuel Kant (1724–
1804) as historical examples here. Those accepting the consequentialist conception of moral 
responsibility, on the other hand, have traditionally contended that determinism poses no 
threat to moral responsibility since praising and blaming could still be an effective means of 
influencing another's behavior, even in a deterministic world. Thomas Hobbes (1588–1679), 
David Hume (1711–1776), and John Stuart Mill (1806–1873) are, along with the Stoics, 
representatives of this view. This general trend of linking the consequentialist conception of 
moral responsibility with compatibilism about causal determinism and moral responsibility and 
the merit-based conception with incompatibilism continued to persist through the first half of 
the twentieth century. 
 
2. Recent Work on the Concept of Responsibility 
The issue of how best to understand the concept of moral responsibility is important, for it can 
strongly influence one's view of what, if any, philosophical problems might be associated with 
the notion, and further, if there are problems, what might count as a solution. As discussed 
above, philosophical reflection on moral responsibility has historically relied upon one of two 
broad interpretations of the concept: 1) the merit-based view, according to which praise or 
blame would be an appropriate reaction toward the candidate if and only if she merits—in the 
sense of ‘deserves’—such a reaction; or 2) the consequentialist view, according to which praise 
or blame would be appropriate if and only if a reaction of this sort would likely lead to a desired 
change in the agent and/or her behavior. Though versions of the consequentialist view have 
continued to garner support (Smart; Frankena 1963: ch. 4; Schlick 1966; Brandt 1992; Dennett 
1984: ch. 7; Kupperman 1991: ch. 3; and Vargas 2013: ch. 6), work in the last 50 years on the 
concept of moral responsibility has increasingly focused on: a) offering alternative versions of 
the merit-based view; and b) questioning whether there is but one concept of moral 
responsibility. 

 

5 

Increased attention to the stance of regarding and holding persons morally responsible has 
generated much of the recent work on the concept of moral responsibility. All theorists have 
recognized features of this practice—inner attitudes and emotions, their outward expression in 
censure or praise, and the imposition of corresponding sanctions or rewards. However, most 
understood the inner attitudes and emotions involved to rest on a more fundamental 
theoretical judgment about the agent's being responsible. In other words, it was typically 
assumed that blame and praise depended upon a judgment, or belief (pre-reflective in most 
cases), that the agent in question had satisfied the objective conditions on being responsible. 
These judgments were presumed to be independent of the inner attitudinal/emotive states 
involved in holding responsible in the sense that reaching such judgments and evaluating them 
required no essential reference to the attitudes and emotions of the one making the judgment. 
For the holder of the consequentialist view, this is a judgment that the agent exercised a form of 
control that could be influenced through outward expressions of praise and blame in order to 
curb or promote certain behaviors. For those holding the merit view, it is a judgment that the 
agent has exercised the requisite form of metaphysical control, e.g., that she could have done 
otherwise at the time of action (Watson 1987: 258). 
If holding responsible is best understood as resting on an independent judgment about being 
responsible, then it is legitimate to inquire whether such underlying judgments and their 
associated outward expressions can be justified, as a whole, in the face of our best current 
understanding of the world, e.g., in the face of evidence that our world is possibly deterministic. 
According to incompatibilists, a judgment that someone is morally responsible could never be 
true if the world were deterministic; thus praising and blaming in the merit-based sense would 
be beside the point. Compatibilists, on the other hand, contend that the truth of determinism 
would not undermine the relevant underlying judgments concerning the efficacy of praising and 
blaming practices, thereby leaving the rationale of such practices intact. 
 
2.1 Strawson and the Reactive Attitudes 
In his landmark essay, ‘Freedom and Resentment,’ P. F. Strawson (1962) sets out to adjudicate 
the dispute between those compatibilists who hold a consequentialist view of responsibility and 
those incompatibilists who hold the merit-based view.[9] Both are wrong, Strawson believes, 
because they distort the concept of moral responsibility by sharing the prevailing assumption 
sketched above — the assumption that holding persons responsible rests upon a theoretical 
judgment of their being responsible. According to Strawson, the attitudes expressed in holding 
persons morally responsible are varieties of a wide range of attitudes deriving from our 
participation in personal relationships, e.g., resentment, indignation, hurt feelings, anger, 
gratitude, reciprocal love, and forgiveness. The function of these attitudes is to express “…how 
much we actually mind, how much it matters to us, whether the actions of other people—and 
particularly some other people—reflect attitudes towards us of good will, affection, or esteem 
on the one hand or contempt, indifference, or malevolence on the other.” (p. 5, author's 

 

6 

emphasis) These attitudes are thus participant reactive attitudes, because they are: a) natural 
attitudinal reactions to the perception of another's good will, ill will, or indifference (pp. 4–6), 
and b) expressed from the stance of one who is immersed in interpersonal relationships and 
who regards the candidate held responsible as a participant in such relationships as well (p. 
10).[10] 
The reactive attitudes can be suspended or modified in at least two kinds of circumstances, 
corresponding to the two features just mentioned. In the first, one might conclude that, 
contrary to first appearances, the candidate did not violate the demand for a reasonable degree 
of good will. For example, a person's behavior may be excused when one determines that it was 
an accident, or one may determine that the behavior was justified, say, in the case of an 
emergency when some greater good is being pursued. In the second kind of circumstance, one 
may abandon the participant perspective in relation to the candidate. In these cases, one 
adopts the objective standpoint, one from which one ceases to regard the individual as capable 
of participating in genuine personal relations (either for some limited time or permanently). 
Instead, one regards the individual as psychologically/morally abnormal or undeveloped and 
thereby a candidate, not for the full range of reactive attitudes, but primarily for those objective 
attitudes associated with treatment or simply instrumental control. Such individuals lie, in some 
sense or to some varying extent, outside the boundaries of the moral community. For example, 
we may regard a very young child as initially exempt from the reactive attitudes (but 
increasingly less so in cases of normal development) or adopt the objective standpoint in 
relation to an individual we determine to be suffering from severe mental illness (P. F. Strawson 
1962: 6–10; Bennett: 40; Watson 1987: 259–260; R. Jay Wallace: chs. 5–6). 
The central criticism Strawson directs at both consequentialist and traditional merit views is that 
both have over-intellectualized the issue of moral responsibility—a criticism with which many 
subsequent thinkers have wrestled.[11] The charge of over intellectualization stems from the 
traditional tendency to presume that the rationality of holding a person responsible depends 
upon a judgment that the person in question has satisfied some set of objective requirements 
on being responsible (conditions on efficacy or metaphysical freedom) and that these 
requirements themselves are justifiable. Strawson, by contrast, maintains that the reactive 
attitudes are a natural expression of an essential feature of our form of life, in particular, the 
interpersonal nature of our way of life. The practice, then, of holding responsible—embedded 
as it is in our way of life—“neither calls for nor permits, an external ‘rational’ justification” (p. 
23). Though judgments about the appropriateness of particular responses may arise (i.e., 
answers to questions like: Was the candidate's behavior really an expression of ill will?; or Is the 
candidate involved a genuine participant in the moral sphere of human relations?), these 
judgments are based on principles internal to the practice. That is, their justification refers back 
to an account of the reactive attitudes and their role in personal relationships, not to some 
independent theoretical account of the conditions on being responsible. 
Given the above, Strawson contends that it is pointless to ask whether the practice of holding 

 

7 

responsible can be rationally justified if determinism is true. This is either because it is not 
psychologically possible to divest ourselves of these reactions and so continually inhabit the 
objective standpoint, or even if that were possible, because it is not clear that rationality could 
ever demand that we give up the reactive attitudes, given the loss in quality of life should we do 
so. In sum, Strawson attempts to turn the traditional debate on its head, for now judgments 
about being responsible are understood in relation to the role reactive attitudes play in the 
practice of holding responsible, rather than the other way around. Whereas judgments are true 
or false and thereby can generate the need for justification, the desire for good will and those 
attitudes generated by it possess no truth value themselves, thereby eliminating any need for 
an external justification (Magill 1887: 21; Double 1996b: 848). 
Strawson's concept of moral responsibility yields a compatibilist account of being responsible 
but one that departs significantly from earlier such accounts in two respects. First, Strawson's is 
a compatibilist view by default only. That is, on Strawson's view, the problem of determinism 
and freedom/responsibility is not so much resolved by showing that the objective conditions on 
being responsible are consistent with one's being determined but rather dissolved by showing 
that the practice of holding people responsible relies on no such conditions and therefore needs 
no external justification in the face of determinism. Second, Strawson's is a merit-based form of 
compatibilism. That is, unlike most former consequentialist forms of compatibilism, it helps to 
explain why we feel that some agents deserve our censure or merit our praise. They do so 
because they have violated, met, or exceeded our demand for a reasonable degree of good will. 
 
2.2 Developments After Strawson 
Most agree that Strawson's discussion of the reactive attitudes is a valuable contribution to our 
understanding of the practice of holding responsible, but many have taken issue with his 
contentions about the insular nature of that practice, namely that a) since propriety judgments 
about the reactive attitudes are strictly internal to the practice (i.e., being responsible is defined 
in relation to the practice of holding responsible), their justification cannot be considered from a 
standpoint outside that practice; and b) since the reactive attitudes are natural responses 
deriving from our psychological constitution, they cannot be dislodged by theoretical 
considerations. Responding to the first of these, some have argued that it does seem possible to 
critique existing practices of holding responsible from standpoints outside them. For example, 
one might judge that either one's own existing community practice or some other community's 
practice of holding responsible ought to be modified (Fischer and Ravizza 1993: 18; Ekstrom 
2000: 148–149). If such evaluations are legitimate, then, contrary to what Strawson suggested, 
it seems that an existing practice can be questioned from a standpoint external to it. In other 
words, being responsible cannot be explicated strictly in terms of an existing practice of holding 
responsible. This then, would suggest a possible role to be played by independent theoretical 
conditions on being responsible, conditions which could prove to be compatibilist or 
incompatibilist in nature. 

 

8 

Objecting to the second of Strawson's anti-theory contentions, some have argued that 
incompatibilist intuitions are embedded in the reactive attitudes themselves so that these 
attitudes cannot persist unless some justification can be given of them, or more weakly, that 
they cannot but be disturbed if something like determinism is true. Here, cases are often cited 
where negative reactive attitudes seem to be dispelled or mitigated upon learning that an 
agent's past includes severe deprivation and/or abuse. There is a strong pull to think that our 
reactive attitudes are altered in such cases because we perceive such a background to be 
deterministic. If this is the proper interpretation of the phenomenon, then it is evidence that 
theoretical considerations, like the truth of determinism, could in fact dislodge the reactive 
attitudes (Nagel 1986: 125; Kane 1996: 84–89; Galen Strawson 1986: 88; Honderich 1988: vol. 2, 
ch. 1; and replies by Watson 1987: 279–286 and 1996: 240; and McKenna 1998). 
Versions of Strawson's view continue to be very ably defended, and shortly, more will be said 
about the significant way in which his work continues to shape contemporary discussion of the 
concept of responsibility. However, many have taken objections of the above sort to be decisive 
in undermining the most radical of Strawson's anti-theory claims. Incompatibilists, in particular, 
seem largely unpersuaded and so have continued to assume a more or less traditional merit-
based conception of moral responsibility as the basis for their theorizing. A number of 
compatibilists also remain unconvinced that Strawson has successfully shown independent 
theoretical considerations to be irrelevant to ascriptions of responsibility. It is noteworthy that 
some of these have accorded the reactive attitudes a central role in their discussions of the 
concept of responsibility, resulting in new merit-based versions of compatibilism (see e.g., 
Fischer and Ravizza 1998, and McKenna 2012). 
Until recently philosophers have assumed that they were concerned about a shared concept of 
moral responsibility. Even when controversy increasingly arose over how best to characterize it, 
the assumption seems to have been that it was a controversy over the one correct way of 
characterizing the concept of responsibility. Strawson was certainly amongst those who made 
this assumption in trying to adjudicate the dispute between those compatibilists who held the 
consequentialist view of responsibility and incompatibilists who held the merit-based view. 
However, a number of authors have suggested of late that at least some disagreements about 
the most plausible overall theory might be based on a failure to distinguish between different 
but related concepts of responsibility. 
Broadly speaking, a distinction has been made between responsibility as accountability and 
responsibility as attributability.[12] Drawing on Strawson's work, many contemporary 
accountability theorists maintain that to be responsible is to be an apt candidate for the 
reactive attitudes (Bennett 1980; Wallace 1994; Watson 1996; Fischer & Ravizza 1998; and 
Darwall 2006). In other words, an agent is responsible, if and only if it is appropriate for us to 
hold her responsible, or accountable, via the reactive attitudes. This highlights a main theme in 
Strawson--namely, that our responsibility practices are inherently social. Through the reactive 
attitudes (e.g., resentment) we communicate to fellow members of the moral community our 

 

9 

interpersonal expectation for a reasonable degree of goodwill (Stern 1974; Watson 1987/1996; 
McKenna 1998/2012; Darwall 2006; Shoemaker 2007).[13] 
Since the reactive attitudes--when expressed and accompanied by their associated practices--
may have consequences for the well-being of an agent (especially in the case of those blaming 
attitudes and practices involved in holding someone accountable for wrong-doing), they would 
seem to be appropriate only if it is fair that the agent be subject to them in the sense that s/he 
deserve them.[14] This concern about fairness may be the original source of the merit-based 
view of responsibility. Relatedly, this line of thought may help explain the historical 
preoccupation with whether responsibility for an action requires the ability to have done 
otherwise. That is, the normative concern for a fair opportunity to avoid blame and sanction 
may lie behind the felt need to have access to alternatives. (Zimmerman: ch. 5; Wallace: 103–
117; Watson 1996: 238–9; Magill 1997: 42–53; Nelkin 2012:31–50). 
Notably, some accounts of responsibility make no essential reference to the reactive attitudes 
or their accompanying practices. Perhaps the clearest example of these are so-called “ledger” 
views of moral responsibility. According to such views, the practice of ascribing responsibility 
involves assigning a credit or debit to a metaphorical ledger associated with each agent 
(Feinberg: 30–1; Glover: 64; Zimmerman: 38–9; and discussion of such views in Watson 1987: 
261–2; and Fischer & Ravizza 1998: 8–10, nt. 12). In other words, an agent is responsible if a 
fault or credit is properly attributable to her. 
Ledger views belong to a broader class of views which regard responsibility to be a matter of 
proper attributability. As Gary Watson has highlighted, the central concern in such views is 
whether the agent's action or attitude discloses her evaluative judgments or commitments 
(1996). Satisfying some baseline conditions of responsibility as attributability would appear to 
be necessary in order to be responsible in the sense of accountable. For example, it would seem 
unfair to hold someone accountable for an action via reactive attitudes such as resentment or 
indignation, if the action was not properly attributable to the agent--say, because she 
succumbed to a genuinely coercive psychological compulsion. Yet being responsible in the 
attributability sense is not sufficient for being responsible in the accountability sense. As 
Watson points out, it may make no sense to hold the agent responsible for the action in 
question, since it may not be the sort of thing for which they are accountable to us. For example, 
one may think that in making a career decision, an acquaintance failed to give due consideration 
to what would most fully develop and exercise his talents. Though this is not a moral judgment 
in the narrow sense favored by accountability theorists (that is, it is unconnected to any 
interpersonal demand, or mutual expectation, of the sort presupposed by the reactive 
attitudes) it is a case of finding fault in the way an agent has exercised his judgment. If 
responsibility as accountability and attributability can come apart in this way, then there appear 
to be at least two distinct concepts of responsibility.[15] 
Some views fit uneasily in either of these two categories. For example, according to another 
influential view, someone is responsible for an action or attitude just in case it is connected to 

 

10 

her capacity for evaluative judgment in a way that opens her up, in principle, to demands for 
justification from others (Oshana 1997; Scanlon 1998; and Smith 2005/2008/2012). Such a 
view—call it the "answerability" model—appears to combine aspects of the attributability and 
accountability models (see discussion by Watson 2011 and Shoemaker 2012). The self-
disclosure aspect of the attributability model is reflected in emphasizing that the target of 
appraisal must be judgment-sensitive. The interpersonal emphasis characteristic of Strawson-
inspired accountability models is reflected in the demand for justification (though answerability 
theorists tend to reject a necessary connection between these demands and the reactive 
attitudes). In this way, the answerability model offers the possibility of re-unifying discussions of 
responsibility (Smith 2012), but some see further grounds for distinguishing an additional sense 
of responsibility (Shoemaker 2012). 
The recognition of diversity within the concept or amongst concepts of moral responsibility has 
generated new reflection on whether the conditions on being morally responsible are in tension 
with one another (Nagel 1986; G. Strawson 1986, 105–117, 307–317; Honderich 1988: vol. 2, ch. 
1; Double 1996a: chs. 6–7; Bok 1998: ch. 1; Smilansky 2000: ch. 6); For example, some have 
argued that while a compatibilist sense of freedom is sufficient for attributability, genuine 
accountability would require that agents be capable of exercising libertarian freedom. A rapidly 
expanding body of empirical data on folk intuitions about freedom and responsibility has added 
fuel to this debate (Nahmias et. al. 2005 and 2007; Vargas 2006; Nichols & Knobe 2007; Nelkin 
2007; Roskies & Nichols 2008; and Knobe & Doris 2010). 
If there are irreconcilable tensions within the concept of responsibility, then the conditions of its 
application cannot be jointly satisfied. Of course, there have always been those—e.g., hard 
determinists—who have concluded that the conditions on being morally responsible cannot be 
met and thus that no one is ever morally responsible. However, a noteworthy new trend 
amongst both contemporary hard determinists and others who conclude that the conditions for 
the applicability of our folk concept cannot be jointly satisfied has been the move to offer a 
revisionist conception of moral responsibility (or something analogous to moral responsibility) 
and its associated practices rather than to reject talk about being responsible outright. 
Revisionism about moral responsibility is a matter of degree. Some revisionists seek to salvage 
much if not most of what they take to be linked to the folk concept (Dennett 1984: 19; 
Honderich 1988: vol. 2, ch. 1; Scanlon 1998: 274–277; Vargas 2004/2005/2013), while others 
offer more radical reconstructions of the concept and associated practices (Smart 1961; 
Pereboom 2001: 199–212; Smilansky 2000: chps. 7–8; Kelly 2002).[16] 
Conclusion 
It is difficult to overestimate the influence of Strawson's work on the topic of moral 
responsibility. The resurgence of interest in metaphysical treatments of freedom and moral 
responsibility in recent years is a sign that most have not been persuaded by his most radical 
critique of such approaches. Nevertheless, his enduring influence is reflected in the ongoing rich 
discussion of the place and role of the reactive attitudes in human life and in the way 

 

11 

contemporary theorists situate their models of responsibility in relation to the accountability 
model, which he helped to define. 
 
 
Bibliography 
 

Adkins, A.W.H., 1960. Merit and Responsibility: A Study in Greek Values, Oxford: 

 

Arpaly, Nomy, 2003. Unprincipled Virtue: An Inquiry into Moral Agency, New York: 

–––, 2006. Merit, Meaning, and Human Bondage: An Essay on Free Will, 

Austin, J.L., 1979. “A Plea for Excuses” in Philosophical Papers, J.O. Urmson and 

Aristotle, 1985. The Nicomachean Ethics, trans. by Terence Irwin, Indianapolis: 

Ayer, A.J., 1980. “Free Will and Rationality” in van Stratten (ed.) 1980. 
Baier, Kurt, 1991. “Types of Responsibility.” in The Spectrum of Responsibility, 

Berofsky, Bernard, ed., 1966. Free Will and Determinism, New York: Harper & 

–––, 1984. The Complete Works of Aristotle: The Revised Oxford Translation, ed. 

 
Clarendon Press. 
 
Hackett Publishing Co.. 
 
Jonathan Barnes, 2 vols., Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
 
Oxford University Press. 
 
Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
 
G.J. Warnock, eds., New York: Oxford University Press. 
 
 
Peter French, ed., New York: St. Martin's Press. 
 
Row. 
 
 
Clarendon Press. 
 
Press. 
 
Brandt, Richard, 1969. “A Utilitarian Theory of Excuses” The Philosophical Review, 
78: 337–361. Reprinted in Morality, Utility, and Rights, New York: Cambridge University 
Press, 1992. 
 
 
 
Nicomachean Ethics” Ancient Philosophy 11: 137–48. 
 
Responsibility,”in Shoemaker 2013. 
 
 
Philosophy Compass, 7: 197–207. 

–––, 1959. Ethical Theory, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, Inc.. 
–––, 1958. “Blameworthiness and Obligation,” in Melden 1958. 
Brickhouse, T.C. 1991. “Roberts on Responsibility for Action and Character in the 

Broadie, Sarah, 1991. Ethics with Aristotle, New York: Oxford University Press. 
Coates, Justin D. and Tognazzini, Neal, 2012. “The Nature and Ethics of Blame,” 

Bennett, Jonathan, 1980. “Accountability” in van Stratten 1980. 
Bobsien, Susanne, 2001. Determinism and Freedom in Stoic Philosophy, Oxford: 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

Bok, Hilary, 1998. Freedom and Responsibility, Princeton: Princeton University 

Brink, David and Nelkin, Dana, 2013. “Fairness and the Architecture of 

12 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

Doris, John M., 2002. Lack of Character: Personality and Moral Behavior, New 

Double, Richard, 2000. “Metaethics, Metaphilosophy, and Free Will Subjectivism,” 

–––, 1996a. Metaphilosophy and Free Will, New York: Oxford University Press. 
–––, 1996b. “Honderich on the Consequences of Determinism,” Philosophy and 

––– eds., 2013. Blame: Its Nature and Norms, New York: Oxford University Press. 
Curren, Randall, 2000. Aristotle on the Necessity of Public Education, New York: 

–––, 1989. “The Contribution of Nicomachean Ethics iii.5 to Aristotle's Theory of 

Dennett, Daniel, 2003. Freedom Evolves, New York: Viking Press. 
–––, 1984. Elbow Room: The Varieties of Free Will Worth Wanting, Cambridge, 

Darwall, Stephen, 2006. The Second-Person Standpoint: Morality, Respect, and 

 
 
Roman & Littlefield. 
 
Responsibility,” History of Philosophy Quarterly, 6: 261–277. 
 
 
MA: MIT Press. 
 
Accountability, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
 
York: Cambridge University Press. 
 
in Kane 2002. 
 
 
Phenomenological Research, 66 (December): 847–854. 
 
 
Cambridge University Press. 
 
Westview Press. 
 
than-Minimally-Decent Agency” in Shoemaker and Tognazzini forthcoming. 
 
Cambridge University Press. 
 
Philosophy 10: 81–103. 
 
Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
 
104 (January): 63–77. 
 
 
(October): 93–139. 
 
Blackwell. 
 
 

Fingarette, Herbert, 1967. On Responsibility, New York: Basic Books, Inc. 
Fischer, John Martin, 1999. “Recent Work on Moral Responsibility” Ethics, 110 

–––, 1994. The Metaphysics of Free Will: An Essay on Control, Cambridge, MA: 

–––, 1991. The Non-reality of Free Will, New York: Oxford University Press. 
Echenique, Javier, 2012. Aristotle's Ethics and Moral Responsibility, New York: 

Ekstrom, Laura Waddell, 2000. Free Will: A Philosophical Study, Boulder, CO: 

Eshleman, Andrew, forthcoming. “Worthy of Praise: Responsibility and Better-

Feinberg, Joel, 1970. Doing and Deserving: Essays in the Theory of Responsibility, 

Feldman, Fred, 1995. “Desert: Reconsideration of Some Received Wisdom” Mind, 

Everson, Stephen, ed., 1998. Companions to Ancient Thought 4: Ethics, New York: 

–––, 1990. “Aristotle's Compatibilism in the Nicomachean Ethics,” Ancient 

–––, ed., 1986. Moral Responsibility, Ithaca: Cornell University Press. 
Fischer, John Martin and Ravizza, Mark, 1998. Responsibility and Control: A 

13 

–––, eds., 1993. Perspectives on Moral Responsibility, Ithaca: Cornell University 

Fischer, J.M., Kane, R., Pereboom, D., and Vargas, M. 2007. Four Views on Free 

–––, 1998. Moral Appraisability: Puzzles, Proposals, and Perplexities, New York: 

Hart, H. L.,, 1968. Punishment and Responsibility, New York: Oxford University 

Frankfurt, Harry, 1969. “Alternate Possibilities and Moral Responsibility,” The 

Glover, Jonathan, 1970. Responsibility, New York: Humanities Press. 
Haji, Ishtiyaque, 2002. “Compatibilist Views of Freedom and Responsibility” in 

Helm, Bennett, 2012. “Accountability and Some Social Dimensions of Human 

Hieronymi, Pamela, 2004. “The Force and Fairness of Blame,” Philosophical 

Fischer, John Martin and Tognazzini, Neal, 2011. “The Physiognomy of 

Theory of Moral Responsibility, New York: Cambridge University Press. 
 
Press. 
 
Responsibility” Philosophy and Phenomonological Research, 82: 381–417. 
 
Will, Oxford: Blackwell Publishers. 
 
Journal of Philosophy, 66: 828–839. 
 
 
Kane 2002. 
 
Oxford University Press. 
 
Press. 
 
Agency,” Philosophical Issues: A Supplement to Noûs, 22: 217–32. 
 
Perspectives, 18: 115–148. 
 
Incompatibilism as False, and the Real Problem,” in Kane 2002. 
 
and Phenomenological Research, 66 (December): 855–862. 
 
vols., Oxford: Clarendon Press 
 
Press. 
 
 
University Press. 
 
 
180–205. 
 
Psychology, New York: Oxford University Press. 
 
Psychology, eds. John Doris, et al., New York: Oxford University Press. 
 

Honderich, Ted, 2002. “Determinism as True, Both Compatibilism and 

Knobe, J. and Doris, J., 2010. “Responsibility,” in The Handbook of Moral 

Kupperman, Joel, 1991. Character, New York: Oxford University Press. 

–––, 1996. The Significance of Free Will, New York: Oxford University Press. 
Kelly, Erin, 2002. “Doing Without Desert,” Pacific Philosophical Quarterly, 83: 

Kennett, Jeanette, 2001. Agency and Responsibility: A Common-sense Moral 

Irwin, Terrance, ed., 1999. Classical Philosophy, New York: Oxford University 

–––, 1980. “Reason and Responsibility in Aristotle,” in Rorty 1980. 
Kane, Robert, ed., 2002. The Oxford Handbook of Free Will, New York: Oxford 

–––, 1996. “Compatibilism, Incompatibilism, and the Smart Aleck,” Philosophy 

–––, 1988. A Theory of Determinism: The Mind, Neuroscience, and Life Hopes, 2 

14 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Levy, Neil, 2005. “The Good, the Bad, and the Blameworthy,” Journal of Ethics 

Macnamara, Coleen, 2011. “Holding Others Responsible,” Philosophical Studies, 

McKenna, Michael and Russell, Paul, eds., 2008. Free Will and Reactive Attitudes: 

Melden, A.I., ed., 1958. Essays in Moral Philosophy, Seattle: University of 

Meyer, Susan Suave, 1988. “Moral Responsibility: Aristotle and After,” in Everson 

Magill, Kevin, 2000. “Blaming, Understanding, and Justification,” in T. van den 

–––, 1997. Freedom and Experience: Self-Determination without Illusions, New 

McKenna, Michael,2012. Conversation and Responsibility, New York: Oxford 

–––,1998. “The Limits of Evil and the Role of Moral Address: A Defense of 

Mackie, John L., 1985. “Morality and the Retributive Emotions,” in Persons and 

 
and Social Philosophy, 2(1): 2–16. 
 
Values (Volume 2), Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
 
152: 81–102. 
 
Beld 2000. 
 
York: St. Martins Press. 
 
University Press. 
 
Strawsonian Compatibilism,” Journal of Ethics, 2: 123–142. 
 
Perspectives on P.F. Strawson's “Freedom and Resentment”, Burlington, VT: Ashgate 
Publishing. 
 
Washington Press. 
 
1998. 
 
 
Press. 
 
Folk Intuitions about Free Will and Moral Responsibility,” Philosophical Psychology, 18: 
561–584. 
 
Responsibility, and Mechanism: Experiments on Folk Intuitions,” Midwest Studies in 
Philosophy, 31: 214–242. 
 
Oxford University Press. 
 
Midwest Studies in Philosophy, 31: 243–259. 
 
The Cognitive Science of Folk Intuitions,” Noûs, 41(4): 663–685. 
 
University Press. 
 

–––, 1993. Aristotle on Moral Responsibility, Cambridge, MA: Blackwell Pub.. 
Nagel, Thomas, 1986. The View From Nowhere, New York: Oxford University 

Nozick, Robert, 1981. Philosophical Explanations, Cambridge, MA: Harvard 

Oshana, Marina, 1997. “Ascriptions of Responsibility,” American Philosophical 

–––, 2007. “Do We Have a Coherent Set of Intuitions About Moral Responsibility?” 

Nichols, Shaun and Knobe, Joshua, 2007. “Moral Responsibility and Determinism: 

Nahmias, E., Morris, S., Nadelhoffer, T., and Turner, J. 2005. “Surveying Freedom: 

Nahmias, E., Coates, D. Justin, Kvaran, Trevor, 2007. “Free Will, Moral 

Nelkin, Dana, 2011. Making Sense of Freedom and Responsibility, New York: 

15 

–––, 1992. “Strawson's Way of Naturalizing Responsibility,” Ethics, 102: 287–302. 
Scanlon, T. M., 2008. Moral Dimensions: Permissibility, Meaning, Blame, 

–––, 1998. What We Owe to Each Other, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 

–––, 1988. “The Significance of Choice,” in The Tanner Lectures on Human Values 

Pereboom, Derk, 2001, Living Without Free Will, New York: Cambridge University 

–––, 2000. “Living Without Free Will: The Case for Hard Compatibilism” in Kane 

Russell, Paul, 2013.“Responsibility, Naturalism, and ‘The Morality System’,” in 

–––, 1995. Freedom and Moral Sentiment: Hume's Way of Naturalizing 

–––, ed., 1997. Free Will, Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Co.. 
Roberts, Jean, 1984. “Aristotle on Responsibility for Action and Character,” 

Rorty, Amelie Oksenberg, ed., 1980. Essays on Aristotle's Ethics, Los Angeles: 

Roskies, A.L., and Nichols, S. 2008. “Bringing Responsibility Down to Earth” 

Quarterly, 34: 71–83. 
 
Press. 
 
2000. 
 
 
Ancient Philosophy, 9: 23–36. 
 
University of California Press. 
 
Journal of Philosophy, 105(7): 371–388. 
 
Shoemaker 2013. 
 
Responsibility, New York: Oxford University Press. 
 
 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
 
Press. 
 
(Volume 8), Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press. 
 
 
New York: Cambridge University Press 
 
 
Accountability,”Ethics, 121: 602–32. 
 
 
Moral Community,”Ethics, 118: 70–108. 
 
(Volume 1), New York: Oxford University Press. 
 
Agency and Responsibility, Volume 2, New York: Oxford University Press. 
 
369–383. 
 

Sher, George, 2006. In Praise of Blame, New York: Oxford University Press. 
Shoemaker, David, 2011. “Attributability, Answerability, and 

–––, 2009. “Responsibility and Disability,” Metaphilosophy, 40: 438–61. 
–––, 2007. “Moral Address, Moral Responsibility, and the Boundaries of the 

Shoemaker, David, ed., 2013. Oxford Studies in Agency and Responsibility 

Shoemaker, David and Tognazzini, Neal, eds., forthcoming. Oxford Studies in 

Schlick, Moritz, 1966. “When is a Man Responsible,” in Berofsky, 1966. 
Schoeman, Ferdinand, ed., 1987. Responsibility, Character, and the Emotions, 

Slote, Michael, 1990. “Ethics Without Free Will,” Social Theory and Practice, 16: 

Smart, J.J.C., 1961. “Free Will, Praise, and Blame,” Mind, 70: 291–306. 

16 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

–––, 2008. “Control, Responsibility, and Moral Assessment,” Philosophical Studies, 

–––, 2007. “On Being Responsible and Holding Responsible,” The Journal of Ethics, 

–––, 2005. “Responsibility for Attitudes: Activity and Passivity in Mental Life,” 

Sommers, Tamler, 2012. Relative Justice: Cultural Diversity, Free Will, and Moral 

Talbert, Matthew, 2012. “Blame and Responsiveness to Moral Reasons: Are 

Smilansky, Saul, 2000. Free Will and Illusion, New York: Oxford University Press. 
–––, 1996. “Responsibility and Desert: Defending the Connection,” Mind, 105: 

Sorabji, Richard, 1980. Necessity, Cause, and Blame, Ithaca: Cornell University 

Stern, Lawrence, 1974. “Freedom, Blame, and the Moral Community,” The 

Smiley, Marion, 1992. Moral Responsibility and the Boundaries of Community, 

Smith, Angela M., 2012.“Attributability, Answerability, and Accountability: In 

 
 
157–163. 
 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
 
Defense of a Unified Account,” Ethics, 122: 575–589. 
 
138: 367–392. 
 
11: 465–484. 
 
Ethics, 115: 236–71. 
 
Responsibility, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
 
Press. 
 
Journal of Philosophy, 71: 72–84. 
 
Studies, 75: 5–24. 
 
 
 
1–25. Reprinted in Fischer and Ravizza, 1993. 
 
Psychopaths Blameworthy?” Pacific Philosophical Quarterly, 89: 516–35. 
 
Blame,” Philosophia. 
 
LaFollette, Malden, MA: Wiley Blackwell:4592–4602. 
 
 
Press. 
 
Strawson, New York: Oxford University Press. 
 
New York: Oxford University Press. 
 

Tognazzini, Neal, forthcoming. “Blameworthiness and the Affective Account of 

–––, 2013. “Responsibility,”The International Encyclopedia of Ethics, ed. Hugh 

van den Beld, T., 2000. Moral Responsibility and Ontology, Dordrecht: Kluwer. 
van Inwagen, Peter, 1978. An Essay on Free Will, New York: Oxford University 

Strawson, Galen, 1994. “The Impossibility of Moral Responsibility,” Philosophical 

–––, 1986. Freedom and Belief, New York: Oxford University Press. 
Strawson, P. F., 1980. “Reply to Ayer and Bennett,” in van Stratten 1980. 
–––, 1962. “Freedom and Resentment,” Proceedings of the British Academy, 48: 

van Stratten, Z., ed., 1980. Philosophical Subjects: Essays Presented to P.F. 

Vargas, Manuel, 2013. Building Better Beings: A Theory of Moral Responsibility, 

–––, 2004. “Responsibility and the Aims of Theory: Strawson and Revisionism,” 

17 

–––, 2005. “The Revisionist's Guide to Responsibility,” Philosophical Studies, 125: 

–––, 2006. “Philosophy and the Folk: On Some Implications of Experimental Work 

Wallace, R.J., Kumar, R., and Freeman, S., eds., 2011. Reasons and Recognition: 

Wallace, James, 1974. “Excellences and Merit,” Philosophical Review, 83: 182–

Wallace, R.J., 2011. “Dispassionate Oppobrium: On Blame and the Reactive 

–––, 1994. Responsibility and the Moral Sentiments, Cambridge, MA: Harvard 

Pacific Philosophical Quarterly, 85: 218–241. 
 
399–429. 
 
for Philosophical Debates on Free Will,” Journal of Cognition and Culture, 6(1–2): 239–
254. 
 
199. 
 
Sentiments,”in Wallace, Kumar, and Freeman 2011. 
 
University Press. 
 
Essays on the Philosophy of T.M. Scanlon, New York: Oxford University Press. 
 
 
Freeman 2011. 
 
 
 
California Press. 
 
 
 
Ethics, 14: 103–115. 
 

–––, 1996. “Two Faces of Responsibility,” Philosophical Topics, 24: 227–248. 
–––, 1987. “Responsibility and the Limits of Evil,” in Schoeman 1987. 
Williams, Bernard, 1993. Shame and Necessity, Los Angeles: University of 

Wolf, Susan, 1990. Freedom Within Reason, New York: Oxford University Press. 
–––, 1981. “The Importance of Free Will,” Mind, 90: 386–405. 
Zimmerman, Michael, 2010. “Responsibility, Reaction, and Value,” Journal of 

Waller, Bruce, 2011. Against Moral Responsibility, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Watson, Gary, 2011. “The Trouble with Psychopaths,” in Wallace, Kumar, and 

–––, 1988. An Essay on Moral Responsibility, Totowa, NJ: Roman and Littlefield. 

18 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

