First published 2010 

270 Madison A venue, New York,  NY  1 0016 

published in the UK 

by  Routledge 
2 Park 

Milton Park, 

Oxon OX14 4RN 

RoutleJge is an  imprint cfthe 

&_Francis  Gmup,  an  ii:forma  business 

© 2010 Taylor &  Francis 

in Perpetua and Bell  Gothic by 
Production Ltd, 

Devon, UK 

Printecl and bound in the United States of America on acid-free paper by 
Edwards Brothers, Inc. 

form or by any  electronic, 

All rights reserved.  No part of this book may be reprinted or 
or utilized in 
now knov;n or 
or in  any information storage or retricsal system, 
writing from the publishers. 

invented, including ph<:)tC>COPY:lD£ 

Trademark Notice:  Product or corporate names may he trademarks or 
recn.-.:ren·n  trademarks, and are used 
for identification and '"'''"'"""u' 

intent to infringe. 

Librwy 
Russdl, Philip L. 

Cataloging  in  Publication Data 

The history of Mexico: from pre-conquest to 
Pl1ilip  Russell.- -l steel. 

p.  cm. 

Includes index. 

1.  Mexico,--History. 
F1226.R94 2010 
972  dc22 

l. Title. 

lSBN13:  978--0  415-87236-2 (hhk) 
!SBN13:  978  0-415-87237-9 (pbk) 
!SBN13:  978-0- 203-85127--2 (ebk) 

2009047308 

List of  Figures 
List of Tables 
Preface 
List of Abbreviations 

1 

lVI esoameri ea 

2  The  Conquest of Mexico1  1519-1521 

3  Three  Centuries  of Colonial  Rule 1  1521--1810 

4  From  Corn to Capitalism/  1521-1810 

5  The  Far  North/  1598-1810 

6  The  End  of Spanish  Rule 1  1810-1821 

7  Nationhood/  1821-1855 

8  The  Dawn  of Industrialization/  1821-1855 

9  The  Diplomats Arrive/  1822-1855 

10  The  North  Adrift,  1821-1845 

l l   Shifting  Boundaries/  1845-1855 

12  Juarez and  Diaz/  1856-1909 

13  Plunging  into the  International  Market1  1856-1909 

14  A Superpower  Emerges  Next Door1  1856-1909 

vii 
ix 
xi 
xiv 

2 

15 

27 

73 

94 

112 

142 

172 

184 

188 

194 

216 

263 

284 

V 

CONTENTS 

15  The  Revolution,  1910-1916 

16  Destruction  and  Development,  1910-1916 

17  Trying to  Pick a Winner,  1910-1916 

18 

Institutionalizing the  New  Regime,  1917-1940 

19  Picking  up the  Pieces,  1917-1940 

20  Uncle  Sam  Confronts  Revolutionary  Nationalism,  1917-1940 

21  After Cardenas,  1941-1970 

22  The  Mexican  Economic  Miracle,  1941-1970 

23  The  New  Partnership,  1941-1970 

24  Politics  in  Times  of Crisis,  1971-2000 

25  Plunging  Back  into the  International  Market,  1971-2000 

26  The  End  of  Nationalism,  1971-2000 

27  2000  Election 

28  The  Fox  Administration,  2000-2006 

29  The  2006  Elections 

30  The  Calder6n  Administration,  2006-2009 

Appendix:  Mexican  Presidents 
Glossary 
Notes 
Bibliography 
Index 

296 

317 

322 

334 

382 

391 

408 

453 

466 

478 

535 

564 

580 

590 

594 

605 

611 
612 
617 
695 
770 

,. 
I 

r 

0.1  Map of Mexico 
1.1  Mesoamerica 
1.2  Teotihuacan 
1.3  Drawing from  lintel  1,  Yaxchilan temple 33 
1.4  Palenque 
1.5  El  Castil\o at Chichen  Itza 
2.1  Map of Cortes's  march 
2.2  The  valley  of  Mexico  in  Aztec times 
2.3  Survivors' depiction  of smallpox victims 
3.1  The  decline and  recovery  of the  indigenous population 
3.2  Sor Juana de  la  Cruz 
3.3  Mission  N uestro  Senor  Santiago,  Jalpan de  Serra,  Queretaro 
3.4  Surviving  Quiroga-era hospital,  Santa  Fe  de  la  Laguna 
4.1  Xalpa aqueduct,  about 15  km  northwest of Tepotzotlan,  built in  the  1700s 
5.1  Native  pictograph  of  Spaniards on  horseback  on  the walls  of Caf\on  del  Muerto, 

Arizona 

5.2  Taos  Pueblo,  north  house  block,  by  John  1<.  Hillers,  1879 
6.1  Father  Miguel  Hidalgo 
6.2  Jose  IVIarfa  Morelos 
6.3  Leona  Vicario 
7.1  Antonio  L6pez  de  Santa Anna 
7.2  Hut near  Cordoba,  Veracruz 
8.1  "La Dificultad" mine,  Real  del  Monte,  Hidalgo 

11.1  General  Winfield  Scott riding  into  Mexico  City's main  square,  the  Z6calo,  in  1847 
11.2  Mexican  border with the  United  States c.1855 
12.1  Benito Juarez 
12.2  Podirio  Dfaz 
12.3  Yaqui  prisoners  in  penitentiary 
12.4  Tehua woman 
12.5  Mexico  City's  main  plaza,  with cathedral  in  background 
12.6  Posada's drawing  of  Podirio  Dfaz 
13.1  Native  people  leaving  a train at Amecameca,  Mexico,  1907, by  Sumner  Matteson 
13.2  Cigarette factory 
15.1  Francisco  M adero 
15.2  Villista troop train 
15.3  Francisco  Villa and  Emiliano  Zapata 
15.4  Tortilla maker with army 

xvi 
3 
6 
7 
9 
10 
19 
21 
24 
33 
56 
63 
64 
77 

95 
104 
115 
121 
126 
149 
165 
173 
203 
205 
221 
233 
248 
250 
257 
261 
269 
274 
299 
306 
309 
314 

.. 
rm 

' 

EO 

What Polk's intentions were  regarding  Mexico- and whether he even  had  any clear notion 
of  what  he  wanted  and  how  to  get  it-are  a  bit  of  a  mystery  even  today.  Texas  was 
already  a state,  and  while  its southern  boundary was  a matter of dispute,  no  one  but the 
Texans  themselves  thought  it worth  a war.  That  is why  most  historians believe that  Polk 
really aimed from the start at the  richest prize left in  NOI'th  America: the  del-elict province 
of  Alta  California. 

Waiter A.  McDougall,  19971 

In  October  1845,  the  Mexican  government  stated  it  would  receive  a  U.S.  representative  to 
negotiate outstanding differences.  In  response  President Polk sent John Slidell,  a Spanish-spcaking 
politician  from  Louisiana,  to  Mexico.  Polk  instructed  Slidcll  to  negotiate  the  purchase  of Alta 
California and New Mexico. 

In a sense, Slidell 's mission was doomed before it started, since he was not authorized to negotiate 
on the two points that  Mexicans felt  it was  necessary to discuss:  1)  whether Mexico  still h~d any 
residual claims to Texas;  and  2)  if it did not,  what the boundary between Texas and Mexico wa;. 
An additional factor dooming his mission vvas his arriving with the title of"minister," the equivalent 
of a diplomat arriving today with the title of "ambassador." That title implied that Mexico and  the 
United  States  had  reestablished  diplomatic  relations--broken  after  the  1845  U.S.  annexation  of 
Texas-and that the Texas question was behind them.  This view that contrasted sharply with the 
Mexican perception of relations with the  United States. 2 

In  his  1844  State  of the  Union  Address,  President Tyler had  addressed  the  first  point,  noting 
that Mexico's  claim  to  Texas 1Nas  extinguished because Texans had  organized themselves  into  an 
independent republic recognized by several of"the leading powers of the earth" and because Mexico 
had failed  to recongucr Texas after nine years. 3 

The U.S. claim to Texas was much stronger than its assertion that the Rio Grande formed Texas's 
southern border.  Slidell' s instructions  on that question stated,  "ln regard to the  right of Texas to 
the  boundary  of the  del  Norte  [Rio  Grande],  from  its  mouth  to  the  Paso,  there  cannot,  it  is 
apprehended,  be any  very serious  doubt."4 

The  U.S.  claim to  the  Rio  Grande boundary was  based on:  1)  the  claim the  United States had 
obtained via  the Louisiana Purchase,  and  2) the December  1836  claim by the Texas Congress that 
the  Rio  Grande  formed the border.  The  Adams-Onis Treaty extinguished whatever rights  might 
have been acquired  via the Louisiana  Purchase.  The claim by the Texas  Congress neither reflected 
the historic boundary  of Texas nor the  de  facto  situation  during the  existence  of the  Republic  of 
Texas.  Even after the  U.S.  annexation  of Texas,  Mexicans  continued to  collect customs duties at 
Point Isabel  (today's  Port lsabel),  north of the  Rio  Gran de. 1 

At the time Texas was annexed to the United States, many viewed the Rio Grande as a promising 
trade route to New Mexico.  Some Texans hoped the Rio Grande vHmld replace the Santa Fe Trail. 

SHIFTING  BOUNDARIES,  1845-1855 

settlers 

the  Rio  Grandc to  the  Hudson  and  the 
for  San  Luis  Potos{  and  other 

Traders were  aware 
that Matamoros  served  as  a 
of northern  Mexico.  While 
the commercial and residential eenter of Matamoros was on the south side of the riYer,  the actual 
north  of the  mouth of the  Rio  Grande  at Point lsabel.  Control of land  north of the 
the 
the area between 
of this  land  became  a  matter of national 

$10 to $14 million worth of cargo a vcar.  In addition to 

the  Nueces  and  the  Rio  Grande  for  its 

soon  after  the  Mexican -American 

Rio  Gran de  would 

control  of the 

In 

was 

vvas 

c 

' 

for  both countries. 6 

On  November 

1 8L~S,  Shdell  arrived  in  Mexico.  His  instructions  to 

additional 

Mexican 

conflicted  with  Mexican nationalism.  There is  no indication Slidell foresaw 

. l-Ie shared Polk' s view that the matter would be 

Mexico was 

and isolated. 

the easiest solution for both 

would be for Mexico to sell 

the annexation of 

and  use  the monev received to  resolve its 

) 

Mexicans had  a  wrv different  view  of the  situation. 

J 

felt  threatened 

had  seen  steal  land  frorn  Indians  and  enslave  blacks  and  whose  citizens  were 

toward  Mexico.  The  Mexicans  did  not share  the  U.S.  notion  that frontiersmen 

the noble precursors of civilization.  Rather, 
the wav for more 

felt that if 

J 

the  Mexican  nation would cease  to cxist 7 
additional 

Since  Polk  instructed Sliclell  to 

a  final  chance for  peace  was  lost.  To  further 

most 
Mexican  firebrands  were  more  than 

issue  was 

to the  Americans. 

Mexican 

that  could  be  considered 

the Texas 

as  settled and then 
have  set  itself  up  for  a  coup.  As  historian  Karl  Schmitt  commented:  "Could  any 

further territorial 

with Slidcll' s instructions,  would 

or  leader  have  surrendered 

and  then  survived  to  make  it  stick?  It seems 

unlikely."8 

Since Mexico had threatened to go to war if Texas was 

the United States was preparing 

while  Slidell  vvas  in  Mexico.  In  1844,  a  force  commanded 

General 

made a 

as  an Indian 

, was 

at Fort 

cast of the Sabine River in Louisiana.  On 
so that he  could 

1 S,  1845, Tay]or received orders to move southwest 
in the  event of annexation: will  be our [south]  western border."9 

In response to  this 

moved  his 

to 

Christi,  a  small  Mexican 

of fewer  than  a  hundred  people 

on  the  Gulf Coast.  An  American  trading 

there 

to Mexican smugglers.  Taylor's 

came overland  via  San  Antonio.  Most of the rest 
from  New  Orleans.  There  followed  six  months  of boredom 

of  his  n1en  came  bv 

"''··<nH"<"""  with drills,  parades,  and breaking horses. 10 
Whether Polk wanted war, or simply wanted to negotiate from a position of strength, has been 

since 

historians.  It is  not  an  either-or  question,  though,  since,  as  Polk's 

Charles Sellers noted,  Polk thought peaceful  coercion vvould  get him  what he wanted.  However, 
if it did not,  he would "not shrink from  war to  accomplish his  purposes." 11 

Events in Mexico made it appear that >var could still be avoided. 

his bellicose statements, 
President Paredes took no action,  since he lacked an dTective army and the money to finance  one. 
,  after harsh criticism in the press, he sent troops north under the command of General 
Pedro Ampudia. They reinforced the Mexican position on the lower Rio Grande, but did not cross 
to the north side  of the river. 12 

lf the  Polk administration intended only to hluiT the  Mexicans,  it pushed  the  situation too far. 
On  January  13,  1846,  after  receiving  word  that  Mexicans  were  unwilling  to  negotiate  other 
matters  before  settling  the  Texas  question, 
of War  William  Marey  ordered  Taylor  to 
move his  force  to "positions on or near" the  Rio  Grande. 13 

EARLY  NINETEENTH-CENTURY  MEXICO,  1821-1855 

A  fevv  locally  procured  ox-carts,  175  wagons,  l ,500  Mexican  pack 

steamships that had been plying the  Ohio and Mississippi rivers moved 
up the  Rio  Grande to  Camargo,  the head of navigation.  His 
spent four  miserable  months  there  in  mud  from  a  recent  flood  and  heat  as 
Fahrenheit.  Estimates place the number of deaths resulting from poor sanitation 
1 ,000.  A lack of supplies, not Mexican resistance, delayed 
on a vvar 
f()Y an offensiYe 
nu;n when he 

at more than 
Since the United  States was not 
army required a massive logistical effort. The supplies necessary 

not arrive until 
his advance. 29 

to outfit 6 

supplying 

Taylor 

as  112 

Even 

had 

and  shallow-draft 
miles 
which had swelled to  15,000, 

s force 

first major 

pass  through the  Sierra  Madre  Oriental. 
The  Americans  faced  a  difficult  task,  as  the 
to  the  'vest,  and 

a 
mountain 
that pass  lay  Saltillo  and the  interior of Mexico. 
was 
mountains 
fortresses  to  the  north,  east,  and  west.  The  7, 303-man  Mexican  force  in 

of 10,000, which 

by  a  river to its 

was 

rmho,,·rr,,·  OUtnumbered 

f~JJTe. 

stiff resistance in the 

, 

settled f(x less  than total 

.  He 

permit  the  Mexicans  to  retreat to  Saltillo  with  their  arms,  rather  than 
forces  were running low  on  ammunition and had suffered  120 

or  8.5  percent of the men fighting.  This  exceeded the  Mexican 

rate  of 5 

While 

his 

then  in  exile  in 

means.  Santa 
to Polk with a deal.  Atocha claimed that if Polk would 
blockade at V cracruz, Santa Anna would sa Ye lives and money 
and a 

settlement of the  conf1ict.l 1 

• 

Polk 
sent his  confidential 

to  end  the  war 

Santa Anna to pass through the  U.S. 
arranging for the cession 

Atocha's proposal  and ordered that Santa Anna  be  allowed to sail  from  Cuba to 

, only two years after he had been exiled "for life." ln the 

Santa Anna landed at Verac:ruz and then made a triumphal 

Veracruz.  In  August of 1 
Mexico 
two years, 
had had  four different governments and even more finance  ministers,  none  of ·whom had 
any credibility.  The nation needed a savior and looked to Santa 
invitation to serve as  president. 32 

who once again 

Two weeks  after his  arrival  in Mexico 

,  on  September  28,  1846,  Santa  Anna  ordered the 

Mexican annY  north toward 

s force.  This act added Polk to the 

list of those 

Santa  Anna. 
Santa  Anna  paused  in  San  Luis  Potosi  to  gather  supplies  and  additional 

The  Mexican 
joined  him.  Rather  than  defending  Saltilio,  Santa  Anna  had 
force  that  had  defended 
ordered the troops who left 
to regroup in San Luis  PotosL  A  lack of moncv hampered 
Santa Anna' s efforts.  The refusal of the states of Jalisco,  Durango, and Zacatecas,  which in the past 
had opposed Santa Anna,  to supply men and  materiel  presented 

another obstacle. 33 

After f(Jur months in San Luis Potos1,  Santa Anna decided to attack 

force.  This decision 
was based on a captured U .S.  dispatch that revealed that much ofTaylor' s army had been withdrawn 
to take part in a planned amphibious landing at Veracruz.  On January 27,  1 
Santa Anna' s force 
started north, some 21  ,55 3 strong-another tribute to his organizational capacity. In twenty-seven 
days, his force marched 2 40 miles and decreased to 15, 
not due to hostile fire, but cold weather, 
poor food,  and desertion. A large contingent of soldaderas, vvho prepared food, maintained clothing, 
provided medical  care,  and  on occasion,  engaged in  combat,  accompanied the force  north.  Their 
presence vvas  a major factor  in  stemming desertion. 34 

Santa  Anna's  still  formidable  force  approached  Taylor's  position  ten  miles  south  of Saltillo. 
Each  nation  engaged  gave  the  battleground  where  they  met different  descriptive  names.  To  the 
Americans,  the place was Buena Vista,  referring to the fine  view south from the high plateau that 
the  Americans  were  defending.  The  Mexicans  called  the  battlefield  Angostura  (the  narrows), 
referring  to  the  narrow  pass  through  which  the  Saltillo-San  Luis  Potosi  road  passed.  Mountains 

the  road  to  both  the  west and  east.  Steep  gullies  crisscrossed  the  area  alongside  the  road, 

SHIFTING  BOUNDARIES,  1845-1855 

forming a natural barrier. 

The~ensuing battle  lasted two 

February 22  and  23,  1847.  On one occasion,  the Mexicans 
through  the  east  side  of the  U.S.  line.  Reinforcements  thrown  into  the  breach  saved  the 
Americans.  Later Mexican  attacks  were turned back by light artillery,  which proved decisive  due 
to  its  ability  to  shift  rapidly  to  check  Mexican  infantry  advances.  Finally,  after  two 
of hard 
fighting  and  heroism  on both sides,  Santa  Ann a's  forces  turned back.  Taylor  lost 

U .S.  death toll of any battle in the war, and 387 

or about 14 

was  mainly composed of green volunteers,  they were well rested, well fed,  and 

The  Mexicans  lost  more  than  twice  that  number.  Although  Taylor's  4,594-man  force 
effective 

support. 

Had Santa  Anna  persisted  a third day,  he might have  broken through  U.S.  lines.  However,  he 

decided his  men were  incapable of fighting for another day.  Rather than risking a decisive 
Santa Anna pulled his  men back.  He justified quitting a battlefield where he claimed to have  won, 
noting that his  troops had not eaten or slept in forty-eight hours and were dying of 
and fatigue. 

Strategically the battle accomplished little,  since both armies returned to their initial 

"o•·~;.~+;em 
Santa Anna in  San Luis Potos{ and Taylor in Saltillo. However, the battle did stir the llres 
55 
in  the  United States  as  reports arri~red of Taylor' s turning back of Santa Anna' s superior force. 

M 

M 

The  battle  at  Buena  Vista  left  the  Americans  in  a  quandary.  Taylor's  campaign  had  pcrm:itted 
U.S.  forces  to  occupy territory from  the  Gulf of Mexico to  Saltillo.  However,  it did  not immed(cid:173)

lead  to peace,  since distance  prevented  U.S.  forces  from pressuring the central 

in  Mexico  City. 

U.S.  Senator Thomas  H.  Benton wrote in his  memoirs of Polk's dilemma: 

They wanted a  small  war, just large  enough to require a treaty of peace,  and not 
to make military  reputations,  dangerous for  the presidency.  Never were  men at the 
government less  imbued  with military spirit,  or more addicted  to intriguc. 36 

Polk' s hopes for  a short, neatly executed war vYere  never 1net.  Even though they had defeated the 
Mexicans  on the battlefield,  after almost a year peace  was  still  elusive. 

After Buena Vista, Taylor suggested maintaining his position in  northern Mexico and tben waiting 
for the Mexicans to tire of the U.S.  presence. This, he felt,  would lead to a negotiated withdrawal. 

Polk rejected this strategy,  claiming that it would necessitate a long defensive line  and 

guerrilla  attacks.  He  also  rejected  the  idea  of moving  Taylor' s  force  south  since  he deemed  the 
desert between Saltillo  and Mexico  City too formidable  an  obstacle  to  march across. 37 

E n:n bei~)re Buena Vista,  Polk had d~cided on an amphibious invasion of Veracruz followed 

an  attack on Mexico 
with the invaders retracing Cortes's footsteps.  Taking Veracruz would 
prevent the  Mexican  government  from  importing  arms  and  deny  it revenue  from  the  Veracruz 
customs house. 38 

Polk also  feared  that if the  war dragged on,  criticism  from  the home  front would escalate.  As 
Senator Ben ton noted, a defensive strategy would "prolong the war and ruin the Democratic 
" 
U.S.  opponents of the ·war included those opposed to the military, abolitionists, those feeling their 
businesses would be harmed, opponents of a powerful presidency, vVhigs opposed to the incumbent 
Democrats,  and those  feeling  the war was  unjust. 39 

Robert E.  Lee  and  Ulvsses  S.  Grant,  who  would  lead  the  armies  of the  U.S.  Civil  War,  both 
criticized the Mexican-American VVar.  Grant stated the war was "the most unjust ·war ever waged 

j 

EARLY  NINETEENTH-CENTURY  MEXICO,  1821-1855 

SHIFTING  BOUNDARIES/  1845-1855 

by  a 

,  Abraham  Lincoln  commented  on  Polk's  1847 
Union  message,  "How  like  the  half-insane  mumblings  of a  fever  dream  is  the  whole 

a  ·weaker nation." 

war part of his  late ""',"''k:'" 

The  best 

criticism  of the  war 

David 
Thoreau,  who  was  briefly jailed for  his  refusal  to  pay  taxes  to support the  war.  ln  his  book  Civil 
and the Mexican--American War to "a hundred thousand 
Disobedience,  Thoreau linked both 
merchants and farmers 
are 
in humanity  ... "41 

who are  more interested in commerce and agriculture than 

citizen  came  from 

a 

undermine  the  vvar 

Though opposition  did  not 

the  war  did  hecome  a  major 
political issue in the  1846 Congressional elections.  Polk 
to war critics in his  December 
1846  State  of  the  Union  Address:  "A  more  effectual  means  could  not  have  been  devised  to 
encourage  the  enemy and protract the  war  than  to  adYocate  and  adhere  to  their  cause,  and thus 
give  them  'aid  and  comfort."'  The  words  "aid  and  comfort"  were  a 
allusion  to  the 
constitution's treason clause.+2 

Polk selected  General  Winfleld  Scott to  lead  the  force  invading Veracruz.  Scott was  general(cid:173)

in-chief of the army and had served in  the military for almost 
years.  As  a result of his 
distinguishing himself as  a commander in the vVar  of 1812, he  vvas  promoted to brigadier general 
at the age of twenty-nine.  Later he remained in the limelight as  an Indian fighter.  In choosing Scott 
to  command the  invasion 
popularity. 
Nonetheless Taylor 
nomination and was elected 
president. 43 

Polk,  a  Democrat,  attempted to  neutralize 

his military victories into the  1848 

On  March  9,  184 7,  the  campaign  to  take  Veracruz  began  with  an  amphibious  landing  three 
. At the time, it was the  largest amphibious landing in  the annals of war.  More 
rniles south the 
than  10,000 troops -vvent ashore in sixty-five 
surfboats towed close to the shore by steamers. 
In addition, artillery and supplies were landed. Horses were thrown overboard and forced to swim. 44 
The Americans landed unopposed. As Frederick Zeh, a Bavarian emigrant who sened with U. S. 
noted in his first-person account of the landing, "The Mexicans had plenty of time to prepare 
a forceful  response for  us,  but they neglected everything;  and from beginning to end,  their entire 
defensive." It was a serious military error for 
military leadership vvas  devoid of energy and 
the Mexicans not to oppose the landing since the  U.S.  troops were most Yulnerable  as  they  were 
disembarking. 45 

after they landed,  cutting off supplies.  Then,  rather than storming the 

Rather than  attacking Veracruz from  the  sea,  as  the  Mexicans  had  anticipated,  the  Americans 
and 
encircled the 
casualties,  Scott ordered a prolonged shelling. The shelling lasted four days.  During 
suffering 
this period, Scott would not permit the evacuation of women, children, and non-combatants, since 
he 
felt their continued presence in the city would increase pressure for surrender. Finally, 
after 6, 700 rounds--463, 000 pounds~had been lobbed into the city,  Veracruz surrendered. During 
the siege some 600 Mexican soldiers and 400 to 500 civilians died.  U.S.  dead numbered 
about 
thirteen. 46 

The approach of the yellow fever season provided an incentive for a rapid move inland.  Initially 
logistics  presented  more  of a  problem  than  hostile  fire.  The  supplies  included  roughly  300,000 
horse- and mule-shoes, and 300,000 bushels of oats, and 200,000 of corn. On April8, after Scott's 
force had  acquirecl sufficient mules and wagons,  his  troops began to move toward Mexico  City. 47 
At Cerro Gordo,  fifty  rniles northwest of V eracruz,  Scott found  his  way blocked by a Mexican 
force  commanded by  Santa Anna.  The  situation  was  the  reverse  of Buena  Vista.  Santa  Anna  was 
entrenched  on  high ground,  while  U.S.  forces  vvere  coming  from  below.  The  Mexicans  trained 
their  artillery  on  the  road,  assuming  that  the  U.S.  force,  with  its  heavily  laden  supply  wagons, 
would follow it inland. 

On  April  17,  rather than pushing through the concentrated fire  directed toward the road,  the 
Americans  turned  north.  Troops  under  the  command  of a  young  captain  named  Robert  E.  Lee 

pushed their way through ravines and thickets north of the road. The Mexicans had considered this 
Santa  Anna had 
engineer had advised him to do so.  Then 
stormed  up  another  hill,  Cerro 

troops on the hill,  even though his 
support from  Cerro 
U.S. 

them  to occupy the top of a 

Cerro 

This 

overlooked Mexican forces.  Other U.S. 

Pn""'·m··n behind the Mexican line, 

continued through woods and across ravines 
American forces 

them,  broke and  ran. 
Battle of Ccrro Gordo lasted 

three hours. There were 431  U.S. 

Anna lost more than  1 ,000.  Scott's force took more than 3,000 
not be cared  for,  so they were released.  Santa Anna 

escaped 

Santa  Anna  retreated  to  Puebla,  a 

of 80,000  lying 

. There he reguested funds from Bishop Francisco Pablo 

Mexico 
his  army.  Vazquez  said  no  Church money should he  used for  the  war  and  retired to  his 
home.  After he failed  to obtain the financial  support he was 
Mexico  City.+R 

Santa Anna continued on to 

Rather than immediatelv following Santa Anna into Mexico Citv, Scott 
welcomed him.~ No one atternpted to  organize  a defe~se of the 

w·here 
.  Scott remained  in 
three months.  His  forces  ·were  low  on  ammunition,  and many  of his  men were 
a short period and returned home. \Vhile he awaited 

the 
Puebla 
wounded or sick.  Others had enlisted for 

in 

and  additional 

in  Puebla,  Scott spent at least  $10,000 

to  bribe  Santa 

to hold peace talks.  He rationalized this payoff, noting that since the 
Indians  and 

pirates,  it was  appropriate to bribe  Mexican officials. 49 

States brihecl American 

On 

7,  after  deciding  he  could  not  obtain  peace 
force  to  advance  on Mexico  City.  To many, 

his 
A  force  of 30,000 
200,000.  As  in  Aztec times,  lakes  and  svvam.ps 

on  their  own  ground  was 

Mexico 

negotiation,  Scott  ordered 
mission  seemed 

fortified 

After evaluating intelligence reports, Scott decided to turn south of Lakes Chalco and Xochimilco, 
him to bypass  Santa Anna' s strong outlying position at El  Pefi6n.  This placed his  force  at 
the extreme southern end of the Valley of Mexico.  In response,  Santa Anna shifted his men to his 
southern defensive positions. 

lava bed, today's fashionable suburb of El Pedregal. This 

Once again,  Captain Lee outflanked the Mexicans.  He managed to lead a force  across an almost 
the Americans southwest 
General  Gabriel  Valencia  awaited  them. 
Santa Ann a's order 

of Mexico 
a  force  commanded 
Valencia remained isolated from other Mexican forces 
to  combine  his  forces  with  Santa  Anna's.  He  feared  that  Santa  Anna  would 
Mexico 

if the two forces  were combined. 

to his refusal to 

credit for 

At 

As  it turned out, the credit Valencia received differed from what he had anticipated.  Americans 

moved up a ravine running behind his force  and then staged a surprise attack with fixed 
Valencia's force broke and ran.  U.S.  forces  suffered 
casualties,  while 700 Mexicans 
800 were captured. The Mexicans also lost twenty-tvvo artillery 

700 pack 

and 
and other 

s 1 

Later the same 

August 20, U.S. troops approached Churubusco, where a former 

formed one of the strong points of Santa Anna' s defensive line.  An eight-foot-thick adobe wall  had 
been  constructed  there  as  part  of  the  defenses.  After  meeting  some  of the  most  determined 
resistance of the war,  the 6,000 American attackers finally forced the  1,980 Mexican defenders to 
the U .S.  artillery,  the elan 
surrender.  The 
of the  U.S.  troops,  and  the  Mexicans'  ammunition  shortage.  After  the  Mexicans  surrendered 
Churubusco, U.S.  General David Twiggs met the Mexican commander General Pedro Mada 
who  uttered  the  most  celebrated  sentence  of the  war,  "If  we'd  had  enough  ammunition,  you 
wouldn't be here."52 

resulted from a breach of the defensive wall 

EARLY  NINETEENTH-CENTURY  MEXICO,  1821-1855 

SHIFTING  BOUNDARIES,  1845-1855 

Rather than advancing  on Mexico  City,  five  miles  north of Churubusco,  Scott ordered a halt. 
His  troops  were  tired  and  hungry  and  an  attack  might have  scattered  the  Mexican  government, 
leaving  no  one  to  negotiate  a  peace  treaty with.  In  a  single  day,  Santa  Anna lost 4,000 killed or 
wounded,  and  3,000 captured,  including eight generals,  two of vvhom  were former presidents of 
Mexico.  Scott lost  1 ,0.53,  of whom  139  were killed.  Santa Anna's forces  suffered not only heavy 
casualties south of Mexico  City but also  hopeless  demoralization among those remaining. 53 

After Churubusco,  peace talks began.  The Mexicans offered  to renounce their claims to Texas 
and  declare  the  area  between  the  Nueces  and  the  Rio  Grande  neutral 
.  This  was  not, 
however,  what  the  Americans  were  looking  for.  Polk  commented  on  the  unwillingness  of the 
Mexicans to cede  further territory in his  December  184 7  State  of the  Union  address: 

The doctrine of no territory is the doctrine of no indemnity, and if sanctioned would be a public 
acknowledgment  that  our  country  was  wrong  and  that  the  war  declared  by  Congress  with 
extraordinary unanimity was unjust and should be abandoned-an admission unfounded in 
and degrading to the national  character. s+ 

After rejecting the Mexicans' initial proposal, U.S. negotiators proposed the transfer to the United 
States of New Mexico and most of the present state of California.  This time the Mexicans rejected 
the proposal.  The hawks in  Santa Anna' s  cabinet refused to  part with that  much territory. 55 

On September 8, Scott concluded that there was little possibility of a peace accord, so he ordered 
his  troops to attack Mexico  City from  the west, just the  opposite  of what Santa Anna had initially 
anticipated.  His  first  targets  were two buildings,  Molino  del  Rey  (King's  Mill),  a  hundred  yards 
west of Chapultepec Castle, and the Casa Mata, a stone fortress 500 yards west of that. Chapultepec, 
in turn,  was  three  miles  southwest of the  center of Mexico 
.  Repeated  infantry charges took 
Molino  del Rey,  and artillery reduced the  Casa Mata. 

The Americans then assaulted Chapultepec.  Despite its impressive appearance, perched high on 
a  hill,  Chapultepec  Castle  had  been  built  as  a  summer  home  for  the 
not  as  a  heavily 
constructed  fort.  On  September  13,  the  attack  began  \vith  more  than  twelve  hours  of artillery 
bombardment followed by an infantry assault.  As  Major General John Quitman later wrote: "The 
assault forces  advanced like  a flood.  The Mexicans stood in the parapets with rare firmness.  For a 
brief time,  they  struggled  arm  to  arm,  wielding  swords  and  bayonets,  as  well  as  rifles."  Finally, 
the Americans prevailed. 56 

The  battle  at  Chapultepec  has  been  immortalized  in  both  countries.  Mexicans  annually 
commemorate the valor of the niiios heroes-···-the cadets at the militarv academv located in the castle. 
They  died  defending  Chapultepec  rather  than  surrendering  to  the  Americans.  The  U.S.  Marine 
Corps  hymn  keeps  the  battle  alive  in  American  memory  with  its  reference  to  "the  halls  of 
Montezuma." 

' 

' 

11.1  General  Winfield Scott riding into  Mexico  City 1S  main square,  the  Z6ca/o1  in  1847 

Source:  Reproduced  courtesy of the  Benson  Latin  American  Collection,  the  UnivNsity of Texas  at Austin 

of the  U.S. 

vvas  the 

Irish  immigrants  who  had  been 
British rule.  Before 
in  come cases,  had  been the 

had joined the U.S. army, 

of rioters in the  United States. 60 

U.S. 

of 
out  of their  homeland 

manv of whom were 
crop  failure  and 
had faced anti-lrish sentiment 

I 

Once  the  Irish  arrived  in 

the  Mexicans  began  to 
Mexicans  addressed  them  as  "Sons  of Ireland,  a 

on  both  ethnic  and 
race,"  and  sent  messages  in 

such as: 

Can  you  fight 
Come  over  to  us! 
benevolence,  form 

the  side  of those  who  put  fire  to  your 

in  Boston  and 

Mexicans  and  Irishmen,  united  by  the  sacred  ties  of religion  and 
one people. 61 

Chapultepec formed the last defensive position between the Americans and Mexico City.  Santa 
Anna still  had  roughly  5,000  troops  in  the  Ciudadela,  a  tobacco  factory  that had been  converted 
into a fort,  and perhaps another 7,000 elsewhere in the city.  Rather than defending the capital, he 
marched his  troops out of the  city.  As  a parting gesture,  he opened  the prisons,  loosing hundreds 
of felons  on the populace  and the invaders. 57 

The  entire  world  recognized  Scott' s  defeat  of Santa  Anna  as  an  impressive  military  feat.  The 
Duke  of  Wellington,  Europe's  most  distinguished  solder,  commented,  "His  campaign  was 
unsurpassed in military annals." 58 

The  conservative  Mexico  City government decided  on its  own  to surrender the  city to  avoid 
combat damage.  However, many residents did their best to turn back U. S.  troops.  Lacking firearms, 
they bombarded American troops with boiling oil, stones, flowerpots, and other objects flung from 
rooftops.  This  harassment  lasted  for  three  days.  In  some  cases,  houses  sheltering  such  attackers 
were reduced  by firing  eight-inch howitzers at them. 59 

In  addition to appealing to ethnic 
and  320 acres of land. 

and  their  Catholicism,  deserters  were 

money 

As  a  result  of  these  appeals  and  harsh  treatment  from  their  oHlcers,  several  hundred  U.S. 

soldiers deserted and were incorporated into the Mexican army as  the San Patricio Brigade. 
40  percent  of its  members  were  Irish  born,  while  20 
were  German born.  Brigade members fought capably and bravely  at 
At Churubusco, they were among the staunchest 
if 

were  U.S.  born,  and  14  percent 
and  Buena Vista. 
what fate  would befall them 

were captured. 62 

After marching his troops out of Mexico City, Santa Anna sought funds and munitions to continue 
opposing the Americans.  However the government,  which reorganized itself after fleeing  Mexico 
relieved Santa Anna of command.  Given Santa Anna' s dismissal,  combat was cssentiall y over 

after the U.S.  occupation of Mexico  City. 63 

EARLY  NINETEENTH-CENTURY  M EX I CO,  1821-1855 

SHIFTING  BOUNDARIES,  1845-1855 

"At the time, Mexican President Manuel de la Pena y Pcfia commented that Mexico 

did not 

California and New Mexico for $15  million but rather to 

U.S. troops out 

nnm·1-c>rl  the settlement. 

vvho ultimately received S 2. 5 million of the $15  million indemnity payment, 
wanting to be paid in hard cash,  also  supported a settlement. 

One of the ac9iotistas who had the biggest stake in the settlement was British consul Evven 
who  received  S 600,000 of the  first  $3  million indemnity 

70 

The 

of 

Hidalgo gave  the 

85,000 

the United States the option of moving to Mexico to 
for  more  than  a  year  in  the 
U.S.  citizens and  were guaranteed 

acquired 

of any property 

became 

Mexicans were 

to retain as much territory as 

dkL  A 

in the United States advocated taking the entire country.  Advocates 
-were  not  conflned  to  the  United  States.  Some  Mexican  liberals  who 
nr'-"''-'"'''(1  to General  Scott that he should become dictator of Mexico. 

"all of Mexico" movement 
"all  of Mexico" position 
admired  the  United  States 
wanted that to be the 

towards annexation 

the  United States. 71 

of seizing "all of Mexico" did not 

for a 

Poinsctt warned that taking all of Mexico would require a 
Mexican 
Mexican 
feared that all the land annexed would become slave 

resistance to the United States.  Since the 

force and would inflame 
in  any 

of 

absorbing Mexico since 

Others opposed annexation because 
did  not want 7  million  Mexicans  of mixed  race  to  be  cast  into  the  U.S.  racial  melting pot. 
of Mexico,  commented, 

author  of the  classic  account of the 

William 
"The 

D 

As  had  been  the  case  a  decade  earlier  in 
Mexican-American War.  In his  biography of Polk,  Eugene McCormac observed: 

"Manifest 

formed  the  leitmotif of the 

Determined from the beginning to add  California and New  Mexico to our national domain, he 
with ~· dogg~d persistence which neither opposition  nor denunciation could 
pursued his 
weaken.  'Whatever may  be thought of his  motives or his  methods,  to him  is  due the  credit (or 
censure,  if you please)  of extending to the  Pacific the boundaries of the  United Statcs. 71 

The Mexican press  limited  the possible actions of Mexico's leaders 

urging war on them and 
public sentiment to favor war. Mexicans' failure to accurately assess the relative military 
whipping 
strength 
the  United States and  Mexico impaired their decision-making ability.  Finally,  many in 
Mexico felt  that if Mexico  did not take  a  strong stance  against its  northern neighbor,  the  United 
States would continue to press claims 
nibbling away at Mexican territory until the nation 
ceased to exist. I+ 

Given that the United States had long supply lines, a pre-industrial economy, and a small standing 
army,  and  that  it was  forced  to  attack  the  strong defensive  position  offered by  the  Sierra  Madre 
Oriental, it is  worth considering why the United States triumphed over Mexico.  The U.S.  victory 
amazed 
observers.  A  British  journalist  commented,  "There  must be  some  mystery-~ 
some leading cause,  imperfectly  understood  on  our side  of the Atlantic."7

' 

Factors  contributing to the  U.S.  victory include: 

11111  The U.S.  population at the time of the war consisted  of 17 million whites and  3 million slaves, 
more than double the number of Mexicans.  This enabled the  United States to draw on a much 
larger population for  soldiers  and  war production. 

11111  African  Americans  formed  a  significant  clement  of the  U.S.  presence  in 

performing 
labor in camp and  serving white soldiers.  The Mexican--American War is  the 
U.S.  war in 
which  African  Americans  were  not  mobilized  as  combatants--an  indicator  of  the  racial 
sensitivities of the time. Far outweighing African Americans' contribution in 
black slaves 
in  the  United  States  produced food  and cotton  for  military uniforms and for  export. 76 
"flying"  artillery  that  could  be  moved 

111  The  United  States  made  extensive  use  of 

keeping  up  with  the  troops  and  advancing  to fire  on  enemy  positions. 

officers  were 

to  move  and  fire  without 

to  wait  for  orders from  a  central  command. 

U.S.  artillery played a crucial  role in several battles, such as  those as  Palo 
and 
Veracruz. At Buena Vista,  General John Wool stated, "Without our artillery we would not have 
maintained  our position a single hour."77 

11111  The smooth-bore muskets that were the standard U. S.  infantry weapon were among the world's 

most  advanced  shoulder  weapons.  The  milling  machines  used  in  their  manufacture 
interchangeable 
considerably greater than  the hundred-yard range of the  Mexicans'  muskets. 

and  uniform  barrel  diameter.  U.S.  muskets  had  a 

of 220 

111 

the  time  of the Mexican-American War,  the  majority  of the  lieutenants  and  captains were 
\Vest  Point  graduates.  Y cars  of campaigning  against  elusive  Indian  guerrillas  on  the  western 
frontier  accustomed these  officers  to rapid,  decentralized decision-making.  Such  officers  were 
especially  valuable  when  U.S.  forces  were  operating in small  units,  as  at  Resaca  de  la  Palma. 
After the  war,  Scott commented: 

l  give  it as  my fixed  opinion that but for  our graduated cadets the  war between  the  United 
States and  Mexico might,  and probably would,  have  lasted some four or five  years, 
its  first half,  more defeats than victories  falling  to our share,  whereas in two 
conquered a great country and  a peace without the loss  of a  single  battle or 

Ill  The elan of the all-volunteer U.S.  force was  crucial. 

existing militia units volunteered en 
masse,  reinforcing camaraderie.  Initial American victories lifted spirits and additional triumphs 
them  high.  This  Clan  and  patriotism  was  evident in  one  officer who savv  the  U.S.  J:lag  at 
Monterrey and  commented,  "A glow  of honest pride lit up  my  face,  and I thanked  God I was 
an American,  and that he had endowed my own country with so much to love and venerate."80 
Even though some  Americans  opposed  the war,  the  United States was  much more united than 
Mexico.  The desire to acquire  California was a generally shared 
just as  expansion into the 
Mississippi Valley had been a generation earlier.  Herman Melville described the pro-war feeling 
in a small  New York  town:  "People here are  all  in  a state of delirium about the Mexican War. 
A  military  ardor  pervades  all  ranks ... and  'prcntice  boys  arc  running  off  to  the  wars 
scores.~--Nothing is  talked of but the  'Halls  of the  Montezumas. "'81 

11111  The U.S.  economy,  unlike the Mexican economv,  which had 

to recover ground lost during 
the struggle for independence, was beginning its i~dustrialization. The United States could achicv~ 
what, for the times,  were prodigious logistical feats.  For 
forty-nine ten-inch mortars and 50,000 shells  were ordered, manufactured,  and 
Veracruz. 82 

within a four-month 

A number of factors  contributed to the Mexican  loss: 

Ill  The  Mexican  population  of seven  million  was  substantially  smaller  than  the  U.S.  population. 
Only a small proportion of Mexico's population was mobilized,  some 70,000 out of 7 million, 
or  1 percent.  This contrasts with the U.S.  Civil War in which roughly  3 million,  or 10 percent 
of the  population,  were mobilized for  the Union and  Confederate armies. 83 

11111  Mexican statesmen failed  to sec in  time  that the  United States  constituted a threat to  Mexico. 
As late as  1825, the Mexican government convened a special commission to advise on developing 

EARLY  NINETEENTH-CENTURY  MEXICO,  1821-1855 

California.  It warned not of danger from the United States but from Russia.  Even the 
perceptive Humboldt wrote in the first  decade  of the nineteenth 

that 

the  principles  of wisdom and moderation 
animated,  lead  us  to hope  that  a  friendly  arrangement will  soon  fix  the  limits  ho>n·AA-
two nations,  vvho  both possess  more ground than 

which the government of the  United 

can possibly cultivate. 84 

Some Mexicans did see the danger posed by the United States before war broke out. For 
f()rmer President V alentln G6mez Far!as wrote in 184 3 that Texas was the 
, which if it 
fall into American hands, would unlock the last barrier to the rest of northern Mexico. By 
this "giant step" toward  California,  he  wrote,  the  United  States  would  be  extended 
to sea" and Mexico's hopes  for  a prosperous future  would be gone. 
save  California. 85 

then it was  too late 

111  The frec1uent  changes  in  government in  the  mid-1840s  undermined  the government's 

weak  financial  structure.  The  U.S.  occupation  of  the  Veracruz, 
customs houses further impoverished the government. 86 

and 

111  The ever present possibility of a  coup made  presidents keep  one eye  on the  United States 

the other on possible rivals. The most serious internal conflict, known as the Revolt of the 
occurred just before the invasion of Veracruz when conservatives rebelled against liberals in 
capital.  Rather  than  rushing  to  defend  the  port,  Mexicans  engaged  in  an  artillery  duel 
downtown  Mexico 
authorizing the  government to con Jscate 

liberal  Acting  President  G6mez 

The  revolt  was  triggered 

to  mance t  e  war. 

l 
1urc 1 

Cl 

f.. 

h 

1·· 

87 

111  The actio~~ of i~dividual Mexican  states  also  weakened the  war effort.  Yucatan  declared 
failed  to contribute to the 

independent on January  1,  1846.  This  renegade  state  not 
cfiort but sold supplies to U .S.  naval forces blockading V eracruz before the invasion. 
Tabasco,  Sinaloa,  and  Chihuahua were unable  to  contribute to the  national  war effort 
they were fighting what amounted to internal civil wars. 
default, much of the defense 
fell' on  the i~dividual state  being invaded.  Puebla failed  to accept this  dcfense  burden, and 
State of Mexico,  which U.S.  forces had to pass  through to enter Mexico 
be neutral. 
perception that military  commanders  were  abusive  and authoritarian.  Conservative 
were reluctant to  see  militia units  recruit politically unreliable  members  of the  lower 
The  Mexico 

state governors were reluctant to raise  militia units due to the long-

opposec  attempts to  ort1  y  t 1e 

l 
municipa 

•f' 

f 

l 

l 

88 

declared itself 

111  Political, 

and  racial  divisions hampered  the  war effort.  In  1848,  the  newspaper El 

XIX  commented: 

The forces of disintegration---formerly civil strife and more recently foreign war-have 
building up in our country.  They have gathered so much force,  arc so numerous, and 
palpable that at first glance one can doubt if our republic is really a society rather than 
a gathering of men without  bonds,  rights,  and  duties. 89 

111  Many  wealthy  Mexicans not only failed  to contribute to the war diort but actually 

the invaders.  Often merchants preferred Scott to Santa Anna and  his  forced loans.  Santa 
complained that the 
went into hiding as  U.S.  troops approached Mexico  City,  so 
could avoid  contributing to its  defense.  Certainly the sight of the rich attending the opera 
bullfights  did  nothing  to  encourage  the  defenders  of Mexico  City,  who  ate  poorly  and 
practically dressed in rags. 90 

The wealthy and the Church wanted to maintain their properties and prerogatives. The 

States  made  it clear that none  of these  interests would be jeopardized.  After taking 
Scott published a manifesto declaring that Americans were friends  of the Mexicans and that 
Catholic Church and property rights would he respected.  He and his staff attended Mass at 
Cathedral in full  dress uniform.  He ordered his men to salute priests.  President Polk rcauest:ed 

SHIFTING  BOUNDARIES,  1845-1855 

, '""""'L bishops  in  the  United  States  inform  their  Mexican  counterparts that  the  United 

respect the  Church. 91 

slaves in 

Mexican Indians,  roughly half the population, produced little 

support the war effort. 

u~'c"'"'"" to  a "nation." Taking 

had little  in common with the rest of Mexico and little 
of the  national  crisis  to ach·ance  their  own 

people 

in  the  central  and  southern 

the  U.S.  invasion.  In  northern  Veracruz, 
rose up, 
and for ten months the Huasteca [region ofVeracruz] was the stage for the most horrible 

tovvns  and haciendas.  Hacendado  Manuel  Soto  wrote, "Blood 

under  pressure  from 

such uprisings  diverted men and arms  away from fighting Americans. 92 

conflict with  independent Indian  groups  such  as  the  Apache had  left 

areas  of 

Mexico  unable  and  unwilling  to  resist  the  U.S.  army.  American 

~~,"~''"''·'v' abandoned homes, overgrown fields,  and hastily finished graves---a result of Indian 
the 

occupied.  Prior to the  Battle  of Buena 

the parts  of northern  Mexico 

of Chihuahua,  Durango,  and  Zacatecas  ordered  soldiers  to  remain  at  home  to 
Indian raids. 91 

civilian population 
officers  and  Mexican  landowners 

reacted as  ifthe war was being 

two foreign powers. 
fraternized.  Other lando\vners,  such  as  the 

Navarro family in  Coahuila,  sold massive  amounts of livestock,  corn, and wheat to 
army.  To insure that the  U.S.  forces  did not antagonize  landowners,  Generals  Scott 

insisted  that  all  food  and  supplies  needed  by  U.S. 

were  paid  f()r  in 

nc<'v'"'"-'-" sales.  Other Mexicans served U.S. troops as guides, teamsters, and 
them with mules,  cattle,  and corn. 94 
The army rd1ected the chronic financial  problems of 
ments.  The  lack  of Hnances  resulted  in  an  army that  was  poorly  equipped at  the 
hostilities  and  made it difficult to amass  war materiel  later on. 95 
The 

nineteenth-century Mexican 

army  that defended  Mexico reflected  Mexican society  as  a  whole.  The armv 
since' individuals  with  little military  training  used  brib,es  or political inHuenc~ 
positions.  The  officer corps was  conservative and  elitist.  Of the  137 most 

and ~ui:JPlltu 

all but about 

government 

had fought on the Spanish side in the independence 
resulted  in  changes  in  the  army's  command  structure. 

These  repeated  personnel  shifts  impaired  fighting  ability.  Mexico's  bloated  army  had 
officers  commanding  20,000  enlisted  men.  The  British  ambassador  wrote  home  in  1846  that 
the  army  was  "the  worst perhaps  to  be  found  in  any 
on Mexico 

"The enemy cavalry no\v had a marvelous opportunity to 

of the  world." 

while 

but to do this required courage and a spirit of daring-do which, 

Mexican troops was 
little  training  and,  as  a 

since 

were often impressed or taken from 
could  not  perform  tactical  maneuvers 

groups. 97  Historian Josefina 

described the army defending Mexico as 

comprised of untrained conscripts who deserted as  soon as  the opportunity presented 
and  led  bv  otTicers  who  dedicated  themselves  to  politics.  The  cavalrv  and  artillery 
which had acqui:ed a certain fame, had declined due to the lack of funds and failure to maintai~ 
proper levels  of enlistment. 98 

Thompson,  the  U.S.  ambassador  to  Mexico  from  1842  to  1844,  noted  that  Mexican 
recruitment consisted mainly of capturing Indians,  of whom no more than one in ten had  ever 
seen  a gun and not one in a hundred had fired  one. 99 

11  The effectiveness of Mexican  cannons was limited by their being of a variety of calibers and by 
poor logistics.  The solid  shot used  by  Mexicans  \Vas  less  effective  than  the  grape  and  canister 

EARLY  NINETEENTH-CENTURY  MEXICO,  1821-1855 

In  addition  to  securing  the  desired rail  right  of way,  the  Gadsden 

States  of the responsibility for 

Indians  raids  across the border. 

Mexicans strongly condemned the sale of the Gadsden Purchase. The Plan of AyutJa comrneJ!lt 

on Santa Anna' s role in  the  sale: 

Despite having a duty to preserve the territorial integrity of the Republic, he sold a vv.u~•uer• 
part of it, sacrificing our brethren on the northern border, who from now on will be 
in  their own land,  just as  occurred in  California. 132 

Mexico and U.S.  ·Mexican relations both underwent major changes in the 1850s. After the 1 
the Mexican government became more stable thanks to revenues obtained from the export of 
materials.  At the same time,  the  U.S.  interest in territorial acquisition waned.  Instead,  the 
States sought to acquire raw materials and invest in the mines that produced them and in the 
that transported them to the  United States. 133 

ur 

