Page 1

*646 Re D'Jan of London Ltd

Chancery Division (Companies Court)

17 June 1993

[1993] B.C.C. 646

Hoffmann LJ (sitting as an additional judge of the Chancery Division)

Judgment delivered 17 June 1993

Winding up—Summary remedy against delinquent directors etc.—Whether director was negligent in
signing insurance proposal—Materiality of director's 99 per cent ownership of company—Whether
director had acted honestly and reasonably and ought
fairly to be excused for negligence—
Companies Act 1985, sec. 727 ; Insolvency Act 1986, sec. 212 .

This was a summons by a liquidator under sec. 212 of the Insolvency Act 1986 against “D”, a
former officer of
the company. The company was insolvent with a deficiency as regards
unsecured creditors of about £500,000. D held 99 of the 100 issued ordinary shares in the
company, and his wife the other. He had proved as an unsecured creditor in the sum of £102,913
and had been paid an interim dividend of 40p in the pound. The liquidator had paid a further
dividend of 20p but withheld payment to D pending the resolution of the proceedings.

The liquidator's summons alleged that D was negligent in completing and signing a proposal form
for fire insurance, with the result that the insurers repudiated liability for a fire at the company's
premises in which stock said to be worth some £174,000 was destroyed. D accepted that the
wrong answer was given on the form, entitling the insurers to repudiate. His evidence was that he
did not fill in the form himself or read it before he signed.

Held , declaring that D was liable to compensate the company for the loss caused by his breach
of duty in an amount not exceeding any unpaid dividends to which he would otherwise be entitled
as an unsecured creditor:

1 In failing even to read the form, D was negligent. Signing forms without reading them was
something a busy director might do, but that did not mean that it was not negligent. A director did
not always have to read the whole of every document which he signed, but the proposal form
was an extremely simple document asking a few questions which D was the best person to
answer. By signing the form, he accepted that he was the person who should take responsibility
for its contents.

2 The duty of care owed by a director at common law was accurately stated in sec. 214(4) of the
Insolvency Act 1986 . Both on the objective test and on the subjective test, D did not show
reasonable diligence when he signed the form. He was therefore in breach of his duty to the
company.

3 It was no defence to argue that D and his wife as shareholders would probably have ratified D's
action if they had known or thought about it before the liquidation removed their power to do so.

4 Although for the purposes of the law of negligence the company was a separate entity to which
D owed a duty of care which did not vary according to the number of shares he owned, the
economic reality of his 99 per cent shareholding could be taken into account in exercising the
court's discretionary power under sec. 727 of the Companies Act 1985 to relieve a director from
liability. His breach of duty in failing to read the form before signing was not gross. It was the kind
of thing which could happen to any busy man. At that time the company was solvent and the only
persons whose interests he was foreseeably putting at risk by not reading the form were himself
and his wife. D certainly acted honestly. For the purposes of sec. 727 he acted reasonably and
he ought fairly to be excused for some, though not all, of the liability which he would otherwise
have incurred.

*647

The following case was referred to in the judgment:

Multinational Gas and Petrochemical Co v Multinational Gas and Petrochemical Services Ltd
& Ors [1983] Ch 258 .

Page 2

Representation

Marion Simmons (instructed by Berwin Leighton ) for the applicant.

Jonathan Russen (instructed by Ronald Fletcher Baker & Co ) for the respondent.

JUDGMENT

Hoffmann LJ:

This is a summons under sec. 212 of the Insolvency Act 1986 by a liquidator against a former
officer of the company. This is a summary procedure which used to be called a misfeasance
summons but has been extended to include breaches of any duty including the duty of care. The
liquidator alleges that
in completing and signing a
proposal form for fire insurance with the Guardian Royal Exchange Assurances plc. As a result,
the insurers repudiated liability for a fire at the company's premises in Cornwall which had
destroyed stock said to be worth some £174,000. The company is insolvent, having a deficiency
as regards unsecured creditors of about £500,000. The liquidator
therefore brings these
proceedings for the benefit of the unsecured creditors.

the respondent Mr D'Jan was negligent

Mr D'Jan signed the insurance proposal on 18 September 1986. It was headed “Business
insurances proposal”. Mr D'Jan signed on the front page, under the words:

“I declare that to the best of my knowledge and belief all the statements and particulars
made with regard to this proposal are true and I agree that this proposal shall be the
basis of a contract of insurance to be expressed in the usual terms of the policy issued
by Guardian Royal Exchange Assurances plc.”

On the same page the form required certain information to be filled in and also asked three
specific questions, including:

“7. Have you or any director or partner … been director of any company which went into
liquidation …?”

The question was answered “No”. Mr D'Jan admits that this was wrong. In the previous year, a
company called Harleyshield Ltd, of which Mr D'Jan was a director, had gone into insolvent
liquidation. And there had been a couple of other insolvencies about five years earlier. The
liquidator says that Mr D'Jan gave a wrong answer to another question as well, but as this
involves construing the rather obscure language in which the question is phrased and as Mr
Russen, who appeared for Mr D'Jan, realistically accepts that the wrong answer to question 7
was enough to entitle the insurers to repudiate, I need not say more about the other question.

Mr D'Jan says he realises – perhaps more clearly now than he did at the time – the importance of
giving correct answers on insurance proposals. But he says that he did not fill in the form himself
or read it before he signed. It was filled in by his insurance broker, Tarik Shenyuz, who had been
handling his personal and corporate insurance affairs for about five years. Mr D'Jan says that Mr
Shenyuz had demonstrated his competence by obtaining good rates and recommending him to
loss adjusters who had obtained satisfactory settlements on his claims. So he trusted Mr
Shenyuz to fill in the form correctly.

Mr Shenyuz flatly contradicted this account of how the form came to be signed. He says that he
simply delivered the form to Mr D'Jan's premises and took it away again, acting as no more than

Page 3

a messenger between the company and the firm of insurance brokers in Surrey for whom he was
at the time acting as subagent. He says that Mr D'Jan's accountant Mr Ekrem was well versed in
insurance matters and that the company would have needed no help in filling out the form.

*648

Both Mr D'Jan and Mr Shenyuz are highly intelligent men who gave their evidence with
confidence and the conflict is not easy to resolve. But I prefer the evidence of Mr D'Jan. He did
not strike me as a man who would fill in his own forms. I think he would have wanted Mr Shenyuz
to earn his commission by attending to these matters and I accept
that he signed in the
expectation that Mr Shenyuz would have completed the form correctly.

Nevertheless I think that in failing even to read the form, Mr D'Jan was negligent. Mr Russen said
that the standard of care which directors owe to their companies is not very exacting and signing
forms without reading them is something a busy director might reasonably do. I accept that in
real life, this often happens. But that does not mean that it is not negligent. People often take
risks in circumstances in which it was not necessary or reasonable to do so.
the risk
materialises, they may have to pay a penalty. I do not say that a director must always read the
whole of every document which he signs. If he signs an agreement running to 60 pages of turgid
legal prose on the assurance of his solicitor that it accurately reflects the board's instructions, he
may well be excused from reading it all himself. But this was an extremely simple document
asking a few questions which Mr D'Jan was the best person to answer. By signing the form, he
accepted that he was the person who should take responsibility for its contents. In my view, the
duty of care owed by a director at common law is accurately stated in sec. 214(4) of the
Insolvency Act 1986 . It is the conduct of:

If

“… a reasonably diligent person having both-

(a) the general knowledge, skill and experience that may reasonably be expected of a
person carrying out the same functions as are carried out by that director in relation to
the company, and

(b) the general knowledge, skill and experience that that director has.”

Both on the objective test and, having seen Mr D'Jan, on the subjective test, I think that he did
not show reasonable diligence when he signed the form. He was therefore in breach of his duty
to the company.

Mr Russen said that nevertheless the company could not complain of the breach of duty because
it is a principle of company law that an act authorised by all the shareholders is in law the act of
the company: see Multinational Gas and Petrochemical Co v Multinational Gas and
Petrochemical Services Ltd [1983] Ch 258 . Mr D'Jan held 99 of the 100 issued ordinary shares
and Mrs D'Jan held the other. Mr D'Jan must be taken to have authorised the wrong answer in
the proposal because he signed it himself. As for Mrs D'Jan, she had never been known to object
to anything which her husband did in the management of the company. If she had known about
the way he signed the form and it was too late to put the matter right, the chances are that she
would also have approved. She could hardly have brought a derivative action to sue her husband
for negligence because he could have procured the passing of a resolution absolving himself
from liability.

The difficulty is that unlike the Multinational case, in which the action alleged to be negligent was
specifically mandated by the shareholders, neither Mr nor Mrs D'Jan gave any thought to the way
in which the proposal had been filled in. Mr D'Jan did not realise that he had given a wrong
answer until the insurance company repudiated. By that time the company was in liquidation. In
my judgment the Multinational principle requires that the shareholders should have, whether
formally or informally, mandated or ratified the act in question. It is not enough that they probably
would have ratified if they had known or thought about it before the liquidation removed their
power to do so.

It follows that Mr D'Jan is in principle liable to compensate the company for his breach of duty.
But sec. 727 of the Companies Act 1985 gives the court a discretionary *649 power to relieve a
director wholly or in part from liability for breaches of duty, including negligence, if the court
considers that he acted honestly and reasonably and ought fairly to be excused. It may seem odd

Page 4

that a person found to have been guilty of negligence, which involves failing to take reasonable
care, can ever satisfy a court
the section clearly
contemplates that he may do so and it follows that conduct may be reasonable for the purposes
of sec. 727 despite amounting to lack of reasonable care at common law.

that he acted reasonably. Nevertheless,

In my judgment, although Mr D'Jan's 99 per cent holding of shares is not sufficient to sustain a
Multinational defence, it is relevant to the exercise of the discretion under sec. 727 . It may be
reasonable to take a risk in relation to your own money which would be unreasonable in relation
to someone else's. And although for the purposes of the law of negligence the company is a
separate entity to which Mr D'Jan owes a duty of care which cannot vary according to the number
of shares he owns, I think that the economic realities of the case can be taken into account in
exercising the discretion under sec. 727 . His breach of duty in failing to read the form before
signing was not gross. It was the kind of thing which could happen to any busy man, although, as
I have said, this is not enough to excuse it. But I think it is also relevant that in 1986, with the
company solvent and indeed prosperous, the only persons whose interests he was foreseeably
putting at risk by not reading the form were himself and his wife. Mr D'Jan certainly acted
honestly. For the purposes of sec. 727 I think he acted reasonably and I think he ought fairly to
be excused for some, though not all, of the liability which he would otherwise have incurred. Mr
D'Jan has proved as an unsecured creditor in the sum of £102,913. He has been paid an interim
dividend of 40p in the pound and the liquidator has paid a further dividend of 20p but withheld
payment to Mr D'Jan pending the resolution of these proceedings. In my view, having been
responsible for the additional shortfall in respect of unsecured creditors, I do not think that he
should be allowed any further participation in competition with ordinary trade creditors. On the
other hand, I do not think it would be fair to ask him to return what he has received or make a
further contribution out of his own pocket to the company's assets. I therefore declare that Mr
D'Jan is liable to compensate the company for the loss caused by his breach of duty in an
amount not exceeding any unpaid dividends to which he would otherwise be entitled as an
unsecured creditor.

(Order accordingly)
*650

© 2014 Sweet & Maxwell

