Student: Juan Pablo Fagiani 
Dozent: Prof. Dr. Armin Schäfer 
Seminar: Demokratie und Kapitalismus: Perspektiven 
auf ein widersprüchliches Verhältnis 
WS 2014/15 
 

 

Wolfgang Streeck – The crisis of democratic capitalism (2011) 

 

“A decent, ethical society would pay only marginal attention to profits” 
(Noam Chomsky1) 
 
 
The  whole  literature  on  the  relationship  between  free  markets  and  free  democratic  societies  can  by 
analyzed  from  two  different  perspectives.  One  of  those  asserts  that  there  is  a  tension  between  the 
concepts of capitalism and democracy, and it can be divided between liberals and left authors. Among the 
latter, Streeck explains how it is not possible for governments to simultaneously abide by the principles 
that guide democratic societies and free markets, even though those governments commited to. Mainly, 
the  author  poses  the  question  ‘What  are  the  conflicting  principles  that  makes  disequilibrium  and 
instability  the  rule  rather  than  the  exception  of  the  advanced  capitalist  economies?  And,  based  on  this 
intrinsic conflict, how can the financial crisis that started in 2008 be explained?  

 

The  main  argument  of  Streeck  (2010)  is  that  advanced-capitalist  societies  enhance  a  constant  conflict 
between  two  principles.  On  the  one  hand,  marginal  productivity,  as  evaluated  by  the  workings  of  free 
markets. On the other hand, social rights or entitlements, regarding the collective choices of democratic 
policies. The attempts of the government to fulfill simultaneously both principles is impossible since both 
of  them  almost  never  align  –  it  is  virtually  a  dog  chasing  his  own  tail.  “Good  economic  policy  is  non-
political  by  definition”  (Op.  cit.:  10).Moreover,  an  essential  claim  of  Streeck’s  statement  is  that  this 
conflict is to be analyzed within democratic capitalism. 

According to this author’s posture, during the 19th and almost the first half of the 20th century there was 
evidence that capitalism and democracy ‘may not sit easily together’2. However, after the Second World 
War, it was widely agreed that, for capitalism to be in accordance with democracy, the former would have 
to be subjected to extensive political control. Thus, democracy would be protected from being inhibited 
by the free play of market forces. Streeck (2011) refers to this societal model ‘democratic capitalism’ and 
its  hard-core  enhances  the  tension  of  both  principles  named  above.  Based  on  a  non-alignment  of  the 

                                                           
1  Source:  “Democracy’s  invisible  line”,  Le  Monde  Diplomatique,  August  2nd  2008.  Available  online  at: 
http://mondediplo.com/2007/08/02democracy  
2 Such tension was manifested in the different perspectives and goals a) the bourgeoisie and the political Right 
and b) the rising working class and the political Left were striving for. On the one hand, the fear of the majority 
rule could hinder private property and the play of free market forces by the formers. On the other hand, the 
concern  that  capitalist  will  make  a  collision  to  avoid  democracy  in  order  to  be  governed  by  a  majority  that 
strives for social and economic redistribution (Streeck 2011). 

Essay – Wolfgang Streeck – The crisis of democratic capitalism (2011) 

  1 

contradictory principles the model strives for, the governments can for some time neglect one in favor of 
the other. Nevertheless, those governments are eventually punished by its consequences3.  

Ever since the implementation of democratic capitalism in the post-war period, Streeck (2011) asserts this 
tension has never been solved, but rather it has been crystallized in different ways. “[T]he epicentre of the 
tectonic  tension  within  democratic  capitalism  has  migrated  from  one  institutional  location  to  the  next, 
giving  rise  to  a  sequence  of  different  but  systematically  related  economic  disturbances”  (Op.  cit.:  23). 
Consequently,  the  toleration  of  inflation  (between  the  mid-1940s  and  mid-1970s),  the  acceptance  of 
public debt (between mid-1970s and late 1980s) and deregulation of private credit (between 1990s and 
2008)  were  no  more  than  temporary  patches  or  stopgaps  to  the  inherent  two-principle-conflict  of 
democratic  capitalism.  For  this  reason,  “the  present  crisis  can  only  be  fully  understood  in  terms  of  the 
ongoing,  inherently  conflictual  transformation  of  the  social  formation  we  call  ‘democratic  capitalism’” 
(Op. cit.: 5). 

In terms of Streeck (Op. cit.), the financial crisis that began in 2008 forced once again a migration of the 
democratic  capitalism’s  tension  from  one  institutional  location  to  another,  and  therefore  produced 
economic  disturbances.  Those  disturbances  have  two  main  consequences.  On  the  one  hand,  the 
manifestation of a fierce struggle between global financial investors and nation-states, a distinctive new 
feature.  On  the  other  hand,  the  complexity  this  crisis  gained4.  “Since  then  [1980s],  the  battlefields  on 
which  the  contradictions  of  democratic  capitalism  are  fought  out  have  become  ever  more  complex, 
making  it  exceedingly  difficult  for  anyone  outside  the  political  and  financial  elites  to  recognize  the 
underlying interests and identify their own” (Op. cit.: 28). Just some elites have power over these topics, 
which opposes to an egalitarian democratic perspective. 

In accordance to the development of ideas of authors who perceived the ‘inegalitarian’ logic of capitalism 
as a threat for the ‘egalitarian’ order of democracy, Polanyi describes the idea of Marktgesellschaft. This 
idea  could  be  considered  as  the  inversion  of  values  from  the  market  as  an  instrument  to  procure 
wellbeing to a goal by itself and, ultimately, the adoption of the market rationale not just by the economy 
but by society as a whole (Branco 2012). The implementation of this Marktgesellschaft as the alternative 
to  Collectivism,  would rejoice  Hayek. Nevertheless  what  happened with  the  crisis  that  began  in  2008  is 
not  completely  a  Marktgesellschaft  –  as  the  punishing  market  mechanisms  did  not  operate  over  those 
who made wrong decisions or economically acted following profit-seeking regardless of any sort of ethics. 
It was rather a selective operationalization of the punishing market mechanism in favor of financial elites. 
Accordingly, “the political manageability of democratic capitalism has sharply declined in recent years […] 
in  the  emerging  global  political-economic  system”  (Op.  cit.:  24)  by  the  actions  taken  by  those  financial 
elites.  In  other  words,  as  Lindblom  suggested  with  the  concept  of  ‘market  as  a  prison’,  those  elites 
constraint  policy-makers  who  (have  to)  strive  for  the  common  interest  in  favour  of  their  profit-seeking 

                                                           
3 More specifically, “their majority, while those that disregard the claims for compensation from the owners of 
productive resources, as expressed in the language of marginal productivity, cause economic dysfunctions that 
will become increasingly unsustainable and thereby also undermine political support” (Op. cit.: 7). 
4 This crisis takes various elements, namely a) “[s]ome governments, including the Obama administration, have 
attempted to generate renewed economic growth through even more debt”; b) other governments “may be 
secretly hoping for a return to inflation, melting down accumulated debt by softly expropriating creditors”; c) 
“financial  markets  may  be  looking  forward  to  a  promising  fight  against  political  interference”;  d)  “financial 
markets need government debt for safe investment […], since “[t]he middle classes of the advanced-capitalist 
countries  have  put  a  good  part  of  their  savings  into  government  bonds”  (Op.  cit.:  22);  e)  “[t]he  same 
Manhattan-based ratings agencies that were instrumental in bringing about the disaster of the global money 
industry are now threatening to downgrade the bonds of states that accepted a previously unimaginable level 
of  new  debt  to  rescue  that  industry  and  the  capitalist  economy  as  a  whole”  (Op.  cit.:  26);  among  other 
elements. 

Essay – Wolfgang Streeck – The crisis of democratic capitalism (2011) 

  2 

perspective5. Accordingly, by understanding finance as one possible current manifestation of market logic 
and profit-seeking, Walby (2013) asserts that “[t]he relationship between finance and the state depends 
on whether states are democratic or captured by finance” (Op. cit.: 503); namely the post-war period in 
the Western world or the development of a neoliberal project. 

The  bottom  line  is  that,  on  the  one  hand,  citizens  are  increasingly  more  insulated  from  electoral 
pressure6;  on  the  other  hand,  “the  average  citizen  will  pay  […]  with  his  or  her  private  savings,  cuts  in 
public entitlements, reduced public services and higher taxation” (Op. cit.: 23). What kind of democracy is 
it when the average citizen has to pay for the profit-seeking decisions of certain elite that went wrong? 

 

The  tension  between  democracy  and  capitalism  adduced  by  left  authors  is,  from  a  micro  or  individual 
level,  an  internal  contradiction  of  interests.  As  a  consumer,  each  individual  is  led  by  self-interest,  in  a 
broad sense, which enables ‘profit-seeking’ as the main driver acting7. Simultaneously, as a citoyen, each 
individual is led by the collective-interest. Thus, this homo economicus, social actor and/or normal person 
is eventually trapped in a situation in which he has to privately pay the costs of certain good or service 
and, at the same time, share the benefits of consuming that good or service with others – i.e. one way of 
seeing  the  dilemma  of  public  goods  expressed  by  the  mainstream  economics.  This  contradiction 
generates  an  internal  conflict  within  this  person  -  if  I  ‘have  to’  care  just  about  myself  and  my  own 
wellbeing, why should I sacrifice for others’ wellbeing? 

This conflict is only generated if self- and collective-interest are dissociated – which are not8. This is not 
just a concept of indigenous peoples of the American continent, oriental religion or philosophy of life, or 
the  Gaia  hypothesis.  It  is  in  fact  an  observable  truth,  crystallized  in  current  problems  –  e.g.  in  illegal 
migration.  Francis  Kologo,  Burkinabé  cotton  production  manager  asserts,  “Wenn  der  Westen  seine 
Baumwollsubventionen  nicht  stoppt,  dann  sind  wir  gezwungen  auszuwandern.  Wenn  wir  auswandern, 
können Sie ruhig 10 Meter hohe Mauern bauen. Wir werden trotzdem nach Europa kommen”9. The same 
happens in the US-Mexican border. Profit-seeking without boundries is not possible since it is eventually 
in  detriment  of  others.  The  fact  that  poverty  in  Africa,  Asia  or  Latin  America  end  up  affecting  Western 
developed countries shows that we are all intermingled. Boundaryless profit-seeking has been tried to be 
institutionalized through measures such as financial deregulations and, in a broad manner, become real 
by the imprisonment of the political realm by the individualistic, utilitarian and equilibrium-driven market 

                                                           
5 “More than ever, economic power seems today to have become political power, while citizens appear to be 
almost entirely stripped of their democratic defences and their capacity to impress upon the political economy 
interests and demands that are incommensurable with those of capital owners” (Op. cit.: 29). 
6  This  is  more  evident  in  countries  that  suffered  more  the  onslaught  of  the  financial  crisis.  “[C]itizens 
increasingly  perceive  their  governments,  not  as  their  agents,  but  as  those  of  other  states  or  of  international 
organizations, such as the IMF or the European Union, immeasurably more insulated from electoral pressure 
than was the traditional nation-state. In countries like Greece and Ireland, anything resembling democracy will 
be effectively suspended for many years; in order to behave ‘responsibly’, as defined by international markets 
and  institutions,  national  governments  will  have  to  impose  strict  austerity,  at  the  price  of  becoming 
increasingly unresponsive to their citizen” (Op. cit.: 26). 
7  As  someone’s  interest  and  could  be  something  different  than  wealth  and  lucre,  then  self-interest  will  be 
understood as a broader concept than profit-making. 
8 Self- and collective-interest might be dissociated until certain point. Accordingly, self-interest is necessary for 
the fulfillment of basic needs, namely housing, food and clothing; but not after that accomplishment.  
9 Source: ‘Let’s make money’ (2008), documentary film. 

Essay – Wolfgang Streeck – The crisis of democratic capitalism (2011) 

  3 

logic of the mainstream economics (Branco 2012). That is how by next year it is estimated that 1% of the 
world’s population will own more wealth than the other 99%10. 

Not  only  non-western  perspectives  support  the  idea  of  intermingling  self-  and  collective  interest. 
According to the early modern English poet John Donne, “no man is an island, entire of itself; every man is 
a piece of the continent, a part of the main”. It is no coincidence that this thought can be found in a time 
period when concepts of Democracy and Capitalism had a distant meaning from what they have today; 
i.e. during the early modern period. It is the oversimplification of the behavior of social actors done by the 
market  logic  that  contradicts  with  this  understanding  of  the  relationship  between  democracy  and 
capitalism. Branco (2012) explains that it is so difficult to ‘think out of the (economic) box’ because of a 
naturalization and current dehumanization of mainstream economics. “[M]ainstream thought is thereby 
asserting  the  idea  that  humans  have  neither  the  ability  nor  the  power  to  change  it,  in  other  words  to 
construct a different economics, placing it above political debate” (Op. cit.: 36).  

The free-market logic is just a mean and, as such, it is neutral. Therefore the market logic is by itself not 
contradictory  to  democracy,  it  depends  on  which  field  or  sphere  it  is  used  for.  The  problem  between 
capitalism and democracy arises when this certain tool is used as the decision rule over specific aspects of 
political life that cannot be administered under the logic underneath this tool – e.g. efficiency. The main 
reason for this is that such aspects of political life were the result of long political struggles, e.g. universal 
education, access to health or the right to vote11. In view of this, the implementation of the market logic 
on such  subjects  involves  the  exclusion of  consumers.  This  would be  no  problem  if  the  decision is  over 
cinema  tickets;  but  it  is  if  we  decide  on  who  is  getting  medical  assistance  and  who  is  not.  Thus,  such 
exclusion is ‘undemocratic’ since it undermines not just the liberal democratic ethical principle – i.e. the 
equal right of every man and woman to the full development and use of his or her capabilities –, but also 
the egalitarian perspective of Marx and Lenin based on empowering everyone in the society. 

To summarize, Streeck (2011) synthesizes, on the one hand, the idea of tension between capitalism and 
democracy, in which capitalism negatively impacts on democracy – i.e. the idea of left authors regarding 
this relationship. On the other hand, the replacement of the economic power for political power in terms 
of  importance  or,  in  terms  of  Lindblom,  the  idea  of  the  ‘market  as  a  prison’.  On  this  basis,  Streeck 
concludes that citizens have been deprived from their democratic defenses and social empowerment by 
those owners of capital. 

 

Literature 

Branco, Manuel Couret (2012): Economics against Democracy. In Review of Radical Political Economics, 44 
(1): 23–39. 

Streeck, Wolfgang (2011): The Crises of Democratic Capitalism. In New Left Review 71: 5-29. 

Walby, Sylvia (2013): Finance versus democracy? Theorizing finance in society. In Work, employment and 
society, 27(3): 489–507. 

                                                           
10 Source: “That is why New Oxfam report says half of global wealth held by the 1%”, The Guardian, 19 January 
2015. Available online at: http://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jan/19/global-wealth-oxfam-inequality-
davos-economic-summit-switzerland  
11 By the right to vote it is meant the logic of the Theory of Public Choice, in which sometimes vote exchange or 
vote trading is possible. It is interesting how, under this view, a liberal and a communist could exchange votes.  

Essay – Wolfgang Streeck – The crisis of democratic capitalism (2011) 

  4 

