Minutes
Seminar: Introduction to English Language Teaching 
Lecturer: Prof. Dr. phil. Dirk Siepmann 
Student: Rebecca Mey  (956416)
Date: 26/04/2016 
Topic of the session: Second Language Acquisition and Methodology 

At the beginning of the session Prof. Siepmann introduced the topic of the session. He said that
after having thought about first language acquisition we would now go over to second language
acquisition and methodology. Prof. Siepmann asked us to explain the difference between late
second language learners and early second language learners. We figured out that little children are
learning languages more intentionally. Seven year olds and adults know how to write and read, they
are literated. So, if both languages are taught at the same time, there may be interferences.
Yet, as Prof. Siepmann explained, there is a more serious problem for literated people who are
learning a second language. 
To discuss this problem we came back to Chomsky and his theories of language acquisition.
Chomsky developed an own theory of an account of linguistic knowledge. He said that linguistic
knowledge consists of a store of individual words and morphemes as well as rules to assemble
them.   Due   to  this   linguistic   knowledge   we   would   produce   a   sentence   like   “The  captain   has
illuminated the seat belt sign as an indication that landing is imminent”. However, we would never
say something like this. Instead, the sentence “The seat belt sign is on, we're about to land” makes
more sense. This sentence is produced due to an linguistic knowledge of a store of different sizes.
It's about learning language on segmentation and a principle called principle of least effort.
Prof. Siepmann explained this principle to us with the example of the phrase “gimme some”. A
child who has successfully uttered the sentence “gimme some pizza”  will use the phrase again to
get e.g. some juice: “Gimme some juice!”. The child learns that there is a phrase like “gimme
some” which is variably used. 
After that, Prof. Siepmann explained the connection between the principle of least effort and second
language acquisition. He asked the students why L2 learners end up with a different knowledge than
L1 learners even if both groups learn the language at school. First of all it was established that L2
learners learn the second language through written texts. Moreover, the language learning process is
influenced by the vocabulary section of their textbook and the methodology of the second language
teacher. L2 learners learn the second language in words and not in phrases like L1 learners would
normally do (principle of least effort). Non native speakers are putting words together rather than
using constructions. This is a big problem as L2 learners end up with a different knowledge than L1

learners. 
Furthermore, Prof. Siepmann also mentioned other factors which have an influence on the second
language   acquisition.  These   factors   are,   for   example,   the   memory  of   phonological   sequences
(ability to remember phonological sequences), the nature of student interaction and output, the
frequency and nature of input or the perceived closeness of L2 to L1. 
We then went on introducing the contrastive analysis hypothesis. We said that this hypothesis
belongs to the behaviorist theory. The main message of the hypothesis is that there is a strong
influence of the native language on the second language learning process. If, for instance, an
English person tries to learn the French object pronouns, he may struggle because in French the
object pronoun comes in front of the verb and not as in English and German after the verb. Indeed,
English students who are learning French put the pronouns on the wrong position. However, French
students put English pronouns on the right position. Going from English to French seems to be
more difficult than the other way round. So, the contrastive hypothesis does not seem to be 100 %
right. 
Then we took a deeper look at “phrasal verbs”. Examples phrasal verbs are “put off” or “put in” or
“put out”.  These verbs are rather difficult L2-learners because they are not very transparent. A L2
learner would only use phrasal verbs and not lexical verbs if the phrasal verb was similar to an
equivalent verb in their mother tongue. This phenomenon has something to do with complexity: We
use less complex verbs or phrases. 
So, we got to know that there are all sorts of influence that make second language acquisition more
complex. The question is how we are including these in our teaching. This was the objective of  the
next topic : “Methods and Approaches in Foreign Language Teaching”. 
Prof. Siepmann asked us what exactly the difference between foreign language teaching, German
“Didaktik”,   and   language   teaching   methodology,   German   Methodik,   is.   We   figured   out   that
“Didaktik” is any kind of theory about language learning. “Methodik”, in contrast, is an actual
teaching method. It is part of Didaktik. 
Then Prof. Siepmann told us something about teaching quality: He said that there are two different
ways of looking at it: The first approach says that teaching is effective when it meets certain
methodological requirements. Yet, the danger of this teaching approach is that one could end in
methodological dogmatism. The second approach says that teaching is as effective as the effects it
produces. This approach requires an output orientation and empirical proof of effectiveness. At this
point Prof. Siepmann gave us the example of the Hattie study called “visible learning”. In this study
Hattie questioned how well particular interventions work in the classroom. It has been shown that
teachers were good teachers when they looked at the effects of the students. Moreover, one should
also not tell the students to do their best. Instead, one should tell them to do better than their best. 

After that, we dealt with determinants of teaching: The DESI study has shown that teachers perform
better when their class is monolingual. Even grammar instructions can be done in English and not in
the native tongue. Secondly, learning needs to be habit forming. That means we constantly have to
repeat what we have learned. Teachers should also focus on their students' accuracy and fluency and
consider mistakes  as  opportunities. Moreover, it has  also been shown that the most effective
language learning method is bilingual teaching. This has proven to be true for many students.
Furthermore, teachers should also focus on correct speech and also on correct writing, Writing is as
important as a correct speech.
In the end, we talked about general teaching methods and techniques. In language teaching it is
important   to   identify   similarities   and   differences   in   grammar   and   vocabulary.   In   terms   of
vocabulary, one may find some false friends or some words which sound the same in the mother
tongue. Moreover, it can also be useful to include some cultural issues in our teaching, for instance
the parliamentary system.
The homework for the next week was to read the pages 59 to 63 in our textbook, to think about the
slide “teaching methods and techniques” and to prepare examples of these techniques for language
learning.

