Review

TRENDS in Microbiology Vol.11 No.8 August 2003

359

Making informed decisions: regulatory
interactions between two-component
systems

Jetta J.E. Bijlsma and Eduardo A. Groisman

Department of Molecular Microbiology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Washington University School of Medicine,
Campus Box 8230, 660 S. Euclid Avenue, St Louis, MO 63110, USA

Bacteria experience a multitude of stresses in the com-
plex niches they inhabit. These stresses are denoted by
speciﬁc signals that typically alter the activity of individ-
ual two-component regulatory systems. Processing of
multiple signals by different two-component systems
occurs when multiple sensors interact with a single
response regulator, by phosphatases interrupting phos-
phoryl transfer in phosphorelays and through transcrip-
tional and post-transcriptional mechanisms. Gaining
insight into these mechanisms provides an understand-
ing at the molecular level of bacterial adaptation to ever
changing multifaceted environments.

phosphorylate from small molecular weight phosphoryl
donors, such as acetyl phosphate and carbamoyl phos-
phate [3,4]. In addition, the vast majority of sensor kinases
exhibit phosphatase activity towards their
cognate
response regulators. Although most two-component sys-
tems entail a single His-to-Asp phosphotransfer event
between a histidine kinase and a response regulator, there
is a subset that consists of a three-step His-Asp-His-Asp
phosphorelay (Fig. 1b) [1,2]. The extra phosphorylatable
domains in a phosphorelay can be present in separate
proteins or be part of multi-domain (i.e. hybrid) sensor
proteins, which, in either case, will ultimately donate the

A crucial question in signal transduction is: how does an
organism integrate multiple inputs into the most appro-
priate action? Most of the present knowledge on bacterial
gene regulation is based on studies conducted in labora-
tory settings, where conditions are carefully controlled
and, typically, only one stress is applied at a time.
Although this reductionist approach has been successful
in elucidating several regulatory mechanisms, it does not
take into consideration the multitude of simultaneous
stresses that bacteria experience in the niches they
occupy. We are now beginning to uncover how bacteria
adjust their behavior in response to multiple cues from
complex environments.

Bacteria sense environmental conditions using a
variety of systems, which include secondary metabolites
and ions, such as cyclic adenosine monophosphate and
Fe2þ
, and regulatory proteins, such as catabolite regulat-
ory protein (CRP) and ferric uptake regulator (Fur), whose
afﬁnity for DNA changes on ligand binding. However, two-
component systems are the predominant form of signal
transduction used by bacteria to respond to environmental
stresses [1,2]. Two-component systems usually consist of a
sensor protein (or histidine kinase) and a cognate response
regulator. Sensor proteins use adenosine triphosphate
(ATP) to autophosphorylate at a conserved histidine
residue, often in response to a speciﬁc signal. The high-
energy phosphoryl group is then transferred to a con-
served aspartate residue in the response regulator, often
altering its ability to bind target DNA sequences (Fig. 1a)
[1,2]. Certain response regulators have the ability to

Corresponding author: Eduardo A. Groisman (groisman@borcim.wustl.edu).

(a)

Sensor

Sensing
domain

Kinase
domain

P+

Response regulator

Receiver
domain

Regulatory

domain

ATP

ADP

(b)

ATP

ADP

H

H

D

P+

P+

D

D

P+

H

TRENDS in Microbiology 

Fig. 1. Two-component systems consist of a sensor protein (histidine kinase) that
transfers a high-energy phosphoryl group to the response regulator, which is
often a transcription factor. (a) The sensor protein autophosphorylates on a con-
served histidine residue (H) in the kinases domain (blue), often in response to sig-
nal sensing in the sensing domain (purple). The high-energy phosphoryl group (P)
is then transferred to a conserved aspartate (D) residue in the receiver domain
(green) of the response regulator, often changing the ability of its regulatory
domain (grey) to bind DNA. (b) The His-Asp-His-Asp three-step phosphorelay con-
sists of the transfer of the phosphoryl group from the conserved histidine in the
sensor to additional phosphorylatable aspartate and histidine residues in auxiliary
domains before transfer
the
response regulator. Many different arrangements of these extra phosphorylatable
domains exist within proteins and pathways. They are either present in separate
proteins, a representative example of which is depicted here, or part of multi-
domain (hybrid) sensors.

to the aspartate in the receiver domain of

http://timi.trends.com 0966-842X/03/$ - see front matter q 2003 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/S0966-842X(03)00176-8

360

Review

TRENDS in Microbiology Vol.11 No.8 August 2003

phosphoryl group to the response regulator controlling
gene transcription (Fig. 1b).

How is speciﬁcity between cognate sensor/regulator
pairs maintained in organisms harboring multiple two-
component systems? Based on conserved residues around
the phosphorylatable histidine, sensor proteins have been
divided into two major families and several minor ones [5].
The conserved residues of sensor proteins are proposed to
function as ‘anchors’ that mediate the interaction with
conserved residues around the phosphorylatable aspar-
tate in the response regulator, bringing the catalytic
residues of both molecules in close proximity [6,7].
Speciﬁcity between a cognate sensor/regulator pair is
then mediated by hypervariable residues around the
phosphorylatable aspartate in the response regulators
[6,8]. This notion is strengthened by the observation that
mutations in the hypervariable region of the response
regulator PhoB increase its afﬁnity for the non-cognate
sensor VanS [9].

Two-component systems are ideally suited to function in
the integration of multiple signals because the membrane
location of the sensor protein allows transduction of
environmental cues, and the high degree of speciﬁcity
of each sensor/regulator pair ensures a physiological
response. Different two-component systems can process
multiple signals into a particular response by interacting
with one another and/or by phosphorylating from small
molecular weight phosphodonors [10,11]. This article
will discuss: (1) how multiple sensors interact with a
single response regulator (Fig. 2a); (2) the phosphorylation
of response regulators by non-cognate sensors (Fig. 2b);
(3) the ability of phosphatases to interrupt the phosphoryl
ﬂow in His-Asp-His-Asp phosphorelays (Fig. 2a) and
(4) transcriptional and post-transcriptional control mech-
anisms (Fig. 2c, Fig. 2d).

Multiple sensors acting on a single response regulator
Different signals can be fed into the same regulatory
pathway if the phosphorylated state of a single response
regulator is modiﬁed by several cognate sensors, each
responding to a different signal. The best-studied example
of signal
integration is bacterial chemotaxis, where
swimming behavior is modiﬁed in response to changes in
the concentration of different substrates. These changes
are sensed by distinct chemoreceptors that, through the
coupling protein CheW, alter the phosphorylated state of
the histidine kinase CheA, resulting in phosphorylation of
the response regulators CheY and CheB [12]. Phosphoryl-
ation of CheY promotes a conformational change that
affects its ability to interact with the ﬂagellar motor,
altering ﬂagellar rotation from smooth to tumble. A
dedicated aspartyl phosphatase, termed CheZ, accelerates
the dephosphorylation of phospho-CheY. Phosphorylation
of CheB stimulates the methylesterase activity of CheB
towards the chemoreceptors, which leads to downregulation
of CheA autokinase activity, thereby providing a negative
feedback [12].

Escherichia coli has ﬁve chemoreceptors, which
respond to speciﬁc ligands [12] and are clustered at the
bacterial poles; these chemoreceptors form signaling
teams consisting of trimers of the same or different dimeric

http://timi.trends.com

chemoreceptors [13,14]. The chemoreceptor clusters form
a complex with CheA and CheW [14,15], thus enabling
simultaneous processing of multiple signals. Furthermore,
ligand binding by one chemoreceptor inﬂuences the
surrounding chemoreceptors, leading to increased stimu-
lation of CheA kinase activity [14,16,17].

A similar convergence of sensor proteins controls
sporulation in the Gram-positive bacterium Bacillus
subtilis. Here, ﬁve related histidine kinases – KinA,
KinB, KinC, KinD and KinE – phosphorylate the response
regulator Spo0F (Fig. 2a) [18]. The Kin proteins exhibit
sequence similarity in the residues surrounding the
phosphorylatable histidine residue that will donate the
phosphoryl group to the conserved aspartatyl residue in
Spo0F but differ in their putative sensing domains,
indicating that they respond to different ligands or
conditions. Consistent with this notion, the severity of
the sporulation defect displayed by mutants in KinA, KinB
or KinC depends on the growth conditions [19].

Quorum sensing governs bioluminescence in the mar-
ine bacterium Vibrio harveyi in response to two different
autoinducers: AI-1, speciﬁcally produced and detected by
V. harveyi, and AI-2, a product of the metabolism of a wide
variety of microorganisms [20]. These autoinducers are
sensed by two different hybrid histidine kinases: LuxN,
which senses AI-1, and LuxQ, which responds to AI-2 via
the periplasmic protein LuxP. These sensors converge onto
a histidine-containing phosphotransfer protein termed
LuxU, which will ultimately donate the phosphate to the
response regulator LuxO [21]. Phosphorylated LuxO
activates a repressor that turns off transcription of the
bioluminescence genes. The potential for AI-1 and AI-2 to
control independently the phosphorylated state of LuxO
could allow V. harveyi to respond not only to its own cell
density but also to that of other microbes. However, when
both autoinducers are present, expression of the LuxO-
controlled genes changes 10- to 100-fold more than when
only one of them is present, suggesting that the quorum-
sensing circuit of V. harveyi functions as a ‘coincidence
detector’ that discriminates between the presence of both
autoinducers and all other conditions (i.e. the presence of
either autoinducer or no autoinducer at all) [21].

E. coli harbors a pair of two-component systems –
NarQ/NarP and NarX/NarL – that exhibit sequence
similarity, most strikingly around the phosphorylatable
histidine for the sensors NarX and NarQ, and around the
phosphorylatable aspartate residue for the regulators
NarL and NarP [22,23]. Both NarX and NarQ respond to
nitrate and nitrite and can phosphorylate both NarP and
NarL. Nitrate is detected at lower concentrations than
nitrite by NarX [24], which mainly dephosphorylates NarL
when nitrite is the signal. Phosphorylation of the NarL
and NarP proteins results in non-equivalent responses
because these regulators recognize slightly different
target sequences [25]. Thus, small differences in signal
preference by the NarX and NarQ sensors, coupled to
distinct promoter recognition by the NarL and NarP
regulators, allows the integration of a range of signals
(i.e. the concentrations of both nitrate and nitrite) into
distinct responses.

Review

TRENDS in Microbiology Vol.11 No.8 August 2003

361

Does ‘cross-talk’ occur between non-cognate
two-component systems?
Despite the high degree of speciﬁcity revealed by struc-
tural and mutational analysis of two-component system
proteins, certain histidine kinases have been shown to
interact with and modify the phosphorylated state of non-
cognate regulators in a process referred to as ‘cross-talk’
[26]. For example, the PhoB/PhoR system of E. coli is
normally switched on in low phosphate conditions (Fig. 2b).
However,
in strains lacking the sensor PhoR, PhoB-
activated genes can be induced by glucose and pyruvate
in a process mediated by the non-cognate sensor CreC
(Fig. 2b), or by the low molecular weight phosphodonor
acetyl-phosphate [27]. The PhoB protein can be phos-
phorylated, even by the sensor protein VanS from the
Gram-positive species Enterococcus faecalis [28], although
the efﬁciency of this reaction is four orders of magnitude
lower than that exhibited by cognate proteins [29],
reﬂecting a non-physiological interaction. Other cases of
‘cross-talk’ include phosphorylation of the response reg-
ulator OmpR (which normally responds to osmolarity
changes sensed by its cognate sensor EnvZ) by the sensor
ArcB, which is activated in anaerobiosis [30].

spurious

activation when the

It has been proposed that two-component systems use
‘cross-talk’ to integrate multiple signals that normally
activate separate two-component systems [26]. However,
the physiological relevance of ‘cross-talk’
is presently
unclear because phosphotransfer between non-cognate
sensors and regulators has been found only in vitro, or
in vivo when the non-cognate proteins are present in high
gene dosage and/or when the cognate sensor is missing.
These are crucial issues because the efﬁciency of the
interaction between a response regulator and a non-
cognate sensor and/or low molecular weight phosphodo-
nors appears to be too low for ‘cross-talk’ to occur when
these proteins are present at normal
levels [29,31].
Moreover, sensor proteins that exhibit phosphatase
activity towards their cognate response regulators will
abrogate
inducing
signalsare absent. For example, a mutant allele of the
Salmonella response regulator PhoP that can be activated
(i.e. phosphorylated) from acetyl phosphate promotes gene
transcription in the absence of PhoP’s cognate sensor
PhoQ [32]. This activation is independent of the concen-
tration of Mg2þ
, which is the signal controlling the PhoQ
protein. However, high Mg2þ
abolishes this activation in
the presence of the PhoQ protein, reﬂecting the Mg2þ
-
promoted PhoQ-mediated dephosphorylation of phospho-
PhoP. This indicates that ‘cross-talk’ might be better
evaluated using mutant sensors that retain phosphatase
activity but cannot serve as phosphodonors. Furthermore,
a modeling study predicts that phosphatase activity
provides sensors with a mechanism to avoid spurious
‘cross-talk’, and suggests that the lack of phosphatase
activity in the histidine kinase CheA allows the incorpor-
ation of cues provided by other two-component systems
into bacterial chemotaxis [33].

Two important studies raise further questions about the
occurrence of physiological ‘cross-talk’. One study [34]
explored ‘cross-talk’ among the E. coli UhpA/UhpB, PhoB/
PhoR, NtrB/NtrC and ArcA/ArcB two-component systems.

http://timi.trends.com

In this study, the expression of target genes for each
system was investigated when two or more signals speciﬁc
for these systems were provided [34]. ‘Cross-talk’ could be
detected only towards the response regulator NtrC when
its cognate sensor NtrB was mutated. The results of the
second study [35] suggest that the speciﬁcity of the
interaction between sensor and regulator pairs appears
to prevent non-cognate partners from interacting: the
response regulators NtrC and DctD from Rhizobium
meliloti have only four amino acids in common around
the conserved aspartate residue, which is in contrast to the
14 residues shared between the equivalent region of the
Rhizobium DctD and E. coli NtrC proteins. Thus, although
the Rhizobium DctD/DctB system can ‘cross-talk’ with the
E. coli NtrB/NtrC system in E. coli, ‘cross-talk’ has not
been detected between the R. meliloti NtrB/NtrC and
DctD/DctB systems [35]. This implies that the R. meliloti
NtrC protein has diverged from the E. coli NtrC, possibly
to avoid non-physiological interactions with the DctCD
system. Cumulatively, the studies described above suggest
that ‘cross-talk’ is rare, if it occurs at all in a way that is
signiﬁcant biologically.

Phosphatases can interrupt phosphoryl ﬂow in a
phosphorelay
The phosphorylated state of a response regulator is
determined not only by its ability to phosphorylate from
its cognate sensor kinase but, potentially, also by speciﬁc
phosphatases that respond to additional signals. The His-
Asp-His-Asp phosphorelay is ideally suited to integrate
extra cues because the phosphorylation state of the several
domains can be disrupted at different points in the
cascade. The signal transduction cascade controlling
B. subtilis sporulation is the paradigmatic example of
integration of multiple signals into a phosphorelay.
Triggered by environmental and nutritional conditions
that are incompatible with bacterial growth, the sporula-
tion phosphorelay begins with phosphorylation of the
response regulator Spo0F by any of ﬁve different kinases
(KinA, KinB, KinC, KinD or KinE), it is followed by phos-
photransfer from Spo0F to Spo0B and ends with phospho-
transfer to Spo0A (Fig. 2a), a transcription factor that
activates the genes necessary for sporulation and represses
genes involved in competence development [36,37].

Two families of aspartyl phosphatases control the
the Rap family members
sporulation phosphorelay:
RapA, RapB and RapE [36,38] that speciﬁcally dephos-
phorylate Spo0F, and the phosphatases Spo0E, YnzD and
YisI that target Spo0A [39]. Transcription of the rapE gene
is promoted during vegetative growth, ensuring that
sporulation does not take place in optimal growing
conditions. Transcription of the RapA and RapB phospha-
tases is induced by a two-component system – ComA/
ComP – that governs the development of competence, an
alternative state that is incompatible with sporulation,
ensuring that sporulation and competence do not develop
at the same time [36,38]. In addition to their transcrip-
tional control, the activity of Rap phosphatases is inhibited
by speciﬁc pentapeptides derived from larger proteins that
are encoded in the same operon and co-transcribed with
the rap genes [37,38]. These larger proteins are secreted

362

Review

TRENDS in Microbiology Vol.11 No.8 August 2003

(b)

Low phosphate

conditions

CreC

PhoR

CreB

PhoB

CreB

P

PhoB

P

PhoB

P

(a)

KinA

Spo0F

RapA

P

KinB

Spo0F

Spo0E

P

P

Spo0F

Spo0B

P

Spo0A

P

(c)

Low phosphate

PhoR

ResE

PhoP

PhoP

P

ResD

ResD

P

resA resB resC resD resE

PhoP PhoP

(d)

Mg2+

Fe3+

Cell envelope stress

PhoQ

PmrB

RcsC

YojN

PmrD

PhoP

PmrA

RcsB

PhoP

P

PmrA

P

pmrD

ugd

RcsB

P

RcsA

TRENDS in Microbiology 

Fig. 2. Different two-component systems can process multiple signals into a particular response by interacting with each other. (a) Multiple cognate sensors can change the
phosphorylated state of a single protein. In B. subtilis, any of ﬁve kinases (KinA, KinB, KinC, KinD and KinE) can phosphorylate the response regulator Spo0F. Sporulation is
controlled by the phosphorylated state of Spo0A, which receives its phosphoryl group from Spo0B via a phosphorelay that starts with the phosphorylation of Spo0F by a
kinase (here, only KinA and KinB are depicted for clarity) and is followed by phosphotransfer from Spo0F to Spo0B. This His-Asp-His-Asp phosphorelay provides several
entry points for signal integration. Two families of aspartyl phosphatases dephosphorylate Spo0F and Spo0A and thus also determine their phosphorylation state. The Rap
family consists of RapA, RapB and RapE (RapA is depicted here), and acts on Spo0F. The other family consists of Spo0E, YnszD and YisI (Spo0E is depicted here), and acts
on Spo0A. (b) Sensors can interact with and modify the phosphorylated state of non-cognate response regulators in a process referred to as ‘cross-talk’. In Escherichia coli,
the histidine kinase PhoR normally phosphorylates the response regulator PhoB in response to low phosphate conditions. However, in the absence of the sensor PhoR, the
non-cognate sensor CreC can phosphorylate PhoB. The efﬁciency of this interaction is probably lower than that between the cognate protein pairs, as indicated by the
dashed line. (c) Transcriptional control of one two-component system by another two-component system leads to the transcription of the genes controlled by the ﬁrst sys-
tem being dependent on the signals for both systems. In Bacillus subtilis, transcription of the ResD/ResE system, which regulates genes required for anaerobic respiration,
is controlled by the PhoP/PhoR system, which responds to phosphate starvation. When phosphate levels are low, transcription of resDE genes depends on the response
regulator PhoP, which activates the promoter in front of the resABCDE operon and represses the constitutive promoter in front of resDE. In addition, the ResD protein is
necessary for full activation of the PhoP/PhoR system, indicating that the ResD/ResE and PhoP/PhoR systems are connected through a positive feedback loop. This ﬁgure

http://timi.trends.com

Review

TRENDS in Microbiology Vol.11 No.8 August 2003

363

and processed before the peptides are imported back into
the cytoplasm by a speciﬁc oligopeptide permease. When
these peptides accumulate beyond a certain level, they
inhibit
the RapA and RapB phosphatase activities,
thereby allowing phosphotransfer to proceed from Spo0F
to Spo0B. As peptide accumulation can be affected at
several steps, this might provide a timing mechanism for
the development of sporulation [38]. Thus, the regulatory
pathways leading to competence or sporulation are closely
intertwined,
the bacteria constantly
monitor the signals received and make a decision based
on the relative weight each signal has at any given
moment in time, which is determined by the relative
activity of several kinases and phosphatases [36,37,40].

indicating that

In Gram-negative bacteria, His-Asp-His-Asp phospho-
relays typically consist of hybrid sensors. Sequential
phosphotransfer within the same hybrid sensor must
occur before transfer to the response regulator that
mediates transcription [41,42]. The role of the extra
signaling domains in hybrid sensors does not appear to
be in integrating additional signals but in controlling other
processes. For example, they determine the speciﬁcity for
the cognate response regulator in the case of the sensors
BvgS and EvgS [43] and regulate the autokinase activity of
the sensor VirA [44]. The only phosphatase acting on two-
component system proteins identiﬁed in E. coli – termed
SixA – does not exhibit sequence identity to the B. subtilis
phosphatases and acts on the histidine phosphotransfer
domain of the hybrid sensor ArcB [45]. The sixA gene
appears to be constitutively expressed and its deletion does
not signiﬁcantly interfere with the correct regulation of
ArcA-regulated genes [46]. Thus, integration of signals
through the His-Asp-His-Asp phosphorelay is used in
B. subtilis sporulation but its prevalence in other systems
and organisms awaits further investigation.

Transcriptional and post-transcriptional mechanisms
An intrinsic property of two-component systems is that
gene transcription requires both the presence of the
response regulator and the signal that promotes its
activation, which is sensed by the cognate histidine kinase.
Thus, when a two-component system is transcriptionally
controlled by another two-component system, the genes
regulated by the ﬁrst system will be expressed only when
the signals activating both systems are present. For
example, transcription of the ResD/ResE system, which
regulates the genes required for anaerobic respiration in
B. subtilis, is controlled by the PhoP/PhoR system, which
responds to phosphate starvation (Fig. 2c) [47]. When
phosphate levels are low, transcription of resDE genes
depends on both response regulators PhoP and ResD
(which is expressed at low levels from a PhoP-independent
promoter). In addition, the ResD protein is necessary for
full activation of the PhoP/PhoR system, indicating that
the ResD/ResE and PhoP/PhoR systems are connected

through a positive feedback loop (Fig. 2c) which allows the
products under control of ResD/ResE to incorporate the
phosphate imported by the products controlled by PhoP/
PhoR into ATP [47]. Microarray studies carried out in
E. coli and B. subtilis have identiﬁed several cases in
which a two-component system is under the transcrip-
tional control of another two-component system [48,49],
suggesting that the requirement for two signals for gene
expression could be a common feature in two-component
signal transduction.

Expression of certain genes is dependent on the
simultaneous activation of several regulatory systems.
In Ralstonia solanacearum, expression of the Eps viru-
lence factor is governed by a LysR-type regulator and a
pair of two-component systems [50]. The VsrA/VsrD
system and the LysR-type regulator are required for
expression of a protein that, together with another two-
component system (termed VsrC/VsrB), promotes tran-
scription of the eps gene [50,51]. Thus, eps is expressed
only when the signals for both two-component systems and
the LysR-type regulator are present, which effectively
integrates three signals into one output.

It is often the case that particular genes are needed
under different stress conditions. Expression of such genes
can be accomplished by the presence of binding sites for
several regulatory proteins in their promoters, or by post-
transcriptional mechanisms that activate two-component
systems even in the absence of their speciﬁc signals. An
example of the ﬁrst scenario is the regulation of the
Salmonella ugd gene: it is transcriptionally regulated by
the PmrA/PmrB system, which responds to extracytoplas-
mic Fe3þ
, and by the RcsC/YojN/RcsB phosphorelay, which
is activated by cell envelope stress (Fig. 2d) [52]. The ugd
gene is necessary for the PmrA-controlled modiﬁcation of
the lipopolysaccharide and the RcsB-dependent pro-
duction of the colanic acid capsule. The presence of distinct
binding sites for the PmrA and RcsB response regulators
in the ugd promoter allows for two different signals to
activate the ugd gene independently.
and cell envelope stress signals,
low Mg2þ
promotes transcription of the ugd gene in a
novel process that does not require binding of the Mg2þ
-
responsive regulator PhoP to the ugd promoter (Fig. 2d)
[53]. Low Mg2þ
, which is sensed by the sensor kinase
PhoQ, promotes expression of the PhoP-activated PmrD
protein, which activates the PmrA/PmrB system at a
post-transcriptional level. Thus, even in the absence of
Fe3þ
, which is the speciﬁc signal sensed by the PmrB
protein, ugd,
is
expressed in response to the low Mg2þ
signal. By contrast,
the PmrD protein is not required for the Fe3þ
-promoted
activation of
the PmrA/PmrB system. This enables
Salmonella to express independently all PmrA-regulated
gene products in response to two signals – high Fe3þ
and
low Mg2þ
.

In addition to the Fe3þ

like other PmrA-activated genes,

has been adapted from Birkey et al. [47]. (d) The presence of binding sites for several regulatory proteins in the promoter of an effector gene, and post-transcriptional mech-
anisms lead to the independent transcription of this gene in response to different conditions. In Salmonella enterica, the ugd gene is under the transcriptional control of the
PmrA/PmrB system, which responds to extracytoplasmic Fe3þ
, and the RcsC/YojN/RcsB system, which responds to envelope stress. Transcription of the ugd gene is also
promoted in response to low Mg2þ
, the signal for the sensor PhoQ. Upon phosphorylation, PhoP switches on expression of the PmrD protein, which activates the
PmrA/PmrB system at a post-transcriptional level.

http://timi.trends.com

364

Review

TRENDS in Microbiology Vol.11 No.8 August 2003

Box 1. Autoregulation of two-component systems

Many two-component systems positively regulate their own expression.
Such systems typically harbor (at least) two promoters: a constitutive
promoter that provides background levels of expression, producing
enough sensor and regulator proteins to detect and respond to the
presence of signal, and an autoregulated promoter that contains a
binding site for the response regulator and is responsible for the
production of additional sensor and regulator molecules [56–58]. If
constitutive promoters supply sufﬁcient levels of two-component
proteins to react to a signal, what is the function of autoregulation?

Autoregulation could provide bacteria with a ‘memory’ of previous
encounters with a signal because the increased amounts of sensor and
response regulator proteins would still be present after the signal
disappears [59].
Indeed, the PhoB/PhoR system reacted faster to
phosphate limitation in organisms previously exposed to this condition.
This ‘learning’ behavior was dependent on the presence of elevated
levels of the PhoB and PhoR proteins, being abolished by constitutive
expression of the PhoB/PhoR system [59].

Autoregulation might be necessary for

those two-component
systems in which the response regulator controls a number of target
binding sites that is too large relative to the amount of response
regulator made from the constitutive promoter. A survey of well
characterized systems of E. coli and Salmonella supports a correlation
between autoregulation and the presence of multiple regulated
promoters: PhoQ/PhoP, PmrB/PmrA, CpxA/CpxR, PhoR/PhoB and
NtrB/NtrC are all autoregulated and control at least four promoters,

whereas the UhpB/UhpA system is not known to be autoregulated and
appears to control only the uhpT gene.

Autoregulation could facilitate the hierarchical organization of a
regulon so that certain genes are expressed by the phosphorylated
response regulator produced from a constitutive promoter, whereas
others are strictly dependent on higher levels of response regulator
produced from an autoregulated promoter [60]. A temporal pattern of
gene expression is observed when the BvgA/BvgS system of Bordetella
pertusis is activated. A group of genes that includes bvgAS is expressed
immediately upon activation when BvgA levels are still low; whereas
transcription of another group requires a dramatic increase in BvgA
levels generated from autoregulation [56]. The bipA gene represents a
third group, which is expressed at intermediate concentrations of BvgA
because its promoter harbors both high- and low-afﬁnity binding sites
for phospho-BvgA [61]. Thus, both the afﬁnity and the position of a BvgA
binding site determine the sequential expression of BvgA-regulated
genes. This has led to the suggestion that BvgA/BvgS, and potentially
other two-component systems, could function as rheostats rather than
switches [61].

In addition, autoregulation could provide a threshold for gene
activation: only when a signal persists will it promote sufﬁcient levels
of phosphorylated response regulator for gene regulation to take place
[62]. Although some of the discussed roles for autoregulation are
mutually exclusive, they could all be true because autoregulation could
be used for different reasons in different systems.

Connections shape the architecture of regulatory
networks
Two-component systems can be regarded either as
switches whereby changes in phosphorylation of response
regulators determine the ‘on’ or ‘off’ state [40], or as
rheostats [54], whereby the phosphorylation leads to
gradual differences in the expression of target genes
(see Box 1). Regardless of how a single two-component
system functions, the outcome of the interaction between
two-component systems can be described with Boolean
operators in analogy to neural networks [55].

The independent activation of a particular response
regulator by different signals can be described by the
Boolean operator OR. For example, high Fe3þ
OR low
Mg2þ
promote transcription of PmrA-regulated genes.
This Boolean operator can also be used to denote the
activation of a particular promoter by different response
regulators, and for multiple sensors converging onto a
single response regulator. The transcriptional control of a
two-component system by another might be deﬁned with
the Boolean operator AND: both the low phosphate signal
controlling PhoB AND the anaerobic conditions activating
ResE must be present to ensure ResD/ResE-promoted
expression. Likewise, the Boolean operator AND describes
the regulatory cascade leading to the transcription of the
virulence factor eps because all three signals need to be
present
for transcription to occur. The circuitry of
bioluminescence production in V. harveyi is indicative of
the Boolean operator OR: either AI-1 OR AI-2 can induce
expression of LuxO- regulated genes; however, if the
synergistic effects of these autoinducers on LuxO-con-
trolled expression is the only physiologically relevant
output, the Boolean operator AND would best describe this
circuit. Finally, the function of phosphatases in a phos-
phorelay represents the Boolean operator NOT: the

http://timi.trends.com

response regulator Spo0A will be phosphorylated if the
signals for the Rap phosphatases are NOT present.

In summary, although bacteria use a variety of ways to
integrate multiple signals via two-component systems,
transcriptional control seems to be the most prevalent way
by which the different outputs are connected. Microarray,
ChIP-chip, genetic studies and regulatory circuit simu-
lations are uncovering novel regulatory interactions
which, ultimately, might make it possible to predict
bacterial behavior under different circumstances, pro-
vided that we know all signals that are present in a
particular environment.

Acknowledgements
We thank four anonymous reviewers for valuable comments on our
manuscript. Our research on two-component systems is supported, in
part, by grants AI42236 and AI49561 from the National Institutes of
Health to E.A.G. who is an Investigator of the Howard Hughes Medical
Institute. J.J.E.B has been supported by the Netherlands Organization for
Scientiﬁc Research (NWO) and is the recipient of an EMBO long-term
fellowship.

References
1 Stock, A.M. et al. (2000) Two-component signal transduction. Annu.

Rev. Biochem. 69, 183–215

2 Hoch, J.A. and Silhavy, T.J. (1995) Two-Component Signal Transduc-

tion, ASM Press

3 Lukat, G.S. et al.

(1992) Phosphorylation of bacterial response
regulator proteins by low molecular weight phospho-donors. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 89, 718–722

4 McCleary, W.R. et al. (1993) Is acetyl phosphate a global signal in

Escherichia coli? J. Bacteriol. 175, 2793–2798

5 Fabret, C. et al. (1999) Two-component signal transduction in Bacillus
subtilis: how one organism sees its world. J. Bacteriol. 181, 1975–1983
6 Zapf, J. et al. (2000) A transient interaction between two phosphorelay
proteins trapped in a crystal
lattice reveals the mechanism of
molecular recognition and phosphotransfer in signal transduction.
Structure Fold. Des. 8, 851–862

7 Tzeng, Y.L. and Hoch, J.A. (1997) Molecular recognition in signal
transduction: the interaction surfaces of the Spo0F response regulator

Review

TRENDS in Microbiology Vol.11 No.8 August 2003

365

with its cognate phosphorelay proteins revealed by alanine scanning
mutagenesis. J. Mol. Biol. 272, 200–212

8 Hoch, J.A. and Varughese, K.I. (2001) Keeping signals straight in

phosphorelay signal transduction. J. Bacteriol. 183, 4941–4949

9 Haldimann, A. et al. (1996) Altered recognition mutants of the
response regulator PhoB: a new genetic strategy for studying
protein-protein interactions. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 93,
14361–14366

10 Lawhon, S.D. et al. (2002) Intestinal short-chain fatty acids alter
Salmonella typhimurium invasion gene expression and virulence
through BarA/SirA. Mol. Microbiol. 46, 1451–1464

11 McCleary, W.R. and Stock, J.B. (1994) Acetyl phosphate and the
activation of two-component response regulators. J. Biol. Chem. 269,
31567–31572

12 Bourret, R.B. and Stock, A.M.

information
processing: lessons from bacterial chemotaxis. J. Biol. Chem. 277,
9625 –9628

(2002) Molecular

13 Ames, P. et al. (2002) Collaborative signaling by mixed chemoreceptor
teams in Escherichia coli. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 99, 7060–7065
14 Shimizu, T.S. et al. (2000) Molecular model of a lattice of signalling
proteins involved in bacterial chemotaxis. Nat. Cell Biol. 2, 792–796
15 Levit, M.N. et al. (2002) Organization of the receptor-kinase signaling
array that regulates Escherichia coli chemotaxis. J. Biol. Chem. 277,
36748–36754

16 Kim, S.H. et al. (2002) Dynamic and clustering model of bacterial
chemotaxis receptors: structural basis for signaling and high
sensitivity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 99, 11611–11615

17 Falke, J.J. and Hazelbauer, G.L. (2001) Transmembrane signaling in

bacterial chemoreceptors. Trends Biochem. Sci. 26, 257–265

18 Jiang, M. et al. (2000) Multiple histidine kinases regulate entry into
stationary phase and sporulation in Bacillus subtilis. Mol. Microbiol.
38, 535–542

19 LeDeaux, J.R. et al. (1995) Different roles for KinA, KinB, and KinC in
the initiation of sporulation in Bacillus subtilis. J. Bacteriol. 177,
861–863

20 Bassler, B.L. (2002) Small talk. Cell-to-cell communication in bacteria.

Cell 109, 421–424

21 Mok, K.C. et al. (2003) Vibrio harveyi quorum sensing: a coincidence
detector for two autoinducers controls gene expression. EMBO J. 22,
870–881

22 Rabin, R.S. and Stewart, V.

(1992) Either of two functionally
redundant sensor proteins. NarX and NarQ, is sufﬁcient for nitrate
regulation in Escherichia coli K-12. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 89,
8419 –8423

23 Rabin, R.S. and Stewart, V. (1993) Dual response regulators (NarL and
NarP) interact with dual sensors (NarX and NarQ) to control nitrate-
and nitrite-regulated gene expression in Escherichia coli K-12.
J. Bacteriol. 175, 3259–3268

24 Lee, A.I. et al.

(1999) Signal-dependent phosphorylation of the
membrane-bound NarX two-component sensor-transmitter protein
of Escherichia coli: nitrate elicits a superior anion ligand response
compared to nitrite. J. Bacteriol. 181, 5309–5316

25 Darwin, A.J. et al. (1997) Differential regulation by the homologous
response regulators NarL and NarP of Escherichia coli K-12 depends
on DNA binding site arrangement. Mol. Microbiol. 25, 583–595

26 Wanner, B.L. (1992) Is cross regulation by phosphorylation of two-
in bacteria?

component response regulator proteins important
J. Bacteriol. 174, 2053–2058

27 Wanner, B.L. (1993) Gene regulation by phosphate in enteric bacteria.

J. Cell Biochem. 51, 47–54

28 Fisher, S.L. et al. (1995) Cross-talk between the histidine protein
kinase VanS and the response regulator PhoB, Characterization and
identiﬁcation of a VanS domain that inhibits activation of PhoB. J. Biol.
Chem. 270, 23143–23149

29 Fisher, S.L. et al. (1996) Kinetic comparison of the speciﬁcity of the
vancomycin resistance VanS for two response regulators, VanR and
PhoB. Biochemistry 35, 4732 –4740

30 Matsubara, M. et al. (2000) Tuning of the porin expression under
anaerobic growth conditions by His-to-Asp cross-phosphorelay
through both the EnvZ-osmosensor and ArcB-anaerosensor in
Escherichia coli. Genes Cells 5, 555–569

31 McCleary, W.R. (1996) The activation of PhoB by acetylphosphate. Mol.

Microbiol. 20, 1155–1163

http://timi.trends.com

32 Chamnongpol, S. and Groisman, E.A.

(2000) Acetyl phosphate-
dependent activation of a mutant PhoP response regulator that
functions independently of its cognate sensor kinase. J. Mol. Biol. 300,
291–305

33 Alves, R. and Savageau, M.A.

(2003) Comparative analysis of
prototype two-component systems with either bifunctional or mono-
functional sensors: differences in molecular structure and physiologi-
cal function. Mol. Microbiol. 48, 25–51

34 Verhamme, D.T. et al. (2002) Investigation of in vivo cross-talk
between key two-component systems of Escherichia coli. Microbiol.
148, 69–78

35 Allaway, D. et al. (1995) NtrBC-dependent expression from the
Rhizobium meliloti dctA promoter in Escherichia coli. FEMS Micro-
biol. Lett. 128, 241–245

36 Perego, M. (1998) Kinase-phosphatase competition regulates Bacillus

subtilis development. Trends Microbiol. 6, 366–370

37 Lazazzera, B.A. and Grossman, A.D. (1998) The ins and outs of peptide

signaling. Trends Microbiol. 6, 288–294

38 Perego, M. and Brannigan, J.A. (2001) Pentapeptide regulation of

aspartyl-phosphate phosphatases. Peptides 22, 1541 –1547

39 Perego, M. (2001) A new family of aspartyl phosphate phosphatases
targeting the sporulation transcription factor Spo0A of Bacillus
subtilis. Mol. Microbiol. 42, 133–143

40 Msadek, T. (1999) When the going gets tough: survival strategies and
environmental signaling networks in Bacillus subtilis. Trends Micro-
biol. 7, 201–207

41 Kwon, O. et al. (2000) Phosphorelay as the sole physiological route of
signal transmission by the arc two-component system of Escherichia
coli. J. Bacteriol. 182, 3858 –3862

42 Jourlin, C. et al. (1997) Transphosphorylation of the TorR response
regulator requires the three phosphorylation sites of the TorS
unorthodox sensor in Escherichia coli. J. Mol. Biol. 267, 770–777

43 Perraud, A.L. et al. (1998) Speciﬁcity of the BvgAS and EvgAS
phosphorelay is mediated by the C-terminal HPt domains of the sensor
proteins. Mol. Microbiol. 27, 875–887

44 Chang, C.H. et al. (1996) Pleiotropic phenotypes caused by genetic
ablation of the receiver module of the Agrobacterium tumefaciens VirA
protein. J. Bacteriol. 178, 4710–4716

45 Ogino, T. et al. (1998) An Escherichia coli protein that exhibits
phosphohistidine phosphatase activity towards the HPt domain of the
ArcB sensor involved in the multistep His-Asp phosphorelay. Mol.
Microbiol. 27, 573–585

46 Matsubara, M. and Mizuno, T. (2000) The SixA phospho-histidine
phosphatase modulates the ArcB phosphorelay signal transduction in
Escherichia coli. FEBS Lett. 470, 118–124

47 Birkey, S.M. et al. (1998) Pho signal transduction network reveals
direct transcriptional regulation of one two-component system by
another two-component regulator: Bacillus subtilis PhoP directly
regulates production of ResD. Mol. Microbiol. 30, 943–953

48 Oshima, T. et al. (2002) Transcriptome analysis of all two-component
regulatory system mutants of Escherichia coli K-12. Mol. Microbiol.
46, 281–291

49 Kobayashi, K. et al. (2001) Comprehensive DNA microarray analysis of
Bacillus subtilis two-component regulatory systems. J. Bacteriol. 183,
7365–7370

50 Huang, J. et al. (1995) A complex network regulates expression of eps
and other virulence genes of Pseudomonas solanacearum. J. Bacteriol.
177, 1259–1267

51 Garg, R.P. et al. (2000) Multicomponent transcriptional regulation at
the complex promoter of the exopolysaccharide I biosynthetic operon of
Ralstonia solanacearum. J. Bacteriol. 182, 6659 –6666

52 Mouslim, C. and Groisman, E.A. (2003) Control of the Salmonella ugd
gene by three two-component regulatory systems. Mol. Microbiol. 47,
335–344

53 Kox, L.F. et al. (2000) A small protein that mediates the activation of a
two-component system by another two-component system. EMBO J.
19, 1861 –1872

54 Russo, F.D. and Silhavy, T.J. (1993) The essential tension: opposed
reactions in bacterial two-component regulatory systems. Trends
Microbiol. 1, 306–310

55 Hellingwerf, K.J. et al.

(1995) Signal transduction in bacteria:
phospho-neural network(s) in Escherichia coli? FEMS Microbiol.
Rev. 16, 309–321

366

Review

TRENDS in Microbiology Vol.11 No.8 August 2003

56 Scarlato, V. et al. (1990) Positive transcriptional feedback at the bvg
locus controls expression of virulence factors in Bordetella pertussis.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 87, 6753 –6757

57 Soncini, F.C. et al. (1995) Transcriptional autoregulation of the
Salmonella typhimurium phoPQ operon. J. Bacteriol. 177, 4364–4371
58 Kato, A. et al. (1999) Molecular characterization of the PhoP-PhoQ
two-component system in Escherichia coli K-12: identiﬁcation of
extracellular Mg2 þ -responsive promoters. J. Bacteriol. 181,
5516 –5520

59 Hoffer, S.M. et al. (2001) Autoampliﬁcation of a two-component

regulatory system results in “learning” behavior. J. Bacteriol. 183,
4914–4917

60 Cotter, P.A. and DiRita, V.J.

(2000) Bacterial virulence gene
regulation: an evolutionary perspective. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 54,
519–565

61 Deora, R. et al. (2001) Diversity in the Bordetella virulence regulon:
transcriptional control of a Bvg-intermediate phase gene. Mol.
Microbiol. 40, 669–683

62 Raivio, T.L. et al. (1999) The Cpx envelope stress response is controlled
by ampliﬁcation and feedback inhibition. J. Bacteriol. 181, 5263–5272

Endeavour

the quarterly magazine for the history

and philosophy of science

Online access to Endeavour is FREE

to BioMedNet subscribers,

providing you with a collection of

beautifully illustrated articles
on the history of science, book
reviews and editorial comment.

featuring

The pathway to the cell and its organelles: one hundred years of the Golgi apparatus by M. Bentivoglio and P. Mazzarello
Joseph Fourier, the ‘greenhouse effect’ and the quest for a universal theory of terrestrial temperatures by J.R. Fleming

The hunt for red elixir: an early collaboration between fellows of the Royal Society by D.R. Dickson
Art as science: scientiﬁc illustration 1490–1670 in drawing, woodcut and copper plate by C.M. Pyle

The history of reductionism versus holistic approaches to scientiﬁc research by H. Andersen

Reading and writing the Book of Nature: Jan Swammerdam (1637–1680) by M. Cobb
Coming to terms with ambiguity in science: wave–particle duality by B.K. Stepansky

The role of museums in history of science, technology and medicine by L. Taub
The ‘internal clocks’ of circadian and interval timing by S. Hinton and W.H. Meck

The troubled past and uncertain future of group selectionism by T. Shanahan
A botanist for a continent: Ferdinand Von Mueller (1825–1896) by R.W. Home

Rudolf Virchow and the scientiﬁc approach to medicine by L. Benaroyo
Darwinism and atheism: different sides of the same coin? by M. Ruse
Alfred Russel Wallace and the ﬂat earth controversy by C. Garwood
John Dalton: the world’s ﬁrst stereochemist by Dennis H. Rouvray

Forensic chemistry in 19th-century Britain by N.G. Coley
Owen and Huxley: unﬁnished business by C.U.M. Smith
Characteristics of scientiﬁc revolutions by H. Andersen

and much, much more . . .

Log on to http://reviews.bmn.com, hit the ‘Browse Journals’ tab and scroll down to Endeavour

Locate Endeavour in the BioMedNet Reviews collection.

http://timi.trends.com

