German Capitalism:

Does It Exist? Can It Survive?

Wolfgang Streeck

95/5

This  paper  is  a  preprint  of  a  contribution  to:  Colin  Crouch  and  Wolfgang  Streeck,  eds.,
1995: Modern Capitalism or Modern Capitalisms?, London: Francis Pinter. The French edition
(Y a-t-il plusieurs formes de capitalisme?) will be published by Editions La Decouverte, Paris,
in 1995.

Max-Planck-Institut für Gesellschaftsforschung
Lothringer Str. 78
D-50677 Köln
Germany

Telephone
Fax
E-Mail
Home Page

0221/33605-0
0221/33605-55
mpi@mpi-fg-koeln.mpg.de
http://www.mpi-fg-koeln.mpg.de

MPIFG Discussion Paper 95/5
ISSN 0944-2073
November 1995

2

MPIFG Discussion Paper 95/5

Abstract

Drawing on extensive comparison with the United States, Japan and Britain, the pa-
per  describes  the  “German  model”  of  advanced  capitalism  as  an  institutionalized
high-wage  economy  combining  high  competitiveness  in  world  markets  with  strong
social cohesion and, in particular, low levels of inequality along a variety of dimen-
sions. This combination is explained by a unique set of socio-economic institutions,
in particular socially instituted and circumscribed markets, negotiated firms commanding
long-term attachment of both labor and capital, a facilitating state relying mainly on
indirect means of intervention, widespread associational self-governance by organized
groups in civil society, and institutionalized cultural patterns that promote long-term
commitments and continuity. These institutions are shown to call forth and support a
particular pattern of production,  sometimes  referred  to  as  diversified  quality  produc-
tion, that has in the 1970s and 1980s made possible both high wages and a low dis-
persion of wages and incomes.
In its second part, the paper proceeds to analyze in detail the performance problems of
an institutionalized high-wage economy of the German kind, and specifies a set of
conditions that must be met for such an economy to remain simultaneously competi-
tive and socially cohesive. The present crisis of the German “social market economy”
is discussed in terms of a coincidence of three factors: a possible secular exhaustion of
the model as such, the shock of unification, and the constraints imposed by growing
globalization of the capitalist economy on national economic governance.

Zusammenfassung

Auf der Grundlage eines Vergleichs mit den Vereinigten Staaten, Japan und Groß-
britannien wird das „deutsche Modell“ des entwickelten Kapitalismus als institutio-
nalisierte  Hochlohnwirtschaft  beschrieben,  die  hohe  Wettbewerbsfähigkeit  in  interna-
tionalen Märkten mit starker sozialer Kohäsion und relativ geringer wirtschaftlicher
Ungleichheit verbindet. Diese Kombination wird als Resultat einer Reihe typischer
sozio-ökonomischer Institutionen erklärt, insbesondere  sozial  institutionalisierter  und
umschriebener  Märkte;  durch  Aushandlung  regierter  Unternehmen,  deren  Kapital  und
Arbeit  langfristig  an  sie  gebunden  sind;  einen  unterstützenden  Staat,  der  sich  vor-
nehmlich  indirekter  Interventionsformen  bedient;  weitverbreiteter  verbandlicher
Selbstregulierung  organisierter  gesellschaftlicher  Gruppen;  und  institutionalisierter
kultureller Muster, die langfristige Bindungen  und  Kontinuität  fördern.  Diese  Institu-
tionen begründen und unterstützen eine bestimmte Art wirtschaftlicher Produktion,
die  als  diversifizierte  Qualitätsproduktion  bezeichnet  worden  ist  und  in  den  siebziger
und achtziger Jahren zugleich hohe Löhne und eine geringe Dispersion von Löhnen
und Einkommen ermöglicht hat.
In seinem zweiten Teil untersucht der Aufsatz die derzeitigen Bestandsprobleme einer
institutionalisierten  Hochlohnökonomie  der  deutschen  Art  und  nennt  eine  Reihe
von  Bedingungen,  die  erfüllt  sein  müssen,  damit  eine  solche  Ökonomie  zugleich
wettbewerbsfähig und sozial  kohäsionsfähig  bleiben  kann.  Die  gegenwärtige  Krise
der deutschen „sozialen Marktwirtschaft“ wird als Resultat des  Zusammentreffens
dreier  Faktoren  dargestellt:  einer  möglichen  säkularen  Erschöpfung  des  Modells  als
solchem, des Schocks der Wiedervereinigung, und der Rückwirkungen der zunehmen-
den Globalisierung der kapitalistischen Ökonomie auf nationale Formen wirtschaftli-
cher Steuerung.

Streeck: German Capitalism

Contents

List of Tables 

Does It Exist?

The Economic Institutions of Postwar German Capitalism

Institutional Structure and Economic Performance

Three Conditions of Success: A Socio-Economic Tightrope Walk

Can It Survive?

The Model Exhausted?

The Shock of Unification

The Challenge of Globalization

The Parochialism of Nationally Organized Capitalism

References 

3

4

5

7

13

15

17

17

20

22

25

28

4

MPIFG Discussion Paper 95/5

List of Tables

1

The Comparative Performance of the German Economy

2 Wage Spread

3 Other Indicators of Inequality

4

Employment Stability

5 Unions and Collective Bargaining

6

Employment and Unemployment

7 Working Time

8

Labor Input

6

6

7

10

12

18

18

18

Streeck: German Capitalism

5

Does It Exist?

In the roughly four decades between the end of the Second World War and
German  unification,  West  German  society  gave  rise  to  a  distinctive  kind  of
capitalist  economy,  governed  by  nationally  specific  social  institutions  that
made for high international competitiveness at high wages and, at the same
time,  low  inequality  of  incomes  and  living  standards.1  Already  by  the  late
1980s, when the differences in performance and social organization between
the West German economy and its main competitors came to be widely no-
ticed, the continued economic viability of the “German model” began to ap-
pear doubtful to many. Shortly thereafter, the survival of the German version
of advanced capitalism became tied to its successful extension to the former
East Germany. With the 1992 completion of the European Internal Market, it
became in addition dependent on the compatibility of German economic in-
stitutions with the emerging regime of the integrated European economy.

At the time of unification, West Germany was the internationally most suc-
cessful of the major economies (Table 1). More exposed to the world market
than both Japan and the U.S., the country accounted for a significantly larger
share  in  world  visible  exports  than  Japan,  with  roughly  half  its  population,
and  for  about  the  same  share  as  the  United  States,  which  has  a  population
twice  the  Japanese.  West  German  trade  and  current  account  balances,  ex-
pressed  in  percent  of  GDP,  exceeded  those  of  Japan,  and  presented  a  stark
contrast to the chronically deficitarian Anglo-American economies. This was
in  spite  of  the  fact  that  German  wages  had  long  been  considerably  higher
than Japanese and American wages.

Characteristically,  the  international  success  of  the  West  German  high-wage
economy  was  accompanied  by  comparatively  little  internal  inequality.  The
difference between high and average wages, as measured by the ratio of the
ninth over the fifth decile of the wage spread, was much lower in Germany
than in its major competitor countries. Similarly, German low wages, as rep-
resented  by  the  first  decile  of  the  distribution,  were  significantly  higher  in
relation to the median (Table 2). Moreover, during the 1980s, at a time when
in all other industrialized countries the wage spread increased, the relation of
the  high  Germany  wage  to  the  median  remained  essentially  unchanged,
whereas  the  low  wage  increased  substantially,  from  61  to  65  percent  of  the
median  wage.  Furthermore,  intersectoral  wage  dispersion  was  dramatically

                                                  
1 I am indebted to Jonathan Zeitlin for critical comments. Most of the tables draw
on data assembled by Greg Jackson, under the auspices of joint work with Ronald
Dore.

6

MPIFG Discussion Paper 95/5

Table 1

The Comparative Performance of the German Economya

Trade

in Goods

and Services,
in % of GDPb

Visible Exports
in % of World
Total Exportsc

Trade (Current Account)

Balance in % of GDP

1988

1994

1988

1993

1988

1994

Hourly
Wage of
Workers,
US=100d

1992

54.9

51.0

12.0

10.1

6.5 (4.0)

2.7 (−1.1)

160 (119)

48.7
18.0
19.6

50.8
16.7
21.8

5.4
9.8
12.0

4.8
9.6
12.3

−4.5 (−3.1) −2.1 (−1.8)e
3.4 (3.1)e
3.3 (2.8)
−2.6 (−2.6) −2.5 (−2.3)

  91 (82)
100 (66)
100

Germany
United
Kingdom
Japan
United States

a 1988: West Germany. 1994: United Germany.
b Trade data calculated on a balance of payments basis. Source: IMF, International Financial Statis-

tics Yearbook, 1994, and International Financial Statistics, June 1995.

c Exports calculated on an international transactions basis.
d In  parentheses:  In  purchasing  power  equivalents.  Source:  Freeman  (1994,  31),  based  on  data
from  U.S.  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics,  Hourly  Compensation  Costs  for  Production  Workers  in
Manufacturing, 1992. German data refer to West Germany only.

e 1993.

Table 2

Wage Spread

D9:D5a

D1:D5b

Early 1980s

Early 1990s

Early 1980s

Early 1990s

Germany

United Kingdomc

Japanc

United States

1.63

1.72

1.63

2.16

1.64

1.99

1.73

2.22

0.61

0.68

0.63

0.45

0.65

0.59

0.61

0.40

Germany: Gross monthly earnings plus benefits (calculated as 1/12 of 13th and 14th month pay plus holi-
day  allowances  plus  Christmas  allowances)  of  full-time,  full-year  workers.  Source:  German  Socio-
Economic  Panel,  Waves  1-8.  Calculated  by  Viktor  Steiner,  Zentrum  für  Europäische  Wirtschaftsfor-
schung, GmbH.

United Kingdom: Gross hourly earnings of persons paid on adult rates, whose pay for the survey week
was not affected by absence. Data prior to 1983 include men under 21 and women under 18. Source:
New Earnings Survey.

Japan: Monthly scheduled earnings of regular workers, 18–59 years old, at non-governmental establish-
ments with at least 5–10 workers (varies by survey year), excluding agriculture, forestry and fisheries,
private  household  services  and  employees  of  foreign  governments.  Source:  Basic  Survey  of  the
Wage Structure. Taken from Katz, Loveman and Blanchflower (1992).

United States: Gross hourly earnings, computed as annual earnings divided by annual hours worked (an-
nual weeks worked  multiplied  by  usual  weekly  hours)  of  wage  and  salary  workers.  Source:  Current
Population Survey.

a Ninth over fifth decile. Source: OECD Employment Outlook, July 1993.
b First over fifth decile. Source: OECD Employment Outlook, July 1993.
c Males only.

Streeck: German Capitalism

7

Table 3

Other Indicators of Inequality

Intersectoral

Wage Dispersion

Freemanc

ILO Datad

Average Earnings

of Workers in

Small Enterprises,

in Percent of Earnings
of Workers in Large

Enterprisesa

Ratio of CEO Earn-

ings to Average

Earnings of Manual

Workers in

Manufacturingb

Germany
United
Kingdom
Japan
United States

17.7

21.0
26.7
27.3

14.9  (29)

90  (58)

20.0  (20)
24.1  (20)
24.8  (24)

80  (40)
77  (68)
57  (35)

10.2

15.5
7.8
25.8

a Source: Loveman and Sengenberger (1990, 34). In parentheses: Employment in small manufac-
turing enterprises, in percent of total employment in manufacturing 1986/87. Small manufacturing
enterprises are those with less than 500 workers. Sources: Acs and Audretsch (1993, 228); Sta-
tistics  Bureau  of  Japan,  Management  and  Coordination  Agency,  Annual  report  on  the  Labour
Force Survey.

b Source on CEO earnings: The Wyatt Company. German and British data relate to large compa-
nies  in  all  industries;  Japanese  data,  to  companies  of  all  sizes  in  all  industries;  U.S.  data,  to
manufacturing  firms  of  all  sizes.  To  increase  comparability,  earnings  are  calculated  as  average
earnings  in  the  upper  quartile  of  CEO  earnings.  Average  earnings  of  workers:  various  national
sources.

c Freeman (1988) uses several indicators of inter-industry wage dispersion, calculated on different
data as the variance of the logarithm of earnings by industry, multiplied by 100. The figures in the
table represent the average of the three most recent indicators that include all four countries. The
indicators are based on UN data from 1983, ILO data from 1984, and U.S. Bureau of Labor Statis-
tics data from 1986.

d Coefficient  of  variation  of  average  wages  and  salaries  of  full-time  workers  at  adult  rates  of  pay
between  ISIC  categories  (industries).  Source:  ILO  Yearbook,  own  calculations.  In  brackets  the
number of sectors over which the coefficient was calculated. Fewer categories are likely to under-
estimate the coefficient.

low in West Germany compared to both Japan and the U.S., and so were the
earnings differentials between workers in small and large firms (Table 3). In
the latter respect, it is important to note that the employment share of small
and medium-sized firms in West Germany was far higher than in Britain and
the U.S., and close to Japan in spite of a comparatively low wage differential.
Finally, the ratio of German chief executive salaries over skilled wages, while
higher than in Japan, was lower than in Britain and, in particular, the U.S.

The Economic Institutions of Postwar German Capitalism

The  West  German  combination  of  external  competitiveness  and  normalized
high-wage  employment  reflects  the  operation  of  a  distinctive  set  of  socio-
economic institutions. These, in turn, reflect a complex historical compromise
between  liberal  capitalism,  as  introduced  after  the  Second  World  War,  and

8

MPIFG Discussion Paper 95/5

two different countervailing forces, Social Democracy and Christian Democ-
racy – as well as between traditionalism and two alternative versions of mod-
ernism,  liberalism  and  socialism,  and  of  course  between  capital  and  labor.
This compromise was struck, and became firmly institutionalized, at  a  time
when both the Communist wing of the labor movement and the authoritarian
faction  of  the  German  business  class  were,  for  different  reasons,  excluded
from political participation.

Under these circumstances, those who wanted to turn the new Germany into
a liberal market economy had to accept the revival of a variety of traditional-
ist status protections – for farmers, civil servants, Mittelstand and the like – as
well as an extensive welfare state and established labor unions. At the same
time, the old  middle  classes,  represented  especially  by  the  Christian  Demo-
cratic Party, while successfully defending some of their protective institutions
– like the special status of artisanal firms – had to learn to use these under the
competition regime of a market economy and in the presence of a safely en-
trenched  union  movement.  Labor,  finally,  was  never  strong  enough,  like  in
Sweden, to rid society in the name of progress of, for example, small firms,
apprenticeship or  works  councils.  Indeed  German  unions  were  rebuilt  after
the  war  as  Einheitsgewerkschaften,  uniting  previously  divided  socialist  and
Catholic  movements,  which  contributed  to  the  recognition  by  labor  of  the
need  to  seek  productive  coexistence  with  non-socialist,  traditional  forms  of
social  organization,  as  well  as  class  compromise  at  the  workplace  and  be-
yond.

While the result of all this was certainly a capitalist market economy, it was
one that was and remains richly organized and densely regulated by a vast
variety  of  institutions  that  have  sprung  from  sometimes  incompatible
sources,  from  Mittelstand  traditionalism  to  various  ideological  stripes  of  or-
ganized labor. While this makes Germany different from the United States, it
also  distinguishes  it  from  Sweden,  in  that  Germany  never  became  a  Social-
Democratic  society.  Although  workers  and  unions  were  able  gradually  to
build a strong position for themselves in German capitalism, stronger than in
all other large capitalist countries, the German political economy continued to
allow for decentralized compromise and local commitments supplementing,
underpinning  and  sometimes  superseding  the  high  politics  of  class  accom-
modation at national level. On the other hand, although its political economy
is  highly  institutionally  coordinated,  and  regardless  of  many  other,  often
striking  parallels,  Germany  differs  also  from  Japan,  in  that  the  institutions
that embed its economy and shape its performance are politically negotiated
and typically legally constitutionalized, rather than commanding compliance
as a matter of informal obligation or as a result of successful conservative so-
cial engineering in a closed national or “enterprise community.”

Streeck: German Capitalism

9

Compared  to  the  other  major  capitalist  economies,  the  institutional  frame-
work of the German economy can be summarily described as follows2:

1. Markets are politically instituted and socially regulated, and regarded as
creations  of  public  policy  deployed  to  serve  public  purposes.  The  postwar
competition  regime  is  strict,  resulting  in  comparatively  low  industrial  con-
centration  in  most  sectors.  At  the  same  time,  wide  areas  of  social  life,  like
health care, education and social insurance, are not governed by market prin-
ciples, and some markets, like those for labor and capital, are less so than oth-
ers. Competitive  markets  coexist  with  an  extensive  social  welfare  state,  and
political  intervention  and  social  regulation  often  interfere  with  the  distribu-
tive outcome of markets, for example by building a floor under them. Also,
small  firms  are  in  various  ways  shielded  from  the  competition  of  large  in-
dustry, or are publicly assisted in competing with  it.  Reflecting  a  history  of
fragmented markets offering little space for mass production, price competi-
tion is often mitigated by product specialization.

2. Firms are social institutions, not just networks of private contracts or the
property of their shareholders. Their internal order is a matter of public inter-
est and is subject to extensive social regulation, by law and industrial agree-
ment. Also, managers of large German firms face capital and labor  markets
that  are  highly  organized,  enabling  both  capital  and  labor  to  participate  di-
rectly  in  the  everyday  operation  of  the  firm  and  requiring  decisions  to  be
continuously  negotiated.  Decisions  thus  take  longer,  but  are  also  easier  to
implement once taken.

German capital markets are not “markets for control.” Many companies con-
tinue to be privately held; only a small part of the productive capital is traded
at  the  stock  exchange;  banks  may  hold  equity;  shareholding  is  highly  con-
centrated;  and  shares  and  companies  do  not  often  change  hands.  Firms  fi-
nance  themselves  less  through  equity  than  through  long-term  bank  credit.
Since  banks  can  cast  proxy  votes  on  behalf  of  shares  they  hold  in  deposit,
they can effectively monitor management performance, which allows them to
give firms long-term loans and creates an incentive for them not to speculate
with stock. Labor is similarly present within firms, with workforces exercis-
ing legal rights  to  co-determination  through  works  councils  and,  where  ap-
plicable, supervisory board representation. Together with collective bargain-
ing  and  legal  regulation,  co-determination  supports  an  employment  regime
that  makes  it  difficult  for  employers  to  dismiss  workers,  resulting  in  em-

                                                  
2 The 

following  stylized  account  draws  on 

Hollingsworth et al. (1994).

the 

typology  developed 

in

10

MPIFG Discussion Paper 95/5

ployment spells almost as long as in Japan, and much longer than in the U.S.
(Table  4).  Turning  labor  into  a  more  fixed  production  factor  and  making  it
more  similar  to  capital  than  in  market-driven  employment,  this  encourages
high employer investment in skills.

Table 4

Employment Stability

Median Tenure in Present Job,

Average Tenure in Present Job,

in Years

in Years

Germany (1990)a
United Kingdom (1991)
Japan (1990)b
United States (1991)

7.5
4.4
8.2
3.0

10.4
7.9
10.9
6.7

a 1990. Excluding apprentices.
b Regular employees (persons hired for an indefinite period); temporary workers hired for more than

one month; daily workers hired for over 17 days, in private establishments with over 9 employees.

Source: OECD Employment Outlook, July 1993.

3. The  postwar  German  state  is  neither  laissez-faire  nor  etatiste,  and  is  best
described as an enabling state. Its capacity for direct intervention in the econ-
omy is curtailed by vertically and horizontally fragmented sovereignty, and
by robust constitutional limitations on discretionary government action. Ver-
tical  fragmentation  between  the  federal  government  and  the  Länder  closely
limits  what  political  majorities  at  national  level  can  do,  making  political
change  slow  and  policies  less  than  immediately  responsive  to  electoral  ma-
jorities.  The  electoral  system,  which  favors  coalition  governments,  further
adds to the centrist drift and the long response time of German politics.

Horizontally,  sovereignty  is  divided  between  the  federal  government  and  a
number of independent authorities insulated from electoral pressure, like the
Bundesbank or the Federal Cartel Office. Policy objectives like monetary sta-
bility  and  competitive  markets  are  in  this  way  removed  from  government
discretion  and  depoliticized.  A  similar  effect  is  caused  by  strong  constitu-
tional  protections,  like  the  right  of  unions  and  employers  associations  to
regulate  wages  and  working  conditions  without  government  interference.
The result is both immobility and predictability of government policies, pre-
cluding rapid political innovation and allowing economic agents to develop
stable  expectations,  pursue  long-term  objectives,  and  build  lasting  relations
with one another.

Constitutionally  dedicated  to  competitive  markets  and  a  hard  currency,  the
postwar German state lacks capacity for a selective industrial policy. In com-

Streeck: German Capitalism

11

pensation,  it  offers  firms  and  industries  a  wide  range  of  general  infrastruc-
tural  supports,  like  high  public  spending  on  research  and  development.
Moreover,  to  safeguard  social  cohesion,  the  federal  government  spends  a
considerable share of the Gross Domestic Product on social protection. It also
accepts a constitutional obligation to provide for “equal living conditions” in
all Länder, which has given rise to an extensive, redistributive system of reve-
nue  sharing.  To  expand  its  capacities  in  line  with  its  responsibilities,  the
German state has developed an extraordinary ability to assist groups in civil
society  in  organizing  themselves,  devolving  on  them  governance  functions
that would otherwise have to be either performed by the state or left to the
market. It is through state-enabled collective action and quasi-public, “corpo-
ratist”  group  self-government  that  the  German  political  economy  generates
most  of  the  regulations  and  collective  goods  that  circumscribe,  correct  and
underpin the instituted markets of soziale Marktwirtschaft.

4. Widespread  organized  cooperation  among  competitors  and  bargaining
between organized groups, conducted through publicly enabled associations,
is  probably  the  most  distinctive  feature  of  the  German  political  economy.
Governance is delegated either to individual associations or to collective ne-
gotiations  between  them,  with  the  state  often  awarding  its  outcome  legally
binding status. Associations  performing  quasi-public  functions  are  typically
granted some form of obligatory and quasi-obligatory membership, helping
them overcome the free-rider problems associated with collective goods pro-
duction and giving Germany the most densely organized civil society among
the larger countries.

Publicly enabled associations regulate instituted markets in a variety of ways.
German  business  associations,  prevented  by  law  from  operating  as  cartels,
turn price into quality competition, by promoting product specialization and
setting and enforcing high quality standards. To the same effect,  employers
associations  prevent  low-wage  competition  by  negotiating  uniformly  high
labor  standards  with  national  industrial  unions.  To  make  the  outcome  eco-
nomically  viable,  “dual”  training,  with  associatively  organized  cooperation
between  competing  firms,  between  government  and  industry,  and  between
business  and  labor  procures  the  skill  base  firms  need  to  be  competitive  in
quality markets. For the same purpose, associations also organize cooperative
research and technology transfer. Legally enabled associational support is es-
pecially vital for small and medium-sized firms.

Above all, associative regulation constitutes the single most important source
of egalitarianism in the German economy. Joint governance of labor markets
by  employers  associations  and  centralized  industrial  unions  is  so  firmly  es-

12

MPIFG Discussion Paper 95/5

tablished that by the 1980s Germany had become the only major economy in
which  the  “postwar  settlement”  between  capital  and  labor  remained  intact
(Table 5). Although unionism has been comparatively stable, associative labor
market  governance  in  Germany  is  above  all  accomplished  through  near-
universal collective bargaining coverage, due to strongly institutionalized in-
dustry-wide negotiations and legal extension of agreements. More than any-
thing else, it is the German system of centralized and interconnected collec-
tive  bargaining  that  is  responsible  for  the  low  dispersion  of  wages  in  Ger-
many between individuals, industrial sectors, and small and large firms.

Table 5

Unions and Collective Bargaining

Union Densitya

Collective
Bargaining
Coverageb

Germany
United
Kingdom
Japan
United States

1980

1985

1988

1990

1980

1990

37.0

37.4

33.8

    32.9d

     82

     82e

50.7
31.1
23.0

45.5
28.9
18.0

41.5
26.8
16.4

    39.1
    25.4
    15.6

     70f
     28
     26

     47
     21g
     18

Variation in
Coverage
Rates by
Industries

1990c

0.14

0.34
0.74
0.61

a Employed  members  only.  Sources:  1980,  1985,  1988:  Visser  (1991).  1990:  OECD  Employment

Outlook, 1994.

b OEDC  Employment  Outlook,  1994.  The  German  figures  are  estimates  supplied  by  the  WSI,  a  re-
search  institute  of  the  German  Trade  Union  Confederaton  (DGB).  The  Bundesarbeitsministerium
(Federal  Ministry  of  Labor)  reports  a  coverage  rate  of  90  and  91  percent  for  the  two  years;  the
OECD source uses the government data.

c Coefficient of variation. Source: see b.
d West Germany.       e   West Germany.       f   1978.      g   1989.

5. German  economic  culture  is  often  traditionalist.  Savings  rates  are  high,
and consumer credit, although increasing, remains low by comparison. Price
competition is mitigated by socially established preferences for quality. Mar-
kets do not per se confer merit: social status and solidarity interfere, and secu-
rity  is  regarded  as  important.  Speculation  is  not  valued.  Continuous  moni-
toring of one’s short-term balance of economic advantage is not a social norm,
encouraging  long-term  orientations  and  commitments  and  supporting,
among  other  things,  a  redistributive  tax  system.  Professional  competence  is
highly regarded for its own sake; German managers tend to be engineers, and
authority at the workplace is based on superior technical knowledge. Collec-
tivism and discipline have given way as core cultural values to privacy and
autonomy from organizational control and market pressure, as evidenced by
strong  cultural  support  for  short  working  hours,  low  participation  in  paid

Streeck: German Capitalism

13

employment,  and  a  qualification-based  organization  of  work.  Work-related
knowledge  is  vested  in  an  occupational  qualification  structure,  where  the
distinction between knowledge and skills is conceived as gradual rather than
categoric.  Institutionally,  this  is  reflected  in  the  unique  vocational  training
system, with its long socialization periods leading to portable certificates un-
der  national  regulations  negotiated  between  unions  and  employers  associa-
tions.3

Institutional Structure and Economic Performance

In the 1970s and 1980s, the institutional structure of the West German econ-
omy  conditioned  and  sustained  a  distinctive  pattern  of  performance  that
happened to be highly competitive in world markets. High costs originating
in socially circumscribed labor markets ruled out price-competitive  produc-
tion  throughout  the  economy  and  forced  firms  to  seek  survival  in  quality-
competitive international markets. Here, the same set of German institutions that
constituted a prohibitive liability in price-competitive markets served as a competitive
asset – with what would be debilitating rigidities for firms trying to compete on
price,  offering  enabling  flexibilities  to  firms  pursuing  quality-competitiveness
through upgrading and customization of products4.

While  imposing  constraints  that  make  low-cost  production  prohibitively
costly, German economic institutions offer firms rich opportunities for strategic
upgrading. An extended social welfare state, negotiated management under

                                                  
3 Nothing in the above is to suggest that the institutional configuration that made
up the “German system” in the 1970s and 1980s was created in one piece, or cre-
ated for the economic purposes that it came to serve. Some of its elements were
pre-Wilhelminian, others were introduced by the Allies after 1945, and still others
originated  in  the  politics  of  the  Federal  Republic,  sometimes  drawing  on  and
modifying older arrangements, and sometimes not. Moreover, each element, for
example the banking system, was subject to its own historical dynamic. All were
and continue to be changing, for their own reasons as well as in reaction to each
other, and certainly there can be no presumption of a preestablished fit between
them, even though one might want to allow for some reinforcement effects of the
“model’s”,  historically  contingent,  social  and  economic  success.  That  its  parts
happened to perform together so well during the period in question must be at-
tributed at least as much to fortuna as to virtu.

4 For more detail see my essay on “diversified quality production” (Streeck 1992).
Quality competition can be described as the pursuit of monopoly rents through
product diversification. The latter can, within limits, expand quality-competitive
markets  by  breaking  up  existing  mass  markets.  Within  quality  markets,  price
competition is suspended as long as the price differential to less customized, sub-
stitute products is not excessive.

14

MPIFG Discussion Paper 95/5

co-determination, and encompassing collective bargaining place the economy
under social pressures that prevent anything beyond moderate differentiation
of  wages  and  working  conditions.  Unions  and  business  associations,  then,
find it in their common interest to deploy their quasi-public powers to help
the  economy  move  into  quality-competitive  markets,  through  cooperative
upgrading of skills, work organization, technology and products. Just as the
universality of the pressure accounts for the fact that only very few German
products  have  remained  price-competitive,  the  general  availability  of  coop-
erative supports, also generated by encompassing labor-inclusive associative
governance under state facilitation, explains the high general competitiveness
and  low  sectoral  specialization  of  the  German  manufacturing  sector.  How
successful this system has been is indicated by the fact that before unification,
that  sector  was  proportionately  larger  than  in  any  comparable  country,  in
spite of its having to pay much higher wages. It also was and still is interna-
tionally competitive across a uniquely wide range of products, making Ger-
many by far the world’s most diversified export economy.

German industrial upgrading is typically slow and gradual but also continu-
ous,  reflecting  an  institutional  infrastructure  that  makes  for  long  decision
times while fostering long-term orientations. The resulting pattern of innova-
tion is one that is more likely to generate improvements of existing products
of existing firms and sectors than to give rise to new sectors. Generally, sticky
decisions, steady commitments and delayed responses in German institutions
make  for  slow  fluctuations,  up  or  down,  in  economic  activity  and  perform-
ance;  for  flat  cyclical  movements,  especially  compared  to  the  United  States;
and for low dispersion of outcomes, all of which are conducive to stable co-
operation and steady improvement across the board. Averages are typically
high, coefficients of variation low, and extreme cases are rare at both ends.

The  broad  movement  of  the  German  economy  in  the  1970s  and  1980s  into
quality-competitive  markets  was  helped  by  the  traditional  preference  of
German  consumers  for  quality.  Traditionalism  contributed  also  to  a  high
savings rate, which helped generate the patient capital needed for continuous
upgrading  of  products  and  production  factors.  Within  firms,  sticky  capital
and committed labor, having access to voice as an alternative to exit, enabled
managements  to  take  the  long  view,  based  on  stable  bargains  with  and  be-
tween  both.  In  politics,  divided  and  immobile  economic  government  en-
shrined  a  currency  regime  that  foreclosed  devaluation  to  restore  price-
competitiveness, and offered investors insurance against electoral volatility.

Above all,  the  success  of  the  “German  model,”  as  long  as  it  lasted,  derived
from the way in which it utilized social pressures for an egalitarian distribu-
tion of economic outcomes to generate an egalitarian distribution of produc-

Streeck: German Capitalism

15

tive  capabilities,  with  the  latter  in  turn  enabling  the  economy  to  underwrite  the
former.  Complementing  social  constraints  on  some  economic  strategies  with
productive  opportunities  for  others,  and  thereby  creating  a  pattern  of  pro-
duction  capable  of  sustaining  a  socially  desirable  but  economically  improb-
able pattern of distribution, the system managed to combine competitive effi-
ciency with high economic equality and social cohesion.

Three Conditions of Success: A Socio-Economic Tightrope Walk

Competitive  success  of  an  institutionalized  high-wage  economy  like  Ger-
many’s  is  inevitably  precarious  and  fragile,  as  it  must  simultaneously  ac-
commodate  international  markets  and  domestic  pressures  for  equality  and
social  cohesion.  Three  highly  elusive  conditions  must  be  met  for  this  to  be
possible:

1. Worldwide  product  markets  for  quality-competitive  goods  must  be  large
enough to sustain full employment in an economy that has barred itself from
serving  price-competitive  markets.  The  volume  of  demand  that  a  quality-
competitive economy can attract depends on the historical evolution of global
demand generally, the competitive capabilities of other economies, successful
domestic  product  innovation  expanding  quality-competitive  markets  at  the
expense  of  price-competitive  ones,  and  domestic  production  costs  not  ex-
ceeding  the  point  where  the  price  differential  between  quality-competitive
and price-competitive goods becomes too large for too many customers.

2. Product innovation must proceed fast enough to give the economy a sus-
tained edge in the quality-competitive markets in which it competes. This re-
quires  continuous  high  investment  in  research  and  development.  Product
leadership  also  depends  on  a  country’s  culturally  rooted  pattern  of  knowl-
edge  production  and  diffusion,  as  well  as  of  management,  technology  use,
work organization and skill formation continuing to match changing markets
and technologies.

3.  The economy’s labor supply must fit the volume and character of demand
in quality markets, providing the skills needed to serve such markets and al-
lowing  for  a  satisfactory  level  of  employment  in  high-skill  and  high-wage
jobs. The latter requires that no more than a few among a country’s workforce
be unable to function in high-skill jobs. Only if their numbers are small can
they be taken out of the labor market and sustained by a welfare state funded
from the rich proceeds of high quality-competitiveness. Employment for the

16

MPIFG Discussion Paper 95/5

others  must  be  made  possible  by  a  labor  market  policy  –  public,  private  or
both – that upgrades their skills to a level where they can earn the high wages
mandated for them by collective bargaining and social citizenship. Moreover,
to the extent that markets for high-quality products cannot be indefinitely ex-
panded  by  accelerated  product  innovation,  demand-side  employment  con-
straints must be accommodated by cutting the labor supply, through reduc-
ing working time or retiring part of the workforce, to allow for an equitable
distribution of the available high-wage employment among the vast majority.

Socially acceptable redistribution of employment is possible only as long as
quality-competitive  product  markets  are  large  enough  for  institutionally
mandated underemployment to be small enough to be welcomed as leisure.
If  underemployment  incurred  in  defense  of  normalized  high-wage  employ-
ment exceeds the very low level that alone can be socially acceptable, thereby
turning  into  unemployment  –  be  it  because  international  quality  markets
have  become  crowded;  the  rate  of  innovation  in  the  domestic  economy  has
slowed down in comparison to relevant competitors; labor market policy has
failed, for whatever reason, to upgrade skills or retire capacity efficiently and
equitably; or wage moderation, containment of social spending and process
innovation fail to compensate for limited product advantage or the failures of
labor market policy – the costs of social  support  for  those  outside  the  labor
market  must  soar,  further  depressing  the  economy’s  international  competi-
tiveness, and high equality among the employed is bound to be increasingly
overshadowed by deep inequality between the employed and a large number
of long-term unemployed.

At this point, social institutions that rule out low-wage employment in order
to generate high-wage employment become increasingly likely to be overrid-
den by market forces. As the labor constraint that drives industrial strategy in
an instituted high-wage economy is weakened, with low-wage employment
becoming an option for profit-seeking employers and work-seeking workers,
its virtuous supply-side effect wanes, eventually resulting in even less high-
wage  and  high-skill  employment  than  there  might  have  been  without  de-
regulation. In the ensuing spiral of institutional erosion and structural down-
grading, the difference in governance and performance between an instituted
high-wage and a liberal market economy disappears.

Streeck: German Capitalism

17

Can It Survive?

In 1993 the German economy moved into its worst recession in postwar his-
tory, raising the possibility that the German economic Sonderweg might finally
have  ended.  In  the  following  I  will  distinguish  three  sources  of  the  present
malaise of German capitalism: (1) a possible secular exhaustion of its capacity to
perform the complicated balancing acts required for its success; (2) the strains
caused by the shock of unification; and (3) the changing conditions in the global
economy of which Germany is part. My argument will be that while in normal
circumstances the “German model” may or may not once again have found a
way out of its difficulties, unification may have so much exacerbated these as
to  make  them  unsurmountable.  Moreover,  even  if  East  Germany  could
against the odds be incorporated in United Germany on West German terms,
the simultaneous incorporation of Germany as a whole in a globalized world
economy  exposes  German  economic  institutions  to  new  kinds  of  pressure
that they may be unable to withstand.

The Model Exhausted?

If  there  was  one  blemish  on  West  German  economic  performance  in  the
1980s,  this  was  persistent  high  unemployment.  To  be  sure,  unemployment  in
the  much  more  market-driven  economy  of  the  United  Kingdom  was  even
higher throughout the period (Table 6). But in Germany, with its institution-
alized commitment to social cohesion and its deployment of labor constraint
as  a  supply-side  stimulus,  it  posed  more  fundamental  problems.  This  ex-
plains  why  German  unions  in  the  1980s  used  their  political  and  industrial
clout to redistribute employment by reducing working time (Table 7) – fore-
going economic growth by cutting labor input (Table 8), and trading potential
increases  in  money  income  for  leisure,  in  an  effort  to  defend  high  equality.
They also tried to win employers and government for a nationwide “training
offensive,” aimed at raising worker skills to a level where ideally everybody
could be employed at high wages in  a  flat  wage  structure, so  as  to  avoid  the
need to restore full employment by wage cuts, broader wage dispersion, and a prolif-
eration of low-wage and low-skill jobs.

This  strategy  was  not  entirely  ineffective.  By  the  end  of  the  1980s,  unem-
ployment was beginning to decline, and overall employment and workforce
participation  had  slightly  increased.  Still,  a  sizable  number  of  unemployed,
almost half of them long-term, remained. Depending on the perspective, this
could be blamed on the institutional rigidities of German labor markets, or al-
ternatively on lack of effort in labor market policy and working time reduction.

18

MPIFG Discussion Paper 95/5

Table 6

Employment and Unemployment

Average Unemployment Ratea

Long-Term Unemploymentb

1981–85

1986–90

1991–94

1990

1993

         6.4
Germany
United Kingdom        11.3
         2.5
Japan
United States
         8.2

5.8
8.8
2.5
5.8

        5.4c
        9.7
        2.4
        6.7

       46.3
       36.0
       19.1
         5.6

       40.3d
       42.5
       17.2
       11.7

a OECD standardized unemployment rates, defined as the number of persons unemployed as a per-
centage  of  the  total  labor  force  (including  the  self-employed  and  the  armed  forces).  Unemployed
persons  are  persons  aged  15  and  over  who  (1)  are  without  work,  (2)  are  available  to  start  work
within the next two weeks, and (3) have actively sought employment at some time during the previ-
ous four weeks (definition adopted from ILO and used by both EUROSTAT and OECD to calculate
standardized rates). OECD Employment Outlook, various issues.

b From survey-based data. Long-term unemployment is defined as the percentage of the unemployed
that  have  been  out  of  employment  for  12  months  or  more.  Source:  OECD  Employment  Outlook,
1992 and 1995.

c West Germany only. According to EUROSTAT, the rate for united Germany was 7.1 percent.
d Data refer to united Germany.

Table 7

Working Time

Germany
Japan
United States

Average Hours Worked Per Person and Yeara

1973

1,804
2,185
1,831

1983

1,668
2,095
1,754

1993

           1,534b
           1,965c
           1,743

a Source: OECD Employment Outlook, July 1993.  Data  includes  part-time  work.  Germany  and  U.S.:

dependent employment only; Japan: total employment.

b West Germany only. No data for united Germany available.
c

1992.

Table 8

Labor Input

Labor Force Participation

Total (Females)a

Average Yearly Rate of
Change in Employment,

1983-1990b

1979

1992

Males

Females

Germany
68.3 (52.2)
United Kingdom 74.3 (58.0)
Japan
71.8 (54.7)
72.1 (58.8)
United States

69.8 (59.0)
75.1 (64.5)
75.5 (61.7)
76.9 (68.9)

0.9
1.2
1.0
1.7

1.7
2.9
1.6
2.8

Percent
Change in
Resident
Population
1970-1988c

0.8
2.6
18.6
20.1

a Total labor force, divided by the population of working age (15-64) at mid-year. Source: OECD Em-

ployment Outlook, July 1993.

b Source: OECD Employment Outlook, July 1993
c Source:The Economist Book of Vital Statistics, 1990, p. 18.

Streeck: German Capitalism

19

It could also be attributed to costs, of labor or the welfare state, having crossed
the threshold beyond which they begin to count again even in quality mar-
kets. But it could as well have been due to deficient product innovation failing to
keep the economy quality-competitive in spite of and together with its insti-
tutional  rigidities  and  high  social  costs.  As  high  unemployment  became  in-
creasingly  entrenched,  the  question  for  those  trying  to  save  the  system  be-
came  whether  there  were  possibilities  for  speeding  up  innovation  and  im-
proving  labor  market,  training  and  working  time  policies  that,  if  inevitable
together with some negotiated cost-cutting, could restore high-wage full em-
ployment, thereby preempting pressures for more markets, more managerial
prerogative, and a liberal Ordnungspolitik of deregulation. Conversely, argu-
ments  for  such  changes  came  to  be  based  on  claims  that  improved  product
innovation alone would not win back a sufficiently large market share; that
labor market, training and working time policies had reached their financial,
social or other limits; and that effective cost reduction was achievable only by
deregulation returning allocational decisions to “market forces”.

To many, the collapse of employment in the 1993 recession confirmed earlier
diagnoses  of  endemic  weaknesses.  Japanese  advances  in  traditionally  Ger-
man quality markets suggested that the era  of  undisputed  German  product
leadership had ended, and with it the capacity of German industry to evade
price competition. Also, growing pressures on German firms to cut costs con-
firmed suspicions that in times of assured product advantage, German man-
agements  had  neglected  process  innovation,  especially  the  introduction  of
“lean” production methods, not least in response to powerful works councils
defending jobs under endemic high unemployment. Mounting mass dismiss-
als and rapidly rising unemployment rates, not just in East but also in West
Germany,  seemed  to  show  that  the  possibilities  for  working  time  reduction
and  early  retirement  had  been  exhausted.  And  the  limitations  of  skill  up-
grading as a means of full employment policy seemed to be indicated, among
other things, by a higher-than-ever number of young people dropping out of
the apprenticeship system, due apparently to its significantly raised intellec-
tual demands.

Perhaps most disturbing were concerns, also older than the crisis but drama-
tized by it, that the German system of knowledge production and diffusion
might  have  structurally  and,  barring  major  institutional  adjustments,  irre-
versibly lost touch with changing markets. With the Japanese successes of the
late 1980s, competitive advantage in quality  markets  appeared  to  derive  in-
creasingly  from  fast  product  turnover  rather  than  slow  product  refinement.
The German system of innovation, management and “organizational culture”
–  with  applied  research  conducted  by  research  institutes  and  associations

20

MPIFG Discussion Paper 95/5

close to industrial users linking up with widely available shopfloor-generated
worker  skills  vested  in  long-term  commitments  to  quasi-professional  occu-
pational identities, and governed by consensus-building institutions like co-
determination – seemed far better suited to the former than to the latter, and
unlikely to be able to move from the one to the other on short notice.

Already  before  unification,  German  capitalism  may  thus  have  hit  its  limits
with respect to the size of its possible product markets, its capacity to main-
tain product leadership, its ability to manage its labor market, or more than
one of these at the same time. Indications were that in response, it had slowly
begun to deteriorate into a pattern where socially instituted markets, negoti-
ated  management,  structurally  conservative  politics,  quasi-public  associa-
tional governance and cultural traditionalism resulted no longer in industrial
upgrading, but in an ever-expanding number of people being relegated to an
ever  more  expensive  and,  ultimately,  unsustainable  social  safety  net  in  the
widest  sense,  being  kept  out  of  employment  at  public  expense,  or  in  em-
ployment at private expense.

Whether or not these tendencies could have been corrected in normal condi-
tions  is  a  moot  question.  Experience  suggests  that  prospects  for  consensual
cost-cutting  were  not  entirely  bleak.  German  collective  bargaining,  together
with  the  institutionalized  monetarism  of  the  Bundesbank,  has  always  been
remarkably good at keeping unit labor costs under control, without deregu-
lation and indeed in order to prevent it (Streeck 1994). Unification, however,
and  the  boom  and  bust  that  followed  it  did  nothing  to  resolve  whatever
structural problems may have existed at the time. Instead it imparted an his-
torical  shock  to  the  “German  model”  that  may  well  have  been  powerful
enough to throw it off course once and for all.

The Shock of Unification

The crisis of the early  1990s  might  have  come  even  without  unification,  be-
cause of a secular exhaustion of the “German model”. But it could also have
been caused by unification alone, since rebuilding a country as large as East
Germany  would  have  been  demanding  even  on  the  strongest  economy.
Sorting out the two explanations is further complicated by the possibility that
the inherent institutional logic of the (West) German political economy may
have forced it to define the problems of unification in a way that made them
even more difficult to resolve than they would otherwise have been.

The West German response to unification was above all designed to protect
the West German social order from being modified by the event. Unification

Streeck: German Capitalism

21

was  conceived  and  executed  as  a  giant  exercise  in  Institutionentransfer:  a
wholesale transplantation of the entire array of West German institutions to
the  former  East  Germany.  This  approach  was  supported  by  all  major  West
German players, including business, labor, the conservative government, and
the  Social-Democratic  opposition.  With  respect  to  the  economy,  unification
involved the immediate expansion to the East of socially circumscribed mar-
kets, negotiated firms, enabling state intervention and market-regulating as-
sociations.  Immediately  thereafter,  national  unions  and  employers  associa-
tions formally committed themselves to raising East German wages to West
German  levels  within  the  next  half  decade,  explicitly  ruling  out  the  estab-
lishment of a low-wage area in the East. In part this reflected a shared belief
that  however  low  East  German  wages  might  be,  German  industry  could
never be price-competitive. But there was clearly also a fear that a low-wage
regime  in  the  East  might  erode  the  high-wage  and  high-skill  regime  in  the
West by opening up opportunities for low-wage production that might lure
German firms away from the upgrading path of industrial virtue.

While its wages were being raised far beyond its productivity, East German
industry  was  included  in  the  rigorous  competition  regime  West  German
firms had had four decades to learn to live with. Nobody can  have  been  in
doubt that this was bound to place the East German economy under poten-
tially destructive adjustment pressures, with the likely outcome of prolonged
mass  unemployment.  This,  in  turn,  inevitably  triggered  massive  financial
transfers from West to East, given that among the institutions that had been
transplanted wholesale with unification was the West German welfare state.
While it has been argued that these risks were difficult to gauge at the time of
unification,  it  is  questionable  whether  more  realistic  forecasts  would  have
made much of a difference. Bent on protecting West German institutions, all
relevant parties more or less consciously opted for a policy of trying to buy the
East German economy into the West German high-wage system, at whatever cost
to East German workers or West German taxpayers, in the hope that some-
how the price would be less than catastrophic.

That hope may well be disappointed. By the mid-1990s United Germany was
engaged in the largest wealth transfer in economic history, having committed
itself for at least a decade to subsidize the neue Länder at a level of about $100
billion a year, to cover all manner of expenses, from public infrastructural in-
vestment to pension supplements and, not least, unemployment benefit. Still,
there is no guaranteee that this extraordinary redistributive effort will not in
the end be self-defeating. Public debt has exploded since 1989, and may not
be reined in for a long time – or only by cuts in the welfare state or in research
and development effort that would in more than one way be obstructive of a

22

MPIFG Discussion Paper 95/5

quality-competitive  “social  market  economy.”  Also,  world  markets  for  Ger-
man  products,  hardly  large  enough  to  provide  full  employment  for  West
Germany and perhaps shrinking anyway for reasons of their own, may prove
too small for Germany as a whole; the training costs of continued industrial
upgrading,  even  if  they  might  have  been  manageable  for  the  West,  may  be
too high for West and East together, especially as the latter has to be subsi-
dized by the former; and the  capacity  of  the  West  German  economy  for  in-
dustrial  innovation,  perhaps  already  in  decline,  may  not  suffice  to  restore
competitiveness to West and East Germany at the same time.

Eastern  unemployment  and,  compared  to  the  Western  part  of  the  country,
regional  impoverishment  may  thus  become  a  lasting  condition,  owing  in  a
paradoxical  sense  to  the  excessively  ambitious  targets  imposed  on  the  neue
Länder  as  part  and  parcel  of  Institutionentransfer.  At  the  same  time,  abiding
efforts to subsidize internal inequality down to a level compatible with insti-
tutional  continuity  may  cause  constant  financial  bleeding.  Protracted  eco-
nomic  stagnation  and  declining  competitiveness  may  then  unleash  market
forces strong enough to erode, gradually and a under growing risk of divisive
political conflict, the very same institutions, and make impossible the kind of
economic performance, that unification by Institutionentransfer was intended
to preserve.

The Challenge of Globalization

On the surface, it would seem hard to understand why a set of economic in-
stitutions as successful in world markets as the German one should be threat-
ened  by  further  economic  internationalization.  But  while  the  free  trade  re-
gime of the postwar period left national boundaries intact – although allow-
ing them to be crossed – globalization abolishes them. Competitive perform-
ance of German high-wage capitalism requires continuous supportive as well
as  directive  public  or  quasi-public  intervention,  inevitably  organized  at  na-
tional level and dependent on a capacity, vested in the nation-state, to police
the  boundaries  between  the  national  economy  and  its  environment.  While
versions  of  capitalism  that  require  less  state  capacity  for  their  governance
may  hope  that  the  attrition  of  national  boundaries  under  globalization  will
leave them intact, this is quite different for a nationally organized economy
like Germany.

The  postwar  German  compromise  between  labor  and  capital,  or  between
German society and its capitalist economy, was conditional on limited mobil-
ity of production factors across national  borders.  At  its  core  was  an  institu-
tionalized mutual accommodation of capital and labor markets – both them-

Streeck: German Capitalism

23

selves  highly  organized  by  government  intervention  and  associative  self-
regulation – that turned  less-than-perfectly  mobile  capital  into  a  societal  re-
source, and the financial sector into an economic infrastructure, for a pattern
of  production  compatible  with  social  objectives  like  low  inequality.  In  ex-
change, society provided a labor supply willing and able to satisfy economic
requirements of high competitiveness in international quality markets. Glob-
alization, by increasing the mobility of capital and labor across national bor-
ders, extricates the labor supply from national control and enables the finan-
cial sector to refuse doing service as a national utility. By internationalizing,
and thereby disorganizing, capital and labor markets, globalization dissolves
whatever  negiotiated  coordination  may  have  been  nationally  accomplished
between them and replaces it with global hierarchical dominance of the for-
mer over the latter.

The West German labor market has long attracted foreign workers, so much so
that by the late 1980s the number of foreigners living in West Germany had
become  far  higher  than  in  any  other  Western  European  country.  Still,  the
German mixture of immigration controls, effective enforcement of labor stan-
dards, full extension to immigrants of union representation and social rights
and partial integration of foreign workers in training and retraining kept the
supply of unskilled labor to domestic employers low enough to sustain labor
market pressures for upward restructuring. The breakdown of Communism
in Eastern Europe, however, has unleashed an inflow of immigrants of a di-
mension that in the long term seems incompatible with high labor standards,
an extended welfare state, and a normalized pattern of high-wage and high-
skill employment.

Unemployment  in  Eastern  Europe  will  change  German  labor  markets  even
without direct immigration, much more so than the completion of the Euro-
pean Community’s “Internal Market” in 1992. It has always been part of the
German  model  that  low-skill  jobs  were  to  be  allowed  to  move  to  low-wage
countries, with job outflow  ideally  balanced  by  growth  of,  and  training  for,
high-skill and high-wage employment. High long-term unemployment in the
1980s showed that achieving this balance was becoming difficult even when
the Iron Curtain was still in place. Today the Czech Republic in particular has
become a vast low-wage labor pool for German firms – and, unlike classical
low-wage  countries  like  Portugal,  one  with  a  skilled  workforce  geographi-
cally  close  enough  to  Germany  even  to  be  included  in  just-in-time  produc-
tion.

Accession of Eastern Europe to the European Union, which Germany cannot
resist because it must be vitally interested in political stability behind its East-
ern borders, will remove the last remaining uncertainties for Western inves-

24

MPIFG Discussion Paper 95/5

tors, most of whom will be German. It will also make construction of a “Social
Dimension” of the European Internal Market, one that might protect German
labor markets from the deregulating effects of internationalization, even more
difficult than it already is. The consequence will be a further increase in the
availability  to  German  employers  of  cheap,  and  sometimes  not  even  un-
skilled,  labor,  undermining  the  German  high-wage  system  by  encouraging
outflow of jobs at a time of growing inflow of workers.

As the German labor market is dissolving into its international environment,
so  is  the  German  capital  market.  Financial  capital  was  always  more  interna-
tionally mobile than labor, and West Germany was one of the first countries
after the war formally to dispense with capital controls. But for a long time
there were a number of effective impediments to capital mobility sufficient to
allow for a meaningful distinction between German and non-German capital,
and for the former to be governed by national institutions. For reasons related
to  national  history  and  international  politics,  German  finance  capital  was
historically less cosmopolitan in outlook and enjoyed less international mar-
ket access than British capital. Also, German banks’ Hausbank mode of opera-
tion was and is hard to apply outside Germany; different national regulatory
regimes  made  international  operations  costly  to  enter;  and  communication
technology before the micro-electronic revolution slowed international capital
flows,  thereby  limiting  the  size  of  the  international  capital  market.  As  to
German industrial capital, general logistical, organizational and political un-
certainties  combined  with  cultural  idiosyncrasies  of  management  and  work
organization  –  as  well  as  with  the  specific  incentives  offered  by  Standort
Deutschland, such as high-skilled labor and social peace – to keep the outflow
of investment and jobs limited.

Globalization has removed most of these constraints and turned formal into
de facto liberalization of capital markets. Financial internationalization weak-
ens  the  hold  German  banks  have  over  the  credit  supply  to  German  firms,
which in turn weakens the banks’ capacity and motivation to monitor com-
pany performance and promote prudent long-termism in company strategy.
Large German firms seem to have for some time been making efforts to extri-
cate  themselves  from  the  tutelage  of  their  Hausbanken,  in  part  because  with
globalization their credit needs are beginning to outgrow the German market.
Simultaneously,  attracted  by  burgeoning  international  opportunities,  the
German financial sector is becoming more internationally minded, with even
Sparkassen  and  Genossenschaftsbanken  taking  a  keen  interest  in  the  global  ca-
sino.  As  national  boundaries  wither  away,  and  the  German  financial  sector
dissolves into a globally integrated financial services industry, the special re-
lationship  between  German  banks  and  German  firms  may  increasingly  be-
come less “relational” and more market-like.

Streeck: German Capitalism

25

The Parochialism of Nationally Organized Capitalism

If  national  boundaries  are  doomed  to  fall  in  the  course  of  globalization,
making it impossible for nationally distinct versions of capitalism to remain
distinct from their environment, could the German model not survive by be-
ing extended to the emerging global economy? Indeed as the capitalist econ-
omy  internationalizes,  some  of  the  institutions  that  govern  its  German  ver-
sion  are  being  adopted  by  other  countries  and  international  organizations.
Unlike the Institutionentransfer of German unification, however, this process is
highly selective, being strictly limited to institutions that make or accommo-
date markets at the exclusion of others, equally central to German capitalism,
that socially embed and correct such markets.

1.
International markets are constructed through diplomacy, not through the
complex domestic class politics that gave rise to soziale Marktwirtschaft. They
are  therefore  not  likely  ever  to  become  embedded  in  similar  protective-
redistributive arrangements as German markets. Nota bene that Germany, in
coalition with the British and against the French, succeeded in extending its
competition  regime  to  the  European  Community,  whereas  its  efforts  to  en-
dow  the  Internal  Market  with  a  “social  dimension,”  in  alliance  with  the
French and against the British, came to naught.

2. The German firm cannot serve as a model for corporate reorganization in
other countries. Co-determination is not based in the individual firm and its
competitive  interests,  but  in  the  broader  German  political  and  institutional
context.  It  cannot  therefore  be  internationally  extended.  This  holds  even
within the European Community, where efforts to export German company
law,  and  with  it  the  characteristic  balance  between  capital  and  labor  in  the
governance  of  large  firms,  were  defeated  by  resistance  not  just  from  Euro-
pean capital, but also from most  non-German  trade  unions.  Moreover,  Ger-
man management practices, unlike Japanese ones, have never been success-
fully  reproduced  outside  Germany,  reflecting  the  dependence  of  German
firms for crucial governance functions on a – national – exoskeleton of rule-
setting  institutions  that  an  individual  firm  cannot  and  will  not  build  on  its
own.

3. Even more than in Germany, what state capacity there is in the interna-
tional  economy  is  weak  and  fragmented.  International  efforts  to  mobilize
state-like forms of public power for purposes of economic governance never
got very far, not even in the European Community, which historically repre-
sents the most ambitious attempt at state-building above the nation-state.  If
monetary union is ever realized, the European Central Bank will be as insu-

26

MPIFG Discussion Paper 95/5

lated  from  political  pressure  as  the  German  Bundesbank,  and  will  operate
under the same monetarist principles. Unlike the German state, however, the
European  quasi-state  has  no  capacity  to  provide  for  equalization  of  living
conditions  in  its  territorial  subunits.  Even  more  importantly,  the  German
state’s quintessential ability to replace direct state intervention and provision
with assistance to organized social groups regulating themselves in the pur-
suit  of  collective  goods  –  such  as  the  infrastructural  conditions  of  interna-
tional  competitiveness  under  high  labor  standards  and  a  hard  currency  re-
gime  –  cannot  be  replicated  at  the  international  level.  Just  as  German
Marktwirtschaft  is  being  internationalized  without  its  social  correctives,  Ger-
man institutionalized monetarism is about to be transferred to the European
Community  without  the  associative  self-governance  that  makes  it  sozialver-
träglich in Germany.

4. German  associations  prosper  because  of  their  close  relationship  to  a  fa-
cilitating  state.  No  such  state  exists,  nor  can  one  exist,  in  the  international
economy. To the extent that the latter is a negotiated economy, it is negotiated
between states, not between associations. Beyond the nation-state there are no
organized social groups with the capacity to build and maintain a floor under
international markets, or correct international market outcomes by negotiated
redistribution.  Other  than  states,  the  only  major  actors  in  the  international
arena  are  large  firms,  increasingly  institutional  in  character,  with  ample  re-
sources  to  pursue  their  interests  individually,  unconstrained  by  union  or
government pressure forcing them into international class solidarity, and in-
deed  with  a  growing  capacity  to  extricate  themselves  from  associative  gov-
ernance at national level, very likely increasingly also in Germany.

5. German traditionalist culture would seem to be even less suitable for in-
ternationalization. As Michel Albert (1993) has pointed out, Germans are as
susceptible as anybody else to the attractions of non-traditional, “American”
economic culture. Compared to these, the slow-moving, conservative, collec-
tivistic and all-too-prudent German system must inevitably seem boring and
utterly devoid of “fun.” In fact there are many ways in which cultural inter-
nationalization may disrupt the standard operating procedures of a densely
organized  society  like  Germany  that  thrives  on  long-term  incremental  im-
provement  and  requires  stable  commitments  and  suppression  of  opportun-
ism. Just as German savers and investors may grow more rechenhaft, German
managers, increasingly trained at American business schools, may want to be
allowed to “make decisions” like their American role models. And there are
indications  that  the  German  vocational  training  system  is  about  to  be  dra-
matically  transformed  by  internationalization,  among  other  things  by  Euro-

Streeck: German Capitalism

27

pean  Community  “harmonization”  of  skill  profiles  in  the  unified  European
labor market.

Market-modifying  and  market-correcting  political  intervention  in  the  econ-
omy, including publicly enabled associational self-regulation, can take place
only within nation-states, because it is only here that the public power neces-
sary  for  the  purpose  can  be  mobilized.  Economic  globalization  therefore
erodes  the  conditions  for  such  intervention  and,  by  default  but  also  by  de-
sign, leaves  only  de-politicized,  privatized  and  market-driven  forms  of  eco-
nomic order. It is above all for this reason that the German version of capital-
ism  cannot  be  exported.  Globalization  discriminates  against  modes  of  eco-
nomic  governance  that  require  public  intervention  associated  with  a  sort  of
state capacity that is unavailable in the anarchic world of international poli-
tics. It favors national systems like those of the United States and Britain that
have  historically  relied  less  on  public-political  and  more  on  private-
contractual economic governance, making them more structurally compatible
with the emerging global system, and in fact enabling them to regard the lat-
ter  as  an  extension  of  themselves.  It  is  this  deregulatory  bias  of  globalization
that seems to  be  at  the  bottom  of  Albert’s  (1993)  pessimistic  prediction  that
global  competition  will  result  in  the  perverse  outcome  of  the  less  well-
performing  Anglo-American  model  of  capitalism  outcompeting  the  better
performing “Rhine model.”

28

MPIFG Discussion Paper 95/5

References

Acs, Z. J., and D. B. Audretsch, eds., 1993: Small Firms and Entrepreneurship: An East-

West Perspective, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press

Albert, M., 1993:  Capitalism Against Capitalism, London: Whurr Publishers
Freeman, R., 1988: “Labour Market Institutions and Economic Performance,” in Eco-

nomic Policy, Vol. 3, April 1988, 64-80

Freeman, R. B., 1993: “How Labor Fares in Advanced Economies,” in R. B. Freeman,

ed., Working Under Different Rules, New York: Russell Sage Foundation

Hollingsworth,  J.  R.,  Ph.  C.  Schmitter  and  W.  Streeck,  1994:    Governing  Capitalist
Economies: Performance and Control of Economic Sectors, New York: Oxford Univer-
sity Press

Loveman, G., and W. Sengenberger, 1990: “Introduction: Economic and Social Reor-
ganization in the Small and Medium-Sized Enterprise Sector”, in W. Sengenber-
ger et al., eds., The Re-Emergence of Small Enterprises: Industrial Restructuring in In-
dustrialized Countries, Geneva: International Institute for Labor Studies, 1-61

Streeck, W., 1992: “Productive Constraints: On the Institutional Conditions of Diver-
sified Quality Production,” in Social Institutions and Economic Performance: Studies
of Industrial Relations in Advanced Capitalist Economies, London: Sage, 1-40

Streeck, W., 1994: “Pay Restraint Without Incomes Policy: Constitutionalized Mone-
tarism and Industrial Unionism in Germany,” in R. Boyer, R. Dore and Z. Mars,
eds., The Return to Incomes Policy, London: Francis Pinter, 118-140

Visser, J., 1991: “Trends in Trade Union Membership,” in OECD Employment Outlook,

July, 97-134

