HOW TO WRITE A SEMINAR 

PAPER…

WS 2014-2015. Dr. Sabine N. Meyer. Jatin Wagle

1

HOW TO GET STARTED…. 

BASIC QUESTIONS

• What do I want to do?

• What are my strengths?
• What are my weaknesses?
• What motivates / interests / attracts me

• What do I need to do?

• What are the minimum requirements?
• What are the speciﬁc requirements in terms of

• Form
• Content
• Frame (length/pages and time/deadline)

2

STEP ONE: 

INVENTION, OR: WELCOME TO THE LAB!

Locate a subject
• Browse the syllabus / your notes…
• Read secondary texts for ideas which you could develop further
• Select the material / the genre / the text
• Play with potential themes, topics and questions
• Try to develop speciﬁc ideas
• Create a list of concrete examples
• Brainstorming: Generate a list of ideas without thinking about them 

too deeply, then sort them

• Free-writing: Try to write as much as possible in one stretch about 
your subject, then look for observations which could be developed 
further

3

STEP ONE: 

INVENTION, OR: WELCOME TO THE LAB!

Use invention techniques:

! Construct a map of subtopics and questions around the central 

topic, sort them and draw connections between them

4

4

STEP ONE: 

INVENTION, OR: WELCOME TO THE LAB!

5

STEP ONE: 

INVENTION, OR: WELCOME TO THE LAB!

Once you located one or several possible topics, you need 
to look at the secondary or critical literature.
• What is out there? What has been done so far? 
• Is there too much/too little secondary literature?
• Are there questions that have never been asked?
• Are there questions that have been asked but not thoroughly 

answered?

• Gaps in the research done so far? Strands of research you 

disagree with?

6

STEP ONE: PHRASING A TOPIC

Topic: 
• Issue, problem, question that you want to discuss 
• Should involve several points of view (+ your own)
Relevance:
• Topic has to be relevant
• Debatable, unknown
• If debated, new synthesis, new theoretical approach
• Topic needs to lend itself to a thorough analysis
• Ask yourself: “So what?”
Topic and logical argumentation:
• Is the line of possible argumentation clear?
• Is the methodology known? 

7

STEP ONE: PHRASING A TOPIC

From a Broad Topic to a Focused One
• The most frequent mistake is that the topic is too wide in its scope, i.e. 

too inclusive and exhaustive, or overgeneralized, e.g. Love in English 
poetry

• Never write purely narrative or overview (survey) papers (retelling the 
story of e.g. the Civil War), otherwise your paper will be superﬁcial and 
lack in academic relevance.

• Make sure that the topic is speciﬁc enough for you to deal with diverse 

interpretations.

• Ideally, you should be able to become a specialist in your chosen topic, 

i.e. you know (almost) everything that was written about it (this 
particularly includes the most recent literature).

• Alongside specialization, never lose sight of the wider context (historical 

or interpretive).

8

STEP ONE: PHRASING A TOPIC

To summarize, your aim is to explain:
What you are writing about – your topic:

• I intend to/would like to show/aim at showing that…
• What interests me most is…
• My discussion is meant to demonstrate how…

• Revise / deﬁne scope

• I will concentrate on the following central aspects / questions…
• The analysis will focus on three important features…

What you (and others) don‘t know about it: 

• In contrast to the research done so far…
• In order to close this existing gap…

Make an assessment of its relevance for the reader and the wider research 
community

• I think that it will help in better understanding…
• The discussion will reveal the major source of…

9

STEP TWO: DEVELOPING A THESIS

Deﬁnition
• A thesis: A general, non-trivial statement about an object or phenomenon 

which has to be proven by demonstration and argument.
Wording the Thesis:
• The thesis must be properly worded, interesting, and challenging/contestable. 
A vague, confusing, overly general/speciﬁc, obvious, boring thesis will result in 
a boring paper and discourage any reader from reading it.

• Properly worded, the thesis should: 

• be clear, comprehensible, and direct
• predict major divisions in the structure of the paper
• commit the writer to an unmistakable course, argument, or point of 

view

• It's good to use words emphasizing a certain development: conﬂict, 

contribution, representation, development, negotiation.

10

STEP TWO: DEVELOPING A THESIS

Do I have a thesis?
• The thesis is a ‘claim’
• Be realistic: Why claim something you can’t possibly  prove?
• Be challenging: Why claim something that ‘goes without saying’?
• A thesis links a subject with a controlling idea: “the poetic 

representation of death in this poem (= subject to be discussed) is 
an effort to manage its threat through its artistic expression (= 
claim to be proved)” 

• The thesis is the organizing principle of your argument.
• State it at the beginning, recall it throughout, reassess it at the end.
• Always keep your thesis in mind!
• Change it when necessary: Remember a thesis is a thesis is a thesis.

11

STEP TWO: DEVELOPING A THESIS

How to Tell a Strong Thesis Statement from a Weak One:

1. A strong thesis statement takes some sort of stand.

e.g. There are some negative and positive aspects to the Banana Herb 

Tea Supplement.

This is a weak thesis statement. First, it fails to take a stand. Second, the 

phrase negative and positive aspects is vague.

e.g. Since Banana Herb Tea Supplement promotes rapid weight loss 
that results in the loss of muscle and lean body mass, it poses a 
potential danger to customers.

This is a strong thesis because it takes a stand, and because it's speciﬁc.

12

STEP TWO: DEVELOPING A THESIS

2. A strong thesis statement justiﬁes discussion.

e.g. My family is an extended family.

This is a weak thesis because it merely states an observation. Your reader won’t 

be able to tell the point of the statement, and will probably stop reading.

e.g. While most American families would view consanguineal marriage as a 
threat to the nuclear family structure, many Iranian families, like my own, 
believe that these marriages help reinforce kinship ties in an extended family.

This is a strong thesis because it shows how your experience contradicts a 

widely-accepted view. A good strategy for creating a strong thesis is to show 
that the topic is controversial. Readers will be interested in reading the rest 
of the essay to see how you support your point.

13

STEP TWO: DEVELOPING A THESIS

3. A strong thesis statement expresses one main idea.

e.g. Companies need to exploit the marketing potential of the Internet, and 

Web pages can provide both advertising and customer support.

This is a weak thesis statement because the reader can’t decide whether the 
paper is about marketing on the Internet or Web pages. To revise the thesis, 
the relationship between the two ideas needs to become more clear. 

e.g. Since the Internet is ﬁlled with tremendous marketing potential, 

companies should exploit this potential by using Web pages that offer both 
advertising and customer support.

This is a strong thesis because it shows that the two ideas are related. Hint: a 

great many clear and engaging thesis statements contain words like 
because, since, so, although, unless, and however.

14

STEP TWO: DEVELOPING A THESIS

4. A strong thesis statement is speciﬁc.

e.g. World hunger has many causes and effects.

This is a weak thesis statement for two major reasons. First, world 

hunger can’t be discussed thoroughly in seven to ten pages. Second, 
many causes and effects is vague. You should be able to identify 
speciﬁc causes and effects.

e.g. Hunger persists in Glandelinia because jobs are scarce and farming 

in the infertile soil is rarely proﬁtable.

This is a strong thesis statement because it narrows the subject to a 

more speciﬁc and manageable topic, and it also identiﬁes the speciﬁc 
causes for the existence of hunger.

15

STEP THREE: INTRODUCTION

The purpose of an introduction:

! State the frame of reference: What the reader needs to know in 

order to follow your argument.

! To invite the reader to read on: “This would later reveal/lead to…”

! State the appeal of your argument: “You will ﬁnd out/learn that…”

! Share your excitement: Your insight and how you wish to defend/

prove it.

! Sketch out a ground plan: “We will ﬁrst… and then…”

! State your promise:  Your thesis and its value

16

STEP THREE: INTRODUCTION

The introduction needs to consist of the following parts:

I. Establishing Common Ground

• Introduce the reader to your topic, open up your topic

 Here are some strategies of how to lead into a topic: 

• You can start with a quotation (e.g. from an article/essay): 

EXAMPLE: “xxxxxx” (xxxx). As this quotation shows… This quotation 
serves as the starting point for my discussion of the representation of 
the American South in Kate Chopin’s novel The Awakening (1899).  

17

STEP THREE: INTRODUCTION

• You can start with a short ‘narrative’: 

EXAMPLE: In 1899 Kate Chopin’s novel The Awakening was published, a novel 
that deals with… (keep your plot summary VERY short; don’t retell, just 
summarize in two or three sentences) 

• You can start by positioning your topic/material in public debates (e.g. 

reviews): 
EXAMPLE: The publication of Kate Chopin’s novel The Awakening (1899) 
instigated heated debates … Against the backdrop of these reﬂections I will…

• You can start by positioning of your topic in scholarly debates: 

EXAMPLE: Recent scholarship on Kate Chopin’s novel The Awakening (1899) 
has increasingly focused on the development of the novel’s protagonist, Edna 
Pontellier, from… to…. This has mainly to do with the rise of feminist criticism 
in European and American scholarship. As Showalter argues, “xxxx.” In a similar 
vein, xxx claims that…. These scholars have, however, neglected to duly 
consider…

18

STEP THREE: INTRODUCTION

II. State Your Problem
Thesis Statement: To be veriﬁed/falsiﬁed in the course of your 

paper 

Alternative options: stating the main point/solution vs. promising a 

solution (just indicating where your paper is headed)

III. Approach and Methodology
Include a critical reﬂection of your approach and methodology.
e.g. theories on gender and ethnicity
Deﬁne central terms (e.g. “gender”) in the introduction or in a 

separate chapter.

19

STEP THREE: INTRODUCTION

IV. Research Report
• The research report elaborates on theoretical texts and 

secondary literature that are central to your paper and to the 
topic as such. Here, you should mention key texts and trace 
the current debate on your topic.

• As you normally cannot include all positions in your paper, you 
should justify your exclusions and choice of theoretical and 
secondary literature. 

• Ideally, you should position your work vis-à-vis the work that has 

been done so far.

20

STEP THREE: INTRODUCTION

V. Structure
• Give a short overview of how your paper 

will be structured.

• Roughly speaking, the introduction should 
not be longer than about 1/10 of your 
whole paper.

21

STEP FOUR: THE MAIN PART

• Usually, the main body of your paper contains a 

section on theory, on literary or historical 
contextualization. Including the research debate 
(section 2), and a section dealing with textual 
analysis, i.e. with the primary text(s) (section 3).

• Theoretical and/or contextual work should never 

exceed textual analysis. The primary text has to be 
at the center of your analysis!

22

STEP FOUR: THE MAIN PART

Thinking in paragraphs

! What makes a paragraph:

! Content
! Function
! Tone

! 'miniature essay': controlling ideas and connecting them
! Organization and development: building an argument
! Single unit within a larger ﬂow
! Unique, but bound to the logic of the argument
! Room to breathe: paragraphs, line breaks and transitions

23

STEP FOUR: THE MAIN PART

Thinking in paragraphs

• Efﬁciency: the paragraph is a servant to the master argument
• Economy: variation between statement and preparation
• Evidence: caring for the rhetorical 'dress code'
• Enactment: constructing a plot or narrative

Optimizing your structure

• Move it: if your results question or contradict your thesis, adapt 

and revise your thesis and move (remove) your paragraphs.

• Think functionally: does the paragraph add to the argument or 
not, is it part of a logical sequence of ideas, or does it confuse / 
diffuse?

24

STEP FIVE: CONCLUSION

The end is not an end:

• Retracing the steps: summary
• Reassessing the steps: evaluating
• Stepping beyond: what remains to be done

‘I’m done' is not enough:

• What we have learned
• What we could do
• What it means within the larger scheme of things
• What has not been solved
• Questions for further study

25

STEP FIVE: REVISION

• Revision (there is no end to it)

• Going through your paper again (and again)
• Let someone have a look at it (thanks!)

• Formal Issues
• Sources
• Notes
• Spell check

• For these formal issues, go through the following slides…

26

FORMATTING AND STYLE

General Guidelines
• 1.5-space the text of your paper (MLA says double-
spaced), and use a legible font like Times New Roman (size 
12)
• Set the margins of your document to 2.5 cm on the top, 2 
cm on the bottom, 2.5 cm on the left, and 4 cm on the 
right.
• Indent the ﬁrst line of a paragraph 0.5 cm (ﬁve spaces or 
press tab once) from the left margin.
• Number all pages starting with the introduction.

27

FORMATTING AND STYLE

Titles
• Capitalize nouns, pronouns, verbs, adjectives, adverbs, and 

subordinating conjunctions (after, although, before, if, when, where 
while) in the titles of articles, books, etc.

• Do not capitalize articles (a, an, the), prepositions (against, between, in, 
of,…), coordinating conjunctions (and, but, for, nor, or, so, yet), and the 
to in inﬁnitives unless they are ﬁrst words of the title or subtitle:
e.g. Gone with the Wind; The Art of War; There Is Nothing Left to Lose
• Use italics throughout your paper for titles of larger works (books, 

journals) and foreign words (e.g. Bildungsroman), and “quotation marks” 
for titles of shorter works (poems, articles).

28

FORMATTING AND STYLE

Punctuation

• Before the second quotation mark (no matter if you quote part of or the 

entire sentence):

comma: “…,” full stop: “….”
semicolon: “…”; … colon: “…”: …

E.g. In his famous and inﬂuential work On the Interpretation of Dreams, 
Sigmund Freud argues that dreams are the “royal road to the unconscious,”1 
expressing in coded imagery the dreamer’s unfulﬁlled wishes through a 
process known as the “dream work.”² According to Freud, actual but 
unacceptable desires are censored internally and subjected to coding through 
layers of condensation and displacement before emerging in a kind of rebus 
puzzle in the dream itself.³

29

TERMINOLOGY/LANGUAGE

• Literary and cultural studies require an acute awareness of 

terminology. Terms have a history; they carry different 
meanings at different times and in different contexts.
• For instance, the literary term “romance” designates 

different genres depending on whether you are talking 
about mediaeval France or about eighteenth-century 
England.

• Thus, be careful to deﬁne and contextualize terms 

according to literary and cultural studies, and demonstrate 
your awareness of controversial and pejorative terms by 
putting them in quotation marks.

30

TERMINOLOGY/LANGUAGE

• Use language that can also be understood by a reader who is not a 

specialist in the respective ﬁeld of study. Complicated wording or 
sentence structures do not make for a good paper.

• Do not use too many specialized terms or overly complicated 

terminology

• Do not use overly lengthy and complicated sentences

• Use language that is as clear, direct, and precise as possible. In good 

academic works, there is nothing to hide through muddled and 
opaque wording.

• Keep the language as neutral and balanced as possible. Avoid hasty, 
informal, and unnecessary value judgments and dismissive remarks.

31

TERMINOLOGY/LANGUAGE

• Avoid informal style and colloquialisms-
• Do NOT use contractions, viz. don’t, can’t
• Remember the apostrophes in genitive cases, e.g. “author’s 

intention” and NOT “authors intention”

• Expressing one’s intention: in this paper I intend to; this paper 

seeks to…./aims at….; I will analyze etc. (Do NOT use the 
present tense.)

• Avoid ﬁllers/vagueness. Avoids statements, viz. In the main part, 

I will introduce my thesis. Or, many different scholars wrote 
many different things on this topic. Or, I will analyze my topic 
with the help of several passages from my novel.

32

TITLE PAGE

• The title page should be single-spaced.
• In the upper left-hand corner, list the name of the university 

and the department, also the term, the course title, the 
instructor’s name, and the date of submission.

• In the lower right-hand corner, list your name, email address, 
phone number, subjects, program, and number of semesters 
(Fachsemester).

• Center the title. Use italics and quotation marks when 

referring to other works in your title, just as you would in 
your text.

Sample Title
Page

33

Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität
Englisches Seminar: Amerikanistik
Sommersemster 2009
Hauptseminar: Edgar Allan Poe
Dozentin: Dr. Juliane Schmidt
May 25, 2009

SAMPLE TITLE 

PAGE

Myths of Femininity in Edgar Allan Poe’s 

“Ligeia”:

Conformity and Subversion

Maria Muster
Musterstraße 14
48143 Münster
Email: m.muster@uni-muenster.de
Tel. 0251-555 555
Anglistik/Amerikanistik/Germanistik
(Bachelor 2fach)
3. Fachsemester
Matrikelnummer

14

34

Sample Table of
SAMPLE TABLE 
Contents
OF CONTENTS

Table of Contents

1. Introduction 

2. Mythology 

Try to come up with
intelligent chapter 
Section headings: 
headings!!!!
Short, clear, cleverly 
worded, insightful 
reference/s to the 
content of the 
section.

2.1. Roland Barthes and Simone de Beauvoir 
2.2. Myths of Femininity

2.2.1. Temptress Eve: Carrier of Death 
2.2.2. Virgin Mary: Bridge to the Beyond 

2.3. The Cult of True Womanhood 

3. “Ligeia” 

3.1. Structural Implications 
3.2. The Image of Ligeia 
3.3. The Deathbed Scene 

4. Conclusion 

List of Works Cited

1

2

2
3

3
4

5

6

6
8
9

10

15

35

QUOTING, PARAPHRASING, SUMMARIZING

These three ways of incorporating other writers’ work into your own 
differ according to the closeness of your writing to that of the source.
• Quotations must be identical to the original, using a narrow segment of 
the source. They must match the source document word for word and 
must be attributed to the original author.

• Paraphrasing involves putting a passage from source material into your 
own words. A paraphrase must also be attributed to the original source. 
Paraphrased material is usually shorter than the original passage, taking 
a somewhat broader segment of the source and condensing it slightly.
• Summarizing involves putting the main idea(s) into your own words, 

including only the main point(s). Once again, it is necessary to attribute 
summarized ideas to the original source. Summaries are signiﬁcantly 
shorter than the original and present only a broad overview of the 
source material.

36

QUOTING, PARAPHRASING, SUMMARIZING
Quotations, paraphrases, and summaries serve many 

purposes. You might use them to…

• provide support for claims or add credibility to your writing;
• refer to work that leads up to the work you are now doing;
• give examples of several points of view on a subject;
• call attention to a position that you wish to agree or disagree with;
• highlight a particularly striking phrase, sentence, or passage by 

quoting the original;

• distance yourself from the original by quoting it in order to inform 

the reader that the words are not your own;
• expand the breadth or depth of your writing.

37

QUOTATION           PARAPHRASE

“One of the most striking 
things about detective 
ﬁction”, Patricia Craig 
argues in her critical 
introduction to English 
detective stories, “is the 
ease with which it 
accommodates all kinds 
of topical ideologies.”

It is among the most 
prominent features of 
detective ﬁction, Patricia 
Craig points out, that all 
kinds of topical ideologies 
are easily accommodated 
within it.

38

QUOTATIONS

Short Quotations
• To indicate short quotations (fewer than four typed lines of prose or three lines 

of verse) in your text, enclose the quotation within double quotation marks. 
Provide the author and speciﬁc page citation (in the case of verse, provide line 
numbers) in the text, and include a complete reference on the “Works Cited” page. 
Punctuation marks such as periods, commas, and semicolons should appear after 
the parenthetical citation. Question marks and exclamation points should appear 
within the quotation marks if they are a part of the quoted passage but after the 
parenthetical citation if they are a part of your text. For example:
According to some, dreams express “profound aspects of personality” (Foulkes 
184), though others disagree.
According to Foulkes’s study, dreams may express “profound aspects of 
personality” (184).
Is it possible that dreams may express “profound aspects of personality” (Foulkes 
184)?

39

QUOTATIONS

Long Quotations
• For quotations that are four or more lines of verse or prose: place quotations in 
a free-standing block of text and omit quotation marks. Start the quotation on a 
new line, with the entire quote indented one inch from the left margin. Your 
parenthetical citation should come after the closing punctuation mark. When 
quoting verse, maintain original line breaks. For example:
Nelly Dean treats Heathcliff poorly and dehumanizes him throughout her 
narration:

They entirely refused to have it in bed with them, or even in their room, and 
I had no more sense, so, I put it on the landing of the stairs, hoping it would 
be gone on the morrow. By chance, or else attracted by hearing his voice, it 
crept to Mr. Earnshaw's door, and there he found it on quitting his chamber. 
Inquiries were made as to how it got there; I was obliged to confess, and in 
recompense for my cowardice and inhumanity was sent out of the house. 
(Bronte 78)

40

QUOTATIONS

Adding or Omitting Words In Quotations
• If you add a word or words in a quotation, you should put brackets 
around the words to indicate that they are not part of the original text.
Jan Harold Brunvand, in an essay on urban legends, states: "some 
individuals [who retell urban legends] make a point of learning every 
rumor or tale" (78).

• If you omit a word or words from a quotation, you should indicate the 
deleted word or words by using ellipsis marks, which are three periods 
(...) preceded and followed by a space. For example:
• In an essay on urban legends, Jan Harold Brunvand notes that "some 

individuals make a point of learning every recent rumor or tale ... and 
in a short time a lively exchange of details occurs" (78).

41

QUOTATIONS

NOTE: According to the 6th Edition of the MLA Handbook, 
brackets are no longer needed around ellipses unless adding 
brackets would clarify your use of ellipses.
For example, if there are ellipsis marks in the quoted author's 
work, do not put brackets around them; but do use brackets 
around ellipsis marks you add, so as to distinguish them from 
ellipsis marks in the quoted author’s work. Also note that the 
MLA Style Guide still requires brackets, so it’s probably best 
practice to follow the MLA manual appropriate to your 
assignment or publication.

42

PLAGIARISM

• Every quotation as well as idea, thought, knowledge from another person must 

be marked as such and its source must be speciﬁed! 

• Otherwise your inclusion of someone else’s thoughts and ideas is plagiarism and 
will be seriously punished. In an academic environment where everybody is free 
and dependent upon being able to borrow and use other authors' ﬁndings and 
research, it is equally necessary that all scholars abide by the rules that one never 
tries to attempt to pass other knowledge as one’s own. 

• Plagiarism is a form of academic dishonesty at all universities and is considered a 
serious offense with equally serious consequences. Acts of plagiarism will lead to 
a "fail," sometimes even to suspension or exclusion.

Examples of plagiarism include:
• failure to provide sources for quotations or paraphrases
• paraphrasing, omitting, rearranging, or forming new combinations of words in an 

attempt to make the thoughts of another person appear as your own

43

WORKS CITED

• Sources must reﬂect current scholarly debates on the 

issue

• Not the general scholarship on your material but the 

literature dealing speciﬁcally with your topic 

• Academic sources (watch out for unserious publishers)
• Only serious websites from the internet
• MLA RULES!

44

WORKS CITED

Basic Rules
• Begin your Works Cited page on a separate page at the end of your 

research paper. It should have the same margins as the rest of your paper.
• Label the page Works Cited (do not underline the words Works Cited or 

put them in quotation marks) and center the words Works Cited at the top 
of the page. 

• 1.5 space all citations, but do not skip spaces between entries. 
• Indent the second and subsequent lines of citations ﬁve spaces so that you 

create a hanging indent. 

• List page numbers of sources efﬁciently, when needed. If you refer to a 
journal article that appeared on pages 225 through 250, list the page 
numbers on your Works Cited page as 225-50. 

45

ADDITIONAL BASIC RULES NEW TO MLA 2009

• For every entry, you must determine the medium of publication. 

Most entries will likely be listed as Print or Web sources, but 
other possibilities may include Film, CD-ROM, or DVD.

• Writers are no longer required to provide URLs for Web 

entries. However, if your instructor or publisher insists on them, 
include them in angle brackets after the entry and end with a 
period. For long URLs, break lines only at slashes.

• If you're citing an article or a publication that was originally 
issued in print form but that you retrieved from an online 
database, you should type the online database name in italics. 
You do not need to provide subscription information in addition 
to the database name.

46

47

WORKS CITED: THE BASICS

Listing Author Names
• Entries are listed by author name (or, for entire edited 

collections, editor names). Author names are written last 
name ﬁrst; middle names or middle initials follow the ﬁrst 
name.

• Do not list titles (Dr., Sir, Saint, etc.) or degrees (PhD, MA, 

DDS, etc.) with names. Do, however, include sufﬁxes like “Jr.” 
or “II.” Putting it all together, a work by Dr. Martin Luther 
King, Jr. would be cited as “King, Martin Luther, Jr.,” with the 
sufﬁx following the ﬁrst or middle name and a comma. 

48

WORKS CITED: BOOKS

Basic Format
• Book with a single author: First, the author’s name appears 
in last name, ﬁrst name format. The basic form for a book 
citation is:
Lastname, Firstname. Title of Book. Place of Publication: 
Publisher, Year of Publication. Medium of Publication. 

Examples: Book with One Author
Gleick, James. Chaos: Making a New Science. New York: Penguin, 1987. Print. 

Henley, Patricia. The Hummingbird House. Denver: MacMurray, 1999. Print.

49

WORKS CITED: BOOKS

Book with More Than One Author
• The ﬁrst given name appears in last name, ﬁrst name format; subsequent author names 

appear in ﬁrst name last name format.

Gillespie, Paula, and Neal Lerner. The Allyn and Bacon Guide to Peer Tutoring. 

Boston: Allyn, 2000. Print. 

• If there are more than three authors, you may choose to list only the ﬁrst author 

followed by the phrase et al. (Latin for "and others") in place of the subsequent authors' 
names, or you may list all the authors in the order in which their names appear on the 
title page. (Note that there is a period after “al” in “et al.” Also note that there is never a 
period after the “et” in “et al.”).

Wysocki, Anne Frances, et al. Writing New Media: Theory and Applications for 

Expanding the Teaching of Composition. Logan, UT: Utah State UP, 2004. Print. 

or
Wysocki, Anne Frances, Johndan Johnson-Eilola, Cynthia L. Selfe, and Geoffrey 
Sirc. Writing New Media: Theory and Applications for Expanding the Teaching 
of Composition. Logan, UT: Utah State UP, 2004. Print.

50

WORKS CITED: BOOKS

Two or More Books by the Same Author
• List works alphabetically by title. (Remember to 
ignore articles like A, An, and The.) Provide the 
author’s name in last name, ﬁrst name format for the 
ﬁrst entry only. For each subsequent entry by the 
same author, use three hyphens and a period.
Palmer, William J. Dickens and New Historicism. 

New York: St. Martin's, 1997. Print. 

---. The Films of the Eighties: A Social History. 
Carbondale: Southern Illinois UP, 1993. Print.

51

WORKS CITED: BOOKS

A Book by a Corporate Author
• A corporate author may be a commission, a 

committee, or any group whose individual 
members are not identiﬁed on the title page. List 
the names of corporate authors in the place where 
an author’s name typically appears at the beginning 
of the entry. 

American Allergy Association. Allergies in 
Children. New York: Random, 1998. Print.

52

WORKS CITED: BOOKS

Book without an apparent author
• List by title of the book. Incorporate these entries 

alphabetically just as you would with works that 
include an author name. For example, the following 
entry might appear between entries of works 
written by Dean, Shaun and Forsythe, Jonathan.

Encyclopedia of Indiana. New York: Somerset, 

1993. Print.

53

WORKS CITED: BOOKS

A Translated Book
• Cite as you would any other book. Add "Trans."—the 
abbreviation for translated by—and follow with the 
name(s) of the translator(s).

Foucault, Michel. Madness and Civilization: A History 

of Insanity in the Age of Reason. Trans. Richard 
Howard. New York: Vintage-Random House, 1988. 
Print.

54

WORKS CITED: BOOKS

Republished Book 
• Books may be republished due to popularity without becoming a 
new edition. New editions are typically revisions of the original 
work. For books that originally appeared at an earlier date and that 
have been republished at a later one, insert the original publication 
date before the publication information. For books that are new 
editions (i.e. different from the ﬁrst or other editions of the book), 
see An Edition of a Book below.

Butler, Judith. Gender Trouble. 1990. New York:   Routledge, 

1999. Print. 

Erdrich, Louise. Love Medicine. 1984. New York:   Perennial-

Harper, 1993. Print.

55

WORKS CITED: BOOKS

An Edition of a Book
• There are two types of editions in book publishing: a book that has been 

published more than once in different editions and a book that is prepared 
by someone other than the author (typically an editor).
A Subsequent Edition
• Cite the book as you normally would, but add the number of the edition 

after the title.
Crowley, Sharon, and Debra Hawhee. Ancient Rhetorics for Contemporary 

Students. 3rd ed. New York: Pearson/Longman, 2004. Print. 

A Work Prepared by an Editor
• Cite the book as you normally would, but add the editor after the title.

Bronte, Charlotte. Jane Eyre. Ed. Margaret Smith. Oxford: Oxford UP, 

1998. Print.

56

WORKS CITED: BOOKS

An Anthology or Collection
• List by editor or editors, followed by a comma and 

“ed.” or, for multiple editors, “eds.”
Hill, Charles A., and Marguerite Helmers, eds.  Defining  

Visual Rhetorics. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum  
Associates, 2004. Print. 

Peterson, Nancy J., ed. Toni Morrison: Critical and  

Theoretical Approaches. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins  UP, 
1997. Print.

57

WORKS CITED: BOOKS

A Work in an Anthology, Reference, or Collection
• Works may include an essay in an edited collection or 

anthology, or a chapter of a book. The basic form is for this 
sort of citation is as follows:

Lastname, First name. "Title of Essay." Title of Collection. 

Ed. Editor's Name(s). Place of Publication: Publisher, 
Year. Page range of entry. Medium of Publication. 

Harris, Muriel. "Talk to Me: Engaging Reluctant Writers." 
A Tutor's Guide: Helping Writers One to One. Ed. Ben 
Rafoth. Portsmouth: Heinemann, 2000. 24-34. Print.

58

WORKS CITED: BOOKS

Article in a Reference Book (e.g. 
Encyclopedias, Dictionaries)

• For entries in encyclopedias, dictionaries, and other 
reference works, cite the piece as you would any 
other work in a collection but do not include the 
publisher information. Also, if the reference book is 
organized alphabetically, as most are, do not list the 
volume or the page number of the article or item.
"Ideology." The American Heritage Dictionary. 3rd 

ed. 1997. Print.

59

WORKS CITED: BOOKS

A Multivolume Work
• When citing only one volume of a multivolume work, include the volume number 

after the work's title, or after the work's editor or translator.
Quintilian. Institutio Oratoria. Trans. H. E. Butler. Vol. 2. Cambridge: Loeb-

Harvard UP, 1980. Print. 

• When citing more than one volume of a multivolume work, cite the total number 
of volumes in the work. Also, be sure in your in-text citation to provide both the 
volume number and page number(s). (See Citing Multivolume Works on the In-
Text Citations – The Basics page, which you can access by following the 
appropriate link at the bottom of this page.)
Quintilian. Institutio Oratoria. Trans. H. E. Butler. 4 vols. Cambridge: Loeb-

Harvard UP, 1980. Print. 

• If the volume you are using has its own title, cite the book without referring to the 

other volumes as if it were an independent publication.
Churchill, Winston S. The Age of Revolution. New York: Dodd, 1957. Print.

60

WORKS CITED: BOOKS

An Introduction, Preface, Foreword, or Afterword
• When citing an introduction, a preface, a forward, or an afterword, write the 
name of the author(s) of the piece you are citing. Then give the name of the 
part being cited, which should not be italicized or enclosed in quotation 
marks.
Farrell, Thomas B. Introduction. Norms of Rhetorical Culture. By Farrell. 

New Haven: Yale UP, 1993. 1-13. Print. 

• If the writer of the piece is different from the author of the complete 

work, then write the full name of the principal work's author after the word 
"By." For example, if you were to cite Hugh Dalziel Duncan’s introduction of 
Kenneth Burke’s book Permanence and Change, you would write the entry 
as follows:
Duncan, Hugh Dalziel. Introduction. Permanence and Change: An 

Anatomy of Purpose. By Kenneth Burke. 1935. 3rd ed. Berkeley: U of 
California P, 1984. xiii-xliv. Print.

61

WORKS CITED: OTHER PRINT/BOOK SOURCES
Dissertations and Master’s Theses
• Dissertations and master's theses may be used as sources whether published or not. 
Cite the work as you would a book, but include the designation Diss. (or MA/MS 
thesis) followed by the degree-granting school and the year the degree was awarded.
• If the dissertation is published, italicize the title and include the publication date. You 
may also include the University Microﬁlms International (UMI) order number if you 
choose:

Bishop, Karen Lynn. Documenting Institutional Identity: Strategic Writing in the 
IUPUI Comprehensive Campaign. Diss. Purdue University, 2002. Ann Arbor: 
UMI, 2004. Print. 

Bile, Jeffrey. Ecology, Feminism, and a Revised Critical Rhetoric: Toward a 

Dialectical Partnership. Diss. Ohio University, 2005. Ann Arbor: UMI, 2006. 
AAT 3191701. Print. 

• If the work is not published, put the title in quotation marks and end with the date the 

degree was awarded:

Graban, Tarez Samra. "Towards a Feminine Ironic: Understanding Irony in the 

Oppositional Discourse of Women from the Early Modern and Modern 
Periods." Diss. Purdue University, 2006. Print.

62

WORKS CITED: PERIODICALS

Article in a Magazine
• Cite by listing the article's author, putting the title of the 

article in quotations marks, and italicizing the periodical title. 
Follow with the date of publication. Remember to abbreviate 
the month. The basic format is as follows:
Author(s). "Title of Article." Title of Periodical Day 

Month Year: pages. Medium of publication. 

Poniewozik, James. "TV Makes a Too-Close Call." Time 

20 Nov. 2000: 70-71. Print. 

Buchman, Dana. "A Special Education." Good 

Housekeeping Mar. 2006: 143-48. Print.

63

WORKS CITED: PERIODICALS

Article in a Newspaper
• Cite a newspaper article as you would a magazine article, but note the different 

pagination in a newspaper. If there is more than one edition available for that 
date (as in an early and late edition of a newspaper), identify the edition 
following the date (e.g., 17 May 1987, late ed.).

Brubaker, Bill. "New Health Center Targets County's Uninsured Patients." 

Washington Post 24 May 2007: LZ01. Print. 

Krugman, Andrew. "Fear of Eating." New York Times 21 May 2007 late ed.: 

A1. Print. 

• If the newspaper is a less well-known or local publication, include the city name 

and state in brackets after the title of the newspaper.

Behre, Robert. "Presidential Hopefuls Get Final Crack at Core of S.C. 

Democrats." Post and Courier [Charleston, SC] 29 Apr. 2007: A11. Print. 

Trembacki, Paul. "Brees Hopes to Win Heisman for Team." Purdue 

Exponent [West Lafayette, IN] 5 Dec. 2000: 20. Print.

64

WORKS CITED: PERIODICALS

A Review
• To cite a review, include the title of the review (if available), then the 
abbreviation "Rev. of" for Review of and provide the title of the work 
(in italics for books, plays, and ﬁlms; in quotation marks for articles, 
poems, and short stories). Finally, provide performance and/or 
publication information.

Review Author. "Title of Review (if there is one)." Rev. of 

Performance Title, by Author/Director/Artist. Title of Periodical 
day month year: page. Medium of publication. 

Seitz, Matt Zoller. "Life in the Sprawling Suburbs, If You Can 

Really Call It Living." Rev. of Radiant City, dir. Gary Burns and 
Jim Brown. New York Times 30 May 2007 late ed.: E1. Print.

65

WORKS CITED: PERIODICALS

Anonymous Articles
• Cite the article title ﬁrst, and ﬁnish the citation as you 

would any other for that kind of periodical.
“Business: Global Warming's Boom Town; Tourism 
in Greenland.” The Economist 26 May 2007: 82. 
Print. 

“Aging; Women Expect to Care for Aging Parents 
but Seldom Prepare.” Women's Health Weekly 10 
May 2007: 18. Print.

66

WORKS CITED: PERIODICALS

An Article in a Scholarly Journal
• In previous years, MLA required that researchers determine whether or 
not a scholarly journal employed continuous pagination (page numbers 
began at page one in the ﬁrst issue of the years and page numbers took 
up where they left off in subsequent ones) or non-continuous pagination 
(page numbers begin at page one in every subsequent issue) in order to 
determine whether or not to include issue numbers in bibliographic 
entries. The MLA Handbook for Writers of Research Papers 7th edition 
(2009) eliminates this step. Always provide issue numbers, when available.
Author(s). "Title of Article." Title of Journal Volume.Issue (Year): 

pages. Medium of publication. 

Bagchi, Alaknanda. "Conflicting Nationalisms: The Voice of the 
Subaltern in Mahasweta Devi's Bashai Tudu." Tulsa Studies in 
Women's Literature 15.1 (1996): 41-50. Print.

67

WORKS CITED: ELECTRONIC SOURCES

Important Note on the Use of URLs in MLA
• MLA no longer requires the use of URLs in MLA citations. Because 
Web addresses are not static (i.e. they change often) and because 
documents sometimes appear in multiple places on the Web (e.g. 
on multiple databases). MLA explains that most readers can ﬁnd 
electronic sources via title or author searches in Internet Search 
Engines.

• For instructors or editors that still wish to require the use of URLs, 
MLA suggests that the URL appear in angle brackets after the date 
of access. Break URLs only after slashes.
Aristotle. Poetics. Trans. S. H. Butcher. The Internet Classics 

Archive. Web Atomic and Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, 13 Sept. 2007. Web. 4 Nov. 2008. <http://
classics.mit.edu/Aristotle.html>.

68

WORKS CITED: ELECTRONIC SOURCES
Abbreviations Commonly Used with Electronic Sources
• If publishing information is unavailable for entries that require 
publication information such as publisher (or sponsor) names 
and publishing dates, MLA requires the use of special 
abbreviations to indicate that this information is not available. 
Use n.p. to indicate that neither a publisher nor a sponsor 
name has been provided. Use n.d. when the Web page does 
not provide a publication date.

• When an entry requires that you provide a page but no 

pages are provided in the source (as in the case of an online-
only scholarly journal or a work that appears in an online-
only anthology), use the abbreviation n. pag.

69

WORKS CITED: ELECTRONIC SOURCES
Citing an Entire Web Site
• It is necessary to list your date of access because web postings are often 

updated, and information available on one date may no longer be 
available later. Be sure to include the complete address for the site.
• Remember to use n.p. if no publisher name is available and n.d. if no 

publishing date is given.

• Editor, author, or compiler name (if available). Name of Site. Version number. 

Name of institution/organization afﬁliated with the site (sponsor or 
publisher), date of resource creation (if available). Medium of publication. 
Date of access.
The Purdue OWL Family of Sites. The Writing Lab and OWL at 

Purdue and Purdue U, 2008. Web. 23 April 2008. 

Felluga, Dino. Guide to Literary and Critical Theory. Purdue U, 28 

Nov. 2003. Web. 10 May 2006.

70

WORKS CITED: ELECTRONIC SOURCES
Course or Department Websites
• Give the instructor name. Then list the title of the course (or the school 

catalog designation for the course) in italics. Give appropriate department 
and school names as well, following the course title. Remember to use n.d. 
if not publishing date is given.
Felluga, Dino. Survey of the Literature of England. Purdue U, Aug. 

2006. Web. 31 May 2007. 

English Department. Purdue U, 14 May 2009. Web. 20 Apr. 2009. 

A Page on a Web Site
• For an individual page on a Web site, list the author or alias if known, 

followed by the information covered above for entire Web sites. 
Remember to use n.p. if no publisher name is available and n.d. if no 
publishing date is given.
"How to Make Vegetarian Chili." eHow.com. eHow, n.d. Web. 24 Feb. 

2009.

71

WORKS CITED: ELECTRONIC SOURCES
An Image (Including a Painting, Sculpture, or 
Photograph)

• Provide the artist's name, the work of art italicized, the date 

of creation, the institution and city where the work is 
housed. Follow this initial entry with the name of the 
Website in italics, the medium of publication, and the date of 
access.
Goya, Francisco. The Family of Charles IV. 1800. Museo 

Nacional del Prado, Madrid. Museo National del Prado. Web. 
22 May 2006. 

Klee, Paul. Twittering Machine. 1922. Museum of Modern Art, 

New York. The Artchive. Web. 22 May 2006.

72

WORKS CITED: ELECTRONIC SOURCES

An Article in a Web Magazine
• Provide the author name, article name in quotation 
marks, title of the Web magazine in italics, publisher 
name, publication date, medium of publication, and the 
date of access. Remember to use n.p. if no publisher 
name is available and n.d. if not publishing date is given.
Bernstein, Mark. "10 Tips on Writing the Living 

Web." A List Apart: For People Who Make 
Websites. A List Apart Mag., 16 Aug. 2002. Web. 4 
May 2009.

73

WORKS CITED: ELECTRONIC SOURCES

An Article in an Online Scholarly Journal
• For all online scholarly journals, provide the author(s) name(s), the name 
of the article in quotation marks, the title of the publication in italics, all 
volume and issue numbers, and the year of publication.
Article in an Online-only Scholarly Journal
• MLA requires a page range for articles that appear in Scholarly Journals. If 
the journal you are citing appears exclusively in an online format (i.e. there 
is no corresponding print publication) that does not make use of page 
numbers, use the abbreviation n. pag. to denote that there is no pagination 
for the publication.

Dolby, Nadine. “Research in Youth Culture and Policy: Current Conditions 

and Future Directions.” Social Work and Society: The International 
Online-Only Journal 6.2 (2008): n. pag. Web. 20 May 2009.

74

WORKS CITED: ELECTRONIC SOURCES

Article in an Online Scholarly Journal That Also 
Appears in Print

• Cite articles in online scholarly journals that also appear in 
print as you would a scholarly journal in print, including the 
page range of the article. Provide the medium of publication 
that you used (in this case, Web) and the date of access.

Wheelis, Mark. "Investigating Disease Outbreaks Under a 

Protocol to the Biological and Toxin Weapons 
Convention." Emerging Infectious Diseases 6.6 (2000): 
595-600. Web. 8 Feb. 2009.

75

WORKS CITED: ELECTRONIC SOURCES
An Article from an Online Database (or Other Electronic 

Subscription Service)

• Cite articles from online databases (e.g. LexisNexis, ProQuest, JSTOR, 

ScienceDirect) and other subscription services just as you would print sources. 
In addition to this information, provide the title of the database italicized, the 
medium of publication, and the date of access. 
Note: Previous editions of the MLA Style Manual required information about 
the subscribing institution (name and location). This information is no longer 
required by MLA.
Junge, Wolfgang, and Nathan Nelson. “Nature's Rotary Electromotors.” 

Science 29 Apr. 2005: 642-44. Science Online. Web. 5 Mar. 2009. 
Langhamer, Claire. “Love and Courtship in Mid-Twentieth-Century 

England.” Historical Journal 50.1 (2007): 173-96. ProQuest. Web. 27 
May 2009.

76

WORKS CITED: ELECTRONIC SOURCES

E-mail (including E-mail Interviews)
• Give the author of the message, followed by the 
subject line in quotation marks. State to whom to 
message was sent, the date the message was sent, 
and the medium of publication.

Kunka, Andrew. "Re: Modernist Literature." 

Message to the author. 15 Nov. 2000. E-mail. 

Neyhart, David. "Re: Online Tutoring." Message to 

Joe Barbato. 1 Dec. 2000. E-mail.

77

WORKS CITED: ELECTRONIC SOURCES

A Listserv, Discussion Group, or Blog Posting
• Cite Web postings as you would a standard Web entry. Provide the author of 

the work, the title of the posting in quotation marks, the Web site name in 
italics, the publisher, and the posting date. Follow with the medium of 
publication and the date of access. Include screen names as author names 
when author name is not known. If both names are known, place the author’s 
name in brackets. Remember if the publisher of the site is unknown, use the 
abbreviation n.p.
Editor, screen name, author, or compiler name (if available). “Posting 

Title.” Name of Site. Version number (if available). Name of institution/
organization affiliated with the site (sponsor or publisher). Medium of 
publication. Date of access. 

Salmar1515 [Sal Hernandez]. “Re: Best Strategy: Fenced Pastures vs. Max 
Number of Rooms?” BoardGameGeek. BoardGameGeek, 29 Sept. 2008. 
Web. 5 Apr. 2009. 

78

MLA CITATION GUIDE & RELATED 

SOURCES

• For more information, especially concerning 

citing speeches, interviews, ﬁlms, TV shows, sound 
recordings, abbreviations etc., please consult:
MLA Handbook for Writers of Research Papers. 

7th ed. New York: MLA, 2009. Print. 

The Purdue OWL Family of Sites. The Writing 
Lab and OWL at Purdue and Purdue U, 2008. 
Web. 4 Jan. 2010.

79

MLA UPDATE 2009

• In the summer of 2008, the Modern Language Association 
released its third edition of the MLA Style Manual and Guide 
to Scholarly Publishing, which publicly unveiled modiﬁcations to 
MLA Style for the upcoming year.

• These changes went into effect January 2009 with the 

release of MLA Handbook for Writers of Research Papers (7th 
edition). General paper formatting (margins, headings, etc.) 
and in-text citations will remain the same, but all Works 
Cited style entries will be different from the 6th edition 
guidelines.

80

MLA CHANGES 2009 (IN A NUTSHELL)

No More Underlining! Underlining is gone. MLA now 
recommends italicizing the titles of independently published 
works (books, periodicals, ﬁlms, etc).
No More URLs! While website entries will still include authors, 
article names, and website names, when available, MLA no longer 
requires URLs. Writers are, however, encouraged to provide a 
URL if the citation information does not easily lead to the source.
Continuous Pagination? Who Cares? You no longer have to worry 
about whether scholarly publications employ continuous 
pagination or not. For all such entries, both volume and issue 
numbers are required, regardless of pagination.

81

PARENTHETICAL DOCUMENTATION
Basic In-Text Citation Rules
• In MLA style, referring to the works of others in your text is done by 

using what is known as parenthetical citation.

• Immediately following a quotation from a source or a paraphrase of a 

source's ideas, you place the author's name followed by a space and the 
relevant page number(s).
Human beings have been described as “symbol-using animals” (Burke 
3).

• When a source has no known author, use a shortened title of the work 

instead of an author name. Place the title in quotation marks if it is a short 
work, or italicize it if it is a longer work.

• Your in-text citation will correspond with an entry in your Works Cited 

page, which, for the Burke citation above, will look something like this:
Burke, Kenneth. Language as Symbolic Action: Essays on Life, 

Literature, and Method. Berkeley: U of California P, 1966.

82

PARENTHETICAL DOCUMENTATION

Multiple Citations
• To cite multiple sources in the same parenthetical reference, 

separate the citations by a semi-colon:
...as has been discussed elsewhere (Burke 3; Dewey 21). 
When Citation is not Needed  
• Common sense and ethics should determine your need for 

documenting sources. You do not need to give sources for familiar 
proverbs, well-known quotations or common knowledge. 
Remember, this is a rhetorical choice, based on audience. If you’re 
writing for an expert audience of a scholarly journal, they’ll have 
different expectations of what constitutes common knowledge.

83

PARENTHETICAL DOCUMENTATION
Author-Page Style
• MLA format follows the author-page method of in-text citation. This 

means that the author's last name and the page number(s) from which 
the quotation or paraphrase is taken must appear in the text, and a 
complete reference should appear on your Works Cited page. The 
author's name may appear either in the sentence itself or in parentheses 
following the quotation or paraphrase, but the page number(s) should 
always appear in the parentheses, not in the text of your sentence. For 
example:
Wordsworth stated that Romantic poetry was marked by a “spontaneous 
overflow of powerful feelings” (263). 

  Romantic poetry is characterized by the “spontaneous overflow of 

powerful feelings” (Wordsworth 263). 

  Wordsworth extensively explored the role of emotion in the creative 

process (263).

84

PARENTHETICAL DOCUMENTATION
Anonymous Work/Author Unknown
• If the work you are citing to has no author, use an abbreviated version of the 
work's title. (For non-print sources, such as ﬁlms, TV series, pictures, or other 
media, or electronic sources, include the name that begins the entry in the Works 
Cited page). For example:
An anonymous Wordsworth critic once argued that his poems were too 
emotional (“Wordsworth Is a Loser” 100). 
Citing Authors with Same Last Names
• Sometimes more information is necessary to identify the source from which a 

quotation is taken. For instance, if two or more authors have the same last name, 
provide both authors' ﬁrst initials (or even the authors' full name if different 
authors share initials) in your citation. For example:
Although some medical ethicists claim that cloning will lead to designer 
children (R. Miller 12), others note that the advantages for medical research 
outweigh this consideration (A. Miller 46).

85

PARENTHETICAL DOCUMENTATION

Citing Multiple Works by the Same Author
• If you cite more than one work by a particular author, include a shortened title 

for the particular work from which you are quoting to distinguish it from the 
others.
Lightenor has argued that computers are not useful tools for small children 
(“Too Soon” 38), though he has acknowledged elsewhere that early 
exposure to computer games does lead to better small motor skill 
development in a child's second and third year (“Hand-Eye Development” 
17).

• Additionally, if the author's name is not mentioned in the sentence, you would 
format your citation with the author's name followed by a comma, followed by 
a shortened title of the work, followed, when appropriate, by page numbers:
Visual studies, because it is such a new discipline, may be “too 
easy” (Elkins, “Visual Studies” 63).

86

PARENTHETICAL DOCUMENTATION
Citing Indirect Sources
• Sometimes you may have to use an indirect source. An 

indirect source is a source cited in another source. For such 
indirect quotations, use “qtd. in” to indicate the source you 
actually consulted. For example:
Ravitch argues that high schools are pressured to act as 
“social service centers, and they don’t do that well” (qtd. in 
Weisman 259).  

• Note that, in most cases, a responsible researcher will 

attempt to ﬁnd the original source, rather than citing an 
indirect source.

87

