Mark Lett (2015) 26:715–726
DOI 10.1007/s11002-014-9294-1

Drink coca-cola, eat popcorn, and choose powerade:
testing the limits of subliminal persuasion

Laura Smarandescu & Terence A. Shimp

Published online: 14 May 2014
# Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014

Abstract Research by marketing/advertising scholars has yielded anything but defin-
itive results when testing whether subliminal advertising is capable of persuading
consumers. Recent research in social cognition has provided impressive evidence that
subliminally priming brand names affects individuals’ attitudes, choices, and behaviors.
In the spirit of replication and boundary-condition testing, we conducted three studies
to examine whether subliminally priming brand names remains successful under more
realistic marketplace conditions. Study 1 pits an underdog brand against a market share
leader and demonstrates that subliminal priming significantly influences purchase
intentions when consumers are in an active thirst state. Study 2 examines the boundary
conditions of this effect on brand choice in a simulated store environment and also
obtains a significant priming effect when consumers are in an active thirst state.
However, this effect is nullified in study 3 that is structurally parallel to study 2 but
which adds a 15-min time delay between the prime and the choice task. The resultant
null effect questions the ability of subliminal priming to persuade consumers under
more realistic marketplace conditions.

Keywords Subliminal advertising . Priming . Persuasion . Motivation . Replication .
Boundary-condition testing

1 Introduction

The interrelated topics of subliminal perception, subliminal persuasion, and subliminal
advertising have long intrigued, provoked, and concerned all parties interested in
advertising and its impact—practitioners, the general public, policy makers, and
scholars. By way of distinction, subliminal perception refers to the awareness of stimuli

L. Smarandescu (*)
Iowa State University, 2350 Gerdin Building, Ames, IA 50011, USA
e-mail: smarand@iastate.edu

T. A. Shimp
Moore School of Business, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 29208, USA

716

Mark Lett (2015) 26:715–726

presented at a speed or visual level that is below the conscious threshold, whereas
subliminal persuasion necessitates that the subliminally presented stimuli have some
effect on individuals’ attitudes or behaviors (Epley et al. 1999).

Subliminal persuasion and its advertising counterpart are of great concern given
the chilling implication that consumer behavior could be influenced surreptitiously.
The original outcry occurred over 50 years ago in response to a researcher, James
Vicary, who claimed to have increased the sales of Coca-Cola and popcorn in a
New Jersey movie theater by using the subliminal message: “Drink Coca-Cola, and
Hungry? Eat popcorn.” (Block and Vanden Bergh 1985). This message was
supposedly flashed for 1/3,000 of a second at 5-s intervals. Though Vicary’s
research is scientifically meaningless (he failed to use proper experimental proce-
dures), the topic of subliminal persuasion has since fostered considerable scholarly
research. Marketing and advertising scholars conducted the initial research, follow-
ed more recently by fine-tuned testing by psychologists using priming procedures.
The following sections provide reviews of select studies from both research
traditions.

2 Review of investigations by marketing/advertising researchers

Cuperfain and Clarke (1985) found mixed results for subliminal persuasion when
testing brands that varied in familiarity to consumers. Participants were exposed to a
subliminal message that lasted for 1/60th of a second, a considerably longer duration
than is used in more current subliminal priming research. Cuperfain and Clarke’s
(1985) results were mixed as to whether subliminal stimuli are capable of affecting
brand preferences: a significant effect materialized for the established brand but not for
the relatively unknown brand.

Hawkins (1970) detected increased thirst ratings in participants after they had been
exposed to the word Coke that had been presented to them subliminally for 2.7 milli-
seconds (ms) on 40 occasions. Beatty and Hawkins’ (1989) attempted to replicate
Hawkins’ (1970) finding by presenting a group of participants with the same subliminal
stimulus (COKE) versus a control group exposed to nonsense letters (NYTP).
Obtaining a null effect, they concluded that Hawkins (1970) likely detected a statisti-
cally significant effect due to Type I error. Beatty and Hawkins (1989) acknowledged
that the amount of time for presenting the subliminal stimulus that they used—also
2.7 ms—was perhaps too short to impact participants’ thirst ratings.

2.1 Need for additional research

This brief review illustrates that the empirical evidence produced by marketing/
advertising researchers is mixed regarding the effectiveness of subliminal advertising
and leans heavily in the direction of weak or null effects. Recently, the psychology field
has emphasized the strong need for further inquiry in instances where empirical
evidence is ambiguous, and issued a call for boundary testing and replication research
(cf. Fanelli 2012; Francis 2012; Schooler 2011; Simmons et al. 2011). The recent
publication of tests of subliminal persuasion by psychologists using the methodology of
priming provides a springboard for our research wherein we test the boundaries of prior

Mark Lett (2015) 26:715–726

717

priming research by creating more ecologically valid conditions and demonstrate that
there are limits to the effects of subliminal priming.

3 Select review of subliminal priming research

Recent studies in social cognition using the technique of subliminal priming have
demonstrated that this technique has the capacity to persuade. Subliminal priming
involves presenting people with single words or images at a speed that is below the
conscious threshold. These words/images activate people’s knowledge, beliefs, stereo-
types, or cognitions. These cognitions are capable of influencing individuals’ attitudes,
choices, and behaviors under the right conditions, specifically when the primed topic is
compatible with individuals’ current need states, motivations, or goals (Bargh 2002;
Bargh and Chartrand 1999).

Strahan et al. (2002) tested whether subliminal thirst-related primes would encour-
age thirsty participants to increase the consumption of the beverage product used in the
study. Two prime words (thirst and dry) were presented 13 times each at 16 ms for a
total of 26 priming trials. Participants who received thirst-related subliminal primes
drank significantly more than control group participants who were exposed to neutral
primes (i.e., pirate, won). This result indicates that subliminal priming is effective if the
prime is goal-relevant and people are motivated to pursue the goal. Importantly, this
study simply had participants participate in a taste test, evaluate two unnamed bever-
ages, and drink as much of each as they desired. The dependent variable was the total
amount of the two beverages combined that participants consumed. This study did not
pit one brand against another to determine whether the subliminal priming of a goal-
congruent product encouraged the choice or greater consumption of the product.

In a follow-up study, Strahan et al. (2002) tested whether subliminally presented
thirst-related words would make thirsty participants more susceptible to an advertise-
ment for a thirst-quenching sports beverage (a hypothetical brand named Super-
Quencher, which was more related to the active goal, thirst) versus an electrolyte-
restoring sports beverage (a hypothetical brand called PowerPro, which was less related
to the active goal). Participants who received the thirst-related prime (i.e., thirst, dry)
chose more coupons for Super-Quencher, the brand more closely related to the active
goal, than participants who received a neutral prime (i.e., pirate, won).

Karremans et al. (2006) conducted two studies that involved subliminally priming a
beverage brand name and examined purchase intentions for this brand. In a first study,
they subliminally primed one group of participants with the brand name Lipton Ice
versus a control group that was primed with the neutral name Npeic Tol, formed by
scrambling the letters from Lipton Ice. Participants chose between the primed brand
Lipton Ice and a Dutch brand of mineral water, Spa Rood. Researchers found that
participants were more likely to indicate intentions to drink the primed brand if they self-
reported being thirsty. Karremans et al.’s (2006) second study induced thirst in half of
participants by having them eat a very salty treat, and replicated the same effect:
Participants in the thirsty condition were more affected by the Lipton Ice prime than
those assigned to the non-thirsty condition. Karremans et al. acknowledged two limita-
tions: They did not examine how long the effects of subliminal priming last, nor did they
provide their participants with an opportunity to make a real choice between brands.

718

Mark Lett (2015) 26:715–726

Using the same theoretical logic, Bermeitinger et al. (2009) performed a study using
“motivation for concentration enhancement” as the congruent goal for the focal product,
dextrose pills. Participants were exposed to subliminal primes of either of two
(hypothetical) brands of dextrose pills. These researchers found that tired participants
consumed significantly more dextrose pills of the brand for which they were sublimi-
nally primed. Bermeitinger et al.’s study represents an important extension over prior
research in demonstrating an effect of a subliminal brand prime on actual consumption
behavior, beyond an effect on consumption intentions. However, Bermeitinger et al. did
not use actual but only hypothetical brand names. Researchers have established that it is
far easier to affect dependent variables when unknown brand names are used as study
stimuli versus using the names of familiar brands (e.g., Shimp et al. 1991).

3.1 Summary of subliminal priming research

Findings from these studies make it clear that subliminal advertising is capable of
influencing consumers under ideal conditions, namely, when brand choice closely
follows exposure to subliminally primed words and when hypothetical rather than real
brands are used. Additional research is needed to determine whether this effect may
occur under more realistic marketplace conditions, such as when familiar brand stimuli
are used, when exposure to the primes and brand choice are separated in time, and
when priming occurs in actual consumption environments where consumers are ex-
posed to several product categories and make multiple brand-selection decisions.

3.2 Our contribution

Table 1 provides an overview of the findings and unresolved issues of prior research on
subliminal advertising. Our research examines whether subliminal advertising effects
replicate under more ecologically valid marketplace conditions. First, this research tests
whether subliminal priming impacts individual purchase intentions and choices of a
familiar brand when that brand is pitted against a higher market share brand from the
same category. Specifically, Powerade, a small market share brand in the sports drink
category, is subliminally primed and set against its larger competitor, Gatorade. The
rationale behind this decision is that Gatorade was purchased more frequently by our
sample and habitual choice could lead to a ceiling effect that would reduce the likelihood of
observing a significant priming effect (cf. Verwijmeren et al. 2011). Second, this research
employs a measure of consumer choice (studies 2 and 3) that more closely mirrors
consumer choice in the marketplace. Specifically, using a simulated shopping procedure,
we had participants in both studies 2 and 3 make brand choices from several product
categories. Then, in study 3, we delayed the choice task by 15 min from the subliminal
priming procedure—in comparison to prior priming research, as well as our study 2, where
measurement of the dependent variable occurred almost immediately after the prime.

4 Overview of studies

Using sports drinks as the target product category, we primed participants in all
three studies with the name of a second-tier brand of sports drink, Powerade, or

Mark Lett (2015) 26:715–726

719

Table 1 Prior subliminal advertising research: findings and unresolved issues

Author(s)

Primary finding

Unresolved issues

Cuperfain and Clarke

Obtained mixed evidence of subliminal

Among other study limitations, there

(1985)

advertising effectiveness

is no clear reason for pattern of results

Hawkins (1970)

Provided evidence of enhanced thirst

Statistically reliable effect or mere artifact?

ratings following exposure to
subliminal stimulus

Beatty and Hawkins

Found null subliminal effect upon

Subliminal stimulus presented for possibly

(1989)

replicating Hawkins (1970)

too short of time

Strahan et al. (2002) Achieved significant effects using
goal-relevant subliminal primes

Karremans et al.

(2006)

Obtained significant effects using
goal-relevant subliminal primes
and measuring usage intentions

Bermeitinger et al.

(2009)

Achieved significant effect of
subliminal prime on actual
consumption behavior

Somewhat irrelevant to actual consumer

behavior because target brand was
not pitted against another brand

Meaningful extension to Strahan et al.
(2002) but did not have participants
make actual choice between brands
nor test the length of subliminal effect

The effect materialized when using

hypothetical brand names but did not test
whether the effect would be obtained when
using actual marketplace brands or under
delay conditions

with a neutral control word, Drawepoe, formed by scrambling Powerade’s letters in
adherence with Karremans et al.’s (2006) procedure. After exposure to the sublim-
inal prime, participants’ levels of thirst and intentions to drink Powerade were
measured (study 1), and in studies 2 and 3 they made brand-selection choices in a
simulated shopping environment, either shortly after the prime (study 2) or after a
15-min delay (study 3).

We chose Powerade as our primed brand after pretesting a number of popular
beverage brands pursuant to Karremans et al. (2006) criteria. Karreman et al.’s first
criterion was the thirst-quenching quality of the beverage. Our pretest indicated that
two sports drink brands, Gatorade and Powerade, were perceived to be the most
thirst-quenching in the set of tested brands. Also consistent with Karremans et al.
the target brand would not be frequently
(2006), the second criterion was that
indicated that Powerade was purchased
purchased by participants. The pretest
in line with Gatorade’s much larger
significantly less frequently than Gatorade,
market share.

5 Study 1: a systematic replication of prior research

The initial purpose of this study was to replicate Karremans et al.’s (2006) results using
familiar brands from the same category. Karremans et al. (2006) had participants
choose from two different beverage categories, ice tea and mineral water. If their
findings are replicated, then we would demonstrate that their priming effect holds more
widely.

720

5.1 Procedure

Mark Lett (2015) 26:715–726

One-hundred and twenty-four undergraduates participated in this experiment in full
accordance with university policies regarding human subjects. Participants were ran-
domly assigned to one of two priming conditions: Powerade versus the neutral prime,
Drawepoe. Participants were informed that they were going to participate in two
individual studies to be completed on computers. The first study was introduced as a
visual detection task, the purpose of which was to determine how accurate individuals
are at detecting small deviances in their visual field. This task, adapted from Bargh and
Chartrand (2000), replicated Karremans et al. (2006) procedure that was used to mask
participant exposure to the subliminal prime. Participants were instructed to detect how
many lowercase b’s would appear among 25 strings of capital B’s presented at the
center of the screen. Also, participants were informed that to aid their focus, a string of
X’s would be presented as an orienting cue before each string of B’s; the strings of X’s
were used to mask the Powerade and Drawepoe prime words. Each prime was
presented for 23 ms, was preceded by a string of X’s (XXXXXXXX) for 500 ms,
and followed by the same string of X’s for another 500 ms. Each string of B’s followed
immediately the string of X’s and appeared on screen for 300 ms. A manipulation
check verified that participants correctly attended to the experimental procedures. The
correct numbers of lowercase b appearances were 3, 4, 3, 4, 2. We excluded participants
who gave estimates that were smaller by 2 on at least 3 of the 5 estimations using the
rationale that they would not have been able to observe the subliminal prime given that
they missed exposure to letters that were presented 13 times longer—i.e., 300 ms
versus 23 ms.

To be confident that the brand primes were in fact subliminal, we ran a separate test
in which we exposed a different group of participants to the same visual detection task
(see Bargh and Chartrand 2000) and asked them to identify the word presented. None
of the 20 participants in this group guessed the primed word, Powerade.

After completing the visual detection task, participants were introduced to the
critical task, presented as part of a study on consumer preferences for beverages.
Individuals were asked to indicate their purchase frequency for three beverages—
Gatorade, Powerade, and Coca-Cola—rated these brands on their thirst-quenching
properties, rated their present level of thirst, and indicated their intentions to drink
these brands. The behavioral intentions items were presented in random order and were
measured with an item selected from Karremans et al. (2006): “I would like to drink
[brand] at this moment.” Participants’ level of thirst was measured with two items:
“How thirsty are you at this moment?” and “How much do you feel the need to drink at
this moment?”

5.2 Results and discussion

A two-way ANOVA using the presence of the prime (Powerade vs. the neutral prime
Drawepoe) and reported thirst (low vs. high thirst based on a median split) as
independent variables and intentions to drink Powerade as dependent variable reveals
significant main effects for both prime (F 1, 118=5.41, p<.05) and thirst (F 1, 118=10.77,
p<.05), qualified by a significant interaction between the prime and thirst (F 1, 118=4.46
p<.05). Means and standard errors are graphed in Fig. 1.

Mark Lett (2015) 26:715–726

721

e
d
a
r
e
w
o
P

 

 
 
y
u
B
o
t
 
s
n
o
i
t
n
e
t
n

I

Low Thirst
High Thirst

6

4

2

0

Neutral Prim e

Prim e

Prime Condition

Fig. 1 Intentions to buy Powerade by thirst and prime condition

Examining the paired contrasts shows that the subliminal prime did not affect
participants in the low-thirst condition, but that priming of Powerade significantly
affected intentions for individuals in the high-thirst condition (t 115=3.06; p<.01).
Importantly, no significant effect of prime was found on participants’ self-reported
thirst (F 1, 118=1.36 p>.1), which excludes the possibility that the interaction effect was
due to the Powerade prime increasing participants’ thirst ratings. No significant inter-
action effect was found for the other two brands (Gatorade: F 1, 118=.55, p>.1; Coca-
Cola: F 1, 118=.06, p>.1).

These results showing that subliminal priming affected participants’ intentions to
drink the primed brand (Powerade) are consistent with prior research (Bermeitinger
et al. 2009; Karremans et al. 2006; Strahan et al. 2002) that has demonstrated priming
effects only when the primed product or brand is goal-congruent and participants are
motivated to pursue the goal. In our study, subliminal priming enhanced intentions to
drink a familiar lower market share brand, Powerade, over a more powerful competitor,
only for thirsty participants. As noted, prior research by psychologists used hypothet-
ical brand names for which participants had no prior cognitions or preferences and for
which it would have been relatively easy to demonstrate successful persuasion. This
study demonstrates that the effects of subliminal persuasion on purchase intentions
extend to familiar brands sharing a common product category when individuals are in
an active goal state (i.e., thirst) and when the brand is relevant to the goal.

6 Study 2: a novel subliminal priming investigation

Study 2 tested for the effect of the subliminal prime on brand choice from a simulated
store shelf resembling the snacks display in the student cafe, thereby providing a more
ecologically valid test of subliminal persuasion. If the effects of the subliminal prime
would translate into real time choice behavior, we would expect that the prime would
affect the choice of Powerade, but mostly in the group of thirsty participants who
would have been motivated to pursue the thirst-quenching quality of Powerade. As in
study 1, we placed the choice task relatively close in time to the subliminal prime
(i.e., <5 min).

722

Mark Lett (2015) 26:715–726

6.1 Design and procedure

Ninety-eight students participated for extra credit in this study. The study design was a
2 (prime: Powerade vs. neutral prime Drawepoe)×2 (thirst: low vs. high) between
subjects design. Participants were randomly assigned in roughly equal numbers to the
experimental conditions.

Participants were told that the first part of the study involved a taste test of grocery
brands. This part of the experiment served to disguise the thirst manipulation, which
was adapted from Ferguson and Bargh (2004). Participants assigned to the high-thirst
condition were asked to sample and evaluate two flavors of Ms. Vickie’s potato chips.
This brand was familiar to our participants and fit with Ferguson and Bargh’s (2004)
selection criteria: It had high sodium content (240 mg per serving) and was expected to
enhance participants’ thirst.

Participants assigned to the low-thirst condition sampled two flavors of Propel
bottled water and were instructed to drink as much as they wished and then rate how
much they liked the two flavors. Participants assigned to the high-thirst condition
sampled and rated two different flavors of potato chips (Simply Sea Salt and Smoke-
house Bbq). After evaluating the samples, all participants were exposed to the same
subliminal priming procedure as in study 1. At the end of the priming task, participants
rated their level of thirst and evaluated four brands—Gatorade, Powerade, Propel, and
Coca-Cola—in terms of how familiar they were with these brands and how thirst-
quenching they perceived each to be. The brands were presented in random order. Next,
participants were thanked for their participation and, as a reward, were offered a choice
of one beverage and two snacks from a simulated grocery shelf set up adjacent to the
lab featuring a variety of cookies, granola bars, and salty snacks. A research assistant
distributing debriefing forms recorded participants’ choice of the beverage brand. The
choice task was presented within 5 minutes following the exposure to the subliminal
prime, which was the same time delay as in study 1.

6.2 Manipulation checks

A manipulation check revealed that the thirst manipulation was effective: Individuals in
the high-thirst condition reported being significantly thirstier than individuals in the
low-thirst condition (F1, 94=92.25, p<.05). On the visual detection task, two partici-
pants showed estimations that were smaller by 2 on at least 3 of the 5 “b” estimates and
were eliminated from analysis. To rule out an alternative explanation that the prime and
the experience of thirst may alone affect individuals’ perceptions of how thirst-
quenching the Powerade brand was, we ran a two-way ANOVA using participants’
perceptions of the thirst-quenching measure as a dependent variable and the presence of
the prime and the level of thirst as independent variables. No significant effect of these
variables on Powerade’s thirst-quenching quality was found (p>.1).

6.3 Results

As noted, participants had the option of choosing one beverage brand (either Gatorade
or Powerade) and two brands of snack products from a simulated store display. Choices
for the snack items were merely included to add an element of marketplace realism to

Mark Lett (2015) 26:715–726

723

the choice task. The dependent variable of interest is the proportion of participants
selecting Powerade versus Gatorade given exposure to the subliminal prime, Powerade,
in the presence versus the relative absence of an active goal, thirst.

A logistic regression was run using brand choice as dependent variable and thirst
(low vs. high) and exposure to the brand prime (Powerade vs. Drawepoe) as categorical
independent variables. The analysis reveals a significant main effect of thirst on choice of
Powerade (Wald=5.8; p <. 05), and a significant interaction between the presence of the
prime and thirst on the choice of Powerade (Wald=5.51; p<.05). The critical question is
whether the subliminal prime affected differently thirsty and non-thirsty participants.
When exposed to the neutral Drawepoe prime, thirsty participants (32 %) were not more
likely to select Powerade than non-thirsty participants (43.5 %). However, when presented
with the Powerade subliminal prime, thirsty participants were more likely to select
Powerade over Gatorade (52 %) than were non-thirsty participants (17.4 %). These results
indicate that subliminal priming was effective in driving consumer choice behavior, in
particular when participants’ need-to-drink goal was activated.

An important issue remains, however. Specifically, would priming still manifest a
significant effect on choice behavior if the choice task involved a longer delay
following the priming procedure compared to the relatively immediate choice task
employed in study 2? Toward this end, we conducted study 3.

7 Study 3: a test of time delay

In this study our choice task took place after a relatively long delay from the subliminal
prime (15 min)—in comparison to our study 2 and the short time span used by
psychologists (Bermeitinger et al. 2009; Karremans et al. 2006; and Strahan et al.
2002). We anticipated that the prime’s influence would decay and have diminished
impact on participants’ choice of Powerade (cf. Chartrand et al. 2008; Gibson and
Zielaskowski 2013).

7.1 Design and procedure

One-hundred and thirty-eight undergraduate students participated for extra credit in this
study. The study design was a 2 (prime: Powerade vs. neutral prime Drawepoe)×2
(thirst: low vs. high) between subjects design. Participants were randomly assigned in
roughly equal numbers to the experimental conditions. Other than for the fact that the
choice task took place 15 min after the priming procedure, the study procedures in
study 3 are fundamentally identical to those used in study 2.

7.2 Manipulation checks

A manipulation check revealed that the thirst manipulation was effective: Individuals in
the high-thirst condition reported being significantly thirstier than individuals in the
low-thirst condition (F1, 136=73.36, p<.05). Analysis of the visual detection data
indicated that participants correctly attended to the prime and did not show significant
errors in their “b” estimates. A two-way ANOVA using participants’ perceptions of the
thirst-quenching measure as a dependent variable and the presence of the prime and the

724

Mark Lett (2015) 26:715–726

level of thirst as independent variables detected no significant effect of these variables
on Powerade’s thirst-quenching quality.

7.3 Results

A logistic regression analysis reveals, in contrast to the result in study 2, that the
presence of the subliminal prime had no significant effect on the choice of the
Powerade brand (Wald=.30; p=.58). In fact, participants who were subliminally primed
with Powerade were equally likely to select Powerade (27.1 %) as did participants in
the control condition who were primed with the neutral word Drawepoe (26.5 %). The
analysis indicates that as in study 2, thirst was a statistically significant predictor for the
choice of Powerade (Wald=5.14; p<.05). Hence, individuals in the high-thirst condi-
tion were significantly more likely to select Powerade (36.1 %) than individuals in the
low-thirst condition (16.7 %), regardless of whether they were exposed to the Powerade
or Drawepoe primes.

However, the interaction between the presence of the subliminal prime and thirst was
not statistically significant (Wald=.58; p=.45). Within the Powerade prime condition,
the percentage of thirsty participants selecting Powerade (33.3 %) was significantly
higher than the percentage of non-thirsty participants selecting that brand (19.4 %).
While this pattern would seem to support the predicted effect, an identical pattern of
results was obtained for participants in the control condition who were primed with
Drawepoe. Specifically, 39.4 % of thirsty controls selected Powerade compared to only
14.3 % of non-thirsty participants selecting this brand. The significant main effect of
thirst on participants’ choice of Powerade replicating across studies 2 and 3, was not
affected by the time delay introduced, and occurred due to factors outside the scope of
this research. Goukens et al. (2007) showed that people tend to seek variety when they
are in an active goal state. Thus, thirsty participants may have pursued variety by
choosing disproportionately more the relatively novel brand, Powerade, over the more
familiar, heavily advertised Gatorade. In conclusion, the thirst manipulation affected the
choice of Powerade, but neither the subliminal prime nor the interaction between prime
and thirst had significant effects on participants’ choice of Powerade. These results
indicate that subliminal priming was ineffective in driving consumer choice behavior
when a 15-min delay was introduced between the priming task and choice.

8 General discussion

The study of subliminal advertising has experienced a history of mixed effects that
question the ability of subliminal stimuli to persuade consumers. Psychologists have
recently demonstrated statistically reliable persuasion effects when subliminally prim-
ing a goal (Strahan et al. 2002) or a hypothetical brand name (Karremans et al. 2006;
Bermeitinger et al. 2009). Using this research as a springboard, we conducted three
studies designed first to replicate prior research and then to test boundary conditions
and assess the reliability of this effect in a more realistic market-choice context.

Our study 1 replicated Karremans et al.’s (2006) study 1. We demonstrated in this study
a significant interaction effect (on purchase intentions) between a subliminally primed
brand name and the presence of a goal (thirst) that was appropriate for the product

Mark Lett (2015) 26:715–726

725

category. This result demonstrates the efficacy of subliminal priming when a familiar
second-tier brand (Powerade) is pitted against the category’s market leader (Gatorade). We
also obtained a statistically significant effect in study 2 in the context of a simulated, albeit
simplified, shopping environment where more- or less-thirsty participants chose between
the subliminally primed brand, Powerade, and its bigger competitor, Gatorade. In our
paradigm, we used a subliminal prime that was presented at the same duration as in
Karremans et al. (2006), significantly longer than the too short exposure used by Beatty
and Hawkins (1989). Importantly in study 2, the choice task was presented shortly after
the priming manipulation (<5 minutes delay). However, when in study 3 the delay time
was extended to 15 minutes, the prior statistically significant effect was nullified.

One interpretation of our results is that the persuasive effects of subliminal priming
may be limited to measures taken shortly after participants have been exposed to
subliminal primes, which was the case in our relatively simple replication study 1, as
well as in our more ecologically valid study 2; in both studies, the critical dependent
measures were taken within 5 minutes from the subliminal priming procedure.

In study 3, which was structurally parallel to our study 2, we also had participants
make a choice between well-known brands in a simulated shopping environment, but
after a 15 minutes delay following the priming procedure. The insertion of a time delay
was intended to test whether it would erode the significant priming effect obtained in
study 2. This would suggest that the effect of priming dissipates over time and thus that
under real-world conditions—where, say, a subliminal message precedes consumer
choice by many minutes if not days—a subliminal prime is unlikely to influence
consumer choice behavior.

It is important to note that the sample size in our study 3 (approximately 34 partici-
pants per group) is larger than the sample size of study 2 and other studies that obtained
statistically significant effects: Strahan et al. (2002) had approximately 20 participants per
group in study 1 and 18 per group in study 2; Karremans et al. (2006) had approximately
30 participants per group in study 1 and 26 per group in study 2. Hence, the null effect
obtained in this study cannot be attributed to a sample size-based Type I error.

In light of the fact that we employed procedures that closely followed those used by
Karremans et al. (2006), our research suggests that subliminal priming can affect
behavioral intentions and brand choice in situations where familiar brands are involved
and a familiar brand is pitted against a market leader—but only when the dependent
measures are presented in temporal proximity to the priming procedure (studies 1 and
2), but not after a 15 minutes delay (study 3). That said, it would be premature to
conclude definitively that subliminal priming cannot influence consumer choice behavior
under actual marketplace conditions. The intriguing (and perhaps chilling) possibility of
positive subliminal persuasion based on the work previously reviewed should encourage
additional investigation.

References

Bargh, J. A. (2002). Losing consciousness: automatic influences on consumer judgment, behavior, and

motivation. Journal of Consumer Research, 29(2), 280–285.

Bargh, J. A., & Chartrand, T. A. (1999). The unbearable automaticity of being. American Psychologist, 54(7),

462–479.

726

Mark Lett (2015) 26:715–726

Bargh, J. A., & Chartrand, T. L. (2000). The mind in the middle: a practical guide to priming and automaticity
research. In H. T. Reis & C. M. Judd (Eds.), Handbook of research methods in social and personality
psychology (pp. 253–285). New York: Cambridge University Press.

Beatty, S. E., & Hawkins, D. I. (1989). Subliminal stimulation: some new data and interpretation. Journal of

Advertising, 18(3), 4–8.

Bermeitinger, C., Ruben, G., Nadine, J., Manfred, N., Ecker, U. K. H., & Doerr, R. (2009). The hidden

persuaders break into the tired brain. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 45(2), 320–326.

Block, M., & Vanden Bergh, B. G. (1985). Can you sell subliminal messages to consumers? Journal of

Advertising, 14(3), 59–62.

Chartrand, T. L., Huber, J., Shiv, B., & Tanner, R. J. (2008). Nonconscious goals and consumer choice.

Journal of Consumer Research, 35(2), 189–201.

Cuperfain, R., & Clarke, T. K. (1985). A new perspective of subliminal perception. Journal of Advertising,

14(1), 36–41.

Epley, N. K., Savitsky, K., & Kachelski, R. A. (1999). What every skeptic should know about subliminal

persuasion. Skeptical Inquirer, 23(5), 40–45.

Fanelli, D. (2012). Negative results are disappearing from most disciplines and countries. Scientometrics,

90(3), 891–904.

Ferguson, M. J., & Bargh, J. A. (2004). Liking is for doing: the effect of goal pursuit on automatic evaluation.

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 87(5), 557–572.

Francis, G. (2012). Too good to be true: publication bias in two prominent studies from experimental

psychology. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 19(2), 151–156.

Gibson, B., & Zielaskowski, K. (2013). Subliminal priming of winning images prompts increased betting in

slot machine play. Journal of Applied Psychology, 43(1), 106–115.

Goukens, C., Dewitte, S., Pandelaere, M., & Warlop, L. (2007). Wanting a bit(e) of everything: extending the

valuation effect to variety seeking. Journal of Consumer Research, 34(3), 386–394.

Hawkins, D. (1970). The effects of subliminal stimulation on drive level and brand preference. Journal of

Marketing Research, 7(3), 322–326.

Karremans, J. C., Stroebe, W., & Claus, J. (2006). Beyond Vicary’s fantasies: the impact of subliminal priming

and brand choice. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 42(6), 792–798.

Schooler, J. (2011). Unpublished results hide the decline effect. Nature, 470(7335), 437.
Shimp, T. A., Stuart, E. W., & Engle, R. W. (1991). A program of classical conditioning experiments testing

variations in the conditioned stimulus and context. Journal of Consumer Research, 18(1), 1–12.

Simmons, J. P., Nelson, L. D., & Simonsohm, U. (2011). False positive psychology: undisclosed flexibility in
data collection and analysis allows presenting anything as significant. Psychological Science, 20(10), 1–8.
Strahan, E. J., Spencer, S. J., & Zanna, M. P. (2002). Subliminal priming and persuasion: striking while the

iron is hot. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 38(6), 556–568.

Verwijmeren, T., Karremans, J. C., Stroebe, W., & Wigboldus, D. H. J. (2011). The workings and limits of

subliminal advertising: the role of habits. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 21(2), 206–213.

