PHILOSOPHY OF MIND

04/27/16

Prof. Dr. Sven Walter

lecture 3: reductive physicalism -- semantic physicalism, 

analytic behaviorism, and the identity theory

Overview

semantic physicalism

analytic behaviorism

(type) identity theory

Putnam‘s multiple realizability argument

Kripke‘s argument

local reductionism (species-specific identities) 

Lewis‘ functionalistic identity theory

Property Identity

When (i.e., under what conditions) are property F and property G identical? 

When (i.e., under what conditions) are two properties identical? 

When (i.e., under what conditions) do the predicates “F” and “G” refer to the same 
property?

Property Identity

Carnap: Property F and property G are identical iff the predicates “F” and “G” are 
synonymous. 

logical positivism: the language of physics as the “lingua franca” of a unified 
science

Any meaningful scientific concept, statement and law must be translatable into 
physical concepts, statements and laws. 

Psychology, e.g., is “an integral part of physics” in that “[a]ll psychological 
statements which are meaningful … are translatable into statements which do not 
involve psychological concepts, but only the concepts of physics” (Hempel 1949, 
18). 

Semantic Physicalism

Semantic Physicalism: Every meaningful mental expression can be defined solely 
in terms of physical expressions.

“x is excited” is translatable into a physical predicate like 

x’s body … has a physical structure that is characterized by a high pulse and 
rate of  breathing, by vehement and factually unsatisfactory answers to 
questions, by the occurrence of agitated movements on the application of 
certain stimuli etc. Carnap (1932, 170-171) 

Semantic Physicalism

property identity as translatability or synonymy of the corresponding 
predicates: property F is identical to property G iff the predicates “F” and “G” have 
the same meaning

intranslatability as non-identity: If “F” and “G” are not synonymous, F and G are 
not identical. 

Unless one can define mental predicates in terms of physical predicates, there can 
be no successful reduction of the mental to the physical. 

Analytic Behaviorism

Analytic behaviorism: Mental properties reduce to behavioral dispositions by 
means of mental concepts being definable in terms of behavioral dispositions.

Analytic Behaviorism

But what about my mental state of thinking about next year’s vacation or dreaming 
of world peace? 

What about the fact that sometimes our behavior does not manifest our true 
mental states (super Spartans)?

Is there non-circular definition of mental states in a non-mentalistic, purely 
behavioral vocabulary?

Identity Again

Does the identity of properties F and G really require the synonymy of the 
predicates “F” and “G”? 

“The thesis that consciousness is a process in the brain is put forward as a 
reasonable scientific hypothesis, not to be dismissed on logical grounds 
alone” (Place 1956; 1970, 42; emphasis S.W.). 

Predicate synonymy is too strong a requirement on property identity to be 
plausible. 

Identity Again

What it is for properties F and G to be identical?

Gottlob Frege

“The morning star is (identical to, the same star as) the morning star” 

“The morning star is (identical to, the same star as) the evening star”

There can be true identity statements which are not a priori or analytic.

Identity Again

The meaning of the term “being in pain” differs from the meaning of the term 
“being in brain state b,” and so “being in pain” may not be definable in terms of 
“being in brain state b.“ 

However, even if “being in pain” and “being in brain state b” are not synonymous, 
“being in pain is being in brain state b” may be true: Just go into the lab and see 
whether we can find a brain state b such that the statement might be acceptable on 
empirical and methodological grounds, just as science discovered that the morning 
star is in fact the evening star. 

Identity Theory

The mind just is the brain in the sense that when we talk about mental phenomena 
like pains, feelings, and sensations, we are as a matter of empirical fact, not as a 
matter of linguistic definition, talking about properties, states and processes in or of 
the physical brain.

(Type) Identity Theory: Every mental property is identical to some physical 
property, i.e., every mental predicate does de facto denote, refer to, a physical 
property.

Identity Again

F = G iff for all objects x, Fx iff Gx

F = G iff it is nomologically necessary that for all objects x, Fx iff Gx, i.e., for all 
nomologically possible worlds w and all objects x, x has F in w iff x has G in w

Arguments for the Identity Theory

The Argument from Simplicity

Why do I wish [to identify sensations with brain processes]? Mainly because of 
Occam's razor. … There does seem to be, so far as science is concerned, nothing in 
the world but increasingly complex arrangements of physical constituents. All 
except for one place: in consciousness. That is, for a full description of what is going 
on in a man you would have to mention not only the physical processes in his 
tissues, glands, nervous system, and so forth, but also his states of consciousness … 
his visual, auditory, and tactual sensations, his aches and pains. That these should 
be correlated with brain processes does not help, for to say that they are correlated 
is to say that they are something ‘over and above.’ … So sensations, states of 
consciousness, do seem to be the one sort of thing left outside the physicalist 
picture, and for various reasons I just cannot believe that this can be so. That 
everything be explicable in terms of physics … except the occurrence of sensations 
seems to me frankly unbelievable. (Smart 1959)

Arguments for the Identity Theory

The Argument from Simplicity

It seems to me that science is increasingly giving us a viewpoint whereby organisms 
are able to be seen as physico-chemical mechanisms: it seems that even the 
behavior of man himself will one day be explicable in mechanistic terms. There does 
seem to be, so far as science is concerned, nothing in the world but increasingly 
complex arrangements of physical constituents. (Smart 1959)

Arguments for the Identity Theory

The Argument from Explanatory Value

Suppose one group of historians of the distant future studies Mark Twain and 
another studies Samuel Clemens. They happen to sit at the same table at a meeting 
of the American Historical Association. A briefcase falls open, a list of the events in 
the life of Mark Twain tumbles out and is picked up by a student of the life of Samuel 
Clemens. My Lord, he says, the events in the life of Mark Twain are exactly the same 
as the events in the life of Samuel Clemens. What could explain this amazing 
coincidence? The answer, someone observes, is that Mark Twain = Samuel Clemens. 
(Block and Stalnaker 1999)

Arguments for the Identity Theory

The Causal Argument 

For something to have a causal effect on something physical, it better ought to be 
something physical itself. 

Since the mental seems to have a causal effect on something physical, it thus better 
ought to be something physical.

Arguments against the Identity Theory

The Multiple Realizability Argument 

The brain-state theorist has to ... specify a physical-chemical state such that any organism ... 
is in pain if and only if (a) it possesses a brain of a suitable physical-chemical structure; and 
(b) its brain is in that physical-chemical state. This means that the physical-chemical state in 
question must be a possible state of a mammalian brain, a reptilian brain, a mollusc’s brain 
... etc. At the same time, it must not be a possible ... state of a brain of any physically 
possible creature that cannot feel pain. ...

Thus if we can find even one psychological predicate which can clearly be applied to both a 
mammal and an octopus (say “hungry”), but whose physical-chemical “correlate” is different 
in the two cases, the brain-state theory has collapsed. ... Finally, the hypothesis becomes 
still more ambitious when we realize that the brain-state theorist is not just saying that pain 
is a brain state; he is, of course, concerned to maintain that every psychological state is a 
brain state. (Putnam 1967, 436)

Arguments against the Identity Theory

M

P

M

P1

P2

…

Pn

identity: P= M

no identity: 

Pi  M for all I

Pi  Pj, Pi = M, Pj = M is 

inconsistent

Arguments against the Identity Theory

The Multiple Realizability Argument 

(∀x) (Mx ≡ Px) 

will usually be false, and hence no law

(∀x) (Mx ≡ (P1x  …  Pnx) 

will be true, but not a law either

Since identity requires law-full covariation of properties, no identities are 
forthcoming. 

Kim‘s Dilemma

Disjunctive move: Maybe Fodor is wrong and ‘P1x  …  Pnx’ really does pick out a 
scientific kind. In that case, we have our laws for reducing M to some physical 
property, viz., the disjunctive property P1x  …  Pnx.

Local reductionism / species-specific reductionism: But suppose Fodor is right and 
‘P1x  …  Pnx’ is unfit for laws because the things it picks out are too diverse. Yet, 
we know that ‘M’ applies to all and only those things to which ‘P1x  …  Pnx’ 
applies, so M is unfit for laws as well. 

If there are to be laws, the only ‘law-fit’ properties are P1, P2, …, Pn. 

Local Reductionism

Local reductionism / species-specific reductionism: Hence, laws must be couched 
in terms of P1, P2, …, Pn. 

local or species-specific reductions via bridge-laws: (x) (Sx  (Mx  Pix)) 

Local Reductionism

[I]f each of the psychological kinds posited in a psychological theory has a 
physical realization for a fixed species, the theory can be “locally reduced” to 
the physical theory of that species, in the following sense. Let S be the 
species involved; for each law Lm of psychological theory Tm, S  Lm (the 
proposition that Lm holds for members of S) is the “S-restricted” version of 
Lm. (Kim 1992, 328)

But why stop at the level of species? 

And what about the general property of being in pain? 

Kripke‘s Argument

possible worlds: possible complete ways of how things could have been

rigid designators: rigid designators designate the same individual in every possible 
world, if it denotes something at all (e.g., proper names)

nonrigid designators: nonrigid designators can designate different individuals in 
different possible worlds (e.g., definite descriptions)

necessary truth: A proposition is necessarily true iff it is true in all possible worlds. 

contingent truth: A proposition is contingently true iff it is true in the actual world, 
but false in some other possible world.

Kripke‘s Argument

a priori: Propositions are a priori iff their truth can be grasped without having any 
empirical knowledge, just by means of being a competent speaker.

a posteriori: Propositions are a posteriori iff their truth can be grasped only with 
empirical knowledge.

Kripke‘s Argument

the standard position: 

necessary and a priori 

contingent and a posteriori

Kripke: 

necessary and a priori 

contingent and a posteriori

necessary and a posteriori

contingent and a priori

Kripke‘s Argument

What about ‘pain is c-fiber firing’? 

It’s clearly a posteriori. But is it necessary or contingent? 

Place:  It’s contingent. We only make a claim about our world. Pain is contingently 

identical to c-fiber firing, although it could have been identical to something 
else. 

Kripke: Nah! 

Kripke‘s Argument

‘pain’ and ‘c-fiber firing’ are rigid designators. 

But identity statements containing two rigid designators are necessarily true, if true 
at all. 

Hence, if they are contingent, they are false! 

Hence, if there is only one possible world in which they are false, they are false 
(in our world as well). 

Kripke‘s Argument

And clearly, we can imagine a possible world which is almost the same as ours, but 
in which pain is d-fiber-firing instead of c-fiber-firing. 

If that world is indeed nomologically possible, then ‘pain is c-firing’ is false.

But can this argument really be any good? 

Compare: Water cannot be identical to H2O, because we can imagine a possible 
world which is almost the same as ours, but in which water is XYZ instead of H2O. 

(to be continued…)

Lewis

Avoid this problem by rejecting Kripke’s assumption that “pain” and “c-fiber firing” 
are rigid designators. 

Instead of looking for property-identities across all possible worlds, we should 
identify mental properties with physical properties relative to worlds, species or 
structures. 

The concept “pain” is the concept of a property that occupies a causal role in a 
certain population, and thus a non-rigid designator, defined relationally in terms of 
the causal role of pain, which picks out different physical properties relative to 
different species. 

(to be continued …)

