Psychological Review
2002, Vol. 109, No. 4, 646 – 678

Copyright 2002 by the American Psychological Association, Inc.
0033-295X/02/$5.00 DOI: 10.1037//0033-295X.109.4.646

Conditionals: A Theory of Meaning, Pragmatics, and Inference

P. N. Johnson-Laird

Princeton University

Ruth M. J. Byrne
University of Dublin

The authors outline a theory of conditionals of the form If A then C and If A then possibly C. The 2 sorts
of conditional have separate core meanings that refer to sets of possibilities. Knowledge, pragmatics, and
semantics can modulate these meanings. Modulation can add information about temporal and other
relations between antecedent and consequent. It can also prevent the construction of possibilities to
yield 10 distinct sets of possibilities to which conditionals can refer. The mental representation of a
conditional normally makes explicit only the possibilities in which its antecedent is true, yielding other
possibilities implicitly. Reasoners tend to focus on the explicit possibilities. The theory predicts the major
phenomena of understanding and reasoning with conditionals.

You reason about conditional relations because much of your
knowledge is conditional. If you get caught speeding, then you pay
a fine. If you have an operation, then you need time to recuperate.
If you have money in the bank, then you can cash a check.
Conditional reasoning is a central part of thinking, yet people do
not always reason correctly. The lawyer Jan Schlictmann in a
celebrated trial (see Harr, 1995, pp. 361–362) elicited the follow-
ing information from an expert witness about the source of a
chemical pollutant trichloroethylene (TCE):

P. N. Johnson-Laird, Department of Psychology, Princeton University;
Ruth M. J. Byrne, Department of Psychology, University of Dublin,
Dublin, Ireland.

This research was made possible in part by a grant to P. N. Johnson-
Laird from the National Science Foundation (Grant BCS 0076287) to study
strategies in reasoning. We thank Jon Baron and Ray Nickerson for their
helpful criticisms of an earlier version of this article. We thank Yingrui
Yang for providing technical help and advice, Patricia Barres for carrying
out Experiment 2, Rachel McCloy for carrying out a study of modus
tollens, Dan Zook for writing a preliminary version of the program for
pragmatic modulation, and David Over for engaging in many discussions
of philosophical theories of conditionals. We are also grateful to many
people: Peter Wason, now in retirement, for pioneering the psychological
study of conditionals; Jonathan Evans and David Over for a critique of our
account, which they presented at the Workshop on Mental Models in
Brussels, March 2001, and also for many discussions of conditionals; Luca
Bonatti, the late Martin Braine, Keith Holyoak, Howard Margolis, David
O’Brien, and Lance Rips for their vigorous criticisms of the model theory;
Monica Bucciarelli, Orlando Espino, Vittorio Girotto, Eugenia Goldvarg,
Paolo Legrenzi, Maria Sonino Legrenzi, Juan Garcı´a Madruga, Henry
Markovits, Mary Newsome, Cristina Quelhas, Sergio Moreno Rios, Carlos
Santamarı´a, Fabien Savary, Walter Schaeken, Walter Schroyens, Alessan-
dra Tasso, and Valerie Thompson for their collaboration in studies of
conditional reasoning. We are also grateful to the following individuals for
many useful ideas: Bruno Bara, Victoria Bell, David Green, Uri Hasson,
Mark Keane, Markus Knauff, Jim Kroger, Robert Mackiewicz, Hans-
Georg Neth, Tom Ormerod, Rosemary Stevenson, Dan Sperber, Vladimir
Sloutsky, and Jean-Baptiste van der Henst.

Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to P. N.
Johnson-Laird, Department of Psychology, Princeton University, Green
Hall, Princeton, New Jersey 08544. E-mail: phil@princeton.edu

If the TCE in the wells had been drawn from out of the river,

then there’d be TCE in the riverbed.
But there isn’t any TCE in the riverbed.

Schlictmann then argued that these premises were consistent with
the proposition that no contamination came from the river. What
he overlooked is that the conclusion is not merely consistent with
the premises but follows necessarily from them. Psychologists
disagree about the cause of such oversights and about conditional
reasoning in general (e.g., Braine & O’Brien, 1998; Cheng &
Holyoak, 1985; Johnson-Laird, 1986; Rips, 1983). Philosophers,
logicians, and linguists also disagree about the meaning of condi-
tionals (Adams, 1975; Lewis, 1973; Stalnaker, 1968). No consen-
sus exists about if.

Our concern is everyday conditionals, including all sentences of
the form If A then C or C if A, where A and C are declarative
clauses. Naive individuals can grasp the meaning of such asser-
tions, and they can use it to reason. The term naive refers here
merely to people who have not studied logic in any depth. In the
1970s, psychologists assumed that such individuals reason using
formal rules of inference like those of a logical calculus. The
challenge was to pin down the particular rules (e.g., Braine, 1978;
Johnson-Laird, 1975; Osherson, 1974 –1976). Such theorizing ne-
glected a discovery made by Wason (1966). Intelligent adults in
his selection task regularly committed a logical error. He laid out
four cards in front of them:

A B 2

3

They knew that each card had a letter on one side and a number on
the other side. He showed them a conditional: If a card has the
letter A on one side then it has the number 2 on the other side.
Their task was to select those cards that had to be turned over to
discover whether the conditional was true or false about the four
cards. Most people selected the A and 2 cards, or the A card alone.
They failed to select the 3 card. However, if the 3 has an A on its
other side, the conditional is false. Indeed, nearly everyone judges
it to be false in this case. Individuals also generate this case when
they are asked to make a conditional false (Oaksford & Stenning,
1992), and they judge that the probability of this case is zero given

646

CONDITIONALS

647

the truth of the conditional (Johnson-Laird, Legrenzi, Girotto,
Legrenzi, & Caverni, 1999). When Wason and Shapiro (1971)
changed the assertion to a sensible everyday conditional, many
people made the correct selection. Theories based on formal rules
have difficulty in explaining both the error with neutral condition-
als and its correction with sensible content.

Our theory is not formal. It assumes instead that reasoners use
the meaning of premises, and general knowledge, to imagine the
possibilities under consideration—that is, to construct mental mod-
els of them (see Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991; Polk & Newell,
1995). Mental models can be constructed from perception, imag-
ination, or the comprehension of discourse. They underlie visual
images, but they can also be abstract, representing situations that
cannot be visualized. Each mental model represents a possibility.
It is akin to a diagram in that its structure is analogous to the
structure of the situation that it represents, unlike, say, the structure
of logical forms used in formal rule theories.

Some sentential connectives such as and and or have logical
meanings that are easy to define. For example, consider the fol-
lowing:

Either the printer is broken or else the cable is disconnected,

but not both.

The truth of an exclusive disjunction such as this one is a function
of the truth of its constituent atomic propositions, that is, those
propositions that contain neither not nor connectives (the printer is
broken, the cable is disconnected). The exclusive disjunction is
true in two cases: first, where it is true that the printer is broken but
false that the cable is disconnected, and, second, where it is false
that the printer is broken but true that the cable is disconnected.
Logicians lay out these conditions in a truth table, as shown in
Table 1, in which we abbreviate the atomic propositions. Each row
in the truth table represents a different possibility. Thus, the first
row represents the possibility in which both the printer is broken
and the cable is disconnected; in this possibility, the exclusive
disjunction is false. The connective and can be defined in an
analogous way. A conjunction of the form A and C is true in just
one row of its truth table, namely, where A is true and C is true, and
it is false in every other case. Those sentential connectives that can
be defined in a truth table are known as truth functional—that is,
their meanings are functions that take the truth values of proposi-
tions as inputs and deliver a truth value as an output. The logic of
these truth-functional meanings is captured in the sentential cal-
culus (see, e.g., Jeffrey, 1981).

Psychological theories based on formal rules (hereinafter rule
theories) and the theory based on mental models (hereinafter the

Table 1
A Truth Table for the Exclusive Disjunction “Either the Printer
Is Broken or Else the Cable is Disconnected”

Printer is broken

Cable is

disconnected

Either printer is broken or else

cable is disconnected

True
True
False
False

True
False
True
False

False
True
True
False

model theory) run in parallel for many aspects of reasoning.
Insofar as both sorts of theory reflect logical principles, however,
they have potential limitations (cf. Sloman, 1996). And at the heart
of these limitations is the vexed question of conditionals. Are they
truth functional or not? The answer is not clear. Some theorists
have argued that conditionals have the same meaning as the
truth-functional connective of material implication (e.g., Grice,
1975; Wilson, 1975), which is shown in Table 2. Other theorists
have rejected this analysis (e.g., Gazdar, 1979; O’Brien, 1999).
The profundity of the puzzle correlates with the length of its
literature. One aim of the present article is to resolve this puzzle.

Simple inferences from conditionals are of four main sorts:
1. Modus ponens:

If there is a circle then there is a triangle.
There is a circle.

⬖ There is a triangle.

2. Modus tollens:

If A then C.
A.
⬖ C.

If there is a circle then there is a triangle.
There is not a triangle.

⬖ There is not a circle.

If A then C.
Not C.
⬖ Not A.

3. Denial of the antecedent:

If there is a circle then there is a triangle.
There is not a circle.

⬖ There is not a triangle.

If A then C.
Not A.
⬖ Not C.

4. Affirmation of the consequent:

If there is a circle then there is a triangle.
There is a triangle.

⬖ There is a circle.

If A then C.
C.
⬖ A.

Modus ponens and modus tollens are valid for both conditionals
and biconditionals (If and only if there is a circle then there is a
triangle), whereas the other two inferences are valid only for
biconditionals. There are more experimental studies of these and
other inferences with if than of any other deductive term (for
reviews, see Baron, 1994; J. Evans, Newstead, & Byrne, 1993;
Garnham & Oakhill, 1994). Likewise, there are probably more
semantic analyses of if than of any other single word in English
(e.g., Harper, Stalnaker, & Pearce, 1981; Jackson, 1987; Lewis,
1973; Traugott, ter Meulen, Reilly, & Ferguson, 1986). Some
authors have despaired of formulating the conditions in which
conditionals are true and have argued instead that they have merely
conditions in which it is justifiable to assert them (see, e.g.,
Adams, 1970, 1975; cf. Lewis, 1976). Such skepticism is in
striking contrast to the ease with which individuals understand
conditionals in daily life and judge them to be true or false.

Our goal is to resolve the problems of conditionals. We there-
fore formulate a theory of the meaning of conditionals, of how this
meaning is modulated by semantics and pragmatics, and of its use
in reasoning. Braine and O’Brien (1991) offered such an account
based on a rule theory. The present article offers an account based
on the model theory. Of course, the model theory has had some-
thing to say about conditionals in the past (e.g., Johnson-Laird &
Byrne, 1991), but its account was incomplete. Critics have iden-
tified two principal lacunae (see, e.g., Fillenbaum, 1993; Holyoak

648

JOHNSON-LAIRD AND BYRNE

Table 2
A Truth Table for a Material Implication, “The Printer Works
Implies That the Cable Is Connected”

Printer works

Cable is
connected

The printer works implies
that the cable is connected

True
True
False
False

True
False
True
False

True
False
True
True

& Cheng, 1995). The theory said nothing about the semantic
mechanism that allows the meanings of a conditional’s constituent
clauses to influence its interpretation. Likewise, the theory said
nothing about the pragmatic mechanism that allows context and
knowledge to influence the interpretation of a conditional. Rule
theories do not account for such effects, but as Bonatti (1994a,b)
has pointed out, the model theory is in the same difficulty. The
new theory fills the lacunae. It makes sense of the everyday
comprehension of conditionals and of the phenomena that occur
when they are used to make inferences. It also makes some
unexpected predictions, which have led to the discovery of new
phenomena.

The article begins with a theory of the core meanings of con-
ditionals, both indicative and subjunctive. It then outlines the
theory of mental models and extends this theory to the mental
representation of basic conditionals. It next formulates a principle
of semantic modulation and a principle of pragmatic modulation.
These mechanisms modulate the core meanings of conditionals.
The article then describes how the new theory accounts for rea-
soning with conditionals, for the selection task, and for so-called
illusory inferences based on conditionals. Finally, it draws some
general conclusions about conditionals and conditional reasoning.

The Core Meanings of Basic Conditionals

Philosophers and logicians distinguish between the meaning of
an expression and its reference. The classic illustration contrasts
the Morning star and the Evening star, which differ in meaning but
have the same reference, namely, the planet Venus. We assume
that the meaning of a sentence when it is used in a particular
context functions to refer to a situation or to a set of situations.
Most sentences, however, can be used to express many different
meanings, depending on their context. The sentence “We are
here,” for instance, expresses different meanings depending on
who asserts it and when and where they assert it. It is laborious to
keep writing, “the meaning of a sentence when it is used in a
particular context,” and so unless the distinction matters we use
assertion to refer to sentences and to the meanings that they
express.

We develop a model theory of conditionals below, but in our
account of their meaning, we refer to possibilities, not to models.
Our aim is to make the theory of meaning independent of the
theory of comprehension, which relies on models as mental rep-
resentations. To frame the theory of meaning, we need to consider
the ontology of the situations that occur in everyday life. A major
dichotomy is between factual claims about situations and modal
claims about them. A conditional such as “If Pat goes to the party

then Viv will go too” makes a factual claim. In the case that Pat
goes and Viv does not, the conditional is false. Modal claims are
of various sorts, but we focus on the most familiar, which are
epistemic claims about what is possible and deontic claims about
what is permissible. A conditional such as “If Pat goes to the party
then it is permissible for Viv to go” makes a deontic claim. In the
case that Pat goes, and Viv does not,
is not
necessarily false. It is false only if Viv has no such permission
conditional on the truth of the antecedent. There are other sorts of
modal claim. For example, the assertion “If you’re going to Venice
then you ought to see the Doge’s palace” expresses a recommen-
dation. Likewise, the assertion “If he is wearing a red tie, then he
must be wearing a tie” makes a logical claim. To keep matters
simple, however, we focus on factual and deontic conditionals.

the conditional

The ontology of daily life distinguishes between factual possi-
bilities, such as (at the time of writing) “Al Gore is elected
President of the United States in 2004,” and counterfactual possi-
bilities, such as “Al Gore was elected President of the United
States in 2000.” A counterfactual possibility refers to a situation
that once was a factual possibility but that did not occur. A factual
possibility that did occur thereby becomes a fact, that is, an actual
state of affairs. The ability to envisage counterfactual possibilities
is an important part of how one evaluates what actually happens
(Byrne, 1997; Byrne & McEleney, 2000; Byrne, Segura, Culhane,
Tasso, & Berrocal, 2000; Kahneman & Miller, 1986). The distinc-
tion between factual and counterfactual possibilities is reflected in
the English language, and in the construction of conditionals,
though their syntax is complex (see Dudman, 1988). Consider the
outcome of an election that has been decided but that is not known
to the speaker. Reference to a factual possibility calls for the
present tense of the modal auxiliary have: “If Gore has won the
election.” However, where the outcome is known, reference to a
counterfactual possibility calls for the past tense of the modal
auxiliary have: “If Gore had won the election.”

Assertions can describe a fact, a factual possibility, a counter-
factual possibility, and even an impossibility. These four catego-
ries also occur in fictional discourse. Thus, given the situation at
the end of the first act of Hamlet, there is a factual possibility that
Hamlet will kill the king. At the end of the second act, there is a
counterfactual possibility that Hamlet had killed the king while the
latter was at prayer. Systems of modal logic do not make these
distinctions and are accordingly difficult to apply to the analysis of
natural language (Karttunen, 1972). However, granted the exis-
tence of the four sorts of situation, we can formulate a semantic
theory of conditionals.

The Core Semantics

We begin our analysis with basic conditionals, which are those
with a neutral content that is as independent as possible from
context and background knowledge, and which have an antecedent
and consequent that are semantically independent apart from their
occurrence in the same conditional. We consider two sorts of basic
conditional, those of the form If A then C and those of the form If
A then possibly C, and we argue that each of them has a core
meaning.

The antecedent A of a basic conditional is a description—almost
always a partial description— of a possibility. The consequent C
can serve any illocutionary role and is interpreted as though it were

CONDITIONALS

649

an isolated main clause in a context that satisfies the antecedent. It
follows that the antecedent of a conditional must be a declarative
clause in order to describe a situation. In contrast, the consequent
of a conditional can have any illocutionary force. It can make an
assertion, ask a question, give a command, or make a request.
Thus, all of the following are acceptable conditionals:

If Vivien leaves, then you will leave.
If Vivien leaves, then are you allowed to leave?
If Vivien leaves, then please leave.

However, conditionals with antecedents that ask questions, make
requests, or perform any other illocution apart from assertion are
ungrammatical, for example, “If are you allowed to leave, then
Vivien will leave.” One minor exception occurs: An antecedent
can form a wh question provided that it echoes the form of a
relevant precursor, for example:

If Vivien arrived then Evelyn left.
Evelyn left if who arrived?
A basic conditional, If A then . . .

, asserts that its antecedent

is a possibility:

Factual possibilities:

a
¬ a

a denotes the possibility satisfying the antecedent, A; ¬ denotes
negation; and so ¬ a denotes a possibility that satisfies the nega-
tion of the antecedent, not A. Here and throughout the article, we
use lowercase letters to represent possibilities corresponding to
atomic propositions. A conditional can be qualified to assert that
the antecedent is definitely the case: “If there is a circle, which
there is, then . . .” The antecedent and its qualification refer to the
following where E denotes the occurrence of a circle:

E
Fact:
Counterfactual possibility: ¬ E

A conditional can also be qualified to rule out the possibility of the
antecedent, but in this case the antecedent must be couched in the
subjunctive in order to convey that it is a counterfactual possibil-
ity: “If there had been a circle, which there wasn’t, then . . .” The
antecedent and its qualification now refer to the following:

Counterfactual possibility:
Fact:

E
¬ E

In sum, the antecedent of a conditional establishes two possibili-
ties, either two factual possibilities or a fact and a counterfactual
possibility.

The antecedent refers to a possibility, and the consequent is
interpreted in that context. The principle is corroborated by the
existence of conditionals with no antecedents. They occur when
the situation makes a possibility so obvious that it is unnecessary
to describe it. For example, a spouse observing some incipient
misbehavior can assert, “I’ll divorce you,” where the force of the
assertion is “If you do that, I’ll divorce you.” Conditionals with no
consequents also occur when the context makes the outcome so
obvious that it is unnecessary to describe it—for example, “If you
do that again . . .” Hereinafter, we focus on complete conditionals
in which both antecedent and consequent make assertions.

The antecedent of a basic conditional describes a possibility
almost completely, that is, it describes all that one needs to know
in order to interpret the conditional. Thus, a typical basic condi-
tional is “If the weather is fine, then the sun shines.” It asserts that
the sun is bound to shine in fine weather. The consequent may
refer explicitly to a necessity: “If the weather is fine, then the sun
must shine.” The set of possibilities is exactly the same as the
preceding factual assertion. Unlike modal logic, the force of must,
if anything, is weaker than a factual claim. It signals an inference
or expectation rather than a matter of fact. In contrast, the conse-
quent can assert merely a possibility given the antecedent: “If the
weather is fine then the sun may shine.” Hence, there are two sorts
of basic conditional. In the case of If A then C, the consequent has
to occur given the antecedent:

Possibilities:

a

c

In the case of If A then possibly C, the consequent may occur given
the antecedent:

Possibilities:

a
c
a ¬ c

What about the possibilities in which the antecedent of a con-
ditional is not satisfied? Our account does not constrain them.
Hence, each of the two sorts of basic conditional has its own core
meaning. The core meaning of If A then C refers to the following:

Factual possibilities:

a
c
¬ a
c
¬ a ¬ c

We call this interpretation the conditional meaning. Its three pos-
sibilities are described completely by the following conjunction of
conditionals: If A then C, and if not A then either C or not C.
Indeed, the conditional meaning applied to this conjunction of
conditionals also yields the preceding set of possibilities. Necessity
and sufficiency are nothing more than these possibilities in which
A is sufficient (but not necessary) for C and C is necessary (but not
sufficient) for A. A basic deontic conditional of the form If A then
C is obligatory has an analogous interpretation:

Factual possibilities:

a
c
¬ a
c
¬ a ¬ c

:Deontic possibilities

Here, the antecedent refers to factual possibilities and the conse-
quent refers to deontic possibilities, that is, what is permissible in
each possibility.

The core meaning of If A then possibly C refers to the following:

Factual possibilities:

a
c
a ¬ c
¬ a
c
¬ a ¬ c

We call this interpretation the tautological meaning, because it
allows any possibility, and so the conditional cannot be false. A
deontic conditional has the same interpretation except that the
consequent refers to deontic possibilities. The conditional can be
paraphrased as If A then possibly C, and if not A then possibly C.

650

JOHNSON-LAIRD AND BYRNE

As shown below, the pragmatics of the situation often rules out one
of the possibilities, particularly the possibility in which C occurs in
the absence of A.

We integrate these assumptions in the first principle of the five

that will make up our theory of conditionals:

Principle 1. The principle of core meanings: The antecedent
of a basic conditional describes a possibility, at least in part,
and the consequent can occur in this possibility. Each of the
two sorts of basic conditional accordingly has a core meaning
referring to a set of factual or deontic possibilities. The core
meaning of If A then C is the conditional interpretation, which
refers to the possibilities:

c
a
¬ a
c
¬ a ¬ c

The core meaning of If A then possibly C is the tautological
interpretation, which refers to the possibilities:

a
c
a ¬ c
¬ a
c
¬ a ¬ c

The conjunction of two basic conditionals If A then C, and if not
A then not C can be interpreted as a conjunction of two conditional
meanings, which yield the following:

Factual possibilities:

a

c
¬ a ¬ c

In other words, A is both necessary and sufficient for C. The
following conjunction also yields the same set: If A then C, and if
C then A. The set corresponds to the biconditional interpretation
expressed by If, and only if, A then C.

Alternative Theories

One corroboration of the present semantics comes from a com-
parison with an alternative theory (formulated by Quine, 1952;
defended by Wason & Johnson-Laird, 1972, p. 90; and maintained
by K. Holyoak, personal communication, 1999, and O’Brien,
1999). According to this alternative, conditionals have a “defec-
tive” truth table with no truth value when their antecedents are
false, that is, they are partial truth functions with no result in this
case. The account is plausible at first sight but founders on the case
of biconditionals. As we saw earlier, the biconditional If, and only
if, A then C is synonymous with the conjunction If A then C, and
if not A then not C. With a defective truth table, the first of these
conditionals has no truth value when A is false, and the second of
them has no truth value when A is true. However, the biconditional
in daily life is true when both A and C are true and when neither
is true and is false in any other case. This complete truth table for
the biconditional cannot be equivalent to a conjunction in which
there is always one conjunct lacking a truth value. The bicondi-
tional can also be paraphrased as If A then C, and if C then A.
Suppose neither A nor C is true. The biconditional is true, but
neither of the two conditionals in this conjunction has a truth value.
The idea that a conjunction of two assertions having no truth value

should somehow yield a true assertion is a recipe for nonsense. The
principle of core meanings is therefore corroborated at the expense
of defective truth tables. Yet, as is shown below, the present theory
captures the intuition underlying the appeal of defective truth
tables.

The reader is invited to evaluate an inference based on the

following premise:

In this hand of cards, there is an ace or there is a king, or both.

Given the truth of this premise, does it follow validly that

If there isn’t an ace in this hand of cards, then there is a king?

The reader should judge whether there could be any circumstances
in which the premise is true but the conclusion false. Everyone to
whom we have given this inference informally has accepted its
validity (see also Ormerod, Manktelow, & Jones, 1993; Richard-
son & Ormerod, 1997). The premise is consistent with the follow-
ing:

Factual possibilities:

ace ¬ king
king
king

¬ ace
ace

Hence, it follows that if there isn’t an ace, there is a king. The
validity of the inference demonstrates the existence of the condi-
tional interpretation of the “if . . . then” premise.

Another alternative account of conditionals concerns the condi-
tions in which speakers are justified in asserting them. A philo-
sophical tradition deriving from Adams (1975) postulates that the
degree to which a conditional If A then C, is “assertible” equals the
conditional probability of C given A, that is, p(C兩 A). A related
view (Stalnaker, 1970; Stevenson & Over, 1995, pp. 617– 618) is
that the probability of a conditional, p(If A then C), is close to the
conditional probability p(C兩 A). The seductive nature of the claim
depends in part on the syntax of English. Certain sentential mod-
ifiers are taken to apply only to main clauses but not to subordinate
clauses such as the antecedents of conditionals. As a corollary,
consider the following:

What’s the probability that if Paolo has the king then he also

has the ace?

It is easy to interpret this question as meaning

If Paolo has the king then what’s the probability that he also

has the ace?

Such an interpretation, of course, is a direct way of asking for the
conditional probability. Investigators must take extra pains to ask
for the absolute probability of a conditional instead of this condi-
tional probability, or else participants are in danger of confusing
the two. Moreover, naive individuals are likely to base their
answers not on the actual possibilities but on mental models of
them (see the section The Interpretation of Basic Conditionals). In
an unpublished study, Girotto & Johnson-Laird (2002) examined,
for example, the following problem:

There are three cards face down on a table: 3, 6 and 8. Paolo
takes one card at random, and then he takes another at

CONDITIONALS

651

random. Maria says: “If Paolo has the 8 then he has also the
3.” What is the probability that Maria’s assertion is true?

There are three possibilities for Paolo’s hand, and only one of them
violates Maria’s assertion granted a conditional interpretation, and
so the correct answer is 2/3, but if individuals rely on mental
models, then they will think only of the case in which the ante-
cedent is true as satisfying the conditional and, accordingly, infer
that the probability is 1/3. In contrast, the following question asks
for the conditional probability:

Paolo shows his card: It is the 8. What is the probability that

he has the 3?

The correct answer is 1/2. The results showed that naive individ-
uals do not tend to give the same estimates for the two probabil-
ities. The majority give the correct answer for the conditional
probability, but the modal response for the probability of the
conditional was the one based on mental models, and a handful of
participants even responded 2/3.

Yet another alternative to our theory is that conditionals do
not merely refer to sets of possibilities but rather assert that a
relation holds between the antecedent and consequent (e.g.,
Barwise, 1986). One putative relation is that the antecedent is
the cause of the consequent (but cf. Goldvarg & Johnson-Laird,
2001). Another is that
logically implies the
consequent, perhaps taking into account other premises (e.g.,
Braine & O’Brien, 1991; D. Sperber, personal communication,
September 1994). Again, we corroborate our account by show-
ing that any such relation is not part of the meaning of a basic
conditional.

the antecedent

Several sorts of counterexample exist to the claim that the
consequents of conditionals can be inferred from their antecedents.
One sort of counterexample occurs with the relevance interpreta-
tion of conditionals (see the Ten Sets of Possibilities for Condi-
tionals section). It does not yield the modus ponens inference. For
example, the following inference is bizarre:

If you’re interested in Vertigo, it is on TV tonight.
You’re interested in Vertigo.
Therefore, Vertigo is on TV tonight.

And modus tollens is still odder:

relation. If it did, then to deny the relation while asserting the
conditional would be to contradict oneself. Yet, the next example
is not a contradiction:

If there was a circle on the board, then there was a triangle on
the board, though there was no relation, connection, or
constraint, between the two—they merely happened to
co-occur.

In summary, the basic conditionals If A then C and If A then
possibly C refer to sets of possibilities, and each has its own core
meaning: the conditional interpretation in which A is sufficient for
C and C is necessary for A and the tautological interpretation
compatible with any possibility. Other interpretations of condition-
als do occur, but as we show later, they result from the modulating
effects of semantics and pragmatics.

The “Paradoxes” of Implication

Does the principle of core meanings yield a truth-functional
account of the meaning of conditionals? On the one hand, the
possibilities in the conditional interpretation correspond to the
truth-functional connective of material
implication. The truth-
functional analysis, however, is one that many logicians and phi-
losophers reject (e.g., Stalnaker, 1975). It leads to seeming para-
doxes, it cannot be applied to counterfactual conditionals, and it
yields interpretations that depart from theorists’ intuitions. On the
other hand, our theory is based on possibilities, not truth values. In
this section, we resolve the apparent paradoxes. In subsequent
sections, we show that conditionals are not truth functional.

The so-called paradoxes of implication arise because on an
analysis of conditionals as material implications, the mere falsity
of the antecedent, or the mere truth of the consequent, suffices to
establish the truth of the conditional as a whole (see Table 2).
Consider the conditional “If there is a circle, then there is a
triangle.” When it is false that there is a circle, the conditional is
true. Likewise, when it is true that there is a triangle, the condi-
tional is true. However, the skeptics say that the following infer-
ences, which are valid on this account, are dubious:

There isn’t a circle.
Therefore, if there is a circle then there is a triangle.

If you’re interested in Vertigo, it is on TV tonight.
In fact, it is not on TV tonight.
Therefore, you’re not interested in Vertigo.

And:

There is a triangle.
Therefore, if there is a circle then there is a triangle.

Another sort of counterexample is a conditional expressing a
deontic relation, such as “If a person is drinking beer, then the
person is 19 years of age.” Given that, say, Fred is drinking beer,
it does not follow that Fred is 19 years of age but only that he
ought to be 19 years of age. Yet another sort of counterexample is
a conditional with an interrogative consequent, for example, “If the
president phones, will you talk to him?” Questions are not infer-
able from premises.

We do not deny that many conditionals are interpreted as
conveying a relation between their antecedents and consequents.
However,
the core meaning alone does not signify any such

The paradoxes are readily resolved. The preceding inferences
are valid, but their oddity has nothing to do with conditionals.
Analogous arguments that naive individuals resist can be derived
from disjunctions. For example, the inclusive disjunction “There is
not a circle or there is a triangle” is true provided that at least one
of its two disjuncts is true; otherwise, it is false. The following two
arguments parallel the paradoxes of implication, and they are also
rejected by naive reasoners:

There is not a circle.
Therefore, there is not a circle or there is a triangle.

652

And:

JOHNSON-LAIRD AND BYRNE

There is a triangle.
Therefore, there is not a circle or there is a triangle.

The causes of the paradoxes are twofold. First, they throw seman-
tic information away. Their premises contain more semantic in-
formation, that is, rule out more possibilities, than do their con-
clusions. Naive reasoners do not spontaneously draw conclusions
that throw information away by adding disjunctive alternatives
(Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991). Second, the judgment of the truth
or falsity of assertions containing connectives, such as conditionals
and disjunctions, is a meta-ability. That is, it calls for a grasp of the
metalinguistic predicates true and false, which refer to relations
between assertions and the world (see, e.g., Jeffrey, 1981). In
contrast, a task that taps directly into the interpretation of asser-
tions is to judge what is possible. For instance, suppose that the
following conditional holds: “If there is a circle, then there is a
triangle.” Is it possible that there is triangle? And is it possible that
there isn’t a circle? Naive individuals answer both questions in the
affirmative, and they do not find the task difficult (Barrouillet &
Lecas, 1999; Johnson-Laird & Savary, 1996).

Subjunctive and Counterfactual Conditionals

When modal auxiliaries, such as have and will, are used in the
past tense, they can express the subjunctive mood in English. Thus,
the following conditional is subjunctive: “If there had been a
circle, then there would have been a triangle.” One interpretation
of this conditional is counterfactual. That is, there was neither a
circle nor a triangle, but had there been a circle there would have
been a triangle. Such assertions are known as counterfactual
conditionals. Some counterfactuals are true, for example, “If you
hadn’t been born, then you wouldn’t be alive now.” It is false that
you weren’t born, and it is false that you are not alive now, yet the
conditional is true. And some counterfactuals are false, for exam-
ple, “If you weren’t alive now, then you wouldn’t have been born.”
It is false that you aren’t alive now, and it is false that you weren’t
born, but the conditional is false. You could have died yesterday,
and yet you would have been born. Hence, among counterfactuals
with false antecedents and false consequents, there are some that
are true and some that are false. Counterfactual conditionals there-
fore cannot be truth functional (Quine, 1952).

Philosophers have struggled to frame the truth conditions of
counterfactual conditionals. One stratagem owes much to Ram-
sey’s (1929/1990) idea of using a thought experiment to evaluate
conditionals. Ramsey wrote as follows in a footnote:

If two people are arguing “If p will q?” and both are in doubt as to p,
they are adding p hypothetically to their stock of knowledge and
arguing on that basis about q; so that in a sense “If p, q” and “If p, not
q” are contradictories. We can say they are fixing their degrees of
belief in q given p. If p turns out to be false, these degrees of belief
are rendered void. (p. 155)

Stalnaker (1968) extended this idea to deal with counterfactuals:
You add the antecedent to your set of current beliefs, adjust these
beliefs where necessary for consistency, and check whether the
consequent of the conditional holds. If it does, the conditional is
true; if it does not, the conditional is false. This account has been

applied to the circumstances in which conditionals are assertible
(e.g., Adams, 1975). It has also been applied within the framework
of a “possible worlds” semantics for modal logic (see, e.g., Kripke,
1963). A possible world is, in effect, a possible state of affairs,
though one that is completely specified, and the actual world is
treated as a member of the set of possible worlds. On Stalnaker’s
(1968) analysis, the truth of a conditional in a world, w1, depends
on another world, w2, that is accessible to w1 and that is the most
similar possible world to w1 except that the antecedent of the
conditional holds in it. If the consequent is true in w2, then the
conditional as a whole is true; otherwise, it is false. It is not
obvious that there is always a single world most similar to the
actual world except that a counterfactual antecedent is true. If there
is always a unique world of this sort, then one of the following pair
of assertions is true and one of them is false:

If Verdi and Bizet had been compatriots, then they would

both have been Italian.

If Verdi and Bizet had been compatriots, then they would

both have been French.

Yet, it is impossible to decide which assertion is the true one.

In the light of such examples, Lewis (1973) argued that a
conditional is true just in case there is a world in which the
antecedent and consequent are true that is closer to the actual
world than any world in which the antecedent is true and the
consequent false. Thus, consider the truth value in our world of the
conditional: “If Quayle had been the Republicans’ 1992 Presiden-
tial candidate, then Clinton would have lost.” It is necessary to find
a world that is as alike to the actual world as possible except that
Quayle was the Republicans’ Presidential candidate. There will be
other differences in consequence of this change. If this world
supports the truth of the consequent of the conditional, then the
counterfactual is true; otherwise, it is false.

These analyses are sophisticated but problematical. One diffi-
culty is illustrated by our example. One could assume that Quayle,
as we know him, was nominated as a result of some extraordinary
events at the Republican convention. He would have lost the
election, and so the conditional is false. Alternatively, one could
assume that Quayle underwent an extraordinary mental transfor-
mation as a prerequisite for the Republicans to nominate him. He
turned out, say, to be wise, though dyslexic. In this case, it is
conceivable that he would have beaten Clinton. There is no ob-
jective way to determine which of these two worlds is more similar
to the actual world (Kratzer, 1989). One cannot observe counter-
factual states, and so the truth or falsity of a counterfactual con-
ditional about a contingent matter may never be ascertained. Per-
haps that is why counterfactual speculations so intrigue historians,
novelists, and sports fans.

Our concern is the meaning of conditionals, not their truth or
falsity. The principle of core meanings postulates that indicative
conditionals refer to sets of possibilities, and subjunctive condi-
tionals call for only a slight addition to the principle:

Principle 2. The principle of subjunctive meanings. A sub-
junctive conditional refers to the same set of possibilities as
the corresponding indicative conditional, but the set consists
either of factual possibilities or of a fact in which the ante-

cedent and consequent did not occur and counterfactual pos-
sibilities in which they did occur.

tions, and each mental model represents a clause in these
assertions only when it is true in that possibility.

CONDITIONALS

653

To illustrate the principle, consider the subjunctive conditional “If
there had been a circle, then there would have been a triangle.” The
principle implies that this conditional can refer to a set of past
factual possibilities, such as the following:

Factual possibilities:

‚
E
¬ E
‚
¬ E ¬ ‚

Such conditionals are typically used when a speaker does not know
what happened in some past situation but asserts a conditional
relation, for example, “If there had been any deserters at Waterloo,
then they would have been shot.” The subjunctive principle also
allows for a counterfactual interpretation:

Fact:
Counterfactual possibilities:

¬ E ¬ ‚
‚
‚

E
¬ E

Such conditionals are typically used when a speaker knows what
happened but asserts a conditional about an alternative to reality,
for example, “If there had been any deserters at Waterloo, not that
there were, then they would have been shot.” There are subjunctive
conditionals corresponding to the tautological interpretation, for
example, “If there had been a circle then there might have been a
triangle.” This conditional refers to

Factual possibilities:

E
‚
E ¬ ‚
¬ E
‚
¬ E ¬ ‚

It can also refer to a set in which the fourth possibility is a fact (or
perhaps the third) and the rest are counterfactual possibilities.

In this section, we have argued that basic indicative conditionals
have core meanings that refer to sets of possibilities and that basic
subjunctive conditionals also have such core meanings. A natural
question to raise is how such meanings are mentally represented.
Before we can answer it, however, we need to outline a general
theory of comprehension and representation.

The Theory of Mental Models

The theory of mental models was originally postulated in order
to explain the comprehension of discourse and elementary deduc-
tive reasoning. In this section, we sketch the theory and its com-
puter implementation (see Johnson-Laird & Savary, 1999). By
definition, a mental model of an assertion represents a possibility
given the truth of the assertion. Hence, a set of mental models
represents a set of possibilities. Each model corresponds to a true
row in a truth table, though, as shown below, a mental model may
not contain all the information in the corresponding row in the
truth table. There may also be true rows in the truth table that are
not represented explicitly in any mental models. The fundamental
representational principle of the theory is as follows:

The principle of truth: Each mental model of a set of asser-
tions represents a possibility given the truth of the asser-

The principle implies that mental models represent only what is
true and not what is false. Moreover, each mental model represents
a clause in the premises only when the clause is true within the
possibility that the model represents. This point can best be ex-
plained by way of an example. There are three mental models of
an inclusive disjunction, such as “The battery is dead or the circuit
is not connected, or both.” These models are as follows:

Factual possibilities:

dead

¬ connected
dead ¬ connected

Each line denotes a separate model, dead denotes a model of the
clause the battery is dead and ¬ connected denotes a model of the
negative clause the circuit
is not connected. The first model
accordingly represents the possibility in which it is true that the
battery is dead, but the model does not make explicit that it is false
that the circuit is not connected in this possibility, that is, the
circuit is connected. Similarly, the second model represents the
possibility in which it is true that the circuit is not connected, but
the model does not make explicit that it is false that the battery is
dead in this possibility. As the example illustrates, mental models
represent negations when they are true, but they do not represent
false clauses, whether they are affirmative or negative. Reasoners
make mental “footnotes” to capture the information about what is
false. The computer program implementing the theory almost
literally uses footnotes. To represent the first of the models above,
it uses the notation ((dead)(t14)), where t14 is an automatically
generated variable with a value of (connected). What happens to
footnotes, as we show below, depends on the level of expertise at
which the program is operating.

Each entry in a truth table represents the truth or falsity of an
assertion given a particular possibility. In contrast, each mental
model in a set represents a possibility. A corollary is that possi-
bilities are psychologically basic, not truth values. Discourse about
the truth or falsity of propositions is at a higher level than mere
descriptions of possibilities. Logicians say that reference to truth
and falsity occurs not in the language under analysis—the so-
called object language— but in a metalanguage, which is a lan-
guage for talking about the object language. Johnson-Laird (1990)
argued that children first learn to use language to refer to possi-
bilities. Later, they develop a metalinguistic ability to use the
predicates true and false. Adults are likewise often puzzled by the
truth or falsity of assertions containing connectives. For example,
if they are told that the assertion “Gawain is a knight, and Lancelot
is a knave” is false, then they sometimes assume that it is false that
Gawain is a knight and false that Lancelot is a knave (Byrne &
Handley, 1992). They overlook that a conjunction can be false
even though one of its conjuncts is true. In contrast, they realize
that a conjunction is compatible with a single possibility—the one
in which both conjuncts hold. Natural language is its own meta-
language. One consequence is that conditionals can make asser-
tions about their own truth or falsity, for example, “If this condi-
tional is true, then its antecedent is true but its consequent is false.”
Similarly, assertions can make explicit reference to what is possi-

654

JOHNSON-LAIRD AND BYRNE

ble or impossible, for example, “If it is impossible that Mallory
climbed Everest, then it is impossible that Irvine climbed it.”

According to the principle of truth, mental models represent true
possibilities. The principle does not imply, however, that individ-
uals never represent false cases. They can use their mental foot-
notes about what is false to construct fully explicit models of what
is true. Hence, the inclusive disjunction above has the following
fully explicit models:

Factual possibilities:

dead

connected
¬ dead ¬ connected
dead ¬ connected

These models can in turn be used to infer what is false, namely, the
complement of the set:

Factual impossibility: ¬ dead

connected

The task is difficult because people tend to forget mental footnotes
and because it is hard to construct the complement of a set of
models (see Barres & Johnson-Laird, 1997).

How are inferences made with mental models? The next exam-

ple illustrates a simple method. Consider these premises:

The battery is dead or the circuit is not connected, or both.
In fact, the battery is not dead.

The disjunction has the mental models presented at the start of this
section, and the categorical premise eliminates the first and third of
them. The remaining model yields the conclusion “The circuit is
not connected.” This conclusion is valid, that is, it is necessarily
true given the truth of the premises, because it holds in all the
models—in this case,
the single model— consistent with the
premises.

The model theory provides a unified account of inference. If a
conclusion holds in all the models of the premises, it is necessary
given the premises, that is, it is deductively valid. If it holds in at
least one model of the premises, then it is possible (see Bell &
Johnson-Laird, 1998). And the probability of a conclusion depends
on the proportion of equiprobable models in which it holds or on
the sum of the probabilities of the models in which it holds
(Johnson-Laird, Legrenzi, et al., 1999). Experimental evidence has
corroborated the model
theory (e.g., Johnson-Laird & Byrne,
1991). Inferences based on one model are easier than inferences
based on multiple models. Reasoners tend to neglect models, and
so their systematic errors correspond to a proper subset of the
models, typically just a single model. Perhaps the strongest evi-
dence, however, is the phenomenon of illusory inferences, which
we describe later in the article. They are systematic fallacies that
cannot be explained by theories based solely on valid rules of
inference.

The computer program implementing the model theory operates
at different levels of expertise (Johnson-Laird & Savary, 1999). At
its most rudimentary level, Level 1, it forgets mental footnotes.
Consider an inclusive disjunction of the form

A and B, or C and D.

This inclusive disjunction yields the following models:

a

b

c

d

Here, as usual, lowercase letters denote models of the correspond-
ing uppercase propositions. At this level, the program does not
distinguish between exclusive and inclusive interpretations of a
disjunction, which, as the example shows, it represents in two
models. It is able, however, to make the correct responses to the 61
so-called direct reasoning problems of Braine, Reiser, and Rumain
(1984), and the number of models it constructs predicts their
difficulty just as well as Braine’s theory even though, unlike that
theory, it does not depend on parameters estimated from the data
(Johnson-Laird, Byrne, & Schaeken, 1992).

At Level 2, the program takes mental footnotes into account in
combining models. It distinguishes between inclusive and exclu-
sive disjunctions, and its models for the assertion above are

a

a

b

b

c
c

d
d

In this case, there is a footnote that C or D, or both, are false in the
first model, and a footnote that A or B, or both, are false in the
second model. The contents of footnotes do not emerge into the
explicit content of any resulting models.

At Level 3, footnotes not only control a conjunction of sets of
models, but now their content emerges into the resulting models.
The models for the assertion above are accordingly still more
complex:

a
a
a
¬ a

b ¬ c
d
c ¬ d
b
b ¬ c ¬ d
d
b
a ¬ b
d
¬ a ¬ b
d
b
d

c
c
c
c

a

Finally, at Level 4, the program goes beyond human performance.
It always constructs fully explicit models, and so it always makes
correct deductions. We now turn to the extension of the theory to
conditionals.

The Interpretation of Basic Conditionals

The theory postulates the following:

Principle 3. The principle of implicit models: Basic condi-
tionals have mental models representing the possibilities in
which their antecedents are satisfied, but only implicit mental
models for the possibilities in which their antecedents are not
satisfied. A mental footnote on the implicit model can be used
to make fully explicit models (at Levels 2 and above), but
individuals are liable to forget the footnote (Level 1) and even
to forget the implicit model itself for complex compound
assertions.

According to this principle, the mental models for the conditional
interpretation of If A then C are as follows:

CONDITIONALS

655

Factual possibilities:

c
a
. . .

where the ellipsis denotes the implicit model, which has no explicit
content, and which distinguishes a conditional from a conjunction,
A and C. Similarly, the mental models for the tautological inter-
pretation of If A then possibly C are as follows:

Factual possibilities:

a
c
a ¬ c

. . .

The principle of implicit models also applies to subjunctive
conditionals. When a subjunctive conditional, such as “If there had
been a circle then there would have been a triangle” refers to
unknown past possibilities, it has the following mental models:

Factual possibilities: E ‚
. . .

However, the counterfactual interpretation has two explicit mod-
els, one of the fact and one of the counterfactual possibility:

Fact:
Counterfactual possibilities:

¬ E ¬ ‚
‚

E

. . .

The presence of two explicit mental models, as we show below,
has consequences for conditional inferences.

The models for specific conditional assertions, such as “If Pat
has malaria then she has a fever,” differ from those for universal
conditional assertions, such as “If a patient has malaria then she
has a fever” (see Langford, 1992). The specific assertion has the
following mental models:

Factual possibilities: Pat malaria

fever

. . .

The footnote on the implicit model denotes that it represents the
possibilities in which it is false that Pat has malaria. Hence, the
conditional’s fully explicit models are as follows:

Factual possibilities: Pat

fever
malaria
¬ malaria
fever
¬ malaria ¬ fever

Here we adopt the notational convention that a token only at the
start of the first line, such as Pat in this case, is an entity for which
each model specifies an alternative set of possible properties.
Hence, the set of models represents Pat’s possible properties, and
they allow that Pat could have a fever without malaria. The
universal assertion has the following logical form: “For any x, if
patient(x) and has(x malaria) then has(x fever).” Variables do not
occur in models (Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991, chapter 9). The set
of patients with malaria is accordingly represented using a small
but arbitrary number of tokens:

Factual possibilities:

patient malaria
patient malaria

fever
fever

. . .

Each row in this diagram, unlike previous examples, represents a
different individual, and the diagram as a whole represents the set
of patients with malaria. A mental footnote indicates that the
ellipsis represents entities other than patients with malaria. If the
cardinality of the set matters, then models can be tagged with
numerals, just as they can be tagged to represent numerical prob-
abilities (see Johnson-Laird, Legrenzi, et al., 1999).

Models of general assertions can be unified with models of

particular facts. Consider, for example, the following premises:

If a patient has malaria then she has a fever.
Pat is a patient with malaria.

Given these premises, it follows that Pat has a fever. This inference
can be made by unifying the preceding models of Pat’s properties
and of the set of patients. The result is the following model

Fact: Pat

patient malaria

fever

From this model, it follows that Pat has a fever.

The Corroboration of the Principle of Implicit Models

A developmental trend supports the model theory. Young chil-
dren interpret basic conditionals as conjunctions, slightly older
children interpret them as biconditionals, and adolescents and
adults are able to make the conditional interpretation (see, e.g.,
Taplin, Staudenmayer, & Taddonio, 1974; cf. Markovits, 1993;
Russell, 1987). This result is a nice confirmation of the model
theory: Conjunctions have one fully explicit model, which corre-
sponds to the single explicit mental model of the analogous con-
ditional; biconditionals have two fully explicit models; and con-
ditionals have three fully explicit models. Sloutsky and Morris
(1999) also observed that children tend to ignore the second clause
of a compound premise, so that the premise calls for exactly one
model. They are most likely to ignore the second clause of a
tautology or contradiction, less likely to ignore it in a disjunction,
and least likely to ignore it in a conjunction. Barrouillet (1997) and
his colleagues have recently demonstrated the developmental trend
in several studies (see Barrouillet & Lecas, 1998; Lecas & Bar-
rouillet, 1999). For instance, Barrouillet and Lecas (1999) carried
out a study of 90 children (30 each at the mean ages of about 9,
111⁄2, and nearly 15 years). The children’s task was to list the
possibilities consistent with basic conditionals. The participants
also carried out a task that measured the capacity of their working
memories. They counted out loud the number of red dots on
sequences of cards, and then at the end of the sequence they had
to recall in correct order the number of dots on each card. The
results confirmed the predictions. The children showed the devel-
opmental sequence of conjunction, biconditional, and conditional.
The measure of working memory capacity correlated strongly and
significantly with these interpretations (r ⫽ .78), and it did so even
when school grade was partialed out (cf. Simon, 1982).

Other evidence shows that young children interpret conditionals
as akin to conjunctions (see, e.g., Delval & Riviere, 1975; Kuhn,
1977; Paris, 1973; Politzer, 1986). O’Brien and his colleagues,
however, have argued that if is not understood as and (O’Brien,
1999, p. 399; O’Brien, Dias, & Roazzi, 1998). Yet, Schroyens,
Schaeken, and d’Ydewalle (2000) carried out a meta-analysis of
developmental studies, and its results corroborated the model

656

JOHNSON-LAIRD AND BYRNE

theory, not the rule theories. Likewise, O’Brien himself proposed
the conjunctive interpretation in the past. He wrote “Braine,
O’Brien, and Connell found that young children persist in making
conjunction-like responses even when provided with evidence to
the contrary” (O’Brien, 1987, pp. 74 –75). The principle of implicit
models implies that individuals should tend to treat basic condi-
tionals as conjunctions, because they discount implicit possibilities
in which the antecedent of an indicative conditional is false. The
principle has some unexpected consequences that emerged from
the computer program implementing the model theory. These
predictions led to the discovery of a phenomenon.

Experiments 1 and 2

The computer program implementing the model theory predicts
that the mental models of conjunctions, disjunctions, and basic
conditionals should interact in a surprising way. Basic condition-
als, as readers will recall from the section The Core Meanings of
Basic Conditionals, are those that have a neutral content indepen-
dent of context and background knowledge. The conjunction of
two basic conditionals of the form If A then B, and if C then D
yields the following mental models (at Level 2):

Factual possibilities:

a

a

b

c
d
c d

b
. . .

The ellipsis denotes an implicit model with a footnote indicating
that the antecedents of the two conditionals are both false. How-
ever, an inclusive disjunction of the two conditionals yields exactly
the same set of mental models. If the first conditional is true, it has
the following mental models:

Factual possibilities:

a
b
. . .

These already occur in the models of the conjunction of the two
conditionals. If the second conditional is true, it has the following
mental models:

Factual possibilities:

c
d
. . .

These already occur in the models of the conjunction. And if both
conditionals are true, they have the models for the conjunction
above. In short, the disjunction requires no additional mental
models over and above those elicited by the conjunction (at Lev-
els 1 and 2). However, the fully explicit models of the conditionals,
which take into account the falsity of clauses, yield 9 explicit
models for the conjunction and 15 explicit models for the disjunc-
tion. A disjunction of conjunctions, such as A and B, or C and D,
has the following mental models:

Factual possibilities:

a

a

b

b

c
d
c d

The only difference between this set and the set for the two
preceding assertions is the lack of an implicit model (denoted by
the ellipsis). However, as the developmental trend shows, individ-

uals are likely to forget the implicit model. Indeed, if young
children treat conditionals as though they were conjunctions, then
complex conditionals should cause adults to regress to conjunc-
tions, too (cf. Case, 1985). They should forget the implicit model
of basic conditionals and, in consequence, treat them as akin to
conjunctions. The model theory, accordingly, predicts that the
three following assertions should tend to be interpreted in the same
way even though their real meanings are distinct:

1. If A then B, and if C then D.
2. If A then B, or if C then D.
3. A and B, or C and D.

The theory also predicts that it should be difficult to envisage the
possibilities in which these assertions are false: The participants
have to infer them from the true possibilities.

There was no evidence in the literature, and so we carried out
two experiments to examine these predictions. The first experi-
ment was carried out as a class exercise in an undergraduate course
in which each experimenter was a student and tested a separate
naive individual. None of the acting experimenters knew the
predictions of the model
theory. The second experiment was
carried out in a conventional way with just one experimenter, and
it did not include the disjunction of conjunctions. Otherwise, the
two experiments were similar, and so we report them together.

Method. The participants acted as their own controls and listed the sets
of possibilities for four assertions. In Experiment 1, the assertions were as
follows:

1. If there is a A on the board then there is a 2, and if there is a C on the

board then there is a 3.

2. If there is a D on the board then there is a 5, or if there is an E on the

board then there is a 6, and both conditionals may be true.

3. There is a J on the board and there is a 9, or there is a L on the board

and there is a 7, and both conjunctions may be true.
There was also a control assertion, which was a conjunction of conjunc-
tions. Experiment 2 used Assertions 1 and 2, and two control assertions, a
conjunction of disjunctions and a disjunction of disjunctions. The asser-
tions were presented in different random orders to the participants, who
wrote down a list of the possibilities given the truth of each assertion, that
is, pairings of letters and numbers, such as A2. When they had completed
this task, they went through the assertions again and wrote down the cases
in which they would be false. In Experiment 1, there were 25 participants
from a class on cognitive science at Princeton University. In Experiment 2,
there were 21 participants, who were students at Princeton University, and
who received either a course credit or a monetary reward.

Results and discussion. The results corroborated the predic-
tions. Table 3 presents the percentages of responses to the three
experimental assertions, and no other responses occurred reliably.
The numbers of participants in Experiment 1 who listed the re-
sponses in the order predicted by the computer model were as
follows: 9 for Assertion 1, 17 for Assertion 2, and 16 for Asser-
tion 3. There are 16 possible selections, and so the chance prob-
ability of making the three selections in their predicted order is
very small, that is, the chance probability for one such selection is
1/16 ⫻ 1/15 ⫻ 1/14 ⬍ .0003, and so the binomial probability for,
say, 9 out of 25 participants’ making this selection is minuscule.
The results for Experiment 2 were almost as robust. In both
experiments, the control sentences were accurately interpreted, but
the task of generating false possibilities was very hard, yielding
many varied selections. It seemed that the participants—with con-
siderable difficulty—inferred the false possibilities from the true

CONDITIONALS

657

Table 3
Percentages of Responses to the Experimental Sentences in
Experiments 1 and 2

Assertion 1:

Assertion 2:

Assertion 3:

If A then B,

If A then B,

A and B,

and

or

or

Possibilities

if C then D

if C then D

C and D

A B

C D
A B C D

84 (62)
80 (52)
80 (76)

92 (90)
96 (95)
96 (52)

92
88
76

Note. Values shown are the percentages of participants who listed the
predicted possibilities given the truth of the assertions in Experiment 1
(n ⫽ 25) and Experiment 2 (n ⫽ 21). The percentages for Experiment 2 are
shown in parentheses. The assertions and possibilities are stated as though
they had the same lexical materials.

ones. Few participants accounted for all 16 contingencies in their
combined lists of true and false possibilities.

The results confirmed the model theory of the interpretation of
basic conditionals. Naive individuals take a conjunction of condi-
tionals to have the same possibilities as a disjunction of condition-
als and as a disjunction of conjunctions. Hence, their interpretation
of basic conditionals regresses to a childlike conjunction. Alterna-
tive psychological theories of conditionals, including rule theories,
either do not deal with the meaning of connectives or else treat
their meanings as captured in the rules of inference that govern
them (e.g., Braine & O’Brien, 1991). Because conditionals, dis-
junctions, and conjunctions are governed by different formal rules
of inference, these theories fail to explain why the three sorts of
assertion in our experiments are interpreted in the same way.

Another line of evidence corroborates the regression to
conjunction-like interpretations of conditionals. Johnson-Laird,
Legrenzi et al. (1999) carried out a study in which adults were
asked to judge the probability of one assertion given the truth of
another initial assertion. The evidence showed that the participants
based their estimates on the equiprobability of mental models of
the assertions, for example, the participants gave estimates of 33%
for one of the three possibilities compatible with an inclusive
disjunction. On some trials, the initial assertion was a basic con-
ditional such as “There is a box in which if there is a yellow card
then there is a brown card.” The conditional has two mental
models, one explicit and the other implicit:

yellow brown

. . .

The participants had to infer the probability of the conjunction “In
the box there is a yellow card and a brown card,” which has just
a single mental model corresponding to the explicit model of the
conditional. Most participants inferred a probability of 50%, which
is predicted from the two models of the conditional. However, over
one third of the participants gave an estimate of 100%. This
judgment and others in the task show that people often forget the
implicit model and, as a result, treat the conditional as though it
were a conjunction, which has only a single mental model.

Judgments of Truth and Falsity

Judgments of the truth or falsity of basic conditionals also
corroborate the principle of implicit models. Such judgments call
for a higher order analysis than merely generating possibilities
compatible with a conditional (see the section The Theory of
Mental Models). Given a conditional, such as “If there is a circle
then there is a triangle,” participants usually judge that the condi-
tional is neither true nor false when its antecedent is false. Instead,
they deem it irrelevant (J. Evans, 1972; Johnson-Laird & Tagart,
1969). As we have seen, theorists have defended a defective truth
table in which a conditional has no truth value when its antecedent
is false. The model theory, however, accounts for the result with-
out having the undesirable consequences of the defective truth
table (see the section The Theory of Mental Models). There is no
explicit mental model representing the possibilities in which the
antecedent is false, and so naive individuals and theorists deem the
conditional neither true nor false but irrelevant.

Another consequence of conditionals’ having only one explicit
mental model is that it is easy to confuse one basic conditional,
such as “If there is circle then there is a triangle,” with its converse,
“If there is a triangle then there is a circle.” One way for people to
grasp the difference between the two conditional interpretations is
to generate an additional explicit model of the first conditional,

Factual possibility: ¬ E ‚

They can then note that this model is impossible according to the
second conditional. Otherwise, they will tend to confuse the two
conditionals. The same confusion can occur in daily life. Thus, for
example, it is easy to confuse “If the DNA matches the sample,
then the suspect is guilty” with “If the suspect is guilty, then the
DNA matches the sample.” This confusion may in part be respon-
sible for analogous confusions between the conditional probability
of a DNA match given guilt and the conditional probability of guilt
given a DNA match (see Johnson-Laird, Legrenzi, et al., 1999).
Unlike indicative conditionals, counterfactual conditionals have
two explicit mental models. For example, the counterfactual “If
there had been a circle, then there would have been a triangle” has
the following mental models:

Fact:
Counterfactual possibilities:

¬ E ¬ ‚
‚

E

. . .

It follows that if individuals are asked to list the possibility that
best fits a basic conditional, they should tend to list the possibility
corresponding to the explicit model of an indicative conditional
(the circle and triangle). And they should tend to list the factual
case (neither a circle nor a triangle) more often for counterfactual
conditionals than for indicative conditionals. Byrne and Tasso
(1999) corroborated both these predictions.

The Principle of Semantic Modulation

The model theory is committed to the compositionality of the
process of interpreting sentences, that is, the meanings of words
and phrases are combined according to their syntactic relations to
yield the meaning of a sentence (see Johnson-Laird & Byrne,
1991, chapter 9). The computer program implementing the theory

658

JOHNSON-LAIRD AND BYRNE

is compositional in exactly this sense. However, the meanings of
words are often interrelated, and in this section we describe how
the content of the antecedent and consequent can modulate a
conditional’s core meaning. In the next section, we describe how
a conditional’s context can affect its interpretation, and then we
outline the different possible interpretations of conditionals that
these effects of semantic and pragmatic modulation can yield. In
both cases, by definition, we are no longer dealing with basic
conditionals.

The model theory makes the following assumption:

Principle 4. The principle of semantic modulation: The mean-
ings of the antecedent and consequent, and coreferential links
between these two clauses, can add information to models,
prevent the construction of otherwise feasible models of the
core meaning, and aid the process of constructing fully ex-
plicit models.

Here is an example of how this principle works. Consider the
following conditional:

If Vivien entered the elevator, then Evelyn left it one floor up.

The coreferential pronoun it establishes a spatial and a temporal
relation between the two events: Evelyn left the elevator one floor
above and after the floor on which Vivien entered it. The condi-
tional is accordingly not truth functional. Given that its antecedent
is true, its truth depends on the consequent event occurring in the
appropriate spatial and temporal relation to the antecedent event.
Another conditional illustrates how semantics can prevent the
construction of models:

If it’s a game, then it’s not soccer.

universal claims, such as “If a dog is tame, then it is obedient,”
contain a pronoun that functions as a bound variable in the pred-
icate calculus: For any x, if x is a dog and x is tame, then x is
obedient. We showed earlier how models can represent such
assertions (see the section The Interpretation of Basic Condition-
als). Another use of pronouns is merely to stand in place of an
earlier expression in a sentence, for example, “If he paid tax to the
British Inland Revenue, then now he pays it to the American
Internal Revenue Service.” In this case, it is not coreferential with
the tax referred to in the antecedent, and the usage is a case of what
Geach (1962) called “a pronoun of laziness” (pp. 124 –125). The
interpretation of the assertion accordingly calls for substituting tax
for it in the consequent clause.

A use of pronouns that

is problematic for rule theories is
illustrated in the following conditional: “If there is a car in the
garage, then Mr. Toad will drive it.” The pronoun is not a simple
case of coreference, because the antecedent does not establish a
definite referent to which the pronoun can refer. The force of the
pronoun is to refer to the car in the garage if there is one.
However, the natural interpretation of this assertion cannot be
captured in the first-order predicate calculus (see, e.g., G. Evans,
1980). That is, the following interpretation is not viable: If there
exists an x such that x is a car and x is in the garage, then Mr. Toad
drives x. The scope of the quantifier, there exists an x, is restricted
to the antecedent of the conditional, and so the x in the consequent
is unbound. One solution is to represent the assertion with a
universal quantifier (see, e.g., Reinhart, 1986): For any x, if x is a
car and x is in the garage, then Mr. Toad drives x. According to the
model theory, however, if there is a car in the garage, the pronoun
refers to it, and if there is not a car in the garage, the pronoun has
no referent. The assertion accordingly refers to the factual possi-
bilities:

The fully explicit models of the conditional interpretation if they
were unconstrained by semantics would be as follows:

A car in garage Toad drives it

¬ A car in garage

Factual possibilities:

It

game ¬ soccer
¬ game ¬ soccer
¬ game
soccer

These three models represent the different possibilities for the
referent of it, assuming that its two occurrences in the conditional
are coreferential. However, the meaning of the noun soccer entails
that it is a game (for different implementations of this assumption,
see, e.g., Fodor, Garrett, Walker, & Parkes, 1980; Miller &
Johnson-Laird, 1976; Quillian, 1968). Hence, an attempt to con-
struct the third model would yield an inconsistency, because it
would refer to something that is both a game and not a game. The
assertion therefore has just these fully explicit models:

Factual possibilities:

It

game ¬ soccer
¬ game ¬ soccer

Various referential relations can hold between the antecedent
and consequent of a conditional. For example, a pronoun in the
consequent can refer back anaphorically to a reference established
in the antecedent: “If Fido is tame, then he is obedient.” Alterna-
tively, a pronoun in the antecedent, which is a subordinate clause,
can refer forward cataphorically to a reference established in the
consequent: “If he is tame, then Fido is obedient.” Similarly,

Readers may wonder about the different interpretations of condi-
tionals that can arise from the semantic modulation of core mean-
ings. We return to this question after we examine pragmatic
modulation.

The Principle of Pragmatic Modulation

Pragmatics concerns the effects on interpretation of the linguis-
tic context of an utterance, its social and physical situation, back-
ground knowledge, and the conventions of discourse (Levinson,
1983). We refer to these factors collectively as the context of an
utterance, and they include the participants’ task in psychological
experiments (Thompson, 2000). Context can play a part in deter-
mining the particular proposition that a sentence expresses, and
this proposition in turn determines what inferences reasoners can
make from the sentence. Conditionals are notoriously influenced
by their context, and so our goals are to describe the underlying
mechanism that allows contextual knowledge to modulate sets of
models and to outline a computer program that implements the
mechanism. Our assumption is that the mechanism is likely to
intercede in the case of implicatures based on the conventions
governing discourse (see, e.g., Fillenbaum, 1977; Geis & Zwicky,
1971; Grice, 1975; Sperber & Wilson, 1995).

CONDITIONALS

659

For an illustration of the role of context, consider the following
well-known example, which has perplexed many theorists (e.g.,
Lewis, 1973; Lycan, 1991; Over & Evans, 1997; Stalnaker, 1968):

If you strike a match properly, then it lights.
Therefore, if a match is soaking wet and you strike it prop-

erly, then it lights.

This inference is valid given the conditional interpretation of the
two assertions. Yet, obviously, it is unacceptable in everyday life.
There are equivalent inferential problems with disjunctive asser-
tions, for example,

You put sugar on your porridge, or it doesn’t taste sweet.
Therefore, you put sugar or diesel oil on your porridge, or it

doesn’t taste sweet.

One reaction to such examples is that their premises are not strictly
true. They should be reformulated to state all the relevant infor-
mation: “If a match has not been soaked in water or treated in any
other way that affects its potential for lighting and it is struck
properly, then it lights.” However, there can never be any guaran-
tee that all the relevant conditions have been captured in the
antecedent. The solution accordingly degenerates into a vacuous
claim: “If a match is in such a state that it lights when it is struck
properly and it is struck properly, then it lights.” Moreover, infer-
ences in daily life are made in the absence of complete informa-
tion. One jumps to a conclusion that reality may overturn. Beliefs
such as that properly struck matches light and that sugar makes
porridge taste sweet are useful idealizations.

A standard way to treat such idealizations in artificial intel-
ligence is as default assumptions (Minsky, 1975). If a match is
struck properly and there is no information to the contrary, then,
by default, it lights. Researchers have devised formal systems
that
incorporate rules or axioms to accommodate reasoning
from defaults (see Brewka, Dix, & Konolige, 1997). However,
a more psychological approach may emerge from the way that
the model theory deals with the indeterminacy of discourse. A
model can be built on the basis of default assumptions, and
revised, if necessary, by abandoning the default values in the
light of subsequent information. Indeed, the theory of mental
models relies on this procedure (Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991,
chapter 9). An analogous idea underlies our approach to the
pragmatics of conditionals.

According to the principle of core meanings, the antecedent
of a conditional may provide only a partial description of the
possibility in which to evaluate the consequent. Richardson and
Ormerod (1997) showed the effects of familiarity and causality on
paraphrasing conditionals as disjunctions and vice versa. They
suggested that familiarity can only aid the process of turning
existing partial models into fully explicit models, whereas causal-
ity can lead to the fleshing out of implicit possibilities into fully
explicit models. Our proposal does not draw this distinction, which
may be restricted to the paraphrase task, but makes a more general
claim about the effects of knowledge:

Principle 5. The principle of pragmatic modulation: The
context of a conditional depends on general knowledge in
long-term memory and knowledge of the specific circum-
stances of its utterance. This context is normally represented

in explicit models. These models can modulate the core
interpretation of a conditional, taking precedence over con-
tradictory models. They can add information to models, pre-
vent the construction of otherwise feasible models, and aid
the process of constructing fully explicit models.

No one knows how the mind represents knowledge. It could take
the form of assertions in a mental language or a semantic network
(e.g., Fodor et al., 1980); content-specific rules, procedures, or
productions (e.g., Newell, 1990); or distributed representations
(e.g., Rumelhart & McClelland, 1986). However, people often
have knowledge about situations, that is, they know what the
different possibilities are. The model theory accordingly assumes
that such knowledge is represented in explicit models, which
modulate the mental models of a core interpretation. In the case of
an inconsistency, the resulting unification gives precedence to an
explicit model from general knowledge.

We have developed a computer program that implements the
essential principle of pragmatic modulation. It operates at three
levels of expertise (see the section The Theory of Mental Models),
and it uses a knowledge base of explicit models of possibilities to
modulate the interpretation of assertions. As an illustration, con-
sider how the program works with the conditional “If a match is
struck properly, then it lights,” which is represented as

If match-struck, then match-lights.

And suppose that a match is soaked in water and then struck:

Match-soaked and match-struck.

What happens? The program begins by building the mental models
of the conditional, which at Level 1 are:

Match-struck Match-lights

. . .

It adds the information in the second premise to yield the follow-
ing:

Match-soaked Match-struck Match-lights

The program’s knowledge base includes the fact that if a match is
soaking wet, it will not light, which is represented in fully explicit
models:

Match-soaked ¬ Match-lights
¬ Match-soaked ¬ Match-lights
¬ Match-soaked
Match-lights

According to the premises, the match was soaked, and this fact
triggers the matching possibility in the knowledge base:

Match-soaked ¬ Match-lights

The conjunction of this model with the model of the premises
would yield a contradiction (and the null model), but the program
follows the principle of pragmatic modulation and gives prece-
dence to general knowledge. Hence, the possibility from general
knowledge is combined with the model of the premises to yield the
following reinterpretation:

660

JOHNSON-LAIRD AND BYRNE

Match-soaked, and match-struck, and so it is not the case that

match-lights.

The model of the premises also triggers another possibility from
the knowledge base:

¬ Match-soaked Match-lights

This second possibility and the model of the premises are used to
construct a counterfactual conditional:

If it had not been the case that match-soaked and given
match-struck, then it might have been the case that match-
lights.

As a further illustration, consider the following example sug-

gested by a reviewer:

If today is Monday, then today is Tuesday.
Today is Monday.

The program’s knowledge base represents the fact that the days of
the week are mutually exclusive:

Monday ¬ Tuesday
¬ Monday
Tuesday
¬ Monday ¬ Tuesday

The first of these models takes precedence over the model of the
premises:

Monday Tuesday

The program uses the model in the knowledge base to draw the
conclusion:

If he is a friend of Pat, then he is honest.
If he is a friend of Viv, then he is not honest.
He is a friend of Pat and Viv.

People try to reason their way to consistency; that is, if they detect
the inconsistency, they try to determine which premise to abandon
and to create a diagnosis of the situation (for model accounts of
these processes, see Johnson-Laird, Legrenzi, Girotto, & Legrenzi,
2000; M. S. Legrenzi, Girotto, Legrenzi, & Johnson-Laird, 2000).
If one conditional is stated to have a more probable consequent
than the other, then reasoners are likely to favor it (George, 1999).
If only one conditional rests on definite knowledge, then it takes
precedence over the other. And if both conditionals are based on
general knowledge, then reasoners may also know which of them
takes precedence, for example,

If the boxer punches his opponent below the belt, then he will

be disqualified.

If the boxer punches his opponent above the belt, then he will

not be disqualified.

The boxer punches his opponent above the belt and below the

belt.

Therefore, he will be disqualified.

People know that an illegal action is not offset by a legal action,
and so the first conditional takes precedence over the second. One
might argue that the second conditional is not strictly true and
attempt to amend it. We spelled out the difficulties for this ap-
proach in our earlier discussion of the case of the soaked match. It
leads ultimately to the need for a vacuous reformulation of the
conditional: “If the boxer punches his opponent above the belt and
does nothing that results in his disqualification, then he will not be
disqualified.”

Monday, and so it is not the case that Tuesday.

Ten Sets of Possibilities for Conditionals

It uses the model of the premise to trigger the second model in the
knowledge base, which it uses to frame the counterfactual condi-
tional:

If it had not been the case that Monday, then it might have

been the case that Tuesday.

The models in the knowledge base are compatible with the correct
conditional claim:

If today is Monday, then today is not Tuesday.

Indeed, because naive individuals judge a conditional as true just
in case its antecedent and consequent are both true (see the
Judgments of Truth and Falsity section), they judge the original
conditional as false because it conflicts with this case.

Logically speaking, a set of assertions of the following form is

inconsistent:

If A, then C.
If B, then not C.
A and B.

If neither conditional is definitive, then indeed people will treat
them as inconsistent, for example,

The principle of core meanings implies that any conditional
referring to two or more possibilities must include one that satis-
fies the antecedent and consequent and that any conditional refer-
ring to only one possibility cannot refer to the possibility that
falsifies (or violates) the conditional. Semantics and pragmatics,
however, allow any other modulation of the two core interpreta-
tions. A conditional of the form If A then possibly C may refer to
all four possibilities of the tautological interpretation, and a con-
ditional of the form If A then C may refer to the three possibilities
of the conditional interpretation. Modulation can yield either of the
other two sets of three possibilities containing the possibility of A
and C, any of the three sets of two possibilities containing the
possibility of A and C, and any of the three single possibilities
excluding A and not C. The theory accordingly predicts that
conditionals can refer to 10 distinct sets of possibilities out of the
16 a priori sets for binary connectives. In this section, we illustrate
the 10 sets of possibilities, and we also corroborate the occurrence
of this sort of modulation. In addition, however, modulation can
establish an indefinite number of different temporal, spatial, and
coreferential relations between the antecedent and consequent of a
conditional.

1. The tautological interpretation. This is a core interpretation
of the basic conditional If A then possibly C. When the antecedent
is satisfied, the consequent is possible, and when the antecedent is

CONDITIONALS

661

not satisfied, the consequent is also possible. For example, the
assertion “If there are lights over there, then there may be a road”
can refer to the following:

Factual possibilities:

lights
road
lights ¬ road
¬ lights
road
¬ lights ¬ road

On this interpretation, the conditional is a tautology compatible
with any state of affairs. The possibility satisfying the antecedent
can be factual or counterfactual. A special case of a tautology
arises with a conditional such as “If it rains, then it rains,” which
allows for two possibilities:

Factual possibilities:

rain
¬ rain

Such a conditional can be used to express events beyond the
speaker’s control.

2. The conditional interpretation. This is a core interpretation of
the basic conditional If A then C. The antecedent is sufficient for
the consequent; the consequent is necessary for the antecedent. For
example, the assertion “If the patient has malaria, then she has a
fever” can refer to the following:

Factual possibilities:

patient

fever
malaria
¬ malaria
fever
¬ malaria ¬ fever

Goldvarg and Johnson-Laird (2001) argued that the meaning of
causation is equivalent to the conditional interpretation combined
with the temporal constraint that the antecedent possibility does
not follow the consequent possibility. The possibilities satisfying
the antecedent can be factual, as above, or counterfactual.

3. The enabling interpretation. With the tautological interpre-
tation for If A then possibly C, the two possibilities in which the
antecedent holds are conveyed by the modal qualification in the
consequent. However, a common interpretation is that C does not
occur in the absence of A. Thus, the antecedent is necessary for the
consequent: A is the only enabling condition for C. For example,
the assertion “If you log on to the computer, then you may be able
to receive e-mail” implies that it is impossible to receive e-mail
unless you are logged on:

Factual possibilities:

you

log on
receive
log on ¬ receive
¬ log on ¬ receive

Staudenmayer (1975) dubbed this interpretation the reverse con-
ditional. In an appropriate context, it can be elicited without a
modal auxiliary in the consequent (see, e.g., Cosmides, 1989). The
possibilities satisfying the antecedent can be factual or counterfac-
tual, for example, “If you had logged on to the computer, then you
might have been able to receive e-mail.”

4. The disabling interpretation. Content or context prevents the
construction in the tautological meaning of the possibility in which
neither the antecedent nor the consequent occurs. Hence, when the
antecedent is satisfied, the negation of the consequent is possible,
and when the antecedent is not satisfied, the negation of the
consequent is impossible. A “recipe” for generating this interpre-

tation is to fill in the sentence frame Even if A then C may still
occur, for example, “Even if the workers settle for lower wages
then the company may still go bankrupt.” The implicature (in the
sense of Grice, 1975) is that the firm is bound to go bankrupt if the
workers do not settle for lower wages, but settling may disable this
outcome:

Factual possibilities:

settle
bankrupt
settle ¬ bankrupt
bankrupt

¬ settle

The subjunctive mood allows a counterfactual interpretation.

5. The biconditional interpretation. The antecedent is both nec-
essary and sufficient for the consequent. We saw earlier that this
interpretation occurs for explicit biconditionals, but many condi-
tionals in everyday life elicit a biconditional interpretation as a
result of their content or context. Consider the following assertion:
“If he drives the car, then he will crash it,” where one knows that
he cannot crash the car unless he drives it. Context, however, can
exert more subtle effects. P. Legrenzi (1970), in a classic study,
showed that people tend to interpret a conditional as a bicondi-
tional in a “binary” universe. He used the conditional “If the ball
rolls to the left, then the red light comes on” in a situation in which
the ball could roll either to the left or right and the light was either
red or green. In this case, reasoners’ knowledge is as follows:

Factual possibilities:

rolls left
rolls right

red light
green light

However, even when content and context are neutral, conditionals
are often interpreted as biconditionals (see J. Evans, 1982; Stau-
denmayer, 1975; Staudenmayer & Bourne, 1978; Wason &
Johnson-Laird, 1972). Such a biconditional can be counterfactual,
for example, “If the ball had rolled to the left, then the red light
would have come on.”

6. The strengthened antecedent interpretation. The theory pre-
dicts that a feasible interpretation of a conditional, If A, then C,
should be one that has just the two models:

Factual possibilities:

a
c
a ¬ c

Some conditionals with a negative antecedent have this interpre-
tation. Their effect is to imply that at the very least the antecedent
is true and that an even stronger claim made in the consequent may
be true, for example, “If it doesn’t rain, then it’ll pour.” The verb
to pour (with rain) means that it will rain heavily, and so the force
of the utterance is that it will rain and may rain heavily. The
conditional accordingly has the following two models:

Factual possibilities:

rain
pour
rain ¬ pour

The interpretation can occur with affirmative conditionals when
the truth of the antecedent is known to speaker and hearer. For
example, the assertion “If there is gravity (which there is), then
your apples may fall tomorrow” has the following models:

Factual possibilities:

gravity
apples fall
gravity ¬ apples fall

662

JOHNSON-LAIRD AND BYRNE

7. The relevance interpretation. Content or context precludes
the possibility in the conditional interpretation in which the con-
sequent does not occur. Typical examples occur when the ante-
cedent asserts merely a condition to which the consequent may be
relevant, for example, “If you are interested in Vertigo, then it is on
TV tonight.” Individuals know that the antecedent possibility has
no bearing on the occurrence of the consequent, and so the con-
sequent holds in any case:

Factual possibilities:

interested
¬ interested

on TV
on TV

The conditional can be paraphrased as “If you are interested or not,
Vertigo is on TV tonight.” Other conditionals call for the same set
of possibilities on the basis of their content, such as “If you are in
contact with the infectious disease, then you’re immune”:

Factual possibilities:

contact
¬ contact

immune
immune

Once again, the possibilities can be either factual or counterfactual,
for example, “Even if you had been in contact with the infectious
disease, you are still immune.” This example is a case of a
semifactual conditional. It has a counterfactual possibility satisfy-
ing the antecedent, but the consequent is a fact.

8. The tollens interpretation. Conditionals consistent with only
a single possibility usually depend on common knowledge be-
tween the speaker and hearer. These facts of the matter can be
expressed either literally or ironically. Thus, when a consequent is
obviously false, it conveys that the antecedent is false too (by
analogy with a modus tollens inference). Individuals can use their
knowledge of the consequent’s falsity to prevent the construction
of all models apart from one in which neither the antecedent nor
consequent is satisfied, for example, “If that experiment works,
then I’ll eat my hat.” The conditional has only a single model:

Fact: ¬ works ¬ eat hat

However, a counterfactual claim of the sort “If that experiment had
worked, then I would’ve eaten my hat” reintroduces two possibil-
ities:

Fact:
Counterfactual possibility:

¬ worked ¬ eaten hat
eaten hat

worked

What is unusual is that the counterfactual possibility is doubly
false, once because of the counterfactual interpretation and once
because of irony.

9. The ponens interpretation. When an antecedent is obviously
true, it conveys that the consequent is true (by analogy with modus
ponens). A typical example is “If my name’s Alex, then Viv is
engaged” when the speaker’s name is known to be Alex. The same
information can be asserted explicitly: “If my name’s Alex, which
it is, then Viv is engaged.” The conditional has just a single model
in which both the antecedent and consequent are satisfied:

Fact: Alex Viv engaged

This sort of conditional cannot be sensibly asserted as a counter-
factual. For instance, “If my name had been Alex, then Viv would
have been engaged” is bizarre given a speaker whose name is
known to be Alex.

10. Denial of the antecedent and affirmation of the consequent.
An ironic assertion of the following sort is an instance of this
interpretation: “If Bill Gates needs money, then I’ll be happy to
lend it to him.” The notion that the world’s richest man needs
money is plainly false, but the speaker is nevertheless happy to
lend him money. The antecedent is false and the consequent is
true:

Fact: ¬ need

happy to lend

The corresponding counterfactual, “If Bill Gates had needed some
money, then I’d have been happy to lend him some,” reintroduces
an extra possibility:

Fact:
Counterfactual possibility:

¬ need
need

happy to lend
happy to lend

What the theory rules out is the occurrence of affirmative
conditionals If A then C that have any of the following interpre-
tations (where nil signifies the null model, which arises from a
contradiction):

Factual possibilities:

Factual possibilities:

1.

a ¬ c
¬ a
c
¬ a ¬ c

2.

a ¬ c

¬ a

3.

4.

a ¬ c ¬ a

c
c ¬ a ¬ c ¬ a ¬ c

Factual possibility:

5.

a ¬ c

6.
nil

We used irony to illustrate some of the predicted interpretations.
This maneuver is dangerous, because it could yield interpretations
contrary to the theory. Is it possible, for example, to make an ironic
interpretation of a conditional that yields an interpretation in which
the antecedent is satisfied but the consequent is not? The following
sort of assertion ought to yield this interpretation: “If my name is
Alex, then Attila the Hun was kindhearted,” where it is known that
the speaker’s name is Alex and that Attila was not kindhearted.
Likewise, an assertion of the sort “If you’re interested, then Attila
the Hun was kindhearted” ought to yield a variant on the relevance
interpretation in which the consequent is false. In fact, neither of
these interpretations appears to be viable. Likewise, no interpre-
tation of a conditional is a self-contradiction. A conditional of the
form If not A then A has the following model:

Fact:

a

A conditional of the form If both A and not A then both C and not
C has an interpretation in which both the antecedent and conse-
quent are false. No conditional expresses a self-contradiction, but
the negation of a conditional expressing a tautology is self-
contradictory, for example, “It is not the case that if it rains, then
it rains.”

Deontic Conditionals

The antecedents of conditionals refer to possibilities, but the
consequents can refer to deontic possibilities. A deontic possibility
is a situation that is permissible, and a deontic necessity is a

CONDITIONALS

663

situation that is obligatory. Thus, the conditional interpretation of
the assertion “If there is a circle, then a triangle is obligatory”
refers to the following:

Factual possibilities:

‚ :Deontic possibilities
E
¬ E
‚
¬ E ¬ ‚

A circle could occur without a triangle, but it would violate this
deontic rule. The deontic conditional “If there is a circle, then a
triangle is permissible” has the tautological interpretation. How-
ever, if the antecedent is the only possibility in which the conse-
quent is permissible, then the conditional refers to the following:

Factual possibilities:

‚ :Deontic possibilities

E
E ¬ ‚
¬ E ¬ ‚

If a triangle occurs without a circle, then it violates what is
permissible according to this rule.

Do deontic conditionals yield all 10 sets of possibilities open to
factual conditionals? The answer is, indeed, that they do, though
some of the interpretations are rare. Table 4 includes examples in
each category, and we comment only on two that require contex-
tual cues to their meaning. The interpretation that strengthens the

antecedent can occur when the truth of the antecedent is common
knowledge. Thus, when the speaker and hearer both know that the
hearer is allowed to drink alcohol, the deontic assertion “If you’re
allowed to drink, then you can have a beer” has the following
models:

Factual possibilities:

drink
beer
drink ¬ beer

:Deontic possibilities

The interpretation that denies the antecedent and affirms the con-
sequent calls for irony. If it is mutual knowledge that Viv has been
cruel toward Pat but that Pat is a devout Christian, a speaker can
assert “If Viv has been so kind to Pat, then Pat must turn the other
cheek and forgive Viv.” The antecedent is ironic, whereas the
consequent is not. The force of the utterance is, accordingly, as
follows:

Factual
possibility: ¬ Viv kind Pat forgive

:Deontic possibility

Previous accounts have postulated some of the 10 sets of pos-
sibilities (e.g., Veltman, 1986), but to our knowledge no other
theory postulates all of them. Table 4 summarizes the 10 sets,
giving examples of both factual and deontic conditionals.

Table 4
The Interpretations of Conditionals of the Form If A Then C

Number of possibilities

The ten interpretations

Four

Three

Two

One

Tautology
c
a
a ¬ c
¬ a
c
¬ a ¬ c
If there are lights over there then there may be a road.
If she owns the house then she may look out of the window.

Conditional
c
a
¬ a
c
¬ a ¬ c
If the patient has malaria then she

has a fever.

Enabling
c
a
a ¬ c
¬ a ¬ c
If oxygen is present then there

may be a fire.

If he promised then he must take the

If it’s her book then she is allowed

kids to the zoo.

to give it away.

a

Biconditional
c
¬ a ¬ c
If he drives the car then he will

crash it.

Strengthen antecedent

a
c
a ¬ c

If there is gravity (which there is)

then your apples may fall.

Disabling
a
c
a ¬ c
¬ a
c
If the workers settle for lower wages

then the company may still go
bankrupt.

If you’re married then you have the

right to remain silent.

Relevance
c
a
¬ a
c
If you’re interested in seeing Vertigo

then it is on TV tonight.

If she owes money then she must

If you’re allowed to drink then you

If you’re interested then he must pay

repay it.

can have a beer.

the fine.

Tollens
¬ a ¬ c
If it works then I’ll eat my hat.
If it works then I’ll be obligated to

jump in the lake.

Ponens

a

c

If my name is Alex then Viv is

engaged.

If I’m a soldier then I must fight.

Deny antecedent and affirm consequent
¬ a
If Bill Gates needs money then I’ll

c

lend it to him.

If Viv has been so kind to Pat then Pat
as a devout person must forgive Viv.

Note. The table presents the set of possibilities referred to by each sort of conditional and everyday examples of factual and deontic conditionals.

664

JOHNSON-LAIRD AND BYRNE

Experiment 3: The Corroboration of Modulation

The model theory implies that individuals normally rely on the
mental models of conditionals. They can construct fully explicit
models, but modulation should yield different interpretations, that
is, different fully explicit models depending on semantics and
pragmatics. We have carried out several studies in which we
manipulated content in order to modulate the interpretation of
conditionals. Their results corroborated the theory. These experi-
ments showed that reasoners had no difficulty in listing the ap-
propriate possibilities for conditionals, that modulation affected
their performance, but that it was not always easy to elicit certain
interpretations. We report here an experiment in which the partic-
ipants listed what was possible and impossible for each of the
seven sorts of conditional that have two or three fully explicit
models (see Table 4). We avoided conditionals that have only one
model, because their interpretation often depends on irony. Four of
the conditionals had consequents containing the modal auxiliary
may:

Tautology: If there are lights over there then there may be a

road.

Enabling: If you log on to the computer then you may be able

to receive e-mail.

Disabling: If it is sunny then it may also be cloudy.
Strengthened antecedent: If there is gravity (which there is)

then your apples may fall tomorrow.

Three of the conditionals had consequents without the modal
auxiliary:

Conditional: If the patient has malaria, then she has a fever.
Biconditional: If it’s heated, then this butter will melt.
Relevance: If you’re interested, then Letterman is on TV

tonight.

Method. The participants acted as their own controls and listed what
was possible and impossible (in any order) for each of the seven condi-
tionals, which were presented in a different random order to each of the
participants. Three of the conditionals were of the form If A then C, and
four of them were of the form C if A; and the participants were assigned
alternately to one of two counterbalanced assignments of these forms to the

sentences. We tested 22 Princeton University undergraduates who were
fulfilling a course requirement. One participant failed to carry out the task
properly, stating possibilities that referred only to one of the clauses in the
conditional, and so we replaced him with another participant.

Results and discussion. Table 5 presents the most frequent
interpretations for the seven conditionals. Overall, the results cor-
roborated the model theory’s predictions. As the table shows, there
was a reliable effect of modulation, and the participants tended to
make an interpretation corresponding to its predicted effects. The
mean number of different interpretations that the participants made
was 5.05, and the mean number of interpretations that fit the
predicted modulation was 3.7. Because there are at least seven
possible interpretations of a conditional, any participant who made
at least two of the predicted interpretations showed a bias toward
the predictions. In fact, all 22 participants showed such a bias
(binomial p ⫽ .522); likewise, 20 of the participants were more
likely to make a predicted interpretation than not, 1 participant
went against the trend, and there was one tie (binomial p ⬍
.000001). All the participants tended to begin with the possibility
corresponding to an explicit mental model of the conditional
(binomial p ⫽ .522).

In general, all the predicted interpretations did occur (see Table
5). For five of the seven conditionals they occurred more often
than any other interpretation, and for six of the seven conditionals
they occurred more often than expected by chance (binomial
probabilities ranged from p ⬍ .03 to p ⬍ 1 in 10 million, assuming
that the chance probability of the predicted interpretation is 1/7).
The disabling conditional elicited its predicted interpretation only
four times. Although it was the only conditional to yield this
interpretation, it elicited more often the tautological interpretation
and the enabling interpretation. With hindsight, our choice of the
sentence “If it is sunny, then it may also be cloudy” was injudi-
cious. The participants considered that it was possible to have no
clouds even when it was not sunny, as at nighttime. The bicondi-
tional sentence elicited a conditional interpretation more often than
its predicted interpretation. The participants considered it possible
for butter to melt when it was not heated. Another of our studies,
however, readily elicited the biconditional interpretation using the
following assertion: “If he drives the car, then he will crash it.”

Table 5
The Number of Participants Making the Most Frequent Interpretations in Experiment 3 (N ⫽ 22)

a
c
a ¬ c
¬ a
c
¬ a ¬ c

11
4
8

The seven sorts of sentence

Tautology
Enabling
Disabling
Strengthening antecedent
Conditional
Biconditional
Relevance

The true possibilities in the participants’ interpretations

a
c
a ¬ c
¬ a ¬ c

a
c
a ¬ c
c

¬ a

a
c
a ¬ c

c
a
¬ a
c
¬ a ¬ c

a

c
¬ a ¬ c

a
¬ a

c
c

6
17
6
2

4

11

2

17
11

Total

19
21
18
13
19
18
18

2
7
4

14

Note. The table shows only those interpretations made by more than 1 participant. The predicted interpretations are given along the diagonal.

CONDITIONALS

665

Modulation is a robust phenomenon, though its effects are
sometimes unpredictable. The occurrence of the conditional inter-
pretation is another piece of evidence against the hypothesis that
conditional assertions have a defective truth table. The conditional
interpretation is equivalent to material implication, though we
elicited it in judgments of possibility and impossibility rather than
of truth and falsity.

Conditional Reasoning

Many studies have been made of the four main conditional
inferences: modus ponens, modus tollens, affirmation of the con-
sequent, and denial of the antecedent (see the Introduction). Only
modus ponens and modus tollens are valid for the conditional
interpretation, whereas all four inferences are valid for the bicon-
ditional interpretation. Some instances of modus ponens are so
easy to make that psychologists have argued that their validity
must depend on a formal rule of inference (e.g., Macnamara, 1986;
Falmagne & Gonsalves, 1995). Formal rules, by definition, are
blind to content. They make no distinction between basic condi-
tionals and conditionals of other sorts. Thus, as J. Macnamara
(personal communication, 1989) wrote:

By a formal logical rule, I take it, we mean a rule that applies to a
string in virtue of its form. That is, the rule can apply whenever a
string is described as having a certain form . . . The question of
whether there is a psychological version of this rule in the minds of
normal people (not trained in logic) turns on whether they have a
secure intuition, applying equally to any content, that [the rule ap-
plies]. I take it that they have. And for me, that’s an end of it.

Is modus ponens applicable in this universal way? Several skeptics
have claimed that it is not. Thus, Lycan (1991) argued that “no
interesting ‘rules’ of inference are even normatively valid in the
first place” (p. 5). He reviewed four sorts of counterexample to
modus ponens, which we examine in turn. First, a speaker asserts
“I’ll be polite if you insult me, but I won’t be polite if you insult
my wife.” The hearer insults both the speaker and his wife. The
example, which is due to Allan Gibbard (as cited in Lycan, 1991),
illustrates how contradictions can arise from modus ponens. Indi-
viduals are likely to treat this case like our earlier example of a
boxer punching both above and below the belt (see the section The
Principle of Pragmatic Modulation). They know that insults to
spouses take precedence, like blows below the belt, and so they
infer that the speaker will not be polite. Second, consider the
following sequence of premises:

If Albert comes to the party, it will be great.
If Albert and Betty come to the party, it will be awful.
If Albert and Betty and Carl come to the party, it will be great.
. . . and so on, with alternating consequents.

Each assertion can be treated as true. Yet, given that both Albert
and Betty come to the party, modus ponens from the first premise
yields the conclusion that the party will be great, and modus
ponens from the second premise yields the conclusion that it will
be awful (see Lewis, 1973, for the provenance of the example). It
hinges on the fact that antecedents often establish only a partial
context (see the principle of core meanings). Hence, the mutual
context of the set of conditionals as a whole modifies the inter-
pretation of their individual antecedents:

If Albert comes to the party without Betty, it will be great.
If Albert and Betty come to the party without Carl, it will be

awful.

. . . and so on.

Third, consider the following immediate inference:

If my good friend Smedley finishes his book, I’ll be happy.
Therefore, if my good friend Smedley finishes his book and

concludes it with a vicious attack on me, I’ll be happy.

This inference is of the form known as strengthening the anteced-
ent:

If A, then C.
Therefore, if A and B, then C.

Such inferences are valid deductions with material implications,
but not, as in the present case, with everyday conditionals.
Material implications are true if their consequents are true and
if the antecedents are false (see Table 2), and so in strengthen-
ing the antecedent of a material implication the conclusion is
true if the premise is true. Our elucidation of this example rests
once again on the partial context that the antecedent describes
(cf. our earlier analysis of striking a soaking wet match).
Fourth, there is McGee’s (1985) example based on the 1980
U.S. presidential election. The contest was between Ronald
Reagan and Jimmy Carter, with the Republican John Anderson
a distant third. The following premises asserted prior to the
election are true:

If a Republican wins the election, then if it’s not Reagan who

wins, it will be Anderson.

A Republican will win.

The following conclusion is valid according to modus ponens:

Therefore, if it’s not Reagan who wins, it will be Anderson.

From a formal standpoint, the inference is valid; compare

If there’s a letter on the board, then if it’s not an A it’s a B.
There’s a letter on the board.
Therefore, if it’s not an A then it’s a B.

However, many people judge that the conclusion to the Reagan
inference is false, because if Reagan had not won, then Carter
would have won. The elucidation of their view depends once again
on background knowledge. They know that Reagan and Anderson
cannot both win. Hence, the fully explicit models of the first
premise are as follows (where Republican represents a Republican
as winning):

Factual
possibilities:

Republican ¬ Reagan
Republican

Anderson
Reagan ¬ Anderson
¬ Republican ¬ Reagan ¬ Anderson

They also know that either Reagan or his Democratic opponent,
Carter, will win. When models of this knowledge are unified with
the preceding possibilities, the result is as follows:

666

JOHNSON-LAIRD AND BYRNE

Factual
possibilities: Republican

Democrat ¬ Reagan ¬ Anderson

Reagan ¬ Anderson ¬ Carter
Carter

The premise that a Republican will win is combined with these
models, and the result is that Reagan will win, and so the condi-
tional conclusion in the example does not follow from the
premises.

Lycan (1991) drew the following moral: In certain contexts and
with certain interpretations, modus ponens is valid. He denied only
that such inferences are valid in virtue of their form. We agree.
Problems arise only if one envisages a formal rule of modus
ponens that is automatically triggered by any sentences that match
its syntactic form, regardless of their content or context.

The Four Inferences

The model theory predicts that the fewer the models that have to
be constructed for an inference, the easier the inference should be:
Reasoners should be faster to reach a conclusion and more likely
to be correct. A special case of this prediction is that those
inferences that can be drawn from mental models should be easier
than those that can be drawn only from fully explicit models. This
prediction has many ramifications for reasoning with conditionals,
and we examine the important cases.

The first consequence is that modus ponens should be easier
than modus tollens, because modus ponens can be drawn from the
mental models of a conditional interpretation, whereas modus
tollens can be drawn only from fully explicit models. Indeed, the
most robust phenomenon in conditional reasoning is that modus
ponens is easier than modus tollens—participants often respond
that nothing follows from the modus tollens premises (see J. Evans
et al., 1993, for a review). The model theory readily accounts for
this response. The mental models of a conditional, If A then C, are
as follows:

Factual possibilities:

a
c
. . .

At the most primitive level of performance (Level 1 in the program
described earlier), which does not take footnotes into account,
these models do not distinguish between a conditional and a
biconditional interpretation. At Level 2, the conditional interpre-
tation has a footnote indicating that the implicit model represents
possibilities in which A is false, and the biconditional interpreta-
tion has a footnote indicating that the implicit model represents
possibilities in which both A is false and C is false. The categorical
premise for modus ponens, A, eliminates the implicit model, and
the categorical conclusion, C, follows from the remaining model.
When the same models are combined with the categorical premise
for modus tollens, Not C, the only result is the model ¬ c, and so
it seems that nothing follows.

The theory predicts that performance on modus tollens should
be improved by any manipulation that helps reasoners to cease
focusing on the explicit mental model of the conditional and to
convert the footnote on the implicit model into an explicit model
of the possibility in which the antecedent is false. Girotto, Maz-
zocco, and Tasso (1997) corroborated this prediction. They ma-
nipulated the order of the two premises. When the conditional
occurs first, working memory is already preoccupied during the

interpretation of the categorical premise, and so reasoners are
unlikely to construct an additional fully explicit model. However,
when the categorical premise occurs first, it enables reasoners to
reject the explicit mental model immediately. This step frees up the
processing capacity of working memory and allows reasoners to
use the categorical premise to construct the fully explicit model,
¬ a ¬ c, which yields the conclusion, not A.

Another way in which to enhance modus tollens should be to
use materials that help the participants to construct fully explicit
models. As the theory predicts, modus tollens is easier with a
biconditional interpretation, which has just two fully explicit mod-
els, than with a conditional interpretation, which has three fully
explicit models (Johnson-Laird et al., 1992). Likewise, the differ-
ence between modus ponens and modus tollens tends to disappear
with conditionals of the form “A only if C, because the negative
force of only highlights the possibility of not C (J. Evans, 1977; J.
Evans and Beck, 1981). Still another way to enhance modus
tollens is to use subjunctive conditionals, such as “If Linda were in
Galway then Cathy would be in Dublin.” The counterfactual
interpretation makes explicit the possibility required for modus
tollens:

Fact:
Counterfactual
possibility:

¬ Linda in Galway ¬ Cathy in Dublin

Linda in Galway

Cathy in Dublin

As the theory predicts, reasoners made more modus tollens infer-
ences from subjunctive conditionals than from indicative condi-
tionals (Byrne & Tasso, 1999). Some reasoners, as Thompson and
Byrne (2000) showed, make the counterfactual interpretation of
subjunctive conditionals, but others make the factual interpretation
or focus on only one of the two models above. These differences
predict the inferences that they are likely to draw, for example, the
counterfactual interpretation increases modus tollens and denial of
the antecedent in comparison with the factual interpretation.

A second consequence of the model theory, as J. Evans (1993)
pointed out, is that affirmation of the consequent should be more
frequent than denial of the antecedent. If individuals reason at a
primitive level, ignoring footnotes, they construct the following
mental models for a basic conditional, If A then C:

c
a
. . .

They will therefore affirm the consequent, but they will not deny
the antecedent, because when these models are combined with the
categorical premise, not A, the result is the model ¬ a, from which
nothing follows. If reasoners use mental footnotes to construct
fully explicit models, then they should refrain from both inferences
unless they make the biconditional interpretation:

a

c
¬ a ¬ c

The theory therefore predicts that affirmation of the consequent
should occur more often, and more rapidly, than denial of the
antecedent. Although some authors have claimed that the literature
is equivocal (e.g., J. Evans, 1993; O’Brien et al., 1998), a recent
systematic study showed these predicted effects on both latencies
and percentages of responses (Barrouillet, Grosset, & Lecas,

CONDITIONALS

667

2000). Earlier studies have also shown significant biases in favor
of affirmation of the consequent over denial of the antecedent (e.g.,
Wason, 1964). Likewise, Schroyens, Schaeken, and d’Ydewalle’s
(2000) meta-analysis of the literature showed that affirmation of
the consequent is more frequent than denial of the antecedent.
Instead of a general process of fleshing out models explicitly,
Schroyens, Schaeken, and d’Ydewalle proposed that reasoners
engage in a goal-directed process of searching for explicit models
that refute either a putative conclusion or the failure to draw a
conclusion—for example, to refute affirmation of the consequent,
they search for a model in which the consequent holds and the
antecedent is false:

Factual possibility: ¬ a

c

Several other factors should affect basic conditional inferences.
When individuals carry out a series of inferences, they develop
different strategies for coping with them (Johnson-Laird, Savary,
& Bucciarelli, 1999). Some reasoners consider the possibilities
compatible with the premises; others follow up the consequences
of a categorical premise or supposition; still others convert all the
premises into a chain of conditionals. Hence, different individuals
are likely to develop different strategies for coping with condi-
tional inferences. Another factor that should affect conditional
inferences is the so-called figural effect, which is the tendency for
reasoners to draw conclusions interrelating items in the same order
in which information about those items entered working memory
(see Bauer & Johnson-Laird, 1993; Johnson-Laird, 1975). The
effect, as J. Evans (1993) emphasized, should increase modus
ponens and denial of the antecedent and decrease modus tollens
and affirmation of the consequent.

Modulation and Inferences

Semantic and pragmatic modulation can yield models that un-
dermine the sufficiency or the necessity of the antecedent for the
occurrence of the consequent (Thompson, 1994, 1995). In the case
of the soaked match, for instance, the antecedent is no longer
sufficient for the consequent. Byrne (1989) established that indi-
viduals made modus ponens from such premises as the following:

If he went fishing then he had a fish supper.
He went fishing.

They inferred that he had a fish supper. However, they tended not
to draw this conclusion with the addition of certain conditional
premises, such as the following:

If he went fishing, then he had fish for supper.
If he caught some fish, then he had fish for supper.
He went fishing.

This suppression counts against Macnamara’s (personal commu-
nication, 1989) litmus test for a formal rule of modus ponens,
which should apply regardless of context (see the beginning of the
present section). Politzer and Braine (1991) argued that the addi-
tional conditional falsifies the first conditional. The claim is, in
effect, that conditionals with incomplete descriptions of their an-
tecedent contexts are false. However, as our earlier account of the
soaked match showed (see the section The Principle of Pragmatic
Modulation), this analysis of pragmatic effects is not viable. More-

over, Byrne, Espino, and Santamarı´a (1999) demonstrated suppres-
sion without affecting the believability of the original conditional
(see also Byrne, 1991). According to the principle of pragmatic
modulation, the second conditional makes salient to reasoners that
to go fishing in itself is not sufficient for a fish supper. One also
has to catch fish. Hence, reasoners balk at making modus ponens
from a premise that merely asserts that a person went fishing.

Modulation can also affect inferences when reasoners them-
selves generate their own instances that render the antecedent
unnecessary (Markovits, 1984; Markovits & Vachon, 1990) or
insufficient (Cummins, Lubart, Alksnis, & Rist, 1991). Stevenson
and Over (1995) argued that the sufficiency of an antecedent for a
consequent is represented by the proportion of equiprobable mod-
els in which the antecedent holds and in which the consequent also
holds. This idea fits the model-based theory of extensional prob-
abilities (see Johnson-Laird, Legrenzi, et al., 1999). Indeed,
Stevenson and Over showed that lowering the credibility of a
conditional suppresses inferences from it in exactly the way that
modulation predicts.

In the absence of semantic cues, certain inferences become more
difficult (see Byrne & Handley, 1997; Byrne, Handley, & Johnson-
Laird, 1995). Similarly, reasoners are likely to reject unbelievable
conclusions (see the large literature on effects of belief, e.g.,
J. Evans et al., 1993). Participants in a study carried out by Santa-
marı´a, Garcı´a-Madruga, and Johnson-Laird (1998) were given the
following sort of premises:

If Ann is hungry then she has a snack.
If she has a snack then she eats a light supper.

A conditional interpretation yields the transitive conclusion:

⬖ If Ann is hungry then she eats a light supper.

The participants, however, tended to declare that nothing followed
from the premises. The conclusion seems unbelievable. It asserts,
contrary to the normal causal relation, that hunger leads to a light
meal. It lacks the causal intermediary—the snack—that explains
the unusual relation. Once again, people’s beliefs modulate the
models that they construct, and they construct the null model in the
case of conflict.

Experiment 4: Modulating Modus Tollens

Modulation should have a major impact on modus tollens. Some
contents should make the inference easier, and some should make
it harder. For example, consider the following premises:

If Bill is in Rio de Janeiro then he is in Brazil.
Bill is not in Brazil.

These premises should readily yield the following conclusion:

Bill is not in Rio de Janeiro.

Reasoners know that Rio de Janeiro is in Brazil, and so if Bill is
not in Brazil then he cannot be in Rio. Their familiarity with the
spatial inclusion in the conditional should yield an explicit model
of the possibility referred to in the categorical premise:

Bill ¬ In Rio ¬ In Brazil

668

JOHNSON-LAIRD AND BYRNE

Premises of this sort should yield more modus tollens conclusions
than premises based on unfamiliar spatial inclusions, such as:

If Ann is in the Champagne Suite then she is in the Hotel

LaBlanc.

Ann is not in the Hotel LaBlanc.

Spatial exclusions should inhibit modus tollens, for example:

If Bill is in Brazil then he is not in Rio de Janeiro.
Bill is in Rio de Janeiro.

Reasoners should tend balk at the following conclusion:

Bill is not in Brazil.

They know that if Bill is in Rio, then he must be in Brazil.
Premises of this sort should yield fewer modus tollens conclusions
than premises based on unfamiliar spatial exclusions, such as the
following:

If Ann is in the Hotel LaBlanc then she is not in the Cham-

pagne Suite.

Ann is in the Champagne Suite.

Semantic modulation accordingly predicts that reasoners should
make modus tollens inferences more often from spatial inclusions
than from spatial exclusions, and pragmatic modulation predicts
that this effect should be larger for the familiar relations than for
the unfamiliar relations.

Method. The participants were their own controls and drew conclu-
sions to two familiar and to two unfamiliar inclusions, and to two familiar
and to two unfamiliar exclusions. In addition, there were two filler infer-
ences in the form of modus ponens. The resulting 10 sets of premises were
presented in a different random order to each of the participants. Their task
was to write down what,
if anything, followed necessarily from the
premises. The instructions explained that a conclusion follows necessarily
if it must be the case given that the premises are true. The materials for the
modus tollens inferences concerned geographical locations and locations in
hotels and were assigned twice at random to the forms of inference. We
tested 50 undergraduates at the University of Dublin, who participated
voluntarily, but we rejected the results from the 9 participants who failed
to make responses to all the premises.

Results and discussion. Table 6 presents the percentages of
correct conclusions to the four sorts of problem. The results
corroborated the model theory’s predictions. The participants drew
twice as many modus tollens conclusions to the spatial inclusions
as to the spatial exclusions (Wilcoxon test, z ⫽ 4.33, p ⬍ .0001).
No reliable difference occurred between the familiar and the
unfamiliar premises (Wilcoxon test, z ⫽ 1.42, p ⬍ .16). However,
as predicted, the interaction was reliable: The difference between

Table 6
The Percentages of Modus Tollens Conclusions for the Four
Sorts of Inference in Experiment 4: The Spatial Inclusion and
Exclusion Problems With Familiar and Unfamiliar Relations

Contents

Familiar
Unfamiliar
Overall

Inclusions

Exclusions

Overall

92
82
87

34
54
44

63
68

the inclusions and exclusions was greater for the familiar relations
than for the unfamiliar relations (Wilcoxon test, z ⫽ 2.72, p ⬍ .01).
For the inclusions,
the participants drew more modus tollens
conclusions from the familiar relations than from the unfamiliar
relations (Wilcoxon test, z ⫽ 2.14, p ⬍ .05), whereas for the
exclusions they drew fewer modus tollens conclusions from the
familiar relations than from the unfamiliar relations (Wilcoxon
test, z ⫽ 2.17, p ⬍ .05).

This study shows an effect of content on modus tollens. Rea-
soners’ grasp of spatial inclusions makes them more likely to make
the inference, whereas their knowledge of spatial exclusions makes
them less likely to make the inference. The phenomena reflect both
semantic and pragmatic modulation. The model theory predicts
both effects. In contrast, if reasoning is a formal process based on
rules, it is difficult to explain why content has such a large effect
on performance.

The Effects of Negation on Conditional Reasoning

In a major series of studies, Evans and his colleagues have
investigated the effects of negation on reasoning with basic con-
ditionals (see, e.g., J. Evans, 1989). These studies have established
the occurrence of systematic biases. Evans emphasized that he uses
the term bias as a description of a phenomenon, not as an expla-
nation. One such bias occurring with the four main conditional
inferences is that reasoners are more likely to draw negative
conclusions than affirmative conclusions (J. Evans, 1977; cf. Du-
gan & Revlin, 1990; Wildman & Fletcher, 1977). At one time,
Evans suggested that reasoners may merely have been cautious
about drawing affirmative conclusions (J. Evans, 1977, 1982).
However, he later conceded that this explanation is unsatisfactory
(J. Evans, 1993). The bias does not occur with modus ponens, with
premises of the form A only if C (J. Evans, 1977), or with other
sorts of deduction. The model theory suggests an alternative ex-
planation. It is relatively hard to draw an affirmative conclusion
from a denial of the antecedent in the following case:

If A then not C.
Not A.
Therefore, C.

Mental models of the conditional do not allow any conclusion to
be drawn:

Factual possibilities:

a ¬ c

. . .

The conclusion follows only from the fully explicit models of a
biconditional interpretation. To construct such an interpretation, it
is necessary to work out the possibility in which A is false, and in
which not C is false. The latter is in effect a double negation: If not
C is false, then C is true. The fully explicit model in the bicondi-
tional interpretation is, accordingly, as follows:

Factual possibility: ¬ a

c

The categorical premise, Not A, now yields the double negative
conclusion: C. The theory explains the bias as a result of the
difficulty of inferring affirmative conclusions that depend on a
double negation. Johnson-Laird suggested this explanation in a
review of J. Evans (1993), and Evans and Handley (1999) en-

CONDITIONALS

669

dorsed it. The explanation has the advantage that it does not predict
any bias for modus ponens, and no exceptions to it are in the data
that Evans (1993) reported. Likewise, according to the model
theory, A only if C has two explicit mental models, and so they do
not need to be made explicit. Hence, the explanation does not
predict the bias for these assertions. Evans has proposed a similar
hypothesis. He has observed that individuals are less inclined to
make a valid inference if it calls for the falsification of a negative
component, that is, the negation of a negation. The phenomenon
occurs with conditional and disjunctive reasoning (e.g. J. Evans,
1972; J. Evans & Newstead, 1977; Roberge, 1971, 1974). In short,
the model theory explains the bias: It is difficult to draw affirma-
tive conclusions from double negations.

Evans and his colleagues have proposed an important simplifi-
cation to the model theory, which we have incorporated in the
present account (see J. Evans, 1993; J. Evans, Clibbens, & Rood,
1996; J. Evans & Handley, 1999). The original theory had postu-
lated that a negative assertion was likely to elicit models of both
the assertion and its corresponding unnegated proposition
(Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991). Thus, a conditional of the form If
not A then C was supposed to elicit the following mental models:

¬ a
a

c

The point of the assumption was to account for “matching” bias.
This bias is the tendency for reasoners to ignore negatives in
conditionals in matching them to categorical premises or to cards
in the selection task. Evans and his colleagues, however, have
discovered the key to the phenomenon. It depends on the relative
difficulty of grasping that one assertion refutes another. This task
is easier with explicit negations than with implicit negations. It is
thus easier to understand that the assertion “The number is not 4”
refutes “The number is 4” than to understand that “The number is
9” refutes “The number is 4” (cf. J. Evans & Handley, 1999; J.
Evans, Legrenzi, & Girotto, 1999). The difficulty of implicit
negation, in turn, appears to depend on background knowledge
about the size of the contrast class (Oaksford & Stenning, 1992;
Schroyens, Verschueren, Schaeken, & d’Ydewalle, 2000). The
model theory can accordingly rely on the simple unadorned prin-
ciple of truth. Mental models represent true assertions, whether
they are affirmative or negative, but not false assertions.

The Selection Task

The selection task, which we described in the Introduction, has
launched more studies than any other form of conditional reasoning,
but the literature has outpaced knowledge. Because the selection task
is complex, the phenomena are diverse. The model theory appears to
explain them, and it yields some new predictions. The selection task
calls for a meta-linguistic grasp of truth and falsity and for the ability
to think about potential evidence—such as numbers and letters on the
other side of cards—bearing on the truth or falsity of assertions.
Reasoners need to represent the possible counterexamples to condi-
tionals, that is, they need to overcome the principle of truth and to
envisage what falsifies a factual conditional or what violates a deontic
conditional. For example, the conditional If there is an A then there is
a 2 has the following counterexample:

Impossibility:

a ¬ 2

Reasoners then need to match each of the cards to the counter-
example and to choose only those cards that could be instances of
it. The outcomes in this case are as follows:

A: Select as a potential counterexample.
B: Do not select, because it cannot be a counterexample.
2: Do not select, because it cannot be a counterexample.
3: Select as potential counterexample, because 3 is a case of

¬ 2.

According to the model theory, there are three sources of diffi-
culty in the selection task. First, reasoners may fail to realize the
need to consider counterexamples to the conditional. Second, they
may have difficulty in working out the counterexamples, because
they have to construct them from their mental models of the
assertion. This failure to construct counterexamples is critical, and
it explains the differences between the selection task and the main
conditional inferences (Markovits & Savary, 1992). Semantic and
pragmatic modulation have a major influence on the ease of
envisaging counterexamples. Third, reasoners may have difficulty
in understanding negation, for example, that 3 is an instance of the
model ¬ 2. With a basic conditional of the form “If A, then 2,”
naive individuals tend to construct the following mental models
and to base their selections on them:

Factual possibilities:

a

2
. . .

They select A, and they select 2 in addition unless they construct
the following explicit model:
Factual possibility: ¬ a

2

F. Cara and Broadbent (personal communication, 1992) demon-
strated the correlation between the conditional interpretation and
the selection of the A card, and the biconditional interpretation and
the selection of the A and the 2 cards.

Griggs and Jackson (1990) established a related phenomenon in
studies testing a prediction from Margolis (1987). When partici-
pants had to circle just two cards that violate a basic conditional of
the form “If A, then 2,” then a greater proportion of them selected
not A and not 2 than in the standard task. According to the model
theory, this response is a result of a biconditional interpretation,
which can yield the fully explicit models:

Factual possibilities:

a

2
¬ a ¬ 2

Reasoners in the standard task are reluctant to select all four cards
corresponding to these models, because the “demand characteris-
tics” of the experiment suggest that this response would be inap-
propriate. Those that make the biconditional interpretation accord-
ingly select the A and the 2 cards, which are more salient. When
reasoners have merely to select two cards, however, then those
who made the biconditional interpretation can select those cards
that match its second explicit model.

When conditionals contain negated antecedents or consequents,
the participants select the card satisfying the antecedent, but they
show the “matching” bias for the consequent, that is, they ignore
negation in the consequent and choose the card that it mentions (J.
Evans, 1989; J. Evans & Lynch, 1973). Hence, given the condi-

670

JOHNSON-LAIRD AND BYRNE

tional “If there is an A then there is not a 2,” they make the correct
selection of the A and 2 cards, unlike their error with affirmative
conditionals. The model theory, following J. Evans and Handley
(1999), explains this choice in terms of the comparison between
the mental models of the conditional and the four cards. The
participants do not have a genuine insight into the task. They
merely fail to grasp that the 3 card is a true instance of the case
represented by ¬ 2. The participants’ apparent insight into the task
disappears when the four cards are explicitly labeled as follows (J.
Evans & Handley, 1999):

A not A 2

not 2

They select the A and not 2 cards to test the conditional “If A, then
not 2.”

According to the model theory, the main stumbling block to
correct selections is the failure to construct counterexamples. The
theory accordingly makes a key prediction:

Any experimental manipulation that fosters explicit models of
counterexamples to conditionals should enhance perfor-
mance in the selection task.

Semantic or pragmatic modulation can lead individuals to con-
struct counterexamples directly or to flesh out explicit models
of the conditional. Participants in another early study had to
select those instances that would violate a deontic conditional
that was familiar to them, for example, “If an envelope is
sealed, then it has a 5 penny stamp on it.” They already knew
what was permissible:

Factual possibilities:

sealed 5 penny :Deontic possibilities

¬ sealed 5 penny
¬ sealed 4 penny

The complement of these models represents the violation of the
rule:

Factual possibility:

sealed 4 penny :Deontic impossibility

Hence, the participants performed much better with these condi-
tionals than with basic conditionals, and there was no transfer from
them to the basic conditionals (Johnson-Laird, Legrenzi, & Le-
grenzi, 1972). Individuals who were not familiar with the postal
regulation that inspired these materials did not show any enhanced
performance with them (e.g., Cheng & Holyoak, 1985; Golding,
1981; Griggs & Cox, 1982). As modulation predicts, improvement
occurs with familiar relations (Wason & Shapiro, 1971), but not
with arbitrary or unfamiliar relations (Griggs, 1983; Griggs & Cox,
1983; Griggs & Newstead, 1982; Manktelow & Evans, 1979).

Deontic conditionals have often led to improved performance.
Thus, as Griggs and Cox (1982) showed, the conditional “If a
person is drinking beer then the person must be over 18” tends to
elicit the selection of the correct potential violations (the card
representing a beer drinker and the card representing an individual
less than 18 years old). Cheng and Holyoak (1985) advanced a
pragmatic theory in order to explain this phenomenon. They ar-
gued that reasoners map conditionals onto pragmatic reasoning
schemas, such as the following:

If the precondition is not satisfied (e.g., person is not over 18
years), then the action (e.g., drinking beer) must not be
taken.

And the schema, in turn, elicits the correct selection of cards
(Cheng & Holyoak, 1985; Kroger, Cheng, & Holyoak, 1993). As
the example illustrates, however, pragmatic reasoning schemas
contain the modal auxiliaries may and must, which are systemat-
ically ambiguous between what is possible and what is permissi-
ble. This ambiguity shows that the schemas are high level rather
than foundational. Pragmatic modulation provides an alternative
explanation. Reasoners use their general knowledge to construct
fully explicit models of the conditional:

Deontic
possibilities:

drinking beer

over 18

¬ drinking beer
over 18
¬ drinking beer ¬ over 18

:Factual
possibilities

The complement of these models is a violation of the deontic
principle, which general knowledge may provide directly:

Deontic
impossibility: drinking beer ¬ over 18 :Factual possibility

Reasoners can use this model to evaluate the cards, selecting only
those that are potential violations.

Cosmides (1989) proposed an evolutionary explanation of the
deontic selection task. She argued that human evolution has led to
a specific inferential module concerned with violations of social
contracts (see also Gigerenzer & Hug, 1992). People are thus
innately equipped to check for cheaters. Cosmides showed that a
background story eliciting the idea of cheating led participants to
make a surprising selection. To test a conditional rule of the form
If A then C, they selected instances corresponding to Not A and C.
In the context of the story, the rule “If a man has a tattoo on his
face then he eats cassava root” tended to elicit selections of the
following cards: no tattoo and eats cassava root. The result is
remarkable, but there is no need to invoke an innate inferential
module to explain it (see also Griggs, 1984; Holyoak & Cheng,
1995). In the context of the story, the rule signifies that men
without the tattoo are not allowed to eat cassava root. Hence,
pragmatic modulation yields an enabling deontic interpretation
(see Table 4):

Factual
possibility:

tattoo
eats cassava
tattoo ¬ eats cassava
¬ tattoo ¬ eats cassava

:Deontic possibility

The violation of the conditional is, accordingly, as follows:

Factual
possibility: ¬ tattoo eats cassava

:Deontic impossibility

And this model controls the participants’ selections.

Certain contents lead to effects of the participants’ point of
view. For example, Manktelow and Over (1991) used the deontic
conditional “If you tidy your room then you may go out to play.”
The pragmatic modulation of this conditional should lead to a

biconditional interpretation (Fillenbaum, 1977) and hence to the
following representation:

mance. For example, they told their participants that a certain
machine generated cards according to the following rule:

CONDITIONALS

671

Factual possibilities:

tidy

play :Deontic possibilities

¬ tidy ¬ play

There are therefore two sorts of violation:

Factual
possibilities:

tidy ¬ play
play

¬ tidy

:Deontic impossibilities

It follows that reasoners should select all four cards. The first of
these violations, however, is likely to concern the child to whom
the conditional applies; the second of them is likely to concern the
parent who grants the conditional permission. As Manktelow and
Over (1991) showed, participants who were asked to take the point
of view of one of the protagonists tended to base their selections on
the violation of concern to that individual (see also Manktelow &
Over, 1995). Even children are sensitive to point of view as Light,
Girotto, and Legrenzi (1990) showed in the first study of the
effects of this variable on the selection task (cf. Girotto, Gilly,
Blaye, & Light, 1989). As the model theory predicts, however,
adults with a neutral point of view do tend to select all four cards
(Politzer & Nguyen-Xuan, 1992).

If the model theory is correct, then effects of point of view
should occur with conditionals that are not deontic. Consider, for
example, the following assertion: “If the Greeks disarmed, then the
Turks disarmed,” which is likely to yield a biconditional interpre-
tation. As Johnson-Laird and Byrne (1996) argued, reasoners who
take the Greek point of view should tend to select cards corre-
sponding to the following counterexample:
Greeks disarmed ¬ Turks disarmed

However, reasoners who take the Turkish point of view should
tend to select cards corresponding to the following counter-
example:

¬ Greeks disarmed Turks disarmed

Two recent studies have corroborated such effects of point of view
with conditionals that are not deontic (see Fairley, Manktelow, &
Over, 1999; Staller, Sloman, & Ben-Zeev, 1999).

The model theory’s key prediction is that any manipulation that
yields explicit models of counterexamples should enhance perfor-
mance in the selection task. This prediction applies to any mate-
rials whatsoever, and it has been corroborated in three separate
lines of research. First, as Griggs and his colleagues have shown,
instructions to check for violations improved performance with
basic conditionals (Chrostowski & Griggs, 1985; Dominowski,
1995; Griggs, 1995; Griggs & Cox, 1983; Platt & Griggs, 1993).
Likewise, Green (1995; see also Green & Larking, 1995) showed
that instructions to envisage counterexamples to factual condition-
als also improved performance. Green, Over, and Pyne (1997)
showed that reasoners’ assessments of how likely they were to
encounter a counterexample (in four stacks of cards) also predicted
their selections (see also Green, 1997).

Second, Sperber, Cara, and Girotto (1995) used a more indirect
procedure to render counterexamples more relevant—in the sense
of Sperber and Wilson (1995)—and thereby improved perfor-

If a card has an A on one side, then it has a 2 on the other side.

The machine went wrong, but it has been repaired, and the par-
ticipants now have to check that the job has been done properly.
They were thus likely to represent the machine’s potential error
explicitly:

A ¬ 2

This and other conditionals used in Sperber and Girotto’s experi-
ments elicited neither a permission schema ( pace Cheng & Ho-
lyoak, 1985) nor a check for cheaters ( pace Cosmides, 1989); yet
the participants’ performance improved significantly.

Third, Love and Kessler (1995) used a content and context that
suggested the possibility of counterexamples. For example, they
used the conditional rule “If there are Xow then there must be a
force field,” where the Xow are strange crystallike living organ-
isms who depend for their existence on a force field. In a context
that suggested the possibility of counterexamples—mutant Xows
who can survive without a force field—the participants carried out
the selection task more accurately than in a control condition that
did not suggest such counterexamples. Likewise, Liberman and
Klar (1996) demonstrated that apparent effects of “checking for
cheaters” are better explained in terms of the participants’ grasp of
appropriate counterexamples and of the relevance of looking for
instances of them.

Reasoners can be sensitive to the likelihood of encountering a
potential counterexample. This phenomenon has led some theorists
to introduce Bayesian considerations into their analysis of the
selection task (Kirby, 1994; Nickerson, 1996). Oaksford and
Chater (e.g., 1994, 1996) have defended a normative approach
inspired by Anderson’s (1993) rational analysis. They argued that
deductive logic is the wrong normative model to apply to the
selection task, and they relied instead on an existing normative
theory for the selection of data relevant to hypotheses. They
proposed that participants rationally seek to maximize the ex-
pected gain in information from selecting a card. Nickerson (1996)
and others have defended similar ideas. Thus, if a person is testing,
say, the conditional “If it is a raven then it is black,” it makes sense
to look for counterexamples among ravens and black entities in the
world, because the frequency of nonblack entities is so much
greater than the frequency of black entities.

Are people rational in basing their choices in the selection task
on expected gain in information? Not necessarily. Santamarı´a and
Johnson-Laird (2001) paid their participants 1,000 pesetas (about
$7) at the start of a selection task using a basic conditional and then
charged them 250 pesetas for each card that they chose to select.
The participants were told that they would keep whatever money
they had not spent, provided that their evaluation of the conditional
was correct. The instructions made clear that the basic conditional
applied only to the four cards, but the monetary incentive did not
improve performance in comparison with an unpaid control group.
The participants’ selections would not have allowed them to eval-
uate the conditional correctly. It is hard to justify their performance
as rational when it cost them money. Stanovich and his colleagues
have similarly shown that participants’ Scholastic Achievement
Test scores—a measure of higher cognitive ability— correlate with

672

JOHNSON-LAIRD AND BYRNE

accuracy in the selection task with basic conditionals (Stanovich,
1999). The more competent individuals made the logically correct
selections.

If the Bayesian analyses of the selection task are correct, then
manipulating the probabilities of the antecedent, A, and the con-
sequent, C, of the conditional If A then C should affect perfor-
mance. The logically correct selections should be more frequent
when the probabilities of A and C are high than when they are low.
Indeed, when these two probabilities are high, the not C card may
be more informative than the A card. Such effects do occur (e.g.,
Kirby, 1994; Oaksford, Chater, & Grainger, 1999), but there have
also been failures to detect them (Oberauer, Wilhelm, & Diaz,
1999; Santamarı´a & Johnson-Laird, 2001). Likewise, when people
carried out the selection task with an inclusive disjunction, such as
“Every card has a number which is even on one side, or it has a
letter which is a vowel on the other side,” the participants tended
to make the correct selections (Wason & Johnson-Laird, 1969).
However, the most frequent error was to select the cards that match
the mental models of the disjunction. This error cannot be de-
fended as an attempt to maximize the expected gain of informa-
tion. A card with an even number, for example, is a true instance
of the rule, whatever is on its other side, and so the participants
gained no information whatsoever by turning it over. We conclude
that naive individuals are not always sensitive to the expected gain
in information and that they make genuine logical errors in the
selection task.

The crux of the selection task is that content and context can
recruit knowledge that modulates the set of models of the condi-
tional. Without such knowledge, reasoners are likely to base their
selections on their mental models of conditionals. Modulation,
however, can lead them to construct counterexamples to condi-
tionals. It can lead to a biconditional interpretation in which the
participants’ point of view picks out
the potential counterex-
amples. It can lead to an enabling interpretation. It may even lead
to other interpretations (see Table 4), with their concomitant
selections.

Illusory Inferences With Conditionals

The model theory entails that certain inferences with condition-
als should yield compelling, but invalid, conclusions. These illu-
sory inferences arise from the failure of mental models to represent
what is false according to the premises. The illusions have been
demonstrated in a variety of domains including quantified, modal,
and probabilistic reasoning (see, e.g., Goldvarg & Johnson-Laird,
2000, 2001; Johnson-Laird et al., 2000; Yang & Johnson-Laird,
2000). The most compelling illusions, however, occur with basic
conditionals, for example:

Suppose that the following assertions apply to a specific hand

of cards:

If there is a king in the hand then there is an ace in the
hand, or else if there is not a king in the hand then
there is an ace in the hand.

There is a king in the hand.

What, if anything, follows?

Therefore, there is an ace.

Few expert reasoners resist this conclusion. However, as we ex-
plain presently, it is a fallacy, whether the disjunction is interpreted
as inclusive or exclusive. The exclusive interpretation can be
expressed unequivocally by the rubric used in the following prob-
lem:

Suppose you are playing cards with Billy and you get two
clues about the cards in his hand. You know that one of the
clues is true and that one of them is false, but unfortunately
you don’t know which one is true and which one is false:
If there is a king in his hand then there is an ace in his

hand.

If there is not a king in his hand then there is an ace in

his hand.

Please select the correct answer:

a) There is an ace in Billy’s hand.
b) There is not an ace in Billy’s hand.
c) There may, or may not, be an ace in Billy’s hand.

Most people inferred that there is an ace in Billy’s hand. They
make analogous errors in estimating the probabilities of cards
(Johnson-Laird & Savary, 1996). The model theory predicts that
reasoners construct the following mental models of the disjunction
of conditionals:

Factual possibilities:

king
¬ king

ace
ace

From these models, it follows that there is an ace. However, this
conclusion is not valid. An exclusive disjunction of the condition-
als yields the fully explicit models:

Factual possibilities:

king ¬ ace
¬ king ¬ ace

Hence, granted a disjunction of the two conditionals, one of them
could be false. With an exclusive disjunction, one of them must be
false. If, say, the first conditional is false, then there is no guar-
antee that there is an ace in the hand even when, as in the first
problem above, there is definitely a king in the hand. According to
the model theory, the illusions arise from the principle of truth.
The failure to represent what is false according to the premises
leads to erroneous models. Hence, any manipulation that empha-
sizes falsity should alleviate the illusions. Several studies have
corroborated this prediction (Goldvarg & Johnson-Laird, 2000,
2001; Tabossi, Bell, & Johnson-Laird, 1999).

Illusory inferences strike some critics as artificial, but they do
occur in everyday life. A search on the World Wide Web for the
sequence or else if yielded several illusions, including the follow-
ing warning from a professor to students taking his class:

Either a grade of zero will be recorded if your absence is not
excused, or else if your absence is excused other work you
do in the course will count.

Everyone in an experiment carried out by Johnson-Laird and
Savary (1999) drew the conclusion:

The mental models of this assertion yield the two possibilities that
presumably the professor and his students had in mind:

CONDITIONALS

673

¬ excused
excused

zero-grade
other-work-counts

In other words, both the professor and his students succumbed to
an illusion. What the professor should have asserted to convey the
two intended possibilities was a conjunction of the conditionals:

A grade of zero will be recorded if your absence is not
excused, but if your absence is excused, then other work
you do in the course will count.

Neither the illusions nor their alleviation can be explained by
current rule theories. These theories rely solely on valid principles
of inference, which cannot account for systematic invalidity.

General Discussion

The model theory of conditionals rests on five assumptions in
addition to the original theory of mental models, which includes
the principle of truth. These assumptions are as follows:

1. The principle of core meanings: The antecedent of a basic
conditional describes a possibility, at least in part, and the conse-
quence can occur in this possibility. The core meaning of If A then
C is the conditional interpretation, and the core meaning of If A
then possibly C is the tautological interpretation.

2. The principle of subjunctive meanings: A subjunctive con-
ditional refers to the same set of possibilities as the corresponding
indicative conditional, but the set consists either of factual possi-
bilities or of a fact in which the antecedent and consequent did not
occur and counterfactual possibilities in which they did occur.

3. The principle of implicit models: Basic conditionals have
mental models representing the possibilities in which their ante-
cedents are satisfied, but only implicit mental models for the
possibilities in which their antecedents are not satisfied. A mental
“footnote” on the implicit model can be used to make fully explicit
models, but individuals are liable to forget the footnote, and even
to forget
for complex compound
assertions.

the implicit model

itself

4. The principle of semantic modulation: The meanings of the
antecedent and consequent, and coreferential links between these
two clauses, can add information to models, prevent the construc-
tion of otherwise feasible models, and aid the process of construct-
ing fully explicit models.

5. The principle of pragmatic modulation: The context of a
conditional depends on general knowledge in long-term memory
and knowledge of the specific circumstances of its utterance. This
context is normally represented in explicit models. These models
can modulate the mental models of a conditional, taking prece-
dence over contradictory models, and they can add information to
models, prevent the construction of otherwise feasible models, and
aid the process of constructing fully explicit models.

What is the real nature of conditionals and conditional reason-
ing? Readers may have the impression that for some unknown
reason conditionals have many meanings and that they accordingly
give rise to many diverse results in reasoning. Readers may even
wonder why, given such diverse interpretations, languages contain
conditionals. In our view, conditionals have core meanings, and
the varied phenomena arise from their mental models. Speakers
think of a possibility and assert that something holds or may hold
in that context. The assertion is accordingly a conditional. Listen-

ers understand the conditional by envisaging the antecedent pos-
sibility and that the consequent holds or may hold in it (cf.
Ramsey, 1929/1990). Both parties appreciate that there are other
possibilities, but they do not normally bother to envisage them.
The result is a rudimentary representation—a set of mental models
in which not all possibilities are represented explicitly. The focus
on possibilities that satisfy antecedents gives rise to the apparent
paradoxes that occur when individuals are forced to think about
truth instead of possibilities. However, comparable paradoxes oc-
cur with disjunctions. This same focus also gives rise to systematic
misinterpretations. Individuals overlook what is false, particularly
the possibilities when the antecedent is false. As Experiments 1
and 2 showed, this oversight yields the same interpretation for both
conjunctions of conditionals and disjunctions of conditionals. The
conjunctive-like interpretation of conditionals is akin to a regres-
sion to a child’s interpretation.

The meanings of antecedents and consequents and their refer-
ential relations can modulate the core meanings of conditionals.
Likewise, general knowledge and knowledge of context—repre-
sented in explicit models of what is possible— can also modulate
the core meanings. One consequence is a semantic relation be-
tween the antecedent and the consequent, such as temporal or
spatial relation between them. However, modulation can also
prevent the construction of models in the sets corresponding to
core interpretations—a process that yields 10 distinct sets of pos-
sibilities (see Table 4). Experiment 3 corroborated the occurrence
of such modulations. They are also likely to occur with other
sentential connectives. The following inference, for example, is
valid in form:

Eva’s in Rio or she’s in Brazil.
She’s not in Brazil.
Therefore, she’s in Rio.

However, no sensible person other than a logician is likely to draw
this conclusion. It is impossible for Eva to be in Rio and not in
Brazil, because Rio is in Brazil.

If a connective such as a conditional is truth functional, then it
takes two truth values as input, one for the antecedent and one for
the consequent, and it delivers as output a truth value that depends
solely on these input truth values. In other words, whether a
conditional is true or false depends not on the particular contents
of its antecedent and consequent but only on their truth values.
This principle is unworkable for conditionals in natural language.
If the interpretative system has access only to the truth values of
the antecedent and consequent, then it is unable to take into
account either temporal or spatial relations or to determine which
of the 10 different sets of possibilities is applicable. Conditionals
are not truth functional. Nor, in our view, are any other sentential
connectives in natural language.

Because individuals focus on the antecedent possibilities of
conditionals, certain inferences are difficult. Thus, modus tollens
(If A then B: Not B, therefore, Not A) can be difficult both in life
and in the laboratory. Similarly, when individuals seek evidence in
the selection task to test the truth of a hypothesis, they tend not to
use the falsifying case of a basic conditional. And, just as the focus
on truth leads to confusion between disjunctions and conjunctions
of conditionals, it also underlies compelling illusory inferences,
such as the following one:

674

JOHNSON-LAIRD AND BYRNE

One of these assertions is true and one of them is false:

If there is a king in the hand then there is an ace.
If there isn’t a king in the hand then there is an ace.

Therefore, there is an ace in the hand.

Such errors arise according to the model theory because individ-
uals neglect what is false.

The theory makes a key prediction that any manipulation that
reduces the focus on antecedent possibilities should improve per-
formance with the difficult inferences. This prediction has been
confirmed for many sorts of conditional reasoning. For example,
the difficulty of modus tollens is reduced with biconditionals of the
form A if and only if C because only if tends to elicit a represen-
tation of the possibility in which neither the antecedent nor the
consequent is satisfied:

Factual possibilities:

a

c
¬ a ¬ c

Similar phenomena occur with counterfactual conditionals of the
form If A had happened then C would have happened because the
counterfactual interpretation also represents the facts of the matter:

Fact:
Counterfactual possibilities:

¬ a ¬ c
c

a

Content and context can modulate the representation of condi-
tionals, affecting the antecedent’s necessity or sufficiency for the
consequent. These effects, in turn, enhance or suppress inferences.
Modus ponens is suppressed in contexts that make clear that the
antecedent provides only a partial condition for the consequent to
occur or leads to it only with a certain probability. As Experi-
ment 4 showed, modulation also affects modus tollens. The infer-
ence was enhanced by knowledge of a spatial inclusion and the use
of familiar relations; it was suppressed by knowledge of spatial
exclusion and the use of unfamiliar relations. Similarly, in the
selection task, modulation can increase the likelihood that reason-
ers represent counterexamples and, in consequence, make correct
selections. In deontic domains, the premises often elicit a bicon-
ditional interpretation and, accordingly, have two distinct sorts of
counterexample. The participants’ point of view determines which
of these counterexamples they use to control their selections. The
same effects occur in domains that are not deontic, contrary to
other theories of the selection task.

What are the alternative accounts of conditionals? By far the
most important of them are those based on formal rules. The late
Martin Braine and his colleagues (see, e.g., Brain & O’Brien,
1991) proposed that the meaning of a conditional is equivalent to
two rules of inference, one for modus ponens and another for
conditional proof (see also Ryle, 1949, chapter 5, for a precursor
to this idea). Rips (1994) proposed a similar formal system that he
implemented computationally, though the full program is not in the
public domain. Rule theories and the model theory concur that
individuals can reason from suppositions (see, e.g., Byrne et al.,
1995). However, our evidence is otherwise incompatible with rule
theories. They cannot explain why individuals list the same pos-
sibilities for conjunctions and disjunctions of conditionals (Exper-
iments 1 and 2). They cannot explain the modulation of core
meanings into 10 distinct sets of possibilities (including those
corroborated in Experiment 3). They cannot explain effects of both

semantic and pragmatic modulation on conditional inferences,
such as the enhancement and inhibition of modus tollens (Exper-
iment 4). They cannot explain the comparable effects of content on
the selection task. They cannot explain the developmental se-
quence of interpretations (conjunction, biconditional, conditional).
And they cannot explain the occurrence of systematic errors in
reasoning, such as the illusory inferences based on conditionals.
The model theory predicts all of these phenomena.

Conditionals have an indefinite number of meanings—10 sets of
possibilities and a variety of relations between antecedent and
consequent. This diversity is inimical to formal rules. Yet, ad-
vanced thinkers who reflect on their own reasoning may construct
formal rules for themselves for the core meanings of basic condi-
tionals. This process leads ultimately to the discipline of formal
logic. Rules and models are not incompatible for core meanings.
However, the meaning of a term is not the same as the rules of
inference for it (Johnson-Laird, 1983, p. 41; Osherson, 1974 –
1976, Vol. 3, p. 253; Prior, 1960). Rules of inference enable
reasoners to pass from premises to conclusions; meanings relate
assertions to possibilities in the world.

Ultimately, the complexity of conditionals has simple causes.
Their chameleon-like characteristics arise from interactions among
a set of elementary components: Their core meanings referring to
possibilities, their representation in mental models, and their se-
mantic and pragmatic modulation.

References

Adams, E. W. (1970). Subjunctive and indicative conditionals. Founda-

tions of Language, 6, 89 –94.

Adams, E. W. (1975). The logic of conditionals: An application of prob-

ability to deductive logic. Dordrecht, the Netherlands: Reidel.

Anderson, J. R. (1993). Rules of the mind. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Baron, J. (1994). Thinking and deciding (2nd ed.). Cambridge, England:

Cambridge University Press.

Barres, P. E., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1997). Why is it hard to imagine
what is false? In M. G. Shafto & P. Langley (Eds.), Proceedings of the
Nineteenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (p. 859).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

Barrouillet, P. (1997). Modifying the representation of if . . . then sentences
in adolescents by inducing a structure mapping strategy. Current Psy-
chology of Cognition, 16, 609 – 637.

Barrouillet, P., Grosset, N., & Lecas, J.-F. (2000). Conditional reasoning
by mental models: Chronometric and developmental evidence. Cogni-
tion, 75, 237–266.

Barrouillet, P., & Lecas, J.-F. (1998). How can mental models theory
account for content effects in conditional reasoning? A developmental
perspective. Cognition, 67, 209 –253.

Barrouillet, P., & Lecas, J.-F. (1999). Mental models in conditional rea-

soning and working memory. Thinking & Reasoning, 5, 289 –302.

Barwise, J. (1986). Conditionals and conditional information. In E. C.
Traugott, A. ter Meulen, J. S. Reilly, & C. A. Ferguson (Eds.), On
conditionals (pp. 21–54). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
Press.

Bauer, M. I., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1993). How diagrams can improve

reasoning. Psychological Science, 4, 372–378.

Bell, V., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1998). A model theory of modal reason-

ing. Cognitive Science, 22, 25–51.

Bonatti, L. (1994a). Propositional reasoning by model? Psychology Re-

view, 101, 725–733.

Bonatti, L. (1994b). Why should we abandon the mental logic hypothesis?

Cognition, 50, 17–39.

CONDITIONALS

675

Braine, M. D. S. (1978). On the relation between the natural logic of

reasoning and standard logic. Psychological Review, 85, 1–21.

Braine, M. D. S., & O’Brien, D. P. (1991). A theory of If: A lexical entry,
reasoning program, and pragmatic principles. Psychological Review, 98,
182–203.

Braine, M. D. S., & O’Brien, D. P. (Eds.). (1998). Mental logic. Mahwah,

NJ: Erlbaum.

Braine, M. D. S., Reiser, B. J., & Rumain, B. (1984). Some empirical
justification for a theory of natural propositional logic. In The psychol-
ogy of learning and motivation (Vol. 18, pp. 313–371). New York:
Academic Press.

Brewka, G., Dix, J., & Konolige, K. (1997). Nonmonotonic reasoning: An
overview. Stanford, CA: Center for Language Science and Information
Publications, Stanford University.

Byrne, R. M. J. (1989). Suppressing valid inferences with conditionals.

Cognition, 31, 61– 83.

Byrne, R. M. J. (1991). Can valid inferences be suppressed? Cognition, 39,

71–78.

Byrne, R. M. J. (1997). Cognitive processes in counterfactual thinking
about what might have been. In D. K. Medin (Ed.), The psychology of
learning and motivation, advances in research and theory (Vol. 37, pp.
105–154). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.

Byrne, R. M. J., Espino, O., & Santamarı´a, C. (1999). Counterexamples
and the suppression of inferences. Journal of Memory and Language, 40,
347–373.

Byrne, R. M. J., & Handley, S. J. (1992). Reasoning strategies. Irish

Journal of Psychology, 13, 111–124.

Byrne, R. M. J., & Handley, S. J. (1997). Reasoning strategies for suppo-

sitional deductions. Cognition, 62, 1– 49.

Byrne, R. M. J., Handley, S. J., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1995). Reasoning
from suppositions. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 48A,
915–944.

Byrne, R. M. J., & McEleney, A. (2000). Counterfactual thinking about
actions and failures to act. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learn-
ing, Memory, and Cognition, 26, 1318 –1331.

Byrne, R. M. J., Segura, S., Culhane, R., Tasso, A., & Berrocal, P. (2000).
The temporality effect in counterfactual thinking about what might have
been. Memory & Cognition, 28, 264 –281.

Byrne, R. M. J., & Tasso, A. (1999). Deductive reasoning with factual,
possible, and counterfactual conditionals. Memory & Cognition, 27,
726 –740.

Case, R. (1985). Intellectual development: Birth to adulthood. New York:

Academic Press.

Cheng, P. N., & Holyoak, K. J. (1985). Pragmatic reasoning schemas.

Cognitive Psychology, 17, 391– 416.

Chrostowksi, J. J., & Griggs, R. A. (1985). The effects of problem content,
instructions and verbalization procedure on Wason’s selection task.
Current Psychological Research and Reviews, 4, 99 –107.

Cosmides, L. (1989). The logic of social exchange: Has natural selection

shaped how humans reason? Cognition, 31, 187–276.

Cummins, D. D., Lubart, T., Alksnis, O., & Rist, R. (1991). Conditional

reasoning and causation. Memory & Cognition, 19, 274 –282.

Delval, J. A., & Riviere, A. (1975). “Si llueve, Elisa lleva sombrero”: Una
investigacio´n psicologia sobre la tabla de verdad del condicional. [A
psychological investigation of the conditional truth table]. Revista De
Psicologia General y Aplicada, 136, 825– 850.

Dominowski, R. L. (1995). Content effects in Wason’s selection task. In
S. E. Newstead & J. S. B. T. Evans (Eds.), Perspectives on thinking and
reasoning: Essays in honour of Peter Wason (pp. 41– 65). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.

Dudman, V. H. (1988). Indicative and subjunctive conditionals. Analy-

sis, 48, 113–122.

format as contributors to conditional reasoning. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 42A, 829 – 848.

Evans, G. (1980). Pronouns. Linguistic Inquiry, 11, 337–362.
Evans, J. S. B. T. (1972). Interpretation and “matching bias” in a reasoning

task. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 24, 193–199.

Evans, J. S. B. T. (1977). Linguistic factors in reasoning. Quarterly Journal

of Experimental Psychology, 29, 297–306.

Evans, J. S. B. T. (1982). The psychology of deductive reasoning. London:

Routledge & Kegan Paul.

Evans, J. S. B. T. (1989). Bias in human reasoning: Causes and conse-

quences. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Evans, J. S. B. T. (1993). The mental model of conditional reasoning:

Critical appraisal and revision. Cognition, 48, 1–20.

Evans, J. S. B. T., & Beck, M. A. (1981). Directionality and temporal
factors in conditional reasoning. Current Psychological Research, 1,
111–120.

Evans, J. S. B. T., Clibbens, J., & Rood, B. (1996). The role of implicit and
explicit negation in conditional reasoning bias. Journal of Memory and
Language, 35, 392– 404.

Evans, J. S. B. T., & Handley, S. J. (1999). The role of negation in
conditional inference. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
52A, 739 –769.

Evans, J. S. B. T., Legrenzi, P., & Girotto, V. (1999). The influence of
linguistic form on reasoning: The case of matching bias. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 52A, 185–214.

Evans, J. S. B. T., & Lynch, J. S. (1973). Matching bias in the selection

task. British Journal of Psychology, 64, 391–397.

Evans, J. S. B. T., & Newstead, S. E. (1977). Language and reasoning: A

study of temporal factors. Cognition, 8, 265–283.

Evans, J. S. B. T., Newstead, S. E., & Byrne, R. M. J. (1993). Human

reasoning: The psychology of deduction. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

Fairley, N., Manktelow, K. I., & Over, D. E. (1999). Necessity, sufficiency
and perspective effects in causal conditional reasoning. Quarterly Jour-
nal of Experimental Psychology, 52A, 771–790.

Falmagne, R. J., & Gonsalves, J. (1995). Deductive inference. Annual

Review of Psychology, 46, 525–559.

Fillenbaum, S. (1977). Mind your p’s and q’s: The role of content and
context in some uses of and, or, and if. In G. H. Bower (Ed.), Psychology
of learning and motivation (Vol. 11, pp. 41–100). New York: Academic
Press.

Fillenbaum, S. (1993). Deductive reasoning: What are taken to be the
premises and how are they interpreted? Behavioral and Brain Sci-
ences, 16, 348 –349.

Fodor, J. A., Garrett, M. F., Walker, E. C. T., & Parkes, C. H. (1980).

Against definitions. Cognition, 8, 263–367.

Garnham, A., & Oakhill, J. V. (1994). Thinking and reasoning. Oxford,

England: Basil Blackwell.

Gazdar, G. (1979). Pragmatics: Implications, presupposition and logical

form. New York: Academic Press.

Geach, P. (1962). Reference and generality. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University

Press.

Geis, M. C., & Zwicky, A. M. (1971). On invited inferences. Linguistic

Inquiry, 2, 561–566.

George, C. (1999). Evaluation of the plausibility of a conclusion derivable
from several arguments with uncertain premises. Thinking & Reason-
ing, 5, 245–281.

Gigerenzer, G., & Hug, K. (1992). Domain specific reasoning: Social

contracts, cheating, and perspective change. Cognition, 43, 127–171.

Girotto, V., Gilly, M., Blaye, A., & Light, P. (1989). Children’s perfor-
mance in the selection task: Plausibility and familiarity. British Journal
of Psychology, 80, 79 –95.

Girotto, V., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2002). [Results on the probability of

conditionals and conditional probabilities]. Unpublished raw data.

Dugan, C. M., & Revlin, R. (1990). Response options and presentation

Girotto, V., Mazzocco, A., & Tasso, A. (1997). The effect of premise order

676

JOHNSON-LAIRD AND BYRNE

in conditional reasoning: A test of the mental model theory. Cogni-
tion, 63, 1–28.

Golding, E. (1981). The effect of past experience on problem solving. Paper
presented at the meeting of the British Psychological Society, Guildford,
England.

Goldvarg, Y., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2000). Illusions in modal reasoning.

Memory & Cognition, 28, 282–294.

Goldvarg, Y., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2001). Naı¨ve causality: A mental
model theory of causal meaning and reasoning. Cognitive Science, 25,
565– 610.

Green, D. W. (1995). Externalization, counter-examples and the abstract
selection task. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 48A,
424 – 446.

Green, D. W. (1997). Hypothetical thinking in the selection task: Ampli-
fying a model-based approach. Current Psychology of Cognition, 16,
93–102.

Green, D. W., & Larking, R. (1995). The locus of facilitation in the abstract

selection task. Thinking & Reasoning, 1, 183–199.

Green, D. W., Over, D. E., & Pyne, R. (1997). Probability and choice in the

selection task. Thinking & Reasoning, 3, 209 –235.

Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole & J. L. Morgan
(Eds.), Syntax and semantics: Vol. 3. Speech acts (pp. 41– 48). New
York: Academic Press.

Griggs, R. A. (1983). The role of problem content in the selection task and
in the THOG problem. In J. S. B. T. Evans (Ed.), Thinking and reason-
ing: Psychological approaches (pp. 16 – 43). London: Routledge &
Kegan Paul.

Griggs, R. A. (1984). Memory cueing and instructional effects on Wason’s
selectional task. Current Psychological Research and Reviews, 3, 3–10.
Griggs, R. A. (1995). The effects of rule clarification, decision justifica-
tion, and selection instruction on Wason’s abstract selection task. In
S. E. Newstead & J. S. B. T. Evans (Eds.), Perspectives on thinking and
reasoning: Essays in honour of Peter Wason (pp. 17–39). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.

Griggs, R. A., & Cox, J. R. (1982). The elusive thematic-materials effect
in Wason’s selection task. British Journal of Psychology, 73, 407– 420.
Griggs, R. A., & Cox, J. R. (1983). The effects of problem content and
negation on Wason’s selection task. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 35A, 519 –533.

Griggs, R. A., & Jackson, S. L. (1990). Instructional effects on responses
in Wason’s selection task. British Journal of Psychology, 81, 197–204.
Griggs, R. A., & Newstead, S. E. (1982). The role of problem structure in
a deductive reasoning task. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Lan-
guage, Memory, and Cognition, 8, 297–307.

Harper, W. L., Stalnaker, R., & Pearce, G. (Eds.). (1981). Ifs: Conditionals,
belief, decision, chance, and time. Dordrecht, the Netherlands: Reidel.

Harr, J. (1995). A civil action. New York: Random House.
Holyoak, K. J., & Cheng, P. (1995). Pragmatic reasoning with a point of

view: A response. Thinking & Reasoning, 1, 289 –313, 373–388.
Jackson, F. (1987). Conditionals. Oxford, England: Basil Blackwell.
Jeffrey, R. (1981). Formal logic: Its scope and limits (2nd ed.). New York:

McGraw-Hill.

Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1975). Models of deduction. In R. J. Falmagne (Ed.),
Reasoning: Representation and process in children and adults (pp.
7–54). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1983). Mental models: Towards a cognitive science
of language, inference and consciousness. Cambridge, England: Cam-
bridge University Press.

Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1986). Conditionals and mental models. In E. C.
Traugott, A. ter Meulen, J. S. Reilly, & C. A. Ferguson (Eds.), On
conditionals (pp. 55–75). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
Press.

& G. Butterworth (Eds.), Causes of development (pp. 121–131). Hemel
Hempstead, Hertfordshire, England: Harvester-Wheatsheaf.

Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. J. (1991). Deduction. Hillsdale, NJ:

Erlbaum.

Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. J. (1996). A model point of view: A
comment on Holyoak and Cheng. Thinking & Reasoning, 1, 339 –350.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., Byrne, R. M. J., & Schaeken, W. S. (1992). Propo-

sitional reasoning by model. Psychological Review, 99, 418 – 439.

Johnson-Laird, P. N., Legrenzi, P., Girotto, V., & Legrenzi, M. (2000,
April 21). Illusions in reasoning about consistency. Science, 288, 531–
532.

Johnson-Laird, P. N., Legrenzi, P., Girotto, V., Legrenzi, M., & Caverni,
J.-P. (1999). Naive probability: A mental model theory of extensional
reasoning. Psychological Review, 106, 62– 88.

Johnson-Laird, P. N., Legrenzi, P., & Legrenzi, M. S. (1972). Reasoning

and a sense of reality. British Journal of Psychology, 63, 395– 400.

Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Savary, F. (1996). Illusory inferences about

probabilities. Acta Psychologica, 93, 69 –90.

Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Savary, F. (1999). Illusory inferences: A novel

class of erroneous deductions. Cognition, 71, 191–229.

Johnson-Laird, P. N., Savary, F., & Bucciarelli, M. (1999). Strategies and
tactics in reasoning. In W. S. Schaeken, G. De Vooght, A. Vandieren-
donck, & G. d’Ydewalle (Eds.), Deductive reasoning and strategies (pp.
209 –240). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Tagart, J. (1969). How implication is understood.

American Journal of Psychology, 82, 367–373.

Kahneman, D., & Miller, D. (1986). Norm theory: Comparing reality to its

alternatives. Psychological Review, 93, 136 –153.

Karttunen, L. (1972). Possible and must. In J. P. Kimball (Ed.), Syntax and

semantics (Vol. 1, pp. 1–20). New York: Seminar Press.

Kirby, K. N. (1994). Probabilities and utilities of fictional outcomes in

Wason’s four-card selection task. Cognition, 51, 1–28.

Kratzer, A. (1989). An investigation of the lumps of thought. Linguistics

and Philosophy, 12, 607– 653.

Kripke, S. (1963). Semantical considerations on modal logic. Acta Philo-

sophica Fennica, 16, 83–94.

Kroger, J. K., Cheng, P. W., & Holyoak, K. J. (1993). Evoking the
permission schema: The impact of explicit negation and a violation-
checking context. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 46A,
615– 635.

Kuhn, D. (1977). Conditional reasoning in children. Developmental Psy-

chology, 13, 342–353.

Langford, P. E. (1992). Evaluation strategies for some nonstandard con-

ditionals during adolescence. Psychological Reports, 70, 643– 664.

Lecas, J.-F., & Barrouillet, P. (1999). Understanding of conditional rules in
childhood and adolescence: A mental models approach. Current Psy-
chology of Cognition, 18, 363–396.

Legrenzi, M. S., Girotto, V., Legrenzi, P., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2000).
Reasoning to consistency: A theory of naı¨ve nonmonotonic reasoning.
Manuscript in preparation.

Legrenzi, P. (1970). Relations between language and reasoning about
deductive rules. In G. B. Flores D’Arcais, & W. J. M. Levelt (Eds.),
Advances in psycholinguistics (pp. 322–333). Amsterdam: North-
Holland.

Levinson, S. (1983). Pragmatics. Cambridge, England: Cambridge Uni-

versity Press.

Lewis, D. (1973). Counterfactuals. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University

Press.

Lewis, D. K. (1976). Probabilities of conditionals and conditional proba-

bilities, II. Philosophical Review, 95, 581–589.

Liberman, N., & Klar, Y. (1996). Hypothesis testing in Wason’s selection
task: Social exchange cheating detection or task understanding. Cogni-
tion, 58, 127–156.

Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1990). The development of reasoning. In P. Bryant

Light, P. H., Girotto, V., & Legrenzi, P. (1990). Children’s reasoning on

CONDITIONALS

677

conditional promises and permissions. Cognitive Development, 5, 369 –
383.

Love, R., & Kessler, C. (1995). Focussing in Wason’s selection task:

Content and instruction effects. Thinking & Reasoning, 1, 153–182.

Lycan, W. G. (1991). MPP, RIP. Unpublished manuscript, University of

North Carolina.

M. D. S. Braine & D. P. O’Brien (Eds.), Mental logic (pp. 385– 420).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

Ormerod, T. C., Manktelow, K. I., & Jones, G. V. (1993). Reasoning with
three types of conditional: Biases and mental models. Quarterly Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 46A, 653– 678.

Osherson, D. N. (1974 –1976). Logical abilities in children (Vols. 1– 4).

Macnamara, J. (1986). A border dispute: The place of logic in psychology.

Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Manktelow, K. I., & Evans, J. S. B. T. (1979). Facilitation of reasoning by
realism: Effect or non-effect? British Journal of Psychology, 70, 477–
488.

Manktelow, K. I., & Over, D. E. (1991). Social roles and utilities in

reasoning with deontic conditionals. Cognition, 39, 85–105.

Manktelow, K. I., & Over, D. E. (1995). Deontic reasoning. In S. E.
Newstead & J. S. B. T. Evans (Eds.), Perspectives on thinking and
reasoning: Essays in honour of Peter Wason (pp. 91–114). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.

Margolis, L. (1987). Patterns, thinking and cognition: A theory of judge-

ment. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Markovits, H. (1984). Awareness of the ‘possible’ as a mediator of formal
thinking in conditional reasoning problems. British Journal of Psychol-
ogy, 75, 367–376.

Markovits, H. (1993). The development of conditional reasoning: A Pi-
agetian reformulation of mental models theory. Merrill-Palmer Quar-
terly, 39, 133–160.

Markovits, H., & Savary, F. (1992). Pragmatic schemas and the selection
task: To reason or not to reason. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 45A, 133–148.

Markovits, H., & Vachon, R. (1990). Conditional reasoning, representa-
tion, and level of abstraction. Developmental Psychology, 26, 942–951.
McGee, V. (1985). A counterexample to modus ponens. Journal of Phi-

losophy, 82, 462– 471.

Miller, G. A., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1976). Language and perception.

Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Minsky, M. L. (1975). Frame-system theory. In R. C. Schank & B. L.
Nash-Webber (Eds.), Theoretical issues in natural language processing.
Preprints of a conference at Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA.

Newell, A. (1990). Unified theories of cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard

University Press.

Nickerson, R. (1996). Hempel’s paradox and Wason’s selection task:
Logical and psychological puzzles of confirmation. Thinking & Reason-
ing, 2, 1–31.

Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (1994). A rational analysis of the selection task

as optimal data selection. Psychological Review, 101, 608 – 631.

Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (1996). Rational explanation of the selection

task. Psychological Review, 103, 381–391.

Oaksford, M., Chater, N., & Grainger, B. (1999). Probabilistic effects in

data selection. Thinking & Reasoning, 5, 193–243.

Oaksford, M., & Stenning, K. (1992). Reasoning with conditionals con-
taining negated constituents. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 18, 835– 854.

Oberauer, K., Wilhelm, O., & Diaz, R. R. (1999). Bayesian rationality for
the Wason selection task? A test of optimal data selection theory.
Thinking & Reasoning, 5, 115–144.

O’Brien, D. P. (1987). The development of conditional reasoning: An iffy
proposition. In H. Reese (Ed.), Advances in child development and
behavior (Vol. 20, pp. 61–90). New York: Academic Press.

O’Brien, D. P. (1999). If is neither and nor material implication. Com-
mentary on Lecas & Barrouillet (1999). Current Psychology of Cogni-
tion, 18, 397– 407.

O’Brien, D. P., Dias, M. G., & Roazzi, A. (1998). A case study in the
mental models and mental-logic debate: Conditional syllogisms. In

Over, D. E., & Evans, J. S. B. T. (1997). Two cheers for deductive

competence. Current Psychology of Cognition, 16, 225–278.

Paris, S. G. (1973). Comprehension of language connectives and proposi-
tional logical relationships. Journal of Experimental Child Psychol-
ogy, 16, 278 –291.

Platt, R. D., & Griggs, R. A. (1993). Facilitation in the abstract selection
task: The effects of attentional and instructional factors. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 46A, 591– 613.

Politzer, G. (1986). Laws of language use and of formal logic. Journal of

Psycholinguistic Research, 15, 47–92.

Politzer, G., & Braine, M. D. S. (1991). Responses to inconsistent premises
cannot count as suppression of valid inferences. Cognition, 38, 103–108.
Politzer, G., & Nguyen-Xuan, A. (1992). Reasoning about conditional
promises and warnings: Darwinian algorithms, mental models, relevance
judgements or pragmatic schemas? Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 44, 401– 412.

Polk, T. A., & Newell, A. (1995). Deduction as verbal reasoning. Psycho-

logical Review, 102, 533–566.

Prior, A. N. (1960). The runabout inference-ticket. Analysis, 21, 38 –39.
Quillian, M. R. (1968). Semantic memory. In M. Minsky (Ed.), Semantic

information processing (pp. 216 –270). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Quine, W. V. O. (1952). Methods of logic. London: Routledge.
Ramsey, F. P. (1990). General propositions and causality. In D. H. Mellor
(Ed.), Foundations: Essays in philosophy, logic, mathematics and eco-
nomics (pp. 145–163). London: Humanities Press. (Original work pub-
lished 1929)

Reinhart, T. (1986). On the interpretation of ‘donkey’-sentences. In E. C.
Traugott, A. ter Meulen, J. S. Reilly, & C. A. Ferguson (Eds.), On
conditionals (pp. 103–122). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
Press.

Richardson, J., & Ormerod, T. C. (1997). Rephrasing between disjunctives
and conditionals: Mental models and the effects of thematic content.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 50A, 358 –385.

Rips, L. J. (1983). Cognitive processes in propositional reasoning. Psycho-

logical Review, 90, 38 –71.

Rips, L. J. (1994). The psychology of proof. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Roberge, J. J. (1971). Some effects of negation on adults’ conditional

reasoning abilities. Psychological Reports, 29, 839 – 844.

Roberge, J. J. (1974). Effects of negation on adults’ comprehension of
fallacious conditional and disjunctive arguments. Journal of General
Psychology, 91, 287–293.

Rumelhart, D. E., & McClelland, J. L. (1986). Parallel distributed pro-
cessing: Explorations in the micro-structure of cognition: Vol. 1. Foun-
dations. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Russell, J. (1987). Rule-following, mental models, and the developmental
view. In M. Chapman & R. A. Dixon (Eds.), Meaning and the growth of
understanding: Wittgenstein’s significance for developmental psychol-
ogy. New York: Springer.

Ryle, G. (1949). The concept of mind. London: Hutchinson.
Santamarı´a, C., Garcı´a-Madruga, J. A., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1998).
Reasoning from double conditionals: The effects of logical structure and
believability. Thinking & Reasoning, 4, 97–122.

Santamarı´a, C., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2001). Are people rational in the

abstract selection task? Manuscript in preparation.

Schroyens, W., Schaeken, W., & d’Ydewalle, G. (2000). Conditional
reasoning by model and/or rule: A meta-analytic review of the theories
and the data. Manuscript submitted for publication.

678

JOHNSON-LAIRD AND BYRNE

Schroyens, W., Verschueren, N., Schaeken, W., & d’Ydewalle, G. (2000).
Conditional reasoning with negations: Implicit and explicit affirmation
or denial and the role of contrast classes. Thinking & Reasoning, 6,
221–251.

Simon, H. A. (1982). Models of bounded rationality (Vols. 1 and 2).

Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Sloman, S. A. (1996). The empirical case for two systems of reasoning.

Psychological Bulletin, 119, 3–22.

Sloutsky, V. M., & Morris, B. J. (1999). How to make something out of
nothing: Adaptive constraints on children’s information processing.
Manuscript submitted for publication.

Sperber, D., Cara, F., & Girotto, V. (1995). Relevance theory explains the

selection task. Cognition, 52, 3–39.

Sperber, D., & Wilson, D. (1995). Relevance: Communication and cogni-

tion (Rev. ed.). Oxford, England: Blackwell.

Staller, A., Sloman, S. A., & Ben-Zeev, T. (1999). Perspective effects in
non-deontic versions of the Wason selection task. Memory & Cogni-
tion, 28, 396 – 405.

Stalnaker, R. C. (1968). A theory of conditionals. In N. Rescher (Ed.),
Studies in logical theory (American Philosophical Quarterly Monograph
No. 2). Oxford, England: Blackwell.

Stalnaker, R. C. (1970). Probability and conditionals. Philosophy of Sci-

ence, 37, 64 – 80.

Stalnaker, R. C. (1975). Indicative conditionals. Philosophia, 5, 269 –286.
Stanovich, K. E. (1999). Who is rational? Studies of individual differences

in reasoning. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

Staudenmayer, H. (1975). Understanding conditional reasoning with mean-
ingful propositions. In R. J. Falmagne (Ed.), Reasoning: Representation
and process in children and adults (pp. 55–79). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Staudenmayer, H., & Bourne, L. E. (1978). The nature of denied propo-
sitions in the conditional reasoning task: Interpretation and learning. In
R. Revlin & R. E. Mayer (Eds.), Human reasoning (pp. 83–99). New
York: Wiley.

Stevenson, R. J., & Over, D. E. (1995). Deduction from uncertain premises.

Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 48A, 613– 643.

Tabossi, P., Bell, V. A., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1999). Mental models in
deductive, modal, and probabilistic reasoning. In C. Habel & G. Rickheit
(Eds.), Mental models in discourse processing and reasoning (pp. 299 –
331). Berlin, Germany: John Benjamins.

Taplin, J. E., Staudenmayer, H., & Taddonio, J. L. (1974). Developmental
changes in conditional reasoning: Linguistic or logical? Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 17, 360 –373.

Thompson, V. A. (1994). Interpretational factors in conditional reasoning.

Memory & Cognition, 22, 742–758.

Thompson, V. A. (1995). Conditional reasoning: The necessary and suf-
ficient conditions. Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology, 49,
1– 60.

Thompson, V. A. (2000). The task-specific nature of domain-general

reasoning. Cognition, 76, 209 –268.

Thompson, V. A., & Byrne, R. M. J. (2000). Reasoning counterfactually:
Making inferences about things that didn’t happen. Manuscript submit-
ted for publication.

Traugott, E. C., ter Meulen, A., Reilly, J. S., & Ferguson, C. A. (Eds.).
(1986). On conditionals. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
Press.

Veltman, F. (1986). Data semantics and the pragmatics of indicative
conditionals. In E. C. Traugott, A. ter Meulen, J. S. Reilly, & C. A.
Ferguson (Eds.), On conditionals (pp. 147–168). Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.

Wason, P. C. (1964). The effect of self-contradiction on fallacious reason-

ing. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 20, 273–281.

Wason, P. C. (1966). Reasoning. In B. M. Foss (Ed.), New horizons in

psychology. Harmonsworth, Middlesex, England: Penguin Books.

Wason, P. C., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1969). Proving a disjunctive rule.

Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 21, 14 –20.

Wason, P. C., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1972). Psychology of reasoning:

Structure and content. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Wason, P. C., & Shapiro, D. (1971). Natural and contrived experience in
a reasoning problem. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 23,
63–71.

Wildman, T. M., & Fletcher, H. J. (1977). Developmental increases and
decreases in solutions of conditional syllogism problems. Developmen-
tal Psychology, 13, 630 – 636.

Wilson, D. (1975). Presuppositions and non-truth-conditional semantics.

London: Academic Press.

Yang, Y., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2000). Illusions in quantified reasoning:
How to make the impossible seem possible, and vice versa. Memory &
Cognition, 28, 452– 465.

Received April 5, 2000
Revision received July 20, 2001

Accepted July 31, 2001 䡲

