Philos Stud (2015) 172:1243–1263
DOI 10.1007/s11098-014-0347-3

Extending the extended mind: the case for extended
affectivity

Giovanna Colombetti • Tom Roberts

Published online: 24 June 2014
Ó The Author(s) 2014. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com

Abstract The thesis of the extended mind (ExM) holds that the material under-
pinnings of an individual’s mental states and processes need not be restricted to
those contained within biological boundaries: when conditions are right, material
artefacts can be incorporated by the thinking subject in such a way as to become a
component of her extended mind. Up to this point, the focus of this approach has
been on phenomena of a distinctively cognitive nature, such as states of disposi-
tional belief, and processes of planning and calculation. In this paper, we aim to
expand the scope of ExM by considering the case for extended affectivity. We begin
by clarifying the central commitments of ExM, before investigating its applicability
to a range of affective phenomena, both dispositional and occurrent. We argue that
proponents of ExM should also accept that the vehicles of emotions, moods, sen-
timents, temperaments, and character traits can extend beyond skull and skin.
Keywords Extended mind  Affectivity  Emotion  Mood

1 Introduction

According to the thesis of the extended mind (ExM henceforth), under certain
circumstances we should see the material vehicles that realize the mind as
encompassing not just brain activity, but also that of the body and the material
environment. This ‘‘vehicle externalist’’ thesis was formulated by Clark and
Chalmers (1998) and has been further elaborated by Andy Clark in subsequent
works (e.g., Clark 2003, 2008, 2010a, b), partly in response to critical engagement
by those sympathetic to internalism (for example by Adams and Aizawa 2001,
2010a, b; Rupert 2004; Weiskopf 2008).

G. Colombetti (&)  T. Roberts
Department of Sociology, Philosophy, and Anthropology, University of Exeter, Devon, UK
e-mail: g.colombetti@exeter.ac.uk

123

1244

G. Colombetti, T. Roberts

Due to its focus on beliefs and other cognitive states and processes, ExM is best
known as the hypothesis of extended cognition (HEC; see Rupert 2004). It is not
clear, however, that only states with a distinctively cognitive character fall under the
purview of the theory. Indeed Chalmers (2008, p. xiv), in his foreword to Clark’s
book Supersizing the Mind, remarks in passing that

It is natural to ask whether the extended mind thesis might itself be extended.
What about extended desires, extended reasoning, extended perception,
extended imagination, and extended emotions? I think there is something to be
said for each of these. Perhaps the camera on my iPhone can serve as an
external perceptual mechanism. And perhaps one might have something akin
to an extended mood, if not an extended emotion, when one’s environment is
always nudging one toward happiness or sadness.

Our aim in this paper is to take up this lead and address, speciﬁcally, the question of
whether affectivity can be extended. To anticipate, our answer is that, indeed, it can.
More precisely, we propose that the arguments that have been provided so far to
extend cognitive states apply also to a variety of affective states, such as—as we
shall see—emotions, moods, sentiments, and others. Thus if one buys ExM, or
better HEC, one should also buy HEA—the Hypothesis of Extended Affectivity.

In arguing for this conditional claim, we will not offer a defence of ExM. We are
this
aware that, as mentioned, several criticisms have been raised against
hypothesis, and we suspect that those who are critical of ExM in the ﬁrst place
are likely to be critical of HEA as well. On our part, we are broadly sympathetic to
ExM, and think that most of the critical challenges it has faced have been rebutted
adequately (see Clark 2008, 2010a, b; Hurley 2010). Our most general aim in this
paper, then, is to enrich the debate over ExM further, partly by clarifying its central
commitments and implications, and partly (and more interestingly) by developing it
in a novel context.

To this purpose, we begin with an overview of ExM in Sect. 2, distinguishing in
particular two of its targets: standing dispositional mental states, and temporary,
occurrent cognitive processes. In Sect. 3 we introduce and deﬁne a variety of
affective states as standardly formulated in the philosophy of emotion, again
distinguishing between occurrent and dispositional varieties. In Sect. 4 we argue
that dispositional affective states can be extended, and in Sect. 5 we discuss
occurrent states, arguing that they can also be extended.

2 The extended mind thesis

It is important to distinguish two targets of ExM: (1) standing, enduring mental
states, such as dispositional beliefs; and (2) temporary, ﬂeeting occurrent cognitive
processes, such as calculating a complex sum at a certain moment. ExM is the thesis
that, sometimes, the material vehicles that realize both (1) and (2) extend beyond
skull and skin, into the world. Wilson and Clark (2010) make this point particularly
clearly (see also Sutton 2006). In their view, most of our cognitive extensions
involve ‘‘transient creations, geared towards a speciﬁc purpose’’, which ‘‘combine

123

Extending the extended mind

1245

core neural resources with temporary add-ons’’ (64). Some of these transient
creations may involve one-off
integrations between organism and external
resources, or repeated ones. Both are distinguished, however, from the ‘‘more
stable and permanent
relationships between biological agents and extended
cognitive resources’’ (64). In this latter case,
it seems appropriate to talk of
extended mental states, to refer to more stable and robust cognitive capacities. The
distinction between transient cognitive states and more permanent mental ones is
one of degree rather than kind: ‘‘the notion of an extended mind is nothing more
than the notion of a cognitive extension … that scores rather higher on the …
dimension of durability and reliability’’ (Wilson and Clark 2010, p. 64).

Importantly, the arguments provided in the relevant literature to support the
extension of (1) and (2) are not exactly the same. One needs to keep this in mind
when considering how to apply ExM to affectivity, given that, as we shall see in the
next section, the realm of the affective includes dispositional as well as occurrent
phenomena.

The argument for the extension of standing, non-occurrent mental states is the
one provided by Clark and Chalmers (1998) with the famous and much-discussed
example of two imaginary (but plausible) characters, Otto and Inga. Inga is a
healthy adult, whereas Otto suffers from a mild form of Alzheimer’s. In order not to
lose important information, Otto continually maintains, updates, and consults a
notebook that he carries with him wherever he goes. One day, both Inga and Otto
hear of an interesting exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art (MoMA) in New
York, and decide to go and see it. Inga thinks brieﬂy, remembers that the MoMA is
on 53rd Street, and sets off. Otto, on his part, looks up the address of the MoMA in
his notebook, and then sets off as well.

Clark and Chalmers (1998, p. 13) point out that ‘‘in relevant respects, the cases
[of Inga and Otto] are entirely analogous: the information plays for Otto the same
role that memory plays for Inga’’; namely, information in the notebook is retrieved
when needed and guides Otto’s intentional behaviour, just as information in Inga’s
brain does for her. Speciﬁcally, the example shows that the information in Otto’s
notebook is functionally equivalent to Inga’s standing, non-occurrent belief that the
MoMA is on 53rd Street. The notebook entries meet the so-called criteria of glue-
and-trust (Clark 2010a, p. 83): they are constant (although not always consciously
entertained), easily accessed when needed, and automatically endorsed.1 This
equivalence of role is the basis for Clark and Chalmers’ claim that Otto’s notebook
can be seen as, literally, part of the material vehicles realizing his standing belief
that the MoMA is on 53rd Street: ‘‘when it comes to belief, there is nothing sacred
about skull and skin. What makes some information count as a belief is the role it
plays, and there is no reason why the relevant role can be played only from inside
the body’’ (14). Otto’s standing belief that the MoMA is on the 53rd Street, or better
the material vehicles implementing this belief, can thus be seen as extended over his
notebook; the supervenience base of Otto’s standing belief is not a brain process,

1 Clark and Chalmers (1998, p. 17) tentatively mentioned also a fourth criterion, which holds that
extended mental states must have received prior conscious endorsement, but this demand was later
abandoned (see Clark 2010b). We shall not pursue this further here, but see Roberts (2011) for discussion.

123

1246

G. Colombetti, T. Roberts

but an extended system formed by Otto and his notebook. The presence of the
notebook, and its readiness for deployment by the subject, contributes to a
distinctive dispositional proﬁle that can be attributed to the whole system: the
proﬁle that characterises standing belief.

Clark and Chalmers’ defence of ExM appeals to the parity principle, which
reiterates the point that there is nothing sacred about skin and skull, and that what
matters for establishing whether something is part of a mental process is what this
something does: ‘‘If, as we confront some task, a part of the world functions as a
process which, were it done in the head, we would have no hesitation in recognizing
as part of the cognitive process, then that part of the world is (so we claim) part of
the cognitive process’’ (8; italics in original). The right way to understand this
principle, in our view, is not as aiming to offer a deﬁnitive ‘‘mark of the mental’’ or
‘‘of the cognitive’’, by antecedently identifying the mind with some internal neural
goings-on. Rather, this principle ‘‘is best seen as a heuristic (a rough-and-ready tool)
for identifying some plausible cases of cognitive extension’’ (Clark 2011, p. 48); as
such,
it draws upon existing common-sense characterizations of paradigm
psychological categories: if some hybrid organism-world system plays roughly
the same role as something that we already call cognitive/mental, then we are
justiﬁed in seeing this system as a cognitive/mental one (see also Clark 2007;
Kiverstein and Clark 2009).2 Material resources that reside outside of the body thus
count as components of the realization base of a subject’s dispositional mental
states, according to the guiding principles of ExM, when they are incorporated by
the subject in such a way that a relatively stable, enduring system can be identiﬁed,
whose functional properties are, intuitively, recognizably mental in character.

The strategy for defending the extension of more transient, occurrent cognitive
processes, such as the acts of calculating or preparing a presentation as they are taking
place over some limited span of time, is rather different, but rests upon parallel
considerations of parity. Here the reliance is not on the criteria of glue and trust (which,
as we saw, are meant to be met by dispositional mental states), but on the notions of
coupling and self-stimulating loops (see in particular Clark 2008, pp. 129–131; see
also Shapiro 2011, pp. 175–177). The concept of coupling relevant here is one
inherited from dynamical systems theory, where two or more systems are said to be
coupled when they reciprocally inﬂuence and constrain one another’s behaviour over
time, such that they can be modelled as a single system. Various arguments for ExM
suggest that in those cases where an organism is in an intimate relationship of ongoing
give and take with an external item, then the two can be considered one single system.
Clark (2008, p. 131) acknowledges, however, that coupling alone is not sufﬁcient
for extension: ‘‘sometimes, all coupling does is provide a channel allowing
externally originating inputs to drive cognitive processing along’’. In these cases,
coupling may boost one’s cognitive capacity, yet fail to instantiate an extended

2 But see Wheeler (2011) for the different position that ExM requires a locationally uncommitted
‘‘scientiﬁcally informed, theory-loaded’’ (p. 419) mark of the cognitive. According to Wheeler, Clark’s
appeal to our rough sense of what counts as cognitive risks favouring an internalist view of cognition. See
Clark (2011) for the response that any scientiﬁcally informed mark of the cognitive is, rather, more likely
to favour the brain as the locus of cognition. In this paper we align ourselves with Clark.

123

Extending the extended mind

1247

cognitive system. What is also needed for extending cognition, Clark proposes, is a
‘‘self-stimulating loop’’. To illustrate this idea, he introduces the example of the
turbo-driven engine, which uses exhaust ﬂow to boost its own power: emissions are
recycled and sent to a turbine and then to a compressor, which forces air and fuel
back into the engine at high speed and pressure; the engine can then produce more
power than a standard engine with the same capacity. As Clark points out, in this
case it is plausible to see the power-generating mechanism of the car as involving
the engine plus the turbo-driven loop, with its various components. Clark’s view is
that self-stimulatory loops of an analogous kind are at play during the process of,
say, calculating with pen and paper, or working at an architectural plan while using
compass, square rule, etc. In these cases, the organism distributes information out
into the world (symbols, lines, sketches), which is then recycled by the organism as
input, enabling it to boost its ‘‘naked’’ calculating and planning capacities. In these
instances, we ought to talk of extended occurrent cognitive processes, implemented
by material vehicles that span brain, body, and world: ‘‘These are the cases where
we confront a recognizably cognitive process, running in some agent, that creates
outputs (speech, gesture, expressive movements, written words) that, re-cycled as
inputs, drive the cognitive process along. In such cases, any intuitive ban on
counting inputs as parts of mechanisms seems wrong’’ (Clark 2008, p. 131, italics in
original). The point, in other words, is that when we face a system that is in a close
relationship of give and take with some environmental item, and that exploits this
coupling to achieve some cognitive capacity, it seems intuitively wrong not to count
those environmental items as parts of a cognitive system.

Further passages suggest that, for Clark, the intuition that occurrent cognitive
processes extend over self-stimulatory loops is strongest in those cases where the self-
stimulatory activity has been designed, or selected and maintained, for a certain
purpose over time. This point comes through in Clark’s (2008, p. 130) following
comparison. Consider ﬁrst the momentary facilitation of one’s ﬂow of thoughts due to
the sound of rain hitting the window. Here, Clark claims, the rain is not part of
cognitive processing because it is not ‘‘part … of any system selected or maintained for
the support of better cognizing. It is indeed mere (but as it happens helpful) backdrop’’.
However, in the case of a robot designed to use the sound of rain to perform operations
essential to some kind of problem solving, ‘‘it is not clear, at least to me, that the whole
drop-based timing mechanism is not usefully considered as one of the robot’s
cognitive routines’’ (p. 130). The intuition that relevant loops of self-stimulated
activity can become part of cognitive routines is even stronger, Clark believes, in the
case of a robot that evolved to spit stored water onto a plate to generate sounds used to
time certain operations key to problem solving. Here, the appeal to the diachronic
properties of a material resource—its proper function, or its history of recruitment,
selection and maintenance—can be read as a further condition on its being counted as a
true part of a coupled system, thus guarding against the problem of ‘‘cognitive bloat’’
by restricting the class of agent/world interactions that fall within HEC.3

3 See Rowlands (2009) for further defence of the historical condition on cognitive extension, and Allen-
Hermanson (2013) for discussion.

123

1248

G. Colombetti, T. Roberts

In sum, then, the argument for the extension of occurrent cognitive states, as
reconstructed here, is that when a system is coupled to an environmental item
through which the system loops some kind of self-stimulating activity, and this self-
stimulating activity in particular has been set in place and maintained over time to
achieve a certain cognitive feat, then the system is intuitively best regarded as an
extended (i.e., world-involving) cognitive system.4

Having clariﬁed this, in the rest of this paper we will argue that there are
scenarios in which the material underpinnings of affective phenomena extend
beyond biological boundaries, and that the hypothesis of extended affectivity (HEA)
applies to both standing and occurrent states and episodes in this domain. There are
situations, that is, in which it is legitimate to speak of affective dispositions as
having a physical basis which is distributed across both organism and environment,
or in which recognizably occurrent affective processes are driven, and boosted, by a
subject’s self-stimulating loops of interaction with worldly materials, such that any
intuitive disqualiﬁcation of the extra-neural components from the proper parts of the
system seems to be grounded in internalist bio-prejudice. We thus intend to advance
a stronger proposal than the more familiar hypothesis of embodied affectivity,
which, in a variety of forms, has already received support both in the history of
philosophy (see Colombetti and Thompson 2008) and in the light of empirical
ﬁndings (for overviews, see e.g. Prinz 2004, Esp. Chap. 3; Gibbs 2006, Chap. 8;
Niedenthal 2007; Krueger 2012). Emotional episodes,
is now commonly
recognized in affective science, include a range of bodily components including
facial and vocal expressions, autonomic nervous system activity, and distinctive
behavioural stances (see Davidson et al. 2003; two main sections of this work are
dedicated to ‘‘autonomic psychophysiology’’ and ‘‘expression’’). Moreover, there is
evidence indicating that impairments in facial or autonomic feedback dampen
emotion experience (e.g., Cole 1999; Mack et al. 2005; Davis et al. 2010; Krueger
2012). We thus treat the view that the vehicles of affectivity span both neural and
non-neural, but still biological, underpinnings as having a rich pedigree, and as
providing as compelling a case as any within the literature on embodied cognition
more generally. Our focus will be on the more controversial thesis, according to
which affective phenomena extend not simply beyond the skull, but beyond the skin
as well.

it

Before examining the cases that we take to motivate HEA, we shall disambiguate
the various categories of phenomena that lie within the affective domain, the better
to see the conditions under which they might be accommodated by ExM. In doing
so, we will appeal to distinctions commonly drawn in the philosophy of emotion,
which we think also correspond to our intuitions or ‘‘rough sense’’ of what belongs

4 This argument is not uncontroversial, even among supporters of ExM. Wheeler (2013, pp. 284–293) for
example does not think it succeeds in securing HEC; Shapiro (2011, p. 178), on the other hand, thinks that
it does provide a reason for endorsing HEC that critics need to rebut. We shall not engage with this debate
here. As mentioned earlier, our aim in this paper is to discuss whether and how already existing
arguments for HEC (as developed primarily in Clark’s work) apply to the realm of affectivity. If one does
not accept those arguments, then one is not likely to accept HEA either, at least in the way we articulate it
here.

123

Extending the extended mind

1249

to the realm of the affective. In other words, we do not aim to provide a theory-
loaded, scientiﬁcally grounded ‘‘mark of the affective’’ (vs. Wheeler 2011), but an
accessible, folk-psychological characterization of various affective phenomena
which ought to come across as relatively uncontroversial.

3 The realm of the affective

In Clark and Chalmers’ original discussion, Otto’s (standing) belief that the MoMA
is on 53rd St. is extended. However, Otto’s desire to go and see the exhibition, like
Inga’s, appears to remain inside him (see Clark and Chalmers 1998, p. 13). In
addition, Otto’s enjoyment of the exhibition, once he ﬁnally gets to the MoMA,
presumably need not involve his notebook either. It is certainly implausible to
imagine that when Otto sees a painting by, say, Kandinsky, he looks up his
notebook, reads that Kandinsky is his favourite painter, and only then looks back to
the painting in awe and admiration. As Sterelny (2010, pp. 471–472) writes, in a
quick passage on the possibility of extending desires and emotions, ‘‘it is hard to
credibly imagine Otto keeping his preferences in his notebook, representing the
information that he is gay, or that he likes blonds. … The notebook might be an
external belief store, but not an external store of lusts,
longings, hopes and
preferences’’. The reason why Sterelny thinks that desires and emotions cannot be
extended is that these are typically experiential and bodily phenomena: ‘‘The
notebook might of course be an external cue, a prompt that allows Otto better access
to his internal, embodied wants and desires. But it cannot substitute for those
internal states, for these have a phenomenological, embodied component’’ (p. 472).
Sterelny in particular blames the parity principle for the impossibility of extending
desires and emotions: ‘‘parity supported cases do not plausibly generalize to other
intentional or cognitive states, in particular those with an affective or motivational
elements. The more one thinks cognition is embodied, the less one will accept
functional equivalence between inner and outer’’ (p. 471).

Note, though, that the parity principle does not require functional equivalence
between internal and external processes. What it requires is functional equivalence
between internal processes (which we already intuitively regard as cognitive or as
mental more generally), and extended systems composed of internal-plus-external
processes—in other words, it requires functional integration between inner and
outer, such that the resulting system does something that we are inclined to identify
as cognitive or mental (see Wilson and Clark 2010). An extended cognitive process,
then, is not one where the outer plays the same functional role as the inner. As
Wilson and Clark admit, some passages in Clark and Chalmers (1998) do suggest
that the outer must by itself be functionally equivalent to the inner for it to be part of
an extended mind (e.g., see the passage, quoted earlier, that the information in
Otto’s notebook plays the same role as Inga’s memory). The right interpretation, it
has now been clariﬁed, is that it is the joint system Otto-plus-notebook that is
functionally equivalent to (plays the same role as) Inga’s internal memory system. It
follows that, in order to extend affective states, one need not ﬁnd outer processes
that have themselves an embodied or phenomenological character. Rather, it is

123

1250

G. Colombetti, T. Roberts

enough to point to integrated extended systems whose states and processes play a
role that we intuitively regard as distinctively affective.5 As we are about to show,
we believe that there are indeed extended affective systems of this kind.

Importantly, when asking whether affectivity can be extended, one should not
forget that the realm of the affective, as conceptualized in mainstream philosophy of
emotion and by our folk judgements concerning emotional categories, includes a
variety of both occurrent and dispositional phenomena. Our aim is to argue that all
of these can be extended, by applying the arguments already provided so far for
ExM and presented in the previous section. To do so we need ﬁrst to illustrate the
various phenomena that are traditionally, and intuitively, seen as making up the
realm of the affective.

The emotions (fear, anger, sadness, hope, shame, joy, contempt, and so on) are
paradigmatic affective states. The term ‘‘emotion’’, however, is ambiguous: it,
alongside the labels for individual emotion types, can indicate both an occurrent and
a dispositional state (see also Goldie 2000, p. 104). If we hear that Mary is angry at
John, we can understand this in two ways. We can infer that Mary is at present
experiencing an episode of anger at John, and is also perhaps in some way
expressing her anger at John, and/or undergoing some physiological change, such as
a change in heart rate; or, we can infer that Mary has a longstanding angry
disposition toward John, such that she may experience and also express her anger
when she is in John’s presence.

To avoid this ambiguity, we distinguish between emotional dispositions, and
emotional episodes (see also Deonna and Teroni 2012), where the latter are
occurrent states with an event-like or temporal structure. Occurrent emotions
(emotional episodes) are the component of the affective domain that has received
the greatest philosophical attention, and of which there is the greatest diversity of
competing theoretical analyses. For the sake of providing the broadest possible
treatment of the issue, rather than entering the debate over which of these accounts
is correct, we adopt here a ‘‘componential’’ approach, according to which emotional
episodes are complex occurrences involving cognitive evaluations or ‘‘appraisals’’,
bodily (autonomic and expressive) changes, and feelings. This approach reﬂects not
only, we think, our common-sense understanding of the emotions, but also a
dominant trend in affective science (e.g., Russell 2003; Scherer 2009). We return to
the question of whether any or all of these elements can be extended in Sect. 5
below.

Other common occurrent affective states are moods, such as having the blues,
feeling elated, being grumpy, feeling anxious, or feeling upbeat. They are usually
characterized in the philosophy of emotion as diffuse affective colorations that
inﬂuence one’s experience of the world, and that make some emotional episodes
more likely than others (someone in a grumpy mood, for example, is more likely to

5 This relatively liberal understanding of the parity principle is consistent, furthermore, with those
approaches to ExM that have emphasized the integration and complementarity of inner and outer
resources (e.g. Menary 2010; Sutton 2010), and argued that it is precisely the distinctively different
powers and capabilities contributed by non-neural components that make them suitable candidates for
cognitive extension.

123

Extending the extended mind

1251

burst out at someone else in anger; someone in an anxious mood is more likely to be
preoccupied with things that would otherwise not worry her). Moods are primarily
feeling states, but are also associated with characteristic bodily postures and
gestures, and expressive-behavioural attitudes. Moods are typically distinguished
from emotional episodes by reference to duration and intentional character. Moods
generally last longer than emotional episodes—one can feel grumpy for hours or
even days. Moreover, moods, unlike emotional episodes such as anger, sadness,
fear, pride, and so on, are not directed at speciﬁc objects (things, people, events);
one does not usually have the blues, or feel up, about anything in particular. How
exactly to characterize the intentionality of moods is a matter of debate. Some
philosophers think that moods are not intentional states altogether (e.g., de Sousa
1987), whereas others think that they are rather about general or indeterminate
objects (Broad 1954; Goldie 2000; Solomon 2007; Ben-Ze’ev 2010). Here we take
moods to be pervasive affective states with an unclear intentionality, such that they
are not about anything in particular, but remain nevertheless ‘‘open’’ to the world, in
the sense that they present the world as affectively toned, in one way or another.
Moods, too, are naturally conceived of as event-like, i.e., as unfolding over a span of
time, during which they can change and evolve. Think, for instance, of a bad temper
caused by a difﬁcult day at the ofﬁce taking on a particular coloration as one deals
with, say, people, trafﬁc, and weather during the journey home.

The affective realm also includes a variety of dispositional states. We have
already encountered the emotional dispositions, which are dispositions to undergo a
certain kind of (occurrent) emotion. When we say that Mark is envious of the rich,
for example, we mean that Mark is prone to experience and/or manifest envy for a
rich person whenever he meets one or hears about her and her possessions. Being
angry, being jealous, being scared, and being proud are all examples of expressions
that can refer not just to occurrent emotional episodes but also to emotional
dispositions (e.g., Ryle 1949, Chap. 4). Emotional dispositions can last very long, up
to one’s whole life.

Emotional dispositions are distinguished from the sentiments. Emotional
dispositions can be characterised as ‘‘single-track’’, namely, as tendencies to
exhibit one speciﬁc emotion (e.g., anger, envy, jealousy, fear, pride; see Deonna and
Teroni 2012). Some affective dispositions however are ‘‘multi-track’’, i.e., they are
tendencies to feel a variety of different emotions. When we say that Mary loves
John, for example, we imply that Mary is likely to undergo an intelligible pattern of
different emotions towards John and in relation to him, such as erotic desire and
warm affection, but also worry, pride, or jealousy. Similarly for hatred. These multi-
track affective dispositions are traditionally characterized as the sentiments (see also
Broad 1954; Ben Ze’ev 2000, Chap. 4).

A further category of affective dispositions are the temperaments. A tempera-
ment is generally viewed as the tendency to have certain moods. Often-cited
examples of temperaments are being cheerful, being phlegmatic, being irritable,
being gloomy, being melancholic, being lascivious, and being nervous (Deonna and
Teroni 2012, Chap. 9). Someone with an irritable temperament, for instance, is
disposed to enter a grumpy mood more often than someone with a cheerful or
phlegmatic temperament.

123

1252

G. Colombetti, T. Roberts

Finally,

loyal,

frivolous, cruel, but also negligent,

temperaments are distinguished from character traits, which are
dispositions to evaluate and affectively respond to events in a certain way.
Paradigmatic examples are ‘‘being optimistic, kind, courteous, opportunist,
meticulous, modest,
insensitive,
unfriendly as well as the standard virtues and vices’’ (Deonna and Teroni 2012,
p. 106; Goldie 2004). Character traits differ primarily from sentiments in that the
latter are considered attachments to speciﬁc things (objects, but also people and
institutions), whereas the former are attachments to values (such as justice, modesty,
loyalty, and so on). Recent literature has raised a sceptical challenge to the treatment
of character traits as context-independent, enduring, and stable features of moral
agents (e.g., Harman 2000), motivated by results from situationist social psychology
(see, e.g., Kunda 1999 for discussion), which have been taken to indicate that
individuals tend not to exhibit uniform traits—e.g., kindness, charity, or honesty—
across different contexts and situations. One response (e.g., Upton 2005) is to hold
that features of character should be understood in ‘‘local’’ terms, as dispositions to
respond evaluatively only within a circumscribed context—to attribute to an agent
the property, for example, of being ‘‘honest-at-work’’, or ‘‘compassionate-towards-
the-sick’’. We will not take a stand upon the question of which account of character
traits, global or local, is correct, but hold that each is consistent with HEA as we will
develop it.

Occurrent emotional episodes and moods, and dispositional emotions, senti-
ments, temperaments, and character traits differ in their temporal span. Emotional
episodes typically last a few seconds or minutes, whereas moods can last for hours,
days, or even weeks. The various dispositional affective states are usually long-
lasting and relatively stable: one can be angry at one’s parents for the whole of one’s
life; likewise for a sentiment of love, a gloomy temperament, and a frivolous
character trait. Arguably, not all affective dispositions fall neatly within one
category only. Being irascible, for example, can be seen as a single-track emotional
disposition (e.g., Goldie 2004), but also as a temperament, and even as a character
trait (if one exhibits a pattern of preferential attachments to one’s own interests at
the expense of others’, say). For our purposes, what matters is that it is possible, and
indeed customary, to identify a variety of occurrent as well as dispositional affective
phenomena. Moreover, we can do so in the absence of a deﬁnitive, theory-driven
‘‘mark of the affective’’: our appeal is to well-established and, we think, relatively
uncontroversial categorizations of affective phenomena.

4 Extending affective dispositions

We shall argue that all of these phenomena can be extended, on the basis of the
arguments already provided for ExM, as detailed in Sect. 2.

Consider the affective dispositions ﬁrst (emotional dispositions, temperaments,
sentiments, character traits). Otto’s example, recall, was intended to make the point
that the material vehicles realizing his belief that the MoMA is on 53rd St. include
his notebook. The belief in question is standing or dispositional, and has a speciﬁc
content. Of
the emotional

the various affective dispositions listed earlier,

123

Extending the extended mind

1253

dispositions are most similarly standing and intentionally directed states. Can we
ﬁnd a case of an extended emotional disposition, along the lines of Otto’s case? We
think so. Take for instance Eve’s dispositional resentment at her parents. Imagine
that Eve occasionally records in her diary the things that her parents do that make
her angry, such as ‘‘my father does not care about my feelings’’, ‘‘my mother always
criticizes me and does not appreciate my achievements’’, and so on. Eve does not
always consciously exhibit resentment, but when she reads these statements, she
does. Sometimes she re-reads the previously recorded entries in her diary, which
also elicits her resentment; in fact, her record of past episodes contributes to fuel her
resentment, even during periods of her life when she does not interact much with her
parents, and is otherwise quite satisﬁed with her professional and marital life.
Without the diary, we can imagine, she would not rekindle her resentment that
often, in fact she may even be able to forget her negative relationship with her
parents, and cultivate more positive memories and feelings toward them. Without
the diary, that is, she is not (or need not be) so disposed to manifest parent-directed
resentment.

This scenario strikes us as plausible, and one in which, if one endorses ExM, one
also ought to say that Eve’s diary is part of the supervenience base of the system that
realizes her standing, dispositional resentment
toward her parents. The parity
principle applies smoothly in this case: if Eve were disposed to rehearse those
statements (‘‘my mother always criticizes me’’, etc.), and hence to undergo bouts of
occurrent resentment, ‘‘only’’ in virtue of her internal condition, we would have no
hesitation to consider her in a state of dispositional resentment toward her parents.
Eve’s interaction with her diary meets the criteria of glue and trust: the object is
consistently and straightforwardly available; it is accessible for ﬂuent use in the
course of Eve’s day to day activities; and she does not submit its contents to
reﬂective scrutiny, but deploys them with a trusting attitude (i.e., when she reads the
entries, she is convinced by what they say).6

It is also possible, we think, to extend temperaments. Thus consider Reinier, a
person with a melancholic temperament, who is generally prone to self-doubt, tends
to view his daily circumstances in a negative light, worries about trivial matters, and
dwells upon past failures. Reinier, let us suppose, decides at some point to change
his affective outlook and, perhaps under the advice of a therapist, begins to compile
a notebook of inspirational quotations, cheerful sayings, and positive accounts of his
own achievements and successes, which he consults whenever he detects or predicts
that his mood is on a downward turn. If, after a suitable period of training and
adjustment, the use of this external resource enables Reinier to undergo more
frequent occurrences of positive mood, then, it seems to us, if one endorses ExM

6 In contrast, imagine that Eve consults an entry but initially fails to grasp its signiﬁcance, or doesn’t
fully interpret some negative written remark about her parents appropriately. Although the episode may
eventually effect an episode of resentment, once she comes to appreciate the content fully, her
consultation of the diary in this case lacks the trusting attitude required by the Clark and Chalmers’
criterion on extension. In the latter case, it is not appropriate to ascribe to Eve the state of dispositional
resentment, because she is not suitably poised to manifest the resentful attitude, but only reaches it after
some mental effort.

123

1254

G. Colombetti, T. Roberts

one also ought to say that the notebook is part of the supervenience base of Reinier’s
cheerful temperament (a temperament, recall, can be seen as the disposition to have
certain moods). Reinier’s notebook, in this scenario, comes to satisfy the glue-and-
trust conditions in virtue of its skilful and uncritical deployment, and its steady
availability. The parity principle also applies in this example: if the re-evaluation of
events as positive were carried out entirely in Reinier’s head and he achieved a more
positive mood as a consequence, we would have no hesitation to see the process as
an illustration of Reinier’s cheerful temperament.

Similar considerations, we contend, also apply to the sentiments (such as love
and hatred). Think this time, for example, of the use that people make of objects to
rekindle speciﬁc feelings of attachment towards someone or something. Widows
often add the wedding ring of their spouse to their ring ﬁnger, as a way to maintain a
sense of connectedness with the deceased person; more generally it
is not
uncommon to wear the jewels or clothes of a deceased loved one to cultivate their
memory and a sense of proximity to them. If sentiments are dispositions to be
attached to certain objects, including people, then the deceased spouse’s ring in this
example ought to be seen as a proper part of the vehicles that instantiate the
sentiment of love towards a speciﬁc person. Or consider that religious faith is often
supported by favoured and oft-consulted devotional texts, as well as material objects
and practices. If a person were to sustain her practices of religious observance
entirely in her head, without the recourse to any text, object and rituals, we would
have no hesitation to call her faithful. From the perspective of ExM, relying on a
text and manipulating objects (such as a rosary) to enable occurrent experiences of
devotion ought to count as a proper part of (the vehicles of) a faithful disposition or
sentiment.

The case of character traits does not strike us as different in principle. Just as
Reinier can rely on his notebook to alter his temperament, he may also rely on it to
change, and to maintain, his character traits. For example we can imagine that
Reinier, thanks to his notebook, becomes a meticulous person. Before he started to
add to-do-lists and appointments to the volume he was scattered and disorganized,
but by continually structuring his behaviour through coordinated interaction with
the notebook’s entries (and, let us say, a timer and alarm-clock), he gains a punctual
and efﬁcient aspect to his character. Or one may decide to become more courteous
and gentlemanly (perhaps as a consequence of cultural and social pressures, but not
necessarily) by acquiring a manual of good manners, carrying it and following its
advice systematically and appropriately. If the manual is smoothly integrated within
the person’s behaviour, implicitly trusted and regularly employed, such that we
would have no hesitation to call the person ‘‘courteous’’ were he to act as he does
without any reliance on the manual, then we ought to see the manual as part of the
material vehicles that enable the character trait of being courteous. Here, it is not
only a mere behavioural disposition that is governed by the manual, but a pattern of
attention and motivation: without the guidebook, we can imagine, the individual
struggles to maintain focus on the aspiration of improved manners, even though he
may entertain it as an inchoate or abstract goal. In the presence of the manual,
though, and in virtue of its prominent inﬂuence in directing attention and guiding
behaviour during his negotiation of social interactions, he is able to recognise and

123

Extending the extended mind

1255

make effective the value he places upon etiquette and its enhancement of
interpersonal relationships.

Think also of a case of extended unfriendliness or introversion, where one blocks
oneself off from worldly stimuli by using headphones all the time, and more
generally structuring one’s appearance and environment so as to discourage
interactions with other people and to change the space of ways in which they show
up for one (as, for instance, potential conversation participants, friends, sympath-
isers, annoyances, and so forth). This example, especially, can be applied neatly
within a framework that construes character traits as local: ‘‘unfriendliness-on-the-
bus’’, a context sensitive trait, is here partially subserved by the subject’s being
plugged into her technology. If we understand traits in this way, then the fact that
some extra-neural artefacts are deployed for their transformative effects only within
a certain domain—workplace, home, public transport—is no barrier to their being
true extensions of a person’s character. Moreover, environmental components may
lend a degree of stability to a person’s dispositions, enabling her to exhibit
responses with a greater degree of uniformity across different social contexts than
would otherwise be possible.

Before moving on to occurrent affective phenomena, we wish to address the
possible worry that our scenarios do not
illustrate instances of extended
dispositional affective states, but simply reduce to further instances of (extended)
dispositional belief.7 According to this objection, if, for example, the instigation of
Eve’s occurrent resentment, or the improvement of Reinier’s mood, can only occur
via their treating certain externally encoded contents as true, then it may be
reasonable to regard those external encodings as part of the dispositional basis of
belief, while retaining an internalist analysis of the relevant affective phenomena.
Similarly, perhaps, with our example of extended religious faith—if one takes
religious faith to reduce to a set of dispositional beliefs.

Note ﬁrst that this worry does not apply to all of our examples. In the scenarios
illustrating the extended sentiment of love, and extended meticulous, courteous, and
unfriendly character traits, the environmental items over which these affective
phenomena are said to extend are not repositories of any propositional content; it is
thus not clear to what kind of extended dispositional belief these affective
phenomena could reduce. Even in the examples of Eve and Reinier, we contend, the
objection does not succeed in excluding the possibility of HEA. Note that there are
two readings of the doxastic alternative. On the ﬁrst, the affective phenomena in
question are a component of the dispositional proﬁle of evaluative belief; for
instance, part of what it is to believe that one’s parents treated one badly just is to be
disposed to exhibit
the occurrent
resentment, or changes in mood, involved in the scenarios of Eve and Reinier
respectively, are internally realized manifestations of an extended standing belief
(other manifestations of the doxastic state would include treating the relevant
content as true in thought, word, and deed). On the second reading, the subjects’
standing doxastic states involves their being disposed to entertain certain occurrent

towards them. On this view,

resentment

7 Thanks to an anonymous referee for raising this concern.

123

1256

G. Colombetti, T. Roberts

beliefs, which causally mediate their affective responses. Again, although the
standing beliefs may have partially extended vehicles,
the occurrent mental
phenomena—cognitive and affective—would remain internal.

Although we do not deny here that

there may be instances in which an
individual’s dispositional mental states operate in these ways (note that it may not
always be possible neatly to categorize what a subject believes and what her
standing affective attitudes are, or whether or not her occurrent emotions are
mediated by belief), we do not accept that every standing affective state can be
analyzed in doxastic terms. Conceding this point would amount to effectively
denying that there are dispositional affective states at all.8 In addition, some
straightforward amendments can be applied to our cases in order to show that there
can be distinctively affective dispositional states, and that the onset of an occurrent
emotion, or of a change of mood, need not be mediated by occurrent beliefs. For
example, we can imagine that the contents of Reinier’s notebook possess an
imperative form (‘‘keep it up!’’; ‘‘go for it!’’, ‘‘ﬁnd a place inside where there is
joy’’); or that Eve’s book contains evocative images rather than written text. These
changes diminish the temptation to construe the cases as involving the endorsement
of a particular content as true—again, because there is no candidate propositional
content—and so the dispositional proﬁles in question are more obviously affective,
rather than doxastic. Moreover, it is possible to construct scenarios in which the
relevant disposition is subserved by non-representational artefacts altogether, as
when an otherwise anxious Reinier uses, say, a stress ball to regulate his mood with
such regularity and proﬁciency that it becomes reasonable to see it as part of the
basis for his now calmer temperament. In these scenarios, it appears illegitimate to
ascribe to the subject a standing belief from which the affective changes issue, either
as manifestations of that belief or as causal products of an intermediate thought—
because there is no proposition that he or she takes to be true.

5 The case of occurrent affective states

What about occurrent affective states, namely emotional episodes and moods? Can
they also be extended? Given the diversity of existing accounts of occurrent
emotions, there is no single or authoritative solution to the question whether
emotional episodes can have extended material underpinnings; one’s openness to
this possibility will rest, ultimately, upon one’s ontology of these phenomena. As
mentioned in Sect. 3, for the sake of providing the broadest possible treatment, we
adopt here a componential approach, according to which emotional episodes
typically comprise cognitive, bodily (autonomic and expressive), and phenomenal

8 This denial faces the problem of recalcitrant emotional dispositions, i.e., emotions that we have in spite
of what we believe. For example, one may be disposed to undergo bouts of fear whenever one is on a
plane, in spite of one’s standing belief that ﬂying is not dangerous. Here, we cannot explain the
occurrence of fear by appealing to a standing belief that ﬂying is dangerous, for the person does not
believe so. The solution is to allow that there are dispositional emotions that cannot be accounted for in
dispositional doxastic terms.

123

Extending the extended mind

1257

features. From this perspective, to extend occurrent emotions, some or all of these
components would have to be extended. In this section we examine each of these
components in turn. If one endorses a theory that treats a particular component as
forming the essential core of occurrent emotion, then one can accept that this
element’s extension sufﬁces for emotional extension simpliciter. Otherwise, one
might adopt a partial, or componential, view.

As remarked in Sect. 3, occurrent emotions, in contrast to the dispositional
phenomena examined earlier, are not static but event-like; they take place over a
certain temporal
interval, during which they evolve. In seeking to determine
whether the material basis for some core component of an occurrent emotion can be
extended, then, we must understand each component as having a duration, during
which it may transform. Let us consider ﬁrst the cognitive component, often also
termed ‘‘appraisal’’. To extend this, we must make reference to intentional events in
possession of
the relevant diachronic properties. Thinking of appraisals as
judgements lets us do this, by allowing us to treat occurrent emotional episodes
as content-involving performances in which a subject actively partakes over time.9
The judgements in question pertain to how we are faring in the world, broadly
construed, and to the ways in which external states of affairs impinge upon a web of
personal interests, values and concerns. An episode of occurrent anger incorporates
the judgement that we have been wronged or offended, for instance, while sadness
includes the judgement that we have suffered a loss. For present purposes, a crucial
component of this account is that it allows episodes of judging to be not only
instantaneous endorsements of some content as true, but ‘‘upheavals of thought’’, to
use Nussbaum’s (2001) phrase—namely, cognitive episodes through which the
agent can move quickly or slowly, coming to recognize, conceptualize, and
acknowledge the impact
failures and
achievements) have upon her interests, and to reorganize her evaluative perspective
accordingly. These temporally structured acts of judging, we believe, are of an
appropriate format to be carried out in close collaboration with material things, and
so present a promising candidate for extending the cognitive element of occurrent
emotions. Consider again Eve,
the person whose emotional disposition of
resentment towards her parents, we proposed earlier, can be seen as extending
over her diary in virtue of the role that this resource plays in her life. What about the
(occurrent) act of writing the diary, however? Is it just a case of ‘‘jotting out’’, on
paper, contents that are already well-formed and ‘‘complete’’ in Eve’s head or
organism? In our view, writing about one’s emotion episodes is rarely (if ever) a
mere description of one’s evaluative position. More often, the act of writing, as it
takes place, contributes to clarifying and articulating one’s thoughts, to demarcating
them more clearly from others, and thus to constraining the judging process as it is

factors (wins and losses,

that salient

9 See Solomon (1993) and Nussbaum (2001) for theoretical analyses of emotions that treat them as
essentially judgement-like. We offer the judgement view as one promising approach to the cognitive
component of emotions that ﬁts with the tenets of HEA, but there may be others.

123

1258

G. Colombetti, T. Roberts

performed by the emoting subject.10 The case of Eve, as we imagine it, is one
where, as she writes that her parents do not listen to her, do not appreciate her, and
so on, she is engaged in unfolding and articulating a speciﬁc evaluative judgement,
which the act of writing down helps to clarify and structure. This act also feeds back
into Eve, inﬂuencing her overall evaluative perspective as she continues to be
engaged in the activity. In the act of writing, the external item contributes to an
affective process with intentional directedness, such that we can talk here, we
submit, of an extended appraisal component.

What about the bodily components of emotion? If the autonomic components can
be functionalized, then they are, in principle, also apt for inclusion in HEA. Any
artiﬁcial device coupled to the organic body to support a speciﬁc function
(regulating the heart rate, or the release of some hormone) would count as an
‘‘autonomic extension’’ (see also Stephan et al. 2014). Similarly, the expressive
(facial, gestural) component of an emotion can be extended by a hybrid system with
expressive functions. Indeed, we already often naturally attribute expressive
manifestations to hybrid systems (and to artefacts themselves); think for example of
the act of smashing a vase on the ﬂoor in anger, or of using a handkerchief to cover
one’s face in sadness.

Finally, the prospects for extending the material underpinnings of the qualitative
character of an emotional episode are more difﬁcult to assess, because there is no
well-articulated and accepted metaphysical account of
the relation between
phenomenal and physical properties, and so it is hard to see what it would take
for an extended system to instantiate the supervenience basis of the felt quality of
fear, anger, or jealousy, for example. If one thinks, for instance, that consciousness
depends on a particular distribution of neurophysiological activity, then it is not
easy to imagine how equivalent properties can be implemented within a hybrid, and
thus partially non-neural, system. According to Clark (2009, 2012), for example,
consciousness cannot extend because only the brain appears able to access and
integrate information at the adequate temporal scale and bandwidth. Although
recent work disputes Clark’s point and advances a novel extended view of
perceptual consciousness (Ward 2012), it is not obvious whether and how this view
applies to emotional consciousness. As an elaboration of this point is beyond the
scope of this paper, we will not pursue this issue here. We would like to highlight,
however, that external resources may be capable of performing at least a deep, and
explanatorily ineliminable, role in determining the overall dynamics and tone of the
qualitative component of an emotional episode as it unfolds. Consider a jazz
saxophonist, grieving at the loss of her best friend, whose playing sets up a mutually
constraining cycle of affective responding and expression: the qualities of the music
performed, and of the actions and gestures initiated, feed back into the character of
the musician’s emotional experience, which in turn governs what she plays next.

10 Psychologists have indeed pointed out that writing about one’s feelings has positive therapeutic effects
(e.g., Pennebaker 1997). Why this is the case is not yet clear. One possibility is that writing about one’s
feelings enhances awareness of one’s emotional state, and that this heightened awareness in turn
contributes to increased emotion differentiation or ‘‘granularity’’, which is positively associated with the
capacity to regulate one’s emotions (Barrett et al. 2001).

123

Extending the extended mind

1259

The rate, rhythm, tone, and volume of the music (for instance) affect, and are
affected by, the ebb and ﬂow of the saxophonist’s feelings of sadness,
their
intensity, poignancy, and so forth. A self-stimulating, coupled relationship is
instantiated between musician and instrument, that is quite unlike the unidirectional
causal link that holds between an environmental happening and a feeling response in
ordinary cases. The self-stimulatory character of this loop is arguably most apparent
in the case of the musical improviser, who does not plan what she is going to play
before she plays it. In this case her feelings are shaped, moment by moment, by the
novel musical form she and her instrument are bringing forth (see Cochrane 2008
for a discussion of solo jazz improvisation and the extended-mind view). If we
endorse the intuition that couplings like this one, selected and maintained for the
function they perform, ought to be treated as uniﬁed wholes, then we can view the
activity of the whole loop as responsible for the episode’s overall phenomenal
character. The continuous interaction with the musical instrument enables the
achievement of a speciﬁc feeling, with a particular temporal structure, that would
not be possible without the manipulation of the external artefact. In its strongest
form, this counterfactual can be taken to support an extended-vehicle account of the
qualitative character of emotion, wherein this character supervenes upon activity
that belongs to the entire coupled system. But even if this proposal fails to comply
with one’s favoured metaphysical picture of consciousness, it is possible to identify
an essential explanatory role for the interaction between agent and environment in
such cases. One can concede that, at any moment, the minimal supervenience base
for emotional feelings is, strictly speaking, conﬁned to the neural, while also
adopting the lesson that a complete account of the diachronic character of such a
qualitative episode must make essential reference to the coupled system as a whole.
Lastly, let us consider moods, such as having the blues, being grumpy, being
downcast, feeling up or down. Moods can also be seen as involving autonomic,
expressive, and phenomenal components, and therefore the possibility of extending
them relies, as for occurrent emotions, on the possibility of extending those features.
The major difference here is that moods do not have any clear intentional or
cognitive element; but otherwise, the considerations developed above for the other
components of emotion apply just as well in the case of mood. Again, playing a
musical instrument provides perhaps the clearest example. The coupled system
constituted by the instrumentalist-plus-her-saxophone, where the musician self-
stimulates her activity by looping her performance through the instrument, extends
at least the expressive component of mood (e.g., a nostalgic mood, or a euphoric
one). The saxophone’s ‘‘voice’’ expands the subject’s expressive range beyond
those of her unadorned vocal capacities, and empowers novel communicative
abilities. In addition, the coupling with the instrument inﬂuences the way the world
appears to the musician (the way the world is ‘‘coloured’’, so to speak), including
the kind of actions she is more inclined to undertake in it, and the kind of emotional
episodes she is more likely to go through. For example, while playing the musician
may become more likely to endure occurrent emotions of sadness or happiness. This
increased likelihood is a property of the closely coupled hybrid system musician-
plus-instrument. Another example would be one in which what is extended is the
autonomic aspect of mood, thanks to the integration of an artiﬁcial device within the

123

1260

G. Colombetti, T. Roberts

person’s physiological functionality (as in the earlier example of a device that
regulates heart rate). In this case, again, it is this integrated system that is inclined to
undergo some occurrent emotions rather than others, undertake some actions rather
than others, and to which the world appears ‘‘coloured’’ in some ways rather than
others. Although one may still want to maintain here that the phenomenal aspects of
mood are realized by a process inside the organism (in the brain, perhaps, or in some
part of it), it appears, again, that other core aspects of these occurrent affective
phenomena are apt for inclusion within HEA.

6 Conclusion

We have suggested that the resources of ExM need not be restricted to a narrow
class of cognitive states and processes, nor that external materials, devices, and
artefacts are implicated in this view only when they are put to use in the service of
‘‘intelligent problem solving’’. The domain of the affective, too, can extend beyond
the skin. In drawing out the various categories of phenomena that constitute this
domain, we can see that the arguments deployed to motivate an extended treatment
of belief, memory, planning, and calculation can be applied to cases of mood,
sentiment, temperament, character, and emotion. Affective states may be charac-
terized dispositionally, as more or less enduring tendencies to act and feel in
systematic ways, and if a functionally speciﬁable system composed of both
biological and non-biological resources instantiates some dispositional phenomenon
which we would have no hesitation to call affective if we were to appeal to intuitive,
folk-psychological thinking, then excluding the inorganic elements from an account
of
the phenomenon’s material underpinnings appears to be mere internalist
prejudice. In this way, we can see that stable subject-artefact coalitions may come to
exhibit the dispositional properties that are essential to a temperament such as
cheerfulness; an emotional disposition like resentment; or longer-term sentiments
such as loving concern for another. Character traits, too, where their core features
are dispositionally deﬁned, may be realized by systems whose physical vehicles
extend across biological boundaries, whether through an agent’s self-conscious
organisation of her environment, or just in virtue of the materials (text, clothing,
technology) with which she adorns herself.

Elsewhere, it is the dynamic and self-stimulating nature of a subject-environment
coupling, again in conjunction with the deliverances of a heuristic parity principle,
that grounds its being understood as an instance of extended affectivity. Occurrent
moods and emotional episodes, unfolding over time, can be realized and structured
through acts of musical or written expression, for example, in such a way that it
does not make sense to single out the neural constituents as the privileged locus of
the episode in question. The agent’s capacities for emotional feeling are enhanced in
such an encounter; emotional experiences of hitherto-unattainable forms, depths,
and clarity are made possible by an individual’s world-engaging performances.

For proponents of the ExM approach to cognition, we submit, this should not be
an entirely unexpected result. If, as authors working under this banner have
suggested, we must construe cognitive capacities as densely and inextricably

123

Extending the extended mind

1261

embedded within a wider cultural, technological, and social context in which
thinkers deploy environmental opportunities to shape and expand their powers for
thinking, then it is natural to anticipate that the same may hold true for affective
phenomena. Only if one were to endorse a very strict conceptual separation between
cognition and emotion, would the claim that one but not the other might be realized
within an extended system be a sustainable theoretical position. If we are correct in
our analysis, proponents of ExM ought to accept that—just as in the case of
cognition—an exhaustive description of the nature of human affectivity, philo-
sophical or empirical, cannot be achieved unless attention is directed outward from
the merely neural, and indeed beyond the spatial limits of the living organism.

Acknowledgments Both authors contributed equally to this paper.This work has been funded by the
European Research Council under the European Community’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/
2007–2013), ERC grant agreement nr. 240891 (EMOTER). We are grateful to audiences in Manchester,
Edinburgh, Exeter, Cagliari and Osnabru¨ck for their observations on working versions of this article.
Many thanks also to Andy Clark, John Dupre´, Joel Krueger, Adam Toon and two anonymous referees for
their comments on previous drafts.

Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License
which permits any use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and
the source are credited.

References

Adams, F., & Aizawa, K. (2001). The bounds of cognition. Philosophical Psychology, 14(1), 43–64.
Adams, F., & Aizawa, K. (2010a). Defending the bounds of cognition. In R. Menary (Ed.), The extended

mind (pp. 67–80). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Adams, F., & Aizawa, K. (2010b). The value of cognitivism in thinking about extended cognition.

Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 9(4), 579–603.

Allen-Hermanson, S. (2013). Superdupersizing the mind: Extended cognition and the persistence of

cognitive bloat. Philosophical Studies, 164, 791–806.

Barrett, L. F., Gross, J. J., Christensen, T. C., & Benvenuto, M. (2001). Knowing what you’re feeling and
knowing what to do about it: mapping the relation between emotion differentiation and emotion
regulation. Cognition and Emotion, 15(6), 713–724.

Ben Ze’ev, A. (2000). The subtlety of emotions. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Ben-Ze’ev, A. (2010). The thing called emotion. In P. Goldie (Ed.), The Oxford handbook of philosophy

of emotion (pp. 41–62). New York: Oxford University Press.

Broad, C. D. (1954). Emotion and sentiment. The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 13(2),

203–214.

Chalmers, D. (2008). Foreword to Supersizing the mind (pp. ix–xix). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Clark, A. (2003). Natural-born cyborgs: Minds, technologies, and the future of human intelligence.

Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Clark, A. (2007). Curing cognitive hiccups: A defense of the extended mind. Journal of Philosophy,

104(4), 163–192.

Clark, A. (2008). Supersizing the mind: Embodiment, action, and cognitive extension. Oxford: Oxford

University Press.

Clark, A. (2009). Spreading the joy? Why the machinery of consciousness is (probably) still in the head.

Mind, 118(472), 963–993.

Clark, A. (2010a). Coupling, constitution and the cognitive kind: A reply to Adams and Aizawa. In R.

Menary (Ed.), The extended mind (pp. 81–100). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

123

1262

G. Colombetti, T. Roberts

Clark, A. (2010b). Memento’s revenge: The extended mind, extended. In R. Menary (Ed.), The extended

mind (pp. 43–66). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Clark, A. (2011). Finding the mind. Philosophical Studies, 152(3), 447–461.
Clark, A. (2012). Dreaming the whole cat: Generative models, predictive processing, and the enactivist

conception of perceptual experience. Mind, 121(483), 753–771.

Clark, A., & Chalmers, D. (1998). The extended mind. Analysis, 58(1), 7–19.
Cochrane, T. (2008). Expression and extended cognition. The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 66,

329–340.

Cole, J. (1999). On ‘‘being faceless’’: Selfhood and facial embodiment. Journal of Consciousness Studies,

4(5–6), 467–484.

Colombetti, G., & Thompson, E. (2008). The feeling body: Towards an enactive approach to emotion. In
W. F. Overton, U. Muller, & J. L. Newman (Eds.), Developmental perspectives on embodiment and
consciousness (pp. 45–68). New York: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Davidson, R. J., Scherer, K. R., & Goldsmith, H. H. (Eds.). (2003). Handbook of affective sciences. New

York: Oxford University Press.

Davis, J. I., Senghas, A., Brandt, F., & Ochsner, K. N. (2010). The effects of botox injections on

emotional experience. Emotion, 10(3), 433–440.

de Sousa, R. (1987). The rationality of emotion. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Deonna, J. A., & Teroni, F. (2012). The emotions: A philosophical introduction. Oxon and New York:

Routledge.

Gibbs, R. W. (2006). Embodiment and cognitive science. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Goldie, P. (2000). The emotions: A philosophical exploration. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Goldie, P. (2004). On personality. London and New York: Routledge.
Harman, G. (2000). The non-existence of character traits. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 100,

223–226.

Hurley, S. (2010). The varieties of externalism. In R. Menary (Ed.), The extended mind (pp. 101–153).

Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Kiverstein, J., & Clark, A. (2009). Introduction: Mind embodied, embedded, enacted: One church or

many? Topoi, 28, 1–7.

Krueger, J. (2012). Seeing mind in action. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 11(2), 149–173.
Kunda, Z. (1999). Social cognition: Making sense of people. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Mack, H., Birbaumer, N., Kaps, H. P., Badke, A., & Kaiser, J. (2005). Motion and emotion: Emotion
processing in quadriplegic patients and athletes. Zeitschrift fu¨ r Medizinische Psychologie, 14(4),
159–166.

Menary, R. (2010). Cognitive integration and the extended mind. In R. Menary (Ed.), the extended mind

(pp. 227–243). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Niedenthal, P. M. (2007). Embodying emotion. Science, 316(5827), 1002–1005.
Nussbaum, M. (2001). Upheavals of thought: The intelligence of emotions. Cambridge: Cambridge

University Press.

Pennebaker, J. W. (1997). Writing about emotional experiences as a therapeutic process. Psychological

Science, 8(3), 162–166.

Prinz, J. J. (2004). Gut feelings: A perceptual theory of emotion. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Roberts, T. (2011). Taking responsibility for cognitive extension. Philosophical Psychology, 25(4), 1–11.
Rowlands, M. (2009). Extended cognition and the mark of the cogntive. Philosophical Psychology, 22(1),

1–19.

Rupert, R. D. (2004). Challenges to the hypothesis of extended cognition. Journal of Philosophy, 101(8),

389–428.

Russell, J. A. (2003). Core affect and the psychological construction of emotion. Psychological Review,

110(1), 145–172.

Ryle, G. (1949). The concept of mind. New York: Barnes & Nobles.
Scherer, K. R. (2009). The dynamic architecture of emotion: Evidence for the component process model.

Cognition and Emotion, 23(7), 1307–1351.

Shapiro, L. (2011). Embodied cognition. London & New York: Routledge.
Solomon, R. C. (1993). The passions: Emotions and the meaning of life. Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing.
Solomon, R. C. (2007). True to our feelings: What our emotions are really telling us. Oxford: Oxford

University Press.

Stephan, A., Walter, S., & Wilutzky, W. (2014). Emotions beyond brain and body. Philosophical

Psychology, 27(1), 98–111.

123

Extending the extended mind

1263

Sterelny, K. (2010). Minds: Extended or scaffolded? Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 9,

465–481.

Sutton, J. (2006). Distributed cognition: Domains and dimensions. Pragmatics & Cognition, 14(2),

235–247.

Sutton, J. (2010). Exograms and interdisciplinarity: History, the extended mind, and the civilizing

process. In R. Menary (Ed.), the extended mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Upton, C. L. (2005). A contextual account of character traits. Philosophical Studies, 122(2), 133–151.
Ward, D. (2012). Enjoying the spread: Conscious externalism reconsidered. Mind, 121(483), 731–751.
Weiskopf, D. A. (2008). Patrolling the mind’s boundaries. Erkenntnis, 68, 265–276.
Wheeler, M. (2011). In search of clarity about parity. Philosophical Studies, 152(3), 417–425.
Wheeler, M. (2013). Is cognition embedded or extended? The case of gestures. In Z. Radman (Ed.), The
hand, an organ of the mind: What the manual tells the mental (pp. 269–301). Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.

Wilson, R. A., & Clark, A. (2010). How to situate cognition: Letting nature take its course. In P. Robbins
& M. Aydede (Eds.), The Cambridge handbook of situated cognition (pp. 55–77). New York:
Cambridge University Press.

123

