Methodological nationalism and beyond: 
nation-state building, migration and the  

social sciences 

ANDREAS WIMMER AND NINA GLICK SCHILLER 

Abstract  Methodological  nationalism  is  understood  as  the  assumption  that  the 
nation/state/society is the natural social and political form of the modern world. We 
distinguish three modes of methodological nationalism that have characterized main-
stream social science, and then show how these have influenced research on migra-
tion. We discover parallels between nationalist thinking and the conceptualization of 
migration in postwar social sciences. In a historical tour d’horizon, we show that this 
mainstream concept has developed in close interaction with nation-state building pro-
cesses in the West and the role that immigration and integration policies have played 
within them. The shift towards a study of ‘transnational communities’ – the last phase 
in this process – was more a consequence of an epistemic move away from methodo-
logical nationalism than of the appearance of new objects of observation. The article 
concludes by recommending new concepts for analysis that, on the one hand, are not 
coloured  by  methodological  nationalism  and,  on  the  other  hand,  go  beyond  the 
fluidism of much contemporary social theory. 

 
After the first flurry of confusion about the nature and extent of contemporary pro-
cesses  of  globalization,  social  scientists  moved  beyond  rhetorical  generalities  about 
the decline of the nation-state and began to examine the ways in which nation-states 
are  currently  being  reconfigured  rather  than  demolished.  That  nation-states  and 
nationalism  are  compatible  with  globalization  was  made  all  too  obvious.  We  wit-
nessed the flouring of nationalism and the restructuring of a whole range of new states 
in  Eastern  Europe  along  national  lines  in  the  midst  of  growing  global  interconnec-
tions. The concomitance of these processes provides us with an intellectual opening to 
think about the limitations of our conceptual apparatus. It has become easier to under-
stand that it is because we have come to take for granted a world divided into discrete 
and  autonomous  nation-states  that  we  see  nation-state  building  and  global  inter-
connections  as  contradictory.  The  next  step  is  to  analyse  how  the  concept  of  the 
nation-state  has  and  still  does  influence  past  and  current  thinking  in  the  social 
sciences, including our thinking about transnational migration. 

It is our aim in this article to move in this direction by exploring the intellectual 
potential of two hypotheses. We demonstrate that nation-state building processes have 
fundamentally shaped the ways immigration has been perceived and received. These 
perceptions have in turn influenced, though not completely determined, social science 

Global Networks 2, 4 (2002) 301–334. ISSN 1470–2266 
© 2002 Andreas Wimmer and Nina Glick Schiller 

301 

Andreas Wimmer and Nina Glick Schiller 

theory and methodology and, more specifically, its discourse on immigration and inte-
gration.  We  are  designating  as  methodological  nationalism  the  assumption  that  the 
nation/state/society is the natural social and political form of the modern world.1 

The  article  is  organized  into  four  sections.  The  first  discusses  four  modes  of 
methodological  nationalism  and  shows  their  importance  in  social  science  thinking. 
We  then  demonstrate  how  the  study  of  transnational  migration  was  influenced  and 
limited by the constraints of methodological nationalism. Third, we sketch out a his-
torical  perspective  that  allows  us  to  see  how  nation  building,  the  control  and  res-
triction of immigration and the rise of a social science preoccupation with migration 
are  interlinked  processes  developing  in  a  transnational  field  of  social  forces.  The 
fourth section focuses on the last phase in this process and describes the recent waves 
of research on globalization and transnational migration. 

Only  now  that  nation-states  have  lost  some  of  their  power  to  transnational  cor-
porations and supranational organizations can we see, looking backward, what shape 
modernity has taken during the last 200 years. It was cast in the iron cage of national-
ized  states  that  confined  and  limited  our  own  analytical  capacities.  Reflecting  the 
current conceptual liberation, the influence of methodological nationalism has begun 
to  be  examined  in  history  (Bender  2001;  Rodgers  1998),  geography  (Taylor  1996), 
sociology  (Beck  2000)  and  anthropology  (Glick  Schiller  2000;  Glick  Schiller  et  al. 
1992, 1995; Wimmer 1996a). Perhaps it was more difficult to see the world in three 
dimensions when the sun stood at its zenith. In the evening, shadows grow and allow 
us to perceive the environment in clearer contours. 

What  we  discover  in  this  twilight  is  how  transnational  the  modern  world  has 
always been, even in the high days when the nation-state bounded and bundled most 
social  processes.  Rather  than  a  recent  offspring  of  globalization,  transnationalism 
appears as a constant of modern life, hidden from a view that was captured by metho-
dological  nationalism.  Thus,  the  value  of  studying  transnational  communities  and 
migration  is  not  to  discover  ‘something  new’  –  though  this  represents  a  highly 
rewarding strategy of research in our contemporary intellectual environment – but to 
have contributed to this shift of perspective away from methodological nationalism. A 
thorough  reflection  on  the  history  of  transnational  social  relations  and  their  recent 
‘discovery’ may thus be an appropriate starting point for rethinking the history of the 
social sciences in general. It may help us develop the perspective of an ‘observer of 
second  order’,  as  Niklas  Luhmann  once  said,  from  which  we  can  observe  both  the 
social scientists observing the social world as well as the effects that this has on this 
world and how, at the same time, the forces of the social world shape the outlook of 
the social scientists. 

Three modes of methodological nationalism 

Our  argument focuses  on  what  we  perceive  as  the  major, dominant  trends  in  social 
science thinking of the past century. We do not discuss coterminous currents that con-
tradicted  the  hegemonic  discourse.  Especially  in  times  of  intensified  global  inter-
connections, theories reflecting these developments appeared and provided tools for 
analysis  not  coloured  by  methodological  nationalism.  The  most  obvious  of  these 
currents was political economy in the Marxian tradition, always devoting attention to 
capitalism as a global system rather than to its specific national manifestations, and 

302 

Methodological nationalism and beyond 

especially the studies of imperialism by Rosa Luxemburg and others before the First 
World  War,  when  transnational  movements  of  commodities,  capital  and  labour 
reached a first peak. Wallerstein’s world system theory belongs to a second wave of 
theorizing developing in the 1970s, when transnational connections were again inten-
sifying  and  multiplying.  A  second  and  equally  important  line  of  development  not 
included in our discussion is methodological individualism in its various forms where 
the  analysis  does  not  rely  on  explicit  reference  to  larger  social  entities  (such  as  the 
school  of  marginal  utility  and  rational  choice  in  economics  and  political  science  or 
interactionism in sociology). 

These views  remained  heterodox, however,  and did  not  shape  the  social  science 
programme in the same way as the currents discussed in this article did. The epistemic 
structures and programmes of mainstream social sciences have been closely attached 
to, and shaped by, the experience of modern nation-state formation. The global forces 
of transnational capitalism and imperialism, that reached their apogee precisely in the 
period when social sciences formed as independent disciplines, left only few traces in 
the  basic  paradigmatic  assumptions  of  these  disciplines  and  were  scarcely  reflected 
upon systematically. 

Our  starting  point  is  the  classical  social  theory  that  has  marked  the  sociological 
tradition especially. As a host of scholars have repeatedly argued, the classic theory of 
modernity has a blind spot when it comes to understanding the rise of nation-states as 
well  as  of  nationalism  and  ethnicity  (Esser  1988;  Guiberneau  1997;  Imhof  1997; 
A. D.  Smith  1983;  Thompson  and  Fevre  2001).  In  the  eyes  of  Marx,  Durkheim, 
Weber and Parsons, the growing differentiation, rationalization and modernization of 
society  gradually  reduced  the  importance  of  ethnic  and  national  sentiments.  Most 
classic  grand  theory  was  constructed  as  a  series  of  socio-structural  types  (from 
feudalism  through  capitalism  to  communism,  from  Gemeinschaft  to  Gesellschaft, 
organic  to  mechanic  solidarity,  traditional  to  modern  society,  and  so  forth). 
Nationalism was attributed to earlier stages in the continuum of social evolution. As a 
traditional,  communitarian,  ascriptive,  bourgeois  or  pre-rational  phenomenon, 
nationalism  was  thought  to  be  a  transitory  stage  on  the  way  to  the  modern, 
rationalized and individualized class society based on achievement. Nationalism and 
patriotism  were  soon  to  be  wiped  out  by  proletarian  internationalism  (Marx  and 
Engels)  or  by  a  post-patriotic  ‘idéal  humaine’  (Durkheim)  (see  A. D.  Smith  1983; 
Guiberneau 1997; on Max Weber’s rather more differentiated later view A. D. Smith 
1983: 31–3). 

These  schemes  were  shielded  from  the  overwhelming  and  obvious  fact  that 
nationalist politics and conflicts have shaped the history of the nineteenth and twen-
tieth  centuries.  Grand  theory  was  immunized  thanks  to  a  hierarchical  division  of 
labour  between  academic  disciplines.  The  study  of  the  rise  of  nationalism  and  the 
nation-state, of ethno-national wars of nineteenth- and early twentieth-century Europe 
was delegated to history – with few exceptions such as a short essay Durkheim wrote 
immediately after the First Word War. Communal identities and nation-building pro-
cesses outside Europe and the United States were made the domains of anthropology 
and  later  of  political  science.  The  much-deplored  failure  of  social  theory  until  the 
1980s to address the significance and sources of nationalism in the modern world can 
in part be attributed to this disciplinary division of labour that was established at the 
beginning of twentieth century (Wimmer 1999).  

303 

Andreas Wimmer and Nina Glick Schiller 

It is particularly marked in the social sciences of France (Taguieff 1991: 46) and 
Germany, where the sociologist Otto Hondrich (1992) felt moved to deliver a public 
nostra  culpa  for  having  neglected  nationalism  as  an  object  of  social  theory  (see 
Radtke 1996). In the Anglo-Saxon world, the early works on nationalism by Deutsch, 
Kedouri,  Gellner  and  Smith  and  others  developed,  from  the  1980s  onwards,  into  a 
well-established research tradition, especially in the field of historical sociology (cf. 
Thompson and Fevre 2001), without, however, having much influence on mainstream 
social theory.  

More  fundamentally,  however,  this  silence  about  the  continuing  importance  of 
national  principles  stemmed  from  a  methodological  problem,  as  Anthony  Smith 
suggested two decades ago (A. D. Smith 1983: 26). That nationalist forms of inclu-
sion and exclusion bind our societies together served as an invisible background even 
to the most sophisticated theorizing about the modern condition. The social sciences 
were  captured  by  the  apparent  naturalness  and  givenness  of  a  world  divided  into 
societies along the lines of nation-states (Berlin 1998). What Billig (1995) has shown 
for everyday discourse and practice holds true for grand theory’s encounters with the 
social  world  as  well:  because  they  were  structured  according  to  nation-state  prin-
ciples, these became so routinely assumed and ‘banal’, that they vanished from sight 
altogether. 

Methodological nationalism has thus inhibited a true understanding of the nature 
and limits of the modern project. It has produced a systematic blindness towards the 
paradox that modernization has led to the creation of national communities amidst a 
modern  society  supposedly  dominated  by  the  principles  of  achievement.  Whether 
Parsons and Merton or Bourdieu, Habermas and Luhmann, none of these authors dis-
cusses  in  any  systematic  fashion  the  national  framing  of  states  and  societies  in  the 
modern age. Interestingly enough, such nation-blind theories of modernity were for-
mulated in an environment of rapidly nationalizing societies and states, sometimes, as 
was the case with Max Weber and Emile Durkheim, on the eve or in the aftermath of 
nationalist wars.  

Ignoring the national framing of modernity, however, is just one form of metho-
dological  nationalism  A  second  variant,  typical  of  more  empirically  oriented  social 
science  practices,  is  taking  national  discourses,  agendas,  loyalties  and  histories  for 
granted, without problematizing them or making them an object of an analysis in its 
own  right.  Instead,  nationally  bounded  societies  are  taken  to  be  the  naturally  given 
entities  to  study.  Here  are  some  illustrative  examples  of  the  naturalization  of  the 
nation-state from different disciplinary traditions. 

International  relations  assume  that  nation-states  are  the  adequate  entities  for 
studying the international world. While the anarchical nature of this interstate system 
and  the  changing  dynamics  of  hegemony  and  polycentrism  have  been  discussed  at 
length, almost no research was done on why this international system has become an 
international  one  (one  exception  is  Mayall  1990).  Similarly,  scholarship  after  the 
Second World War on the newly independent states thought of nation building as a 
necessary,  although  somewhat  messy,  aspect  of  the  decolonization  process  (see  for 
example Wallerstein 1961). The task of building a viable national culture was seen as 
an  evident  corollary  to  the  other  tasks  of  modernization,  projecting  as  a  model  a 
vision  of  Western  nation-state  building.  Nation  building  and  state  formation  made 
natural bedfellows in the works of modernization theorists such as Lerner or Rostow, 

304 

Methodological nationalism and beyond 

since  the  nation-state  model  represented  the  only  thinkable  way  of  organizing 
politics. 

Economics studied the economy of nationally bounded entities or their relations to 
each  other  through  trade,  capital  flows  and  the  like.  Since  the  publication  of  Adam 
Smith’s  An  inquiry  into  the  nature  and  causes  of  the  wealth  of  nations  (A.  Smith 
1983/1789)  and,  on  the  continent,  of  Friedrich  List’s  masterpiece,  Das  nationale 
System  der  politischen  Ökonomie  (List  1974/1856),  the  distinction  between  internal 
economy and external relations has become a guiding principle for the evolution of 
the discipline. It is significant that List called the economic processes bounded by a 
national state a Volkswirtschaft, literally the economy of the people. Smith made clear 
in the introduction to his three-volume magnum opus, that he was about to explain the 
employment  of  labour  and  capital  in  different,  more  or  less  civilized  nations.  John 
Maynard  Keynes  and  other  major  political  economists  of  the  twentieth  century 
remained  faithful  to  this  perspective  and  took  the  distinction  between  national 
domestic economy and international external economy for granted. 

Methodological nationalism even characterized later attempts at overcoming these 
limitations  of  perspective  and  to  describe  larger,  cross-national  economic  systems. 
While dependency theory was supposed to overcome the one-nation focus of Ameri-
can modernization theory, it replaced it with a model of exploitation and dominance 
between nation-states, thus implicitly reproducing the national state as a basic unit of 
analysis (cf. Luton 1976). 

Modern history was largely written, up to the 1990s and, with notable exceptions 
such  as Immanuel Wallerstein’s (1974) or Eric  Wolf’s (1982) work,  as a  history  of 
particular nation-states or of their relations to each other – often no longer with the 
obviously nationalist aim of legitimizing a particular nation-building project, as had 
been the case up to the Second Word War, but still deeply influenced by the methodo-
logical assumption that a particular nation would provide the constant unit of obser-
vation  through  all  historical  transformations,  the  ‘thing’  whose  change  history  was 
supposed  to  describe.  This  continues  to  be  the  dominant  perspective  in  the  newly 
revived  historiography,  art  history  and  archaeology  of  many  Eastern  European 
academics, including those of Greece (Karakasidou 1994; Niculescu forthcoming). 

In  anthropology,  methodological  nationalism  had  various  and  insidious  effects, 
especially once the discipline abandoned diffusionism and turned towards functional-
ism  as  its  leading  paradigm.  Anthropologists  often  assumed  that  the  cultures  to  be 
studied  were  unitary  and  organically  related  to,  and  fixed  within,  territories,  thus 
reproducing  the  image  of  the  social  world  divided  into  bounded,  culturally  specific 
units  typical  of  nationalist  thinking  (Basch  et  al.  1994;  Wimmer  1996a).  Moreover, 
early anthropologists defined their field of enquiry by negatively extrapolating from 
the  nation-state  building  experiences  of  the  West:  tribes  without  modern  states  and 
ethnic  groups  before  nations  became  their  privileged  objects,  systematically  ‘over-
looking’  the  influence  of  the  colonial  regime  or  of  nation-building  agendas  on  the 
subject peoples they studied. 

When anthropologists worked in complex societies, including industrialized West-
ern  countries, methodological  nationalism  again  shaped  what  they  saw. The  anthro-
pology  of  ethnic  groups  within  modernizing  or  industrial  nation-states  tended  to 
describe them as culturally different from the ‘majority’ population because of their 
different  historical  origin,  including  their history  of  migration,  rather  than  see  these 

305 

Andreas Wimmer and Nina Glick Schiller 

differences as a consequence of the politicization of ethnicity in the context of nation-
state building itself. Yet it was a central part of the nation-state project to define all 
those  populations  not  thought  to  represent  the  ‘national  culture’  as  racially  and 
culturally different, producing an alterity that contributed to efforts to build unity and 
identity  (Glick  Schiller  1999a,  1999b,  1999c;  Williams  1989;  Wimmer  2002). 
Anthropology thus reproduced and naturalized the view from the centre of the emerg-
ing national state.  

Thus,  we  can  find  naturalization  of  the  nation-state  in  different  disciplines  and 
many  intellectual  variations.  Naturalization  owes  its  force  to  the  compartmental-
ization of the social science project into different ‘national’ academic fields, a process 
strongly influenced not only by nationalist thinking itself, but also by the institutions 
of the nation-state organizing and channelling social science thinking in universities, 
research institutions and government think-tanks. It is telling that funding for cross-
country comparative research is extremely difficult to mobilize even nowadays, as a 
recent report has shown for the field of migration studies (Henke 2001). The major 
research programmes of funding bodies are directed to contribute towards the solution 
of  national  problems  in  economy,  politics  and  the  social  services.  In  most  states, 
universities  are  linked  to  national  ministries  of  education  that  favour  research  and 
teaching on issues of ‘national relevance’. Academies are – with exceptions such as in 
Germany – usually ‘national ones’ and sometimes play important roles, most promin-
ently in France, in maintaining the cultural treasures of the nation. Add to this the fact 
that almost all statistics and other systematic information are produced by government 
departments of nation-states and thus take the national population, economy, polity as 
their  given  entity  of  observation  (Favell  forthcoming),  and  we  can  understand  why 
naturalizing the nation-state has become the most prominent form of methodological 
nationalism in the postwar social sciences. 

Another variant of naturalizing the nation-state consists in downplaying national-
ism’s role in modern state building by analytically separating the rise of nationalism 
from that of the modern state and of democracy. In this way, the national framing of 
the modern state building experience and of democratization become almost invisible. 
State and nation become two separate objects of enquiry. Most scholars of national-
ism  discussed  the  nation  as  a  domain  of  identity.  The  nation  is  understood  to  be  a 
people  who  share  common  origins  and  history  as  indicated  by  their  shared  culture, 
language and identity (Calhoun 1997; McCrone 1998; A. D. Smith 1998). In contrast, 
the ‘state’ is generally understood to be a sovereign system of government within a 
particular territory. In political science, this has seen the emergence of a mainstream 
theory  that  sees  the  state  as  a  neutral  playing ground  for different  interest  groups  – 
thus excluding from the picture the fact that the modern state itself has entered into a 
symbiotic relationship with the nationalist political project. This even holds true for 
sophisticated accounts of state modernization such as Giddens’s (1995) Nation-state 
and violence.  

Where  this  segregation  was overcome  and the  relations between nation building 
and  modernizing  states  were  systematically  examined,  many  authors  fell  into  other 
modes  of  naturalizing  the  nation-state.  Thus,  for  Ernest  Gellner,  the  rise  of  the 
national state is a necessary corollary to the industrialization of society, providing for 
the  culturally  homogenous  and  communicatively  integrated  space  that  a  dynamized 
economy ‘needs’ (Gellner 1983). For Anthony Smith (1995) only nations and national 

306 

Methodological nationalism and beyond 

states are apt to provide the feelings of security, identity and cultural comfort that we 
need in a rapidly changing and globalizing world. It is only during the last decade that 
these  blinkers of methodological  nationalism  have been overcome by going  beyond 
the  dichotomy  between state  and nation  without  falling  into  the  trap of  naturalizing 
the nation-state (Breuilly 1993; Mann 1993; Wimmer 1996b and 2002). 

Methodological  nationalism  also  segregates  democracy  from  nationalism.  The 
historic and systematic logic tying both together has become eradicated from our his-
torical  memories.  Most  current  theories  and  histories  of  democracy,  especially  the 
treatises of political philosophers, neglect this link. They look at the inner dynamics 
of  the  evolving  democratic  polities  and  lose  sight  of  the  nationalist  principles  that 
historically  defined  its  boundaries  –  with  few  exceptions  such  as  Snyder’s  (2000) 
recent From voting to violence or an essay by the Georgian philosopher Ghia Nodia 
(1992). 

As an effect of this double segregation, nationalism appears as a force foreign to 
the history of Western state building. Instead, it is projected to others, to bloodthirsty 
Balkan  leaders  or  African  tribesmen  turned  nationalists. Western  state  building was 
reimagined  as  a  non-national,  civil,  republican  and  liberal  experience,  especially  in 
the writings of political philosophers such as Rawls (Sen 1999). Segregation and dis-
location are thus closely related. The ethno-nationalist wars and violence suppressed 
from the history of one’s own state reappear in the contemporary scenery of far-away 
places. However, what we nowadays call ethnic cleansing or ethnocide, and observe 
with  disgust  in  the  ‘ever  troublesome  Balkans’  or  in  ‘tribalistic  Africa’,  have  been 
constants  of  the  European  history  of  nation  building  and  state  formation,  from  the 
expulsion of gypsies under Henry VIII or of Muslims and Jews under Ferdinand and 
Isabella  to  Ptolemy’s  night  in  France  or  the  ‘people’s  exchange’  (as  it  was  called 
euphemistically) after the Treaty of Lausanne between Turkey and Greece. Many of 
these histories have disappeared from popular consciousness – and maybe have to be 
forgotten,  if  nation  building  is  to  be  successful,  as  Ernest  Renan  (1947/1882)  sug-
gested over a hundred years ago. 

Let  us  now  address  a  third  and  last  variant  of  methodological  nationalism:  the 
territorialization of social science imaginary and the reduction of the analytical focus 
to the boundaries of the nation-state. The social sciences have become obsessed with 
describing processes within nation-state boundaries as contrasted with those outside, 
and  have  correspondingly  lost  sight  of  the  connections  between  such  nationally 
defined territories. To cast this in an image borrowed from Giddens (1995), the web 
of  social  life  was  spun  within  the  container  of  the  national  society,  and  everything 
extending  over  its  borders  was  cut  off  analytically  –  similar  to  the  way  a  pancake 
takes on a discrete shape, separated from the batter, once it is laid on a hot griddle, to 
switch to a kitchen metaphor. The container society encompasses a culture, a polity, 
an  economy  and  a  bounded  social  group  (Taylor  1996).  Major  theoretical  debates 
evolved  around  the  relative  weight  of  each  of  these  dimensions  in  structuring  the 
entire social fabric – Parsonians voting for culture while Marxists favouring economy 
–  and  whether  society  determined  individual  actions  or  the  other  way  round,  with 
social structures emerging from individual agency. Almost no thought was given to 
why  the  boundaries  of  the  container  society  are  drawn  as  they  are  and  what 
consequences  flow  from  this  methodological  limitation  of  the  analytical  horizon  – 
thus removing trans-border connections and processes from the picture.  

307 

Andreas Wimmer and Nina Glick Schiller 

It is interesting that this also holds true for social scientific analysis of the nation-
state building process itself. The concepts of the modern state and of a national popu-
lation have historically developed within trans-border rather than territorially limited 
national spaces (Glick Schiller and Fouron 2001a). In many cases, these trans-border 
spaces were delimited by the practice and ideology of colonial and imperial domin-
ation  and  ideas  of  popular  sovereignty  and  republican  independence  were  formed 
within trans-border networks of literate circles. We have to think outside the box of 
dominant  national  discourses  to  see  such  trans-border  foundations  of  particular 
nation-state  building  projects,  to  see  the  dynamics  between  English  domination  of 
Ireland  and  English  national  identity  or  the  linkage  between  French  ideas  about 
citizenship  and  concepts  of  civilization  and  the  French  colonial  project  (Lebovics 
1992).  Accepting  the  prevailing  paradigm  that  divides  a  state’s  affairs  into  internal 
national matters and international affairs that have to do with state-to-state relations, 
the  history  of  such  trans-border  and  transnational  nation-state  building  becomes 
invisible.  The  writing  of  national  histories  compounds  this  invisibility  by  confining 
the narrative within state borders.  

The  three  variants  of  methodological  nationalism  that  we  have  discerned  in  our 
tour  d’horizon  across  disciplines  and  times  are  thus  ignorance,  naturalization  and 
territorial  limitation.  The  three  modes  intersect  and  mutually  reinforce  each  other, 
forming  a  coherent  epistemic  structure,  a  self-reinforcing  way  of  looking  at  and 
describing the social world. The three variants are more or less prominent in different 
fields of enquiry. Ignorance is the dominant modus of methodological nationalism in 
grand theory; naturalization of ‘normal’ empirical science; territorial limitation of the 
study of nationalism and state building. 

What does all this have to do with migration studies and the growth of studies of 
transnational  migration?  The  next  section  shows  how  methodological  nationalism 
influenced  the  postwar  definition  of  international  migration  and  immigrant  inte-
gration.  In  section  three  we  will  set  this  static  picture  in  motion  and  see  how 
scholarship after the Second Word War actually developed and how it related to the 
process of nation-state building. 

Defining the object of migration studies 

In  order  to  understand  how  methodological  nationalism  has  influenced  the  study  of 
migration, we will first describe in more detail the relation between nationalist think-
ing and the container model of society that came to dominate postwar social sciences. 
From  this,  it  will  be  easy  to  see  why  migration  has  become  an  important  object  of 
enquiry for the social sciences. 

Modern  nationalism  fuses  four  different  notions  of  peoplehood  that  had 
developed  separately  in  early  modern  Europe.  These  are:  the  people  as  a  sovereign 
entity,  which  exercises  political  power  by  means  of  some  sort  of  democratic 
procedure;  the  people  as  citizens  of  a  state  holding  equal  rights  before  the  law;  the 
people  as  a  group  of  obligatory  solidarity,  an  extended  family  knit  together  by 
obligations  of  mutual  support;  and  the  people  as  an  ethnic  community  undifferen-
tiated by distinctions of honour and prestige, but united through common destiny and 
shared culture. These four notions of peoplehood are fused into one single people writ 
large. Democracy, citizenship, social security and national self-determination are the 

308 

Methodological nationalism and beyond 

vertexes  of  the  world  order  of  nation-states  as  it  matured  after  the  Second  World 
War. 

Once  this  order  is  established,  the  nationalist  imaginary can  be  projected  on  the 
surface of the earth and become territorially inscribed. For the isomorphisms between 
citizenry,  sovereign,  solidarity  group  and  nation  entail  that  all  corresponding 
territorial borders become coincident. This border congruence implies a much stricter 
definition  of  what  pertains  to  the  realm,  and  what  falls  outside  it.  The  shift  to 
territorially fixed boundaries, to be sure, concurs with the establishment of centralized 
kingdoms,  thus  preceding  the  nationalization  of  modern  states  (Guernée  1986). 
However,  the  establishment  of  frontier  posts,  the  physical  demarcation  of  frontiers 
and the sacralization of the national territory are all linked to the emergence of nation-
states (Nordman 1997) because the national territory at the same time traces the fron-
tiers of the sovereign population, delineates the homeland of the citizenry, defines the 
borderline between social order and disorder and distinguishes between the national 
home  and  the  wilderness  of  the  foreign.  Nationalists  thus  make  a  fetish  of  national 
territory, a sanctuary that deserves to be defended with the blood of the people. 

It  is  easy  to  see  the  parallels  with  the  container  model  of  society  that  had 
developed in the social sciences and became dominant after the Second World War. 
The  translation  is  almost  one  to  one:  the  citizenry  is  mirrored  in  the  concept  of  a 
national legal system, the sovereign in the political system, the nation in the cultural 
system  and  the  solidary  group  in  the  social  system,  all  boundaries  being  congruent 
and together defining the skin holding together the body of society. Borrowing from 
the image of the stability of the body, the idea of functional integration, so prominent 
in standard social science thinking up to the 1980s, paralleled the nationalist fusion of 
the four notions of peoplehood into one national corpus. What the People is for the 
nationalist is what the Society is for postwar social scientists. Both share a set of basic 
assumptions about how the social world is constituted. 

It should by now become clear why, for both nation-builders as for postwar social 
scientists,  migrants  constitute  an  object  of  special  attention  and  for  enquiry.  In 
nationalist doctrine as well according to the container model of society, immigrants 
must appear as antinomies to an orderly working of state and society, even in societies 
where  past  immigration  constitutes  the  foundation  myth  of  the  nation.  We  see  four 
reasons  why  migrants  become  a  special  object  of  policy-making  as  well  as  of  a 
specializing  body  of  research.  First,  they  destroy  the  isomorphism  between  people, 
sovereign and citizenry. Immigrants are perceived as foreigners to the community of 
shared  loyalty  towards  the  state  and  shared  rights  guaranteed  by  that  state.  Trans-
national  migrants  presumably  remain  loyal  to  another  state  whose  citizens  they  are 
and to whose sovereign they belong, as long as they are not absorbed into the national 
body  through  assimilation  and  naturalization.  In  recent  years,  and  with  a  renewed 
intensity that is likely to increase after 11 September 2001 social science research has 
been  interested  in  the  political  activity  and  loyalty  of  immigrants,  a  theme  that 
parallels  the  nation-state’s  interest  in  the  supervision,  limitation  and  control  of  the 
immigrant population. 

Second,  immigrants  destroy  the  isomorphism  between  people  and  nation.  They 
appear as spots on the pure colours of the national fabric, reminding nationalist state 
builders and social scientists alike of the ethnic minorities that have been ‘absorbed’ 
into  the  national  body  through  a  politics  of  forced  assimilation  and  benevolent 

309 

Andreas Wimmer and Nina Glick Schiller 

integration. Immigrants  thus represented  a renewed  challenge  to  the  nation-building 
project and point to the fragility of its achievements – especially in places where the 
nation had never been imagined as plural and itself consisted of former immigrants. 

Even in immigrant societies, the major preoccupation of postwar migration studies 
was  to  measure  and  scrutinize  the  cultural  differences  between  immigrants  and 
nationals and to describe pathways of assimilation into the national group, in short, to 
deliver a description of the mechanics of a successful nation making process (Favell 
forthcoming). The taken-for-granted assumptions of methodological nationalism pre-
clude problematizing or researching whether immigrants  de facto reduce rather than 
increase cultural heterogeneity because the reference group of the national community 
may  be  heterogeneous  in  class  and  culture  and  thus  contain  greater  diversity  com-
pared with a migrant population (Waldinger 2000). 

The  different  postwar  theories  of  immigrant  integration  –  from  the  Chicago 
School’s assimilationism to multiculturalism to racialization and ethnicization theory 
to  neo-assimilationism  –  all  presuppose  that  the  relevant  entities  to  be  related  are  a 
nation/state/society (not necessarily a homogenous one) on the one hand, and immi-
grants coming from outside this nation/state/society on the other. This conception of 
the basic problem owes its strength not only to functionalist tradition – defining inte-
gration as a major problem to be researched – but also to methodological nationalism: 
integration  is  always  thought  of  as  being  established,  less  problematical,  and  less 
fragile among those belonging to the national people. 

Third, immigrants destroy the isomorphism between people and solidarity group. 
They are not meant to be part of the system of social security that the national com-
munity  developed  in  New  Deals  and  Beveridge  Plans,  because  they  come  ‘from 
outside’ into the national space of solidarity. But they cannot be completely excluded 
from the emerging welfare systems because these are historically and institutionally 
tied to the work process for which immigrants were recruited (Bommes and Halfmann 
1994).  Due  to  this  tension,  immigrants’  integration  into  the  welfare  systems  had  a 
touch of illegitimacy and abuse. A whole branch of postwar immigration studies has, 
especially  in  Europe,  studied  the  implications  of  immigration  for  national  welfare 
systems,  analysed  immigrant  unemployment,  traced  the  dynamics  of  slum  develop-
ment and ghettoization, and tried to understand the culture of poverty in which immi-
grants were thought of being trapped. Not being a member of the national family, the 
immigrant  was  seen  as  prone  to  become  a  marginal  man  exposed  to  the  risks  of 
loneliness  and  starvation.  In  quantitative  studies,  following  the  logic  of  methodo-
logical nationalism, immigrants have usually been compared with ‘national means’ of 
income,  with  children  per  family,  with  percentages  of  unemployment  and  welfare 
dependence,  taking  for  granted  that  this  would  be  the  adequate  unit  of  comparison 
(see Vertovec’s (1999) review of studies on ‘social cohesion’). They are rarely com-
pared with sectors of a national population that they resemble in terms of income or 
education.  However,  when  such  comparisons  are  made,  immigrants  often  do  better 
than  the  non-immigrant  population  (Rumbaut  and  Cornelius  1995  for  the  USA  and 
Bolzman et al. 2000 for Switzerland). 

Fourth, in the eyes of nation-state builders and social scientists alike, every move 
across national frontiers becomes an exception to the rule of sedentariness within the 
boundaries  of  the  nation-state.  The  exceptionality  of  cross-border  settlement  is, 
evidently enough, linked to the territorialization of the nationalist imaginary and the 

310 

Methodological nationalism and beyond 

parallel emergence of the container model of society discussed above. A major branch 
of postwar migration studies and a whole series of specialized research institutes have 
developed  analysing  such  cross-border  movements,  the  push–pull  mechanisms 
driving them, the networks of chain migration sustaining them, the role of social and 
cultural capital in limiting and directing them. 

The focus of this body of literature is only on the migration of non-citizens, not 
the  ‘return’  migration  of  co-nationals  such  as  the  Aussiedler  (usually  translated  as 
ethnic Germans) in Germany. Until 1989, the  Aussiedler were studied by folklorists 
and historians  –  not  by  migration  specialists  who  focused  exclusively on  the  immi-
gration of Ausländer (foreigners). And only cross-national migration is the object of 
migration  studies.  ‘Internal’  migration  of  citizens  from  one  city  to  another,  from 
deindustrializing areas to a booming metropolis, is not considered a problem deserv-
ing special attention and either goes completely unnoticed or is seen as a part of the 
study of urbanization and thus dealt with in academic fields separated from migration 
studies.  Cross-border  migration,  by  contrast,  appears  as  an  anomaly,  a  problematic 
exception to the rule of people staying where they ‘belong’, that is, to ‘their’ nation-
state.  Postwar  migration  studies  thus  naturalized  this  belonging,  moving  it  into  the 
background  of  social  science  reasoning  and  transforming  it  into  one  of  its  incon-
testable axioms. 

These  four  points  make  it  clear  how  much  migration  studies  are  a  child  of  the 
postwar era, when nation-states had reached their zenith of power to direct, limit and 
influence both  migratory movements  and social  science  thinking  about these  move-
ments.  Describing  immigrants  as  potential  security  risks,  as  culturally  others,  as 
socially marginal and as an exception to the rule of territorial confinement, postwar 
social  sciences  mirrored  and,  as  we  will  see  in  the  next  section,  at  the  same  time 
legitimized  the  project  of  nation-state  building  aimed  at  establishing  a  sovereign 
citizenry, a homogenous nation, a community of solidarity and a territorially-bounded 
state. 

Phases of nation building and discourses on immigration 

So  far  our  argument  has  largely  been  conceptual  and  abstract,  proceeding  through 
analogies between the ideologies of nation-state building and the conceptual schemes 
of the social sciences (the first section) and of postwar migration studies (the second 
section).  In  the  following  section,  we  should  like  to  situate  this  relationship 
historically.  We  will  sketch  a  broad  picture  of  how  different  phases  of  nation-state 
formation have influenced both the state’s attitude towards migration and the way that 
these have been conceptualized by the social sciences. We will see that the postwar 
situation,  with  nationalist  closure  paralleling  container  reasoning  in  the  social 
sciences, is by no means the only form that this relationship took. 

The scenario for telling this story is a world expanding and contracting in phases 
of globalization and nationalization, but still remaining, as a perspective not limited 
by  methodological  nationalism  allows  us  to  see,  an  interconnected  realm  of  cross-
border relationships. It is hoped that our story contributes towards a new, integrated 
view on how nation-state building, migration and the social science project are related 
to one other. 

311 

Andreas Wimmer and Nina Glick Schiller 

Phase I: The prewar era 

We identify four periods, painting the changes that are of interest in broad strokes so 
as to gain an overview of the landscape and using dates as only approximate markers 
of  global  historical  transformations:  1870–1918,  1919–45,  1946–89,  1990–present, 
the last phase being discussed in a section of its own. 

Our  historical  portrait  begins  in  a  period  that  stems  from  the  1870s  to  the  First 
World War. The belle époque was a time of dramatic growth with high demands for 
labour,  punctuated  by  economic  crashes  as  well  as  important  periods  of  stagnation 
and decline. These fluctuations marked the industrial development of both Europe and 
the  United  States,  with  ramifications  and  connections  in  Mexico,  Brazil,  Argentina, 
China,  Japan,  Russia  and  Turkey.  It  was  in  this  period  that  industrial  capitalists 
searching for higher rates and new sources of profits, turned to new forms of global 
financing  and  investment.  Corporations  emerged  as  important  public  actors  with 
rights protected by the states in which they were based. They formed monopolies and 
cartels  and  launched  what  we  now  are  able  to  recognize  as  an  intensive  period  of 
globalization (Held et al. 1999; Mittleman 1996a, 1996b; Wimmer 2001a). 

The period was marked by two trends that were related to each other in complex 
ways  that  are  rarely  explored.  First  of  all,  this  was  a  time  of  intense  nation-state 
building.  Railroads  helped  develop  national  markets  for  agricultural  and  manufac-
tured goods. National postal services contributed to the development of the national 
economy.  Legal  equality  of  citizens  abolished  the  last  corporate  and  feudal  restric-
tions  on  economic  activity.  Public  education  and  public  health  contributed  to  the 
public’s embodied experiences of the nation-state as young people found themselves 
within  the  confines  of  classrooms  that  taught  national  rituals  and  members  of  the 
public found their private consumption and bodily habits topics of public education 
and  discussion.  In  many  states,  voting  rights  were  extended  to  this  newly  educated 
mass of adult males. In short, a citizenry, a sovereign and a nation were created, thus 
realizing to a large extent the nationalist dream outlined in the previous section. 

While industries developed within the confines of these nationalizing states, pro-
tected  by  tariffs  from  competing  capitalist  interests,  commercial  competition  tied  to 
concepts  of  national  interest  launched  a  new  period  of  colonialism.  This  was  the 
epoch in which European states ‘scrambled’ for Africa, as well as a time of height-
ened  competition  between  European  states  and  the  United  States  for  the  control  of 
raw  materials  produced  in  the  Caribbean,  Latin  America  and  Asia.  It  was  also  a 
period  in  which,  as  part  of  this  effort  to  monopolize  sources  of  raw  materials  and 
obtain labour for their production, imperialism was practised and theorized. 

The  result  of  these  various  and  interactive  developments,  in  a  period  that  was 
simultaneously  one  of  nation-state  building  and  intensive  globalization,  was  wide-
spread  labour  migration  that  spanned  the  globe  with  little  or  no  restriction  in  most 
states. Free workers selling their labour power on a newly established world market 
for  labour  made  up  a  section  of  this  migration.  Another  section  was  composed  of 
indentured labourers replacing slaves on the plantations or constructing railroads and 
other  major  infrastructure  projects  all  around  the  world,  especially  in  the  colonies 
(Potts 1990). Poles and Italians migrated to northern France; Switzerland welcomed 
diverse populations; England saw influxes from the continent; and German industrial 
development  fuelled  migrations  from  the  east  and  south.  Brazil  welcomed  migrants 

312 

Methodological nationalism and beyond 

from  Europe,  the  Middle  East  and  Japan.  Indian  and  Chinese  labourers  went  to  the 
Caribbean and southern and eastern Africa. Mexicans, Turks, Syrians and populations 
from southern and Eastern Europe migrated to the United States (Wyman 1993). The 
United States, currently portrayed as the land of immigrants unlike European states, 
was actually the first, and for a time the only, state to erect any significant barriers 
when  it  passed  the  Chinese  exclusion  act  in  1882  for  a  ten-year  period  (it  was 
renewed in 1892). For a certain period Germany, which contained within its borders 
land that had been part of an earlier Polish state, tightly controlled and supervised the 
movement  of  Polish  speakers  (but  not  of  Italians  and  other  immigrants),  including 
those  holding  German  passports.  German  officials  doubted  the  loyalty  of  Polish 
speakers to the German national state and saw Polish nationalism as a major risk to 
the integrity of the newly unified German state. 

In general, however, this was a period when not even passports and entry docu-
ments were required. Most European countries abolished the passport and visa system 
they had installed in the first half of the nineteenth century, after France took the lead 
in eliminating such barriers to the free movement of labour in 1861. By 1914 all such 
documents  had  been  virtually  eliminated  in  Europe  (Torpey  2000).  Fearing  labour 
shortages,  some  states  tried  to  keep  workers  from  leaving,  but  these  efforts  were 
relatively  ineffective.  Workers  migrated  into  regions  in  which  there  was  industrial 
development  and  returned  home  or  went  elsewhere  when  times  were  bad.  Switzer-
land,  France,  England,  Germany,  the  United  States,  Brazil  and  Argentina  built 
industrialized economies with the help of billions of labour migrants who worked in 
factories, fields, mills and mines. 

The  fact  that  migrants  came  and  went,  maintained  their  home  ties,  sent  home 
money  to  buy  land  and  supported  home  areas  by  remittances  was  understood  as 
common practice. At the beginning of this period it was still easy for migrants to gain 
citizenship  even  in  Germany,  where  many  immigrant  labourers  acquired  German 
citizenship  (cf.  on  pre-1913  citizenship  laws  Borneman  1997:  98–102).  This  easy 
access to citizenship reflected the fact that ‘the people’ was still basically defined in 
terms of shared citizenship rights and democratic inclusion – the people as nation and 
as  a  group  of  mutual  solidarity  were  important  only  in  the  subsequent  period  of 
nation-state  building.  Mirroring  the  lack  of  barriers  to  migration  and  the  open 
citizenship regimes, E. G. Ravenstein (1889), in the first systematic analysis of migra-
tion,  did  not  differentiate  analytically  between  internal  and  international  migration. 
Instead,  Ravenstein  treated  all  movements  of  people  across  the  terrain  as  part  of  a 
single phenomenon, largely determined by the distribution of economic opportunities 
over physical space. He found that international migration followed the same ‘laws’ 
as internal migration. More precisely, he maintained that in all cases migration con-
sisted  of  movements  from  country  to  town  and  from  poorer  to  richer  areas  as  the 
latter.  The  fact  that  in  international  migration  migrants  crossed  a  national  boundary 
caused  inconvenience  for  the  researcher  compiling  statistics  but  did  not  produce 
different social dynamics. 

Yet  the  nation-state  building  that  emerged  within  this  period  of  globalization 
eventually fostered conceptualizations of ‘the people’ that would dramatically affect 
migration  and  alter  the  way  in  which  social  scientists  thought  about  migration.  A 
concept of ‘ethnic’ and/or ‘racial’ peoplehood began to replace a ‘civic’ conception 
initially shaped by Enlightenment philosophers and concretized in the course of the 

313 

Andreas Wimmer and Nina Glick Schiller 

US, French and Haitian revolutions. The people now primarily meant a nation united 
through common ancestry and a shared homeland, no matter where its members might 
have  wandered.  This  concept  of  the  people  gave  each  nation  its  own  national 
character,  its  peculiar  nature and homeland,  and  a  claim  to  a  place  in  the  sun.  This 
nationalized view of the people developed within a growing competition for political 
pre-eminence in Europe. It can be observed in all nation-building histories, despite the 
much-commented  differences  between  France  and  Germany  (Brubaker  1998; 
Silverman  1995).  National  chauvinisms  and  racisms  legitimated  both  the  colonial 
empire  building  of  the  period  and  the  culmination  of  this  competition  in  the  First 
World War. It was in the context of this competition and of the salience of ideas about 
nation  and  race  that  nation-state  builders,  including  elites,  political  leaders,  state 
officials  and  intellectuals,  initiated  systematic  efforts  to  erase,  deny  or  homogenize 
the  internal  cultural  and  national  diversity  that  existed  within  all  the  industrializing 
states of Europe and the Americas. 

In this article we are particularly concerned with the role of the social sciences in 
this  reconceptualization.  The  social  sciences  emerged  as  distinct  intellectual  enter-
prises  during  this  period  and  were  both  shaped  by  and  contributed  to  the  trans-
formation of concepts of nation and immigrant. In the transition from civic to national 
concepts of the people, folklore studies in Europe and anthropology in both Europe 
and the United States played a crucial role. Nations were increasingly seen as organic 
wholes, nourished by the pure lore, tradition or rural virtue of the peasant, yeoman or 
farmer not yet afflicted by cosmopolitan modernity. Ideas about nation as races based 
on  blood  were  popularized  globally,  entering  into  the  nation-state  building  projects 
and  imperial  ideologies  used  to  legitimate  colonial  expansion  (Dikötter  1997). 
Meanwhile, sociology developed those grand schemes of progress – from tradition to 
modernity,  community  to  society  –  that  made  the  national  framing  of  this  epochal 
transformation invisible. However, Durkheim and Weber, to mention just two of the 
intellectual  giants  of  this  period,  took  it  as  self-evident  that  it  would  be  their  own 
nationally framed society that would advance on this road to the future at the fastest 
speed  and  in  competition  with  other  candidates  to  the  status  of  the  most  civilized 
nation. 

Within this growth of scholarship coloured by different modes of methodological 
nationalism, there was no conceptual space to examine the way in which the forging 
of  each  nation-state  was  not  confined  to  its  territorial  borders  but  took  place  in  a 
complex dialectic between a state and its colonies or between the population within a 
national  territory  and  its  political  exiles  and  transmigrants  living  abroad.  Only 
recently  has  the  scholarship  of  colonialism  begun  to  illustrate  how  the  nation-state 
building of such countries as France, England and even the United States (as it took 
on  colonies  and  began  to  police  the  Caribbean)  was  shaped  by  distinctions  drawn 
between  colonizer  and  colonized  or  between  immigrants  and  natives  (Gilroy  1991; 
Glick  Schiller  1999a,  1999b;  Hall  et  al.  2000;  Lebovics  1992;  Rafael  1995;  Stoler 
1989).  These distinctions  served  to  homogenize  and valorize  the national  culture of 
the  colonizing  country  and  popularize  the  notion  that  it  was  a  unitary  and  bounded 
society, distinguishable from the subordinated peoples by a racial divide. 

As nationalist concepts of people and society took hold, the conception of immi-
grants  began  to  change.  By  the  turn  of  the  century,  while  the  flow  of  migration 
generally remained unrestricted, migrants began to be conceptualized as continuing to 

314 

Methodological nationalism and beyond 

have memberships in their ancestral homelands. Many actors contributed to popular-
izing this idea and it was (in many ways) the obverse of the process of conceptual-
izing the world as divided up into peoples, each made up of a national citizenry and 
sovereign.  The  presence  of  non-national  citizens  thus  becomes,  as  discussed  in  the 
previous section, a major risk for national sovereignty and security. 

By  contrast,  and  again  conforming  to  the  newly-nationalized  notion  of  people-
hood, emigrant-sending states including Italy and the Austro-Hungarian ones started 
to see their emigrants as still members of their home countries and expected them to 
return (Cinel 1982; Harrington 1982; Wyman 1993). Remittances from abroad were 
understood  to  be  a  significant  part  of  the  economies  of  many  regions.  Emigrant-
sending  states  established  institutions  to  protect  emigrants  as  well  as  police  them. 
Political exiles dispersed from areas of Europe in which nationalist struggles perco-
lated.  They  continued  to  wage  their  struggles  transnationally.  In  exile  these  leaders 
saw  the  dispersed  workers  of  their  region  as  compatriots  and  sought  to  engender 
within  them  nationalist  identities  and  emotions  through  meetings,  newspapers,  and 
religious  and  fraternal  organizations.  Emigrant  workers  who  moved  back  and  forth 
between  home  regions  and  countries of  immigration  both  within  Europe  and  across 
the Atlantic to the Americas began to become engaged in these nation-state building 
projects  in  their  homeland.  Both  European  and  Asian  immigrants  began  to  believe 
that the degree of respect they would be accorded abroad would be increased if the 
power  and  prestige  of  their  motherland  increased  and  many  became  fervent 
nationalists (Cinel 1982; Kwong 1987). 

All these transnational political activities and engagements seemed to justify the 
fears  of  nationalizing  states  that  immigrants  undermined  the  stability  and  territorial 
boundedness of the nation. By the end of this first period, immigrants had come to be 
seen as politically dangerous and in national or racial terms fundamentally different. 
Their  presence  was  seen  to  endanger  the  isomorphism  between  citizenry,  sovereign 
and state. In Europe meanwhile, political leaders who faced the political repercussions 
of intensive industrialization, the vast disparities between rich and poor exacerbated 
by processes of globalization, and internationalist revolutionary workers movements 
fanned  the  wave  of  distrust  and  hatred  to  non-nationals  that  exploded  with  the  out-
break of the First World War. 

Phase II: From the First World War to the cold war 

The  First  World  War  ended  the  period  of  the  free  movement  of  labour  and  other 
aspects of intensive globalization. The disruption of economies, first by war and then 
by the reconstitution of many regions into newly-independent states contributed to the 
continuing  closure  of  borders  instituted  as  part  of  the  national  defences  of  these 
newly-nationalizing states. At the same time, the warlike process of nation-state form-
ation,  with  all  its  ethnic  cleansings  and  the  mass  denaturalizations  it  entailed,  was 
(and still is) the major force producing refugees (Sassen 1999; Zolberg 1983). 

Mass  slaughter  in  the  name  of  national  honour  and  independence  had  given  the 
idea  of  a  national  community  of  destiny  an  unprecedented  plausibility,  making 
national  affiliations  a  question  of  life  and  death  not  only  in  the  trenches  but  in  the 
larger society as well. Distinguishing between friend and foe on the basis of national 
background  had  become  common-sense  practice  and  ideology.  The  success  of  the 

315 

Andreas Wimmer and Nina Glick Schiller 

Russian Revolution fanned the surveillance of migrants as potential threats to national 
security  and  reinforced  the  differentiation  between  national  and  foreign  ideas  and 
ideologies.  The  political  turbulence of  the  times,  in  which  capitalist  depression was 
countered by revolutionary politics with armed insurrection in Germany and the rise 
of republican Spain, contributed to the efforts by nationalist states to police borders 
and limit the movements of political and labour activists. 

Previous  efforts  at  developing  a  system  of  migration  control  were  revised  and 
developed into historically novel forms of border policing. It now became necessary 
for  a  person  to  have  a  permit  to  enter  a  country  and  reside  there,  creating  both  the 
differentiation between nationals – who did not need such permits – and foreigners, as 
well  as  between  legal  and  illegal  residents  of  states.  The  power  to  issue  permits 
became concentrated in the central government. In the USA this power, initially con-
tested by various states, strengthened the position of the federal government and its 
role in the delineation of the nation from its enemies. In Europe the new regime of 
visas  began  to  link  the  right  to  reside  in  a  country  with  a  work  permit,  virtually 
defining a foreigner as a temporary worker. In short, an entire central state apparatus 
of overseeing, limiting and controlling immigration was institutionalized between the 
two world wars. Immigrants, by the logic of border control and rising security con-
cerns, were now natural enemies of the nation. 

Meanwhile, the devastation of the war in Europe had disrupted the transnational 
ties of family members abroad by impeding the sending of letters, money and pack-
ages. As refugees fled from war zones in Europe and borders changed, many trans-
migrants  living  in  the  United  States  lost  track  of  their  families,  some  permanently. 
The  massive  unemployment  and  poverty  of  the  depression  also  made  it  difficult  to 
send remittances. People thrown out of work in the Americas returned to the homes 
they had been building in their regions of origin. At the same time, limits on immi-
gration in the United States effectively halted the back and forth travel that had been a 
mainstay of immigrant families, communities and transnational nation-state building 
before the war. Similar developments occurred for migrants within Europe. 

Transnational  politics  and  long  distance  nationalism,  the  ideology  of  belonging 
that extends homeland politics into transnational social fields, however, did continue 
during this period. The German, Italian and Japanese governments were among those 
active in monitoring their nationals abroad and nurturing their loyalties to their home-
land (Cinel 1982; Harrington 1982; Lesser 1999). 

The brief period between the First and Second World Wars was a turning point in 
the  growth  of  methodological  nationalism  and  it  is  in  this  period  that  our  contem-
porary  concept  of  immigration  develops.  The  social  sciences  began  to  play  an 
important role in this conceptualization. The Chicago School of Sociology linked to 
Robert  Park,  Louis  Wirth,  William  I.  Thomas  and  Florian  Znaniecki,  and  St  Clair 
Drake elaborated the first systematic approach to migration. 

While they were convinced of the virtues of a value-free sociology, their models 
carried with them a series of national values and norms about how immigration was to 
be understood. They established a view of each territorially-based state as having its 
own, stable population, contrasting them to migrants who were portrayed as marginal 
men living in a liminal state, uprooted in one society and transplanted into another. 
They advocated assimilation, not by formulating plans for societal intervention but by 
proposing  a  ‘race-relations  cycle’  in  which  the  process  of  acculturation  and  assimi-

316 

Methodological nationalism and beyond 

lation of immigrants occurred normally and naturally in the course of several gener-
ations (Park 1950). Their casual use of the word ‘race’ accepted the conflation of race 
and  nation  and  placed  together  southern  and  Eastern  European  immigrants,  Jewish 
immigrants and African-Americans as all racially different from mainstream America, 
although with different degrees of distance that would affect their rate of assimilation. 
The  movement  of  immigrants  was  counter-posed  to  the  immigrant-receiving  state, 
whose  society  seemed  fixed  within  a  homogenous  national  culture.  The  placing  of 
African-Americans  alongside  immigrants  within  the  race-relations  cycle  portrayed 
them as outside the nation, although they had been part of the US population since the 
period of conquest. This discursive move marked the nation as white and normalized 
the colour line (Lieberson 1980; Williams 1989). 

Immigrants were now seen not only as a security risk, but also as destroying the 
isomorphism  between  nation and people  and  thus  a  major  challenge  to  the  ongoing 
nation-building  project,  constantly  forcing  the  machinery  of  assimilation  to  absorb 
new waves of cultural heterogeneity. The fact that nation-state building was an ongoing 
process and that the state contained within its borders significant differences between 
classes,  cultures,  genders,  and  regions  became  more  difficult  to  perceive.  National 
integration and cultural homogeneity of the national society were taken as givens. 

While  seemingly  ahistorical,  these  concepts  were  very  much  a  product  of  the 
retreat  from  globalization  of  the  period  after  the  First  World  War  and  the  great 
depression of the 1930s. In fact, it seems to us that it was the reduced degree of global 
economic integration during this period that prompted and facilitated the qualitative 
leap in nation-state building and the emergence of the container model in the social 
sciences that the Chicago School helped to propagate. Social order contained within 
the  nation-state  became  the  taken-for-granted  premise  of  the  new  social  science  as 
well as of migration studies. Even the fact that there had been a period of free labour 
migration  within  previous  periods  of  globalization  was  soon  forgotten.  As  the  new 
image  of  migration  as  threatening  social  order  became  dominant,  the  social  move-
ments that had so readily crossed borders and fuelled political and intellectual life also 
faded first from view and then from memory, including the internationalism of labour, 
the  first  women’s  movement,  pan-Africanism  and  various  forms  of  long  distance 
nationalism (Gabaccia 2000; Gilroy 1993; Lemelle and Kelley 1994; Rodgers 1998). 
In point of fact the actual data produced by the Chicago School and those influ-
enced  by  this  school  demonstrated  ongoing  and  significant  transnational  familial, 
religious, economic and political ties of most migrant populations. Park specifically 
documented patterns of social control and gossip that extended transnationally from 
peasant villages to the streets of New York City, the role of the immigrant press in 
fuelling what we would today define as long distance nationalism within US immi-
grant populations and emigrant sending countries, and the patterns of regular return 
and the flow of remittances (Park 1974/1925; Schermerhorn 1949). However, because 
their  vision  was  limited  by  the  container  model  of  society,  all  evidence  of  trans-
national  connections  were  defined  as  transitory  phenomena  that  would  disappear  in 
the wake of a natural process of assimilation. 

Phase III: The cold war 

During the period after the Second World War known as the cold war the blind spot 

317 

Andreas Wimmer and Nina Glick Schiller 

became  blindness,  an  almost  complete  erasure  of  the  historical  memories  of  trans-
national and global processes within which nation-states were formed and the role of 
migration  within  that  formation.  Modernization  theory  made  it  look  as  if  Western 
Europe and the USA had developed national identities and modern states within their 
own territorial confines rather than in relationship to a global economy and flows of 
ideas. The growth of the United Nations and the granting of formal independence to 
most former colonies popularized a vision of the world as divided up into a host of 
nation-states of equal significance and sovereignty. The European postwar terrain of 
displaced persons and refugees was rapidly reordered by the insistence that everyone 
must  belong  somewhere.  In  the  United  States  school  children  read  morality  tales 
about  the  ‘man  without  a  country’  and  sang  patriotic  songs.  Throughout  the  world 
civic  education  had  become  equated  with  lessons  in  patriotism.  People  were 
envisioned  as  each  having  only  one  nation-state  and  to  belong  to  the  world  people 
were  thought  to  require  a  national  identity.  The  social  sciences  neither  investigated 
nor problematized this assumption but took it for granted in the conceptualizations we 
described at length in the preceding section. 

By recalling just briefly the cold war context in which the social sciences grew to 
maturity,  we  can  gain  some additional  insights  into  the way migration  studies were 
shaped by this environment. In Europe, the competition with the Soviet Union spurred 
the development of social democratic ideologies and a form of social welfare capital-
ism.  The  people  now  comprised  not  only  a  nation,  citizenry  and  a  sovereign,  but  a 
group  of  solidarity  as  well.  With  the  establishment  of  national  welfare  states,  the 
nationalist project reached its culmination and fulfilment. Membership in this group 
of solidarity was a privilege, and state boundaries marked the limitation of access to 
these privileges (Wimmer 1998a). 

In addition, cold war tensions and suspicions called for an ever tighter policing of 
borders  and  a  careful  investigation  of  the  motives  of  all  those  seeking  to  cross 
national borders. Immigration became ever more problematic. To cross the iron cur-
tain, one had to be a political refugee. In the West, only those who fled communism 
were allocated the right to move and resettle permanently. Otherwise, the consensus 
held  that  national  borders  should  limit  the  flow  of  populations  and  serve  as  vessels 
within which national cultures were contained and cultivated. Yet, as industrial struc-
tures  became  reconstituted  in  the  wake  of  war,  and  after  depression  and  war  had 
depopulated the old continent, new demands for labour arose in Western Europe and 
the USA. 

In  this  conjuncture,  England,  France  and  the  Netherlands  turned  to  their  own 
colonial populations, populations who had been educated to see the colonial power as 
the  motherland,  and  shared  language  and  a  system  of  education  with  those  mother-
lands. West Germany sought to restrict and control influxes of workers by the use of 
labour contracts that recruited guest workers. Face to face with the competition of a 
socialist  East  Germany,  West  German  postwar  leaders  confronted  with  particular 
urgency the necessity of forging national consensus and labour peace on the basis of 
generous  social  welfare  benefits  to  citizens.  Guest  workers  were  seen  as  an  apt 
solution  to  the  need  for  malleable  labour  for  postwar  reconstruction  and  industrial 
development,  since  they  would  contribute  their  labour  and  not  disrupt  either  the 
cultural or economic pact that German leaders tried to forge with their citizenry. The 
USA used a bit of both strategies, utilizing its colonial Puerto Rican population and 

318 

Methodological nationalism and beyond 

developing the Bracero Program of Mexican contract labour. While seeming very dif-
ferent,  both  strategies  provided  for  the  needs  of  industry  while  minimizing  the 
challenge  to  the  concept  if  not  the  practice  of  national  closure,  naturalized  and 
normalized by social science. 

In the USA, despite massive efforts at assimilation, the previous waves of immi-
grants settled in urban areas maintained their national identities, even if their cultural 
practices  were  increasingly  similar  to  their  working-class  neighbours  (Gans  1982). 
These groups were designated ‘nationalities’ in popular parlance, reflecting ideologies 
about national belonging of the prewar period. There is some evidence that families 
and organizations within these nationality groups began to reconstitute transnational 
connections  disrupted  by  two  world  wars.  Politicians  campaigning  in  immigrant 
neighbourhoods  during  this  period  recognized  these  connections,  promising  to 
develop  or  support  American  foreign  policies  to  help  the  homelands  of  whatever 
nationality group they were addressing, Irish, Italian, Polish, Serbian, or Greek (Glick 
Schiller 1999a, 1999b; Redding 1958; Weed 1973). But due to the limitations that the 
container model of society imposed on the social sciences, much of this history has 
yet  to  be  recovered.  In  the  USA,  until  the  Glazer  and  Moynihan’s  (1963)  seminal 
statement to move ‘beyond the melting pot’, the social sciences ignored these persist-
ing  identities  and  the  ways  in  which  US  urban  political  life  was  organized  to  give 
salience to competing ethnic groups, rather than respond to class-based discourse (cf. 
Steinberg  1989).  Instead,  immigrants  were  portrayed  as  uprooted  from  their  home-
lands and much time and resources were invested in measuring rates and degrees of 
assimilation.  

In the 1960s much of this rhetoric changed abruptly in the USA and the effects of 
these changes on the rhetoric of nation-state building and on social science resonated 
around the world, especially after the end of the cold war. The catalyst for the changes 
was  the  US  civil  rights  movement  that  exposed  the  unstated  but  institutionalized 
equation of American identity with whiteness. As black activists strove to develop for 
themselves a differentiated and contestational political identity, they reached back to 
the  prewar  pan-African  movement  and  rekindled  an  African-American  cultural 
politics (Ture and Hamilton 1992/1967). In the wake of the Black Power movement, 
other  populations,  which  had  been  excluded  from  the  US  racialized  nation-building 
project with its normative whiteness, began to elaborate ideologies of cultural plural-
ism (Glazer and Moynihan 1963; Glick Schiller 1975, 1977; Steinberg 1989). In this 
context, which included the cold war implications of the exposure of US racism, the 
racially  construed  national  quotas  embedded  in  US  immigration  law  were  finally 
eliminated in 1965. 

Let us now turn to Europe. In West Germany, the postwar project of reconstruct-
ing  a  nation-state  sought  to  renew  a national  culture  while  repudiating Nazi  ideolo-
gies. The people continued to be defined primarily as a nation of shared culture and 
history, now including the horrors of the Nazi period and the historic responsibility 
flowing from these, which became a major element of collective consciousness of the 
educated elites. The social scientists of the time did not challenge this concept of the 
German people as constituted by shared historical destiny and culture, accepting the 
view that outsiders could become German only with great difficulty, even though data 
on  the  history  of  Germany  clearly  demonstrate  the  widespread  absorption  of  immi-
grants before the First World War. 

319 

Andreas Wimmer and Nina Glick Schiller 

Since  immigrant  workers,  according  to  this  conceptual  divide  between  autoch-
thons  and  aliens,  were  supposed  to  return  home,  they  were  not  initially  a  topic  of 
social  science  research  or  theory.  However,  when  it  became  clear  that  many  had 
settled and become incorporated in Germany, German researchers began to track their 
numbers and impact. Their main concern was the consequence for the national class 
system, more specifically, how elements of a caste-like stratification were introduced 
setting apart immigrant-aliens from the national population (see the pioneering work 
by  Castles  and  Kosack  1974,  or,  from  a  functionalist  point  of  view,  Hoffmann-
Nowotny  1973).  Migrant  distinctiveness  and  home  ties  were  taken for granted.  The 
contrast with the USA is impressive and confirms our hypotheses about the shaping of 
scholarship  by  the  specific  experience  of  nation-state  formation:  German  scholars 
produced neither models nor measures of inevitable assimilation and political incor-
poration  comparable  to  American  sociology,  which  in  the  postwar  years  first  pro-
duced  increasingly  refined  measures  and  scales  of  assimilation  and  then  models  of 
cultural pluralism. 

British  social  scientists,  in  the  midst  of  incorporating  newcomers  who  were 
defined  as  black  but  British,  turned  to  theories  of  race  relations  to  describe  and 
problematize  migrants  –  echoing  the  importance  of  racial  categories  in  the  nation-
building  experience  of  Britain  in  the  context  of  its  imperial  expansion.  Here  as 
elsewhere, the bounded view of the nation and the ideology of territories containing 
distinct  national  cultures  precluded  a  study  of  the  continuing  home  ties  of  the  ex-
colonials. At the very same time, the transnational populations from India, Pakistan, 
the Caribbean and Africa helped to maintain British influence in its former colonies at 
a  time  when  competition for  political  hegemony  and  access  to raw  materials  devel-
oped  both  with  the  Soviet  Union  and  the  United  States.  But  methodological 
nationalism precluded a post-colonial scholarship that would examine the continuities 
of empire during the era of formal sovereignty. 

French scholars resembled their colleagues of other states in accepting their own 
state’s  view  of  the  link  between  nation,  citizenry  and  sovereign  (Silverman  1995). 
The French people were primarily seen as a political community held together by the 
democratic process, by an act of auto-constitution that transforms citizens into mem-
bers  of  a  nation,  to  echo  Renan’s  famous  formula.  Consequently,  immigrants  are 
politically  incorporated  through  naturalization,  which  implies  and  presupposes  cul-
tural  assimilation,  becoming  a  member  of  the  French  nation.  Political  incorporation 
and cultural assimilation guarantee that the spots of foreignness are coloured as fast as 
possible in tricolour. 

Following this philosophy of integration, anthropologists refused to form a branch 
studying immigration because they did not want to build up cultural barriers between 
new and old citizens of the Grand Nation (Meillassoux 1980). It was sociologists who 
provided a reflection and at the same time a justification for integration à la française, 
describing how naturalization and political incorporation would create, through iden-
tification  and  social  mixing,  a  new  group  of  true  Frenchmen  (this  is  the  canonical 
position of Schnapper 1991). Even if they had wanted to, social scientists would face 
enormous difficulties in describing and underlining differences between new and old 
Frenchmen.  The  national  census  systems  do  not  distinguish  between  newly  made 
citizens and the français de souche. Michèle Tribalat’s (1995) study on the assimil-
ation  of  immigrants,  based  on  data  that  contained  these  distinctions,  produced  a 

320 

Methodological nationalism and beyond 

scandal,  although  her  results  reported,  to  the  great  relief  of  policy  makers  and 
academics  alike,  that  French  assimilationism  worked  and  effectively  turned  immi-
grants into Frenchmen. 

In short, at the height of the cold war and of the power of nationalized states, the 
specific  style  of  nation  building  also  led  –  through  the  mirror  effects  of  methodo-
logical  nationalism  –  to  different  modes  of  social  science  reasoning  about  immi-
gration.  Everybody  who  witnessed  the  difficulties  of  cross-national  communication 
during conferences, yet alone of collaboration in joint research projects, experienced 
this mutual estrangement and sometimes even bewilderment (on the relation between 
styles of nation building and philosophies of immigrant integration see also Brubaker 
1992; Castles 1995; Favell 1998). 

Beyond methodological nationalism? 

The current period of globalization has transformed migration studies with the emer-
gence  of  a  transnational  paradigm.  The  economic  restructuring  of  current  globaliz-
ation dates back to the 1970s, marked by the end of Bretton Woods, the movement of 
industrial production from the USA and Europe to sites with lower labour costs, and 
the development of new ways to organize and expedite the rapid flow of capital. 

The worldwide recession and the oil crisis in the 1970s, which may have spurred 
the  new  period  of  globalization,  stimulated  anti-immigrant  movements  throughout 
Europe  and  a  consensus  to  limit  immigration  severely  to  zero.  By  now  it  was  an 
accepted response for nationals to blame foreigners for everything, although the very 
identification of a territorially based population with a nation-state (and with only one 
nation-state) was  a  relatively  new  invention.  The  momentum  to  stop  migration  as  a 
solution  to  problems  that  were  in  fact  of  a  systemic  nature  took  different  forms  in 
different locations, and was implemented with increasing severity in the course of 20 
years, limited the citizenship rights of former colonial populations and abruptly ended 
guest worker programmes. The rhetoric of zero immigration masked the fact that the 
door  was  left  open  for  continuing  immigration  of  family  members,  highly-skilled 
immigrants  and  persons  categorized  as  political  refugees. In  point  of  fact,  the  rapid 
pace  of  globalization,  increased  by  the  implementation  of  the  economic  reforms  in 
Russia and Eastern Europe after the end of the cold war and in Asia after the Asian 
economic  crisis  of  the  1990s,  increased  the  pace  of  migration.  Migration  is  now 
structured, perceived and discussed under different categorizations in different loca-
tions:  refugee  flows,  family  reunification,  the  import  of  skilled  workers  on  special 
visas, contract domestic labour and illegals. 

Social scientists’ theories of migration did not fundamentally alter until the cold 
war had ended and lifted some of the barriers of methodological nationalism – parallel 
to  the  destruction  of  the  Berlin  Wall.  Scholars  in  a  number  of  fields,  together  with 
political  leaders  and  journalists,  began  to  announce  that  the  world  was  becoming 
qualitatively different and applied the term ‘globalization’ to what they were observ-
ing, fascinated by various kinds of flows of people, ideas, objects and capital across 
the territorial borders of states. 

In anthropology, the globalization fever led to what we could call the ‘dissing’ of 
previous  paradigms.  We  heard  about  disjuncture,  dislocation,  displacement,  dis-
engagement,  disconnection  and  the  dismantling  of  the  old  stabilities,  knowledges, 

321 

Andreas Wimmer and Nina Glick Schiller 

conventions  and  identities  (Appadurai  1990,  1991,  1993;  Featherstone  1993;  Rouse 
1991). Working independently of each other on the east and west coast of the USA, 
anthropologists and ethnographically inclined sociologists began to posit that a new 
form of migration was beginning, which they entitled transnationalism (Glick Schiller 
and Fouron 1991; Glick Schiller et al. 1992; Goldring 1996; Guarnizo 1997; Kearney 
1991;  Levitt  1997;  Rouse  1992).  Later,  mainstream  sociology  joined  the  trend  and 
forcefully  contributed  to  its  formulation  and  expansion  (Portes  et  al.  1999).  Even 
before the first statements about transnational migration by anthropologists and socio-
logists had been formulated, new data describing the transnational ties among recent 
migrants  were  presented,  but  methodological  nationalism  kept  scholars  from  fully 
appreciating and theorizing what they were seeing (Chaney 1979; Gonzalez 1988).  

The first wave of global studies produced a set of problematic assumptions. First 
of  all,  scholars  tended  to  see  communications  technology  –  computers,  telephones, 
televisions, communication satellites and other electronic innovations – as the motor 
of change. Suddenly we could all visually experience the same war, the same concert, 
or the same commercial and share the information age. The power of the new tech-
nology combined with the postmodern insistence on the stability of the past and the 
fluidity  of  the  present  led  to  a  rather  crude  technological  determinism  strangely 
contrasting with the otherwise constructivist impetus of much of this literature. This 
impeded discussion of the broader social and economic forces past and present, which 
had shaped the transnational ties that linked the globe together. In addition, the impact 
of past technologies, which facilitated previous leaps in global integration – including 
the steamship, the telegraph, telephone and radio – were dismissed or forgotten. 

Second, the first wave of transnational studies tended to speak of globalization in 
terms of an epochal turn, characterizing the previous historical period as one in which 
our  units  of  analysis  were  bounded  and  people  lived  within  these  bounded  units  of 
tribe, ethnic group and state. Many scholars asserted that the increase in trans-border 
activity  signalled  the  demise  of  the  nation-state  as  both  a  centre  of  power  and  as  a 
potent source of identity politics (Kearney 1991). The past was static, the present was 
fluid;  the  past  contained  homogenous  cultures  while  now  we  lived  in  a  world  of 
hybridity and complexity. 

A  second  wave  of  global  studies  has  emerged  that  addresses  some  of  the  mis-
conceptions of the first few years. We will mention five moments of this transition. 
First, we now can acknowledge that globalization is not in itself a new phenomenon 
(Went  2000;  Wimmer  2001a).  Our  article  has  made  clear  that  while  significant 
changes have occurred in the world since the end of the cold war, we are at the same 
time also experiencing a paradigm shift. We have been able to begin to analyse and 
discuss  transnational  migration  and  long  distance  nationalism  because  we  have 
changed  the  lens  through  which  we  perceive  and  analyse  the  world,  putting  aside 
some of the preconceptions of methodological nationalism. 

Raising  questions  about  what  new  globalization  and  transnationalism  really  are, 
this  new,  more  sophisticated  scholarship  is  disentangling  long-term  trends,  periodic 
recurrences and novel occurrences in the historical development of global connections 
(Glick  Schiller  1999a,  1999b,  1999c;  Panitch  1996,  2000;  Smith  1997;  Went  2000; 
Wilson and Donnan 1998). Actually, since the beginning of the expansion of Europe 
in the fifteenth century, the globe has been encompassed by various forms of econ-
omic activities and flows of objects and ideas. Colonization was a global process that 

322 

Methodological nationalism and beyond 

knit together disparate territories and peoples. Some scholars began to argue that the 
world was actually more globally integrated in the nineteenth century than it is now or 
that we are just now returning to the kind of integration the world experienced before 
the First World War (see Jessop 1999 for a summary of this debate). However, there 
is a general consensus that contemporary globalization processes seem more potent in 
their degree of penetration into the rhythms of daily life around the world (Held et al. 
1999). 

In  the  field  of  migration  studies,  after  the  initial  celebrations  of  the  novelty  of 
diasporic  identities,  more  careful  scholarship  on  the  historical  depth  of  diasporic 
experiences started to emerge (Cohen 1997; Foner 1997, 2001; Morawska 2001). It 
allows us to evaluate the transnational practices out of which cultures such as those in 
the Caribbean and post-colonial societies from India to Samoa emerged. 

Second,  scholars  of  both  Asia  and  Latin  America  have  begun  to  examine  the 
articulation  of  regions  into  global  processes,  thus  overcoming  another  limitation  of 
methodological  nationalism  and  breaking  up  the  national  focus  of  the  development 
and modernization paradigm. Anthropologists are playing an important role in exam-
ining local and regional variations in connecting the global and the local. They have 
also  provided  descriptions  of  Asian  discourses  about  ‘alternative  modernities’  and 
explored  the  particularities  of  transnational  processes  in  China  and  Southeast  Asia 
(Ong 1997; Ong and Nonini 1997; Smart 1997; Szanton Blanc 1997). Thus, the one-
way road image of history and globalization, a heritage of the schemes of grand social 
theory,  is  slowly  overcome  by  acknowledging  multiple  ways  to  and  through 
modernity (Eisenstadt 2000; Therborn 1995; Wimmer 2001b). 

Third, much more attention is now being paid to the continuing role of the nation-
state in transnational processes. It is becoming increasingly apparent that the nation-
state  ‘has  been  rather  more  successful  in  weathering  the  storms  of  post-socialism, 
post-colonialism,  and  globalization’  than  was  the  case  in  the  early  days  of  global-
ization research (Panitch 2000; Sassen 1996, 2001). Scholars also began to look at the 
past  and  contemporary  role  of  nation-states  in  fostering  continuing  ties  with  popu-
lations  settled  abroad,  thus  relativizing  earlier  statements  about  the  ‘decline  of  the 
nation-state’ (Basch et al. 1994; Glick Schiller 1999a, 1999b, 1999c; Guarnizo 1997, 
1998;  Guarnizo  and  Diaz  1999;  Mahler  1998;  R.  Smith  1998;  Smith  and  Guarnizo 
1998). 

Finally, a concept of long distance nationalism has been developed that takes up 
once again the observations of ‘home country’ nationalism made but not theorized by 
the  Chicago  School  and  scholars  of  nationalism  (Anderson  1993,  1994;  Fuglerud 
1999;  Glazer  1954;  Skrbi˘  1999).  Long  distance  nationalism  links  together  people 
living in various geographic locations and motivates them to action in relationship to 
an ancestral territory and its government. Through such ideological linkages, a terri-
tory, its people and its government become a trans-border enterprise. Long distance 
nationalism  may  bind  together  immigrants,  their  descendants,  and  people  who  have 
remained  in  their  homeland  into  a  fragile,  but  vocal  trans-border  citizenry  (Glick 
Schiller and Fouron 2001a: 17–20). As in other versions of nationalism, the concept 
of  a  people  comprising  a  citizenry,  a  sovereign,  a  nation  and  a  group  of  solidarity 
remains salient, but these different embodiments are not thought of as congruent and 
territorially bounded. 

Thus, a number of issues about transnational migration and long distance national-

323 

Andreas Wimmer and Nina Glick Schiller 

ism that could not be addressed during previous periods are now possible to research 
and theorize. However, this does not mean that we have broken free from the influ-
ence  of  methodological  nationalism.  We  are  still  struggling  to  understand  how  our 
vision is being shaped and distorted by our own location in the grid of nation-states 
and the constraints this places on our scientific perspectives. We conclude this section 
with some areas in which methodological nationalism is still visible. 

Diaspora  studies  often  trace  dispersed  populations  no  matter  where  they  have 
settled, focusing on the dynamics of interconnection, nostalgia and memory and iden-
tity within a particular population, relating them to a particular homeland. No longer 
confined  to  a  territorially  limited  entity,  the  nation  is  extending  across  different 
terrains and places but nevertheless imagined as an organic, integrated whole. In this 
modus  operandi,  nation-state  building  processes  that  impinge  upon  diasporic 
populations  in  various  locations  are  usually  overlooked.  If  the  relationship  between 
the diaspora and nation-state building is examined, it is uniquely and exclusively in 
terms of the diaspora’s own homeland and its politics. Thus, the image and analytical 
techniques associated with describing a bounded national container society are repro-
duced, albeit in a different form. 

Similar  points  have  to  be  made  with  regard  to  the  study  of  ‘transnational 
communities’.  Here  many  of  the  critiques  of  the  past  errors  of  community  studies 
apply:  much  of  transnational  studies  overstates  the  internal  homogeneity  and  boun-
dedness of transnational communities, overestimates the binding power for individual 
action,  overlooks  the  importance  of  cross-community  interactions  as  well  as  the 
internal  divisions  of  class,  gender,  region  and  politics,  and  is  conceptually  blind  to 
those cases where no transnational communities form among migrants or where exist-
ing ones cease to be meaningful for individuals. Furthermore, the different meanings 
of a particular transnational identity are usually precluded, meanings that take actors 
in  very  different  political  directions  and  alliances.  In  short,  approaching  migrant 
transnational social fields and networks as communities tends to reify and essentialize 
these communities in a similar way that previous approaches reified national commu-
nities or the Redfield school essentialized peasant communities. 

Strangely  enough,  the  neo-communitarianism  of  transnationalism  studies  also 
reproduces  the  standard  image  of  a  world  divided  into  nations  and  thus  naturalizes 
this vision of the world in new forms. Transnational semantically refers us to the non-
transnational  or  simply  to  the  national  as  the  entity  that  is  crossed  or  superseded. 
Migrants are no longer uprooted or climbing up the assimilative ladder to the national 
middle  classes,  but  they  are  still  the  others,  foreign  and  alien  to  the  nationally-
bounded  society.  Studies  that  examine  the  connections  between  transnational 
migrants and actors within the various localities in which they settle and into which 
they  move  could  carry  us  beyond  the  static,  reified  and  essentialized  concept  of 
community  and  into  the  study  of  migrants  and  non-migrants  within  social  fields  of 
differential power (see Nyiri 1999; Ong 1999; Wimmer 1998b). 

Some final remarks 

Going beyond methodological nationalism in the study of current migration thus may 
require more than a focus on transnational communities instead of the nation and its 
immigrants. In order to escape the magnetism of established methodologies, ways of 

324 

Methodological nationalism and beyond 

defining the object of analysis and algorithms for generating questions, we may have 
to  develop  (or  rediscover?)  analytical  tools  and  concepts  not  coloured  by  the  self-
evidence of a world ordered into nation-states. This is what we perceive, together with 
many other current observers of the social sciences, as the major task lying ahead of 
us. We are certainly not able to offer such a set of analytical tools here (Castles 2001; 
Wimmer 2002). 

Rather,  it  was  one  aim  of  this  article  to  describe  with  more  precision  than  has 
hitherto been the case the obstacles to overcome on this road to a new social theory. 
Knowing more about how our perceptions of migration, including some of the recent 
work on transnationalism, have been shaped by the nation-state building project of the 
modern world is an important step. It may prevent us from running, enthusiastically 
searching  for  newness,  along  the  most  promising-looking  road,  without  knowing 
exactly how we got to the crossroad where we actually find ourselves. Looking back 
may help us to identify the paths that will bring us right back to where we now stand. 
We described three modes of methodological nationalism that have shaped the social 
science  programme:  ignoring,  naturalization  and  territorial  limitation,  and  we  have 
identified  the  ways  in  which  these  have  influenced  mainstream  migration  studies. 
Describing immigrants as political security risks, as culturally others, as socially mar-
ginal and as an exception to the rule of territorial confinement, migration studies have 
faithfully mirrored the nationalist image of normal life. 

Our  second  aim  was  to  sketch  out,  in  admittedly  rather  audacious  and  broad 
strokes,  a  history  of  the  past  century  that  would  help  us  to  understand  how  this 
binding  of  the  scientific  eye  to  the  body  of  the  nation  came  about  and  how  this 
relationship has evolved through different phases of nation building. We started this 
historical tour d’horizon from the period of unrestricted migration in an environment 
of  a  globalized  economy  and  fierce  competition  between  nationalizing  states  and 
ended  it  again  in  a  period  of  intensified  globalization,  our  contemporary  epoch. 
During the period in between, the fabrics of economic, political and cultural life were 
more  and  more  closed  along  national  lines  and  the  container  model  of  society 
established its hegemony over the social sciences. For all these different phases, we 
have described how the process of nation-state building has generated, as one of its 
aspects,  different  stances  towards  cross-border  migration  and  immigrant  integration 
that  were mirrored,  if not  sometimes  sustained or  even produced, by  the  basic  con-
cepts  of  migration  research.  Taking  such  a  historically  informed  ‘view  from  afar’ 
allowed  us  to  see  what  migration  researchers  saw,  what  they  did  not  see  and  to 
explain why these varying blind spots have evolved. We have taken the point of view 
of an observer of second order, observing what professional observers do and do not 
observe. 

Thus, we tried to give an example of how the methodological limitations of first 
order observations could be overcome. This example took the form of an anthropo-
logically informed historical narrative. Such an approach does not provide the well-
developed  conceptual  tools  that  would  allow  us  to  elaborate  this  perspective  more 
systematically. This remains a task for the future. However, a word of caution is in 
place here. It would certainly be naive to think that we will ever develop a theoretical 
language  not  profoundly  influenced  by  the  social  and  political  forces  around  us  – 
most of us have given up the dream of reaching an Archimedean point of objectivity. 
Equally naive would be to maintain that methodological nationalism was inhibiting a 

325 

Andreas Wimmer and Nina Glick Schiller 

‘true’ understanding of the world now to be discovered. The days when such a mirror 
concept of reality and scientific description still hold are gone too. 

While  we  are  still  striving  for  an  adequate  understanding  of  what  is  happening 
nowadays,  we  can  already  predict  that  the  new  concepts  eventually  emerging  will 
necessarily  again  limit  and  shape  our  perspective,  again  force  us  to  overlook  some 
developments and overemphasize others. Every clear conceptual structure necessarily 
limits the range of possible interpretations, as well as the empirical domains that can 
be  meaningfully  interpreted.  To  understand  means  to  reduce  complexity.  Going 
beyond this truism, however, the task is to determine what reductions of complexity 
will make best sense of the contemporary world and which ones are leaving out too 
many  tones  and  voices,  transforming  them  into  what  model  builders  call  ‘noise’. 
While we have devoted the body of this article to a description of the Charybdis of 
methodological  nationalism,  we  should  like  to  end  it  with  a  hint  of  the  Scylla  of 
methodological ‘fluidism’. 

This  is  where  much  contemporary  theory  currently  seems  headed.  Where  there 
were  fixed  boundaries,  everything  is  now  equally  and  immediately  interconnected. 
Structures  are  replaced  with  fluidity.  Being  sedentary  is  replaced  with  movement. 
While  the  immigrant  used  to  be  portrayed  as  the  marginal  exception  to  the  rule  of 
staying  at  one’s  national  home,  the  transnational  life  of  migrants  constantly  on  the 
move  is  now  the  prototype  of  the  human  condition.  The  territorial  boundedness  of 
analysis  has  been  overcome  by  a  spiralling  rhetorics  of  deterritorialization  and 
delocalization.  Contemporary  social  theory,  such  as  the  works  of  Urry  (2000)  or 
Papastergiadis (2000) trenchantly criticized by Favell (2001), seems to be breathlessly 
hunting  after  the  signifiers  shooting  around  the  globe,  driven  by  new  techniques  of 
communication and globalized markets. 

They  tend  to  forget  that  production  for  these  markets  is  embedded  in  concrete 
geographical  locations  and  takes  place  within  bounded,  not  necessarily  territorially 
limited  social  environments  (Sassen  2001).  Moreover,  while  it  is  important  to  push 
aside the blinders of methodological nationalism, it is just as important to remember 
the continued potency of nationalism. Framing the world as a global market place can 
not  begin  to  explain  why,  under  specific  circumstances,  not  only  political  entre-
preneurs  but  also  the  poor  and  disempowered  continue  to  frame  their  demands  for 
social justice and equality within a nationalist rhetoric and why migrants sometimes 
embrace  versions  of  long  distance  nationalism  (Glick  Schiller  and  Fouron  2001a, 
2001b). 

Stuart Hall’s (1989) dramatic statement that ‘we are all migrants now’ is no more 
true  in  2001  than  it  was  in  1989  when  he  issued  his  challenge  to  think  beyond  the 
opposition of citizens with stable national cultures and migrants with their contested 
identities. Not only does it remain true that 95 per cent of the people of the world are 
not migrants but it is also true that, despite global media and rapid flows of inform-
ation, national identities remain salient in many localities around the world. 

Nor  can  we  blithely  take  up  the  perspective  of  cosmopolitanism,  either  as  a 
description of the post-national stage of identity or as a political goal to be reached 
(Beck 2000). Such a stance may be helpful for a deconstruction of nationalism, taking 
a  very  different  tack  than  previous  discussions  of  the  invention  or  imagination  of 
community. But it does not acknowledge that nationalism is a powerful signifier that 
continues  to  make  sense  for  different  actors  with  different  purposes  and  political 

326 

Methodological nationalism and beyond 

implications (Fouron and Glick Schiller forthcoming; Friedman 1996; Glick Schiller 
and Fouron 2001a, 2001b). Having hinted at the Scylla of fluidism and of the rhetoric 
of cosmopolitanism, the challenge remains to develop a set of concepts for the study 
of migration that does more than reflect these preconceptions and taken for granted 
assumptions of our times. 

Andreas Wimmer is at the Center for Development Research, 
University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. 

Nina Glick Schiller is at the Department of Anthropology, 
University of New Hampshire, Durham, USA. 

Acknowledgements 

We would like to thank the organizers and the participants of the SSRC conference on trans-
national migration, held at the University of Princeton in June 2001, where a first version of the 
article  was  presented.  We  especially  thank  Stephen  Castles  and  Aristide  Zolberg  for  their 
extensive  and  inspiring  discussions  of  the  article,  as  well  as  Peter  van  der  Veer,  Rainer 
Bauböck,  Werner  Schiffauer,  Robert  Smith,  Ewa  Morawska  and  José  Casanova  for  their 
comments  and  critiques.  Michael  Bommes  has  read  the  manuscript  and  provided  thoughtful 
comments for which we should like to thank him. 

Note 

1.  We  owe  the  term  to  Herminio Martins  (1974:  276f.),  who  mentioned  it en  passant  in  an 
article on social theory. He uses the term in a similar way as we do in this article. Anthony 
Smith (1983: 26) mentions the concept a decade later, referring to the fact that statistics and 
also  social  science  research  based  upon  them  make  national  societies  the  natural  unit  of 
analysis.  The  term  is  certainly  inspired  by  the  notion  of  methodological  individualism, 
which  has  been  introduced  by  Schumpeter  and  popularized  by  Friedrich  von  Hayek  and 
later  Karl  Popper.  Methodological  individualism  –  usually  attributed  to  the  sociological 
programme  of  Max  Weber  –  means  analysing  a  society  as  the  effect  of  aggregated 
decisions and actions of individuals, which are the basic units of social science analysis. In 
the words of von Hayek methodological individualism stands for the conviction that ‘the 
concepts and views held by individuals … form the elements from which we must build up, 
as  it  were,  the  more  complex  phenomena’  (von  Hayek  1943:  38).  Our  use  of  the  term 
methodological  nationalism  is  somewhat  broader  compared  with  methodological  indi-
vidualism. We include not only positive and explicit affirmations that nations are the basic 
units  of  analysis,  but  also  works  that:  (1)  follow  this  principle  without  being  explicit  or 
even knowledgeable about it; and/or (2) neglect and overlook the importance of nationalist 
doctrine for the modern world. Overlooking and ignoring definitively represents a mode of 
methodological nationalism that finds no parallel in classic discussions of methodological 
individualism. 

References 

Anderson, B. (1993) ‘The new world disorder’, New Left Review, 193, 2–13. 
Anderson, B. (1994) ‘Exodus’, Critical Inquiry, 20, 314–27. 
Appadurai,  A.  (1990)  ‘Disjuncture  and  difference  in  the  global  cultural  economy,  Public 

Culture, 2, 1–24. 

327 

Andreas Wimmer and Nina Glick Schiller 

Appadurai, A. (1991) ‘Global ethnoscapes: notes and queries for a transnational anthropology’ 
in  R.  Fox  (ed.)  Recapturing  anthropology,  Santa  Fe,  NM:  School  of  American  Research 
Press. 

Appadurai, A. (1993) ‘Patriotism and its futures’, Public Culture, 5, 411–29. 
Basch,  L.,  N.  Glick  Schiller  and  C.  Szanton  Blanc  (1994)  Nations  unbound:  transnational 
projects,  postcolonial  predicaments  and  deterritorialized  nation-states,  Amsterdam: 
Gordon and Breach. 

Beck,  U.  (2000)  ‘The  cosmopolitan  perspective:  sociology  of  the  second  age  of  modernity’, 

British Journal of Sociology, 51, 79–105. 

Bender,  T.  (2001)  ‘Writing  national  history  in  a  Global  Age’,  Correspondence:  an  inter-

national review of culture and society, 7. 

Berlin, I. (1998) ‘Nationalism: past neglect, present power’ in H. Hardy and R. Hausheer (eds) 

The proper study of mankind: an anthology of essays, London: Pimlico, 581–604. 

Billig, M. (1995) Banal nationalism, London: Sage. 
Bolzman C., F. Rosita, V. Marie with the collaboration of El-S. Jasmin and E. Elisabeth (2000) 
‘Adultes issus de la migration: le procesus d’insertion d’une génération à l’autre’, Rapport 
de recherche au PNR39, Genève: Institut d’études socials, manuscript. 

Bommes,  M.  and  J.  Halfmann  (1994)  ‘Migration  und  Inklusion:  Spannungen  zwischen 
für  Soziologie  und  Sozial-

Nationalstaat  und  Wohlfahrtsstaat’,  Kölner  Zeitschrift 
psychologie, 46, 406–24. 

Borneman, J. (1997) ‘State, territory, and national identity formation in the two Berlins, 1945–
1995’ in A. Gupta and J. Ferguson (eds) Culture, power and place: explorations in critical 
anthropology, Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 93–117. 

Breuilly, J. (1993) Nationalism and the state, Manchester: Manchester University Press. 
Brubaker,  R.  (1992)  Citizenship  and  nationhood  in  France  and  Germany,  Harvard:  Harvard 

University Press. 

Brubaker, R. (1998) ‘Myths and misconceptions in the study of nationalism’ in J. Hall (ed.) The 
state of the nation: Ernest Gellner and the theory of nationalism, Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 272–306. 

Calhoun, C. (1997) Nationalism, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.  
Castles,  S.  (1995)  ‘How  nation-states  respond  to  immigration  and  ethnic  diversity’,  New 

Community, 21, 293–308. 

Castles, S. (2001) ‘Studying social transformation’, International Political Science Review, 22, 

13–32. 

Castles,  S. and G.  Kosack  (1974) Immigrant  workers  and  class  structure  in  western  Europe, 

London: Oxford University Press. 

Chaney, E. (1979) ‘The world economy and contemporary migration’, International Migration 

Review, 13, 204–12. 

Cinel,  D.  (1982)  From  Italy  to  San  Francisco:  the  immigrant  experience,  Stanford,  CA: 

Stanford University Press. 

Cohen,  R.  (1997)  Global  diasporas:  an  introduction,  Seattle:  University  of  Washington 

Press. 

Dikötter,  F.  (1997)  ‘Racial  discourse  in  China:  continuities  and  permutations’  in  F.  Dikötter 
(ed.) The construction of racial identities in China and Japan: historical and contemporary 
perspectives, Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 12–33. 

Eisenstadt, S. N. (2000) ‘Multiple modernities’, Daedalus: Journal of the American Academy 

of Arts and Sciences, 129, 1–29. 

Esser,  H.  (1988)  ‘Ethnische  Differenzierung  und  moderne  Gesellschaft’,  Zeitschrift  für 

Soziologie, 17, 235–48. 

Favell,  A.  (1998)  Philosophies  of  integration:  immigration  and  the  idea  of  citizenship  in 

France and Britain, London: Macmillan. 

328 

Methodological nationalism and beyond 

Favell, A. (2001) ‘Review essay: Migration, mobility and globaloney: metaphors and rhetoric 

in the sociology of globalization’, Global Networks, 1, 389–98. 

Favell,  A.  (forthcoming)  ‘The  integration  of  immigrants  in  Western  Europe:  contours  and 
constraints of a research paradigm’ in M. Bommes and E. Morawska (eds)  Reflections on 
migration research: constructions, omissions and promises of interdisciplinarity, Berkeley: 
University of California Press. 

Featherstone,  M.  (ed.)  (1993)  Global  culture:  nationalism,  globalization  and  modernity, 

London: Sage. 

Foner, N. (1997) ‘What’s new about transnationalism? New York immigrants today and at the 

turn of the century’, Diaspora, 6, 355–74. 

Foner,  N.  (ed.)  (2001)  Islands  in  the  city:  West  Indian  migration  to  New  York,  Berkeley: 

University of California Press. 

Fouron, G. and N. Glick Schiller (forthcoming) ‘Killing me softly: violence, globalization and 
the apparent state’ in J. Friedman (ed.) Globalization, the state and violence, Lanham, MD: 
AltaMira Press. 

Friedman, J. (1996) ‘Politics of de-authentification: escaping from identity, a commentary on 

“beyond authenticity” by Mark Rogers’, Identities, 3, 127–36. 

Fuglerud,  Ø.  (1999)  Life  on  the  outside:  the  Tamil  diaspora  and  long  distance  nationalism, 

London: Pluto. 

Gabaccia, D. R. (2000) Italy’s many diasporas: elites, exiles and workers of the world, Seattle: 

University of Washington Press. 

Gans,  H.  (1982)  The  urban  villagers:  group  and  class  in  the  life  of  Italian-Americans,  New 

York: Free Press, second edition. 

Gellner, E. (1983) Nations and nationalism, Ithaca: Cornell University Press. 
Giddens, A. (1995) Nation-state and violence, Los Angeles: University of California Press. 
Gilroy,  P.  (1991)  There  ain’t  no  black  in  the  Union  Jack:  the  cultural  politics  of  race  and 

nation, Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 

Gilroy,  P.  (1993)  The  black  Atlantic:  modernity  and  double  consciousness,  Cambridge,  MA: 

Harvard University Press. 

Glazer, N. (1954) ‘Ethnic groups in America: from national culture to ideology’ in M. Berger, 
T.  Abel  and  C.  Page  (eds)  Freedom  and  control  in  modern  society,  New  York:  Van 
Nostrand, 158–73. 

Glazer,  N.  and  D. P.  Moynihan  (1963)  Beyond  the  melting  pot:  the  Negroes,  Puerto  Ricans, 

Jews, Italians, and Irish of New York City, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 

Glick (Schiller) Barnett, N. (1975) The formation of a Haitian ethnic group, Ph.D. dissertation, 

Department of Anthropology, Columbia University, New York. 

Glick Schiller, N. (1977) ‘Ethnic groups are made not born’ in G. L. Hicks and P. E. Leis (eds) 

Ethnic encounters: identities and contexts, North Scituate, MA: Duxbury Press, 23–35. 

Glick Schiller, N. (1999a) ‘Transmigrants and nation-states: something old and something new 
in US immigrant experience’ in C. Hirschman, J. DeWind and P. Kasinitz (eds) Handbook 
of international migration: the American experience, New York: Russell Sage, 94–119.  

Glick  Schiller,  N.  (1999b)  ‘Who  are  these  guys?  A  transnational  perspective  on  national 
identities’  in  L.  Goldin  (ed.)  Identities  on  the  move:  transnational  processes  in  North 
America and the Caribbean Basin, Houston: University of Texas Press, 15–44. 

Glick Schiller, N. (1999c) ‘Transnational nation-states and their citizens: the Asian experience’ 
in K. Olds, P. Dicken, P. Kelly, L. Kong and H. Wai-chung Yeung (eds) Globalization and 
the Asia Pacific, London: Routledge, 202–18.  

Glick  Schiller,  N.  (2000)  ‘Long  distance  nationalism:  pasts,  presents,  and  futures’,  paper 

delivered at Harvard Anthropology Seminar.  

Glick Schiller, N. and G. Fouron (1991) ‘Everywhere we go we are in danger: Ti manno and 

the emergence of a Haitian transnational identity’, American Ethnologist, 17, 329–47. 

329 

Andreas Wimmer and Nina Glick Schiller 

Glick Schiller, N. and G. Fouron (2001a) Georges woke up laughing: long distance nationalism 

and the search for home, Durham, NC: Duke University Press. 

Glick  Schiller,  N.  and  G.  Fouron  (2001b)  ‘I  am  not  a  problem  without  a  solution:  poverty, 
transnational  migration,  and  struggle’  in  J.  Maskovsky  and  J.  Good  (eds)  New  poverty 
studies: the ethnography of politics, policy and impoverished people in the US, New York: 
New York University Press, 321–63. 

Glick Schiller, N., L. Basch and C. Blanc Szanton (1992) Towards a transnational perspective 
on migration: race, class, ethnicity and  nationalism  reconsidered, New York: New York 
Academy of Sciences. 

Glick  Schiller,  N.,  L.  Basch  and  C.  Blanc  Szanton  (1995)  ‘From  immigrant  to  transmigrant: 

theorizing transnational migration’, Anthropology Quarterly, 68, 48–63. 

Goldring, L. (1996) ‘Blurring borders: constructing transnational community in the process of 

Mexico–US migration’, Research in Community Sociology, 6, 69–104. 

Gonzalez,  N.  (1988)  Soujourners  of  the  Caribbean:  ethnogenesis  and  ethnohistory  of  the 

Garifuna, Urbana: University of Illinois Press. 

Guarnizo, L. E. (1997) ‘The emergence of a transnational social formation and the mirage of 

return migration among Dominican transmigrants’, Identities, 4, 281–322. 

Guarnizo, L. E. (1998) ‘The rise of transnational social formations: Mexican and Dominican 
state responses to transnational migration’, Political Power and Social Theory, 12, 45–
94. 

Guarnizo,  L. E.  and  L. M.  Diaz  (1999)  ‘Transnational  migration:  a  view  from  Colombia’, 

Ethnic and Racial Studies, 22, 397–421. 

Guernée, B. (1986) ‘Des limites féodales aux frontières politiques’ in P. Nora (ed.) Les lieux de 

mémoire, vol. 2, La Nation, Paris: Gallimard, 11–34. 

Guibernau, M. (1997) ‘Marx and Durkheim on nationalism’, in H-R. Wicker (ed.) Rethinking 
nationalism  and  ethnicity:  the  struggle  for  meaning  and  order  in  Europe,  Oxford:  Berg, 
73–90. 

Hall,  C.,  K.  McClelland  and  J.  Rendall  (2000)  Defining  the  Victorian  nation:  class,  race, 

gender and the British Reform Act of 1867, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Hall, S. (1989) ‘Ethnicity, identity and difference’, Radical America, 23, 9–20. 
Harrington,  M.  (1982)  ‘Loyalties:  dual  and  divided’  in  S.  Thernstrom  (ed.)  The  politics  of 

ethnicity, Cambridge: MA: Belknap Press, 104–9. 

Held,  D.,  A.  McGrew,  D.  Goldblatt  and  J.  Perraton  (1999)  Global  transformations:  politics, 

economics and culture, Oxford: Polity Press. 

Henke,  R.  (2001)  ‘Funding  possibilities  for  ex  ante  designed  internationally  comparative 
empirical research’, Report prepared for the Metropolis International Steering Committee, 
manuscript. 

Hoffmann-Nowotny,  Hans-Joachim  (1973)  Soziologie  des  Fremdarbeiterproblems:  Eine 

theoretische und empirische Analyse am Beispiel der Schweiz, Stuttgart: Enke. 

Hondrich, K. O. (1992) ‘Wovon wir nichts wissen wollten’, Die Zeit, 25 September. 
Imhof,  K.  (1997)  ‘Nationalism  and  the  theory  of  society’  in  H-R.  Wicker  (ed.)  Rethinking 
nationalism  and  ethnicity:  the  struggle  for  meaning  and  order  in  Europe,  Oxford:  Berg, 
57–72. 

Jessop,  B.  (1999)  ‘Reflections  on  globalization  and  its  (il)logic(s)’  in  K.  Olds,  P.  Dicken,  P. 
Kelly,  L.  Kong  and  H.  Wai-chung  Yeung  (eds)  Globalization  and  the  Asia-Pacific: 
contested territories, London: Routledge, 19–38. 

Karakasidou, A. N. (1994) ‘Sacred scholars, profane advocates: intellectuals molding national 

consciousness in Greece’, Identities, 1, 35–62. 

Kearney, M. (1991) ‘Borders and boundaries of the state and self at the end of empire’, Journal 

of Historical Sociology, 4, 52–74. 

Kwong, P. (1987) The new Chinatown, New York: Hill and Wong. 

330 

Methodological nationalism and beyond 

Lebovics,  H.  (1992)  True  France:  the  wars  over  cultural  identity,  1900–1945,  Ithaca,  NY: 

Cornell University Press. 

Lemelle,  S.  and  R.  Kelley  (1994)  Imagining  home:  class,  culture  and  nationalism  in  the 

African diaspora, London: Verso. 

Lesser,  J.  (1999)  Negotiating  national  identity:  immigrants,  minorities  and  the  struggle  for 

ethnicity in Brazil, Durham, NC: Duke University Press.  

Levitt,  P.  (1997)  ‘Transnationalizing  community  development:  the  case  of  migration  between 
Boston and the Dominican Republic’, Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 26, 509–26. 
Lieberson,  S.  (1980)  A  piece  of  the  pie:  black  and  white  immigrants  since  1880,  Berkeley: 

University of California Press. 

List, F. (1974/1856) National system of political economy, New York: Garland. 
Luton, H. (1976) ‘The satellite/metropolis model: a critique’, Theory and Society, 3, 573–81. 
McCrone, D. (1998) The sociology of nationalism, London: Routledge. 
Mahler,  S.  (1998)  ‘Theoretical  and  empirical  contributions  toward  a  research  agenda  for 
transnationalism’  in  M. P.  Smith  and  L. E.  Guarnizo  (eds)  Transnationalism  from  below, 
New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 64–100. 

Mann, M. (1993) The sources of social power, volume II: the rise of classes and nation-states, 

1760–1914, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Martins, H. (1974) ‘Time and theory in sociology’ in J. Rex (ed.) Approaches to sociology: an 
introduction  to  major  trends  in  British  sociology,  London  and  Boston:  Routledge  and 
Kegan Paul, 246–94. 

Mayall,  J.  (1990)  Nationalism  and  international  society,  Cambridge:  Cambridge  University 

Press. 

Meillassoux,  C.  (1980)  ‘Gegen  eine  Ethnologie  der  Arbeitsmigration’  in  J.  Blaschke  and  K. 

Greussing (eds) Dritte Welt in Europa, Frankfurt: Syndikat, 53–9. 

Mittleman,  J.  (1996a)  ‘The  dynamics  of  globalization’  in  J.  Mittleman  (ed.)  Globalization: 

critical reflections, Boulder, CO: Lynne Reinner, 1–20. 

Mittleman,  J.  (1996b)  ‘How  does  globalization  really  work?’  in  J.  Mittleman  (ed.) 

Globalization: critical reflections, Boulder, CO: Lynne Reinner, 21–32. 

Morawska, E. (2001) ‘The new–old transmigrants, their transnational lives and ethnicization: a 
comparison of 19th/20th and 20th/21st C. situations’ in J. Mollenkopf and G. Gerstle (eds) 
Immigrants, civic culture and modes of political incorporation, New York: Sage and Social 
Science Council, 175–211. 

Niculescu,  G.-A.  (forthcoming)  ‘Nationalism  and  the  representation  of  society  in  Romanian 
archaeology’ in A. Oroveanu et al. (eds) Nation and national ideology: past, present and 
prospects, Bucharest: New Europe College. 

Nodia, G. (1992) ‘Nationalism and democracy’, Journal of Democracy, 3 (4), 3–22. 
Nordman, D. (1997) ‘Des limites d’état aux frontières nationales’ in P. Nora (ed.) Les lieux de 

mémoire: la nation, vol. 1, Paris: Gallimard, 1125–46. 

Nyiri,  P.  (1999)  New  Chinese  migrants  in  Europe:  the  case  of  the  Chinese  community  in 

Hungary, Aldershot: Ashgate. 

Ong,  A.  (1997)  ‘A  momentary  glow  of  fraternity:  narratives  of  Chinese  nationalism  and 
capitalism’ in N. Glick Schiller (ed.) Narratives of capitalism, Special issue of Identities, 3, 
331–66. 

Ong, A. (1999) Flexible citizenship: the cultural logic of transnationality, Durham, NC: Duke 

University Press. 

Ong,  A.  and  D.  Nonini  (eds)  (1997)  Ungrounded  empires:  the  cultural  politics  of  Chinese 

transnationalism, New York: Routledge. 

Panitch, L. (1996) ‘Rethinking the role of the state’ in J. Mittleman (ed.) Globalization: critical 

reflections, Boulder, CO: Lynne Reinner, 83–113. 

Panitch, L. (2000) ‘The new imperial state’, New Left Review, 2, 5–20. 

331 

Andreas Wimmer and Nina Glick Schiller 

Papastergiadis, N. (2000)  The turbulence of migration: globalization, deterritorialization and 

hybridity, Cambridge: Polity Press. 

Park, R. E. (1950) Race and culture, Glencoe, IL: Free Press. 
Park, R. E. (1974/1925) ‘Immigrant community and immigrant press and its control’ reprinted 
in E. Hughes, C. Johnson, J. Masuoka, R. Redfield and L. Wirth (eds) The collected papers 
of Robert Park, New York: Arno, 152–64. 

Portes,  A.,  L. E.  Guarnizo  and  P.  Landolt  (eds)  (1999)  ‘Transnational  communities’,  special 

issue of Ethnic and Racial Studies, 22 (2). 

Potts, L. (1990) The world labour market: a history of migration, London: Zed Books. 
Radtke, F.-O. (1996) ‘Fremde und Allzufremde. Zur Ausbreitung des ethnologischen Blicks in 
der  Einwanderungsgesellschaft’  in  H.-R.  Wicker,  J.-L.  Alber,  C.  Bolzman,  R.  Fibbi,  K. 
Imhof  and  A.  Wimmer  (eds)  Das  Fremde  in  der  Gesellschaft:  Migration,  Ethnizität  und 
Staat, Zurich: Seismos, 333–52. 

Rafael,  V.  (1995)  Discrepant  histories:  translocal  essays  on  Filipino  cultures,  Philadelphia: 

Temple University Press.  

Ravenstein,  E. G.  (1889)  ‘The  laws  of  migration:  second  paper’,  Journal  of  Royal  Statistical 

Society, 52, 241–305. 

Redding, J. (1958) Inside the Democratic Party, Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill. 
Renan,  E.  (1947/1882)  ‘Que’est-ce  qu’  une  nation?’  in  Oeuvres  complètes,  vol.  1,  Paris: 

Calmann-Levy, 887–90. 

Rodgers,  D.  (1998)  Atlantic  crossings:  social  politics  in  a  progressive  age,  Cambridge,  MA: 

Belknap Press of Harvard. 

Rouse, R. (1991) ‘Mexican migration and the social space of postmodernism’, Diaspora, 1, 8–

23. 

Rouse,  R.  (1992)  ‘Making  sense  of  settlement:  class  transformation,  cultural  struggle  and 
transnationalism  among  Mexican  migrants  in  the  United  States’  in  N.  Glick  Schiller,  L. 
Basch and C. Blanc-Szanton (eds) Towards a transnational perspective on migration: race, 
class, ethnicity and nationalism reconsidered, New York: New York Academy of Sciences, 
25–52. 

Rumbaut,  R. G.  and  W. A.  Cornelius  (eds)  (1995)  California’s  immigrant  children:  theory, 
research  and  implications  for  educational  policy,  San  Diego:  Center  for  US–Mexican 
Studies, University of California, San Diego. 

Sassen, S. (1996) Losing control: sovereignty in an age of globalization, New York: Columbia. 
Sassen, S. (1999) Guests and aliens, New York: New Press. 
Sassen,  S.  (2001)  ‘Cracked  casings:  notes  towards  an  analytics  for  studying  transnational 
processes’ in L. Pries (ed.) New transnational social spaces, London: Routledge, 187–207. 
Schermerhorn,  R. A.  (1949)  These  our  people:  minorities  in  American  culture,  Boston,  MA: 

DC Heath and Company. 

Schnapper,  D.  (1991)  La  France  de  l’intégration:  sociologie  de  la  nation  en  1990,  Paris: 

Gallimard. 

Sen, A. (1999) Reason before identity, Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Silverman,  M.  (1995)  ‘Rights  and  difference:  questions  of  citizenship  in  France’  in  A. 
Hargreaves  and  J.  Leaman  (eds)  Racism,  ethnicity,  and  politics  in  contemporary  Europe, 
Aldershot: Edward Elgar, 253–63. 

Skrbi˘, Z. (1999) Long distance nationalism: diasporas, homelands and identities, Aldershot: 

Ashgate. 

Smart, A. (1997) ‘Capitalist story-telling and hegemonic crises: some comments’, Identities, 3, 

399–412. 

Smith, A. (1983/1789) An inquiry into the nature and causes of the wealth of nations, Oxford: 

Oxford University Press. 

Smith, A. D. (1983) ‘Nationalism and social theory’, British Journal of Sociology, 34, 19–38. 

332 

Methodological nationalism and beyond 

Smith, A. D. (1995) Nations and nationalism in a global era, Cambridge: Polity Press. 
Smith, A. D. (1998) Nationalism and modernism: a critical survey of recent theories of nations 

and nationalism, London: Routledge. 

Smith,  M. P.  and  L. E.  Guarnizo  (eds)  (1998)  Transnationalism  from  below:  comparative 

urban and community research, 6, New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers. 

Smith,  R.  (1997)  ‘Transnational  migration,  assimilation,  and  political  community’  in  M. 
Crahan  and  A.  Vourvoulias-Bush  (eds)  The  city  and  the  world,  New  York:  Council  on 
Foreign Relations, 110–32. 

Smith,  R.  (1998)  ‘Transnational  localities:  community,  technology  and  the  politics  of 
membership  within  the  context  of  Mexico–US  migration’  in  M. P.  Smith  and  L. E. 
Guarnizo  (eds)  (1998)  Transnationalism  from  below:  comparative  urban  and  community 
research, 6, New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 196–241. 

Snyder,  J.  (2000)  From  voting  to  violence:  democratization  and  nationalist  violence,  New 

York: Norton. 

Steinberg,  S.  (1989)  The  ethnic  myth:  race,  ethnicity  and  class  in  America,  Boston:  Beacon 

Press. 

Stoler, A. (1989) ‘Making empire respectable: the politics of race and sexual morality in 20th 

century colonial cultures’, American Ethnologist, 16, 634–60. 

Szanton Blanc, C. (1997) ‘A thoroughly modern Asian: capital, culture and nation in Thailand 
and  the  Philippines’  in  A.  Ong  and  D.  Nonini  (eds)  Ungrounded  empires:  the  cultural 
politics of Chinese transnationalism, New York: Routledge, 261–86. 

Taguieff, P-A. (1991) ‘Le “nationalisme des nationalists”: un problème pour l’histoire des idées 
politiques  en  France’  in  G.  Delannoi  and  P.-A.  Taguieff  (eds)  Théories  du  nationalisme, 
Paris: Éditions Kimé, 47–174.  

Taylor,  P. J.  (1996)  ‘Embedded  statism  and  the  social  sciences:  opening  up  to  new  spaces’, 

Environment and Planning A, 28, 1917–28. 

Therborn,  G.  (1995)  European  modernity  and  beyond:  the  trajectory  of  European  societies, 

1945–2000, London: Sage. 

Thompson, A. and R. Fevre (2001) ‘The national question: sociological reflections on nation 

and nationalism’, Nations and Nationalism, 7, 297–315. 

Torpey,  J.  (2000)  The  invention  of  the  passport:  surveillance,  citizenship  and  the  state, 

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Tribalat, M. (1995) Faire France: une grande enquête sur les immigrés et leurs enfants, Paris: 

Editions La Découverte. 

Ture, K. and C. Hamilton (1992/1967) Black Power: the politics of liberation in America, New 

York: Vintage Books. 

Urry, J. (2000) Sociology beyond societies, London: Routledge. 
Vertovec, S. (ed.) (1999) Migration and social cohesion, Aldershot: Edward Elgar. 
von Hayek, F. (1943) ‘Scientism and the study of society’, Economica, 10, 34–63. 
Waldinger,  R.  (2000)  ‘The  sociology  of  immigration:  second  thoughts  and  reconsiderations’, 
keynote  address  prepared  for  the  conference  on  migration  and  development,  Princeton 
University. 

Wallerstein, I. (1961) Africa: the politics of independence, New York: Vintage. 
Wallerstein, I. (1974) The modern world-system: capitalist agriculture and the origins of the 

European world-economy in the sixteenth century, New York: Academic Press. 
Weed, P. (1973) The white ethnic movement and ethnic politics, New York: Praeger. 
Went, R. (2000) Globalization: neoliberal challenges, radical responses, London: Pluto. 
Williams, B. F. (1989) ‘A class act: anthropology and the race to nation across ethnic terrain’, 

Annual Review of Anthropology, 18, 401–44. 

Wilson, T. and H. Donnan (eds) (1998) Border identities: nation and state at the international 

frontier, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

333 

Andreas Wimmer and Nina Glick Schiller 

Wimmer, A. (1996a) ‘L’héritage de Herder: nationalisme, migrations et la pratique théorique 

de l’anthropologie’, Tsantsa: Revue de la Société Suisse d’Ethnologie, 1, 4–18. 

Wimmer, A. (1996b) ‘L’État-nation: une forme de fermeture sociale’, Archives Européennes de 

Sociologie, 37, 163–79. 

Wimmer,  A.  (1998a)  ‘Binnenintegration  und  Aussenabschliessung:  zur  Beziehung  zwischen 
Wohlfahrtsstaat  und  Migrationssteuerung  in  der  Schweiz  des  20  Jahrhunderts’  in  M. 
Bommes and J. Halfmann (eds) Migration in nationalen Wohlfahrtsstaaten: Theoretische 
und vergleichende Untersuchungen, Osnabrück: IMIS, 199–221. 

Wimmer,  A.  (1998b)  ‘Zurich’s  Miami:  transethnic  relations  of  a  transnational  community’, 
Transnational  Communities  Working  Paper  WP-98-07,  Oxford:  Institute  for  Social  and 
Cultural Anthropology. 

Wimmer,  A.  (1999)  ‘Verwischte  Grenzen:  Zum  Verhältnis  zwischen  Soziologie,  Ethnologie 
und  Volkskunde’  in  C.  Giordano  (ed.)  Borderlines:  Soziologie,  Kulturanthropologie  und 
Ethnologie. Annali di Sociologia – Soziologisches Jahrbuch, 12. 

Wimmer,  A.  (2001a)  ‘Globalizations  avant  la  letter:  a  comparative  view  on  isomorphization 
and heteromorphization in an interconnecting world’, Comparative Studies in Society and 
History, 43, 435–66. 

Wimmer, A. (2001b) ‘Modernisation as a case of transformation’ in G. Elwert, M. Kohli, W.-
H. Krauth and W. Schelkle (eds) Paradigms of social change: modernisation, development, 
transformation, evolution, Frankfurt: Campus, 77–89. 

Wimmer,  A.  (2002)  Nationalist  exclusion  and  ethnic  conflict:  shadows  of  modernity, 

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Wolf, E. R. (1982) Europe and the people without history, Berkeley: University of California 

Press. 

Wyman,  M.  (1993)  Round-trip  to  America:  the  immigrants  return  to  Europe  1880–1930, 

Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. 

Zolberg,  A.  (1983)  ‘The  formation  of  new  states  as  a  refugee-generating  process’  in  G. 
Loescher and J. Scanlan (eds) ‘The global refugee problem: US and world response’, The 
Annals of American Academy of Political and Social Science, 467, 24–38. 

334 

