Vol. 144, No. 2  ·  Research article

Slum  tourism  in  the  context  of  the 
tourism and poverty (relief) debate

Fabian Frenzel1

1 School of Management, University of Leicester, University Road, Leicester LE1 7RH, England, ff48@le.ac.uk

Manuscript submitted: 31 May 2012  /  Accepted for publication:  11 July 2013   /  Published online: 19 November 2013

Abstract
The  paper  examines  the  role  of  slum  tourism  in  poverty  relief.  To  do  so,  it  surveys  the  state-of-the-art  literature  on 
tourism  and  poverty  and  investigates  the  ways  in  which  slum  tourism  research  relates  to  this  literature.  Slum  tou-
rism  research  has  addressed  the  question  of  how  the  poor  may  benefit  from  this  practice;  however,  these  efforts 
have  not  systematically  considered  the  general  debate  on  tourism  and  poverty  relief.  The  survey  of  slum  tourism 
 re  search  also  contributes  to  the  conceptual  development  of  the  tourism-poverty  nexus.  The  predominant  choice  of  ap-
proaches  in  this  field  relies  on  quantitative  indicators  of  poverty  relief,  but  these  do  not  sufficiently  account  for  the 
 multi -dimensional  character  of  poverty.  The  study  of  slum  tourism  research  points  to  the  multi-dimensional  valorisa-
tion  of  poverty  in  tourism  which  is  an  aspect  often  overlooked  in  the  state-of-the-art  research  on  tourism  and  poverty.

Zusammenfassung

Der Artikel untersucht die Rolle des Slumtourismus bei der Armutsbekämpfung. Dazu wird der Stand in der 
Li teratur zum Thema Tourismus und Armut dargestellt und überprüft, inwieweit sich die Forschung zu Slum­
tourismus auf diese Literatur bezieht. Die Slumtourismusforschung hat zwar die Frage aufgeworfen, in welcher 
Weise die Armen von dieser Aktivität profitieren, jedoch wurde dabei die allgemeine Diskussion zu Tourismus und 
Armut nicht systematisch berücksichtigt. Der Überblick über die Slumtourismusforschung trägt darüber hinaus 
auch zur Weiterentwicklung des Konzepts ‚Tourismus und Armut‘ bei. Die vorherrschenden Ansätze auf diesem 
Gebiet gründen sich auf quantitative Armutsindikatoren, diese werden jedoch dem mehrdimensio nalen Charakter 
von Armut nicht gerecht. Die Untersuchung der Slumtourismusforschung verweist auf die viel schichtige Inwert­
setzung von Armut durch Tourismus, ein häufig übersehener Aspekt in der Literatur zu Tou rismus und Armut. 
Keywords      Slum tourism, poverty, poverty alleviation
to poverty relief. Slum tourism promoters, tour provi­
ders as well as tourists claim that this form of tour­
Slum tourism is on the rise across the developing 
ism contributes to development in slums by creating a 
variety of potential sources of income and other non­
world and it remains a contentious and much­debated 
leisure practice. While critics maintain that visiting 
material benefits. In line with these assessments and 
slums is voyeuristic (see Butler 2012 for an overview 
on the basis of similar arguments local governments 
of the arguments), proponents often link slum tourism 
in more developed slum tourism locations encourage 
Frenzel, Fabian 2013: Slum tourism in the context of the tourism and poverty (relief) debate. – DIE ERDE 144 (2): 117­128

1.   Introduction

DOI: 10.12854/erde­144­9

117

DIE ERDE · Vol. 144 · 2/2013DIE ERDEJournal of the Geographical Society of BerlinSlum tourism in the context of the tourism and poverty (relief) debate

and support slum tourism as a development strategy. 
In the ethical debates on slum tourism, its apparent 
economic benefit is most frequently evoked. In this ar­
gument, slum tourism proponents tap into the claim 
that tourism can be a solution to underdevelopment 
and poverty, a view that sees tourism as a moderni­
sation strategy for least developed (LDC) and develo­
ping countries (DC). In the last 40 years, however, such 
arguments have been frequently contested and critics 
have pointed to the limits of tourism as a development 
and anti­poverty strategy (Scheyvens 2007, 2011; Hall 
2007). In the most comprehensive review of the de­
bate to date, Scheyvens (2011) concludes that a care­
ful evaluation of specific initiatives needs to  replace 
earlier generalisations. She warns against a blanket 
assumption of the use and usefulness of tou rism as a 
development strategy. In academic reflections on slum 
tourism there have been multiple  attempts to evaluate 
its potential to relieve poverty; however, both a link to 
existing debates in the broader tourism field as well as 
a synthesis of the approaches is lacking.
The purpose of this paper is to address this deficit by 
surveying existing research of slum tourism’s role in 
poverty relief in the context of broader discussions on 
tourism and poverty. Slum tourism has grown signifi­
cantly over the last 30 years both in size and range of 
destinations, however it remains a niche form of tou­
rism in comparison to overall tourism in LDC and DCs. 
Despite this niche character in proportional terms, I 
argue that slum tourism offers specific insights into 
the study of tourism and poverty because slum tou­
rism has a special relationship to poverty. This is pre­
dominantly so because in slum tourism poverty is not 
just a more or less accidental condition of the locale. 
Rather, poverty itself becomes the main attraction of 
the destination and is central to the discourses that 
constitute the slum tourism experience (Rolfes 2009; 
Meschkank 2010;  Dyson 2012). The perspectives on 
poverty relief in slum tourism differ to those in other 
forms of tourism in LDC and DC. These differences 
include the much­observed paradox about slum tour­
ism and poverty alleviation: If slum tourism was a 
 successful strategy for poverty mitigation, would it not 
undermine its own premise (Steinbrink et al. 2012)? 
More questions arise: As people pay to see poverty, 
poverty becomes a commodity (Freire-Medeiros  2009) 
and is valorised (Rolfes 2009). What implications does 
this have for the social construction of poverty in 
slum tourism? Is slum tourism in some way rendering 
poverty into something valuable? Is poverty norma­
lised and made acceptable in slum tourism? Does slum 
118

tourism perhaps deal with the problem of poverty by 
making poverty unproblematic? Such negative assess­
ments are set against more positive ones. 
Slum tourism does not occur in all poor areas of the 
world, but develops under very specific conditions, 
and the study of these conditions is one of the key 
questions for slum tourism research (Frenzel 2012). 
One of these conditions seems to be linked to pio­
neering visits to slums by justice tourists (Scheyvens 
2002). Events of political tourism of the global justice 
movement ( Higgins-Desbiolles 2008, 2009b) triggered 
slum tourism development in three of its mayor glob­
al destinations, in the townships of South Africa, in 
Rio de Janeiro and in Nairobi in Kenya (Frenzel 2012). 
Does slum tourism arise from visits by political tour­
ists interested in pursuing global justice and equity? 
Do its political roots remain as justice tourism de­
velops into a broader consumer leisure practice of 
slum tourism in some destinations? These questions 
about the political nature of slum tourism point to 
an important and yet generally overlooked aspect 
of the ‘tourism and poverty nexus’ (Scheyvens 2011), 
namely that poverty is a political problem. Defini­
tions of poverty differ greatly between approaches. 
Poverty is defined as absolute or relative, as material 
or as multi­dimensional, to mention the most impor­
tant perspectives. These definitions in the literature 
 relate to how poverty (and therefore poverty relief) is 
identified and measured and what results such meas­
ures produce. Poverty is also socially constructed as 
a problem, and the specific ways in which the prob­
lem is constructed open up a space for fierce politi­
cal debates. Poverty alleviation today is a universal 
aim, an enshrined ethical and political target across 
the world regardless of context and situation. At the 
same time, poverty appears to result from economic 
and political arrangements that are broadly defended 
and supported. Poverty alleviation is therefore also 
a political question, with a discursive history as the 
‘social question’ (Arendt 2006) that is increasingly 
debated on a global scale (Frenzel 2012). 
Tourism studies’ approaches to poverty and poverty 
relief have to be understood in the context of this com­
plex debate (Scheyvens 2011). In this paper I firstly 
review the state­of­the­art literature on tourism and 
poverty relief. This review is structured along the later 
questions for the review of research on slum tourism 
and poverty relief, namely what conceptions of poverty 
are considered and how poverty is quantitatively as­
sessed. Moreover, I ask to what extent poverty is un­

DIE ERDE · Vol. 144 · 2/2013Slum tourism in the context of the tourism and poverty (relief) debate

2.  The tourism and poverty (relief) debate
2.1 Early approaches: liberal and critical

derstood as a political ‘social’ question and placed in 
the context of the broader economic and political order. 
Following on from this reflection I introduce the way 
poverty relief has been addressed in the context of slum 
tourism. I survey studies that have attempted to meas­
ure slum tourism´s effect on poverty relief. In the exist­
ing literature, slum tourism’s effects on poverty relief 
are mostly addressed on a case study basis. In review­
ing this literature conclusions can be drawn towards 
a future research agenda on poverty relief. Finally – 
as the review shows – the slum tourism discourse on 
poverty relief often evokes qualitative approaches that 
provide new insights into social and political questions 
over poverty relief.  The slum tourism discourses are 
linked to the political and social question of poverty. 
I conclude by attempting to answer how the special 
character of slum tourism may contribute to the un­
derstanding of the tourism­poverty nexus. 
In her comprehensive review of literature on the nexus 
of tourism and poverty, Scheyvens (2011, 2007) differ­
entiates four conceptual approaches that structure the 
debate as well as give some idea of its historical devel­
opment; the (neo­)liberal, the critical, the alternative 
and the poststructuralist/post­development approach. 
The liberal approach links tourism to development 
and modernisation and sees the tourism phenomenon 
primarily as an economic exchange. According to this 
reading tourism provides a promising tool for poverty 
relief because it offers foreign exchange earnings and 
growth potential in LDCs and DCs. Poor countries of­
ten have resources desired by tourists, including hard­
ly developed natural environments, e.g. beaches and 
mountain areas. The income differences between visi­
tors and hosts provide the backdrop for competitive 
destination pricing. As early as the 1950s and 1960s 
this affirmative approach to tourism development led 
to World­Bank­financed tourism programmes (Haw-
kins and  Mann 2007). Nation states, primarily in the 
Mediterranean area, also adopted tourism develop­
ment approaches based on this assumed perfect match. 
Parallel to the overall approach to poverty alleviation 
at the time, poverty was primarily understood as a 
problem that results from underdevelopment and that 
can be cured by economic growth. Once tourism was 
established as an industry it would provide the growth 
needed to foster development and poverty reduction 
would follow (Zhao and Ritchie 2007). 

From the 1970s onwards this approach has met with 
increasing scepticism.  Scheyvens (2011) describes the 
views emanating from this period as the ‘critical ap­
proach’ to tourism as a tool for poverty reduction. The 
critics were often motivated by a rejection of mass tour­
ism development as well as a critical view on some of 
the cultural implications of the expansion of tourism, 
often describing tourism in LCDs/DCs as a form of neo­
colonialism or ­imperialism (Turner and Ash 1975; Nash 
1989). Critics also highlighted the costs of tourism for de­
veloping countries in terms of cultural and social change. 
Empirical research into the effects of tourism­led de­
velopment further questioned many of the assumptions 
about tourism’s potential as a ‘passport to development’ 
(De  Kadt 1979) on economical grounds. The research 
showed that tourism development in DCs and LDCs led to 
growth, however foreign exchange earnings leaked back 
to developed countries as tourists’ desires for imported 
products and investors’ returns on investment had to be 
served. Traditional development approaches came under 
increasing scrutiny in the 1980s as a spiralling debt cri­
sis locked many countries in the developing world firmly 
into dependency.  Foreign exchange earnings seemed not 
to help the development of the country nor trickle down 
to ease the burden of poverty among populations. Rather 
they were often completely consumed to service foreign 
debt. As critics point out, tourism combined the econom­
ic ‘underdevelopment’ caused by dependency with the 
post­colonial discursive ‘under­development’ in which 
tourism constructed LDCs and DCs as places of depriva­
tion and want, establishing a post­colonial supremacy of 
the global ‘North’ (Hall and Tucker 2004; Escobar 1995).
In the 1980s, alternative forms of tourism developed 
to address the limits of the previous development 
of tourism. Alternative tourism encompasses many 
approaches to tourism. With regard to the tourism­ 
poverty nexus, alternative approaches attempt to cre­
ate forms of tourism that can more directly contribute 
to the development of the poorest and to prevent some 
of the negative impacts (Scheyvens 2011). This includes 
the development of ‘community­based tourism’ (CBT). 
CBT attempts to direct tourist flows to the poorest 
by establishing tourism in communities on the basis 
of their direct participation. In the 1980s and 1990s 
CBT developed into a strong fad among development 
institutions  and  non­governmental  organisations 
(NGOs) and it did not remain without criticism. Critics 
pointed to the limited economic viability of tourism 
119

2.2 Alternative tourism

DIE ERDE · Vol. 144 · 2/2013Slum tourism in the context of the tourism and poverty (relief) debate

approaches that were not driven by profit orientation 
but by development aims. Moreover, these forms of 
tourism were also accused of opening up ever more 
places to tourism development, catering for special 
interest tourists that liked to explore unique places. 
Butcher’s (2003) critique of the ‘moralisation of tour­
ism’ furthermore questioned alternative tourism be­
cause of its tendency to promote individual consumer 
choice as a solution to global inequality. Butcher called 
this approach ‘degraded politics’ (2003: 110). More re­
cent criticisms of CBT have included the view that it 
was mainly serving the interests of the ‘NGO indus­
try’ as a development tool with little positive impact 
on the communities (Ruiz-Ballesteros and Hernuandez-
Ramuriez 2010; Baptista 2012). 
The strong criticism of traditional development ap­
proaches in the 1980s led to a slow reorientation of 
the global economic discourse away from pursuing 
‘development’ and towards the aim of poverty allevia­
tion, a shift that was mirrored in the views on tourism 
(Zhao and Ritchie 2007). In this context the ‘pro­poor 
tourism’ (PPT) paradigm developed. According to 
Scheyvens (2011) a reinvention of the liberal approach 
of tourism and development took place, where many 
of the traditional claims on tourism’s potential benefit 
for the poor were repeated with a slightly modified 
focus (see also Harrison 2008). Scholars today tend to 
subsume the ‘pro­poor tourism’ (PPT) approach with 
neo­liberal tendencies of the prevailing global devel­
opment organisations (Scheyvens 2011). Academic 
proponents of PPT argue for a stronger integration 
of ideas derived from alternative approaches, like 
participation and empowerment, into the tourism 
development (Ashley and Haysom 2006). In a frequent 
definition of PPT, the aim is to render all forms of tour­
ism more beneficial to the poorest. While benefits are 
described both in terms of material gains as well as 
in qualitative advantages like access to education 
and participation, the focus is on ‘net­benefits’ for the 
poor (Ashley et al. 2001). When those ‘net­benefits’ 
are to be evaluated, however, a quantitative measure 
of poverty alleviation seems the most apparent tool. 
In alignment with such an approach, the United Na­
tions World Tourism Organisation (UNWTO) considers 
tourism development to be pro­poor when it secures 
an overall reduction of the number of poor people, 
measured in terms of absolute poverty, following the 
120

2.3	The	quantification	of	poverty

World Bank definition of the absolute poverty line at 
1,25 US$ per day (Schilcher 2007;  Scheyvens 2010). 
Some claim that economic growth automatically re­
duces the number of people living in absolute poverty 
(Dollar and Kraay 2001). Following this claim, World 
Bank and UNWTO always regard growth as ‘pro­poor’. 
UNWTO established its own research and development 
programme to mirror this approach in the Sustainable 
Tourism – Eliminating Poverty ( ST­EP) framework.  An 
example of a study that attempts to apply this view of 
tourism and poverty alleviation is Blake et al.’s (2008) 
comprehensive study of tourism’s role in poverty al­
leviation in Brazil. The researchers use a computable 
general equilibrium model (CGE) to calculate the to­
tal revenue tourism brings to the Brazilian economy. 
A CGE measures the influence of selected factors (like 
the growth or decline of tourism revenue) on a broad 
set of indicators, like tax and foreign exchange earn­
ings, wage and poverty levels etc. Data are collected for 
a base year in a social accounting matrix (SAM), using 
key commodities and industries as well as information 
on household earnings. Brazil’s direct and indirect 
tourism revenue accounted for about 5.5 % of Brazils 
GDP (Arbache et al. 2004) in the base year 2002. The 
SAM also showed the effects of tourism on different in­
come groups and on labour earnings relative to capital 
earnings. Accordingly, only 13 % of tourism income in 
2002 benefited capital (capital took 55 % of earnings 
in the overall Brazilian economy in that year) whereas 
labour benefited proportionally stronger from tour­
ism income. Also, the overall importance of tourism 
earnings was higher among low skilled labour. Both 
effects (tourism is labour­intensive and the labour is 
low skilled) point to a beneficial role of tourism devel­
opment for the poor (Blake et al. 2008). 
Using the CGE Blake et al. also investigate the effects 
of tourism expansion. They run a simulation with a 
10 % increase in tourism earnings. As expected, this 
leads to benefits for wages, tax revenue and capital 
earnings, however, without any specific benefit for the 
poorest. Their findings suggest that the crucial vari­
able that guarantees a disproportionate benefit for 
the poor is the use of the increased tax revenue by the 
state. Only if this is redistributed to the poorest does 
tourism growth benefit the poor more then other in­
come groups. Therefore, social and distributive policy 
appears to be the crucial factor for tourism’s impact 
on poverty alleviation. If growth is the sole strategy 
for poverty reduction, income differences and hence 
relative poverty remain stable at best. Only through 
policy intervention can tourism help to level the gen­

DIE ERDE · Vol. 144 · 2/2013Slum tourism in the context of the tourism and poverty (relief) debate

2.4	Beyond	quantification

eral distribution of wealth in a society and improve 
equity. Schilcher (2007) concurs with this view in her 
discussion of the UNWTO and World Bank approach 
to PPT. She argues that for UNWTO tourism is still 
pro­poor even if rich people benefit from it propor­
tionally more than the poor, increasing the inequal­
ity in a given country. As Schilcher (2007) points out, 
reducing the poverty alleviation target to a reduction 
of ‘absolute poverty’ is aligned with neo­liberal poli­
tics of market and trade liberalisation. ‘Strategies to 
alleviate poverty are subject to ideological interpre­
tations lying within the (capitalist) extremes of neo­
liberalism and protectionism’ (Schilcher 2007: 167).
The paradox is that pro­poor policies that aim at in­
creasing equity and income equality in countries 
usually depend on policy strategies of state inter­
ventionism and protectionism. These are, however, 
diametrically opposed to neo­liberal strategies of 
trade liberalisation and state spending that focus on 
enhancing private sector activities. The problem be­
comes tangible when, as is the case in Fiji, state spend­
ing favours the development of tourism infrastructure 
against the construction of infrastructure serving the 
poorest. In terms of UNWTO definitions such an ap­
proach would be considered pro­poor, because tour­
ism is likely to grow (Schilcher 2007). In her examina­
tion of PPT, Scheyvens (2007, 2011) confirms Harrison’s 
(2008) critical assessment that the new or neo­liberal 
approach differs little from earlier attempts to pro­
mote tourism as a tool to development. It is also impor­
tant to note that despite the differences between neo­
liberal, critical and alternative approaches to tourism 
and poverty relief, they all assume certain ideas about 
poverty and indeed tourism. In light of these assump­
tions,  ontological  and  epistemological  questions 
about poverty and tourism have been raised in what 
Scheyvens (2007, 2011) describes as a fourth approach, 
‘post­structuralist’ or ‘post­developmental’ to poverty 
alleviation and tourism.  Scheyvens (2011) suggests 
that notions of poverty differ greatly and that such 
differences have not been sufficiently reflected in the 
tourism literature. If poverty is understood as a multi­
dimensional phenomenon (Tomlinson et al. 2008) its 
measurement can’t be reduced to quantitative indica­
tors such as the absolute and relative poverty lines. 
PPT academics propose to consider non­monetary, 
qualitative aspects of tourism’s role in poverty relief, 

however, in actual practice the evaluation seems to 
tend to move back to positivist, quantitative indica­
tors. Indeed PPT focuses squarely on ‘net­benefits’ 
translated into the headcount of people that move 
beyond the poverty line. There is an understandable 
lure of measurable positive and negative impacts that 
enable the calculation of quantifiable ‘net­ benefits’, 
but such assessments overlook the complexities of 
the issue and lead to questionable results. Indeed, as 
discussed earlier, they seem to feed into an almost 
mechanical understanding of tourism growth and 
poverty relief. In this context it is important to con­
sider interventions into our understanding of tour­
ism and tourists. While positivist approaches to tour­
ism tend to see it as an industry, Higgins- Desbiolles 
(2009a) proposes to understand tourism as a social 
force. Just as the phenomenon of migration has eco­
nomic as well as many other aspects to it, tourism 
can be read as a complex social phenomenon beyond 
its industry characteristics. Rather than focusing 
squarely on economic cost­benefit analyses, research 
needs to study tourism as a dynamic system with 
a range of different effects. For  Higgins-Desbiolles, 
this includes the role tourism can play in promoting 
peace, cultural and social change or influencing po­
litical decision­making. In a post­structuralist view 
tourism in its totality can no longer be reduced to 
either beneficial or adverse effects on complex is­
sues like poverty alleviation. Taking into account 
the dynamism of the tourism system one can also 
better consider the influences of a variety of stake­
holders in shaping tourism. This includes the ability 
of social movements and other agents, including the 
poor to shape tourism in the ways they see it fit and 
to transform the tourism system (Scheyvens 2011). In 
the case of slum tourism, may tourists influence the 
way in which poverty alleviation policy is shaped in 
a particular country? Can tourism influence the aspi­
rations and expectations of poor people?  
Post­structural approaches tend to highlight the com­
plexity of the issue and focus on case studies. This 
has its limits. The question is how to best ensure that 
research efforts and results on the basis of case stud­
ies are transferable between cases.  Zhao and  Ritchie 
(2007) propose a comprehensive research framework 
that addresses some of the limits of previous studies. In 
particular they acknowledge the ontological and epis­
temological questions that persist over poverty and 
121

2.5 Summary: tourism and poverty (relief)

DIE ERDE · Vol. 144 · 2/2013Slum tourism in the context of the tourism and poverty (relief) debate

the poor. In evaluating ‘Anti­Poverty Tourism’ (APT), 
they propose to rely on a set of qualitative indicators, 
including the concepts of ‘opportunity’, ‘empower­
ment’ and ‘security’. These function to evaluate tour­
ism in specific cases. Their matrix includes additional 
indicators highlighting the participation of locals in 
tourism, not simply as participation in the workforce, 
but equally as entrepreneurs and as local residents. 
They also propose to analyse stakeholders and in par­
ticular the tourists’ role in shaping tourism in relation 
to poverty. Therefore research may ask to what extent 
tourists engage with the poor and find ways to do so 
beyond leaving money. This includes offers in place for 
tourists to engage in volunteering and philanthropy 
while on their trip. Overall,  Zhao and  Ritchie (2007) 
create a very useful listing of themes for the research 
of anti­poverty tourism in specific localities. What is 
particularly intriguing is the idea that tourism might 
not be the best strategy to alleviate poverty in a given 
context, and its development, in cases of conflict with 
better strategies, should not be pursued.
The approach needs to be developed further in light of 
some of the considerations Zhao and Ritchie propose. 
For example while some acknowledgement is given 
to questions of ownership of the means of produc­
tion and, in particular, land, these are crucial fa  ctors 
to determine potential negative impacts of tourism 
development. This is pertinent when previously com­
monly used resources, like beaches, are enclosed and 
privatised in the context of tourism development (Rice 
2005). And while  Zhao and  Ritchie (2007) acknowl­
edge the multi­dimensional character of poverty and 
the calculation thereof, they fall short of debating pov­
erty as a social and political question. This, however, 
could open the research agenda to the study of tourist 
and host interactions that move beyond philanthropy 
and into solidarity, political alliances and the formula­
tion of shared demands. This is in alignment with Schil-
cher’s plea for future research which proposes that we 
should tackle the issue of empowerment beyond the lo­
cal level. “Research should focus on practical solutions 
to the question of the empowerment of the poor – both 
at national and local level” (Schilcher 2007: 185). Over­
all, the state of the art research on the nexus of poverty 
and tourism shows a tend­     ency to reject blanket as­
sumptions about the use and utility of tourism in pov­
erty relief. By moving to case study approaches, more 
theoretical approaches that see tourism as a panacea 
to poverty relief or to condemn tourism outright are 
increasingly rejected. In surveying the slum tourism 
literature with regard to poverty relief in the light of 
122

3.  Slum tourism and poverty 
3.1 Methodological problems

this debate in the next section, I highlight the limits 
and omissions in slum tourism research and search for 
contributions from slum tourism reflections for the 
broader tourism and poverty debate.
Perhaps unsurprisingly, claims that slum tourism 
helps the poor abound in the marketing literature of 
slum tourism producers. Companies like Exotic Tours, 
one of the major providers of favela tourism in Rio de 
Janeiro, claim on their website that “Your visit will help 
our sustainable project as well as create work oppor­
tunities within the community” (Exotictours 2013). 
Across the major global slum tourism destinations 
similar claims can be found in most promotional ma­
terial. Slum tourists often repeat these claims, partly 
to justify their trips and partly because tour operators 
make them believe that their visits, donations and res­
taurant meals do make a difference (Freire-Medeiros 
2009). However, scrutinising these claims slum tour­
ism research rarely relies on quantitative measures. 
Quantitative evaluations of slum tourism’s role in pov­
erty relief do not exist (Frenzel and Koens 2012). This 
gap is caused by a range of problems that slum tourism 
researchers have pointed out. The first problem seems 
to be that places most frequently visited by slum tour­
ists are not places that qualify as struck by absolute 
poverty in terms of World Bank definitions. This is true 
for the countries visited by slum tourists which tend to 
belong to the category of DCs rather than LDCs. Indeed 
slum tourism is most frequently pursued in countries 
that have made strong economic advances in the last 
two decades, i.e. Brazil, South Africa and India.
This problem also applies on a city level. In Rio de 
Janeiro the overwhelming majority of slum tourists 
are channeled into only one favela, namely Rocinha 
(Freire-Medeiros 2011; Frisch 2012). Rocinha’s popu­
lation shows a broad range of levels of wealth, and 
while some residents live in absolute poverty, the 
economic status of others corresponds to middle­
income groups in Brazil (Freire-Medeiros 2009). 
In comparison to other favelas in Rio, particularly 
those on the industrial northern side of the city, 
Rochinha is relatively rich. Census data show that 
90 % have TVs, most people are in work and major 
elements of Brazilian consumer culture, includ­
ing banks with ATMs and fastfood chains like Bobs 
Burger, are located in this favela. Within Rocinha 

DIE ERDE · Vol. 144 · 2/2013Slum tourism in the context of the tourism and poverty (relief) debate

tourists are usually not led beyond the centre of 
the favela, major thru­fares and hubs of activities to 
where the poorest favela residents live (Freire-Me-
deiros 2012). Rocinha’s population is certainly poor 
in relative terms, compared to the rest of the city. 
Moreover, it is poor if poverty is understood as a 
multidimensional phenomenon. Open sewage chan­
nels cause aggravated health problems, housing in 
the poorer parts of Rocinha is highly precarious and 
the security situation remains tight, even after Rio’s 
city government invaded the favela in autumn 2011. 
A variety of other factors contribute to the multi­
dimensional poverty in Rocinha and more generally 
to Brazilian favelas, for example the stigmatisation 
that favela residents are met with by their better­
off compatriots (Frisch 2012; Freire-Medeiros 2012). 
This complex context shows that a measure of PPT 
that focuses on the number of people that have been 
lifted out of absolute poverty can only produce very 
limited results in the context of tourism in Rocinha.
A similar picture appears in the other main slum 
tourism destinations. Township tours do not visit 
the poorest townships, and the complexities of pov­
erty exceed any measure of purely quantifiable terms 
(Koens 2012). In India the slum of Dharavi, while fea­
turing poor housing conditions and limited to non­ex­
istent public services, is a place of a significant indus­
try. Most residents are in work and live of their work 
in conditions that can be considered poor, however 
not in absolute terms (Meschkank 2010; Dyson 2012). 
Secondly, in purely quantitative terms, slum tourism 
is simply too small to have a major effect on poverty 
alleviation. Even in the most developed slum tourism 
destinations, like Rocinha in Rio de Janairo, current 
estimates consider 30 000 tourists per month to tour 
the neighbourhood. The tours are normally traded 
at 30 US$, leading to a gross value of the industry in 
the range of 900 000 US$ per month. To Rocinha’s 
150 000 residents, even if they profited more or less 
equally and directly, this would not produce tangi­
ble results in income improvements (Freire-Medeiros 
2009, 2012). As stated earlier the application of a more 
qualitative research framework to slum tourism is 
the predominant choice of slum tourism researchers 
(Frenzel and Koens 2012). Without explicitly drawing 
from Zhao and Richie’s (2007) framework, much re­
search looks at the indicators they list. This includes 
(business) opportunity, participation, empowerment 
and security. Furthermore, a lot of research attempts 
to establish the way tourists understand poverty in 
the context of their experience of slum tourism.

3.2  The role of slum tourism in poverty alleviation

Studies on South Africa (Rogerson 2004b; Ramchander 
2007; Koens 2012) focus on the business opportunities 
for residents that develop as a result of township tour­
ism. The general limitation seems to be that business­
es belong to non­local operators who take most of the 
generated revenue. Rogerson (2004b) identifies a lack 
of education and resources that prevent the poor from 
a successful participation in the burgeoning business. 
Overall, his study establishes that there are very lim­
ited positive effects of township tourism on the urban 
poor in Soweto.  Ramchander (2007) reports similar 
results. He finds that locals often overestimate posi­
tive impacts of township tourism development that 
is fuelled by promises from development organisa­
tions and local government. Rather than bringing new 
wealth to the community, township tourism seems to 
leave little to the majority of the local residents as or­
ganisers and entrepreneurs keep the profits from the 
tours. As a general problem of South African tourism, 
township tourism also seems to display a racial ine­
quality (Rogerson 2004a). Township tours are mostly 
offered by businesses in ‘white’ ownership, which also 
retain most of the profits. Koens’s (2012) study looks at 
the attempts and difficulties to foster the development 
of businesses owned by people previously discrimi­
nated against in the South African apartheid regime. 
He points to the casual character of most income pro­
vided through tourism. The small businesses relate 
to each other in a highly competitive market in which 
increasingly larger white owned companies also oper­
ate. The key issue seems to be that despite the South 
African government’s support for the businesses, the 
effects on business opportunity remain limited. 
Freire-Medeiros (2012) reports a similar situation from 
Rio de Janeiro. Favela tourism is operated by small­ 
and medium­sized private businesses, run by entre­
preneurs from outside the favela. Political influence 
on the decision­making processes of these entrepre­
neurs by favela residents is minimal. In terms of par­
ticipation through work, some operators employ local 
guides. While such initiatives produce positive results, 
Freire-Medeiros also reports on struggles over work­
place democracy as conflicts arise between guides 
and business owners over the terms of employment 
(Freire- Medeiros 2012). Participation is highlighted 
in attempts by governments to use slum tourism for 
development, for example in the initiatives by the 
State of Rio de Janeiro to foster tourism development 
in the context of the most recent favela pacification 
123

DIE ERDE · Vol. 144 · 2/2013Slum tourism in the context of the tourism and poverty (relief) debate

3.3 The valorisation of poverty in slum tourism

programme. In Santa Marta, neighbourhood initia­
tives have been funded to develop favela tourism after 
the pacification of the favela (AP 2010). The results of 
these recent initiatives remain to be evaluated. It is im­
portant to note that earlier attempts by the city and 
state governments to foster favela tourism crucially 
lacked participation and subsequently failed (Men-
ezes 2012). Security improvements are usually not 
the result but the condition of slum tourism develop­
ment. They can be identified, however, in the context 
of broader questions of empowerment through slum 
tourism.  Wattanawanyoo (2012) reports from Bang­
kok how visits of slum tourists help the Pom Mahakan 
community in an informal settlement in Krung Rat­
tanakosin to increase their bargaining power against 
city authorities that intend to evict the settlement. 
The example of Pom Mahakan aligns with broader 
observations of the positive effects that slum tourism 
may have. Evidence from Rio de Janeiro shows that 
favela residents generally welcome tourists. Accord­
ing to  Freire-Medeiros’s (2012) survey of residents’ 
perception of favela tourism, one of the reasons lies 
in the valorisation of the favela by the tourists. In the 
Brazilian context, favela residents are often subject 
to social stigma and discrimination. They desire rec­
ognition which they get, to some extent, in tourists’ 
attention. In his survey of residents’ attitudes to tour­
ism in the Greater Cairo slums, Mekawy (2012) also 
finds overtly positive responses. There is a lack of 
knowledge whether similar effects can be studied in 
other slum tourism destinations and this gap should 
be addressed in future research. To date the context 
of valorisation is normally understood in a differ­
ent, more negative way. For Rolfes (2009) and Freire-
Medeiros (2009, 2013) valorisation means the com­
modification of poverty. Here the slum is valorised in 
purely monetary terms, and the curiosity of tourists 
is translated into the price of the tour. This valorisa­
tion is considered problematic firstly because of the 
distribution of profits or added value between those 
that operate the tours and those that are involved in 
producing and in some way own the resource that is 
being toured, i.e. the slum dwellers. Secondly, a relat­
ed question occurs: How do operators organise their 
tours? Apart from technically facilitating the visit of 
tourists, they are also engaged in presenting and rep­
resenting the slums. Here it is useful to think about 
tour operators as curators (Butler 2012). 
124

Problematising the representation of slums and pov­
erty, researchers show that when poverty is com­
modified in tours, it is essentialised, fetishised and 
romanticised (Freire-Medeiros 2012). The complex 
and multi­dimensional phenomenon of poverty in a 
favela like Rocinha is translated into a consumable 
story which can be told in three hours (Freire- Medeiros 
2012). This phenomenon is not limited to the walking 
tour. Rather, as Freire-Medeiros (2009) describes, the 
favela becomes an abstraction of global range in the 
‘trademark favela’ that resurfaces in concepts for night 
clubs, urban art, video games and of course films in a 
variety of locations across the globe (Freire- Medeiros 
2009;  Linke 2012). Some argue that such a process 
constitutes a negative effect of slum tourism on pover­
ty, as the complex problem is rendered into a spectacle 
for consumption (Linke 2012). At the same time it is 
these processes that encourage more tourists to con­
sider doing slum tours (Mendes 2010; Freire- Medeiros 
2011). In this context it is important to consider that 
tourists who visit slums already have ideas about 
what they expect to see. The important role of poverty 
in attracting slum tourists has been confirmed by a 
variety of studies (Rolfes 2009; Freire-Medeiros 2009; 
Meschkank 2010; Dyson 2012). Indeed the ‘attraction’ 
of poverty is directly linked to romanticised percep­
tions of the poor, a sense of authenticity that tourists 
hope to find there, and idealisations of a simple life 
that have long circulated in Western discourses about 
the (poorer) others (Steinbrink 2012; Scheyvens 2011; 
Hall and Tucker 2004; Koven 2004; Hutnyk 1996). 
Meschkank (2012) points out that slums have place­ 
related semantics of poverty, squalor and desperation. 
She therefore posits, following Pott (2007), that slum 
tourism is a form of communication. Building on the 
tourists’ pre­existing perceptions about poverty, tour 
operators may change the existing essentialist views 
tourists hold on poverty. In Mumbai, the dominant 
tour operator presents the slum of Dharavi as an in­
dustrious place in which nearly 1 billion US$ are made 
annually in a variety of industries. In  Meschkank’s 
study tourists often quote this information as a key 
learning experience in the slum tour, because it con­
tradicts their preconception of poverty and slums as 
connected to a lack of employment. The place­based 
semantics have changed. Here a crucial effect of slum 
tourism on poverty is revealed. Slum tourism may not 
end poverty, but end certain perceptions about pover­

3.4 Slum tourism as communication

DIE ERDE · Vol. 144 · 2/2013Slum tourism in the context of the tourism and poverty (relief) debate

ty and slums. This comes with the caveat that Dhavari 
is no longer considered a ‘real slum’ or ‘real poverty’ 
by the tourists, indicating that the place­based se­
mantic of slum and poverty survives the experience 
of one case which might be qualified as an exception 
(Meschkank 2012). In Crossley’s (2012) analysis of vol­
unteer tourists’ relationship to poverty, in this case 
in a rural setting, even less of a positive effect on the 
changes on perception of tourists is reported. Crossley 
(2012) argues that tourist constructions of poverty 
after their visit tend to naturalise and de­dramatise 
poverty in order to deal with the dramatic impact of 
the experience of poverty. The encounter fulfils a re­
demptive function for the volunteers. 
Crossley (2012) identifies three psychosocial mecha­
nisms at play in the case of volunteer tourists’ encoun­
ter with poverty. Firstly tourists use their volunteer­
ing experience to justify continuing their life after the 
experience unchanged rather than as an imperative to 
change it, because they have ‘done their bit’. Secondly 
tourists use the trip to confirm views of poverty as 
somewhat beautiful. Poverty becomes a (rural) land­
scape that is at once exotic and seductive. Thirdly tour­
ists also construct the poor as happy, living a more au­
thentic life that fulfils them. In all these three coping 
mechanisms, old, often colonial tropes of the attrac­
tion of the poor ‘other’ come to the forefront. In slum 
tourism post­colonial patterns have been identified 
across its long history. Steinbrink (2012) points to the 
predominance of othering in different slum tourism 
locations. In the current slum tourism phenomenon, 
tourists often construct their own desired position of 
globality by identifying the slum dwellers as their lo­
cal other. Slum tourism thus serves the post­colonial 
fantasy of the Western tourist. Dovey and King (2012) 
present a different reading of the ‘taste of the slum’ 
and maintain that it has a transformative potential. 
The slum to them appears as sublime, a category of 
such uncertainty that it evokes the need to reconsider 
previous conceptions. They argue that the opening of 
the slum to the Western gaze carries the potential to 
politicise the struggle for global justice, despite West­
ern coping mechanisms. Rather than only a matter of 
curatorship, the urban fabric of the slum itself imposes 
a transformative experience onto the visiting tourist.
To render those considerations into indicators of slum 
tourism’s utility in poverty relief, one would have to 

3.5 Qualitative indicators

add considerably more empirical research that inves­
tigates tourists’ understandings and considerations 
before and after the trip among other aspects. Zhao 
and  Ritchie’s (2007) suggested search for indicators 
of tourists engaging in philanthropy as a result of the 
trip could be one approach. However, the process of 
communication in slum tourism can also be analysed 
further. It could be argued that notions of poverty are 
negotiated and co­created between tourists, tour op­
erators and locals, and even, following Dovey and King 
(2012), the built environment. Within this co­creation 
process tour operators play a crucial role where the ef­
fect on slum tourists’ understanding of poverty is con­
cerned. As stated earlier, tour operators can be seen 
as curators of the slum tourism experience (Butler 
2012). Therefore it is important to ask how poverty is 
presented, and whether the presentations tend to en­
able the romanticisation and fetishisation of poverty 
or whether they allow the destabilisation of previous 
conceptions. This idea of curatorship to frame the role 
and responsibility of providers leads to the question 
of the motives of providers. Arguably a profit motive 
seems prone to undermine positive effects. The tours 
might be constructed along instrumental lines, serv­
ing best the interests of tourists and appealing to their 
expectations, while daring little that could reduce the 
number of tourists wanting to take part. 
However, not­for­profit operators might also be drawn 
to an instrumental approach to presenting poverty. 
Baptista (2012) shows, following critical development 
scholars (Escobar 1995), how poverty is fetishised in 
development organisations as they compete for govern­
ment funding and donations. Indeed Baptista’s critique 
of community based tourism (CBT) focused on the way 
certain ideas can become fads in the development in­
dustry. As poverty is ascribed to places where locals 
often might not consider themselves to be poor, pov­
erty is fetishised because it enables Western NGOs to 
secure funding.  This problem also applies to academic 
research or political activism. Researchers, who could 
be considered curators of poverty in a more abstract 
sense, equally compete over funding and might operate 
with fetishised concepts of poverty to secure resourc­
es. Political activists, interested in advocacy for the 
poor, also have to rely on abstract notions of poverty, 
and are in permanent danger of fetishising poverty in 
pursuit of political arguments (Frenzel et al. 2011). The 
problem of fetishising poverty is pertinent to all these 
fields, as poverty remains necessarily an abstraction 
that describes a variety of experiences, situations and 
phenomena. This abstraction is permanently negoti­
125

DIE ERDE · Vol. 144 · 2/2013Slum tourism in the context of the tourism and poverty (relief) debate

4.  Conclusion

ated and modified as it circulates between people with 
different experiences and preconceptions. This circu­
lation also takes place in slum tourism and therefore 
one of the central questions for the qualitative role of 
(slum) tourism in poverty relief seems to relate to the 
ways poverty is valorised in the tourism context.
From a theoretical perspective, the valorisation of 
slums and poverty in slum tourism relates to the val­
orisations of poverty that take place across a variety 
of communicative systems, like charity, academic re­
search and political activism. In all cases valorisation 
carries the danger that new fetishised, romanticised 
and otherwise abstract notions of poverty are cre­
ated. Most importantly, the valorisation may lead to 
the ‘real’ abstraction of commodification in which the 
slum and poverty is being exchanged into monetary 
value. For the study of slum tourism’s role in poverty 
alleviation, this latter effect seems the least relevant to 
study because the overall monetary value of exchanges 
remains small. Qualitative approaches, in contrast, en­
able the study of a whole range of different processes of 
valorisation, in which understandings of poverty cir­
culate and are exchanged as a result of slum tourism. 
In this paper I presented approaches of slum tourism 
research to the question of poverty relief against the 
backdrop of the state­of­the­art literature on tourism 
and poverty relief. I found that slum tourism research 
predominantly takes place in the context of qualitative 
approaches to tourism and poverty relief. In particu­
lar, the concepts of opportunity, participation, security 
and empowerment are discussed. Furthermore the lit­
erature has found that a valorisation of poverty takes 
place in slum tourism. A valorisation of poverty takes 
place not simply in the context of monetary value but 
also, and more importantly, on the level of semantics. 
When poverty becomes interesting, and the object of 
tourist curiosity, the pertinent question seems to be 
in what ways it is being represented and recreated 
when tourists experience and encounter it. It might be 
tempting to reduce the complexities of these exchanges 
by analysing slum tourism as the capitalist commodi­
fication of poverty, where the experience of poverty is 
monetised. In such a context the question of distribu­
tive justice can be addressed, when it is considered 
who deserves what share of the profits. However such 
a quantitative reading overlooks the aforementioned 
complexities of the valorisation processes that take 
126

place in slum tourism. Indeed apart from producing 
few results in terms of the effect of slum tourism, such 
a reading ignores the more salient effects, positive and 
negative, that slum tourism may have on poverty.
Regarding the broader nexus of tourism and poverty 
this insight is equally significant. Projected onto the 
debates on slum tourism we can now understand 
the different approaches that Scheyvens (2007, 2011) 
identified more precisely. (Neo­)liberal approaches 
tend to focus on quantitative ‘net­benefits’ to evalu­
ate tourism’s role. The economics of tourism are 
based on the ‘real’ abstraction in which valorisation 
is understood in purely monetary terms. Critical ap­
proaches, while questioning the distribution of the 
profits, adhere to a similar paradigm. Alternative 
approaches move beyond the monetary understand­
ing of valorisation. However, in pursuing a tourism 
development that avoids quantitative ‘impacts’, the 
potential of tourism as a force of valorisation are 
not  sufficiently  acknowledged.  Post­structuralist 
and post­development approaches demand a change 
in the understanding of tourism. No longer should it 
be predominately seen as an industry, but rather as 
a social force (Higgins-Desbiolles 2009a). Even in at­
tempts to comprehensively quantify tourism’s impact 
on poverty relief (Blake et al. 2008) the result is that 
tourism revenue only benefits the poorest when poli­
cies intervene to channel the revenue there (Schilcher 
2007). Tourism as a social force is more than an in­
come generator. When the multi­dimensional valori­
sation of poverty is studied, overlaps between slum 
tourism semantics and those of political activism and 
advocacy can be examined. In these overlaps the ‘so­
cial question’, the political negotiation of poverty and 
its alleviation, might emerge. The multi­dimensional 
tourist valorisation of the slums might contribute, 
therefore, to a broader debate of the ‘social question’.
To see tourist valorisation primarily in economic 
terms means to hope for an almost technical process 
by which monetary revenue from tourism exchanges 
‘magically’ reduces poverty. We can now specify how 
such a role of tourism can be theorised. To quantify 
poverty relief is itself a way of fetishising poverty 
within the academic discussions of poverty. Rather 
than colonising our understanding of poverty and 
poverty relief in tourism with this one notion of mon­
etary valorisation, future research designs need to 
develop criteria to evaluate the valorisation process 
as multi­dimensional. Further research should focus 
on developing a set of criteria that determine the val­

DIE ERDE · Vol. 144 · 2/2013Slum tourism in the context of the tourism and poverty (relief) debate

orisation of poverty in the context of semantics. These 
criteria could enable the analysis of the communica­
tive processes in which poverty is negotiated and re­
defined in slum tourism. Building on Zhao and Ritchie’s 
(2007) set of criteria, notions of opportunity, security, 
empowerment and participation should be developed 
to reflect how they are fostered or hindered in this 
process. This includes questions of how slum tourism 
providers represent poverty, whose perspectives cir­
culate and, importantly, whether the communication 
continues beyond the slum tourism encounter. Rather 
than simply focusing on incidents of philanthropy 
emerging from slum tourism encounters as suggested 
by Zhao and Ritchie (2007), research could ask wheth­
er it enables global linkages, leading to the formation 
of alliances that address the social question as they 
pursue the communicative and political task of better 
understanding the root causes of poverty. Further­
more, research could investigate how the communica­
tive processes that take place in slum tourism relate 
to those that take place in the context of development 
work, academic reflections and political activism.
 In refusing to limit tourism’s role to the quantitative 
abstraction according to which tourism may produce 
monetary benefits for the poor, future research might 
most importantly ensure against an understanding 
of poverty relief as a technicality. The study of slum 
tourism shows conversely that poverty relief will 
depend not least on maintaining and enhancing an 
inclusive processes of communication in which so­
cial justice, equity and distribution is being debated. 
(Slum) tourism might be considered pro­poor when 
it offers a place where this communication can occur.
AP 2010: Brazil’s Rio wants tourists visiting its slums – 
Times Union. – Online available at: http://www.times­
union.com/news/article/Brazil­s­Rio­wants­tourists­
visiting­its­slums­637674.php, 31/08/2010
Arbache, J.S., V. Teles, N. da Silva and S. Cury 2004: Social ac­
counts matrix of Brazil for tourism – 2002. – Centre of 
Excellence in Tourism CET/NET, Brasilia University
Arendt, H. 2006: On revolution. – New York
Ashley,  C.,  H.  Goodwin and  D.  Roe 2001: Pro­poor tourism 
strategies: Making tourism work for the poor – London
Ashley, C. and G. Haysom 2006: From philanthropy to a dif­
ferent way of doing business: Strategies and challenges 
in integrating pro­poor approaches into tourism busi­
ness. – Development Southern Africa 23 (2): 265­280

References

Baptista, J.A. 2012: Tourism of poverty: The value of being 
poor in the non­governmental order. – In:  Frenzel,  F., 
K. Koens and M. Steinbrink (eds.): Slum tourism: Poverty, 
power and ethics. – New York et al.: 125­143
Blake, A., J.S. Arbache, M.T. Sinclair and V. Teles 2008: Tourism and 
poverty relief. – Annals of Tourism Research 35 (1): 107­126
Butcher, J. 2003: The moralisation of tourism. Sun, sand and 
saving the world. – London et al.
Butler,  S.R. 2012: Curatorial interventions in township 
tours: Two trajectories. – In: Frenzel, F., K. Koens and M. 
Steinbrink (eds.): Slum tourism. Poverty, power and eth­
ics. – New York et al.: 215­231
Crossley,  É. 2012: Poor but happy: Volunteer tourists’ en­
counters with poverty. – Tourism Geographies  14 (2): 
235­253
De Kadt, E. 1979: Tourism – passport to development? Per­
spectives on the social and cultural effects of tourism in 
developing countries. – New York et al.
Dollar, D. and A. Kraay 2001: Growth is good for the poor. – 
New York 
Dovey, K. and R. King 2012: Informal urbanism and the taste 
for slums. – Tourism Geographies 14 (2): 275­293
Dyson, P. 2012: Slum tourism: Representing and interpret­
ing ‘reality’ in Dharavi, Mumbai. – Tourism Geographies 
14 (2): 254­274
Escobar,  A. 1995: Encountering development: The making 
and unmaking of the Third World. – Princeton
Exotictours 2013: Favela tour: Exotic tours Brazil. – Online 
available at: www.exotictours.com.br/,  07/08/2013
Freire-Medeiros, B. 2012: Favela tourism: Listening to lo­
cal voices. – In: Frenzel, F., K. Koens and  M. Steinbrink 
(eds.): Slum tourism. Poverty, power and ethics. – New 
York et al.: 175­192
Freire-Medeiros, B. 2011: ‘I went to the city of god’: Gringos, 
guns and the touristic favela. – Journal of Latin American 
Cultural Studies 20 (1): 21­34
Freire-Medeiros, B. 2009: The favela and its touristic tran­
sits. – Geoforum 40 (4): 580­588
Freire-Medeiros, B. 2013: Touring poverty. – New York
Frenzel,  F. 2012: Beyond ‘Othering’: The political roots of 
slum tourism. – In: Frenzel, F., K. Koens and M. Steinbrink 
(eds.): Slum tourism. Poverty, power, and ethics. – New 
York: 49­65 
Frenzel,  F.,  S.  Böhm,  P.  Quinton,  A.  Spicer,  S.  Sullivan and  Z. 
Young 2011: Comparing alternative media in North and 
South: The cases of IFIWatchnet and Indymedia in Afri­
ca. – Environment and Planning A 43 (5): 1173­1189
Frenzel, F. and K. Koens 2012: Slum tourism: Developments 
in a young field of interdisciplinary tourism research. – 
Tourism Geographies 14 (2): 195­212
Frisch, T. 2012: Glimpses of another world: The favela as a tour­
istic attraction. – Tourism Geographies 14 (2): 320­338
127

DIE ERDE · Vol. 144 · 2/2013Slum tourism in the context of the tourism and poverty (relief) debate

Hall, C. 2007: Pro­poor tourism: Who benefits? Perspectives 
on tourism and poverty reduction. – Clevedon
Hall, C. and H. Tucker (eds.) 2004: Tourism and postcoloni­
alism: Contested discourses, identities and representa­
tions. – London
Harrison,  D. 2008: Pro­poor tourism: A critique. – Third 
World Quarterly 29 (5): 851­868
Hawkins, D. and S. Mann 2007: The world bank’s role in tourism 
development.  – Annals of Tourism Research 34 (2): 348­363
Higgins-Desbiolles, F. 2009a: Capitalist globalisation, corpo­
rated tourism and their alternatives. – New York
Higgins-Desbiolles, F. 2009b: International solidarity move­
ment: A case study in volunteer tourism for justice. – 
 Annals of Leisure Research 12 (3/4): 333­349
Higgins-Desbiolles, F. 2008: Justice tourism and alternative glo­
balisation. – Journal of Sustainable Tourism 16 (3): 345­364
Hutnyk, J. 1996: The rumour of Calcutta: Tourism, charity, 
and the poverty of representation. – London
Koens, K. 2012: Competition, cooperation and collaboration 
in township tourism: Business relations and power in 
township tourism. – In: Frenzel, F., K. Koens and M. Stein-
brink (eds.): Slum tourism. Poverty, power and ethics. – 
New York et al.: 83­100
Koven, S. 2004: Slumming: Sexual and social politics in Vic­
torian London. – Princeton et al.
Linke,  U. 2012: Mobile imaginaries, portable signs: Global 
consumption and representations of slum life. – Tourism 
Geographies 14 (2): 294­319
Mendes, A.C. 2010: Showcasing India unshining: Film tour­
ism in Danny Boyle’s ‘Slumdog Millionaire’. – Third Text 
24 (4): 471­479
Menezes,  P. 2012: A forgotten place to remember: Reflec­
tions on the attempt to turn a favela into a museum. – In: 
Frenzel, F., K. Koens and M. Steinbrink (eds.): Slum tour­
ism. Poverty, power and ethics. – New York et al.: 103­124
Mekawy, M.A. 2012: Responsible slum tourism: Egyptian ex­
perience. – Annals of Tourism Research 39 (4): 2092­2113 
Meschkank,  J. 2010: Investigations into slum tourism in 
Mumbai: Poverty tourism and the tensions between dif­
ferent constructions of reality. – GeoJournal 76 (1): 47­62
Meschkank,  J. 2012: Negotiating poverty: The interplay 
between Dharavi’s production and consumption as 
a tourist destination. – In: Frenzel, F., K. Koens and M. 
Steinbrink (eds.): Slum tourism. Poverty, power and 
ethics. – New York et al.: 144­158
Nash, D. 1989: Tourism as a form of imperialism. – In: Smith, 
V. (ed.): Hosts and guests: The anthropology of tourism. – 
Philadelphia: 37­54

Pott, A. 2007: Orte des Tourismus: Eine raum­ und gesell­
schaftstheoretische Untersuchung. – Bielefeld
Ramchander, P. 2007: Township tourism: Blessing or blight? The 
case of Soweto in South Africa. – In: Richards, G. (ed.): Cultural 
tourism: Global and local perspectives. – New York: 39­67
Rice,  A. 2005: Post­tsunami reconstruction and tourism: 
A second disaster? – Online available at: http://www.
naomiklein.org/files/resources/pdfs/tourism­concern­
tsunami­report.pdf, 09/09/2013
Rogerson, C.M. 2004a: Transforming the South African tour­
ism industry: The emerging black­owned bed and break­
fast economy. – GeoJournal 60 (3): 273­281
Rogerson, C.M. 2004b: Urban tourism and small tourism en­
terprise development in Johannesburg: The case of town­
ship tourism. – GeoJournal 60 (1): 249­257
Rolfes,  M. 2010: Poverty tourism: Theoretical reflections 
and empirical findings regarding an extraordinary form 
of tourism. – GeoJournal 75 (5): 421­442
Ruiz-Ballesteros, E. and M. Hernuandez-Ramuriez 2010:  Tourism 
that empowers? – Critique of Anthropology 30 (2): 201­229
Scheyvens, R. 2007: Exploring the tourism­poverty nexus. – 
Current Issues in Tourism  10 (2­3): 231­254. – Online 
available at: http://www.informaworld.com/10.2167/
cit318.0, 14/07/2010
Scheyvens, R. 2011: Tourism and poverty. – New York
Scheyvens, R. 2002: Tourism for development: Empowering 
communites. – London
Schilcher, D. 2007: Growth versus equity: The continuum of 
pro­poor tourism and neoliberal governance. – Current 
Issues in Tourism 10 (2­3): 166­193
Steinbrink, M. 2012: ‘We did the slum!’. Urban poverty in his­
torical perspective. – Tourism Geographies 14 (2): 213­234
Steinbrink,  M.,  F.  Frenzel and  K.  Koens 2012: Development 
and globalization of a new trend in tourism. – In: Fren-
zel, F., K. Koens and M. Steinbrink (eds.): Slum tourism. 
Poverty, power and ethics. – New York et al.: 1­18
Tomlinson,  M.,  R.  Walker and  G.  Williams 2008: Measuring 
poverty in Britain as a multi­dimensional concept, 1991 
to 2003. – Journal of Social Policy 37 (4): 597­620
Turner, L. and J. Ash 1975: The golden hordes: International 
tourism and the pleasure periphery. – London
Wattanawanyoo,  K. 2012: Poverty tourism as advocacy: A 
case in Bangkok. – In: Frenzel, F., K. Koens and M. Stein-
brink (eds.): Slum tourism. Poverty, power and ethics. – 
New York et al.: 207­214
Zhao, W. and J.R.B. Ritchie 2007: Tourism and poverty alle­
viation: An integrative research framework. – Current 
Issues in Tourism 10 (2­3): 119­143

128

DIE ERDE · Vol. 144 · 2/2013