Cellular Microbiology (2007) 9(7), 1834–1850

doi:10.1111/j.1462-5822.2007.00919.x
First published online 26 March 2007

Salmonella Pathogenicity Island 4 encodes a giant
non-ﬁmbrial adhesin and the cognate type 1
secretion system

Roman G. Gerlach,1 Daniela Jäckel,1
Bärbel Stecher,2 Carolin Wagner,1 Andrei Lupas,3
Wolf-Dietrich Hardt2 and Michael Hensel1*
1Institut für Klinische Mikrobiologie, Immunologie und
Hygiene, FAU Erlangen-Nürnberg, D-91054 Erlangen,
Germany.
2Institut für Mikrobiologie, ETH Zürich, Switzerland.
3MPI für Entwicklungsbiologie, Tübingen, Germany.

Summary

Pathogenicity Islands play a major
role in the
pathogenesis of infections by Salmonella enterica.
The molecular function of Salmonella Pathogenicity
Island 4 (SPI4) is largely unknown, but recent work
indicated a role of SPI4 for Salmonella pathogenesis
in certain animal models. We analysed the virulence
functions of SPI4 and observed that SPI4 is contrib-
uting to intestinal inﬂammation in a mouse model. On
a cellular level, SPI4 mediates adhesion to epithelial
cells. We demonstrate the function of SPI4-encoded
proteins as a type I secretion system (T1SS) and
identify SiiE as the substrate protein of the T1SS.
SiiE is secreted into the culture medium but med-
iates contact-dependent adhesion to epithelial cell
surfaces. SiiE is a very large non-ﬁmbrial adhesin
of 600 kDa and consists of 53 repeats of Ig domains.
Our study describes the ﬁrst T1SS-secreted protein
that functions as a non-ﬁmbrial adhesin in binding
to eukaryotic cells. The SPI4-encoded T1SS and
SiiE might functionally resemble the type I ﬁmbrial
adhesins.

Introduction

The acquisition of virulence functions encoded by genes
within pathogenicity islands is considered as the major
driving force in the evolution of the gastrointestinal patho-
gen Salmonella enterica (Groisman and Ochman, 1997;
Marcus et al., 2000). Two hallmarks of the pathogenesis
of Salmonella infections are directly linked to genes
within Salmonella Pathogenicity Islands (SPI) (reviewed

Received 24 November, 2006; revised 19 January, 2007; accepted 22
January, 2007. *For correspondence. E-mail hensel@mikrobio.med.
uni-erlangen.de; Tel. (+49) 9131 8523640; Fax (+49) 9131 8522531.

© 2007 The Authors
Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

in Hensel, 2004). SPI1 encodes a type III secretion
system (T3SS) for the translocation of effector proteins by
extracellular Salmonella into eukaryotic host cells. This
translocation ultimately triggers invasion, i.e. the uptake of
Salmonella by non-phagocytic cells (Schlumberger and
Hardt, 2006). The SPI1-T3SS is also involved in the elici-
tation of gastrointestinal
inﬂammation (for reviews, see
Wallis and Galyov, 2000; Hapfelmeier and Hardt, 2005).
S. enterica is a facultative intracellular pathogen that
survives and proliferates within a membrane-bound
organelle within host cells termed ‘Salmonella-containing
vacuole’ or SCV. The function of a second T3SS encoded
by SPI2 is required for ablating host cell defence mecha-
nisms and for the modiﬁcation of host cell
transport
processes (Kuhle and Hensel, 2004). Genes encoding
effector proteins are located within SPI1 and SPI2, but
are also present on various loci scattered over
the
chromosome. Two genes, each encoding an effector for
the SPI1-T3SS and SPI2-T3SS, are located within SPI5.
SPI3 genes contribute to the intracellular phenotype by
encoding a high-affinity Mg2+ uptake system required to
adapt to the nutritional limitations in the SCV. There is also
evidence that the SPI3-encoded autotransporter protein
MisL functions as a non-ﬁmbrial adhesin during intestinal
colonization (Dorsey et al., 2005).

SPI4 has typical characteristics of SPI; however, the
molecular
function of SPI4-encoded proteins is not
known. The initial description of SPI4 suggested the pres-
ence of 18 open reading frames (ORFs) (Wong et al.,
1998). A reﬁned analysis based on the genome sequence
of S. Typhimurium, however, showed that only six ORFs
are present
in SPI4 (McClelland et al., 2001; Morgan
et al., 2004). The role of SPI4 in Salmonella pathogenesis
has been unclear, but a recent study using signature-
tagged mutagenesis identiﬁed SPI4 as a colonization
factor during infection of calf
(Morgan et al., 2004).
However, this study did not indicate a role of SPI4 during
orogastral
infection of chicken, suggesting SPI4 as a
determinant of host speciﬁcity. A recent screen for Salmo-
nella mutant strains attenuated in a model for long-term
persistence identiﬁed a strain defective in SPI4 genes
(Lawley et al., 2006).
In competition experiments with
wild-type (WT) S. Typhimurium, a SPI4-deﬁcient strain
was slightly attenuated in long-term persistence.

In addition to T3SS encoded by SPI and the translo-
cated effector proteins, adhesins are known virulence
determinants of Salmonella. There is a large number of
operons encoding ﬁmbrial adhesins but the role in patho-
genesis has only been partially understood and analysis
is complicated by the redundancy of ﬁmbrial adhesins. As
many as 13 operons encoding putative ﬁmbrial adhesins
have been predicted from the S. Typhimurium genome
sequence and expression of 11 of these operons has
been demonstrated (Humphries et al., 2003). In addition
three non-ﬁmbrial adhesins have been described. MisL
(Dorsey et al., 2005) and ShdA (Kingsley et al., 2002) are
members of the autotransporter family and BapA was
recently characterized as an adhesin for homotypic inter-
actions during bioﬁlm formation (Latasa et al., 2005).
While non-ﬁmbrial adhesins are usually secreted by
the autotransporter mechanisms (also known as type V
secretion), ﬁmbrial adhesins use the general secretion
pathway for the transport of subunits that are subse-
quently assembled by speciﬁc pathways (reviewed in
Soto and Hultgren, 1999).

During our ongoing systematic functional analyses of
newly described pathogenicity islands of S. enterica, we
observed a virulence defect of SPI4-deﬁcient bacteria
speciﬁcally during interaction with polarized epithelial
cells. This observation prompted us to study the function
of genes within SPI4 in more detail. We set out to inves-
tigate the role of SPI4 in Salmonella virulence using
reﬁned cell culture and infection models. Our data dem-
onstrate that SPI4 encodes a novel member of the family
of large, repetitive non-ﬁmbrial adhesins and a cognate
type I secretion system (T1SS) for the secretion of this
adhesin.

Results

SPI4 function is not required for invasion of HeLa cells
or intracellular replication

To investigate the role of SPI4 in virulence, we ﬁrst applied
routinely used cell culture infection models. The effect of a
deletion of SPI4 on host cell invasion was analysed using
the gentamicin protection assay with the human epithelial
cell line HeLa. A strain with a defect in the SPI1-encoded
T3SS was about 500-fold reduced in invasion of HeLa
cells (Fig. S1A), but strains deﬁcient in the SPI2-T3SS or
lacking the entire SPI4 locus did not show a reduced
invasion. The intracellular replication in RAW264.7, a
murine macrophage-like cell line was also investigated.
The intracellular replication of S. Typhimurium WT, the
SPI1- and SPI4-deﬁcient strains was not signiﬁcantly
different. In contrast, a mutant strain deleted in the SPI2-
encoded T3SS showed highly reduced intracellular repli-
cation (Fig. S1B). These data indicate that SPI4 does not

Salmonella Pathogenicity Island 4 1835

contribute to Salmonella invasion of the epithelial cell line
HeLa and intracellular
replication in macrophage-like
cells.

SPI4 function is not required for pathogenesis in a
murine typhoid fever model

The systemic pathogenesis of a SPI4 deletion strain was
compared with that of the WT and previously character-
ized mutant strains deﬁcient in SPI2 function. Cohorts of
C57BL/6 mice were orally infected with approximately
5 ¥ 109 colony-forming units (cfu), and the bacterial
burden was determined at 3 and 5 days after infection. As
expected from previous reports, a SPI2-deﬁcient strain
was incapable of proliferating in liver, spleen, mesenteric
lymph nodes (MLN) or Peyer’s Patches (PP) and the
bacterial burden remained at a low level. In contrast,
Salmonella WT replicated in these organs and high bac-
terial burdens developed. The kinetics of systemic prolif-
eration of the SPI4 mutant strain was comparable with
that of WT Salmonella and mice had to be sacriﬁced at
day 5 due to the development of the severe systemic
infection (Fig. 1A). Based on these results, SPI4 does not
appear relevant for the development of systemic infec-
tions in the murine model. This observation, however, is in
contrast to the report by Morgan et al. (2004) who found a
reduced systemic colonization of BALB/c mice after oral
infection with siiE and siiF strains that are defective in a
large repetitive protein and a putative subunit of a T1SS
respectively. These disparate results may be due to the
different infectious dose applied here and by Morgan et al.

SPI4 contributes to gastrointestinal inﬂammation in the
murine colitis model

We investigated the possible role of SPI4 in the interaction
of Salmonella with the intestinal mucosa (Fig. 1B). Intes-
tinal inﬂammation is usually not induced by S. Typhimu-
rium infection of mice. However, a recently developed
model system of caecal
inﬂammation in streptomycin-
pretreated mice allows the analysis of intestinal symp-
toms caused by Salmonella infection (Barthel et al., 2003)
and was applied for our study (Hapfelmeier and Hardt,
2005). Oral infection with WT Salmonella caused severe
caecal inﬂammation, as quantiﬁed by histological scoring
of oedema, PMN inﬂux, loss of goblet cells and epithelial
damage. A mutant strain deﬁcient in the function of the
SPI1-encoded T3SS caused highly reduced caecal
inﬂammation. The pathological scores observed after
infection with the SPI4-deﬁcient strain were signiﬁcantly
reduced, but inﬂammation caused by the SPI4 strain was
more severe than caused by the SPI1 strain (Fig. 1B;
Fig. S2). The colonization of the caecum, liver, spleen and
ileal lymph nodes was comparable after infection with all

© 2007 The Authors
Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Cellular Microbiology, 9, 1834–1850

Fig. 1. Role of SPI4 in systemic murine
Salmonella infections and Salmonella-induced
colitis.
A. Cohorts of C57BL/6 mice were
intragastrically infected with 5 ¥ 109 cfu of
various S. Typhimurium WT (circles), SPI2
(triangles) or SPI4 (squares) strains. At days
3 or 5 after infection, mice were sacriﬁced
and the organ burden of Salmonella was
determined for liver, spleen, MLN and PP.
*below detection limit.
B. Cohorts of 10 streptomycin-pretreated
C57BL/6 mice per group were infected
intragastrically with 5 ¥ 107 cfu of S.
Typhimurium WT SL1344, SPI4 (MvP656) or
complemented SPI4 [MvP656 (p7B4)] strains.
Additional experiments were performed by
infecting cohorts of ﬁve mice with SPI1
(SB161) and SPI1 SPI4 (MvP603) strains.
Mice were sacriﬁced 24 h after infection and
the bacterial burden in caecal contents, ileal
and caecal mesenteric lymph nodes, spleen
and liver was determined (see Fig. S1).
Salmonella-induced inﬂammation was
quantiﬁed by histopathological analyses of
caecal sections (see Experimental
procedures). Haematoxylin and eosin-stained
sections of caecal tissue were scored with
respect to oedema in the submucosa (black),
PMN inﬁltration (mid grey), reduction of the
number of goblet cells (dark grey) and
desquamation/erosion/ulceration of the
epithelial layer (open bars). Scores were
plotted as stacked vertical bars. Statistical
analysis: comparison of groups infected with
mutant stains to the group infected with WT
Salmonella. ***P < 0.001; n.s., not signiﬁcant.

1836 R. G. Gerlach et al.

A

1
–
g

 

u

f
c
 
g
o
L

/

n
a
g
r
o
U
F
C
g
o
L

 

Liver

WT

SPI2
SPI4

*

MLN

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

Spleen

PP

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

/

n
a
g
r
o
U
F
C
g
o
L

 

/

n
a
g
r
o
U
F
C
g
o
L

 

3

5

time after infection (day)

3

5

time after infection (day)

B

12

10

n.s.

***

e
r
o
c
s

l

i

l

a
c
g
o
o
h
a
p

t

8

6

4

2

0

edema 
PMN
goblet cells 
epithelium

n.s.

WT

SPI4

SPI4 [p7B4]

SPI1 SPI4

SPI1

of the strains tested. There was only a slight reduction of
the bacterial burden in the caecal lymph nodes. To test the
speciﬁcity of the SPI4 deletion, complementation of the
mutation was performed. A cosmid clone harbouring the
entire SPI4 locus was identiﬁed and introduced into the
SPI4-deletion strain. Caecal
inﬂammation was restored
by complementation of the SPI4 strain with the cosmid
harbouring SPI4. The histopathology observed after infec-
tion with a mutant strain deﬁcient in both SPI1 and SPI4
was not different from that of a SPI1-deﬁcient strain.

SPI4 is required for adhesion to epithelial cells

The data reported here suggest a function of SPI4
during intestinal infections and a previous study showed
a role of SPI4 in intestinal colonization of Salmonella-
infected calves (Morgan et al., 2004). We performed
further experiments to investigate the possible function
of SPI4-encoded proteins in interaction with epithelial
cells. In order to use an epithelial cell culture model that
is more reminiscent of the physiological situation of the

© 2007 The Authors
Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Cellular Microbiology, 9, 1834–1850

Salmonella Pathogenicity Island 4 1837

Fig. 2. SPI4 is required for adhesion to epithelial cells. The
epithelial cell line MDCK was grown to conﬂuent monolayers and
infected with various Salmonella strains as indicated in strain
background 12023 (A, C) and SL1344 (B). Infection was performed
at moi of 5 (A, B) and 60 (C). Twenty-ﬁve minutes after infection
cells were washed vigorously to remove non-adherent bacteria.
The cells were lysed and serial dilutions of the lysates were plated
onto agar plates in order to quantify adherent bacteria (A, B).
Statistical analyses were performed by Student’s t-test; *P < 0.05;
**P < 0.01. (C) Infected monolayers were washed, ﬁxed and
processed for immunostaining of bacterial LPS (red) without
permeabilization. Subsequently, the cells were permeabilized and
immunostained for host cell ezrin (green). Scale bar: 40 mm.

intestinal epithelium, we used cell
lines such as T-84,
CaCo-2 and MDCK that form polarized monolayers. We
found that the canine epithelial cell
line MDCK formed
polarized epithelia in a highly reproducible fashion.
MDCK monolayers have been used in several previous
studies (Finlay et al., 1988; Garcia-del Portillo et al.,
1992) and we selected this cell
line for further assays.
Polarized MDCK monolayers were infected with Salmo-
nella WT and SPI4-deﬁcient strains and non-adherent
bacteria were removed by washing. While 4.24% of the
introduced Salmonella 12023 WT bacteria were adher-
ent, only 0.28% of the inoculum of the SPI4 strain were
adherent (Fig. 2A). The SPI4-encoded large repetitive
protein SiiE has some properties of non-ﬁmbrial adhes-
ins and we speculated that SiiE might mediate the adhe-
sion. The adhesion of a siiE deletion strain was reduced
to the same extend as that of the SPI4-deﬁcient strain.
the DSPI4 strain complemented with a
Adhesion of
cosmid harbouring SPI4 was restored to the level of the
WT, while adhesion of the DSPI4 strain harbouring the
cosmid vector was as low as that of the DSPI4 strain
(Fig. 2A). Adhesion assays were also performed with
Salmonella strain SL1344 WT and isogenic mutant
strains as used for the murine colitis model (Fig. 2B). In
this strain background we observed a similar level of
reduction of adhesion of a SPI4-deﬁcient strain. As Sal-
monella rapidly invades epithelial cells and the adhesion
assay might also determine internalized bacteria, we
compared the adhesion of a non-invasive invG strain
deﬁcient
in the SPI1-encoded T3SS to an invG SPI4
double mutant. The number of adherent bacteria was
reduced for the invG strain. The number of adherent
invG SPI4 bacteria was 26.5-fold lower, indicating that
SPI4-mediated adhesion is independent
from SPI1-
mediated internalization. As a further approach to
determine adherent Salmonella, we investigated the dis-
tribution of adherent bacteria on the surface of MDCK
cells (Fig. 2C). In this assay the host cells were not per-
meabilized, thus only non-internalized adherent bacteria
were immunostained. As expected from the quantiﬁca-
tion shown in Fig. 2A and B, only few adherent bacteria
were found for the SPI4-deﬁcient strain.
In contrast,

© 2007 The Authors
Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Cellular Microbiology, 9, 1834–1850

1838 R. G. Gerlach et al.

Aiis

B

DC

Aiis

B

DC

Eiis

Eiis

::HA

F

F

siiA::HA

siiA B::HA

p3187

p3188

siiA B    C

siiD

siiF

p3224

p3229

p3223

A

B

N

SiiE

C

high numbers of Salmonella WT cells were found on the
apical side of MDCK cells. Similar observations on the
role of SPI4 in adhesion were made with polarized
monolayers of T-84 and CaCo-2 cells (data not shown).

SiiE as a secreted protein

To approach the molecular functions of SPI4-encoded
proteins, we performed bioinformatic analyses. SPI4 har-
bours six genes designated siiA to siiF. Based on
sequence similarity, Morgan et al. (2004) proposed that
siiC, siiD and siiF may encode for subunits of a T1SS with
SiiC, SiiD and SiiF functioning as the outer membrane
secretin, the HlyD-like membrane fusion protein and the
inner membrane transport ATPase respectively. The
product of siiA is a 210-amino-acid (aa) protein without
similarity to database entries other than of S. enterica.
SiiB (462 aa) shows low sequence similarity to MotA, a
protein involved in the chemotactic regulation of ﬂagella.
SiiE (5559 aa) is a highly repetitive protein consisting of
53 Ig domains, which distantly resemble the Ig domains of
Yersinia pseudotuberculosis invasin, as judged by Hidden
Markov Model (HMM)–HMM comparisons (see Experi-
mental procedures and Fig. S3). The Ig repeats are pre-
ceded by a N-terminal coiled coil
region with eight
heptads. Ig repeats 52 and 53 are separated by an inser-
tion of about 60 residues. SiiA, SiiB and SiiE were anno-
tated as secreted proteins and a typical signal sequence
was predicted for SiiB by the SignalP-NN and SignalP-
HMM algorithms. For SiiA a signal sequence was pre-

Fig. 3. Genetic organization of SPI4,
positions of deletions and complementation
constructs and domain prediction for SiiE.
A. The genetic organization of siiABCDEF in
SPI4 is depicted. The position of deletions for
mutant strains used in this study is shown as
well as the position of inserts of cosmids and
plasmids for complementation. Putative
functions of the gene products as annotated
in the genome sequences of S. enterica are
shown.
B. Analysis of the tertiary structure of SiiE.
The domain structure of SiiE is schematically
shown. Predictions for coiled-coil domains
and Ig-fold domains are shown. Note the
short insertion of 60 aa between the two most
C-terminal Ig repeats. For further details on
the repeat structure of SiiE, see Fig. S3.

WT

MvP616

SPI4, MvP589
siiA, MvP591
siiB, MvP593
siiC, MvP595
siiD, MvP597
siiE, MvP599
siiF, MvP812
p7B4

unknown function
T1SS component
T1SS substrate
HA tag

N-terminal domain
coiled-coil region
unknown
Ig-fold repeats

dicted with low probability by the SignalP-NN but not by
the SignalP-HMM algorithm.

this model,

Based on these predictions we assumed that SPI4
encodes a T1SS with SiiCDF being the structural com-
the secretion system while SiiABE might
ponents of
be putative secreted proteins. To test
the
three candidate substrate proteins were tagged with a
C-terminal HA-tag. The HA-tag has been proven useful
to follow the secretion of substrate proteins of various
secretion systems and C-terminal
tags are usually
tolerated. Due to the large size of siiE, we per-
well
formed chromosomal tagging (Uzzau et al., 2001). For the
tagging of siiA and siiB, low-copy-number vectors were
constructed that also contained the regions upstream of
siiA harbouring the putative promoter of the sii operon. In
addition, gene-speciﬁc deletions of all SPI4 genes were
generated (see Fig. 3A of a schematic representation).

To test the expression of HA-tagged alleles of siiA, siiB
and siiE, various in vitro growth conditions were applied
that have previously been shown to affect the expression
of genes within SPIs. Growth in minimal media inducing
the expression of SPI2 and SPI3 genes did not result in
detectable cellular levels of SiiA-HA, SiiB-HA or SiiE-HA,
or of tagged proteins present in the supernatant (data not
shown). However, SiiB-HA was detectable in the total cell
fraction of cultures grown overnight in Luria–Bertani (LB)
with aeration. We next used culture conditions shown to
induce the expression of genes involved in invasion and
enteropathogenesis. Cell
lysates obtained from subcul-
tures grown in LB to late exponential growth phase

© 2007 The Authors
Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Cellular Microbiology, 9, 1834–1850

Δ
Δ
Δ
Δ
Δ
Δ
Δ
A

TC

SN

DP

SN

DP

1

2

3

3.5

4

6

h p.i.

TC CD

SN Sol

WM OM IM

Salmonella Pathogenicity Island 4 1839

B

SiiE-HA

FliC

SiiA-HA

SiiB-HA

SiiE

DnaK

OmpA

AtpF

Fig. 4. SiiE is a secreted protein.
A. S. Typhimurium strain MvP616 expressing siiE::HA was subcultured in LB and culture aliquots were collected at various time points post
inoculation (p.i.). The bacterial cells were pelleted by centrifugation and resuspended in sample buffer for phosphate gel electrophoresis (TC).
Bacterial cells were collected by centrifugation and protein present in the culture supernatant (SN) was concentrated by TCA precipitation and
resuspended in sample buffer. The cell pellet was resuspended and subjected to vigorous mixing to detach protein from the cell surface.
Bacterial cells were collected by centrifugation, detached protein (DP) was precipitated from the supernatant by TCA and resuspended in
sample buffer. In order to load comparable amounts of cell lysates and secreted or detached protein, the volume of sample buffer for
resuspension was adjusted according to the optical density of the culture at OD600. SiiE-HA was detected by Western blot analyses using a
monoclonal antibody against the HA tag. To control the enrichment of proteins from supernatant and detached fractions, these fractions were
analysed for the ﬂagellar subunit FliC.
B. Subcellular fractionation was performed for S. Typhimurium WT and WT strains harbouring plasmids for expression of siiA::HA or siiB::HA
fusions. Bacteria were subcultured in LB for 3.5 h. Bacterial cells were recovered by centrifugation and the protein present in the supernatant
was precipitated as in A. Bacterial cells were subjected to subcellular fractionation and the presence of SiiA-HA, SiiB-HA and SiiE was
analysed in the various fractions: TC, total cell lysate; CD, cell debris after low speed centrifugation; SN, supernatant; Sol, cytosolic fraction;
WM, whole membrane fraction; OM, outer membrane; IM, inner membrane. As controls for the various subcellular fractions, DnaK, OmpA and
AtpF were detected using speciﬁc antisera as markers for cytosolic, outer membrane and inner membrane respectively.

showed high cellular levels of SiiA-HA, SiiB-HA (data not
shown) and of SiiE-HA (Fig. 4A). The large size of SiiE
required the application of gel electrophoresis and
Western blotting systems optimized for the resolution of
large proteins because conventional SDS-PAGE proce-
dures did not result in efficient transfer to membranes. We
found 1.3% agarose gels and phosphate buffer systems
most useful for this purpose. Next, protein present in the
culture supernatant of cultures grown in LB to late expo-
nential phase was recovered by precipitation and sub-
jected to Western blotting of the HA-tag. SiiE-HA was
detected as secreted protein and secretion was detect-
able from 3.5 h of subculture. The amounts of secreted
SiiE-HA increased with culture time (Fig. 4A). Detachment
of surface-associated protein by mechanical shearing did
not recover SiiE-HA. We raised an antiserum against the
recombinant C-terminal portion of SiiE that was used for
detection of SiiE in subsequent experiments. For further
experiments, cells were subcultured for 3.5 h in LB broth.
Culture supernatants were analysed and the cells were

subjected to subcellular fractionation (Fig. 4B). SiiA-HA
and SiiB-HA were not detectable in culture supernatants
and subcellular fractionation revealed the presence of
both proteins in the inner membrane. In contrast, SiiE was
detected by the a-SiiE serum in the culture supernatant
and, to a lesser extend, in cell lysates. The protein was
neither associated with puriﬁed bacterial membranes of in
vitro grown bacteria nor detectable in the soluble fraction
representing the bacterial cytoplasm. These observations
indicate that SiiE may only be loosely associated with
membranes and demonstrate the transport of SiiE across
the bacterial cell envelope.

Cell contact-dependent function of SiiE

The data reported above show a function of SPI4 in adhe-
sion but also demonstrate that SiiE is predominantly
secreted into the culture media. We assumed that the
function of SiiE as an adhesin would require the presence
of this protein on the bacterial cell surface. First, Salmo-

© 2007 The Authors
Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Cellular Microbiology, 9, 1834–1850

1840 R. G. Gerlach et al.

Fig. 5. SiiE is only present on the cell envelope of adherent Salmonella.
A. Salmonella WT and SPI4 strains were subcultured in LB for 3.5 h, transferred to glass slides, ﬁxed and subjected to immunoﬂuorescence
analyses with antisera against SiiE (red) and Salmonella LPS (blue). Scale bar, 4 mm.
B. MDCK cells were infected with a Salmonella WT strain constitutively expressing GFP (green) as described for Fig. 2 and ﬁxed 25 min after
infection. Cells were immunostained for LPS (red, left panel) or SiiE (red, right panel) and F-actin was labelled with a phalloidin-AlexaFluor647
conjugate in order to visualize host cells. Cells were visualized by confocal laser-scanning microscopy (CLSM). Scale bars correspond to 7 mm
and 2 mm in overview micrographs and inserts respectively.
C. MDCK cells were infected with GFP-expressing Salmonella WT and SPI4 strains and processed as for (B). Immunostaining of adherent
bacteria was performed for SiiE (red) and LPS (blue), if indicated, and CLSM micrographs were subjected to image deconvolution. Note the
appearance of patches of SiiE on the surface of Salmonella WT. Scale bars: 1 mm.

Immunoﬂuorescence analysis of

nella WT and SPI4 strains were grown in vitro under
conditions that induced the synthesis and secretion of
SiiE.
these bacteria
using the antiserum raised against SiiE did not allow the
detection of the SiiE on the bacterial cell surface (Fig. 5A).
Electron microscopy analyses also did not reveal
the
presence of SPI4-dependent surface structures on bacte-
ria grown in vitro (data not shown). These results were
consistent with the lack of cell-associated SiiE observed
in the experiments shown in Fig. 4 but inconsistent with
the role of SiiE in adhesion. We next analysed the pres-
ence of SiiE on bacteria adhering to epithelial cells. Under
these experimental conditions, SiiE was detectable
with the anti-SiiE serum on a subset of adherent bacteria
(Fig. 5B). No staining was observed for SPI4-deﬁcient
bacteria (data not shown). Immunostaining for the outer
membrane component lipopolysaccharide (LPS) showed
a continuous peripheral staining for all bacteria (Fig. 5B,
left panel). In contrast, SiiE was only detected on a subset
of adherent bacterial (36% positive for SiiE) and present
in patches on the cell surface (Fig. 5B, right panel). One
explanation for these observations could be the masking
of SiiE by the very long O-antigen of the LPS of Salmo-

nella grown in culture. It has also been observed that
contact to host cells induces structural changes in Salmo-
nella LPS (Lyczak et al., 2001)
that might unmask
SiiE and allow antibody binding. To test this possibility,
we used waaL-, wzzST-, fepE- and wzzST/fepE-deﬁcient
strains that lack the entire O-antigen, the long form of
O-antigen, the very long O-antigen and long and very long
O-antigen respectively (Murray et al., 2003). The strains
were cultured in LB broth analysed for SiiE secretion
and surface-bound SiiE by immunoﬂuorescence. All four
mutant strains secreted SiiE; however, no surface-bound
SiiE was detected on these strains (data not shown). We
next tested the effect of growth on solid media on the
distribution of SiiE but observed the absence of bacterial
surface-bound SiiE under these conditions (data not
shown). This observation indicates that contact to a host
cell surface is required to retain SiiE on the surface of the
bacterial cell envelope. Interestingly, the bacteria formed
clusters on some host cells, while other host cells were
completely devoid of adherent bacteria. As the incubation
time of 25 min would not allow massive replication, these
clusters are distinct from microcolonies that result from
bacterial replication after adhesion. To investigate the dis-

© 2007 The Authors
Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Cellular Microbiology, 9, 1834–1850

10

1

0.1

**

**

**

n.s.

**

l

m
u
u
c
o
n
i
 
f
o
 
%

)

(
 
a
i
r
e
t
c
a
b
 
t
n
e
r
e
h
d
a

w / o
p r ei m

m

u

W

e
n
T i m

n

u

m

e

S

w / o
P I 4 i m

P I 4
S

e

n

u

m

T

T

W
W

Fig. 6. Inhibition of adhesion by antisera to SiiE. Adhesion assays
with S. Typhimurium WT or the SPI4 strain were performed at a
moi of 5 basically as described for Fig. 2. If indicated, immune
serum against the C-terminal moiety of SiiE or a pre-immune
serum was added at a ﬁnal concentration of about 100 mg ml-1 IgG
to the inoculum immediately prior to infection. The data shown are
means and standard deviations of adhesion assays done in
triplicate. Statistical analyses by Student’s t-test were performed by
comparing assays with the WT assay without addition of serum
(WT w/o), or between assays as indicated by bars. **P < 0.01; n.s.,
not signiﬁcant.

tribution of SiiE on the bacterial surface in more detail,
micrographs of Salmonella WT adhering to the apical side
of MDCK cells were subjected to image deconvolution
(Fig. 5C). Patches of SiiE were detected on the bacterial
cell envelope. Interestingly, in most of the SiiE-positive
bacteria these patches were absent from the poles of the
bacterial rods. So far, we have not been able to detect the
formation of SPI4-dependent surface structures on adher-
ent Salmonella by transmission and immunoelectron
microscopy. Our observations suggest
that SiiE is a
secreted protein that is retained on the bacterial surface
upon host cell contact.

To further investigate the function of SiiE as an adhesin,
we tested if adhesion of Salmonella to MDCK cells could
be blocked. First, we added the recombinant GST–SiiE
fusion protein used to raise antisera but did not observe
a signiﬁcant reduction of adherent bacteria (data not
shown). However, we observed that a large portion of the
GST–SiiE protein is degraded at the C-terminus, which
may result in a reduced number of functional adhesins.
Next we used the antiserum against the C-terminal moiety
of SiiE in functional assays. Salmonella WT and the SPI4
strain were incubated with MDCK cells in the presence of
the antiserum or the corresponding pre-immune serum
and adherent bacteria were quantiﬁed (Fig. 6). The addi-

Salmonella Pathogenicity Island 4 1841

tion of the pre-immune serum had no effect on the adhe-
sion of Salmonella. In contrast, addition of the anti-SiiE
serum resulted in highly reduced numbers of adherent
bacteria similar to the effect of a deletion of SPI4. The
inhibition of adhesion by antibodies to secreted SiiE sup-
ports the role of SiiE as the protein relevant for bacterial
cell contact.

Functional requirement for the secretion of SiiE

In order to understand the requirements for secretion of
SiiE, we generated and analysed the effect of each of the
gene-speciﬁc deletions of the SPI4 genes on the secretion
of SiiE (Fig. 7). SiiE is the largest protein in the proteome
of S. Typhimurium. Other large proteins are BapA with
300 kDa (Latasa et al., 2005), STM3691 with 150 kDa
(McClelland et al., 2001; Riess et al., 2004), and ShdA with
about 200 kDa (Kingsley et al., 2002). We assumed that
SiiE should be detectable in the secretome of S. Typhimu-
rium without Western blotting if sufficient amounts of
protein were secreted and recovered from the culture
supernatant. In fact, in Coomassie-stained gels of total cell
lysates and culture supernatants of S. Typhimurium WT a
protein band of more than 540 kDa was detectable that
was absent in the siiE strain (Fig. 7A). Deletions of siiC,
siiD and siiF all resulted in the lack of secreted SiiE in the
culture supernatant (Fig. 7B). However, SiiE was detect-
able in the total cell fractions of cultures of siiC, siiD or siiF
strains grown in LB to late exponential phase, demonstrat-
ing that these deletions were non-polar on the expression
of siiE. In contrast, SiiE was detectable in total cell fractions
and culture supernatants of siiA or siiB strains. Thus, SiiA
and SiiB are neither proteins secreted into the growth
medium nor essential components of the T1SS, and we
hypothesize that these proteins may act as regulatory
factors or as accessory components of the T1SS. Comple-
mentation of the mutation in siiC was performed with
plasmids harbouring siiABC. The mutations in siiD and siiF
were complemented with plasmids harbouring siiD or siiF
under control of the siiA promoter. As shown in Fig. 7C,
complementation of deletion of siiC, siiD or siiF restored
the secretion of SiiE into the culture supernatant. Taken
together, these data demonstrate that SiiE is a secreted
protein that is secreted by bacteria in the late exponential
phase and SiiCDF form the cognate T1SS for SiiE. The
large size of SiiE probably led to the lack of detection in
previous secretome analyses performed under similar
growth conditions, although high-molecular-weight bands
were present
in these previous secretome analyses
(Hueck et al., 1995; Kaniga et al., 1995).

Characterization of the secretion signal of SiiE

Proteins secreted by T1SS are commonly recognized
by a C-terminal signal sequence. For example, HlyA, the

© 2007 The Authors
Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Cellular Microbiology, 9, 1834–1850

1842 R. G. Gerlach et al.

A
siiA B

C D E F WT

α SiiE

n.d.

Co

pellet

supernatant
[C]

[D]

[F]

α SiiE

Co
M

α SiiE

Co

B

C

M

supernatant

Fig. 7. Functional requirements for secretion of SiiE.
A. The synthesis of SiiE was analysed in the background of S.
Typhimurium WT or mutant strains harbouring gene-speciﬁc
deletions of siiA, siiB, siiC, siiD, siiE or siiF. Bacterial strains were
subcultured for 6 h in LB. Bacterial cells were recovered by
centrifugation, and equal amounts of cells as adjusted by OD600
were lysed in sample buffer (pellet).
B. Protein present in the culture supernatant was recovered by
precipitation and resuspended in sample buffer (supernatant).
Samples were subjected to gel electrophoresis on 1.3% agarose
gels and analysed by Western blotting using antiserum against
recombinant SiiE. Bacterial cell lysates and protein recovered from
supernatants were also analysed by SDS-PAGE and Coomassie
staining (Co). ‘M’ indicates the 500 kDa protein of the
high-molecular-weight marker.
C. Synthesis and secretion of SiiE by strains harbouring mutations
in genes for the T1SS components SiiC, SiiD and SiiF and
complementing plasmids. The analysis was performed as in (B)
and SiiE in the culture supernatants was detected by Western
blotting using the a SiiE serum. n.d., not determined.

best-characterized T1SS substrate protein, has a signal
sequence at the C-terminal 60 aa. We set out to identify
the signal sequence of SiiE. As modiﬁcation of the entire
siiE gene of 17 kb appeared technically difficult, we gen-
erated fragments of SiiE and followed the secretion. We
observed that a recombinant protein consisting of GST
and ﬁve C-terminal domains of SiiE was expressed by

Salmonella under control of the siiA promoter. The GST–
SiiE fusion protein was secreted under culture conditions
that resulted in the secretion of full-length SiiE. There-
fore, the GST–SiiE fusion protein appeared useful for
the signal sequence. A set of
the characterization of
GST–SiiE proteins with nested C-terminal
truncations
was generated and the secretion was investigated
under in vitro conditions triggering secretion of WT SiiE
(Fig. 8). After 5 h of subculture of the siiE strain harbour-
ing various plasmids, synthesis of the GST–SiiE fusion
proteins was observed for all constructs. Analyses of
protein secreted into the culture supernatant indicated
that the GST–SiiE fusion protein with the full C-terminal
region was secreted. Secretion of this fusion protein was
not detectable in the background of the siiEF mutation,
demonstrating the speciﬁc secretion by the SPI4-T1SS.
However, none of the constructs with deletions of the
C-terminal region of SiiE were detectable in the culture
supernatants of the siiE and siiEF strains. These obser-
the C-terminus as a signal
vations show the role of

strain construct

C del. TC

SN

siiE GST::siiE

15115-16677        0

siiEF GST::siiE

15115-16677        0

siiE GST::siiE

15115-16647

siiE GST::siiE

15115-16617

siiE GST::siiE

15115-16587

siiE GST::siiE

15115-16557

siiE GST::siiE

15115-16527

siiE GST::siiE

15115-16497

siiE GST::siiE

15115-16467

siiE GST::siiE

15115-16437

-10

-20

-30

-40

-50

-60

-70

-80

Fig. 8. Characterization of the secretion signal of SiiE. A series of
plasmids were constructed for the expression of GST and the
C-terminal moiety of SiiE under control of the promoter of siiA.
These constructs either contained the entire C terminus of SiiE or
deletions of various extent is indicated as amino acid residues
deleted from the C terminus (C del.). The plasmids were introduced
into S. Typhimurium siiE or siiEF strains as indicated and the
resulting strains were grown under conditions that induced
expression of SPI4 genes and secretion of SiiE. Total cell lysates
(TC) and protein secreted into the culture supernatant (SN) were
analysed by Western blots using the antiserum against SiiE
basically as described for Fig. 7.

© 2007 The Authors
Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Cellular Microbiology, 9, 1834–1850

sequence for the recognition and secretion of SiiE by the
SPI4-T1SS.

Discussion

inﬂammation.

In this study, we deﬁned SPI4 as a virulence locus of
S. enterica involved in binding to epithelial cells and con-
tributing to enteropathogenesis in a murine model. Still,
the role of SPI4 in pathogenesis remains controversial.
Our work indicated a role of SPI4 in the enteropathogen-
esis in the murine colitis model. Morgan et al. (2004)
reported a function of SPI4 in intestinal colonization in
calves but did not observe a contribution of SPI4 to intes-
tinal
In contrast, no virulence defect of
SPI4-deﬁcient strains was observed in the chicken infec-
tion model. SPI4-mediated adhesion appears to be
required for the efficient colonization of the intestine, but
inﬂammatory response appears to be dependent on the
host species applied for
the infection model. While
Morgan et al. (2004) found reduced systemic proliferation
of SPI4 mutant strains after oral
infection of mice our
analyses did not suggest an attenuation of the systemic
virulence of a SPI4-deﬁcient strain. However, it should be
noted that infection models were used with different infec-
tious doses that might critically affect the kinetics of sys-
temic infection. It is also of interest that a murine model
identiﬁed SPI4 as one factor contributing to persistent
Salmonella infections (Lawley et al., 2006). Further
careful analyses and comparison of SPI4 phenotypes in
different infection models will be required to reveal the
role of SPI4 for Salmonella pathogenesis.

Our experimental analyses demonstrated that SPI4
encodes a T1SS consisting of SiiCDF with SiiE as the
substrate protein. Two further SPI4-encoded proteins,
SiiA and SiiB are not secreted into the growth media but
represent inner membrane proteins that are not required
for the secretion of SiiE. SiiE is the largest protein of the
Salmonella proteome and characterized by a highly
repetitive domain structure. SiiE contains 53 tandem
copies of an Ig domain of about 100 aa, distantly resem-
bling the domains of Yersinia invasin. The only obvious
alteration is an insertion of 60 aa between the last two
repeats of the Ig domains. What might be the biological
explanation for the large size and the unusual protein
architecture of SiiE? Gram-negative bacteria express a
variety of ﬁmbrial adhesins of variable length. The ﬁmbrial
shaft is assembled by homopolymers of ﬁmbrial subunits
and the number of these subunits determines the distance
between the tip with a speciﬁc subunit involved in binding
of host cell target molecules and the ﬁmbrial base in the
outer membrane. The large number of Ig domains in the
non-ﬁmbrial adhesin SiiE may fulﬁl a similar role as the
shaft subunits of the classical ﬁmbrial adhesins (for a
model, see Fig. S4). A molecular requirement for the very

Salmonella Pathogenicity Island 4 1843

large size of SiiE might be the speciﬁc composition of the
outer membrane of S. enterica. It has been reported that
during the extracellular life, Salmonella express long and
very long LPS molecules with modal repeats of
the
O-antigen of up to 35 and more than 100 respectively. The
expression of long and very long forms of LPS protects
extracellular Salmonella from the antimicrobial effects of
complement and antimicrobial peptides, but may also
mask the binding sites of adhesins. The large number of
the Ig repeats thus may extend the adhesion domain of
SiiE beyond the LPS in order to allow binding to a cognate
receptor. Recent studies on the needle-like extensions
formed by the T3SS of Shigella ﬂexneri (West et al., 2005)
or Yersinia enterocolitica (Mota et al., 2005) suggest that
the length of these structures is critical for the proper
function during pathogenesis and distinct molecular
mechanisms of control exist. Similar constraints may
apply to non-ﬁmbrial adhesins. Along these lines, we
observed that a truncated SiiE derivative with an internal
deletion of 20 Ig domains is still synthesized and secreted,
but unable to confer adhesion to polarized epithelial cells
(R.G. Gerlach, D. Jäckel and M. Hensel, unpubl. obs.).

SPI4 expression and secretion coincides with the acti-
vation of invasion genes in Salmonella. A study by Ahmer
et al. (1999) reported that expression of reporter fusions
in SPI4 was dependent on the function of SirA and HilA,
two regulators of genes in SPI1. Taken together, these
observations suggest that SPI4 function is required during
a phase of pathogenesis that also requires the function of
SPI1, i.e. the invasion of enterocytes. The SPI4-mediated
adhesion to epithelial cells might be a functional require-
ment for the subsequent SPI1-mediated translocation of
effector proteins, resulting in invasion and inﬂammatory
responses.

T1SS have adapted to various transport

functions,
ranging from uptake of nutrients to export of antibiotics
and metal ions and the secretion of a large number of
virulence proteins in Gram-negative bacteria. Proteins
secreted by T1SS such as haemolysins, toxins or pro-
teases require secretion into the extracellular medium
for their proper function. In contrast, the proper function
of an adhesin requires the binding to the bacterial
cell envelope. We observed that SiiE is secreted into
the supernatant during culture in laboratory media, but
present on the bacterial surface during contact with host
cells. This observation may be explained by the retention
of the substrate protein SiiE by the SPI4-T1SS. Alterna-
tively,
the adhesin functions of SiiE may require the
formation of the tripartite complex with SiiE binding to
receptors on the host cell membrane as well as to a
receptor present in the bacterial cell envelope in the outer
membrane and the release from the membrane at a later
stage of growth. At present, there is no indication that
release of SiiE from the membrane is the result of a

© 2007 The Authors
Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Cellular Microbiology, 9, 1834–1850

1844 R. G. Gerlach et al.

proteolytic processing, and other mechanisms may have
to be considered. The secretion of the adhesin SiiE shows
an interesting similarity to the ﬁlamentous haemagglutinin
(FHA) of Bordetella pertussis (reviewed in Locht et al.,
1993). This adhesin is secreted by the two-partner
secretion pathway and the release of FHA is mediated
by proteolytic processing through the autotransporter
protease Spb1 (Coutte et al., 2001). A recent study
demonstrated that
the release of FHA is important
for B. pertussis pathogenesis, because a Spb1-deﬁcient
strain was defective in respiratory tract colonization,
despite increased adhesion to epithelial cells (Coutte
et al., 2003). We propose that, in a similar fashion, the
function of SiiE of Salmonella is only required during a
short phase of Salmonella pathogenesis and that
the
presence of this adhesin on the cell surface may interfere
with subsequent phases of pathogenesis, such as inva-
sion and intracellular life. An adhesin function of GbpA of
Vibrio cholerae has been observed despite the secretion
of this protein into the supernatant (Kirn et al., 2005). A
bridging function of GbpA between a bacterial receptor
and GlcNAc-coated host surfaces has been proposed.
We have not been able to restore adhesion of the siiE
strain by addition of SiiE-containing culture supernatant
(data not shown), indicating that SiiE-mediated adhesion
cannot be explained by a bridging function.

To our knowledge, SiiE is the ﬁrst T1SS substrate protein
which mediates adhesion to eukaryotic cell surfaces.
Although inspection of bacterial genomes sequences
suggest the presence of various T1SS that secrete adhe-
sion molecules (for compilation and review, see Delepel-
aire, 2004), only two T1SS that are involved in bioﬁlm
formation were characterized in detail. BapA of S. enterica
serovar Enteritidis is a large repetitive protein and a recent
study by Latasa et al. (2005) demonstrated the secretion of
BapA by a cognate T1SS and the function in homotypic
adhesion during Salmonella bioﬁlm formation. LapA of
Pseudomonas ﬂuorescens with 8682 aa is even larger
than SiiE and work by Hinsa et al. suggested the T1SS
secretion of LapA and showed defects in bioﬁlm formation
of LapA-deﬁcient P. ﬂuorescens strains (Hinsa et al.,
2003). As expected for a T1SS substrate protein, SiiE is
secreted into the growth medium and is not detectable on
the cell surface after culture in vitro. Other non-ﬁmbrial
adhesins are autotransporters that form b-barrel structures
that anchor the protein in the outer membrane. We
have also been able to demonstrate the function of the
C-terminal part of SiiE as a recognition domain for secre-
tion by the SPI4-T1SS. The presence of C-terminal signal
sequences has been shown for other T1SS substrate
proteins (reviewed in Delepelaire, 2004) and the charac-
terization of HlyA, the prototype T1SS substrate deﬁned a
60 aa domain at the C-terminus (Mackman et al., 1987).
Similar to the observation reported here,
the ultimate

amino acid residues of this signal sequence were essential
for the secretion of HlyA. We are currently in the process of
deﬁning the SiiE signal sequence more precisely.

Interestingly, additional

large repetitive proteins have
been identiﬁed in the genome of S. Typhimurium. BapA, a
386 kDa protein, shows a domain organization similar to
that of SiiE (Latasa et al., 2005). ORF STM3691 encodes
a protein with a predicted mass of 148 kDa with similarity
to non-ﬁmbrial adhesins such as BadA of Bartonella
henselae (Riess et al., 2004). STM3691 has features of
autotransporter proteins but the function of the STM3691-
encoded protein has not been elucidated. ShdA and MisL
are further members of the autotransporter family and
ﬁbronectin binding and expression in the intestine have
been reported (Kingsley et al., 2002; Dorsey et al., 2005).
There is a surprisingly large number of adhesins in
S. enterica. With SiiE there are four non-ﬁmbrial adhesins
with functions demonstrated and STM3691 is the ﬁfth
putative adhesin of the family. In addition, genes for up to
13 ﬁmbrial adhesins have been identiﬁed in the different
serovars of S. enterica, but the molecular functions of
most of these adhesins is still unknown. The large number
of adhesins might reﬂect the complex pathogenesis of
Salmonella infections and ability of this pathogen to adapt
to niches in various mammalian and non-mammalian
hosts as well as to non-host environments. The ﬁmbrial
adhesins Fim, Lpf and Pef are not required for the adhe-
sion of Salmonella to the polarized cell lines MDCK and
T-84 (Bäumler et al., 1996). The SPI4-encoded adhesin
SiiE might bind to molecules speciﬁcally present on polar-
ized epithelial cells, and we propose a function during
interaction with the intestinal mucosa of the host.

In conclusion, we have identiﬁed the role of the giant
repetitive protein SiiE as an adhesin. SiiE is secreted by a
cognate T1SS and might functionally resemble ﬁmbrial
adhesins. SiiE is involved in enteropathogenesis of
S. enterica and future work has to reveal the contribution
of SPI4 and SiiE in host speciﬁcity and tissue tropism.

Experimental procedures

Bacterial strains and construction of deletion mutant
strains

Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium (S. Typhimurium)
NCTC 12023 was used as WT strain. Bacterial strains used in this
study are described in Table 1. Mutant strains deleted for the entire
SPI4 locus or harbouring gene-speciﬁc deletions of individual
SPI4 genes were generated by the ‘one-step’ inactivation protocol
as previously described (Datsenko and Wanner, 2000; Chakra-
vortty et al., 2002). Primers for the deletions are described in
Table S1. For infection experiments in the colon inﬂammation
model, S. Typhimurium strain SL1344 was used as WT and
isogenic deletion strains were generated in this strain background.
The DSPI4::aph mutation of strain MvP493 was moved into
SL1344 and SB161 by P22 transduction according to standard

© 2007 The Authors
Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Cellular Microbiology, 9, 1834–1850

Table 1. Bacterial strains and plasmids used in this study.

Salmonella Pathogenicity Island 4 1845

Designation

NCTC 12023 strains

NCTC 12023
P7D8
P2D6
MvP493
MvP589
MvP591
MvP593
MvP595
MvP597
MvP599
MvP601
MvP616
MvP812

SL1344 strains

SL1344
SB161
MvP602
MVP603
MvP656

Plasmids

pWSK29
pGEX-6P1
pSuperCos1
p3171
p3187
p3188
p3199
p3223
p3224
p3229
p3212
p3234
p3235
p3236
p3237
p3238
p3239
p3240
p3241
p7B4

Relevant characteristics

Reference/source

WT, identical to ATCC14028
invC::mTn5
ssaV::mTn5
DSPI4::aph
DSPI4::FRT
DsiiA::FRT
DsiiB::FRT
DsiiC::FRT
DsiiD::FRT
DsiiE::FRT
DsiiEF::FRT
siiE::HA FRT
DsiiF::FRT

rpsL hisB
DinvG
DSPI4::aph in SL1344
DSPI4::aph in SB161
DSPI4::FRT in SL1344

Low copy number vector, AmpR
Expression of GST fusions
Cosmid vector
siiE15115-16677 in pGEX-6P1
PsiiA siiA::HA in pWSK29
PsiiA siiAB::HA in pWSK29
PsiiA in pWSK29
siiF in p3199
PsiiA siiABC in pWSK29
siiD in p3199
PsiiA GST::siiE15115-16677 in pWSK29
PsiiA GST::siiE15115-16647 in pWSK29
PsiiA GST::siiE15115-16617 in pWSK29
PsiiA GST::siiE15115-16587 in pWSK29
PsiiA GST::siiE15115-16557 in pWSK29
PsiiA GST::siiE15115-16527 in pWSK29
PsiiA GST::siiE15115-16497 in pWSK29
PsiiA GST::siiE15115-16467 in pWSK29
PsiiA GST::siiE15115-16437 in pWSK29
SPI4 in pSuperCos1

NCTC, Colindale, UK
Deiwick et al. (1998)
Shea et al. (1996)
This work
This work
This work
This work
This work
This work
This work
This work
This work
This work

Lab collection
Kaniga et al. (1994)
This work
This work
This work

Wang and Kushner (1991)
Pharmacia
Stratagene
This work
This work
This work
This work
This work
This work
This work
This work
This work
This work
This work
This work
This work
This work
This work
This work
Hansen-Wester et al. (2004)

procedures (Maloy et al., 1996). Strain MvP656 was generated by
FLP-mediated deletion of the aph resistance cassette.

Construction of epitope-tagged alleles of SPI4 genes

A chromosomally HA epitope-tagged allele of siiE was con-
structed as previously described (Uzzau et al., 2001). Plasmids
for expression of siiA::HA or siiB::HA were constructed by PCR
ampliﬁcation of genomic DNA of S. Typhimurium using primer
pairs SiiA-Pro-long-For-EcoRI/SiiA-HA-Rev-XbaI or SiiA-Pro-
long-For-EcoRI/SiiB-HA-Rev-XbaI respectively, and cloning of
the resulting fragments as EcoRI/XbaI fragments into pWSK29.

Generation of antisera

recombinant GST–SiiE-C fusion protein was carried out using
standard protocols (Amersham GST fusion system handbook)
with a GSTrap FF 1 ml column (GE Healthcare). Fusion proteins
containing elution fractions were pooled and separated with a
preparative 8% PAA gel. The band respective to GST–SiiE-C was
cut out and the protein was electro-eluted from the gel (Electro-
Eluter Model 422, Bio-Rad). The eluted protein was lyophilized
(Bachofer SpeedVac concentrator connected to a Leybold-
Heraeus Lyovac GT2) and stored at -20°C upon reconstitution.
Polyclonal antiserum against a GST fusion of the C-terminal
fragment of SiiE of S. enterica serovar Typhimurium was raised in
New Zealand white rabbits (done at Eurogentec, Seraing,
Belgium) or BALB/c mice according to standard protocols
(Harlow and Lane, 1988).

A DNA fragment encoding for the last 520 C-terminal aa of SiiE
was ampliﬁed from genomic DNA of S. Typhimurium using
primers GST-SiiE-C-For-BamHI and GST-SiiE-C-Rev-SalI. The
fragment was cloned into pGEX-6P1 (Amersham) vector using
the BamHI and SalI sites. Production and puriﬁcation of the

Gel electrophoresis and blotting of SiiE

A continuous phosphate buffer system was used (Ausubel et al.,
1987) to cast an agarose gel
in a Mini Protean III chamber
(Bio-Rad) using 1.5 mm spacer plates.

© 2007 The Authors
Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Cellular Microbiology, 9, 1834–1850

1846 R. G. Gerlach et al.

A 1 cm plug of 15% PAA containing 100 mM NaPi pH 7.2 and
10% glycerol was cast ﬁrst and allowed to polymerize. A 1.3%
agarose (SeaKem Gold, Cambrex) gel containing 100 mM NaPi
pH 7.2, 0.1% SDS and 30% glycerol was poured on top of the
PAA plug and a 10 well comb was inserted into the liquid gel. The
samples were boiled in 1¥ phosphate/SDS sample buffer for
2 min at 100°C and the gel was run in 1¥ phosphate/SDS buffer
pH 7.2 at 25 mA (6 h) or 10 mA (overnight) constant current. The
gels were blotted on 0.45 mm Protran nitrocellulose membranes
(Whatman Schleicher and Schuell) for 2 h at 0.8 mA cm-2 in
Towbin transfer buffer (Ausubel et al., 1987) and subsequently
the membranes were blocked with 3% BSA in TBST for 1 h at
room temperature (RT) or overnight at 4°C. Alternatively, SDS-
PAGE was performed using precast 3–8% Tris-acetate gradient
gels (Invitrogen NuPage) and Coomassie staining with PageBlue
(MBI Fermentas).

Complementation of mutations in SPI4

A cosmid library of genomic DNA of S. Typhimurium 12023 in
pSuperCos1 has been previously described (Hansen-Wester
et al., 2004). In order to identify a clone harbouring SPI4, about
1000 clones of the cosmid library in E. coli XL1-Blue MR1 were
spotted on membranes and probed with DNA fragments derived
from siiD and siiE essentially as described before (Hansen-Wester
et al., 2004). Several positive clones were identiﬁed and further
analysed by restriction analyses and PCR with primer pairs spe-
ciﬁc for siiA and siiF. Two clones were identiﬁed that harboured the
entire SPI4 locus and cosmid p7B4 was used for further analyses.
Further complementation constructs were generated by ampli-
ﬁcation of individual genes of SPI4 or regions containing several
genes. The deletion of siiC was complemented by plasmid p3224
that harbours siiABC under control of the siiA promoter. p3224
was constructed by PCR with primers SiiA-Pro-long-For-EcoRI
and SiiABC-Rev-XbaI and cloning of the resulting EcoRI/XbaI
fragment into pWSK29. The promoter of siiA was ampliﬁed using
primers SiiA-Pro-long-For-EcoRI and SiiA-Pro-Rev-SmaI. The
resulting DNA fragment was digested with EcoRI and SmaI and
cloned in pWSK29 to yield p3199. siiD and siiF were ampliﬁed
with primers SiiD-For-SmaI/SiiD-Rev-XbaI and SiiF-For-SmaI/
SiiF-Rev-XbaI respectively, and cloned as SmaI/XbaI fragments
into p3199. For construction of plasmids for analyses of the SiiE
secretion signal, GST::siiE15115-16677 was ampliﬁed from p3171 and
the fragment was subcloned in p3199 to generate p3212. A
similar approach was used to generate plasmids p3134–3241
that express GST fusions with truncated C-terminal parts of SiiE.

Subcellular fractionation

Subcellular fractionation was basically performed as described
(Freeman et al., 2002). Brieﬂy, overnight cultures were reinocu-
lated 1:50 in fresh LB supplemented with appropriate antibiotics
and grown with aeration for 3.5 h in 250 ml baffle ﬂask at 150 r.
p.m. At the end of the incubation 150 ml of the suspension was
sampled, centrifuged (10 000 g, 4°C, 5 min) and the pellet was
resuspended in 50 ml 1¥ SDS-PAGE sample buffer (Ausubel
et al., 1987) per 1 OD600. The remaining suspension was centri-
fuged for 20 min at 8000 g at 4°C. The supernatant was sterile
ﬁltered (0.45 mm Schleicher and Schuell ﬁlter) and secreted pro-
teins were precipitated from the supernatant by addition of

0.1 vol. of 100% TCA and incubation overnight at 4°C. Precipi-
tated protein was recovered by centrifugation (12 000 g, 4°C,
45 min) and the resulting pellet was washed twice in ice-cold
acetone (10 000 g, 4°C, 30 min), air dried and subsequently
resuspended in 400 ml 1¥ SDS-PAGE sample buffer. The pellet
was washed once in ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS)
(8000 g, 4°C, 20 min) and resuspended in 10 ml ice-cold PBS
supplemented with bacterial protease inhibitor cocktail (P8465,
Sigma). The bacteria were lysed by three passages through a
French pressure cell (2000 psi) and crude cellular debris was
separated by centrifugation (400 g, 4°C, 30 min). The cleared
supernatant was centrifuged in a Beckman ultracentrifuge (SW40
rotor, 100 000 g, 4°C, 1 h). The supernatant (soluble fraction)
was centrifuged again (SW40 rotor, 100 000 g, 4°C, 1 h) and an
aliquot of
the supernatant was mixed with an equal volume
of 2¥ sample buffer and boiled (2 min, 100°C). The pellet
(membrane fraction) was washed once with ice-cold distilled H2O
(SW40 rotor, 100 000 g, 4°C, 1 h) and resuspended in 1 ml ice-
cold 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0. Ten millilitres of Sarkosyl buffer [1%
N-lauroylsarcosine (Sarkosyl)
in 10 mM EDTA, pH 8.0] was
added and incubated for 10 min on ice. Outer membrane (pellet)
and inner membrane (soluble) were separated by centrifugation
(SW40 rotor, 100 000 g, 4°C, 2 h) and the pellet was washed
once with 10 ml
ice-cold 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 (SW40 rotor,
100 000 g, 4°C, 1 h) and resuspended in 400 ml 1¥ SDS-PAGE
sample buffer. The proteins of the inner membrane fraction were
precipitated with TCA as described above and ﬁnally resus-
pended in 400 ml 1¥ SDS-PAGE sample buffer.

Antibodies for the control of subcellular fractions were rabbit
antisera against E. coli proteins anti-ATP synthase subunit b
(AtpF), OmpA and DnaK (Stressgen #SPA-880). For detection of
HA-tagged proteins a rat monoclonal against the HA tag was
used (Roche #1867423, dilution 1:10 000).

Immunoﬂuorescence

For immunostaining cells were directly ﬁxed after infection with
3% PFA in PBS for 15 min at RT. The cells were washed thrice
with PBS. Antibodies were diluted in blocking solution (2% goat
serum 2% BSA) optionally supplemented with 0.1% saponin for
permeabilization. Cells were incubated in staining solution for at
least 1 h at RT and washed thrice with PBS between staining
steps. Coverslips or membranes from cell culture inserts were
mounted on glass slides using Fluoroprep (Biomerieux). Imaging
was done on a Leica TCS NT confocal microscope with subse-
quent deconvolution using Huygens Essential v2.9 (SVI BV, Hil-
versum, Netherlands). 3D reconstruction was done using Imaris
v4.5 (Bitplane AG, Zürich, Switzerland). For additional
image
processing Photoshop CS2 (Adobe) was used.

Epithelial cell invasion model

HeLa cells were seeded in 24 well plates (Greiner bio-one Cell-
star) at a density of 5 ¥ 104 cells per well 24 h prior to infection.
Overnight cultures grown in LB + appropriate antibiotics were
reinoculated 1:30 in fresh medium and grown aerobically for
another 3.5 h. An inoculum of approximately 2 ¥ 106 bacteri-
a ml-1 (moi = 10) was prepared in Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle’s
medium (DMEM)
(PAA; high glucose, 10% FCS, 2 mM
Glutamax) and 500 ml well-1 were used to infect the HeLa cells.

© 2007 The Authors
Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Cellular Microbiology, 9, 1834–1850

The plates were centrifuged for 5 min at 500 r.p.m. to synchro-
nize infection and subsequently incubated for 25 min (37°C, 5%
CO2, 90% humidity). The cells were washed thrice with PBS
and 500 ml of DMEM containing 100 mg ml-1 gentamicin was
applied to each well to kill remaining extracellular bacteria. After
1 h of incubation the cell layers were washed again with PBS
and then lysed for 10 min with PBS containing 0.1% Triton
X-100 to liberate the intracellular bacteria. Serial dilutions
of the inoculum and the lysates were plated on MH plates to
determine the cfu. The percentage of
invasive bacteria was
calculated.

Salmonella Pathogenicity Island 4 1847

Mouse systemic infection model

Bacteria from 40 ml LB overnight culture were pelleted for 10 min
at 7000 g and resuspended in 12 ml PBS. 300 ml of this inoculum,
corresponding to approximately 5 ¥ 109 cfu was administered by
intragastric gavage to mice. At days 3 and 5 post infection 4–10
animals per group were sacriﬁced. Serial dilutions of homoge-
nates of spleen, liver and mesenteric lymph nodes were plated
onto MH plates. LB plates containing 50 mg ml-1 kanamycin
(mutant strains) or Leifson plates (WT control) were used to
determine the cfu in Peyer’s patches. Cfu per organ (spleen,
MLN, PP) or cfu per gram of organ (liver) were calculated.

Intracellular replication in macrophages

Mouse intestinal inﬂammation model

RAW cells were seeded in 24 well plates (Greiner bio-one Cell-
star) at a density of 7 ¥ 105 well-1 5 h prior to infection and
allowed to attach. Overnight cultures grown in LB + appropriate
antibiotics were used to prepare an inoculum with approximately
7 ¥ 106 bacteria ml-1 (moi = 10) in DMEM (PAA; high glucose,
10% FCS, 110 mg l-1 sodium pyruvate). Five hundred microlitres
per well was used to infect the RAW cells. The plates were
centrifuged for 5 min at 500 r.p.m. to synchronize infection and
subsequently incubated for 25 min (37°C, 5% CO2, 90%
humidity). The wells were washed three times with PBS and
500 ml of DMEM containing 100 mg ml-1 gentamicin was applied
to each well to kill remaining extracellular bacteria. After 1 h of
incubation the cell
layers were washed again with PBS and
500 ml of fresh medium containing 15 mg ml-1 gentamicin was put
into each well. At 2 h and 16 h post infection macrophage cell
layers were lysed for 10 min with PBS containing 0.1% Triton
X-100 to liberate the intracellular bacteria. Serial dilutions of the
inoculum and the lysates were plated on MH plates to determine
the cfu. Fold of replication (16 h versus 2 h) was calculated.

Adhesions assays

MDCK cells were seeded in 24 well plates (Greiner bio-one
Cellstar) at a density of 1 ¥ 105 cells per well or on semiper-
meable polycarbonate membranes (Millipore, 3 mm pore size) at
a density of 5 ¥ 105 cells per insert. Cells were allowed to dif-
ferentiate for 4–14 days in MEM media (PAA) supplemented
with 10% FCS, nonessential amino acids and penicillin/
streptomycin. Media were changed to antibiotic-free media 4 h
before infection.

Bacteria were subcultured (1:30 from overnight cultures) in
LB broth with appropriate antibiotics for 3.5 h and adjusted to
OD600 = 0.2 (viable counts experiments) or OD600 = 0.6 (immuno-
ﬂuorescence). A mastermix of the inoculum was prepared in MEM
(without penicillin/streptomycin) and the cells were infected for
25 min at a moi of 5 (viable counts experiments) or a moi of 60
(immunoﬂuorescence). The cells were washed with PBS ﬁve
times and lysed with 500 ml pre-warmed 0.1% Triton X-100 in PBS
for 5 min at 37°C. Serial dilutions were made in pre-chilled PBS
and plated on MH plates (viable counts experiments).

In antibody-blocking experiments pre-immune or

immune
serum from rabbits was added to the inoculum at a 1:25 dilution
(ﬁnal concentration approximately 100 mg ml-1 IgG). The cells
were washed with PBS ﬁve times and lysed with 500 ml pre-
warmed 0.1% Triton X-100 in PBS for 5 min at 37°C. Serial
dilutions were made in pre-chilled PBS and plated on MH plates.

The model of murine colitis was used (Barthel et al., 2003) and
for consistency with previously established conditions for infec-
tion and pathological scoring, experiments were performed
with S. Typhimurium SL1344 and isogenic mutant strains
and previously established bacterial growth conditions. Speciﬁed
pathogen-free C57BL/6 mice (6–10 weeks old) were obtained
from Janvier (Le Genest Saint Isle). For infections, S. Typhimu-
rium strains were grown for 12 h at 37°C in LB broth containing
0.3 M NaCl, diluted 1:20 in fresh medium, and subcultured for 4 h
under mild aeration. Bacteria were washed in ice-cold PBS and
resuspended in cold PBS (5 ¥ 107 cfu per 50 ml). Infections were
performed in individually ventilated cages (Tecniplast, Bugug-
giate, Italy) as described (Hapfelmeier et al., 2005). Brieﬂy, mice
were pretreated by gavage with 20 mg of streptomycin as
described. Twenty-four hours after streptomycin pretreatment the
mice were intragastrically inoculated with 5 ¥ 107 cfu of
the
respective S. Typhimurium strains.

For analysis of S. Typhimurium loads in caecal content and
organs, ileal and caecal MLNs, spleen and liver were removed
aseptically and homogenized in cold PBS containing 0.5% Ter-
gitol and 0.5% BSA. Caecum content was suspended in 500 ml
cold PBS. The bacterial
loads were determined by plating on
MacConkey agar plates (50 mg ml-1 streptomycin) as described
recently (Hapfelmeier et al., 2005). Animal experiments were
approved by the Swiss authorities and performed according to
the legal requirements.

For histopathological evaluation, tissues were embedded in
OCT (Sakura, Torrance, CA) and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen.
Cryosections (5 mm; cross-sectional) were stained with haema-
toxylin and eosin. Caecum pathology was evaluated by two
pathologists in a blinded manner using a histopathological
scoring scheme as previously described (Barthel et al., 2003).
Brieﬂy: (i) the extent of submucosal oedema was deduced from
the extension of the submucosa and scored by morphometric
analysis of the average thickness of the submucosa relative to
the thickness of the complete caecal wall. The scores were:
0 = no pathological changes; 1 = detectable oedema (< 10%);
2 = moderate oedema (10–40%); 3 = profound oedema (> 40%).
(ii) PMN inﬁltration into the lamina propria: 0 = less than ﬁve PMN
per high power ﬁeld (HPF; diameter 420 mm); 1 = 5–20 PMN per
HPF; 2 = 21–60 per HPF; 3 = 61–100 per HPF; 4 = more than
100 per HPF. (iii) Loss of goblet cells: 0 = more than 28 goblet
cells per HPF (400¥); 1 = 11–28 goblet cells per HPF; 2 = 1–10
goblet cells per HPF; 3 = less than 1 goblet cell per HPF. (iv)
integrity: 0 = no pathological changes detectable;
Epithelial
1 = epithelial desquamation; 2 = epithelial erosion; 3 = epithelial
ulceration associated with formation of granulation tissue.

© 2007 The Authors
Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Cellular Microbiology, 9, 1834–1850

1848 R. G. Gerlach et al.

The combined pathological score for each tissue sample was
determined as the sum of these individual scores: 0 = no signs of
inﬂammation; 1–2 = minimal signs of inﬂammation that are nor-
mally found in untreated SPF mice and therefore considered as
non-pathological; 3–4 = slight
inﬂammation; 5–8 = moderate
inﬂammation; 9–13 = profound inﬂammation.

Statistical analysis of the combined pathological score was
performed using the exact Mann–Whitney U-test and the SPSS
Version 11.0 software, as described before (Hapfelmeier et al.,
2005). Values of P < 0.05 were considered as statistically signiﬁ-
cant. Bacterial colonization was analysed in a similar manner. To
allow the statistical analysis of the bacterial
loads, values for
animals yielding ‘no cfu’ were set to the minimal detectable value
(MLN = 10 cfu; spleen = 20 cfu; liver = 60 cfu; intestinal content =
between 67 and 400 cfu, see above). Afterwards, the median
values were calculated using Microsoft Excel 2003 and statistical
analysis was performed using the exact Mann–Whitney U-test and
the SPSS Version 11.0 software. Values of P < 0.05 were consid-
ered as statistically signiﬁcant. NS = not statistically signiﬁcant.

Bioinformatics

Sequence analysis of SiiE (GenBank gi 32812845) was per-
formed in the MPI Bioinformatics Toolkit (Biegert et al., 2006),
using the modules HHrep for repeat detection, Quick2D for com-
parative secondary structure prediction, and HHpred for the
detection of homologues by HMM comparisons. Coiled coils were
predicted using COILS (Lupas et al., 1991). The alignment of the
53 Ig domains was made in MACAW (Schuler et al., 1991). The
results of the analysis are shown in Fig. S3.

Acknowledgements

We would like to acknowledge the contributions of Valerie Mar-
quard to the identiﬁcation of cosmid clone p7B4 for complemen-
tation analyses, Cédric Cheminay in animal experiments, Manfred
Rohde in analysing SPI4-dependent surface structures by elec-
tron microscopy and Marcus Kremer for histopathological quanti-
ﬁcation. We also like to thank Stefanie Hölzer and Nuno Cláudio
for sharing unpublished materials and data and Petra Müller for
critical comments on the manuscript. This work was supported by
Grants HE1964 of the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft to M.H.
M.H. would also like to thank the Fonds der Chemischen Industrie
for ﬁnancial support. W.D.H. was supported by the Swiss National
Science Foundation (3100AO-100175).

References

Ahmer, B.M., van Reeuwijk, J., Watson, P.R., Wallis, T.S.,
and Heffron, F. (1999) Salmonella SirA is a global regulator
of genes mediating enteropathogenesis. Mol Microbiol 31:
971–982.

Ausubel, F.M., Brent, R., Kingston, R.E., Moore, D.D.,
Seidman, J.G., Smith, J.A., and Struhl, K. (1987) Current
Protocols in Molecular Biology. New York: Wiley.

Barthel, M., Hapfelmeier, S., Quintanilla-Martinez, L., Kremer,
M., Rohde, M., Hogardt, M., et al. (2003) Pretreatment of
mice with streptomycin provides a Salmonella enterica
serovar Typhimurium colitis model that allows analysis of
both pathogen and host. Infect Immun 71: 2839–2858.

Bäumler, A.J., Tsolis, R.M., and Heffron, F. (1996) Contribu-
tion of ﬁmbrial operons to attachment to and invasion of
epithelial cell
Infect
Immun 64: 1862–1865.

lines by Salmonella typhimurium.

Biegert, A., Mayer, C., Remmert, M., Soding, J., and Lupas,
for protein

A.N. (2006) The MPI Bioinformatics Toolkit
sequence analysis. Nucleic Acids Res 34: W335–W339.

Chakravortty, D., Hansen-Wester, I., and Hensel, M. (2002)
Salmonella pathogenicity island 2 mediates protection of
intracellular Salmonella from reactive nitrogen intermedi-
ates. J Exp Med 195: 1155–1166.

Coutte, L., Antoine, R., Drobecq, H., Locht, C., and Jacob-
Dubuisson, F. (2001) Subtilisin-like autotransporter serves
as maturation protease in a bacterial secretion pathway.
EMBO J 20: 5040–5048.

Coutte, L., Alonso, S., Reveneau, N., Willery, E., Quatann-
ens, B., Locht, C., et al. (2003) Role of adhesin release for
mucosal colonization by a bacterial pathogen. J Exp Med
197: 735–742.

Datsenko, K.A., and Wanner, B.L. (2000) One-step inactiva-
tion of chromosomal genes in Escherichia coli K-12 using
PCR products. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97: 6640–6645.

Deiwick, J., Nikolaus, T., Shea, J.E., Gleeson, C., Holden,
D.W., and Hensel, M. (1998) Mutations in Salmonella
Pathogenicity Island 2 (SPI2) genes affecting transcription
of SPI1 genes and resistance to antimicrobial agents.
J Bacteriol 180: 4775–4780.

Delepelaire, P. (2004) Type I secretion in Gram-negative

bacteria. Biochim Biophys Acta 1694: 149–161.

Dorsey, C.W., Laarakker, M.C., Humphries, A.D., Weening,
E.H., and Bäumler, A.J. (2005) Salmonella enterica sero-
type Typhimurium MisL is an intestinal colonization factor
that binds ﬁbronectin. Mol Microbiol 57: 196–211.

Finlay, B.B., Gumbiner, B., and Falkow, S. (1988) Penetra-
tion of Salmonella through a polarized Madin-Darby
canine kidney epithelial cell monolayer. J Cell Biol 107:
221–230.

Freeman, J.A., Rappl, C., Kuhle, V., Hensel, M., and Miller,
S.I. (2002) SpiC is required for translocation of Salmonella
Pathogenicity Island 2 effectors and secretion of translocon
proteins SseB and SseC. J Bacteriol 184: 4971–4980.

Garcia-del Portillo, F., Foster, J.W., Maguire, M.E., and
Finlay, B.B.
the micro-
environment of Salmonella typhimurium-containing vacu-
oles within MDCK epithelial cells. Mol Microbiol 6: 3289–
3297.

(1992) Characterization of

Groisman, E.A., and Ochman, H. (1997) How Salmonella

became a pathogen. Trends Microbiol 5: 343–349.

Hansen-Wester, I., Chakravortty, D., and Hensel, M. (2004)
Functional transfer of Salmonella Pathogenicity Island 2 to
Salmonella bongori and Escherichia coli. Infect Immun 72:
2879–2888.

Hapfelmeier, S., and Hardt, W.D. (2005) A mouse model for
S. typhimurium-induced enterocolitis. Trends Microbiol 13:
497–503.

Hapfelmeier, S., Stecher, B., Barthel, M., Kremer, M., Muller,
A.J., Heikenwalder, M., et al.
(2005) The Salmonella
Pathogenicity Island (SPI)-2 and SPI-1 type III secretion
systems allow Salmonella serovar typhimurium to trigger
colitis via MyD88-dependent and MyD88-independent
mechanisms. J Immunol 174: 1675–1685.

© 2007 The Authors
Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Cellular Microbiology, 9, 1834–1850

Harlow, E., and Lane, D. (1988) Antibodies: A Laboratory
Manual. Cold Spring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Labo-
ratory Press.

Hensel, M. (2004) Evolution of pathogenicity islands of Sal-

monella enterica. Int J Med Microbiol 294: 95–102.

Hinsa, S.M., Espinosa-Urgel, M., Ramos, J.L., and O’Toole,
(2003) Transition from reversible to irreversible
G.A.
attachment during bioﬁlm formation by Pseudomonas ﬂuo-
rescens WCS365 requires an ABC transporter and a large
secreted protein. Mol Microbiol 49: 905–918.

Hueck, C.J., Hantman, M.J., Bajaj, V., Johnston, C., Lee,
C.A., and Miller, S.I.
(1995) Salmonella typhimurium
secreted invasion determinants are homologous to Shi-
gella Ipa proteins. Mol Microbiol 18: 479–490.

Humphries, A.D., Raffatellu, M., Winter, S., Weening, E.H.,
Kingsley, R.A., Droleskey, R., et al. (2003) The use of
ﬂow cytometry to detect expression of subunits encoded by
11 Salmonella enterica serotype Typhimurium ﬁmbrial
operons. Mol Microbiol 48: 1357–1376.

Kaniga, K., Bossio, J.C., and Galan, J.E. (1994) The Salmo-
nella typhimurium invasion genes invF and invG encode
homologues of the AraC and PulD family of proteins. Mol
Microbiol 13: 555–568.

Kaniga, K., Trollinger, D., and Galan, J.E. (1995) Identiﬁca-
tion of two targets of the type III protein secretion system
encoded by the inv and spa loci of Salmonella typhimurium
that have homology to the Shigella IpaD and IpaA proteins.
J Bacteriol 177: 7078–7085.

Kingsley, R.A., Santos, R.L., Keestra, A.M., Adams, L.G.,
and Baumler, A.J. (2002) Salmonella enterica serotype
Typhimurium ShdA is an outer membrane ﬁbronectin-
binding protein that
is expressed in the intestine. Mol
Microbiol 43: 895–905.

Kirn, T.J., Jude, B.A., and Taylor, R.K. (2005) A colonization
factor links Vibrio cholerae environmental survival and
human infection. Nature 438: 863–866.

Kuhle, V., and Hensel, M. (2004) Cellular microbiology of
intracellular Salmonella enterica: functions of the type III
secretion system encoded by Salmonella pathogenicity
island 2. Cell Mol Life Sci 61: 2812–2826.

Latasa, C., Roux, A., Toledo-Arana, A., Ghigo, J.M., Gamazo,
C., Penades, J.R., et al. (2005) BapA, a large secreted
protein required for bioﬁlm formation and host colonization
of Salmonella enterica serovar Enteritidis. Mol Microbiol
58: 1322–1339.

Lawley, T.D., Chan, K., Thompson, L.J., Kim, C.C., Govoni,
G.R., and Monack, D.M. (2006) Genome-wide screen for
Salmonella genes required for long-term systemic infection
of the mouse. PLoS Pathog 2: e11.

Locht, C., Bertin, P., Menozzi, F.D., and Renauld, G. (1993)
The ﬁlamentous haemagglutinin, a multifaceted adhesion
produced by virulent Bordetella spp. Mol Microbiol 9: 653–
660.

Lupas, A., Van Dyke, M., and Stock, J. (1991) Predicting
coiled coils from protein sequences. Science 252: 1162–
1164.

Lyczak, J.B., Zaidi, T.S., Grout, M., Bittner, M., Contreras, I.,
(2001) Epithelial cell contact-induced
and Pier, G.B.
alterations in Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi
lipo-
polysaccharide are critical for bacterial internalization. Cell
Microbiol 3: 763–772.

Salmonella Pathogenicity Island 4 1849

McClelland, M., Sanderson, K.E., Spieth, J., Clifton, S.W.,
Latreille, P., Courtney, L., et al. (2001) Complete genome
sequence of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium
LT2. Nature 413: 852–856.

Mackman, N., Baker, K., Gray, L., Haigh, R., Nicaud, J.M.,
and Holland, I.B. (1987) Release of a chimeric protein into
the medium from Escherichia coli using the C-terminal
secretion signal of haemolysin. EMBO J 6: 2835–2841.

Maloy, S.R., Stewart, V.L., and Taylor, R.K. (1996) Genetic
Analysis of Pathogenic Bacteria. Cold Spring Harbor, NY:
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

Marcus, S.L., Brumell, J.H., Pfeifer, C.G., and Finlay, B.B.
(2000) Salmonella pathogenicity islands: big virulence in
small packages. Microbes Infect 2: 145–156.

Morgan, E., Campbell, J.D., Rowe, S.C., Bispham, J.,
Stevens, M.P., Bowen, A.J., et al. (2004) Identiﬁcation of
host-speciﬁc colonization factors of Salmonella enterica
serovar Typhimurium. Mol Microbiol 54: 994–1010.

Mota, L.J., Journet, L., Sorg, I., Agrain, C., and Cornelis, G.R.
(2005) Bacterial injectisomes: needle length does matter.
Science 307: 1278.

Murray, G.L., Attridge, S.R., and Morona, R. (2003) Regula-
tion of Salmonella typhimurium lipopolysaccharide O
antigen chain length is required for virulence; identiﬁcation
of FepE as a second Wzz. Mol Microbiol 47: 1395–1406.
Riess, T., Andersson, S.G., Lupas, A., Schaller, M., Schafer,
A., Kyme, P., et al. (2004) Bartonella adhesin a mediates a
proangiogenic host cell response. J Exp Med 200: 1267–
1278.

Schlumberger, M.C., and Hardt, W.D. (2006) Salmonella type
III secretion effectors: pulling the host cell’s strings. Curr
Opin Microbiol 9: 46–54.

Schuler, G.D., Altschul, S.F., and Lipman, D.J. (1991) A
workbench for multiple alignment construction and
analysis. Proteins 9: 180–190.

Shea, J.E., Hensel, M., Gleeson, C., and Holden, D.W. (1996)
Identiﬁcation of a virulence locus encoding a second type III
secretion system in Salmonella typhimurium. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 93: 2593–2597.

Soto, G.E., and Hultgren, S.J. (1999) Bacterial adhesins:
common themes and variations in architecture and
assembly. J Bacteriol 181: 1059–1071.

Uzzau, S., Figueroa-Bossi, N., Rubino, S., and Bossi, L.
(2001) Epitope tagging of chromosomal genes in Salmo-
nella. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98: 15264–15269.

Wallis, T.S., and Galyov, E.E. (2000) Molecular basis of
Salmonella-induced enteritidis. Mol Microbiol 36: 997–
1005.

Wang, R.F., and Kushner, S.R. (1991) Construction of versa-
tile low-copy-number vectors for cloning, sequencing and
gene expression in Escherichia coli. Gene 100: 195–199.
West, N.P., Sansonetti, P., Mounier, J., Exley, R.M., Parsot,
C., Guadagnini, S., et al. (2005) Optimization of virulence
functions through glucosylation of Shigella LPS. Science
307: 1313–1317.

Wong, K.K., McClelland, M., Stillwell, L.C., Sisk, E.C., Thur-
ston, S.J., and Saffer, J.D.
Identiﬁcation and
sequence analysis of a 27-kilobase chromosomal fragment
containing a Salmonella pathogenicity island located at 92
minutes on the chromosome map of Salmonella enterica
serovar typhimurium LT2. Infect Immun 66: 3365–3371.

(1998)

© 2007 The Authors
Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Cellular Microbiology, 9, 1834–1850

1850 R. G. Gerlach et al.

Supplementary material

The following supplementary material is available for this article
online:
Fig. S1. Role of SPI4 for invasion of HeLa cells and intracellular
replication in RAW macrophages.
A. HeLa cells were infected with various Salmonella strains as
indicated. Non-internalized bacteria were removed by washing
and residual extracellular bacteria were killed by addition of gen-
tamicin and incubation for 1 h. Subsequently, host cells were
lysed by addition of PBS containing 0.1% Triton X-100 and intra-
cellular bacteria were quantiﬁed by plating serial dilutions onto
agar plates. Bacterial invasion is expressed as percentage of the
inoculum internalized by host cells.
B. The murine macrophage-like cell line RAW 264.7 was infected
with various Salmonella stains as indicated. Non-internalized
bacteria were removed as described above and the intracellular
bacteria were quantiﬁed 2 h and 16 h after infection by plating
serial dilutions of lysates. Intracellular proliferation is expressed
as the ratio of intracellular bacteria at 16 h to 2 h after infection.
The mean values and standard deviations of three assays are
shown. Statistical analyses were performed by Student’s t-test;
*P < 0.05; **P < 0.01.
Fig. S2. Mouse intestinal inﬂammation. Groups of 10 (A–F) or
ﬁve (G–L) streptomycin-pretreated mice were infected with Sal-
monella WT or various mutant strains as indicated. Twenty-four
hours after infection mice were sacriﬁced and bacterial burden

inﬂammation were quantiﬁed. (A and G) Bacterial
and caecal
loads in the
loads in the caecal contents, (B and H) bacterial
ileal MLN, (C and I) bacterial loads in the caecal MLN, (D and
J) bacterial loads in the spleen and (E and K) bacterial loads in
the liver. (F and L) Pathological scores as shown in Fig. 2B.
Dotted line:
limit of detection. Black bar: median. Statistical
analysis: comparison of groups to WT S. Typhimurium. n.s., not
signiﬁcant.
Fig. S3. Repeat structure of SiiE. The predicted domains of SiiE
are indicated and structurally unassigned regions are shown in
italics. The 53 repeats of the Ig domain are aligned and their
predicted secondary structure is shown above the alignment
(s = b-strand). Residues in the Ig domains are coloured by type to
facilitate reading the alignment.
Fig. S4. Model for SPI4 function. The function and predicted or
experimentally demonstrated subcellular localization of SPI4
gene products are indicated. A model for the functional analogy
between SiiE and ﬁmbrial adhesins is shown.
Table S1. Oligonucleotides used in this study.

This material is available as part of the online article from:
http://www.blackwell-synergy.com/doi/abs/10.1111/
j.1462-5822.2007.00919.x

Please note: Blackwell Publishing are not responsible for the
content or functionality of any supplementary materials supplied
by the authors. Any queries (other than missing material) should
be directed to the corresponding author for the article.

© 2007 The Authors
Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Cellular Microbiology, 9, 1834–1850

