Neuron, Vol. 35, 1167–1175, September 12, 2002, Copyright 2002 by Cell Press

Brain Areas Active during Visual
Perception of Biological Motion

Emily D. Grossman1 and Randolph Blake
Vanderbilt Vision Research Center/Department

of Psychology

Vanderbilt University
Nashville, Tennessee 37203

Summary

Theories of vision posit that form and motion are rep-
resented by neural mechanisms segregated into func-
tionally and anatomically distinct pathways. Using
point-light animations of biological motion, we exam-
ine the extent to which form and motion pathways are
mutually involved in perceiving figures depicted by the
spatio-temporal integration of local motion compo-
nents. Previous work discloses that viewing biological
motion selectively activates a region on the posterior
superior temporal sulcus (STSp). Here we report that
the occipital and fusiform face areas (OFA and FFA)
also contain neural signals capable of differentiating
biological from nonbiological motion. EBA and LOC,
although involved in perception of human form, do not
contain neural signals selective for biological motion.
Our results suggest that a network of distributed neu-
ral areas in the form and motion pathways underlie
the perception of biological motion.

Introduction

It is widely believed that primate vision comprises multi-
ple visual areas organized into hierarchical pathways
specialized for registering information about particular
aspects of the visual scene (Felleman and Van Essen,
1991). Over the years, this overarching model has taken
different forms, with some versions emphasizing distinc-
tions between “sustained” and “transient” aspects of
vision (Breitmeyer and Ganz, 1976; Kulikowski and Tol-
hurst, 1973), others distinguishing “color” and “broad-
band” channels (Schiller et al., 1990), and still others
focusing on distinctions between perceiving objects and
acting upon objects (Goodale and Humphrey, 1998). One
currently popular version of this theory posits a so-called
“motion” pathway extending into more dorsal aspects
of extrastriate and posterior parietal cortex, specialized
for registering information about the locations of objects
and their movements within the visual scene, and an
“object” stream pathway in ventral cortex involved in
specifying information about the shapes and identities
of visual objects (Ungerleider and Mishkin, 1982; Living-
stone and Hubel, 1987). This particular version of the
multiple pathway model has sparked a wealth of re-
search aimed at testing the notion of object-grounded
and motion-grounded neural systems (Haxby et al.,
1991; Tanaka, 1996; Bradley et al., 1998; Kourtzi and
Kanwisher, 2000).

While not disputing the notion of object-based and

1Correspondence: e.grossman@vanderbilt.edu

motion-based processing streams, several recent neu-
ral imaging studies have sought to determine the extent
to which neural representations of objects are distrib-
uted throughout visual cortex. Sereno et al. (2002) found
evidence for cue-invariant, 3D shape representations in
multiple brain areas spanning object and motion path-
ways in anesthetized monkeys. Haxby et al. (2001) found
that the distribution of brain activity associated with
viewing faces and objects was widespread within ven-
tral temporal cortex, leading these authors to downplay
the importance of highly specialized neural areas in ob-
ject recognition. We, too, have recently become inter-
ested in the question of distributed neural representa-
tions, in our case, representations associated with a
particularly salient class of motion-defined forms, i.e.,
biological motion. In this paper, we report results from
a brain imaging study that examines patterns of neural
activity within multiple brain areas implicated in visual
perception of bodies and body parts.

In these experiments, we have capitalized on a vivid,
remarkable example of motion-defined shape: Johans-
son’s “point-light” animation sequences (Johansson,
1973). These animations convey complex human activi-
ties using just a handful of dots placed on the joints
of the human body. Single static frames resemble a
meaningless cluster of dots portraying no hint of an
object, human or otherwise, but when shown in rapid
succession, these animated dots are grouped to create
the perception of a human form engaged in a readily
identified activity (Cutting et al., 1978; Ahlstro¨ m et al.,
1997; Neri et al., 1998; Mather et al., 1992). The compel-
ling sense of human form created by the spatio-temporal
integration of these local dot motions would seem to
imply that “object” and “motion” pathways are together
creating perception of an active person.

Brain imaging studies in humans have pinpointed a
region on the posterior superior temporal sulcus (STSp)
that is active when observers perceive biological motion
in point-light animations (Bonda et al., 1996; Howard et
al., 1996; Grossman et al., 2000; Vaina et al., 2001).
It seems reasonable to place STSp within the motion
pathway, based on its proximity to motion-responsive
areas MT and MST (Suneart et al., 1999); moreover,
STSp is far removed from ventral temporal cortex and,
by implication, brain areas involved in form perception.
Nonetheless, point-light animations portraying biologi-
cal motion create compelling impressions of a class of
recognizable objects, namely humans, so it is natural to
suppose that this unique type of structure from motion
also activates “object-selective” ventral stream mecha-
nisms. Thus while STSp may be selectively activated
when viewing biological motion perception, the entire
network of brain areas involved in registering all aspects
of these salient animations may extend to the form
pathway.

We have examined this supposition by isolating brain
areas generally believed to be involved in the perception
of objects, including human body parts, and then mea-
suring BOLD signals in those areas produced by viewing
biological motion sequences. These areas are: (1) the

Neuron
1168

Figure 1. Schematics of the Stimuli
Dynamic human activity was portrayed by the
motion twelve dots located on the joints and
head of an actor performing various activities.
Occlusions of some dots naturally occur as
limbs pass behind the body. These occlu-
sions help convey normal, three-dimensional
body movement, and so were retained in the
animations (i.e., not all dots were visible at all
times). The scrambled animations contained
the same motion vectors as the biological
ones, but the initial starting positions of the
dots are randomized within a region approxi-
mating the size of the body. The whole-body
animations depicted an actor performing the
same activities as the point-light animations.
The rotating, structured globe was created by
moving 200 dots sinusoidally within a circular
aperture. The variable speed of the dots con-
veyed three-dimensional structure, but the
direction of the rotation was ambiguous. The
wire frame pictured above to denote three-
dimensional structure was not visible in the
experiment. The stationary, headless body
condition consisted of
images of bodies
standing or sitting, with the heads erased.
Observers also viewed images of faces and
common household objects.

lateral occipital complex (LOC), which has been impli-
cated in the perception of forms regardless of the visual
cues used to define those forms (Grill-Spector et al.,
1999); (2) the extrastriate body area (EBA), which has
recently been implicated in the perception of images of
bodies and body parts, but not faces (Downing et al.,
2001); and (3) the occipital (OFA) and fusiform face areas
(FFA), both of which have been implicated in the percep-
tion of faces (Kanwisher et al., 1997), as well as in the
perception of other highly familiar objects (Gauthier et
al., 1999). We used widely accepted stimuli and subtrac-
tion conditions to isolate these object-responsive brain
areas, including pictures of headless bodies to activate
the EBA, pictures of objects to activate the LOC, and
pictures of faces to activate the FFA and OFA (Figure 1).
We also measured neural activity in STSp, the brain
area implicated in perception of biological motion. In
localizing STSp, observers viewed point-light actors
performing a variety of human activities. However, these
animations, composed of only 12 dots, are visually
sparse in comparison to the pictures of headless bodies,
faces, and objects. To evaluate the consequence of this
sparseness on BOLD signal levels, we included anima-

tions in which the entire figure of the actor was visible.
Also, to determine if neural responses were due to the
presence of an object, or specifically because the object
is biological, we included animations of a nonbiological
object (a rotating, 3D globe) defined solely by dot mo-
tions.

Results

Our strategy entailed several steps: (1) use standard
subtraction conditions to localize STSp, EBA, LOC, OFA,
and FFA (Figure 2A), (2) assess patterns of activation
across all of these areas by comparing evoked BOLD
signals to a common baseline of fixation, and (3) deter-
mine whether neural signals within those regions are capa-
ble of discriminating between biological and scrambled
point-light animations. To control for attention, which is
known to modulate BOLD signals in many of the neural
areas included in this study (Corbetta et al., 1991; Wojci-
ulik et al., 1998), observers performed a 1-back task on
the individual stimuli within each block.

Results from our measurements are discussed brain
region by brain region in the following sections and are

Brain Areas in Biological Motion Perception
1169

Figure 2. Summary of Regions of Interest (ROIs) and BOLD Responses in Biological Related Stimulus Conditions
(A) The ROIs in the right hemisphere of observer D.L. are displayed on the lateral and ventral surfaces of the gray matter. A cut, as indicated
by the green plane, was made and the posterior end of the cortex flattened. We examined BOLD signals in four regions of interest: STSp
(red), EBA (purple), LOCd (blue), FFA and OFA (orange). (B–E) The average BOLD activity levels for these ROIs (with FFA and OFA averaged)
during the stimulus conditions depicting some kind of biological object, or the scrambled biological motion vectors. These stimulus conditions
included animations of point-light biological motion (pink), point-light scrambled motion (yellow), whole-bodies (dark purple), pictures of faces
(magenta), and stationary images of headless bodies (green). The percent change activation levels are relative to a fixation baseline. Error
bars indicate 1 standard error.

shown in Figures 2B–2E. Using some of the same data
from Figure 2, Figures 3 and 4 highlight contrasts impor-
tant for evaluating differences in selectivity among the
areas.

The Posterior Superior Temporal Sulcus
STSp is located at the posterior end of the superior
temporal sulcus, near the junction of the STS and the
inferior temporal sulcus (ITS). This brain area responds

Figure 3. Average Percent Change in the
STSp and LOCd ROIs for the Animated Dot
Displays
Point-light biological, scrambled, and the ro-
tating globe were the visually sparsest of all
the stimuli used in these experiments. The
biological and object identities were con-
structed by the movements of dots only, and
could not be ascertained from a single, sta-
tionary frame. Even when animated,
the
scrambled animation looks like an incoherent
cloud of dots. Asterisk indicates a significant
difference for the biological motion condition
over both the scrambled and rotating globe.
All other contrasts were nonsignificant.

Neuron
1170

Table 1. Frequency of Activated Regions during the Point-Light Biological Motion Localizer

Num Observed Hemispheres

ROI

STSp
ITS
STSa
FFA

Left

10/10
6/10
2/10
3/10

Right

9/10
5/10
6/10
4/10

Talaraich Coordinates

Left

X

⫺41.3
⫺43.1
⫺46.9
⫺33.3

Y

⫺52.8
⫺58.5
⫺41.9
⫺40.5

Z

11.8
11.2
6.6
⫺13.9

Right

X

46.1
48.8
50.0
37.1

Y

⫺48.5
⫺53.3
⫺33.0
⫺36.0

Z

12.4
10.8
4.3
⫺12.2

A total of ten observers viewed the biological and scrambled point-light animations. Simulations of false positive rates were used to determine
the threshold for the activation maps. Table indicates the number of observers and Talairach coordinates for each hemisphere of the activated
clusters. Abbreviations: STSp ⫽ superior temporal sulcus, the posterior end, ITS ⫽ inferior temporal sulcus, specifically the small region of
the ITS between the STS and MT⫹, STSa ⫽ anterior region on the superior temporal sulcus, FFA ⫽ fusiform face area.

more strongly to point-light animations portraying bio-
logical motion than it does to “scrambled” animations,
created with the same motion vectors but whose starting
positions are spatially randomized (Grossman and
Blake, 2001). STSp does not respond well to coherent,
translational motion, nor does it respond to the presence
of kinetic boundaries (Grossman et al., 2000). In other
words, this region is functionally and anatomically dis-
tinct from other motion-responsive areas in the human
brain, including human MT⫹ (Watson et al., 1993; Tootell
et al., 1995; Orban et al., 1995) and the kinetic occipital
region (KO, or LO, as it is sometimes called; Van Oos-
tende et al., 1997; Malach et al., 1995).

In the present study, observers viewed blocks of 1 s
animations of point-light biological motion interleaved
with blocks of 1 s animations of scrambled motion. In
nine of the ten observers, a bilateral region on the poste-
rior end of the STS, at the junction with the ITS, was
more active during the biological epochs than during
the scrambled epochs (p ⬍ .001). In the tenth observer,
this region was only found in the left hemisphere (Table
1). Based on the anatomical location and the functional
response during the localizer condition, these regions
became the STSp region of interest (ROI) for each ob-
server.

Within these ROIs, we compared BOLD signals during
the four stimulus conditions depicting biological events
(Figure 2B). Two of these conditions—whole body and
point-light biological—were animated sequences de-
picting human activities, while the other two condi-
tions—headless bodies and bodiless heads—were sta-
tionary images. BOLD activity levels were highest during
the epochs of whole bodies, point-light bodies, and
faces, and lowest during the epochs of headless bodies.
Pairwise comparisons revealed that only the difference
between whole bodies and headless bodies was signifi-
cant (p ⬍ .001). It is noteworthy that bodies defined by
only twelve points of light were as effective as whole
body animations in activating STSp. The is the only brain
area in which these two dynamic biological motion ani-
mations resulted in equivalent neural responses. This is
testimony to the vividness of perception produced from
these simple, sparsely sampled animations and to the
importance of STSp in the perception of dynamically
defined complex activity.

In contrast to BOLD signals evoked by biological mo-
tion, the rigidly rotating globe defined by moving dots
evoked trivially small BOLD signals that were no different

from those found during the scrambled motion epochs
(Figure 3A). The weak, nonspecific neural response to
the kinetic globe implies that STSp is not simply register-
ing structure from motion but, instead, is specialized for
the kinematics portraying biological motion. At the same
time, motion is not absolutely crucial for activating STSp,
for pictures of faces also produced reliable responses
from this area. Face-responsive regions on the STS have
been previously reported in the literature (Chao et al.,
1999; Puce et al., 1998; Hoffman and Haxby, 2000), and
it is possible that the face-responsive STS region (STS-
FA) and STSp overlap, resulting in strong BOLD re-
sponses to the images of faces. Using the FFA localizer
(faces–objects), we attempted to determine the extent
of overlap between STSp and STS-FA. However, we
were able to localize STS-FA in only one observer, and
there was no overlap between the two ROIs. Further
testing is needed to determine conclusively the relation-
ship between the face- and body-responsive regions on
the STS.

The Extrastriate Body Area
Following the lead of Downing et al. (2001), we localized
the EBA by subtracting activation evoked by pictures
of stationary headless bodies from activity evoked by
pictures of stationary household objects. Using this sub-
traction, we were able to localize a region in the anterior
extent of occipital cortex, dorsal to the inferior occipital
sulcus. This region was bilateral in five of the six observ-
ers tested, and only in the left hemisphere of the sixth
(Talairach coordinates: left hemisphere: ⫺39.3, ⫺70.1,
13.5; right hemisphere: 40.6, ⫺65.7, 10.6).

Results for EBA are summarized in Figure 2C. Consis-
tent with previous reports, this region was most active
during stimulus conditions in which pictures of the hu-
man body were shown (p ⬍ .05), which included the
epochs of stationary headless bodies and animations
of whole bodies (including the heads). We found that
faces alone were slightly less effective (though not sig-
nificantly different) in activating this region. Body shapes
depicted by the point-light sequences were also slightly
less effective than the explicit body images in activating
the EBA.

Both STSp and EBA have been implicated in the per-
ception of bodies, albeit using very different visual stim-
uli. How are there two areas different? To answer this
question, it is interesting to compare the responses of
EBA and STSp during the two localizers used to identify

Brain Areas in Biological Motion Perception
1171

Figure 4. Average Percent BOLD Signal Change during the STSp
and EBA Localizer Scans
(A) Subtracting BOLD signal levels during the point-light scrambled
(light bars) from point-light biological (dark bars) motion intervals
results in a significant contrast in STSp, but not in EBA. (B) However,
subtracting activity levels elicited by pictures of household objects
(light bars) from that elicited by pictures of stationary headless bod-
ies (dark bars) results in higher percent signal change and more
contrast in EBA.

these regions (Figure 4). BOLD signal levels in STSp
during point-light biological animations were signifi-
cantly higher than during the scrambled intervals (p ⬍
.01), but this was not true for EBA (p ⫽ .41). Conversely,
during the EBA localizer, the images of headless bodies
produced significantly more activation in EBA than did
images of objects (p ⬍ .01), but there was no significant
difference between the two in STSp (p ⫽ .53). It is unlikely
that the poor discrimination between headless bodies
and objects in STSp is due to the absence of a face in
the headless bodies images. Quite the opposite, this
region responded equally well to animated displays with
no facial information (i.e., the point-light sequences) and
to images of faces. Instead, we believe it is the absence
of dynamic signals, not the absence of a face, that is
responsible for STSp’s weak response to images of
headless bodies.

The Lateral Occipital Complex (Dorsal)
The lateral occipital complex (LOC) is a large area of
cortex starting most dorsally at the posterior end of the
lateral occipital sulcus and extending through the ventral
temporal cortex. We localized this region using the tech-
nique of Kourtzi and Kanwisher (2000), in which neural
activity during periods of viewing texture patterns is
subtracted from activity associated with viewing faces
and objects. In our study, this subtraction revealed a

large region of activation, the most posterior and dorsal
extent of which we will refer to as LOCd (Talairach coor-
dinates: left hemisphere: ⫺28.4, ⫺77.8, ⫺2.5; right hemi-
sphere: 33.9, ⫺74.7, ⫺1.0). The more anterior extent of
the activated region lies on the ventral surface of the
temporal lobe and encompasses other object- and face-
responsive brain areas on the posterior fusiform gyrus,
including the occipital face area (OFA). Based on previ-
ous work showing clear functional differences between
anterior and posterior regions of LOC (Grill-Spector et
al., 1999; Bar et al., 2001), we felt it important to analyze
the BOLD signals separately for the LOCd (discussed
in this section) and the OFA (discussed in the following
section).

BOLD signal

levels in the LOCd were significantly
higher when observers viewed faces and objects than
when they viewed images of texture patterns created
from scrambling the face and object pictures (p ⬍ .001).
BOLD signals in LOCd were highest during the condi-
tions showing whole-body animations and face images
(no significant difference between the two conditions,
p ⫽ .29), almost twice that for conditions when observers
viewed stationary pictures of headless bodies or the
point-light animations depicting biological motion (Fig-
ure 2D; p ⬍ .0001). There were no significant differences
between BOLD signal
levels while observers viewed
point-light biological motion, scrambled motion, or the
structured rotating globe animation (Figure 3B).

The Occipital and Fusiform Face Areas
Situated more anterior than LOC on the ventral surface
of the temporal lobe is a cluster of foci related to object
and face recognition. The most widely studied of these
regions is the fusiform face area (FFA), located on the
ventral medial aspect of the temporal lobe abutting the
cerebellum. The FFA is functionally identified by its
greater response to images of faces than to common
household objects (Kanwisher et al., 1997). There is also
another, more posterior region on the fusiform gyrus
that responds strongly to faces and objects, and may
lie within or just anterior to the LOC. This occipital face
area (OFA), like the FFA, is often found by contrasting
activation when observers view pictures of faces versus
pictures of objects. We were able to localize the FFA in
both hemispheres of all five observers tested using this
contrast (Talairach coordinates: left hemisphere: ⫺34.0,
⫺39.7, ⫺15.3; right hemisphere: 37.6, ⫺38.9, ⫺14.2); the
OFA was localized in both hemispheres of three of these
five observers, and only the left hemisphere of a fourth
(Talairach coordinates: left hemisphere: ⫺35.0, ⫺55.0,
⫺11.7, right hemisphere: 37.5, ⫺54.2, ⫺9.9). Across the
stimulus conditions tested, we found no differences in
the patterns of activity levels between the FFA and OFA,
with the exception of overall slightly higher percent sig-
nals changes in the OFA. The results from these two
regions, therefore, were averaged and are presented
together.

Of all the stimulus conditions tested, the images of faces
alone produced the highest responses in the fusiform ar-
eas (Figure 2E). This “face-only” activation was signifi-
cantly higher than that produced when observers viewed
pictures of objects (p ⬍ .001), headless bodies (p ⬍ .01),
or whole bodies with the faces intact (p ⬍ .05).

Neuron
1172

Although faces also activated the fusiform face areas
significantly more than the animations of point-light bio-
logical motion (p ⬍ .001), the contrast between point-
light biological and point-light scrambled was also sig-
nificant (p ⬍ .001). Critically, although activation levels
are overall lower, the biological organization of the point-
light animations is sufficient to activate this region, as
evidenced by the contrast with scrambled animations.
Incidentally, our failure to identify reliable FFA activation
in an earlier study (Grossman et al., 2000) may be attrib-
utable, at least in part, to non-optimal slice placement
for capturing the ventral temporal cortex in all observers.
It is also noteworthy that in the present study, unlike
the earlier one, FFA was localized using the standard
stimulus contrast (faces minus objects).

Discussion

People watch other people all the time, trying to deduce
intentions and moods based on dynamic visual informa-
tion. Indeed, recognizing what others are up to is one
of the most important perceptual activities we engage in.
It is not surprising, therefore, that people are remarkably
adept at perceiving intentions and affect even when
those personal characteristics are portrayed in point-
light animations devoid of static form cues. Befitting
such a crucial perceptual skill, neural representations
of biological activity are widely distributed throughout
visual cortex. Based on converging lines of evidence,
Allison et al. (2000) propose that a major component
in this distributed representation is a large expanse of
cortex spread across the STS.

The results from our study, while confirming the im-
portance of the STS in perception of biological activity,
reveal that neural areas in the ventral stream are also
activated when one views point-light biological motion
animations. The fusiform and occipital face areas in ven-
tral temporal cortex contain neural signals capable of
discriminating between point-light animations that orga-
nize into biological motion and those that organize into
scrambled motion. Our results also demonstrate that
other neural areas previously found to be selectively
involved in the perception of bodies and objects, specifi-
cally LOC and EBA, can not discriminate between bio-
logical and scrambled point-light animations. To deter-
mine the discriminability of the neural signals within
these five regions—STSp, FFA, OFA, EBA, and LOC—we
probed each with a variety of biological and nonbiologi-
cal visual stimuli. What conclusions can we draw from
the patterns of activations in these distributed areas?
To answer this question, we need to reconsider the
response selectivity of these neural regions.

In the ventral stream, point-light bodies certainly pro-
duce weaker responses than those evoked by faces or,
for that matter, by animated whole bodies in FFA and
OFA. However, when observers view point-light bodies,
the fusiform activations are significantly stronger than
those resulting from the same point-lights scrambled to
destroy the impression of a human body. In principle,
then, neural activity in the fusiform region could form
part of a distributed representation of human bodies,
including bodies defined by motion. But how does this
“object” pathway region—the FFA—acquire its selectiv-

ity for motion-defined bodies? After all, the human form
in point-light animation sequences is portrayed exclu-
sively by motion signals associated with hierarchical,
pendular motions of the limbs: perception of a human
form emerges only from the integration of motion signals
over space and time. To the extent that the motion analy-
ses underlying point-light animations are performed ex-
clusively by neural mechanisms within the motion path-
way, our results would imply that the outputs of those
mechanisms project to the FFA; this idea, incidentally,
is one component of a recently published model of face
recognition (O’Toole et al., 2002). Of course, it is possible
that FFA itself contains neural machinery for registering
the motion signals necessary for constructing the body
representation in point-light animations. From our re-
sults, we cannot distinguish between these two hypoth-
eses, and to do so may require using analytic techniques
that reveal the strength of functional connectivity among
areas (Friston et al., 1995).

In contrast to FFA and OFA, LOC has been character-
ized as a general object recognition area, responding
invariantly to images that can be interpreted as shapes
regardless of the visual cues creating the shapes’ con-
tours (Grill-Spector et al., 2001). Our results, however,
place some limits on the generality of that characteriza-
tion. In particular, point-light animations, although readily
organized into a visible human form, produced no
greater activation in LOCd than did scrambled anima-
tions which resembled a disorganized cloud of dots.
Similarly, the rotating globe, also easily organized into a
structured shape, did not increase brain activity beyond
levels found during viewing of scrambled motion. Evi-
dently, the cue invariance of LOC does not extend to
all forms defined by motion.

Finally, biological and scrambled motion produced
equivalent BOLD responses in EBA, implying that this
brain region does not carry signals capable of register-
ing the presence of human forms as depicted in point-
light animations. This is not to say that EBA does not
register the presence of a human form—indeed, this
area is functionally defined by its stronger response to
images of headless bodies than to nonhuman objects
(Downing et al., 2001). Nor do our results imply that EBA
is not involved in viewing bodies in motion, as evidenced
by the equivalent BOLD responses to whole bodies in
motion and to images of stationary, headless bodies.
Instead, our results indicate that the BOLD signals in
EBA are contingent upon the shape of the body being
explicitly represented in the image.

It is interesting to note that STSp behaves in a fashion
complementary to EBA. Unlike in EBA, the BOLD re-
sponses in STSp are selectively driven by the dynamics
of the human form. This is evidenced by (1) the equiva-
lent BOLD responses produced by stationary images of
bodies and by nonhuman objects, and (2) the stronger
BOLD responses produced by dynamic human bodies
than by a moving, nonhuman object. Together, these
results imply that STSp is specialized for a particular
class of dynamic events, namely moving human bodies.
Also, unlike in EBA, the BOLD responses in STSp do
not depend on the explicit representation of the human
body, for STSp responded just as strongly to point-light
animation sequences as to animations showing whole
bodies in motion.

Brain Areas in Biological Motion Perception
1173

To end on a speculative note, it is reasonable to won-
der why the human brain would contain multiple areas
(e.g., EBA and STSp) dedicated to the perception of
human bodies. Perhaps identification of an individual
constitutes a different perceptual task than perceiving
an individual’s mood or intentions. Intentions can be
judged based on gestures, actions, and expressions
independent of identity. Accurate identification, on the
other hand, must generalize across gesture, mood, and
activity. Given these divergent demands, extraction of
the visual information subserving identification and per-
ception of intention may require different neural opera-
tions, perhaps most efficiently embodied in separate
neural architectures (EBA and STSp, respectively).

Experimental Procedures

Participants
Ten individuals (6 men, 4 women) with normal or corrected to normal
vision participated in this study. All observers had experience view-
ing point-light animations and easily recognized all the biological
motion sequences as human activities. The observers gave informed
consent as approved by Vanderbilt University Institutional Review
Board.

Stimuli
Visual Stimuli were displayed using Matlab (Mathworks, Inc.) to-
gether with routines from the Psychophysics Toolbox (Brainard,
1997; Pelli, 1997). Point-light biological motion sequences were cre-
ated by videotaping an actor performing various activities, including
running, jumping, throwing, and kicking. The segments were digi-
tized, and the joint positions in each frame were encoded as motion
vectors with initial starting positions. Scrambled biological motion
animations were created by randomizing the starting positions of
each joint within a region approximating that covered by the biologi-
cal sequences. The motion vectors were left intact so that the joints
moved naturally as they would in the biological animations. This
manipulation ensured the individual motion components were iden-
tical in both the biological and scrambled animations; only the hierar-
chical relations among the dots in the scrambled displays were
destroyed. For both kinds of animations, the joints were displayed
as small, black dots subtending approximately 9 arc min of visual
angle against a gray background. Each biological activity sequence
consisted of 20 frames displayed in a 1 s interval (33 ms interframe
interval, 60 Hz). At this display rate, the biological animations gener-
ated smooth apparent motion, depicting natural body movement.
Whole body animations depicted the same activities as the point-
light sequences, with the entire body of the actor being visible.
These animations sequences were recorded with a digital video
camera, edited into 1 s clips that were then converted to Quicktime
files displayed with Matlab QT routines.

Random dot cinematograms depicting a structured “globe” and
coherent planar motion were created with 200 dots horizontally
displaced within a circular aperture. Approximately half the dots
moved leftwards within the aperture while the other half moved
rightwards. To create the structured globe, the speed of the dots
was sinusoidally modulated such that the dots moved fastest on
the outer edges of the aperture and slowest in the center. These
animations create the vivid impression of a 3D transparent globe
rotating about its vertical axis (Doner et al., 1984). Two coherent
planes of transparent motion were created by moving half the dots
leftward and half rightward, with the constant speed throughout
the animation. The average speed of the dots was 4.8⬚/s (48 ms
interframe interval, 60Hz), and the aperture subtended 7.2⬚ ⫻ 7.2⬚
of visual angle.

Some observers also viewed grayscale images of faces, headless
bodies, and common household objects. These images were static,
not animated, and they subtended 7.5⬚ ⫻ 7.5⬚ of visual angle. Texture
patterns were created by breaking the images into small pieces
that were then spatially shuffled to yield scrambled images lacking
coherent spatial structure.

All individuals participated in the STSp localizer experiment in
which point-light biological and scrambled motion animations were
presented alternately in a block design. The resulting images from
this scan were used to determine biological motion responsive ROI.
All individuals also viewed alternating blocks of biological, scram-
bled, and whole-body motion, and in a separate scan the structured
rotating globe and planar transparent motion. For five individuals,
epochs of point-light biological motion were included within the
structured globe and planar motion scan to eliminate any effect of
neural adaptation to the coherent dots and still maintain the atten-
tion of the observers. We found no difference in BOLD signal levels
for the structured globe or planar motion in the two condition or
three condition scans. Six of the ten observers (D.L., D.R., F.R., J.L.,
K.B., M.R.) participated in additional scans designed to localize the
EBA (alternating blocks of stationary headless bodies and objects).
Five observers (D.L., D.R., F.R., K.B., M.R.) were also scanned to
localize LOC and the FFA (alternating blocks of faces, objects, and
texture patterns).

Imaging
All brain images were collected on a 3 Tesla GE Signa scanner
located within Vanderbilt University Medical School. Observers par-
ticipated in scanning sessions that lasted approximately 1.5 hr. Dur-
ing this time, we acquired high resolution T1 anatomical images of
the observer’s head (124 slices, 1.4 ⫻ 1.4 ⫻ 9375 mm), T2 functional
images in the axial plane (single-shot EPI, TR ⫽ 1500 ms, TE ⫽ 25
ms, flip ⫽ 90⬚, 21 axial slices, 3.75 ⫻ 3.75 mm inplane, 5 mm, no
gap), and T1 high resolution images of the slice positions. Slices
positions were chosen to cover the entire occipital pole, the ventral
surface of the temporal lobe, and the posterior extent of the superior
temporal sulcus . Because the high resolution slice anatomy images
were collected in alignment with the T2 functional images, the high
and low resolution images were naturally co-registered with each
other. The slice anatomy images were manually aligned with the
T1 whole-brain images, subsequently allowing us to register the
functional images into the whole-brain coordinate space. Using this
alignment method, we were able to have some individuals return to
the scanner on different days, align the data into common space,
and treat the images as if they had been acquired on the same day.
Functional scans lasted 172.5 s, the initial 6 s (4 volumes) of which
were discarded prior to analysis to allow for MR stabilization. The
images and animations were blocked into 10.5 s epochs consisting
of seven stimuli (1 s each, 500 ms interstimulus interval). The exem-
plars within the block were chosen randomly on each trial, but with
a 50% chance of repeating on successive trials. Observers were
instructed to monitor the stimuli carefully, and indicate sequential
repetitions with a button press (1-back task), and the task was made
more taxing by requiring observers to respond within the short 500
ms interval between the animations. This kind of challenging task
maintains the observer’s level of attention through a block of trials,
an important consideration in view of evidence that attention can
modulate BOLD signal in early and extrastriate visual areas (Somers
et al., 1999; Watanabe et al., 1998). During the intervals involving
the structured globe and planar motion, the near and far surfaces
of the flowfield were inherently ambiguous, resulting in spontaneous
reversals of depth ordering. Consequently, a 1-back task would
have had no objective measure of correctness. To promote attention
in these epochs, observers were instructed to monitor the motion
direction of the dots in the nearest plane of depth. For all conditions,
the order of the blocks was counterbalanced across subjects. Fol-
lowing each stimulus block was a 3 s (2 volume) interval of fixation
during which only a small cross in the center of the screen was
visible.

Visual displays were back-projected with a DLP projector onto a
screen located at the observer’s feet. A periscope mirror attached
to the birdcage headcoil was adjusted prior to the onset of the scans
to maximize viewing angle of the screen.

Analysis
Images were corrected for in- and out-of-plane motion using AIR
3.08 (Woods et al., 1998). All subsequent analyses were done using
Brain Voyager (Brain Innovations, Inc.) and Matlab. The realigned
images were corrected for linear trend over time then spatially fil-

Neuron
1174

tered with a 5 mm FWHM gaussian filter. The filtered and unfiltered
images were averaged together to created “multifiltered” images,
as described by Skudlarski et al. (1999). Multifiltering minimizes sites
of single voxel false positive activations while maximizing signal
change that may be lost by spatial smoothing alone.

All observers viewed alternating blocks of point-light biological
and scrambled motion, allowing us to localize STSp as described
in our earlier work (Grossman et al., 2000). Because of spatial and
temporal correlations naturally occurring in the data, the actual
r-cutoff value for determining regions of interest (ROIs) was empiri-
cally derived through repeated simulations of false positive rates
occurring in the voxels within the brain. This was done in the follow-
ing manner: (1) the BOLD signal values within each voxel were ran-
domly shuffled in time, (2) the correlation between the randomized
time series and the localizer boxcar was computed for each voxel,
(3) the value corresponding to the upper .01% cutoff of the distribu-
tion of r values across the brain (corresponds to a 1% Type I error
rate) was selected. These steps were repeated 1000 times, and the
final r value threshold for determining the activation maps was taken
as the mean value of the distribution of cutoff values.

In localizing the ROIs, we used previously published and widely
accepted “subtraction” conditions. However, to compare the activ-
ity levels during a variety of visual tasks, the raw MR signal from
each scan was converted into percent change of the mean BOLD
signal activation level during the fixation intervals in the scan. Fur-
ther, we found that because of the short time between volume
acquisitions (1.5), and the relatively short block duration (10.5 s),
the MR signal barely reached saturation before the end of the epoch,
and was more appropriately fit by a sinusoidal model (i.e., Boynton
et al., 1996) than by an on-off boxcar function. Thus in calculating
percent change values, we calculated the peak-to-peak differences
between the stimulus and fixation intervals.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by a Vanderbilt University Discovery Grant,
NSF BCS0079579 and NSF BCS0121962. We thank Nancy Kan-
wisher and Paul Downing for their headless bodies and object stim-
uli, and we thank Marvin Chun, David Lyon, and Duje Tadin for
comments on an earlier version of the manuscript.

Received: March 18, 2002
Revised: August 5, 2002

References

Ahlstro¨ m, V., Blake, R., and Ahlstro¨ m, U. (1997). Perception of bio-
logical motion. Perception 26, 1539–1548.
Allison, T., Puce, A., and McCarthy, G. (2000). Social perception from
visual cues: Role of the STS region. Trends Cogn. Sci. 4, 267–278.
Bar, M., Tootell, R.B.H., Schacter, D.L., Greve, D.N., Fischl, B., Men-
dola, J.D., Rosen, B.R., and Dale, A.M. (2001). Cortical mechanisms
specific to explicit visual object recognition. Neuron 29, 529–535.
Bonda, E., Petrides, M., Ostry, D., and Evans, A. (1996). Specific
involvement of human parietal systems and the amygdala in the
perception of biological motion. J. Neurosci. 16, 3737–3744.
Boynton, G.M., Engel, S.A., Glover, G.H., and Heeger, D.J. (1996).
Linear systems analysis of functional magnetic resonance imaging
in human V1. J. Neurosci. 16, 4207–4221.
Bradley, D.C., Chang, G.C., and Andersen, R.A. (1998). Encoding of
three-dimensional structure-from-motion by primate area MT neu-
rons. Nature 392, 714–717.
Brainard, D.H. (1997). The psychophysics toolbox. Spat. Vis. 10,
443–446.
Breitmeyer, B.G., and Ganz, L. (1976). Implications of sustained and
transient channels for theories of visual pattern matching, saccadic
suppression, and information processing. Psychol. Rev. 8, 1–36.
Chao, L.L., Martin, A., and Haxby, J.V. (1999). Are face-responsive
regions selective only for faces? Neuroreport 10, 2945–2950.
Corbetta, M., Miezin, F.M., Dobmeyer, S., Shulman, G.L., and Pe-
tersen, S.E. (1991). Selective and divided attention during visual

discriminations of shape, color, and speed: functional anatomy by
positron emission tomography. J. Neurosci. 11, 2383–2402.
Cutting, J.E., Proffitt, D.R., and Kozlowski, L.T. (1978). A biomechani-
cal invariant for gait perception. J. Exp. Psychol. Hum. Percept.
Perform. 4, 357–372.
Doner, J., Lappin, J.S., and Perfetto, G. (1984). Detection of three-
dimensional structure in moving optical patterns. J. Exp. Psychol.
Hum. Percept. Perform. 10, 1–11.
Downing, P., Jiang, Y., Shuman, M., and Kanwisher, N. (2001). A
cortical area selective for visual processing of the human body.
Science 293, 2470–2473.
Felleman, D.J., and Van Essen, D.C. (1991). Distributed hierarchical
processing in the primate cerebral cortex. Cereb. Cortex 1, 1–47.
Friston, K.J., Ungerleider, L.G., Jezzard, P., and Turner, R. (1995).
Characterizing modulatory interactions between areas V1 and V2 in
human cortex: A new treatment of functional MRI data. Hum. Brain
Mapp. 2, 211–224.
Gauthier, I., Skudlarski, P., Gore, J.C., and Anderson, A.W. (1999).
Activation of the middle fusiform ‘face area’ increases with expertise
in recognizing novel objects. Nat. Neurosci. 2, 568–573.
Goodale, M.A., and Humphrey, G.K. (1998). The objects of action
and perception. Cognition 67, 181–207.
Grill-Spector, K., Kushnir, T., Edelman, S., Avidan, G., Itzchak, Y.,
and Malach, R. (1999). Differential processing of objects under vari-
ous viewing conditions in the human lateral occipital complex. Neu-
ron 24, 187–203.
Grill-Spector, K., Kourtzi, Z., and Kanwisher, N. (2001). The lateral
occipital complex and its role in object recognition. Vision Res. 41,
1409–1422.
Grossman, E.D., and Blake, R. (2001). Brain activity evoked by in-
verted and imagined biological motion. Vis. Res. 41, 1475–1482.
Grossman, E., Donnelly, M., Price, R., Pickens, D., Morgan, V., Neigh-
bor, G., and Blake, R. (2000). Brain areas involved in perception of
biological motion. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 12, 711–720.
Haxby, J.V., Grady, C.L., Horwitz, B., Ungerleider, L.G., Mishkin, M.,
Carson, R.E., Herscovitch, P., Schapiro, M.B., and Rapoport, S.I.
(1991). Dissociation of object and spatial visual processing path-
ways in human extrastriate cortex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 88,
1621–1625.
Haxby, J.V., Gobbini, M.I., Furey, M.L., Ishai, A., Schouten, J.L., and
Pietrini, P. (2001). Distributed and overlapping representations of
faces and objects in ventral temporal cortex. Science 293, 2425–
2430.
Hoffman, E., and Haxby, J. (2000). Distinct representations of eye
gaze and identity in the distributed human neural system for face
perception. Nat. Neurosci. 2, 574–580.
Howard, R.J., Brammer, M., Wright, I., Woodruff, P.W., Bullmore,
E.T., and Zeki, S. (1996). A direct demonstration of functional spe-
cialization within motion-related visual and auditory cortex of the
human brain. Curr. Biol. 6, 1015–1019.
Johansson, G. (1973). Visual perception of biological motion and a
model for its analysis. Percept. Psychophys. 14, 201–211.
Kanwisher, N., McDermott, J., and Chun, M.M. (1997). The fusiform
face area: a module in human extrastriate visual cortex specialized
for face perception. J. Neurosci. 17, 4302–4311.
Kourtzi, Z., and Kanwisher, N. (2000). Cortical regions involved in
processing object shape. J. Neurosci. 20, 3310–3318.
Kulikowski, J.J., and Tolhurst, D.J. (1973). Psychophysical evidence
for sustained and transient detectors in human vision. J. Physiol.
232, 149–162.
Livingstone, M.S., and Hubel, D.H. (1987). Segregation of form, color,
movement, and depth: Anatomy, physiology, and perception. Sci-
ence 240, 740–749.
Malach, R., Reppas, J.B., Benson, R.R., Kwong, K.K., Jiang, H.,
Kennedy, W.A., Ledden, P.J., Brady, T.J., Rosen, B.R., and Tootell,
R.B. (1995). Object-related activity revealed by functional magnetic
resonance imaging in the human occipital cortex. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 92, 8135–8139.

Brain Areas in Biological Motion Perception
1175

Mather, G., Radford, K., and West, S. (1992). Low-level visual pro-
cessing of biological motion. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 249,
149–155.
Neri, P., Morrone, M.C., and Burr, D.C. (1998). Seeing biological
motion. Nature 395, 894–896.
Orban, G.A., Dupont, P., De Bruyn, B., Vogels, R., Vandenberghe,
R., and Mortelmans, L. (1995). A motion area in human visual cortex.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 92, 993–997.
O’Toole, A.J., Roark, D.A., and Abdi, H. (2002). Recognizing moving
faces: A psychological and neural synthesis. Trends Cogn. Sci. 6,
261–266.
Pelli, D.G. (1997). The VideoToolbox software for visual psychophys-
ics: Transforming numbers into movies. Spat. Vis. 10, 437–442.
Puce, A., Allison, T., Bentin, S., Gore, J.C., and McCarthy, G. (1998).
Temporal cortex activations in viewing eye and mouth movements.
J. Neurosci. 18, 2188–2199.
Schiller, P.H., Logothetis, N.K., and Charles, E.R. (1990). Functions of
the colour-opponent and broad-band channels of the visual system.
Nature 343, 68–70.
Sereno, M.E., Trinath, T., Augath, M., and Logothethis, N.K. (2002).
Three-dimensional shape representation in monkey cortex. Neuron
33, 635–652.
Skudlarski, P., Constable, R.T., and Gore, J.C. (1999). ROC analysis
of statistical methods used in functional MRI: Individual subjects.
Neuroimage 9, 311–329.
Somers, D.C., Dale, A.M., Seiffert, A.E., and Tootell, R.B. (1999).
Functional MRI reveals spatially specific attentional modulation in
human primary visual cortex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96, 1663–
1668.
Suneart, S., Van Hecke, P., Marchal, G., and Orban, G.A. (1999).
Motion responsive regions of the human brain. Exp. Brain Res. 127,
355–370.
Tanaka, K. (1996). Inferotemporal cortex and object vision. Annu.
Rev. Neurosci. 19, 109–139.
Tootell, R.B.H., Reppas, J.B., Kwong, K.K., Malach, R., Born, R.T.,
Brady, T.J., Rosen, B.R., and Belliveau, J.W. (1995). Functional anal-
ysis of human MT and related visual cortical areas using magnetic
resonance imaging. J. Neurosci. 15, 3215–3230.
Ungerleider, L., and Mishkin, M. (1982). Two cortical visual systems.
In Analysis of Visual Behavior, D. Ingle, M. Goodale, and R. Mans-
field, eds. (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press), pp. 549–586.
Vaina, L.M., Solomon, J., Chowdhury, S., Sinha, P., and Belliveau,
J.W. (2001). Functional neuroanatomy of biological motion percep-
tion in humans. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98, 11656–11661.
Van Oostende, S., Sunaert, S., Van Hecke, P., Marchal, G., and
Orban, G.A. (1997). The kinetic occipital (KO) region in man: An fMRI
study. Cereb. Cortex 7, 690–701.
Watanabe, T., Harner, A.M., Miyauchi, S., Sasaki, Y., Nielsen, M.,
Palomo, D., and Mukai, I. (1998). Task-dependent influences of at-
tention on the activation of human primary visual cortex. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 95, 11489–11492.
Watson, J.D.G., Myers, R., Frackowiak, R.S., Hajnal, J.V., Woods,
R.P., Mazziotta, J.C., Shipp, S., and Zeki, S. (1993). Area V5 of
the human brain: Evidence from a combined study using positron
emission tomography and magnetic resonance imaging. Cereb. Cor-
tex 3, 79–94.
Wojciulik, E., Kanwisher, N., and Driver, J. (1998). Covert visual
attention modulates face-specific activity in the human fusiform
gyrus: fMRI study. J. Neurophys. 79, 1574–1578.
Woods, R.P., Grafton, S.T., Watson, J.D., Sicotte, N.L., and Mazzi-
otta, J.C. (1998). Automated image registration: II. Intersubject vali-
dation of linear and nonlinear models. J. Comput. Assist. Tomogr.
22, 155–165.

