British Educational Research Journal
Vol. 40, No. 4, August 2014, pp. 699–717

DOI: 10.1002/berj.3108

Legitimating status: perceptions of
meritocracy and inequality among
undergraduates at an elite British university

Natasha Kumar Warikooa* and Christina Fuhrb
aHarvard University Graduate School of Education, Cambridge, USA; bUniversity of
Oxford, Department of Sociology, Oxford, UK

Given the frequent critiques of elite universities for admitting low numbers of state school graduates
and, more recently, British Afro-Caribbean students, how do students attending those universities
make meaning of the admissions process? Through an analysis of 46 one-on-one in-depth inter-
views with undergraduates attending Oxford University, we show that students believe in the fair-
ness of the admissions process, while lamenting the lack of opportunities for educational
advancement faced by some disadvantaged youth in British society. Despite their understanding
that many British youth do not have access to educational experiences that make Oxbridge an
attainable goal, most students do not support changes to make access more equitable across class or
racial/ethnic lines. This perspective, which legitimates the status students gain through matricula-
tion at an elite university, supports the maintenance of unequal access to an Oxford education
despite the advantages that education is known to confer to graduates. The findings demonstrate
elites acknowledging the disadvantages of particular groups in society without acknowledging their
own advantages in the same system. They do so by recognizing two elements of merit: (1) intelli-
gence, which most students assumed led to their own admission; and (2) cultivation of that intelli-
gence, which requires elite secondary schools and which most students see as disadvantaging
particular groups in society. In the paper we highlight differences in meaning-making between grad-
uates of grammar, comprehensive and private schools.

Modern western societies operate on the premise that status is achieved rather than
inherited. Meritocracy—a system in which rewards are distributed based on individ-
ual merit rather than, for example, inheritance or payment—serves to legitimate the
status hierarchy in modern industrial democracies, in contrast to the inherited and
coercive dominance of elites in traditional societies (Young, 1958; Weber, 1968;
Bourdieu & Passeron, 1977). Lipset and Bendix (1992) argue that social mobility in
fact characterizes modern industrial societies. The status attainment literature docu-
ments just how much social mobility takes place by showing that education level is
associated with adult earnings independent of parents’ level of education (Blau &
Duncan, 1967). Still, the degree to which individuals can actually change their social
status has been questioned by many (Bourdieu, 1984; Bowles & Gintis, 1976; Kara-
bel & Halsey, 1977). Michael Young, in the book that coined the term ‘meritocracy’
(1958), warned against a system in which elites use notions of ‘merit’ to reproduce
status and hence to sustain inequality in society.

*Corresponding author. 6 Appian Way, 4th Floor, Cambridge, MA 02138, United States. Email:
Natasha_warikoo@gse.harvard.edu

© 2013 British Educational Research Association

700 N. K. Warikoo and C. Fuhr

The education system is a key site through which meritocracy is legitimated while
simultaneously status is reproduced (Bourdieu & Passeron, 1977). Early research
focuses thereby on schools. Bourdieu and Passeron (1977) demonstrate how schools
maintain society’s status hierarchy and consequent inequalities by expecting an
unspoken set of behaviors, dispositions and styles for success in school. These tastes,
behaviors and dispositions—cultural capital—are internalized by high status children
from their parents and are not explicitly taught in school but are necessary for school
success and consequently for status attainment. Overall, we also know that adults’
levels of education are correlated with the degree to which they perceive social
rewards to be fairly distributed on the basis of merit; those with higher levels of educa-
tion are more likely to believe that their country is a meritocracy (Duru-Bellat & Ten-
ret, 2012).

Studies focusing on higher education show that only those who are successful
in the stratified education system have the chance to attend elite universities and
thus are able to achieve elite status, and that success is mediated by family back-
ground (Shiner & Modood, 2002; Archer et al., 2003; Reay et al., 2005). Fur-
thermore, access to information on higher education and the application process
is mediated by social class (Archer et al., 2003; Reay et al., 2005). Recent
research has also shown that among applicants to Oxford University, cultural
capital plays a significant role in many admissions decisions (Zimdars et al.,
2009).1 Once students matriculate, elite universities promote the creation and
perpetuation of elite status in their students, through (1) constructing social cate-
gories such as ‘Oxbridge graduate’ that provide advantages on the job market
and in politics; and (2) promoting the notion that their graduates have important
qualities that differentiate them from non-graduates (Kamens, 1977; Meyer,
1977; Collins, 1979). In Britain, the notion of an Oxbridge graduate’s intellectual
qualities and qualifications for leadership in society extend well beyond the cam-
pus walls to the larger society, and hence matriculation symbolically endows
students with membership in that high status group.

Both the status attainment (Blau & Duncan, 1967; Lipset & Bendix, 1992) and the
reproduction (Bourdieu & Passeron, 1977; Willis, 1977) models of education empha-
size the degree to which structural opportunities and barriers exist or do not exist in
education (Davies, 1995; Stevens, 2008). Neither of these prominent perspectives,
however, focuses on how individual actors make meaning of their place in educational
institutions. In spite of the rich body of research on admissions and access to higher
education in Britain, studies have not yet analyzed how students themselves make
meaning of their success in the admissions contest to elite higher education. Not only
institutions but also the individuals that institutions and gatekeepers reward have an
interest in maintaining the legitimacy of the criteria for success in the institution.2 In
order to embrace their elite status students attending elite universities must maintain
the legitimacy of the contest for admission despite well-publicized inequalities in who
attends their universities related to school type (state or private) and race (for exam-
ple, see Harris, 2010; Lammy, 2010; Vasagar, 2010b; Parel & Ball, 2013). What do
those who succeed in admission to elite British universities make of their status posi-
tion, especially given the disproportionate number of students from advantaged back-
grounds?

© 2013 British Educational Research Association

Legitimating status

701

Many Oxbridge graduates will go on to leadership roles in society, with consider-
able decision-making power. For example, a recent study found that in Britain 62%
of elites in the diplomatic service are graduates of Oxbridge, as are 58% of elite law-
yers and 55% of those with top civil service positions (Sutton Trust, 2012). At Oxford
in particular, 18% of Britain’s Houses of Parliament are alumnae of Oxford (Vasagar,
2010a). Hence, the perspectives of students in this study can have real, significant
effects on future decision-making regarding access to and the opening up of elite
higher education to underrepresented groups in Britain. Accordingly, this article will
provide nuanced insights not only into how status but also the social inequalities it
produces are perpetuated in society.

This paper analyzes Oxford undergraduates’ meaning-making of university admis-
sions through an analysis of 46 in-depth one-on-one interviews with undergraduates
at Oxford University. We analyze not only students’ perceptions of the fairness of
Oxford’s admissions process but also their explanations for why some groups are
underrepresented in the student body and what, if anything, should change about
that process. The findings demonstrate how the perspectives of elite actors can serve
to legitimate and, consequently, perpetuate a system of meritocracy whose outcomes
are stratified by race, class and school type.

The narratives below show students working to maintain and defend their elite
status, through maintaining the legitimacy of the process by which they attained elite
status and by rejecting potential university practices that might suggest an alternative
process. They do this within a social context that forcefully challenges the legitimacy
of the admissions process. These threats to the legitimacy of their status may in fact
heighten the desire to legitimate that status (Jackman & Muha, 1984). Two rationales
constitute their meaning-making. First, most students describe the admissions
process as meritocratic and reject the tradition of inherited status. Some, especially
private school graduates, state this unconditionally, with little hesitation. Second,
those who acknowledge the dearth of state school graduates and minority students
either suggest that underrepresented students are choosing not to apply or matricu-
late, or else they define meritocracy as being constituted not only by intelligence but
also by skills that are best cultivated in private school settings, accounting for the
overrepresentation of private school graduates. These views allow students to
maintain a sense of accomplishment in their status and accordingly their sense of self-
worth in an elite, competitive institution.3 This second rationale conceptualizes the
university as static, such that prospective students must conform to the cultural and
academic expectations there, rather than a dynamic one that responds to the needs of
a changing student body comprised of a diverse set of meritorious students.

When asked to explain the underrepresentation of black4 students at Oxford, stu-
dents in our study do acknowledge secondary schooling inequality in British society
and the effect this has on admissions. Very public debates highlight the underrepre-
sentation of state school graduates and of British Afro-Caribbean students at top Brit-
ish universities like Oxford, and most students across class and race lines made their
knowledge of this inequality known. Hence, their elite perspectives are considerably
more nuanced in their acknowledgement of inequality of opportunities than status
reproduction theories might predict. Nevertheless, most students acknowledged only
the minimum necessary to explain stratification in admissions. Notably, although

© 2013 British Educational Research Association

702 N. K. Warikoo and C. Fuhr

they identified the disadvantages that led some groups to underrepresentation at
Oxford, they did not make connections to the advantages that they themselves
enjoyed in the admissions contest. Furthermore, students generally could not think of
university policies to decrease the social stratification they acknowledged, and they
did not support suggested ones. This finding resonates with other research showing
that those with advantages in society can be willing to acknowledge others’ disadvan-
tages and lament them while simultaneously disagreeing with social policies that
would remedy those disadvantages (Bobo & Kluegel, 1993; Schuman et al., 1997;
Citrin et al., 2001; Quillian, 2006; Bell & Hartmann, 2007). Rather than resulting
from feelings of group threat or socialization, however, as the literature on racial
attitudes and multiculturalism suggests, we find that the motivation to legitimate status
seems to underlie the disconnect between students’ expressed dissatisfaction with
schooling inequality and their lack of willingness to alter the admissions process. The
findings demonstrate how elite meaning-making serves to defend, maintain and
hence perpetuate their elite status.

Methodology

This research is based primarily on 46 one-on-one in-depth, semi-structured inter-
views conducted with undergraduates attending Oxford University who had attended
for at least two terms.5 All respondents are British-born or arrived before age six. We
interviewed 46 students in order to have some variability in students’ backgrounds
and experiences while simultaneously having time to conduct in-depth, in-person
interviews with each individual. Thirty-six respondents have two British-born par-
ents, and 10 have at least one parent born outside the European Union. Students
were recruited through emails sent to all undergraduates enrolled in two Oxford col-
leges, and were paid 15 pounds sterling to participate. All students who agreed to be
interviewed were included in the study, and an effort was made to recruit students less
inclined initially, by sending more than one message to residents of the colleges. The
colleges are neither among the oldest Oxford colleges, nor among the newest colleges,
and student performance at both colleges is within the middle 50% of Oxford colleges
(University of Oxford, 2010d). While our sample is not meant to be representative of
the Oxford student body, we chose to focus on colleges toward the median in terms of
history and student performance so that we could investigate student perspectives
that are likely to cut across numerous colleges.

Students were interviewed by one of the authors of this paper, a West European
doctoral student at the time, for one to two hours each. Students also filled out a
survey prior to the interview, which asked about their backgrounds (race/ethnicity,
parents’ countries of origin, city of childhood, etc.), political identification and their
positions on a variety of political issues. Survey data was mainly used to understand
students’ social backgrounds and political perspectives in a short answer format. After
interviews were transcribed and coded in ATLASti, we analyzed answers to the
following questions for the analyses that follow:
(1) Would you say Oxford is a meritocracy in terms of its admissions?6
(2) Less than 1% of Oxford students are black, but 2% of Britain’s population is
black. How do you explain this difference?

© 2013 British Educational Research Association

Legitimating status

703

(3) Should the university do anything about the underrepresentation of black

students?

Twenty respondents attended privately-funded (independent) secondary schools,
eight attended state-funded grammar schools, and 18 attended state-funded non-
grammar schools (graduates from both types of schools are referred to as state school
graduates in the text unless otherwise suggested).7

The distinction between state school graduates and private school graduates
follows British public discourse on inequality with respect to university admissions.
Public accusations of elitism at Oxford and Cambridge often cite the dearth of state
school graduates (for example, see Vasagar, 2010b). Recently, critics have cited the
underrepresentation of black students, as well (for example, see Harris, 2010; Vasa-
gar, 2011; Parel & Ball, 2013). We chose to ask a question about black student under-
representation for comparison to US data, and because of recent controversies about
the dearth of British black students at Oxford. Twenty-six respondents were women
and 20 men. Of the 10 children of immigrants interviewed, three are black students
whose parents are from Africa. The others have parents from Asia (6), the Middle
East (1) and South America (1).8

The inclusion of a significant number of state school graduates and children of
immigrants allowed us to look carefully at these two groups and at whether they
express significantly different answers to our interview questions. We expected to
observe differences between children of immigrants and those with UK-born parents
and between state and private school graduates with respect to perspectives on meri-
tocracy, given their lack of history at Oxford and the overrepresentation of private
school graduates at the university. However, we only found significant differences in
the answers analyzed below between state and private school graduates, which this
paper will draw upon where applicable.

Findings

Oxford admissions and meritocracy

Oxford University became increasingly meritocratic after World War II in its admis-
sions, but since the 1970s the strong competition for admission has led to an increase
in the preponderance of private school graduates (Soares, 1999). Candidates for
study at Oxford apply to its colleges rather than to the university as a whole. The min-
imum criteria are three A grades in the A level examinations (or the equivalent in a
foreign system) and an on-campus interview held by tutors in the subject and college
to which a candidate has applied (University of Oxford, 2011a). Each subject also has
different additional requirements for admission. Many require an A in the A level
exam of the subject; others require an Oxford-administered written exam such as the
‘Thinking Skills Assessment’ which measures ‘skills and aptitude’; and others require
a portfolio or written work to be submitted (University of Oxford, 2011b). The listed
criteria by which admissions tutors make decisions in specific subjects vary. For
example, for anthropology and archeology, in addition to the A level A grades,
students must demonstrate an ‘ability to digest and assimilate significant quantities of

© 2013 British Educational Research Association

704 N. K. Warikoo and C. Fuhr

data and argue from evidence’, and in their interview they ‘consider problems from
archaeological and anthropological points of view’ (University of Oxford, 2010a).
The biology department makes clear that tutors look for skills and interest rather than
content knowledge of biology: ‘Interviews are designed to enable you to show your
enthusiasm for biology and your ability to study. We are not testing your factual
knowledge but your ability to think’ (University of Oxford, 2010b). Soares (1999)
has shown that by the 1970s Oxford was significantly open to working class students,
who were present, for example, in greater numbers at Oxford than at Harvard. Never-
theless, today 45% of Oxford students come from private schools, while 7.1% of Brit-
ish school students attend private schools (UK Department for Education, 2011;
University of Oxford, 2011c).

When posed the question ‘would you say Oxford is a meritocracy in terms of its
admissions?’ 37 out of the 46 respondents (80%) agreed. One private school graduate
responded:

Um, that’s what they say… Out of how many thousand applications, it’s their job to get it
down to the top 160… I know it’s quite subjective …—how do you distinguish between
159th and 161st—but that’s what they are trying to do. They are trying to make it as fair as
possible… They are not trying to play any tricks. They are not doing anything below the
belt. It’s in their interest to get the best 160 candidates that they can.

Note that this student, while expressing faith in the system, does acknowledge that
some may critique it. The finding that most students support the admissions process
is not surprising, given that those who have achieved within the competitive system
have reason to perceive it to be a fair system. Still, the proportion was higher for pri-
vate school graduates compared to students who came from state schools. Further-
more, 18 of the 46 respondents (nearly 40%) also mentioned unequal schooling as a
mechanism by which others—especially students from state schools—did not have
the opportunity to meet the meritocratic standards that Oxford holds. For example,
the student above noted that ‘obviously [Oxford] doesn’t get that many applications
from certain demographics so… there are, 60% of working class people in Britain,
but there are only 40% working class people in Oxford’.

Some students both affirmed Oxford’s meritocracy while also reporting unequal
access via low-quality schooling. Here too we found a difference in the understand-
ings of private and state school graduates: among all private school graduates, 25%
acknowledged inequality in schooling, while among state school graduates who did
not attend grammar schools, 55% mentioned schooling inequality. This suggests that
those who gained entree despite their state-funded secondary education are more
likely to see faults in the meritocratic system—in this case via schooling inequality—
while those from private schools are more likely to overlook unequal access, suggest-
ing that exposure to schooling inequalities personally may make state school gradu-
ates more cognizant of
inequalities in the system. Nevertheless, as this data
demonstrates, most of these students did not connect the lack of equal schooling
opportunities directly to a lack of fair chance to gain admission to Oxford, and hence
to a fair chance to obtain elite status.

Both state and private school graduates citing unequal schooling asserted that state
schools lack resources such as good teachers and preparation for exams and the

© 2013 British Educational Research Association

Legitimating status

705

Oxford admissions interview. For example, one state school graduate from London,
the child of an immigrant mother, said:

Lots of [private] schools have people that… give you lots of interview practice and you get
sent on courses, and other schools [state schools], they don’t have anyone that goes here
[Oxford] and you get sent without any preparation… Also in terms of grades, some schools
are just better at getting good grades than other ones, and if you just aren’t rich enough to
get sent to one of those really good schools where they give you loads and loads of work—
there are a lot of people who could be here but they can’t just because they haven’t been
trained well enough.

Some respondents particularly asserted that state schools do not encourage students
to excel and interestingly to apply to Oxford, such as this white English student:

I was lucky. My parents could afford to send me to a private school where, because I was
quite intelligent, I was told by my teachers, ‘You should be looking at Oxbridge. You
should work hard. This is how you prepare’. And you get trained in that way of thinking,
and some… friends who went to state schools were told, ‘Don’t bother applying to Oxford.
It’s for posh kids’. I’ve got friends who were actually discouraged from applying to Oxford
who are now here.

This private boarding school graduate both acknowledges the disadvantages of his
state school peers while also asserting that he was ‘quite intelligent’, presumably a
factor in his admission. Thus he both acknowledges the disadvantages that some
students unlike himself face, while simultaneously asserting his qualification for being
at Oxford as intelligence. This outlook resonates with those of many others who also
identified inequality in schooling while also emphasizing belief in Oxford’s meritoc-
racy. In other words, to some, unequal outcomes based on unequal schooling was
lamentable but did not compromise Oxford’s meritocracy. For instance, this white
private school graduate said:

From my experience the people that are admitted are based on how good they are rather
than where they are from… but I think it’s about 50% go to a [private] school who come
here, but only about 3% of people in England go to a [private] school. So it is a meritoc-
racy but that meritocracy might be to do with the upbringing of the child.

Students like the one above believed that admissions should be based on criteria
that are achieved more successfully through private school education (high
national test grades, interview performance), because those are what constitute
meritocracy.

These findings suggest that the students understood merit not only as intelligence
and thus intellectual capabilities but also as constituted by skills, which they accepted
to be cultivated most successfully in private schools and in middle- and upper-class
families. This explains why some state school students could use their own admission
as evidence of meritocracy. For example:

It proved to be a meritocracy for me because I went to a state school, and I’m an ethnic
minority. So all these stereotypes that Oxford has, I kind of went against. So Oxford has a
stereotype of admitting only private school children who are British and who are white and
who are predominantly male as well. So being a female, Muslim, ethnic minority and from
a state school, I kind of went against all of the stereotypes and still managed to get in… It
does appreciate all people on their merit.

© 2013 British Educational Research Association

706 N. K. Warikoo and C. Fuhr

Like several others, this student still tempered her view of Oxford’s meritocracy by
recognizing the dearth of students from secondary schools like the ones they
attended:

Then again there is also a huge ratio of private school to state school so I am not sure
whether that’s based on merit, because I’m not sure all private school children would be
more intelligent than state school children, so I think there is a slight kind of bias towards
them. But, I think it’s getting better, definitely.

Such a qualification of an affirmative answer regarding whether Oxford is a meritoc-
racy was common.

A minority who identified inequality in schooling argued that this inequality com-
promises Oxford’s meritocracy. These students believed that merit is evenly distrib-
uted in the population, and so the disproportionate numbers of private school
students indicated a problem. The 20% of students who said that Oxford is not a mer-
itocracy either cited inequality in schooling or else pointed to peers whose parents also
went to Oxford.9 These families with a lineage of Oxford students were cited by three
students who attended state schools, and by no private school students, suggesting
that students from less traditional Oxford families were more likely to ascribe an elite
character to the Oxford student body in terms of family background. These students
were not sure about whether or how Oxford took legacy families into consideration,
but they suspected it mattered. For example, one state school graduate whose grand-
parents were immigrants from Greece said:

A general thing that I just heard was that people from Oxford like to keep their own to their
own. Sort of like if your parent was there, it’s sort of a link; like when I was watching The
History Boys one of the guys who got in, his dad went to the same college and he wasn’t as
good as all the others.

This student attended a state school in London. If his parents are not Oxford
graduates,
then acknowledging legacy preferences does not compromise his
admissions achievement. He draws from popular culture—a movie—to under-
stand how family connections to Oxford (and its colleges) might advantage the
children of Oxford graduates. Students citing the lack of meritocracy defined
merit as potential to shine at Oxford, based on intelligence alone. For example,
recall the student above who cited the overrepresentation of private school gradu-
ates as evidence of a lack of meritocracy, assuming that intelligence is evenly
distributed in the population.

all

In sum, we found that most students acknowledged others’ disadvantages in
getting into Oxford and achieving the elite status it confers, but this understand-
ing did not translate into an acknowledgment of their own advantages in status
achievement. While a majority of students acknowledged that merit can be culti-
vated,
in one
way or another. This allows them to maintain a sense of accomplishment despite
obvious inequalities, and provides a rationale for the perpetuation of their status
and with it the inequality in its attainment. This finding is even more pronounced
in the following section, where students give explanations for the underrepresenta-
tion of black students at Oxford.

related their own status

achievement

to intelligence

© 2013 British Educational Research Association

Legitimating status

707

Explanations for black underrepresentation

Recurrent outcries over the predominance of graduates of private secondary schools
at Oxford (BBC News, 2000; Shepherd, 2010; Vasagar, 2010b) have more recently
been accompanied by highly visible public critiques by both an Afro-Caribbean
Labour Member of Parliament (Lammy, 2010) and Conservative Prime Minister
David Cameron (Vasagar, 2011) related to the underrepresentation of British Afro-
Caribbean students at Oxford. In 2009, just one British Afro-Caribbean student was
admitted, and the rate of admission for British Afro-Caribbean students was consid-
erably lower than that of white British students (University of Oxford Equality and
Diversity Unit, 2010). These public critiques suggest that Oxford admissions holds
deep symbolic meaning for the British public.10

Given these critiques, when students in our study were asked to explain why black
students are underrepresented at Oxford, over half (57%) argued that blacks are
mainly part of the working class and thus are living in poor areas with poorly funded
schools, which either do not prepare their pupils sufficiently for exams and the Oxford
interview or do not encourage them to apply:

You get to Oxford as a result of your education. No matter how naturally brilliant you are,
you have to be well educated. And… the wealth distribution in society means that white
people have more access to the best education even in the state sector. The state schools
are of a lower quality, in my belief, in areas of greater ethnic density.

This student attending a top British boarding school before Oxford.

Independent of minorities’ ability to come to Oxford due to low-quality schooling,
nearly half of respondents believed that blacks are underrepresented at Oxford
because they do not apply. They gave two kinds of reasons for their perceived low
rates of application from black students.11 First, some felt that Oxford’s image as an
elite, sometimes racist institution along with the paucity of black students on campus
puts off black secondary school students from applying: ‘I don’t know if it’s Oxford’s
image and stereotype, whether that’s blocking people from going… There is this view
of Oxford as being very kind of unattainable almost, if you’re not white, posh, went to
private school, things like that’. This student may have sympathized with a supposed
cultural difference for black students. During his interview he described a teacher’s
encouragement to apply to Oxford at his rural state secondary school, despite his par-
ents’ lack of understanding of the admissions process or even the location of Oxford
prior to the teacher’s recommendation. His parents did not have post-secondary
education.

Other students sympathized with an assumed disinterest in Oxford due to the lack
of ethnic minorities on campus. One state school respondent who made this argu-
ment supported her idea by providing an example of a black friend of hers who did
not apply to Oxford:

Well, from my personal experience, one of my friends at school was black, and she got—
she had the grades to get into Oxford or Cambridge but she didn’t even want to apply,
because she was like: ‘There’s not enough black people there so I don’t want to go’. So she
went to Imperial12 in London to do Medicine. I think that’s just what people think: ‘I’ll be
isolated because everyone will be white and I’ll stand out because I’m black’.

© 2013 British Educational Research Association

708 N. K. Warikoo and C. Fuhr

This white British student’s mother works in the service industry and her father works
as a transport driver. Later in her interview she opined that Oxford should encourage
students from working class and ethnic minority areas to apply, just as a teacher
encouraged her to apply. Yet she also expressed strong opposition to class- or race-
based preferences in admission.

Second, some believed that black students’ family cultures were not conducive to
academic success and interest in elite education. These students specifically identified
black applicants, and argued that their lack of cultural focus on educational achieve-
ment prevents them from applying to and enrolling in elite universities like Oxford:
‘You could perhaps argue that among the black population there might be a greater
percentage of problems like absentee fathers, or both parents working all the time so
not having this opportunity to develop their child’s intellectual interest’. This student
is a private school graduate, and grew up in a neighborhood with high levels of educa-
tion among adults and very low levels of socioeconomic disadvantage. Both of her
parents are university graduates. Others pointed to cultural definitions of what is
important: ‘From what I know there may be cultural pressures. If you’re male and
black, working and excelling academically is not the thing to be seen doing…’ This
student grew up in a neighborhood that is 97% white. The student’s parents are uni-
versity graduates who sent her to a private secondary school. Based on their secondary
schools and childhood neighborhoods, both of the above quoted students are less
likely to have had black peers growing up. In fact, 4 of the 20 private school graduates
gave these kinds of cultural explanations for black underrepresentation, in contrast to
just one each of graduates of grammar and non-grammar state schools. The evidence
suggests that the lack of exposure makes private school graduates more likely to assert
stereotypes about black British culture.

To sum up, most students explained the low numbers of black students at Oxford
as related to either a cultural lack of interest or encouragement, which led to low
numbers of applicants; or to class and subsequent school inequality that made black
teens less prepared for admission to and study at Oxford. This again suggests that stu-
dents view admission to Oxford as based on skills and cultures that are best cultivated
in private schools and in privileged families. Furthermore, the findings suggest that
those without personal exposure to social disadvantages, like graduates from private
schools, are less likely to realistically identify problems faced by minorities in achiev-
ing elite status.

Given the overall beliefs in meritocracy as well as the explanations for black disad-
vantage, what do students feel the university should do, if anything? Answers to this
question, detailed below, illuminate the degree to which students are willing to change
a process in which they were successful, in order to increase opportunities for others.

Maintaining status

In order to understand what actions students would be willing to have the university
take to change the underrepresentation of black students, if anything, we asked, ‘should
the university do anything about
the underrepresentation of black students?’
The question asks students open-endedly to suggest any changes at the university
level that will presumably make the admissions process lead to a student body more

© 2013 British Educational Research Association

Legitimating status

709

representative of the British population at large.13 Interestingly, although a majority of
students either qualified their answers to whether Oxford is a meritocracy or disagreed
altogether, few, when asked, had suggestions for how the university could better include
black students. One-third of students overall said that the university did not need to
address this issue. For some of these respondents, the only solution they imagined was
one they strongly disagreed with—to take ethnicity into account in admissions. One-
fourth specifically responded to the question by asserting their opposition to an admis-
sions process that takes ethnicity into account. For example:

I know the college runs a tutoring scheme in Tower Hamlets… I think what they are doing
is good, really, there is nothing wrong with it. I don’t think they need to change any of the
admissions systems to benefit certain ethnic minorities and make quotas and let them in
on that basis.

This white student graduated from a state-funded grammar school. His family has a
long history in the civil service. Like him, over one-third of our respondents felt that
the university was doing enough already, sometimes mentioning Oxford’s ‘access’
schemes in which undergraduates recruit in schools from which Oxford typically does
not receive applications.

Others felt that although unequal schooling leads to low proportions of black stu-
dents (and state school graduates), it was not Oxford’s responsibility to remedy this
inequality at the secondary school level. For example, one graduate of an elite British
boarding school said:

Yes, I do think [the underrepresentation of black students] is a problem, but Oxford
doesn’t represent the country. But I also think that there is only so much that Oxford can
do about it, because if the situation in the country at large is such that students aren’t suffi-
ciently educated to be at Oxford, Oxford shouldn’t dumb itself down purely to take on the
burden of the country.

We quoted this student earlier, in his remarks about the importance of a solid educa-
tion beyond intelligence as necessary for entree to Oxford. Although students like
him felt underrepresentation was undesirable, they thought that the university had
already fulfilled its responsibility to attempt to change the profile of its student body,
and that further changes by the university were not warranted.

The above responses indicating the university should do nothing, or nothing
more than it already is, given by 74% of students overall, suggest that even while
acknowledging inequality the students who have gained admission prefer to maintain
the status quo. In other words, although they recognize others’ disadvantages and
lament them, they are leery of any policy that might disrupt admissions for students
like themselves. Accordingly, our evidence suggests that to these students, maintain-
ing a diverse student body did not qualify as an important institutional goal for the
university. Nevertheless, maintaining the legitimacy of the admissions contest was
important to them. To do this, the university needed to convince them that enough
outreach had been made to underrepresented groups—and most students were
convinced.

The finding that students could not think of and did not support suggested policies
to decrease the social stratification they acknowledged to exist in admissions seemed
to be motivated by the disconnect between their dissatisfaction with social inequality

© 2013 British Educational Research Association

710 N. K. Warikoo and C. Fuhr

in the larger society and their lack of felt responsibility and willingness to alter the
admissions process. Many students’ responses to the question of whether the univer-
sity should do anything about the underrepresentation of minorities at Oxford did not
connect to their explanations for underrepresentation. For example, one grammar
school graduate opined:

I think a lot of people who are black don’t want to apply here because from what I hear at
home like a lot of my friends who are of ethnic minority [background], they are really
bright but they didn’t want to apply here because they felt there weren’t enough people like
them.

This student later, when asked if the university should do anything about the lack of
black students, said, ‘I think they [Oxford] does enough’. If indeed the lack of minori-
ties on campus prevents black students from applying, this student’s suggestion will
maintain the status quo of black underrepresentation. It is important to note that this
student is the daughter of Asian immigrants who run a fast food establishment, so a
family history of privilege cannot explain her perspective. Rather, she felt that making
provisions for underrepresented groups like black students and state school graduates
would spoil the game: ‘as soon as you start trying to like do this [consider type of
school or race in admissions] then you’re not making it a fair sort of thing’. Her defini-
tion of fairness precludes compensatory practices.

Similarly, one private school graduate listed both structural and cultural reasons
for the lack of black students at Oxford, invoking structural racism: ‘I think part of it
is history… institutionalized racism possibly… I think part of the problem in black
communities particularly is the lack of role models, and I think that’s partly to do with
the breakdown of the family’. Still, when asked to identify solutions, she strongly
disagreed with race-based policies and stated that because Oxford has not caused
disadvantage it should not take part in rectifying it:

I don’t think that affirmative action is the answer because I think that… that’s just a ges-
ture towards what is actually a bigger problem within society. Those figures [on underrep-
resentation] are a manifestation of the problems facing the black community. I think most
people would see that if you look at the ethnic diversity of Oxford, there are a fair number
of—well mostly white students. There’s also a fair representation of Asian students, but
it’s black students who seem to be underrepresented. And I think that is suggestive of
greater problems within society, not Oxford’s bias.

Because this private school graduate sees ‘structural racism’ as a problem in the
larger society rather than at Oxford, she places responsibility for change outside the
gates of Oxford and does not include the university as part of the society that has per-
petuated inequality. This interpretation resonates with the answers to a survey ques-
tion based on underrepresented ethnic and racial minorities. For the survey
statement ‘Underrepresented ethnic minorities should get special consideration in
university admissions because they have experienced disadvantage in their lives’ just
22% of respondents agreed. This finding suggests that only a minority of students
believe that the underrepresentation of disadvantaged groups can undermine the
admissions contest unless provisions are made for individuals who have suffered dis-
advantages. Although class defines social life in Britain to a greater extent than race,
when asked a similar question regarding working class students only a minority

© 2013 British Educational Research Association

Legitimating status

711

agreed as well (38%). In other words, despite an awareness of the inequality in access
to Oxford by race and class, the majority of students advocated the maintenance of
the admissions status quo. In this way, the disconnect between students’ expressed
dissatisfaction with schooling inequality and their lack of felt responsibility and will-
ingness to alter the admissions process allows students to defend and maintain the
legitimacy of their status.

Conclusion

In this paper we have detailed how students attending Oxford University understand
their own elite status attainment through their admission to Oxford, their explana-
tions of others’ absence, and the extent to which the absence of others should be rem-
edied. A majority of students believed that Oxford is meritocratic in its admissions
process. Still, private school graduates were more likely than state school graduates to
believe in Oxford’s meritocracy. This finding suggests that those who gained entree
despite their state-funded secondary education are more likely to see faults in the
meritocratic system—in this case via schooling inequality—while those from private
schools are more likely to overlook unequal access.

Many students did believe that some schools—especially private schools—better
prepare students to become ‘Oxford material’ than others, accounting for the over-
representation of advantaged students on campus. This was the case for both state
and private school graduates. Although we expected that attending a state secondary
school would make individuals more concerned about fairness, we surprisingly found
that was not the case.14 Most state school graduates, like their privately educated
counterparts, did not connect the lack of equal schooling opportunities directly to a
lack of fair chance to gain admission to Oxford.

Thus, students defined meritocracy not only as intelligence but also as skills, which
many acknowledged are best cultivated in private school settings. Students acknowl-
edged others’ disadvantages in getting into Oxford through their lack of access to the
skills cultivated in high-quality schools, while maintaining that their own success in
admission had to do with intelligence, seen as inherent to the individual. Their sense of
accomplishment and self-worth derived from their self-identified intelligence, which
provided them with a solid and defensible rationale to overlook inequalities nurtured
in the seemingly meritocratic system.

Furthermore, by affirming Oxford’s meritocracy in admissions and recognizing the
university’s outreach to underrepresented groups, most students thereby maintained
the legitimacy of the admissions contest and thus preserved the legitimacy of their
burgeoning elite status as Oxford undergraduates. Interestingly, this British way of
making meaning of admission to an elite university resembles recent findings at sec-
ondary boarding schools in the United States. Two recent studies of students attend-
ing elite American boarding schools find that most students believe that intelligence
and hard work rather than privilege or parental influence afforded them the opportu-
nity to study at elite high schools (Gaztambide-Fernandez, 2009; Khan, 2010). Khan
(2010) calls this a perspective of ‘democratic inequality’, in which ‘differences in out-
comes are explained by the capacities of people’ (p. 196) while masking the durable
inequality that a democratic inequality perspective perpetuates. This rationale allows

© 2013 British Educational Research Association

712 N. K. Warikoo and C. Fuhr

students to maintain their sense of accomplishment and self-worth in a meritocratic
system that cultivates inequality.

Still, as mentioned above, many did not gloss over the social inequality that leads to
an overrepresentation of private school graduates and an underrepresentation of
racial minorities at Oxford. When asked to explain the underrepresentation of black
students at Oxford respondents cited class, culture and schooling inequality. In this
way, their views do not map onto a straightforward status reproduction model. In
light of very public critiques of Oxford admissions, most students acknowledge a
degree of inequality in secondary school quality, but just enough to maintain the legit-
imacy of the admissions process. These findings resonate with Jackman and Muha’s
(1984) analysis of the ways in which dominant groups in society maintain their advan-
tage in the face of public critiques of inequality by defending the legitimacy of a sys-
tem that led to their advantages. Jackman and Muha describe how dominant groups
(1) privilege individual rights over group rights, much the way our respondents advo-
cated individualistic, race- and class-blind assessments of candidates; and (2) advo-
cate symbolic rather than substantive concessions, such as the Oxford outreach
programs to disadvantaged youth that encourage underrepresented groups’ applica-
tions to Oxford rather than policies that ensure their presence on campus.

Findings also showed that students had difficulty connecting unequal schooling,
which many mentioned, to actions the university could take to help combat the
underrepresentation of minorities. Most did not support any form of ‘compensatory
sponsorship’ (Grodsky, 2007) through taking into account race or even social class in
admissions, even though some admissions tutors at Oxford already practice an infor-
mal school-type version of compensatory sponsorship (Zimdars, 2010). This support
for the status quo in terms of policies while simultaneously acknowledging the disad-
vantages of others resonates with research in the United States analyzing white Amer-
icans’ views on racial
inequality. Specifically, white Americans often recognize
African Americans’ disadvantages while disagreeing with social policies to remedy
those disadvantages, such as affirmative action, aid to poor families with children,
and busing to promote school integration; some have termed these views ‘new racism’
(Bobo & Kluegel, 1993; Quillian, 2006; Schuman et al., 1997) for their expression of
views that perpetuate minority disadvantages in society, in an era in which overt rac-
ism is no longer socially acceptable. Similarly, Americans often express support for
multiculturalism in the abstract, but not for social policies to promote multicultural-
ism such as bilingual education (Citrin et al., 2001; Bell & Hartmann, 2007). Much
debate has considered whether these views are the result of feelings of group threat,
individualized race prejudice from childhood, or political philosophy (Bobo & Klue-
gel, 1993; Sniderman & Carmines, 1996; Sears et al., 2000). These studies employ
large scale quantitative data to examine the correlation between policy preferences,
feelings of group threat and expressions of race prejudice. While such an analysis is
not possible in our study, in this context we might assume that students’ lack of sup-
port for compensatory measures have more to do with a desire to legitimate status, in
the context of the British political landscape, which in turn shapes policies at Oxford
University. Britain experienced no mass movement to combat racial discrimination,
and does not have policies of affirmative action in higher education. Class shapes Brit-
ish individuals’ identities as well as how inequality is understood in British society,

© 2013 British Educational Research Association

Legitimating status

713

similar to the role that race plays in US society. Furthermore, elite British universities
have historically been ‘socially buffered’ from British society, compared to elite US
universities’ stronger ties to the state and local communities (Ramirez, 2006), and
perhaps consequently are not expected to play a role in stemming inequality of access
based in children’s unequal schooling experiences. Other research has shown that
national context does indeed influence the degree to which individuals in society
believe that the society functions as a meritocracy (Duru-Bellat & Tenret, 2012). Ori-
gins aside, the lack of expectation that the university change and adapt to accommo-
date nontraditional students assists in the maintenance of a static model of
meritocracy at Oxford, and in this way reproduces social inequality.

In the end, although many students acknowledged others’ disadvantages in getting
into Oxford, most did not acknowledge their own advantages in admission to Oxford.
Through this perspective, students did not have to compromise the legitimization of
their own status achievement based on merit and thus their elite status itself. Given
that a significant proportion of Oxford graduates will hold leadership roles in Britain
in the future, such perspectives are likely to have noteworthy effects on decision-mak-
ing on access and opening up elite education in Britain. Accordingly, our findings
have significant societal relevance. We show how assumed future leaders place
responsibility outside the gates of elite higher educational institutions. We have
shown that not only institutions but also the individuals that institutions and
gatekeepers reward have an interest in maintaining the legitimacy of the criteria for
success in the institution.

Future research should further analyze elite status achievement from the perspec-
tive of elite individuals themselves in other domains, as we have shown that a look at
individuals (in contrast to institutions; Bourdieu & Passeron, 1977), and a focus on
meaning-making (in contrast to socialization or credentialing effects; Stevens, 2008)
provides a more nuanced understanding of how status may be perpetuated in society.
In view of our findings, we also suggest that when scholars seek to understand the
reproduction of status and in particular elite status, a look not only at what gains
status but also at how those who attain elite status make meaning of their position, in
the face of an unequal society, is insightful.

Acknowledgements

We thank Ruben Gaztambide-Fernandez, Anna Zimdars, Daniel Sabbagh, and
reviewers for British Education Research Journal for helpful comments on previous
versions of this article. Funding for this research was provided by the British Academy.

NOTES

1 On the other hand, some Oxford admissions tutors admit to considering school type (state versus private) in
their admissions decisions, in that they assume a state school student with lower grades than a student from
an elite private school may have more potential to shine at Oxford (Zimdars, 2010). These decisions seem to
be wise, given research showing that for a given level of school performance state school graduates do better
than private school graduates at Oxford (Ogg et al., 2009).

2 At the secondary level, Gaztambide-Fernandez (2009) and Khan (2010), in two recent ethnographies of elite
American boarding schools, find that boarding school students believe that hard work and being smart are
the critical drivers of their and their peers’ admission to those elite high schools.

© 2013 British Educational Research Association

714 N. K. Warikoo and C. Fuhr

3 This ‘belief in a just world’ (Lerner, 1980) has been shown by social psychologists to improve mental health
and self-esteem (Dalbert, 2001). It is interesting to note that students’ definitions of meritocracy do not align
with the dominant view of moral philosophers, who suggest that if merit is inherent rather than earned it can-
not be the basis for the social distribution of rewards (Rawls, 1971)—in this case, for admission to Oxford.

4 We use the term ‘black’ to suggest students of African descent, including Afro-Caribbeans and Africans. This
is consistent with the daily usage of the term ‘black’, which for most ethnic minorities in Britain does not
include any Asian groups (Modood, 1994). Asians, when taken as a whole, are not underrepresented at
Oxford, although there is some evidence to suggest that Asians experience discrimination in admissions (Zim-
dars et al., 2009).

5 We excluded first year students because they have not fully experienced university life, an important topic for

the project beyond this paper.

6 Some students asked what meritocracy means. They were told, ‘Meritocracy is a system in which achieve-
ment and success are based on merit rather than, for example, who your parents are, what school you went
to, your class, who you know, etc.’

7 Seven percent of British primary and secondary students attend independent schools (UK Department for
Education, 2011), and 42% of students accepted to Oxford are from independent schools (University of
Oxford, 2011c).

8 The total does not add up to 10 because some students’ parents were from different regions. Although we did
not purposefully sample respondents whose parents come from particular regions of the world or who express
particular ethnic identities, we did oversample for children of immigrants through follow-up emails seeking
those with immigrant parents after our initial round of interviews.

9 Elite British universities do not have explicit policies to admit children of their graduates at higher rates or
with weaker profiles than others. Nevertheless, it is a common perception that in fact attending Oxford or
Cambridge—even particular colleges within them—is done over generations in elite British families and that
these elite universities and their colleges welcome and support these family legacies.

10 The Oxford admissions office has disputed these critiques by claiming that the underrepresentation is due to
Afro-Caribbeans tending to choose the most highly selective subjects (medicine and law) (University of
Oxford, 2010c).

11 In reality, Afro-Caribbean students are more likely to apply than whites with the same number of A grades
(University of Oxford, 2010c). In fact, a lack of application alone cannot explain underrepresentation,
because black students have lower rates of admission to Oxford. In 2009, for example, British-born black
Caribbean students had a 2.9% success rate for admission, in contrast to the 27.6% success rate for white
applicants (University of Oxford Equality and Diversity Unit, 2010). This, in addition to black students being
less likely to apply to Oxford, led to just one British-born Afro-Caribbean student being admitted to Oxford in
2009, out of 34 applicants. British Afro-Caribbean students’ propensity to select the most competitive sub-
jects, including medicine and law, may explain some of this difference (University of Oxford, 2010c).

12 After Oxford and Cambridge, Imperial is Britain’s highest ranking university for the sciences.
13 Although the UK Race Relations Act of 1976 prohibits ‘positive discrimination’, it allows for ‘positive action’
in Britain. On the surface this suggests that any kind of preference for racial minorities is not allowed in
admissions. However, the United States Civil Rights Act similarly prohibits racial discrimination, yet certain
forms of affirmative action for racial minorities in higher education admissions have been implemented and
then challenged in the courts and, in some cases, allowed, under particular legal interpretations. For multiple
social, cultural, and political reasons beyond the legal question, racial considerations in university admissions
(as well as in hiring) have not been implemented in Britain, but it is possible that such considerations could
withstand legal challenges (Teles, 2001).

14 Reay and her colleagues (2009) have shown that working class students do articulate cultural boundaries

between themselves and more advantaged peers at an elite British university.

References

Archer, L., Hutchings, M. & Ross, A. (2003) Higher education and social class: Issues of exclusion and

inclusion (London and New York, Routledge and Falmer).

BBC News (2010) Chancellor attacks Oxford admissions. Available online at: http://news.bbc.co.uk/

2/hi/uk_news/education/764141.stm (accessed 23 May 2011).

Bell, J. M. & Hartmann, D. (2007) Diversity in everyday discourse: The cultural ambiguities and

consequences of ‘happy talk’, American Sociological Review, 72(6), 895–914.

Blau, P. M. & Dudley Duncan, O. (1967) The American occupational structure (New York, Wiley).
Bobo, L. & Kluegel, J. R. (1993) Opposition to race-targeting: Self-interest, stratification ideology,

or racial attitudes?, American Sociological Review, 58(4), 443–464.

Bourdieu, P. (1984) Distinction: A social critique of the judgment of taste (Cambridge, Harvard Univer-

sity Press).

Bourdieu, P. & Passeron, J. C. (1977) Reproduction in education, society and culture. Trans. R.

Nice, Vol. 5, Sage studies in social and educational change (London, Sage Publications).

© 2013 British Educational Research Association

Legitimating status

715

Bowles, S. & Gintis, H. (1976) Schooling in capitalist America: Educational reform and the contradic-

tions of economic life (New York, Basic Books).

Citrin, J., Sears, D. O., Muste, C. & Wong, C. (2001) Multiculturalism in American public opin-

ion, British Journal of Political Science, 31(2), 247.

Collins, R. (1979) The Credential society: An historical sociology of education and stratification (New

York, Academic Press).

Dalbert, C. (2001) The justice motive as a personal resource: Dealing with challenges and critical life

events (New York, Kluwer Academic and Plenum Publishers).

Davies, S. (1995) Leaps of faith: Shifting currents in critical sociology of education, American Jour-

nal of Sociology, 100(6), 1448–1478.

Duru-Bellat, M. & Tenret, E. (2012) Who’s for meritocracy? Individual and contextual variations

in the faith, Comparative Education Review, 56(2), 223–247.

Gaztambide-Fernandez, R. A. (2009) The best of the best: Becoming elite at an American boarding

school (Cambridge, Harvard University Press).

Grodsky, E. (2007) Compensatory sponsorship in higher education, American Journal of Sociology,

112(6), 1662–1712.

Harris, M. (2010) What more can be done to widen access to highly selective universities? (Bristol, Office

for Fair Access).

Jackman, M. R. & MicMuha, M. J. (1984) Education and intergroup attitudes: Moral enlighten-
ment, superficial democratic commitment, or ideological refinement?, American Sociological
Review, 49(6), 751–769.

Kamens, D. H. (1977) Legitimating myths and educational organization: The relationship between

organizational ideology and formal structure, American Sociological Review, 42(2), 208–219.

Karabel, J. & Halsey, A. H. (1977) Power and ideology in education (New York, Oxford University

Press).

Khan, S. R. (2010) Privilege: The making of an adolescent elite at St Paul’s School (Princeton, Prince-

ton University Press).

Lammy, D. (2010) The Oxbridge whitewash, The Guardian. Available online at: http://www.guard
ian.co.uk/commentisfree/2010/dec/06/the-oxbridge-whitewash-black-students (accessed 23 May
2011).

Lerner, M. J. (1980) The belief in a just world: A fundamental delusion (New York, Plenum Press).
Lipset, S. M. & Bendix, R. (1992) Social mobility in industrial society (New Brunswick, Transaction

Publishers).

Meyer, J. W. (1977) The effects of education as an institution, American Journal of Sociology, 83(1),

55–77.

Modood, T. (1994) Political blackness and British Asians, Sociology, 28(4), 859–876.
Ogg, T., Zimdars, A. & Heath, A. (2009) Schooling effects on degree performance: A comparison
of the predictive validity of aptitude testing and secondary school grades at Oxford University,
British Educational Research Journal, 35(5), 781–807.

Parel, K. & Ball, J. (2013) Oxford University accused of bias against ethnic minority applicants, The
Guardian, 26 February. Available online at: http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/2013/feb/26/
oxford-university-ethnic-minority-applicants (accessed 21 March 2013).

Quillian, L. (2006) New approaches to understanding racial prejudice and discrimination, Annual

Review of Sociology, 32(1), 299–328.

Ramirez, F. O. (2006) Growing commonalities and persistent differences in higher education: Uni-
versities between global models and national legacies, in: H.-D. a. B. R. Meyer (Ed.) The new
institutionalism in education (Albany, State University of New York Press), 123–141.

Rawls, J. (1971) A theory of justice (Cambridge, Belknap Press of Harvard University Press).
Reay, D., David, M. E. & Ball, S. J. (2005) Degrees of choice: Class, race, gender, and higher education

(Stoke-on-Trent, Trentham Books).

Reay, D., Crozier, G. & Clayton, J. (2009) ‘Strangers in paradise’? Working-class students in elite

universities, Sociology, 43(6), 1103–1121.

Schuman, H., Steeh, C. & Bobo, L. (1997) Racial attitudes in America: Trends and interpretations

(Cambridge, Harvard University Press).

© 2013 British Educational Research Association

716 N. K. Warikoo and C. Fuhr

Sears, D. O., Sidanius, J. & Bobo, L. (2000) Racialized politics: The debate about racism in America

(Chicago, University of Chicago Press).

Shepherd, J. (2010) Oxford University admitted fewer state school pupils in 2009. Available online at:

http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2010/mar/22/oxford-university-fewer-state-school-pupils
(accessed 23 May 2011).

Shiner, M. & Modood, T. (2002) Help or hindrance? Higher education and the route to ethnic

equality, British Journal of Sociology of Education, 23(2), 209–232.

Sniderman, P. M. & Carmines, E. G. (1996) Beyond race: Social justice as a race neutral ideal,

American Journal of Political Science, 40(1), 33.

Soares, J. A. (1999) The decline of privilege: The modernization of Oxford University (Stanford, Stan-

ford University Press).

Stevens, M. (2008) Culture and education, Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social

Science, 619, 97–113.

Sutton Trust (2012) The educational backgrounds of the nation’s leading people. Available online at:

http://www.suttontrust.com/research/the-educational-backgrounds-of-the-nations-lead-
ing-people/ (accessed 30 November 2012).

Teles, S. M. (2001) Positive action or affirmative action? The persistence of Britain’s antidiscrimi-
nation regime, in: J. D. Skrentny (Ed.) Color lines: Affirmative action, immigration, and civil rights
options for America (Chicago, University of Chicago Press), 241–269.

UK Department for Education (2011) Schools, pupils and their characteristics. Available online
at: http://www.education.gov.uk/researchandstatistics/statistics/statistics-by-topic/schoolpupil
characteristics/a00196810/schools-pupils-and-their-characteristics-january-2 (accessed 10 June
2012).

University of Oxford (2010a) Admissions: Archaeology and anthropology—how to apply. Available
online at: http://www.ox.ac.uk/admissions/undergraduate_courses/courses/archaeology_and_
anthropology/archandanth_2.html (accessed 2 August 2010).

University of Oxford (2010b) Biological sciences admissions and application. Available online at:

http://www.biology.ox.ac.uk/admissions_application.htm (accessed 14 July 2010).

University of Oxford (2010c) These issues are not just black and white. Available online at: http://

www.ox.ac.uk/media/behind_the_headlines/101307.html (accessed 23 May 2011).

University of Oxford (2010d) Undergraduate degree classifications. Available online at: http://www.
ox.ac.uk/about_the_university/facts_and_figures/undergraduate_degr_2.html#acollege_under-
graduate_degree_classifications_200910_sorted_by_rank (accessed 13 January 2011).

University of Oxford (2011a) Entrance requirements. Available online at: http://www.ox.ac.uk/admis-
sions/undergraduate_courses/courses/courses_and_entrance_requirements/(accessed 13 Janu-
ary 2011).

University of Oxford (2011b) How to apply: Tests. Available online at: http://www.ox.ac.uk/admis-

sions/undergraduate_courses/how_to_apply/tests/index.html (accessed 27 May 2011).

University of Oxford (2011c) Undergraduate admissions statistics: School type. Available online at:
http://www.ox.ac.uk/about_the_university/facts_and_figures/undergraduate_admissions_statistics/
school_type.html (accessed 30 May 2011).

University of Oxford Equality and Diversity Unit (2010) University of Oxford Race Equality Scheme
2009–2010: Annual progress report. Available online at: http://www.admin.ox.ac.uk/media/
global/wwwadminoxacuk/localsites/equalityanddiversity/documents/race/racereport2010.pdf
(accessed 13 January 2011).

Vasagar, J. (2010a) New Oxford school of governance will ‘groom future world leaders’, The Guard-
ian, 19 September. Available online at: http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/2010/sep/20/
oxford-university-blavatnik-school-governance (accessed 6 June 2012).

Vasagar, J. (2010b) Save top university spaces for state school pupils, says Cable, The Guardian, 15
July. Available online at: http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/2010/jul/15/cable-univer-
sity-state-school-places (accessed 20 July 2010).

Vasagar, J. (2011) Oxford University and David Cameron clash over black student numbers, The
Guardian, 11 April. Available online at: http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/2011/apr/11/
oxford-cameron-black-students?INTCMP=SRCH (accessed 23 May 2011).

© 2013 British Educational Research Association

Legitimating status

717

Weber, M. (1968) Economy and society: An outline of interpretive sociology (New York, Bedminster

Press).

Willis, P. E. (1977) Learning to labour: How working class kids get working class jobs (Farnborough,

Saxon House).

Young, M. D. (1958) The rise of the meritocracy, 1870–2033: An essay on education and equality

(London, Thames and Hudson).

Zimdars, A. (2010) Fairness and undergraduate admission: A qualitative exploration of admissions

choices at the University of Oxford, Oxford Review of Education, 36(3), 207–323.

Zimdars, A., Sullivan, A. & Heath, A. (2009) Elite higher education admissions in the arts and

sciences: Is cultural capital the key?, Sociology, 43(4), 648–666.

© 2013 British Educational Research Association

