POLITICS OF THE POPULAR

INTRODUCTION TO ANGLO-AMERICAN CULTURAL 

STUDIES 

SS 2016

ANG-V1/CULTURAL STUDIES

THURSDAY: 12:00-14:00

ROOM: 41/215

Jatin Wagle
Email: jatin.wagle@uni-osnabrueck.de                       Ofﬁce hours: Tuesdays, 11:00-12:00

1

QUESTIONS: JOHN STOREY, “WHAT IS POPULAR CULTURE?”

• Do you agree with the claim, “…all texts are ultimately political…” (4)? 

Why?

• What is “…made clear in such formulations as a female pop singer, a black 

journalist, a working-class writer, a gay comedian…” (4)? Can you come 
up with more such formulations?

• Why is it problematic to measure the “popular” in numbers?
• What is meant by the claim, “Taste is a deeply ideological category…”? 

Explain.

• What does the example of Pavarotti’s free concert in Hyde Park tell us? 

Can you think of similar examples?

• How do you understand the statement, “Whatever popular culture is, 

what is certain is that its raw materials are those which are commercially 
provided”?

• How do you respond to the characterization of popular culture “as a 
site of struggle between the ‘resistance’ of subordinate groups and the 
forces of ‘incorporation’ operating in the interests of dominant groups”?

2

ROLAND BARTHES

• Roland Barthes (1915-80): Literary 

and cultural critic and theorist, 
philosopher, linguist, semiotician

• Combined the inﬂuences of Marxism, 

psychoanalysis and linguistics

• Best-known for his pioneering 

writings towards establishing and 
popularizing the intellectual 
movements described as Structuralism 
and then Poststructuralism.

3

BARTHES & STRUCTURALISM/POSTSTRUCTURALISM

• Structuralism: Postwar intellectual movement, beginning in 

the 1950s, which takes up the insights developed in 
Structural Linguistics (by Saussure et al.) into the nature of 
language as a system or structure of signs and “applies” it to 
other (cultural) ﬁelds/practices/discourses, viz. fashion, 
advertising, ﬁlm, popular literature, etc.

• Poststructuralism: Movement beginning in the late sixties and 
seventies; problematizes the signiﬁcant insights of structural 
linguistics; interrogates and subverts the notion that a stable 
structure underlies all systems of thought and 
communication, and questions the binary oppositions with 
which Structuralism operates.

4

BARTHES, MYTHOLOGIES

• Collection of critical essays: Pioneering 

analyses of varied aspects/texts of popular 
culture

• Sheer diversity of themes, objects, 

questions, texts

• Accessibly written, yet theoretically 

sophisticated analyses

• Originally written for the journal Les 

Lettres nouvelles

• Text divided into two parts: “Mythologies” 
- analytical and “Myth Today” - theoretical

5

BARTHES, MYTHOLOGIES

• The purported contexts and tasks of Mythologies:

“The starting point of these reﬂections was usually a feeling of 
impatience at the sight of the 'naturalness' with which 
newspapers, art and common sense constantly dress up a reality 
which, even though it is the one we live in, is undoubtedly 
determined by history. In short, in the account given of our 
contemporary circumstances, I resented seeing Nature and 
History confused at every turn, and I wanted to track down, in 
the decorative display of what-goes-without-saying, the ideological 
abuse which, in my view, is hidden there.” (Preface, 1957: 10)
“This book has a double theoretical framework: on the one hand, 
an ideological critique bearing on the language of so-called mass-
culture; on the other, a ﬁrst attempt to analyse semiologically the 
mechanics of this language.” (Preface, 1970: 8)

6

BARTHES, THE MODERN MYTH

•

In Mythologies, Roland Barthes 
analyses common cultural 
practices, discourses, and artifacts 
as modern myths and suggests, 
“myth is a language” (10). 

• What do you think is a modern 
myth? And, how is it constructed?

• Modern myth = “the falsely 

obvious” (10)

• Socially constructed connotation

7

SEMIOLOGY

“We shall …take language, discourse, speech, etc., 
to mean any signiﬁcant unit or synthesis, whether 
verbal or visual: a photograph will be a kind of 
speech for us in the same way as a newspaper 
article; even objects will become speech, if they 
mean something. This generic way of conceiving 
language is in fact justiﬁed by the very history of 
writing: long before the invention of our alphabet, 
objects like the Inca quipu, or drawings, as in 
pictographs, have been accepted as speech. This 
does not mean that one must treat mythical speech 
like language; myth in fact belongs to the province 
of a general science, coextensive with linguistics, 
which is semiology.” (“Myth is a type of speech,” 
109)

8

BARTHES: SHORT BIBLIOGRAPHY

Barthes, Roland (1972) Critical Essays, trans. Richard Howard, Evanston: 
North- western University Press.
–––– (1972) Mythologies, trans. Annette Lavers, London: Jonathan Cape.
–––– (1974) S/Z, trans. Richard Miller, New York: Hill and Wang.
–––– (1975) The Pleasure of the Text, trans. Richard Miller, New York: Hill and 
Wang.
–––– (1976) Sade, Fourier, Loyola, trans. Richard Miller, New York: Hill and 
Wang.
–––– (1977) Image-Music-Text, selected and trans. Stephen Heath, London: 
Fontana/Collins.
–––– (1978) A Lover’s Discourse: Fragments, trans. Richard Howard, New York: 
Hill and Wang.
–––– (1979) The Eiffel Tower and Other Mythologies, trans. Richard Howard, 
New York: Hill and Wang.
–––– (1980) New Critical Essays, trans. Richard Howard, New York: Hill and 
Wang.

9

THREE MODERN SENSES OF THE TERM “CULTURE”

• A general process, of intellectual, 

spiritual, and aesthetic development 
(from the 18th century onwards)

• A particular way of life, whether of 

a people, a period, a group, or 
humanity in general (ﬁrst 
formulated by Herder et al)

• A repository, of the works and 
practices belonging to intellectual, 
and especially artistic, activity

10

POSTWAR DEVELOPMENTS

STUDYING CULTURE AFTER “THE LINGUISTIC TURN”

• Problematization of the stable, anthropological 

opposition, nature vs. culture, E.g. Not a stone as such vs. 
a stone fashioned as weapon, but “stone” as a linguistic 
sign (Claude Lévi-Strauss)

• Language as signifying practice, or a system of signs 

(Ferdinand de Saussure)

• Postwar: All sorts of social practices studied as systems 

of signs, and thus, as cultural practices, e.g., fashion, 
cuisine, popular culture (Roland Barthes), prisons, 
psychiatric facilities, and sexuality (Michel Foucault)

• Culture, both a material practice and a discourse 

(Raymond Williams)

11

COLD WAR AND THE POLITICAL OF CULTURE

• Cold War: Response to the Hungarian uprising 
in1956 and its brutal suppression by the Soviet 
Union
• Emergence of the so-called “Old New Left” in 
Britain before the New Left of 1968

• The Left, especially the intellectual, non-dogmatic 

Left’s disenchantment with institutionalized 
Communism and its politics
• Realization: The need to engage with the cultures of 
the people, with the everyday lives of the working 
classes in the postwar era
• Stuart Hall: “Politics by other means”

12

MODERN, INSTITUT CULTURAL STUDIES

• What?

Mode/strategy/methodology of studying cultures 
and societies in the wake of the linguistic turn in 
the Humanities

• Where, or the institutional location?

Centre for Contemporary Cultural Studies at 
Birmingham, or the Birmingham School of 
Cultural Studies

• When?
1964
• Who?

Richard Hoggart, the ﬁrst director

13

CULTURAL STUDIES IN BRITAIN

SIGNIFICANT, EARLY DEVELOPMENTS

• 1957: Richard Hoggart, Uses of Literacy

• 1958: Raymond Williams, Culture and Society

• 1963: E. P. Thompson, Making of the English Working Class

• Stuart Hall, Founder/Editor, New Left Review

14

