Copyright © 2007 by the author(s). Published here under license by the Resilience Alliance.
Pahl-Wostl, C., J. Sendzimir, P. Jeffrey, J. Aerts, G. Berkamp, and K. Cross. 2007. Managing change
toward adaptive water management through social learning. Ecology and Society 12(2): 30. [online] URL:
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art30/

Research, part of a Special Feature on New Methods for Adaptive Water Management
Managing Change toward Adaptive Water Management through Social
Learning

Claudia Pahl-Wostl 1, Jan Sendzimir 2, Paul Jeffrey 3, Jeroen Aerts 4, Ger Berkamp 5, and 
Katharine Cross 5

ABSTRACT. The management of water resources is currently undergoing a paradigm shift toward a more
integrated and participatory management style. This paper highlights the need to fully take into account
the complexity of the systems to be managed and to give more attention to uncertainties. Achieving this
requires adaptive management approaches that can more generally be defined as systematic strategies for
improving management policies and practices by learning from the outcomes of previous management
actions.  This  paper  describes  how  the  principles  of  adaptive  water  management  might  improve  the
conceptual and methodological base for sustainable and integrated water management in an uncertain and
complex world. Critical debate is structured around four questions: (1) What types of uncertainty need to
be taken into account in water management? (2) How does adaptive management account for uncertainty?
(3) What are the characteristics of adaptive management regimes? (4) What is the role of social learning
in managing change? Major transformation processes are needed because, in many cases, the structural
requirements, e.g., adaptive institutions and a flexible technical infrastructure, for adaptive management
are  not  available.  In  conclusion,  we  itemize  a  number  of  research  needs  and  summarize  practical
recommendations based on the current state of knowledge.

Key Words: adaptive management; integrated water resources management; social learning; adaptive
governance; change management; uncertainty

INTRODUCTION

In the past, water resources management focused
on  well-defined  problems  that  grew  increasingly
urgent during the 19th and 20th centuries as urban
populations  became  more  concentrated  and
industrial and agricultural productivity intensified.
Public  health  problems  within  cities  and  the
seemingly insatiable demand for more water drove
major  efforts 
in  urban  water  management.
Eutrophication problems in lakes and coastal seas
triggered  more  involved  research  and  legislation.
Rivers were controlled to protect cities and dryland
agriculture  from  flooding.  In  the  short  run,
technological  fixes  proved  to  be  very  efficient  in
solving  a  number  of  these  urgent  environmental
problems,  e.g.,  the  increasing  sophistication  of
wastewater  treatment  plants  addressing  problems
related  to  hygiene  and  pollution.  However,  these
problems were generally dealt with in isolation, and

potentially  undesirable  long-term  consequences
were  not  taken  into  consideration.  The  system
paradigm on which traditional water management
has been based has often been characterized as a
“command-and-control” approach. System design
was  typically  targeted  at  high  predictability  and
controllability.

For the past two decades, new and more integrated
approaches  to  water  management  have  been
developed  and  are  being  implemented  to  address
perceived  shortcomings  in  earlier  approaches.
During the last decade, the principle of integrated
water  resources  management  (IWRM)  has,  for
example,  been  used  as  a  framework  for  the
implementation  of  such  integrated  approaches  to
water management (GWP-TEC 2000). “Integrated”
clearly indicates a desire to functionally engage a
range  of  perspectives  by  formally  considering  a
wide range of potential trade-offs at different scales

1University of Osnabrueck, 2International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, 3Cranfield University, 4Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, 5IUCN - The World
Conservation Union

in  space  and  time.  Such  an  approach  attempts  to
overcome  the  shortcomings  of  technical  end-of-
pipe solutions that deal with individual problems in
isolation  and  run  the  risk  of  causing  unexpected
consequences  (Pahl-Wostl  2007a).  However,  the
implementation  of  an  IWRM  approach  that  fully
accounts for the complexity and interdependencies
of human-technology-environment (HTE) systems
has yet to be realized. The increasing awareness of
the complexity of environmental problems and of
HTE systems has encouraged the development of
new management approaches based on the insight
that the systems to be managed are, in broad terms,
complex,  unpredictable,  and  characterized  by
unexpected responses to intervention (Committee
on Grand Canyon Monitoring and Research 1999,
Pahl-Wostl 2002, Prato 2003, Pahl-Wostl 2007b; S.
Light and K. Blann, unpublished manuscript). Such
complex  adaptive  systems  are  characterized  as
hierarchies  of  components  interacting  within  and
across scales, with emergent properties that cannot
be  predicted  by  knowing  the  components  alone
(Lansing 2003). Control is distributed rather than
central  (Allen  and  McGlade  1985,  Pahl-Wostl
1995). Rather than trying to change the structure of
complex,  adaptive  systems 
them
controllable  by  external  intervention,  innovative
management approaches aim to make use of the self-
organizing properties of the systems to be managed.

to  make 

Increasing awareness of complexity is a necessary
but  not  a  sufficient  condition  for  changing  water
management practices. Recent attempts (e.g., Pahl-
Wostl 2002, Galaz 2005, Jeffrey and Gearey 2006,
W.  Medema,  B.  McIntosh,  and  P.  Jeffrey,
unpublished manuscript) to manage water systems
have  revealed  that  major  knowledge  gaps  in  the
following  areas  may 
the  successful
implementation of new management approaches.

impede 

The management paradigm

Current  approaches  to  realizing  integrated  water
management build on the heritage of a command-
and-control paradigm that has been dominating the
water management community for decades. Such a
paradigm requires that system behavior be highly
predictable.  The  failure  to  implement  integrated
approaches  may  due  less  to  the  principle  of
integration  itself  than  to  the  mental  models  that
frame the process of its implementation.

Ecology and Society 12(2): 30
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art30/

The conceptual foundation

An  understanding  of  the  concepts  involved  in
system  change,  especially  when  this  occurs  in
surprising and nonlinear ways, is needed to make
researchers ask questions and think about ways to
manage change. Basic concepts of this type capture
insights into what blocks or foments change over
what  area  and  for  how  long,  all  of  which  is  key
information  for  management  decisions.  Concepts
such  as  resilience,  vulnerability,  and  adaptive
capacity can inspire new management approaches
and  help  us  to  better  understand  and  express  the
results of exploratory analyses of and experiments
involving  complex  adaptive  systems.  These
concepts  can  also  help  us  understand  how
management  influences  system  change.  Concepts
of  this  type  can  help  to  characterize  water
management regimes, by accounting for both their
components  and  their  interdependencies,  and  to
analyze their performance under current and future
drivers  in  terms  of,  e.g.,  reaching  management
objectives and the ability of the management regime
to  adapt  to  change.  This  conceptual  foundation
would be greatly improved by better integrating the
complexity and unpredictability of policy and social
learning  processes.  The  implementation  of  water
management  policies  in  a  given  river  basin  must
take into account its political, economic, and social
realities and thus requires a transparent and open
discourse between scientists and policy makers

Transition processes

Current water management regimes have evolved
over  decades,  and  changing  them  will  take  some
time.  How  can  we  directly  study  and  analyze
transition  processes  when  the  scale  of  change
approaches or exceeds the time horizon of academic
projects or careers? A better understanding of the
transition processes and the barriers and facilitators
for change is essential to catalyze change and foster
the implementation of a transition process toward
integrated  and  adaptive  resource  and  water
management 
failures,
despite  superior  technology  and  well-financed
central control, give rise to a key question: How can
we improve understanding and trust through a social
process of learning and negotiated change?

regimes.  Management 

We maintain that, in environmental, economic, and
social terms, sustainable water management can be
successfully implemented only if more attention is

given to understanding and closing these knowledge
gaps, including the need to deal with uncertainties.
Numerous  technical  and  quantitative  approaches
already exist to account for uncertainties in policy
analysis  and  formulation  (Morgan  and  Henrion
1990). Qualitative uncertainty can be tackled via a
variety  of  participatory  approaches  targeted  at
achieving social learning processes and negotiations
to  reach  consensus  despite  different  perspectives
(Gunderson et al. 1995, Newig et al. 2005; C. Pahl-
Wostl, M. Craps, A. Dewulf, E. Mostert, D. Tabara,
and T. Taillieu, unpublished manuscript).

is  needed 

to  account  for  all 

However,  a  change  in  the  overall  management
paradigm 
the
uncertainties in a more comprehensive fashion. This
paper describes how the principles of adaptive water
management  might  improve  the  conceptual  and
methodological basis for achieving sustainable and
integrated water management in an uncertain and
complex world. Sections 2 through 5 address the
following questions:
 

l  What types of uncertainty need to be taken

into account in water management?
 

l  What is adaptive management, and how does

l  What  are  the  characteristics  of  adaptive

it account for uncertainty?
 

management regimes?
 

l  What  is  the  role  of  social  learning  in
managing change in the context of adaptive
management?

WATER MANAGEMENT AND THE NEED
TO TAKE UNCERTAINTIES INTO
ACCOUNT

Because of a tradition rooted in the hydrological and
engineering sciences, water managers have a vast
array of experiences, methods, and tools with which
to  address  environmental  and  quantifiable
uncertainties.  However, 
the  knowledge  and
methods needed to address uncertainties in learning
and decision-making processes are largely lacking.
Rogers  and  Hall  (2003)  make  plain  the  need  for
governance systems to be more flexible and to take
uncertainty into account. Rees (2003) addresses the
need for new strategies to manage risks in integrated

Ecology and Society 12(2): 30
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art30/

water  resource  management  and  emphasizes  the
need  to  consider  economic,  social,  and  political
uncertainties, which are often of more importance
than environmental uncertainties. By embracing a
wider perspective, it is possible to distinguish the
different types of uncertainty that need to be taken
into  account  when  addressing  a  management
problem (Funtowicz and Ravetz 1990, Pahl-Wostl
et al. 1998, Oberkampf et al. 2001, Walker et al.
2003).

Types of uncertainty

The  best-known  type  of  uncertainty  is  a  lack  of
knowledge because of the limited availability and
the  variability  of  data.  Quite  a  few  technical
approaches  exist  to  include  such  uncertainties  in
simulation models. Uncertainties may be captured
by  including  uncertainty  bounds  in  results  from
model  simulations  or  other  types  of  quantitative
assessments.

An equally important but often less recognized type
of uncertainty is uncertainty in our understanding
of the system itself, not only its historical trends but
also the system elements and interactions, including
nonlinearities,  feedback  loops,  and  delays,  that
generate those trends. This applies in particular to
socioeconomic  systems  and  human  behavior  in
those cases in which there is more than one possible
interpretation of the same phenomenon. Also, our
understanding  of  ecosystems  is  not  as  well
developed as that of hydrological systems, the home
turf of many scientists and practitioners working in
water management. Furthermore, integrated water
management requires an understanding of the full
complexity  of  coupled  human-environment-
technology systems.

Another  source  of  uncertainty  inherent  in  system
behavior rather than in the knowledge about it is the
unpredictability  of  certain  factors.  In  loosely
coupled  systems,  the  trajectory  a  system  follows
depends greatly on the original conditions around
which it self-organizes. One prominent example is
climate change and corresponding changes in nature
and the likelihood of extreme events.

Uncertainty may also arise from the diversity of the
rules and underlying mental models that determine
and possibly constrain stakeholder perceptions and
actions.  Stakeholders  may  have  different  ideas
about the causes of problems and appropriate and

legitimate solutions, and use these ideas to construct
quite different concepts of what is at stake, the goals
to be achieved, the likelihood of the success of a
particular measure, etc. The simultaneous presence
of  multiple  frames  of  reference  when  seeking  to
understand  a  phenomenon 
is  also  called
“ambiguity” (Dewulf et al. 2005).

What  does  such  a  broad  understanding  of
uncertainty  imply  for  the  different  steps  in  the
management cycle, particularly in terms of the ways
in  which  different  kinds  of  uncertainties  can  be
assessed as part of the whole sequence of steps, from
defining the problem to monitoring the performance
of the management strategies implemented?

Problem definition

Ambiguity,  i.e.,  the  possibility  of  more  than  one
interpretation, is often encountered when defining
the  nature  of  the  problem  such  as  this:  Is  nitrate
pollution of groundwater by agriculture caused by
a profit-maximizing agricultural industry or by the
refusal  of  consumers  to  pay  higher  prices  for
agricultural  products?  Even  when  the  strategic
management  goal  is  prescribed  by  law,  e.g.,  the
European Water Framework Directive, the setting
of operational targets in areas such as the desirable
ecological  state  of  a  river  and  the  acceptable
economic impacts of management measures is open
to  interpretation.  Given  uncertainties  in  the  data,
more  than  one  legitimate  interpretation  may  be
compatible with the available body of knowledge.
Different perceptions and conflicts of interest thus
require  participatory  problem  definition  and  goal
setting, although not by experts alone, plus a clear
recognition of the uncertainties in this process.

Choice of measures

in 

the  performance  of 

The  outcomes  of  management  measures  are
uncertain because of the complexity of the system
to  be  managed  and  uncertainties 
the
environmental  and  socioeconomic  developments
that  affect 
the  chosen
management strategies. As a result, robust strategies
that perform well under a wide range of uncertain
but possible future developments might be chosen
over  strategies  that  perform  best  under  certain
conditions but fail if those conditions are not met
(J. C. J. H. Aerts, W. Botzen, A. Van der Veen, J.
Krykrow, and S. Werners, unpublished manuscript).

Ecology and Society 12(2): 30
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art30/

Implementation of measures and monitoring of
performance

New knowledge about system behavior or changes
in environmental and/or socioeconomic conditions
may  demand  changes  in  management  strategies.
When  actors  behave  differently  than  expected,
management  measures 
to
undesirable effects. The relevance and meaning of
indicators  for  success  or  failure  may  be  judged
differently  by  different  groups,  and  thus  lead  to
different  assessments  of 
the  performance  of
management strategies.

sometimes 

lead 

In  the  face  of  these  challenges,  ignorance  and/or
negligence is not an appropriate way to deal with
uncertainty  in  water  management.  Management
first  needs  to  broaden  the  public  debate  and
understanding  of  such  uncertainties  and 
the
consequences of failing to address them or learning
to live with them. Adaptive management explicitly
accounts for such uncertainties and also requires a
basic rethinking of the role of management in an
uncertain and changing world.

ADAPTIVE MANAGEMENT

Adaptive  management  can  more  generally  be
defined  as  a  systematic  process  for  improving
management policies and practices by learning from
the outcomes of management strategies that have
already  been 
implemented.  Adaptive  water
management aims to increase the adaptive capacity
of the water system by putting in place both learning
processes  and  the  conditions  needed  for  learning
processes to take place. As pointed out by Bormann
et al. (1993), “Adaptive management is learning to
manage by managing to learn.” In this case, learning
encompasses a wide range of processes that span
the  ecological,  economic,  and  socio-political
domains in the testing of hard and soft approaches
(Pahl-Wostl  2002,  Gleick  2003).  In  this  respect,
adaptive management emphasizes the importance
of the management process rather than focusing on
goals, but without claiming that the process is an
end 
that
management strategies and even goals may have to
be adapted during the process as new information
becomes  available,  and  that  the  quality  of  the
process,  e.g.,  who  is  involved  and  which  kind  of
information is taken into account, is essential for the
outcomes finally achieved.

It  explicitly 

recognizes 

in 

itself. 

Ecology and Society 12(2): 30
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art30/

Among environmental scientists, adaptive management
is generally best known because of its application
in the field of ecosystem management. The idea of
adaptive  management  has  been  discussed  in
ecosystem  management  for  quite  some  time
(Holling 1978, Walters 1986, Pahl-Wostl 1995, Lee
1999).  Adaptive  management  acknowledges  that
our ability to predict the future key drivers of any
given ecosystem, as well as system behavior and
responses,  is  inherently  limited.  As  a  result,
management  must  include  the  ability  to  change
management practices by incorporating the insights
gained  from  past  experience.  A  most  influential
publication on this topic was the seminal book of
Walters  (1986),  who  claimed 
that  scientific
understanding  will  come  from  the  experience  of
management  as  an  ongoing,  adaptive,  and
experimental  process,  rather  than  through  basic
research or the development of ecological theory.
What has been perceived as the most effective form
of adaptive management, known as active adaptive
management, uses management programs that are
designed 
to  experimentally  compare  selected
policies  or  practices  by  evaluating  alternative
hypotheses about the system being managed (e.g.,
Gunderson et al. 1995, Kiker et al. 2001, Richter et
al.  2003).  This  implies  that  hypotheses  can  be
generated  and 
the  outcomes  of
experiments. However, when extending management
to social-ecological systems, we must recognize that
testing hypotheses about human behavior is not the
same as testing hypotheses about the dynamics of
ecosystems.  Actors  may  change  the  rules  under
which  they  operate  when  they  are  exposed  to  a
model  of  themselves  and  confronted  with  the
possible  consequences  of  their  behavior.  Here,
experiments and the generation of hypotheses may
support processes of social learning that develop the
capacity of the actors to deal with uncertainties and
to  learn  from  experience.  Adaptive  management
supports reflexive governance, and the actors within
the  system  adopt  the  strategy  of  rethinking  and
renegotiating their assumptions.

tested  via 

Adaptive  management  includes  at  its  core  an
assessment and learning cycle. Close inspection of
an  AEAM  (Adaptive  Environmental  Assessment
and Management) learning cycle (Fig. 1) shows that
it can be portrayed as a recasting of the scientific
method of hypothesis testing, coupled interactively
with modeling, such that it is fully integrated with
the formulation of policy and the implementation
or  management  of  action  plans  based  on  policy.
Hypotheses refer to working assumptions that make

it  possible  to  structure  arguments  and  the  policy
debate. Modeling permits careful elaboration of the
system structure and quantitative relations implied
in hypotheses such that participants in the process
can  explore  the  dynamic  implications  of  each
hypothesis under different scenarios. Policy within
the scientific context is seen more as an expression
of how to test the hypotheses or questions generated
during  assessment.  This  experimental  framework
relieves  decision  makers  of  the  responsibility  to
deliver  policies  as  “solutions,”  but  it  challenges
them  to  join  the  experiment  and  test,  rather  than
defend, assumptions. Getting stuck with a policy,
even  one  that  started  as  a  good  policy,  strangles
innovation and understanding in a changing world.
Therefore, striving to answer good questions, i.e.,
inquiry,  is  as  important  as  implementing  good
policy, i.e., management. The latter should be part
of the former, and vice versa.

To  take  into  account  the  different  kinds  of
uncertainties (see Section 2) and to implement and
sustain the capacity for change, the whole process
of policy development and implementation requires
a number of steps that are part of an iterative cycle
as represented in Fig. 2. All of these steps should be
participatory. In the definition of the problem (0),
different perspectives need to be taken into account.
The design of policies (1) should include scenario
analyses  to  identify  key  uncertainties  and  find
strategies that perform well under different possible,
but initially uncertain, future developments; this is
preferable to searching for the best strategy for very
specific  conditions,  e.g.,  climate,  because  that
strategy may not perform well if those conditions
are not met. Policies must be understood as semi-
open experiments that require a careful evaluation
of  potential  positive  or  negative 
feedback
mechanisms by planning and implementing other
related  policies  (1,  2).  Decisions  should  be
evaluated  in  part  by  how  much  it  would  cost  to
reverse  them.  Large-scale  infrastructure  or  rigid
regulatory frameworks increase the costs of change,
but costs may also be related to a loss of trust and
credibility if uncertainties and the possible need for
changes  are  not  addressed  by  the  competent
authority during policy development (3). The design
of monitoring programs should include processes
that  can  pinpoint  undesirable  developments  at  an
early  stage.  This  might  imply  different  kinds  of
knowledge, including community-based monitoring
systems (3). The policy cycle must include support
for institutional settings in which actors assess the
performance  of  management  strategies  and

Ecology and Society 12(2): 30
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art30/

Fig. 1. Iterative process of model development linked to policy formulation whose evaluation stimulates
reassessment of the problem (after Sterman 2000).

implement  change  if  needed  (4).  Continuous
replanning and reprogramming based on the results
of  monitoring 
should  be
institutionalized (4).

evaluation 

and 

Moberg and Galaz (2005) introduce “adaptive co-
management”  as  a  new  term  that  emphasizes  the
collaboration  between  agencies,  researchers,  and
local stewards and contrast this concept with that of
adaptive  management,  which  they  refer  to  as
embracing  a  top-down  governance  approach.  We
do not consider it necessary to introduce yet another
term  and  concept.  The  definition  of  adaptive
management is broad enough as it stands and in no

way  excludes  a  polycentric  governance  approach
(D. Huitema, W. Egas, S. Möllenkamp, E. Mostert,
C.  Pahl-Wostl,  and  R.  Yalcin,  unpublished
manuscript). Its implementation should be based on
a  participatory  assessment  and  implementation
process  that  takes  into  account  the  particular
institutional, cultural, and socioeconomic contexts
in a given river basin.

Furthermore,  research  shows  the  importance  of
managing uncertainty and unexpected shocks to a
system  by  using  a  more  flexible  and  diverse
management style. For example, Fraser et al. (2005)
base  their  view  of  the  importance  of  portfolio

Ecology and Society 12(2): 30
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art30/

Fig. 2. Iterative cycle of policy development and implementation in adaptive management.

in 

management  and  diversifaction 
reducing
vulnerability  in  agro-environmental  systems  on
panarchy theory (Gunderson and Holling 2002). A
number of researchers (J. C. J. H. Aerts, W. Botzen,
A.  Van  der  Veen,  J.  Krykrow,  and  S.  Werners,
unpublished  manuscript;  J.  C.  J.  H.  Aerts  and  S.
Werners, unpublished manuscript) are working on
concepts  applicable  to  portfolio  management  and
diversification  in  water  management.  Extensive
literature  on  diversification  in  management  as  a
means  of  becoming  more  adaptive  is  found  in
financial research (e.g., Markovitz 1952), and more
recently in biodiversity research (Figge 2004).

transition 

Finally, integrating learning with changes in policy
is possible only if the policies already implemented
can  be  changed.  The 
to  adaptive
management  relies  on  increasing  the  adaptive
capacity  of  the  (water)  system  by  meshing
management  and  policy  with  learning.  Adaptive
management  aims  to  design  integrated  systems
based on an understanding of the interdependence
between technologies, economic factors, and formal
and informal institutions. The problem to be tackled
is to increase the ability of the whole system to learn
about  and  change  the  context  within  which  it
responds  to  change,  rather  than  reacting  to

Ecology and Society 12(2): 30
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art30/

undesirable  impacts  of  change.  Institutionalizing
this  learning  capability  over  the  long  term  will
secure the adaptive foundation of management.

Adaptiveness  suggests  a  diversity  of  means
available to address a challenge. Confining one’s
approach, even in the attempt to become adaptive,
to  a  single  method  could  constrain  adaptiveness
over  the  longer  term.  There  is  no  ideal  path  to
adaptiveness.  Choosing 
the  most  appropriate
management approach may depend on how well it
satisfies certain criteria at this stage of development
(see van Eeten and Roe 2002 for other alternatives).
For  example,  one  may  ask  if  current  water
management regimes that have evolved under a very
different  management  paradigm  possess 
the
structural  requirements  needed 
implement
adaptive management approaches.

to 

ADAPTIVE MANAGEMENT REGIMES

to 

technologies, 

interconnected  and  essential 

A  management  regime  is  here  referred  to  as  the
whole  complex  of 
institutions,
environmental  factors,  and  paradigms  that  are
highly 
the
functioning  of  the  management  system  that  is
targeted to fulfill a societal function such as water
supply  or  flood  protection.  It  is  noted  that
“institution” is used to refer to the formal, e.g., laws,
and informal, e.g., norms, rules that determine the
behavior of actors, but not to the physical structures
that are referred to as organizations. Because of their
high  interconnectedness  and  internal  logic,  it  is
assumed that the individual elements of the regime
cannot be exchanged arbitrarily. A transition from
centralized  water 
to
decentralized  technologies  at  household  scale
requires, for example, major changes in the roles of
actors,  legal  regulations,  consumer  habits,  etc.
(Panebianco and Pahl-Wostl 2006). How a regime’s
performance is influenced by these factors and their
relationships can be one basis of analysis.

technologies 

treatment 

Another approach is to assess a regime’s capacity
to be adaptive based on how well its performance
meets certain requirements that can be summarized
as follows:
 

l  New  information  must  be  available  and/or
collected,  e.g.,  performance  indicators  and
indicators  of  change  that  may  lead  to
desirable  or  undesirable  effects,  and
monitored over appropriate time scales that

are generally longer than those mandated by
short-term political objectives.
 

l  The actors in the management system must
be able to process this information and draw
meaningful conclusions from it. This can be
achieved if a learning cycle and negotiation
process  unite  the  actors  in  all  phases  of
assessment,  policy 
implementation,  and
monitoring. Because actors pursue different
and changing political interests, transparency
and  leadership  are  of  major  importance  to
make such multiparty negotiation processes
work.
 

to  all 

l  Change must be possible in ways that are open
and  understandable 
the  actors.
Managers must be able to implement change
based  on  new  information,  processed  in  a
transparent manner, that makes it clear who
decides  how 
change
management  practices  and  what  evidence
was used to make this decision. To do this, it
is  necessary  to  strike  a  balance  between
continuity  and  flexibility,  because  some
management strategies may take one or more
decades to be implemented and tested.

and  when 

to 

important  question 

  An 
is  whether  current
management regimes allow the implementation of
management approaches that meet the requirements
listed above. If the regimes evolved under another
management paradigm, then this is probably not the
case. Some structural requirements that are likely
to make a system adaptive have been summarized
in  Table  1.  This  table  contrasts  two  regimes  that
differ significantly in terms of five characteristics
in the following table (Pahl-Wostl et al. 2005, Pahl-
Wostl 2007b). Regime typologies generally reject
the idea of an infinite variety of approaches and are
based on the assumption that management regimes
can be classified into different groups based on some
internal  logic  of  coherent  characteristics.  The
characteristics of integrated adaptive regimes are to
be  regarded  as  working  hypotheses,  because  the
change toward more adaptive regimes is slow and
available  empirical  evidence  is  limited.  One
possible  reason  for  this  lack  of  innovation  is  the
strong  interdependence  of  the  factors  stabilizing
current  management  regimes.  One  cannot,  for
example,  move  easily 
to
participatory  management  practices  without
changing  the  whole  approach  to  information  and
risk  management.  Hence,  research  is  urgently

top-down 

from 

needed to better understand the interdependence of
key elements of water management regimes and the
dynamics  of  transition  processes,  so  that  we  can
compare  and  evaluate  alternative  management
regimes  and  implement  and  support  transition
processes if required.

The transition from a prediction-and-control to an
integrated adaptive regime is difficult. One reason
for  this  is  the  obstacles  that  impede  the  practical
implementation of adaptive management, such as
the  high  costs  of  information  gathering  and
monitoring, resistance from managers who may fear
increased transparency and loss of control, political
risks because of the uncertainty of future benefits,
the lack of stable funding, and fear of failure (Lee
1993). In an analysis of the implementation of the
adaptive  management  framework  in  the  Florida
Everglades,  Gunderson  (1999)  identified  three
major barriers to the successful implementation of
adaptive  management:  inflexibile  social  systems,
ecological  systems  that  lack  resilience,  and  the
technical  challenges  associated  with  designing
experiments.

Institutional  challenges  can  also  restrict 
the
usefulness  of  adaptive  management  approaches.
For  example,  Lee  (1993)  identifies  complicated
social  dynamics  and  institutional  rigidities  as
possible barriers to the successful application of an
adaptive management approach. Institutional needs
for  information  are  an  associated  feature  here.
Learning  is  information-intensive  and  requires
active  stakeholder  participation  (Margoluis  and
Salafsky  1998).  The  level  of  cooperation  that  is
required  to  gather  the  information  needed  for
adaptive management indicates that many different
stakeholders need to maintain a commitment to the
learning process.

To initiate the transition to adaptive management,
there must be widespread dissatisfaction with the
current  or  anticipated  performance  of  existing
management strategies, those involved must have
the  ability  to  detect  and  monitor  potential  gaps
between  the  achieved  and  desired  goals  of  the
current  management  system,  and  those  involved
must be willing to change. In this type of process,
the  initial  phase  is  particularly  crucial,  and  the
development  of  informal  actor  networks  can
contribute  to  success  (Olsson  et  al.  2006,  Pahl-
Wostl  et  al.  2006).  An  alternative  perspective  on
policy and change is necessary in situations in which
social  learning  processes  are  precursors  to  more
adaptive management regimes.

Ecology and Society 12(2): 30
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art30/

PROCESSES OF CHANGE AND THE ROLE
OF SOCIAL LEARNING

The role of social learning in understanding
and managing change

Why is social learning needed in the transition to
adaptive water management? 

As pointed out in the previous section, there is often
a mutual dependence among regime elements such
as  technical  infrastructure,  e.g.,  large  technical
infrastructure for flood protection; citizen behavior,
e.g.,  expectations  regarding  safety  in  floodplains,
risk  perception;  and  engineering  rules  of  good
practice. In many cases they have co-evolved over
a long period of time. Mutual relations of this type
can develop into pathological path dependence or
so-called  “lock-in”  situations  that  block  changes
toward  new  resource  management  schemes  and
require  collective  learning  and  decision-making
processes  (Pahl-Wostl  2002).  To  escape  lock-in,
actors  need  to  learn  to  recognize  how  their  own
frames  of  reference  influence  and  constrain  their
thinking  and  that  other  legitimate  frames  of
reference exist. Collective action and the resolution
of  conflicts  require  that  people  recognize  their
interdependence and their differences and learn to
deal with them constructively. Mutual recognition
of  shared  paradigms  can  open  the  door  to
compromise. The different groups need to learn and
increase  their  awareness  of  their  biophysical
environment  and 
the  complexity  of  social
interactions. This does not imply that a consensus
must  be  achieved,  but  what  is  required  is  the
development of a minimum level of trust as a basis
for transparent and efficient communication. Social
learning  in  river  basin  management  is  needed  to
develop  and  sustain  the  capacity  of  different
authorities, experts, interest groups, and the public
to manage their river basins in a sustainable way
and balance multiple and competing interests for the
benefit of the social-ecological system as a whole.

Social learning for adaptive management

A  concept  for  social  learning  in  river  basin
management has been developed in the context of
the European project HarmoniCOP (Harmonizing
COllaborative  Planning).  The  main  objectives  of
HarmoniCOP (www.harmonicop.info)  were 
to
increase  the  understanding  of  participatory  river
basin  management  in  Europe;  generate  practical,
useful information about and improve the scientific

Ecology and Society 12(2): 30
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art30/

Table  1.  Ideal-typical  characterizations  of  a  prediction-and-control  and  an  integrated  adaptive  water
management regime.

Characteristic

Prediction-and-control regime

Integrated adaptive regime

Governance structure

Sectoral integration

Scale of analysis and
operation

Information management

Governance is centralized and
hierarchical, with narrow stakeholder
participation.

Sectors are separately analyzed,
resulting in policy conflicts and the
emergence of chronic problems.

Transboundary problems arise when
river sub-basins are the exclusive scale
of analysis and management.

Governance is polycentric and horizontal, with
broad stakeholder participation.

Cross-sectoral analysis identifies emergent
problems and integrates policy implementation.

Transboundary issues are addressed by multiple
scales of analysis and management.

Understanding is fragmented by gaps
and the failure to integrate information
sources that are proprietary.

Comprehensive understanding is achieved by
open, shared information sources that fill gaps
and facilitate integration.

Infrastructure

A massive, centralized infrastructure has
single sources of design, power, and
delivery.

A decentralized infrastructure on an appropriate
scale has diverse sources of design, power, and
delivery.

Finances and risk

Financial resources are concentrated in
structural protection, i.e., sunk costs.

Financial resources are diversified using a broad
set of private and public financial instruments.

base of social learning and the role of information
and communication technology tools in river basin
management; and support the implementation of the
European  Water  Framework  Directive  The
approach  adopted  by  the  HarmoniCOP  project  is
characterized  by  a  broad  understanding  of  social
learning  that  is  rooted  in  the  more  interpretative
strands of the social sciences. Figure 3 represents
the  framework  for  social  learning  developed  to
account for learning processes in actor networks in
water  resources  management  (Pahl-Wostl  2002,
Craps et al. 2003, Bouwen and Taillieu 2004). The
framework is structured into context, process, and
outcomes,  plus  a  feedback  loop  to  account  for
change  in  a  cyclic  and  iterative  learning  process.
The context refers to the governance structure and
the natural environment in a river basin. To improve
the state of the environment implies in practice most
often  a  change  in  the  governance  structure.  The
process refers to multiparty interactions in formal
or informal negotiations; processes of this type are
at the heart of iterative policy cycles (see Fig. 2).

Social learning is assumed to occur at two levels:
(1) at short to medium time scales, it occurs at the
level of processes between actors, and (2) at medium
to long time scales, at the level at which structural
context shifts the governance structure.

One distinct feature is the emphasis on relational
processes,  which  takes  into  account  the  fact  that
dealing with factual information about a problem is
always  embedded  in  a  context  of  negotiated
meaning.

The  process  concept  that  refers  to  multiparty
interactions in actor networks has two pillars (Fig.
3).  They  relate  to  the  processing  of  factual
information  about  a  problem, 
i.e.,  content
management, and engaging in processes of social
exchange, 
involvement.  Social
involvement refers to essential elements of social
processes, such as the framing of the problem, the
management  of  the  boundaries  between  different
stakeholder  groups,  the  type  of  ground  rules  and

social 

i.e., 

Ecology and Society 12(2): 30
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art30/

Fig. 3. Conceptual framework for social learning in resources management. In the center are multiparty
processes that are influenced by the context in which they are embedded and that produce outcomes that
may lead to changes in the context, and thus to a cyclic and iterative long-term process of change.

negotiation  strategies  chosen,  or  the  role  of
leadership in the process. As an example, the role
of framing is explained in more detail.

Framing 

During the initial stages of dealing with a problem,
the  framing  and  reframing  of  a  problem  domain
determine  the  direction  of  the  overall  process.
Frames  may  be  derived  from  the  culture,  social
roles, scientific disciplines, etc. Actors have frames
that determine how they make sense of and interpret

their  physical  and 

information  and 
social
environment. Differences in how an issue is framed
are  among  the  key  reasons  for  problems  in
communication  and  entrenched  conflicts  among
actors.  The  framing  of  an  issue  includes,  for
example, what is at stake, who should be included,
and  which  roles  the  different  actors  should  play.
Processes  of  framing  and  reframing  are  essential
elements  of  group  social  dynamics  during  the
negotiation of the meaning of key issues such as the
goals to be achieved or how to measure management
success.  Experienced  negotiators  know 
that

powerful  actors  often  impose  their  frames  or
interpretations  of  an  issue  onto  a  process.  A
relational practice may be a moderated role-playing
game or policy exercise in which actors are willing
to reflect and discuss their own perspectives as well
as listen to others. This type of social learning does
not necessarily lead to consensus, but develops the
ability to deal with differences constructively when
transparency makes clear everyone's intentions.

A  central  hypothesis  of  the  concept  of  social
learning  is  that  social  involvement  and  the
management of content are strongly interdependent
and cannot be separated. The overall process aims
to  improve  both  technical  qualities,  such  as  the
improvement of the state of the environment, and
relational  qualities,  such  as  an  increase  in  the
capacity of a stakeholder group to manage a problem
and/or institutional change. This leads as well to a
different  interpretation  of  the  role  of  information
and  of  information  and  communication  tools  and
the  ability  of  an  actor  network  to  use  new
information  in  social  learning  processes  and  to
determine collective action. Knowledge relevant for
decision  making  cannot  be  reduced  to  objective
facts devoid of context and subjective interpretation.
The  development  of  joint  interpretations  and  the
implementation  of  collective  action  need 
to
integrate tacit knowledge, which is not externalized
and codified and can thus only be shared through
joint  activities  that  require  physical  proximity
(Nonaka  1991).  Participatory  methods  such  as
group model building and role-playing games are
based on relational practices and can thus support
social learning in actor groups (Pahl-Wostl and Hare
2004,  Maurel  et  al.  2007).  Such 
learning
environments  are  perceived  to  be  crucial  for  the
adaptive  governance  of  social-ecological  systems
(Folke  et  al.  2005,  Pahl-Wostl  2005).  Hence,  an
entirely  new  element  of  monitoring  refers  to  the
quality  of  the  communication  process  in  actor
networks  and  the  appropriateness  of  the  chosen
institutional setting.

Such  multi-actor  processes  are  embedded  in  a
structural  governance  context  that  has  a  strong
influence and may constrain or facilitate learning
processes (Tippett et al. 2005).

Ecology and Society 12(2): 30
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art30/

Toward guidance for managing change

The  discussion  in  the  previous  section  on  social
learning in actor networks developed the image of
dynamic  and  multilevel  policy  arenas  and
highlighted  the  fact  that  there  may  be  barriers  to
change, given the importance of context and path
dependence. How can we guide and manage change
to overcome such barriers?

As  highlighted  in  Fig.  3,  decisions  and  the
management of water resources do not take place
in  isolation,  but  are  rather  complex  political
processes  that  take  shape  at  different  semi-
autonomous  political 
this
understanding to concrete political actions it may
be  useful  to  distinguish  the  following  levels
explicitly (Pahl-Wostl et al. 2006):
 

levels.  To 

link 

l  The  context  level  incorporates  the  wider
political  and  institutional  environment  that
determines the governance structure.
 

l  The network level refers to the policy arenas
that  determine  the  participating  actors  and
type of institutions, i.e., who is in and who is
out  of  the  process,  and  thus  also  to  the
boundaries and framing of the problems and
solutions taken into account.
 

l  The  social  interaction  or  game  level  deals
with  the  institutions  and  rules  that  shape
individual behavior and collective negotiation
and 
learning  and  decision-making
processes.  Such  interactions  are  referred  to
here as games in which rules determine the
positions of the actors, the actions they can
take, etc.

the 

  Understanding  how,  at  the  levels  of  context,
networks, and games, actors and institutions create
perceptions and make use of tools is critical for the
adaptive  management  of  water  resources.  The
hierarchical  levels  described  are  not  controlled
through  top-down  authority,  but  operate  semi-
independently through sets of interactions among
variables operating on similar planes. For example,
the context level would refer to decision spaces for
adaptive  management  operating  over  decades,
whereas the game level would shape management
options  over  weeks  or  months.  The  coupling
between the various levels shapes the outcome of

Ecology and Society 12(2): 30
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art30/

decisions about water management and investments
and hence determines the adaptive capacity of the
water sector or of a specific river basin.

strongly  influence  policy  development  and
implementation, an influence that should be
made explicit.

These ideas form the basis of a coherent framework
for analyzing the political context within which an
adaptive capacity needs to be developed for river
basin management. Table 2 summarizes 12 political
actions that actors need to consider if they wish to
develop adaptive capacity for the management of a
river  basin.  These  actions  require  active  social
learning that involves perceptions, tools, actors, and
institutions at the context, network, and game levels.
In  the  following  subsections  the  different  actions
are described in more detail.

The context level 

The context level refers to the wider context within
which river basin management takes shape. It refers
to societal views, national constitutions and laws,
the approaches and tools used for management, and
the existing landscape of actors and institutions that
is  formed  over  long  periods  of  time.  It  typically
affects  the  management  of  several  river  basins
because  it  generally  constrains  and  determines
practices at larger spatial scales, such as countries
or socioeconomic regions. The two main activities
that take place at the context level are:

l 

l 

shaping and developing. Actors at the context
level  can  shape  the  context  and  discourse
(Olsson et al. 2006) within which networks
are  managed  and  games  are  conducted  by
using opportunities to change existing water
policies.  New  tools  or  mechanism  can  be
developed that can change the way networks
and  policy  actors  find  solutions  to  water
allocation problems.
 
grouping and creating. Stakeholders in river
basins and at national levels often cluster in
different  groups  that  hold  similar  views  or
interests.  Creating  or  (re-)grouping  actors
either at national levels or within a river basin
can help to change the way a policy network
is managed or functions. Although different
actors can cluster in different ways, another
option 
to  create  new  (groups  of)
institutions. This often happens at the national
level when a new water policy is developed
and the existing institutional setup needs to
be  brought 
the  policy.
Institutions also refer to social norms that may

line  with 

is 

into 

 The network level

to 

It  pertains 

The network level refers primarily to the provincial
context  of  river  basin  management,  even  though
basins  span  continents. 
the
relationships  established  between  interdependent
institutions and how they do or do not cooperate.
The context level determines how the network level
will be formed and function, and in turn the network
level  determines  how  organizations  will  play  the
game, i.e., their approach to decision making and
their  attitudes  to  new  tools  for  river  basin
management.  The  network  level  is  formed  over
years and usually applies to the management of a
regional river basin. At the network level, the actors
focus on:

l 

l 

reframing  and  selecting.  Social  learning
includes the reframing of problems to make
sense of available information and assess its
use in adaptive river basin management. The
network can also be used as a tool to bring
forward ideas and reframe river management
problems  into  a  more  manageable  form.
Traditional  instruments,  such  as  existing
regulations used for river basin management,
may not be very effective within a network;
instead,  instruments  must  be  selected  and
altered  to  fit  the  frame  of  reference  of  the
network. The tools selected and adapted for
the network depend on the actors that make
up the network and the relationships that exist
between the actors (Kickert et al. 1999).
 
activating  and  reforming.  Sometimes  new
actors are activated, i.e., created or brought
into a network to carry out functions needed
to manage the network. New actors can be
introduced  by  setting  up  or  reorganizing  a
commission, recruiting them, or bringing in
an advisor (Kickert et al. 1999). For example,
an association of business owners could be
created  to  take  part  in  public  discussions
about floodplain management to ensure that
the interests of the business community are
represented. Introducing a new party into a
network  does  not  automatically  solve
problems and create new ideas; rather, new
ideas  arise  as  a  result  of  the  interactions
between the new and existing members of a

Ecology and Society 12(2): 30
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art30/

Table 2. Water management hierarchies for adaptive management.

Hierarchical levels

Perceptions

Tools

Context level

Network level

Game level

Shaping

Reframing

Convenanting

Developing

Selecting

Using

Actors

Grouping

Activating

Switching

Institutions

Creating

Reforming

Arranging

network. Reframing problems through such
interactions  will  lead  to  actual  reformation
through action. For example, institutions that
are  created  or  activated  can  be  part  of  the
reforming  process  in  a  network.  Network
management steers the process of reforming
as perceptions shift and actors enter and leave
the network.

 The game level

Networks, which are the patterns of relationships
between actors, are the context in which games take
place. At the same time, games change and influence
the  shape  of  networks.  Actors  within  networks
choose  strategies,  i.e.,  policy-making  processes,
that  seem  rational  according  to  the  network  they
interact with, their individual goals, and the overall
context of the policy-making process. Furthermore,
the  actors  driving  river  basin  management  at  the
game  level  are  influenced  by  other  forms  of
management,  e.g.,  agricultural  management,  and
the relationships developed in the network through
present  and  past  interactions.  A  characteristic
feature of a game is that the result derives from the
interactions between the strategies of all the actors
involved.  The  rules  of  the  game  interactions  put
constraints on actors but are at the same time the
product of their interactions (Kickert et al. 1999).
The  game 
individuals  and
organizations that make decisions over periods of
several months. Their essential activities include:

includes 

level 

l 

covenanting and using. Covenanting refers to
a management strategy aimed at improving
the consistency of the decisions made in the
game  by  exploring  and  consolidating  the

l 

perceptions of the actors involved (Klijn and
Teisman 1997). The covenanting concept is
used to emphasize that specialized actors, e.
g., network managers, have the potential to
enrich new initiatives. These actors may need
to be trained to use the tools they manipulate
to effectively play the game. For example, a
tool  kit  for  environmental  flows  can  be
developed to guide river basin management,
but it may be of little use unless the actors are
trained in how to apply the knowledge from
the tool kit. This learning can evolve over time
through  interactions  with  other  actors  or
through active training courses.
 
switching on and arranging. Policy-making
processes  can  be  improved  by  figuratively
switching on specific participants. Selective
activation  demands  that  managers  assess
which  actors  are  essential  at  any  given
moment in the policy process, whether or not
they should be involved, and how to involve
them.  The 
through
activating and deactivating actors depends on
choosing the appropriate actors, as well as the
willingness and ability of actors to invest time
and resources in a policy process. Arranging
refers  to  the  capacity  of  the  participants
involved  to  develop  platforms  on  which
games can be played and to their ability to
develop  or  use 
interaction.
Arrangement as a management activity is the
art of linking interdependent actors in such a
way that rearrangements do not result in high
transaction  costs  (Kickert  1999).  Different
actors may be brought in or new relationships
forged  to  change  the  status  quo  and  move
forward on an issue.

success  achieved 

rules 

for 

CONCLUSIONS AND CHALLENGES

A range of strong arguments supports the claim for
a  paradigm  shift  in  water  management.  The
emphasis on reducing complexity, externalizing the
human dimension, and designing technical systems
that can be controlled has resulted in quite rigid and
inflexible management systems that do not perform
well  in  times  of  uncertainty  and  change.  To
implement integrated management approaches that
take into account the complexity of the systems to
be managed requires a change in the understanding
of what management implies, how and which kinds
of  uncertainties  are  addressed,  and  how  risks  are
managed.  Complex  social-ecological  systems
cannot  be  predicted  and  controlled,  and  a  more
adaptive approach is required.

However, integrated and adaptive water management
approaches  cannot  be 
implemented  without
profound  structural  changes.  In  industrialized
countries  with  a  strong  prediction-and-control
tradition of water management, a complete system
redesign  comprising  technologies,  organizational
structure, regulations, and thus a major transition is
needed. In many developing countries, the base for
management has yet to be developed. The changes
needed are no less profound, but these countries face
entirely different problems. Many countries suffer
from a lack of political stability and the absence of
any  reliable  administration.  The  knowledge  base
and  monitoring  capacity  for  implementing  water
management  are  often  missing.  Building  the
capacity to manage water has to be seen in a larger
context  of  socioeconomic  development.  Given
these  uncertainties,  an  adaptive  and  flexible
management  approach  seems  to  be  mandatory.
These  countries  need  to  develop  and  implement
management strategies tailored to their needs and
the political and environmental context rather than
trying  to  adopt  blueprints  for  institutions  or
technologies  that  may  be  entirely  unsuitable  for
their situation.

We  argue  that  change  and  the  design  and
implementation of integrated and adaptive, and thus
sustainable, water management regimes cannot be
brought  about  by  top-down  implementation  but
require a process of learning and change. This can
be explored by recognizing how decisions evolve
at the context, network, and game levels. Dynamic
and flexible actor platforms are needed that allow
different  perspectives  and  the  interpretation  and

Ecology and Society 12(2): 30
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art30/

negotiation  of 
the  different  dimensions  of
sustainability. As numerous analyses have shown,
learning often occurs in shadow networks outside
the  formal  water  management  context.  We  argue
that  learning  cycles  should  be  implemented  as  a
recognized and important element of the established
management  regime.  Social  learning  is  of  major
importance  to  initiate  change  in,  to  build,  and  to
sustain the adaptive capacity of water management
systems.  A  range  of  knowledge  gaps  still  exists.
Nevertheless, 
these
recommendations  for  policy  makers  to  develop,
implement,  and  sustain  adaptive  management
practices to support sustainable water management
in times of increased uncertainty because of global
change:
 

is  possible 

to  make 

it 

l  The complex social-ecological nature of river
basin  environments  and 
inherent
uncertainties associated with their management
have  to  be  taken  into  account  in  policy
development and implementation.
 

the 

l  Management strategies should be robust and
perform well under a range of possible, but
uncertain,  future  developments.  This  might
imply  the  need  for  a  diversification  in
management measures.
 

l  The  design  of  transparent  and  open  social
learning  processes  is  a  key  requirement  of
sustainable water management regimes.
 

l  Effort has to be devoted to building trust and
social  capital  for  problem  solving  and
collaborative governance.
 

l  An  increase  in,  and  maintenance  of,  the
flexibility  and  adaptive  capacity  of  water
management  regimes  should  be  a  primary
management goal.
 

l  Entrenched  perceptions  and  beliefs  block
innovation  and  change.  Space  has  to  be
provided  for  creative  and  out-of-the-box
thinking and experiments.
 

l  There  is  a  significant  need  to  train  a  new
generation of water management practitioners
skilled  in  participatory  system  design  and
implementation.

the  capacity 

Implementing these recommendations would help
develop 
to  devise  alternative
management  strategies  and  to  choose  between
alternatives based on sound deliberation. There are
reasons to be optimistic that these recommendations
will fall on fertile ground. For a long time, discourse
on radical change in water management has taken
place in shadow networks. However, the political
recognition  and  increased  awareness  of  climate
change and unprecedented experiences with failures
of water management have opened up windows of
opportunity in which the willingness to experiment
with new approaches is much higher than it used to
be. Future work on comparative analyses will still
need to develop a sound classification of problems
and associated uncertainties and processes suitable
for 
implementation  of
management approaches that take into account the
characteristics  of  the  environmental  and  societal
context in which they are embedded.

the  development  and 

Responses to this article can be read online at:
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art30/responses/

Acknowledgments:

We would like to thank our partners in the NeWater
project for numerous inspiring discussions on the
themes elaborated in this paper, and Georg Holtz
and Art Dewulf for their critical review of an earlier
draft of the current paper. The work presented in
this  paper  was  financially  supported  by  the
European  Commission  (Contract  No.  511179  -
NEWATER). 

LITERATURE CITED

Allen,  P.,  and  J.  McGlade.  1985.  Modeling
complexity: 
the  dynamics  of  discovery  and
exploitation in a fisheries example. Pages 49-76 in 
I.  Prigogine  and  M.  Sangliere,  editors.  Laws  of
nature and human conduct. Task Force on Research,
Information  and  Study  of  Science,  Brussels,
Belgium.

Bormann,  B.  T.,  P.  G.  Cunningham,  M.  H.
Brookes,  V.  W.  Manning,  and  M.  W.  Collopy. 
1993.  Adaptive  ecosystem  management  in  the
Pacific  Northwest.  U.S.  Forest  Service,  General

Ecology and Society 12(2): 30
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art30/

Technical Report PNW-GTR-341.

Bouwen,  B.,  and  T.  Taillieu.  2004.  Multiparty
collaboration as social learning for interdependence:
developing  relational  knowing  for  sustainable
natural 
Journal  of
Community  and  Applied  Social  Psychology 
14:137-153.

resource  management. 

Committee  on  Grand  Canyon  Monitoring  and
Research. 1999. Downstream: adaptive management
of  Glen  Canyon  Dam  and  the  Colorado  River
ecosystem;  report  to  National  Research  Council. 
National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., USA.
Available online at: http://www.nap.edu/books/030
9065798/html/R1.html.

Craps, M., editor.  2003.  Social  learning  in  river
basin management; report of workpackage 2 of the
HarmoniCOP project. (http://www.harmonicop.uni-
osnabrueck.de/_files/_down/SocialLearning.pdf).

Dewulf, A., M. Craps, R. Bouwen, T. Taillieu, and
C.  Pahl-Wostl.  2005.  Integrated  management  of
natural resources: dealing with ambiguous issues,
multiple actors and diverging frames. Water, Science
and Technology 52:115-124.

Figge, F. 2004. Bio-folio: applying portfolio theory
to  biodiversity.  Biodiversity  and  Conservation 
13:827-849.

Folke, C., T. Hahn, P. Olsson, and J. Norberg. 
2005.  Adaptive  governance  of  social-ecological
systems.  Annual  Review  of  Environment  and
Resources 30:441-473.

Fraser, E. D. G., W. Mabee, and F. Figgre. 2005.
A framework for assessing the vulnerabulity of food
systems to future shocks. Futures  37:465-479.

Funtowicz,  S.  O.,  and  J.  R.  Ravetz.  1990.
Uncertainty  and  quality  in  science  for  policy. 
Kluwer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands.

Galaz,  V.  2005.  Does  the  EC  Water  Framework
Directive  build  resilience?  Harnessing  socio-
ecological 
in  European  water
management. Resilience and Freshwater Initiative
Policy  Paper.  Swedish  Water  House,  Stockholm,
Sweden.

complexity 

Gleick, P. 2003. Global freshwater resources: soft-
path  solutions  for  the  21st  century.  Science 

302:1524-1528.

Global  Water  Partnership-Technical  Advisory
Committee (GWP-TAC). 2000. Integrated water
resources management. TAC Background Papers,
No. 4. GWP, Stockholm, Sweden.

Gunderson,  L.  1999.  Resilience,  flexibility  and
adaptive  management—antidotes  for  spurious
certitude?  Conservation  Ecology  3(1):7.  [online]
URL: http://www.consecol.org/vol3/iss1/art7.

Gunderson,  L.  H.,  and  C.  S.  Holling,  editors. 
2002. Panarchy: understanding transformation in
human  and  natural  systems. 
Island  Press,
Washington, D.C., USA.

Gunderson, L. H., C. S. Holling, and S. S. Light,
editors. 1995. Barriers and bridges to the renewal
of ecosystems and institutions. Columbia University
Press, New York, New York, USA.

Holling, C. S., editor. 1978. Adaptive environmental
assessment  and  management.  John  Wiley,  New
York, New York, USA.

Jeffrey, P., and M. Gearey. 2006. Integrated water
resources  management:  lost  on  the  road  from
ambition 
to  realisation?  Water,  Science  and
Technology 53(1):1-8.

Kickert,  W.  J.  M.,  E.-H.  Klijn,  and  J.  F.  M
Koppenjan.  1999.  Managing  complex  networks:
strategies for the public sector. Sage, London, UK.

Kiker, C. F., J. W. Milon, and A. W. Hodges. 2001.
Adaptive  learning  for  science-based  policy:  the
Everglades  restoration.  Ecological  Economics 
37:403-416.

Klijn, E.-H., and G. R. Teisman. 1997. Strategies
and games in networks. Pages 98-118 in W. J .M.
Kickert,,  E.-H.  Klijn,  and,  J.F.M  Koppenjan,
editors. Managing complex networks: strategies for
the public sector. Sage, London, UK.

Lee,  K.  N.  1993.  Compass  and  gyroscope:
integrating politics and science for the environment. 
Island Press, Washington, D.C., USA.

Lee, K. N., 1999, Appraising adaptive management.
Conservation Ecology 3(2):3.
[online] URL: http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol3/
iss2/art3/.

Ecology and Society 12(2): 30
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art30/

Margoluis, R., and N. Salafsky. 1998. Measures
of  success:  designing,  monitoring  and  managing
conservation  and  development.  Island  Press,
Washington, D.C., USA.

Markowitz, H. 1952. Portfolio selection. Journal
of Finance 17:1.

Maurel, P., M. Craps, F. Cernesson, R. Raymond,
P. Valkering, and N. Ferrand.  2007. Concepts and
methods  for  analysing  the  role  of  IC-tools  in  SL
processes for river basin management. Environmental
Modelling and Software 22:630-639.

conventional 

Moberg, F., and V. Galaz. 2005. Resilience: going
from 
freshwater
management for human and ecosystem compatibility. 
Swedish  Water  House  Policy  Brief,  No.  3.
Stockholm International Water Institute, Stockholm,
Sweden.

to  adaptive 

Morgan,  M.  G.,  and  M.  Henrion.    1990.
Uncertainty: a guide to dealing with uncertainty in
quantitative  risk  and  policy  analysis.  Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK.

Newig, J., C. Pahl-Wostl, and K. Sigel. 2005. The
role of public participation in managing uncertainty
in  the  implementation  of  the  water  framework
directive. European Environment 15:333-343.

Newson, M. 1992. Land, water, and development:
sustainable  management  of  river  basin  systems. 
Routledge, London, UK.

Nonaka, 
company. Harvard Business Review 69:96-104

I.  1991.  The  knowledge-creating

Oberkampf, W. L., J. C. Helton, C. A. Joslyn, S.
F. Wojtkiewicz, and S. Ferson. 2001. Challenge
problems:  uncertainty  in  system  response  given
uncertain  parameters,  Epistemic  Uncertainty
Project. Available online at http://www.sandia.gov/
epistemic/prob.statement.12-01.pdf.

Olsson, P., L. H. Gunderson, S. R. Carpenter, P.
Ryan, L. Lebel, C. Folke, and C. S. Holling. 2006.
Shooting  the  rapids:  navigating  transitions  to
adaptive governance of social-ecological systems.
Ecology and Society 11(1):18 [online] URL: http://
www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol11/iss1/art18/.

Pahl-Wostl,  C.  1995.  The  dynamic  nature  of

Ecology and Society 12(2): 30
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art30/

Technovation 26(9):1090-1100.

Prato,  A.  2003  Adaptive  management  of  large
rivers with special reference to the Missouri River.
Journal  of 
the  American  Water  Resources
Association 39(4):935-946.

Rees,  J.  2002.  Risk  and 
integrated  water
management.  TAC  Background  Papers,  No.  6.
Global Water Partnership, Stockholm, Sweden.

Richter, B. D., R. Mathews, D. L. Harrison, and
R.  Wigington.    2003.  Ecologically  sustainable
water  management:  managing  river  flows  for
ecological 
integrity.  Ecological  Applications 
13:206-224.

Rogers,  P.,  and  A.  Hall.  2003.  Effective  water
governance.  TAC  Background  Papers,  No.  7.
Global Water Partnership, Stockholm, Sweden.

Sterman, J. D. 2000. Business dynamics: systems
thinking  and  modeling  for  a  complex  world. 
McGraw-Hill/Irwin, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Tippet, J., B. Searle, C. Pahl-Wostl, and Y. Rees. 
2005. Social learning in public participation in river
basin  management.  Environmental  Science  &
Policy 8(3):287-299.

van Eeten, M. J. G., and E. Roe. 2002. Ecology,
engineering, and management; reconciling ecosystem
rehabilitation  and  service  reliability.  Oxford
University Press, New York, New York, USA.

Walker, W., P. Harremoës, J. Rotmans, J. Van der
Sluijs, M. Van Asselt, P. Jansen, and M. P. Krayer
von  Krauss.  2003.  Defining  uncertainty:  a
conceptual  basis  for  uncertainty  management  in
model-based  decision 
Journal  of
Integrated Assessment 4(1):5-17.

support. 

Walters,  C.  J.  1986.  Adaptive  management  of
renewable  resources.  McGraw  Hill,  New  York,
New York, USA.

ecosystems:  chaos  and  order  entwined.  Wiley,
Chichester, UK.

Pahl-Wostl, C. 2002. Towards sustainability in the
water sector: the importance of human actors and
processes  of  social  learning.  Aquatic  Sciences 
64:394-411.

Pahl-Wostl,  C.  2006.  The  importance  of  social
learning in restoring the multi-functionality of rivers
and  floodplains.  Ecology  and  Society  11(1):10.
[online] URL: http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol11/
iss1/art10/.

Pahl-Wostl,  C.  2007a.  The 
implications  of
complexity  for  integrated  resources  management.
Environmental Modelling and Software 22:561-569.

Pahl-Wostl, C. 2007b. Transition towards adaptive
management  of  water  facing  climate  and  global
change. Water Resources Management 21(1):49-62.

Pahl-Wostl, C., G. Berkamp. and K. Cross. 2006.
Adaptive  management  of  upland  rivers  facing
global  change:  general 
insights  and  specific
considerations  for  the  Rhone  basin.  Available
online at: http://rosenberg.ucanr.org/documents/
Rosenberg_Paper_Pahl-Wostlcanada.pdf.

Pahl-Wostl,  C.,  T.  Downing,  P.  Kabat,  P.
Magnuszewski,  J.  Meigh,  M.  Schlueter,  J.
Sendzimir,  and  S. Werners.  2005.  Transition  to
adaptive water management; the NeWater Project.
NeWater  Report,  No.  1.  NeWater  Project,
University  of  Osnabrück,  Osnabrück,  Germany.
Available online at: www.newater.info.

Pahl-Wostl, C., and M. Hare. 2004. Processes of
social learning in integrated resources management.
Journal  of  Applied  and  Community  Psychology 
14:193-206.

Pahl-Wostl, C., C. C. Jaeger, S. Rayner, C. Schär,
M. van Assel, D. M. Imboden, and A. Vckovski.
1998.  Regional  integrated  assessment  and  the
problem  of  indeterminacy.  Pages  435-497  in  P.
Cebon,, U. Dahinden, H. C. Davies, D. M. Imboden,
and  C.  C.  Jaeger,  editors.  Views  from  the  Alps:
regional perspectives on climate change. MIT Press,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.

Panebianco,  S.,  and  C.  Pahl-Wostl.  2006.
Modelling  socio-technical 
in
wastewater treatment—a methodological proposal.

transformations 

