84924_JPR_75-90.qxd  12/14/2007  2:44 PM  Page 75

© 2008 Journal of Peace Research,
vol. 45, no. 1, 2008, pp. 75–89
Sage Publications (Los Angeles, London, New Delhi
and Singapore)
DOI 10.1177/0022343307084924

http://jpr.sagepub.com

Peace and Development: Towards 
a New Synthesis*

JON BARNETT
School of Anthropology, Geography and Environmental Studies, 
University of Melbourne

This article develops a theory of peace as freedom that explains some important relationships between
peace  and  development.  It  does  this  by  critically  examining  and  then  synthesizing  Johan  Galtung’s
theory  of  peace  as  the  absence  of  violence  and  Amartya  Sen’s  theory  of  development  as  freedom.
Galtung’s theory of peace is clear on the meaning and causes of direct violence, but vague on the details
of structural violence. Sen’s theory helps overcome many of the problems associated with structural vio-
lence, although its focus on agents and the state tends to downplay the importance of larger-scale politi-
cal and economic processes. In the theory of peace as freedom, peace is defined as, and in praxis is
enlarged  through,  the  equitable  distribution  of  economic  opportunities,  political  freedoms,  social
opportunities, transparency guarantees, protective security and freedom from direct violence. The insti-
tutions required for peace as freedom are considered, and it is suggested that the pluralist state is the
best model for providing and maintaining peace as freedom. Some implications of this theory for exist-
ing and future analyses of the causes of violent conflict are discussed.

Introduction

This  article  is  concerned  with  the  intersec-
tion  of  peace  and  development  theories.
Efforts  to  formally  relate  the  two  concepts
date  back  to  the  rise  of  both  the  idea  of
‘development’ and growth in concern about
nuclear war after World War II.1 Academic
thinking about the intersections of peace and
development  arguably  reached  its  zenith  in
the  1980s  (Galtung,  1989;  Hettne,  1983;
Sørensen, 1985). At the same time, the inter-
national policy community was investigating
similar  issues,  for  example  through  the

* Thanks to three anonymous reviewers and JPR editor Nils
Petter Gleditsch for their extremely helpful suggestions on
ways to improve this article, which was completed with the
assistance  of  an  Australian  Research  Council  Discovery
Grant DP0556977. E-mail: jbarn@unimelb.edu.au.
1 Although thinking about social order (peace) and social
progress  (development)  is  arguably  as  old  as  human
thought itself.

Brandt  (ICIDI,  1983)  and  Palme  (ICDSI,
1982)  reports,  which  investigated  the  eco-
nomic  and  social  opportunity  costs  of  the
military–industrial  complex  and  the  rela-
tionships  between  economic  growth  and
military spending.

These  early  explorations  of  peace  and
development  sought  to  answer  the  question
‘what  kind  of  development  would  facilitate
the  emergence  of  more  peaceful  economic,
social and political structures?’ (Hettne, 1983:
340). To answer this question, Hettne (1983)
and Sørensen (1985) drew from the ‘Another
Development’  view  proposed  by  the  Dag
Hammarskjöld  Foundation  (1975),  which
defined  development  as  need-oriented,  en-
dogenous, self-reliant, ecologically sound and
based  on  structural  transformation. Yet  this,
like  Galtung’s 
‘six  cosmologies’
approach  to  peace  and  development,  is

(1985) 

75

84924_JPR_75-90.qxd  12/14/2007  2:44 PM  Page 76

76

journal of P E A C E R E S E A RC H

volume 45 / number 1 / january 2008

somewhat abstract and offers little in the way
of  steps  towards  transformation. This  article
seeks  to  offer  a  somewhat  more  evidence-
based and policy-oriented answer to Hettne’s
question.

So, there is a history of efforts to link peace
and development. However, since the end of
the Cold War, the concept of ‘peace’ has been
notably absent in the development literature.
In  peace  research,  there  has  been  a  marked
absence  of  any  new  theory  of  peace  beyond
ongoing debates about the democratic peace,
and there has been no theory and almost no
reference to a wider idea of peace that includes
development  issues.  But,  at  the  same  time,
both peace and development researchers have
focused  on  the  causes  and  consequences  of
civil wars. Many of the possible causes identi-
fied  by  peace  research,  such  as  resource
endowments  (de  Soysa,  2000),  poverty
(Fearon & Laitin, 2003), democracy (Hegre 
et  al.,  2001),  rent-seeking  (Weede,  1996),
financial  f lows  (Gartzke  &  Li,  2003),  and
economic and political transitions (Esty et al.,
1999),  are  central  concerns  of  development
studies. Surprisingly, the impacts of civil wars
on  development  are  not  as  central  to  de-
velopment studies as they ought to be (but see
Collier,  2003;  Stewart  &  Fitzgerald,  2001),
although  there  has  been  much  research  into
the causes of and solutions to complex politi-
cal emergencies that involve both violent con-
f lict  and  humanitarian  crises  (Goodhand,
1999).  This  has,  in  turn,  led  to  a  growing
interest  in  the  broader  connections  between
development  and  security  (Duffield,  2001;
Thomas, 2001).

These post-Cold War studies suggest that
there is a conf luence of problems in the world
that  justifies  some  new  thinking  about  the
connections between peace and development
in theory. Weede (1996: 4) also identifies this
conf luence, writing that ‘the problems of eco-
nomic  development  and  prosperity,  social
order and liberty, and international relations
and war are … closely interdependent’. This

conf luence  seems  to  be  more  prevalent  in
developing countries, suggesting a prima facie
case  for  linking  development  with  peace.
Further, as the international community in-
creasingly engages in various interventions to
restore peace and provide humanitarian relief
and reconstruction in conf lict-prone develop-
ing  countries,  the  success  of  these  interven-
tions  to  some  extent  ‘depends  on  how  the
problems  of  “conf lict”  and  “crisis”  and  the
desired goal of “peace” are conceived at a more
general level’ (Nathan, 2000: 188). This latter
argument  suggests  that  there  may  be  some
practical  advantages  to  rethinking  peace  in
terms of the structural conditions – such as are
associated with the development agenda – that
enable it.

This  article  therefore  seeks  to  articulate
some  important  relationships  between  peace
and  development  in  theory.  It  does  this  by
linking  Galtung’s  (1969)  theory  of  ‘peace  as
the  absence  of  violence’  with  Sen’s  (1999)
theory of ‘development as freedom’. A focus
on  these  two  theorists  is  justified,  because
both are recognized as leaders in their respec-
tive fields of peace studies and development
economics – as recognized by their peers,2 and
by the major international awards they have
received.3 Through  this  process,  the  article
constructs a theory of ‘peace as freedom’ that
accommodates  concern  for  both  peace  and
development.

The  theory  of  peace  as  freedom  that  is
developed here is a wider notion of peace that
includes more than the absence of direct phys-
ical violence. However, it does not advocate an
open-ended approach such as that associated
with Galtung’s (1969) classic formulation of
‘structural violence’, which has been criticized

2 According to the ISI Web of Science database, Galtung’s
(1969) Journal of Peace Research article has been cited 160
times in listed journals, while Sen’s (1999) Development as
Freedom has  been  cited  698  times  (checked  on  20
December 2006).
3 Galtung was awarded the Right Livelihood Award (the
‘Alternative  Nobel  Prize’)  in  1987;  Sen  was  awarded  the
Nobel Prize in economics in 1998.

84924_JPR_75-90.qxd  12/14/2007  2:44 PM  Page 77

Jon  Barnett

P E A C E A N D D E V E L O P M E N T

77

for being so broad that ‘violence’ becomes so
ubiquitous  as  to  be  meaningless  (Bufacchi,
2005; Lawler, 1995).4 In contrast, this article
expands the idea of peace to include a limited
set  of  additional  criteria  drawn  from  Sen’s
notion of development as freedom. This offers
a  somewhat  post-hoc  framework  that  may
help  consolidate  existing  findings  from  re-
search on civil conf licts and development. It
may  also  help  systematize  further  empirical
investigations into conf lict and development,
and some suggested ways forward are outlined
prior  to  the  conclusions  of  this  article. The
idea of peace as freedom can also be seen as a
‘boundary  object’  that  facilitates  interfaces
between diverse and often otherwise discon-
nected  intellectual  and  policy  communities
(Star & Griesemer, 1989). It may help bring
peace  and  development  researchers  closer
together. Finally, in constructing its theory of
peace  as  freedom,  this  article  hopes  to  offer
some  of  the  ‘new  theoretical  ideas’  that
Patomäki  (2001:  726)  sees  as  necessary  to
redefine peace research.

Peace According to Galtung

Galtung’s  theory  of  peace  is  based  on  one
underlying  principle  –  that  ‘peace  is  the
absence of violence’ (1969: 167). In this sense,
Galtung’s  is  as  much  a  theory  that  defines
violence  as  it  is  a  theory  about  peace.  This
peace/violence  dualism  tends  to  simplify  the
continuous nature of social conditions to polar
opposites and so lacks sensitivity to the rather
more dialectical (or in Boulding’s [1977] terms
‘evolutionary’) character of social change. So,
a theory of peace may be based not on the con-
tradistinction to violence, but on a statement
of what peace is (as opposed to what it is not).
Galtung’s theory of peace therefore hinges
on  his  definition  of  violence.  Violence,  he

4 Yet,  there  were  some  fascinating  early  attempts  by
Galtung & Høivik (1971), Høivik (1977) and Kohler &
Alcock (1976) to quantify ‘structural violence’ in the form
of measuring loss of life years.

says,  is  ‘the  difference  between  the  potential
and the actual, between what could have been
and  what  is’  (1969:  168). This  is  obviously
appropriate for crude violences that create, say,
physical  harm  to  people’s  bodies  or  mental
harm  to  children,  yet  it  ultimately  requires
some measures of what is possible in order to
determine the extent to which violence occurs.
For example, if we take the life expectancy of
Japanese women and the income of men from
Luxembourg  to  be  the  measure  of  what  is
possible for women, we find that violence acts
on almost all women. Further, the measures
may change, since what is ultimately possible
is determined by the applications of science,
technology and governance, all of which have
pushed  out  the  boundaries  of  possibility  in
most societies over time.

So, what is possible – Galtung’s potential –
is  the  best  that  humans  can  do,  and  anyone
who is not a beneficiary of the best that can be
done is the subject of violence. Yet, if peace is
a  universal  goal,  then  everyone,  everywhere,
now  and  into  the  future,  should  be  able  to
reach the same level of attainment (live as long
as a Japanese woman and be as wealthy as a
male  from  Luxembourg).  In  practice,  this
seems  impossible,  since  the  process  of  accu-
mulation  that  leads  to  highest  standards  of
attainment  may  not  be  sustainably  (I  mean
ecologically)  replicated  in  all  societies.  Given
existing inequalities in income and health (to
continue with just these two metrics), a sus-
tainable  set  of  possibilities  will  require  some
contraction in the levels of attainment of the
wealthy and healthy and an increase in those
for  the  poor,  to  reach  some  point  of  con-
vergence. It follows, then, that pathways to a
universal sustainable set of possibilities can be
construed as violence to those whose current
conditions are above the sustainable possibility.
This is not to say that Galtung’s definition
of violence is not instructive. His intention is
nothing  more  than  to  outline  ‘theoretically
significant  dimensions  of  violence’,  and  he
acknowledges  the  problematic  nature  of  his

84924_JPR_75-90.qxd  12/14/2007  2:44 PM  Page 78

78

journal of P E A C E R E S E A RC H

volume 45 / number 1 / january 2008

criteria  of  ‘potential’  (1969:  168)  and,  in-
deed, the problematic nature of the concept
of ‘peace’ itself (Galtung, 1985). Rather, it is
to say that a theory of violence based on the
difference between the actual and the poten-
tial  is  hard  to  operationalize  at  the  point  at
which peace is more rather than less prevalent
(though this is a point we are very far from,
even  now).  It  also  suggests  that  a  theory  of
violence  based  on  the  differences  between
people here and now may be more instruct-
ive, as it would be based on what is currently
possible.  Further,  such  a  theory  needs  to
explicitly consider what is sustainably possible
for all people given existing resources.

Galtung’s is a theory that speaks more of
structures  than  agents  (Boulding,  1977;
Patomäki, 2001). He explains this as trying to
‘liberate  myself  from  the  built  in  actor-
oriented  perspective  of  so  much  Western
social science’ (1985: 145). His theory of vio-
lence  accommodates  the  military–industrial
complex, for example, but says little about the
choices  that  people  within  these  processes
make; for example, is an unemployed migrant
who joins the army in the absence of alterna-
tive career prospects an agent of violence? If
(s)he  smokes  and  this  causes  her  to  have  a
reduced life expectancy (a difference between
the actual and potential), is this a product of
structure (circumstance, environment, tobacco
marketing) or agency (personal choice)? These
questions  point  to  the  limitations  of  many
theories  of  violence,  which  tend  to  be  con-
cerned with structures rather than agents. Yet,
as much as structures inf luence agents, agents
can also change structures, and so there is a
need to seek to situate individuals in relation
to the process and f lows that inf luence them,
and which they ref lexively inf luence in turn
(Giddens, 1984).

Galtung (1969) decomposed violence into
two types: personal and structural.5 Personal
violence occurs when there is an actor and/or
a  tangible  action  such  as  war  or  domestic 
violence  that  does  injury  to  people.  This

sovereignty.  Galtung  calls 

speaks to the common view of ‘peace’ as the
absence  of  war  and  other  violations  of
personal 
the
absence  of  this  direct  violence  ‘negative
peace’. This is the most straightforward and
least problematic aspect of his theory of peace
(leaving aside the question of ‘just war’).

Galtung’s theory of peace says that there
is more to violence than the absence of direct
violence. Structural violence, he says, is vio-
lence caused not by direct somatic harm, but
by systems of unequal power that structure
unequal  life  chances  such  that  a  person’s
potential  is  unrealized.  So,  in  that  racial  or
sexual  discrimination,  declining  terms  of
trade,  malnutrition,  famine  and  unemploy-
ment all affect people’s life chances such that
realization  of  their  potential  is  constrained,
these (and many other processes) can be said
to  be  forms  of  structural  violence.  These
structures have histories and geographies and
manifest  themselves  on  different  people,
through  different  systems,  in  various  ways.
Structural  violence,  then,  is  about  social
justice  and  equality  (called  positive  peace),
and a limitation to Galtung’s theory is that
while  perfect  equality  is  its  goal,  this  is  not
practically  possible  and,  indeed,  may  not  be
desirable.  Structural  violence  is  perhaps  best
understood as  a  ‘metaphor’  rather  than  a
theory (Boulding, 1977).

Structural  violence  as 

formulated  by
Galtung  is  a  ‘maximalist’  agenda  (Rogers  &
Ramsbotham, 1999), the function of which is
to highlight the negative consequences of the
uneven distribution of power and resources and
to understand these as largely avoidable, highly
destructive social processes. It leaves open the
question of pathways to redistribute power and
resources, and Galtung is silent on this matter,
which  Boulding  (1977)  implies  is  because
engaging  with  the  nature  of  transformation
5 Galtung (1990) later added a third type – ‘cultural vio-
lence’ – that refers to the symbolic aspects of social life that
justify or normalize violence. Largely for reasons of cogency,
this article limits its concerns to the material manifestations
of violence.

84924_JPR_75-90.qxd  12/14/2007  2:44 PM  Page 79

Jon  Barnett

P E A C E A N D D E V E L O P M E N T

79

demands some consideration of steering, hier-
archy  and  some  recognition  of  inequality  in
capabilities  –  all  of  which  are  anathema  to
Galtung’s strong preference for equality.6 To be
sure,  this  lack  of  consideration  of  the  reform 
of  structures  is  not  a  problem  unique  to
Galtung’s  view  of  structural  violence,  and,
indeed, it is desirable in as much as suggestions
may  lead  to  manifestos  that  may  lead  to 
violence. Nevertheless,  structural  transform-
ation  towards peace is an area that could be
better  informed  by  other  theories  of  social
change, 
those  associated  with
including 
development studies.

In  Galtung’s  formulation,  then,  peace  is
the absence of both direct and structural vio-
lence.  He  notes  that  negative  and  positive
peace  are  contiguous  with  each  other,  and
this is clearly the case, as revealed by recent
research  into  the  linkages  between  war
(direct violence), absolute poverty and verti-
cal  and  horizontal  inequalities  (structural
violence),  famine  (structural  violence)  and
famine  relief  (which  affects  another  form 
of  structural  violence)  (De  Waal,  1997;
Goodhand,  2003;  Østby,  2005;  Stewart  &
Fitzgerald,  2001).  Nevertheless,  the  positive/
negative  peace  dualism  constrains  thinking
about  peace  by  reducing  its  diverse  and
contingent nature into another dualism, which
Boulding (1977) suggests is not overly useful.
Underlying Galtung’s (1985: 146) notion
of structural violence is a concern for ‘basic
human  needs’  provision,  informed  by  the
basic  needs  approach  to  development  that
emerged in the mid-1970s. Thus, for Galtung,
structural  violence  ‘could  just  as  well  be
taken  as  a  point  of  departure  for  develop-
ment studies as for peace studies. The two are
very similar, and should be regarded as two
sides of the same coin’ (1985: 147). This rep-
resents an initial point of departure for con-
sidering development in relation to peace.

6 Even if he embraces equality, Galtung disavows Marxism.
He is more an anarchist egalitarian.

Development According to Sen

The modern (post-1945) history of develop-
ment  theory  is  one  of  abstract  theories  of
structural  processes  leading  to  programmes
of action implemented across large and often
diverse populations assuming – as neoclassical
economics does – that people behave in com-
mon ways (to maximize material gain) regard-
less of location, and ignoring the particularities
of  in  situ institutions  (Brohman,  1995).
Programmes  to  modernize,  industrialize,
revolutionize,  liberalize  and  adjust  have  all
been  implemented,  and,  because  of  their
scale  and  insensitivity  to  place,  they  have
tended  to  benefit  some,  marginalize  many
and create much environmental damage.

It is in the context of the failures of these
meta-theories and their programmatic mani-
festations to do development that Sen (1999)
has  proposed  his  alternative  theory  of  de-
velopment. The  book  Development  as  Free-
dom contains  a  vision  of  the  good  life  as  a
valuable  goal  and  an  explanation  of  how  it
might be achieved, supported by arguments
synthesized from both economics and phil-
osophy. It is the culmination of much of Sen’s
previous work, all of which points towards an
alternative  to  the  utilitarianism  that  under-
pins economics and much moral philosophy
(Stewart & Deneulin, 2002).

At  the  heart  of  Development  as  Freedom
lies  Sen’s  claim  that  development  is  not  so
much something that can be done to others,
but is instead something that people do for
themselves. This claim is based on his studies
of famine (Sen, 1981), his observations about
the preconditions of the success of the East
Asian economies, and his observations about
the  enhanced  freedoms  and  opportunities
afforded to most people in liberal democratic
societies. So, for Sen, people will ‘develop’ as
they see fit given sufficient ‘economic oppor-
tunities, political liberties, social powers, and
the enabling conditions of good health, basic
education,  and  the  encouragement  and

84924_JPR_75-90.qxd  12/14/2007  2:44 PM  Page 80

80

journal of P E A C E R E S E A RC H

volume 45 / number 1 / january 2008

cultivation  of  initiatives’  (1999:  4).  These
opportunities are, in Sen’s words, ‘freedoms’,
and it is freedom, he argues, that should be
both the means (how to attain) as well as the
ends (the goal) of development.7

Sen’s approach to development moves away
from  specifying  outcomes  (such  as  Galtung’s
difference  between  the  potential  and  the
actual). This is justified in the case of develop-
ment, as policies and programmes often entail
the  imposition  of  values  (such  as  increased
utility or increased production) on societies at
the expense of good processes, and often at the
expense  of  some  groups.  For  example,  the
building of dams for irrigation, flood control
and electricity generation may serve the na-
tional  interest  by  facilitating  increased  pro-
duction, yet the processes by which dams are
built often entail displacement and social and
environmental  costs  to  some  communities.
In  arguing  that  freedom  is  both  the  means
and the ends of development, Sen is, in ef-
fect, saying that prescribing outcomes as the
goal of policy is not possible, since there are
potentially  as  many  different  kinds  of  lives
that people value as there are people. This is
what a focus on freedom entails, as Marcuse
explains: ‘the subsequent construction of the
new society cannot be the object of theory,
for it is to occur as the free creation of the lib-
erated individuals’ (Marcuse, 1969: 135).

Sen’s  theory  of  development  as  freedom
rests on an explication of what freedoms are,
what they do, and which ones matter most.
Freedoms  are  seen  as  both  processes  that
allow free actions and decisions, and oppor-
tunities that people have available to them. As
an example of a procedural unfreedom, Sen
gives  the  violation  of  voting  privileges  (the
denial or impairment of free political choice);
as  an  example  of  opportunity  unfreedom, 
he  gives  the  example  of  hunger  (the  lack 

7 Sen’s  theory  of  freedom  incorporates  both  positive  free-
doms,  understood  as  people’s  control  over  their  own  lives
(their sovereignty), and negative freedoms, understood as the
absence of coercion (see Sen, 1985, for his exposition of this).

of  opportunity  to  avoid  premature  death).
What  freedoms  do,  in  Sen’s  view,  is  allow
people to take initiatives to pursue outcomes
that are valuable to them. Sen’s theory, there-
fore, speaks to agency in ways that Galtung’s
does not. However, it is not a grand theory of
the way agents will behave (other than to say
they are likely to act to pursue the things that
they value), but rather a theory that seeks to
create the conditions in which agency can be
exercised.  In  this  respect,  it  offers  much  to
redress  the  lack  of  agency  in  Galtung  (and
others’) peace theory.

The  freedoms  that  most  matter  for
development, or what Sen (1999: xii) calls ‘the
crucial instrumental freedoms’, include: eco-
nomic  opportunities  (for  example,  the  free-
dom of women to seek employment and the
freedom  of  individuals  to  interact  to  seek
mutually advantageous outcomes in terms of
consumption and production); political free-
doms (for example, freedom of speech, freedom
of the media, civil liberties and the freedom to
vote);  social  opportunities  (for  example, the
opportunity  to  access  education  and  health
care  and  to  participate  in  social  life);  trans-
parency guarantees (the procedures to ensure
openness and accountability in transactions to
militate against corruption and other inappro-
priate  dealings);  and  protective 
security
(arrangements as typically associated with social
security to protect people from misery). These
freedoms are interconnected, and they ‘supple-
ment’ and ‘reinforce’ each other (1999: 40).

Sen (1999) ultimately sees liberal institu-
tions as the best means to deliver well-being
(defined not merely in terms of utility). This
is  based  on  recognition  of  the  ability  of
liberal  democracies  to  create  conditions
where  people  are  free  to  function  as  they
wish,  and  where  the  power  and  control
aspects of freedom can be balanced through
democratic  structures  of  governance  (Sen,
1985).  While  faith  in  liberalism  may  be
unpopular  in  some  circles  of  development
thinking (Sandbrook, 2000), Sen is not alone

84924_JPR_75-90.qxd  12/14/2007  2:44 PM  Page 81

Jon  Barnett

P E A C E A N D D E V E L O P M E N T

81

in  his  optimism  about  the  ability  of  liberal
democracies to deliver the good life (Donnelly,
1999; Giddens, 1994; Habermas, 1996).

The  explanatory  power  of  Sen’s  theory,
therefore,  depends  on  the  extent  to  which
one thinks that the benefits afforded to people
in liberal democratic societies are a function
of  the  structures  of  those  societies  (Sen’s
view), or a function of the systems of unequal
exchange that these societies have historically
controlled  (through  colonization)  and  con-
tinue  (through  capitalist  political-economy
processes) to  control  (Sandbrook’s  [2000]
view).  For  his  part,  Sen,  like  Habermas
(1990), has faith in the power of communi-
cation  and  reason  to  determine  private  and
collective  action  towards  the  good  life,  given
appropriate  structures  of  governance.  In  this
view, authority is accorded solely on the basis of
a reasoned and persuasive argument, and poli-
cies have to be continually justified in and of
themselves rather than on the basis of the power
of  the  proponents.  Democracy  is  essential  in
this process, as it requires enabling institutions
and practices that are non-discriminatory and
transparent,  in  which  freedom  of  speech  and
the freedom of the press are guaranteed.

While it bridges structure and agency, Sen’s
theory  of  development  as  freedom  does  not
offer much of an explanation of how the power
of  structures  and  agents  creates  and  sustains
unfreedom. This is the most common and per-
suasive  critique  of  Development  as  Freedom
(Navarro,  2000;  Sandbrook,  2000;  Evans,
2002).  For  example,  while  Sen  argues  con-
vincingly that states should provide procedural
freedoms and opportunities, he does not say
why they do not, other than saying that insti-
tutions  that  allow  for  freedom  can  deliver
freedom. This quixotic character of freedom as
both  means  and  ends  is  not  unique  to  Sen’s
account;  for  example,  Marcuse  (1969)  sees
freedom as the ability of free people to continu-
ally be able to create and recreate themselves
and society as they see fit, where the extent of
freedom is the extent to which this is possible.

Perhaps  the  greater  limitation  to  Sen’s
theory is that it does not account for the dif-
ficulties  of  achieving  some  semblance  of
equity and sustainability. Sen is not silent on
these issues; he argues that reason ‘is no enemy
of  valuing  equality  of  well-being’  (1985:
194),  thereby  pointing  to  the  aforemen-
tioned  transformative  character  of  political
freedoms; he argues that the pursuit of well-
being  does  not  always  entail  the  accumula-
tion  of  material;  and  he  suggests  there  are
‘capitalist virtues’ that can constrain the ex-
cesses  of  market  processes.  He  also  stresses
the responsibilities that attend freedom and
acknowledges the difficulties of value plural-
ism that make it possible for people to value
being ‘well-off’, even if available information
suggests  that  one  person’s  material  circum-
stances  occur  at  the  expense  of  another’s.
Nevertheless, it seems reasonable to argue, as
Streeton (2000) and Sandbrook (2000) do,
that  in  a  world  of  interdependencies  where
capitalism  is  the  near-universal  economic
order  and  has  been  able  to  sustain  itself
despite its widely recognized and undeniable
social and environmental costs, Sen’s trust in
the  ability  of  reason,  communication,  cap-
italist  ethics  and  enhanced  information  to
deliver  equity  is  insufficient.8 Crudely  put,
Sen’s  theory  can  be  read  as  saying  that  good
systems,  and  good  people,  can  deliver  good
outcomes for everyone. But, the inverse of his
positive view of agency is that not-good people
defend  and  sustain  not-good  systems,  even
when  available  information  highlights  that
there are not-good processes and outcomes.

Sen’s oblique recognition of the power of
malign  structures  and  agents  perhaps  arises

8 On the issue of interdependence, Galtung (1985) offers
‘self reliance’ in the form of use of only locally owned factors
of production and internalization of the externalities of pro-
duction wherever possible. When not possible, he advocates
the  fair  sharing  of  externalities  (which  would  seem  to
be ‘violence’  in  his  terms),  horizontal  exchanges  and
South–South  cooperation.  This,  perhaps,  amounts  to  a
fairer system of trade, but it is not one that would be likely
to  produce  the  degree  of  prosperity  that  Weede  (1996),
among others, considers necessary for democracy and peace.

84924_JPR_75-90.qxd  12/14/2007  2:44 PM  Page 82

82

journal of P E A C E R E S E A RC H

volume 45 / number 1 / january 2008

because his focus is largely on individuals and
states as the locus of governance. There is less
focus  on  the  international  system  and  its
political, economic and environmental f lows.
Yet, the problem of control to sustain free-
doms also concerns global processes, hence the
interest  in  global  governance  (Young,  1997;
Rittberger, 2001; Thomas, 2001). This agenda
includes  more  than  interventions  in  sover-
eignty to protect human rights; it also includes
issues  of  intragenerational  inequity  arising
from the operation of global markets, as well
as the opportunities available to future gener-
ations (intergenerational equity). It is an issue
that  Galtung’s  theory  of  peace  recognizes,
even if his notion of structural violence is no
more  descriptive  of  the  processes,  and  even
less prescriptive with respect to solutions.

The  problems  of  unfreedom,  then,  arise
from  structural  power  operating  at  many
scales  and  through  diverse  systems.  If  the
worst we can say of Sen’s theory of develop-
ment as freedom is that it does not account
and prescribe for everything and somewhat
disregards the importance of some structures,
then this still renders it superior to most of
the  best  theories  of  social  change.  It  offers
much to a theory of peace, and of develop-
ment, in that it: focuses on agents; focuses on
the  state  and  acknowledges  the  benefits  of
political  and  economic  liberalism,  but  does
not argue that either is sufficient; is prescrip-
tive about transformation and social change;
and  is  rooted  in  observations  of  processes
that deliver well-being in both developed and
developing countries. Further, it articulates a
vision  and  a  set  of  institutional  conditions
without  recourse  to  contradistinctions  and
dualisms.

Synthesis: Peace as Freedom

There  are,  therefore,  strong  compatibilities
between peace and development. They are, in
Sørensen’s  (1985:  70)  terms,  ‘structurally
interlocked’. However, given the diversity of

views on the meaning and practice of peace
and development and, in the wake of the end
of the Cold War, the shifting set of problems
to  be  addressed  in  peace  studies  (Rogers  &
Ramsbotham,  1999),  it  is  even  less  obvious
now that ‘everybody immediately understands
what  it  [peace  and  development]  implies’
(Hettne,  1983:  329).  Hence,  the  following
seeks  to  synthesize  Galtung’s  and  Sen’s  the-
ories in order to produce a rough sketch of a
theory of peace as freedom.

Synthesizing Sen’s development as freedom
with Galtung’s theory of peace leads to a def-
inition  of  peace  as  the  goal  and  process  of
expanding people’s freedoms.9 In this definition,
peace  is  not  defined  in  contradistinction  to
violence or any other set of bads (although, of
course, one could talk of unfreedoms, as Sen
sometimes does). Sen’s (1999) account of free-
doms  and  opportunities  as  processes  that
enable people to lead the lives they value offers
a  detailed  and  more  satisfying  substitute  for
that which Galtung calls ‘structural violence’.
However,  from  the  previous  discussion,  at
least two additions to his list of five important
freedoms  (economic  opportunities,  political
freedoms,  social  opporunities,  transparency
guarantees  and  protective  security)  seem
necessary  for  a  larger  theory  of  peace  as
freedom. These are: freedom from direct vio-
lence, and the equitable allocation of freedoms
within and between generations. Direct vio-
lence  is  taken  here  to  be  ‘where  there  is  an
actor  that  commits  the  violence’,  including
both  the  actual  act  and  the  threat  of  an  act
(Galtung, 1969: 170). This notion of freedom
from direct violence is self-evident.

‘Equity guarantees’ are taken here to mean
the equitable distribution of the previous six
freedoms and opportunities among all people
within current generations and between future
generations. These pertain to processes that

9 This  is,  perhaps,  not  such  a  radical  departure  from
Galtung’s view of peace, which has long included passing
references to – but not an exposition of – freedom as an
important need relevant to peace.

84924_JPR_75-90.qxd  12/14/2007  2:44 PM  Page 83

Jon  Barnett

P E A C E A N D D E V E L O P M E N T

83

restrict  freedoms  and  opportunities.  For
example, in the area of resource extraction by
multinational companies (such as of minerals
in Africa or timber in Asia), equity guarantees
would  result  in:  the  allocation  and  enforce-
ment of property rights; transactions that are
transparent  to  third  parties  and  which are
subject  to  a  independent  legal  system;  and
vendors being free from threats to their civil
liberties, free to choose among buyers, free to
choose  how  to  use  the  resources  to  which
they are entitled, and free from the need to
sell resources to pay for basic social opportu-
nities. In this example, were everyone entitled
to  the  same  freedoms  and  opportunities,
holders of property rights would be free to sell
but would do so only if it were their reasoned
calculation that it was in their interests to do
so, rather than having resources ‘plundered’ or
selling  because they  were  compelled  to  by
extreme poverty or threats of violence.

In a world where people are free to choose,
where  political  freedoms  are  universally
upheld, and where information is more freely
available, individuals with freedoms and op-
portunities  may  act  consciously  to  affect
structures  to  enhance  the  opportunity  free-
doms of others. Giddens (1991) describes this
possibility  as  ‘life  politics’,  which  is  seen  to
involve people’s choices to be active partici-
pants  in  events  that  affect  their  own  and
others’ lives. Individuals may choose, then, to
take  charge  of  political  issues  that  defy  the
limitations  of  contemporary  political  pro-
cesses  to  generate  new  or  reform  existing
structures  of  authority  and  governance.
Exactly what these will look like depends on
exactly how people participate in political life.
In  as  much  as  people  cannot  exercise
control over all the important aspects of their
lives, their freedom can be served even if they
have not exercised direct control over policy
implementation.10 Thus,  some  institutions
are  required  to  provide  the  freedoms  and
opportunities necessary for peace and develop-
ment, and  this  includes  equity  guarantees.

The principal, if to varying degrees imperfect,
institution that has emerged to provide free-
doms and opportunities is the state. It is not
possible here to even brief ly review the con-
tested meaning of ‘the state’ or to consider its
effectiveness (let alone the hundreds of so-called
states)  in  providing  freedoms  and  opportun-
ities (Strange, 1996; World Bank, 1997). How-
ever, it is only in the idea of a pluralist and ‘civil
association’ state – where the state is the prod-
uct of a social contract between individuals
(Oakeshott, 1962; Schwarzmantel, 1994) –
that it seems possible for the state to control
freedoms and opportunities without any sub-
stantive violations of those same freedoms and
opportunities.

There is evidence to suggest that the more
states are of the pluralist type, the more free-
doms and opportunities are upheld. The rela-
tive successes of the liberal democratic welfare
states  of  Western  Europe  in  balancing  free-
doms  with  opportunities  and  guarantees
suggest that peace and development are indeed
matters  of  institutional  design  (Donnelly,
1999).  Liberal  political  systems  are  generally
better at providing economic opportunities for
their citizens, and they also seem to be better
at  providing  protective  security  (Donnelly,
1999; Tavares & Wacziarg, 2001). Democratic
countries also clearly show a stronger commit-
ment  to  domestic  and  global  environmental
problems  than  non-democracies  (Neumayer,
2002). This is arguably due to the interacting
effects of freedom of information, freedom of
speech,  freedom  to  lobby  and  vote,  regime
responsiveness  and  learning  arising  from  the
electoral  system,  and  the  use  of  green  con-
sumerism  to  change  supply  (Payne,  1995).
There  are  also  links  between  liberal  democ-
racies and freedom from direct violence (see the
next section).

The pluralist state offers the most practic-
able  basis  for  peace  as  freedom  through  its

10 Sen (1985) gives the example of freedom from mugging
requiring government to exercise control.

84924_JPR_75-90.qxd  12/14/2007  2:44 PM  Page 84

84

journal of P E A C E R E S E A RC H

volume 45 / number 1 / january 2008

ability to balance freedoms, opportunities and
guarantees.11 Yet,  institutions  that  promote
freedoms and opportunities are imperfect in
even  the  most  advanced  of  pluralist  states,
creating a range of ‘democratic deficits’, where
there are slippages between public demands
for control to ensure freedoms and the inad-
equacy  of  policies  to  achieve  these.  Such
deficits, however, do not point to the inev-
itable failure of the pluralist state to provide
freedoms  and  opportunities,  but  rather  to
the incompleteness of the liberal democratic
project.  The  important  issue  is  that  the
potential exists for a process of ongoing re-
finement,  because  liberal  democratic  states
are  more  rather  than  less  responsive  to  the
exercise of political agency. In undemocratic
states,  this  potential  is  curtailed,  but  the
widespread  exercise  of  agency  can  begin  a
process  of  expanding  freedoms,  as  people’s
revolutions  from  France  to  the  Philippines
have shown.

Whereas pluralistic states can potentially
provide and maintain freedoms and oppor-
tunities for all people within their sovereign
domains, the extent to which they can man-
age  global  processes  that  structure  inequity
within  and  between  generations  is  less
obvious. There are at least two reasons to sug-
gest that a system of pluralist states can better
manage these processes. First, given sufficient
information about the effects of the actions
that  emanate  from  a  pluralist  state  (for
example, from its foreign policy or from one
of its companies), it could act to curtail those
actions.12 Second, these f lows exploit places
where, for example, labour markets are not
free; labour and resource owners are vulner-
able to capital, because protective security is
not guaranteed and economic opportunities
and  political  freedoms  are  restricted;  the

11 This is not to say that it is the only institution capable
of providing peace as freedom, but rather, given the exist-
ing set of institutions in the world, it seems to be the insti-
tution that has the most potential. From the pluralist state
can come the possibility for alternative institutions.

threat  of  violence  is  compelling,  because
human  rights  are  not  upheld;  and  trans-
parency about transactions is restricted. So,
in a world where freedoms and opportunities
are  universally  upheld,  these  places  of  ex-
ploitation cease to be particularly vulnerable
to global flows.

However, most states are largely unwilling
to manage most of the global processes that
structure  inequality  within  and  between
generations. Even seemingly elementary f lows,
such as the arms trade or trafficking in women,
are  largely  unregulated.  To  be  sure,  some
progress  towards  global  governance  has  been
achieved  through  the  multilateral  organiza-
tions  such  as  the  United  Nations  and  its
various  organs  and  treaties.  Furthermore,
processes  associated  with  globalization  also
seem to increase the prospects for peace and
development. For example, the emergence of
human  rights  organizations  like  Amnesty
International, coupled with the proliferation
of  harder-to-contain  communications  tech-
nologies such as mobile telephones and the
Internet,  have  increased  transparency  and
made it harder for human rights violations to
go  unnoticed  (Brophy  &  Halpin,  1999;
Cleaver, 1998). It also seems that increasing
integration of markets can lead governments
to respect political freedoms and human rights
(Hafner-Burton, 2005).

Nevertheless,  if  freedoms  and  opportun-
ities  are  to  be  equitably  distributed  across
space  and  time,  it  seems  undeniable  that 
a  modified  process  to  address  global  prob-
lems  is  required.  The  form  of  a  system  of 
global governance that is capable of manag-
ing global problems has been much discussed
(COGG,  1995;  Gordenker  &  Weiss,  1995;
Griffin,  2003).  Desirable  attributes  of  such 
a system include increased participation from
actors  other  than  states,  enhanced  channels 
of  communication  and  space  for  reasoned

12 This is one of the positives of sovereignty; all processes have
some origin in space (even if it is a person using a computer),
and sovereign states control space.

84924_JPR_75-90.qxd  12/14/2007  2:44 PM  Page 85

Jon  Barnett

P E A C E A N D D E V E L O P M E N T

85

dialogue,  improved  coordination  of  policy
implementation,  respect  for  human  rights,
receptiveness and a more f lexible approach to
the  limits  of  sovereignty. The  goal  of  such  a
system should be to make states less the arbiters
of  power,  and  more  brokers,  facilitators  and
conduits for the representation of people.

Peace as Freedom as an 
Analytical Tool

Although the theory of peace as freedom as
proposed  here  speaks  to  a  larger  gamut  of
problems than freedom from direct violence,
it  also  offers  a  potentially  useful  framework
for consolidating existing strands of research
on  direct  violence  and  guiding  further  re-
search.  It  suggests  that  there  are  six  factors
that  may  be  important  in  explaining  the
causes of direct violence: the provision of eco-
nomic opportunities, political freedoms, so-
cial  opportunities,  transparency  guarantees,
protective security and equity guarantees.

Each of these six variables can be captured
through  indicators,  for  example  the  Fraser
Institute’s Economic Freedom Index, Freedom
House’s  Political  Rights  and  Civil  Liberties
ratings,  World  Bank  indicators  of  access 
to  health  care  and  education,  Transparency
International’s Corruption Perceptions Index,
various indicators on social security spending
from the International Labour Organization,
and  indicators  of  income  inequality  between
countries,  within  countries,  and  between
regions within countries, such as are available
from  the  World  Bank.  These  indicators  can
(and  have  been)  used  to  test  important  rela-
tionships between variables. They could also be
used to develop a multivariable or composite
indicator of peace as freedom.

There is, of course, a considerable amount
of  research  that  explores  the  links  between
some of the variables identified in the theory
of peace as freedom and direct violence (a full
review  of  which  is  beyond  the  scope  of  this
article).  Most  of  this  research  examines  cor-

relations  between  one  or  two  variables  and
direct  violence.  The  concentration  of  effort
has  been  on  research  exploring  the  links
between  interstate  war  and  democracy  (the
democratic peace proposition). This research
shows  that  freedom  from  direct  violence 
due  to  civil  and  international  war  and  state
repression  is  greater  in  liberal  democracies
where there are economic and political free-
doms (Davenport & Armstrong, 2004; Hegre
et al., 2001; Owen, 1994; Ward & Gleditsch,
1998).  There  is  an  older  and  now  much
revived  effort  to  examine  the  links  between
political  freedoms,  economic  freedoms  and
direct  violence  (the  capitalist  peace  propos-
ition),  which  suggests  that  there  are  strong
causal relationships between free markets and
open trade, growth and prosperity, democracy
and  freedom  from  direct  violence  (Gartzke,
2007; Mousseau, 2003; Weede, 1996). There
has been relatively far less research examining
the links between transparency and violence,
but  it  has  been  argued  that  a  lack  of  trans-
parency in the political and economic actions
of states can create disaffected populations and
generate organized groups to capture the state
using force, causing the state to defend itself
(Le Billon,  2001;  Munslow,  1999). There  is
also  some  evidence  to  suggest  that  a  lack  of
economic opportunities and/or a lack of pro-
tective security can lead some individuals to
join  armed  groups  because  the  opportunity
costs of doing so are low (Goodhand, 2003;
Keen,  2000;  Ware,  2005).  On  the  issue  of
equity within a country, some argue that the
unequal distribution of freedoms and oppor-
tunities  can  lead  to  the  generation  of  griev-
ances that can escalate into violence (Cramer,
2003;  Stewart,  2000);  and  a  lack  of  social
opportunities can lead young people to join
armed groups (Hage, 2003; Maclure & Sotelo,
2004). This and other research suggests that
there is some analytical value to the theory of
peace as freedom and some scope for further
research to explore to the connections between
the variables it identifies.

84924_JPR_75-90.qxd  12/14/2007  2:44 PM  Page 86

86

journal of P E A C E R E S E A RC H

volume 45 / number 1 / january 2008

Conclusions

Peace as freedom suggests that the means and
ends  of  peace  and  development  practices
should be to ensure the equitable distribution
of  economic  opportunities,  political  free-
doms, social opportunities, transparency guar-
antees, protective security and freedom from
direct  violence.  It  is  a  theory  that  merges
some  of  the  most  useful  aspects  of  both
Galtung’s and Sen’s theories and, hopefully,
avoids some of their pitfalls. It is a view that
merges peace and development into a single
framework. It is more than, and avoids the
dangers in, defining peace as the opposite of
violence  and/or  the  absence  of  war  and,
instead,  offers  a  theory  of  peace  based  on
peace per se. It also has close parallels to the
notion  of  human  security  in  which  free-
dom from  fear  and  want  are  central  tenets
(UNDP,  1994),  and  it  has  strong  synergies
with  a  rights-based  approach  to  peace  and
development (Bhatia et al., 2000).

By moving away from a theory based on
what peace is not, by articulating the com-
plex  and  interdependent  characteristics  of
peace as freedoms and opportunities, and by
focusing as much on processes as outcomes,
the theory of peace as freedom facilitates a more
nuanced and multivariate assessment of peace
based  on  its  contingent  nature.  In  this 
view, it is not the case that there is either peace
or violence, because peace is not constructed
in  such  dualistic  terms.  Rather,  peace  as
freedom  suggests  that  peace  is  more  or  less
present  based  on  the  degree  to  which  each
important freedom and opportunity is pres-
ent and the degree to which they are collect-
ively  present.  The  focus  is  on  what  exists
now,  shifting  the  terms  of  discussion  away
from potentiality and its inherent problems.
The peace as freedom view considers both
agents and structures. It means a partial re-
focusing  on  the  structures  that  can  create 
freedoms and guarantee opportunities – prin-
cipally, but not entirely, this means a concern
for  the  state.  This  is  justified  in  terms  of

freedom from direct violence, because states
have  murdered  four  times  as  many  people 
in the 20th century than warfare within or
between  states  (Rummel,  1995).  It  is  justi-
fied  in  terms  of  development,  because  the
state as sovereign has the power to resist and
adapt to global f lows and the power to pro-
vide freedoms and entitlements to its people.
This  refocus  on  the  state  is  also  a  feature 
of  the  critical  peace  studies  called  for  by
Patomäki (2001). The focus on agents offers
much to peace studies, since most contempor-
ary research into the cause of violent conflict
focuses  on  the  structural  conditions  that
increase the risk of conf lict rather than the
decisions of actors to engage in violent acts.
Understanding peace as freedom in this way
offers  a  framework  for  assessments  and  re-
assessments of peace and development at any
scale and in any place. It also offers a basis upon
which  the  causes  of  armed  conf licts  may  be
systematically  identified  and  then  examined.
Indeed, if such linkages between the denial of
freedoms and opportunities and violent con-
f lict can be determined in a more systematic
and  robust  way,  then  a  theory  of  peace 
as freedom may have the potential to become
a  theory  that  unifies  many  areas  of  peace
studies.

References

Bhatia, Gurcharan; John O’Neill, Gerald Gall &
Patrick  Bendin,  eds,  2000.  Peace,  Justice  and
Freedom: Human Rights Challenges for the New
Millennium. Edmonton: University of Alberta
Press.

Boulding,  Kenneth,  1977. 

‘Twelve  Friendly
Quarrels with Johan Galtung’, Journal of Peace
Research 14(1): 75–86.

Brohman,  John,  1995.  ‘Economism  and  Critical
Silences in Development Studies: A Theoretical
Critique  of  Neoliberalism’,  Third  World
Quarterly 16(2): 297–318.

Brophy, Peter & Edward Halpin, 1999. ‘Through
the Net to Freedom: Information, the Internet
and  Human  Rights’,  Journal  of  Information
Science 25(5): 351–364.

84924_JPR_75-90.qxd  12/14/2007  2:44 PM  Page 87

Jon  Barnett

P E A C E A N D D E V E L O P M E N T

87

Bufacchi,  Vittorio,  2005.  ‘Two  Concepts  of
Violence’,  Political  Studies  Review 3(2):
193–204.

Cleaver, Harry, 1998. ‘The Zapatista Effect: The
Internet and the Rise of an Alternative Political
Fabric’,  Journal  of  International  Affairs 51(2):
621–640.

COGG  (Commission  on  Global  Governance),
1995. Our Global Neighbourhood: The Report of
the Commission on Global Governance. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.

Collier, Paul, 2003. Breaking the Conflict Trap: Civil
War  and  Development  Policy.  Washington, 
DC  &  New  York:  World  Bank  &  Oxford
University Press.

Cramer,  Cristopher,  2003. 

‘Does  Inequality
Cause  Conf lict?’,  Journal  of  International 
Development 15(4): 397–412.

Dag  Hammarskjöld  Foundation,  1975.  What
Now?  Another  Development:  An  Independent
Proposal  in  Preparation  for  the  UN  General
Assembly’s  7th  Special  Session  on  Development
and  International  Cooperation.  Uppsala:  Dag
Hammarskjöld Foundation.

Davenport, Christian & David Armstrong, 2004.
‘Democracy  and  the  Violation  of  Human
Rights:  A  Statistical  Analysis  from  1976  to
1996’,  American  Journal  of  Political  Science
48(3): 538–554.

de  Soysa,  Indra,  2000.  ‘The  Resource  Curse: 
Are  Civil  Wars  Driven  by  Rapacity  or
Paucity?’,  in  Mats  Berdal  &  David  Malone,
eds,  Greed  and  Grievance:  Economic  Agendas
and Civil Wars. Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner
(113–136).

De Waal, Alex, 1997. Famine Crimes: Politics and
the  Disaster  Relief  Industry  in  Africa.  Oxford:
International  African  Institute,  with  James
Currey.

Donnelly, Jack, 1999. ‘Human Rights, Democracy,
and  Development’,  Human  Rights  Quarterly
21(3): 608–632.

Duffield, Mark, 2001. Global Governance and the
New  Wars:  The  Merging  of  Development  and
Security. London: Zed.

Esty, Daniel; Jack Goldstone, Ted Gurr, Barbara
Harff, Marc Levy, Geoffrey Dabelko, Pamela
Surko & Alan Unger, 1999. ‘State Failure Task
II  Findings’,  En-
Force  Report:  Phase 
vironmental Change and Security Project Report
5: 49–72.

Evans,  Peter,  2002. 

‘Collective  Capabilities,
Culture,  and  Amartya  Sen’s  Development  as
Freedom’, Studies in Comparative International
Development 37(2): 54–60.

Fearon, James & David Laitin, 2003. ‘Ethnicity,
Insurgency, and Civil War’, American Political
Science Review 97(1): 75–90.

Galtung, Johan, 1969. ‘Violence, Peace, and Peace
Research’,  Journal  of  Peace  Research 6(3):
167–191.

Galtung,  Johan,  1985.  ‘Twenty-Five  Years  of
Peace  Research:  Ten  Challenges  and  Some 
Responses’, Journal  of  Peace  Research 22(2):
141–158.

Galtung,  Johan,  1989.  Peace  and  Development 
in  the  Pacific  Hemisphere.  Honolulu,  HI: 
University of Hawaii Institute for Peace.

Galtung, Johan, 1990. ‘Cultural Violence’, Journal

of Peace Research 27(3): 291–305.

Galtung, Johan & Tord Høivik, 1971. ‘Structural
and  Direct  Violence:  A  Note  on  Oper-
ationalization’,  Journal  of  Peace  Research 8(1):
73–76.

Gartzke,  Erik,  2007.  ‘The  Capitalist  Peace’,
American  Journal  of  Political  Science 51(1):
166–191.

Gartzke, Erik & Quan Li, 2003. ‘War, Peace, and
the  Invisible  Hand:  Positive  Political  Exter-
nalities  of  Economic  Globalization’,  Inter-
national Studies Quarterly 47(4): 561–586.

Giddens,  Anthony,  1984.  The  Constitution  of
Society:  Outline  of  the  Theory  of  Structuration.
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

Giddens,  Anthony,  1991.  Modernity  and  Self
Identity:  Self  and  Society  in  the  Late  Modern
Age. Cambridge: Polity.

Giddens, Anthony, 1994. Beyond Left and Right:
The  Future  of  Radical  Politics.  Cambridge:
Polity.

Goodhand,  Jonathan,  1999. 

‘From  Wars  to
Complex Political Emergencies: Understanding
Conf lict and Peace-Building in the New World
Disorder’, Third World Quarterly 20(1): 13–26.
Goodhand, Jonathan, 2003. ‘Enduring Disorder
and  Persistent  Poverty:  A  Review  of  the
Linkages Between War and Chronic Poverty’,
World Development 31(3): 629–646.

Gordenker,  Leon  &  Thomas  Weiss,  1995.
‘Pluralising  Global  Governance:  Analytical
Approaches  and  Dimensions’,  Third  World
Quarterly 16(3): 357–387.

84924_JPR_75-90.qxd  12/14/2007  2:44 PM  Page 88

88

journal of P E A C E R E S E A RC H

volume 45 / number 1 / january 2008

Griffin,  Keith,  2003.  ‘Economic  Globalization
and  Institutions  of  Global  Governance’,  De-
velopment and Change 34(5): 789–808.

Habermas, Jurgen, 1990. Moral Consciousness and

Communicative Action. Cambridge: Polity.

Habermas,  Jurgen,  1996.  Between  Facts  and
Norms: Contributions to a Discourse Theory of
Law and Democracy. Cambridge: Polity.

Hafner-Burton, Emilie, 2005. ‘Right or Robust?
The  Sensitive  Nature  of  Repression 
to
Globalization’, Journal of Peace Research 42(6):
679–698.

Hage, Gassan, 2003. ‘“Comes a Time We Are All
Enthusiasm”:  Understanding  Palestinian  Sui-
cide  Bombers  in  Times  of  Exighophobia’,
Public Culture 15(1): 65–89.

Hegre,  Håvard;  Tanja  Ellingsen,  Scott  Gates  &
‘Toward  a
Nils  Petter  Gleditsch,  2001. 
Democratic  Civil  Peace?  Democracy,  Political
Change, and Civil War, 1816–1992’, American
Political Science Review 95(1): 33–48.

Hettne,  Björn,  1983.  ‘Peace  and  Development:
Contradictions  and  Compatibilities’,  Journal
of Peace Research 20(4): 329–342.

Høivik,  Tord,  1977. 

‘The  Demography  of
Structural  Violence’,  Journal  of  Peace  Research
14(1): 59–73.

ICDSI  (Independent  Commission  on  Dis-
armament  and  Security 
Issues),  1982.
Common  Security:  A  Blueprint  for  Survival.
New York: Simon and Schuster.

ICIDI  (Independent  Commission  on  Inter-
national Development Issues), 1983. Common
Crisis  North–South:  Cooperation 
for  World
Recovery. London: Pan.

Keen, David, 2000. ‘Incentives and Disincentives
for Violence’, in Mats Berdal & David Malone,
eds,  Greed  and  Grievance:  Economic  Agendas
and Civil Wars. Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner
(19–41).

Kohler,  Gernot  &  Norman  Alcock,  1976.  ‘An
Empirical Table of Structural Violence’, Journal
of Peace Research 13(4): 343–356.

Lawler,  Peter,  1995.  A  Question  of Values:  Johan
Galtung’s Peace Research. Boulder, CO: Lynne
Rienner.

Le  Billon,  Philippe,  2001.  ‘Angola’s  Political
Economy  of  War:  The  Role  of  Oil  and 
Diamonds  1975–2000’,  African  Affairs
100(398): 55–80.

Maclure, Richard & Melvin Sotelo, 2004. ‘Youth
Gangs  in  Nicaragua:  Gang  Membership  as
Structured Individualization’, Journal of Youth
Studies 7(4): 417–432.

Marcuse,  Herbert,  1969.  Negations:  Essays  in

Critical Theory. London: Allen Lane.

Mousseau, Michael, 2003. ‘The Nexus of Market
Society,  Liberal  Preferences,  and  Democratic
Peace: Interdisciplinary Theory and Evidence’,
International 
47(4):
483–510.

Studies  Quarterly

Munslow,  Barry,  1999.  ‘Angola:  The  Politics  of
Unsustainable  Development’,  Third  World
Quarterly 20(3): 551–568.

Nathan, Laurie, 2000. ‘The Four Horseman of the
Apocalypse:  The  Structural  Causes  of  Crisis
and  Violence  in  Africa’,  Peace  and  Change
25(2): 188–207.

Navarro,  Vicente,  2000. 

‘Development  and
Quality of Life: A Critique of Amartya Sen’s
International 
Development  as  Freedom’, 
Journal of Health Services 30(4): 661–674.

Neumayer, Eric, 2002. ‘Do Democracies Exhibit
Stronger  International  Environmental  Com-
mitment? A Cross-Country Analysis’, Journal
of Peace Research 39(2): 139–164.

Oakeshott, Michael, 1962. Rationalism in Politics

and Other Essays. London: Methuen.

Østby,  Gudrun,  2005.  ‘Horizontal  Inequalities
and  Conflict’,  paper  prepared  for  the  46th
Annual  Convention  of  the  International
Studies Association, Honolulu, HI, 1–5 March
(http://www.polarizationandconf lict.org/bcn
04/7%D8stby_Horiz.pdf).

Owen,  John,  1994.  ‘How  Liberalism  Produces
Democratic  Peace’,  International  Security
19(2): 87–125.

Patomäki,  Heikki,  2001.  ‘The  Challenge  of
Critical Theories: Peace Research at the Start of
the  New  Century’,  Journal  of  Peace  Research
38(6): 723–737.

Payne,  Rodger,  1995. 

the 
Environment’,  Journal  of  Democracy 6(3):
41–55.

‘Freedom  and 

Rittberger, Volker, ed., 2001. Global Governance
and the United Nations System. Tokyo: United
Nations University Press.

Rogers, Paul & Oliver Ramsbotham, 1999. ‘Then
and Now: Peace Research – Past and Future’,
Political Studies 47(4): 740–754.

84924_JPR_75-90.qxd  12/14/2007  2:44 PM  Page 89

Jon  Barnett

P E A C E A N D D E V E L O P M E N T

89

Rummel,  Rudolph,  1995.  ‘Democracy,  Power,
Genocide  and  Mass  Murder’,  Journal  of
Conf lict Resolution 39(1): 2–26.

Sandbrook, Richard, 2000. ‘Globalization and the
Limits of Neoliberal Development Doctrine’,
Third World Quarterly 21(6): 1071–1080.

Schwarzmantel,  John,  1994.  The  State  in  Con-
temporary  Society.  New  York:  Harvester
Wheatsheaf.

Sen,  Amartya,  1981.  Poverty  and  Famines:  An
Essay on Entitlement and Deprivation. Oxford:
Clarendon.

Sen,  Amartya,  1985.  ‘Well-Being,  Agency  and
Freedom: The Dewey Lectures 1984’, Journal
of Philosophy 82(4): 169–221.

Sen,  Amartya,  1999.  Development  as  Freedom.

New York: Anchor.

Sørensen, Georg, 1985. ‘Peace and Development:
Looking for the Right Track’, Journal of Peace
Research 22(1): 69–77.

Star, Susan & James Griesemer, 1989. ‘Institutional
Ecology: “Translations” and Boundary Objects:
Amateurs  and  Professionals 
in  Berkeley’s
Museum  of  Vertebrate  Zoology,  1907–39’,
Social Studies of Science 19(3): 387–420.

Stewart, Frances, 2000. ‘Crisis Prevention: Tackl-
ing  Horizontal  Inequalities’,  Oxford  Devel-
opment Studies 28(3): 245–263.

Stewart,  Frances  &  Severine  Deneulin,  2002.
‘Amartya Sen’s Contribution to Development
Thinking’,  Studies 
in  Comparative  Inter-
national Development 37(2): 61–70.

Stewart,  Frances  & Valpy  Fitzgerald,  eds,  2001.
War  and  Underdevelopment:  Volume  1,  The
Economic and Social Consequences of Conf lict.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Strange, Susan, 1996. The Retreat of the State: The
Diffusion  of  Power  in  the  World  Economy.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Streeten,  Paul,  2000.  ‘Freedom  and  Welfare: 
A Review Essay on Amartya Sen, Development

as  Freedom’,  Population  and  Development
Review 26(1): 153–162.

Tavares,  Jose  &  Romain  Wacziarg,  2001.  ‘How
Democracy  Affects  Growth’,  European  Eco-
nomic Review 45(8): 1341–1378.

Thomas,  Caroline,  2001.  Global  Governance,
Development  and  Human  Security: The  Chal-
lenge of Poverty and Inequality. London: Pluto.
UNDP (United Nations Development Program),
1994. Human Development Report 1994. New
York: Oxford University Press.

Ward,  Michael  &  Kristian  Gleditsch,  1998.
‘Democratizing  for  Peace’,  American  Political
Science Review 92(1): 51–62.

Ware,  Helen,  2005.  ‘Demography,  Migration 
and Conf lict in the Pacific’, Journal of Peace
Research 42(4): 435–454.

Weede, Erich, 1996. Economic Development, Social
Order, and World Politics. Boulder, CO: Lynne
Rienner.

World  Bank,  1997.  World  Development  Report
1997: The State in a Changing World. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.

Young,  Oran,  ed.,  1997.  Global  Governance: 
from  the  Environmental

Drawing  Insights 
Experience. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

JON BARNETT, b. 1971, PhD in Resource
Management  and  Environmental  Science
(Australian  National  University,  1999);
Australian Research Council Fellow, School of
Anthropology, Geography and Environmental
Studies,  University  of  Melbourne  (2005–  );
member of the Scientific Steering Committee
of  the  Global  Environmental  Change  and
Human  Security  (GECHS)  Project;  main
research 
security, 
development and climate change. Most recent
book: The Meaning of Environmental Security
(Zed, 2001).

interests:  environment, 

