Session 4 
25.04.2016

Historic, cultural and legal aspects of induction methods for ASCs

Silja Timm

sitimm@uos.de

1

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35

Historical Background
A variety of different drugs are part of our society since decades and is often used for the induction of 
altered states of consciousness. These drugs differ in their chemical composition and in the effects they 
evoke in the user, according to which most of them can be assigned to one of four big classes. The first class 
comprises psychedelics, which are characterized by altering the state of consciousness of the user and by 
producing for example different kinds of hallucinations and pseudo-hallucinations. Examples are LSD, 
psilocybin and mescaline. The second class consists of opioids like heroin, opium or morphine, which 
provide a pain relief and lead to euphoria and sedation.  As a third class there are the so-called stimulants, 
like cocaine and speed, which act on the central nervous system and produce feelings of extreme well-being
and increased motor and mental activity. Lastly, the fourth class contains depressants, which slow down the
nervous system and suppress brain activity, thereby causing a relief from anxiety. Exemplary substances are 
alcohol and cannabis. In the 19th century many of the aforementioned substances were first isolated and 
identified.  Mescaline and LSD, for example, were first synthesized in 1919 by E. Späth and 1938 by A. 
Hoffmann, respectively. The psychoactive effects of LSD were not discovered until five years later.  In 
addition to these effects, potential medical usage of LSD was first studied in 1952 by C. Savage, using LSD in 
people with depression. One year later R. Sandison clinically employed LSD in psycholytic therapy (Fig. 1). 
However, also potential dangers, like psychological and physical harms, resulting from the usage of some 
drugs were discovered the latest, when the substances appeared on the streets. This in turn led to drug 
usage and its harm becoming a topic of public interest. In order to reduce the drug usage, the first drug 
conventions were introduced in the US in 1970. According to the US government, their purpose to classify 
drugs based mainly on their medical use and potential harm. Until now drugs are classified into five distinct 
categories in the US, namely Schedules I to V. Schedule I classifies substances with currently no accepted 
medical use and a high potential for abuse. Schedule I substances are assumed to be the most dangerous of
all scheduled drugs, with the potential of severe psychological or physical dependence. Those include 
among others heroin, LSD, psilocybin. The difference between these and the Schedule II drugs is merely the 
fact that the latter have some accepted medical use. Examples are cocaine, methamphetamine or Ritalin. 
Schedule III drugs, like ketamine and anabolics, have only a moderate to low risk of physical and 
psychological dependence and a lower potential for abuse. Drugs classified in Schedule IV and V have a low 
or very low potential for abuse as well as risk of dependence, like Valium and Lomotil (Drug Schedules n.d.).

Current Debate
For many years there is an ongoing debate about the current drug laws. Not only is the process of drug 
scheduling criticized for not being based on scientific evidence but it is also argued that the scheduling itself
may produce harm and has huge impacts on for example society or neuroscience research (Nutt et al., 
2013). Not only are, according to Nutt et al (2007), the potential harms, like risk of addiction or physical 

2

36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70

harm commonly not assessed transparently but the scheduling even seems fairly arbitrary and is 
scientifically not validated. It is in fact not scientifically verifiable that all scheduled drugs are actually 
dangerous. Often it is assumed that in many cases classification is not - as proposed by the US government -
based on the potential harm a substance causes in a user, but rather based on political and historical 
reasons (Nutt et al., 2013). Historically, the point in time of the discovery of potential medical usage of a 
substance played a major role in classification of Schedule I substances. For some substances their potential
medical benefits were already encountered before the introduction of the conventions, which led to the 
possibility of those drugs escaping the scheduling, while others could not. The problem here is that modern 
methods to discover potential medical usage, based on the understanding of the toxicology and 
pharmacology of the substances, were mainly not available back then (Nutt et al., 2013). Nowadays, for 
some substances it is assumed that they are not as harmful as declared and that the harm of some 
controlled drugs might even be less than of some uncontrolled ones, as shown by Nutt et al. (2007).  In 
terms of societal harm it is even assumed that the harm resulting from the controls might be worse than 
the drug-induced harm (Nutt et al., 2013). Negative effects resulting from scheduling are very strongly 
reflected when it comes to research. Particularly the effects of Schedule I drug laws play a major role here, 
as the convention from 1971 restricts the use of these substances. In their paper from 2013 Nutt et al. 
address this topic. They argue that the controlling has limited and will further limit neuroscience research 
on the scheduled substances as well as the discovery of new treatment options.  The situation is very 
problematic, because on one side if a drug has no known medical uses, in addition to some potential harm, 
it will be classified as a Schedule I drug, which then on the other side strongly limits research on this drug, 
as from that moment on research is only possible with the approval of governmental agencies. This 
difficulty is additionally enhanced by the fact that even if medical benefits of a substance have been 
discovered, there is just no policy agreed on for taking substances out of Schedule I, which influences the 
research on therapeutic uses even stronger.  The bottom line is that from the moment a drug is classified as 
Schedule I it is almost impossible to redeem it from this classification.  Especially for psychedelics this 
caused almost a total disappearance of research on these drugs. In cases of e.g. LSD this is especially 
questionable, since LSD is a promising substance in terms of being useful in advancing research on 
consciousness, meaning that the scheduling not only limits the discovery of potential therapeutic uses but 
even affects general neuroscientific research.  Since Nutt et al. assume that many of the substances actually 
have a high potential for medical applications, they call on the scientific community to make a case to their 
government for transferring some substances from Schedule I to Schedule II, as that would already make 
research on their potential therapeutic uses much easier.
However, when it really comes to the question, whether the current drug laws and classification systems 
should be changed, the answer is highly dependent on the point of view. Comparison between 
neuroscience and e.g. opinions of the pharmaceutical industry or politics reflects a clear conflict of interest. 

3

71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
103
104
105

Legalization proponents could give a variety of arguments on why the current laws should be changed. 
They could argue that the current laws impair the individual freedom. Also they might see the laws as a 
waste of government resources. For example in a study for the Cato Institute from 2010, Miron and 
Waldock estimate that legalizing drugs would save the government approximately $41.3 billion annually on 
expenditures related to the enforcement of prohibition.  Another possible argument might be that 
legalization would force organized crime from the drugs trade and enable the government to regulate and 
control the market by prescriptions or licensing. On the other hand opponents could reason that alcohol 
and abuse of pharmaceutical products leads to enough problems and that legalization would lead to even 
more addicts. This in turn might instead of reducing crime even cause an increase. Moreover one could 
contend that a higher utilization of drugs would overwhelm the already burdened health care system.
Hence, many opinions have to be examined when it comes to considering the legalization of drugs.

Future
Since this debate is not a new one, many thoughts have already been invested into possible changes and 
how to realize them. Even though not completely elaborated and definitely in spots criticizable, future ideas
have been developed and could be further investigated. Concerning the seemingly arbitrary decisions when 
it comes to classification of drugs, Nutt et al. (2007) deal with the proper assessment of harmfulness of 
different substances. They suggest a new system for assessing the potential harm of individual drugs based 
on scientific knowledge. In the scale they propose, they define the following 9 parameters to assess harm, 
resulting from three major categories with three subgroups each. The first category is physical harm, which 
is split up into the subgroups of acute, chronic and intravenous harm. The second one concerns 
dependence and includes the factors of intensity of pleasure as well as of psychological and physical 
dependence. Lastly, the social harms are assessed by means of intoxication, other social harms and health-
care costs. After developing this scale, the authors tested it by giving it to two independent groups of 
experts, one group only comprising psychiatrists and the other one having a wider spread of expertise. 
These groups were asked to rate the harm of a number of different drugs, by defining a value for each 
parameter. The list of drugs to be rated included some scheduled and some uncontrolled substances. The 
mean scores of both groups were compared and the result shows that the process is valid and robust, as it 
produces similar outcomes in the two groups. Moreover their findings again underline that current 
classification processes are scientifically not verifiable by showing that the correlation between the harm 
scores and the class of a substance were surprisingly low. For example, alcohol and tobacco were rated 
more overall harmful than LSD and ecstasy, emphasizing that the exception from classification of these two 
substances is arbitrary from a scientific point of view.  With their scale, Nutt et al. provide an alternative 
way of assessing the harm of drugs that is comprehensive and transparent and involves several aspects of 
potential harm. Here, one could argue that the summed up average harm value is too simple and too 

4

106
107
108
109
110
111
112
113
114
115
116
117
118
119
120
121
122
123
124
125
126
127
128
129
130
131
132
133
134
135
136
137
138
139
140

general, especially when it comes to dependencies, and that it would be helpful to have information about 
the usage of a particular drug on a particular user. That is pertinently and it would definitely be the ideal 
way to include individual factors, like genetic neurological potential for abuse, but it is also clear that such 
an approach would be hardly realizable. Nevertheless, Nutt et al. provided a good method, which assesses 
the harm of drugs for the average user on an objective, scientific basis and which can be further developed.
Another sophisticated idea concerning the regulation of drug usage in the future comes from Thomas 
Metzinger (2006). According to him, the most fundamental questions of neuroethics that should be 
considered are: (1) What are good states of consciousness at all?, (2) Which altered states of consciousness 
do we want to integrate into our culture?, (3) Which altered states do we want to fight with all means and 
hold off from it? When talking about drug policy, he argues for a much more detailed policy, which decides 
individually for each case by having precise laws for each and every molecule and its phenomenological 
profile. He suggests introducing something like a driver's license for a certain molecule and its induced 
altered state of consciousness.  For the example of LSD, Metzinger even developed a concrete proposal of 
how to acquire such a license, containing four steps. First the applicants have to undergo a neuro-
psychiatric screening, which is based on neurological diseases and critical personality traits in order to 
investigate whether they have an increased risk of psychosis. When this test is passed every candidate has 
to get a long-term care insurance covering all risks for consecutive psychiatric symptoms. The third step is a 
theory course informing about history, scientific background and risks of LSD that is finished by passing an 
exam in the end. Lastly, also a practical course of five therapeutically guided sessions, using different doses 
has to be completed. The owner of a LSD driver's license then has the permission to buy two single doses 
per year in a pharmacy. Here, many things would need to be discussed and reviewed when it comes to 
actually implementing this. One could for example argue about the exact amount of doses. Those are 
problems that need to be discussed and facts that have to undergo the assessment of experts, but also 
things that do not impair the sense and purpose of Metzinger's idea. His driver's license is just a suggestion 
on how to achieve a more intelligent drug policy, which - according to him - should pursue the goal of 
convincing the people it is made for and thereby letting the differentiation between legal and illegal 
become secondary.  However, he also states that such a license is not suitable for all substances. In case of 
heroin and cocaine he clearly holds the opinion that there can never be a driver's license, as these 
substances are uncontrollable and have an increased potential of physical and mental harm. However, such 
a policy as suggested by Metzinger will also need much bureaucracy, thereby probably costing lots of time 
and money. 
In conclusion, when trying to analyze and discuss the current situation of drug laws it is perfectly clear that 
different viewpoints have to be integrated. Plenty of open issues have to be reviewed and resolved before a 
change can actually be carried out, but by raising this subject and addressing appropriate questions and 
problems we are headed in the right direction.

5

References
(1) Metzinger T. (2006) Intelligente Drogenpolitik für die Zukunft. Gehirn und Geist, 1-2, 32-37. German.
(2) Miron J, Waldock K. (2010) The Budgetary Impact of Ending Drug Prohibition. Cato Institute. Executive 
Summary.
(3) Nutt D, King L, Saulsbury W, Blakemore C. (2007) Development of a rational scale to assess the harm of 
drugs of potential misuse. Lancet, 369, 1047-1053.
(4) Nutt D, King L, Nichols D. (2013) Effects of Schedule I drug laws on neuroscience research and treatment 
innovation. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 14,577-585.
(5) Vollenweider F, Kometer M. (2010) The neurobiology of psychedelic drugs: implications for the 
treatment of mood disorders. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 11, 642-651.
(6) Drug Schedules n.d. [Internet]. United States: Drug Enforcement Administration [cited 2016 April 29]. 
Available from: http://www.dea.gov/druginfo/ds.shtml

6

Figures

Figure 1: A brief history of psychedelic drugs (Vollenweider and Kometer, 2010)

7

