Industrial Health 2004, 42, 196–206

Original Article

Participatory Approaches to Improving Safety and
Health under Trade Union Initiative
—Experiences of POSITIVE Training Program in Asia—

Tsuyoshi KAWAKAMI1*, Kazutaka KOGI1, Naoki TOYAMA2 and Toru YOSHIKAWA1

1 Institute for Science of Labour, Japan, 2-8-14, Sugao, Miyamae-ku, Kawasaki, 216-8501 Kanagawa, Japan
2 Tokyo Occupational Safety and Health Center, Z-Building, 7-10-1, Kameido, Koutou-ku, 136-0071 Tokyo, Japan

Received February 19, 2004 and accepted March 1, 2004

Abstract:  The participatory, action-oriented training program in occupational safety and health
named POSITIVE (Participation-Oriented Safety Improvements by Trade Union InitiatiVE) was
established in Pakistan and extended to other countries in Asia.  The steps taken in the development
of the POSITIVE program included collecting local good examples in safety and health, developing
an action-checklist, testing a participatory training program, and conducting follow-up activities to
examine local achievements.  Training manuals were compiled to provide workers with the practical,
easy-to-understand information on safety and health improvements and on the positive roles of
trade unions.  Trade union trainers trained in the methodology conducted serial POSITIVE training
workshops in Pakistan and then in Bangladesh, Mongolia, Nepal, the Philippines and Thailand and
recently in China.  These workshops resulted in many low-cost improvements at the workplace
level.  These improvements were carried out in the technical areas of materials handling, workstations,
machine safety, physical environment, and welfare facilities.  The trade union networks have been
vital in reaching an increasing number of grass-root workplaces and in expanding the program to
other countries.  This included the visits to Mongolia and Thailand of Pakistani trade union trainers
to demonstrate the POSITIVE training.  The participatory training tools used in the POSITIVE
program such as the action checklist and group discussion methods were commonly applied in
different local situations.  Participatory approaches adopted in the POSITIVE program have proven
useful for providing practical problem-solving measures based on the local trade union initiative.

Key words:  Participatory training, Occupational safety and health, Action checklist, Low-cost
improvement, Trade union, Networking

Introduction

As rapid industrialization grows, securing safety and health
at work is becoming an increasingly important concern for
trade unions in Asia.  Many new production technologies
being applied have had both positive and negative effects
in terms of safety and health.  Workers are still facing
traditional and emerging work-related risks1–3).  Such risks

*To whom correspondence should be addressed.

include handling of heavy materials, transferred production
machines, work-stations not fitted to local workers, hazardous
substances banned or strictly regulated in industrially
developed countries, and poor welfare facilities at the
workplace.  Monotonous and repetitive patterns of work
seen in assembly lines need special attention in view of the
growing need for preventing musculoskeletal disorders and
psychosocial stress4).  Diversifying working time arrangements
such as shift and night work require adequate measures to
counter the adverse health and social effects5–7).  As in other

POSITIVE TRAINING PROGRAM IN ASIA

197

developing regions, workers in industrially developing
countries in Asia need practical safety and health support
measures suited to the local situations.

Trade union networks in Asia have been increasingly
developed to promote grass-root level activities of workers.
Awareness is growing that the knowledge of the risks
associated with the transferred technologies and of the
practical  countermeasures  to  be  taken  should  be
communicated to the grass-root level.  It is true that, despite
resource constraints, local workplaces have demonstrated their
initiative to improve safety and health, resulting in multiple
improvement examples8–11).  These improvements have been
built on local wisdom and available resources12, 13).  Workers
and trade unions had the potential to play the greater roles
in improving safety and health at the enterprise level.  It has
been a real challenge for the trade unions in Asia to provide
and extend workable support through their networks to fortify
the initiative of grass-root workers14).

It is striking that participatory approaches to improving
safety and health are gaining momentum in many countries
in Asia15–19).  Action tools aimed at active participation of
both workers and employers have been playing dynamic
roles in facilitating concrete improvement actions20, 21).  Action
checklists, group work dynamics and photo sheets showing
local good examples present typical examples of the action
tools.  Applying new participatory training methods, the small
enterprises in the Philippines that participated in the Work
Improvement in Small Enterprises (WISE) project in the
Philippines from 1994–1996, with the technical assistance
of the ILO and the financial assistance of the United National
Development Programme (UNDP), produced over 2,000
improvement examples22).  These improvements covered
multiple technical areas using the locally available materials
at low-cost23–25).  Local trade union trainers as well as
employer and government trainers jointly organized and
implemented the WISE training courses in the Philippines.
Participatory approaches established in the WISE program
have thus been adapted to the trade union-specific situations
with a view to strengthening the trade union initiative in
improving safety and health.  The WISE program pointed
to the importance of building sustainable safety and health
practices on participation of local people.  The participated
local workers and employers had gained self-confidence to
take more assertive roles in their workplaces.  It was
considered that extending participatory approaches to more
workers at the grass-root workplaces would be possible
through action-oriented support for local trade union
initiatives and networks.  The new program built on local
trade union practice and needs was required.  Such urgent

needs were communicated to the Japan International Labour
Foundation (JILAF) by Pakistani trade union leaders.  Thus,
a participatory training program to improve safety and health
under the trade union initiative was first built in Pakistan in
1994.  The program has gradually expanded, during the
subsequent decade, to Bangladesh, the Philippines, Mongolia,
Thailand and Nepal and recently to China.  JILAF has
provided the financial and logistical support while the
Institute for Science of Labour (ISL), Japan offered technical
assistance to develop the contents of the program.  The new
program was named as POSITIVE (Participation-Oriented
Safety Improvement by Trade Union InitiatiVE).  Based on
these experiences, some common features of local trade union
initiatives in improving safety and health and the growth of
the POSITIVE program are discussed.

Methods

Establishing POSITIVE training program in Pakistan

National trade union centers in Pakistan had strong concern
over workers’ safety and health problems and requested
technical cooperation to JILAF.  Practical problem-solving
measures to strengthen workers’ own capacities to identify
safety and health risks were expected.  The measures were
required to be easy-to-apply at the workplace level and to
assist workers in producing practical improvement proposals
to convince their employers.

International experiences of the successful intervention
measures at the workplace level were reviewed.  The ILO’s
WISE program in the Philippines22–25) and other participatory
training experiences in Japan, Malaysia26) and Thailand16)
were referred to.  The successes in intervention measures
commonly focused on learning steps from local good
examples and the group discussion methods to enhance the
active involvement of local people.  Action-checklists have
commonly played a central role in assisting local workers
and employers to identify feasible solutions.  Stress was
placed on looking at multiple action needs of local workplaces
and starting with low-cost feasible actions.  Participatory
intervention measures using action-checklist exercises and
group work processes were considered particularly relevant
to the new training program to be built on the trade union
initiative.

The four-day pilot POSITIVE training workshops were
conducted in Karachi in 1994 and Faisalabad in 1995 in
Pakistan.  The participants were local trade union leaders
and members.  The training program was designed to be
action-oriented for meeting the immediate needs of local
workers covering five technical areas; materials handling,

198

T  KAWAKAMI et al.

Fig. 1.   Steps taken in the POSITIVE training workshop

Table 1.   46 items listed in the action checklist used in the POSITIVE training workshops27)

Materials storage and handling

1, Clear transport ways; 2, Wide and even transport ways; 3, Carts and other wheeled devices; 4, Multi-level shelves or storage racks; 5,
Pallets or containers; 6, Mobile storage racks; 7, Hoists and conveyors; 8, Grips or holding points

Machine safety

9, Guards to dangerous moving parts of machines; 10, Safety devices protecting the worker’s hands; 11, Feeding to avoid hazards; 12,
Easy-to-read labels and signs; 13, Good machine maintenance; 14, Clearly visible emergency controls

Work-stations

15, Working at elbow height; 16, Platforms for small workers and work item holders for tall workers; 17, Tools, controls and materials
within easy reach of workers; 18, Jigs, clamps, vices or other fixtures to hold items; 19, Hanging tools or conveniently fixed tools; 20,
Home for each tool; 21, Alternate standing and sitting while at work; 22, Chairs or benches of correct height

Physical environment

23, Skylights and clean windows; 24, Ceilings and walls in light colors; 25, General artificial lighting; 26, Local task-lights for precision
and inspection work; 27, Relocate light sources to eliminate direct glare; 28, Move hazard sources out of the workplace; 29, Screens,
partitions or barriers to reduce the harmful effects of hazardous agents; 30, Labels on all the containers of hazardous chemicals; 31,
Covered containers for organic solvents; 32, Personal protective equipment; 33, Local exhaust ventilation; 34, Safe wiring connectors for
supplying electricity; 35, Heat protection of the building by backing up walls or roofs; 36, Natural ventilation by more openings, windows
or open doorways; 37, Fire extinguishers within easy reach; 38, At least two unobstructed ways out of every floor or every big room

Welfare facilities and work organization

39, Adequate supply of cool, safe drinking water; 40, Cleaned toilets and washing facilities close to the work area; 41, Resting corners and
a separate hygienic place for eating meals; 42, First-aid equipment and a qualified first-aider; 43, Combine tasks so that each worker can
perform varied and interesting work; 44, Buffer stock of unfinished products between different work-stations; 45, Layout and the order of
operations to ensure smooth flow of work; 46, Short breaks for strenuous work or work requiring continuous attention

work-stations, machine safety, physical environment, and
welfare facilities.  As shown in Fig. 1, a factory visit with
the action checklist exercise was placed at the beginning of
every POSITIVE training program.  This was to help the
participants start with the reality of local workplaces and
learn locally practicable solutions.  The POSITIVE action
checklist (Table 1) consisting of 46 essential items in the
five technical areas was formulated and applied.  While using
the checklist, participants were advised to identify both good
points and points to be improved at the workplace.  After
the workplace visit combined with the checklist exercise,
the simple implementation rules and local good example
photos in the five technical areas were presented.  Group
discussions were followed to prioritize improvement points
and conduct real improvements.  Achieving a consensus for
priority actions in a given time framework was an important
part of the training.  At the end of each session for this group

discussion, a representative of each group presented the
summary of ideas for solving existing problems.

Development of training manuals and local trade union
trainers

Compiling  the  pilot  training  experiences,  a  trainer
manual27) and an action manual28) of the POSITIVE program
were drafted and published.  Both the two manuals were
translated into local languages of each country where the
POSITIVE workshops were conducted, except in the
Philippines where the original English version could be used
in training.  The trainer manual described the ways to organize
successful participatory training workshops and to make
technical sessions clear and concise.  As shown in Table 2,
the key elements to become a successful participatory trainer
were stressed.  The guidance notes to plan effective follow-
up and evaluation activities were attached.  In the POSITIVE

Industrial Health 2004, 42, 196–206

POSITIVE TRAINING PROGRAM IN ASIA

199

Table 2.   Key elements to become successful trade union trainers27)

Key elements

Measures

Organization skills
Technical knowledge
Group work skills
Presentation skills

Planning effective workshops and recruit appropriate participants
Understanding and applying basic rules of the five technical areas
Guiding and facilitating active group discussions
Speaking in a clear and concise manner using audio visual aids effectively

Fig. 2.   Examples from the POSITIVE action checklist28)

program, follow-up activities were essential for sustaining
local improvement actions.

The action manual was aimed to provide workers with
the ready-to-use information for improving safety and health.
The manual consisted of (1) the 46-item action checklist
with illustrations, (2) technical explanation on each of the
46 items, and (3) good example photos covering the five
technical areas.  Figure 2 gives a portion of the action checklist
with the illustrations.  The technical explanation for each
of the checklist items was provided in the identical format
consisting of “benefits for workers”, “basic rules”, “what
workers can do”, “how to collaborate with employers” “points
to remember” and “further suggestions”.

Using the trainer manual, the first training-of-trainer (TOT)
workshop was undertaken in Pakistan in the mid-1990s and
then in each of the other six countries.  The participants

were recruited from the active trade union members who
know the local workplace conditions.  After the TOT, they
were to organize the POSITIVE training workshops without
direct outside assistance.  In the TOT workshop, facilitator
roles of POSITIVE trainers were emphasized to enhance
inter-active discussions among their training participants.
The four key elements to become skillful POSITIVE trainers
were stressed (Table 2).  As well as having technical
knowledge on practical, low-cost improvements, the trainers
required organizational skills to increase the sense of
participation and to facilitate the active discussion among
the participants.  The voluntary expansion of the POSITIVE
program by the trade union trainers met the trade union
purpose to upgrade the quality of the working lives of local
workers.

200

T  KAWAKAMI et al.

Table 3.   Evaluation results of POSITIVE training workshops

Technical sessions

Strongly agree

Agree

Disagree Strongly disagree

Checklist exercises
Materials handling
Machine safety
Work-stations
Physical environment
Welfare facilities

35
31
28
24
26
32

13
16
21
23
20
14

1
2
0
2
3
3

0
0
0
0
0
0

Evaluation results of 49 participants in the two workshops in Pakistan.

Table 4.   Examples of group discussion results mentioning existing good points

and improvement proposals in a garment factory27)

Technical areas

Materials handling

Work-stations

Machine safety

Three good points

Three points to be improved

1. Clear passageways
2. Carts and hand trolleys
3. Organized storage systems

1. Mobile storage trolleys
2. More mechanical aids for materials loading
3. Multi-level racks for storage chemical containers

1. Appropriate working height
2. Tools and switches placed within easy reach of workers
3. Chutes for collecting wastes

1. Chairs for standing workers
2. Work height adjustment in the cutting section
3. Use more fixing devices

1. Safe guards
2. Clear instructions for safe machine operation
3. Emergency stop switches

1. Moving chains and gears to be covered
2. Clear labels and signs
3. More feeder systems

Physical environment

Welfare facilities

1. Full use of skylights and artificial lighting
2. National ventilation and exhaust fans
3. Proper storage of chemical containers

1. Resting corners
2. Sufficient number of toilets
3. Drinking water facilities at the workplace

1. More local task lights
2. Proper lids for all chemical containers
3. Increasing ventilation in the chemical storage area

1. First aid boxes in the workplace
2. Changing rooms and lockers especially for women workers
3. Recreation facilities

Results

Evaluation of the POSITIVE training program

Table 3 shows the evaluation results on the technical
contents by the participants of the two pilot POSITIVE
training workshops in Pakistan.  The technical contents of
the POSITIVE training program were well accepted by the
participants.  The similar affirmative evaluation results have
been  gained  in  the  subsequent  training  workshops.
Particularly, the participants appreciated the easy-to-
understand  and  action-oriented  technical  contents.
Participatory approaches using action-checklist exercises
and group discussions were also highly valued by the
participants.    Participants  mentioned  in  their  written
comments that the POSITIVE training program using many
good example pictures and illustrations was helpful for
illiterate workers to understand practical safety and health
contents.  Some participants proposed a longer duration of
the training to obtain more detailed knowledge while the

majority supported the four-day seminar program.  Table 4
shows a sample of group discussion results in the pilot training
in which the checklist exercise was organized in a garment
factory.  The points raised by the participants in the five
technical areas were technically reasonable.  Many of their
ideas for improvements were possible to implement at low-
cost  using  locally  available  materials.   Applying  the
POSITIVE action-checklist, the participating workers were
able to identify both good examples and relevant action
points.  The POSITIVE program contents tested was
considered appropriate for workers and the trade unions in
Pakistan to strengthen their improvement actions in safety
and health at the workplace.  The next step was to extend
the established POSITIVE training program to many grass-
root workplaces in Pakistan through the trade union networks.
One should note that all these points were equally relevant
in other countries where POSITIVE workshops could be
organized.

Industrial Health 2004, 42, 196–206

POSITIVE TRAINING PROGRAM IN ASIA

201

Fig. 3-1.   Improvement resulting from a POSITIVE training workshop in Pakistan.  Before improvement, workers carried
heavy materials manually (left).  After improvement, hand trolleys newly applied (right).

Fig. 3-2.   Before improvement, waste materials placed on the passageway (left).  After improvement, waste storage areas
designated (right).

Expansion of the POSITIVE program in Pakistan

The expansion of the POSITIVE program in Pakistan has
been striking.  The trained trade union trainers have conducted
POSITIVE training workshops actively using their networks.
In the first three years (1995–1997) of the project, 77 training
workshops were carried out and 1,897 workers and trade
union members were trained in Pakistan.  Among the 77
training workshops, 45 were conducted at the workplace
level for easier access to workers.  As of 2,003, over 150
trade union trainers trained 7,251 workers, confirming the
high sustainability of the program.

After attending the training, the trained workers have
applied the action-checklist to their own workplaces to
identify  feasible  solutions.    Many  safety  and  health
improvements in materials handling, work-stations, machine

safety, physical environment, and welfare facilities have been
implemented in collaboration with their employers.  Some
workplaces succeeded in newly establishing their safety and
health committees as well as the improvements of the five
technical areas.  As shown in Fig. 3-1 and 3-2, the reported
improvements were carried out using locally available
materials.  Table 5 shows 74 improvement results reported
in a follow-up workshop.  It was particularly important that
many improvements were possible at low-cost.  The trained
workers were able to propose concrete solution ideas in safety
and health and convinced their employers to take necessary
actions.    Some  participants  pointed  to  their  positive
experiences that their safety and health proposals submitted
to their employers produced visible results and benefited
both workers and employers.  These joint successful

202

T  KAWAKAMI et al.

Table 5.   Improvement examples classified by technical areas and costs

Area\Cost (USD)

Materials handling
Work-stations
Machine safety
Physical environment
Welfare facilities
Total

0

2
1
3
1
1
8

<20

<100

100<

Total

  1
  5
  7
  9
  7
29

  3
  3
  1
12
  8
27

  0
  0
  4
  2
  4
10

  6
  9
15
24
20
74

experiences have greatly helped build the stronger worker-
employer communication and collaborative relationships.
The POSITIVE program has been adjusted to meet
industry-specific safety and health needs.  A typical example
was the adjusted program for the coal mining industry in
Pakistan.  Learning from the POSITIVE checklist, some
local trade union members developed an action checklist
for the coal mining industry depending on their practical
experiences.  The checklist consisting of 154 items to respond
to the practical improvement needs of the coal mining
industry that has faced high accident risks.  The checklist
covered the broad and specific safety and health needs of
miners.  They were “preparation before entering the mine”,
“materials  handling”,  “storage  of  explosives”,
“workstations”, “face”, “haulage transportation and machine
safety”,  “use  of  safety  lamps”,  “electrical  safety”,
“ventilation”, “fire-fighting”, “welfare facilities”, and “safety
and health organization”.  The local trade union trainers have
completed 90 workplace-level training workshops and trained

2,550 workers from 2001–2003.  Remarkable was that the
trade union used the POSITIVE program to strategically
organize mining workers and to strengthen their initiative
for improving the working conditions.

Spread to other countries

The success of the POSITIVE program in Pakistan has
been widely communicated to trade unions in other Asian
countries.  As a result, many proposals requesting POSITIVE
training workshops were sent to JILAF.  In response,
POSITIVE training workshops have been held in the
Philippines, Bangladesh, Mongolia and Thailand after the
initial success in Pakistan (Fig. 4).  The first POSITIVE
workshops in Mongolia and Thailand were held with the
assistance of Pakistani trainers.  It was of particular interest
that the grass-root training experiences of Pakistani trade
union trainers were applicable in Mongolia and Thailand.
The impact was substantial.  For example, in Mongolia, 205
POSITIVE workshops have been conducted and 5,192
workers have been trained during 1998–2001 by the trained
Mongolian trade union trainers.  The POSITIVE workshops
and associated train-the-trainers activities were similarly
successful in Bangladesh, Nepal, the Philippines and China.
Lately in 2003, the pilot workshops held in China led to
subsequent train-the-trainers activities in some provinces
in China.

Special efforts were done in each country to adjust the
training materials to the local situation.  Improvement rules,
checklists, and manuals were translated into the local

Fig. 4.   Spread of the POSITIVE program in Asia.

Industrial Health 2004, 42, 196–206

POSITIVE TRAINING PROGRAM IN ASIA

203

languages and tested repeatedly.  Local good examples were
collected in the respective countries and used for their
training.  To ease the participation of more workers, a one-
day training program was designed and applied at the
workplace27).  The one-day program consisted of the checklist
exercise, trainer presentations showing selected improvement
rules and local good examples, and group discussions to
identify improvement points.  In the 205 training workshops
undertaken  in  Mongolia,  108  were  conducted  at  the
workplace level applying the one-day training program.  The
local trainers have used the printed photo sheets showing
local good examples when no audio-visual aids like an
overhead projector were available at the workplace.  The
one-day seminars organized subsequently also led to many
low-cost improvements.

Environmental protection was added to the POSITIVE
program as the sixth technical area.  The Pakistani trade
union trainers found it possible to reduce environmental
pollution sources in the workplaces under their initiatives.
Four new items to promote environmental protection that
can be implemented by the workers at the workplace were
identified for the POSITIVE training program.  They were:
“select raw materials without damages or decays and free
from unnecessary package materials”, “collect wastes as
separately as possible and recycle them into the production
processes  so  as  to  minimize  wastes”,  “reduce  water
consumption by collecting solid waste before flushing with
water and adopting washing rather than continuous rinsing”,
and “collect and dispose of hazardous waste separately from
other  waste  and  establish  proper  waste  treatment
mechanisms”.  The 4 items were added to the checklist and
then the participating workers have been trained to find the
practical solutions in environmental protection at the
workplace level.

In conducting the POSITIVE activities, the trainers usually
concentrated not only on facilitating the planning and
implementation of low-cost improvements, but also on
strengthening the roles of workers’ representatives in safety
committees and trade-union-based risk communication and
campaigns.  This was useful in enhancing the roles of trade
union members in the overall safety and health activities at
enterprise level.  The action-oriented nature of the POSITIVE
methodology was useful in encouraging this kind of enterprise
level cooperation involving both employers and workers.
Further, the evaluation of each POSITIVE workshop was
done by distributing a brief questionnaire to the participants.
The questionnaire results from the seven countries confirmed
that the POSITIVE methods were favorably evaluated by
the participants.  The action-oriented aspects of the group

work  and  of  the  training  materials  were  particularly
appreciated by the participating workers.  Usually, the
majority of the workers agreed to spread the methodology
to other workers through trade union initiatives.  The obtained
positive feedback from the workers were beneficial in
collecting local good examples that could be used to amplify
the training materials suited to each local situation.

Discussion

The experiences of the POSITIVE program in nearly a
decade on the trade union initiative have demonstrated the
importance of both the local initiative through the national
trade union centers and the network support for training of
trainers.  Practical training methods such as action-checklist
application, local good example demonstration, and group
discussions were useful for strengthening the local trade union
initiative.  The trade union networks have always played
essential roles in reaching grass-root workplaces and
extending the training, resulting in many tangible changes
in safety and health.  Trained workers in the POSITIVE
program were able to propose the feasible action plans that
could  be  implemented  at  low-cost.    The  workers’
representatives took the greater initiative in day-to-day safety
and health activities in the workplace.  They succeeded in
convincing their employers to invest the necessary resources
for the proposed improvements so that the both sides shared
benefits from the positive workplace changes.

The expansion of the POSITIVE program has coincided
with a growing trend of participatory approaches to improving
safety and health in various target groups in Asia17, 29).  The
success of the POSITIVE methodology should be seen in
the context of these mutually related participatory approaches.
Various support programs to the local initiative have provided
workers and employers in different countries with the
practical measures to improve safety and health.  In Vietnam,
for example, participatory training methods have been widely
applied to farmers.  The training program named WIND
(Work Improvement in Neighbourhood Development) has
been extending practical support measures using an action-
checklist and group work dynamics to rural agricultural
villages, resulting in positive impacts on both the working
and living conditions30–34).  In Thailand, home workers have
been trained using participatory training methods and
broadened their network coverage35).  It should be noted that
these successful programs have placed clear focus on practical
action-oriented methods to assess safety and health risks
and relied on local initiative and resources.

The existing trade union networks were strikingly powerful

204

T  KAWAKAMI et al.

for multiplying the effects of the action-oriented training
program locally and regionally.  This was because trade union
leaders and members had known the workplace potential to
improve safety and health and looked for practical approaches
leading to concrete workplace actions36).  The POSITIVE
program has replied to such immediate needs.  Remarkable
were the trade union efforts to further adjust the program to
be suited to the local workplace situations.  The shortened
one-day training workshops organized at the workplace were
precious opportunities to many workers in participating in
safety and health improvements.  The photo sheets showing
local good examples enabled trade unions to conduct the
POSITIVE training in the workplace where audio-visual aids
were not available.  The adjusted program for the coal miners
in Pakistan indicated that the participatory approaches
adopted in the POSITIVE program could be applied for
different workplace situations under the trade union initiative.
The expansion of the POSITIVE program has involved many
workers and trade union members to strengthen their safety
and health networks.

The trained trade union trainers have played facilitator
roles and widened the POSITIVE training.  The trainers
presented technical improvement rules in an easy-to-
understand manner.  They encouraged the participants to
look at existing local good examples and to formulate feasible
action plans in their own workplaces.  Through group work
discussions, ideas and views among different participants
have been shared.  The participatory trainers in the POSITIVE
program have organized the training confirming these
essential steps.  It was of particular interest that the Pakistani
POSITIVE trainers helped conduct the initial POSITIVE
training workshops in Mongolia and Thailand and built the
firm base for the further development of the POSITIVE
program in these countries.  The facilitator roles transferred
by the Pakistani trainers were helpful for the wider acceptance
of the program.  The trade unions’ network support which
started in Pakistan is now spreading to other countries37).

Conclusions

The new action-oriented POSITIVE training program
under the trade union initiative has been effectively applied
in seven industrially developing countries in Asia.  This
program has greatly facilitated the trade union activities for
improving safety and health at the workplace in these
countries.  Participatory, action-oriented steps taken in the
program helped the participating workers identify concrete
solutions in their workplaces.  Practical training tools such
as action-checklists, group discussions, and local good

example photos were particularly useful in supporting such
workers’ initiative in a locally adjusted manner.  Workers’
practical action proposals taking into account low-cost ideas
have often strengthened the constructive relationships with
their employers.  The trade union networks have fortified
the workers’ initiative in improving safety and health and
expanded the POSITIVE program reaching many grass-root
workplaces.  It was confirmed that action-oriented safety
and health programs can be built on the workers’ own
experiences and initiative.  We need to further encourage
the application of practical training tools for involving local
human resources and experiences.

References

  1) ILO East Asia Multidisciplinary Advisory Team (1994)
Protecting and saving lives at work: the emerging
challenge in Asia. International Labour Office.

  2) ILO East Asia Multidisciplinary Advisory Team (1994)
Preventive measures in hazardous occupations in Asia:
a guide. International Labour Office.

  3) ILO (2001) Occupational safety and health. In: Decent
work in Asia, Report of the Director-General, 13th Asian
Regional Meeting, 74–80, International Labour Office.
  4) Kawakami T, Arphon S, Ikegami T, Kogi K (2001)
Occupational safety and health management in four
multi-national enterprises in Thailand, Journal of
Science of Labour 77, 193–201.

  5) Osiri P, Sakai K, Kawakami T, Chaikittiporn C (1994)
A survey on shift work systems in Thailand, Journal
of Science of Labour (Part II) 70, 193–201.

  6) Chaikittiporn C, Kawakami T, Kogi K (2001) Support
measures to improve night and shift work conditions
in Thailand: a case study in a glass factory. Journal of
Human Ergology 30, 185–90.

  7) Fischer  FM  (2001)  Shiftworkers  in  developing
countries:  health  and  well-being  and  supporting
measures. Journal of Human Ergology 30, 155–60.

  8) Khai T, Kawakami T, Toi L, Kogi K (1996) Improving
safety and health of rural sugar-cane factories in the
Mekong Delta Area in Vietnam. Journal of Science of
Labour 73, 14–22.

  9) Kawakami T, Chaikittiporn C (1996) Developing
interactive support mechanisms for improving safety
and  health  in  some  industries  in  Thailand.
Environmental Sciences 4 (supple), 147–55.

10) Kawakami  T,  Khai  T  (1997)  Sharing  positive
experiences in making changes in work and life in a
local district in Vietnam. Journal of Human Ergology

Industrial Health 2004, 42, 196–206

POSITIVE TRAINING PROGRAM IN ASIA

205

30, 129–40.

11) Kogi K, Phoon WO, Thurman JE (1988) Low-cost ways
of improving working conditions: 100 examples from
Asia. International Labour Office.

12) Khai T, Kawakami T, Kogi K (2001) How a small
enterprise improve the conditions of night and shift
work using local resources, Journal of Human Ergology
30, 173–9.

13) Kogi K, Sen RN (1987) Third world ergonomics.

International Review of Ergonomics 1, 77–118.

14) Kawakami K, Batino J, Khai T (1999) Ergonomic
strategies for improving working conditions in some
developing countries in Asia. Industrial Health 37, 187–
98.

15) Kogi K (1995) Participatory ergonomics that builds

on local solutions. J Human Ergology 24, 37–45.

16) Tandhankul N, Yuansaard S, Pongpanich C, Punpeng
T, Punngok A, Kawakami T (1995) Experiences of
successful action programmes for occupational health,
safety, and ergonomics promotion in small scale
enterprises in Thailand. J Human Ergology 24, 105–
15.

17) Kogi K, Kawakami T (1997) Current research. In:
Occupational and environmental health in the Asia-
Pacific region. Environmental Management and Health
8, 183–92.

18) Kogi K (1998) Collaborative field research and training
in occupational health and ergonomics. Int J Occup
Environ Health 4, 189–95.

19) Kawakami T, Kogi K (2001) Action-oriented support
for occupational safety and health programs in some
developing countries in Asia. Int J Occup Saf Ergon 7,
421–34.

20) Thurman JE, Louzine AE, Kogi K (1988) Higher
productivity and a better place to work—Practical ideas
for owners and managers of small and medium-sized
industrial enterprises: action manual. International
Labour Office.

21) International Labour Organization (1996) Ergonomic
checkpoints: practical and easy-to-implement solutions
for improving safety, health and working conditions.
International Labour Office.

22) Batino J (1997) Work improvement in small enterprises
(WISE) project in the Philippines, in the proceedings
of  the  5th  Southeast Asian  Ergonomic  Society
Conference on Human Factors; Vision - Care for the
Future, 536–41.

Environmental Management and Health 8, 171–2.

24) Kawakami T, Batino J (1998) Workplace improvements
that can reduce the risk of musculoskeletal disorders—
Experiences of the WISE approach in the Philippines—.
Asian-Pacific Newsletter, Occupational Health and
Safety.

25) Kogi K, Kawakami T, Itani T, Batino JM (2003) Low-
cost work improvements that can reduce the risk of
musculoskeletal disorders. International Journal of
Industrial Ergonomics 31, 179–84.

26) Rampal KG, Kogi K, Che Man ABB, Chaikittiporn C,
Ismail N, Kawakami T, Musri M (1996) Experiences
of action-oriented field ergonomics training in Malaysia.
Journal of Science of Labour (Part II), 24–30.

27) Kogi  K,  Kawakami  T  (1996)  JILAF  POSITIVE
program—Training manual for occupational safety and
health—. Japan International Labour Foundation and
Institute for Science of Labour.

28) Kogi  K,  Kawakami  T  (1999)  JILAF  POSITIVE
program—Action manual for occupational safety and
health—. Japan International Labour Foundation and
Institute for Science of Labour.

29) International Labour Office (ILO) (2001) Conditions
of work. In: Decent work in Asia, Report of the Director-
General,  13th  Asian  Regional  Meeting,  80–1,
International Labour Office.

30) Khai T, Kawakami T, Kogi K, Son N (1996) Ergonomic
checkpoints  for  agricultural  working  and  living
conditions. Toyota Foundation.

31) Kawakami T, Khai T (1997) Improving conditions of
work and life in a rural district in the Mekong Delta
area in Vietnam. Environmental Management and
Health 8, 175–6.

32) Khai T, Kawakami T, Kogi K, Ngoan L (1998) Work
Improvement in Neighbourhood Development (WIND)
trainers manual. Center for Occupational Health and
Environment of Can Tho Department of Health, Institute
for Science of Labour, Toyota Foundation.

33) Kawakami T, Khai T, Kogi K (1998) Development and
practice of the participatory action training programme
for improving working and living conditions of farmers
in the Mekong Delta Area in Vietnam. J Science Labour
75, 51–63.

34) Khai T, Kawakami T (2002) Work Improvement in
Neighbourhood Development (WIND) Programme.
Centre for Occupational Health and Environment,
Cantho, Vietnam.

23) Conferido RD (1997) Low-cost solution to improving
Philippine  working  conditions;  is  it  wise?

35) Arphon S, Chaikittiporn C (2003) Work Improvement
for Safe Home (WISH) program, Bangkok, Thailand.

206

T  KAWAKAMI et al.

36) Japan International Labour Foundation (JILAF) (1998)
JILAF POSITIVE program for OHS. The Position Paper
in the Regional Conference on the Establishment of
an Asian Trade Union Institute for Occupational Health,
Safety and Environment. Bangkok, Thailand.

37) Yoshikawa T, Kogi K, Kumar R, Kawakami T (2003)
Development and practice of the participatory action-
oriented training programme of occupational safety and
health for trade union in Nepal. J Science Labour 79,
147–60.

Industrial Health 2004, 42, 196–206

