THE TASKS FOR TODAY

1. Recap: What’s expected of your 
RPOs and how to write them…
2. Brief discussion of your research 

questions and/or theses…

3. Discussion of Jhumpa Lahiri’s 

“When Mr. Pirzada Came to Dine.”

1

RPO

Research Paper Outline should contain the following:
1. Title page of your paper (and the Table of Contents)
2. Short introduction, containing…

A. Your (preliminary) thesis statement
B. Brief research review or report (should refer to at 

least three secondary sources)

C. Brief account of what the paper will contain or how 
you are presenting your argument, i.e. the structure 
of the paper

2

RPO

3. The “Works Cited” page
• Excluding the Title page and the “Works Cited” 
page, the RPO should not exceed one and a half 
page.
• Please refer to the presentation “How to Write a 
Seminar Paper” to see how to structure and format 
all the parts of the RPO.
• Due date: 20.01.2015

3

PHRASING A THESIS

• The thesis must be properly worded; it should be both interesting and 

contestable.

• Neither a vague and confusing, nor an obvious and boring thesis will yield an 

interesting argument.

• Similarly, neither an overly generalized nor a minutely speciﬁc thesis will result 

in a productive discussion.

• Properly worded, the thesis should…
be clear, comprehensible, and direct
be able to indicate the major parts of the paper
commit the author to an unmistakable point of view and/or course of 
argument

• It is often useful to use words emphasizing a certain development, viz. conﬂict/

contrast, representation/depiction, development, negotiation.

4

THESIS AND YOUR PAPER

• The thesis is a claim.
• Be realistic: Why claim something you can’t possibly prove/justify?
• Be challenging: Why claim something that simply ‘goes without saying’?
• A thesis links a subject with an idea: “the poetic representation of 

death in this poem (= subject to be discussed) is an effort to manage 
its threat through its artistic expression (= claim to be proved)” 

• The thesis is the organizing principle of your argument.
• State it at the beginning, recall it throughout, reassess it at the end.
• Always keep your thesis in mind.
• Change it when necessary: Remember a thesis is a thesis is a thesis.

5

JHUMPA LAHIRI, “WHEN MR. PIRZADA CAME TO DINE”
• What does the title tell you? 
— Beginning of an anecdote/memory/family story?
• What is the narrative situation? Explain.
— homodiegetic/autodiegetic narrator; narrator-focalizer: Lilia, a 
child of ten. Is there internal and variable focalization? E.g. her 
mother (26-27)
• What effect does the narrative situation create?
— Child focalizer: Play on degrees of awareness/knowledge of 
the narrator, and the difference between the awareness of the 
narrator and the narrated world populated by adults and 
politics…

6

JHUMPA LAHIRI, “WHEN MR. PIRZADA CAME TO DINE”

— possibility of narrative irony and ingenue irony/critique 
(25-26)
• How does it affect our reading of the story?
— identiﬁcation/distance and possibility of ironic distance from 
the narrated world.
• Which major tropes/ﬁgures can you identify?
— Mr. Pirzada’s pocket watch (30), television reporting on the 
unrest in Dacca and the candy (31-32, and later), the jack-o’-
lantern (35-36 and 40), Halloween (37-39).
• What is/are its main theme/s?

7

