Leading Edge

Review

Engineering Cellular Metabolism

Jens Nielsen1,2,3,* and Jay D. Keasling2,4,5,6,7,*
1Department of Biology and Biological Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, Kemiva¨ gen 10, SE412 96 Gothenburg, Sweden
2Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Technical University of Denmark, Kogle Alle´ , DK2970-Hørsholm, Denmark
3Science for Life Laboratory, Royal Institute of Technology, SE17121-Solna, Sweden
4Joint Bioenergy Institute, Emeryville, CA 94608, USA
5Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering & Department of Bioengineering, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley,
CA 94720, USA
6Biological Systems & Engineering Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
7Synthetic Biology Engineering Research Center (Synberc), Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
*Correspondence: nielsenj@chalmers.se (J.N.), keasling@berkeley.edu (J.D.K.)
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2016.02.004

Metabolic engineering is the science of rewiring the metabolism of cells to enhance production of
native metabolites or to endow cells with the ability to produce new products. The potential appli-
cations of such efforts are wide ranging, including the generation of fuels, chemicals, foods, feeds,
and pharmaceuticals. However, making cells into efﬁcient factories is challenging because cells
have evolved robust metabolic networks with hard-wired, tightly regulated lines of communication
between molecular pathways that resist efforts to divert resources. Here, we will review the current
status and challenges of metabolic engineering and will discuss how new technologies can enable
metabolic engineering to be scaled up to the industrial level, either by cutting off the lines of control
for endogenous metabolism or by inﬁltrating the system with disruptive, heterologous pathways
that overcome cellular regulation.

Introduction
For at least 8,000 years, humans have harnessed microbes to
produce fermented foods and beverages. In more recent his-
tory, microbes have been used to produce chemicals for a
wide range of applications. During World War I, Chaim Weis-
mann developed the acetone-butanol-ethanol fermentation pro-
cess, which was used for 50 years to produce acetone and is
now being revived for production of 1-butanol. In the 1920s,
fermentation of the ﬁlamentous fungus Aspergillus niger was
adapted to generate citric acid, a food and beverage ingredient.
During World War II, the same technology was used for indus-
trial scale production of penicillin, the ﬁrst pharmaceutical pro-
duced by fermentation.

The following decades witnessed a dramatic increase in the
use of microorganisms to synthesize natural products of pharma-
ceutical interest, such as antibiotics, cholesterol lowering agents,
immunosuppressants, and anti-cancer drugs. Improved perfor-
mance of classical fermentation processes for such purposes
was typically achieved through mutagenesis and screening.
For antibiotics in particular, this was an extremely efﬁcient
approach, with penicillin production using Penicillium chrysoge-
num boosted by more than 10,000-fold (Thykaer and Nielsen,
2003). Although genetic engineering made it possible to use a
more directed approach to improve metabolism, most work
focused on the development of cell factories for production of re-
combinant proteins for use as pharmaceuticals, and today, there
are more than 300 biopharmaceutical proteins and antibodies on
the market with sales exceeding $100 billion (Langer, 2012).

With the late 1980s and early 1990s came new insights into the
complex inner workings of cellular metabolism, fueled by bioin-

formatics and mathematical modeling methods that allowed
quantitative analysis. This enabled speciﬁc genetic modiﬁca-
tions altering cellular metabolism to be introduced, such that
ﬂuxes could be directed toward the product of interest. Thus,
the ﬁeld of metabolic engineering was born (Bailey, 1991; Ste-
phanopoulos and Vallino, 1991; Nielsen, 2001; Keasling, 2010).
Now, more than twenty years later, metabolic engineering has
been exploited not only to improve traditional microbial fermen-
tation processes, but also to produce chemicals that are
currently used as fuels, materials, and pharmaceutical ingredi-
ents (Table 1).

Despite the advanced systems and synthetic biology technol-
ogies now available for detailed phenotypic characterization of
cells and genome editing, developing new cell factories that
meet the economic requirements for industrial scale production
is still challenging, typically requiring 6–8 years and over $50
million. The reason for this is inherent to the cells themselves.
To ensure metabolic homeostasis even when exposed to vary-
ing environmental conditions, cells have evolved extensive
regulation and complex interactions between metabolic path-
ways. Redirecting carbon ﬂuxes toward desired metabolites
therefore requires modulating the lines of communication in
endogenous metabolic pathways or inﬁltrating the system with
disruptive signals that interfere with these regulatory mecha-
nisms. At present, our knowledge of how metabolism is regu-
lated even in simple model cells is limited. As a result, engineer-
ing a cell
factory involves several rounds of the so-called
‘‘design-build-test’’ cycle, in which a certain metabolic design
is implemented and improved through genetic engineering
and thereafter tested.

Cell 164, March 10, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc. 1185

Table 1. Some Success Stories of Metabolic Engineering

Chemical

Lysine

1,3-Propanediol

7-ADCA

1,4-Butanediol

Application

Cell Factory

Companies

feed additive (>1 million tons/year)

Corynebacterium glutamicum

Evonik, ADM, CJ, Ajinomoto

chemical building block, e.g., for production
of materials, cosmetics, and food ingredients

precursor for the broad-spectrum antibiotic
Cephalexin

chemical building block, e.g., for production
of Spandex

Escherichia coli

Dupont and Tate&Lyle
joint venture

Penicillium chrysogenum

DSM

Escherichia coli

Genomatica

Artemisinic acid

anti-malarial drug

Saccharomyces cerevisiae

Sanoﬁ Aventis (process
developed by Amyris)

Isobutanol

advanced biofuel

Saccharomyces cerevisiae

Gevo, Butamax

Here, we will discuss the principles and current challenges of
metabolic engineering, focusing on how metabolism can be en-
gineered for industrial
level production of speciﬁc chemicals,
either through de-regulation of endogenous metabolism or
through insertion of heterologous pathways that overcome
cellular regulation. We will then discuss how technologies devel-
oped in recent years can contribute to the design-build-test cy-
cle and how adding a fourth element to this cycle, namely
‘‘learn,’’ can improve the process. Based on implementation of
speciﬁc metabolic designs, can we gain new knowledge about
how metabolism operates and how it is regulated and subse-
quently use this knowledge for improved design?

Challenges for Metabolic Engineering
Even though metabolic engineering has found applications in
optimization of existing processes, much of the current focus
is on the development of novel bioprocesses. In the fuel and
chemical industry, there is much interest in exploiting the poten-
tial of bio-based production for two major reasons: the sustain-
ability factor and the possibility of producing new molecules.
Bio-based production of chemicals allows for use of renewable
raw materials, such as plant-derived feedstocks like starch, su-
crose, cellulose, and lignocellulose that are more sustainable
than many traditional chemical processes relying on fossil fuels.
Furthermore, replacement of traditional chemical synthesis with
bio-based production typically results in reduced environmental
footprint in terms of energy usage and emission (Saling, 2005).
The key driver for the chemical industry is, however, the produc-
tion of chemicals that have either better properties than tradi-
tional chemicals or chemicals that can ﬁnd new applications.
The Route for Development of a Novel Bioprocess
Production of a so-called ‘‘drop-in’’ chemical starts with identiﬁ-
cation of the molecule of interest, followed by determination of
whether there exists a metabolic pathway in nature to produce
this molecule (Figure 1A). Drop-in chemicals are molecules pro-
duced by fermentation instead of from fossil feedstock or other
natural sources that are difﬁcult to work with (such as rare
plants). In some cases, it is possible to identify a natural producer
of the molecule, and this cell factory can then be used for further
improvement. If, on the other hand, you want to transfer the
biosynthetic pathway to a heterologous host, and if all of the en-
zymes of the biosynthetic pathway have not yet been identiﬁed,
heterologous expression requires enzyme discovery as part of

1186 Cell 164, March 10, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.

the metabolic engineering program, as illustrated for production
of artemisinic acid (Ro et al., 2006; Westfall et al., 2012; Paddon
et al., 2013) and opioids (Galanie et al., 2015). In some cases,
however, it is difﬁcult to identify all the biosynthetic enzymes
needed to produce a molecule, and this hinders pathway recon-
struction in a heterologous host. For instance, not all the en-
zymes involved in biosynthesis of the anti-cancer drug taxol
have yet been identiﬁed (Ajikumar et al., 2010). Improved tech-
nologies for DNA and RNA sequencing, bioinformatics, and
structure-function predictions have advanced our ability to
rapidly identify enzyme candidates for a speciﬁc biosynthetic
pathway that can subsequently be evaluated for their ability to
reconstruct a complete pathway. In case it is not possible to
identify a natural producer, chimeric pathways may have to be
reconstructed and some of the enzymes may have to be evolved
or engineered to have new features.

Traditionally, natural producers were developed for produc-
tion of the molecule of interest through classical strain improve-
ment. However, with the advent of metabolic engineering, the
preferred route for developing a novel bio-process is now
through the use of ‘‘platform cell factories’’ (Figure 1A). Examples
include Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Escherichia coli, Aspergillus
niger, Bacillus subtilis, Corynebacterium glutamicum, and Chi-
nese hamster ovary (CHO) cells. The advantage of using platform
cell factories are numerous: (1) they are very well characterized in
terms of genetics and physiology; (2) it is easier to obtain product
approval by governmental organizations if they have been used
for production of a range of products already; (3) many tools for
genome editing are available; and (4) many gene expression
tools are available, e.g., plasmids, promoters, and terminators.
Each of the above mentioned cell factories have speciﬁc advan-
tages. For example, A. niger and B. subtilis have very efﬁcient
protein secretion and are therefore widely used for production
of industrial enzymes, while CHO cells are well suited for pro-
duction of glycosylated proteins to be used as pharmaceuticals.
For fuels and chemicals, there is an increasing focus on use
of S. cerevisiae and E. coli as platform cell factories, with
C. glutamicum as an attractive third choice. To produce a mole-
cule of interest, the biosynthetic pathway for the molecule is
reconstructed in the platform cell factory, resulting in establish-
ment of a proof-of-principle strain (Figure 1B). Generally, this
strain can be patented and represents a key milestone in the
development of a novel bioprocess.

Figure 1. Development of Novel Biopro-
cesses
(A) The typical workﬂow for developing a biotech
process for production of a new molecule. TRY
stands for titer, rate, and yield.
(B) With current technologies, development of a
ﬁnal strain that can be used for industrial produc-
tion from a proof-of-principle strain takes several
years and is costly. There is a need for new tech-
nologies that can shorten the development time
and reduce the costs.
(C) Example of time and cost for development of
bioprocesses for two molecules that have been
launched on the market, the anti-malarial drug ar-
temisinin and the chemical building block 1,3
propanediol.

duction. Traditionally, each round of ge-
netic engineering could only be done in a
serial fashion, so it was time consuming
to introduce the many genetic modiﬁca-
tions required for a ﬁnal production
strain. As we will discuss later, a number
of new technologies are likely to change this and reduce the
time and cost of strain development.
The Bow-Tie Structure of Metabolism
There is a fundamental biological reason why it is often neces-
sary to make a large number of genetic modiﬁcations to alter
cell metabolism. Metabolism is one of the conserved features
of all living cells and has evolved to be organized into a ‘‘bow-
tie’’ structure (Figure 2A). This means that all carbon and energy
sources are converted through central carbon metabolism path-
ways into a set of 12 precursor metabolites (Figure 2A) that are
used for biosynthesis of all cellular components and natural
products generated by cells (Neidhardt et al., 1990). This results
in high ﬂux of carbon through most of the precursor metabolites,
each of which is involved in a large number of reactions (Nielsen,
2003). For example, in yeast, acetyl-CoA is involved in 34 com-
partmentalized metabolic reactions, besides being used for
acetylation of macromolecules. To balance the use of these pre-
cursor metabolites, cells have evolved several
levels of tight
regulation, especially to control biosynthesis of amino acids,
lipids, nucleotides, and carbohydrates needed for cell growth,
homeostasis, and maintenance. It is due to this tight regulation
that redirecting the carbon ﬂuxes in central carbon metabolism
toward molecules of interest is inherently so difﬁcult.

Regulation of central carbon metabolism has evolved to
ensure that production of cellular components is balanced with
energy production and consumption. This allows cells to main-
tain metabolic homeostasis even when exposed to varying envi-
ronmental and nutritional conditions. The same biological and
thermodynamic principles that allow cells to be robust and main-
tain homeostasis also make metabolic engineering challenging.
On the other hand, this robustness can be an advantage. Indeed,
many industrial processes take advantage of cells’ ability to
maintain homeostasis in changing and often harsh industrial
conditions, such as stress imposed by high osmolality, varying
temperatures, low pH, and high product concentrations that
are often toxic. For these reasons, industry often prefers robust

Cell 164, March 10, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc. 1187

Improving Strain Performance
The road from development of a proof-of-principle strain to hav-
ing a cell factory that can be used for commercial production is
long and arduous. The majority of operational costs come with
the fermentation process (Caspeta and Nielsen, 2013), primarily
due to relatively high feedstock costs, and being cost-competi-
tive therefore translates to speciﬁc demands on titer (ﬁnal con-
centration in the fermentation medium), rate (production per
unit of time), and yield (units of product synthesized per unit of
raw material consumed), often referred to as titer, rate, and yield
(TRY) requirements. Moving from a proof-of-principle strain to a
production strain that meets industrial TRY requirements is the
last but most challenging part of developing a novel bioprocess
(Figure 1A), typically involving many years of costly development
time (Figure 1B and 1C).

The main reason for the long development time is the need to
go through many rounds of strain construction and subsequent
phenotypic characterization. Most strains used for industrial
production require a large number of genetic modiﬁcations,
not only in the pathways of interest, but also in other pathways
in order to efﬁciently redirect metabolic ﬂux. For example, in
the E. coli strain used for production of 1,3-propanediol
(used for production of polymers and solvents), the phospho-
transferase (PTS) transport system for glucose uptake and
phosphorylation was replaced by a heterologous glucose
transporter and an additional hexokinase (Nakamura and
Whited, 2003). This was done in order to decouple glucose
transport from the lower glycolysis, making it possible to
convert glucose to 1,3-propanediol with higher yield.
In
S. cerevisiae,
improved ethanol and reduced glycerol pro-
duction could be obtained by engineering the glutamate
biosynthetic pathway (Nissen et al., 2000). By replacing the
NADPH-dependent glutamate dehydrogenase with a NADH-
dependent pathway, ammonia uptake became linked to
NADH consumption. With this new NADH ‘‘sink,’’ glycerol pro-
duction was reduced, freeing up more carbon for ethanol pro-

Figure 2. The Bow-Tie Structure of Meta-
bolism and Acetyl-CoA Metabolism in Yeast
(A) According to the bow-tie structure of meta-
bolism, all carbon sources are converted to 12 pre-
cursor metabolites that are used for biosynthesis
of all secreted metabolites. The precursor metabo-
lites are also used for the biosynthesis of all building
blocks that are needed for synthesizing macromol-
ecules making up the biomass of the cell. The 12
precursor metabolites are: glucose-6-phosphate,
fructose-6-phosphate, ribose-5-phosphate, eryth-
rose-4-phosphae,
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate,
3-phosphoglycerate, phosphoenol-pyruvate, pyru-
vate, acetyl-CoA, 2-oxoglutarate, succinyl-CoA,
and oxaloacetate.
(B) Illustration of how an acetyl-CoA over-produc-
ing strain can be used as a platform strain for
production of a range of different molecules.
Acetyl-CoA (AcCoA) metabolism in yeast is com-
partmentalized and there is no direct exchange of
this metabolite between the different compart-
ments. AcCoA is formed in the mitochondria from
pyruvate and enters the tricarboxylic acid cycle
(TCA). AcCoA is also formed in the peroxisome
from either fatty acids or acetate and can, via the
glyoxylate cycle (GYC), be converted to malate that
can be transported to the mitochondria for oxida-
tion. In order to ensure efﬁcient secretion of the
product from the cell
it is generally preferred to
reconstruct the heterologous pathway in the cytosol, and there is therefore a need to ensure efﬁcient provision of cytosolic AcCoA. AcCoA in the cytosol is
produced from acetate and is used for production of acetoacetyl-CoA (AcAcCoA), required for the biosynthesis of sterols via farnesyl pyrophosphate (FPP), and for
production of malonyl-CoA (MalCoA), required for fatty acid biosynthesis. AcAcCoA, MalCoA, FPP, and fatty acids can all be converted to commercially interesting
products.

cell factories that not only survive, but also divide and produce
the product of interest even under such adverse conditions.

The yeast S. cerevisiae has a proven record of large-scale pro-
duction of bioethanol and is a favorite organism within industry,
but its central carbon metabolism is extensively regulated and
has a relatively ‘‘ﬂat’’ structure, with transcriptional regulation
alone involving 102 transcription factors (TFs), 78% of which
are connected by cross-regulation in a large internal regulatory
loop (O¨ sterlund et al., 2015). Like most bacteria, E. coli has a
more hierarchical TF network structure (Yu and Gerstein, 2006),
making it easier to redirect carbon ﬂuxes to overproduce a spe-
ciﬁc molecule (Chen et al., 2013a), with two prominent examples
being 1,4-butanediol (Yim et al., 2011) and short alkanes (Choi
and Lee, 2013). In addition, several recent studies in E. coli
have provided detailed new knowledge of metabolic regulation,
such as control of iron metabolism through the Fur transcriptional
regulatory network (Seo et al., 2014) and mechanisms of oxida-
tive stress metabolism (Seo et al., 2015). Such insights will allow
for improved design and faster development of cell factories.

Principles and Tools for Advancing Metabolic
Engineering
Platform Strains
Even though the bow-tie structure of metabolism is a challenge
for metabolic engineering, it also offers some features that
may accelerate strain development in the future. For instance,
imagine that for one project, a strain is developed to convert a
carbon source (e.g., glucose) into a molecule of interest by
efﬁciently funneling it through an intermediate molecule (e.g.,
acetyl-CoA) at the center of the bow-tie. With additional smaller
modiﬁcations, this strain could then become a platform for

creating other strains to synthesize products derived from that
same intermediate. Since the hardest problem in strain develop-
ment is often deregulation of central carbon metabolism, such a
strain would be of great value, as the development of the new
strain from that step onward would proceed relatively fast.

This concept of platform strains (Nielsen, 2015) is by no means
new and has been applied successfully before. For example, the
Dutch company DSM, the largest producer of b-lactam anti-
biotics in the world, used one of their high-yielding penicillin-
producing strains as a platform strain to engineer the fungus
P. chrysogenum to efﬁciently produce 7-ADCA, from which
cephalosporins can be derived. They achieved this by extending
the penicillin biosynthetic pathway with an expandase, com-
bined with feeding the cells adipic acid (Crawford et al., 1995),
thereby leveraging the many years of work that went into devel-
oping efﬁcient penicillin-producing strains to generate a new and
more valuable product. Similarly, the Danish company Novo-
zymes, the largest enzyme producer in the world, has used
strains of the fungus Aspergillus oryzae that have been optimized
for protein secretion to rapidly develop efﬁcient production pro-
cesses for new fungal enzymes to be used in detergents, the
food industry, and the biofuel industry.

Platform strains were also used early on in the development
of E. coli strains that efﬁciently produce aromatics. Bio-based
production of aromatics has attracted much interest from the
chemical industry, as many molecules of industrial value, such
as aspartame and indigo, can be derived from aromatic amino
acids or their intermediates. Reconstruction of
the E. coli
pathway for conversion of the amino acid tryptophan into the
plant-derived dye indigo represented a key milestone in meta-
bolic engineering (Murdock et al., 1993). Following this, there

1188 Cell 164, March 10, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.

were several successful cases of engineering E. coli metabolism
to overproduce aromatics. In one study, Liao and colleagues
increased the supply of phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP), a precursor
metabolite for biosynthesis of aromatics, by either expressing a
PEP synthase (Patnaik and Liao, 1994) or using a non-PTS sugar
transport system (Patnaik et al., 1995).

Recently, S. cerevisiae has also been engineered for high-level
production of aromatics (Rodriguez et al., 2015), with the objec-
tive of producing natural plant products such as stilbenoids and
ﬂavonoids. In these cases, one can take advantage of prior
knowledge from plant engineering, since it is generally relatively
easy to express plant P450 enzymes in S. cerevisiae. Indeed,
there are numerous examples of reconstructing complex plant
pathways using aromatic amino acids as building blocks in
yeast. These include production of the antioxidant and potential
drug resveratrol, which is found in the skin of grapes (Li et al.,
2015), and the antioxidant naringenin, which has anti-inﬂamma-
tory and immune-stimulating effects (Koopman et al., 2012).
Notably, the recent reconstruction of a 23-enzyme pathway to
produce opioids in yeast (Galanie et al., 2015) represents an
important milestone in the ﬁeld, as it shows that even very long
and complex pathways can be successfully reconstructed.
This study illustrates another advantage of using a platform cell
factory: having a strain with increased ﬂux toward tyrosine, the
precursor for the biosynthetic pathway, made it easier to identify
good candidate enzymes for the pathway (Galanie et al., 2015).
Despite the success, however, obtaining a proof-of-principle
strain producing a low titer of the product is only the ﬁrst step to-
ward establishing a commercial process, and the TRY of opioid
production will need to be signiﬁcantly improved before microbi-
al production can replace the current process with extraction
from plants.

One area that has attracted signiﬁcant attention recently is
the development of yeast platform strains to produce acetyl-
CoA, as many chemicals of interest can be derived from this
precursor metabolite (Nielsen, 2014; Krivoruchko et al., 2015).
Many commodity chemicals and advanced biofuels must be
produced in large quantities, and using yeast as a cell factory
is therefore favorable, as current bioethanol plants could be ret-
roﬁtted to produce these more valuable chemicals. However,
as illustrated in Figure 2, acetyl-CoA metabolism in yeast is
compartmentalized. In the cytosol, acetyl-CoA is used for lipid
biosynthesis, either via malonyl-CoA for fatty acids or acetoa-
cetyl-CoA for sterols via the mevalonate pathway, and is
derived from acetate by acetyl-CoA synthetases (Acs). Acetate
comes from acetaldehyde, an intermediate in the conversion of
pyruvate to ethanol, the key fermentative route for yeast. On
the other hand, acetyl-CoA in the mitochondria is formed
from pyruvate by the pyruvate dehydrogenase (Pdh) complex,
and there is no direct exchange of acetyl-CoA between the
two compartments, although acetyl-CoA in the cytosol can
be transported to the mitochondria via malate or succinate
(Chen et al., 2012a). Even though biosynthetic pathways can
be reconstructed in the mitochondria (Avalos et al., 2013), it
is generally preferable to do so in the cytosol, as this facilitates
export of the ﬁnal product, which in turn facilitates isolation and
puriﬁcation of the desired compound and reduces the produc-
tion costs dramatically.

The biosynthesis of lipids is highly regulated, particularly at
two enzymatic steps, the conversion of acetyl-CoA to malonyl-
CoA by acetyl-CoA carboxylase (Acc) and the conversion of hy-
droxy-3-methyl-glutaryl-CoA (HMG-CoA)
into mevalonate by
HMG-CoA reductase (Hmgr). Acc is inactivated at the protein
level by the protein kinase Snf1 (AMPK in human)
(Nielsen,
2009), a global energy regulator (Usaite et al., 2009). Recently,
it was shown that a mutant version of Acc that cannot be phos-
phorylated enables high ﬂux toward malonyl-CoA (Shi et al.,
2014). Hmgr is also regulated at the protein level and is bound
to the endoplasmic reticulum membrane while facing the
cytosol. By sensing ER membrane sterol composition, Hmgr
is feedback inhibited by the presence of ergosterol (Nielsen,
2009). Several studies have shown that ﬂux toward mevalonate
can be increased signiﬁcantly through deregulation of Hmgr by
deleting its membrane-binding domain (Donald et al., 1997).

The Acs enzyme is also believed to be regulated through phos-
phorylation and acetylation, but the exact sites have not been
identiﬁed. A breakthrough in increasing ﬂux toward acetyl-
CoA-derived products was the expression of a mutant version
of Acs from Streptococcus enterica that carries a point mutation
preventing inactivation by phosphorylation (Shiba et al., 2007).
Expression of this heterologous Acs is often combined with over-
expression of ALD6 (Shiba et al., 2007), which catalyzes the con-
version of acetaldehyde to acetate. This strategy was recently
combined with blocking of the glyoxylate cycle to prevent trans-
fer of acetyl-CoA from the cytosol to the mitochondria (Chen
et al., 2013b). However, the Acs-catalyzed reaction involves
conversion of ATP to AMP, so several studies have aimed at
creating an energetically more efﬁcient pathway from pyruvate
to acetyl-CoA in the cytosol. For example, some groups have
heterologously expressed bacterial pyruvate formate lyase,
which converts pyruvate to formate and acetyl-CoA (Waks and
Silver, 2009; Kozak et al., 2014a; Zhang et al., 2015), where
formate can subsequently be oxidized to carbon dioxide, with
the generation of NADH, by formate dehydrogenase. Alterna-
tively, a bacterial Pdh localized to the cytosol can directly
generate acetyl-CoA from pyruvate (Kozak et al., 2014b), but
this is a major undertaking as this enzyme is a multimeric and
is larger than bacterial ribosomes.

These studies teach the general lesson that it is often neces-
sary to combine overexpression of speciﬁc enzymes with dereg-
ulation of the pathway in order to ensure high ﬂux through the
pathway of interest. An alternative to de-regulation of individual
enzymes is the expression of a complete heterologous pathway,
as illustrated by expression of the yeast mevalonate pathway in
E. coli
(Martin et al., 2003). E. coli uses a non-mevalonate
pathway for the biosynthesis of farnesyl pyrophosphate, an in-
termediate of the sterol biosynthetic pathway and a precursor
for biosynthesis of sesquiterpenes, a broad class of chemicals
that can be used as perfumes, pharmaceuticals, and biofuels.
This approach circumvents the problem of the endogenous
pathway being regulated, resulting in a signiﬁcant increase in
ﬂux toward farnesyl pyrophosphate, an intermediate for the
anti-malarial drug artemisinic acid (Martin et al., 2003).
Genetic Tools
One of the key requirements for metabolic engineering is the
availability of good genetic tools for genetic engineering of the

Cell 164, March 10, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc. 1189

host cell (Redden et al., 2014; Jensen and Keasling, 2014; David
and Siewers, 2014). As mentioned above, manipulation of meta-
bolism generally involves the knockout, introduction, and over-
expression or mutation of more than one gene. Although using
autonomously replicating vectors, such as plasmids, to intro-
duce genes is useful for constructing proof-of-principle strains,
plasmids tend to be unstable when used in large-scale industrial
cultivation that involves massive cell expansion. In the past,
introducing genes into chromosomes was accomplished primar-
ily using phage integration sites in bacteria and homologous
recombination in yeast. However, ‘‘clustered regulatory inter-
spaced short palindromic repeats’’ (CRISPR)/CRISPR-associ-
ated protein Cas9-based systems now allow introduction of
genes into nearly any location in the chromosome (Jinek et al.,
2012; Jakociunas et al., 2015). With the ability to vary promoter
(Jensen and Hammer, 1998; Redden and Alper, 2015) and ribo-
some binding strength (Salis et al., 2009), as well as the stability
of the mRNA (Smolke et al., 2000; Pﬂeger et al., 2006) and the re-
sulting protein, there are many levers other than copy number
that can be used to alter enzyme production. Morever, in cases
where copy number limits protein production, one can amplify
genes on the chromosome to increase copy number (Tyo
et al., 2009).

Promoters play an essential role in controlling biosynthetic
pathways. Inducible promoters are often essential for pathways
that produce toxic products, and several inducible expression
systems are now available for use in bacteria, yeasts, and other
organisms (Wang et al., 2012). Ensuring that these promoters
have consistent, tunable control in all cells in a culture is essen-
tial
for consistent production of the desired molecule and
for preventing non-producer cells from taking over the popula-
tion (Khlebnikov et al., 2001; Lee and Keasling, 2005).
Promoters that are constitutive,
induced by starvation or
upon entry into stationary phase, or quorum-sensing allow for
inexpensive, inducer-free gene expression, which is particularly
important in large-scale production of chemicals and fuels,
where the cost of the inducer is an issue (Tsao et al., 2010).
However, a trade-off with using constitutive expression of
pathway enzymes is that these often may account for a major
fraction of the cellular proteome. Although small non-coding
RNAs can be used to control protein expression (Na et al.,
2013), so far there have been relatively few implementations
of this approach.

Production of most molecules of interest often requires several
enzymes, and the expression of the genes encoding these en-
zymes must be coordinated. There are many ways to coordinate
expression of multiple genes: (1) use different inducible pro-
moters for each gene; (2) use the same inducible promoter for
each gene but vary the promoter strength (Bakke et al., 2009);
(3) use a non-native RNA polymerase or transcription factor to
control the expression of more than one gene (Alper and Stepha-
nopoulos, 2007); (4) group multiple, related genes into operons
(and use internal ribosomal entry sequences in eukaryotes (Ko-
mar and Hatzoglou, 2005); (5) vary the ribosome binding strength
for the enzymes encoded in the operon (Salis et al., 2009); (6)
control segmental mRNA stability of each coding region (Smolke
et al., 2000; Pﬂeger et al., 2006); (7) control the stability of each
enzyme, and (8) spatial control through attachment to a protein

1190 Cell 164, March 10, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.

scaffold (Dueber et al., 2009) or targeting to special organelles
(Farhi et al., 2011; Avalos et al., 2013).

In all of these cases, it is desirable for the metabolic engineer
to know the speciﬁc activity of each enzyme in the pathway in or-
der to design promoter or ribosome binding site strength or the
stability of mRNA or protein in order to ‘‘dial
in’’ the correct
amount of enzyme in the pathway. However, as knowledge
about the activity of each enzyme in vivo is often absent, the
levels of each metabolite and enzyme in the pathway must be
measured to determine if there are any pathway bottlenecks
and then the level of expression (or mRNA or protein stability)
of the limiting enzyme must be adjusted. This can be a laborious
process. The development of dynamic regulators using tran-
scription factors that can sense intermediates in the biosynthetic
pathway (Farmer and Liao, 2000; Zhang et al., 2012) or pro-
moters that respond to stress (Dahl et al., 2013) eliminates the
need to regulate every step of the pathway and puts the control
in the hands of the cell. Similarly, gene expression can be
controlled in response to medium components, as illustrated
by promoters for hexose transporters in yeast allowing dynamic
regulation of gene expression in response to the extracellular
glucose concentration, which can be used to downregulate a
pathway competing for the precursor needed for the desired
product (Scalcinati et al., 2012).

Regardless of how sophisticated the design tools and how
good the blueprint, there will always be ‘‘bugs’’ in the engineered
system, as we do not know everything about how metabolism is
regulated. For the development of microbial cell factories, sys-
tems biology can provide debugging routines (Park et al.,
2007; Park et al., 2014; Caspeta et al., 2014; Kizer et al., 2008).
Through transcriptomic, proteomic, and metabolomic measure-
ments combined with integrative analysis, it is possible to get
insight into how the introduction of a metabolic pathway impacts
overall cellular physiology. Often, expression of a heterologous
metabolic pathway elicits a stress response in the host, due to
protein overproduction or accumulation of toxic intermediates
or end products (Gill et al., 2000; Martin et al., 2003). These
stresses are reﬂected in mRNA and protein expression and
can therefore be identiﬁed using analysis of the transcriptome,
proteome, metabolome, or ﬂuxome. Information from one or
more of these techniques can then be used to modify expression
of genes in the metabolic pathway or in the host to improve titers
and/or productivity of the ﬁnal product.
Adaptive Laboratory Evolution and High-Throughput
Screening
Once an organism is constructed with a desired metabolic
pathway,
it is necessary to further optimize the metabolic
pathway to increase TRY. Besides directed modiﬁcation of
gene expression, as described above, TRY can be improved us-
ing adaptive laboratory evolution (ALE) (Dragosits and Mattano-
vich, 2013). If production of the desired chemical is coupled to
growth (that is, when the cells grow they must produce the
chemical), then one can use improvements in the growth of the
organism to improve the production of the desired molecule.
ALE is one way to select for faster growing organisms, thereby
selecting for higher production of the desired molecule, as illus-
trated by succinic acid production by yeast (Otero et al., 2013). In
this study, the normal route for biosynthesis of glycine was

Figure 3. The Design-Build-Test-Learn Cy-
cle of Metabolic Engineering
Following identiﬁcation of a target molecule, a
regulatory circuit to be used for expression, and a
suitable host, the biological systems are designed.
This may involve the use of mathematical models
of metabolism and BioCAD software designing
optimal constructs. Thereafter, the pathway is re-
constructed in the build phase and the central
carbon metabolism is engineered to ensure efﬁ-
cient provision of the precursor metabolite. The
constructed strain is tested in bioreactors that
simulate industrial-like conditions, and following
analysis of the data, new knowledge is generated.
This is stored in the learn phase of the cycle and
can hereby be used for improved design in the next
round.

deleted, and an alternative route was introduced that resulted in
production of succinic acid as a by-product, so succinic acid
became a growth-coupled metabolite. ALE has also been shown
to be very efﬁcient for improving growth on non-preferred carbon
sources, such as glycerol for E. coli (Ibarra et al., 2002), galac-
tose for yeast (Hong et al., 2011), and xylose for yeast (Kuyper
et al., 2005), as well as for improving the tolerance to harsh con-
ditions or to the product of interest, as reviewed recently (Drag-
osits and Mattanovich, 2013).

Through the use of next-generation sequencing and systems
biology, it is possible to identify mutations responsible for the
desirable phenoptypes. For example, a single mutation in the
ERG3 gene conferred upon yeast the ability to grow at elevated
temperatures (Caspeta et al., 2014).
In this study, deep
sequencing of the genome gave clear hints on causal mutations,
but transcriptome and/or metabolome analysis assisted in map-
ping molecular mechanisms underlying the acquired pheno-
types. Thus, the mutation was found to result in altered sterol
composition (ergosterol in the yeast membrane was replaced
by fecosterol), and this was associated with an upregulation of
sterol metabolism. This showed that altered membrane proper-
ties due to changes in sterol composition allowed for improved
growth at elevated temperatures.

Although it is trivial to tie substrate consumption or stress
tolerance to growth, coupling production of the majority of small
molecules of commercial interest—such as fatty acids, diols, di-
amines, and short-chain alcohols among others—to growth is
difﬁcult. It is therefore necessary to use other screening or selec-
tion methods to identify improved strains. The combination of
microtiter plates for growth of strain libraries with gas and liquid
chromatography techniques is an option, but the throughput
(102–103 variants per machine per day)
falls far short of
levels necessary for effective interrogation of large genetic li-
braries. Microﬂuidic cell sorting offers interesting opportunities
for screening of cell libraries, as demonstrated recently for iden-
tiﬁcation of yeast strains with improved xylose uptake (Wang
et al., 2014), E. coli strains with improved lactic acid production
(Wang et al., 2014), and yeast strains with improved protein
secretion capacity (Huang et al., 2015).

In nature, the need for sensitive and speciﬁc small-molecule
detection and response has been addressed in part through evo-

re-engineered,

lution and selection for ligand-responsive transcription factors
and their cognate promoters. Transcription-factor-promoter
pairs are archetypal genetic devices within the synthetic biology
paradigm. Abundant in nature, highly modular, and capable of
being evolved or
transcription-factor-based
devices are well suited for a broad range of applications. While
engineered transcription-factor-based biosensors have been
employed for detection of exogenous environmental pollutants
(Simpson et al., 1998), this work has only recently been explored
in the context of metabolic engineering (Chou and Keasling,
2013). Through coupling increased production of an intracellular
metabolite with expression of ﬂuorescent proteins, ﬂuorescent-
activated cell sorting (FACS) has been used for screening of
strains with improved phenotype. Recently, transcription-fac-
tor-based detection of small molecules has been used to in-
crease production of adipate, succinate, and 1-butanol (Dietrich
et al., 2013). We anticipate a time when biosensors can be readily
made for any desired product, allowing use of high-throughput
screening using FACS or microﬂuidics, and hereby, signiﬁcantly
reduce the time required for improving the TRY.

Design-Build-Test-Learn Cycle
As described above, the typical process for engineering meta-
bolism, as any other system, involves four highly interdependent
modules (Figure 3): design (D) of a biological system, in this case
metabolic pathways in a microorganism, to produce a desired
molecule and coding of these pathways into DNA parts and as-
sembly instructions; build (B) the biological system from DNA
parts and production-relevant microbial chassis, using inputs
from D and tools developed through synthetic biology; test (T)
to determine if and how the engineered biological system from
B carried out the desired function, using cell physiology and
omics (possibility to integrate via systems biology tools); and
learn (L) to glean information from the performance of engineered
biosystems to inform decision making in D, B, and T.

Although these steps are now carried out in the research lab-
oratory and a single turn of the DBTL cycle can take months of
work (Qin et al., 2015), we envision a time when metabolic engi-
neering will more closely resemble electronics engineering, with
turn-around times on the order of days to a couple of weeks.
Computer-aided design software for biology will allow the

Cell 164, March 10, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc. 1191

metabolic engineer to design a metabolic pathway inside an or-
ganism of interest, send that design to a biological foundry that
would construct the pathway in the organism of interest (Chen
et al., 2012b), and within a reasonable time frame, send that en-
gineered organism back to the engineer for scale-up and pro-
duction. In order for the foundry to be able to reliably construct
a functional metabolic pathway inside the target organism, the
foundry will need all of the tools to build the pathway (e.g., ro-
botic liquid handling or microﬂuidics for DNA construction
[Shih et al., 2015], genetic control systems to control the genes
of the new metabolic pathway [Lee et al., 2011; Lee et al.,
2015], tools to knock out competing pathways inside the host or-
ganism, etc.), methods and equipment for growing and assaying
for the ﬁnal product, and above all, machine-learning software to
gather the successes and failures of the design, build, and test
processes and attempt to learn from those to make the design
software more capable during the next round. Although it may
be some time before metabolic engineering has the rapid turn-
arounds of electronics engineering, new technologies as dis-
cussed below will clearly lead to a signiﬁcant reduction in the
turnaround time in the DBTL cycle.
Design
Current pathway design is often treated as a one-off process,
relying heavily on domain expertise with no standardization.
The pathway designer generally determines what organism he/
she will use for the production process based on the starting ma-
terials available (e.g., sucrose from cane, glucose from starch,
mixed sugars from cellulosic biomass), the toxicity of the desired
product to an organism, and the processing conditions neces-
sary to produce and purify the desired product (e.g., high tem-
perature, low pH, etc). Based on the choice of organism, the
metabolic engineer is provided with an available set of intracel-
lular metabolites from which to produce the desired end product.
To get from the available starting metabolites inside the cell to
the desired product, the metabolic engineer searches for en-
zymes that could be used in a heterologous metabolic pathway;
these enzymes can be found in online databases of pathways,
the literature where metabolic pathways of various organisms
are described, and genome sequence databases where annota-
tions might indicate reactions that have little to no documenta-
tion in a particular host. In cases where no speciﬁc enzyme
can be identiﬁed, one may evolve an enzyme to carry out the
desired reaction (Renata et al., 2015) or construct an enzyme
de novo (Siegel et al., 2010), which is quite difﬁcult.

The approach described above is difﬁcult to scale, and is often
inefﬁcient because there is no ability to reuse parts or data from
related designs. For data capture and exchange, there are local
successes in the broader community, such as the systems
biology community, where standards have been developed for
omics data capture, but there is little formalism around genotype
speciﬁcation, strain construction speciﬁcation, and particularly
formal representation of observations about data. Small-scale
labs will frequently capture these data on paper or perhaps a
spreadsheet in no particular format, making it extremely prob-
lematic to apply these results to an open-source production
framework.

Here, a BioCAD software providing information about the
starting materials available and the desired product would be

1192 Cell 164, March 10, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.

extremely useful and this kind of software would identify a range
of suitable organisms based on substrates available and process
conditions necessary to produce and purify the desired product
(e.g., low pH, high temperature, etc). After the user selects the
organism, the BioCAD software would then identify all possible
pathways between available intermediates in the cell and the
ﬁnal product, e.g., using BNICE.ch (Hadadi and Hatzimanikatis,
2015). Furthermore, using detailed metabolic models, BioCAD
would be able to enumerate different metabolic engineering tar-
gets that would improve the yield in the conversion of the sub-
strate to the product. Here, genome-scale metabolic models
(GEMs) have shown to be particularly useful (O’Brien et al.,
2015; Lee and Kim, 2015), and GEMs have been developed for
most industrially relevant microorganisms (Kim et al., 2012; Gar-
cia-Albornoz and Nielsen, 2013). Recently, these models have
been expanded to include many other key cellular processes,
such as transcription and translation (O’Brien and Palsson,
2015), allowing for improved simulation capabilities of these
models.

A strength of these models is that they are ‘‘open-ended,’’
meaning that new information can be added to the models
when it is acquired. This was illustrated in a recent study on
oxidative stress in E. coli, where several key pathways were
identiﬁed to be missing in the GEM and improved performance
of the model when added (Brynildsen et al., 2013). These models
do, however, have limitations as they only provide stoichiometric
constraints. Thus, efforts have been made toward integrating ki-
netic information into GEMs, and in this case, the BioCAD soft-
ware could also have the Vmax and Km values for all of the neces-
sary enzymes—as well as dependencies of the enzymes for
cofactors, pH, temperature, etc.—so that promoters, mRNA sta-
bilities, and enzyme stabilities could be programmed to deliver
the most appropriate enzyme for each step in the correct amount
to achieve the desired reaction. Once all design alternatives are
evaluated, the best choice would be sent for construction.
Build
The build phase is the construction or retroﬁtting of the metabolic
pathway in the desired host, as well as the deregulating of the
central carbon metabolism such that a higher ﬂux can be
directed toward the product of interest. Pathway reconstruction
includes synthesis of large DNA constructs containing the genes
encoding the enzymes of the metabolic pathways and the asso-
ciated genetic control systems to regulate enzyme production.
Build also includes knocking out genes or pathways that might
compete or otherwise interfere with the functioning of the heter-
ologous metabolic pathway.

Large DNA construction is one area that has greatly expanded
over the past several years (Kosuri and Church, 2014). It is now
possible to purchase long DNA that will encode an entire enzyme
or a series of enzymes to constitute an entire metabolic pathway.
This has greatly reduced the time and effort needed to build
metabolic pathways, allowing the metabolic engineer to focus
more on developing the host.

In theory, any build team would have at their disposal a variety
of host organisms that have different characteristics: different
optimal growth temperatures, pH optima, abilities to tolerate
various chemicals, abilities to consume different carbon sour-
ces, etc. Ideally, these hosts would all be transformable and

have well-characterized genetic systems that would allow for
control of transcript and protein abundance and timing of
pathway activity during the various phases of growth. In reality,
this is rarely the case: only a few hosts are known well enough
to allow rapid and easy construction of metabolic pathways,
and even in the case of well-known hosts, the genetic tools
are rarely characterized to the extent that the desired level of
the metabolic pathway can be programmed accurately. For
instance, expression from a speciﬁc promoter may be context
dependent and, therefore, vary depending on what other genetic
modiﬁcations are introduced into the host cell.

The recent development of CRISPR/Cas9 systems has al-
lowed engineering of nearly any host that is transformable (Jinek
et al., 2012). Modiﬁcations of these systems allow insertion of
many genes into many target sites (Jakociunas et al., 2015),
knock out or downregulation of competing pathways (Gilbert
et al., 2013), and upregulation of beneﬁcial pathways. These
methods will likely continue to be used and will become a stan-
dard tool in the genetic-engineering toolbox. Furthermore, even
though well-characterized promoters, ribosome binding sites,
mRNA stability elements, and the like are limited, the develop-
ment of computer algorithms to calculate native promoter and
ribosome binding site strength and then to design new ones
will greatly facilitate construction of metabolic pathways that
perform as desired (Salis, 2011).
Test
The test phase includes anything that determines the efﬁcacy of
the design and build, including but not limited to (1) veriﬁcation of
Build success (i.e., construction of metabolic pathway, knockout
of speciﬁc genes, integration of genes, etc.), (2) growth and
physiological characterization of the engineered cells, and (3)
measurement of the transcripts, proteins, and/or ﬁnal products
of the engineered pathway, often at genome scale. It is advanta-
geous to use high-throughput methods, e.g., transcriptomics,
proteomics, and metabolomics, as these allow for global anal-
ysis of cellular metabolism. It is difﬁcult to analyze multiple
data types, but GEMs provide a good scaffold for analysis (Patil
and Nielsen, 2005; Usaite et al., 2009). High-throughput analysis
allows for measurements of speciﬁc pathway protein production
(Redding-Johanson et al., 2011), speciﬁc metabolite presence or
perturbation, or speciﬁc gene expression (Regenberg et al.,
2006; Boer et al., 2010). However, the technologies were devel-
oped for low-throughput research and biomarker identiﬁcation
for small numbers of proteins or metabolites and, when adapted
for metabolic engineering applications, they are slow and only
allow analysis of a smaller subset of strains. As a result, they
cannot be used for routine analysis in the test phase, as this
would be too costly and time-consuming. The absence of a
comprehensive dataset for each constructed strain severely
limits improvement in the success rate of the DBTL cycle, so
improved technologies for formalizing data capture, data anal-
ysis, and data interpretation are needed.
Learn
Learning is possibly the most weakly supported step in current
metabolic engineering practice, yet perhaps the most important
to increasing the rate of success. It is typically nonsystematic
and lacks statistical rigor, relying on ad hoc observations, litera-
ture data, and intuition gathered by individual researchers

responsible for the next round of pathway design. Failed ex-
periments are often discarded or inaccessible to data mining
and seen as uninformative, with only rare success selectively
archived. Nonetheless, it is clear that experienced laboratories
can more consistently produce target molecules of interest, sug-
gesting an opportunity to formalize the learning process.

One area where the DBTL cycle may particularly contribute to
gaining new biological insight is on how metabolism is regulated.
We have extensive information about regulation of metabolism,
but this is generally based on studies of one or a few regulatory
components. A few systems biological studies have enabled
global mapping of key regulatory components, e.g., Snf1 in yeast
(Usaite et al., 2009), but it is still a challenge to integrate this in-
formation into concrete design strategies. However, by inte-
grating engineering design with available information about
regulation, possibly combined with targeted new experiments
to identify novel regulatory structures, it may be possible to
signiﬁcantly advance our understanding of how metabolism is
regulated at the global level. This may allow for new strategies,
as targeting regulation can in some cases be better than simply
overexpressing speciﬁc pathway enzymes. For example, yeast
galactose uptake rate was not improved by overexpression of in-
dividual enzymes or combinations of enzymes in the Leloir
pathway (de Jongh et al., 2008), whereas a 40% increase could
be obtained by engineering the GAL-regulon (Ostergaard et al.,
2000)

Recently, statistical techniques such as principal component
analysis (PCA) have been used to analyze data from engi-
neered organisms to inform the next round of design (Alonso-
Gutierrez et al., 2015). In the past, data from proteomics anal-
ysis were too complicated to allow one to deduce trends that
could be used to understand system limitations and to reengi-
neer the system, but techniques like PCA allow the analysis of
small datasets to reveal patterns or trends that can be used to
guide re-design of a biological system. As more data of any
one type and more diverse data are collected, it will be neces-
sary to use more sophisticated data-analysis tools, such as
machine-learning algorithms (Tarca et al., 2007). Machine-
learning techniques are being used in a diverse set of applica-
tions, but to date, it has been used relatively little for metabolic
engineering purposes. It may, however, offer the possibility of
deducing patterns and trends that will aid in redesign of biolog-
ical systems.

At this time, many biological engineering exercises still do not
collect the vast amounts of data that are collected in other set-
tings, such as over the internet. With improvements in the types
and speed with which we can collect data on engineered sys-
tems, we will soon be awash in data and will need computational
methods to make sense of it all. This will allow us to identify bot-
tlenecks in biosynthetic pathways, diagnose exactly why the
bottlenecks exist, and reengineer systems to produce higher
TRYs of the desired product in less time with less human inter-
vention.

Perspectives
The development of cell factories, which can be used for cost-
efﬁcient production of fuels, chemicals, foods, feeds, and phar-
maceuticals, requires multiple rounds of the DBTL cycle, often

Cell 164, March 10, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc. 1193

because we are missing knowledge of how metabolism is regu-
lated. This takes time and is costly. The main reason for this is the
extensive robustness of cell metabolism, which is due to redun-
dancy, regulation, and tight interaction of metabolism and all
other cellular processes. Metabolism has evolved to support
cell growth and maintenance, and when we seek to engineer
metabolism to redirect metabolic ﬂuxes toward a speciﬁc
metabolite, the regulation within the cell will strive to keep ho-
meostasis and, therefore, counteract our engineering efforts.
However, by formalizing the learn part of the DBTL cycle, it will
be possible to capture knowledge generated in different meta-
bolic engineering efforts and, thereby, accelerate the process.
This will require establishment of BioCAD software that can inte-
grate knowledge and be used as an interactive tool for improved
design by the metabolic engineer. We envisage that BioCAD can
also hold information about detailed metabolic models for plat-
form cell factories and information about promoters, terminators,
integration sites, vectors, and more, so that the complete design
process can be automated. BioCAD could also be used to inte-
grate so-called ‘‘big data’’, e.g., where multi-omics data from
many different strains are collected and analyzed in an integra-
tive fashion. Together with information about transcription-factor
networks and protein-protein interaction networks, this could be
used to gain much new insight into regulation of the applied cell
factory. This will allow the metabolic engineer to rapidly test
different designs and score these against each other and,
thereby, facilitate the design phase. With the advancement in
DNA synthesis and robotics for cloning and phenotypic charac-
terization, the build and test processes may also, to a large
extent, be automated, and the development of novel cell
factories will develop similarly as seen in other manufacturing
processes.

Even though we do have extensive knowledge about yeast
and E. coli that can be integrated into a future BioCAD, a major
hindrance for advancement of the ﬁeld is our lack of fundamental
knowledge. We mentioned several of these earlier, but it will also
be necessary to expand our current list of platform cell factories
in order to expand the possibilities for biochemical transforma-
tions. Not all pathways express well in yeast and E. coli, and it
may also be necessary to have cell factory platforms that can op-
erate at extreme temperatures, extreme pH values (high and
low), and extreme salt concentrations. The development of a
solid knowledge base for such new platform cell factories will
obviously be time-consuming, but using the scaffold for knowl-
edge integration established through BioCAD, it will be possible
to advance rapidly.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We acknowledge funding from the Novo Nordisk Foundation, the Knut and
Alice Wallenberg Foundation, Vetenskapsra˚ det, FORMAS, the Joint Bio-
Energy Institute (http://www.jbei.org/), which is supported by the US Depart-
ment of Energy, Ofﬁce of Science, Ofﬁce of Biological and Environmental
Research through contract DE-AC02-05CH11231 between Lawrence Berke-
ley National Laboratory and the US Department of Energy, and by the Syn-
thetic Biology Engineering Research Center (SynBERC) through National Sci-
ence Foundation grant NSF EEC 0540879. We thank Yun Chen, Victor
Chubukov, Nathan Hillson, Mingtao Huang, Dina Petranovic, and Yongjin
Zhou for constructive comments.

1194 Cell 164, March 10, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.

REFERENCES

Ajikumar, P.K., Xiao, W.-H., Tyo, K.E., Wang, Y., Simeon, F., Leonard, E., Mu-
cha, O., Phon, T.H., Pfeifer, B., and Stephanopoulos, G. (2010). Isoprenoid
pathway optimization for Taxol precursor overproduction in Escherichia coli.
Science 330, 70–74.

Alonso-Gutierrez, J., Kim, E.-M., Batth, T.S., Cho, N., Hu, Q., Chan, L.J.G.,
Petzold, C.J., Hillson, N.J., Adams, P.D., Keasling, J.D., et al. (2015). Principal
component analysis of proteomics (PCAP) as a tool to direct metabolic engi-
neering. Metab. Eng. 28, 123–133.

Alper, H., and Stephanopoulos, G. (2007). Global transcription machinery en-
gineering: a new approach for improving cellular phenotype. Metab. Eng. 9,
258–267.

Avalos, J.L., Fink, G.R., and Stephanopoulos, G. (2013). Compartmentaliza-
tion of metabolic pathways in yeast mitochondria improves the production
of branched-chain alcohols. Nat. Biotechnol. 31, 335–341.

Bailey, J.E. (1991). Toward a science of metabolic engineering. Science 252,
1668–1675.

Bakke, I., Berg, L., Aune, T.E., Brautaset, T., Sletta, H., Tøndervik, A., and
Valla, S. (2009). Random mutagenesis of the PM promoter as a powerful strat-
egy for improvement of recombinant-gene expression. Appl. Environ. Micro-
biol. 75, 2002–2011.

Boer, V.M., Crutchﬁeld, C.A., Bradley, P.H., Botstein, D., and Rabinowitz, J.D.
(2010). Growth-limiting intracellular metabolites in yeast growing under diverse
nutrient limitations. Mol. Biol. Cell 21, 198–211.

Brynildsen, M.P., Winkler, J.A., Spina, C.S., MacDonald, I.C., and Collins, J.J.
(2013). Potentiating antibacterial activity by predictably enhancing endoge-
nous microbial ROS production. Nat. Biotechnol. 31, 160–165.

Caspeta, L., and Nielsen, J. (2013). Economic and environmental impacts of
microbial biodiesel. Nat. Biotechnol. 31, 789–793.

Caspeta, L., Chen, Y., Ghiaci, P., Feizi, A., Buskov, S., Hallstro¨ m, B.M., Petra-
novic, D., and Nielsen, J. (2014). Biofuels. Altered sterol composition renders
yeast thermotolerant. Science 346, 75–78.

Chen, Y., Siewers, V., and Nielsen, J. (2012a). Proﬁling of cytosolic and perox-
isomal acetyl-CoA metabolism in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. PLoS ONE 7,
e42475.

Chen, J., Densmore, D., Ham, T.S., Keasling, J.D., and Hillson, N.J. (2012b).
DeviceEditor visual biological CAD canvas. J. Biol. Eng. 6, 1.

Chen, X., Zhou, L., Tian, K., Kumar, A., Singh, S., Prior, B.A., and Wang, Z.
(2013a). Metabolic engineering of Escherichia coli: a sustainable industrial
platform for bio-based chemical production. Biotechnol. Adv. 31, 1200–1223.

Chen, Y., Daviet, L., Schalk, M., Siewers, V., and Nielsen, J. (2013b). Establish-
ing a platform cell factory through engineering of yeast acetyl-CoA meta-
bolism. Metab. Eng. 15, 48–54.

Choi, Y.J., and Lee, S.Y. (2013). Microbial production of short-chain alkanes.
Nature 502, 571–574.

Chou, H.H., and Keasling, J.D. (2013). Programming adaptive control to evolve
increased metabolite production. Nat. Commun. 4, 2595.

Crawford, L., Stepan, A.M., McAda, P.C., Rambosek, J.A., Conder, M.J., Vinci,
V.A., and Reeves, C.D. (1995). Production of cephalosporin intermediates by
feeding adipic acid to recombinant Penicillium chrysogenum strains express-
ing ring expansion activity. Biotechnology (N. Y.) 13, 58–62.

Dahl, R.H., Zhang, F., Alonso-Gutierrez, J., Baidoo, E., Batth, T.S., Redding-
Johanson, A.M., Petzold, C.J., Mukhopadhyay, A., Lee, T.S., Adams, P.D.,
and Keasling, J.D. (2013). Engineering dynamic pathway regulation using
stress-response promoters. Nat. Biotechnol. 31, 1039–1046.

David, F., and Siewers, V. (2014). Advances in yeast genome engineering.
FEMS Yeast Res. 15, 1–14.

de Jongh, W.A., Bro, C., Ostergaard, S., Regenberg, B., Olsson, L., and Niel-
sen, J. (2008). The roles of galactitol, galactose-1-phosphate, and phospho-
glucomutase in galactose-induced toxicity in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Bio-
technol. Bioeng. 101, 317–326.

Dietrich, J.A., Shis, D.L., Alikhani, A., and Keasling, J.D. (2013). Transcription
factor-based screens and synthetic selections for microbial small-molecule
biosynthesis. ACS Synth. Biol. 2, 47–58.

Kim, T.Y., Sohn, S.B., Kim, Y.B., Kim, W.J., and Lee, S.Y. (2012). Recent ad-
vances in reconstruction and applications of genome-scale metabolic models.
Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 23, 617–623.

Donald, K.A., Hampton, R.Y., and Fritz, I.B. (1997). Effects of overproduction of
the catalytic domain of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase on
squalene synthesis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 63,
3341–3344.

Dragosits, M., and Mattanovich, D. (2013). Adaptive laboratory evolution –
principles and applications for biotechnology. Microb. Cell Fact. 12, 64.

Dueber, J.E., Wu, G.C., Malmirchegini, G.R., Moon, T.S., Petzold, C.J., Ullal,
A.V., Prather, K.L., and Keasling, J.D. (2009). Synthetic protein scaffolds pro-
vide modular control over metabolic ﬂux. Nat. Biotechnol. 27, 753–759.

Farhi, M., Marhevka, E., Masci, T., Marcos, E., Eyal, Y., Ovadis, M., Abeliovich,
H., and Vainstein, A. (2011). Harnessing yeast subcellular compartments for
the production of plant terpenoids. Metab. Eng. 13, 474–481.

Farmer, W.R., and Liao, J.C. (2000). Improving lycopene production in Escher-
ichia coli by engineering metabolic control. Nat. Biotechnol. 18, 533–537.

Galanie, S., Thodey, K., Trenchard, I.J., Filsinger Interrante, M., and Smolke,
C.D. (2015). Complete biosynthesis of opioids in yeast. Science 349, 1095–
1100.

Garcia-Albornoz, M.A., and Nielsen, J. (2013). Application of genome-scale
metabolic models in metabolic engineering. J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 9,
203–214.

Gilbert, L.A., Larson, M.H., Morsut, L., Liu, Z., Brar, G.A., Torres, S.E., Stern-
Ginossar, N., Brandman, O., Whitehead, E.H., Doudna, J.A., et al. (2013).
CRISPR-mediated modular RNA-guided regulation of transcription in eukary-
otes. Cell 154, 442–451.

Gill, R.T., Valdes, J.J., and Bentley, W.E. (2000). A comparative study of global
stress gene regulation in response to overexpression of recombinant proteins
in Escherichia coli. Metab. Eng. 2, 178–189.

Hadadi, N., and Hatzimanikatis, V. (2015). Design of computational retrobio-
synthesis tools for the design of de novo synthetic pathways. Curr. Opin.
Chem. Biol. 28, 99–104.

Hong, K.-K., Vongsangnak, W., Vemuri, G.N., and Nielsen, J. (2011). Unravel-
ling evolutionary strategies of yeast for improving galactose utilization through
integrated systems level analysis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108, 12179–
12184.

Huang, M., Bai, Y., Sjostrom, S.L., Hallstro¨ m, B.M., Liu, Z., Petranovic, D.,
Uhle´ n, M., Joensson, H.N., Andersson-Svahn, H., and Nielsen, J. (2015). Mi-
croﬂuidic screening and whole-genome sequencing identiﬁes mutations asso-
ciated with improved protein secretion by yeast. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
112, E4689–E4696.

Ibarra, R.U., Edwards, J.S., and Palsson, B.O. (2002). Escherichia coli K-12 un-
dergoes adaptive evolution to achieve in silico predicted optimal growth. Na-
ture 420, 186–189.
Jakociunas, T., Bonde, I., Herrga˚ rd, M., Harrison, S.J., Kristensen, M., Peder-
sen, L.E., Jensen, M.K., and Keasling, J.D.
(2015). Multiplex metabolic
pathway engineering using CRISPR/Cas9 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Metab. Eng. 28, 213–222.

Jensen, P.R., and Hammer, K. (1998). The sequence of spacers between the
consensus sequences modulates the strength of prokaryotic promoters.
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 64, 82–87.

Jensen, M.K., and Keasling, J.D. (2014). Recent applications of synthetic
biology tools for yeast metabolic engineering. FEMS Yeast Res. 15, 1–10.

Jinek, M., Chylinski, K., Fonfara, I., Hauer, M., Doudna, J.A., and Charpentier,
E. (2012). A programmable dual-RNA-guided DNA endonuclease in adaptive
bacterial immunity. Science 337, 816–821.

Keasling, J.D. (2010). Manufacturing molecules through metabolic engineer-
ing. Science 330, 1355–1358.

Khlebnikov, A., Datsenko, K.A., Skaug, T., Wanner, B.L., and Keasling, J.D.
(2001). Homogeneous expression of the P(BAD) promoter in Escherichia coli
by constitutive expression of the low-afﬁnity high-capacity AraE transporter.
Microbiology 147, 3241–3247.

Kizer, L., Pitera, D.J., Pﬂeger, B.F., and Keasling, J.D. (2008). Application of
functional genomics to pathway optimization for increased isoprenoid produc-
tion. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 74, 3229–3241.

Komar, A.A., and Hatzoglou, M. (2005). Internal ribosome entry sites in cellular
mRNAs: mystery of their existence. J. Biol. Chem. 280, 23425–23428.

Koopman, F., Beekwilder, J., Crimi, B., van Houwelingen, A., Hall, R.D., Bosch,
D., van Maris, A.J.A., Pronk, J.T., and Daran, J.-M. (2012). De novo production
of the ﬂavonoid naringenin in engineered Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Microb.
Cell Fact. 11, 155.

Kosuri, S., and Church, G.M. (2014). Large-scale de novo DNA synthesis: tech-
nologies and applications. Nat. Methods 11, 499–507.

Kozak, B.U., van Rossum, H.M., Benjamin, K.R., Wu, L., Daran, J.M., Pronk,
J.T., and van Maris, A.J. (2014a). Replacement of the Saccharomyces cerevi-
siae acetyl-CoA synthetases by alternative pathways for cytosolic acetyl-CoA
synthesis. Metab. Eng. 21, 46–59.

Kozak, B.U., van Rossum, H.M., Luttik, M.A.H., Akeroyd, M., Benjamin, K.R.,
Wu, L., de Vries, S., Daran, J.-M., Pronk, J.T., and van Maris, A.J.A. (2014b).
Engineering acetyl coenzyme A supply: functional expression of a bacterial py-
ruvate dehydrogenase complex in the cytosol of Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
MBio 5, e01696–e14.

Krivoruchko, A., Zhang, Y., Siewers, V., Chen, Y., and Nielsen, J. (2015).
Microbial acetyl-CoA metabolism and metabolic engineering. Metab. Eng.
28, 28–42.

Kuyper, M., Toirkens, M.J., Diderich, J.A., Winkler, A.A., van Dijken, J.P., and
Pronk, J.T. (2005). Evolutionary engineering of mixed-sugar utilization by a
xylose-fermenting Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain. FEMS Yeast Res. 5,
925–934.

Langer, E.S. (2012). Biomanufacturing outsourcing outlook. Biopharm International
25. http://www.biopharminternational.com/biomanufacturing-outsourcing-outlook.

Lee, S.K., and Keasling, J.D. (2005). A propionate-inducible expression sys-
tem for enteric bacteria. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 71, 6856–6862.

Lee, S.Y., and Kim, H.U. (2015). Systems strategies for developing industrial
microbial strains. Nat. Biotechnol. 33, 1061–1072.

Lee, T.S., Krupa, R.A., Zhang, F., Hajimorad, M., Holtz, W.J., Prasad, N., Lee,
S.K., and Keasling, J.D. (2011). BglBrick vectors and datasheets: A synthetic
biology platform for gene expression. J. Biol. Eng. 5, 12.

Lee, M.E., DeLoache, W.C., Cervantes, B., and Dueber, J.E. (2015). A highly
characterized yeast toolkit for modular, multipart assembly. ACS Synth. Biol.
4, 975–986.

Li, M., Kildegaard, K.R., Chen, Y., Rodriguez, A., Borodina, I., and Nielsen, J.
(2015). De novo production of resveratrol from glucose or ethanol by engi-
neered Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Metab. Eng. 32, 1–11.

Martin, V.J.J., Pitera, D.J., Withers, S.T., Newman, J.D., and Keasling, J.D.
(2003). Engineering a mevalonate pathway in Escherichia coli for production
of terpenoids. Nat. Biotechnol. 21, 796–802.

Murdock, D., Ensley, B.D., Serdar, C., and Thalen, M. (1993). Construction of
metabolic operons catalyzing the de novo biosynthesis of indigo in Escherichia
coli. Biotechnology (N. Y.) 11, 381–386.

Na, D., Yoo, S.M., Chung, H., Park, H., Park, J.H., and Lee, S.Y. (2013). Meta-
bolic engineering of Escherichia coli using synthetic small regulatory RNAs.
Nat. Biotechnol. 31, 170–174.

Nakamura, C.E., and Whited, G.M. (2003). Metabolic engineering for the mi-
crobial production of 1,3-propanediol. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 14, 454–459.

Neidhardt, F.C., Ingraham, J.L., and Schaechter, M. (1990). Physiology of the
Bacterial Cell (Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates).

Nielsen, J. (2001). Metabolic engineering. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 55,
263–283.

Nielsen, J. (2003). It is all about metabolic ﬂuxes. J. Bacteriol. 185, 7031–7035.

Cell 164, March 10, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc. 1195

Nielsen, J. (2009). Systems biology of lipid metabolism: from yeast to human.
FEBS Lett. 583, 3905–3913.

Nielsen, J. (2014). Synthetic biology for engineering acetyl coenzyme A meta-
bolism in yeast. MBio 5, e02153.

Nielsen, J. (2015). BIOENGINEERING. Yeast cell factories on the horizon. Sci-
ence 349, 1050–1051.

Nissen, T.L., Kielland-Brandt, M.C., Nielsen, J., and Villadsen, J. (2000). Opti-
mization of ethanol production in Saccharomyces cerevisiae by metabolic en-
gineering of the ammonium assimilation. Metab. Eng. 2, 69–77.

O’Brien, E.J., and Palsson, B.O. (2015). Computing the functional proteome:
recent progress and future prospects for genome-scale models. Curr. Opin.
Biotechnol. 34, 125–134.

O’Brien, E.J., Monk, J.M., and Palsson, B.O. (2015). Using genome-scale
models to predict biological capabilities. Cell 161, 971–987.

Ostergaard, S., Olsson, L., Johnston, M., and Nielsen, J. (2000). Increasing
galactose consumption by Saccharomyces cerevisiae through metabolic en-
gineering of the GAL gene regulatory network. Nat. Biotechnol. 18, 1283–1286.
O¨ sterlund, T., Bordel, S., and Nielsen, J. (2015). Controllability analysis of tran-
scriptional regulatory networks reveals circular control patterns among tran-
scription factors. Integr Biol (Camb) 7, 560–568.

Otero, J.M., Cimini, D., Patil, K.R., Poulsen, S.G., Olsson, L., and Nielsen, J.
(2013). Industrial systems biology of Saccharomyces cerevisiae enables novel
succinic acid cell factory. PLoS ONE 8, e54144.

Paddon, C.J., Westfall, P.J., Pitera, D.J., Benjamin, K., Fisher, K., McPhee, D.,
Leavell, M.D., Tai, A., Main, A., Eng, D., et al. (2013). High-level semi-synthetic
production of the potent antimalarial artemisinin. Nature 496, 528–532.

Park, J.H., Lee, K.H., Kim, T.Y., and Lee, S.Y. (2007). Metabolic engineering of
Escherichia coli for the production of L-valine based on transcriptome analysis
and in silico gene knockout simulation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 104, 7797–
7802.

Park, S.H., Kim, H.U., Kim, T.Y., Park, J.S., Kim, S.-S., and Lee, S.Y. (2014).
Metabolic engineering of Corynebacterium glutamicum for L-arginine produc-
tion. Nat. Commun. 5, 4618.

Patil, K.R., and Nielsen, J. (2005). Uncovering transcriptional regulation of
metabolism by using metabolic network topology. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 102, 2685–2689.

Patnaik, R., and Liao, J.C. (1994). Engineering of Escherichia coli central meta-
bolism for aromatic metabolite production with near theoretical yield. Appl. En-
viron. Microbiol. 60, 3903–3908.

Patnaik, R., Spitzer, R.G., and Liao, J.C. (1995). Pathway engineering for pro-
duction of aromatics in Escherichia coli: Conﬁrmation of stoichiometric anal-
ysis by independent modulation of AroG, TktA, and Pps activities. Biotechnol.
Bioeng. 46, 361–370.

Pﬂeger, B.F., Pitera, D.J., Smolke, C.D., and Keasling, J.D. (2006). Combina-
torial engineering of intergenic regions in operons tunes expression of multiple
genes. Nat. Biotechnol. 24, 1027–1032.

Qin, J., Zhou, Y.J., Krivoruchko, A., Huang, M., Liu, L., Khoomrung, S.,
Siewers, V., Jiang, B., and Nielsen, J. (2015). Modular pathway rewiring of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae enables high-level production of L-ornithine. Nat.
Commun. 6, 8224.

Redden, H., and Alper, H.S. (2015). The development and characterization of
synthetic minimal yeast promoters. Nat. Commun. 6, 7810.

Redden, H., Morse, N., and Alper, H.S. (2014). The synthetic biology toolbox
for tuning gene expression in yeast. FEMS Yeast Res. 15, 1–10.

Redding-Johanson, A.M., Batth, T.S., Chan, R., Krupa, R., Szmidt, H.L.,
Adams, P.D., Keasling, J.D., Lee, T.S., Mukhopadhyay, A., and Petzold, C.J.
(2011). Targeted proteomics for metabolic pathway optimization: application
to terpene production. Metab. Eng. 13, 194–203.
Regenberg, B., Grotkjaer, T., Winther, O., Fausbøll, A., A˚ kesson, M., Bro, C.,
Hansen, L.K., Brunak, S., and Nielsen, J. (2006). Growth-rate regulated genes
have profound impact on interpretation of transcriptome proﬁling in Saccharo-
myces cerevisiae. Genome Biol. 7, R107.

1196 Cell 164, March 10, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.

Renata, H., Wang, Z.J., and Arnold, F.H. (2015). Expanding the enzyme uni-
verse: accessing non-natural reactions by mechanism-guided directed evolu-
tion. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 54, 3351–3367.

Ro, D.-K., Paradise, E.M., Ouellet, M., Fisher, K.J., Newman, K.L., Ndungu,
J.M., Ho, K.A., Eachus, R.A., Ham, T.S., Kirby, J., et al. (2006). Production of
the antimalarial drug precursor artemisinic acid in engineered yeast. Nature
440, 940–943.

Rodriguez, A., Kildegaard, K.R., Li, M., Borodina, I., and Nielsen, J. (2015).
Establishment of a yeast platform strain for production of p-coumaric acid
through metabolic engineering of aromatic amino acid biosynthesis. Metab.
Eng. 31, 181–188.

Saling, P. (2005). Eco-Efﬁciency Analysis of biotechnological processes. Appl.
Microbiol. Biotechnol. 68, 1–8.

Salis, H.M. (2011). The ribosome binding site calculator. Methods Enzymol.
498, 19–42.

Salis, H.M., Mirsky, E.A., and Voigt, C.A. (2009). Automated design of synthetic
ribosome binding sites to control protein expression. Nat. Biotechnol. 27, 946–
950.

Scalcinati, G., Knuf, C., Partow, S., Chen, Y., Maury, J., Schalk, M., Daviet, L.,
Nielsen, J., and Siewers, V. (2012). Dynamic control of gene expression in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae engineered for the production of plant sesquite-
pene a-santalene in a fed-batch mode. Metab. Eng. 14, 91–103.

Seo, S.W., Kim, D., Latif, H., O’Brien, E.J., Szubin, R., and Palsson, B.O.
(2014). Deciphering Fur transcriptional regulatory network highlights its com-
plex role beyond iron metabolism in Escherichia coli. Nat. Commun. 5, 4910.

Seo, S.W., Kim, D., Szubin, R., and Palsson, B.O. (2015). Genome-wide
Reconstruction of OxyR and SoxRS Transcriptional Regulatory Networks un-
der Oxidative Stress in Escherichia coli K-12 MG1655. Cell Rep. 12, 1289–
1299.

Shi, S., Chen, Y., Siewers, V., and Nielsen, J. (2014). Improving production of
malonyl coenzyme A-derived metabolites by abolishing Snf1-dependent regu-
lation of Acc1. MBio 5, e01130–e14.

Shiba, Y., Paradise, E.M., Kirby, J., Ro, D.K., and Keasling, J.D. (2007). Engi-
neering of the pyruvate dehydrogenase bypass in Saccharomyces cerevisiae
for high-level production of isoprenoids. Metab. Eng. 9, 160–168.

Shih, S.C., Goyal, G., Kim, P.W., Koutsoubelis, N., Keasling, J.D., Adams, P.D.,
Hillson, N.J., and Singh, A.K. (2015). A versatile microﬂuidic device for auto-
mating synthetic biology. ACS Synth. Biol. 4, 1151–1164.

Siegel, J.B., Zanghellini, A., Lovick, H.M., Kiss, G., Lambert, A.R., St Clair, J.L.,
Gallaher, J.L., Hilvert, D., Gelb, M.H., Stoddard, B.L., et al. (2010). Computa-
tional design of an enzyme catalyst for a stereoselective bimolecular Diels-
Alder reaction. Science 329, 309–313.

Simpson, M.L., Sayler, G.S., Applegate, B.M., Ripp, S., Nivens, D.E., Paulus,
M.J., and Jellison, G.E. (1998). Bioluminescent-bioreporter integrated circuits
from novel whole-cell biosensors. Trends Biotechnol. 16, 332–338.

Smolke, C.D., Carrier, T.A., and Keasling, J.D. (2000). Coordinated, differential
expression of two genes through directed mRNA cleavage and stabilization by
secondary structures. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 66, 5399–5405.

Stephanopoulos, G., and Vallino, J.J. (1991). Network rigidity and metabolic
engineering in metabolite overproduction. Science 252, 1675–1681.
Tarca, A.L., Carey, V.J., Chen, X.W., Romero, R., and Draghici, S. (2007). Ma-
chine learning and its applications to biology. PLoS Comput. Biol. 3, e116.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.0030116.

Thykaer, J., and Nielsen, J. (2003). Metabolic engineering of b-lactam produc-
tion. Metab. Eng. 5, 56–69.

Tsao, C.Y., Hooshangi, S., Wu, H.C., Valdes, J.J., and Bentley, W.E. (2010).
Autonomous induction of recombinant proteins by minimally rewiring native
quorum sensing regulon of E. coli. Metab. Eng. 12, 291–297.

Tyo, K.E., Ajikumar, P.K., and Stephanopoulos, G. (2009). Stabilized gene
duplication enables long-term selection-free heterologous pathway expres-
sion. Nat. Biotechnol. 27, 760–765.

Usaite, R., Jewett, M.C., Oliveira, A.P., Yates, J.R., 3rd, Olsson, L., and Niel-
sen, J. (2009). Reconstruction of the yeast Snf1 kinase regulatory network re-
veals its role as a global energy regulator. Mol. Syst. Biol. 5, 319.

Waks, Z., and Silver, P.A. (2009). Engineering a synthetic dual-organism sys-
tem for hydrogen production. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 75, 1867–1875.

Wang, T., Ma, X., Du, G., and Chen, J. (2012). Overview of regulatory strategies
and molecular elements in metabolic engineering of bacteria. Mol. Biotechnol.
52, 300–308.

Wang, B.L., Ghaderi, A., Zhou, H., Agresti, J., Weitz, D.A., Fink, G.R., and Ste-
phanopoulos, G. (2014). Microﬂuidic high-throughput culturing of single cells
for selection based on extracellular metabolite production or consumption.
Nat. Biotechnol. 32, 473–478.

Westfall, P.J., Pitera, D.J., Lenihan, J.R., Eng, D., Woolard, F.X., Regentin, R.,
Horning, T., Tsuruta, H., Melis, D.J., Owens, A., et al. (2012). Production of
amorphadiene in yeast, and its conversion to dihydroartemisinic acid, precur-

sor to the antimalarial agent artemisinin. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 109,
E111–E118.

Yim, H., Haselbeck, R., Niu, W., Pujol-Baxley, C., Burgard, A., Boldt, J., Khan-
durina, J., Trawick, J.D., Osterhout, R.E., Stephen, R., et al. (2011). Metabolic
engineering of Escherichia coli for direct production of 1,4-butanediol. Nat.
Chem. Biol. 7, 445–452.

Yu, H., and Gerstein, M. (2006). Genomic analysis of the hierarchical structure
of regulatory networks. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 103, 14724–14731.

Zhang, F., Carothers, J.M., and Keasling, J.D. (2012). Design of a dynamic
sensor-regulator system for production of chemicals and fuels derived from
fatty acids. Nat. Biotechnol. 30, 354–359.

Zhang, Y., Dai, Z., Krivoruchko, A., Chen, Y., Siewers, V., and Nielsen, J.
(2015). Functional pyruvate formate lyase pathway expressed with two
different electron donors in Saccharomyces cerevisiae at aerobic growth.
FEMS Yeast Res. 15, fov024.

Cell 164, March 10, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc. 1197

