GREEN VERSUS GOLD

SOURCES IN CALIFORNIA’S
ENVIRONMENTAL HISTORY

Edited by

Carolyn Merchant

Washington, D.C. • Covelo, California

Copyright © 1998 by Island Press

Good-faith efforts have been made to secure permission to reprint the following mate-
rial. If the copyright holder will contact the publisher, any corrections necessary can be
made  to  future  printings.  “A  Historian  Chronicles  the  Return  of  the  Sea  Otter,”  from
Augustin S. Macdonald, Pacific Pelts: Sea Otters Choose California Coast (Oakland, Calif.,
1938); “Yosemite Indians Recount Their Origin Story, Recorded in 1927,” from Elinor
Shane  Smith,  Po-ho-no  and  Other  Yosemite  Legends (Monterey,  Calif.,  1927);  “Samuel
Wood and Alfred E. Heller on California Going, Going. . . , 1962” from California Going,
Going. . . .: Our State’s Struggle to Remain Beautiful and Productive (Sacramento, Calif.:
California Tomorrow, 1962).

All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. No
part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any means without permission in
writing  from  the  publisher:  Island  Press,  1718  Connecticut  Avenue,  N.W.,  Suite  300,
Washington, DC 20009.

ISLAND PRESS is a trademark of The Center for Resource Economics.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Green versus gold : sources in California’s environmental history /

edited by Carolyn Merchant

p.   cm.

Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 1-55963-579-7. — ISBN 1-55963-580-0
1. California—Environmental conditions—History.  2. Human 

ecology—California—History.  3. Nature—Effect of human beings on—
History.    I. Merchant, Carolyn.
GE155.C2G74   1998
333.7’09794—dc21

98-3346
CIP

Printed on recycled, acid-free paper

Manufactured in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

California Indians on “The Way We Lived,” Recorded in 1981

41

kind of owns the tree—like you would a fruit tree. In those days the fam-
ilies owned them. They own trees in the mountains, too. They maintain
border lines, but if you are friendly with them they may give you a tree
in time of need.

Jeff Jones, Nomlaki

California Indians on “The Way We Lived,” Recorded in 1981

39

made brave or to be made wise. There, if they ask for it, they will be given
the power to help themselves and to help all of you.” 

Then Kumush named the different kinds of fish and beasts that the
people should eat. As he spoke their names, they appeared in the rivers
and lakes, on the plains and in the forests. He named the roots and the
berries and the plants that the people should eat. He thought, and they
appeared. 

He divided the work of the people by making this law: “Men shall fish
and hunt and fight. Women shall get wood and water, gather berries and
dig roots, and cook for their families. This is my law.” 

So Kumush finished the upper world and his work in it. Then with his
daughter, he went to the place where the sun rises, at the eastern edge of
the world. He traveled along the sun’s road until he reached the middle
of  the  sky.  There  he  built  a  house  for  himself  and  his  daughter.  There
they live even today. 



California Indians on “The Way We Lived,”

Recorded in 1981

The Creation of Turtle Island, Maidu
In the beginning there was no sun, no moon, no stars. All was dark, and
everywhere there was only water. A raft came floating on the water. It
came from the north, and in it were two persons—Turtle and Pehe-ipe.
The  stream  flowed  very  rapidly.  Then  from  the  sky  a  rope  of  feathers,
called Pokelma, was let down, and down it came Earth-Initiate. When he
reached the end of the rope, he tied it to the bow of the raft, and stepped
in. His face was covered and was never seen, but his body shone like the
sun. He sat down, and for a long time said nothing.

At  last  Turtle  said,  “Where  do  you  come  from?”  and  Earth-Initiate
answered, “I come from above.” Then Turtle said, “Brother, can you not
make for me some good dry land, so that I may sometimes come up out
of the water?” Then he asked another time, “Are there going to be any

From Malcolm Margolin, The Way We Lived: California Indian Reminiscences, Stories, and
Songs (Berkeley, CA: Heyday Books, 1981), pp. 122–23, 45. Reprinted by permission.

40

Indian Lands

people in the world?” Earth-Initiate thought awhile, and then said, “Yes.”
Turtle asked, “How long before you are going to make people?” Earth-Ini-
tiate replied, “I don’t know. You want to have some dry land: well, how
am I going to get any earth to make it of?” Turtle answered, “If you will
tie a rock about my left arm, I’ll dive for some.” Earth-Initiate did as Tur-
tle asked, and then, reaching around, took the end of a rope from some-
where, and tied it to Turtle. When Earth-Initiate came to the raft, there
was no rope there: he just reached out and found one. Turtle said, “If the
rope is not long enough, I’ll jerk it once, and you must haul me up; if it
is long enough, I’ll give two jerks, and then you must pull me up quick-
ly, as I shall have all the earth that I can carry.” Just as Turtle went over
the side of the boat, Pehe-ipe began to shout loudly.

Turtle was gone a long time. He was gone six years; and when he came
up, he was covered with green slime, he had been down so long. When
he reached the top of the water, the only earth he had was a very little
under his nails: the rest had all washed away.

Earth-Initiate took with his right hand a stone knife from under his
left armpit, and carefully scraped the earth out from under Turtle’s nails.
He put the earth in the palm of his hand, and rolled it about till it was
round; it was as large as a small pebble. He laid it on the stern of the raft.
By and by he went to look at it: it had not grown at all. The third time
that he went to look at it, it had grown so that it could not be spanned
by the arms. The fourth time he looked, it was as big as the world, the
raft was aground, and all around were mountains as far as he could see.
The raft came ashore at Tadoiko, and the place can be seen today.

Acorn Trees, Nomlaki (Sacramento River)

The land does not belong to individuals. Dominic’s grandfather [a chief],
by being such a big and good man, was favored. He was left a big valley.
He owned one big oak tree of a special kind. It was a singular tree called
nuis.  There  was  a  village  nearby,  but  old  Dominic’s  grandfather  owned
that tree and got all the acorns from it. He also owned a valley of about
2,000 acres of open land. It was two or three miles away from his home.
This valley was staked off—each different division [kin group] got a dif-
ferent part of the valley for themselves. They had poles to mark the dif-
ferent persons’ territories. . . .

Where there is a tree of small acorns, some family owns that tree. He
[the  family  head]  will  lean  a  stick  against  the  tree  on  the  side  toward
which he lives. Thus the people know what family owns it. He may set
up too many and will give away the others to his relatives. This person

California Indians on “The Way We Lived,” Recorded in 1981

41

kind of owns the tree—like you would a fruit tree. In those days the fam-
ilies owned them. They own trees in the mountains, too. They maintain
border lines, but if you are friendly with them they may give you a tree
in time of need.

Jeff Jones, Nomlaki

