Americas Program Report
Rio de Janeiro: Control of the Poor Seen as
Crucial for the Olympics
By Raul Zibechi | January 18, 2010

The prospect of the FIFA World Cup in 2014 followed by the Olympic Games in 2016 has reignited the
debate about public security in a country where there is an undeclared war taking place in the favelas
between the military police, paramilitary groups, and drug traffickers, but where the principal victims
are the poor.

the Brazilian military is in charge of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). There, as in
Rio, the military police have to use diggers to first clear
the streets, a form of “combat engineering” to overcome
a logistical problem pioneered in Brazil.

In comparing what happens in the favelas of Rio with the
reality of Kabul and Port-au-Prince, the conservative right
wing is deliberately attempting to criminalize the poverty
concentrated in Rio’s 750 favelas inhabited by 1.5 mil-
lion people. The feeling of an escalation in the war was
reinforced when, on Oct 17, two weeks after Rio was
awarded the Olympic Games, a police helicopter was
shot down over the favela known as Morro dos Macacos (
the Hill of Monkeys).

The mountain sides around Rio have been home to poor
migrant workers for over 50 years. They live in precari-
ous conditions without water, electricity, sanitation,
healthcare, or education. Statistics show that 20 people
per day are assassinated in Rio, turning the city into
what the sociologist Vera Malaguti terms “a laboratory of
genocidal techniques.”2 The police in Rio have the dubi-
ous reputation of being the police force with the highest
kill rate in the world. This is not to say that they are out
of control and kill on a whim. Brazil is a paradise of wild
capitalism, with the largest gap of economic inequality in
the world. Rio is its star, with frantic real estate specula-
tion intensifying as the big events approach.

Feared BOPE

Violence in Brazil is not only very high but also continues
to grow alarmingly. In 2006 there were almost 50,000
homicides (49,145 to be exact, or 26.3 per 100,000
inhabitants). In the state of Rio de Janeiro 2008 statistics

Americas Policy Program

w w w. a m e r i c a s p o l i c y. o r g
A New World of Citizen Action, Analysis, and Policy Options

A favela in Rio de Janeiro.

“The day to day reality that Rio police confront in the
favelas is very similar to that which NATO troops face in
Afghanistan,” says Kaiser Konrad, director of Defesanet, a
magazine specializing in military issues.1 He goes on to
say that Rio is one of the most complex theaters of war
in the world, in part due to its diverse geographical ter-
rains such as jungle and mountain ranges. “The danger
encountered by a Western soldier patrolling certain parts
of Kabul is the same as that encountered by a soldier or
policeman called into one of Rio’s hot spots,” he con-
cludes.

In the favelas, the drug traffickers have dug out ditches
and built barricades with large cement blocks or boulders
in order to prevent the progress of the “caveirao,” an
armored vehicle the size of a bus which is used by the
military police when they enter the favelas. The same
tactics are reproduced in the poor areas in Haiti, where

show 5,717 homicides, or 35.8 per 100,000 inhabitants.
There were also, however, 5,095 disappeared people,
many of them victims of intentional violence and buried
in clandestine graves.3

Figures relating to police brutality in Rio are jaw-drop-
ping: in 2003, 1,195 people were killed in police actions.
Of these, 65% had clear signs of having been executed,
i.e. they had at least one bullet in the back. “In 2004, the
police killed 983 people, in 2005 there were 1,098, in
2006, 1063. In 2007, this number rose to 1,330, in 2008
1,137. This adds up to 6,806 people killed by police in
six years.”4 The vast majority are poor and black inhabi-
tants of the favelas aged between 15 and 29. The majori-
ty were assassinated by BOPE, the Special Police
Operations Battalion, or the elite special forces of the mil-
itary police in Rio de Janeiro.

The book, Elite Force, published in 2005, was the first
book that portrayed the actions of BOPE from the inside.
It was co-authored by two former members of BOPE who
had worked in special operations for five years and by an
ex-secretary of national public security. The book, which
was a best-seller and inspired the Golden Bear winning
film of 2008, claimed that BOPE is “the best urban war-
fare force in the world, being the most technical, the
most prepared, and the most powerful.”5

The authors state that both North American and Israeli
defense forces come to Rio to train with BOPE because
“there is no other place in the world where one can train
every single day.” Even though BOPE is often accused of
disproportionate brutality, the force’s honesty is recog-
nized and trusted, in contrast with the military police,
who most people consider corrupt and in collusion with
the drug traffickers.

BOPE was created in 1978, during the military dictator-
ship, but only received its public security mandate in
1991. Originally BOPE was conceived as a war machine:
“It does not receive training in how to interact with civil-
ians or how to control those who break the law: its sole
purpose is to invade enemy territory.”6 The hymn chant-
ed in training states that the mission is to “invade the
favela and crush everybody.” The emblem of the force is
a knife embedded in a skull; its color is black. For many
years the force was comprised of 150 members; recently
it was increased to 400.

Entrance to the force is similar to all military recruitment:
extreme hardship, with excessive physical tests that put
the applicant very close to death and thereby ferment his
insensitivity. Participants recount that training consisted
of “marching 100 kilometers, on foot and without rest,
almost dying of hunger and thirst, completely wiped out
by physical exhaustion, legs and rear ends on fire … but
the worst by far was the ritual of humiliation during the
wind down: they had to dig their own graves and simu-
late their own death, symbolizing that they had reached
the bottom of the abyss.”7

Once inside the favela, BOPE behaves exactly like an
occupying army. “At night we don’t take prisoners,” say
the authors, acknowledging that BOPE is a lethal force
that shows no respect for life or for the dubious rule of
law that prevails in Rio. They concede that the actions of
BOPE have had dreadful and far-reaching consequences:
“The shoot to kill policy pursued that didn’t allow for the
surrender of the offender provoked a paradoxical effect:
it increased their resistance, as well as the rate of vio-
lence directed against the police.”8

The justice system, in effect, collaborates with these
actions by issuing “decrees of resistance” which, accord-
ing to Tim Cargill of Amnesty International, protect the
police by ensuring that the deaths resulting from these
elite force actions are exempt from investigation.9

In addition to BOPE, there is also evidence of illegal mili-
tias comprised of both former and active police mem-
bers, as well as firemen, ex-military, and other state
agents. While the northern zone of Rio is engulfed in a
feud between drug gangs, the western zone is increasing-
ly dominated by these paramilitary groups who now con-
trol 88 favelas while the drug gangs’ control has been
reduced to 71.

“The current mayor of Rio, Eduardo Paes, campaigned
on a platform which defended the power of the paramili-
taries.”10 As soon as the paramilitaries expel the drug
gangs, they impose on the favelas a form of feudal sys-
tem which strictly controls the population, and which is
similar to that which Colombian paramilitaries inflict on
areas they control. “They charge for security. Also for
healthcare. Pirated cable TV costs 20 reais (12 dollars). At
night there is a curfew,” recounts a young woman from
the Vila Sape favela.

p. 2

www.americaspolicy.org
A New World of Citizen Action, Analysis, and Policy Options

technology to detect explosives, and for use in special
tactical missions.12

In the favela Santa Marta, however, an experiment is tak-
ing place to provide the favela with a permanent police
force, which, if successful, could be extended into other
areas. It is known as the UPP (Union of Peacekeeping
Police) and it was installed following the expulsion of the
drug gangs. The UPP represents the first state-run policy
dedicated to winning and holding the traumatic and frag-
ile peace between the favelas and the military police.

Alongside and in conjunction with the UPP, the promise
of increased social programs in health, education, and
sports ostensibly serve to ameliorate the relationship
between the state and the favelas, but likewise ensure
that the state security forces have a permanent presence
in those communities.13

The program of the “pacification” of Santa Marta is the
brainchild of Rio’s governor Sergio Cabral of the PMDB
(the Party of the Democratic Movement of Brazil), ally of
President Lula’s national government. In addition to
promising to eliminate drug trafficking, he states that the
“main aim of the pacifying force is to ensure that the
communities which have endured living with criminals
now learn to coexist with the presence of the state.”14

Nevertheless, the population of Santa Marta complain
that the promises of social reform are unfulfilled or pro-
ceed extremely slowly, that the provision of cable TV,
until then the domain of the gangs, has not been
replaced, and, most objectionably, that the popular public
dances like the funk have been prohibited because the
police link it to drug trafficking, but an alternative for the
entertainment of the youth has not been proposed.

“If they see someone with baggy pants they detain him,
but if someone is dressed in a suit and tie they don’t,”
says a young man from Santa Marta.15 Members of the
residents’ committee complain that they have never
been invited to meetings in which the different projects
of the community were to be discussed. Freixo criticizes
the Santa Marta experiment as being an isolated case
which assuages the middle classes rather than a social
reform program which can be rolled out to include all
favelas in Rio.

Even though it is recognized that it is better for the police
to work with communities rather than occupy them as

The police in a favela.

For the sociologist Ignacio Cano the privatization of
security is unsustainable, given that to date there are
over 300 allegations that the militias participate in drug
trafficking. Recently they threatened to kill the State
Representative Marcelo Freixo, of the Socialist Party, who
had headed an investigation of the militias. Between
2002 and 2008, 1,245 military police were expelled from
the force for having been implicated in drug and/or arms
trafficking and in the creation of militias for profit.11

The Militarization of the Poor

Shortly before the Pan American Games of 2007 in Rio,
the military police invaded the Complexo do Alemao,
one of the poorest neighborhoods of the city, with 1,300
agents who killed 30 people. Many of these deaths were
“summary executions” according to the Ministry of
Human Rights. Currently, a wall is being built around 13
favelas under the guise of “protecting the natural envi-
ronment.”

This is but a small foreshadowing of what will happen in
Rio in the coming years to provide security for the World
Cup and the Olympic Games. The production of a nation-
al armored vehicle modeled on those used in Israel and
South Africa is under development to substitute the
objectionable caveirao, and BOPE is upgrading its
weaponry to include more efficient machine guns,

p. 3

www.americaspolicy.org
A New World of Citizen Action, Analysis, and Policy Options

though it were a theater of war, as is the case with BOPE,
Freixo believes that the community police plan is another
form of control and not the “construction of liberty” if it
is “not accomplished through prioritizing social reform
with the participation of the society that is being
reformed.”16

The majority of social observers all agree that there won’t
be successes in the favelas without major structural
changes. The Human Development Index (HDI) of the
favela Mare is 0.722 while that of Ipanema, one of the
most prosperous neighborhoods of Rio, is 0.962. In Mare
life expectancy is 66 years, in Ipanema it is 80.17 The
localization of the social differences largely explains the
violence in the city. “When inhabitants are prevented
from having access to a significant part of their rights as
citizens, one cannot expect them to recognize or respect
the legitimacy and authority of the administrations that
offer them little or nothing,”18 explains Bruno Lima
Rocha, a political scientist.

In other words, the state is incapable of comprehending
that the problem lies in the fact that one in three citizens
do not have basic minimum rights and it cannot resolve
this problem through repression. Consequently it follows
that chaos is the result of inequality coupled with injus-
tice.

Containing the Poor or Eliminating
Them

The representative Freixo, who dedicates himself to the
issue of security in Rio, believes that “a safe society is
one which develops a culture of rights.” In his opinion,
the main source of the problem evolved in the neo-liberal
1990s when “a section of the Brazilian population did
not serve the system, not even as reservists to the army.
The decade of the 90s presented us with a Brazil that
was not for all.”19

“This is why there is genocide in the poor areas of the
city,” says Freixo, trying to explain the 16,000 homicides
and 12,000 disappearances of the last few years. Brazil
has the fourth-largest prison population in the world after
the United States, China, and Russia. Half a million are in
jail. In the 90s, the imprisoned population increased by
170%, and every year it still increases by 10%.

One can see how this genocide is carried out in the way
the judicial powers approach their task in relation to the

favelas. It is the only area where a “generic search war-
rant” is issued—a judicial instrument which allows for
permission for the police to operate across a community-
wide area, rather than restricting it to a specific personal-
ized warrant. This allows the police to enter into any
home and detain any inhabitant, without limitation. The
text of one of these warrants issued in 2002, analyzed by
a committee which included Representative Freixo,
referred to the population of the favela as “genetic
trash.”20

Vera Malaguti, professor of criminology and general sec-
retary of the Rio Institute of Criminology and author of
Fear in the city of Rio de Janeiro, claims that the trajectory
of fear to chaos and unrest has been the modus operandi
to discipline the impoverished masses. The sense of fear
is fed by the urban elite in order to safeguard their privi-
leges.

This reading of the social reality in Rio throws light on
some facts that the average “carioca” is prone to distort.
Malaguti says that the “left is afraid of the underclass,”
referring to juvenile delinquents of which the Rio police
kills about 1,300 per year to “the applause of the general
public, the elite, certain parts of the academic world, and
some of the left.”21 She goes on to say that the leaders of
the drug gangs were convicted on small offenses, but
were then barbarized in jail.

“The objective of the left should be to pursue fewer incar-
cerations, to foster the familial relationships of those in
jail, and to allow greater communication with the outside
in order to end the perception that those on the outside
are good citizens and those in jail are evil.”22 The real
problem, Malaguti continues, “is that the existence of the
poor has become a hindrance to big business and prop-
erty speculations and therefore they must be exterminat-
ed.”23

The walls currently under construction she categorizes as
“a fascist fence around the poor,” part of a “project of
urban cleansing under the guise of restoring order to the
city, for the benefit of the World Cup, the Olympics, and
all the capital investment that is flowing into Rio. These
investments seem to be an obsession for state and
municipal governments, who are constantly travelling
around the world trying to attract them.”24

At the root of it all lies the problem of power. The elite is
wary and fearful of those millions of black young heirs of

p. 4

w w w. a m e r i c a s p o l i c y. o r g
A New World of Citizen Action, Analysis, and Policy Options

the liberal traditions of the quilombo.25 This is why Rede
Globo, which seems to have a policy of criminalizing
poverty, is relentless in criticizing Leonel Brizola, the only
governor who has so far refused to repress the poor. His
death, according to Malaguti, “has allowed fascism to
occupy the city.” It is no coincidence that the director of
Defesanet blames Brizola for the present situation in the
favelas because he prohibited the police from going into
the hills to kill.26

This war against poverty, camouflaged as a war against
drug trafficking, in the same way as in the past was
defined as a war against communism, seeks to contain
“rebellious poverty,” which is a tradition of Rio de
Janeiro, having been at various times a city described as
quimbola, then janguista, then brizolista.27 The elites are
making the poor pay for their historically ingrained rebel-
lion which aspires to liberty, which began by abolishing
slavery and now threatens the lucrative business of 2014
and 2016.

END NOTES
1 Kasier Konrad, December 10, 2009.
2 Interview with Vera Malaguti, October 28, 2009.
3 Tropa de Elite, p.15.
4 Ibid.
5 Ibid., p30.
6 Ibid, p.8.
7 Ibid., p.22.
8 Ibid., p.30.
9 Bernardo Gutierrez.
10 Ibid.
11 Ibid.
12 Kaiser Konrad.
13 Fabiana Frayssinet.
14 Ibid.
15 Ibid.
16 Ibid.
17 Bernardo Gutierrez.
18 Bruno Lima Rocha.
19 Marcelo Freixo.
20 Justicia Global, p.34.
21 Interview with Vera Malaguti, October 28, 2009.
22 Ibid.
23 Interview with Vera Malaguti, April 18, 2009.
24 Ibid.
25 Hinterland settlements of escaped slaves that engaged in
military resistance.
26 Kaiser Konrad, October 19, 2009.
27 Interview with Vera Malaguti, April 18, 2009. “Janguista”
refers to Joao Goulard (Jango) president of Brazil deposed in
the military coup of 1964. “Brizolista” refers to Leonel
Brizola, twice governor of Rio (1983-1987 and 1991-1994).

Raúl Zibechi is an international analyst for Brecha of
Montevideo, Uruguay, lecturer and researcher on social
movements at the Multiversidad Franciscana de
América Latina, and adviser to several social groups.
He writes the monthly “Zibechi Report” for the
Americas Program (www.americasprogram.org).

Translated for the Americas Program by Isabella
Weibrecht.

p. 5

w w w. a m e r i c a s p o l i c y. o r g
A New World of Citizen Action, Analysis, and Policy Options

FOR MORE INFORMATION
Help the Poor or Learn From Them?
http://americas.irc-online.org/am/5899
Buenos Aires: The Poorest Resist “Social Cleansing”
http://americas.irc-online.org/am/5651
Pentecostalism and South America’s Social Movements
http://americas.irc-online.org/am/5590

RESOURCES
Bernardo Gutiérrez, “Rio de Janeiro: Ciudad de Dios y
del diablo,” El País, Madrid, 25 de octubre de 2009.
Bruno Lima Rocha, “El capitalismo salvaje y la guerra
urbana en Rio de Janeiro,” 16 de noviembre de 2009,
www.estrategiaeanalise.com.br.
Entrevista a Vera Malaguti, “Rio virou um laboratorio de
técnicas genocidas,” 28 de octubre de 2009,
www.correiodacidadania.com.br.
Entrevista a Vera Malaguti, “Pobres en Rio viven días
de horror,” 18 de abril de 2009,
www.correiodacidadania.com.br.
Fabiana Frayssinet, “Brasil: pacificación con gusto a
control social,” IPS, 21 de mayo de 2009.
Justiça Global, “Relatório RIO: violencia policial e inse-
gurança pública,” Rio de Janeiro, octubre de 2004,
www.global.org.br.
Kaiser Konrad, “BOPE. Forças Especiales da Polícia
Fluminense,” Defesanet, 10 de diciembre de 2009.
Kaiser Konrad, “Guerra no Rio: a outra fase da Cidade
Maravillosa,” Defesanet, 19 de octubre de 2009.
Luiz Eduardo Soares, Rodrigo Pimentel y André Batista,
“Tropa de elite,” Editorial Marea, Buenos Aires, 2009.
Marcelo Freixo, “A realidade e a lei,” 23 de diciembre
de 2009 en www.marcelofreixo.com.br.

Published by the Americas Program, copyright © 2010, all rights reserved.

The Americas Program
“A New World of Citizen Action, Analysis, and Policy Options”

Recommended citation:
Raúl Zibechi, "Rio de Janeiro: Control of the Poor Seen as Crucial for the Olympics," Americas Program Report (Washington, DC: Center for International Policy, January 18,
2010).

Web location:
http://americas.irc-online.org/am/6656

Production Information:
Writer: Raúl Zibechi
Translator(s): Isabella Weibrecht
Editor(s): Michael Collins
Layout: Chellee Chase-Saiz

p. 6

Printed on Recycled Paper

