IntroductionIt is not uncommon for lay persons to erroneously believe that criminal inves-tigative analysis, commonly referred to as “criminal proﬁling,” is synonymous with forensic psychology, especially with the rise in popular-ity of television programs on proﬁling that in-corporate psychological concepts. Further con-fusion may occur because practitioners in both ﬁelds read the same research, interview the same criminals, attend the same seminars, develop professional relationships, and cite one anoth-er’s scholarship. However, what happens when forensic psychologists advance opinions about criminal matters based on the extrapolation of academic research on psychological concepts involving sexual homicide cases and reject the opinions of professional criminal proﬁlers who incorporate law enforcement analysis coupled with criminal evidentiary considerations into their work? Timothy Masters, who spent over 9 years in a Colorado prison for the murder of Peggy Hettrick, was released on January 22, 2008. Shortly thereafter, all homicide charges were dropped based on new DNA evidence pointing to other suspects. Masters, who always main-tained his innocence, was convicted largely on the testimony of forensic psychologist, Dr. Reid Meloy. His violent sketches and stories produced when he was an adolescent were used as evidence to arrest and convict him in 1999 of killing Peggy Hettrick in 1987, a convic-tion that was upheld by the Colorado Court of Appeals and the Colorado Supreme Court. Masters’s prosecution raises troubling questions, primarily because it pivoted on the controversial opinions of a board certiﬁed forensic psycholo-gist who analyzed Timothy’s sketches and con-Criminal Investigative Analysis, Forensic Psychology, and the Timothy Masters Casehis paper offers an analysis of the series of events that occurred when a homicide detective contacted an international expert in forensic psychology to assist in the arrest process and the prosecu-tion of a targeted sexual homicide suspect. The forensic psycholo-gist developed a psychological proﬁle of a killer using narrative and drawings made by the suspect to conclude that the suspect’s fantasy was the motive and behavioral preparation for the sexual murder, regardless of the fact that the forensic psychologist knew that there was no direct or physical evidence linking the suspect to the crime. In this article, the authors examine the case of Timothy Masters, who was arrested and convicted of sexual murder based on the testimony of a forensic psychologist while the opinion of a crimi-nal investigative analyst was ignored. By Frank S. Perri, JD, MBA, CPA, and Terrance G. Lichtenwald, PhD(cid:22)(cid:25)(cid:36)(cid:33)(cid:42)(cid:2)(cid:25)(cid:43)(cid:46)(cid:40)(cid:32)(cid:47)(cid:2)(cid:5)(cid:43)(cid:40)(cid:40)(cid:37)(cid:32)(cid:33)This article is approved by the following for continuing education credit:The American College of Forensic Examiners International provides this continuing education credit for Diplomates. After studying this article, participants should be better able to do the following:1.  Understand the difference between criminal investigative analysis and forensic psychology.2.  Consider ethical considerations when offering forensic psychological opinions.3.  Implement Daubert factors when evaluating the appropriateness of forensic testimony.KEY WORDS: Reid Meloy, Timothy Masters, criminal investigative analysis, forensic psychology,Roy Hazelwood, sexual homicide, motive fantasy, pseudo-profileTARGET AUDIENCE: Criminal investigators and psychologistsPROGRAM LEVEL: BasicDISCLOSURE: The author has nothing to disclose.PREREQUISITES: NoneCE ARTICLE: 3 CE CREDITS52 THE FORENSIC EXAMINER® Summer (cid:81)(cid:85)(cid:85)(cid:40)www.acfei.comcluded the drawings reﬂected speciﬁc personal-ity traits, a motive and behavioral preparation to commit sexual homicide. Masters was convicted without a single shred of direct evidence, such as a confession, or physical evidence such as DNA, and was sentenced to life in prison without pa-role.  In this article, the authors review the sexual homicide investigation leading to the arrest of Timothy Masters, analyze the reasoning of the forensic psychologist’s theories used to justify the prosecution, include former FBI proﬁler Roy Hazelwood’s analysis of the sexual homi-cide that was never revealed to the defense, and provide an analysis of the legal implications of the case together with recommendations for fo-rensic psychological practitioners.The Sexual Homicide InvestigationIn 1987, 15-year-old high-school sophomore Timothy Masters lived with his father in Fort Collins, Colorado, a university town on the plains east of the Rocky Mountains. On February 11, 1987, the murdered body of Peggy Hettrick was found in a ﬁeld not far from his residence. Hettrick’s private areas were mutilated; with surgical precision, her killer removed her left nipple, areola, and part of her vulva. She was stabbed in the lower back causing a rib to break and then dragged into a ﬁeld as evidenced by the drag marks in the soil. The body had been partially disrobed and positioned on its back with the legs slightly apart and arms over the head, ex-posing the right breast and pubic area. After the delivery of the fatal wound, a bloody trail indicated that the perpetrator dragged the vic-tim’s body 103.5 feet into the ﬁeld where it was found. According to law enforcement, Timothy Masters was an early suspect because he saw the body on the way to school but failed to report it. Without consulting an attorney, he and his dad allowed detectives to search their home and Tim’s school locker, where the police retrieved his writings, sketches, and survival-knife collection. Timothy’s school locker con-tained a hand-drawn map of what appeared to be the ﬁeld where Hettrick’s body was found and a sketch of a person dragging a body. In his backpack were two Mother’s Day cards he had made years before, while his mother was still alive. The detectives also found a calendar with a date circled reﬂecting the date that Timothy’s mother died four years ear-lier. Peggy Hettrick had been mur-dered one day shy of the February 12th anniversary of the death of Timothy’s mother. Detective Francis Gonzales found Masters at school, and Masters told him he ▲ Timothy Masters at the age of 15▲ Timothy Masters when released from prisonSummer 2009 THE FORENSIC EXAMINER® 53(800) 592-1399had seen Hettrick’s body but assumed it was a mannequin put in the ﬁeld by his friends in an attempt to trick him. Indeed, even the bicyclist who reported the body told police that he too thought it was a mannequin (Yager, Smith, & Goldbaum, 2008). The detectives also found what would be-come the most prejudicial of the prosecution’s evidence a decade later when Masters was put on trial for Hettrick’s murder: hundreds of ex-tremely violent drawings and stories in his bed-room. Many of the pictures showed stabbings with knives and swords; much of the violence was directed at women. A sketch that would be particularly damning showed a ﬁgure that had been shot with arrows being dragged by an-other ﬁgure in the same manner police believe Hettrick’s killer dragged her. While Masters’s volume of drawings raised questions, they did not trigger his arrest because the bedroom and its contents were equally notable for what ofﬁ-cers did not ﬁnd. Ofﬁcers found no blood and no body parts anywhere in the house. There was no ﬁber, hair, skin, ﬁngerprints, or other physi-cal evidence that linked Masters to Hettrick, or any eyewitness. The survival knives were tested at the Colorado Bureau of Investigation and found to have no trace of the victim’s blood or DNA. There were footprints, but he lived next to the ﬁeld and walked through it every day, so his footprints would be present. The police also found a suitcase containing pornographic photographs and a large number of writings and drawings Masters had produced. Additional sets of drawings and writings were seized by police in 1998 when the defendant was arrested. In all, police seized approximately 2,200 pages of material produced by Masters; over 1,000 of these were admitted at trial.Drawings by Timothy Masters During His Adolescent YearsDuring the interrogation, Timothy’s father sat outside the interview room. After reading Timothy his Miranda rights, ofﬁcers prodded him to talk about killing, to think like a killer, to talk about what weapons he might use, and where he might put a body, yet Timothy did not confess. By the sixth hour, it was Detective James Broderick’s turn to tell Timothy to come clean about how he fulﬁlled a fantasy by killing Hettrick: “Why can’t you just say it? Why is it so hard for you to tell me? You got to admit it when it’s over. People get killed in battle, right? Their friends die! A piece in you just died just a minute ago. It’s over. You’re not free anymore” (Moffeit, 2008a). Timothy was interrogated for more than 10 hours without a lawyer. According to Broderick, Timothy failed a lie detector test, but the ofﬁcial report of the test results are lost (Yager et al., 2008). At age 15, Timothy Masters was not arrested, and after high school he joined the navy. In 1992, Detective Linda Wheeler-Holloway thought she had a break on the case when one of Masters’s friends said Masters had told him Hettrick’s nipple was missing. “That’s it. That’s holdback information that only the cops knew” (McLaughlin, 2008). Wheeler-Holloway and Detective Broderick interviewed Masters for 2 days while he was still in the navy, in what was called a “tag-team” interrogation. Timothy had known about the nipple, but a girl in his art class had told him about it (Moffeit, 2008a). “Officers found no blood and no body parts in the house. There was no ﬁber, hair, skin, ﬁngerprints, or other evidence that linked Masters to Hettrick, or an eyewitness.”Timothy’s knife collection54 THE FORENSIC EXAMINER® Summer (cid:81)(cid:85)(cid:85)(cid:40)www.acfei.comThe detectives checked out the story, and it turned out to be true. Broderick kept battering Masters with questions and at one point forced him to break down in tears (Moffeit, 2008a). The interviews were also witnessed by members of Naval Intelligence and the Federal Bureau of Investigation; a naval intelligence ofﬁcer asked her, “You sure you got the right guy?” “I don’t know,” Wheeler-Holloway replied (McLaughlin, 2008). Wheeler-Holloway, however, was impressed that Masters disclosed the same story he had 5 years earlier—that he did not report Hettrick’s body because he thought it was a mannequin/prank, and his stories and drawings stemmed from his ambition to write horror stories like Stephen King. According to court records, Wheeler-Holloway later wrote in a police re-port, “The FBI agents here believe Tim Masters is innocent, and so do I” (Campbell, 2007). Troubled by a seeming reluctance by the po-lice department to pursue other suspects and to have the FBI perform a proﬁle at her request, Wheeler-Holloway ﬁled the case as cold and later left the department for the Colorado Bureau of Investigation. Even Detective Troy Krenning believed it improbable that a boy could have pulled off such a sophisticated, fetishistic kill-ing. On the ﬁrst anniversary of Hettrick’s death, Krenning was instructed to sit in a mobile home opposite Masters’s house to perform surveillance of the crime scene in case the killer came back. Krenning stated, however, “My perspective was to get off Masters and take a look at maybe someone else…We seem to be focused on one” (Moffeit, 2008a). Krenning recalled pressing his colleagues for evidence proving that Masters was a legitimate suspect and his colleagues challeng-ing his position by stating, “Prove that Masters did not commit the crime” (Moffeit, 2007b). Krenning replied that his colleagues’ investiga-tory strategy was the exact opposite of how an investigation unfolds (Moffeit, 2007b). Yet, even with numerous law enforcement col-leagues in his own department and the FBI not convinced that Timothy had anything to do with the murder, Detective Broderick was not satis-ﬁed with the belief that Timothy was innocent. Broderick said a search of Masters’s bedroom, school locker, and backpack revealed numerous drawings and narratives suggesting the teen was ﬁxated on death and violence. Broderick felt the artwork and stories ﬁt the axiom that sexual ho-micide suspects generally fantasize about what they are going to do before they do it; in essence, the “fantasy’s a template for the murder they ac-tually commit” (McLaughlin, 2008).Timothy’ssketchesSummer 2009 THE FORENSIC EXAMINER® 55(800) 592-1399Undisclosed EvidenceBy the time the case went to trial in 1999, there were investigative and prosecu-torial issues that related to exculpatory evidence that could be used to show that the alleged defendant was not the culprit, but that was not revealed to the defense. For example, prosecutors nev-er told defense attorneys about a sex offender and surgeon living near the ﬁeld and close to Timothy’s residence where Hettrick’s body was found. Police initially considered eye surgeon Dr. Richard Hammond as, at the very least, a “person of interest” in 1987 (Darst, 2007). In 1995, police conﬁscated more than 300 home-made videos and over $10,000 worth of por-nography when a housesitter found a hidden camera positioned in Hammond’s bathroom where women’s private areas were videotaped (Reed, 2007). Other cameras were found in a guest bedroom. After bonding out of jail, Hammond checked himself in to the Mountain Crest Hospital in Fort Collins for counseling, where he talked little but revealed on paper an unhappy life, lonely childhood, and voyeuris-tic tendencies since his teen years (Moffeit, 2008a). In addition, plastic surgeon Christopher Tsoi revealed to police investigator Marsha Reed in early 1998 his belief that Hettrick’s genital wounds reﬂected the proﬁciency of a surgeon (Darst, 2007). Though police released a report showing that Reed set up an appoint-ment with Tsoi, no report detailing their con-versation has ever been released (Darst, 2007). In addition, during the autopsy of 1987 mur-der victim Peggy Hettrick, the medical ex-aminer remarked, “A doctor could have done this” (Moffeit, 2007a). Coroner Dr. Patrick Allen’s surprise at the surgical precision of her wounds was only recently recounted in an in-terview with Masters’s defense team and ﬁts the defense’s contention that a 15-year-old could not have pulled off such a sophisticated slay-ing (Moffeit, 2007a).  Dr. Allen later found the most puzzling wounds, un-noticed by ofﬁcers. They were “neatly” execut-ed cuts inside her genitalia that, like the one on her left breast, must have been made with an extremely sharp knife, an instrument different from the one used to stab her. In 21 years of per-forming autopsies, Allen told colleagues, he had never seen wounds like these (Moffeit, 2008). Broderick stated that he never talked to Allen about whether someone with surgical skill must have inﬂicted Hettrick’s wounds: “I can assure you if Dr. Allen’s ﬁnding was that only a surgeon could have made those cuttings, that would have been forensic information he would have certainly told us” (Moffeit, 2008). Interestingly, Meloy also in-dicated that the wounds on Hettrick appeared to be surgical, but Broderick never disclosed Meloy’s over 250-page report (Yager et al., 2008). Dr. Warren James, prominent Fort Collins OB-GYN, indicated that “the perpetrator would not have been able to cut Ms. Hettrick’s upper labia and clitoris if her jeans were pulled up above her knees as demonstrated by the crime scene photos during the surgical procedure. Ms. Hettrick would had to have been positioned in a major frog leg position during the surgi-cal procedure. Based on the surgical precision of the excision, a general physician would not have been able to conduct this procedure, and in fact, most surgeons would not be able to per-form this type of procedure given the precise-ness of the cut. I ﬁnd it highly unlikely that any 15-year-old could perform this precise sur-gical procedure given the advanced anatomical knowledge required and the skill necessary to excise the skin tissue of the fraenulum, clitoral gland, and nipple as most surgeons cannot per-form this procedure” (Moffeit, 2007b).Aerial view of Hettrick’s bodyHettrick’s body on the field56 THE FORENSIC EXAMINER® Summer (cid:81)(cid:85)(cid:85)(cid:40)www.acfei.com In addition, Masters’s defense team indi-cated the police did not look hard enough into Hammond’s background, which in-cluded secret credit cards, a possible fake name, and a Denver residence where Hammond taped sexual encounters with another woman. Hammond was arrest-ed for the illegal taping, but he commit-ted suicide before Masters was convicted. Defense attorneys argued that Hammond was never really investigated because he was a social acquaintance of lead prosecu-tor Terry Gilmore. Prosecutor Gilmore initially denied the claim, but later indi-cated that he was indeed a social acquain-tance of Dr. Hammond (Hartman, 2008). Prosecutor Gilmore and Dr. Hammond had been known to go out together and social-ize (Hughes, 2008b). The authors comment on Dr. Hammond not to imply that he was the killer, but rather to indicate that the arguments used by the police and the prosecution against Timothy applied equally or more to Dr. Hammond in terms of investigating him as a possible suspect, especially with the belief that the murder was a sexual homicide. Yet Prosecutor Blair argued, “Who else could it possibly be? Nobody else had a motive, nobody else had the opportunity, nobody else had the weapon” (Hartman, 2007a). “It wasn’t just the fact that he had these draw-ings … but the number, the sheer number we found,” she said.  Blair added, “What we needed to do is demonstrate that this wasn’t just a passing fancy of this kid, this was complete obsession with death, spe-ciﬁcally the death of a woman, and try to draw parallels between the drawings and our crime scene” (Campbell, 2008). “We’re talking about fantasy that becomes obses-sive” (Moffeit, 2008a). During the trial, the prosecution argued that it was Timothy’s familiarity with the area that the body was found and his love for knives that linked him to the crime. It is apparent that the prosecution was not inter-ested in considering other suspects as possi-ble culprits, especially when Dr. Hammond had his own links to the crime—familiar-ity with the area, an obsession with wom-en’s private areas and an interest in sex-ual deviance, ownership of surgical tools that could be used to kill and mutilate, the skills to perform the type of cuts ob-served by other doctors, as well as the op-portunity to commit the crime. Prosecutor Gilmore stated, “I had absolutely no rea-son to believe he [Hammond] was involved in any way with Peggy Hettrick’s murder  . . . it just never occurred to us” (Hartman, 2008). Prosecutor Blair indicated that “Dr. Hammond wasn’t even a blip on the screen . . . no one thought of him, no one talked of him . . . the crimes that he apparently perpetrated are so much different than the Peggy Hettrick homicide” (Hartman, 2008). However, Ofﬁcer Jack Taylor dis-puted Blair’s comments, indicating that Hammond and his possibility as a sus-pect was common knowledge (Hartman, 2008). In addition, Broderick stated that there was no reason to investigate Hammond for Hettrick’s murder: “Where’s the violence?  Show me that pattern of violence…We searched [Hammond’s] entire house, and there was nothing to link him to Hettrick’s murder” (Moffeit, 2008a). The special pros-ecutor reviewing the case indicated that there was no evidence tying Dr. Hammond to the murder because there was no evi-dence of blood, blood splatter, DNA, ﬁn-gerprints, hair ﬁbers, confessions, or per-sons to whom Hammond confessed the crime (Hartman, 2008). Who destroyed Hammond’s video tapes, and why? “I had a lot to do with that,” Broderick says. “It was an ethical decision. Should we re-vic-timize all these women by telling them they are victims? So it really was an effort to protect them, to preserve these victims’ rights” (Moffeit, 2008a). After viewing several of the videotapes, Ofﬁcer Mickelson started making con-nections: the doctor’s close proximity to the Hettrick crime scene and his obsession with women’s genitalia and breasts. He told Detective Tony Sanchez that Hammond should be investigated for Hettrick’s mur-der. In August 1995, investigators had slated for destruction every piece of evi-dence they seized from Hammond. “Don’t do it, save the evidence,” Ofﬁcer Mickelson re-calls telling Sanchez after he heard about the plan, knowing that they had reviewed only a small portion of the tapes (Moffeit, 2008a). Mickelson wanted to see if Hettrick may have appeared in any of the tapes, but he tes-tiﬁed that at one point he was threatened with the loss of his job if he continued to pursue the Hammond evidence issue (Hartman, 2008). Sanchez, without elaborating, said there were legal issues behind the destruc-tion, even though Sanchez indicated that Hammond should be investigated; “The seized evidence burned for approximate-ly 8 1/2 hours,” according to an August 15, 1995, report by Sanchez (Moffeit, 2008a). Detective Krenning could not believe they burned every piece of evidence, stat-ing, “I can’t recall one other case where the evidence was taken to a landﬁll, mashed up with a grater, and then burned” (Moffeit, 2008a). Nine weeks after Hammond’s pos-sessions were destroyed, Broderick phoned forensic psychologist Reid Meloy to have him study Masters’s artwork (Moffeit, 2008a). Also, newly discovered records not disclosed to the defense show that a witness reported seeing a man running in shorts expose himself near where Hettrick’s body was found; the woman who saw the man said he ﬁt Hammond’s description and was seen going in a nearby house (Hughes, 2007c). Prosecutors and police stated in Masters’s trial that Hettrick’s killer could get sexual satisfaction from passing near where he posed her body (Hughes, 2007c). Tom Bevel, a 1999 prosecution wit-ness and blood-spatter expert, told jurors he believed Hettrick was killed at Landings Drive and dragged or carried to the spot where she was found by a bicyclist the next day. Bevel later stated that police failed to provide him “a litany of items” that he had now seen and that led him to believe Hettrick was killed elsewhere and driven to Landings Drive before being dragged to where she was found (McLaughlin, 2008). Bevel was not aware of Hettrick’s clothing until August 2005 when he got a call from Close-up of Hettrick’s bodySummer 2009 THE FORENSIC EXAMINER® 57(800) 592-1399Barie Goetz, another forensic expert who headed a Colorado Bureau of Investigation crime lab from 1999 to 2004, who stat-ed, “He was never given the physical evi-dence until I took it to him” (McLaughlin, 2008). Bevel added that Goetz also provid-ed photos and reports he had not seen; “I was never aware all those were available” (McLaughlin, 2008). Bevel said he has nev-er experienced a miscommunication of this level in more than 35 years of testifying as an expert (McLaughlin, 2008). Also, a defense expert recently identiﬁed at least a dozen tracks running alongside the blood drag-trail leading to Hettrick’s body as prints from Thom McAn manufactured shoes, not worn by Masters. Yet Broderick’s testimony at trial alluded to only one Thom McAn print and discounted the chance it was tied to the killing (Moffeit, 2007a). Moreover, Masters’s new defense counsel discovered that the FBI had made high-quality casts of footprints in the “drag trail’’ leading to the spot where Hettrick’s body was found. The prints did not belong to Masters, nor was the defense notiﬁed of the FBI results (Banda, 2008).  The Opinion of Forensic Psychologist Dr. Reid MeloyHonorably discharged in 1998 after serv-ing eight years in the navy, Masters moved to California, bought a house in the des-ert town of Ridgecrest, and began work as an aircraft structural mechanic. Detective Broderick was less convinced of Masters’s in-nocence even after his colleagues and the FBI indicated that they believed Timothy was innocent. Broderick sought the opin-ion of forensic psychologist Dr. Reid Meloy, member of the American Board of Professional Psychology (ABPP). Dr. Meloy received details of the case along with more than 2,000 of Masters’s drawings, stories, crime scene videotapes, Broderick’s inter-pretation of Masters’s drawings, police in-terviews with Masters, photographs, maps, and transcripts in order to see if there was a relationship between Masters and the mur-der. Meloy would eventually conclude from Masters’s drawings and stories that Masters ﬁt the proﬁle of a killer because he was a loner, he came from an isolated or deprived background, he often had violent fantasies, and harbored hidden hostility toward au-thorities and women (Moffeit, 2008a).  However, not turned over to the defense were Broderick’s own interpretations of Masters’s artwork that ﬁlled dozens of pages that were dated long before Meloy joined the prosecution’s efforts. On July 24, 1998, Detective Broderick updated prosecutors Gilmore and Blair on the status of Meloy’s work, and in his letter Broderick wrote that he sent Meloy a draft of Masters’s ar-rest warrant and was waiting for his “ap-proval” (Vaughn, 2007). Meloy was so con-vinced that Timothy was the culprit that he sent a pretrial letter to then-Larimer County DA Stuart Van Meveren in which he hoped the work of “superb professionals” Gilmore and Blair “will result in a suc-cessful prosecution” (Vaughn, 2007). Besides the inclu-sion of Dr. Meloy as a prosecution witness, there was no new evidence to link Timothy to the murder. By this time, Timothy’s ap-pearance as an adult helped the prosecu-tion’s cause:  he had grown into an impos-ing ﬁg-ure and looked capable of committing the crime, as con-trasted to a skinny 15-year-old adolescent (Yager et al., 2008). Meloy stated, “In my 18 years of doing this kind of work I have never seen such voluminous productions by a suspect in a sexual homicide; that tells us he was preoc-cupied with sexual violence, violence, sexu-ally sadistic images, images of domination and degradation of women, and he was also fascinated by knives.” Meloy further stated, ‘“After spending six months on the case, I felt I understood the motivations for this homicide and that I had become convinced that Timothy Masters was the individual that had committed this homicide” (Banda, 2008). “Young Timothy killed Hettrick … and, by doing so, had symbolically killed his own mother. A classic case of ‘displaced sexual matricide’ brought on by feelings of abandonment” (Banda, 2008). In court, the prosecution bombarded the jury with Masters’s violent pictures that were shown on a large video monitor. Meloy pointed out features of the drawings that he testiﬁed showed a pairing of sex and violence, which was evidence of “picquerism,” the sadistic pleasure derived from stabbing. He also claimed that Masters was interested in the degradation of women and fascinated with weapons and death (Campbell, 2008a). Although Meloy was barred from giving his opinion about whether or not he be-lieved Masters’s pictures and stories impli-cated him in Hettrick’s murder or that his productions reﬂected his belief that it was a displaced matricide, Meloy drew a very clear correlation between the circumstances of her death and Masters’s artwork as mo-tive for the homicide. He testiﬁed about the characteristics of a sexual homicide and went into detail about how Masters’s productions could be considered a “fantasy rehearsal,” especially a doodle on Masters’s math homework of a knife-wielding hand cutting a diamond shape that Meloy inter-preted as a vagina (see left), “which may have been a rehearsal of the genital mutila-tion” (Campbell, 2008a). According to Meloy, because some of Tim’s drawings were of stabbings, dragging, and so on, they were logically relevant to the defendant’s motive, intent, and plan to commit the crime. The psychologist deﬁned a sexual homicide as one in which there is “primary sexual activity usually involving semen or ejaculation”; yet despite labeling this a sexual homicide, there was no semen found in, on, or near the body (Hartman, 58 THE FORENSIC EXAMINER® Summer (cid:81)(cid:85)(cid:85)(cid:40)www.acfei.com2007a). He showed how speciﬁc pictures could be interpreted to reﬂect the crime; several showed “blitz attacks,” depicted stabbings that Meloy interpreted as sexual in nature and depicted women as murder victims. He opined that Timothy’s retreat into a fantasy world combined to create a boiling kettle of latent violence just waiting to erupt; “A retreat into such a compensa-tory narcissistic fantasy world, replete with sexuality and violence, works for awhile, but at a great cost. The unexpressed rage continues, depression may ensue, and an-ger toward women as sources of both pain (abandonment) and erotic stimulation builds” (Campbell, 2008a). Equally prejudicial was Meloy’s inter-pretation of a picture Masters drew the day after he saw Hettrick’s body. It depicted one ﬁgure dragging another, which was appar-ently wounded or dead, from behind. The wounded ﬁgure was riddled with arrows and blood seemed to ﬂow from its back (see above right).  Entirely discounting the presence of the arrows, which had nothing to do with the murder, Meloy wrote in his report that this picture represented the crime as it ac-tually happened. “This is not a drawing of the crime scene as seen by Tim Masters on the morning of February 11 as he went to school. This is an accurate and vivid draw-ing of the homicide as it is occurring. It is unlikely that Tim Masters could have in-ferred such criminal behavior by just view-ing the corpse, unless he was an experienced forensic investigator. It is much more like-ly, in my opinion, that he was drawing the crime to rekindle his memory of the sexu-al homicide he committed the day before” (Campbell, 2008a). Meloy stated, “Sexual homicide repre-sents the solution, particularly in the form it took in this case: If I kill a woman, she cannot abandon me; if I desexualize her (genital mutilation), she cannot stimu-late me” (Banda, 2008). “These are not conscious thoughts for Tim Masters, but likely represent the unconscious beliefs that drove his behavior the night of Feb. 11, 1987, when he killed and sexually mu-tilated Peggy Hettrick, a victim of choice and opportunity. Ms. Hettrick represented all women to Tim Masters” (Banda, 2008). Meloy indicated that either a conﬂict with a woman in authority or grief over the death of a loved one triggered his murderous out-burst (Banda, 2008). According to Meloy, “A trigger mechanism or precipitating event is a particular occurrence in the life of the perpetrator which causes him to act out his fantasies in the real world” (Banda, 2008). Dr. Meloy testiﬁed that such an event could be conﬂict with one’s spouse or girlfriend, grief over the death of a loved one, or con-ﬂict with women of authority in a school or employment setting” (Banda, 2008). In this case, Meloy stated that Timothy’s trigger mechanism, which was the catalyst for Timothy to kill, consisted of the argu-ment he had with a female teacher at school about a month prior to the murder. The ar-gument ensued between the female teacher and Timothy because the teacher took away a military manual he possessed.Retired FBI Agent Roy Hazelwood’s AnalysisThe crux of Masters’s position during the post-conviction process was that Detective Broderick and Prosecutors Gilmore and Blair withheld information from the de-fense lawyers that could have been used to contradict their case that Masters was a kill-er; specially-appointed prosecutors agreed that the original prosecutors violated pretri-al discovery rules. It was during the review of the violation of pretrial discovery rules that the defense learned that Hazelwood was a retired special agent with the FBI who specialized as an FBI proﬁler and also had published research on the speciﬁc type of crime in question. Moreover, it was learned that Hazelwood’s opinion contradicted the direction the investigation took, the theory of the prosecution, and testimony of the forensic psychologist who was the main prosecution witness. Speciﬁcally, among the material not disclosed that should have been were notes Broderick took after a con-versation with Hazelwood (Hughes, 2007b) as well as faxed memos from Hazelwood to Broderick (Goodbee, n.d.). Hazelwood told Broderick that tying the pictures to the crime, since none of them reﬂected what happened, was “overreaching” (Hughes, 2007b). Hazelwood eventually withdrew from the case after he had concerns over the prosecutors’ trial strategy and psychologi-cal theories to be used at trial (Campbell, 2008b.) He also told Broderick that “fantasy is not motive,” contradicting one of the pillars of Meloy’s testimony (Campbell, 2008a). Hazelwood’s opinion is crucial in understanding why Broderick and the po-lice department did not employ Hazelwood or a proﬁler from the FBI to develop a pro-ﬁle, but instead used the services of a foren-sic psychologist. The differences between FBI proﬁles and the forensic psychologist hired for the Hettrick investigation cannot be overstated and the following quote is in-structive: “The difference is really a matter of the FBI being more oriented towards investigative experience than [academic psychologists] are,” says retired FBI agent McCrary (Winerman, 2004). The investigative aspect and differen-tiation between disciplines that McCrary refers to includes trained and experienced law enforcement ofﬁcers who understand practices and procedures of a criminal in-vestigation, interview and interrogation, search and seizure, reviewing police reports, analysis of intelligence from both physical and witness evidence, evidentiary consid-erations as to how they impact courtroom testimony, and forensic laboratory reports. Academic forensic psychologists focus more on the offender class rather than attempt-ing to solve an individual case. Academic forensic psychologists are more apt to look Summer 2009 THE FORENSIC EXAMINER® 59(800) 592-1399at research of those who have already been 
caught, analyzing their characteristics and 
searching for patterns involving how they 
think, personality traits, and psychological/
social data.
  The study of the available records sup-
ports the observations of McCrary in that 
at some point Meloy believed that academic 
research on sexual homicide could replace 
solid law enforcement investigation proto-
col as evidence. The authors acknowledge 
that forensic psychologists can be involved 
in many different aspects of an investiga-
tion; however, one of the most overrated 
concepts of their work is criminal proﬁl-
ing, and this is where the investigation and 
prosecution of Timothy Masters strayed. 
Even University of Wyoming criminal 
justice professor George Blau considered 
the hidden Hazelwood commentary criti-
cizing Meloy’s theories particularly trouble-
some, stating that “Hazelwood destroys the 
argument of psychological validity” when 
Meloy attempts to “link the crime scene to 
Masters’s drawings” (Moffeit, 2007a).
  In addition to the problems associated 
with the building of a psychological proﬁle 
that would have to either ignore or coun-
ter the opinions of Hazelwood, Hazelwood 
stated in a 1997 memo that Hettrick’s death 
was a “crime of opportunity,” contrary 
to the prosecution’s theory that Masters 
snuck out of his trailer home, stalked Peggy, 
and killed and mutilated her without leav-
ing a shred of evidence (Hughes 2007b). 
The court transcripts make it clear that 
Hazelwood never testiﬁed and that each of 
his cautions were rejected by the investiga-
tors, the prosecution, and the forensic psy-
chologist. Hazelwood’s opinion about the 
relevance of Masters’s drawings to the crime 
directly contradicted Meloy’s eventual testi-
mony, but the conclusions of Hazelwood’s 
report on the case were never introduced 
during the 1999 trial or disclosed to the 
defense (Hughes, 2007b). Masters’s attor-
ney, Fischer, stated, “We would have called 
Hazelwood as fast as we could have called 
him…We’ve got it backed up by the lead-
ing expert in the world, and these guys hid 
it from us” (Hughes, 2007b).
  The formidable obstacle before the foren-
sic psychologist is described by two veter-
an FBI agents who pioneered the bureau’s 
psychological proﬁling program. In the 
early 1970s, Howard Teten and Patrick 
Mullany developed the modern investiga-
tive approach for the Behavioral Science 
Unit, which helps trainees to solve crimes 

by studying the offender, his or her behav-
ior, and the motivation behind it. Teten 
stated, “People get the wrong idea of what 
proﬁling is…It’s not a psychic thing…You 
don’t pick out the perpetrator with a pro-
ﬁle…Not the individual…You pick out a 
type of personality” (Banda, 2008). Absent 
physical evidence, Teten and Mullany said, 
it would be a mistake to rely on that anal-
ysis alone to build a case. Mullany stated 
that, ‘’We never intended that it would be 
the sole evidence that would move the case 
forward…We always intended that it could 
be a technique to ferret out a suspect…
The only thing that should be in court is 
exact evidence: hair, ﬁber, DNA. Even if a 
guy confesses, these are things that need to 
be put in place’’ (Banda, 2008). Mullany’s 
comment on the evidentiary aspects of pro-
ﬁling supports McCrary’s observation that 
the FBI is oriented toward the investigative 
experience where evidence  is still necessary 
for opinions of culpability to withstand le-
gal scrutiny.
  The position of McCrary, Teten, and 
Mullaney is further supported in an article 
titled The Academic and the Practitioner: 
Pragmatists’ Views of Offender Proﬁling 
(Alison & Goodwill, 2004). Using per-
sonality traits as the main foundation for a 
psychological proﬁle that masquerades as 
criminal investigative analysis is of signiﬁ-
cant concern to professionals in the ﬁeld 
(Alison et al., 2004). “While it is acceptable 
to create a proﬁle as an investigative tool, it 
is not acceptable to focus investigations on 
the presumption that the proﬁle is wholly 
accurate, especially when the consequences 
of such action might have signiﬁcant det-
rimental effects on an individual and/or 
an investigation” (Alison et al., 2004). It is 
necessary to “distinguish between informa-
tion that directs an investigation and infor-
mation that proves guilt, arguing that while 
offender proﬁles have been helpful in police 
investigations, extending their use to pro-
vide evidence of guilt is dangerous” (Alison 
et al., 2004).
  Moreover, as important as proﬁling is 
in terms of solving difﬁcult cases, the real-
ity is that professionals in the ﬁeld should 
be aware that, to date, the empirical evi-
dence does not support the scientiﬁc va-
lidity of proﬁlers’s predictive abilities from 
crime scene evidence (Eastwood, Cullen, 
Kavanagh, & Snook, 2006). The authors 
acknowledge that proﬁlers provide services 
in addition to predictions about offender 
characteristics; however, this is arguably the 

most frequently requested type of service 
and the most important task that they per-
form because the proﬁlers belief about the 
type of person who committed the crime 
inﬂuences all subsequent types of proﬁling 
advice (Eastwood et al., 2006).

Analysis of Dr. Meloy’s Opinion
“There have been incidences 
where juries relied on my 
opinion and in the aftermath 
those [opinions] were not 
supported by evidence.” 
—Dr. Reid Meloy

There are several problems in the way Meloy 
was employed in this case. Although foren-
sic psychologists may conduct research on 
criminal proﬁling, that fact does not make 
them a proﬁler. The forensic psycholo-
gists who are proﬁlers have had training 
as proﬁlers and incorporate far more than 
personality trait theory into their analysis. 
Regardless of the lack of evidence linking 
Timothy to the case and the opinion of 
Hazelwood, Meloy continues to push his 
own reversed engineered psychological 
proﬁle matching Masters to the murder. 
This reverse proﬁling exists when one ﬁrst 
determines who they want the suspect to be 
and then continues to add characteristics to 
that individual of the type of person who 
would commit such a crime by the type 
of evidence that is collected—in this case 
drawings and narratives.
  Furthermore, Meloy did not reveal to the 
court that Hazelwood did not agree with 
his opinion, even though during Meloy’s 
testimony he cites Hazelwood’s scholarship 
as scholarship he would have relied upon. 
Meloy never employed any psychological 
tests to derive the assumptions of personal-
ity traits and was left to derive the assump-
tion of Masters’s personality traits from his 
interpretation of Masters’s drawings, knife 
collections, and pornographic magazines. 
The authors believe that a serious ethical 
issue develops when a forensic psychologist 
offers a reason for the arrest warrant, assists 
in drafting the arrest warrant, and testiﬁes 
on behalf of the prosecution as an expert 
in the same case he helped build. 
  Criminal investigative analysis is em-
ployed as a speciﬁc method to analyze 
crimes and develop a hypothesis about the 
characteristics of the person who might 
have committed such a crime; practitioners 

60 THE FORENSIC EXAMINER® Summer (cid:81)(cid:85)(cid:85)(cid:40)www.acfei.comof the ﬁeld do not contend that such an analysis can identify the individual(s) who committed the offense. “In some ways, [proﬁling] is really still as much an art as a science,” says psycholo-gist Harvey Schlossberg, PhD, former direc-tor of psychological services for the New York Police Department (Winerman, 2004). “We as psychologists do look at database sets on known criminal groups, and that indeed does assist in completing analysis of speciﬁc criminal behavior, but such analysis is very different from simply guessing ‘who did it’” (Winerman, 2004). There was no objective analysis in Meloy’s as-sessment of Timothy’s behavior because he vio-lates his own forensic psychological protocol. For example, Meloy’s own scholarship empha-sizes a protocol that, in addition to psychologi-cal testing as mentioned above, competent and thorough completion of the clinical interview and the gathering of independent historical data are critically important in arriving at a reliable, valid understanding of the individual (Meloy & Gacono, 1995). Meloy never interviewed Timothy, thus relying on speculation as to what the drawing and narratives signiﬁed (Hartman, 2007b). Because Meloy was not employed as a neutral party that would have been loyal to the court, there would have been no reason to sub-ject Timothy to an evaluation by Meloy when Meloy already determined that Timothy was the culprit. According to ethical guidelines for forensic psychologists, “forensic psychologists realize that their public role as “expert to the court” confers upon them a special responsi-bility for fairness and accuracy in their public statements” (APA, 1991). It is incorrect to opine that fantasy is equivalent to motive when the fo-rensic psychologist does not know the purpose or intent of the fantasy. Having fantasies is not synonymous with the intent to fulﬁll or perform those fantasies; one only needs to observe all the graphic horror ﬁlms and novels available to the public.  The behavioral science approach mandates that a mental health professional sticks to behav-ior analysis and never testiﬁes or tries to project psychological theories on to the speciﬁcs of a giv-en case. Thus, once a mental health professional abandons this approach as well, the prejudice to a suspect can be insurmountable. Given that one of the authors is a clinical psychologist and has spent the last 20 years working in the criminal justice system providing forensic psychological analysis, the point authoritatively may be made that once the mental health professional begins to champion a cause or a theory as Meloy es-poused (either for or against the individual be-fore the court), the objective analysis owed to the court is lost. In fact, according to the American Psychological Association, a forensic psychologist does not take a side; his or her job is to translate psychological terminology in such a way that is acceptable to the legal system (Brodsky, 1991). The reader should be aware of the fact that if the forensic psychologist is testifying for the defense or the prosecution, this does not mean that they are taking sides; the forensic psychologist’s loy-alty is to the court. Furthermore, what is inter-esting is that even Meloy indicated during his testimony that the research on sexual homicide was scant. Meloy testiﬁed that current scientif-ic journals have reported that the relationship between sexual fantasies and sexual homicides is tentative and opined that no conclusions can be drawn linking fantasies to conduct. Indeed, the inconclusive nature of this re-search is apparent when one of the two studies relied upon by the prosecution’s expert is also relied upon for the proposition that “normal people,” that is, persons who do not commit criminal behavior, also engage in deviant sexu-al fantasies (MacCulloch, Snowden, Wood, & Mills, 1983). If both groups do engage in sa-distic sexual fantasies, there is no one causative factor that explains why some act out their fan-tasies and others do not (MacCulloch et al., 1983). Surveys measuring sadistic fantasy make it clear that it is extremely common and the vast majority of it does not lead to sexual offending (Grubin, 1999). As to rehearsed sadistic fanta-sy, sadistic situations tend to be rehearsed many times in fantasy and at times are tried out in real life over a number of years (MacCulloch et al., 1983). There was no proof of rehearsal through Meloy’s testimony considering that Meloy nev-er interviewed Timothy to validate his conclu-sion. Moreover, the defense did call a prominent forensic psychologist, Dr. John Yuille, who stated that the drawings meant nothing. Because research in sexual homicide is relatively new, Yuille does not believe that a correlation neces-sarily exists between fantasy and homicide; there is room for differing interpretations of the same evidence (Farrell, 1999). In his testimony regard-ing the current state of research on the relation-ship between fantasy and sexual homicide, Yuille stated, “the research is ﬂawed” (Masters, 1999). In addition, he indicated that it is difﬁcult to generalize about the link between fantasy and sexual homicide because the sample size in the research is small (Masters, 1999). Furthermore, the research on how frequently normal people engage in sexual fantasies and who do not com-mit sex crimes is inadequate (Masters, 1999). The research on sexual homicide and its pur-ported application to Masters is simply incor-Robert R. “Roy” Hazelwood, DABFE, DABLEE, has been re-garded as one of the leading pioneers into the study of sexual predators. His work in criminal proﬁling helped to deﬁne the practice, and he has written several books about proﬁling. He was a supervisor for more than 20 years with the FBI Behavioral Science group, and he remains active as a member of the Academy Group, an organization of former FBI agents and law enforcement ofﬁcers. He is now Afﬁliate Professor of Administrative Justice at George Mason University and has appeared as an expert on criminal investigations on numerous radio and television shows. Hazelwood is a commentator for The Forensic Echo. Before joining the FBI, he achieved the rank of Major in the Army Military Police Corp. Holding a Master of Science from NOVA University, he also studied forensic medicine at the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology in Washington DC. He has received nu-merous awards and certiﬁcates from universities, criminal justice associa-tions, and law enforcement agencies around the country. Hazelwood’s early interest in auto-erotic fatalities initiated a groundbreak-ing study that compiled the results of over 150 cases. He also conducted the largest known survey of police attitudes toward rape. With Drs. Park Dietz and Janet Warren, Hazelwood interviewed incarcerated men con-victed of sexually sadistic crimes. They then did an involved study of the wives and girlfriends of sexual sadists. With Dr. John Hunter of the University of Virginia, Hazelwood is now research-ing juvenile sex offenders.  Hazelwood is a Diplomate of the American Board of Law Enforcement Experts, and he spoke at the ACFEI 2005 National Conference as a fea-tured presenter.Summer 2009 THE FORENSIC EXAMINER® 61(800) 592-1399rect. For example, research indicated that those who engage in sexual murder tended to be isolated and engaged in anti-social behavior (Grubin, 1994). There is a re-lationship between sexual abuse in child-hood and the mutilation of murder victims. Sexually abused murderers are more likely to mutilate victims than are those offend-ers not sexually abused (67% versus 44%) (Ressler, Burgess, Hartman, Douglas, & McCormack, 1986). We also see a posi-tive relationship between adolescent sexu-al victimization and the mutilation of the murder victim (78% versus 42%) (Ressler et al., 1986). Furthermore, early fantasies often give rise to behavior tryouts that are precursors to criminal behavior (Burgess, Hartman, Ressler, Douglas, & McCormack,  1986). Lastly, what is most revealing is a study that found that the frequencies of deviant sexual fantasies in control groups representing “normals” tended to be high-er than sex offenders (Langevin, Lang, & Curnoe, 1998). In the Masters case we do not observe ev-idence of isolation, early try-out behaviors, or abuse. What is amazing is that Meloy re-lied on the very research that showed that someone like Timothy would be the least likely candidate to commit sexual murder to justify his belief that Timothy did in fact commit sexual murder. It is incorrect to as-sume that fantasy is a rehearsal to act out when it may serve a number of other pur-poses for the individual such as wish fulﬁll-ment, curiosity, or alleviation of sexual frus-tration (Langevin et al., 1998). Given that there are no certain behavioral indicators to exclusively conﬁrm characteristics in sadis-tic sexual fantasy, fantasy does not appear to be associated toward a type of crime (Gray, Watt, Hassan, & MacCulloch, 2003). In addition to the problematic position that the drawings represent sadistic sexual fantasy, Meloy then takes the position that the drawings represent an illustration of dis-placed matricide, indicating that he killed Peggy Hettrick because Peggy represented Timothy’s deceased mother. The authors went to some length to gather research that would attempt to justify Meloy’s position that Timothy’s actions were a form of dis-placed matricide. The authors located what we believe to be the only study available prior to the trial, titled “Sexual Homicide by Adolescents,” of which Meloy would have been familiar. The study regards ado-lescents who commit sexual homicide and was based on the possibility that at least one of the three cases of adolescent sexual homi-cide may have represented the adolescent’s displaced rage onto a female victim—rage caused by the mother’s threats of separation through suicide (Meyers, 1994). It is interesting to contrast Meloy’s views on a sexual homicide with what retired FBI proﬁler John Douglas states in his book The Mind Hunter (1995). Douglas de-scribes a sexual homicide where the victim was found badly beaten. Her nipples had been cut off and placed on her chest, and there were bite marks on her legs and lac-erations on her body; she was spread-eagled and tied with her belt and nylons, and an umbrella and pen were placed in her vagina (Douglas, 1995). One of the suspects was a 15-year-old boy who had found the victim’s wallet. However, Douglas dismissed the boy as a suspect because the sexual fantasy that pertained to this killer would have taken years to develop (Douglas, 1995). However, Douglas goes on to comment about this particular case after the killer had been ap-prehended, candidly stating that acting out on fantasies to harm others is a crime, but that in themselves “bizarre and deranged fantasies are not a crime” (Douglas, 1995). Douglas’s insight supports Hazelwood’s commentary that fantasy is not necessar-ily motive, and MacCulloch et al.’s (1983) research that sadistic situations tend to be rehearsed many times in fantasy and at times tried out in real life over a number of years. Moreover, one year after Timothy was found guilty, Meloy published an article titled “The Nature and Dynamics of Sexual Homicide: An Integrative Review” (2000) where he, on several occasions, mentions Timothy Masters as a case study of sexual homicide. What is interesting about the article is that he describes characteristics that are common in sexual homicide and cites risk factors that are associated with displaced matricide that would be attrib-utable to Masters—namely 1) a history of mistreatment of women or fantasies of as-saulting women, 2) fetishism for female underclothing and destruction of female clothes, 3) expression of hatred, contempt, or fear of women, and 4) confusion of sexu-al identity. The authors could not ﬁnd any behavioral evidence to support the inclusion of the above criteria to the Masters case.  Meloy’s article attempts to show that Masters would have fulﬁlled the criteria for the motivation model of sexual homicide as developed by Burgess, Ressler, Douglas, and McCormack and elaborated upon by Ressler et al. in their book Sexual Homicide (1988), but the authors’ next search for ev-idence to support this theory proved un-successful. The authors could not ﬁnd evi-dence revealed by the police or Meloy that the criteria outlined in the sexual homicide model applied to Timothy; such evidence could include 1) an ineffective social envi-ronment, 2) formative traumatic events in their childhood such as abuse, 3) personal-ity traits such as chronic lying, stealing, cru-elty, and destroying property, 4) cognition processes entailing negativity and a desire to control and dominate others, 5) hyper-arousal consistent with early trauma and hyperarousal consistent with psychopathy, 6) antisocial acts representing a displace-ment of aggression, and 7) a feedback ﬁlter (learning) where practice makes the crime more closely ﬁt the perfect fantasy. Meloy is, without question, an expert on narcissism and psychopathic personal-ity traits, having published many peer re-view articles and either authored or edited many books dealing in part or in whole on the topic. Thus, when Meloy stated that “virtually all sexual homicide perpetrators evidence narcissistic and psychopathic per-sonality traits” (Meloy, 2000), these authors were troubled as the traits are not clearly evident in the Masters documents. In a study titled the “Characteristics of Sexual Homicides Committed by Psychopathic and Nonpsychopathic Offenders,” the au-thors offer empirical research that is at odds with Meloy’s ﬁndings that both psychopath-ic and non-psychopathic persons engage in sexual homicide (Porter, Woodworth, Earle, Drugge, & Boer, 2003). The authors found “...Meloy relied on the very research that showed that someone like Timothy would be the least likely candidate to commit sexual murder to justify his belief that Timothy did in fact commit sexual murder.”62 THE FORENSIC EXAMINER® Summer (cid:81)(cid:85)(cid:85)(cid:40)www.acfei.comthat about 82% of the psychopathic offend-
ers are more likely to engage in sadistic vio-
lence during the sexual homicide as opposed 
to about 52% of the non-psychopathic of-
fender (Porter et al., 2003). Furthermore, 
the authors of the study indicated that the 
psychopathic killers more likely tended to 
kill for thrill and lacked empathy/remorse, 
while non-psychopathic killers murder be-
cause of negative emotions, rage, and/or 
anger (Porter et al., 2003). By deduction, 
if Meloy states that Timothy’s drawings and 
narrative represent anger and rage toward 
women, the probability that Timothy is 
psychopathic according to Porter’s research 
lessens, which would cast doubt on Meloy’s 
position that all sexual homicide perpetra-
tors evidence narcissistic and psychopathic 
personality traits.
  In addition, Meloy discusses how he 
used the Hazelwood and Warren (1995) 
components that violent sexual fantasies 
in sexual homicide cases can be inferred by 
the perpetrator’s productions, such as inani-
mate objects, dolls, videos, clothing, pho-
tos, drawings, or narratives (Meloy, 2000). 
Meloy fails to disclose, both in his trial testi-
mony where he refers to Hazelwood and in 
his article, that Hazelwood indicated there 
was not enough evidence to suggest that 
Masters was the perpetrator. In addition, 
Meloy states that while adolescent sexual 
homicide perpetrators “are reared in cha-
otic family environments and are physically 
abused, most do not have a history of child 
sexual abuse” (Meloy, 2000). The authors 
could not ﬁnd any evidence that Timothy 
was reared in a chaotic family environment 
or that he suffered from any type of abuse; 
in fact, the reports appear to show that he 
came from a stable household.
  There were other methods, although none 
of them are ideal in terms of validity and re-
liability, for a forensic psychologist to collect 
information about a person’s character and 
behavioral inclinations without interacting 
with the individual. Such methods appear 
familiar to Meloy as he has advertised that 
one of his specialties involves remote per-
sonality assessments—essentially assess-
ments that do not involve meeting with 
and interviewing the person under analy-
sis. The authors could not ﬁnd evidence 
from Meloy’s trial testimony or any other 
records that he used a well-known remote 
personality assessment inventory called the 
Gittinger Personality Assessment System 
to assist in his opinion of what behavior-
al traits Masters harbored, even though it 

was available prior to Masters’s arrest and 
trial. In addition, Professor Gerald Post of 
George Washington University considers 
other factors in remote personality assess-
ment that have been known for years in the 
ﬁeld, including cultural factors, social inter-
action factors, and peer group comparison 
factors. For those that do use remote per-
sonality assessments, the authors of these 
remote assessments go to great lengths to 
advise the reader of the research on their 
validity and reliability (Krauskopf, 1998).
  For example, Timothy was placed in a 
special education class after a teacher dis-
covered some of his disturbing artwork. 
An article in the Denver Post describes, 
“In the margins of his notebooks were 
sketches of dinosaurs with arrows through 
them, gruesome war scenes described by his 
Vietnam veteran dad, and horror ﬂicks such 
as Nightmare on Elm Street that father and 
son watched together” (Moffeit, 2008a). 
Timothy enjoyed writing, and his goal was 
to be another Stephen King. In fact, the au-
thors researched, beginning with the year 
1987 and back, for publications by Stephen 
King that Masters may have read. The au-
thors cross-referenced the themes in King’s 
novels against themes in Masters’s drawings 
and stories and were able to ﬁnd some par-
allels. For example, the correlations between 
his drawings depicting murder, Nazi death 
camps, Nazi sadistic killers, Jews, and an 
adolescent male student are found in the 
Summer of Corruption: Apt Pupil (1982). 
With respect to the psychological dynamics 
of a 12-year-old son of a dying mother who 
must ﬁght evil, the authors direct readers to 
The Talisman (1984). With respect to a son 
who kills his mother, the reader is referred 
to the short story The Woman in the Room 
published in the Night Shift (1978).
  The authors could not ﬁnd any evidence 
that Meloy cross-referenced the stories and 
drawings to what other adolescents pro-
duce, either at the national level or in the 
particular school Timothy attended. There 
was no evidence that there was any explo-
ration as to the timing and manner of pro-
duction of the narratives/drawings and 
what his thoughts and feelings were prior 
to, during, and following the productions. 
For example, Masters was never asked if 
through the use of his narratives/drawings 
he hoped to shock others, punish them, 
or ask for help; Meloy and the court sys-
tem assumed that his pictures proved that 
he was a bigot and racist full of hatred for 
everyone. Judith Challes, the special edu-

cation teacher who knew him best, told 
his reading teacher, “You know, I’m not 
at all concerned about them [his writings 
and drawings],” because most of her kids 
scrawled horriﬁc images (Moffeit, 2008a). 
There is no evidence that Meloy took the 
time to speak to family members or class-
mates about Timothy or whether they had 
ever seen his drawings and discussed their 
signiﬁcance.
  Perhaps Meloy or one of his proxies 
could have asked Ms. Challes if she had any 
knowledge that Timothy hated women, that 
he had a desire to commit acts that were de-
picted in his drawings, if he had hurt others, 
or if there was a connection between what 
he said and what he did. Given that one of 
the authors performs forensic psychologi-
cal services, this would have been a fertile 
area to investigate and assist in a remote 
personality assessment; Timothy spent so 
much time in the company of those teach-
ers, they would probably know him best. 
Did Timothy actually possess adolescent 
psychopathic qualities as Meloy argues in 
his article? This is an area in which Meloy 
has written extensively; perhaps interview-
ing others who knew Timothy may have re-
vealed a behavioral pattern that pointed to 
him as someone other than a psychopath.

Legal Implications 
“He admitted his guilt through 
pictures to us.” 
—a juror after convicting 
Timothy Masters
What is introduced at a trial as evidence 
can have a profound impact on how lay 
persons serving on a jury perceive a person 
charged with a crime. Courts attempt to 
ﬁlter out evidence that may be inﬂamma-
tory or prejudicial in order to assure that a 
defendant receives a fair trial and that he 
or she is not held accountable for an act 
because the jury does not like the individ-
ual’s character. Courts generally do not al-
low what is known as a defendant’s “other 
crimes, wrongs, or acts” to be used against 
them because of the fear that jurors would 
focus too much on these other matters and 
determine the culpability of the accused by 
how they perceive his/her character.
  However, there is an exception in the law 
where a person’s “other crimes, wrongs, or 
acts” can be entered as evidence in a trial to 
assist the jury in determining culpability if 
it goes to something other than a person’s 

Summer 2009 THE FORENSIC EXAMINER® 63(800) 592-1399character, such as the ability to commit 
the crime, a person’s motive, state of mind, 
planning, identity, or if it reveals a modis 
operandi. Courts normally go through a 
balancing test to determine whether the 
probative value of letting in evidence of 
other crimes, wrongs, or acts outweigh 
the prejudicial effect that it may have on 
the accused. Thus, if the defendant’s other 
wrongs or acts reveal motive that can be 
linked to the charged offense, the court 
may decide to let the evidence of other 
wrongs and acts be heard by the jury; even 
though it is prejudicial to the defendant, 
the beneﬁt to the jury in linking motive to 
other evidence is probative in understand-
ing why the crime occurred. The judges on 
the Colorado Supreme Court that upheld 
Timothy’s conviction and believed that 
Meloy’s testimony was useful—known as 
the majority—opined that Timothy’s draw-
ings and writings, as well as the testimony 
pertaining to them, were not being offered 
to prove his character, but to show that he 
acted in a way that proved his motive for 
the crime, his deliberation of the crime, his 
planning and preparation of the crime, his 
opportunity to commit the crime, and his 
subsequent knowledge of the crime.
  The judges who did not believe that 
Meloy’s testimony should have been al-
lowed—referred to as the minority—opined 
that the tendency of juries to overvalue other 
crimes, wrongs, or acts as evidence disclosed 
at trial is supported by the ﬁndings of several 
empirical studies on jury behavior regarding 
a defendant’s past activities (Masters, 2002). 
For example, the studies found that the dis-
taste jurors may have for the defendant’s past 
activities may tend to distort their percep-
tion of the degree of independent evidence 
necessary to meet the prosecution’s burden 
of proving guilt beyond a reasonable doubt 
(Masters, 2002). In other words, the jury 
disproportionately concentrates on a de-
fendant’s past activities at the expense of con-
sidering if there is other evidence that does 
in fact prove the defendant guilty beyond a 
reasonable doubt. Yet, in this case there was 
no other independent evidence necessary to 
meet the prosecution’s burden unless you 
accept the majority’s belief of what consti-
tutes incriminating evidence, such as the fact 
that the victim’s hair was red like Timothy’s 
mother, that Timothy was familiar with the 
area where the victim was found, or that 
Timothy had knives in his collection simi-
lar to the weapon possibly used against the 
victim.

  The majority’s assurance that the pros-
ecution did not emphasize or rely on the 
inadmissible evidence described, in part, 
as the “sporadic use of ethnic slurs,” mis-
characterizes the nature of the inadmis-
sible evidence and the trial proceedings. 
However, the prosecution emphasized to 
the jury numerous images drafted by the 
defendant that gloriﬁed the Ku Klux Klan; 
the Nazi party; killing; and torturing of 
people based on their racial, ethnic, and 
religious backgrounds, sexual orientation, 
and physical limitations, none of which had 
a connection to the Hettrick homicide but 
were used, through Meloy, to prove mo-
tive (Masters, 2002). The prosecution also 
highlighted many of these inadmissible, 
inﬂammatory examples of racial bigotry 
through the testimony of Broderick as be-
ing proof that the defendant committed this 
murder. For example, Broderick testiﬁed as 
to drawings that depicted the Nazi death 
camp welcoming “Each and Every God-
damn Jew” and the caption “Kill the Jew” 
(Masters, 2002). Broderick also testiﬁed as 
to another drawing that showed doctors us-
ing saws, machetes, and knives on people, 
with a caption stating “I’ve found the cure 
for AIDS” (Masters, 2002).
  Research  by  Bright  and  Goodman-
Delahunty titled “Gruesome Evidence and 
Emotion: Anger, Blame and Jury Decision-
Making” (2006) concluded that when grue-
some photographs, for example, are shown 
to a mock jury and while all other aspects of 
evidence remain the same, the rate of con-
viction increases dramatically as contrasted 
if no gruesome photographs are presented at 
trial. If those same gruesome photographs 
are accompanied by oral testimony describ-
ing the photograph, the rate of conviction 
increases even further (Bright & Goodman-
Delahunty, 2006). The reason that the con-
viction rate dramatically increases just on 
the introduction of gruesome evidence is be-
cause there are emotional reactions that acti-
vate the desire to hold someone responsible 
for the gruesome acts (Bright & Goodman-
Delahunty, 2006). Yet in a position contrary 
to Bright’s research, when the majority is 
confronted with the issue of the prejudicial 
impact the hundreds of depictions of draw-
ings and narratives would have on the jurors, 
they reasoned that the jury’s exposure to vio-
lent images through admissible evidence is 
not substantially inﬂuencial; in other words, 
the jury is desensitized to the disturbing im-
ages because of their extensive exposure to 
them (Masters, 2002).

  The lead author of this article works as a 
criminal trial attorney and has participated 
in countless criminal jury trials, including 
homicides. Prior to introducing gruesome 
evidence in homicide trials, the trial judge 
places the burden on the party wanting to 
introduce the evidence to explain its rel-
evance, fully understanding that pictures 
carry great weight in a juror’s mind; as a 
result, trial judges frequently limit what 
jurors will be exposed to because the prej-
udicial impact of gruesome evidence that 
could be linked to the defendant is simply 
too prejudicial to admit. It has also been the 
experience of this author that jurors tend 
to stop listening to evidence when they are 
overcome with negative emotions. The vol-
ume of drawings and narratives that were 
introduced in the Masters trial resulted in 
the case being decided before it ever be-
gan. There was simply too much negative 
emotion to overcome to convince jurors, 
who have promised to listen to all the evi-
dence before coming to a conclusion in 
order to maintain an open mind before 
deliberations. The Masters case overwhelm-
ingly supports the research by Bright and 
Goodman-Delahunty (2006) that gruesome 
evidence can have a disproportionate im-
pact on the willingness to convict and il-
lustrates why it is crucial that the trial court 
ﬁlter evidence that can inﬂame jurors’ pas-
sions and convict based on how they feel 
about the defendant’s interests/lifestyle.
  What is equally amazing about the 
Masters case is that from a legal perspective, 
the circumstantial evidence was non-exis-
tent to extremely weak at best. According 
to Kevin Heller in his article titled “The 
Cognitive Psychology of Circumstantial 
Evidence,” when there is no direct or physi-
cal evidence linking a defendant to a crime 
and the circumstantial evidence is weak, ju-
rors are more willing to ﬁnd the defendant 
not guilty because they are capable of think-
ing of different scenarios that may have 
explained Hettrick’s death (Heller, 2006). 
The stronger the circumstantial evidence, 
meaning the fewer scenarios of alternative 
culpability, the stronger the probability of 
conviction based solely on circumstantial 
evidence (Heller, 2006). Given this author’s 
trial experience with circumstantial evidence 
cases, the author would agree with Heller’s 
position; yet interestingly, the Masters case 
tends to contradict Heller’s position in that 
the jurors still found the defendant guilty 
without direct or physical evidence and 
non-existent or weak circumstantial evi-

64 THE FORENSIC EXAMINER® Summer (cid:81)(cid:85)(cid:85)(cid:40)www.acfei.comdence. This observation further supports Bright’s research that the impact gruesome evidence has on juror perceptions cannot be overstated. Without admitting Timothy’s drawings and narratives describing violent, hate-ﬁlled racist views, there was no case against him; this is aptly evidenced by what one ju-ror stated after returning a verdict of guilty: “He admitted his guilt through pictures to us” (Farrell, 2000). This is not arguing that gruesome evidence should not be admitted because, by deﬁnition, certain crimes inher-ently have gruesome evidence attached to their acts; however, it is critical that a legal connection linking gruesome evidence to a crime be established so that the justice sys-tem can ensure fair proceedings. Yet, the mere fact that a forensic psychologist was permitted to theorize about the defendant’s fantasies depicted in the drawings does not strengthen this weak evidentiary link.  The logical relevance of the defendant’s uncharged fantasies is minimal when com-pared to the overwhelming power of these fantasies to depict the defendant as an evil and bad person (Masters, 2002). Even as-suming that some of the drawings and writings would be admissible, there are hundreds and hundreds of pages that have nothing to do with this case. According to the minority, the writings and drawings are not even “acts” as contemplated by the law, but merely reﬂect, for the most part, a 15-year-old’s fantasies; not one of these 1,000 drawings and narratives concerns this victim personally or reﬂects the man-ner in which the victim was killed (Masters, 1999). However, the prosecution was al-lowed to end their closing argument by urging the jury to convict the defendant because his fantasies proved that he com-mitted this crime: “Please take the time to look at those drawings, read the narratives, study this evidence. The evidence is there. Sometimes it’s hard to ﬁnd. Sometimes you have to do a little thinking as to how the de-fendant could draw something like that un-less he knew how it happened. Please look and read, study, dig into the paper bags. The evidence is there” (Masters, 1999). In addition, courts have an obligation to ascertain whether expert testimony that is disclosed to a jury actually rises to the standard that it is in fact generally accepted within the scientiﬁc community as reliable to support expert opinion under Daubert. The concern is that jurors may rely on infor-mation to determine culpability that is un-founded, creating a scenario where the prej-udice to the defendant denies him/her of a fair trial under the Constitution. The major-ity indicated that the prosecution presented multiple theories of logical relevance to the Masters case and decided that the scientiﬁc principles underlying Dr. Meloy’s testimony were reasonably reliable and that they would aid the jury. According to the majority, Dr. Meloy’s testimony provided an explanation for the seemingly inexplicable, and without it, jurors cannot understand the defendant’s motivation for murder. The Court stated: Dr. Meloy relied on an objective, wide-ly recognized psychological theory, one which was founded on research and study, and one which the trial court de-termined was generally recognized within the forensic community. His testimony consisted of an objective, complex, and highly developed analysis of the crime scene and Defendant’s productions that had been reﬁned by years of research. As such, it was reliable and insightful infor-mation that assisted the jury by placing the crime in context and helping them to understand bizarre and deviant behavior that was unlikely to be within the knowl-edge of ordinary citizens; it helped the jury understand the signiﬁcance of mate-rial facts in the case. (Masters, 2002) Unfortunately, in order to bolster their legal position on the appellate review of Masters, the majority opined the exact op-posite of what the current research and Dr. Yuille indicated on the subject of sexual homicide, in that the role of fantasy is not generally accepted scientiﬁc fact in the fo-rensic psychology community. The majority relies upon the prosecution’s expert to link the defendant’s fantasies to this crime, in spite of the failure of the fantasies to show a link to this speciﬁc victim and this spe-ciﬁc crime. When there is genuine scien-tiﬁc debate over the validity of the expert’s propositions, the non-character purpose of the uncharged acts is much weaker and the danger of use by the forbidden character in-ference much greater. It is clear from the Masters case that the judicial ruling allowing Meloy to tes-tify reﬂects the ﬁndings of the study titled “Asking the Gatekeepers: A National Survey of Judges and Judging Expert Evidence in a Post-Daubert World” (2001) that concluded judges, especially state court judges, do not know how to apply Daubert guidelines; do not understand scientiﬁc evidence; do not know how to ask experts the appropriate questions, issues of statistical signiﬁcance, distinctions between reliability, and validity of the hard sciences versus the behavioral sci-ences; and are in need of judicial education on frequent issues that are brought about by expert testimony such as error rates, va-lidity, and reliability (Gatowski, Dobbin, Richardson, Ginsburg, Merlino, & Dahir, 2001). Moreover, research appears to suggest that jurors, perhaps nonconsciously, assume that all expert evidence admitted at trial has been “approved” by a judge, thus concluding too much about the quality of the evidence presented (Schweitzer et al., 2009).  Speciﬁcally, jurors assume trial judges re-view expert evidence before it is presented to them and that any evidence presented to them must be above some threshold of quality (Schweitzer et al., 2009). If trial judges do adhere to Daubert standards, the jurors’ assumptions may make sense but the research indicates that trial judges do a poor job of screening expert evidence, which is unfortunate; the trial judge is implicitly lending credence to the testimony, thus increasing its persuasiveness (Schweitzer et al., 2009). Interestingly, as recent as March 2008, Meloy testiﬁed for the prosecution in a death penalty case and admitted un-der cross-examination and in reference to the Masters case that “there have been in-cidences where juries relied on my opin-ion and in the aftermath, those [opinions] were not supported by evidence” (Coberly & Campbell, 2008).Recommendations for Forensic Psychologists“What gets us in trouble is not what we don’t know, it’s what we know for sure that just ain’t so.” —Mark TwainThe introduction of Daubert standards changed the landscape for forensic psy-chology and as the Supreme Court of the United States stated, admissible expert tes-timony must be based on more than “sub-jective belief or unsupported speculation” (Daubert, 1993). The Daubert criteria en-compass concerns within the psychological scientiﬁc community that expert testimony was at times admitted absent scientiﬁcally acceptable theories and methods to support the opinions expressed, and conversely that relevant expert testimony based on reliable, competent research was at times excluded. Judge Richard Posner characterized the Summer 2009 THE FORENSIC EXAMINER® 65(800) 592-1399purpose of Daubert as “to protect juries from being bamboozled by technical evi-dence of dubious merit” (Lloyd, 2006). The authors recommend that practitio-ners consider the Daubert factors so that legal requirements are upheld and ethical considerations are considered when offer-ing expert testimony. Although not an ex-haustive list, some of the Daubert factors used by courts in evaluating the reliabil-ity of expert testimony are 1) whether a method consists of a testable hypothesis, 2) whether the method has been exposed to peer review, 3) whether the method is gen-erally accepted with a given community, 4) whether the method is valid and reliable, 5) any known error rates, and 6) is the theory developed “for litigation only.” For example, Meloy uses Masters’s pic-tures as his measurement of the behavioral rehearsal of the Hettrick sexual homicide, yet there is no data to support his hypoth-esis. As to reliability, Meloy does not pres-ent research that a test used to measure the connection between fantasy and motive to commit sexual homicide produces con-sistent results that are reliable. As to error rates, how many times was a woman killed where it was argued to be displaced sexu-al matricide when in fact it was not a dis-placed sexual matricide?  Meloy could not answer this question because there is no data on error rates on this issue. The authors believe that practitioners should consider the ethical implications of their testimony given the impact it may have on an individual’s liberty, and forensic psychologists do have American Psychological Association (APA) ethical guidelines to consider. Too often courts have admitted misleading psychologi-cal testimony with the explanation that it could be countered by testimony from opposing experts and by vigorous cross-examination. From the lead author’s trial experience, there are practical situations where vigorous cross-examination may not make juries aware of what, to sophisticated observers, were obvious defects in the tes-timony, thus ethical considerations should not be ignored just because legal require-ments appear fulﬁlled. The APA, together with other profession-al organizations, established a set of ethical guidelines for forensic psychologists pub-lished in Law and Human Behavior (1991), and although the guidelines do not repre-sent an ofﬁcial statement of the APA, they were endorsed by the American Academy of Forensic Psychology. All of the guide-lines are important, however, because when testifying, forensic psychologists have an obligation to all parties to a legal proceed-ing to present their ﬁndings, conclusions, evidence, or other professional products in a fair manner (APA, 1991). Forensic psy-chologists do not, by either commission or omission, participate in a misrepresentation of their evidence, nor do they participate in partisan attempts to avoid, deny, or sub-vert the presentation of evidence contrary to their own position (APA). For example, Meloy mentioned Hazelwood’s research during the trial, but he never disclosed Hazelwood’s opinion that attempting to stretch Timothy’s drawings into behavioral rehearsal and motive was over-reaching. The courtroom testimony clearly illustrates what can happen when opinions that do not sup-port the position taken by the forensic psy-chologist are either avoided or subverted. The forensic psychologist’s responsibility to make sure that all legal parties understand the validity and reliability issues ensures that the checks and balances built into the legal system can function. Meloy com-mitted a signiﬁcant blunder by attempt-ing to superimpose his expertise with the Rorschach test to bolster his testimony on the connection between Masters’s drawings and the homicide. In order to avoid undue inﬂuence from ﬁnancial gain, the forensic psychologist maintains professional integrity by exam-ining the issue at hand from all reasonable perspectives, actively seeking information that will differentially test plausible rival hypotheses (APA). In this case, the foren-sic psychologist made it clear, by way of his own scholarship, that he is interested in and supports psychoanalytic theories. It is evident that the desire to “push” the le-gitimacy of projectives techniques, at least as practiced by him, as a valid and reason-able method for assessing culpability lead to a tragic error accepted by the Colorado Supreme Court. For example, there is no evidence that Meloy tested a plausible rival hypothesis that the drawings did not reﬂect what the forensic psychologist projected into the drawings or that perhaps Timothy’s vio-lent stories did not mean that his fantasti-cal imagination gave him a motive to kill. In fact, Timothy indicated that, “My peers seemed to approve of them. . . . They liked those drawings . . . they would offer sug-gestions so that encouraged me to draw even more. . . . We would draw horrible gruesome scenes and share it with a guy . . . ‘Oh, that’s cool,’ and pass it back” (Yager et al., 2008). Meloy had access to Timothy’s school records and knew the media ado-lescents were exposed to; he learned that Timothy was in a special education class, that his peer group liked to draw, and that many of them even thought Timothy’s drawings were cool. Meloy could have used all of this information to form an alterna-tive hypothesis.  Meloy was also provided information concerning what Timothy’s fellow students were exposed to by the media. Meloy tes-tiﬁed during the trial that he categorized Timothy’s drawings into over thirty themes; however, these were themes that ﬁt into a sexual homicide hypothesis. He never con-sidered a military theme, even though he ad-mitted that many of the drawings had a mil-itary theme to them. He never considered that the drawings had a Freddy Krueger hor-ror movie theme or, as Timothy stated, were a reﬂection of the work of Stephen King—all possibilities that could have been used to form an alternative hypothesis as to why he wrote stories or drew pictures that were violent. Interestingly, in an article Meloy co-authored titled, “Investigating the Role of Screen Violence in Speciﬁc Homicide Cases,” he considered relevant the content of movies viewed by a sexual homicide de-fendant named Lucas Salmon (Meloy & Mohandie, 2001). Lucas Salmon, together with George Woldt, abducted a 22-year-old female, took turns vaginally raping her, and stabbed, cut, and smothered the woman to death as she lay naked on the pavement (Meloy & Mohandie, 2001). Meloy wrote of the common theme in the movies his cli-ent watched, such as Blood In, Blood Out . . . Bound By Honor and A Clockwork Orange to explain his pairing of sex and violence and how it would impact Lucas’s behavior. Compare and contrast how Meloy took Timothy’s drawings and cross-referenced the classiﬁcations used in sexual homicide such as blitz attack, mutilating etc., but not to any other type of classiﬁcation that would have formed a different hypothesis. For example, Meloy would have known of Timothy’s books and movies that the police recovered from his home and his desire to write like Stephen King because Timothy re-vealed this to the detectives on several occa-sions. Meloy does not appear to extend the same analysis of developing theme consisten-cies for Timothy as alternative hypotheses. It 66 THE FORENSIC EXAMINER® Summer (cid:81)(cid:85)(cid:85)(cid:40)www.acfei.comis plausible Meloy did not develop alterna-
tive hypotheses because he knew that some 
of the major drawings would have more in 
common with non-sexual homicide themes 
as opposed to the voluminous military, hor-
ror movie, and Stephen King themes.
  The fatal error in not actively seeking 
information that will differentially test a 
plausible rival hypothesis is a caution that 
forensic psychologists should heed. The 
ACFEI code of conduct also forbids ACFEI 
forensic examiners from engaging in dual 
roles, not developing and considering alter-
native hypothesis, and from creating pseu-
do proﬁles. Consider that ACFEI members 
are not advocates for one side or the other 
and must maintain objectivity. Members 
should not intentionally withhold or omit 
any ﬁndings or opinions discovered during 
a forensic examination that would cause the 
facts to be misinterpreted or distorted.
  Moreover, forensic psychologists must 
avoid giving written or oral evidence about 
the psychological characteristics of particu-
lar individuals when they have not had the 
opportunity to conduct an examination of 
the individual as it pertains to conclusions 
to be drawn by the forensic psychologist 
(APA, 1991). Forensic psychologists must 
make every reasonable effort to conduct 
such examinations and when not feasible, 
they must make it clear the impact of such 
limitations on the reliability and validity of 
their professional testimony (APA, 1991). 
Meloy had the opportunity to uphold this 
guideline when he testiﬁed by disclosing 
that there were reliability issues as to his 
testimony because he did not conduct an 
examination on Masters, but he did not. 
  Upon Timothy’s release from prison, 
Dr. Meloy stated that Detective Broderick 
and the prosecutors “intentionally manip-
ulated his professional opinion by misrep-
resenting the physical evidence and pro-
viding him only a portion of the evidence 
necessary to make a judgment with re-
spect to Mr. Masters’s psychological state” 
(Moffeit, 2008b). Meloy indicated that 
had he known of Dr. Hammond, then he 
would not have considered Masters to be 
the killer (Moffeit, 2008b). Meloy reversed 
his prior opinion believing that Timothy 
was the killer when he indicated that rela-
tive to Dr. Hammond’s likely perpetration, 
the “probability that Mr. Masters commit-
ted the Hettrick homicide was incredibly 
small” (Carroll, 2008). It was not until it 
was discovered that Timothy was telling 
the truth that Meloy offered to create yet 

another reverse-engineered pseudo-proﬁle 
that implicated Dr. Hammond as the more 
likely suspect, even though Dr. Hammond 
was irrelevant in terms of Meloy’s analysis of 
the drawings. Again, Meloy had no known 
direct, physical, or circumstantial evidence 
that pointed to Dr. Hammond as a more 
likely suspect.
  In  addition,  Meloy  never  disclosed 
Hazelwood’s position that is independent 
of what the police did or did not tell him 
about the evidence. Moreover, Meloy’s po-
sition that he was manipulated is ﬂawed; 
he would have known that there was no 
direct or physical evidence used against 
Timothy, other than his own testimony, 
because he was present at the trial. The 
evidence or lack of evidence presented at 
trial put Meloy on notice as to what exactly 
was used against Timothy. Furthermore, it 
was Meloy, independent of what the police 
disclosed to him, that presented his creden-
tialed testimony as “science” and defended 
the scientiﬁc nature of his testimony as reli-
able before the jury that used his testimony 
to ﬁnd Timothy guilty.

Conclusion
Timothy’s drawings and their perceived sig-
niﬁcance to the case proved to be the fatal 
ﬂaw that produced a series of disasters, the 
ﬁrst of which began with a distorted crimi-
nal investigation leading to the hiring of a 
forensic psychologist. The second disaster 
occurred when the psychologist engaged in 
projective analysis of the drawings without 
sound research to support his opinion. This 
mistake led to the third disaster: a prosecu-
tion that ignored all other evidentiary con-
siderations, resulting in the conviction of 
an innocent person. This conviction created 
the fourth disaster, which represented the 
Colorado Supreme Court upholding the 
ﬂawed testimony of the forensic psycholo-
gist while ignoring the most fundamental 
aspects of Daubert.
  Forensic analysis clearly has its beneﬁts, as 
we have seen with Timothy being excluded 
as a source of DNA on the victim’s cloth-
ing, leading to his freedom. However, we 
also observe that there is a precarious side 
to forensics that cannot be discounted, es-
pecially when we have lay persons who serve 
as jurors and can be swayed by an expert’s 
testimony involving drawings. It is critical 
that if law enforcement does rely on proﬁl-
ing services or forensic psychologists to as-
sist in their investigation, the evidentiary 
aspects of an investigation should not be 

ignored. As of 2008, Timothy appears to 
suffer from post-traumatic stress disor-
der (Moffeit, 2008c). His attorneys have 
encouraged him to see a psychologist, but 
he is weary, stating that “A psychologist 
helped put me away” (Moffeit, 2008c).

References
  Alison, L., West, A., & Goodwill, A. (2004). The 
academic and the practitioner: Pragmatists’ views of 
offender proﬁling. Psychology, Public Policy and Law, 
10(1/2), 71-101.
  APA. (1991). Specialty guidelines for forensic psy-
chologists. Law and Human Behavior, 15(6). 
  Banda, P. (2008, April 6). Did a psychological proﬁle 
go too far? Prince George Citizen Retrieved from http://
www.princegeorgecitizen.com/20080406125908/wire/
world-news/did-a-psychological-proﬁle-go-too-far-
experts-question-if-practice-is-reliable.html
  Bright, D., & Goodman-Delahunty, J. (2006, 
April). Gruesome evidence and emotion: Anger, blame, 
and jury decision making. Law and Human Behavior, 
30(2), 183-202.
  Brodsky, S. (1991). Testifying in court, guidelines 
and maxims for the expert witness. Washington, DC: 
American Psychological Association.
  Burgess, A., Hartman, C., Ressler, R., Douglas, J., 
& McCormack, A. (1986, September). Sexual homi-
cide. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 1(3), 251-272.
  Campbell, G. (2007, July 15). Convicted man’s ap-
peal puts a lot at stake. Greeley Tribune Retrieved from 
http://www.greeleytribune.com/article/20070715/
NEWS/107150120
  Campbell, G. (2008a, January 5). Fort Collins po-
lice face questions in Masters case. Greeley Tribune 
Retrieved from http://www.greeleytribune.com/
article/20080105/NEWS/272599777
  Campbell, G. (2008b, February 1). The Tim 
Masters case: Chasing Reid Meloy. Fort Collins Now 
Retrieved from http://www.fortcollinsnow.com/
article/20080201/NEWS/297958975
  Carroll, V. (2008, October 23). Psychologist’s fan-
tasy. Retrieved from http://www.rockymountainnews.
com/news/2008/oct/23/carroll-psychologists-fantasy
  Coberly, A., & Campbell, G., (2008b, March 
14). Expert in Tim Masters case admits his testimo-
ny was not supported by the facts. Greeley Tribune 
Retrieved from http://www.greeleytribune.com/
article/20080314/NEWS/704078416
  Darst, K. (2007, August 24). Masters’s defense: 
Doctor could have done it. Coloradoan Retrieved 
from http://www.coloradoan.com/apps/pbcs.dll/
article?AID=/20071106/NEWS01/71107028
  Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, 509 U.S. 
79. (1993).
  Douglas, J. (1995). The mind hunter. New York: 
Pocket Star Books.
  Eastwood, J., Cullen, R., Kavanagh, J., & Snook, 
S. (2006, Summer/Fall). A review of the validity of 
criminal proﬁling. The Canadian Journal of Police & 
Security Services, 4(2/3), 118-124.
  Farrell, J. (1999, March 25). Psychologists clash 
over meaning behind sexual homicide. Coloradoan Re-
trieved from http://www.coloradoan.com/apps/pbcs.
dll/article?AID=/20071106/NEWS01/71107017
  Farrell, J. (2000, April 13). Masters: Prosecu-
tion relied on character attacks. Coloradoan Re-
trieved http://www.coloradoan.com/apps/pbcs.dll/
article?AID=/20071106/NEWS01/71107020
  Gatowski, S., Dobbin, S., Richardson, J., Ginsburg, 
G., Merlino, M., & Dahir, V. (2001, October). Ask-
ing the gatekeepers: A national survey of judges and 

Summer 2009 THE FORENSIC EXAMINER® 67(800) 592-1399judging expert evidence in a post-Daubert world. Law and Human Behavior, 25(5), 433-458. Goodbee, F. M. (n.d). Special prosecutor’s of-fered stipulations. Retrieved from http://i.a.cnn.net/cnn/2008/images/01/16/timothy.lee.masters.pdf Gray, N., Watt, A., Hassan, S., & MacCulloch, M. (2003, September). Behavioral indicators of sadistic sexual murder predict the presence of sadistic sexual fantasy in a normative sample. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 18(9), 1018-1034. Grubin, D. (1994). Sexual murder. British Journal of Psychiatry, 165, 624-629. Grubin, D. (1999, March). Actuarial and clinical assessment of risk in sex offenders. Journal of Interper-sonal Violence, 14(3), 331-343. Hartman, P. (2007a, June 12). Free Tim Masters because. Retrieved from http://freetimmastersbecause.blogspot.com Hartman, P. (2007b, September). Homegrown ﬁ-asco. Retrieved from http://freetimmastersbecause.blogspot.com/2007/10/homegrown-ﬁasco.html Hartman, P. (2008, March 11). The Hartman re-port on the special prosecutor’s report. Retrieved from http://freetimmastersbecause.blogspot.com/2008/07/district-attorney-kenneth-t.html Hazelwood, R., & Warren, J. (1995). The relevance of fantasy in serial sexual investigation. In R. Hazelwood & A. Burgess (Eds.), Practical aspects of rape investiga-tion (2nd ed., pp. 127-138). New York: CRC Press. Heller, K. (2006). The cognitive psychology of circum-stantial evidence. Michigan Law Review, 105, 241-306. Hughes, T. (2007a, December 5). Masters’s at-torneys focus on transcript. Coloradoan Retrieved from http://www.coloradoan.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20071205/NEWS01/712050343/1002/CUSTOMERSERVICE02 Hughes, T. (2007b, December 8). Expert ques-tioned testimony in Masters’s case. Coloradoan Re-trieved from http://www.coloradoan.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20071208/NEWS01/712080371 Hughes, T. (2007c, December 4). Prosecutor admits evidence destroyed in Masters’s case. Coloradoan Re-trieved from http://www.coloradoan.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20071204/NEWS01/712040343/1002/CUSTOMERSERVICE02 Hughes, T. (2008a, January 3). Critical infor-mation left out in Masters’s original trial. Col-oradoan Retrieved from http://www.colorado-an.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20080103/NEWS01/801030366/1002/ Hughes, T. (2008b, January 30). Judg-es investigated in their roles as prosecutors in Tim Masters case. Coloradoan Retrieved from http://www.coloradoan.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20080130/NEWS01/801300319/1002/CUSTOMERSERVICE02 Hughes, T. (2008c, January 30). Mas-ters case may have long reach. Coloradoan Re-trieved from http://coloradoan.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20080124/NEWS01/801240375/1002/CUSTOMERSERVICE02 Krauskopf, C.J., (1998, Winter). The personality assessment system: a radical hypothesis. Applied and Preventative Psychology, 7(4), 235-245. Langevin, R., Lang, R., Curnoe, S. (1998, June). The prevalence of sex offenders with deviant fantasies. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 13(3), 315-327. Lloyd, R.M. (2006). Proving lost profits after Daubert: Five questions every court should ask be-fore admitting expert testimony. Universty of Richmond Law Review, 41, 379-424. MacCulloch, M., Snowden, P., Wood, J. & Mills, H. (1983). Sadistic fantasy, sadistic behavior and of-fending. British Journal of Psychiatry, 143, 20-29. Masters v. People, 01 SC 291 (2002). Retrieved from www.courts.state.co.us/supct/supctcaseannctsin-dex.htm Masters v. People, 01 SC 291. (1999, March 24). Transcript of Meloy and Yuille, Retrieved from http://freetimmastersbecause.blogspot.com McLaughlin, E. (2008, January 18). Police split over conviction in Colorado slaying. CNN Retrieved from http://www.cnn.com/2008/CRIME/01/18/mas-ters.cops Meloy, J.R., & Gacono, C.B. (1995). Assessing the psychopathic personality. In J.N. Butcher (Ed.), Clinical personality assessment: Practical approaches (pp. 410-422). Oxford, U.K: Oxford University Press. Meloy, J.R. (2000). The nature and dynamics of sexual homicide: An integrative review. Agression and Violent Behavior, 5(1), 1-22. Meloy, J.R., & Mohandie, K. (2001). Investigating the role of screen violence in speciﬁc homicide cases. Journal of Forensic Science, 46(4), 113-118. Meyers, W. (1994, September). Sexual homicide by adolescents. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 51, 239-242. Moffeit, M. (2007a, December 20). Undisclosed masters evidence nags. Denver Post Retrieved from http://www.denverpost.com/news/ci_7764830 Moffeit, M. (2007b, August 1). Video: Sketchy evi-dence. Denver Post Retrieved from http://www.den-verpost.com/news/ci_6369280. Moffeit, M. (2008a, January 21). Sketchy evidence raises doubt. Denver Post Retrieved from http://www.denverpost.com/headlines/ci_6373222 Moffeit, M. (2008b, October 21). Masters’s team plans federal suit. Denver Post Retrieved from http://www.denverpost.com/specialreports/ci_10771564 Moffeit, M. (2008c, December 28). Mending Mas-ters’s broken life. Denver Post Retrieved from http://www.denverpost.com/popular/ci_11317809 Porter, S., Woodworth, M., Earle, J., Drugge, J., & Boer, D. (2003, October). Characteristics of sexual homi-cides committed by psychopathic and nonpsychopathic offenders. Law and Human Behavior, 27(5), 459-470. Reed, S. (2007, August 19). Opinions on Ham-mond as Hettrick’s killer mixed. Coloradoan Re-trieved http://www.coloradoan.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20071106/NEWS01/71107027 Ressler, R., Burgess, A., Hartman, C., Douglas, J., & McCormack (1986, September). Murderers who rape and mutilate. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 1(3), 273-286. Ressler, R., Burgess, A., & Douglas, J. (1988) Sexual Homicide. New York: Lexington Books. Schweitzer, N. J. & Saks, M. J. (2009). The gate-keeper effect: The impact of judges admissibility de-cisions on the persuasiveness of expert testimony. Psy-chology, Public Policy and Law, 15(1), 1-18. Vaughn, K. (2007, December 1). Taking up Mas-ters’s cause. Rocky Mountain News Retrieved from  http://www.rockymountainnews.com/news/2007/dec/01/taking-up-masters-cause West, A. (2000, August). Clinical assessment of ho-micide offenders. Homicide Studies, 4(3), 219-233 Winerman, L. (2004, July/August). Criminal proﬁl-ing: The reality behind the myth. Retrieved from http://www.apa.org/monitor/julaug04/criminal.html Yager, J., Smith, T., & Goldbaum., M. (2008, November 29). Drawn to murder. CBS News. Retrieved from http://www.cbsnews.com/stories/2008/11/24/48hours/main4630559.shtml (cid:78)Frank  S. Perri, JD, MBA, CPA, ACFEI member and lead author of this research proj-ect, has worked as a prosecutor and defense attorney in the criminal law ﬁeld for over 12 years. Areas of concentration include violent and white-collar crimes. Mr. Perri received his Juris Doctor from the University of Illinois, his Master’s in Business Administration from Case Western Reserve University, and his Bachelor of Arts from Union College. In addi-tion, Mr. Perri is a licensed Certiﬁed Public Accountant. Mr. Perri’s scholar-ship includes fraud-detection homicide and application of the developmental smuggling model. You may contact Mr. Perri via e-mail at frankperri@hot-mail.com.Terrance G. Lichtenwald, PhD, is a Life Fellow and Diplomate in the ACFEI. He earned his Doctorate in Clinical Psychology from an American Psychological Association (APA) approved program and completed an APA approved in-ternship. He has a Master’s degree in Clinical Psychology and a second Master’s in School Psychology. He earned his Bachelor’s degree in Broad Field Social Studies and Psychology. Dr. Lichtenwald has spent 20 years com-pleting forensic, behavioral, psychologi-cal, and security evaluations as well as threat assessments. Scholarship inter-ests include fraud-detection homicide, the application of the developmental smuggling model, white-collar crime, and security/threat assessments.AcknowledgementsThe authors would like to thank Attor-ney Wendell Coates and Attorney Su-san Kalbantner for their review of the manuscript. About the AuthorsEarn CE CreditTo earn CE credit, complete the exam for this article on page 69 or complete the exam on-line at www.acfei.com (select “Online CE”).68 THE FORENSIC EXAMINER® Summer (cid:81)(cid:85)(cid:85)(cid:40)www.acfei.com If you require special accommodations to participate in accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act, please contact the CE Department at (800) 592-1399.Information was relevant and applicable.1. Learning objective 1 was met.2. Learning objective 2 was met.3. Learning objective 3 was met.4. You were satisﬁed with the article.5. ADA instructions were adequate.6. The author’s knowledge, expertise, and clarity were appropriate.7. Article was fair, balanced, and free of commercial bias.8.  The article was appropriate to your education, experience, and        9.  licensure level. Instructional materials were useful.10. 1 2 3 4 51 2 3 4 51 2 3 4 51 2 3 4 51 2 3 4 51 2 3 4 51 2 3 4 51 2 3 4 51 2 3 4 51 2 3 4 5EVALUATION: Circle one (1=Poor 2=Below Average 3=Average 4=Above Average 5=Excellent)Name:                                                           State License #:                                                    Phone Number:                                            Member ID #:                                                    Address:                                                                     City:                                                     State:                   Zip:                                   E-mail:                                                Credit Card #                                                                                                                                                Circle one:      check enclosed      MasterCard      Visa      American Express      Name on card:                                                                       Exp. Date:                 Signature                                                                                   Date                                 PAYMENT INFORMATION:  $15 per test  (FREE ONLINE)Statement of completion: I attest to having completed the CE activity. Please send the completed form, along with your payment of $15 for each test taken. Fax: (417) 881-4702, or mail the forms to ACFEI Continuing Education, 2750 E. Sunshine, Springﬁeld, MO  65804.  If you have questions, please call (417) 881-3818 or toll free at (800) 592-1399.KEY WORDS: Reid Meloy, Timothy Masters, criminal investigative analysis, forensic psychology, Roy Hazelwood, sexual homicide, motive fantasy, pseudo-profileTARGET AUDIENCE: Criminal investigators and psychologistsPROGRAM LEVEL: BasicDISCLOSURE: The authors have nothing to disclose.PREREQUISITES: None1 Picquerism is a form ofa. saddism.b. narcissism.c. psychosis.d. neurosis.2 Meloy is aa. medical doctor.b. forensic psychiatrist.c. forensic psychologist.d. investigator.3 Masters desired to write likea. John Steinbeck.b. Plato.c. James Joyce.d. Stephen King.4 Timothy Masters was found guilty based on a. direct evidence.b. circumstantial evidence.c. physical evidence.d. character evidence.5 According to Meloy, which would not be a displaced matricide risk factor?a. history of mistreatment of women.b. fetishism of female clothing.c. lack of confusion over sexual identity.d. expression of hatred for women.POST CE TEST QUESTIONS (Answer the following questions after reading the article)ATTENTION ACFEI MEMBERS: Journal-Learning CEs are now FREE when taken online. Visit www.acfei.com.CE ARTICLE 4: When Worlds Collide (pages 52–68)ABSTRACTAfter studying this article, participants should be better able to do the following:Understand the difference between criminal investigative analysis and forensic psychology.1. Consider the ethical considerations when offering forensic psychological opinions.2. Implement 3. Daubert factors when evaluating the apprpriateness of forensic testimony.LEARNING OBJECTIVESIn order to receive three CE credits, each participant is required to1. Read the continuing education article.2. Complete the exam by circling the chosen answer for each question. Complete the evaluation form. 3. Mail or fax the completed form, along with the $15 payment for each CE exam taken to:     ACFEI, 2750 East Sunshine, Springﬁeld, MO 65804. Or Fax to: 417-881-4702. Or go online to    www.acfei.com and take the test for FREE.For each exam passed with a grade of 70% or above, a certiﬁcate of completion for 1.0 continuing educa-tion credit will be mailed.  Please allow at least 2 weeks to receive your certiﬁcate. The participants who do not pass the exam are notiﬁed and will have a second opportunity to complete the exam. Any questions, grievances or comments can be directed to the CE Department at (800) 592-1399, fax (417) 881-4702, or e-mail: cedept@acfei.com. Continuing education credits for participation in this activity may not apply toward license renewal in all states.  It is the responsibility of each participant to verify the requirements of his/her state licensing board(s). Continuing education activities printed in the journals will not be issued any refund.TO RECEIVE CE CREDIT FOR THIS ARTICLEThis article is approved by the following for 3 continuing education credits:(ACFEI) The American College of Forensic Examiners International provides this continuing education credit for Diplomates.CE ACCREDITATIONS FOR THIS ARTICLEThis paper offers an analysis of the series of events that occurred when a homicide detective contacted an international expert in forensic psychology to assist in the arrest process and the prosecution as an expert witness against a targeted sexual homicide suspect.  The forensic psychologist developed a psychological proﬁle of a killer using narrative and drawings made by the suspect to conclude that the suspect’s fantasy was the motive and behavioral preparation for the sexual murder regardless of the fact that the forensic psychologist knew that there was no direct or physical evidence linking the suspect to the crime.  In this article, the authors examine the case of Timothy Masters, who was arrested and convicted of sexual murder based on the testimony of a forensic psychologist while ignoring the opin-ion of a criminal investigative analyst.  Summer 2009 THE FORENSIC EXAMINER® 69(800) 592-1399