	  

1	  

Study Skills 
 
Terry Eagleton, Literary Theory: An Introduction, Minneapolis: U of MN P, 2008. 

"Introduction: What is Literature?" (Excerpts) 

Group 1 

[…]  There  have  been  various  attempts  to  define  literature.  You  can  define  it,  for  example,  as 
'imaginative'  writing  in  the  sense  of  fiction  -  writing  which  is  not  literally  true.  But  even  the 
briefest reflection on what people commonly include under the heading of literature suggests that 
this will not do. Seventeenth- century English literature includes Shakespeare, Webster , Marvell 
and  Milton;  but  it  also  stretches  to  the  essays  of  Francis  Bacon,  the  sermons  of  John  Donne, 
Bunyan's  spiritual  autobiography  and  whatever  it  was  that  Sir  Thomas  Browne  wrote.  […]  A 
distinction between 'fact' and 'fiction'; then, seems unlikely to get us very far, not least because 
the distinction itself is often a questionable one. […] 

Perhaps  one  needs  a  different  kind  of  approach  altogether.  Perhaps  literature  is  definable  not 
according to whether it is fictional or 'imaginative', but because it uses language in peculiar ways. 
On this theory, literature is a kind of writing which, in the words of the Russian critic Roman 
Jacobson,  represents   an  'organized  violence  committed  on  ordinary  speech'.   Literature 
transforms  and  intensifies  ordinary  language,  deviates  systematically  from  everyday  speech.  If 
you  approach  me  at  bus  stop  and  murmur  'Thou  still  unravished  bride  of  quietness'  then  I  am 
instantly aware that I am in the presence of the literary. I know this because the texture, rhythm 
and  resonance  of  your  words  are  in  excess  of  their  abstract  able  meaning  -or  as  the  linguists 
might more technically put it, there is disproportion between the signifiers and the signified. Your 
language draws attention to itself, flaunts its material being, as statements like 'Don't you know 
the drivers are on strike?' do not.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

	  

Group 2 

2	  

[…]  Under  the  pressure  of  literary  devices,  ordinary  language  was  intensified,  condensed, 
twisted, telescoped, drawn out, turned on its head. It was language 'made strange'; and because of 
this  estrangement,  the  everyday  world  was  also  suddenly  made  unfamiliar.  In  the  routines  of 
everyday  speech,  our  perceptions  of  and  responses  to  reality  become  stale,  blunted,  or,  as  the 
Formalists  would  say,  'automatized'.  Literature,  by  forcing  us  into  a  dramatic  awareness  of 
language, refreshes these habitual responses and renders objects more 'perceptible'. By having to 
grapple with language in a more strenuous, self-conscious way than usual, the world which that 
language  contains  is  vividly  renewed.  The  poetry  of  Gerard  Manley  Hopkins  might  provide  a 
particularly graphic example of this. Literary discourse 'estranges or alienates ordinary speech, 
but in doing so, paradoxically, brings us into a fuller, more intimate possession of experience. 
Most  of  the  time  we  breathe  in  air  without  being  conscious  of  it:  like  language,  it  is  the  very 
medium in which we move. […] 

The Formalists, then, saw literary language as a set of deviations from a norm, a kind of linguistic 
violence:  literature  is  a  'special'  kind  of  language,  in  contrast  to  the  'ordinary'  language  we 
commonly  use.  […]  For  the  Formalists,  in  other  words,  'literariness'  was  a  function  of  the 
differential  relations  between  one  sort  of  discourse  and  another;  it  was  not  an  eternally  given 
property.  They  were  not  out  to  define  'literature',  but  'literariness'  -  special  uses  of  language, 
which could be found in 'literary' texts but also in many places outside them. […] 

To  think  of  literature  as  the  Formalists  do  is  really  to  think  of  all  literature  as  poetry. 
Significantly, when the Formalists came to consider prose writing, they often simply extended to 
it the kinds of technique they had used with poetry. But literature is usually judged to contain 
much  besides  poetry  -to  include,  for  example,  realist  or  naturalistic  writing  which  is  not 
linguistically self-conscious or self-exhibiting in any striking way. […] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

	  

Group 3 

3	  

When the poet tells us that his love is like a red rose,  we know by the very fact that he puts this 
statement in metre that we are not supposed to ask whether he actually had a lover, who for some 
bizarre reason seemed to him to resemble a rose. He is telling us something about women and 
love  in  general.  Literature,  then,  we  might  say,  is  'non-pragmatic'  discourse:  unlike  biology 
textbooks and notes to the milkman it serves no immediate practical purpose, but is to be taken as 
referring  to  a  general  state  of  affairs.  Sometimes,  though  not  always,  it  may  employ  peculiar 
language as though to make this fact obvious - to signal that what is at stake is a way of talking 
about a woman rather than any particular real-life woman. This focusing on the way of talking, 
rather than on the reality of what is talked about, is sometimes taken to indicate that we mean by 
literature a kind of self-referential language, a language which talks about  itself.  

There are, however, problems with this way of defining literature too. For one thing, it would 
probably have come as a surprise to George Orwell to hear that his essays were to be read as 
though the topics he discussed were less important than the way he discussed them. In much that 
is  classified  as  literature  the  truth-value  and  practical  relevance  of  what  is  said  is  considered 
important to the overall effect. But even if treating discourse 'non-pragmatically' is part of what is 
meant  by  literature',  then  it  follows  from  this  'definition'  that  literature  cannot  in  fact  be 
'objectively' defined. It leaves the definition of literature up to how somebody decides to read, not 
to the nature of what is written. […] 

In this sense, one can think of literature less as some inherent quality or set of qualities displayed 
by  certain  kinds  of  writing  all  the  way  from  Beowulf  to  Virginia  Woolf,  than  as  a  number  of 
ways in which people relate themselves to writing. It would not be easy to isolate, from all that 
has been variously called 'literature', some constant set of inherent features. In fact it would be as 
impossible  as  trying  to  identify  the  single  distinguishing  feature  which  all  games  have  in 
common. There is no 'essence' of literature whatsoever. […] Perhaps 'literature' means something 
like the opposite: any kind of writing which for some reason or another somebody values highly. 
[…] 'Literature' is in this sense a purely formal, empty sort of definition. Even if we claim that it 
is a non-pragmatic treatment of language, we have still not arrived at an 'essence' of literature 
because this is also so of other linguistic practices such as jokes. In any case, it is far from clear 
that we can discriminate neatly between 'practical' and 'non-practical' ways of relating ourselves 
to language. […] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

	  

Group 4 

4	  

We have still not discovered the secret, then, of why Charles Lamb, Thomas Babington Macaulay 
and John Stuart Mill are literature but not, generally speaking, George Bentham, Karl Marx and 
Charles Darwin. Perhaps the simple answer is that the first three are examples of 'fine writing', 
whereas the last three are not. This answer has the disadvantage of being largely untrue, at least 
in my judgement, but it has the advantage of suggesting that by and large people term 'literature' 
writing which they think is good. An obvious objection to this is that if it were entirely true there 
would be no such thing as 'bad literature.' […] The term 'fine writing', or belles lettres, is in this 
sense  ambiguous:  it  denotes  a  sort  of  writing  which  is  generally  highly  regarded,  while  not 
necessarily committing you to the opinion that a particular specimen of it is 'good'.  

With  this  reservation,  the  suggestion  that  'literature'  is  a  highly  valued  kind  of  writing  is  an 
illuminating one. But it has one fairly devastating consequence. It means that we can drop once 
and for all the illusion that the category 'literature' is 'objective', in the sense of being eternally 
given and immutable. If anything can be literature, and anything which is regarded as unalterably 
and unquestionably literature --Shakespeare, for example--can cease to be literature. Any belief 
that  the  study  of  literature  is  the  study  of  a  stable,  well-definable  entity,  as  entomology  is  the 
study of insects, can be abandoned as a chimera. Some kinds of fiction are literature and some are 
not; some literature is fictional and some is not; some literature is verbally self-regarding, while 
some highly-wrought rhetoric is not literature. Literature, in the sense of a set of works of assured 
and unalterable value, distinguished by certain shared inherent properties, does not exist. When I 
use  the  words  'literary'  and  literature'  from  here  on  in  this  book,  then,  I  place  them  under  an 
invisible crossing-out mark, to indicate that these terms will not really do but that we have no 
better ones at the moment.  

	  

