Exercises to Action & Cognition I

Homework #4

Please upload your homework on Friday Nov 21th to Stud.IP. The sheet needs to contain your
name(s), matriculation number(s) as well as your MatLab code and all required labeled ﬁgures.
If you want a correction please say so on the sheet. If you encounter problems, don’t hesitate to
write an email to kahartma@uos.de and ameisener@uos.de. Be sure to include [matlab] in the
subject.

Task: Power & Reﬂectance Spectra; Cone Activation.

1. Get color.mat from Stud.IP. You will ﬁnd two arrays of power spectra of 2 different light
sources (sun and neon light) and the reﬂectance spectra of 2 different materials (leaf and
apple). All values refer to the wavelengths given in wavelengths. That means the value in
sun(1) corresponds to the wavelength given in wavelengths(1), and so on.

2. Stimuli: Calculate the spectrum of reﬂected light for all combinations of light source and
material. Plot the illumination spectra. Use legend() to assign a description to each of the
curves in your ﬁgure. If you have more than 1 line of code for the computation of reﬂected
light for each light/object combination try to ﬁnd a shorter solution using only 1 operator.

3. Cone Spectra: Estimate the absorption spectras of the 3 cone types yourself. For a general

shape for each of the 3 cones have a look at http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spectral_sensitivity.
You may use a suitable approximation by a Gaussian with normpdf()1. You should ﬁnd hints
for taking the right mean for each Gaussian on Wikipedia. Then think about respective stan-
dard deviation. Scale the distributions into [0, 1] so the peaks of the distributions are at 1
(100% absorption at maximum) and plot the absorption spectra. Have a look at max() for
this.

4. Cone Spectral Response on Stimuli: Calculate the cone activation for all spectra of reﬂected
light. Use your estimated absorption spectra from (3.). Again, try to have only 1 line of code
for each cone/light combination.

5. A little thinking: Given a set of cone activations, how could you calculate backwards to
obtain the light spectrum of the visual stimulus that induced those activations? Shortly
discuss possible difﬁculties.

1Yes, damn Gaussians again, they are ubiquitous. If you are bored with them try it with a suitable Poisson or Gamma

distribution (poisspdf or gampdf).

1

