CHAPTER  12

Power and racism

P. J. Henry
Felicia Pratto

This chapter examines the relationship between the social psychological 

conceptualizations of power and of racism, and outlines how research 
on racism can benefit from incorporating the understanding of power pro-
cesses at the intergroup level. Until recently, the social psychology litera-
tures on power and racism developed largely independently (for an excep-
tion  see  Operario  &  Fiske,  1998).  Before  presenting  our  analysis  of  the 
relationship between racism and power, we provide theoretical definitions 
of these constructs. Social psychologists have rarely explicitly defined rac-
ism (for an exception, see Jones, 1997), despite their considerable attention 
to prejudice, discrimination, and stereotyping of racial and ethnic groups. 
Rather, they either rely on colloquial meanings or have defined particular 
varieties of racism (e.g., symbolic racism, modern racism, aversive racism, 
institutionalized  racism).  Hence,  we  begin  by  defining  racism.  Then  we 
summarize how power is defined and used in social psychological research, 
and find that current practices are not adequate for encompassing our defi-
nition of racism. The remainder of the chapter reexamines extant theories 
of racial prejudice and beliefs through the lens of power. We argue that by 
incorporating a broader definition of power, research on racism can more 
fully understand the effects of intergroup power on phenomena recognized 
as racist.

 

341 

342 

Power iN iNTergroUP relaTioNS

definiTion and concePTualizaTion iSSueS 

Surrounding Power and raciSm

“Race” and Racism
Races are not natural categories that classify people by their inherent fea-
tures. Races are social constructions that people create as they try to lend 
meaning to, account for, and justify social differences, such as differential 
role distribution, differential performance at tasks deemed socially mean-
ingful, and most especially, group differences in political ascendancy. His-
torians of race hold that people largely create race concepts as social con-
trol  mechanisms  to  justify  the  colonization,  subordination,  enslavement, 
exclusion, segregation, exploitation, or other oppressive treatment of others 
to benefit themselves (e.g., Allen, 1994, 1997; Fredrickson, 1981; Gossett, 
1963/1997).  Among  the  groups  that  have  been  referred  to  as  a  separate 
“race”  by  someone  else  are  Africans,  Asians,  and  their  descendants  by 
U.S. Americans; Irish and Scots by English invaders; Anasahs by Aryans in 
the Indus Valley; descendants of Noah’s son Ham in the Talmud; Jews by 
European Christian leaders after the Crusades; numerous Native peoples 
by  Spanish,  French,  and  English  conquistadores;  Celts  and  Germans  by 
some  European  and  American  scholars;  and  Aryans  and  Semites  by  the 
Nazis (Allen, 1994; Gossett, 1963/1997).

Once race definitions correspond to social realities, such as identities, 
income levels, language use patterns, religious and cultural practices, race 
designations  can  help  to  distinguish  these  realities,  without  reinforcing 
racial inequality. The U.S. Census divides the population into five different 
race groups: Indigenous American (North and South), White (European), 
African, Asian, Pacific Islander, plus mixed-race people, which is useful for 
documenting  race  differences  in  household  composition  and  income,  for 
example. Race is considered in medicine (Paradies, 2006), because certain 
health problems are more characteristic of some races than of others. For 
example, people whose ancestors hail from Northern Europe or the U.S./
Mexico  border  area  are  more  likely  to  get  diabetes  (Moalem  &  Prince, 
2007), whereas Africans and African Americans have higher rates of sickle-
cell anemia (e.g., Mankad & Hoff, 1992). Religious practices, family pat-
terns, aesthetics of music and speech, and many other habits of living are 
passed on intergenerationally and contribute to perceptions of race differ-
ences. Because “race” persists as a social category system, it may be one of 
the few socially remembered markers we have that correspond to a history 
of shared environmental influences and cultural patterns.

However,  when  perceived  racial  differences  are  evaluated,  such  that 
they justify differential treatment to produce race-based hierarchy, we have 
the contemporary lay definition of racism, given by these current diction-
ary entries:

Power and racism 

343

Merriam- Webster: “A belief that race is the primary determinant of 
human traits and capacities and that racial differences produce an 
inherent superiority of a particular race.”

Cambridge: “The belief that people’s qualities are influenced by their 
race and that the members of other races are not as good as the 
members of your own, or the resulting unfair treatment of members 
of other races.”

American Heritage: “The belief that race accounts for differences in 
human character or ability and that a particular race is superior to 
others.”1

These everyday definitions of racism in fact represent 19th- century scien-
tific racism (see Gosset, 1963/1997) and early 20th- century scientific con-
ceptions of racism (e.g., Allport, 1954).

Yet contemporary social psychological research demonstrates that rac-
ism is manifest in far more complex ways. This research identifies four main 
shortcomings in lay definitions of racism. First, these definitions imply that 
racism is blatant, and do not take into consideration the very subtle forms 
that racism can take in its more modern manifestations (e.g., Dovidio & 
S. Gaertner, 2004; McConahay, 1986; Sears & Henry, 2005).

Second, lay definitions imply that racism is a consciously held belief 
resulting in intentional action. However, racial attitudes may be implicit, 
and  racist  behavior  can  be  performed  without  self- awareness  and  with-
out  intent.  For  example,  Whites  who  have  negative  implicit  associations 
with Blacks are likely to show negative nonverbal behaviors toward Blacks, 
although they are not aware of these behaviors (Dovidio, Kawakami, & S. 
Gaertner, 2002; McConnell & Leibold, 2001). Whites who treat Blacks in 
a discriminatory fashion when there are nonracial explanations available 
for their actions deny that their actions were racist (Dovidio & S. Gaertner, 
2004).  On  the  other  hand,  Whites  who  hold  negative  associations  with 
Blacks  may  still  treat  Blacks  fairly  when  they  are  motivated  to  suppress 
expressions of race prejudice (e.g., Olson & Fazio, 2004) or when their rac-
ist attributions have been exposed (e.g., Czopp, Monteith, & Mark, 2006). 
To summarize, much research has shown dissociations among conscious 
beliefs, implicit attitudes, and actual behaviors in White racism.

A third shortcoming is that lay definitions focus on attributions that 
individuals  make  to  account  for  individual  behavior,  often  toward  other 
individuals.  This  characterization  ignores  the  important  fact  that  racist 
beliefs, stereotypes, and practices are socially coordinated in many ways. 
Implicit negative race associations and automatic stereotype activation are 
not just individual cognitive phenomena but are widely shared within cul-
tures  (e.g.,  Karpinski  &  Hilton,  2001).  Hence,  racial  beliefs  can  appear 
consensual and self- evident. Race definitions and prescribed racist practices 

344 

Power iN iNTergroUP relaTioNS

are associated with important cultural ideologies and practices, so racism 
is embedded not only in individuals’ minds but also within cultures and 
institutions (e.g., Henry, in press; Jones, 1997; Sidanius & Pratto, 1999). 
For example, legalized racist practices such as fugitive slave laws and racial 
profiling enforce discriminatory behaviors across actors, regardless of their 
personal beliefs about race. Social institutions, such as the criminal justice 
system, the labor market, the housing and retail markets, the education sys-
tem, and the health care system, systematically discriminate against certain 
racial groups (see Sidanius & Pratto, 1999, for a review). Individual beliefs, 
attitudes, and actions may have little influence on the standard operating 
procedures of institutions, so individual cognition- focused theories of rac-
ism are inadequate.

Finally,  and  of  most  importance  here,  although  lay  definitions 
acknowledge  social  hierarchy,  they  fail  to  acknowledge  overtly  that  rac-
ism fundamentally concerns group-based power. Racism is the package of 
attitudes,  affect,  associations,  beliefs,  language,  practices,  and  behaviors 
that create or perpetuate power differences among racial groups. Racism 
is understood by social scientists, including psychologists, to be directed 
against those racial groups in society with less power (Jones, 1997; Par-
adies, 2006). Hence, one cannot talk sensibly about racism against racial 
groups in society that have greater power. For example, few would consider 
resistance to and negative attitudes toward Nazis (representing the “Ger-
man Race” in Hitler’s vision) as a form of “racism.” As such, a lay term 
like “reverse racism,” which was created to allege discrimination against 
Whites due to affirmative action programs, is an oxymoron to a social sci-
entist, insofar as racism conceptually is not directed against racial groups 
in  power.  Today,  papers  in  respected  social  psychology  journals  do  not 
refer to racism against Whites.

In  contrast,  other  terms  in  use  in  the  intergroup  literature,  such  as 
stereotyping, prejudice, and discrimination, are not defined by power rela-
tions. Consequently, one can speak sensibly of stereotypes about Whites 
(e.g., “White people can’t jump”), prejudice against Whites (e.g., “I don’t 
like White people”), and discrimination against Whites (e.g., behaviors that 
exclude  Whites).  Strong  negative  language  (e.g.,  Black  Panther  speeches) 
and  certain  hate  crimes  against  Whites  may  be  racially  prejudiced  but, 
again, do not constitute “racism” because of Whites’ superior position in 
the social power hierarchy.

A central thesis of this chapter is that explicit consideration of group 
power is necessary for understanding the ways racism is instantiated in ste-
reotypes and stereotyping, prejudice, discriminatory practices and policies, 
and their consequences. Many intergroup processes are very different when 
directed against members of higher- versus lower-power groups. Prejudice 

Power and racism 

345

and antipathy against members of higher-power groups may have differ-
ent roots and different consequences than prejudice and antipathy against 
members of lower-power groups. For example, intergroup contact may pos-
itively change implicit intergroup attitudes of those in lower power social 
groups more readily than it does for those in higher-power groups (Henry 
& Hardin, 2006). Furthermore, whereas the law often privileges the family 
structures and personal vices of Whites, it differentially punishes those of 
Blacks (e.g., Maurer & King, 2007; Moynihan, 1965). These asymmetries 
cannot be adequately accounted for without acknowledging group power.

In  summary,  social  psychology’s  conceptions  of  racism  are  broader 
than  lay  definitions  that  restrict  racism  to  blatant,  intentional,  individ-
ual processes. The breadth of the social psychological conceptions result 
from  the  fact  that  racism  can  be  intentional  or  unintentional,  conscious 
or unconscious, and active or passive, and can be manifest in individuals, 
institutions, and cultures.2

Conceptualizing Power in Terms of Intergroup Processes
Because power is a characteristic feature of racism, we must consider what 
is meant by power. Although racism by definition involves intergroup pro-
cesses, the two most influential approaches to power in social psychology 
have both focused on interpersonal social influence processes. French and 
Raven (1959) delineated several means by which one person could influence 
another, such as through authoritative roles or coercion (see also Raven, 
1992). Thibaut and Kelley’s (1959) interdependence theory defined power 
as relational, in that whichever party could more easily exit a relationship 
or obtain desired things elsewhere had more influence within the relation-
ship. The interdependence approach also implies that a consequence of hav-
ing power is freedom to realize one’s desires (e.g., Keltner, Gruenfeld, & 
Anderson, 2003). This approach is mostly applied at the individual level or 
to interpersonal relations (e.g., Rusbult & van Lange, 2003).

However, power can and should be studied as an intergroup and not 
just an interpersonal phenomenon. This calls for an expanded conception 
of power, so that we can more fully address how power pertains to racism. 
The conception of power as social influence or outcome control emphasizes 
having power over another person (Fiske & Berdahl, 2007). To the extent 
that Whites control more desirable resources and more often have authority 
positions over non- Whites than the reverse, this understanding of power as 
outcome control is suitable for analyzing racism. From a self- categorization 
theory  perspective,  Turner  (2005)  argues  that  alongside  power  over,  we 
consider power through a group, or getting others to do one’s will and that 
of one’s group because of desire to affiliate with the group. And in fact the 

346 

Power iN iNTergroUP relaTioNS

history of racism demonstrates that Whites forming coalitions and creating 
social categories of race was essential to subjugating Blacks on whose free 
labor  they  depended  (e.g.,  Allen,  1997).  To  the  extent  that  Whites  form 
more effective blocs than those who are not White, and when racial iden-
tity motivates racist action, the power through understanding of power is 
suitable.

Although all three of these conceptualizations of power (freedom to 
act,  influence  over  others,  power  through  group  cohesion)  contribute  to 
understanding racism, all three are insufficient to understand some of the 
most important aspects of racism. For one, racial segregation, both physical 
and economic, limits how much interracial power relations can be said to 
be described by Whites’ controlling Blacks’ outcomes. Additionally, not all 
of interracial power stems from White identification processes. And finally, 
if being low in power means having fewer opportunities and/or stronger 
social constraints, then the social environment must be considered part of 
the analysis of power. Racial disparities in power are exhibited in how eas-
ily people of different races can fulfill their basic needs, as well as in how 
easily they can realize their desires. As we will argue, this disparity is not 
simply  due  to  race  differences  in  power  as  agency.  Moreover,  disparities 
exist in a variety of domains, suggesting that multiple kinds of power exist. 
For now, let us simply consider interracial power as comparative power, or 
one group having more power compared to another group. To spell out this 
conception of power, we turn to power basis theory.

Power basis theory uses an ecological definition of power that encom-
passes how people’s capabilities and their environments together enable or 
disenable  them  to  meet  their  survival  requirements  (Pratto,  Lee,  Tan,  & 
Pitpitan, in press). Constructive power enables people to meet basic needs, 
and  destructive  power  creates  deficits  other’s  in  needs  or  prevents  oth-
ers  from  meeting  their  needs.  Because  people  can  provide  the  means  of 
other people’s needs and desires, there is the possibility of social influence, 
including “soft” tactics such as rewards, and affiliation and “hard” tactics 
such as coercion (Raven, Schwarzwald, & Koslowsky, 1998). According to 
power basis theory, power is not situated in the person or group, or only in 
social relations, but in the relation between human needs, human capaci-
ties, and their local environment. Thus, both the social and physical aspects 
of environments can afford or constrain the meeting of needs. From this 
viewpoint, neither agency nor environmental affordances alone, can guar-
antee that needs are met.

Power basis theory explains recurrent types of power in social relations 
(e.g., force, control of resources, legitimacy) by positing that each basic sur-
vival need has a correspondent basic type of power. For example, the need 
to eat healthy foods and use other material resources makes access to such 
resources  a  recurrent  type  of  power,  whereas  the  need  to  belong  makes 

Power and racism 

347

legitimizing  acceptance  in  or  rejection  from  a  community  a  constructive 
or destructive type of power, respectively. Using this conceptualization, it 
makes sense to say that income inequalities between races bespeak differ-
ences in power, because they pertain to how well members can take care 
of their material needs, regardless of whether they have any interpersonal 
relations with people of other races. Likewise, prejudice and stigma associ-
ated with racism are a kind of destructive power, because they limit the 
communities in which members of certain races can be accepted. For this 
reason, constructive power is not simply agency, because such power also 
depends on the availability of the means of meeting needs in the environ-
ment.

This conception of power as the ability to determine whether needs 
are met better describes the reality of racial power disparities than does 
interpersonal  influence,  because  it  considers  personal  and  group  charac-
teristics  along  with  environmental  features.  Here  we  provide  examples 
of these kinds of power disparities in race that involve people’s needs for 
health, consumable resources, belonging, and knowledge, between Blacks 
and Whites in the United States.

The  most  fundamental  survival  need  is  the  need  for  wholeness  or 
health. Blacks suffer from ill health at higher rates than do Whites in many 
ways, as evidenced in the tragic markers of shorter life expectancies (Arias, 
2006) and higher infant mortality rates (Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention,  2007).  Race  discrimination  in  medical  access  and  treatment 
contributes to this group power difference, as does lack of access to grocery 
stores stocked with healthy foods (Crister, 2000; Zenk et al., 2005). How-
ever, violence also contributes. For example, Blacks are five times as likely 
to  be  murder  victims  as  Whites  (Federal  Bureau  of  Investigation,  2007). 
Race disparities in health behaviors, as well as in how well environments 
afford  health  behavior  and  health  care,  jointly  create  race  differences  in 
health (e.g., Sidanius & Pratto, 1999).

Survival also requires consuming resources such as clothing and shel-
ter.  Wealth  is  one  means  of  meeting  the  need  for  consumable  resources, 
and White wealth is greater than Black wealth. For example, in 2000, the 
median net worth of White American households was over 10 times that of 
Black households ($79,400 vs. $7,500; Orzechowski & Sepielli, 2003).

All  people  have  a  need  to  belong  (e.g.,  Baumeister  &  Leary,  1995), 
and power basis theory views social legitimacy and stigma as indicators of 
belonging or its lack. A third dimension in which Whites maintain greater 
power than Blacks is legitimacy or status. Whites hold positions of author-
ity, have a greater voice in community affairs, and receive more attention 
than Blacks. For example, company presidents and business executives in 
the  United  States  are  disproportionately  White  (e.g.,  U.S.  Glass  Ceiling 
Commission, 1995), and media coverage of crime victims disproportion-

348 

Power iN iNTergroUP relaTioNS

ately focuses on Whites (e.g., Romer, Jameison, & de Couteau, 1998). In a 
plethora of ways, Black belonging is in question, whereas White belonging 
is a given.

The fourth dimension, knowledge, addresses the need to interact com-
petently  with  one’s  environment.  Formal  educational  systems  privilege 
White knowledge more than Black knowledge, for example, in how “stan-
dard English” and “American history” are defined. Blacks are statistically 
discriminated against, in that schools receive less government support to 
the extent they have larger proportions of Blacks (Kozol, 1991). In addi-
tion, Blacks often have to be competent at interacting with both Blacks and 
Whites,  whereas  relatively  few  Whites  need  bicultural  competence  (e.g., 
Ogbu, 1994). Thus, obtaining competence at interacting with one’s envi-
ronment is more difficult for Blacks than for Whites in many ways.

With respect to these survival needs and others, Blacks are substan-
tially lower in power than Whites in the United States. We argue that rac-
ism is the main cause of these power disparities.

The Operationalization of Interpersonal versus Intergroup Power
Our  analysis  addresses  power  at  the  intergroup  level.  But  in  contempo-
rary experiments, power often is operationalized as interpersonal influence 
rather  than  as  intergroup  influence.  Interpersonal  power  is  manipulated 
when  participants  are  told  to  recall  a  time  in  their  lives  when  they  had 
power over another individual or individuals (Galinsky, Magee, Inesi, & 
Gruenfeld, 2006), and when individuals are assigned to leadership roles in 
some team task (Vescio, Snyder, & Butz, 2003). Other studies do examine 
intergroup  power  dynamics  in  experimental  situations,  but  such  studies 
also typically use deliberate influence over outgroup members as the con-
ception of power. For example, group power often is manipulated as direct, 
conscious control over the outcomes of others (Guinote, Judd, & Brauer, 
2002; Sachdev & Bourhis, 1985, 1991; Saguy, Dovidio, & Pratto, 2008), 
or as being the victim of others who directly and consciously control one’s 
outcomes  (Dépret  &  Fiske,  1999).  As  discussed  in  the  previous  section, 
group-based  power  is  neither  always  nor  typically  about  the  direct  and 
intentional exertion of power over others’ outcomes.

Nevertheless,  an  interpersonal  influence  conception  of  power  can 
describe some forms of racism. For example, the fact that the vast major-
ity of employers in the United States are White gives Whites much more 
authority  to  hire  and  fire,  to  set  salaries,  and  to  prescribe  the  terms  of 
employment over Blacks, Latinos, and Asian Americans. Racism in hiring 
discrimination is one kind of biased treatment that can be seen as inter-
personal  influence  (e.g.,  Biernat  &  Kobrynowicz,  1997),  even  though  it 
occurs  within  institutional  contexts  and  has  institutional  as  well  as  per-

Power and racism 

349

sonal consequences. In parallel, many teachers of non-White students are 
White, and teachers have the opportunity to educate and to create records 
that influence students’ outcomes for years to come. These kinds of inter-
personal action fit the conception of racism as members of one race having 
power over members of another. When the treatment is differentially worse 
depending on the target’s race, it is racist.

However,  because  racism  is  inherently  group-based,  there  may  be 
considerable utility in understanding that intergroup power goes beyond 
interpersonal  influence,  or  power  over  others,  for  several  reasons.  First, 
interpersonal power is felt as a personal experience (e.g., Galinsky et al., 
2006), whereas group-based power more typically is an implicitly assumed 
privilege (Powell, Branscombe, & Schmitt, 2005). Members of high-power 
racial  groups  in  society  do  not  “feel”  their  greater  power  and  are  often 
unaware of it, and often will not believe it when told that, as a group, they 
have more power than other racial groups in society. For example, a pow-
erful and widely endorsed item of the Symbolic Racism 2000 scale (Henry 
&  Sears,  2002)  is  the  denial  of  discrimination,  or  the  denial  that  racial 
differences  are  perpetuated  by  the  greater  power  that  Whites  have  over 
Blacks. Likewise, those who score highest on the Social Dominance Ori-
entation scale perceive the smallest Black–White status differences (Kahn, 
Ho,  Sidanius, & Pratto, 2009). Consequently, experimental manipulations 
of power that directly give individuals the feeling that they have control 
over the resources or outcomes of others, even of others who belong to a 
different group, may not capture aspects of intergroup power that are more 
consistent  with  the  realities  of  intergroup  resource  distributions,  where 
individuals in higher-power groups do not have—or acknowledge having— 
direct control.

Second, race-based power is institutionalized (Henry, in press; Jones, 
1997; Sidanius & Pratto, 1999), such that it is not always clear to what 
extent interpersonal power differences contribute to racial differences. For 
example, when police officers use harsh physical constraints on Black sus-
pects, and when juries and judges are more likely to convict and give severe 
sentences to Black than to White defendants, such actions are not merely 
functions  of  interpersonal  dynamics.  The  legal  and  authoritative  institu-
tional roles of police officers, attorneys, and jurists make such treatment 
institutional racism. Finally, racial segregation where people live, worship, 
work, and attend school must be considered an important aspect of racism, 
and because segregation limits interpersonal contact, it is hard to see how 
interpersonal outcome dependence approaches address that aspect of rac-
ism.

Social psychologists have developed some innovations toward broad-
ening  the  conception  of  group-based  power  by  manipulating  individuals 
into groups that are powerful, without giving those individuals direct inter-

350 

Power iN iNTergroUP relaTioNS

personal power. First, students can be led to compare their own school’s 
power with more or less successful and prestigious schools (Jost & Burgess, 
2000; Schmader, Major, Eccleston, & McCoy, 2001). This manipulation 
mentally puts individuals into groups of different power, without imbuing 
them  with  conscious  and  direct  power  over  other  individuals.  Second,  a 
manipulation  of  group  size  into  majority  and  minority  groups  could  be 
considered a proxy for power (e.g., Ebenbach & Keltner, 1998; Guinote, 
Brown, & Fiske, 2006), although it is important to not forget that power 
is sometimes held by minority groups (e.g., colonizers, Whites in apartheid 
South Africa). Additionally, one can consider patterns of power differences 
as they occur naturally in social groups, including those based on race, in 
examining  different  effects  of  high  versus  low  group-based  power  (e.g., 
Henry & Hardin, 2006; Major et al., 2002).3

In  summary,  there  may  be  considerable  value  for  expanding  con-
ceptions of power differences to include those that do not involve direct, 
interpersonal influence. From the perspective of power basis theory, it is 
more important to consider the ease with which environments afford peo-
ple’s needs and people’s assumptions about such affordances, or the lack 
thereof.

TheoreTical iSSueS Surrounding Power 

and raciSm

Power and the Racial Hierarchy Homeostasis
The evidence noted earlier with respect to power basis theory demonstrating 
inequalities in the ability of Whites and Blacks to have their survival needs 
met (see also Sidanius & Pratto, 1999) demonstrates that racial inequality 
persists in the United States.

We now more fully spell out our understanding of racism and preju-
dice in the context of racial power hierarchies, before addressing how it 
pertains to a number of other theories of racial prejudice. According to the 
theory of social dominance (Sidanius & Pratto, 1999), once a power hier-
archy system that is well- legitimized with ideologies and cultural patterns 
is in place, little effort is needed to sustain it in a kind of power– hierarchy 
homeostasis; that is, if institutional discrimination is in place and legitimiz-
ing ideologies are widely spread, seem self- apparently true, and organize 
practices and relationships, then societies will maintain intergroup power 
differences without much effort. Socialization processes can also contrib-
ute to the persistence of racism over time (Sears & Henry, 2005).

The maintenance of these power differences requires a push and pull of 
forces promoting and reducing inequality, such that, in the balance, racial 

Power and racism 

351

power differences in society are stabilized. This balance occurs through the 
trade-off between what are called hierarchy- enhancing legitimizing myths 
(HE-LMs)  and  hierarchy- attenuating  legitimizing  myths  (HA-LMs).  As 
the name suggests, HE-LMs serve to enhance or maintain existing hierar-
chies through beliefs and attitudes that justify the hierarchy. These beliefs 
include current ideas that Blacks are responsible for their lower position in 
society, that discrimination is largely a thing of the past, and that people 
generally get what they deserve (see Pratto et al., 2000). HE-LMs are pow-
erful in maintaining racial hierarchies in the United States, because they 
are rooted in beliefs that form the basis of a national conscience, such as 
the Protestant work ethic and rugged individualism, which stipulate that 
everyone can do or be anything they want provided they try, particularly in 
a land of opportunity (Lipset, 1996; McClosky & Zaller, 1984).

Conversely, HA-LMs serve to reduce social power hierarchies. In the 
case of racism, they might include current beliefs that we should place the 
blame for power disparities between Blacks and Whites not on Blacks but 
on societal discrimination, that discrimination is wrong, that social equal-
ity between the races is necessary for a healthy society, and so forth (e.g., 
Sidanius, Levin, Federico, & Pratto, 2001). HA-LMs can also be rooted in 
values that form the core of a nation’s conscience, including (in the United 
States) the values of equality and justice. All of these beliefs are thought to 
lead to the push-and-pull tension in response to HE-LMs.

This  push  and  pull  against  HE-LMs  is  dynamic.  Reactions  against 
inequality can occur, first, by curtailing institutional discrimination and 
using institutions to broaden people’s means of meeting needs. One impor-
tant example of such a change has been through legal rulings, and federal 
and state education practices: Whereas in 1940, fewer than 8% of African 
Americans graduated from high school, in 2000, over 80% did so (U.S. 
Census Bureau, 2007). Second, changes in which equality- oriented ideolo-
gies are consensual, more culturally potent, and normative should help to 
reduce discriminatory behavior and reorganize the distribution of needed 
resources. For example, activists eventually won abolition partly by identi-
fying the hypocrisies in how the American credos of equality and Christian 
theology were used to legitimize slavery (e.g., Truth, 1854).

But social dominance theory’s analysis also cautions that backlash can 
occur in reaction to change toward equality. Once opposition to inequal-
ity in any form becomes apparent, one can expect countermanding forces 
to  deploy  ideology  and  other  social  control  devices  (e.g.,  the  law,  pow-
erful  institutions)  against  change.  For  example,  American  conservatives 
have changed the meaning of Martin Luther King, Jr.’s “color-blind” ideal 
from one in which discrimination against Blacks is not performed to one in 
which reparations toward Blacks are made problematic.

352 

Power iN iNTergroUP relaTioNS

Contextualizing Current Racial Prejudice Research 
within a Power Framework
According to social dominance theory, the dynamic conflict between HE 
and HA forces helps to maintain a homeostatic power hierarchy. The stan-
dard for deciding how much equality or inequality groups have is not to be 
found in the contents of legitimizing beliefs, nor in whether the government 
is imperial, democratic, or despotic, nor in the economic system, but simply 
in whether groups are able to meet their own needs and equally are able to 
create deficits in others or prevent others from meeting their needs.

This view of power dynamics contrasts markedly most contemporary 
theories  of  racial  prejudice,  which  do  not  address  power.  Rather,  they 
were  developed  in  response  to  the  findings  in  public  opinion  polls  from 
the late 1960s when White Americans began to deny that they endorsed 
racial inequality, while failing to endorse policies that actually do reduce 
racial inequality, such as affirmative action and school desegregation (e.g., 
Jackman,  1978;  Schuman,  Steeh,  Bobo,  &  Kyrsan,  1997).  Such  theo-
ries  include  modern  racism  (McConahay,  1986),  symbolic  racism  (Sears 
&  Henry,  2005),  ambivalent  racism  (Katz  &  Hass,  1988),  and  aversive 
racism (Dovidio & Gaertner, 2004). Although motivations for and mani-
festations  of  racial  prejudice  vary  across  theories,  all  assume  that  there 
has been a shift away from blatant expressions of racial superiority that 
relies on such subtle psychological processes or ideological reasoning that 
Whites  are  unaware  of  their  prejudice.  For  example,  reductions  in  legal 
race discrimination bolster the belief in equal opportunity, making racial 
inequality attributable to Blacks’ shortcomings (Major et al., 2002). Fur-
thermore, Blacks are not resented for having Black characteristics, but for 
violating values such as individualism (McConahay, 1986; Sears & Henry, 
2005). Aversive racists do not seem racist to themselves, because they treat 
Blacks worse than Whites only when there is a plausible, nonracial expla-
nation available for their discriminatory behavior (Dovidio & S. Gaertner, 
2004).

Our explication of power and racism suggests different interpretations 
of  these  sorts  of  racism.  First,  social  dominance  theory  allows  that  any 
kind of racial prejudice or beliefs and, indeed, other ostensibly nonracial 
ideologies  can  function  as  legitimizing  myths  to  garner  approval  of  rac-
ist  practices  and  foment  opposition  to  antiracist  practices.  In  particular, 
modern racism and symbolic racism have been shown to mediate between 
antiegalitarian  values  and  opposition  to  progressive  race  policies  (e.g., 
Pratto, Stallworth, & Conway-Lanz, 1998; Sidanius et al., 2001; Sidanius, 
Devereux, & Pratto, 1992). In other words, these kinds of more modern 
racial  prejudices,  even  if  considered  “subtle,”  may  serve  as  power-  and 
hierarchy- enhancing legitimizing ideologies.

Power and racism 

353

Contextualizing Research on Racial Fear and Threat 
within a Power Framework
Our  analysis  of  power  and  racism  also  suggests  ways  to  reconsider  the 
many theories of racial prejudice based on perceived threat to the domi-
nant group from subordinate groups. We summarize this literature before 
providing our analysis.

Realistic group conflict research describes the roots of prejudice and 
stereotypes in threats that one group poses to another’s resources and inter-
ests  (Jackson,  1993;  Sherif  &  Sherif,  1953).  In  the  racial  arena,  Whites’ 
negative racial attitudes may have roots in threats that they perceive Blacks 
make  to  their  interests  (Bobo,  1983),  or  in  their  perception  that  Blacks’ 
advancements  mean  losses  for  Whites  (Eibach  &  Keegan,  2006).  Inte-
grated threat theory broadens the construct to include threats not only to 
groups’ resources and interests but also to values and worldviews (Stephan 
& Stephan, 2000). Additionally, the basic effects of intergroup contact on 
changing negative racial attitudes (Pettigrew & Tropp, 2006) rely in part 
on the idea that interracial contact disabuses people of fears and threats 
that other racial groups may pose (Islam & Hewstone, 1993; Stephan et 
al., 2002). Separate lines of research confirm that even generalized abstract 
threats to one’s world can influence negative racial attitudes. For example, 
research on authoritarianism shows that particular kinds of threat (norma-
tive threat) strengthen the relationship between authoritarianism and racial 
intolerance (Feldman & Stenner, 1997).

Racial threat and fears also may be invoked as a form of ideological 
communication,  and  fear  messages  can  also  serve  as  legitimizing  myths, 
as  a  number  of  studies  have  shown.  For  example,  George  H.  W.  Bush’s 
famous “Willie Horton” campaign in the 1988 presidential election may 
have triggered race-based fears among Whites concerning crime laws, and 
may have helped garner Bush substantial votes (Kinder & Sanders, 1996). 
Other research shows that presidential campaign advertisements that pro-
voke racial fears can persuade Whites who hold subtle forms of racism to 
vote against White candidates who are not “sufficiently” hostile to Blacks 
or protective of Whites (Mendelberg, 2001).

From the perspective of the relationship between racism and power, 
perceived threats can be different from actual threats. However, because 
perceived threats are so strong in invoking prejudice, one can expect legiti-
mizing ideologies that invoke perceptions of threat to be convincing, regard-
less of their basis in reality. In other words, the actual dangers behind fears 
and threats are less important than the idea that fears and threats provide 
ample, reasonable explanations for racist beliefs and behavior. The hypoth-
esis we would forward, then, is that the removal of any actual threats that 
Blacks might pose to Whites’ power would not make racism go away.

354 

Power iN iNTergroUP relaTioNS

Power and Racial Identity
The one arena in which social psychologists have long- recognized asym-
metries in power with respect to race is in identity and public acceptance. 
Being a normative member of society is conflated with being White (Devos 
& Banaji, 2005; Leach, Snider, & Iyer, 2002). Ethnographic studies con-
sistently show that adolescent White Americans rarely consider themselves 
to have a race (e.g., Tatum, 1997), whereas Black adolescents do consider-
able  work  in  developing  their  racial  identity  against  a  backdrop  of  rac-
ism (e.g., White & Burke, 1987). Blacks, unlike Whites, are labeled with 
their race, as though it were peculiar and explanatory (Pratto, Korchmaros, 
& Hegarty, 2007). People who are neither Black nor White in the United 
States grapple with whether they are like, or should be viewed as being like, 
Blacks or Whites (Cyrus, 1993).

Stereotypes  and  stereotyping  foist  other  identity  problems  on  those 
who  are  not  White.  For  example,  stereotype  threat  (Steele  &  Aronson, 
1995) and rejection sensitivity (Mendoza- Denton, Downey, Purdie, Davis, 
&  Pietrzak,  2002)  are  more  common  and  chronic  among  lower-power 
racial groups. The content of stereotypes that powerful racial groups create 
and promote about minority racial groups creates other kinds of real inter-
personal and identity traps, too. Black people often fear that they will be 
perceived through a racist lens, for example, as criminals or as dangerous 
(Staples, 1978; Lee, 2000). Such concerns are realistic inasmuch as those 
who are not White are subject to police brutality and false witness identi-
fication and conviction at high rates (Sidanius & Pratto, 1999, Chapter 8). 
However, to posture as nonthreatening to Whites, Blacks might consider 
affecting an obsequious posture that also would run the risk of confirm-
ing  a  different,  odious  stereotype,  that  of  Uncle  Tom.  The  trap  between 
being an aggressive threat or a harmless servant narrows the ways Blacks 
can be recognized as respectable and agentic in Whites’ eyes. There is no 
strong, parallel, stereotypical double-bind for Whites, particularly not one 
in which power backs up fears of being stereotyped.

Using Power against Racism
There are important historical examples of individuals in power who have 
made far- reaching decisions that have encouraged antiracism, often in the 
face of considerable public opposition. President Truman ordered the armed 
forces to desegregate fully following World War II, an act that began one 
of the most successful desegregation efforts in American history. President 
Johnson later pushed through the Civil Rights Act and the Voting Rights 
Act in the 1960s, actions that outlawed formal segregation and discrimi-

Power and racism 

355

nation against Blacks. The literature in social psychology has also shown 
how individual power can be used against racism. One study showed that 
people who have a communal relationship orientation, or concern for the 
needs of others without the expectation of the return of any favors, show a 
decrease in their racism when put into a position of power (Chen, Lee-Chai, 
& Bargh, 2001). These findings show that power need not always lead to 
the kinds of attitudes that are harmful toward people of lower-power races, 
at least when power is bestowed upon certain individuals.

Other  studies  in  the  context  of  stereotyping  reveal  circumstances 
where powerful people may resort to individuating information rather than 
stereotypes  concerning  subordinates.  Use  of  individuating  information 
about lower- status people seems to occur in situations where that informa-
tion clearly has some advantage to the powerful person’s pursuit of goals 
(Vescio et al., 2003), or contexts where there are clear advantages to gath-
ering correct information about those lower-power individuals (Overbeck 
& Park, 2001). Such studies provide an optimistic view that some types of 
power, at least as manifest in individuals in interpersonal or organizational 
relationships, may serve to reduce racism.

However, some caveats should be attached to these findings as they 
concern  the  reality  of  racism  at  the  group-based  level.  Most  especially, 
these studies establish laboratory conditions that rarely occur naturally in 
racially hierarchical societies. For example, to expect power to reduce rac-
ism in society broadly, Chen et al.’s (2001) work would require that most 
Whites  be  communal  and  include  Blacks  as  part  of  their  “community,” 
assumptions that seem unlikely given what we know about Black–White 
relations in society. This caveat is not meant to cast doubt on the ability 
of power to have a positive effect on race relations; rather, the caveat sug-
gests that the positive effect of power on racism is probably a relatively rare 
phenomenon.

concluSion

We have argued that racism is an intergroup power situation, not always 
because individual Whites usually, deliberately, and knowingly exert more 
personal  influence  on  Blacks,  but  because  Whites  are  advantaged  over 
Blacks in terms of many kinds of power, that is, ability to meet needs. We 
assume that power imbues all aspects of racism, including racial prejudice, 
the contents and functions of racist legitimizing ideologies, racial identity 
processes,  and  stereotyping  and  stereotype  contents.  Analyses  of  power 
may provide new ways of understanding asymmetries in these processes. 
We  believe  that  researchers  of  these  processes  should  theoretically  and 

356 

Power iN iNTergroUP relaTioNS

empirically investigate when “basic” social psychological processes will not 
be symmetrical for people in low- and high-power groups.

Because public distaste for racism is still increasing, it is equally impor-
tant to spread new scientific conceptions of racism that acknowledge power 
in its subtle and complex forms to the general public. Just as scientific defi-
nitions of racism have become the common understanding of racism so that 
they may be combated in public, the acknowledgment that racism is about 
presumptive power and privileges, as well as about survival needs, can be 
disseminated to the public, so that the fight against racism does not exclude 
changing the racial power hierarchy.

acKnowledgmenT

This  chapter  was  prepared  while  P.  J.  Henry  was  an  Alexander  von  Humboldt 
research fellow at the Institut für interdisziplinäre Konflikt und Gewaltforschung 
(IKG) at the University of Bielefeld.

noTeS

1.  These definitions were obtained from the OneLook Dictionary website: www.

onelook.com.

2.  For  a  comprehensive  analysis  of  racism  as  it  is  manifest  at  different  levels  of 

analysis (i.e., individual, institutional, and cultural), see Jones (1997).

3.  One important consideration is that of group-based status, which is theoreti-
cally distinguishable from power (e.g., Boldry & L. Gaertner, 2006). Many of 
these analyses of group-based power may be conflated with group-based status. 
To this point in the literature on status, power, and racism, it is not clear the 
extent to which there is conflation and how it might be problematic for some of 
the points raised here.

referenceS

Allen, T. W. (1994). The invention of the White race (Vol. 1). New York: Verso.
Allen, T. W. (1997). The invention of the White race (Vol. 2). New York: Verso.
Allport, G. D. (1954). The nature of prejudice. Oxford, UK: Addison- Wesley.
Arias, E. (2006, April 19). United States Life Tables, 2003. Revised March 28, 
2007.  Retrieved  February  20,  2008,  from  www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nvsr/
nvsr54/nvsr54_14.pdf.

Baumeister, R. F., & Leary, M. R. (1995). The need to belong: Desire for interper-
sonal attachments as a fundamental human motivation. Psychological Bul-
letin, 117, 497–529.

Biernat, M., & Kobrynowicz, D. (1997). Gender- and race-based standards of com-

Power and racism 

357

petence: Lower minimum standards but higher ability standards for devalued 
groups. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 72, 544–557.

Bobo, L. (1983). Whites’ opposition to busing: Symbolic racism or realistic group 

conflict? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 45, 1196–1210.

Boldry, J. G., & Gaertner, L. (2006). Separating status from power as an anteced-
ent of intergroup perception. Group Processes and Intergroup Relations, 9, 
377–400.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (May 2, 2007). Overall infant mor-
tality  rate  in  United  States  largely  unchanged:  Rates  among  Black  women 
more than twice that of White women. Retrieved February 20, 2008, from 
www.cdc.gov/od/oc/media/pressrel/2007/r070502.htm?s_cid=mediarel_
r070502_x.

Chen,  S.,  Lee-Chai,  A.  Y.,  &  Bargh,  J.  A.  (2001).  Relationship  orientation  as  a 
moderator of the effects of social power. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 80, 173–187.

Crister, G. (2000, March). Let them eat cake. Harper’s Magazine, pp. 41–47.
Cyrus, V. (1993). Experiencing race, class, and gender in the United States. Moun-

tain View, CA: Mayfield.

Czopp, A. M., Monteith, M. J., & Mark, A. Y. (2006). Standing up for a change: 
Reducing  bias  through  interpersonal  confrontation.  Journal  of  Personality 
and Social Psychology, 90, 784–803.

Dépret, E., & Fiske, S. T. (1999). Perceiving the powerful: Intriguing individuals 
versus  threatening  groups.  Journal  of  Experimental  Social  Psychology,  35, 
461–480.

Devos, T., & Banaji, M. R. (2005). American = White? Journal of Personality and 

Social Psychology, 88, 447–466.

Dovidio, J. F., & Gaertner, S. L. (2004). Aversive racism. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.), 
Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 36, pp. 1–52). San Diego: 
Elsevier Academic Press.

Dovidio, J. F., Kawakami, K., & Gaertner, S. L. (2002). Implicit and explicit preju-
dice and interracial interaction. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
82, 62–68.

Ebenbach, D. H., & Keltner, D. (1998). Power, emotion, and judgmental accuracy 
in social conflict: Motivating the cognitive miser. Basic and Applied Social 
Psychology, 20, 7–21.

Eibach, R. P., & Keegan, T. (2006). Free at last?: Social dominance, loss aversion, 
and Whites and Blacks’ differing assessments of racial progress. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 90, 453–467.

Federal Bureau of Investigation. (2007). Crime in the United States, 2006. Expanded 
Homicide Data Table 5. Retrieved October 2, 2007, from www.fbi.gov/ucr/
cius2006/offenses/expanded_information/data/shrtable_05.html.

Feldman, S., & Stenner, K. (1997). Perceived threat and authoritarianism. Political 

Psychology, 18, 741–770.

Fiske, S. T. (1998). Stereotyping, prejudice, and discrimination. In D. T. Gilbert, S. 
T. Fiske, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), Handbook of social psychology (pp. 357–411). 
Boston: McGraw-Hill.

Fiske,  S.  T.,  &  Berdahl,  J.  (2007).  Social  power.  In  A.  W.  Kruglanski  &  E.  T. 

358 

Power iN iNTergroUP relaTioNS

Higgins  (Eds.),  Social  psychology:  Handbook  of  basic  principles  (2nd  ed., 
pp. 678–692). New York: Guilford Press.

Fredrickson, G. M. (1981). White supremacy: A comparative study in American 

and South African history. New York: Oxford University Press.

French, J. R. P., Jr., & Raven, B. H. (1959). The bases of social power. In D. Cart-
wright (Ed.), Studies in social power (pp. 150–167). Ann Arbor, MI: Institute 
for Social Research.

Galinsky, A. D., Magee, J. C., Inesi, M. E., & Gruenfeld, D. H. (2006). Power and 

perspectives not taken. Psychological Science, 17, 1068–1074.

Gossett, T. F. (1997). Race: The history of an idea in America. New York: Oxford 

University Press. (Original work published 1963)

Guinote, A., Brown, M., & Fiske, S. T. (2006). Minority status decreases sense 
of control and increases interpretive processing. Social Cognition, 24, 169–
186.

Guinote,  A.,  Judd,  C.  M.,  &  Brauer,  M.  (2002).  Effects  of  power  on  perceived 
and objective group variability: Evidence that more powerful groups are more 
variable. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 82, 708–721.

Henry, P. J. (in press). Institutional racism. In J. F. Dovidio, M. Hewstone, P. Glick, 
& V. M. Esses (Eds.), Handbook of prejudice, stereotyping, and discrimina-
tion. London: Sage.

Henry, P. J., & Hardin, C. D. (2006). The contact hypothesis revisited: Status bias 
in the reduction of implicit prejudice in the United States and Lebanon. Psy-
chological Science, 17, 862–868.

Henry, P. J., & Sears, D. O. (2002). The Symbolic Racism 2000 scale. Political 

Psychology, 23, 253–283.

Islam,  M.  R.,  &  Hewstone,  M.  (1993).  Dimensions  of  contact  as  predictors  of 
intergroup anxiety, perceived out-group variability, and out-group attitude: 
An integrative model. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 19, 700–
710.

Jackson, J. W. (1993). Realistic group conflict theory: A review and evaluation of 

the theoretical and empirical literature. Psychological Record, 43, 395–413.

Jackman, M. R. (1978). General and applied tolerance: Does education increase 
commitment to racial integration? American Journal of Political Science, 22, 
302–324.

Jones, J. M. (1997). Prejudice and racism (2nd ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Jost, J. T., & Burgess, D. (2000). Attitudinal ambivalence and the conflict between 
group and system justification motives in low status groups. Personality and 
Social Psychology Bulletin, 26, 293–305.

Kahn, K., Ho, A. K., Sidanius, J., & Pratto, F. (2009). The space between us and 
them:  Perceptions  of  status  differences.  Group  Processes  and  Integrating 
Relations, 12, 591–604.

Karpinski, A., & Hilton, J. L. (2001). Attitudes and the Implicit Association Test. 

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 81, 774–788.

Katz, I., & Hass, R .G. (1988). Racial ambivalence and American value conflict: 
Correlational and priming studies of dual cognitive structures. Journal of Per-
sonality and Social Psychology, 55, 893–905.

Power and racism 

359

Keltner, D., Gruenfeld, D. H., & Anderson, C. (2003). Power, approach, and inhi-

bition. Psychological Review, 110, 265–284.

Kinder,  D.  R.,  &  Sanders,  L.  M.  (1996).  Divided  by  color:  Racial  politics  and 

democratic ideals. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Kozol, J. (1991). Savage inequalities: Children in America’s schools. New York: 

Harper.

Leach,  C.  W.,  Snider,  N.,  &  Iyer,  A.  (2002).  “Poisoning  the  consciences  of  the 
fortunate”: The experience of relative advantage and support for social equal-
ity. In I. Walker (Ed.), Relative deprivation: Specification, development and 
integration (pp. 136–163). New York: Cambridge University Press.

Lee,  J.  (2000).  The  salience  of  race  in  everyday  life:  Black  customers’  shopping 
experiences in Black and White neighborhoods. Work and Occupations, 27, 
353–376.

Lipset, S. M. (1996). American exceptionalism: A double-edged sword. New York: 

Norton.

Major, B., Gramzow, R. H., McCoy, S. K., Levin, S., Schmader, T., & Sidanius, 
J.  (2002).  Perceiving  personal  discrimination:  The  role  of  group  status  and 
legitimizing ideology. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 82, 269–
282.

Mankad, V. N., & Hoff, C. (1992). Introduction: Epidemiology and population 
genetics of sickle cell disease and the sickle cell trait. In V. N. Mankad & R. 
B. Moore (Eds.), Sickle cell disease: Pathophysiology, diagnosis, and manage-
ment (pp. 1–14). Westport, CT: Praeger.

Maurer, M., & King, R. S. (2007). The 25-year quagmire: The War on Drugs and 
its  impact  on  American  society.  Washington,  DC:  The  Sentencing  Project. 
Retrieved November 10, 2009, from www.sentencingproject.org/doc/publi-
cations/dp_25yearquagmire.pdf.

McClosky, H., & Zaller, J. (1984). The American ethos: Public attitudes toward 

capitalism and democracy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

McConahay, J. B. (1986). Modern racism, ambivalence, and the Modern Racism 
Scale. In J. Dovidio & S. Gaertner (Eds.), Prejudice, discrimination, and rac-
ism (pp. 91–126). Orlando, FL: Academic Press.

McConnell, A. R., & Leibold, J. M. (2001). Relations among the Implicit Associa-
tion Test, discriminatory behavior, and explicit measures of racial attitudes. 
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 37, 435–442.

Mendelberg, T. (2001). The race card: Campaign strategy, implicit messages, and 

the norm of equality. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Mendoza- Denton, R., Downey, G., Purdie, V. J., Davis, A., & Pietrzak, J. (2002). 
Sensitivity to status-based rejection: Implications for African American stu-
dents’ college experience. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83, 
896–918.

Moalem, S., & Prince, J. (2007). Survival of the sickest. New York: HarperCol-

lins.

Moynihan, D. (1965). The Negro family: The case for national action. Washing-

ton, DC: U.S. Department of Labor.

Ogbu, J. U. (1994). From cultural differences in cultural frame of reference. In P. 

360 

Power iN iNTergroUP relaTioNS

M. Greenfield & R. R. Cocking (Eds.), Cross- cultural roots of minority child 
development (pp. 365–391). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Olson, M. A., & Fazio, R. H. (2004). Trait inferences as a function of automati-
cally activated racial attitudes the motivation to control prejudiced reactions. 
Basic and Applied Psychology, 26, 1–11.

Operario, D., & Fiske, S. T. (1998). Racism equals power plus prejudice. In J. L. 
Eberhardt  &  S.  T.  Fiske  (Eds.),  Confronting  racism:  The  problem  and  the 
response (pp. 33–53). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.

Orzechowksi, S., & Sepielli, P. (2003, May). Net worth and asset ownership: 1998 
and  2000.  Washington,  DC:  U.S.  Census  Bureau.  Retrieved  October  18, 
2007, from www.census.gov/prod/2003pubs/p70–88.pdf.

Overbeck, J. R., & Park, B. (2001). When power does not corrupt: Superior indi-
viduation processes among powerful perceivers. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 81, 549–565.

Paradies,  Y.  C.  (2006).  Defining,  conceptualizing  and  characterizing  racism  in 

health research. Critical Public Health, 16, 143–157.

Pettigrew, T. F., & Tropp, L. R. (2006). A meta- analytic test of intergroup contact 

theory. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 90, 751–783.

Powell, A. A., Branscombe, N. R., & Schmitt, M. (2005). Inequality as ingroup 
privilege or outgroup disadvantage: The impact of group focus on collective 
guilt  and  interracial  attitudes.  Personality  and  Social  Psychology  Bulletin, 
31, 508–521.

Pratto, F., Korchmaros, J., & Hegarty, P. (2007). When race and gender go without 

saying. Social Cognition, 25, 241–247.

Pratto, F., Lee, I., Tan, J., & Pitpitan, E. (in press). Power basis theory: A psycho-
 ecological approach to power. In D. Dunning (Ed.), Social motivation. New 
York: Psychology Press.

Pratto, F., Liu, J. H., Levin, S., Sidanius, J., Shih, M., Hagit, B., et al. (2000). Social 
dominance  orientation  and  the  legitimization  of  inequality  across  cultures. 
Journal of Cross- Cultural Psychology, 31, 369–409.

Pratto, F., Stallworth, L. M., & Conway-Lanz, S. (1998). Social dominance orien-
tation and the legitimization of policy. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 
28, 1853–1875.

Raven, B. H. (1992). A power/interaction model of interpersonal influence: French 
and Raven thirty years later. Journal of Social Behavior and Personality, 7, 
217–244.

Raven,  B.  H.,  Schwarzwald,  J.,  &  Koslowsky,  M.  (1998).  Conceptualizing  and 
measuring a power/interaction model of interpersonal influence. Journal of 
Applied Social Psychology, 28, 307–332.

Romer, D. Jameison, K. H., & de Couteau, N. J. (1998). The treatment of persons 
of  color  in  local  television  news:  Ethnic  blame  discourse  or  realistic  group 
conflict? Communication Research, 25, 286–305.

Rusbult, C. E., & van Lange, P. A. M. (2003). Interdependence, interaction, and 

relationships. Annual Review of Psychology, 54, 351–375.

Sachdev, I., & Bourhis, R. Y. (1985). Social categorization and power differentials 

in group relations. European Journal of Social Psychology, 15, 415–434.

Power and racism 

361

Sachdev, I., & Bourhis, R. Y. (1991). Power and status differentials in minority and 

majority group relations. European Journal of Social Psychology, 21, 1–24.

Saguy, T., Dovidio, J. F., & Pratto, F. (2008). Beyond contact: Intergroup power 
in the context of power relations. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
34, 432–445.

Schmader,  T.,  Major,  B.,  Eccleston,  C.  P.,  &  McCoy,  S.  K.  (2001).  Devaluing 
domains in response to threatening intergroup comparisons: Perceived legiti-
macy and the status value asymmetry. Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
chology, 80, 782–796.

Schuman, H., Steeh, C., Bobo, L., & Krysan, M. (1997). Racial attitudes in Amer-
ica: Trends and interpretations (3rd ed.). Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univer-
sity Press.

Sears, D. O., & Henry, P. J. (2005). Over thirty years later: A contemporary look at 

symbolic racism. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 37, 95–150.

Sherif, M., & Sherif, C. W. (1953). Groups in harmony and tension: An integration 

of studies in intergroup relations. Oxford, UK: Harper Brothers.

Sidanius, J., Devereux, E., & Pratto, F. (1992). A comparison of symbolic racism 
theory  and  social  dominance  theory  as  explanations  for  racial  policy  atti-
tudes. Journal of Social Psychology, 132, 377–395.

Sidanius, J. Levin, S., Federico, C. M., & Pratto, F. (2001). Legitimizing ideologies: 
The social dominance approach. In J. T. Jost & B. Major (Eds.), The social 
psychology  of  legitimacy  (pp.  307–331).  New  York:  Cambridge  University 
Press.

Sidanius, J., & Pratto, F. (1999). Social dominance: An intergroup theory of social 

hierarchy and oppression. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Staples, R. (1978). Masculinity and race: The dual dilemma for Black men. Journal 

of Social Issues, 34, 169–183.

Steele,  C.  M.,  &  Aronson,  J.  (1995).  Stereotype  threat  and  the  intellectual  test 
performance  of  African  Americans.  Journal  of  Personality  and  Social  Psy-
chology, 69, 797–811.

Stephan, W. G., Boniecki, K. A., Ybarra, O., Bettencourt, A., Ervin, K. S., Jackson, 
L. A., et al. (2002). The role of threats in the racial attitudes of Blacks and 
Whites. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28, 1242–1254.

Stephan, W. G., & Stephan, C. W. (2000). An integrated threat theory of preju-
dice. In S. Oskamp (Ed.), Reducing prejudice and discrimination (pp. 23–45). 
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

Tatum, B. D. (1997). Why are all the Black kids sitting together in the cafeteria? 

New York: Basic Books.

Thibaut, J. W., & Kelley, H. H. (1959). The social psychology of groups. Oxford, 

UK: Wiley.

Truth, S. (1854). Ain’t I a woman? Speech given to the Ohio Woman’s Rights Con-

vention, Akron.

Turner, J. C. (2005). Explaining the nature of power: A three- process theory. Euro-

pean Journal of Social Psychology, 35, 1–22.

U.S. Census Bureau. (2007). Table A-2. Percent of People 25 Years and Over Who 
Have Completed High School or College, by Race, Hispanic Origin and Sex: 

362 

Power iN iNTergroUP relaTioNS

Selected Years 1940 to 2007. Retrieved February 20, 2008, from www.cen-
sus.gov/population/socdemo/education/cps2007/tabA-2.xls.

U.S. Glass Ceiling Commission. (1995). A solid investment: Making full use of the 
nation’s human capital (Final Report of the Commission). Washington, DC: 
U.S. Government Printing Office.

Vescio, T. K., Snyder, M., & Butz, D. A. (2003). Power in stereotypically masculine 
domains: A social influence strategy X stereotype match model.  Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 85, 1062–1078.

White, C. L., & Burke, P. J. (1987). Ethnic role identity among Black and White 
college  students:  An  interactionist  approach.  Sociological  Perspectives,  30, 
310–331.

Zenk, S. N., Schulz, A. J., Israel, B. A., James, S. A., Bao, S., & Wilson, M. L. 
(2005).  Neighborhood  racial  composition,  neighborhood  poverty,  and  the 
special accessibility of supermarkets in metropolitan Detroit. American Jour-
nal of Public Health, 95, 660–667.

