d i s r u p t i v e   p o w e r

OXFORD STUDIES IN DIGITAL POLITICS

Series Editor: Andrew Chadwick, Royal Holloway, University of London

Expect Us: Online Communities and Political Mobilization
Jessica L. Beyer

The Hybrid Media System: Politics and Power
Andrew Chadwick

Tweeting to Power: The Social Media Revolution in American Politics
Jason Gainous and Kevin M. Wagner

The Digital Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy: Information 
Technology and Political Islam
Philip N. Howard

Democracy’s Fourth Wave? Digital Media and the Arab Spring
Philip N. Howard and Muzammil M. Hussain

The MoveOn Effect: The Unexpected Transformation of American  
Political Advocacy
David Karpf

Taking Our Country Back: The Crafting of Networked Politics from 
Howard Dean to Barack Obama
Daniel Kreiss

Bits and Atoms: Information and Communication Technology in Areas of 
Limited Statehood
Steven Livingston and Gregor Walter-Drop

Digital Cities: The Internet and the Geography of Opportunity
Karen Mossberger, Caroline J. Tolbert, and William W. Franko

Revolution Stalled: The Political Limits of the Internet in the  
Post-Soviet Sphere
Sarah Oates

Affective Publics: Sentiment, Technology, and Politics
Zizi Papacharissi

Presidential Campaigning in the Internet Age
Jennifer Stromer-Galley

News on the Internet: Information and Citizenship in the 21st Century
David Tewksbury and Jason Rittenberg

d i s r u p t i v e 

p o w e r

The Crisis of the State 

in the Digital Age

t a y l o r   o w e n

1

1

Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.

It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship,

and education by publishing worldwide.

Oxford   New York

Auckland   Cape Town   Dar es Salaam   Hong Kong   Karachi
Kuala Lumpur   Madrid   Melbourne   Mexico City   Nairobi

New Delhi   Shanghai   Taipei   Toronto

With offices in

Argentina   Austria   Brazil   Chile   Czech Republic   France   Greece
Guatemala   Hungary   Italy   Japan   Poland   Portugal   Singapore
South Korea   Switzerland   Thailand   Turkey   Ukraine   Vietnam

Oxford is a registered trade mark of Oxford University Press

in the UK and certain other countries.

Published in the United States of America by

Oxford University Press

198 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016

© Taylor Owen 2015

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,  

stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,  

without the prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press,  

or as expressly permitted by law, by license, or under terms agreed with the  

appropriate reproduction rights organization. Inquiries concerning reproduction  

outside the scope of the above should be sent to the Rights Department,  

Oxford University Press, at the address above.

You must not circulate this work in any other form

and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer.

Cataloging-in-Publication data is on file at the Library of Congress

9780199363865

1  3  5  7  9  8  6  4  2

Printed in the United States of America on acid-free paper

“To: R & W”

c o n t e n t s

Acknowledgments 

ix

1.  Losing Control  1
2.  Disruptive Power  22
3.  Spaces of Dissent  48
4.  New Money  67
5.  Being There  98
6.  Saving the Saviors  122
7.  Diplomacy Unbound  148
8.  The Violence of Algorithms  168
9.  The Crisis of the State  189

Notes  211
Index  245

a c k n o w l e d g m e n t s

This book represents the culmination of three meandering 
years exploring the intersection of digital technology and 
international affairs and is ultimately the product of many 
people’s work. It began as a lecture and working paper for 
the Trudeau Foundation in the spring of 2012, and I am 
appreciative  of  PG  Forest  giving  me  the  chance  to  come 
back to the Foundation and try out some new ideas on the 
smartest (and most critical) crowd in Canada. At the time, 
the ideas presented were nascent, and represented my ini-
tial explorations of what I increasingly saw as the profound 
ways technology was reshaping the international system.

This essay became a larger research project funded by 
a Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council grant 
called  International  Relations  in  the  Digital Age,  a  part-
nership between the Canadian International Council and 
UBC. My friend and colleague Anouk Dey was critical as 
an RA on both of these initial stages. And my co-PI on the 
SSHRC  research  project,  partner  at  the  CIC  and  Open-
Canada and close friend Jennifer Jeffs built the project and 
team with me. We had a great group of UBC journalism 
students helping out with a wide range of research, includ-
ing  Sadiya  Ansari,  Lindsay  Sample,  Kate  Adach,  Alexis 
Beckett, and Alexandra Gibb.

ac k n ow l e d g m e n t s

For the year I spent focusing on researching and writing 
the book, I had the amazing good fortune of having two 
wonderful  RA’s,  Tanzeel  Hakak  and  Cherise  Seucharan. 
Both are wise beyond their years, and handled my ridicu-
lous schedule and wandering (they would say vague) ideas 
with grace and persistence. Many of the ideas in this book 
are theirs as much as mine.

While writing this book I was also working at the Tow 
Center  for  Digital  Journalism  at  Columbia  with  the  ex-
traordinary  and  tolerant  Emily  Bell.  The  incredible  op-
portunities that working with Emily on building the Tow 
Center afforded me, as well as the time she allowed me to 
binge write among the cramming undergrads in the Bodle-
ian, made this book possible.

As I have now learned, bringing a book into the world is 
a process. Three people made this one happen. First, Ethan 
Bassoff at Lippincott Massie McQuilkin took a chance on 
me, and got this book into the hands of New York publish-
ers. Second, Angela Chnapko at Oxford University Press 
was  supportive,  encouraging,  and  incredibly  helpful  at 
every stage of the editing and publishing process. Finally, 
Blake Eskin agreed to dive in to the project as an utterly 
ruthless editor, and gave me the most educational writing 
experience I have ever had.

Finally, and by far most importantly, I owe everything 
to my amazing parents and to my best friend, confidant, 
fiercest critic, partner and wife Ariel, and to our little man 
Walter.

x

d i s r u p t i v e   p o w e r

c h a p t e r   o n e

l o s i n g   c o n t r o l

Information  is  power.  But  like  all  power,  there  are 
those who want to keep it for themselves.

—Aaron Swartz

In January 2012, the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), 
Scotland  Yard,  and  intelligence  agencies  in  Italy,  France, 
the  Netherlands,  Denmark,  and  Sweden  created  a  task 
force to counter Anonymous. These countries saw the col-
lective of activist hackers and its numerous offshoots as a 
national security threat.

Anonymous—which is best defined as an Internet gath-
ering with a loose and decentralized command structure 
that  operates  on  ideas  rather  than  directives1—came  to 
prominence  in  2008  when  it  mounted  an  attack  on  the 
Church  of  Scientology’s  website  after  the  church  asked 
YouTube to take down a video interview with Tom Cruise. 
Anonymous saw the takedown as an act of censorship and 
said it wanted to completely remove the Church of Scien-
tology’s presence on the Internet and to “save people from 
Scientology  by  reversing  the  brainwashing.”  Since  then, 
hundreds  of  digital  actions  have  been  undertaken  in  the 

1

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

name of Anonymous, ebbing and flowing in both scale and 
frequency. The group has inserted itself into political con-
flicts in the United States and around the globe.

In  November  2011,  at  an  Occupy  rally  against  budget 
cuts and increased tuition at the University of California, 
San Diego, a riot police officer was filmed pepper-spraying 
a peaceful protestor. When video of the incident went viral 
on YouTube, Anonymous responded by leaking the police 
officer’s name, address, phone number, and email address. 
He  received  over  17,000  threatening  emails,  10,000  text 
messages, and hundreds of letters. The group did the same 
to Arizona Department of Public Safety officials in response 
to the passage of Arizona Bill 1070, an anti-immigration 
bill widely seen as racist. This attack was part of the bigger 
operation  called  Anti-Sec  in  which  Anonymous  attacked 
many Western governments for reasons ranging from Inter-
net censorship to racial profiling.

During the Arab Spring, Anonymous worked in support 
of anti-government protestors in Tunisia, Egypt, and Libya, 
hacking into government websites, shutting them down with 
distributed denial-of service (DDoS) attacks, and releasing 
names, email addresses, and passwords of government offi-
cials. In December of 2011, in the name of revealing corpo-
rate and government corruption, Anonymous hacked into 
the US intelligence consultancy Stratfor, obtaining, among 
other data, 2.7 million corporate emails detailing often sen-
sitive  conversations  involving  current  and  former  govern-
ment officials and thousands of off-the-record sources.

While  these  operations  have  many  common  objectives 
and use similar hacking tactics, Anonymous is hard to pin 

2

l osi ng   c on t rol

down. It has no fixed leadership and no national affiliation. 
Individuals loosely coordinate, then attribute their actions to 
Anonymous. As one hacker who participates in Anonymous 
told a Baltimore journalist, “We have this agenda that we 
all agree on and we all coordinate and act, but all act inde-
pendently toward it, without any want for recognition. We 
just want to get something that we feel is important done.”2
Describing  Anonymous  is  a  challenge  when  writing  a 
book. For an intelligence agency—and particularly one like 
the  FBI,  which  has  a  history  of  combating  perceived  US 
threats ranging from the Communist Party to al- Qaeda—its 
amorphous structure, mandate, and tactics can cause much 
greater concern. The United States, which created the Inter-
net as a defense research project, now considers cyberspace 
a “domain” or potential battlefield equal in importance to 
land, sea, air, and outer space. As a result, Anonymous and 
other groups involved in cyberattacks are seen as actors who 
need to be controlled. But Anonymous does not work like 
other political or military actors. It does not use accepted 
international conventions of protest— political marches, pe-
titions, physical violence—to pursue its goals.

It does not need to. Over the past decade, rapid advances 
in digital technology have empowered individuals and ad hoc 
groups to do what was once available only to institutions run 
by the state and to private organizations built on a similar 
top-down, bureaucratic model. “Anonymous demonstrates 
one of the new core aspects of power in a networked, dem-
ocratic society: individuals are vastly more effective and less 
susceptible to manipulation, control, and suppression by tra-
ditional sources of power than they were even a decade ago,” 

3

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

Yochai Benkler, a professor at Harvard’s Berkman Center 
for Internet and Society, wrote in 2012 in Foreign Affairs.3 
As will be explored in these pages, individuals can now do 
things that replace and threaten existing institutions in all 
areas of international affairs, including: development, war, 
diplomacy, finance, international reporting, and activism.

And intelligence gathering: On January 13, 2012, when 
FBI agent Timothy Lauster wrote to task force members 
to  set  up  a  conference  call  “to  discuss  the  on-going  in-
vestigations related to Anonymous, Lulzsec, Antisec, and 
other associated splinter groups,”4 Donncha O’Cearrbhail, 
a  19-year-old  from  Offaly  County,  Ireland,  intercepted 
his email. The next day, O’Cearrbhail asked a prominent 
Anonymous  activist  known  as  Sabu  for  help  over  Inter-
net Relay Chat, a text-based messaging system. “I have ac-
quired info about the time, phone number, and pin number 
of the conference call,” O’Cearrbhail wrote. “I just don’t 
have a good VoIP (Voice Over Internet Protocol) setup for 
actually calling in to record it.”5

O’Cearrbhail got help. On January 17, he recorded the con-
ference call. He sent the file to Sabu, and when Sabu failed to 
post the recording, an audio file was posted on YouTube on 
February 3, which a well-followed  anonymous-linked twitter 
handle @AnonymousIRC promoted and then tweeted: “The 
#FBI might be curious how we’re able to continuously read 
their internal comms for some time now #OpInfiltration.”6

This act of transparency did not go unpunished. O’Cearrbhail 
did not know that Sabu was an FBI informant, enabling crim-
inal hacking under agency guidance. The US government had 
five  individuals  involved  with  the  conference  call  arrested, 

4

l osi ng   c on t rol

including  O’Cearrbhail,  and  charged  them  with  compu-
ter  hacking  conspiracy,  computer  hacking,  and  intentionally 
disclosing  an  unlawfully  intercepted  wire  communication. 
O’Cearrbhail  was  ultimately  released  without  charge.  Other 
Anonymous members, including alleged leaders of the move-
ment, have also been detained. Still, the network continues to 
grow and to challenge the authority of democracies and auto-
cratic states.

In international affairs, the term “rogue” is applied to states 
such as Iran and North Korea, which disregard the norms 
of the international system. It has also been applied to al-
Qaeda, which seeks to destroy Middle Eastern and Western 
governments and restore an international Muslim caliphate 
of the sort that existed in the centuries after Mohammed. 
In short, a rogue actor is one who isn’t constrained by ex-
isting  controls  on  behavior.  A  state,  for  example,  can  be 
belligerent, even violent, but do so within the bounds of in-
ternational law and accepted norms of behavior. States can 
be constrained by the same methods. It is when an actor is 
perceived as uncontrollable that it gets the label of rogue.

Is  Anonymous  a  rogue  group?  Yochai  Benkler  argues 
that Anonymous, unlike al-Qaeda, “causes disruption, not 
destruction.” DDoS attacks on websites have not changed 
the  Vatican’s  stance  on  abortion  or  overturned  the  gov-
ernment of Bahrain, but the line between destruction and 
disruption is largely subjective. As cybercrime author Rich-
ard Powers observes, Anonymous is “attacking the whole 

5

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

power  structure”—the  international  economic  and  polit-
ical  systems  that  have  developed  over  the  past  century.7 
Like many of the individuals and organizations innovating 
online, Anonymous confounds the institutions, boundar-
ies,  and  categories  that  have  maintained  the  balance  of 
power since the end of World War II. Considering that the 
nation-state has the most to lose, and has in the past main-
tained its control via the institutions now being disrupted, 
governmental concern is understandable.

Rogue or not, Anonymous is not an anomaly, and taking 
its leaders out of circulation will not stop it or like-minded 
groups.  It  represents  an  early  example  of  a  new  form  of 
digitally derived power that is disrupting a wide range of 
once powerful 21st-century institutions, not just in inter-
national affairs.

Disruption has become one of Silicon Valley’s most pop-
ular, if cloying, buzzwords. One is hard pressed to find a 
startup that does not describe itself as a disruptive tech-
nology,  or  a  company  founder  who  is  reluctant  to  take 
on the establishment. The concept has also come to stand 
for a form of libertarianism deeply rooted in the technol-
ogy sector, a sweeping ideology that goes well beyond the 
precept  that  technology  can  engage  social  problems  to 
the belief that free market technology-entrepreneurialism 
should  be  left  unhindered  by  the  state.  In  a  sense  then, 
Anonymous  is  an  ideological  manifestation  of  the  most 
doctrinaire of the new technology elite. It represents the 
anarchistic  end  of  a  spectrum  that  includes  everything 
from  the  belief  that  private-sector  massive  open  online 
courses  extend  the  benefits  of  higher  education  to  more 

6

l osi ng   c on t rol

radical  notions  of  markets  unencumbered  by  taxes  and 
regulation  and  offshore  islands  free  from  the  control  of 
the state. At one end is the hope that technology can make 
our social and governance systems more efficient. On the 
other is a desire to burn down the house—to take down 
the state.

The concept of disruption is rooted in the work of Clay 
Christensen, a professor of business administration at the 
Harvard Business School who was originally interested in 
why unimpressive technologies, like the transistor radio, 
allow upstarts like Sony to take over markets from estab-
lished companies like RCA and Zenith, with their refined 
product lines and large markets. “Why is it that compa-
nies like these invest aggressively and successfully in the 
technologies  necessary  to  retain  their  current  customers 
but then fail to make certain other technological invest-
ments that customers of the future will demand?” Chris-
tensen asked in a 1995 Harvard Business Review article 
written with colleague Joseph Bower.8 The authors argue 
that  well-established  companies  are  ahead  in  developing 
new technologies that meet the needs of established cus-
tomers,  but  they  cannot  see  beyond  the  worldview  that 
made them successful. This blind spot allows new compa-
nies to innovate on the margins. Disruptive technologies 
first find a niche audience, and once their value is proven, 
they widen their market, taking down the establishment. 
In  short,  hierarchical  institutions  with  entrenched  prac-
tices, interests, and consumers are bad at anticipating and 
catering to new markets and are therefore vulnerable to 
nimble innovators.

7

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

Christensen  wrote  a  series  of  influential  books,  begin-
ning with The Innovator’s Dilemma, which look at many 
industries, including airlines, steel mills, and journalism, 
through the prism of disruption theory.9 He has also applied 
disruption  theory  to  the  public  sector.  In  a  2006  article 
Christensen and his co-authors argued that in the United 
States too much social spending is directed at maintaining 
the status quo rather than at reaching underserved popula-
tions. “Catalytic innovation,” they write, would “challenge 
industry incumbents by offering simpler, good-enough al-
ternatives to an underserved group of customers.”10

Government has all the burdens of established corpora-
tions:  institutionalized  structures  and  norms  that  lead  to 
lethargy, waste, inefficiency, and a lack of innovation. But 
their purpose is different from that of corporations, which 
have a mission to maximize value for their shareholders. In 
the capitalist model, we hope that the collective impact of 
the private sector benefits everyone to some extent. In the 
public sector, however, the very mandate is to serve every-
one. Disruption theory explains the failure of institutions 
to innovate and their risks of collapse, not the social conse-
quence of that failure. The Kodak workers who lost jobs, or 
towns where the steel mills closed, are not the core focus of 
business theory. And herein lies the problem for the state.
Disruptive innovation—from Anonymous, to cryptocurren-
cies like Bitcoin, to grassroots mapping of natural  disasters—
is  challenging  many  core  functions  of  the  international 
system, functions once controlled by states and international 
institutions. The difference, of course, is that the state won’t 
go away so easily, and the costs of disrupting it can be very  

8

l osi ng   c on t rol

high. A Foreign Ministry or Defense Department suffers from 
the same institutional constraints outlined by Christensen, yet 
it cannot creatively destruct. Or if it does, the risks are enor-
mous, because disruptive innovation could signal the end of 
the centuries-long modes of state governance. And despite the 
imaginings of the techno- and crypto-anarchists, the reper-
cussions would be vast. So the stakes are high, and the aspects 
of the state’s traditional power are fundamentally threatened.
For now, the challenge posed by disruptive innovation 
does not mean the end of the state, but it does suggest that 
the state is in decline, exposing laws, ethics, norms of be-
havior, and hierarchical structures that emerged amid an 
older set of technologies as constraints. Put another way, 
the  state  is  losing  its  status  as  the  pre-eminent  mecha-
nism for collective action. Where it used to be that the 
state had a virtual monopoly on the ability to shape the 
behavior of large numbers of people, this is no longer the 
case. Enabled by digital technology, disruptive innovators 
are now able to influence the behavior of large numbers 
of people without many of the societal constraints that 
have  developed  around  state  action.  These  constraints, 
which disruption theory treats as weaknesses, have his-
torically  been  strengths  of  democratic  societies:  They 
hold government accountable and ensure that it operates 
within the rule of law and within the bounds of prevail-
ing moral and ethical norms. There are of course varying 
degrees  of  success  within  this  framework,  but  the  idea 
of collective representation via institutional governance 
is what has separated modern democratic societies from 
anarchy.

9

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

What does it mean to disrupt the state? What does dis-
ruptive innovation look like in the world of international 
relations? And how is the modern state, still with tremen-
dous power and capacity for violence, pushing back against 
disruptions?

It is widely understood, while sometimes overstated, that 
the Arab Spring movements in Tunisia, Libya, and Egypt 
were enabled in part by the use of digital technology and 
social  media.  Protestors,  traditional  media,  and  citizen 
journalists all used Internet-based technologies to organize 
events, coordinate movement, and broadcast their activi-
ties to the watching world.

What was less clear at the time, but is now evident, is 
that the autocratic regimes that they were protesting were 
digitally equipped to fight back. Egyptian president Hosni 
Mubarak sought to shut down the Internet, and Bahrain 
has proven to be adept at monitoring and censoring its citi-
zens. Nowhere, however, was this digital capability more 
evident than in Syria, where a government was willing to 
brutally kill tens if not hundreds of thousands of its citizens 
to halt the spread of protests from North Africa. Syria, led 
by President Bashar Assad, has almost total control over 
the telecommunication of its citizens. At a national level, 
state-owned  Syrian  Telecommunication  Establishment 
censored  and  filtered  communications  to  crack  down  on 
protestors, activists, and the main rebel organization, the 
Free  Syrian  Army.  In  parallel  to  government  initiatives, 

10

l osi ng   c on t rol

a  network  of  hackers  calling  themselves  the  Syrian  Elec-
tronic Army operates in general support of Assad, both in 
Syria and globally—for example, hacking the AP Twitter 
feed and claiming that the White House has been bombed, 
causing  a  $136.5  billion  drop  in  the  S&P  500.  Both  the 
state and its allied hackers use sophisticated technologies 
to track and target anti-government protestors.

Where  do  an  autocratic  regime  and  its  supporters  get 
such technology? In Syria’s case, the Assad regime obtained 
devices manufactured by Blue Coat Systems, a California 
company.  A  research  center  at  the  University  of  Toronto 
called  the  Citizen  Lab  uncovered  this  connection  after 
obtaining a set of log files from these devices. (After ini-
tial denials, Blue Coat acknowledged that its devices were 
being used in Syria, but denied that the company sold them 
directly to the Syrian government, which would violate a 
US Executive Order banning the transfer to Iran and Syria 
of  technologies  that  facilitate  computer  or  network  dis-
ruption,  monitoring,  or  tracking.)  The  Citizen  Lab  later 
showed that more than twenty other countries, including 
a long list of rights abusers such as Egypt, Saudi Arabia, 
Afghanistan,  Bahrain,  China,  Iraq,  Nigeria,  Russia,  and 
Venezuela, also use Blue Coat devices to censor or monitor 
Internet activity.11 The US government is also a Blue Coat 
customer and used its devices to block Pentagon access to 
websites  supporting  gay  rights  from  Department  of  De-
fense computers.12

Blue Coat is hardly the only Western corporation to pro-
vide  surveillance  services  to  autocratic  regimes.  Google 
engineers in Egypt discovered contract proposals from a 

11

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

digital security software company called Gamma Interna-
tional to the Mubarak regime for €250,000 worth of tech-
nology  that  would  “enable  them  to  intercept  dissidents’ 
emails, record audio and video chats, and take copies of 
computer hard drives.”13 High-profile technology compa-
nies such as Gamma and FinSpy supplied surveillance ser-
vices  to  regimes  in  Egypt,  Tunisia,  Libya,  Bahrain,  and 
Syria.  An  operation  by  WikiLeaks  and  the  British  non-
governmental organization (NGO) Privacy International 
revealed 287 documents indicating that surveillance com-
panies, such as the French arms dealer Amesys, sold both 
spyware and malware to Gaddafi in Libya.14 Narus, a US-
based  Boeing  subsidiary,  sold  surveillance  equipment  to 
Egypt, and Trovicor, a German company, did the same for 
a dozen Middle Eastern and North African countries.15

Five times a year, hundreds of vendors come together in 
Prague,  Dubai,  Brasilia,  Washington,  and  Kuala  Lumpur 
to sell upward of $5 billion in tracking, censoring, moni-
toring,  and  spying  technology  at  the  Intelligent  Support 
Systems trade show, also known as the Wiretappers Ball.16 
These events attract the arms and surveillance industries, 
blue-chip corporations, and officials from democratic and 
autocratic  governments  alike.  A  2012  event  brought  to-
gether more than 2,700 representatives from 110 countries, 
including  problematic  regimes  in  Afghanistan,  Belarus, 
and Sudan.17 When asked whether he would be comfort-
able with Zimbabwe and North Korea buying technology 
there, Jerry Lucas, who runs the Wiretappers Ball, told the 
Guardian,  “That’s  just  not  my  job  to  determine  who’s  a 
bad country and who’s a good country. Do some countries 

12

l osi ng   c on t rol

use this technology to suppress political statements? Yes, I 
would say that’s probably fair to say. But who are the ven-
dors to say that the technology is not being used for good as 
well as for what you would consider not so good?”18

Jerry Lucas is hardly the only one who expects autocratic re-
gimes to use such technology to spy on citizens. In fact, as the 
Assad regime was monitoring dissent, the US State Depart-
ment was developing an ambitious project to “arm” opposi-
tion members with surveillance- circumvention technology.
During the 2009–2010 Iranian “green revolution” pro-
tests, the concept of Internet freedom became a buzzword 
in Washington. By the time of the Arab Spring revolutions, 
the  State  Department  was  ready  to  help  to  develop  and 
provide new digital tools to dissidents. Via a $57 million 
congressional  allocation,  and  as  a  part  their  wider  21st-
century  statecraft  initiative,  the  department  developed 
programs to train and equip allies in the region with ano-
nymizing and circumvention tools.19

One such project was called the Internet in a Suitcase, 
which uses cellphones and wifi routers to create distributed 
networks that allow for secure communication. During the 
2012  Internet  outage  where  Assad  effectively  shut  down 
all  cellphone  and  Internet  activity,  approximately  2,000 
of these mesh network kits were distributed to opposition 
members.20 “The United States is going beyond humanitar-
ian aid and providing additional assistance, including com-
munications  equipment  that  will  help  activists  organize, 

13

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

evade  attacks  by  the  regime,  and  connect  to  the  outside 
world,” Secretary of State John Kerry said.21

This  means  that  the  US  State  Department  is  provid-
ing  circumvention  tools  (technology  the  FBI  has  labeled 
an “indicator of terrorist activity”) to dissidents who are 
being targeted by a government armed with digital surveil-
lance tools made in the United Nations. As Sascha Mein-
rath, who is leading the Internet in a Suitcase project, says, 
“a lot of these technologies can be used for great good, but 
they are also a Faustian bargain.”22

States now find themselves in a convoluted position, as 
both  enablers  and  targets  of  disruptive  actors.  And  this 
perfectly represents the complexity of power, agency, and 
control on the Internet. This Faustian bargain is a manifes-
tation of a new arms race, between people who are empow-
ered through free, secure communication and governments 
that want to monitor and limit this communication. But it 
also tells us something about the way the state views, and 
is increasingly reacting to, the capabilities of digital tech-
nology and to those that are empowered by them.

Until the summer of 2013, this tension was the focus of my 
research for this book. Digital technology, I hypothesized, was 
enabling nontraditional international actors to take on and in 
some important ways replace the capacity of states and large 
institutions in ways that were both filled with opportunity 
but also fundamentally destabilizing to the established inter-
national order. States were taking notice and began to play 
the delicate game of both supporting and in some cases even 
funding what they perceived as beneficial disruptive behavior 
(economic  innovation,  Syrian  dissidents)  while  at  the  same 

1 4

l osi ng   c on t rol

time cracking down on disruptions perceived as threatening 
(Anonymous, terrorist communication, the black market).

What I didn’t know, which we now do, is that in the 
wake  of  September  11,23  Western  democratic  govern-
ments  were  so  concerned  about  the  capabilities  of  the 
digitally empowered that they became willing to subvert 
these digital powers and reassert their control over com-
munications. We have now learned both how threatened 
the  state  truly  was  and  the  extent  they  were  willing  to 
go  to  control  individuals  and  groups  they  perceived  as 
nefarious  actors.  This  book  then  also  became  a  study 
of how democratic states were using technology and the 
consequences of a digital arms race between states and 
their citizens.

When Edward Snowden, an American defense contrac-
tor based in Hawaii, leaked a vast trove of documents de-
tailing the National Security Agency’s (NSA) surveillance 
program, the breadth and audacity of the US surveillance 
state shocked the world. Snowden provided data that ex-
plained how the United States and other democracies were 
attempting to control as much of the global telecommuni-
cations system as possible. In a chilling graphic presented 
to a meeting of the “Five Eyes” surveillance alliance (made 
up  of  the  United  Kingdom,  the  United  States,  Canada, 
Australia,  and  New  Zealand)  the  NSA  described  their 
“New  Collection  Posture.”  The  operational  goals  were 
summarized  in  a  mantra:  “Collect  it  All;  Process  it  All; 
Exploit it All; Partner it All; Sniff it All; Know it All.”24 A 
similar document from British Government Communica-
tions  Headquarters  describes  a  satellite  communications 

15

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

surveillance program as a “Collect it All proof-of-concept 
system.” A memo from the NSA to Japan brags that new 
capabilities are “bringing our enterprise one step closer to 
collecting it all.”25

The  underlying  military  rationale  for  the  surveillance 
state is rooted in the mentality that one can control a battle-
field through situational awareness. The more one knows, 
the  more  one  can  control  outcomes.  Digital  omniscience 
is incredibly difficult to accomplish, however, and it could 
ultimately break a technological system, the Internet, that 
is paradoxically the source of enormous personal freedom, 
expression, and empowerment.

For the state to collect everything, to “know it all,” it 
must  first  normalize  pervasive  surveillance.  Because  al-
Qaeda shares many of the attributes of disruptive innova-
tors,  9/11  afforded  democratic  states  the  pretext  to  pass 
sweeping security legislation. The state’s appetite for om-
niscience is of course not new, but we now know that the 
Patriot Act, drafted in a matter of days and passed by Con-
gress  with  only  a  single  dissenting  voice,  enabled  a  vast 
global  surveillance  infrastructure.  As  journalist  Quinn 
Norton notes, the security establishment can succumb to 
paranoia as well as self-preservation: “When you’re an in-
credibly well-funded defense and intelligence community, 
the lack of existential threats is an existential threat. There 
is nothing to do but be scared of things.”26

And  this  is  partly  for  good  reason:  Al-Qaeda  posed  a 
new kind of threat. Its constituent parts were decentralized, 
spread out around the world, based on an idea, and despite 
their unconventional use of weaponry, connected and fueled 

16

l osi ng   c on t rol

by their ability to communicate, both clandestinely and in 
the  media.  They  were  not  a  national  army  that  could  be 
defeated on a traditional battlefield. They have also proved 
technologically  adept.  In  the  summer  of  2014,  analysis 
demonstrated how they have responded to increased state 
surveillance by developing their own encryptions tools.27

This fear coincided with an additional cultural, techno-
logical,  and  economic  development:  the  creation  of  vast 
amounts  of  data  encompassing  human  communication 
and movement. Google’s mission is to organize the world’s 
information,  a  project  that  is  rapidly  growing  to  include 
the use of robotic data collection, satellite footage, drones, 
and  artificial  intelligence.  Facebook  seeks  to  connect  ev-
eryone  in  the  world,  and  in  so  doing  has  detailed  social 
and behavioral data on over a billion people. It is develop-
ing  advanced  facial  recognition  and  moving  into  virtual 
reality.

There is a perceived benign utopianism to these objectives 
that the state has been able to co-opt. Technology became 
pervasive enough for most people to use  Internet-connected 
devices,  corporations  developed  business  models  depen-
dent on mining data from these communications, and citi-
zens willingly (if not always consciously) exchanged their 
personal  data  for  free  online  services.  For  a  government 
that sought to know everything, to collect it all, corpora-
tions had built an infrastructure, and the public had filled 
in much of the data. The same technological system that 
empowers people to disrupt traditional and state institu-
tions has been shown to be incredibly effective at providing 
the backbone of a surveillance state.

17

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

When  Edward  Snowden  showed  the  extent,  breadth, 
and audacity of the US surveillance state, he wasn’t just re-
vealing a program he saw as unconstitutional or unethical. 
He was providing the data required to understand how the 
US government had chosen to respond to the challenges of 
digitally empowered actors. Just as the Syrian government 
had chosen to use digital networks as a domain to control, 
the US government had, in a post 9/11 state of panic and 
fear,  decided  to  exert  power  over  the  network  itself.  As 
Snowden himself says, “These programs were never about 
terrorism:  they’re  about  economic  spying,  social  control, 
and diplomatic manipulation. They’re about power.”

Digital technology has empowered individuals and groups 
to do things that previously only states and large institu-
tions  could  accomplish.  Precisely  those  trends  that  have 
weakened  the  power  of  the  state—and  that  states  have 
thus  been  programmed  to  dissuade—have  strengthened 
a  new  set  of  actors  who  are  well  placed  to  advance  the 
rights and freedoms of individuals. But these networked 
actors are no more morally bound than those that oper-
ate within the traditional state system. They can use their 
power in many ways, for altruistic or malicious ends. It is 
therefore their ability to act and the new forms of action 
enabled  by  networked  technology  that  are  the  primary 
focus of this book.

The  digitally  empowered  are  only  part  of  the  story. 
Threatened  by  this  decentralized  power  and  fearful  of 

18

l osi ng   c on t rol

nefarious actors wielding it, the state is fighting back. Since 
digital technology challenges centralized command and hi-
erarchical control, the state is increasingly seeking to con-
trol  the  network  itself.  But  in  attempting  to  limit  digital 
empowerment, states could ultimately destroy the benefits 
and freedoms of the network. States will have to choose be-
tween seeking absolute control and giving up some power 
in order to preserve the emerging system. Democratic gov-
ernments  in  particular  face  a  dilemma,  as  the  attributes 
that determine success in a networked world are ones that 
their institutions were built to dissuade. Increasingly, the 
capabilities of the state are at odds with its objectives. This 
tension is not sustainable.

This 21st-century foreign policy challenge is explored in 
three  parts.  The  first  part  begins  with  Disruptive  Power, 
tracing the development of the modern state, which began 
as a mechanism for centralizing and exercising power and 
became hierarchical, bureaucratic, and, in democratic states, 
accountable to the rule of law. In a networked world, how-
ever, groups like Anonymous wield power by being decen-
tralized, collaborative, and resilient. This disruptive power 
threatens the institutions that have preserved the balance of 
power since the end of World War II.

The next four chapters look at individuals and groups 
fueled  by  digital  technologies  in  ways  that  challenge  the 
power  of  established  institutions.  Spaces  of  Dissent  ex-
plores digital activism through the example of a group of 
hackers  called  Telecomix,  who  served  as  a  form  of  tech 
support  for  the  Arab  Spring.  New  Money  examines  the 
rise  of  Bitcoin  and  what  cryptocurrencies  mean  for  the 

19

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

international financial system the state has long controlled. 
Being  There  considers  the  evolution  of  international  re-
porting by juxtaposing the death of seasoned foreign war 
correspondent Marie Colvin during the bombing of Homs, 
Syria, with the new digital tools Syrian citizens used to doc-
ument and stream the war to the world in real time. Saving 
the Saviors looks at the impact of collaborative mapping 
and advances in satellite technology on humanitarian and 
development agencies.

The final three chapters focus on the state’s use of dig-
ital technology and its response to disruptive actors. The 
emerging practice of digital diplomacy—public diplomacy 
through social media as well as more invasive diplomatic 
initiatives—is  the  subject  of  Diplomacy  Unbound.  The 
Violence  of  Algorithms  looks  at  how  advances  in  com-
putational power and automation have produced military 
weapons  and  surveillance  tools  that  blur  the  boundaries 
of the battlefield and the lines between domestic and in-
ternational. Finally, The Crisis of the State outlines four 
challenges  that  together  threaten  the  state’s  traditional 
mechanisms  of  power  and  control,  but  that  also  might 
provide models for 20th-century international institutions 
seeking to adapt—if they are structurally capable of trans-
formation or meaningful reform.

Digitally  enabled  actors, groups,  and ad hoc  networks 
are creating new forms of organization and often share dif-
ferent values and have conflicting objectives from the insti-
tutions of the current international system. What remains 
to  be  seen  is  whether  the  core  characteristics  of  disrup-
tive  power  are  conducive  to  principles  of  accountability, 

2 0

l osi ng   c on t rol

stability,  and  democratic  engagement,  or  fundamentally 
undermine  them.  In  a  world  where  the  traditional  state 
model empowers both democrats and dictators, this is not 
a new tension. But it is one that increasingly represents a 
crisis for both the state and the host of other 20th-century 
institutions that have long controlled power in the interna-
tional system. At the start of a potentially long struggle for 
relevance, states will have to choose between seeking abso-
lute control and giving up some power in order to preserve, 
and hopefully enhance, the emerging system.

21

c h a p t e r   t w o

d i s r u p t i v e   p o w e r

The modern history of power is inextricably tied to the 
development, interests, and capabilities of the state. The 
power that the state has accrued is derived from its ability 
to control its citizens, mobilize collective action, to regu-
late corporations and economic activity, and to  influence 
other states. State power is hierarchical, institutional, and 
structural.  It  is  also  connected  to  the  ability  to  control 
information and broadcasts. A contemporary discussion 
of foreign policy must move beyond the confines of state 
power, however, and into the nebulous, networked world 
emerging around us.

The rise of the nation-state as the primary unit of inter-
national politics coincides with the development of a new 
information technology. Gutenberg’s printing press in the 
15th century paved the way for a transition from the disag-
gregated feudal system of the Middle Ages to a more struc-
tured form of political power.

In addition to allowing information to be dispersed widely, 
the printing press shaped how information was conceived. 
To spread information, one had to put it in a linear, bound 
form.  Society  moved  from  a  decentralized,  oral  tradition 
of knowledge-sharing with privileged access to books and 

22

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

literacy to one where information could be centralized, con-
trolled,  and  mass-produced.  And  with  this  centralization 
of  communicative  and  organizational  authority  came  the 
modern state. This societal shift has largely determined the 
modern  era.  Some  350  years  of  governance,  institutional 
design,  political  evolution,  media,  and  culture  have  been 
dictated by humankind’s rapport with the printed word.

The Treaty of Westphalia, signed in 1648, 200 years into 
the Gutenberg era, ended the Thirty Years’ War and marks 
the birth of the modern nation-state system. Its core contri-
bution was to establish principles for legitimate rule. These 
principles—sovereignty,  the  right  of  self-determination, 
legal equality between states, and nonintervention in the 
internal affairs of other states—would become norms for 
state behavior. A state’s legitimacy was for the first time 
sanctioned by an interstate agreement.

The  treaty  also  established  what  has  been  called  a 
classic  balance-of-power  system,  whereby  large  states 
were  roughly  considered  equal,  and  wars  of  contain-
ment kept the system in check. Political scientist Alan C. 
Lamborn describes the goal of this system as preserving 
“the  independence  of  the  key  states  by  preventing  any 
one state from becoming so powerful militarily that it 
could dominate all the others.”1

In  the  century  before  the  Treaty  of  Westphalia,  politi-
cal philosophers were exploring the nature of power and 
social  organization,  looking  at  the  bargains  territorial 
states could make with their citizens and with other states. 
They  were  also  publishing  and  widely  distributing  their 
ideas.

23

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

Machiavelli, in The Prince, and Hobbes, in Leviathan, 
argue that states gained power and legitimacy by protect-
ing the security and well-being of their citizens. Fighting 
between  states,  they  argued,  could  be  minimized  if  the 
power and independence of each was mutually recognized.
Although there are multiple definitions of statehood, the 
generally used definition comes from Max Weber, who de-
fines the state as “a human community that (successfully) 
claims the monopoly of the legitimate use of physical force 
within a given territory.”2 This basic notion of statehood 
implies that a legitimate state can use force against, or in 
favor of, its citizens without legal consequences.

Historians  have  identified  two  ways  of  looking  at  the 
state:  Political  philosophers  such  as  Hobbes,  Rousseau, 
and  Locke  held  a  Contractarian  view  of  the  state—that 
is, without the existence of the state (i.e., in the “state of 
nature”),  there  would  be  a  foundation  for  anarchy  and 
chaos  everywhere.  According  to  the  Hobbesian  idea  of 
“war of every man against every man” in which life was 
“solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short,” it is necessary 
to have a “common power to keep them all in awe.”3 This 
leads to the creation of a “social contract” or an implicit 
agreement  among  individuals  to  empower  the  state  and 
follow rights and responsibilities vis-à-vis each other: “At 
some point in their history, certain peoples spontaneously, 
rationally,  and  voluntarily  gave  up  their  individual  sov-
ereignties  and  united  with  other  communities  to  form  a 
larger political unit deserving to be called a state.”4

More contemporary definitions of statehood focus on the 
state as an organizational structure with a monopoly on 

2 4

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

the use of violence. Unlike the Contractarian view, which 
locates the source of the state in the conflict between in-
dividuals, the Predatory view focuses on conflict between 
the state and its citizens. In the Predatory view, the state 
uses its comparative advantage over the use of violence to 
enforce laws and rules upon its citizenry. This idea closely 
relates to that of sociologist Charles Tilly’s notion of the 
“state as organized crime,” in which the elites and the lead-
ers work together to maintain the status quo by acquiring 
revenue  and  enforcing  their  power  on  the  citizens.  This 
view holds that the rulers of the state are egotistic, maxi-
mizing, rational actors who are interested in their own sur-
vival and thereby curtail whatever might appear as a threat 
to  their  monopoly  over  power.  Tilly  sees  states  as  “rela-
tively centralized, differentiated organizations, the officials 
of which, more or less, successfully claim control over the 
chief concentrated means of violence within a population 
inhabiting a large contiguous territory.”5 Economist Doug-
las North is even more direct: “A state is an organization 
with a comparative advantage in violence, extending over 
a geographic area whose boundaries are determined by its 
power to tax constituents.”6

The  primacy  of  control  over  the  use  of  force  is  para-
mount in the Predatory view, but both have to do with the 
power of the state to control people. Internally, the state 
manifests its power via a social contract with its citizens, 
whereby it is seen to legitimately provide for the common 
good.  And  externally,  it  maintains  power  via  the  use  or 
threat of force. Both of these forms of control are at their 
foundation, about power.

25

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

Has the power of the state declined? The 20th century 
saw the rise of the institutionalized and globalized state, 
and in many ways the end of the traditional empires and 
monarchist rule that had defined much of the previous cen-
turies. Global powers fought two world wars to define the 
terms of this new global system. World War I essentially 
reversed  the  economic  relationship  between  Europe  and 
America. Whereas Britain and France had been the world’s 
creditors, they became indebted to the United States. Fol-
lowing the war, the League of Nations was founded with 
the goal of bringing order and control to the state system. 
While  ultimately  without  teeth,  and  thus  ineffective  at 
stopping World War II, it did lay the foundation for the 
United Nations.

Following World War II, once again, the result was more 
international institutionalization with the goal of mitigat-
ing the costs of state power. World leaders questioned the 
legitimacy  of  the  state,  appealing  to  universal  principles 
of human rights and justice. This led to the founding of 
the United Nations to prevent another war between great 
powers. Perhaps the most consequential shift, and one that 
served to embed new powers with the state, were the fi-
nancial institutions of the Bretton Woods agreement. This 
agreement  implemented  a  largely  free-market  capitalist 
system for the global economy, with the state, and in par-
ticular the United States, at its center. The fixed exchange 
rate and gold standard systems were created, and the man-
agement of the international monetary system was placed in 
the International Monetary Fund. The International Trade 
Organization, later to become the General Agreement on 

2 6

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

Tariffs and Trade, promoted movement toward a system of 
free trade between countries.

It  is  hard  to  imagine  a  more  robust  statement  of  state 
power  than  the  creation  of  the  global  architecture  that 
followed the two world wars. With it came the establish-
ment of an international system with the United States and 
its economic model at the center. Beyond solidifying this 
power, the state-based institutions that were created were 
designed to address many of the world’s problems.

This move to interstate institutions proved a  double-edged 
sword  for  the  nation-state.  The  success  of  the  Bretton 
Woods  institutions  at  liberalizing  international  trade  in-
evitably led to globalization, which is undermining tradi-
tional core elements of state control, such as governance, 
populations, and territorial sovereignty. Whether it is the 
Internet’s ability to transcend geographical boundaries or 
the rise of multinational corporations beyond the control of 
any one state, national governments have been challenged 
by  new  systems  of  power.7  In  their  book  Globalization/
Anti-Globalization,  David  Held  and  Anthony  McGrew 
argue that we are headed into a post- Westphalian system 
characterized by the increasing questioning of state sover-
eignty in subtle ways. New organizations and institutions 
are wielding authority that once belonged only to the state.8
Eminent international relations scholars Joseph Nye Jr. 
and Robert Keohane push back on such assessments.9 The 
problem with such analyses, they argue, is that they under-
estimate the power of the state, which is more resilient and 
continues to command loyalty from a vast majority of citi-
zens. These pundits of modernity, as Nye and Keohane call 

27

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

them, “failed to analyze how the holders of power could 
wield that power to shape or distort patterns of interde-
pendence that cut across national boundaries.”

What has been grossly overlooked, they argue, is how 
“the new world overlaps and rests on the traditional world 
in which power depends on geographically based institu-
tions.” They call the resulting landscape one of “complex 
interdependence,” in which actors have multiple relation-
ships depending on the nature of their interest, and each 
relationship is governed by some set of norms, values, and 
shared culture. This new ecosystem has not replaced state 
power, they argue, because “information does not flow in 
a vacuum but in political space that is already occupied.” 
This  is  surely  true,  but  it  does  not  negate  the  possibility 
that  power  is  indeed  shifting,  and  that  the  power  of  the 
state could be diminishing.

Nor  does  it  account  for  shifts  in  how  the  state  itself 
wields power, an argument that Nye himself has champi-
oned through his theory of soft power. States, he argues, 
have  two  principal  means  of  persuasion:  the  blunt  force 
of  military  or  economic  coercion  and  the  more  subtle 
forms of coopting and attraction. In the latter, states make 
others  want  what  they  want  through  the  promotion  of 
their values—in the case of the United States, democracy, 
human  rights,  and  individual  prosperity.  According  to 
Nye, these values are promoted through a wide range of 
non-state institutions, and his concept of soft power has 
therefore come to be seen as a broadening of the mandate 
of the state into untraditional areas. While he still sees the 
state as the primary actor of the international system, the 

2 8

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

theory of soft power implicitly elevates a wide network of 
other groups and individuals who had previously been left 
out of the international conversation.

And  they  were  about  to  get  a  lot  more  powerful.  As 
 international-relations  scholars  were  beginning  to  theo-
rize the changing role of the state, a revolution in infor-
mation  technology  was  under  way.  Digital  information, 
and the forms of behavior which it allows, are unbound. 
 Communications are no longer constrained by the linear-
ity of print or the hierarchy of the 20th century, existing 
instead  in  fluid  networks.  They  are  emboldened  by  new 
attributes, such as anonymity and constant change.

What forms of power are emerging in this new space? 
And in what ways are scholars beginning to map out this 
new ecosystem of actors and technologies? One answer is 
the theory of networked power.

Networks are of course nothing new. Polynesian trade routes, 
the Hanseatic League, the Rothschild banks, African talking 
drummers were all non-hierarchical networks of nodes.

But  thinking  about  them  in  an  international  relations 
context  never  seemed  necessary  because  state  power  has 
been so hierarchical and dominant until recently. What’s 
more, advances in information technology have vastly in-
creased the importance of networks. A group of citizens 
could always organize an ad hoc protest, for example, but 
now  this  can  be  done  quickly  and  on  a  vast  scale  with 
mobile phones over social networks.

29

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

Renowned communication theorist Manual Castells has 
in many ways pioneered the study of the social and policy 
effects of digital communication networks. He argues that 
digital technology enables different forms of behavior from 
what was possible on non-digital networks.10

In this view, digital technology increases the power of 
networks by overcoming the overwhelming challenges of 
coordination, communication, size, complexity, and veloc-
ity that previously limited networked behavior.11

States,  Castells  argues,  are  no  longer  isolated  actors 
with  enormous  power.  Their  power  is  challenged  and 
influenced  by  other  powerful  nodes,  sub-networks,  and 
alternative  networks.12  Beyond  state  behavior,  network 
power  has  led  to  the  re-creation  of  civil  society  at  the 
global and the local levels. Despite the diversity of cul-
tures and societies, networks knit civil society together. 
And this is also true at the personal level, where Castells 
sees  a  new  form  of  networked  individualism  emerging. 
He describes a synthesis between our individual-centered 
culture and the desire to coexist online. Ultimately, for 
Castells,  in  a  network  society,  power  continues  to  be 
the fundamental structuring force. However, it does not 
reside  in  institutions,  states,  or  corporations—rather,  it 
is located in the network itself. And as such, it is the be-
havior within these networks that should be the object of 
our analysis.

In its simplest form, a network is a set of interconnected 
nodes (individual, groups, organizations, states, etc.) that 
allows  the  sharing  of  ideas,  goods,  values,  and  other  re-
sources. Networks produce patterns of relationships that 

30

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

influence those in and outside the network. Consequently, 
the power of a network is either derived from its internal 
structure or through the agency its structure derives.13

A network is an interplay between its structure and the 
actors that participate in it. Nodes in a social network can 
be analyzed as individual members, groups, or organiza-
tions;  however,  they  are  connected  in  ways  that  lead  to 
dependency and patterns. Or, put another way, networks 
can have predictable, even determinative, structures akin 
to hierarchies.14

In  computer  science  terms,  nodes  in  a  network  have 
power because they can threaten to sever links with other 
nodes, giving them a degree of influence over their behav-
ior.15 As such, they can define the nature of the network 
by setting conditions and limitations on what information 
the other nodes are able to share. In this construct, power-
ful nodes emerge in part by reducing transaction costs of 
interacting within the network.

Actors within networks may view a network as a means 
for  coordinated  or  collective  action  aimed  at  changing 
international  outcomes  and  national  policies.  However, 
because these networks lack a formal legitimate organiza-
tional ability that would arbitrate or resolve disputes, and 
are non-hierarchical, have loose ties between nodes, and 
have less precise boundaries than traditional institutions, 
there is a fluidity to their behavior.

In  Here  Comes  Everybody:  The  Power  of  Organizing 
without  Organizations,  technology  theorist  Clay  Shirky 
sees  networks  as  new  formations  of  people  and  groups 
that in many ways sit outside the social organizations of 

31

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

hierarchical institutions. For Shirky, the word “organiza-
tion”  has  several  meanings:  It  denotes  the  state  of  being 
organized and also the groups that do the organizing. Typ-
ical organizations are hierarchical with a distinct and clear 
chain of command, which has meant that specific systems 
of management preserve the structures of these organiza-
tions.  The  hierarchical  organization  was  robust  because 
forming competing large institutional groups was relatively 
hard. Now, however, forming a group or alliance online is 
relatively  easy.  “Groups  of  people  are  complex,  in  ways 
that make those groups hard to form and hard to sustain,” 
he argues. “Much of the shape of traditional institutions 
is a response to those difficulties. New social tools relieve 
some of those burdens, allowing for new kinds of group-
forming, like using simple sharing to anchor the creation 
of new groups.”16

Yochai Benkler also sees networks as both a collection 
of individual actions and as an underlying structure: “we 
can  think  of  individuals  as  discrete  entities  in  multiple 
intersecting  networks,  but  also  of  organizations,  or  even 
techno-organizational forms, like WikiLeaks, as opposed 
to Julian Assange as the operative entity.” To this effect, 
network power “describes the extent to which one entity in 
a network can affect the behavior, configurations, or out-
comes of another entity, as well as the modality through 
which it can do so.”17 To Benkler, power within a network 
is  the  extent  to  which  a  node  can  influence  other  nodes 
in their behavior, outcomes, or configuration. In a related 
manner, freedom in a network is the extent to which indi-
viduals or entities can determine their own behavior.

32

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

Twenty years ago only mainstream media could have dis-
seminated a video of the US helicopter attack on journal-
ists in Iraq, as WikiLeaks did. Effective distribution would 
have  depended  on  a  small  number  of  large-scale  media 
outlets. Instead, WikiLeaks posted the video on a series of 
mirrored websites and it went viral in hours, ensuring its 
widespread global dissemination before governments had 
even had a chance to respond. In the networked society, 
power can be exercised through new channels.18

Political  scientist  and  public  policy  leader  Anne-Marie 
Slaughter has been influential in applying network theory 
to the international domain through the articulation of the 
idea of network power. While she ultimately argues that 
all major elements of society are networked—war (organ-
ization between different terrorist groups), diplomacy (in-
tergovernmental cooperation), business (economic groups), 
media (interactive journalism), social relations (social net-
works)—she places much of her focus on the role of the 
state in these systems. She concludes, as we will see, that 
in the end, “Hierarchy and control lose out to community, 
collaboration, and self-organization.”19 Even in the heavily 
institutional world of global trade, networks have become 
the central organizing feature of markets. Global produc-
tion  networks,  not  nation-states,  dominate  the  most  dy-
namic structures of the economy.20 Networks challenge the 
very existence and viability of hierarchical structures.

33

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

For  Slaughter,  power  in  networks  lies  in  the  ability  to 
exert  soft  power:  in  networks,  authority  cannot  be  en-
forced—it needs to be acquired through endearment and 
obligation.21 The power that flows from connectivity, she 
argues, is not the power to impose outcomes since “net-
works are not directed and controlled as much as they are 
managed  and  orchestrated  .  .  .  and  multiple  players  are 
integrated into a whole that is greater than the sum of its 
parts.”22 Networked power instead flows from the ability 
to make a maximum number of valuable connections that 
strive toward some common political, economic, or social 
purpose.

According  to  Slaughter,  global  networks  have  funda-
mentally challenged the notion of Westphalian sovereignty 
first because these nation-states are simply not as effective 
in exerting power as they used to be. As Political Scientist 
Robert Keohane said in 1993, “It is now a platitude that the 
ability of governments to attain their objectives through in-
dividual action has been undermined by international po-
litical and economic interdependence.” This, according to 
Slaughter, has been magnified by networked actors.23

Second, the Westphalian notion of absolute sovereignty 
is declining. The idea whereby the state has complete con-
trol of its territory and the welfare of its citizens is being 
challenged  by  any  number  of  international  legal  regimes 
and norms, most notably the idea of the Responsibility to 
Protect, whereby a state’s sovereignty is conditional on the 
protection of its citizens.

Following this qualification, Slaughter argues that there 
is a need for a different conceptualization of sovereignty, 

34

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

one that focuses on a state’s capacity to participate in trans-
governmental  regimes  and  international  institutions;  this 
notion of sovereignty is inextricably linked to the existence 
of  “government  networks”  operating  across  borders  and 
the power that they wield.

The idea of “sovereignty as responsibility” also flows from 
this notion of evolving sovereignty. According to Slaughter, 
“The best illustration of the new sovereignty can be found 
in  the  operation  of  ‘government  networks’— networks  of 
national government officials of all kinds operating across 
borders  to  regulate  individuals  and  corporations  operat-
ing in a global economy, combat global crime, and address 
common  problems  on  a  global  scale.”  Slaughter  argues 
that networked sovereignty is built on trust and relation-
ships  between  participants,  the  exchange  of  information 
on a regular basis, collaboration on common issues, and 
the offer of technical assistance and professional socializa-
tion to members from less developed countries.

This  definition  of  sovereignty  relies  almost  entirely  on 
the norms of state behavior. It includes many of the lessons 
of network theory and applies them to networks of states. 
However, there is a world of other actors participating in 
networks  that  overlap  and  intersect  with  state  interests. 
What’s more, these actors are not constrained by the same 
legal,  ethical,  and  regulatory  norms  as  states.  And  their 
objectives and goals need not be based in either personal or 
collective interests. Perhaps most important, they are very 
difficult to control.

Slaughter’s  argument  for  networked  power,  like  Nye’s 
soft power before it, ultimately privileges the state in the 

35

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

international system. They both recognize that hierarchies 
are threatened by networks, that new groups have power 
and influence, and that states need to adapt to remain rel-
evant. This in itself is a remarkable shift in thinking. In a 
matter of a decade or two, a system of state-based power 
that has held for half a millennium is in the middle of a 
rapid transformation.

Ultimately,  however,  the  network  power  and  network 
sovereignty arguments fail to take the logic that underpins 
them to their conclusion. At their core, they are still about 
the  state.  They  focus  on  how  the  state  should  and  must 
adapt to remain relevant in this new world. But it could 
equally be true that the attributes that empower individu-
als and groups to challenge dominant actors are powerful 
enough to fundamentally threaten the viability of the state 
as a social construct. This is a far more radical proposition, 
and one with vast consequence. It poses a existential chal-
lenge to the viability of the state in a networked system, 
one that could signal a revolutionary break from the slow 
evolutionary history of the state system described earlier.
To me, the empowerment of digital actors raises funda-
mental  questions  for  the  international  system.  What  are 
the implications that significant state responsibilities will 
be undermined or replaced by networked actors? Are the 
ethical and legal norms that we have embedded into our 
traditional institutions transferable to a networked world? 
What are the risks that our global security and economic 
institutions will be rendered obsolete or irrelevant? How 
are  states  fighting  back,  and  are  their  actions  stemming 
the tide or ultimately hastening their decline? And perhaps 

36

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

most important, how do we as a society engage those who 
have power now, rather than with those that once did?

To answer these questions, we have to first look in more 

detail at what gives networked actors power.

How has Anonymous, a seemingly disorganized, leaderless, 
diffuse group of digital activists, been able to take on the 
world’s most powerful states and corporations? The answer 
gives us a window into the new world of disruptive power.
Information  technology  has  radically  lowered  the  bar-
rier for entry into international collective action. As legal 
scholar Marvin Ammori argues, the marginal production 
and distribution costs are now so low that online partici-
pants are able to overcome the technological and logistical 
costs, and organizational barriers, to coordinated political 
action. This ability for ad hoc collaboration enables a net-
work  of  individual  participants  driven  by  non-monetary 
motivations and leverages their excess labor capacity.24

A divide remains between who has access to this em-
powering  technology  and  who  doesn’t.  Ultimately,  it  is 
not simply about access (though access remains an issue) 
but  about  what  people  are  able  to  do  with  that  access. 
Most of our technology is designed by the affluent, for the 
affluent, which leads to a real bias in who is empowered 
by  it.  Disruptive  power  also  privileges  certain  forms  of 
knowledge. Knowing code, being comfortable with mul-
tiple identities, being curious and creative are powerful in 
the digital world.

37

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

The very qualities that give emergent actors their power 
run  counter  to  the  traditional  norms  of  international 
power. What once made states weak—a lack of structure, 
instability,  decentralized  governance,  loose  and  evolving 
ties—are  precisely  what  makes  groups  like  Anonymous 
powerful.  Their  alternative  approach,  which  is  rooted  in 
the structures of contemporary information technology, is 
transforming the world of international affairs. This rep-
resents a revolution rather than an evolution in power and 
in  this  paradox  lies  the  threat  faced  by  the  nation-state. 
And through an analysis of what makes Anonymous pow-
erful we can identify the three core attributes of disruptive 
power—it is formless, unstable, and collaborative.

O n e: FO r m l e s s

You can’t join Anonymous because it is not an organiza-
tion. You can’t lead it because there is no leader. You quit 
Anonymous  by  no  longer  participating.  Because  there  is 
no centralized leadership, there are no gatekeepers. There 
is no one to decide on membership or to bestow “official 
status”  on  the  organization.  Most  participants  engage 
under a cloak of encryption and pseudonyms.

As  one  Anonymous  participant  put  it,  “Anonymous  is 
not a club, a party or even a movement. There is no char-
ter, no manifesto, no membership fees. Anonymous has no 
leaders, no gurus, no ideologists. In fact, it does not even 
have a fixed ideology.”

This  runs  in  direct  contrast  to  the  firm  hierarchical 
structures that give traditional institutions strength. Think 

38

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

the  United  Nations,  Ford  Motor  Company,  the  US  mili-
tary, the Red Cross. All gain power through the way they 
are ordered.

So  how  are  we  to  understand  an  actor  with  a  large 
amount of power but no institutional structure? The answer 
lies in the power that is gained because of, rather than in 
spite of, its decentralized and non-hierarchical nature—its 
formlessness. Anonymous, like the many other groups that 
are outlined in this book, is organized as a network. Ex-
isting primarily on an information network, Anonymous 
defies political, economic, and structural boundaries that 
encumber traditional institutions.

The  inherent  value  of  anonymity  helps  to  explain  the 
growing power of the individual in an online network. It 
is a technologically determined anonymity that allows in-
dividual users to engage in political speech without fear of 
retribution, and as such, gives them power.25

Communication  within  a  network  is  highly  decentral-
ized.  Planning  and  coordination  for  disparate  activities 
can occur on any number of platforms. When any location 
or  form  of  communication  is  compromised,  a  discussion 
simply  moves  on.  This  enables  very  rapid  evolution  and 
growth.

But hierarchies were created to maintain and legitimize 
sources of power—to be able to trace the information de-
cision  makers  act  on  and  ultimately  to  hold  them  to  ac-
count. How do we replace these norms of accountability in 
a system with no clear power structure? Anonymous can’t 
control  who  acts  in  its  name,  which  can  lead  to  incon-
sistencies.  A  pro-life  hacker  associated  with  Anonymous 

39

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

recently  attacked  Britain’s  largest  abortion  provider  in 
2011. Months later another Anonymous hacker attacked 
the Vatican for being pro-life. A recent white paper by the 
Internet security company McAfee concluded, “If hacktiv-
ists remain unfocused and continue to accept anyone who 
signs on to act on their behalf, we may be on the verge of 
a digital civil war.”

Whether a radically decentralized organizational struc-
ture can be made accountable to its constituents or to soci-
ety remains one of the most pressing questions surrounding 
disruptive  power.  A  lack  of  rigid  structure  also  makes 
groups like Anonymous remarkably resilient. After the ar-
rests of the five top Anonymous hackers, attacks continued 
unabated. Because of the numerous paths that connect any 
two points, when one path is disabled, the network finds 
another and its effectiveness is not compromised.

Computer  scientists  have  long  studied  the  resilience  of 
networks. A recent article in Nature, however, argues that 
not all redundant networks are equal. The authors show 
that one attribute of scale-free networks, such as the In-
ternet,  is  that  most  of  the  network’s  nodes  have  one  or 
two links; few nodes have more. This guarantees that the 
system  is  entirely  connected  and  is  therefore  particularly 
robust.  More  specifically,  nodes’  ability  to  communicate 
with one another in networks such as the Internet is unaf-
fected by high failure rates. This high tolerance for error 
comes at a price, however: if key nodes are attacked, the 
entire network becomes vulnerable.26

The Internet’s resilience follows not only from its high 
tolerance for error but also from packet-switching. Cyber 

40

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

law scholar Michael Froomkin describes packet- switching 
as the method by which data can be broken up into stan-
dardized packets, which are then routed to their destina-
tions  via  an  indeterminate  number  of  intermediaries.27 
Having  many  possible  routes  for  communication  means 
that information can still be transmitted when one break 
occurs. This is one reason the US Department of Defense 
developed the Internet.

And much like the Internet itself, networked actors are 
loosely  connected,  with  very  few  people  holding  large 
numbers of the connections. This makes them incredibly 
hard to shut down and proves immensely frustrating for 
the traditional institutions they are disrupting.

TwO: Un s Ta b l e

In  a  digital  network,  information  is  both  abundant  and 
evolving at an increasingly fast pace. News of world events 
has become a commodity, and the evolution of ideas, ide-
ologies,  beliefs,  and  politics  is  happening  almost  in  real 
time. Software programs, group behavior, and individual 
action are all adapting to a world of massive real-time data 
flows and what is amounting to a new pace of evolution. 
Groups like Anonymous thrive in this instability and un-
certainty and can take advantage of the traditional actors 
who require predictable knowledge of the future to remain 
powerful.

Whether  it  concerns  a  corporation’s  knowledge  of  a 
market or a state’s intelligence service, large 20th- century 
institutions  expect  a  degree  of  predictability  that  is 

41

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

increasingly difficult to attain. This is in part due to the 
scale of data now being produced. For example, every five 
minutes we produce enough data to fill a Library of Con-
gress.  Much  of  this  is  tagged  with  a  host  of  spatial  and 
reference information and is social; two billion pieces of 
content  are  tagged  by  location  each  month  on  the  Face-
book platform alone. This flow of data is leading to a new 
law of production, where the more we consume, produce, 
and use data, the cheaper it becomes. Data is not subject to 
resource constraints.

The production of new information is outpacing our ca-
pability to understand it as a collective. This environment 
privileges actors who thrive on uncertainty and confusion, 
and cripples those that need long-term strategic planning 
to mobilize resources and implement policies.

This scale and pace of information production is lead-
ing to changes in how individuals behave. As one implica-
tion of this, in online networks, relationships are less likely 
to be grounded in history. Hence, group loyalty does not 
ensure path dependency. Often, a movement or campaign 
will create no permanent institution.

In this space, ideas can take on a life of their own, acting 
like viruses and self-marketing. In this way, messages act 
like  “memes”—viral  ideas  that  use  people  to  replicate 
themselves.28

The flip side to rapid, viral distribution is that it privileges 
certain types of information. Internet theorist Evgeny Mo-
rozov warns that online networks, and the pace of change 
they enable, lead to a motivation to engage in superficial 
forms  of  politics,  where  individuals  are  incentivized  to 

42

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

behave loudly and assertively.29 If Morozov is right about 
the  type  of  behavior  that  is  disproportionately  incentiv-
ized, then content that goes viral can be problematic. The 
Kony 2012 viral  video, for example, was disruptive in that 
it managed to promote a cause that was absent from main-
stream  discourse  and  affect  policy  makers  in  a  way  tra-
ditional organizations had failed to, but it was ultimately 
flawed.  Even  so,  its  disruptive  power,  to  both  the  tradi-
tional  aid  organizations  and  to  the  governments  tasked 
with finding Joseph Kony, were clear.

Th r e e: C O l l a b O r aT i v e

We  are  so  used  to  equating  organization  with  hierarchy 
that it at first seems surprising that disparate groups can 
act collectively. In the international system, a state is de-
fined as sovereign by an international organization like the 
United Nations. In a networked model, new actors require 
no outside party to attain status. Instead, their identities 
derive from what they do and from the impact they have. 
But if the Internet technologically empowers individuals to 
act on their own, how does it regulate  collective behavior?
New forms of ad hoc governance are emerging in the net-
worked environment. One idea is that there is an emerging 
form of self-regulation, that technology is enabling a new 
form of collective ad hoc private regulation whereby pri-
vate actors deliberately constrain and influence other pri-
vate actors.30

Harvard Law professor Lawrence Lessig, a leader in the 
global  information  technology  debate,  also  argues  that 

43

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

the legal control of behaviors is just one of many forms of 
constraints, including norms, markets, and system archi-
tecture. So the fact that a network is largely lawless does 
not mean that it is unregulated; it simply means that it is 
regulated by alternative (private) means.31

In 2002, Yochai Benkler adapted this idea of self-regulation 
to the Internet age. Benkler builds on the theory of Robert 
Coase, which classified the regulation of interactions as either 
market-based (via contracts) or hierarchy-based (via institu-
tions), to posit that the Internet permits a third model of pro-
duction: ad hoc volunteerism.32

In this governance system, credibility and authority are 
gained  through  action.  In  a  lovely  turn  of  phrase,  Jenny 
Sundén says that on the Internet one “types oneself into 
being.”33  Similarly,  Manuel  Castells  argues  that  the  new 
actors  gain  their  power  from  communication,  not  from 
representation.34 Both imply that authority in online net-
works such as Anonymous is judged only by the reality the 
participants create.

Collaborative action has proven to be a critical attrib-
ute of disruptive innovators in international affairs. When 
Anonymous  coordinates  a  distributed  denial-of-service 
(DDoS) attack, hundreds or even thousands of computers 
act as a coordinated mob, overloading the servers of the 
target.

States and corporations collaborate, but in a formalized 
top-down  manner,  through  negotiated  treaties  or  merg-
ers.  While  the  concept  of  soft  power  would  dictate  that 
more  informal  influence  is  increasingly  important,  these 
approaches are intended to increase the power of the state. 

4 4

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

They are not an end in themselves and they do not benefit 
all participants equally.

Anonymous, on the other hand, is an intrinsically social 
world based on partnerships, collaborations, and interde-
pendencies.  This  stands  in  direct  contrast  to  command-
and-control hierarchies, market exchanges, and traditional 
bureaucratic instruments.

In the field of international relations the determinative 
effects of social behavior are intimately associated with the 
theory  of  constructivism,  which  posits  that  international 
dynamics are historically and socially constructed rather 
than  purely  a  function  of  either  human  nature  or  state 
power.35 In the online environment, many of the same dy-
namics are at work. danah boyd argues that MySpace and 
Facebook  allow  US  youth  to  socialize  with  friends  even 
when they are unable to gather in unmediated situations, 
thus serving the function of “networked publics” that sup-
port  sociability.36  Professor  of  Library,  Archival  and  In-
formation  Studies  Caroline  Haythornthwaite  argues  that 
because individuals can articulate and make visible their 
social  networks,  individuals  with  “latent  ties”  can  make 
connections that would not usually be made.37 Clay Shirky 
goes a step further, arguing that peer-to-peer is “erasing 
the distinction between consumer and provider” and creat-
ing new forms of socioeconomic relationships.38

It  is  these  social  connections,  intrinsic  to  an  online 
network, that give it power. Logically, a group in which 
people  can  get  to  know  many  others  and  build  genuine 
interpersonal connections will be stronger than one with 
very  loose  ties.  These  social  connections  are  valuable  to 

45

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

corporations  and  governments  who  want  to  know  more 
about it, but they also give tremendous power back to the 
engaged  public.  Even  groups  with  only  latent  ties  allow 
connections to be made and people to be mobilized.

Because  these  networks  are  enabled  by  information 
technology, they also have a different relationship to space. 
The decentralized nodes of Anonymous, for example, are 
not geographically predicated. Still there is certainly segre-
gation online. It is not based on geography, but generally 
on other factors like nationality, wealth, age, and level of 
education.

More important, groups like Anonymous show that col-
lective  action  is  possible  without  centralization  and  a  hi-
erarchical  structure.  Clay  Shirky  argues  that  collective 
activities that formerly required coordination and hierarchy 
can now be carried out through looser forms of coordina-
tion, such as social network connections, common short-
term alignment in a movement, or unified objectives in a 
particular event. In this way, the Internet unites groups so 
disparate that they could not have been formed without it.39
Collective online action also enables groups previously 
marginalized by the threat of violence, such as those in 
autocratic states, to overcome what was a real collective 
action  problem.  Instead  of  having  to  risk  death  in  the 
streets, movements can evolve in safer virtual environ-
ments. This virtual space has also become the location 
of  real  state  oppression,  which  is  explored  throughout 
this book.

It  is  also  potentially  problematic  that  much  of  this 
online activity takes place on platforms owned by private 

46

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

corporations. Writing about networked governance, Mark 
Considine argues that a network is a social world based 
on  partnerships,  collaborations,  and  inter-dependencies, 
as  opposed  to  command-and-control  hierarchies,  market 
exchange,  and  traditional  bureaucratic  instruments.40 
Manuel Castells adds that networks enable a new collec-
tive capitalism, the “signature form of organization in the 
information age.”41

In the end, the relationship between public and private 
spaces is getting increasingly blurred, and states are reg-
ularly seeking private data from the companies that con-
trol the online space. YouTube, for example, has a policy 
against graphic videos but will make exceptions in the case 
of content that is important for human rights, such as vio-
lence against protestors in Bahrain in 2011. However, You-
Tube decides what is politically important.

What  then  are  hierarchical  institutions,  such  as  states 
and corporations, to do in this new world? How are the 
traditional institutions that have long governed, controlled, 
and led (for good and ill) the international system going 
to  adapt  to  these  new  actors?  How  can  states  engage  in 
a  world  where  the  core  tenets  of  their  power  have  been 
flipped upside down?

In  the  following  chapters,  I  explore  this  tension;  show 
which actors are leveraging technology to solve problems, 
cease control, or take power; and how the legacy institu-
tions are, and are not, fighting back.

47

c h a p t e r   t h r e e

s p a c e s   o f   d i s s e n t

On January 28, 2011, in the middle of a popular uprising 
against Egyptian president Hosni Mubarak that was orga-
nized on the Internet and amplified using social media, the 
Mubarak regime turned off most digital communications 
in Egypt. This striking display of state power served as a 
reminder that the free and open communications enabled 
by digital technology remain susceptible to state control.

Members of Telecomix, a decentralized network of mostly 
Western hackers and activists committed to freedom of ex-
pression, saw Mubarak’s Internet blockage as an outrageous 
restriction of a basic human freedom. They began figuring 
out how to reestablish network connections in Egypt.

When the Internet wasn’t entirely shut down, Telecomix 
members  provided  Egyptian  activists  with  surveillance-
circumvention tools such as Tor, which anonymizes digital 
communications, and virtual private networks. They built 
mirrors and proxies to restore access to blocked websites. 
Using a network tool called nMap, they scanned the entire 
Egyptian Internet Protocol (IP) address space to find a few 
thousand machines that still had access to the Internet and 
injected  human-readable  messages  into  their  web-server 
logs describing how to engage online safely and securely. 

48

spac e s   of   di s s e n t

They  manually  relayed  tweets  from  Egyptians  without 
access to Twitter via Internet relay chatrooms (IRCs).

When  Egyptian  Internet  and  mobile  service  was  fully 
shut down, Telecomix partnered with the French Data Net-
work, a hacker-friendly Internet service provider, to set up 
hundreds of dial-up modem lines. They also worked with 
amateur radio enthusiasts to send short logistical messages 
over designated frequencies. To let Egyptian activists know 
about  these  alternate  services,  Telecomix  found  as  many 
fax lines as they could in Egypt. The international group 
sent out thousands of leaflets to fax machines at university 
campuses,  cybercafes,  and  businesses  explaining  how  to 
get around the blackouts, as well as medical information 
about such topics as how to treat someone exposed to tear 
gas. They also set up fax machines to transmit news out 
of Egypt. “When countries block, we devolve,” Telecomix 
member Peter Fein said.

Telecomix originally came together in Sweden in April 
2009 in response to a proposed European Union (EU) law 
that would to cut off Internet access to anyone who repeat-
edly downloaded copyrighted files. They believed such leg-
islation would restrict the free flow of information over the 
Internet. Before a vote could take place, the group published 
the phone numbers of every EU Parliament member, then 
enlisted the Pirate Bay, a file-sharing website that attracted 
20 million monthly visitors at the time, to link to them. Eu-
ropean parliament phones were jammed for several days, 
and legislators subsequently dropped the proposed statute.
After this first, successful campaign, international par-
ticipation  in  Telecomix  quickly  grew.  While  united  by  a 

49

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

general  commitment  to  “keeping  the  Internet  running,” 
there was no singular leadership or direction. “Think of 
Telecomix  as  an  ever  growing  bunch  of  friends  that  do 
things together,” the founder, Chris Kullenberg told jour-
nalist  Andy  Greenberg.  On  its  website  Telecomix  states 
that  they  “know  no  borders  technological  or  territorial. 
We  have  no  specific  agenda,  IRCocratic  leadership  and 
no pre-determined practices. We are an occurrence rather 
than a group.”1

Peter Fein, who emerged as somewhat of a spokesperson 
for the group, wrote on his blog, “Telecomix is an ad hoc dis-
organization of Internauts who support free  communication 
for everyone, regardless of political affiliation. Comprised 
of  programmers,  punks,  politicians,  pirates,  and  others, 
Telecomix  believes  in  person-to-person  communication—
the original p2p.” These people are “motivated by radical 
passion for freedom” and “drawn together by the desire to 
have an Internet adventure, to see what free communica-
tion can do in the lives of ordinary people.”2

As Telecomix worked in support of Egyptian activists, 
its  Internet  Relay  Chatrooms  (IRC)  became  information 
technology (IT) support centers for other activists and rev-
olutionaries. As conflict began in Syria, Telecomix agents 
in France, Germany, and Sweden disseminated videos and 
photographs of atrocities committed by Assad’s police and 
military  forces.  Telecomix  anticipated  an  Internet  shut-
down in Syria similar to what happened in Egypt. Instead, 
the Assad regime monitored Internet and social-media ac-
tivity of rebel groups and activists.

50

spac e s   of   di s s e n t

For Telecomix, this approach posed a new challenge: how 
to send messages without identifying the activists they sought 
to help and putting their lives in danger. A Telecomix agent 
who goes by the screen name of KheOps wrote that this con-
cern ruled out Facebook, which the Syrian government was 
monitoring.3 So the group tried a brute-force solution. Mem-
bers  crawled  the  web  for  as  many  Syrian  email  addresses 
as  they  could  collect—including  addresses  for  pro-Assad 
groups and individuals—and sent the following message:

Dear People of Syria. Fighters for democracy

This  is  Telecomix.  Hacktivists  fighting  for  the  flow  of 

information.

Please find attached guidelines that should help you com-
municate safely and broadcast information. Please read it 
carefully.  Spread  it  as  much  as  you  can,  by  any  means. 
 Democracy, freedom are at stake. We struggled to make 
this message reach you because of censorship.

With freedom feelings.
With kind regards.
Telecomix

Telecomix didn’t really know how many of the people they 
were trying to help had received the messages. As KheOps 
explains,  it  was  “as  if  we  had  sent  thousands  of  carrier- 
pigeons over the border, we did not get any direct feedback. 
. . . Our involvement and concern had increased a lot, but 
the other side of the wall still seemed terribly silent. We thus 
took a step towards a more penetrating action.”4

51

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

Telecomix also built a simple website that included Internet  
security guidelines in Arabic and a small downloadable soft-
ware  package  containing  Firefox  browser  plugins,  a  Tor 
bundle, secure instant-messaging software, and a link to the 
Telecomix  IRC.  The  group  used  19  mirror  sites  with  dif-
ferent  domains  to  avoid  being  blocked.  KheOps  called  the 
successful initiative a combination of “high technical skills, 
deep emotional involvement and decentralized technological 
power.”

Members of Telecomix also scanned the Syrian Internet 
in search of devices vulnerable to hacking. They acquired 
user passwords and got into Cisco Systems-produced net-
work  switches,  cameras  streaming  live  street  scenes,  and 
computers  of  Syrian  government  officials.  They  found 
5,000  unsecured  home  routers  and  warned  their  owners 
about their vulnerability to state surveillance.5 A Telecomix 
member  known  by  the  screen  name  Punkbob  discovered 
logs showing the Internet activity of thousands of Syrians 
including  their  locations,  the  sites  they  visited,  and  the 
complete contents of their communications. The logs came 
from a device built by Blue Coat Systems. Punkbob, who 
claims  to  be  a  Pentagon  contractor,  recognized  them  be-
cause, he said, the Pentagon uses the same software to filter 
and track the Internet use of its employees. The Syrian gov-
ernment was spying on its citizens using US-made devices. 
Telecomix  made  this  data  public,  spurring  widespread 
public scrutiny of Blue Coat Systems and similar Western 
surveillance device manufacturers and playing a role in a 
US executive order against the export of such technology to 
Syria and Iran.

52

spac e s   of   di s s e n t

Telecomix  does  not  fit  comfortably  in  our  traditional 
categories of participants in international affairs. It is not a 
nation-state, a formal institution, or a rogue individual. It 
has a collective identity and its loose, decentralized struc-
ture makes it difficult to control.

“If Telecomix exists anywhere, it’s in our chat networks 
and  the  relationships  of  the  people  who  participate.  We 
operate on a simple principle: you show up, find collabora-
tors, and just go do,” Peter Fein said in a 2012 talk at the 
Personal Democracy Forum conference. “Like the rest of 
the  Internet,  Telecomix  is  put  together  with  bubble  gum 
and popsicle sticks—some days the server crashes, or gets 
DDoS’d  or  someone  forgets  to  pay  the  domain  bill  and 
nothing seems to ever get written down. This turns out to 
be a good thing, because when the Internet breaks, we can 
get some more popsicle sticks and go fix it.”6

This  allows  for  a  legal,  organizational,  practical,  and 
technical fluidity that traditional institutions do not enjoy. 
Fein continues, “When the net went down in Egypt, Tele-
comix didn’t call Ron Wyden to call Hillary Clinton to call 
Obama to call Mubarak and say, ‘please turn the Internet 
back on.’ Instead we took direct action—we got out some 
modems and faxes and just did it ourselves.”

Groups  like  Telecomix  and  Anonymous  represent  a 
new kind of international actor that is remaking interna-
tional affairs. The two movements may employ different 
tactics; in Tunisia, where the Arab Spring began, Anony-
mous took down the websites of the prime minster and the 
government while Telecomix distributed encryption tech-
nology to protestors. But they are both groups of hackers, 

53

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

and  their  members  act  at  great  personal  risk  because  of 
a  shared  ethical  belief  that  freedom  of  information  is  a 
universal right. In his 1984 work on hackers, Steven Levy 
argues that hackers are bound to two principles: First, they 
fight corporate control of the Internet and work to remove 
the barriers that allow corporations to control information 
and behavior online. Second, they believe that centraliza-
tion of power—especially the power of the state—has led 
to wide abuse and needs to be challenged.7 This, of course, 
is a form of anarchism. Instead of manifesting as violence 
or  protest,  however,  groups  like  Telecomix  seek  to  illus-
trate the deficiency of state power by demonstrating their 
own decentralized capabilities.

For groups like Telecomix, hacking is a form of civil dis-
obedience.  Henry  David  Thoreau  coined  the  term  in  his 
1849 essay titled  Civil  Disobedience, which drew on his 
opposition to slavery and the Mexican-American War. To 
Thoreau, governments exist because people have assigned 
them representation and they should not take obedience to 
the state for granted. States needed to earn the loyalty of 
their citizens by pursuing justice and conscientiousness. In 
the absence of such virtues, he argued, civil disobedience 
is  not  only  natural  but  should  be  encouraged.  Civil  dis-
obedience was a check on state power. Thoreau was not 
an anarchist, but he did believe “that government is best 
which governs the least,” and that “government, at its best, 
is an expedient.” He believed that each individual needs to 

54

spac e s   of   di s s e n t

listen to his or her conscience and question the rule of the 
government and its institutions, even at the cost of desta-
bilizing “the collective” and ending in loss of government.
Thoreau’s  position  was  a  radical  one,  and  others  have 
followed his line of thinking. In A Theory of Justice, John 
Rawls defines civil disobedience as “a public, non-violent 
and conscientious breach of law undertaken with the aim 
of  bringing  about  a  change  in  laws  or  government  poli-
cies.” This act needed to be conscientious, with a sincere 
moral conviction and the greater good of society in mind. 
It needed a political motivation, appealing to a “common 
conception of justice.” It had to be aimed at changing the 
law to bring it into conformity with justice. It needed to be 
nonviolent, and participants had to accept any punishment 
that might result from their actions.

Hannah Arendt added a measure of populism to these 
definitions, seeing civil disobedience as representative of a 
groundswell of public dissent that emerges when enough 
people  believe  that  action  is  needed  outside  the  formal 
mechanisms for changing or informing government policy.8 
She  wrote  this  before  the  rise  of  the  Internet,  which  fa-
cilitates mass expression with less friction or commitment 
than a physical protest.9

In the 1950s, students at MIT coined the term “hacking” 
to refer to pranks played in early artificial intelligence labs 
and experiments with track circuitry by the Tech Model 
Railroad Club.10 Journalist Quinn Norton, who has cov-
ered the hacking world for a decade, defines it as “clever 
misuse of any technology.”11 While not explicitly a form of 
civil disobedience, it has always had an anti-authoritarian 

55

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

undercurrent. In a 1986 article titled “The Conscience of a 
Hacker,” a hacker calling himself the Mentor wrote:

We explore . . . and you call us criminals. We seek after 
knowledge . . . and you call us criminals. . . . You build 
atomic bombs, you wage wars, you murder, cheat, and lie 
to us and try to make us believe it’s for our own good, yet 
we’re the criminals. Yes, I am a criminal. My crime is that 
of curiosity. My crime is that of judging people by what 
they say and think, not what they look like. My crime is 
that of outsmarting you, something that you will never for-
give me for. I am a hacker, and this is my manifesto. You 
may stop this individual, but you can’t stop us all.12

The first commonly recognized instance of hacking as a 
form of political activism came in October 1989. An anti- 
nuclear  worm  called  WANK  (Worms  against  Nuclear 
Killers) placed a message on login screens at the National 
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and the US 
Energy Department that said, “WORMS AGAINST NU-
CLEAR  KILLERS  .  .  .  Your  System  Has  Been  Officially 
WANKed.”  The  first  distributed  denial-of-service  (DDoS) 
attack, which overwhelms a website or server with commu-
nication requests, was an act of civil disobedience. In 1994, 
an activist group known as Zippies “email bombed” US gov-
ernment websites in protest of a law banning outdoor raves.
In  1996,  a  collective  of  media  professionals  and  art-
ists calling themselves the Critical Art Ensemble released 
a  manifesto  of  sorts  called  “Electronic  Civil  Disobedi-
ence  and  Other  Unpopular  Ideas.”13  They  argued  that 

56

spac e s   of   di s s e n t

information  flows  electronically,  not  through  castles  and 
city centers, and consequently, the mode of opposition to 
power  had  to  change.  In  1998,  a  group  called  the  Elec-
tronic Disturbance Theater (EDT) began what they called 
acts  of  electronic  civil  disobedience  against  the  Mexican 
government  in  support  of  the  Zapatistas,  a  leftist  rural 
movement in the southern state of Chiapas. The Zapatista 
campaign  inspired  other  movements.  In  1998,  the  EDT 
launched FloodNet—a software that could enable DDoS 
attacks. Part protest, part digital performance art, the idea 
behind the project, as explained by cofounder Brett Stal-
baum, was to serve as “conceptual net art that empowers 
people through activist and artistic expression.” In 1999, 
the worlds of physical and electronic activism merged with 
the  World  Trade  Organization  (WTO)  protests,  where  a 
new  round  of  international  trade  liberalization  negotia-
tions were being launched. While protesters rallied in the 
streets of Seattle, a group called the Electrohippies Collec-
tive, based in Oxford, England, mobilized 450,000 people 
to participate in a DDoS attack on the WTO website.

Academic Molly Sauter sees these and subsequent acts 
of electronic activism as a new form of civil disobedience. 
“Networked technologies mean our opportunities for ef-
fective  political  activism  have  increased  exponentially. 
Where activists once put their physical bodies on the line 
to  fight  for  their  causes,  online  activists  can  engage  in 
digitally-based  acts  of  civil  disobedience  from  their  key-
boards.”14 Sauter identifies three types of online civil dis-
obedience:  using  direct  disruption  tactics  such  as  DDoS 
attacks and website defacements; ferreting out hidden or 

57

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

secret information; and providing activists with additional 
information channels. Together, “these tactics aim to upset 
the status quo by disrupting the normal flow of informa-
tion,  thereby  attracting  attention  to  their  [the  activists’] 
cause and message.” And digital civil disobedience is dy-
namic, she wrote. “The future of digital civil disobedience 
will grow out of new online tactics, augmented by the In-
ternet’s ability to bring people together across geographical 
boundaries.”15

Like acts of offline civil disobedience, digital efforts are 
ethically  motivated,  reject  violence,  a  profit  motive,  and 
destruction of property; and participants accept personal 
responsibility  for  their  actions.  Yet  the  terrain  is  much 
less  clear.16  The  word  “disobedience”  implies  that  laws 
are  broken,  but  law  has  been  slow  to  adapt  to  the  dig-
ital realm. As for the “civil” part, disobedience online fre-
quently  crosses  jurisdictional  boundaries,  and  its  targets 
can include any entity that is perceived to have power. The 
motivation  for  an  act  of  civil  disobedience  online  is  not 
always apparent, as protesters can act anonymously, moti-
vated by everything from political conviction to fun. And 
what does it mean to be violent or destructive online? Is a 
DDoS attack an act of speech or more akin to smashing a 
window?

With  these  and  other  early  displays  of  online  political 
activism, governments and security strategists anticipated 
a potential threat. This range of digitally enabled activist 
behavior poses a real challenge for policy- and lawmakers. 
In 2001, two Rand Corporation analysts, David Ronfeldt 
and John Arquilla, defined what they called Netwar as an 

58

spac e s   of   di s s e n t

“emerging mode of conflict (and crime) at societal levels, 
short  of  traditional  military  warfare,  in  which  the  pro-
tagonists  use  network  forms  of  organization  and  related 
doctrines,  strategies,  and  technologies  attuned  to  the  in-
formation age. These protagonists,” they argue, “are likely 
to  consist  of  dispersed  organizations,  small  groups,  and 
individuals  who  communicate,  coordinate,  and  conduct 
their campaigns in an internetted manner, often without a 
central command.”17

Reflecting  on  what  the  rise  of  Netwar  meant  for  the 
state, Ronfeldt and Arquilla came to two particularly pre-
scient  conclusions.  First,  they  argued,  Netwar  has  both 
dystopian  and  benign  manifestations.  Some,  such  as  ter-
rorist groups, may prove a threat to the state. Others, such 
as NGOs, civil society groups, and liberation movements, 
might have perceived beneficial effects. Both, however, use 
similar  tools  and  tactics.  This  dual  nature,  or  “ambiva-
lence”  as  they  describe  it,  is  challenging  for  the  state  to 
engage with.

Second,  they  argued  that  networks  are  very  hard  to 
counter  with  hierarchical  organizations.  They  warn  that 
“governments  tend  to  be  so  constrained  by  hierarchical 
habits  and  institutional  interests  that  it  may  take  some 
sharp reverses—such as were just suffered in the terrorist 
attacks  in  the  United  States—before  a  willingness  to  ex-
periment more seriously with networking emerges.”18 Ron-
feldt and Arquilla wrote this article in the months before 
the  September  11,  2001,  terrorist  attacks  on  the  United 
States, and as will be explored throughout this book, these 
attacks provided the regulatory and legal justification for 

59

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

the US government to experiment as a networked rather 
than a hierarchical actor.

Cyberactivism has reached critical mass with the prolif-
eration  of  groups  like  Anonymous.  Given  their  influence 
and the scale of their operations, it is almost impossible to 
ignore their role in civil society. But the tension between 
hacking  as  activism  and  hacking  as  terrorism  has  long 
been present.

In testimony before the House Armed Services Commit-
tee in 2000, information security researcher Dorothy Den-
ning reflected on the impact of the electrohippies’ DDoS 
protest  on  the  World  Trade  Organization  in  1999.  How 
should this act be interpreted by the state?

To the best of my knowledge, no attack so far has led to 
violence  or  injury  to  persons,  although  some  may  have 
intimidated their victims. Both the EDT and the electro-
hippies view their operations as acts of civil disobedience, 
analogous to street protests and physical sit-ins, not as acts 
of violence or terrorism. This is an important distinction. 
Most activists, whether participating in the Million Moms 
March or a Web sit-in, are not terrorists. My personal view 
is that the threat of cyberterrorism has been mainly theo-
retical, but it is something to watch and take reasonable 
precautions against.19

The attacks of 9/11 and other events rendered such nu-
anced thinking moot in US political discourse. In Febru-
ary 2012, the US National Security Agency (NSA) labeled 
Anonymous  a  threat  to  national  security,  claiming  they 

6 0

spac e s   of   di s s e n t

“could have the ability within the next year or two to bring 
about a limited power outage through a cyber attack.”20

Anonymous is a leaderless organization that is horizontal, 
decentralized, and all-inclusive. Some argue that it is not 
even an organization but an umbrella brand under which 
individuals  sharing  the  same  ideology  come  together  to 
carry  on  activities  of  online  activism.  Nevertheless,  the 
United States, the United Kingdom, and other governments 
have charged individuals suspected of being connected to 
Anonymous with crimes. In March 2012, the FBI arrested 
Jeremy Hammond for hacking into the private intelligence 
firm Stratfor and stealing the personal details of more than 
850,000  people  (published  by  WikiLeaks  as  the  “Global 
Intelligence  Files”).  That  September,  Barrett  Brown,  the 
self-proclaimed spokesperson for Anonymous, was indicted 
on 17 counts including conspiracy, corruption, concealing 
evidence, and violating the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act.
The zeal in making examples of actions associated with 
Anonymous is alarming. “Those who have the skills and 
capacity to electronically enter these closed systems of in-
formation terrify the state,” Chris Hedges reflected during 
Hammond’s trial. “And the state, when it confronts those 
who have this capacity, uses everything at its disposal to 
destroy these opponents.”21 Most of them are young adults 
with no prior criminal records, yet they are being treated 
like career criminals. They have been pressured into turn-
ing against one another and imprisoned long before they 

61

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

were sentenced. Their families have also become targets; 
Barrett Brown’s mother has been forced to plead guilty to 
charges relating to hiding her son’s laptop from the Fed-
eral  Bureau  of  Investigation  (FBI)  and  now  could  face  a 
fine of $100,000 and up to one year in jail or six months 
of probation. Brown’s attorney, Jay Leiderman, thinks the 
FBI  intends  to  send  a  message  through  these  and  other 
first-generation computer fraud cases: “The government is 
saying loud and clear, if you use computers in ways that 
make us feel uncomfortable you go to jail and you go to 
jail for a very, very long time.”22

The government also seems to be making an example of 
Chelsea Manning, a former US military private first class 
who  was  arrested  for  releasing  to  WikiLeaks  more  than 
250,000 US diplomatic cables, 400,000 US Army Reports 
about Iraq, 90,000 US Army Reports about Afghanistan, 
many other classified US government documents, and the 
video  of  a  Baghdad  airstrike  that  killed  civilians.  Man-
ning’s  stated  motivation  for  the  leak  was  to  “expose  the 
American military’s ‘bloodlust’ and disregard for human 
life  in  Iraq  and  Afghanistan.”23  Initially  Manning  was 
charged on 12 counts, all based on leaking unauthorized 
and classified materials. In March 2011, the charges were 
modified; this time she was charged on 22 counts, includ-
ing aiding the enemy (which potentially carries the death 
penalty), wrongfully storing information, bypassing com-
puter security, and adding unauthorized software. On Feb-
ruary 28, 2013, she pled guilty to 10 out of 22 counts; she 
denied the most severe one, aiding and abetting the enemy, 
which rests on the notion that she knew that al-Qaeda had 

62

spac e s   of   di s s e n t

access to the Internet, and therefore gave them state secrets 
by posting them online.

By most accepted international definitions, Manning has 
been  tortured  by  the  US  government.  Since  her  arrest  on 
May 29, 2010, she has been held in Iraq, Kuwait, Mary-
land,  and  finally  in  the  military  base  in  Quantico,  Vir-
ginia,  where  she  spent  nine  months  in  a  six-by-eight-foot 
maximum-security cell. Manning was allowed out for 20 
minutes a day, shackled, and deprived of almost all human 
contact. She was allowed to sleep only between 1 pm and 11 
pm, naked and facing a bright light. Professor Juan Méndez, 
the UN Special Rapporteur on Torture and Other Cruel, 
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, accused 
the US government of treating Manning inhumanely.24

Manning was acquitted of aiding and abetting the enemy, 
a charge grounded in an 1863 case in which a Union sol-
dier was charged with passing information to the South by 
talking to a newspaper reporter. Yet this zealous prosecu-
tion seems intended to establish new legal norms in dealing 
with  hacking.  As  the  New  York  Times  reported,  “Leak-
ers are being prosecuted and punished like never before. 
Consider that the federal Espionage Act, passed in 1917, 
was used only three times in its first 92 years to prosecute 
government  officials  for  press  leaks.  But  the  Obama  ad-
ministration, in the president’s first term alone, used it six 
times  to  go  after  leakers.  Now  some  of  them  have  gone 
to jail.”25 In a March 2013 New York Times article titled 
“Death  to  Whistle-Blowers,”  Floyd  Abrams  and  Yochai 
Benkler argued that “If successful, the prosecution will es-
tablish  a  chilling  precedent:  national  security  leaks  may 

63

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

subject the leakers to a capital prosecution or at least life 
imprisonment.  Anyone  who  holds  freedom  of  the  press 
dear  should  shudder  at  the  threat  that  the  prosecution’s 
theory presents to journalists, their sources and the public 
that relies on them.”26 That did not happen, but given the 
current climate, journalists could be charged under the Es-
pionage Act in the future. During the Manning trial, the 
judge asked the prosecution if they would “be going after 
Manning the same way if he had given the info to NYT 
or Washington Post instead of WikiLeaks?” They replied 
with a resounding yes.

Societies have a history of ostracizing protesters engaging in 
civil disobedience only to praise them later as foundational 
to the development of the culture. With digital activism, 
the state is seeking control in the only way it knows how: 
through the force of law and legal precedent. In so doing, 
however,  it  is  not  only  radically  redefining  the  enforce-
ment  tools  at  its  disposal  but  also  challenging  unwritten 
social conventions about how to respond to civil disobe-
dience. Spending a night in jail is different from serving a 
30-year prison sentence, and this stricter response narrows 
the spaces of dissent that are fundamental to a democratic 
system, if not closing them off altogether. Political dissent, 
and the escape valve that it represents, requires a system in 
which just punishment is both proportional and known.

Dissent is a social escape valve, a check against the im-
mense power we choose to give to the state, and there are 

64

spac e s   of   di s s e n t

costs to shutting it off. In her 1970 essay “Civil Disobedi-
ence,” Hannah Arendt called civil disobedience a mecha-
nism that sustains the democratic process by “interrupting 
the  authority  and  sovereignty  of  the  state.”  For  Arendt, 
unchallenged sovereignty is the greatest threat to democ-
racy because it “disintegrates plurality and the multiplici-
ties within the space of appearance that are required for 
authentic political life.” In this way, the coming together of 
the social collective is not “dissent”; it is the opposite since 
it demonstrates the “consent” of the citizens about issues 
they face.27

This  view  of  civil  disobedience  as  a  collective  act  has 
roots in Jürgen Habermas, who saw it as a tool for delib-
erative  democracy  and  a  communicative  action  that  was 
conducted in the public space. Actions in this public sphere 
can  sit  awkwardly  between  the  laws  that  govern  society 
and the laws being protested, but, he argues, “the right to 
civil disobedience remains suspended between legitimacy 
and legality for good reasons. But the constitutional state 
which  prosecutes  civil  disobedience  as  a  common  crime 
falls under the spell of an authoritarian legalism.”

In both offline and online formulations of civil disobe-
dience  there  is  a  tension  between  the  moral  and  ethical 
judgments of citizens and the legal constraints imposed on 
them by government. This puts public policymakers in a 
difficult position. They can accept a certain degree of dis-
sent  as  healthy  for  a  political  system,  but  they  must  ac-
knowledge that this implies a limitation of the law. Perhaps 
more challenging, they must make a qualitative distinction 
as to which dissenting behavior is tolerable or even healthy 

65

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

to politics and governance, and which behavior crosses a 
line that moves it into higher order criminality.

In  zealously  prosecuting  activist  hackers,  the  state  is 
doing  more  than  breaking  its  bargain  with  citizens.  As 
Quinn  Norton  states,  “Democracy  was  supposed  to  be 
different.  It  was  supposed  to  be  more  flexible,  not  just 
for  the  benefit  of  the  dissenters,  but  to  keep  the  whole 
project  from  spiraling  into  the  kind  of  craziness  that 
caused empires and great nations to rot, fail, and fall from 
within. The rule of law became justice as it represented 
the needs of people, not just the majority, but of wisdom 
and  progress—a balancing of thought and time.” In this 
balance,  “opposition  was  not  only  a  right,  but  the  only 
quality that kept power sane.” It is this check on power 
that we are at risk of losing.

The state is in a bind, since the Internet is a far more 
difficult place to control than the public square, and acts 
of civil disobedience share form and tactics with more sub-
versive and threatening behavior. Whether it is possible to 
control the Internet, the effort to do so could undermine 
the  democratic  state  by  intimidating  its  citizens  and  de-
stroying its own character in the process.

66

c h a p t e r   f o u r

n e w   m o n e y

Ross  William  Ulbricht,  a  physics  student  in  his  late  20s 
from Austin, Texas, ran Silk Road, a hidden online market-
place, from 2011 until his arrest by the FBI on October 2,  
2013.  He  took  over  the  site  and  the  pseudonym  Dread 
Pirate Roberts from its founder, who left for unknown rea-
sons and remains at large.

“Silk Road is about freedom,” Dread Pirate Roberts de-
clared in his January 2012 State of the Road Address.1 The 
goal is to “grow into a force to be reckoned with that can 
challenge the powers that be and at last give people the op-
tions to choose freedom over tyranny.”

Silk Road wouldn’t show up in a Google search. It could 
only be accessed using the encryption tool Tor, and it had 
many changing web addresses. Once shoppers arrived at 
the Silk Road, they could purchase a wide range of illicit 
goods including drugs, unregulated cigarettes, and forged 
documents. Much like Ebay, anyone could be a seller, and 
the  product  and  services  were  ranked  and  reviewed  by 
users. A drug order would be vacuum sealed and sent via 
the US postal service.

According to Carnegie Mellon researcher Nicolas Christin, 
the site grossed $1.2 million a month in the first half of 2012,2 

67

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

and an analyst at Dublin Trinity College found the site re-
ceived 60,000 visits a day and had over a million active users.3
Essential to the site’s viability, such as it was, was ano-
nymity. And this is where money comes in. Traditionally 
black markets stay out of the reach of the state by using 
cash. The Silk Road, however, could exist online by using 
a new form of electronic currency called Bitcoin. And at 
the time, the Silk Road was the primary global market for 
the use of the currency, with sales of over nine and a half 
million Bitcoins, which at the time would have been worth 
over a billion dollars.4

To Dread Pirate Roberts, this was the true power of his 
venture. Silk Road was about citizens taking power (over 
currency and the free market) back from the state. “The 
people  now  can  control  the  flow  and  distribution  of  in-
formation and the flow of money,” he argued.5 “Sector by 
sector the state is being cut out of the equation and power 
is being returned to the individual.”

And as a person claiming to be a new Dread Pirate Rob-
erts declared, “Silk Road is an idea, and where Silk Road 
now lies is in the people who made it what it was and it 
is those people who will, with a little help, bring the idea 
back to life again under a new name.”6

And so is the case with the idea of Bitcoin. While many 
saw it as inextricably linked to illicit exchanges and there-
fore  made  less  viable  with  the  closing  of  the  Silk  Road, 
others  see  this  as  a  watershed  moment.  Marco  Santori, 
the chairman of the regulatory affairs committee of the 
Bitcoin Foundation, told the New Yorker’s Brian Patrick 
Eha, “Bitcoin’s P.R. problem, with which it has struggled 

68

n e w   mon e y

for the last year or so, is being addressed in a very direct 
way.”7

Eha  continues,  “With  the  bugaboo  of  Silk  Road  ban-
ished,  Bitcoin  might  soon  acquire  a  relatively  clean-cut 
image.  That  would  allow  cryptocurrency  entrepreneurs 
to attract even more funding for companies built on what 
the Bitcoin Foundation considers the legitimate and valu-
able  uses  of  Bitcoin—among  them  e-commerce,  remit-
tances, and financial empowerment for people in the Third 
World.”8

While the Silk Road was an initial trial run for the na-
scent Bitcoin network, its closure by the FBI, which impor-
tantly did not exploit the currency’s code, has ushered in a 
new era of development and hype.

Which  takes  us  to  a  coffee  shop  in  Vancouver,  British 

Columbia, Canada.

Waves  Coffee  House  is  an  ordinary-looking,  Starbucks-
like  coffee  shop  in  an  upper-middle-class  neighborhood 
of clean, comfortable Vancouver. In the back of the cafe, 
there  is  an  automatic  teller  machine  (ATM)  that  allows 
people to deposit cash in exchange for Bitcoins. In its first 
eight  days  of  operation,  the  machine  processed  $81,000 
Canadian dollars (CAD), and in its first month the ATM 
took  in  more  than  a  million  Canadian  dollars.9  Bitcoins 
purchased through the ATM are either deposited into an 
existing wallet or into a newly created one. Over half the 
transactions to date have been into new wallets. In other 

69

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

words,  the  machine  is  drawing  new  Bitcoin  users.  The 
system  is  run  by  a  Canadian  company  called  Robocoin, 
which plans to introduce the ATMs in locations across the 
country.

Where  Robocoin  leaves  off  (that  is,  once  you  have 
purchased  Bitcoins),  another  Canadian  company  called 
Coinkite  steps  in.  Coinkite  allows  you  to  connect  your 
Bitcoin  wallet  to  your  debit  card  and  provides  debit-like 
machines for merchants so they can accept Bitcoins at the 
point of sale. As founder Jamie Robinson explains, “We’re 
really trying to integrate Bitcoin into the mainstream.”10 A 
similar American company, Coinbase, has just received a 
$20 million investment from one of Silicon Valley’s blue-
chip venture funds. In spite of its black market past, Bit-
coin is going mainstream.

Is any of this legal? It is not entirely clear. According to 
a  2013  report  by  the  Canada  Revenue  Agency,  the  gov-
ernment views Bitcoins as virtual money and distinguishes 
them  from  a  “traditional  currency.”  This  makes  them  a 
barter  good  that  must  be  taxed.11  Similarly,  the  US  De-
partment of Justice recently told a Senate committee that 
they consider Bitcoins and other digital currencies a “legal 
means of exchange.”12

But these trepidatious state responses mask an underly-
ing  tension  at  the  core  of  the  Bitcoin  movement.  Is  Bit-
coin a commodity, whose value is very difficult to control 
and  would  therefore  make  adoption  challenging?  Or  is 
it an emerging currency, which poses a real threat to the 
power states derive from their monopolies over currency 
control?

70

n e w   mon e y

This is in many ways a debate for economists, one dis-
cussed later in the chapter, but it also represents markedly 
different political visions from proponents of the emerging 
technology—one seen in the transition from Silk Road to 
Coinbase. Whereas some see cryptocurrency as a radical 
anarchistic decoupling from the state, others (such as Sili-
con Valley investors) see it as a new financial mechanism, 
like Paypal.

In short, there is a growing divide in the Bitcoin commu-
nity between crypto-anarchists who want to use Bitcoin as 
a libertarian weapon against the state and financial institu-
tions, and the Silicon Valley venture capitalists who want 
to make Bitcoin a legal form of exchange by normalizing 
it within state control. Governments are stuck somewhere 
in the middle.

This chapter first outlines the history of the close con-
nection between the control of currency and state power. It 
then details the rise of cryptocurrencies, explains how they 
work,  and  discusses  their  potential  real-world  benefits. 
Finally, it explores the potential challenge to state power, 
analyzes the critiques, and suggests possible futures.

While there is much debate as to the extent of Bitcoins’ in-
fluence, as Alec Ross, a former senior adviser on innovation 
to Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, argues, “This phenome-
non is part of a wider trend towards networked and globalized 
power  structures  that  tend  to  undermine  the  nation-state-
based systems to which we have grown accustomed.”13

As such, it is critical that we understand it.

71

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

Whether it be through tax regimes, global trade systems, 
or reserve currency disputes, control of currency is an im-
portant  attribute  of  state  power.  But  it  was  not  always 
thus. In fact, the connection between the money and state 
power has gone through several evolutions. It took centu-
ries for currency to become the sole bastion of the state.  
If  cryptocurrencies  have  the  potential  to  destabilize  this 
dynamic,  then  it  is  important  to  trace  the  evolution  of 
money as a lever of state power.

As  Benn  Steil  describes  in  Money,  Markets  and  Sov-
ereignty,  for  most  of  history,  money  has  either  literally 
been a metal (gold, silver, or copper) or been tied to the 
value of a commodity (the gold standard).14 These metals 
were mined and traded in rough forms or primitive coins. 
When “coining,” or the fashioning of standard coins from 
metal,  became  widespread  in  the  ancient  world,  it  gave 
people the ability to travel longer distances and to form 
wider  trade  and  social  networks.  The  first  recorded  in-
stances of coins being “sealed” or stamped with a guar-
antee  of  weight  and  purity,  were  in  the  seventh  century 
bc, starting with private sealing in the Mediterranean and 
then spreading to Asia.

With emerging political control over the manufactur-
ing  of  coins  came  abuses  in  power.  In  one  of  the  first 
examples of elites manipulating currency for their own 
benefit,  kings  in  Lydia  created  monopolies  on  coining 
to control the amount of gold in the coins, often vastly 
reducing the gold content to profit off the discrepancy. 
Persian  conquerors  then  helped  to  spread  this  style  of 
coining to Asia and Northern Europe. Various kingdoms 

72

n e w   mon e y

had their own coins, but it was the Romans in the third 
century  bc  who  established  a  central  currency  system 
and delegitimized the use of any other type of coins. The 
Romans  also  systematically  inflated  the  value  of  cur-
rency by reducing the gold content in their coins, caus-
ing political unrest.

Currency production as a lever of state power became 
entrenched around this period of history. The idea is that 
the  state  has  a  natural  role  in  currency  creation  because 
it acts as a neutral body that can guarantee a currency’s 
worth.  Economist  Robert  Mundell,  however,  calls  this  a 
“textbook fiction” because, he argues, states were always 
motivated  to  control  currency  to  reap  potential  profits 
rather  than  through  any  notion  of  establishing  financial 
stability.15

As state control over money normalized, debates emerged 
over the authority and legitimacy of the state to control pro-
duction, and over the efficiency of producing commodity- 
based  currency  on  a  mass  scale.  As  Steil  details,  in  the 
Renaissance period Charles Dumoulin was influential in 
arguing that money could have an “assigned value” apart 
from  its  specific  value  based  on  its  metal  composition. 
However,  for  this  system  to  function,  the  “consent  and 
usage of the people” was essential. Dumoulin did not be-
lieve  that  money  should  be  completely  separate  from  its 
commodity  value—he  called  that  notion  “irrational  and 
 ridiculous”—but he saw how coins worth an agreed-upon 
amount could reduce legal disputes. In this same period, 
Italian mathematician Geminiano Montenari argued that 
individual  states  could  create  money  when  they  saw  fit, 

73

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

but if they were to trade with other nations, the worth of 
their currency had to meet a certain standard of gold or 
silver.

On the other side of the Atlantic, practical matters drove 
the  evolution  toward  a  national  currency.  Early  US  cur-
rency arose out of the need to standardize disparate cur-
rency  systems,  a  hodgepodge  of  gold  coins  of  varying 
purity and a wide range of foreign coins.16 A centralized 
currency  could  be  used  to  collect  taxes  and  to  bind  to-
gether the colonies. The first colony to issue its own paper 
money was Massachusetts, in 1690. It was used to make 
loans to farmers, with the understanding that they could 
trade  the  money  in  on  future  tax  collections.  This  gave 
the colonial powers more credibility as use of the currency 
grew without depreciation.

Slowly, then, the state was getting into the currency busi-
ness. But as the scale of state influence over society grew, 
so too did the need to “anchor” the value of state-issued 
currency  to  a  common  norm.  The  Coinage  Act  of  1816 
established  the  principle  that  state-issued  paper  could  be 
tied to the value of gold, and could be converted into gold 
“on  demand.”  This  evolution  was  as  much  technology-
driven as it was expedient. The technology used to mint 
these token coins (and make them counterfeit-proof) had 
not existed until this period, which is a key reason that the 
act was not passed until this time.

Gradually, more countries followed. Germany passed 
the gold standard in 1871, and the United States in 1873. 
But by then, the gold standard had served to consolidate 
British  power,  making  the  British  the  world’s  bankers 

74

n e w   mon e y

and  London  the  global  financial  center.  Many  foreign 
governments  opened  banks  in  London  so  that  their 
transactions could easily be conducted in gold. Critically, 
Britain never actually made a commitment to following 
the gold standard. Instead, the public developed a trust 
that the banks and government would take action when 
required  to  inflate  or  deflate  currency  to  protect  them 
from  shocks  in  value.  Citizens  saw  a  benefit  to  ceding 
control over currency valuation to political and financial 
institutions. The age of decentralized and disparate cur-
rencies was over.

Gold was not perfect and was still vulnerable to shocks—
for example, substantial gold discoveries between 1849 and 
1851 drove its value down. However, there has never been 
an alternative to gold that resulted in the same high levels 
of stability and international integration. Governments, in 
effect, relinquished an aspect of “sovereignty” in currency 
control in the hope of ensuring a stable economy. And it 
was this measure of stability that kept the gold standard in 
use well into the 20th century.

Though the financial system maintained stability through-
out this period, several trends led to a shift away from the 
gold standard and toward government issued and controlled 
money—or, from fiduciary money, which can be converted 
to  gold,  to  fiat  money,  which  is  convertible  only  into  de-
nominations of its own kind.

At the turn of the century, governments were holding vast 
amounts of gold in reserve and were increasingly tempted 
to  put  it  to  use.  When  they  did  put  more  of  their  gold 
into  circulation,  they  could  no  longer  promise  that  their 

75

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

currency could literally be exchanged for gold. Addition-
ally, once governments had control over the production of 
bank notes, they could debase the currency for their own 
profit and use political and fiscal justifications for it with-
out  needing  the  consent  of  civilians.  Governments  faced 
pressures  from  exporters,  debtors,  and  miners  who  ben-
efited from the currency being debased or inflated. Shifting 
the determination of currency valuation from commodity 
value to the state led to abuse. “This is the fundamental 
conundrum facing a fiduciary money regime,” argues Steil; 
“the better it works, the more compelling the logic for let-
ting it slide towards a fiat regime.” So, governments world-
wide began using up the gold reserves and replacing them 
with US or British currency, which was also supposed to be 
backed by a percentage of gold reserves.

While some economists believe that the Great Depres-
sion would not have been such a widespread disaster if gov-
ernments  had  not  intervened  by  expanding  credit,  many 
others, including Fisher and Keynes, blamed the gold stan-
dard and saw economic sovereignty as the answer to the 
economic collapse. Such sovereignty would insulate a na-
tional economy from economic fluctuations and the chaos 
and unpredictability of the international markets.

By the middle of the 20th century, the Bretton Woods 
system had all but established the US dollar as the global 
standard. Foreign currencies could be converted to US dol-
lars, and US dollars to gold. To keep this increasingly tenu-
ous connection to the value of gold intact, the United States 
was required to hold only 25% of the value of its currency 
in gold, but by the 1960s the US gold supply had diminished 

76

n e w   mon e y

to a point that the government could not uphold even this 
convertibility requirement, and in 1971, it “unbound” the 
US dollar from the gold standard completely.

And  so  began  the  age  of  currencies  decoupled  from  a 
stable commodity value. Governments now had to fix their 
currency to their own reserves, either in their national cur-
rency or in US dollars. This had dual consequences: It made 
the control of currency and its value vulnerable to factors 
outside the purview of the state; at the same time it placed 
tremendous power in the hands of financial policymakers.
There is much debate, beyond the bounds of this book, 
over the wisdom and efficacy of nationally controlled cur-
rencies.  What  is  undoubtable,  however,  is  that  they  give 
governments  tremendous  power  over  the  economies  and 
livelihoods of their citizens. This is more often than not a 
good thing, and in democratic societies, there are means of 
giving authority and legitimacy to this power. But whether 
it be through the US financial crisis, the crash of the euro, 
national defaults in Greece and Argentina, or the increas-
ingly volatile connection of national currencies to domestic 
resource markets, the credibility and capability of the state 
to control the value and stability of currencies, is, for some 
states, waning.

One  need  only  look  to  the  tumultuous  history  of  the 
euro. In many ways, the euro was conceived on the very 
notion  that  control  of  currency  was  tied  inextricably  to 
power. The euro was seen not just as a means to normalize 
trade relations between European countries and to expand 
the overall European access to and integration with global 
markets,  but  also  to  legitimize  the  power  of  a  common 

77

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

political system—the European Union—and to quite liter-
ally solidify the postwar peace.

In  an  article  titled  “Why  the  Euro  Failed  and  How  It 
Will  Survive,”  Pedro  Schwartz  argues  that  the  euro  was 
designed to have an effect similar to that of the gold stan-
dard in that it would be very difficult to devalue but would 
still keep a measure of flexibility. It was based on the idea 
that the economy adapts to shifts in prices and is not ma-
nipulated  through  monetary  policies.  This  represented  a 
real departure from the idea of monetary sovereignty and 
a move away from the national currencies of the postwar 
period.17

To be eligible to adopt the euro, states had to agree to 
maintain exchange rates (within limits) with the euro for 
two years after adoption, keep inflation and interest rates 
close to those of the best performing member states, main-
tain their deficits below 3% of the country’s gross domestic 
product (GDP), and keep their debt to less than 60% of 
GDP.  These  last  two  rules  had  to  be  maintained  for  the 
country to remain as a member of the EU. Perhaps most 
important, central banks producing currency should only 
lend as a last resort; the central bank should provide as-
sistance to the commercial banks when needed, but at high 
interest rates.

This rule was broken in several instances in response to 
the financial crises in Greece, Ireland, Spain, and Portu-
gal. Leaders have attempted to save failing states instead of 
eliminating them from the union by creating bailout funds, 
leading many economists to blame the crisis on a lack of 
central government tied to the euro instead of poor policy 

78

n e w   mon e y

decisions. Again, the conceptual relationship between state 
and currency control remains intact for these economists. 
But  we  should  note  that  part  of  the  political  motivation 
behind  the  creation  of  the  euro  was  the  idea  of  tighten-
ing  the  union  between  European  states.  In  other  words, 
its creation came about not through a nationalistic moti-
vation, but a regional and geopolitical one. As Benjamin 
Cohen argues, “For all of the pact’s insistence on formal 
legislation and golden rules, the same fundamental defect 
remains.  Sovereign  governments,  ultimately,  remain  in 
charge of their own fiscal policy, which means once again 
that if push comes to shove, the pact’s strictures may well 
prove unenforceable.”18

While some imagined that the euro could prove a coun-
terbalance  to  the  US  dollar  as  the  world’s  reserve  cur-
rency (the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries 
[OPEC] actually flirted with making the shift in the early 
days of the EU, a further sign of the connection between 
currency control and geopolitical power), this is now un-
likely. But the US dollar is also in flux, based on the per-
formance of the US economy and the nation’s ever-rising 
national debt.

The real question is how long can this system last, and, 
perhaps  more  important,  what  will  replace  it  and  which 
forces could serve as an alternative? As Steil notes, “The 
dollar is ultimately just another money supported only by 
faith  that  others  will  willingly  accept  it  in  the  future  in 
return for the same sort of valuable things it bought in the 
past. This puts a great burden on the institutions of the U.S. 
government to validate that faith. And those institutions, 

79

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

unfortunately, are failing to shoulder that burden. Reckless 
U.S. fiscal policy is undermining the dollar’s position even 
as the currency’s role as a global money is expanding.”

And so enter the cryptocurrency activists.

Early attempts to return to the age of fiduciary currencies 
and the gold standard were met with the full weight of the 
US fiat system. In 1998, Bernard von NotHaus sought to 
develop his own currency. He began making coins of gold, 
silver, platinum, and copper, and he called them Liberty 
Dollars.19  Owners  received  electronic  certificates  repre-
senting the coins that they owned, which were stored in a 
warehouse in Idaho.

By 2009, when he was charged with “conspiracy against 
the United States” there were approximately 250,000 hold-
ers  of  Liberty  Dollar  certificates.20  On  March  18,  2011, 
Von NotHaus was convicted of “making, possessing and 
selling his own coins.”21 In particular, he was found in vio-
lation of 18 U.S.C. 486, which states, “Whoever, except as 
authorized by law, makes or utters or passes, or attempts 
to utter or pass, any coins of gold or silver or other metal, 
or  alloys  of  metals,  intended  for  use  as  current  money, 
whether in the resemblance of coins of the United States 
or of foreign countries, or of original design, shall be fined 
under this title or imprisoned not more than five years, or 
both.”

Another  early  attempt  at  digital  currency  was  devel-
oped by a physician named Douglas Johnson. E-Gold was 

8 0

n e w   mon e y

an electronic currency tied to the value of gold stored in 
locations  around  the  world.  It  allowed  people  to  make 
anonymous  international  transactions  digitally.  E-Gold 
attracted  attention  from  the  Department  of  Justice,  and, 
in 2007, Johnson and two colleagues were charged with 
money laundering and operating an illegal business. James 
Finch, assistant director of the FBI’s Cyber Division, said, 
“the advent of new electronic currency systems increases 
the risk that criminals, and possibly terrorists, will exploit 
these systems to launder money and transfer funds glob-
ally to avoid enforcement scrutiny and circumvent banking 
regulations and reporting.”22

Drawing  on  a  1982  paper  by  computer  scientist  David 
Chaum, Bitcoin was the first significant effort to create an 
anonymous, cryptologically secure digital currency.23 Previ-
ous digital currencies were backed by precious metals. Bitcoin 
is fully digital, and, despite attempts to find its creator—the 
anonymous  computer  programmer  (or  group  of  program-
mers)  known  by  the  pseudonym  Satoshi   Nakamoto—no 
state laws could be enforced against him (or them). The en-
crypted identities and peer-to-peer structure of the Bitcoin 
network  mean  that  shutting  down  one  part  of  the  system 
will not disable the whole.

The authors of a 2013 report by the British think tank 
Demos on cryptocurrencies argue that “this decentralized 
system, where the minting of digital coins, the regulation of 
the currency and the prevention of fraud is based on mass 
participation  makes  Bitcoin  independent  from  traditional 
financial mechanisms, or indeed any centralized control, in 
a way that other electronic cash systems never could be.”24

81

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

Beyond being a technological leap beyond earlier experi-
ments,  Bitcoin  was  also  a  more  defined  political  project. 
Early Bitcoin enthusiasts and developers saw it as an ex-
pression of digital libertarianism and a means of pushing 
back against state control of currency. Instead of entrusting 
governments, central bankers, and financial institutions to 
control currency, Satoshi Nakamoto built a system that al-
lowed financial transactions to be guaranteed and tracked 
by  a  distributed  network  of  computers  solving  complex 
math problems.

Nakamoto  has  described  Bitcoin  as  a  response  to  the 
inherent flaws in the financial system revealed during the 
2008 financial crisis. Whereas early state-controlled cur-
rencies  required  and  received  the  faith  of  their  users  (or 
citizens),  Nakamoto  argues  that  systems  that  depend  on 
the trust of the state or a financial institution are inher-
ently unstable and that the state could no longer be trusted 
to  maintain  the  value  of  currency.  In  an  early  article  on 
Bitcoin, he argued for a technological solution:

What is needed is an electronic payment system based on 
cryptographic  proof  instead  of  trust,  allowing  any  two 
willing parties to transact directly with each other with-
out  the  need  for  a  trusted  third  party.  Transactions  that 
are computationally impractical to reverse would protect 
sellers from fraud, and routine escrow mechanisms could 
easily be implemented to protect buyers.25

How does one create a currency without physical proper-
ties that is anonymous and not tied to the value of any thing 

82

n e w   mon e y

other  than  itself?  At  its  core,  Bitcoin  is  essentially  just  a 
list. It is a shared accounting ledger that consists of a fixed 
number of slots of code, each one of which is a “coin,” and 
which can be purchased or traded. As Marc Andreessen 
describes it, “Anyone in the world can pay anyone else in 
the world any amount of value of Bitcoin by simply trans-
ferring ownership of the corresponding slot in the ledger. 
Put  value  in,  transfer  it,  the  recipient  gets  value  out,  no 
authorization required, and in many cases, no fees.”26

Technically, the system is a bit more complex, particu-
larly  in  how  it  replaces  a  central  authority  to  guarantee 
the security of transactions with an ingenious distributed 
verification process. This process is described succinctly by 
economic journalist Tim Lee:

Whenever someone makes a Bitcoin transaction, the record 
of  this  transaction  is  submitted  to  the  various  nodes  in 
the network. At fixed intervals, each node bundles up all 
the transactions it has seen into a data structure called a 
“block”  and  then  races  with  the  other  nodes  to  solve  a 
difficult mathematical problem that takes the block as an 
input. The first node to solve its problem (the problem is 
randomized in a way that gives each node a roughly equal 
chance)  announces  its  success  to  the  other  nodes.  Those 
nodes  verify  that  all  the  transactions  in  the  new  block 
follow  all  the  rules  of  the  Bitcoin  protocol,  and  that  the 
solution to the mathematical problem is correct. . . . Once a 
winning solution is found, all nodes then treat the transac-
tions encoded in the winning node’s block as new entries in 
the global transaction register.27

83

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

The security of the transaction is therefore guaranteed 
and tracked by a distributed network of computers solv-
ing  complex  math  problems.  Whichever  computer  solves 
it  gets  a  reward,  and  the  act  of  problem  solving  ensures 
the security of the transaction. As an incentive to solve the 
math  problems,  each  node  in  the  network  is  allowed  to 
add a reward to its efforts. If that node is the first to solve 
the problem, it is “minted” a fixed number of additional 
Bitcoins (currently set at 50). The reward for solving one of 
these problems is halved every four years, thereby limiting 
the  number  of  new  Bitcoins  mined.  Under  this  model,  it 
will take approximately 100 years to reach a total of ap-
proximately 21 million Bitcoins.

Bitcoin  replaces  state  oversight  with  the  capabilities  of 
a distributed network. Properly incentivized, this network 
ensures that coins are not copied or used twice. If you spend 
a Bitcoin, it cannot be returned. And while the value of a 
Bitcoin is not tied to a physical entity, it is also not purely 
a  fiat  currency,  as  the  number  of  Bitcoins  in  circulation 
cannot be arbitrarily controlled. Unlike the US dollar, new 
Bitcoins cannot be either printed or taken out of circulation 
in order to adjust the currency’s value, which is determined 
by a combination of the number of payments being made 
with it, the production of new coins in the problem-solving 
process, and speculation over its future value. So Bitcoin 
sits somewhat uncomfortably between a commodity and a 
fiat currency, an attribute that is the subject of significant 
critique, discussed later.

Bitcoin has some obvious practical applications, begin-
ning with commercial services. For example, technologist 

84

n e w   mon e y

Chris Dixon has argued that Bitcoin could undermine the 
hefty transaction charges that banks place on the use of 
credit  and  debit  cards  and  at  point-of-sale  terminals  at 
retail  outlets.28  Fees  of  up  to  5%  can  take  a  significant 
share  of  revenue,  especially  for  low-margin  businesses. 
Similarly, Marc Andreessen suggests that the low transac-
tion costs of Bitcoin could facilitate online micropayments, 
perhaps finally enabling efficient online content markets. 
While  these  uses  could  drain  the  profits  of  the  banking 
sector, if widely used they are unlikely to enable a revolu-
tionary shift in power.

Bitcoin can also be used for remittances. Kenyans work-
ing  abroad,  for  example,  send  roughly  $1.2  billion  back 
home each year through services such as Western Union 
and  MoneyGram  International  Inc.,  which  deduct  sub-
stantial  fees  for  each  transaction,  approximately  $10  to 
$17 for a transfer of $200.29 A new company called BitPesa 
will allow money transfers through Bitcoin and charge a 
fraction of those fees. As this market develops, money will 
be able to be transferred globally for almost no cost. An 
extension of this model is emerging whereby Bitcoin trans-
fers  can  occur  via  M-PESA,  a  widely  accepted  currency 
transfer system over cell phones. M-PESA has over 18 mil-
lion users in Kenya, and it is planning to integrate Bitcoin.
A range of new services can be built on the Bitcoin in-
frastructure. Bitcoin at its core allows one person on the 
Internet to transfer a unique digital property to someone 
else in a manner that is secure, anonymous, and reliable. 
Andreessen  imagines  that  many  forms  of  digital  prop-
erty  would  benefit  from  this  network,  including  “digital 

85

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

signatures, digital contracts, digital keys (to physical locks, 
or to online lockers), digital ownership of physical assets 
such as cars and houses, digital stocks and bonds.”30

The  underlying  Bitcoin  ledger  system  can  also  be  seen 
as a platform on which a host of services and tools can be 
built.31 For example, Andreessen imagines the Internet of 
Things (think appliances connected to the Internet) using 
Bitcoin  as  a  way  of  making  purchases.  Each  appliance 
would  have  an  identity  on  the  distributed  Bitcoin  ledger 
and it could manage its energy purchases automatically.

But are these commercial utilities really the limit of the 
power of Bitcoin? It certainly is a far more limited view of 
its revolutionary potential than the ideological visions put 
forth  by  many  early  adopters.  What  is  the  potential  for 
cryptocurrency, and is it a legitimate threat to state power?

Cryptocurrency is not without its critics. As the value of 
Bitcoin  shot  through  the  roof  in  late  2013,  going  from 
under $200 to a peak of $1,000, it burst into the popular 
discourse. Economist Tyler Cowen argues that the value of 
the anonymity of the model meant that there was reason 
to grant one-time seigniorage to the original issuers of the 
currency. At some point, though, this system will be repli-
cable without the attached Bitcoin currency, meaning the 
value of the fiat currency will fall to near zero.32

In an article titled “Bitcoin, Magical Thinking and Po-
litical  Ideology,”  programmer,  writer,  and  angel  investor 
Alex Payne sees Bitcoin as a sign of the disconnect between 

86

n e w   mon e y

the boundless techno-optimism of Silicon Valley and the 
realities of the economic market.33 He identifies this tech-
nologist exuberance with a libertarian ideology that is not 
concerned with addressing the structural systems that keep 
people in poverty, but rather focuses exclusively on free-
ing  society  from  the  reach  of  the  state.  This,  he  argues, 
is a fantasy that should be replaced by a focus on social 
services that “meaningfully and accountably improve our 
collective quality of life.” Charlie Stross goes further and 
argues34 that Bitcoin is just another form of tax evasion for 
the wealthy, further diminishing the ability of the state to 
provide social services.

Technology and economics journalist Timothy Lee iden-
tifies the potential for fraudulent collusion. If an individual 
user added 100 Bitcoins to the system as a problem-solving 
reward instead of the standard 50, that person would be 
rejected  from  the  network.  If  a  group  of  “rogue”  nodes 
decided to collude and accept this reward, it could start a 
new  community  with  higher  rewards.  A  critical  mass  of 
users could collude to effectively change the rules of Bit-
coin. Such collusion is both technically possible and, with 
increasing commercial interest in Bitcoin, becoming more 
likely.35

Bitcoin could be a bubble. Its position between a com-
modity and a currency and its fungibility make it subject 
to highly volatile speculation. As financial journalist Felix 
Salmon points out, “It’s very hard to be a currency when 
you’re also a commodity, governed by rules of scarcity and 
subject to speculative attack.”36 There is no central bank 
to  regulate  Bitcoin’s  value,  nor  a  mechanism  to  inflate 

87

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

or deflate it. Whereas commodities can in theory have a 
stable value if the cost of production and storage remains 
flat, this is not guaranteed to be the case, and with shift-
ing computing power, the cost of future Bitcoin mining re-
mains uncertain. The current value of Bitcoin is therefore 
highly speculative, and likely unstable.

There is also a huge environmental cost to Bitcoin mining. 
This will only increase as the computations become more 
complex  over  time  and  the  electricity  needed  to  run  the 
generators increases as the computational capacity soars. 
At a valuation of $1,000 per Bitcoin, the estimated carbon 
footprint of the electricity needed to run the mining eco-
system is 8.5 megatons per year, or 0.03% of global green-
house emissions.37

There is a risk of Bitcoins causing hyperinflation. Sup-
pose the value of a Bitcoin increases by 100 times. That 
would mean that a Bitcoin purchased for $100 would be 
worth  $10,000.  As  the  rest  of  the  economy  would  not 
be inflating in the same manner, the Bitcoin with which 
you could once have bought goods worth $100—say, on 
Amazon.com—would  now  allow  you  to  purchase  goods 
worth $10,000. As the number of Bitcoins is fixed, there 
is no way of halting the inflation of a Bitcoin’s value. You 
could, in theory, have hundreds of billions of dollars stored 
in Bitcoin. And this could in theory, result in a depression. 
Felix Salmon outlines the implication of this in the follow-
ing manner: “In order to have economic growth, you need 
monetary growth as well—and that’s something which is 
impossible  to  achieve  in  a  Bitcoin-based  system.  Curren-
cies such as the dollar, with a central bank which can print 

88

n e w   mon e y

money at will, have succeeded for a reason. As economies 
grow, the money supply has to be able to grow with them.”
Finally, the absence of the state in the oversight of Bit-
coin use allows for dark markets to emerge. The more re-
nowned to date was Silk Road, which was a free market 
for  selling  drugs  and  illegal  services.  But  others  have 
cropped up as well—including an exchange purported to 
sell assassinations.

Each  of  these  critiques  has  been  widely  debated.  And 
while  they  outline  potential  negative  consequences,  none 
of them restrict the Bitcoin network from existing. They do 
not, and cannot, shut it down. And this poses a real chal-
lenge for the states and institution that are threatened by 
its proliferation. It is precisely this reality that fuels many 
of the more radical cryptocurrency proponents.

Bitcoin  was  imagined  and  conceived  as  a  radical  oppo-
sition  to  state  power.  While  there  is  increasing  attention 
paid toward its practical commercial utility—and the sig-
nificant  Silicon  Valley  hype  and  funding  that  goes  with 
it—there is a growing divide in the cryptocurrency com-
munity between those who want to normalize its use and 
those who remain steadfast in its revolutionary potential. 
It is the latter group that articulates a vision for cryptocur-
rency that is particularly relevant to state power and to the 
global financial system that it oversees.

The term “crypto-anarchy” was first coined by former 
engineer turned author Tim May and describes the state 

89

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

of  lawlessness  that  could  arise  from  more  general  use  of 
encryption technologies. Crypto-anarchy, he argues, is “a 
throwback to the pre-state days of individual choice about 
which laws to follow.”38

He  argues  that  this  manifestation  of  personal  capabil-
ity is one that is technologically enabled. “The technology 
for this revolution—and it surely will be both a social and 
economic  revolution—has  existed  in  theory  for  the  past 
decade.  The  methods  are  based  upon  public-key  encryp-
tion, zero-knowledge interactive proof systems, and vari-
ous software protocols for interaction, authentication, and 
verification. . . . But only recently have computer networks 
and personal computers attained sufficient speed to make 
the ideas practically realizable.”

Based  on  ideas  of  Ludvig  von  Mises,  a  group  calling 
themselves the Mises Circle were early proponents of digi-
tal currencies, with a strong focus on individual liberty.39 
“Crypto-anarchy  is  not  a  branch  of  libertarian  theory,” 
they argue.40 “It is a libertarian strategy. It is a framework 
for  action.  The  cryptographic  tools  we  have  today  are 
cheap,  powerful,  and  profoundly  individualistic.  No  one 
can  hold  a  gun  to  an  equation.  Cryptographic  software 
will  function  according  to  the  rules  of  mathematics,  re-
gardless of government directives.”

These are grandiose statements that many have margin-
alized. But they are grounded in attributes of cryptocur-
rency  that  are  worth  exploring.  How  does  the  design  of 
Bitcoin challenge state power?

First, a central asset of Bitcoin is that it is anonymous. 
This allows for decentralized, seemingly formless financial 

9 0

n e w   mon e y

transactions. Or, more specifically, it allows for informa-
tion to be shared within a heavily encrypted network. In 
a very practical sense, this enables new forms of financial 
transactions. You don’t need to know a seller’s name, and 
he doesn’t need to know yours. More important, this ano-
nymity means there is no record of a transaction. This is 
problematic  for  the  state  control  and  regulation  of  both 
currency and markets. As Tim May states, “These devel-
opments  will  alter  completely  the  nature  of  government 
regulation, the ability to tax and control economic interac-
tions, the ability to keep information secret, and will even 
alter the nature of trust and reputation.”41

Second, Bitcoin allows escape from the potential traps, 
or risks, of government-controlled currency. For example, 
Bitcoin  is  popular  in  Cyprus  because,  while  its  value  is 
highly unstable, the government can’t confiscate it or pre-
vent you from sending it out of the country.42 Similarly, if 
you live in a country at risk of hyperinflation, Bitcoin may 
be a legitimate way to opt out of your national currency. 
Salmon  continues,  “If  you  want  to  protect  your  wealth 
from  the  policies  of  your  national  government,  or  from 
the inflationary policies of a heterodox central bank, then 
Bitcoins can be a very good way of doing so in a largely 
undetectable manner.”

The inverse is also true. Within the Bitcoin network itself, 
one is protected from artificial currency inflation (though 
not speculative valuation volatility). Whereas a government-
based fiat currency can adjust valuation through injections 
of currency, making what you hold worth less, Bitcoin has 
no  central  authority  that  can  change  the  model  to  allow 

91

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

for more Bitcoins to be produced. The rate of new Bitcoin 
production is based on a public algorithm.

This leads to a third attribute of Bitcoin’s power—its de-
centralized collaborative nature. In fact, the technology of 
Bitcoin itself solves a core question of networked action. 
Namely, how do you create consensus in large-scale dis-
tributed anonymous systems without relying on any form 
of centralized authority? In short, every node in a Bitcoin 
network has an encryption key that can be verified (via the 
distributed problem-solving system) without the presence 
of a central authority.

Technologist  and  writer  Paul  Bohm  argues  that  this 
ability for decentralized coordinated behavior is the cen-
tral  attribute  on  which  Bitcoin’s  value  will  ultimately 
hinge: “If you think that we’ll increasingly lose trust in 
the central authorities that manage the infrastructure we 
rely on, you might expect Bitcoins to rise a lot in value. 
If not, that is you believe that authorities will be able to 
tackle  the  challenges  of  the  future  better  in  centralized 
form, then from your perspective Bitcoins don’t add value. 
We’ll see.”43

The  degree  of  value  one  places  in  this  decentralizing 
function is rooted in one’s distrust of institutions. As Felix 
Salmon  explains,  this  “built-in  mistrust  of  institutions 
doesn’t just set it apart from fiat currency, it also sets it apart 
from other virtual currencies, such as Facebook credits in 
the US, QQ coins in China, or Linden dollars in Second 
Life.”44 Most other digital currencies are embedded within 
the structure and particular interests of an institution. Bit-
coin exists free of such constraints.

92

n e w   mon e y

Bitcoin was initially born out of this mistrust. Satoshi 
Nakamoto claimed that Bitcoin was “completely decen-
tralized, with no trusted authorities.” He explained that 
this was due to a perceived reliance on trust for a con-
ventional currency to function. The central banks must 
be trusted to keep the value of the currency and banks 
must be trusted to hold money, wisely invest it, and keep 
our  privacy.  History  is  replete  with  breaches  of  these 
trusts.45

Coming  from  the  anonymous  founder  of  a  cryptocur-
rency, this argument could be seen as radical; but it is actu-
ally not that different from what Warren Buffett said to his 
shareholders in 2012:

Investments that are denominated in a given currency in-
clude money-market funds, bonds, mortgages, bank depos-
its, and other instruments. Most of these currency-based 
investments  are  thought  of  as  “safe.”  In  truth  they  are 
among the most dangerous of assets. Over the past century 
these instruments have destroyed the purchasing power of 
investors in many countries, even as these holders contin-
ued  to  receive  timely  payments  of  interest  and  principal. 
This  ugly  result,  moreover,  will  forever  recur.  Govern-
ments determine the ultimate value of money, and systemic 
forces  will  sometimes  cause  them  to  gravitate  to  policies 
that produce inflation. From time to time such policies spin 
out of control.46

If  Bitcoin  is  designed  to  protect  owners  from  the  po-
tential  risk  of  government-controlled  currency,  it  also  is 

93

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

structured to exist out of the reach of the state. Because 
there is neither a central authority nor intermediaries be-
tween participants in a financial transaction (i.e., banks), 
then there is no point of interaction at which government 
can  regulate.  This  means  transactions  can’t  be  taxed  or 
even monitored for criminal activity. It also means that the 
international legal system overseeing financial transactions 
is rendered futile. What’s more, the distributed nature of 
the  network  means  that  finding  and  shutting  down  any 
one node will have no effect on the wider system. As with 
BitTorrent, there is no server you can turn off to make it 
go away.

If Bitcoin were to proliferate, this inability of the state to 
collect revenue and regulate commercial activity is a sure 
threat to the control it currently holds over the financial 
system.

The combination of encryption, “currency mining,” and 
decentralized verification makes Bitcoin potentially pow-
erful  and  difficult  to  control,  but  governments  could  do 
things to make the widespread adoption of Bitcoin prob-
lematic. They could enact laws, for example, that would 
all but remove it from US online commerce. The problem 
is that this technology is increasingly easy to deploy.

Investors like Marc Andreessen see Bitcoin as the future 
currency  of  the  Internet,  one  that  allows  the  simple  ex-
change of value across borders. Bitcoin has the power to 
make remittances obsolete, undercut banks by decreasing 

94

n e w   mon e y

the cost of making online payments and transfers, and pro-
vide a native currency for the Internet of things (imagine 
your washing machine paying its own electricity bill). They 
want Bitcoin to be the next Paypal, with all of the initial 
public offering (IPO) potential that will follow.

Under this model, a third-party service would hold your 
Bitcoins (or e-wallets), connect with your bank account al-
lowing for seamless conversion of Bitcoin to government-
issued currencies, and facilitate point of sale use of Bitcoins 
via online tools and retail terminals. Companies are cur-
rently working with governments to establish this ecosys-
tem within the current economic system. It would simply 
be a cheaper and more efficient way of spending money—
hardly an anarchist’s dream.

Faced with the choice of enabling the beneficial uses of 
Bitcoin at the cost of proliferating its illicit uses, govern-
ments  are  unlikely  to  support  its  normalization  into  the 
financial system. Without this support, Bitcoin as a main-
stream currency is doomed.

Whether or not startup companies normalize their Bit-
coin use with the government, nothing is stopping others 
from existing outside of this model. For every one company 
that wants to be the Bitcoin exchange for online retailers, 
any number of others could seek to be the next Silk Road 
or revolutionary currency.

Meanwhile, more radical technologies like Dark Wallet 
are  emerging;  these  offer  a  higher  degree  of  anonymity 
than  more  mainstream  Bitcoin  tools.  Created  by  an  an-
archist  group,  Dark  Wallet  is  an  attempt  to  return  Bit-
coin  to  its  radical  and  revolutionary  roots.  As  stated  on 

95

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

a website promoting the technology, “Bitcoin is the next 
battleground  in  the  fight  against  supranational  political 
domination. Digital anonymity and freedom of financial 
speech are some of the last tools left in the dwindling gar-
risons of Liberty.”47

Other groups seeking to undermine state power are also 
using  cryptocurrencies.  As  National  Public  Radio  (NPR) 
reported,  the  Oglala  Lakota  Nation  in  Idaho  has  just 
launched  mazacoin  as  a  means  of  increasing  its  indepen-
dence from the US government.48 The Oglala view currency 
control as an act of sovereignty.

How and whether Bitcoin itself succeeds, the disruptive 
power of alternative currencies is still significant, and we 
will certainly see new ones evolve using the technologies of 
early pioneers.

Put another way, the very attributes of cryptocurrencies 
that  would  allow  Zimbabweans  to  protect  their  money 
from hyperinflation, Cypriots to prevent government sei-
zure of their bank accounts, migrant workers to send money 
back to their families for free, or allow your fridge to pay 
its own bills also makes it impossible for governments to 
collect taxes, regulate international financial transactions, 
and monitor organized crime.

Bitcoin was imagined as a response to the tie between 
the state and money. It was invented as the financial lingua 
franca of the Internet—a currency born of, designed for, 
and using the attributes of the worldwide web. The very 
features that make it effective are also attributes that con-
found the state. Bitcoin is anonymous and decentralized. 
The  state  and  its  interaction  with  citizens  is  public  and 

96

n e w   mon e y

highly  centralized.  As  such,  Bitcoin  allows  for  norms  of 
behavior that sit outside the control of government. If the 
state  loses  control  over  the  financial  behavior  of  its  citi-
zens, it faces an existential crisis. On its surface then, Bit-
coin must be viewed as a threat to state power.

97

c h a p t e r   f i v e

b e i n g   t h e r e

Marie  Colvin  was  the  archetypal  foreign  correspondent. 
In  temperament,  bravado,  ingenuity,  and  brash  skill,  she 
was, by all accounts, the embodiment of the wartime jour-
nalist. Throughout her career, she covered conflicts in East 
Timor,  Libya,  Sierra  Leone,  Zimbabwe,  Kosovo,  Chech-
nya, Iran, Iraq. She lost an eye to a grenade in Sri Lanka in 
2001, and since then had worn a black patch.

Time and time again she would arrive somewhere at the 
peak of fighting and risk her life to relay stories to news-
papers and television audiences largely in Western Europe 
and North America. Her capacity to get into tough places 
and her ability to tell stories of suffering, violence, tragedy, 
and horror, all with empathy, was revered and widely emu-
lated.  She  was  a  window  through  which,  we,  as  readers 
and viewers, experienced war.

In  2012,  she  was  in  Homs,  a  city  on  the  front  line  of 
the Syrian war under siege by Bashar al-Assad. Colvin was 
the only British journalist bearing witness to the bombard-
ment,  which  she  described  as  the  worst  conflict  she  had 
ever experienced.

Colvin had snuck into Homs through a tunnel with the 
help of the opposition Free Syrian Army. A photojournalist 

98

be i ng   t h e r e

working with her, Paul Conroy, had earlier told her that 
every bone in his body was telling him not to go back in. 
“Those are your concerns,” she had responded. “I’m going 
in, no matter what. I’m the reporter, you’re the photogra-
pher. If you want, you can stay here.”1

On  February  19,  Colvin  filed  what  would  be  her  last 
dispatch for the Sunday Times. In it, she described the suf-
fering in Homs in vivid emotional detail:

They call it the widows’ basement. Crammed amid make-
shift beds and scattered belongings are frightened women 
and  children  trapped  in  the  horror  of  Homs,  the  Syrian 
city shaken by two weeks of relentless bombardment.

Among the 300 huddling in this wood factory cellar in 
the besieged district of Baba Amr is 20-year-old Noor, who 
lost her husband and her home to the shells and rockets. . . .
For Noor, it was a double tragedy. Adnan, her 27-year-
old brother, was killed at Maziad’s side. “A baby born in the 
basement last week looked as shellshocked as her mother, 
Fatima, 19, who fled there when her family’s  single-storey 
house  was  obliterated.  ‘We  survived  by  a  miracle,’  she 
whispers. Fatima is so traumatised that she cannot breast-
feed, so the baby has been fed only sugar and water; there 
is no formula milk.”

Ali  the  dentist  was  cutting  the  clothes  off  24-year-old 
Ahmed al-Irini on one of the clinic’s two operating tables. 
Shrapnel  had  gashed  huge  bloody  chunks  out  of  Irini’s 
thighs. Blood poured out as Ali used tweezers to draw a 
piece of metal from beneath his left eye. Irini’s legs spasmed 
and  he  died  on  the  table.  His  brother-in-law,  who  had 

99

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

brought him in, began weeping. “We were playing cards 
when a missile hit our house,” he said through his tears. 
Irini was taken out to the makeshift mortuary in a former 
back bedroom, naked but for a black plastic bag covering 
his genitals. . . .

On the lips of everyone was the question: “Why have we 

been abandoned by the world?”2

This  striking  piece  of  journalism  accomplishes  eve-
rything the form allows. It brings us into the conflict. It 
humanizes it. It reflects the scales, from personal to geopo-
litical, that the war represents. And it cost Colvin her life 
to tell it: an improvised explosive device (IED) killed her 
along with French photographer Rémi Ochlik.

Colvin’s  death  shook  me,  not  simply  because  she  was 
uniquely accomplished or that her killing was the latest of a 
prominent journalist covering the Arab Spring, but also be-
cause of how the story of the Arab Spring, and particularly 
of  Homs,  unfolded  for  me.  Whereas  previous  wars  were 
broadcast on cable news and written about in print, I kept 
up with the Arab Spring news in real time on social media. 
Events  were  streamed  live,  both  by  those  living  through 
them and by a community of observers around the world. 
My  Twitter  stream  was  filled  with  real-time  photos  and 
videos of the conflicts, often in vivid and graphic detail.

While there has been much debate over the role of social 
media  in  the  emergence  of  the  Arab  Spring  movements, 
what is uncontested is that many of us followed them in a 
new way. For the Tunisian, Libyan, and Egyptian uprisings, 
this was largely via Twitter, either directly through citizen 

10 0

be i ng   t h e r e

feeds or filtered through curators such as Andy Carvin of 
NPR,  who  pioneered  a  new  form  of  virtual  foreign  cor-
respondence. In Syria, and for the bombing of Homs that 
Colvin was covering, for the first time the world had plenty 
of video, live or nearly live, taken from mobile phones and 
posted to YouTube.

This allowed a graphic view of the conflict without the 
need for Western foreign correspondents to be brave enough 
(some would say reckless) to record it. The video form was 
decisively  amateur.  It  was  shot  from  rooftops  and  while 
running down the street. The quality was poor. But it was 
visceral and authentic in a way that is difficult for profes-
sionals to capture.

So unlike previous wars Colvin had covered, the bom-
bardment of Homs, and indeed much of the Arab Spring, 
was being watched and lived via a range of new technolo-
gies. So maybe we did not need Marie Colvin and Rémi 
Ochlik to witness the bombing of Homs. They certainly 
provided a very different lens, Colvin in vivid prose, and 
Ochlik through beautiful, horrific images. And they pro-
vided a sense of the wider conflict, and of other conflicts, 
that could relay the war in a way that their Western view-
ers  and  readers,  with  similar  backgrounds,  could  under-
stand. But what if amateur representations of conflict were 
higher quality? Would that eliminate the need for foreign 
correspondents? How would that change how Western de-
mocracies understand and respond to war?

Or what if we could feel what it was like to be in Homs 
during  the  war?  Danfung  Dennis  is  an  award-winning 
photojournalist  and  documentary  filmmaker  who  has 

101

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

covered  conflict  for  a  decade.  Having  become  frustrated 
with the limitations of photos and video, and in particular 
the distance between them and the events they depict, he 
left journalism to start a company called Condition One, 
which  has  developed  a  prototype  virtual-reality  camera 
and a headset that immerses the wearer in a 360 degree 
and three-dimensional (3D) video environment. It also has 
an app allowing users to move through a 3D environment 
using an iPad. Dennis says he wants to be able to better 
relay “what it’s like to be there” and “to bridge the emo-
tional gap between the story and ourselves.” Recent exper-
imentation in virtual reality journalism using 360 and 3D 
cameras and the Oculus Rift headset, including a project 
that I am involved in with at Columbia University, an in-
teractive media company Secret Location, and the inves-
tigative documentary program Frontline, are pushing the 
boundaries of what it means to be immersed in a story.

Sam Gregory, the co-director of the human rights NGO 
Witness, believes that live video shot via wearable comput-
ers such as Google Glass and synchronous multi-sensory 
experiences can create an immersive experience that allows 
us to emotionally connect, to empathize with others in a 
way that fundamentally changes our understanding of one 
another. He calls this experience “co-presence for good,” 
which he defines as “using the sense of being together with 
other  people  in  a  remote  environment  to  drive  concrete, 
productive actions, engagement and understanding across 
barriers of geography, exclusion and timezones.”3 Gregory 
is studying how real-time witnessing can be used to sup-
port activism, human rights advocacy, and the protection 

102

be i ng   t h e r e

of rights defenders. And he is right to think that it might. 
A recent study by a team of Canadian psychologists found 
that social presence created by virtual reality can generate 
empathy akin to actually being there.4

We are certain to see the proliferation of virtual- reality 
technology  and  systems  to  carry  cameras  and  micro-
phones,  including  cheap,  small,  autonomous  drones.  It 
is  very  early  for  such  technologies,  and  we  certainly  do 
not know whether they will lead to a better knowledge of 
events or change our actions in response to them. But they 
will surely change the role of reporters and the media insti-
tutions that support them. International reporting is more 
than just bearing witness. Journalists like Colvin interpret 
events and separate the signal from the noise of informa-
tion. Both of these roles are more difficult to replace with 
technology. Now that technology can put us anywhere in 
the  world,  what  do  we  need  foreign  correspondents  for? 
Did Marie Colvin die for nothing?

In a 1787 speech to the British House of Commons while 
debating  the  merits  of  opening  Parliament  to  the  press, 
Edmund  Burke  introduced  the  concept  of  the  Fourth 
Estate.  Since  then,  whether  it  was  Burke  positioning  the 
press as a force to counter the three pillars of parliamen-
tary democracy, or the First Amendment to the US Consti-
tution, signed two years after Burke’s speech, guaranteeing 
the right to a free press, or Thomas Carlyle fifty years later 
pitting the press against the French church, nobility, and 

103

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

the townsmen, the Fourth Estate has come to represent a 
check against state power.

Through the 19th century, the capability, reach, and power 
of  the  press  evolved  along  with  technology.  The  laying  of 
the first transatlantic cable in 1858 shortened communica-
tion  time  from  Europe  to  America  from  10  days  to  min-
utes, transforming what readers knew about the world. The 
proliferation of printing led to the creation of a multitude 
of small newspapers, a truly decentralized media ecosystem 
often serving communities of readers as small as a block or 
a streetcorner. In the 1890s, the United States had more than 
14,000  weekly  newspapers  and  nearly  2,000  dailies.  And 
at the turn of the 20th century, as Western societies were 
industrializing,  so  too  was  the  press—larger  papers,  then 
radio and television stations serving larger audiences with a 
wider range of interests.

The institutionalized press has always had a fraught re-
lationship with the governments it was supposed to hold 
to account. In some cases, the state funded broadcasters 
like  the  British  Broadcasting  Corporation  (BBC)  in  the 
United  Kingdom  or  the  Canadian  Broadcasting  Corpo-
ration (CBC) in Canada but mandated that they operate 
at arm’s length from the providers of their funding. Inde-
pendent corporate press also had a complicated role with 
state policy. In what has become media lore, upon hearing 
initial reports of calm from one of his journalists sent to 
Havana to cover the Spanish-American war in 1897, Wil-
liam  Randolph  Hearst  replied,  “Please  remain.  You  fur-
nish the pictures and I’ll furnish the war.” Often called the 
Yellow War due to the role of the press in instigating it, 

104

be i ng   t h e r e

the Spanish-American War was nonetheless the first widely 
covered conflict, with Americans following new develop-
ments in each day’s newspaper.

Until  recently,  we  have  been  largely  dependent  on  for-
eign  correspondents  to  bear  witness  to  war.  Throughout 
the 20th century foreign correspondents have traded their 
independence for access and for protection from state com-
batants. Embedded reporting allows us into a conflict that 
is being fought on our behalf. But it does so at a cost, as 
reporters are being protected by the forces fighting one side 
of the war. In “The Dangers of Embedded Journalism, in 
War and Politics,” national security reporter David Igna-
tius demonstrates how, following the first Gulf War, jour-
nalists approached the military for greater access to war 
zones so they could expand their reporting. The military 
agreed to this arrangement, since media offered a means 
of swaying public opinion in their favor and of controlling 
the narrative.

There  was  a  cost  to  this  access.  US  military  explicitly 
sought to use embedded reporters to shift public opinion. 
As stated in a military guidance document on embedding, 
“Media coverage of any future operation will, to a large 
extent, shape public perception of the national security en-
vironment now and in the years ahead. This holds true for 
the US public, the public in allied countries whose opinion 
can  affect  the  durability  of  our  coalition,  and  publics  in 
countries where we conduct operations, whose perceptions 
of us can affect the cost and duration of our involvement.”5
Journalists and the media institutions that supported them 
were both to blame. Embedded journalists reported stories 

105

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

from  their  own  eyes  but  often  practiced  self-censorship 
in order to craft a story that was more palatable for their 
audience or to protect the soldiers they traveled with. Ad-
ditionally, interviews reveal that when embedded, journal-
ists become more focused on telling their own story than a 
broader perspective of events. Truth becomes “their truth.”

In turn, editors have their own subjective lenses. They 
want these reports to be exciting and entertaining to com-
pete with other news outlets and magazines, yet not so real 
as to put off the audience. Editors also combine the embed-
ded reports with those from “secondhand” reporters in the 
United States in order to present a balanced perspective.6

The end result is that too often embedding helps to de-
velop a mutually beneficial relationship between the media 
and the military. Perhaps more worrying, this resulted in 
an increasing apathy of viewers/readers to foreign conflict, 
with  Americans  becoming  desensitized  to  violence.  The 
end result of greater access was a less engaged public.

As our eyewitnesses to global events, foreign correspon-
dents  have  the  authority  of  being  there.  Professor  at  the 
Annenburg  School  of  Communications  Barbie  Zelizer 
sees  eyewitnessing  as  a  key  traditional  value  of  interna-
tional  journalism.  In  international  reporting,  significant 
influence extends from combining this witnessing with the 
subjective  bias  of  the  journalist  and  the  audience’s  thirst 
for on-the-ground reporting. But this eyewitness role “ex-
tends journalistic authority in questionable ways,” Zelizer 
claims, in that it “helps legitimate journalism in the pop-
ular imagination, but that legitimation is crafted through 
practices which journalism only partly implements.”7

10 6

be i ng   t h e r e

The  images  produced  by  international  journalists  have 
authority and power. Images and video tend to relay a kind 
of  undeniable  “truth,”  or  the  feeling  of  “being  there.”  In 
this sense, foreign correspondents also represent values of 
“cosmopolitanism” as well as our own culture’s ideas about 
the world. They allow the public to “see” events happening 
abroad but within the context and perspective of their home 
country.

The goal of a foreign correspondent is to report on the 
foreign while maintaining a familiar connection. As such, 
stereotypes  and  domestic  concerns  from  the  correspond-
ent’s  home  country  often  influence  what  is  considered 
newsworthy.  Usually,  the  correspondent  will  have  only  a 
few minutes on the air, so time for challenging assumptions 
is limited.

At the same time, economic changes in international news 
caused by the increase in online news consumption and de-
creasing revenue has led to substantive cuts in international 
news  gathering.  The  expense  of  running  foreign  bureaus 
has  meant  many  closures  worldwide,  especially  since  im-
provements in technology have made it possible for a single 
journalist  to  act  as  videographer,  photographer,  and  live 
reporter.  Both  individual  eyewitnesses  as  well  as  journal-
ists without the support of media corporations can practice 
journalism from their phones. The result has been a shift in 
power from traditional media companies and the states they 
often became too close to, to a combination of citizen re-
porting, a new generation of digitally native journalists, and 
journalism organizations which look very different from the 
networks  of  old.  The  key  question  is,  to  what  degree  are 

107

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

they  fulfilling  the  mandate  of  foreign  reporting—to  bear 
witness, add context, and find the signal in the noise?

A jarring break in the slowly intersecting arcs of new and 
old  media  was  the  emergence  of  WikiLeaks,  a  website 
built to allow whistleblowers to anonymously and securely 
upload sensitive and revealing information. In many ways 
WikiLeaks embodies the attributes of disruptive power: It 
is anonymous, it facilitates the publication of information 
that is damaging to traditional institutions, and it seeks to 
operate outside global norms. It also wants to be consid-
ered a journalistic organization.

Initially WikiLeaks was treated as a cyber-activist or-
ganization  and  information  source  by  other  news  out-
lets, but in 2010 it began trying to shift its image to that 
of  a  legitimate  journalistic  enterprise.  The  debate  over 
whether  WikiLeaks  could  be  considered  a  journalistic 
organization began with its first major release, “Collat-
eral Murder,” which detailed a US helicopter attack on 
journalists on the ground in Iraq. WikiLeaks hosted the 
video  on  its  own  platform,  accompanied  by  investiga-
tive reports from professional journalists it hired. Tra-
ditional  news  outlets  did  not  approve,  and  WikiLeaks 
went back to releasing documents without any editorial 
annotation or collaboration with international news or-
ganizations. WikiLeaks was clearly innovative in its use 
of digital technology to make the secrets of governments 
visible.

10 8

be i ng   t h e r e

On  November  28,  2010,  WikiLeaks  released  the  larg-
est  batch  of  classified  material  in  history,  detailing  com-
munication among US consulates, embassies, and missions 
between  1966  and  2010.  The  data  came  to  Wiki  from 
a  23-year-old  US  Army  private  stationed  in  Iraq  named 
Bradley Manning. (Manning has since changed gender and 
uses the name Chelsea.) Manning was not the first junior 
soldier to be troubled by the perceived abuses witnessed in 
war, but due to the nature of the US military’s data shar-
ing system and the service provided by WikiLeaks, she was 
able to leak massive amounts of sensitive data. Manning 
was  ultimately  charged  with  22  crimes,  including  aiding 
and abetting the enemy, and sentenced to 35 years in prison.
WikiLeaks initially partnered with respected journalis-
tic  outlets  for  Cablegate,  in  large  part  to  be  legitimized. 
While  Julian  Assange,  editor  in  chief  of  WikiLeaks,  be-
lieved he too was a publisher, one who just happened to 
leak source documents, it is clear that the partner news or-
ganizations were never as convinced that WikiLeaks was a 
peer. To them, it was a difficult organization to categorize. 
WikiLeaks  had  originally  partnered  with  the  New  York 
Times, Der Spiegel, and the Guardian to release files, but 
in 2010 the Times claimed that it saw WikiLeaks as more 
of a “source” than a partner.

But what is the difference in WikiLeaks publishing data 
and the New York Times publishing a leaked document? It 
is virtual, and core elements of its process have been techno-
logically enabled. Recently, however, traditional media or-
ganizations such as the New Yorker and the Guardian have 
implemented similar anonymous document uploading tools.

109

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

A vocal proponent of treating WikiLeaks as a legitimate 
journalistic enterprise was Daniel Ellsberg, who leaked the 
Pentagon Papers to the New York Times during the Viet-
nam War. “Anybody who believes Julian Assange can be 
distinguished from the New York Times,” he said, “is on 
a fool’s errand.”8 Just as the US government attempted to 
suppress media coverage of the Pentagon Papers, now it was 
again attempting to delegitimize and suppress WikiLeaks. 
During Vietnam, the government failed when journalists 
convinced the public of the state’s wrongdoing. In the case 
of WikiLeaks, the government seems to have partially suc-
ceeded in delegitimizing Julian Assange and his colleagues 
in the public’s eyes.9

Regardless of labels, there can be little doubt that WikiLeaks 
and other technologies like it pose a challenge to traditional 
journalistic  organizations,  whose  role  has  been  as  a  buffer 
between events as they unfold, the powers that be, and citi-
zens. Because Western societies have historically seen this role 
as important to our governance system, we have attributed 
certain powers and responsibilities to journalism. We tradi-
tionally  gave  them  the  power  to  disseminate  information, 
via broadcast cables and print distribution channels; and in 
some cases, they had legal authority to protect their sources 
and hold illegal documents, with the expectation that editors 
would use information to benefit society. Now, if anyone can 
publish a leak, what is the role of journalistic institutions and 
the legal and regulatory protections we afford them?

Examples  abound  of  digital  media  breaking  down  the 
traditional barriers between the press, the public, and the 
state.  Pope  Francis  uses  the  handle  @Pontifex  to  speak 

110

be i ng   t h e r e

directly  to  his  4.7  million  Twitter  followers.  Vice  News 
and  Buzzfeed  report  from  front  lines  of  warzones  in  a 
brash, first-person style that appeals to their millennial au-
diences. Edward Snowden leaked the NSA documents to 
Glenn Greenwald, a journalist and legal activist living in 
Brazil and blogging for the Guardian. Snowden says that 
he chose not to approach the New York Times because of 
its  decision  not  to  publish  an  earlier  NSA  domestic  sur-
veillance story in the lead-up to the 2004 election, after a 
request from the White House. But what if Snowden had 
given  the  documents  to  a  blog  on  his  brother’s  website? 
What if he had posted them to his own website?

After the billionaire co-founder of Ebay, Pierre Omidyar, 
considered buying the Washington Post, he instead invested 
the roughly $250 million that the purchase would have cost 
into a new media entity. Greenwald, one of Omidyar’s first 
hires, sees this as a direct challenge to old journalism insti-
tutions: Activists and dissenters, Greenwald says, “are on 
the outside of institutional power, and what this is really 
about is being able to create a very well-funded, powerful, 
well-fortified  institution  that’s  designed  not  to  just  toler-
ate that kind of journalism, but to enable it and protect it, 
strengthen it and empower it.”10

Yochai  Benkler  sees  new  digital  institutions  such  as 
WikiLeaks as part of a Networked Fourth Estate. The new 
tools  of  digital  technology  have  empowered  citizens  and 
individual journalists, and Benkler argues that WikiLeaks 
“forces us to ask how comfortable we are with the actual 
shape  of  democratization  created  by  the  Internet.”11  The 
Networked Fourth Estate is resilient in ways that traditional 

111

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

media  companies  are  not.  They  exist  across  multiple  ju-
risdictions  and  run  mirrored  sites  (replicas  of  websites 
hosted  on  different  servers),  making  them  difficult  to  be 
shut down by any one government. They have networks of 
supporters willing to protect them through measures like 
DDoS attacks. They use mercenary tactics such as holding 
“insurance” files of unredacted data that they threaten to 
release if prosecuted, and they regularly mutate and repli-
cate, making an attack on any one site futile. In short, they 
have disrupted both the traditional media outlets and the 
states that those outlets hold to account.

Had  Marie  Colvin  been  reporting  from  Syria  30  years 
ago, she would likely have been the only voice. We would 
have learned about the bombings via her prose. Twenty 
years  ago,  she  might  have  been  there  with  a  cable  TV 
network,  broadcasting  via  satellite  from  a  bombed  out 
hotel. In 2012, she was there alone, with a small group 
of other professional journalists, and thousands of citi-
zens  uploading  their  accounts  to  Twitter  and  YouTube. 
We consumed the conflict in a new way because citizens 
could  document  it  to  the  world  alongside  institutional 
journalists.

But what does this tell us about the existing power struc-
tures and norms of practice of the traditional media ecosys-
tem detailed previously? How are digital media changing 
international  journalism,  and  with  it,  our  understanding 
of the world?

112

be i ng   t h e r e

Large media organizations have held power over the global 
information  environment  through  three  levers  of  control: 
access to information, access to infrastructure, and the crea-
tion of journalistic norms. In each of these areas, digital tech-
nology is challenging the control held by the intersections of 
state and corporate interests that have long shaped the media 
narrative.

First, the media have historically had many ways of con-
trolling, limiting, and shaping access to information. Some 
of this has to do with their ability to deploy resources—for 
example, the media and governments’ mutually beneficial 
relationship when it comes to embedding journalists. The 
government allows the media access to information that the 
public would not otherwise receive. The media then func-
tion  as  a  further  gatekeeper,  deciding  what  is  news  and 
what is not.

The concept of media “indexing” helps to further illu-
minate  this  relationship.  In  “Toward  a  Theory  of  Press-
State Relations in the United States,” political scientist and 
communications professor Lance Bennet argues that gov-
ernment has a privileged place in the structure of public 
debate. It provides access and feeds policy debates. How-
ever, the media, he argues, amplify this influence by decid-
ing what is important based on the government’s position. 
For example, in the media coverage of President Reagan’s 
efforts to fund a war in El Salvador, Bennet found that the 
press framed the situation around the government’s justifi-
cations, and significantly less reporting on the ongoing po-
litical situation was done after Congress stopped debating 
it. When official voices stopped commenting on it, so did 

113

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

the press. This indexing, based on access, is driven both by 
government’s place at the center of democratic society and 
by journalistic norms of balance. As a result, governments 
and media together have traditionally played a significant 
role in deciding and shaping what debates citizens are ex-
posed to and how they are framed.

Until recently, in order to tell a story of an event to the 
world, one needed both to be there and to have the plat-
form  through  which  to  disseminate  it.  This  meant  that 
journalists working for media institutions were the people 
most likely to be present as events unfolded. There were 
always other people there, of course. They just didn’t have 
the  capability  to  broadcast  what  they  were  seeing.  With 
the growth of the Internet and mobile computing, access 
to information is no longer monopolized. Nonprofessional 
journalists  and  citizens  are  finding  their  own  stories  by 
being in the right place at the right time. These eyewitness 
accounts do not necessarily help us understand and con-
textualize an event, but they do bring us there. These per-
spectives notably do not have the distance of professional 
journalism, nor do they attempt the objectivity to which 
the practice aspires.

Traditionally,  mainstream  news  media  have  controlled 
the mass dissemination of information. Ownership of sev-
eral platforms—newspapers, television networks, radio sta-
tions—allowed the voice of a single news outlet to spread 
quickly  and  efficiently.  This  arrangement  also  served  to 
block out other voices. There has traditionally been a con-
nection  between  access  to  distribution  and  editorial  con-
tent production, and the media had a structural power over 

11 4

be i ng   t h e r e

what  information  spread  on  the  various  networks.  The 
reach of certain media conglomerates therefore gave them 
an authority over how debates are framed and what issues 
command the public’s attention.

The former editor of Foreign Affairs, James Hoge, argues 
that in the international affairs space this leads to group-
think and significant power for the media. “An overlooked 
aspect of media pervasiveness,” he argues, “is its ability to 
quickly inform an audience swollen large in times of crisis. 
At such moments the massive flow of information will con-
tain the sound and the unsound, the responsible and the 
irresponsible.”

Anyone  can  now  disseminate  information  on  a  new 
media infrastructure. Blogs, social networks, and the wider 
Internet all allow people to self-publish and have the ca-
pacity to reach most people around the globe. Mainstream 
news no longer has a monopoly on disseminating mass in-
formation. However, mainstream news networks have also 
adopted these formerly alternative online devices, resulting 
in an integration of old and new forms.

Several  years  ago,  a  21-year-old  student  at  Istanbul’s 
Bahçesehir University named Engin Onder co-founded 140 
Journos, an organization whose volunteers use their own 
mobile devices to provide uncensored news to the public 
via social media platforms like Twitter and SoundCloud. 
Named for the 140-character limit on Twitter, 140 Journos 
has never consisted of more than 20 people, and yet it has 
had a marked impact on the closed and controlled Turkish 
media that regularly imprisons citizens for certain types of 
speech. “We are all journalists now,” Onder explained to 

115

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

the Columbia Journalism Review. “What we have is our 
own devices. . . . [I]t actually removes the barriers between 
the person who sees the news and [the one] who creates 
the news.”12

Despite  a  plethora  of  new  platforms,  tools,  and  shar-
ing methods, Director of the MIT Civic Media Lab Ethan 
Zuckerman argues that we remain drawn to local sources 
of information in our day-to-day life. Sites like Kigali Wire 
and MexicoReporter.com represent a new way of report-
ing local news to an international audience using a variety 
of digital tools. The new platforms have now replaced the 
demand for professional journalists, leading to greater cuts 
to the industry and to many outlets depending on just news 
wires like the Associated Press and Reuters.13

In  the  past,  elites  in  the  media  network  have  had  the 
ability  to  establish  norms  to  be  followed  by  the  rest  of 
the  network.  Social  practices  of  journalism  evolved  over 
time and across news outlets, creating strong norms of be-
havior. In this way the news media could be viewed as a 
collective with a standard set of roles and practices. This 
homogeneity of journalistic behavior and coverage has had 
real consequence for the limited frames through which we 
traditionally saw the world and stands in marked contrast 
to the diversity of voices and stories that the new digital 
media ecosystem allows.14 Due to the decentralization of 
access to information and the ability for anyone to broad-
cast,  norms  are  breaking  down  and  new  ones  are  form-
ing. Social networks have been critical in the development 
of a rapidly evolving new set of journalistic practices and 
values that are reinventing how the news is relayed.15

116

be i ng   t h e r e

Take the norm of purported journalistic objectivity, which 
lies in stark contrast to the online world. If I am writing a 
blog or live-tweeting, my subjectivity is explicit. Even if I am 
filming an event on my phone, any number of my personal 
and situational biases are embedded in my documentation. 
My choice of what to film, of how to position and edit the 
video, and whether to broadcast it at all are just some of the 
subjective elements that enter into citizen journalism.

This  shift  in  the  norm  of  objectivity,  which  is  itself  a 
20th-century construct, has also been found among pro-
fessional journalists who blog. Professor of entrepreneurial 
journalism  Jane  Singer  has  studied  how  the  mainstream 
press  are  adopting  previously  alternative  online  media.16 
She found that the behavior of journalists changes online. 
Journalists  often  shift  to  the  first  person  and  reflect  on 
stories in a manner not generally adopted in print or by 
broadcast  outlets.  On  blogs,  the  traditional  gatekeeping 
role of the journalist shifts to one of information verifica-
tion and quality control. The norms of blogging, therefore, 
are driving behavioral change.

Another strong new norm emerging is instantaneity. In a 
recent study of social media storytelling during the Egyp-
tian uprisings, Zizi Papacharissi and Oliveira de Fatima an-
alyzed and mapped information flows over Twitter during 
the Egyptian uprisings as a way of looking at the changing 
dynamic of news. They found that social streams reflect sets 
of “news values” different from those of traditional media. 
On Twitter, values centered on instantaneity, solidarity, and 
information from trusted elites. The differences in these “or-
ganically” emergent values from those of traditional media 

117

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

indicate how media norms can change over a short period 
of time, diminishing the power of mainstream media as an 
enforcer of media norms.17

The structural power traditionally held by the media to 
shape and disseminate news about the world and the limi-
tations of the individual foreign correspondent as a conduit 
to global events have now met the radically disseminated 
world  of  digital  media.  The  resulting  power  shift  from 
media companies and their institutional norms to individ-
uals in the production and destination of news is a major 
change in the international system. This new media eco-
system is far more decentralized, gets news of events to us 
quicker than before, and is less vulnerable to the current 
decline in traditional media revenue models or shifts in do-
mestic political pressures. This is surely a good thing.

But  do  these  new  norms  represent  a  shift  in  power? 
Media theorist Manuel Castells believes so. Social move-
ments  are  organized  not  only  in  a  digital  space  but  also 
in a flow of information existing through networks, face-
to-face  interactions,  and  traditional  media.  They  are  not 
completely divorced from real-world foundations but have 
lost  their  fragmented  nature  and  now  exist  in  a  global 
network. This is a network that is harder to control than 
media infrastructure.

To Castells, power is defined as the ability of one actor 
to control another actor, and counterpower as the ability of 
an actor to resist institutional power. A move toward citizen 
journalism and away from institutionally produced media, is, 
for him, a form of “socialized communication.” In this new 
ecosystem,  traditional  “vertical”  forms  of  communication 

118

be i ng   t h e r e

are replaced by horizontal networks (or the Internet), and 
with this shift comes a challenge to the ability of any one 
organization to control information. The disruption of the 
ability to control information, whether by corporate, media, 
or political elites, is for Castells a form of counterpower.18

This counterpower is by no means absolute. As we have 
seen with the scale of state surveillance and the degree of 
cooperation by the telecommunication and technology com-
panies  that  operate  the  infrastructure  of  our  global  com-
munications, there is a fight for this ability to control and 
monitor information. As we have explored, there is a boom-
ing  private-sector  industry  in  providing  technologies  for 
countries, both autocracies and democracies, to control the 
Internet. But this is an exertion of power in response to the 
communication capabilities afforded through it.19

So where does this leave the media landscape as it relates to 
international journalism? Are we heading toward a world 
where citizen-led media cut out the traditional broadcasters 
and  broadsheets?  In  international  journalism,  is  it  better 
for  us  to  learn  about  the  world  through  those  who  are 
living through events as they unfold? Or would we rather 
continue to have the world told to us through the lens of a 
trusted observer?

We are seeing a new dynamic ecosystem of information 
sharing. Some of this information comes from profession-
als,  some  directly  from  sources,  and  others  from  people 
documenting the lives they are living. Journalist and scholar 

119

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

Paulo Nuno Vicente recently conducted a study of interna-
tional reporters based in Nairobi to investigate their expe-
riences with being part of online media, how they translate 
their perspective into their reporting, and how they view 
the rise of citizen journalism. Most of the reporters were 
aware that they were no longer leading journalism in the 
digital age. Many still attempted to draw borders between 
amateur and professional journalism, underlining the qual-
ity and accuracy of their work. However, many believe the 
two groups can be partners in the telling of international 
stories, each bringing a different perspective to the table. 
In  this  view,  more  traditional  journalists  such  as  Colvin 
can see themselves adding value and context to the flow of 
social media information.20

Did Marie Colvin die for nothing? No, we still need ob-
servers and explainers immersing themselves in places and 
contexts which we citizens cannot ourselves know. But our 
ability to learn about events by other means is rapidly in-
creasing. Our ability to watch from afar will only increase 
when we are able to immerse ourselves in virtual reality 
and real-time social video, or go anywhere a camera on a 
micro-drone will take us. Bearing witness is no longer suf-
ficient to justify the risks correspondents take. And tradi-
tional journalistic roles—providing context and separating 
signal from noise—are being replaced by new digital tools 
and crowd-sourced platforms.

And this has implications for both the state and traditional 
media companies, both of which have gained power and in-
fluence through their capacity to control information. Per-
haps more crucially the traditional media and the legal and 

12 0

be i ng   t h e r e

regulatory system that support it (however imperfect) have 
for over a century provided a check on power. Digital tech-
nology has, in effect, democratized the Fourth Estate and as 
such, the public now bears more responsibility than ever for 
holding power to account. It is yet to be seen whether this 
will be a truly democratizing shift or whether the state will 
be able to fight back though surveillance, secrecy, and force.

121

c h a p t e r   s i x

s a v i n g   t h e   s a v i o r s

On December 27, 2007, Kenya held a presidential election. 
The declared winner was President Mwai Kibaki, but op-
position  supporters  and  international  monitors  disputed 
the results, and ethnic violence broke out. Ory Okolloh, a 
Kenyan lawyer and blogger who lives in South Africa but 
had returned to her native land to vote, faced threats to her 
life. Back in South Africa, she had an idea for a platform 
called  Ushahidi,  the  Swahili  word  for  “testimony,”  that 
would allow Kenyan citizens to anonymously report inci-
dents of violence. An ad hoc group of technologists with 
ties to Kenya saw Okolloh’s post and built Ushahidi in a 
matter of days.

Ushahidi allows data to be uploaded to a live map via 
text message, email, or online entry. An open-source plat-
form,  Ushahidi  was  adapted  for  crowdsourced  mapping 
projects  beyond  the  Kenyan  electoral  crisis.  A  Kenyan 
wildlife group used it to track animal sightings, Al Jazeera 
used it during the 2009 Gaza War, and an initiative called 
HarassMapp uses the Ushahidi platform to map reports 
of sexual assault in Egypt. But Ushahidi came to global 
prominence  after  the  January  12,  2010,  earthquake  in 
Haiti.

122

s av i ng   t h e   s av ior s

Already one of the poorest countries in the world, Haiti 
had  not  been  hit  by  a  large  earthquake  since  1842,  and 
most of the population of the capital city, Port-au-Prince, 
lived in slum conditions in poorly constructed buildings. 
More than 100,000 houses were destroyed as were 60% 
of  government  buildings;  destruction  of  this  magnitude 
gutted the state’s already limited capacity to respond to a 
natural disaster. An estimated 220,000 people were killed, 
including  25%  of  all  civil  servants,  and  300,000  more 
were injured. More than 1.5 million people were housed 
in temporary camps that were vulnerable to aftershocks, 
flooding,  disease,  and  crime.  International  humanitarian 
organizations mobilized to move into Haiti and provide as-
sistance, but information on who needed help, and where, 
was  hard  to  find.  The  Haitian  government  had  not  kept 
detailed  population  records,  and  basic  street  maps  were 
non-existent.

Patrick Meier, at the time a PhD student at the Fletcher 
School of Law and Diplomacy, had friends in Haiti, and he 
followed news about the earthquake closely.1 Starting with 
tweets  by  a  dozen  people  in  Port-au-Prince,  Meier  used 
Ushahidi to create a map of Haiti from Cambridge, Mas-
sachusetts. Some tweets contain geolocation data, which 
can  be  collected  and  mapped  in  real  time.  Meier  began 
following more Haitian Twitter handles, and he incorpo-
rated text messages so that anyone with a cell phone could 
upload information to the map. First, texts came from the 
Haitian Diaspora and then, through a partnership with the 
Haitian telecom Digicel, directly from Haiti via a toll-free 
SMS (Short Message Service) shortcode. Word spread and, 

123

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

within days, thousands of text messages reporting needs 
and locations came in. (Most texts were in Haitian Creole, 
and Meier set up a second platform to facilitate the crowd-
sourced translation of incoming text messages.) Meier en-
listed more than 100 fellow students in the effort. Calling 
themselves  “digital  humanitarians,”  they  tracked  social 
networks and mainstream media for any relevant informa-
tion that could be added to the rapidly evolving map.

Since  Google  Maps  hadn’t  yet  covered  Port-au-Prince, 
they turned to OpenStreetMap, another open-source pro-
ject, whose volunteers created a draft map by downloading 
satellite images of Haiti and tracing streets and buildings. 
Data  uploaded  by  volunteers  using  global  positioning 
system  (GPS)  devices  on  the  ground  filled  in  the  Open-
StreetMap. Within several weeks, people around the world 
edited the map nearly 10,000 times, and the crisis response 
community had a useful map of the affected region.2 The 
US Department of State, US Marines, US Coast Guard, the 
International Red Cross, and a wide array of smaller non-
profit  humanitarian  organizations  as  well  as  private  citi-
zens used the map to target relief. The Federal Emergency 
Management Authority endorsed the map as the most ac-
curate and up-to-date source of information on Haiti avail-
able to the humanitarian community.

In  a  Technology,  Entertainment,  Design  (TED)  talk 
about  digital  humanitarians,  Paul  Conneally,  commun-
ications  manager  for  the  International  Federation  of  the 
Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, presents the earth-
quake in Haiti as a catalyst for change in the humanitar-
ian  community.  “Right  across  the  developing  world,”  he 

12 4

s av i ng   t h e   s av ior s

proclaimed, “citizens and communities are using technol-
ogy to enable them to bring about change, positive change, 
in  their  own  communities.  The  grassroots  have  been 
strengthened through the social power of sharing and they 
are challenging the old models, the old analog models of 
control and command.”3

In a blog post, Meier described how platforms like Usha-
hidi can be useful not just in emergencies but as a tool for 
civil  society  as  a  check  on  governments,  what  he  called 
“sousveillance.”4 Collecting data and publishing maps were 
once the sole privilege of the state, but as Meier argues, the 
Ushahidi platform provides a participatory digital canvas for 
the public decoding, recoding of information and synchro-
nization of said information. In other words, the platform 
serves to democratize dataveillance by crowdsourcing what 
was once the exclusive realm of the “security-informational 
complex.”  With  Ushahidi,  “the  barriers  to  entry  are  now 
very low,” Ushahidi staffer and developer David Kobia adds. 
“The aim is really to push the power down to the masses.” 
Anyone  with  a  computer  and  an  Internet  connection  can 
create a Ushahidi map.

They do need to be connected though. And increasingly 
in  developing  countries,  this  connectivity  is  provided  by 
large multinational technology companies such as Google 
and Facebook, who see global Internet access as a tool for 
economic development. They could well be right, but the 
access  they  are  providing  comes  at  a  cost,  whether  it  be 
having to use Facebook as a portal to the Internet, or new 
systems of micropayment and micro lending. As Facebook 
CEO Mark Zukerberg said about Internet.org, a group he 

125

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

started to bring Internet access to the developing world, the 
goal is to show “people why it’s rational and good for them 
to spend the limited money they have on the Internet.”5

Ushahidi’s work had a significant impact on the Haitian 
crisis and beyond. It has helped individuals and grassroots 
volunteer networks get involved in formal international de-
velopment contexts. It is far more organized than groups 
such as Anonymous and Telecomix; in a paper on the use 
of sophisticated volunteer networks, Meier describes teams 
for media monitoring, geolocation, verification, and analy-
sis. Like an early disruptive innovator, Ushahidi has found 
a capability ignored by the dominant actor (in this case, 
large international organizations and government develop-
ment agencies) and are now growing the capacity to chal-
lenge their control of the space.6

Two  years  after  the  initial  uses  of  the  Ushahidi  plat-
form in the post-Kenyan election violence, one of the co-
founders of the project, Erik Hersman, a technologist and 
a blogger living in Florida but raised in Kenya and Sudan, 
moved  back  to  Nairobi  to  start  an  innovation  hub.  He 
believed  that  the  technology  and  start-up  community  in 
Kenya would benefit from a shared innovation space. The 
space, called iHub, would serve as both Ushahidi’s home 
and a place for a wide range of technology companies and 
programs meant to develop Kenya’s technology sector and 
connect developers and researchers with potential funding. 
It is primarily an incubator and offers free access to 100 
entrepreneurs who have competed for spots.

For  example,  one  project  to  come  through  the  iHub 
program is called M-Farm. Launched and built by three 

12 6

s av i ng   t h e   s av ior s

young women after winning a 48-hour start-up competi-
tion, M-Farm is a text message-based information tool for 
farmers. It allows them to get access to up-to-date retail 
pricing  for  their  products  and  helps  them  to  find  buyers 
and to make purchases, in theory cutting out middle men 
and  giving  farmers  agency  over  pricing.7  The  realities  of 
deploying  a  mobile  software  solution  to  what  is  a  wide-
spread structural challenge in one of the world’s 30 poorest 
countries, where more than half the population lives below 
the poverty line of US$1 per day, are daunting.

Whereas  the  Ushahidi  platform  has  been  used  mostly 
for crisis scenarios, iHub’s desired impact can be far more 
broadly defined. Its creators are aiming to create high val-
ue-added jobs for young Kenyans in the technology sector; 
they are stimulating venture capital investment in a new 
start-up ecosystem, and they are attracting significant in-
vestment  from  corporate  sponsors.  But  they  are  not  just 
seeking to create economic growth; iHub’s proponents also 
make claims as to the values and impact of the technologies 
themselves. M-Farm is promoted as a technological solu-
tion to a development challenge as well as an employment 
initiative for its founders. What’s more, both Ushahidi and 
iHub are seeking to innovate in two spaces, humanitari-
anism and development, long controlled by the state and 
large international organizations.

The history of aid is rife with conflict among states, the in-
stitutions and people delivering assistance, and the people 

127

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

in need. The origins of humanitarian aid are often traced 
to Florence Nightingale’s treatment of the wounded in the 
Crimean War in the middle of the 19th century. Working 
with small groups of volunteer nurses whom she trained, 
Nightingale pleaded with the British government for a state 
solution—the creation of prefabricated hospitals that could 
be  sent  to  the  front  lines.  This  notion  of  helping  others 
while conquering them is of course closely tied to the eco-
nomic and political history of European colonialism.

At around the same time, a non-government humanitar-
ian movement was growing. The International Committee 
of the Red Cross was founded in Switzerland in 1863, and 
the American Red Cross 20 years later. Both experienced 
rapid growth and had massive humanitarian impact during 
World War I. In America alone, by 1918 the organization 
had 3,864 local chapters and 20 million members. It was a 
tangible way in which citizens could help in the war being 
fought a world away.

Following the Second World War, aid industrialized and 
notably became tied up in the development of global financial 
institutions. The creation of the United Nations, the Interna-
tional Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD or 
World Bank), and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) 
as well as state development agencies came about with the 
mixed mandate of promoting Western economic growth and 
capitalist expansion while also raising incomes and creating 
economic stability, and assisting with the industrialization 
of the developing world. Aid and development were caught 
in the mixed motives of the state—and of what many would 
call a new form of economic colonialism.

12 8

s av i ng   t h e   s av ior s

At the same time, an entire industry of independent hu-
manitarianism  emerged.  International  organizations  like 
Oxfam, Care, Save the Children, and World Vision grew 
into large bureaucratic organizations delivering aid mainly 
from citizens of the West to those in need in the developing 
world.

As  human  rights  scholars  Margaret  Satterthwaite  and 
Scott Moses argue, “The expansion of the [international 
non-governmental organization] INGO sector can be use-
fully understood as—among other things—a form of out-
sourcing  by  Western  and  Northern  donor  states.  Where 
in  the  past,  Western  states  governed  directly  via  coloni-
alism  and  indirectly  via  Cold  War-era  neocolonialism, 
now  Western  states  outsource  certain  governance  activi-
ties in the Global South to development and humanitarian 
INGOs.”8 Essentially, INGOs can act as de facto govern-
ments and agents of the Western countries that fund them. 
As they have large budgets and better resources, in coun-
tries like Haiti they can achieve more legitimacy than the 
actual government.

During the 1980s and 1990s, many developing countries 
had little choice but to follow economic policies imposed 
by  donor  countries.  This  frequently  included  the  wide-
spread deployment of Western technologies and IT infra-
structure,  often  designed  for  purposes  far  different  from 
the actual development priorities of the receiving country, 
such as improvements in agriculture, medicine, water and 
sanitation, energy, and ways to fight the spread of disease.9 
It would of course be far more advantageous to incorporate 
local priorities at the start of the technology development 

129

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

processes, but the nature of the aid system, whether it in-
volves food aid, farming equipment, or information tech-
nology, privileges the economic benefits of the donor over 
those of the recipients.

Even before the widespread adoption of the worldwide 
web  and  mobile  telecommunication,  advances  in  infor-
mation  technology  changed  the  practice  of  international 
humanitarian efforts, particularly around disaster manage-
ment and planning.10 Administrative applications for desk-
top  computers  gave  field  operations  more  independence 
in  refugee  food  programming,  project  management,  and 
commodity tracking.11 Humanitarians were early adopters 
of email and computerized bulletin boards. Humanitarian 
institutions shed middle management layers, and the pace 
of international operations sped up with Telexes and fax 
machines. Systems such as the Famine Early Warning, cre-
ated in 1985 by the US Agency for International Develop-
ment (USAID), provided the ability to collect and analyze 
large datasets with the goal of predicting the onset of hu-
manitarian emergencies.

Mapping was also once solely the purview of the state, 
and thus closely aligned with state interests. The evolution 
of cartography can be closely linked to technological devel-
opment. Political scientist Jordan Branch has argued that 
the use of early technologies for mapping, such as the com-
pass, quadrant, printing press, telescope, and sextant, was 
a  fundamental  driver  of  the  development  of  modern  ter-
ritorial state system. These new tools, he argues, “altered 
how political actors understood political space, authority, 
and  organization,  reducing  the  wide  variety  of  medieval 

130

s av i ng   t h e   s av ior s

political forms down to the unique territorial form of the 
sovereign state.”12

The 20th century saw the advent of aerial photography, 
satellite technology, remote sensing, and geographic infor-
mation systems (GIS), all of which were in large part devel-
oped and funded by the state, often for military purposes. 
The history of GIS is particularly closely tied to the state, 
first for land use planning, and then in the late 1960s and 
after widely used for military planning and targeting. By 
the mid 1990s, desktop GIS programs were available, and 
the use of digital mapping across the private sector prolif-
erated. It was mapping moving to the cloud, however, that 
caused a revolution in how we use maps.

Google Earth was launched in June 2005 after Google 
acquired  a  program  funded  by  the  Central  Intelligence 
Agency  (CIA)  called  EarthViewer  3D.  The  desktop  and 
mobile program uses satellite imagery, aerial photography, 
and GIS-based 3D imagery to create a simulation of the 
world that can be explored with remarkable detail and pre-
cision. The potential humanitarian uses of Google Earth 
quickly became clear. Based in part on Google’s experience 
mapping  the  damage  from  Hurricane  Katrina,  in  2007 
the company launched Google Earth Outreach, and what 
they call Google Earth Awareness Layers, which used the 
slogan, “You want to change the world. We want to help.”
One pilot project, a partnership with the United States 
Holocaust Memorial Museum’s Genocide Prevention Map-
ping Initiative, documented war crimes in Darfur, a region 
of  western  Sudan  where  the  government  was  engaged  in 
an ethnic-cleansing campaign. “Crisis in Darfur” brought 

131

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

together high-resolution satellite imagery, geo-tagged pho-
tographs, and written testimony collected by Amnesty In-
ternational. The resulting interactive map captured images 
of  villages  burned  and  of  vast  refugee  camps,  and  it  al-
lowed visitors to learn about the crisis in a new and vis-
ceral way. As Catherine Summerhayes, a lecturer in Film 
and New Media Studies at Australian National University, 
wrote:

When I see the flames of “Crisis in Darfur” growing larger 
on my computer screen as I roll my mouse towards a closer 
focus, I feel a sense of dread and fascination. Why fascina-
tion? Perhaps it is not only towards a spectacle of destruc-
tion in which happily I am not directly involved (as in the 
experience of car accident gazing). Perhaps such a fascina-
tion and dread is also a result from recognition through 
“sympathetic identification.”13

All  Eyes  on  Darfur,  sponsored  by  Amnesty  Interna-
tional, monitored attacks in real time, using satellite data 
from  three  private  companies—Digital  Globe,  Geoeye, 
and  Imagesat—to  monitor  13  vulnerable  villages.  There 
was also an attempt to spatially analyze this real-time data 
to predict other villages that might be at risk of attack.14

Then  actor  George  Clooney  along  with  John  Prender-
grast of the Enough Project conceived of and funded the 
Satellite  Sentinel  Project.  The  Satellite  Sentinel  Project 
seeks to serve as an early warning system for mass atroci-
ties on the border between Sudan and what is now South 
Sudan,  using  regularly  updated  satellite  imagery  from 

132

s av i ng   t h e   s av ior s

DigitalGlobe. The point, Clooney says, was to focus on Su-
danese troops “the level of celebrity attention that I usually 
get. If you know your actions are going to be covered, you 
tend to behave much differently than when you operate in 
a vacuum.”15 Real-time monitoring and the ability to am-
plify findings via the combined media power of Clooney 
and the Enough Project is a powerful combination.

In one case, Satellite Sentinel Project analysts, based in 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, saw what appeared to be 3,000 
Sudanese  troops  readying  an  attack  on  a  village  named 
Kurmuk on the border of South Sudan; they published the 
news to give the villagers a chance to flee, potentially shift-
ing the outcome of a crisis on another continent. As direc-
tor of the Sentinel Project Nathanial Raymond reflected, 
“What  if  we  get  the  direction  the  force  is  going  wrong? 
You could have walked the civilian population right into 
them.” We don’t know how many people were warned of 
the attack, but the village was ultimately taken over by the 
army and used as an airbase.16

Projects  like  All  Eyes  on  Darfur  and  Satellite  Sentinel 
say  that  they  make  a  difference  in  humanitarian  inter-
ventions.  They  seek  to  change  the  behavior  of  would-be 
war criminals by raising the visibility and potential costs 
of their actions, building on an idea first proposed at the 
US-Soviet  Summit  meeting  in  1960  by  President  Dwight 
Eisenhower for a UN-operated aerial surveillance system 
to  detect  preparations  for  bombing  attacks.  The  Soviets 
had recently shot down a CIA spy plane and Eisenhower 
was willing now to allow a system of international surveil-
lance that would negate the need for national espionage. 

133

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

While the Russians dismissed this proposal, 40 years later 
the UN did set up its own satellite surveillance unit, called 
the UN’s Operational Satellite Program, which is used to 
analyze patterns of attack in conflict.17

These satellite projects all seek to raise awareness in the 
West about humanitarian crises. As John Prendergrast puts 
it, “No one can any longer say they don’t know. This tool 
will bring a spotlight to a very dark corner of the earth, 
a torch that will indirectly help protect the victims. It is 
David versus Goliath, and Google Earth just gave David 
a stone for his slingshot.”18 And the hope is that more and 
better information about humanitarian crises will lead to 
better policy decisions.

However,  despite  exuberant  proclamations  about  how 
Google  Earth  Awareness  Layers  provides  “collaborative 
and dynamic ways for communities to come together, share 
critical  information,  and  help  citizens  see  the  world  in  a 
new light,” there is little evidence for any of these claims.19
Amnesty argues that the government of Chad cited the 
All  Eyes  on  Darfur  project  as  a  reason  it  accepted  UN 
peacekeepers. Yet while the villages they were monitoring 
were not attacked, neighboring ones were, and war contin-
ues.20 Two years after the earthquake in Haiti, more than 
half  a  million  people  remained  homeless,  most  living  in 
tents in camps for internally displaced persons. Unsanitary 
living conditions led to a cholera epidemic, affecting 5% 
of the population. The Haitian government is in disarray, 
and foreign governments, international humanitarian or-
ganizations,  and  corporations  have  largely  pulled  out  of 
the country.

134

s av i ng   t h e   s av ior s

How  are  we  to  make  sense  of  this  emerging  space?  It 
seems  filled  with  promise,  idealism,  and  the  rhetoric  of 
liberation. Is it possible for digital technology-enabled ini-
tiatives to change the space of humanitarianism and shift 
power from the state and established NGOs to networks of 
individuals? Can digital humanitarian programs be more 
effective and empowering to the intended recipients of aid? 
Or do these technologies replicate the power structures of 
the  traditional  aid  paradigm,  and  continue  to  propagate 
representations of victimhood?

The term “information and communications for technolo-
gies for development” (ICT4D) emerged from development 
research in the 1960s and 1970s suggesting that societal 
technological development can have an instrumental effect 
on development outcomes. Initially, ICT4D initiatives in-
volved the funding and construction of electrical grids and 
telecommunications  systems  through  state  to  state  aid. 
With  the  rise  of  the  Internet,  these  programs  evolved  to 
include Internet access programs and any number of “e” 
initiatives; e-health, e-government, e-agriculture, e-learn-
ing,  e-security.  Now  the  attention  has  shifted  to  mobile 
technology and the use of satellites, artificial intelligence, 
and drones, all for humanitarian and development ends. 
There has been a new push to invest in and build the next 
generation of ICT infrastructure, whether for mobile com-
munications  or  for  wireless  Internet,  such  as  Facebook’s 
drone  Internet  program  and  Google’s  balloon  Internet 

135

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

initiative.  In  2010,  Africa  as  a  continent  spent  over  $60 
billion on ICT infrastructure, the equivalent of about $60 
per person.21 The same year, the World Bank spent over 
$800 million on ICT development, and the private sector 
invested  over  $10  billion  in  mobile  infrastructure  alone. 
Individuals  are  also  spending  a  huge  amount  to  be  con-
nected. Apart from the richest quintile, Africans who own 
mobile phones spend 11% to 27% of their monthly income 
on them.22

Throughout  this  evolution,  the  critiques  have  remained 
consistent—information technology initiatives, many argue, 
simply  mask  the  core  structural  causes  of  underdevelop-
ment, poor health outcomes, struggling agricultural sectors, 
and poverty. Critics charge that they are a Western-driven 
fix  that  is  imposed  outside  of  local  development  contexts 
and  are  based  on  a  neo-liberal  notion  that  greater  access 
to technology and commerce will lead to economic growth 
and ultimately development.

In  a  1999  paper  reviewing  the  empirical  work  on  the 
connection  between  adoption  of  ICTs  and  development 
indicators, economist Arjun Bedi said the obvious: “Pro-
ponents  attribute  a  wide  and  almost  impossible  array  of 
positive effects to ICTs.”23 Even a cursory scan of the pop-
ular  press,  think  tank  papers,  and  reports  from  interna-
tional development organizations reveals a laundry list of 
utopian  outcomes:  stimulating  economic  growth,  saving 
citizens in emergencies, preventing crimes against human-
ity,  revolutionizing  agriculture,  bringing  medical  care  to 
the  rural  poor,  revealing  government  corruption,  saving 
and spreading democracy.

136

s av i ng   t h e   s av ior s

Despite the overwrought rhetoric, good can come from 
the  adoption  of  new  technologies.  One  of  the  challenges 
in exploring their impact, however, is that many conversa-
tions and objectives merge, and talk of digital humanitar-
ianism gets entwined with economic development efforts 
by governments, telecommunications companies, and ven-
ture capital firms. Ushahidi, for example, has become part 
of iHub, which has a mandate for both creating local jobs 
in the technology sector and solving national development 
problems with digital technology.

There is a significant literature on the impact of infor-
mation technology on the practice and outcomes of human 
development, much of which is outside the bounds of this 
analysis. However, a brief look is valuable to see how its 
adoption, in development institutions and in the communi-
ties they serve, is leading to institutional change, empower-
ing individuals in developing areas, and fueling economic 
growth.

Arjun Bedi notes that lower transaction costs create op-
portunities for disruptive innovators, forcing inefficient or-
ganizations to adapt, and widespread knowledge about new 
technologies allows them to compete. Indeed, institutions 
from  the  World  Bank  (its  Open  Data  Initiative  provides 
free  access  to  almost  all  of  their  data  and  invites  appli-
cation developers to use this data to create development- 
focused  applications)  to  the  United  Nations  (its  Digital 
Pulse  network  of  innovation  labs  works  to  use  real-time 
data to address potential global crises such as famines and 
epidemics) to USAID (its Development Innovation Ventures 
funds development start-ups focused on humanitarian and 

137

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

development  goals)  are  trying  to  embrace  the  new  land-
scape. Whether these established institutions can innovate 
in the wider humanitarian effort remains to be seen.

There is an extensive literature on how digital technol-
ogy  empowers  individuals,  promotes  good  governance, 
and enables political resistance to autocratic regimes.24 Po-
litical scientist Guy Grossman argues that ICT adoption is 
leading to new forms of direct political participation that 
is restraining elite opinion and behavior. In a paper on the 
effects  of  digital  technology  adoption  in  Africa,  anthro-
pologist Gado Alzouma sees “an opportunity for shifting 
and  sharing  power  until  now  concentrated  in  the  hands 
of the urban political authoritarian elite . . . to empower 
rural  and  poor  people  through  the  use  of  information 
technologies.”25

Still,  Manuel  Castells  argues  that  communication  tech-
nologies are a double-edged sword. They can allow societ-
ies to leapfrog stages of development, as occurred in Hong 
Kong, Taiwan, Singapore, Malaysia, and South Korea.26 But 
if  a  country  does  not  have  the  education  system  or  other 
social and political conditions needed to capitalize on new 
technologies,  then  it  can  be  locked  out  of  the  benefits  en 
masse. “Technology per se does not solve social problems,” 
Castells concludes,27 “But the availability and use of infor-
mation and communication technologies are a pre-requisite 
for economic and social development in our world. They are 
the functional equivalent of electricity in the industrial era.”
“The humanitarian model has barely changed since the 
early  twentieth  century,”  Paul  Conneally  says.28  “Its  ori-
gins are firmly rooted in the analogue age, and there is a 

138

s av i ng   t h e   s av ior s

major shift coming.” The catalyst for this shift, he argues, 
was the 2010 Haiti earthquake.

What exactly is new about digital humanitarianism? The 
innovations around maps are the result of several core ad-
vances in online programming, such as the availability of 
cartographic APIs (application programming interfaces) and 
GPS-enabled mobile phones, and communities are emerging 
around this new technology that are able to do things in the 
humanitarian space that were simply not possible before.

These  communities  can  do  things  that  traditional  hu-
manitarian  organizations  cannot.  In  Haiti,  where  tradi-
tional organizations needed field offices or advance teams 
to get information, crisis maps are almost immediately de-
ployable. While traditional organizations could use Usha-
hidi  maps,  a  culture  of  risk  avoidance  makes  using  and 
publishing crowdsourced data very difficult.

What’s more, large humanitarian organizations saw in-
formation technology the way states and traditional media 
organizations did: as a means to enhance their control over 
the dissemination of information, not as a means for two-
way communications. As Gloria Huang from the Ameri-
can Red Cross told journalist Katie Collins, “While they 
were prepared to broadcast information about the disaster 
and what the agency was doing through blogs and social 
media, what they were not prepared for was the influx of 
posts  and  messages  from  people  who  were  suffering,  or 
who knew people who were suffering.”29

Once a humanitarian operation is opened up to public par-
ticipation, it empowers a wide range of new actors and privi-
leges new sources and forms of data. Individuals affected by 

139

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

the crisis can share information with one another, and they 
can communicate directly with the outside world.30

It is difficult to overemphasize how the ability of indi-
viduals  to  report  directly  on  their  own  condition  in  real 
time changes the information environment for humanitar-
ian organizations. In some potentially very powerful ways, 
this  can  serve  to  transfer  ownership  and  power  over  as-
pects of the humanitarian space to those whose lives are 
being affected. In the case of the text message campaign 
in Haiti, this meant transferring the event reporting and 
translation services to local Haitians soon after the system 
was launched. These intertwined technologies lead to new 
mixes of authoritative and non-authoritative data, which 
rapidly can become a complex mix of data streams, types, 
and sources. This then is an additional layer for responders 
already having to navigate coordination among themselves 
and the populations they serve.31 When anyone can partic-
ipate in both the communications and delivery of aid, how 
does the mass organize itself, and what is the role of hu-
manitarian organizations in this information ecosystem?

One answer is that it has simply proven very difficult for 
large traditional organizations and states to play the role of 
both the information hub and subsequent mobilizer of collec-
tive action in humanitarian emergencies. A recent study of the 
Haiti earthquake found that at the operational level, human-
itarian information acquired by the main relief organizations 
was largely not reinforced by local knowledge. Many govern-
ments,  national  non-governmental  organizations,  and  civil 
society  groups  simply  started  with  the  assumption  that  no 
local data was available. Coordination among these groups 

1 40

s av i ng   t h e   s av ior s

was rigid, hierarchical, and cumbersome, leaving them unable 
to respond to the crisis.32 A disaster is best thought of as an 
unpredictable, complex system, yet to create order, large or-
ganizations have traditionally imposed a unified, linear, and 
hierarchical structure, known as a systems model.33 A com-
plex system is very difficult to impose order on, however, par-
ticularly in new digital environments with vast amounts of 
information arriving in in real time.

And  yet  new  organizations  like  Ushahidi  and  Open-
StreetMaps are proving very effective in this new context. 
One way to explain why is by looking to complex adap-
tive systems theory, which posits that actors in a complex 
system exist in a constant state of learning, which allows a 
system as a whole to remain resilient. In a crisis situation, 
this is important because it allows for behaviors to emerge 
in the spaces left absent by traditional organizations and 
structures.34 So, for example, a group of students outside 
Boston could fill the information gaps left by a failure of 
traditional institutions to innovate in the digital space.

Crisis mappers are disruptive innovators, and digital hu-
manitarians may be part of a shift in power from states or 
organizations that used to control aid. Ultimately, however, 
what matters is whether humanitarian assistance is helping 
people. Do these digital innovations empower responders 
and recipients in a way that leads to better outcomes? Or 
do they simple recreate existing institutional norms, power 
structures, and social inequities?

141

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

Haiti  remains  in  a  state  of  humanitarian  emergency, 
widespread  poverty,  and  deep  corruption  after  years  of 
large-scale  international  intervention.  How  then  can  it 
be  a  turning  point  for  humanitarian  innovation,  as  is 
so often claimed? First, Haiti’s history before the earth-
quake  reveals  a  long-running  pattern  of  “permanent 
crisis.”  When  the  US  military  restored  President  Jean-
Bertrand Aristide to power in 1994, international relief 
organizations saw Haiti as an emergency state, a label the 
country has not been able to shake. This led to INGOs 
focusing  on  short-term  projects  rather  than  long-term 
infrastructural development—so that the state was in a 
sense “de-capacitated” by aid, not improved. The earth-
quake did a great deal of damage to government build-
ings and resources—a majority of government buildings 
were  destroyed,  and  many  government  employees  were 
killed. However, less than 1% of the $1.8 billion raised 
for aid went to the Haitian government and restoration 
of government facilities. Most of the aid was distributed 
to foreign, non-state actors.

While many of the innovations were attributed to the ini-
tial response period, the line between emergency assistance 
and long-term development is always blurred, particularly 
in countries with large-scale structural impediments to re-
construction and post-disaster social and economic recov-
ery. As a review of USAID by the NGO Interaction states, 
“The structure of US assistance still reflects an outmoded 
dichotomy between ‘relief’ and ‘development’ in which ef-
fective coordination and handover between these poles is 
often discussed but rarely executed.”35

1 42

s av i ng   t h e   s av ior s

The initial aid effort in Haiti quickly turned into a more 
traditional  development  mission,  mired  in  the  organiza-
tional and government challenges that currently sit largely 
outside the bounds of technological innovation. For exam-
ple, agencies run by certified NGOs in Haiti were the main 
authorities managing camps. They ran on a “project man-
agement  logic”  in  which  they  prioritized  meeting  NGO 
goals of delivering a minimum quality of service to those 
receiving  aid.  This  translated  to  quantity  over  quality  in 
terms of the number of people in need served. Addition-
ally,  there  is  remarkably  little  accountability  for  individ-
ual camp-management agencies. “While failures of quality 
and coverage within project sites are attributable to spe-
cific  CMAs,  failures  of  coverage  for  the  whole  disaster-
affected  population  are  traceable  only  to  the  amorphous 
‘humanitarian  system,’  where  accountability  is  radically 
dispersed.”36  Some  critics  go  further  in  blaming  the  hu-
manitarian community. Laura Zanotti points out that 84 
cents  of  every  dollar  USAID  spends  in  Haiti  goes  to  the 
salaries of international experts.37

Another  question  we  must  ask  then  is  whether  digital 
technology, despite the benefits outlined previously, has a 
substantive impact on the core structural challenges of de-
velopment and humanitarianism. Does it shift power bal-
ances in some of the vexing problems we know are rampant 
in the aid enterprise, such as gender, economic inequality, 
or culture?

Nigerian anthropologist Gado Alzouma says that “instead 
of being a tool for liberation, the Internet can become an in-
timidating technology which can contribute to widening the 

143

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

gap between those who possess everything and those who 
do  not.”38  Despite  some  promising  initiatives  that  actively 
engage  young  women  in  tech,  the  introduction  of  digital 
technologies often magnifies gender imbalances in develop-
ing nations.39 Women often don’t have equal access to edu-
cation; many societies have ingrained beliefs that technology 
is a male domain. Knowledge of English, the dominant lan-
guage of much technology development, is another barrier 
to involvement in new technologies beyond passive usage. As 
a result, those who already have power in a society, as well 
as outsiders, often make coding, design, and infrastructure 
decisions in the design of humanitarian projects. While code 
is becoming increasingly powerful, in many ways forming 
new  laws  of  society,  both  the  government  and  individual 
citizens are largely cut out of its creations.

Manuel  Castells  argues  that  there  is  a  “fourth  world” 
of  people  globally  who  are  cut  off  from  larger  networks 
of communication by poverty and lack of infrastructure. 
He argues that growth of communications technology is a 
function of globalization and capitalism, and that we must 
“redefine social development” to include communications 
technology,  or  the  people  in  the  fourth  world  will  move 
further  into  underdevelopment.40  Within  many  societies, 
the  access  gap  exists  between  urban  and  rural,  rich  and 
poor, men and women, educated and uneducated.41 Tech-
nologies  must  in  part  be  developed  in  the  environments 
where they will be used, to incorporate the community dy-
namics and goals and developmental priorities.42

The concept of governing at a distance is often applied to 
the ways outsiders rule much of a society when responding 

1 4 4

s av i ng   t h e   s av ior s

to a disaster—from the design of camps and the provision 
of goods and services to more structural controls such as 
grant giving and project evaluation.43 In a study of Google 
Earth’s  “Crisis  in  Darfur”  Awareness  Layer,  academic 
Lisa Parks explores how the presentation of Darfur mate-
rial can “reproduce western tropes of African tragedy.”44 
She argues that instead of leading to policy action, these 
images have fostered a particular, highly removed and rep-
resentational version of the events that took place.

Some  scholars  of  geography  like  Jeffrey  Warren  warn 
that we must view mapping as an “inherently un-neutral 
practice.”45 We must therefore understand its role “not as 
documentation of what makes up the world but as rhetori-
cal, tactical, and subjective tools.” Seen this way, mapping 
can be a form of control over those who do not participate 
in the creation of maps.

As Warren points out, digital technology skeptics such 
as  Evgeny  Morozov  warn  that  while  Brazilian  ecologists 
can  use  mapping  to  reveal  deforestation  policies  in  the 
Amazon delta, governments can use these same mapping 
platforms to monitor and control their citizens. For exam-
ple, “In Russia, the Internet has given a boost to extreme 
right-wing  groups  like  the  Movement  against  Illegal  Im-
migration, which has been using Google Maps to visualize 
the location of ethnic minorities in Russian cities and en-
couraging its members to hound them out.”46

The  same  technology  platforms  enable  these  parallel 
examples  of  utopian  liberation  and  dystopian  control.  A 
crisis  map  may  bring  real  benefits  to  those  who  partici-
pate  in  its  creation  by  providing  data.  But  this  data  can 

145

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

also be used for harm. If someone in danger is identified 
and harmed through information on a map, or a woman 
reporting a rape on HarrassMap is identified and harmed 
by her abuser, then who is held accountable? If a govern-
ment  uses  a  crisis  map  as  a  source  of  surveillance  data, 
how do we account for this in an analysis of its utility and 
value?  Accountability  in  open,  collaborative  systems  is  a 
challenge.

Additionally, the assistance that people receive from par-
ticipating in a crisis map will in most cases rely on the help 
of traditional aid organizations. These platforms, while an 
innovation, are being designed and built by privileged out-
siders, who are in very tangible ways benefiting from the 
deployment of the technology. What’s more, they are doing 
so with the necessary participation of those who are most 
disenfranchised. We need to be very careful that we are not 
simply replicating the power structures that have proved so 
problematic in the wider aid and humanitarian world.

Who is empowered in any given crowdsourced data pro-
ject?  Generally,  these  are  the  people  who  built  the  plat-
form and analyze the data. They are acquiring knowledge, 
analytic capability, expertise, and technological advances. 
Many  are  becoming  experts,  and  many  are  employed 
through  this  practice.  In  this  sense,  many  innovations 
simply mimic the top-down structure that is problematic 
with  many  Western-led  humanitarian  and  development 
projects. For example, Ushahidi maps are usually managed 
by  a  small  group,  likely  located  in  an  office  away  from 
the  area  which  it  maps  and  gathering  information  from 
a large group of affected people. The people who benefit 

1 46

s av i ng   t h e   s av ior s

most from this arrangement are those at the top, the ones 
managing the map: They have the most access to informa-
tion and face the least risk. However, the data providers 
on the ground, at the bottom of this structure, may never 
benefit from reporting what they see.

Those who provide the data required to make the sys-
tems work can be empowered by their participation, but 
only if they see a direct response. And the ability for this 
to occur is often deeply embroiled in the structural prob-
lems that led to their harm in the first place. Delivery of aid 
still depends on large institutional actors, whether they are 
national or foreign governments, or international organi-
zations. And while these institutions may engage with the 
new digital humanitarians, they could also simply appro-
priate the technology. What’s more, when the line between 
humanitarian assistance and development gets blurred, as 
is so often the case, then the interplay between individual 
empowerment through technology and domestic state con-
trol and responsibility becomes even more complex. Again, 
the digital technology cannot be separated from the social 
system in which it is used, and there are few domains of 
the international system where this is more consequential 
than in aid and humanitarianism.

Digital  technology  may  be  disrupting  aspects  of  hu-
manitarianism, but is it ultimately helping those doing the 
saving more than those who remain in need?

147

c h a p t e r   s e v e n

d i p l o m a c y   u n b o u n d

At  5  a.m.  on  Friday,  September  7,  2012,  five  Canadian 
diplomats  stationed  in  Tehran  quietly  left  Iran.  Canada 
expelled  all  Iranian  diplomats  from  Ottawa  that  same 
day. After years of increasing tensions and rhetoric, and 
amid growing concerns about possible reprisals from an 
Israeli  or  US  military  strike,  Canada  cut  all  diplomatic 
tries with Iran.

The  relationship  had  soured.  The  Canadian  embassy, 
which had cost $7 million per year to maintain, had almost 
no contact with Iranian officials. What was the value to 
traditional diplomacy, Canadian officials reasoned, if you 
couldn’t  talk  to  anyone?  Not  everyone  agreed  with  this 
fairly dramatic piece of statecraft. John Mundy, a veteran 
Canadian  diplomat  and  the  last  full  Canadian  ambassa-
dor to Iran, told the Globe and Mail that the pullout was 
a grave step that would be very difficult to repair, and one 
that  precluded  Canada  from  having  any  dialogue  with 
Iran.1

Mundy  meant  dialogue  with  the  Iranian  government. 
As  Canada  was  cutting  its  formal  diplomatic  ties  with 
Iranian officials, a separate team within the Department 
of  Foreign  Affairs  and  International  Trade  was  working 

148

di p l om ac y   u n b ou n d

on engaging directly with Iranians. The department part-
nered with the Munk School of Global Affairs at the Uni-
versity of Toronto, specifically researchers from the Citizen 
Lab and ASL19 (a research lab that helps Iranians engage 
with surveillance circumvention technology), to form the 
Iran Global Dialogue on the Future of Iran and build an 
online platform where Iranians could discuss their upcom-
ing election. If Canadian diplomats could not speak to Ira-
nian  officials,  they  were  going  to  help  Iranians  speak  to 
one another.

A  two-day  conference  took  place  in  Toronto  in  May 
2013  and  was  streamed  live  over  the  Internet.  Its  goal 
was  to  provide  Iranian  democracy  activists  with  a  plat-
form to build civil society. Or, more generally, to advance 
human rights in Iran. So the conference was held mostly 
in  Farsi,  with  translations  into  English  and  French,  and 
people from around the world could participate through 
a range of social media platforms, and even email a Ca-
nadian  “Direct  Diplomacy  Team.”  To  allow  people  in 
Iran, where there is mass surveillance and censorship of 
the  Internet,  to  participate  in  the  conference,  the  Cana-
dian Department of Foreign Affairs, Trade and Develop-
ment (DFATD) employed a wide range of circumvention 
technologies  including  Tor  and  Psiphon,  which  allow 
users  to  navigate  online  anonymously  and  to  circum-
vent  government  censorship.  As  of  mid-2014,  the  site 
has  received  more  than  4  million  unique  visitors  from 
inside Iran, and after Hassan Rouhani won the election, 
Global Dialogue launched a follow-up project called the 
Rouhani  Meter,  which  measures  the  Iranian  president’s 

149

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

achievements  against  the  promises  he  made  during  his  
campaign.

Many  have  innocuously  characterized  the  Global  Dia-
logue  as  the  equivalent  of  a  “digital  public  square,”  but 
it  is  without  question  aggressive.  As  Michael  Petrou  of 
Maclean’s  magazine  reported,  one  Canadian  official  ac-
knowledged that the “Iranian government would certainly 
view such activity on Canada’s part as a hostile act, and 
involvement by its citizens as seditious.”2 While this project 
might  further  the  Canadian  government’s  goal  of  foster-
ing  civil  society,  and  perhaps  even  an  ancillary  objective 
of fueling dissent in Iran, it comes with costs to Canada’s 
ability to act on the more traditional stage of state-to-state 
diplomacy.

Foreign Affairs Minister John Baird is sanguine about 
the trade-off. “We can engage in direct diplomacy, not just 
elite diplomacy,” he said and called for getting more Ca-
nadian officials on Twitter. “In the environment of instant 
communication  and  social  media,  we  do  have  to  move 
faster and not be afraid to try new things or to make mis-
takes.” To Baird, the Global Dialogue is only one compo-
nent of a far more assertive form of diplomacy.

In  some  ways  then,  Canada’s  closure  of  formal  diplo-
matic channels with Iran and its shift to digital diplomacy 
does not replace a traditional Canadian role of moderate 
interlocutor, but rather is an expression of an activist for-
eign  policy.  Online,  Baird  and  Prime  Minister  Stephen 
Harper were free to call the election a “sham” and to pro-
voke the Iranian government in a way they likely would-
n’t have on the ground in Tehran. They were also able to 

150

di p l om ac y   u n b ou n d

speak directly to millions of Iranians in a way previously 
impossible.

The  US  government  was  also  deeply  frustrated  with 
the lack of diplomatic progress with Iran. After President 
Barack Obama’s 2009 inauguration, in an effort to rein-
state high-level diplomatic discussions, his administration 
reached  out  to  Iran  by  contacting  the  Supreme  Leader, 
Ayatollah  Ali  Khamenei.  Like  many  previous  American 
overtures, the effort led nowhere.

That summer, Iran detained three American hikers who 
had attempted to cross the border from Iraq. Oman’s Sultan 
Qaboos initially acted as a mediator between the United 
States and Iran, leading to the hikers’ release and the be-
ginning of backroom discussions between negotiators for 
the two countries. Top US officials, including Vice Presi-
dent Joe Biden’s foreign policy adviser Jake Sullivan, met at 
least five times with Iranian officials in Oman. These meet-
ings, arranged in secret, with remarkable levels of clandes-
tine movement, were held simultaneously with more public 
negotiations between Iranian officials and representatives 
of the United States and its allies. At the last minute, the 
United States brought a new agreement to the more public 
table,  one  developed  through  these  backchannel  negotia-
tions with Iran, which none of its allies, not even Israel, 
knew  about.  The  resulting  Geneva  agreement  provided 
Iran with $7 billion in sanctions relief in exchange for tem-
porary curbs on nuclear development. The agreement is in-
tended as a first step toward a final accord to be developed 
in  2015.  It  is  the  first  major  breakthrough  in  diplomatic 
relations between Iran and the West in decades, one driven 

151

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

in part by a common perceived interest in confronting the 
Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS).

Israeli  Prime  Minister  Benjamin  Netanyahu  called  the 
deal a historic mistake that “turns the world into a much 
scarier place,” and Canadian Prime Minister Harper also 
criticized it.3 But the Geneva agreement is clearly a foreign 
policy achievement for Obama, who sees an American in-
terest  in  avoiding  the  back-and-forth  threats  that  could 
lead eventually to either US or Israeli military intervention 
in Iran. It is yet to be seen whether the process will prove 
a success, but it was a classic diplomatic effort. Not unlike 
Kissinger’s secret trips through Pakistan to meet with Chi-
nese officials, which ultimately led to Nixon’s historic visit, 
these negotiations are rooted in a very traditional notion 
of diplomacy.

This traditional approach focuses almost exclusively on 
conversation  between  elites.  High-level  talks  used  to  be 
sufficient, as most relevant groups in a given conflict were 
essentially  hierarchical  organizations.  Just  as  diplomats 
were  once  the  filters  for  news  of  global  events  for  their 
home governments, they were also a primary participant 
in what was an elites discussion. There was always some-
one  with  whom  they  could,  in  theory,  negotiate.  Nelson 
Mandela was a dissident but also the public representative 
of a constituency for whom he could speak. Today, diplo-
mats can, and often need to, engage with a wide variety 
of  networked  citizens.  Like  the  foreign  correspondent  in 
a sea of social media, they are one among many seeking 
influence as global events unfold. The consequence of fail-
ing  to  adapt  will  be  losing  control  over  the  information 

152

di p l om ac y   u n b ou n d

environment and networks of influencers. This new, net-
worked environment challenges what it means to perform 
diplomacy.

To  assess  whether  digital  diplomacy  can  be  an  effective 
tool  for  the  state,  it  is  worth  stepping  back  and  looking 
at the place of diplomacy in the projection of state power 
and the securing of state interests. State diplomacy has, of 
course, been at the center of international affairs since the 
Treaty of Westphalia. Epitomized by Otto Von Bismarck’s 
European statecraft through the middle of the 19th cen-
tury, keeping Europe from war and in so doing building 
the German Empire, the idea of a balance of power among 
states, pursued without war, has a long history. It is what 
underlies the creation of the United Nations following the 
Second World War and the peace among great powers that 
it  was  designed  to  ensure.  Before  Twitter  and  mesh  net-
works and digital security programs, how did we view the 
value of diplomacy, and how did we evaluate its impact?

Power in the diplomatic context is considered the ability 
to affect others in order to obtain the outcomes one wants. 
There are three main ways this can be done. First, coer-
cion is a form of hard power whereby the threat of military 
force is used as a stick to achieve a political end. Second, 
inducement and payments are also a form of hard power 
whereby  economic  advantages  are  dangled  like  a  carrot. 
The third type of diplomatic power is based on attraction 
rather than confrontation; it is more subtle and is generally 

153

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

called soft power. Other countries may aspire to emulate 
one  country’s  success  or  admire  its  values,  and  are  thus 
more likely to follow its guidance or policy agenda. The 
ideal form of soft power is the ability to convince others to 
want what you want, so that you do not have to force the 
other to take the action you desire.

As  discussed  in  the  second  chapter,  the  idea  of  soft 
power  is  generally  attributed  to  Harvard’s  Kennedy 
School  of  Government  professor  Joseph  Nye,  who  de-
fines it as “the ability to affect others to obtain the out-
comes one wants through attraction rather than coercion 
or payment.” A country’s soft power, he argues, “rests on 
its resources of culture, values, and policies.”4 Soft power 
is not exactly policy but rather a consequence of policies. 
Countries  can,  of  course,  do  things  to  promote  them-
selves,  but  this  can  be  risky.  If,  for  example,  the  Voice 
of America were to be perceived as arrogant by those it 
was seeking to influence, Nye explains, then it would not 
exert soft power.5 There is a fine line between soft power 
and propaganda.

Soft power is not a recent American invention. After the 
Franco-Prussian  war,  France  founded  the  Alliance  Fran-
caise, which has outposts in many countries; and during 
World War I, many other nations acted in a similar manner, 
establishing their own cultural offices around the world to 
develop  soft  power.  In  the  United  States,  the  idea  really 
took shape in the 1930s, where the Roosevelt administra-
tion  held  the  position  that  “America’s  security  depended 
on its ability to speak to and to win the support of people 
in other countries.”6

154

di p l om ac y   u n b ou n d

Ultimately,  soft  power  is  not  just  getting  people  to  do 
what they normally wouldn’t but also about aligning their 
interests  with  your  own,  often  as  a  result  of  a  long  and 
trusting relationship. This means that the decline or dis-
ruption of these relationships can undermine soft power. 
For example, as Nye outlines, when the United States was 
seeking support for the Iraq war after the September 11, 
2001, attacks, whether it was Mexico’s UN vote or the use 
of Turkish airspace, “the decline of American soft power 
created  a  disabling  rather  than  an  enabling  environment 
for its policies.”7

Soft power as an instrument of foreign policy is generally 
associated with public diplomacy, which may be defined as 
“the relationship between diplomats and the foreign pub-
lics with whom they work.” US diplomat Edmund Gullion 
coined  the  term  in  the  1960s,  and  throughout  the  Cold 
War  its  main  concern  was  promoting  US  culture  world-
wide. The projection of American military force and capa-
bility, as well as Mikhail Gorbachev’s failure to reform his 
communist  government  played  major  roles  in  ending  the 
Cold War, but so too, argues Nye, did the “soft power of 
liberal ideas.”8 After the Cold War, budgets were cut and 
public diplomacy efforts declined, but 9/11 and the War on 
Terror made it all the more important for the United States 
to assert its cultural values around the world.

Public  diplomacy  has  traditionally  taken  three  forms: 
explaining government foreign policies to those impacted 
by them, developing long-term strategic themes to brand 
foreign policy, and building lasting relationships through 
cultural  and  academic  exchanges.  Notably,  in  the  past, 

155

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

public diplomacy has not made policy, but rather has com-
municated and framed it. But this is changing, as the prac-
tice moves into the digital space.

Despite this clear mandate, the place of both soft power 
and public diplomacy in the broader diplomatic landscape is 
increasingly ambiguous. Jan Melissen, professor of diplomacy 
at the Netherlands Institute for International Affairs argues, 
that “the basic distinction between traditional diplomacy and 
public diplomacy is clear: the former is about relationships 
between the representatives of states, or other international 
actors; whereas the latter targets the general public in foreign 
societies and more specific non-official groups, organizations 
and  individuals.”9  In  a  networked  world,  the  audience  for 
public diplomacy initiatives is increasingly vast and hard to 
define. At times, it seems as if digital public diplomacy means 
relations with anyone and everyone.

President Barack Obama’s major address in Cairo on June 4,  
2009,  was  an  attempt  to  “reframe  the  relationship  be-
tween the US and the Muslim world.” As the first major 
foreign policy initiative of his presidency, Obama sought 
to shift the public discourse and perception in the Middle 
East about America and American foreign policy that had 
so soured under his predecessor, George W. Bush, in the 
wake of the Iraq War. Ten years earlier, Obama might have 
taking to the airwaves and opinion pages of newspapers 
to  promote  this  message.  In  2009  it  meant  engaging  the 
online world.

156

di p l om ac y   u n b ou n d

For  this  task  Obama  deployed  the  State  Department’s 
Digital Outreach Team, a pioneer in digital diplomacy. The 
Digital Outreach Team is a small group of State Depart-
ment officials who engage in foreign comment threads and 
online forums in order to “counter misinformation.” The 
team visits popular Arabic, Farsi, and Urdu news websites 
with large pools of commenters. Members identify them-
selves by name and acknowledge their affiliation with the 
Department  of  State.  American  public  diplomacy  is  cer-
tainly not new to the Middle East, but it once took a very 
different form. Up until the mid-1990s, diplomatic efforts 
were run by the United States Information Agency, which 
used the Voice of America to broadcast in Arabic and pro-
duced  an  Arabic  magazine  called  Al-Majal.  During  the 
Gulf War, the State Department developed new radio sta-
tions, as well as a television station called Al-Hurra. Nei-
ther was particularly successful and both lacked credibility 
in the Arab world.10 Unlike previous efforts— magazines, 
radio, and television that broadcast American views to an 
Arab audience—the Digital Outreach Team took up active, 
constant, real-time engagement.

So  when  Obama  courted  Arab  and  Muslim  audiences 
around his Cairo speech, he was entering uncharted and 
perilous territory. An academic study of the Digital Out-
reach Team’s efforts looked at how American messages were 
received on discussion boards and news sites in the Middle 
East. The authors found that the team primarily worked to 
dispel myths about US policy and refute false claims, but 
at times they came off as condescending or ridiculing. The 
study also found that posts by the Digital Outreach Team 

157

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

generated more negative response toward the United States 
than  had  already  been  posted,  and  these  reactions  were 
so  strong  that  American  engagement  seemed  ultimately 
counterproductive. Comment threads are notoriously iras-
cible  places,  and  they  may  not  be  the  best  platform  for 
diplomacy. In any case, the Digital Outreach Team has ex-
plained  that  their  primary  goal  is  to  present  logical  and 
informed arguments to counter anti-US sentiment online, 
not  for  the  commenters,  who  make  up  a  fraction  of  the 
online audience, but for the broader, silent audience that 
gets their news from these sites.11

Digital  public  diplomacy  has  seen  wide  international 
adoption.  Ambassadors  and  desk  officers  use  Twitter  to 
engage their home constituents or citizens of the countries 
where they are posted. Foreign ministers hold online brief-
ings  on  Facebook,  Twitter,  and  Google  Hangouts,  and 
events are streamed online. As the State Department writes, 
“The role of new media in public diplomacy has gone from 
virtually non-existent to standard practice.” Indeed, in the 
summer of 2014, the Department had 230 Facebook pages, 
80 Twitter accounts, 55 channels on YouTube, and 40 ac-
counts on Flickr. In the US State Department, many such 
initiatives fall under the Bureau of Information Resource 
Management’s Office of eDiplomacy.

The department has also used technology to change its 
own  internal  processes.  The  Communities@State  project 
allows department staff to form online communities, start 
blogs, and discuss policy, with the goal of breaking down 
departmental silos and fostering better internal communi-
cation. Diplopedia is an internal wiki where officials can 

158

di p l om ac y   u n b ou n d

create articles that others can edit collaboratively. One of 
the main advantages of this site is helping with the conti-
nuity of programs once offices are moved to other desks—
it is a place where past knowledge can be stored. Virtual 
Presence Posts is a suite of online tools to help consulates 
and embassies better engage with the public. This is par-
ticularly useful in countries where the United States has no 
physical presence.12

Digitizing  the  traditional  tools  of  public  diplomacy  is 
both appropriate and needed. Doing so is more complex 
than old broadcast models because one has to both com-
municate and actively engage, but ultimately this is doable 
and will prove beneficial to the promotion of state interests.
The  challenge  any  public  diplomacy  initiative  faces  is 
that it does not exist in a vacuum. As such, it must be as-
sessed alongside a much broader range of, at times, contra-
dicting or conflicting policies. Just as Nixon’s diplomatic 
overtures to China were not exogenous from the actions 
of  other  branches  of  US  foreign  policy,  Canada’s  digital 
outreach to Iranian activists should not be viewed as in-
dependent from that country’s strenuous objections to the 
US-led  treaty  process.  The  Iranians  whom  Canada  were 
seeking  to  engage  in  a  conversation  about  their  human 
rights were aware of Canada’s opposition to a nuclear deal 
on  which  their  economic  prosperity  and  re-engagement 
with the international community depended.

This is why US outreach to the Arab world during the 
Iraq War should not be seen as a failure of public diplomacy, 
but as a function of how people felt and were affected by 
the war. And Obama’s attempted digital reparations were 

159

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

dismissed by many in the region not due to the medium in 
which they were debated but because of deep-seated skep-
ticism after years of perceived antagonism.

As the Digital Outreach Team found in its efforts around 
Obama’s Cairo speech, the greatest hindrance to the online 
effort was US foreign policy in the Middle East itself. “The 
work of the Digital Outreach Team is being undermined 
by the trajectory of US foreign policy towards the Middle 
East,”  they  pointedly  concluded.13  No  amount  of  tweet-
ing  will  make  a  difference  if  the  message  being  sold  is 
unappealing.

As many of the State Department’s digital public diplo-
macy initiatives took off, the department was developing a 
broader array of digital programs. Fitting under this evolv-
ing  rubric  of  21st-century  statecraft  are  many  programs 
that extended far beyond the use of Twitter and force us 
to consider the bounds and ultimate costs of more activist 
online diplomacy.

As  Secretary  of  State  Hillary  Clinton  said,  they  were 
“working  to  leverage  the  power  and  potential  in  what  I 
call 21st-Century Statecraft . . . to embrace new tools, like 
using cell phones for mobile banking or to monitor elec-
tions. But we’re also reaching to the people behind these 
tools, the innovators and entrepreneurs themselves.”

The 21st-century statecraft policy framework came out 
of  the  First  Quadrennial  Diplomacy  and  Development 
Review  in  2010,  which  outlined  the  wide  range  of  new 
actors, technologies, and platforms that needed to be in-
corporated  into  US  diplomatic  policy—not  simply  in  the 
promotion of government policy but also in the creation 

16 0

di p l om ac y   u n b ou n d

and implementation of it. As has been outlined throughout 
this book, these actors are powerful and their capabilities 
often confound states. Extending US diplomacy into this 
space means engaging on platforms where participants are 
anonymous, deploying technologies that are widely used by 
criminal organizations, and actively incorporating actors 
whom the government generally dismisses (such as Anon-
ymous and Telecomix) into the conversation of diplomacy.
Officially, the department defines 21st-century statecraft 
as “the complementing of traditional foreign policy tools 
with  newly  innovated  and  adapted  instruments  of  state-
craft that fully leverages the networks, technologies, and 
demographics  of  our  interconnected  world.”  Pointedly, 
they argue that “these new forms of decentralized power 
reflect fundamental shifts in the structure of information 
systems in modern societies.”

A  broad  range  of  development,  policy,  and  public-
diplomacy  programs  falls  under  this  framework.  The 
Civil  Society  2.0  project  is  essentially  a  tech  train-
ing  camp  for  NGOs  and  civil  society  organizations 
around  the  world.  The  State  Department  sends  Amer-
ican  technologists  abroad  to  hold  two-day  training 
workshops  to  help  these  organizations  improve  their 
reach  and  impact.  Tech@State  brings  together  Amer-
ican  technologists,  government  personnel,  and  partner 
organizations  to  brainstorm  and  develop  technology- 
based solutions for problems falling under the targeted 
goals  of  the  US  diplomacy  and  development  agenda, 
such as education, health care, and poverty alleviation. 
The Developer Community is a site for APIs (application 

161

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

programming interface), RSS (rich site summary) feeds, 
and government databases that can encourage develop-
ers to create applications.

Other programs address the shift in the power balances 
laid  out  in  the  Diplomacy  and  Development  Review.  The 
Internet  in  a  Suitcase,  supplied  to  Syrian  rebels  through 
the  Office  of  Syrian  Opposition  Support  as  part  of  $25 
million  in  non-lethal  aid,  is  a  collaboration  with  several 
US  non-profit  partners  to  develop  mesh  network  technol-
ogy so communities of activists can communicate securely 
during communications blackouts and provide digital secu-
rity for network operators and users.14 Another project was 
a joint State Department and Pentagon attempt to circum-
vent Taliban control of communication services by creating 
an independent cellphone network using towers on military 
bases.15 To function effectively, these so-called dissent net-
works need to be highly secure and to be able to connect a 
large number of people across a significant distance.16 Shadi 
Hasan wrote an electrical engineering and computer science 
thesis  on  designing  networks  that  can  function  in  large- 
scale Internet blackouts, and he argues that achieving these 
at the same time is a core challenge of the community of  
technologists and activists developing censorship circumven-
tion  capabilities;  “true  dissent  network  would  fundamen-
tally change the balance of power between repressive regimes 
and dissidents in terms of access to communication.”17

Such  programs  are  being  deployed  in  spaces  of  active 
conflict. The State Department, for example, has supplied 
$25  million  in  counter-surveillance  technology  to  Syrian 
rebels  through  the  Office  of  Syrian  Opposition  Support. 

162

di p l om ac y   u n b ou n d

This  technology  mostly  came  in  the  form  of  satellite 
phones.  A  similar  joint  State  Department  and  Pentagon 
project attempts to circumvent Taliban control of commu-
nication services by creating an independent cellphone net-
work using towers on military bases.

Another more activist digital diplomacy effort was an 
elaborate  scheme  to  create  a  Cuban  version  of  Twitter 
with the goal of fostering dissent and promoting regime 
change there. Between 2009 and 2012, USAID, the in-
ternational  development  arm  of  the  State  Department 
responsible  for  a  wide  range  of  humanitarian  and  aid 
projects around the world, developed a mobile text-based 
service through a clandestine network of contractors and 
front companies allowing Cubans to freely exchange in-
formation.  The  service,  called  ZunZuneo,  had  40,000 
active users at its peak. When it attempted to transition 
to a private company, it failed to find a sustainable reve-
nue model.

The  program  was  ingenious,  audacious—and  ulti-
mately a stain on the reputation of USAID, known for a 
wide range of benign development projects. As Republican 
Senator Mike Johanns said at a hearing into the matter, 
“When I think about USAID I think about words like ‘hu-
manitarian,’ ‘caring,’ ‘road builders.’ I can’t imagine why 
USAID would want to be involved in something like going 
into a country and trying to get Internet access for people 
opposing the regime.”

This  is  of  course  not  entirely  true.  The  USAID  has  a 
long history of interventionist development initiatives. For 
example, since the mid-2000s, the US has been spending 

163

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

tens of millions of dollars a year on what they call “trans-
formational development” initiatives in Iran.

Both the mesh network initiative and the USAID Cuban 
project are attempts by the state to act as a disruptive power 
itself. The core challenge of the State Department’s Internet 
freedom agenda is not that circumvention tools are a bad 
idea, or that the censorship and surveillance programs they 
are meant to counter are not damaging to civil society. It is 
that at the same time as the 21st-century statecraft program 
was supplying Syrian dissidents with counter- surveillance 
technology the US government was simultaneously build-
ing a large-scale international surveillance program of its 
own. What’s more, at the same time the United States was 
supporting these dissidents to oppose certain regimes, the 
regimes  were  often  buying  their  surveillance  hardware 
from American corporations, at the same technology trade 
fairs as the US intelligence agencies. It is an understatement 
to say that activists will be suspicious of US efforts going 
forward. No matter how genuine the intentions, the State 
Department’s Internet freedom agenda cannot be isolated 
from the wider actions of the US government.

This dynamic can work in the other direction as well. 
Digital diplomacy initiatives can negate the efforts of other 
branches of foreign policy. For example, the Cuban social 
network, while an innovative use of digital technology to 
achieve a (however misguided) State Department objective, 
tainted the reputation and hurt the effectiveness of USAID 

164

di p l om ac y   u n b ou n d

as a whole. In Cuba, it fed directly into a narrative of US 
malfeasance and ended the other good works being done 
by the Cuba-based USAID project. Globally, it put USAID 
personnel at risk and marginalized their capability to de-
liver on their often very worthy humanitarian objectives.

And this gets to the core challenge of digital diplomacy, 
one  that  stems  from  the  shift  in  medium  represented  by 
digital technology. It is not just a shift in communication 
platforms to which the practice of diplomacy must adjust. 
The Internet and digital networks are a new space of oper-
ation entirely, with their own power structures, actors, and 
norms of behavior. Yes, digital public diplomacy initiatives 
can increase the reach of the state’s message, and taking to 
Twitter will help diplomats engage with local populations. 
But when the state truly embraced digital tools and capa-
bilities, the resulting innovative digital diplomacy projects, 
the ones that actually have the potential to shift the state 
into this new space of operation, were the ones that ulti-
mately failed. They failed because the state operates under 
different  social,  legal,  and  at  times,  ethical  constraints 
from other online actors. And the costs of operating out-
side of these bounds, taken with the state’s foreign policy 
interests as a whole, are simply too high. While traditional 
state-to-state diplomacy will always be relevant, it might 
be that diplomatic power, or soft power, does not translate 
to the digital world.

It  is  notable,  for  example,  that  Anne-Marie  Slaughter, 
whose theory of networked power was detailed in Chap-
ter  2,  was  director  of  policy  planning  (a  highly  influen-
tial  policy  position)  at  the  State  Department  while  the 

165

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

21st-century statecraft policy was being developed. She has 
rightly argued that the state needs to engage in this new 
digital space and is only one actor of many. She does so in 
a way, however, that ultimately privileges the state. Both 
Slaughter and Nye believe that the interests of the United 
States and of the networked actors they seek to influence 
can be made compatible. The state just has to behave in 
a way that is relevant to the digital world. But the case of 
digital diplomacy shows that this theory has limitations.

When the bounds of diplomacy are extended into influ-
encing not just states but also digital actors, then they over-
lap fundamentally with other foreign policy programs and 
objectives. And this invariably leads to conflicting methods 
and  outcomes.  Because  these  more  invasive  digital  diplo-
macy initiatives are implemented on the very same platforms 
and  using  the  same  tools  as  the  more  innocuous  digital 
public diplomacy programs, it is possible that they tarnish 
the whole enterprise. If this is the case, then the undue neg-
ative costs associated with coercive digital diplomacy dem-
onstrate the weakness of the state in a major realm of its 
foreign policy. And if the state can’t effectively act diplomat-
ically in the digital space, then what does this tell us about 
the contemporary relevance of diplomacy itself?

Returning to the competing approaches to Iranian diplo-
macy, if the goal was to influence the Iranian state to limit 
their nuclear production, then the US model has for now 
been effective. It is a traditional diplomatic goal, which fits 
comfortably within the purview and capability of the State 
Department. The Canadian program has stepped out into 
a  far  more  ambiguous  space.  While  there  is  no  question 

166

di p l om ac y   u n b ou n d

that it met its goal of reaching out to Iranian citizens, if 
it was an attempt to influence the Iranian government by 
building  civil  society  and  perhaps  fostering  dissent,  then 
we need to question the capabilities of the Canadian state 
to see this through. We have to take into consideration the 
wide ranges of implications for doing this, and we are far 
from knowing the outcome. As an initiative it may have 
been successfully, but it must be seen, and ultimately as-
sessed, as a part of a wider foreign policy.

If, on the other hand, this is the Canadian state decid-
ing  that  the  traditional  goals  of  diplomacy  (in  this  case, 
influencing the Iranian government) are obsolete, then they 
will run into a whole different set of challenges. When di-
plomacy steps out of the bounds of the state system and 
into  the  digital  world,  it  has  to  play  in  the  game  that  is 
being played. And as we have seen throughout this book, 
in this space the rules, norms, and capabilities are very dif-
ferent. As we have seen in the 21st-century statecraft ex-
amples, the state is profoundly ill-suited to behave in this 
way, without taking significant risks that will affect a wide 
range of other foreign policy goals.

Ultimately, the challenge of digital diplomacy is grounded 
in  the  paradox  of  state  power  online,  that  states  either 
can’t do the things necessary to exert power in a digital 
network or the strategic costs of doing so are simply too 
high. What’s more, the goals, tools, and strategic frame-
works through which this form of invasive digital diplo-
macy needs to operate extend the bounds of diplomacy so 
far and overlap so significantly with other foreign policy 
goals that they render the practices of diplomacy obsolete.

167

c h a p t e r   e i g h t

t h e   v i o l e n c e   
o f   a l g o r i t h m s

In December 2010, I attended a training session in Tysons 
Corner,  Virginia,  just  outside  Washington,  DC,  for  an 
intelligence  analytics  software  program  called  Palantir. 
Co-founded by Peter Thiel, a libertarian Silicon Valley bil-
lionaire from PayPal and Facebook, Palantir is a slick tool 
kit of data visualization and analytics used by the NSA, 
FBI, CIA, and other US national security and policing in-
stitutions. As far as I could tell, I was the only civilian in 
the course, which I took to explore Palantir’s potential for 
use in academic research.

Palantir is designed to pull together as much data as 
possible, then tag it and try to make sense of it. For ex-
ample, all of the data about a military area of operation, 
including base maps, daily intelligence reports, mission 
reports,  and  the  massive  amounts  of  surveillance  data 
now  being  collected  could  be  viewed  and  analyzed  for 
patterns in one platform. The vision being sold is one of 
total comprehension, of making sense of a messy oper-
ating environment flooded with data. The company has 
a Silicon Valley mentality: War is hell. Palantir can cut 
through the fog.

168

t h e   v iol e n c e   of   a l g or i t h m s 

The  Palantir  trainer  took  us  through  a  demonstration 
“investigation.” Each trainee got a workstation with two 
screens and various datasets: a list of known insurgents, 
daily  intelligence  reports,  satellite  surveillance  data,  and 
detailed city maps. We uploaded these into Palantir, one 
by one, and each new dataset showed us a new analytic 
capability of the program. With more data came greater 
 clarity—which is not what usually happens when an ana-
lyst is presented with vast streams of data.

In  our  final  exercise,  we  added  information  about  the 
itinerary of a suspected insurgent, and Palantir correlated 
the  location  and  time  of  one  meeting  with  information 
it  had  about  the  movements  of  a  known  bombmaker.  In 
“real life,” the next step would be a military operation: the 
launch of a drone strike, the deployment of a Special Forces 
team. Palantir had shown us how an analyst could process 
disparate data sources efficiently to target the use of vio-
lence.  It  was  an  impressive  demonstration,  and  probably 
an easy sell for the government analysts taking the course.
But I left Tysons Corner with plenty of questions. The 
data we input and tagged included typos and other mis-
takes, as well as our unconscious biases. When we marked 
an individual as a suspect, that data was pulled into the 
Palantir database as a discrete piece of information, to be 
viewed and analyzed by anyone with access to the system, 
decontextualized  from  the  rationale  behind  our  assess-
ment.  Palantir’s  algorithms—the  conclusions  and  recom-
mendations that make its system “useful”—carry the biases 
and  errors  of  the  people  who  wrote  them.  For  example, 
the suspected insurgent might have turned up in multiple 

169

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

intelligence reports, one calling him a possible threat and 
another that provided a more nuanced assessment of him. 
When the suspected insurgent is then cross-referenced with 
a known bombmaker, you can bet which analysis was pri-
oritized.  Such  questions  have  not  slowed  down  Palantir, 
which developed a billion-dollar valuation faster than any 
other American company before it, largely due to its gov-
ernment  security  contracts.  In  2014  Palantir’s  value  was 
between $5 billion and $8 billion dollars.

And  analysts  who  use  it  have  no  shortage  of  data  to 
feed into the system. All around us sensors are collecting 
data at a scale and with a precision that in many cases is 
nearing real-time total surveillance. For example, wide-
area  surveillance,  also  called  persistent  ground  surveil-
lance systems, which local law-enforcement agencies use, 
create networks of video cameras to detect and analyze 
crime  in  near  real  time.1  Newer  wide-area  surveillance 
systems do not require a network of individual cameras 
but  can  instead  take  high-resolution  images  of  many 
square miles at once. The Department of Homeland Se-
curity tethered such a motion-imagery system 2,000 feet 
above the desert in Nogales, Arizona. On its first night in 
use, the system identified 30 suspects who were brought 
in for questioning.2

This type of video analysis requires new image- processing 
capabilities. The MATE system, for example, detects move-
ment in the camera’s field of vision that the human eye, even a 
trained officer, would not notice; this can be used in airports 
to detect a suspicious bag. The Camero Xaver system uses 3D 
image reconstruction algorithms and ultra-wideband (UWB) 

170

t h e   v iol e n c e   of   a l g or i t h m s 

sensors to create representations of objects behind barriers.3 
In other words, it can see through walls.

Facial  recognition  and  other  biometrics  technology  are 
also progressing rapidly. A pilot program in San Diego called 
the Automated Regional Justice Information System applies 
algorithms to individual frames from live video feeds and 
then can cross-reference a face against pictures in databases 
at  a  rate  of  a  million  comparisons  a  second.4  One  of  the 
founders of facial recognition technology, physicist Joseph 
J. Atick, is now cautioning against its proliferation, arguing 
that it is “basically robbing everyone of their anonymity.” A 
company called Extreme Reality has developed a biometric 
scanning system that takes images from surveillance video 
to create a map of a person’s skeleton and uses it as a base-
line for detecting suspicious movements.5 Google Glass and 
other miniature cameras move us toward a world in which 
nothing is private, and all behavior is captured.

It’s not enough to collect all this data, and there are limits 
on  the  processing  power  that  allows  computers  to  make 
sense of it. But if research on quantum computing contin-
ues to progress at its current pace, those limits could disap-
pear.6 For political theorist James Der Derian, this potential 
revolutionary advance in computational capability has dra-
matic implications for the international order. Whoever has 
access to quantum computing power will have such an ad-
vantage over the control and understanding of information 
that it could lead to a new kind of arms race. Those who 
possess  quantum  computers  could  in  theory  predict  the 
stock market, model global weather patterns, make signifi-
cant advances in artificial intelligence, and have the ability 

171

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

to process and understand vast stores of real-time surveil-
lance data.

As  Der  Derian  argues,  this  could  signal  a  new  age  and 
form of war. “The goal is to convey a verbal facsimile of con-
temporary global violence as it phase-shifts from a classically 
scripted War 1.0 to an image-based War 2.0, to an indetermi-
nate, probabilistic and observable-dependent form that defies 
fixation by word, number or image, that is, quantum war.”7 
Philosopher Paul Virilio warns of the potential for a future 
“information  bomb”  where  disaster  can  occur  simultane-
ously, everywhere on the planet. This is a concept acknowl-
edged  in  theoretical  physics  but  not  in  the  social  sciences. 
It is for this reason that Der Derian urges an integration of 
science  and  math  into  the  study  of  international  relations. 
He explains that disciplinary borders must be eliminated in 
favor of a “post classical approach,” one that moves away 
from the traditional linear and systematic understanding of 
war, to one that accounts for its messiness and non-linearity.
The potential power of quantum computing puts infor-
mation control at the center of warfare. Andrew Marshall, 
director of the Office of Net Assessment, US Department 
of Defense, has said, if World War I was the chemists’ war, 
and World War II was the physicists’ war, World War III 
will be the information researchers’ war.

Over the course of history, the automation of military tech-
nology has put more distance between the soldier and his 
target. Crossbows, muskets, machine guns, and airplanes 

172

t h e   v iol e n c e   of   a l g or i t h m s 

put more distance than previous technologies, but they still 
required human operation and decision making. Increas-
ingly, however, the decisions made in battle are also being 
automated, eliminating a step of human involvement be-
tween analysis and action.

The idea of robotic war, and the protection that it prom-
ises, is nothing new. In 1495 Leonardo da Vinci proposed 
a  “mechanical  knight”  made  up  of  pulleys  under  a  suit 
of armor. In 1898, Nikola Tesla built a remote-controlled 
boat  that  he  tried  to  sell  to  the  US  military  as  an  early 
form of torpedo, an idea that was implemented by the Ger-
mans  in  World  War  I.  The  United  States  first  developed 
a  gyroscope-guided bomb in 1914. Throughout the 20th 
century, most advances in autonomous weaponry involved 
missile  guidance  systems.  In  the  1950s  and  1960s,  both 
the Soviet Union and the United States began developing 
computer guided missiles that correct their flight autono-
mously. In 1978, the United States deployed the first GPS 
satellite, inaugurating a system that would greatly enhance 
the  capabilities  of  unmanned  aerial  vehicles.  These  sys-
tems  are  not  infallible,  however;  in  1988,  an  automated 
aircraft-defense system on a US battleship in the Persian 
Gulf mistakenly shot down a commercial airliner, killing 
290 people.

But it was only at the turn of the 21st century, with ad-
vances in drone technology and artificial intelligence, that 
the  possibilities  of  robot  war  began  to  be  realized.  The 
United States has deployed 65 Lockheed Martin blimps in 
Afghanistan that provide real-time surveillance and data 
processing across 100 square kilometers at a time.8 These 

173

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

blimps are equipped with high definition cameras and sen-
sors that detect sound and motion. The 360-degree Kestrel 
motion-imagery system, for example, can record all activ-
ity taking place in a city for periods of up to 30 days. To 
process all that information, the system only records ac-
tivity that it assesses as being valuable, and its judgment 
evolves over time though machine learning.

The  United  States  is  not  the  only  country  using  auto-
mated technology. Russia deployed armed robots to guard 
five ballistic missile installations. Each robot weighs nearly 
a ton. They can travel at speeds of 45 kilometers per hour, 
using  radar  and  a  laser  rangefinder  to  navigate,  analyze 
potential targets, and fire machine guns without a human 
pulling the trigger. Russia is planning on vastly increasing 
its use of armed robots, supposedly saving its military more 
than  a  billion  dollars  a  year.9  South  Korea’s  Super  Aegis 
2 automated gun tower can lock onto a human target up 
to  three  kilometers  away  in  complete  darkness  and  auto-
matically fire a machine gun, rocket launcher, or surface-
to-air missile.10 For now, a human is required to make the 
final kill decision, but this is not technically required. South 
Korea has proposed deploying the Super Aegis 2 in the vol-
atile demilitarized zone that separates it from North Korea. 
Communications between the South and North are terrible, 
making this move toward automatic killing in the demilita-
rized zone extremely dangerous. Automation is also used for 
defensive purposes. The Israeli Iron Dome is an air-defense 
system designed to shoot down rockets and artillery shells. 
Israeli officials claim that the Iron Dome, operational since 
March 2011, shot down more than 400 missiles in its first 

174

t h e   v iol e n c e   of   a l g or i t h m s 

18 months. Drones, from the surveillance blimps described, 
to swarms of microdrones outfitted with cameras and other 
sensors,  represent  another  major  advance  that  potentially 
transforms  the  way  military  intelligence  is  collected  and 
processed.

Underlying  all  of  these  technologies  is  computational 
power. With algorithmic technologies that trace and record 
movements of people (at airports, through credit card data, 
our passports, and visual or data surveillance technologies) 
we can detect patterns and ascribe risk to behaviors out-
side the “norm.” The calibration of this norm can either 
be a human decision or a computational one, but in the 
end these norms are built into algorithms. Automation also 
offers the promise of predicting future events. As machines 
learn and algorithms develop, this process becomes further 
and further removed from our human intervention.

This  distancing  dilutes  the  responsibility  of  humans  by 
acting  through  technologies.  As  surveillance  expert  Bruce 
Schneier notes, “any time we’re judged by algorithms, there’s 
the potential for false positive. . . . [O]ur credit ratings depend 
on algorithms; how we’re treated at airport security does, 
too.”  And  most  alarming  of  all,  drone  targeting  is  partly 
based on algorithmic surveillance.11 Fully automated drones 
that can make decisions and even kill by themselves are still 
in development stages, but they are being actively tested.

As  articulated  in  a  2014  Human  Rights  Watch  report 
on automated war, “Fully autonomous weapons represent 
the  step  beyond  remote-controlled  armed  drones.  Unlike 
any  existing  weapons,  these  robots  would  identify  and 
fire  on  targets  without  meaningful  human  intervention. 

175

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

They would therefore have the power to determine when 
to  take  human  life.”12  The  international  community  is 
taking notice. In the past two years, numerous academic 
and policy reports have addressed the legal, ethical, and 
human-rights implications of automated killing, and at the 
2014 UN Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons 
(CCW) conference, automated war was a topic of debate. 
A  civil  society  campaign  has  been  launched,  called  the 
Campaign to Stop Killer Robots.

Automation has radically reshaped the geography of vio-
lence. Just like Anonymous can wield power without occu-
pying a discrete and contiguous geographical space, states 
can wage war without invading enemy territory. In prac-
tice,  this  has  meant  that  the  difference  between  interna-
tional and domestic security paradigms has eroded. While 
the  technology  underpinning  this  capacity  was  already 
long in development, the defining moment in this shift was 
9/11. The decentralized network of al-Qaeda attacked the 
heart of a global superpower on the other side of the world.
In response, the United States deviated from both domes-
tic and international legal and military norms in pursuit of 
a diffuse organization. At home, the Bush administration 
began to operate under what they called the “one percent 
doctrine,” which dictates that if there is a 1% chance of an 
event occurring, the government must treat it as a certainty. 
This doctrine, combined with the questionable notion that 
9/11 could have been predicted with proper data, has led 

176

t h e   v iol e n c e   of   a l g or i t h m s 

to a culture of massive data collection, from the NSA sur-
veillance  apparatus  exposed  by  Edward  Snowden  to  the 
widespread deployment of cameras, sensors, and drones. 
These  programs  seek  to  conquer  the  unknown  and,  like 
the  promise  of  Palantir,  create  order  from  uncertainty. 
As geographer Louise Amoore argues, the law shifted to 
allow and accept the use of massive, invasive databases to 
monitor the civilian populations for the purpose of “risk 
management,” despite the potential to violate civil rights.13
A natural place to introduce these new technologies was 
on the borders. This new approach to border surveillance 
began with the Automated Targeting System which assigned 
risk scores to imported goods as they arrived to US ports in 
shipping containers on cargo vessels. This system was then 
applied to people crossing the US border, using an array of 
data such as financial records, past travel, known move-
ment  and  addresses,  race  and  religion  in  order  to  assign 
risk  instantly.14  This  technology  replaced  with  a  mathe-
matical formula the decisions once made by immigration 
officers. In 2005, the UK Home Office and US Transporta-
tion Security Administration (TSA) started using full body 
scanners at airports, and movement analysis cameras are 
being deployed throughout airport terminals, adding new 
layers of biometric data to the mix.

This spatial blurring has legal implications. The inter-
national legal theorist Wouter Werner looks at US and 
Israeli security policy since 9/11 and argues that acts of 
war  have  become  less  defined  and  boundless.  Werner 
notes  that  states  are  reluctant  to  declare  war  yet  often 
give  violent  and  targeted  directives  that  could  be  seen 

177

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

as warfare. Werner relies on the theories of German po-
litical scientist Carl Schmitt, who explored the concept 
of justus hostis or the “just enemy,” an aspect of Euro-
pean international order dating from the 16th century. 
Justus hostis is based on the idea of an equal or respect-
able  enemy,  one  that  has  similar  capacity  for  fighting 
and similar standing in the international order as its op-
ponent, the recognition of which was the beginning of 
international law. This, of course, mostly applies to wars 
between  states.  Schmitt  argues  that  the  idea  of  justis 
hostis, however, is in decline with the advent of globali-
zation and new technologies that open up new spaces for 
war. “To war on both sides belongs a certain chance, a 
minimum of possibility for victory. Once that ceases to 
be  the  case,  the  opponent  becomes  nothing  more  than 
an object of violent measures. The victors consider their 
superiority in weaponry to be an indication of their justa 
causa,  and  declare  the  enemy  to  be  criminal,  because 
it  is  no  longer  possible  to  realize  the  concept  of  justus 
hostis.”15

Werner  argues  that  the  rise  of  “targeted  killing”  also 
blurs the legal definitions of war. In 2006 the Israeli High 
Court of Justice recognized targeted strikes on individuals 
as  legal,  despite  protests  from  human  rights  groups.  The 
United States has created new categories of “unlawful com-
batants”; it also argued that the “war on terror” was fun-
damentally different from other wars, and that enemies did 
not deserve the same protections. Some scholars compare 
this  language  to  that  used  in  the  19th  century,  with  ref-
erence  to  “savage  warriors,”  who  were  thought  of  as  so 

178

t h e   v iol e n c e   of   a l g or i t h m s 

fundamentally  different  and  outside  of  the  international 
system  that  protections  given  them  were  simply  a  choice 
and not a requirement on the part of the warring state.16

Werner is arguing that the bounds of war have been 
stretched  by  forces  of  globalization,  by  the  changing 
nature of what constitutes an enemy in a post-9/11 con-
flict, and by new technological capabilities. Both the law 
and the theoretical principles that underlie our concep-
tion of just war are being expanded uncomfortably to fit 
this new reality.

With the blurring of national and international defini-
tions comes an extension of the tools and practices of war 
to the domestic context. Tools developed for the battlefield 
are now being widely applied in domestic contexts, begin-
ning with the US border with Mexico. For 25 miles inside 
the border, the US Customs and Border Patrol has the legal 
right to enter anyone’s property (including a computer or 
cell phone) without a warrant.17 What does it mean when 
the state extends military technologies and tactics beyond 
the  battlefield?  Put  another  way,  what  do  computational 
power and surveillance-based weaponry do to the line be-
tween war and peace?

The  border  is  fast  becoming  a  testing  ground  of  the 
US  surveillance  state:  hidden  cameras,  drones,  and  24/7 
electronic  monitoring,  much  of  it  automated.  And  in  an 
extensive multi-year investigation into the US national in-
telligence  and  counterterrorism  infrastructure  built  since 
9/11, the Washington Post found an almost unimaginably 
vast national security apparatus. The investigation, called 
Top-Secret America, found that

179

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

1,271 government organizations and 1,931 private compa-
nies work on programs related to counterterrorism, home-
land  security  and  intelligence  in  about  10,000  locations 
across  the  United  States;  an  estimated  854,000  people, 
nearly  1.5  times  as  many  people  as  live  in  Washington, 
D.C.,  hold  top-secret  security  clearances;  in  Washington 
and the surrounding area, 33 building complexes for top-
secret  intelligence  work  are  under  construction  or  have 
been  built  since  September  2001  which  together  occupy 
the equivalent of almost three Pentagons or 22 U.S. Cap-
itol buildings—about 17 million square feet of space; 51 
federal  organizations  and  military  commands,  operating 
in 15 U.S. cities, track the flow of money to and from ter-
rorist  networks;  and  analysts  who  make  sense  of  docu-
ments and conversations obtained by foreign and domestic 
spying share their judgment by publishing 50,000 intelli-
gence reports each year.18

The  reach  of  this  security  apparatus  is  vast,  and  the 
amount  of  money,  people,  and  resources  implicated  in 
it is remarkable. The US intelligence budget alone is $75 
billion a year, which is a fraction of the entire enterprise. 
The threat is ill-defined but omnipresent. The battlefield is 
global. The laws regulating and checking this immense ca-
pability are poorly defined and often secret. And the lines 
between the domestic and the international, whether it be 
through the sharing of technology and data, or the over-
lapping of operational theaters, are increasingly blurred. It 
is safe to say that there is a risk of the United States becom-
ing a national security state.

18 0

t h e   v iol e n c e   of   a l g or i t h m s 

If  this  happens,  it  will  be  as  a  reaction  to  the  disrup-
tive powers outlined throughout this book. As new actors 
are  empowered  to  act  in  a  digital  environment  in  a  way 
that destabilizes and at times confounds the state, whether 
they  are  activists,  humanitarians,  journalists,  or  terror-
ists, the state can fight back by seeking to control the net-
work. They will either have to control everything or will 
have to come to some sort of accommodation with these 
new disruptive powers. What we currently know about the 
US surveillance state, and the technological, military, and 
prosecutorial  powers  it  seems  willing  to  deploy,  suggests 
that the United States at least is seeking the former.

If  we  are  indeed  heading  into  an  information  research 
war, a Third World War, then it will be because the dig-
ital  landscape  is  being  weaponized.  Take  Google  Earth, 
discussed earlier in the context of humanitarianism. The 
digital mapping of the earth’s surface is also a remarkably 
powerful tool for a wide range of military uses and is in-
creasingly being used as a targeting tool by both states and 
individuals.  A  civilian  in  Germany  discovered  a  Chinese 
training  camp  on  the  China-India  border  using  Google 
Earth; Russia and South Korea have both requested that 
Google  blur  out  “sensitive  areas”;  and  India  has  voiced 
concerns that public maps could further incite tensions in 
Kashmir.  In  the  United  States,  Dick  Cheney’s  house  and 
the Pepsi headquarters are both pixilated out. As the Rus-
sian Federal Security Service proclaimed, “Terrorists don’t 

181

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

need to reconnoiter their target. Now an American com-
pany is working for them.”19

Cultural historian Bruce Franklin outlines how each era 
of  war  has  its  own  “visual  style.”  Vietnam  had  a  guer-
rilla style, created by embedded journalists shooting rough 
video on the ground. Then came a cockpit view during the 
first  Gulf  War,  that  showed  never  before  seen  images  of 
missile strikes, displaying surreal (and highly misleading) 
accuracy. Franklin points out that we are now in a period 
of  sanitized  drone  views.  What’s  more,  the  gun  and  the 
camera are interconnected. Drones are at once a “war ma-
chine”  and  also  a  “watching  machine”  that  grows  more 
sophisticated  with  each  technological  generation  and  is 
able to collect and process more and more data. What is 
unique about this new form of war is that the machines 
are controlled from the other side of the world, via images 
themselves. Drones are operated in much the same way as 
video games—reality controlled by the virtual.20

Another important consequence of the de-spatialization 
of war is in the very conception of security itself, in particu-
lar, how we identify what is and is not a security issue, and 
subsequently  how  we  frame  our  approach  to  such  issues 
through the words, as well as images and video, presented 
to us by government and media.

The  idea  of  “securitization”  in  international  relations 
theory hinges on the notion that through its rhetoric, the 
state  has  the  power  to  identify  which  topics  should  be 
treated  as  security  issues.  And  this  has  tremendous  con-
sequences.  It  both  raises  the  perceived  importance  of  an 
issue and predisposes it to be addressed with militarized 

182

t h e   v iol e n c e   of   a l g or i t h m s 

solutions.  In  the  1990s,  for  example,  the  US  “securitiza-
tion”  of  Africa  led  to  the  deployment  of  a  new  regional 
command called AFRICOM.

Following this framing, the Internet, and digital technol-
ogy itself, is at risk of being “securitized,” and as a con-
sequence, being absorbed into the fabric of state military 
policy.  Once  an  enemy  or  threat  is  perceived  and  labeled 
in an online ecosystem, the platform or technologies them-
selves become the objects of security. This brings with it the 
discourse, resources, and imperatives of war.21 An example 
of this in practice is when the United States identifies users 
of TOR anonymizing software as potential threats and sub-
jects for surveillance, or for the FBI to label the use of mesh 
networking technology as an indicator of terrorist activity.
Prominent  scholar  Barry  Buzan  describes  the  distin-
guishing  feature  of  “securitization”  as  a  specific  rhe-
torical  structure  that  elevates  an  issue  above  politics  to 
the realm of existential crisis. “In security discourse” he 
argues, “an issue is dramatized and presented as an issue 
of supreme priority; thus by labeling it as a security issue 
an agent claims a need for and a right to treat it by ex-
traordinary means.”22

Central  to  this  act  of  dramatization  are  images  and 
videos. In the case of the modern security state, this means 
both the images of violence that are presented to propagate 
a threat and the underlying importance of image analysts 
and spatial data processing to the act of conducting actual 
security operations.

It is useful to think of this as a shift in media, in respect 
to both issue framing and to state security responses. We 

183

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

must look beyond the state’s use of security rhetoric and 
into how society as a whole is propagating a particular nar-
rative of security via the media. This does not mean that 
traditional security institutions are losing power; rather, it 
indicates that the diffusion of the security narrative among 
actors with different imperatives is critical to understand-
ing the way a culture sees threats and supports particular 
responses to them.23

This cultural view has enabled the state to treat the tele-
communications infrastructure in its entirety and all of the 
participants in it as a security issue. It facilitates the merg-
ing of international war and domestic security, and makes 
the distinction between digital acts and their physical vio-
lent manifestations far more difficult to draw.

The act of making the digital world both a threat and 
a weapon has allowed the state to treat it as an object of 
war, and has blurred the lines between belligerents and cit-
izens. Coupled with the power that is derived by the state’s 
increasing  sophistication  in  this  space—whether  through 
automation,  biometrics,  or  the  new  forms  of  social  con-
trol and the violence they enable—there is reason to ques-
tion the narrative of empowerment that has been explored 
throughout this book.

For now, automated violence technologies require the power 
of the state. To do large-scale visual surveillance, for exam-
ple,  one  needs  both  sophisticated  sensor  deployment  plat-
forms  and  significant  computational  power.  While  both 

184

t h e   v iol e n c e   of   a l g or i t h m s 

are increasingly available in some forms to individuals and 
groups,  supercomputers,  quantum  computing,  militarized 
drones,  and  automated  weaponry  are  still  very  much  the 
purview of the state.

These technologies can be disrupted, however. There have 
been a few instances of groups hacking into drone computers 
as well as potential hacks to thwart biometric facial recogni-
tion programs. A community of drone operators post videos 
of drone strikes on YouTube and report on the lives of drone 
operators—how  they  can  commit  acts  of  war  from  miles 
away, and then go “home to eat dinner with their families.”
And other states have found ways of fighting back. In 
2013 Iranian officials claimed to have hacked a US drone, 
forced it to land, and recreated some of its technology. The 
BBC reported that Iranian officials were parading around 
a  downed  but  unscathed  RQ-170  Sentinel  stealth  drone, 
known to be used by the CIA. The Iranians claimed that 
they had not shot it down but had intercepted its GPS soft-
ware to confuse the drone and force it to land.24 The United 
States denied the hack, claiming that the drone’s software 
malfunctioned. Pakistan claims that it also learned how to 
intercept  drones  after  examining  the  helicopter  that  was 
downed  in  the  raid  to  capture  Osama  bin  Laden.25  The 
Wall Street Journal reports that Iraqi insurgents have man-
aged to hack US drones with widely available $25 software, 
which they used to access video feeds from the drones.26

While  there  are  no  recorded  instances  of  biometric 
software  being  hacked,  researchers  have  found  flaws  in 
the programming of facial recognition software that let 
someone confuse the program with fake photos.27 There 

185

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

have  been  several  reports  online  of  civilians  who  have 
been able to hack into security surveillance camera foot-
age.28 A designer has developed “anti-drone” clothing that 
thwarts a drone’s heat-seeking radar.29 The same designer 
is also developing forms of makeup that distort facial fea-
tures so as to confuse facial recognition software.30

While some of these technologies could empower non-
state actors—and the civilian capacity in this space will in-
variably increase with time—there are several reasons the 
state is likely to continue to dominate the use of algorith-
mic violence. The entrenchment of the emerging national 
security state keeps citizens in a state of fear. This means 
that subjects of surveillance often feel they are being pro-
tected by technologies that identify “threats.” There is also 
a very high cost to challenging national security programs. 
The fear of disproportionate penalties surely dissuades dis-
ruptors in this space.

Technological barriers also exist. Many automated tech-
nologies require a level of technical capacity, computational 
power, and data supply that are mainly accessible only by 
states. Even companies with massive computational capac-
ity, like Google, often bend to the will of the state when it 
comes to national security. This creates an asymmetry be-
tween states and individuals, as well as between powerful 
and weak states. As technology spreads down to weaker 
states  and  individuals,  awesome  new  technologies  will 
likely remain state dominated.

What does the future hold for cyber weaponry? Author 
Daniel  Suarez  argues  that  because  these  computational, 
automated tools concentrate tremendous power, they are a 

186

t h e   v iol e n c e   of   a l g or i t h m s 

harbinger of a recentralization of power and a reversal of a 
five-century-old trend to greater democracy. Remote force 
deployment of instruments such as microdrones could the-
oretically allow the state to kill anonymously. Combined 
with  machine  learning  and  artificial  intelligence,  powers 
could target dissidents before they gain traction. This is a 
path to anonymous war.

The obvious solution to this theoretical dystopia, Suarez 
argues,  is  to  ban  robotic  weapons  through  international 
treaty. Although automation can lead to greater precision, 
the  United  States  currently  has  a  directive  that  humans 
must be a part of any decision in war involving fatalities. 
This directive must be kept, but we must also look closely 
at all of the algorithm-based decisions that lead up to this 
ultimate point. If they are biased, flawed, or based on in-
correct data, then the human will be just as wrong as the 
machine.  The  difference,  however,  between  algorithmic 
bias and the subjectivity of human decision making is that 
humans trained to kill will sometimes resist doing so on 
points of conscience. Until we can build ethics, morality, 
and humanity into machines, the errors of man should be 
preferable to the precision of machines.

Ultimately, if the state is willing to make digital space a 
battlefield to be conquered, it remains immensely power-
ful. But this comes at real costs to the long-term viability 
of the networked world and to all of its societal benefits. 
It also represents a predatory view of the social contract 
underlying the Westphalian order, one that risks the legit-
imacy of the state itself. The sovereignty—and with it, the 
power—that citizens willingly give to the state comes with 

187

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

the expectation of protection from physical threats; at the 
same time, citizens expect the state to govern following the 
accepted norms of democratic society. Providing security 
through predatory means, leveraging the comparative ad-
vantage the state has over its citizenry, breaks this bargain. 
And herein lies the crisis facing the state.

188

c h a p t e r   n i n e

t h e   c r i s i s   o f   t h e   s tat e

Disruptive  innovators  empowered  by  digital  technology 
are chipping away at the institutions that defined interna-
tional affairs in the 20th century: foreign ministries, armed 
forces,  development  agencies,  media  conglomerates,  and 
international  organizations  such  as  the  United  Nations, 
the World Bank, and the Red Cross. Some of these institu-
tions are pushing back, at times effectively. But the power 
dynamic is changing for good, and the implications for the 
international system are vast. A great rebalancing is under 
way, and we are only at the beginning. It remains to be 
seen which traditional institutions will come through this 
period of turmoil intact, how they will adapt, and to what 
degree they will remain effective and relevant.

I  remain  unconvinced  that  the  institutions  that  served 
the international community in the 20th century, hierar-
chical organizations built on an industrial model in an era 
of command-and-control governance and economic activ-
ity, are capable of serving the 21st, which has been defined 
by decentralization, digital access, and leaps in computa-
tional power. For institutions that have struggled to adapt, 
the  problem  is  not  going  away.  This  is  less  of  a  radical 
notion than it once was. In a Foreign Affairs article titled 

189

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

“The Unruled World,” governance specialist Patrick Stew-
art  argues  that  the  state-led  institutions  of  the  interna-
tional system are losing their effectiveness, and the future 
will bring “continued spread of an unattractive but adapt-
able multilateral sprawl that delivers a partial measure of 
international cooperation through a welter of informal ar-
rangements and piecemeal approaches.” This is what it will 
look like for states. From the perspective of decentralized 
and  disruptive  actors  with  increasing  power,  even  messy 
multilateral governance appears both state-centric and of 
a different era.

Hierarchical institutions are conservative by design. They 
adapt slowly and cautiously. The international system has 
evolved with safeguards against rapid evolution for good 
reason;  they  are  designed  to  preserve  accountability  and 
adhere to the rule of law. Other than moments of crisis, 
when old norms can be discarded and new ones established, 
change  happens  in  these  institutions  through  slow  learn-
ing and rare acts of transformational leadership.1 There are 
structural disincentives for reform, too. Having to serve a 
multitude  of  interests,  large  institutions  often  sacrifice  a 
degree of efficacy in order to preserve legitimacy.2

In the private sector, businesses rise, go bankrupt, and 
disappear, but creative destruction is more difficult in the 
public sector. Foreign ministries do not simply disappear 
and get replaced by start-ups. Extinction of state institu-
tions, without replacement with new accountable and ef-
fective institutions or networks, will cause real gaps in the 
international  system  and  leave  citizens  vulnerable.  The 
status quo has deep flaws, but the costs of state disruption 

19 0

t h e   c r i si s   of   t h e   s t a t e

are high; a lack of governance can lead to anarchy, chaos, 
famine, and war.

The  new  information  environment,  however,  may  re-
quire  states  to  adopt  some  characteristics  of  start-ups. 
The challenge for institutions is how to rebuild, reform, 
reimagine,  and  disrupt  themselves  in  order  to  remain 
relevant  in  a  digital  era.  For  example,  the  US  State  De-
partment is experimenting with digital diplomacy, as dis-
cussed  earlier.  The  results  have  been  fraught,  but  it  has 
begun to adapt. At the same time, the state has to deter-
mine ways of mitigating the potential harms of networked 
behavior and use its political, economic, and regulatory 
powers to incentivize behavior that is broadly in its citi-
zens’ interests.

This will be no easy task. As argued throughout this 
book, the state faces a fundamental crisis. The attributes 
that  empower  digital  actors  (formlessness,  instability, 
and  collaborativeness)  are  the  very  attributes  that  tra-
ditional state-centric institutions were designed to over-
come.  While  the  democratic  state  serves  a  wide  range 
of  additional  functions  (providing  security,  protecting 
rights and freedoms, delivering social services), and is a 
highly adaptive institution (the US government of 2014 
bears very little resemblance to what it was in 1914), the 
state’s  monopoly  as  a  mechanism  for  collective  demo-
cratic actions is over. States will therefore have to choose 
between seeking absolute control and potentially threat-
ening  the  free  and  open  digital  system  as  well  as  the 
principles of democratic governance, or accept a higher 
degree of uncertainty and give up some power in order 

191

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

to preserve and be a constructive participant in the emer-
gent international system.

This crisis of the state has at least four key components: 
democratic legitimacy, reversing the surveillance state, al-
gorithmic accountability, and Internet governance. Solv-
ing the problems posed by any one of them will not prove 
a panacea for this crisis, nor is this list exhaustive; there 
are many more innovations being developed and impor-
tant questions being addressed. But luckily, in each there 
are individuals and groups experimenting on new models 
and proposing potential solutions. This is the new land-
scape in which the state must constructively engage.

D e m O C r aT i C l e g i T i m aC y

The German Pirate Party was founded in 2006 to represent 
the digital revolution and the transition to the information 
society.  Its  positions  are  closely  connected  to  the  global 
digital activist movement. The party supports government 
transparency,  Internet  privacy,  civil  rights,  the  free  soft-
ware movement, patent and copyright reform, and net neu-
trality. After some early success in Germany, the party has 
spread through Europe, gaining traction in Sweden, Italy, 
Austria,  Norway,  France,  and  the  Netherlands.  Amelia 
Andersdotter, a Swedish member of the European Union 
(EU) Parliament and a digital rights activist, led a common 
EU Pirate Party platform in the 2014 EU elections.

192

t h e   c r i si s   of   t h e   s t a t e

The Pirate Party also relies on digital technology to re-
think the governance processes of traditional political par-
ties. Its principal resulting innovation is what it calls liquid 
democracy. Using an open-source platform labeled Liquid 
Feedback, all members of the Pirate Party can propose poli-
cies.  Proposals  that  receive  10%  support  from  the  mem-
bership then enter a revision period where alternatives can 
be proposed, with competing ideas subject to voting. In a 
process called Global Delegation, members can make other 
members their proxies, on one issue or for all issues. Del-
egates can use the votes they have accrued or hand off their 
blocks  of  votes  to  another  party  member.  (Certain  mem-
bers  have  emerged  as  Pirate  Party  leaders  based  on  their 
reputations  within  the  community.)  Delegated  votes  can 
be reclaimed by members at any time, adding real-time ac-
countability to the power these members acquire. As Berlin 
Pirate Party spokesman Ingo Bormuth told a reporter for 
Tech President, “We want effective people to be powerful 
and do their work, but we want [the grassroots] to be able 
to control them.”3

Fluidity separates delegated democracy from traditional 
representational democracy, where a single elected official 
represents his jurisdiction on all topics for a set term. In 
the Pirate Party system, an expert in a specific topic, say 
health care, could lead the way on an issue of her exper-
tise but stay in the background on other issues. Through 
Global Delegation, generalists can also emerge as consen-
sus leaders.4

The Pirate Party sees liquid democracy as an experiment. 
As  Simon  Weiss,  a  Pirate  Party  politician  in  the  Berlin 

193

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

Parliament explained, “If you want to propose that as a way 
of organizing things, you need to see if it actually works, 
and we’re experimenting on ourselves.”5

While  we  don’t  yet  know  whether  liquid  democracy 
works for the Pirate Party, let alone for other parties, the 
party  systems  through  much  of  the  Western  world  have 
atrophied,  and  the  current  state  of  political  discourse  is 
grossly out of touch with the technological tools that can 
enable  new  systems  of  policy  development  and  account-
ability. As we have seen, the state’s predatory approach to 
governance is at odds with the social contact underlying 
democratic societies, and it risks undermining the very le-
gitimacy with which states have held power. Perhaps even 
more  problematic,  the  status  quo  governance  discourse 
delegitimizes many of the emerging actors with real power, 
and because of this it is blind to some of the core policy 
challenges of the 21st century. The more experimentation 
there is on these fronts the better.

And  these  governance  experiments  are  not  limited  to 
new political parties. From Tahrir Square and the wider 
Arab Spring movement to Occupy Wall Street and its off-
shoots, a new form of protest movement is afoot. Its or-
ganizational tactics and structures arguably point to new 
forms of ad hoc social organizations to protest perceived 
abuses  of  power.  They  rely  on  technology  to  facilitate 
open  communication,  avoid  hierarchy  in  their  organiza-
tion  and  planning,  and  embrace  direct  political  action 
against an old world, perceived (rightly or wrongly) as in-
effective,  corrupt,  and  statist.  As  Ricken  Patel,  president 

194

t h e   c r i si s   of   t h e   s t a t e

and executive director of Avaaz, a civic organization with 
over 32 million global members, said of both movements, 
we are seeing “not just a new media, but a new politics, a 
new activism. A new democracy. The individual now has 
unprecedented  power  to  access  and  publish,  to  connect, 
to organize, to affect. Power and agency is spreading out, 
flattened.”6

Perhaps most important, as journalist and political sci-
entist Ahmed Teleb points out, in both movements, despite 
a  common  opposition  toward  existing  political  systems, 
those  involved  in  each  case  refused  to  enter  the  existing 
political process in any shape or form, instead hoping to 
affect the political discourse and the nature of governance 
from outside the electoral system.7 This doesn’t mean that 
politicians didn’t coopt the activists’ rhetoric to garner sup-
port. However, Teleb believes that these movements mod-
eled democratic behavior to understand what it means to 
live  in  a  participatory  democracy:  “They  wanted  to  see 
what they were never taught in civics class. What does it 
mean to deliberate? What does it ‘feel’ like? In short, they 
wanted to ‘do it themselves.’ But technology extended the 
‘utopianism’  past  the  communal  feeling  during  the  en-
campments and even beyond each movement itself.”

These citizen-led experiments with new forms of social 
organization,  governance,  and  global  activism,  many  of 
which are at their core technologically enabled, are a sign 
that new models are both needed and being pushed by those 
who  ultimately  feel  disenfranchised  from  our   traditional 
institutions and states.

195

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

r e v e r s i n g  T h e s U rv e i l l a n C e sTaT e

As  a  consequence  of  Edward  Snowden’s  revelations  we 
now  know  how  Western  democratic  states  have  chosen 
to respond to the perceived threat of digitally empowered 
actors. They have sought to control them by, in the words 
of the NSA, “collecting it all.”8 They have treated the dig-
ital network as if it were a new battlefield, one that can be 
conquered. As has been discussed, the problem with this 
approach  is  that  in  seeking  to  target  perceived  threaten-
ing disruptive actors, the state risks also shutting down all 
the positive benefits that the Internet and digital networks 
allow.  In  the  digital  world,  the  Assad-supported  Syrian 
Electronic Army uses the same tools and tactics as the US-
supported  Free  Syrian  Army.  What  is  particularly  ironic 
is that they are heading down this perilous path with the 
tacit  and  at  times  explicit  support  of  the  same  corpora-
tions that have long touted the benefits of disruptive inno-
vation—namely, Silicon Valley.

One  underreported  aspect  of  Edward  Snowden’s  NSA 
revelations  has  been  the  close  relationship  between  the 
US government and technology companies. It was always 
widely known that the US telecoms functioned as partners 
in the US surveillance; the legal and logistical infrastructure 
for wiretapping is built into the regulatory agreements that 
allow telecoms to operate. But Silicon Valley said it was op-
posed to clandestine government partnerships, and its pre-
vailing libertarian ethos holds that there is no government 
service or industry that a technocratic innovation can’t effi-
ciently replace. What Evgeny Morozov calls “solutionism” 
is rooted in a belief that algorithms can replace government.

196

t h e   c r i si s   of   t h e   s t a t e

But as technology companies matured, they increasingly 
fell  under  federal  regulation.  Through  e-commerce,  Fed-
eral  Communications  Commission  (FCC)  decisions,  free 
speech  legislation,  media  regulation,  patent  law,  monop-
oly rulings, international trade law, corporate tax policy, 
or counterterrorism measures, the state and Silicon Valley 
have  become  intertwined,  and  the  big  tech  companies 
began courting government and lobbying rather than re-
sisting regulation. Also, Silicon Valley’s primary business 
model depends on large-scale data mining. From Facebook 
to Google to Yahoo to Twitter, targeted user data became 
the core monetizable asset of their ostensibly free products. 
Users entered into a bargain with these companies, trad-
ing their personal information (location, friends, photos, 
personal thoughts, and so on) for the symbiotic benefits of 
free services and access to the information about others.

This emerging information bargain and the infrastruc-
ture built to commercialize it pushed companies closer to 
the interests of the state. The data storage and analysis ca-
pacity they were building was aligned with the surveillance 
needs of the state. With the passage of the Patriot Act, the 
United States gained the legal authority to vastly increase 
its domestic surveillance. But collecting huge amounts of 
data is hard. It is made immeasurably easier when large, so-
phisticated companies can do it for you. So, through direct 
partnerships as well as subversive hacking, the state turned 
to Silicon Valley to enable its surveillance objectives.

Why did once staunchly libertarian Silicon Valley execu-
tives go along with this? First, as explained, they were in-
creasingly dependent on state policy and regulation. They 

197

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

were no longer the scrappy outsiders of corporate America. 
Second, and I believe more critically, revealing their rela-
tionship with the state threatened their core business: col-
lecting data offered to them by their users willingly (and 
some would argue, naively) for free. In this regard, the NSA 
revelations threatened Silicon Valley’s business model.

While the Pirate Party, Anonymous, and others focus on 
rights, freedoms, and security, the artificial intelligence pi-
oneer Jaron Lanier has proposed that our data should not 
be given away for free, a challenge to both the surveillance 
state  and  Silicon  Valley.  In  Lanier’s  view,  most  citizens’ 
understanding of the relationship between computers and 
human beings has not kept pace with technology; this lack 
of knowledge has allowed those who control technology, 
whether  states  or  large  corporations,  to  have  increasing 
power  over  society,  built  on  the  information  we  provide 
freely. Lanier defines information as “a broad term for any 
conscious  intellectual,  artistic,  or  pragmatic  contribution 
to the production of goods, services and cultural output, 
but  it  also  includes  the  data  that  we  unconsciously  radi-
ate simply by exhibiting certain behavioral and consumer 
traits.”

In the 21st century, information holds the same status 
that private property did in the early stages of capitalism. 
Information is private property belonging to individuals, 
but since its value isn’t recognized, corporate giants such 
as Google and Facebook use it without our consent (and 
possibly  without  our  knowledge),  and  we  are  giving  up 
this economic power without a fight. Therefore, he argues, 
people  need  to  commodify  their  data  to  incentivize  the 

198

t h e   c r i si s   of   t h e   s t a t e

creation of an egalitarian society based on the ethics and 
principles  of  free-market  capitalism.  Lanier’s  suggestion 
is that individuals recognize this phenomenon and act as 
owners of their information.

While Lanier is primarily interested in the digital rights 
of  citizens,  his  unconventional  argument  has  broad  con-
sequence for Western nations that are moving toward be-
coming  surveillance  states.  If  information  has  economic 
value, then it is property that cannot be seized by the state.
Ultimately,  the  surveillance  state  doesn’t  just  represent 
the overreaction of the state but is the result of a system 
of economic and political power under threat. Lanier’s ar-
gument  shows  how  a  very  different  approach  to  a  prob-
lem—in this case, state surveillance and personal privacy 
and freedom—can lead to entirely new reforms and poli-
cies. Whether his suggestion is viable or even the right ap-
proach, it is clear to me that if we are going to address the 
immense challenges outlined throughout this book, we are 
going to need to step outside the constraints of the tradi-
tional policy discourse.

a l g O r i T h m i C aC C O U n Ta b i l i T y

Algorithms have an increasing amount of power over our 
lives. Whether in policing, border security, drone targeting, 
tax  enforcement,  e-commerce,  banking,  dating,  or  using 
social media, it is algorithms that are making decisions for 
us, often with serious consequences. A white paper from 
the Institute of the Future predicts that “governance will 
become automatic, and lawbreaking much more difficult. . . .  

199

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

Embedded  governance  will  prevent  many  of  the  crimes 
and  violations  we  see  today  from  happening.  Firearms 
will work only when operated by their rightful, registered 
owners. Office computers will shut down after 40 hours 
of  work  unless  overtime  has  been  authorized.  Disasters 
and  quarantines  could  also  be  managed  more  effectively 
if information about citizens were known and if laws were 
downloaded  to  change  behaviors  immediately.”9  In  this, 
in  my  view  dystopian,  vision  moral  codes,  social  norms, 
and human judgment are augmented or replaced by hidden 
algorithms  and  massive  data  sets,  placing  a  tremendous 
amount of power in their construction and in the people 
and institutions that oversee them.

Algorithms are not neutral. They are designed by people, 
with ideologies, biases, and institutional mandates. Algo-
rithms discriminate and make mistakes. Yet, as computa-
tional journalist and computer scientist Nick Diakopoulos 
argues,  the  problem  with  holding  algorithms  to  account 
is  that  they  are  black  boxes.  We  cannot  see  the  Google 
search  algorithm  since  it  is  proprietary  corporate  infor-
mation, or the algorithm that processes NSA metadata to 
select drone targets as it is shielded by a national security 
classification.10

But  as  journalist  Andrew  Leonard  warns,  we  are  in-
creasingly governed by such automated software. “Call it 
‘algorithmic regulation’ or ‘embedded governance’ or ‘au-
tomated law enforcement,’” he says, “these built-in systems 
are sure to become ubiquitous. . . . They will doubtless be 
quicker to act, more all-seeing and less forgiving than the 
human-populated bureaucracies that preceded them.”11

2 0 0

t h e   c r i si s   of   t h e   s t a t e

The relationship between algorithms and human inter-
action has become very important, and to a large extent 
invisible. This of course poses a real challenge to govern-
ance. How do we regulate something we don’t know? One 
approach is to start by making these algorithms account-
able.  A  beginning  could  be  to  think  of  them  not  as  un-
knowable  black  boxes,  but  as  entities  that  are  designed, 
built,  and  have  consequence  on  those  who  interact  with 
them.  This  approach  invokes  a  legal  accountability—if 
I  am  harmed  by  an  algorithm,  it  should  be  my  right  to 
know how it was built, and how it makes decisions. But 
this position also implies a democratic accountability. As 
a democratic society, we have in the past agreed to collec-
tive rules of behavior and norms of governance. But this 
required  mechanisms  through  which  we  can  know  how 
we are governed. If algorithms represent a new ungoverned 
space, a new public, then they are an affront to our very 
system of governance, one that requires a degree of trans-
parency and accountability in order to function. A public 
space that exists outside of these bounds is a threat to the 
notion of collective governance itself. This at its core, is a 
profoundly libertarian notion—one that states will have to 
engage with seriously if they are going to remain relevant 
to their digital citizenry.12

i n T e r n e T g Ov e r n a n C e

One of the compelling aspects of the Internet is the empow-
erment that can emerge from universal access to a common 
technology. While political, economic, and social factors 

201

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

influence  access  to  the  Internet,  once  a  user  is  online  he 
or she can do the same thing anywhere in the world. It is 
this common freedom to explore, learn, communicate, and 
build that has generated many of the benefits of the Inter-
net. And this universality explains why the Internet rights 
movement puts so much emphasis on access, privacy, and 
online security, and resists state censorship and corporate 
control so strongly.

There  have  always  been  those  who  wanted  to  control 
the  Internet.  Autocratic  regimes  seek  to  monitor,  censor, 
restrict, and control access in their countries. As we have 
seen in the Arab Spring uprisings, the very technology that 
can  allow  people  to  organize,  find  common  cause,  and 
push back against hierarchical power can also be a remark-
able  tool  of  surveillance  and  social  control.  In  2015,  the 
international  community  will  renegotiate  the  UN  treaty 
concerning the governance of the Internet. On one side of 
the  negotiations,  the  United  States  and  its  allies  want  to 
keep  the  Internet  run  by  a  small  group  of  nonprofit  or-
ganizations based in the United States. On the other side 
are states including Russia, China, Brazil, India, and Iran, 
who want a new global body to oversee the Internet.

In China, Russia, and Iran, we are seeing a renewed push 
toward either mass censorship and control or, more drasti-
cally, the creation of national Internets cut off from the rest 
of the world. Balkanization of the Internet received a boost 
from the actions of the NSA revealed by Edward Snowden. 
In April 2014, Vladimir Putin, president of Russia, told a 
media  conference  in  St.  Petersburg  that  the  Internet  was 
built by the CIA as tool for global espionage and hinted 

2 02

t h e   c r i si s   of   t h e   s t a t e

that he wants to build a Russian-run alternative. China was 
supposed to be a major market for Internet-based growth, 
but in light of the NSA actions, it has made US firms like 
IBM and Oracle targets of the Chinese Ministry of Public 
Security, making it far more difficult for them to do busi-
ness there.

This concept of multiple Internets, also referred to as the 
“splinternet,” is not only coming from autocrats. In light of 
NSA revelations, the EU and BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, 
China, and South Africa) are shifting away from US-based 
technologies, companies, and servers toward national and 
regional Internet infrastructure. A report from the London 
School  of  Economics  (LSE)  Media  Policy  Project  outlines 
how  these  countries  are  becoming  increasingly  concerned 
about “privacy sovereignty” and want greater technical con-
trol over the Internet. Brazil and Germany are pushing to 
pass national laws “requiring data pertaining to their citi-
zens to be stored locally instead of shipped around the Inter-
net into the purview of the NSA,” the report says. And EU 
countries are considering revoking data-sharing agreements 
with the United States. (It is debatable whether this would 
actually protect them against NSA spying, as many of these 
“local” companies are actually subsidiaries of US corpora-
tions and therefore still subject to US law.)13

In a speech at the General Assembly of the United Na-
tions,  Brazilian  President  Dilma  Rouseff  called  on  others 
to disconnect from the US Internet and develop their own 
technical  and  governance  structures.  Brazil  is  trying  to 
“lay cables” across South America and beyond, including a 
34,000 km undersea fiber-optic cable from Vladivostok to 

203

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

Fortaleza (via Shantou, Chennai, and Cape Town), making 
it a completely BRICS network. Sascha Meinrath, founder 
of the Open Technology Institute, writes, “The Internet is in 
danger of becoming like the European train system, where 
varying voltage and 20 different types of signaling technol-
ogies force operators to stop and switch systems or even to 
another locomotive, resulting in delays, inefficiencies, and 
higher costs.”14

While  states  are  seeking  to  create  national  Internets, 
individuals and groups are making their own micro net-
works,  either  to  provide  access  to  users  outside  of  large 
telecom and Internet service provider (ISP) networks or to 
operate  beyond  state  and  corporate  control.  Local  mesh 
networks  can  connect  to  the  wider  Internet  via  any  of 
their nodes or exist completely off the grid. Project Mesh-
net  was  created  by  a  group  of  Reddit  users  seeking  to 
“create a versatile, decentralized network built on secure 
protocols  for  routing  traffic  over  private  mesh  or  public 
Internet works independent of a central supporting infra-
structure.”15  They  explain  that  the  Internet  Corporation 
for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN)—and, by ex-
tension, the US government—controls the basic structure 
of the Internet, and they advocate radical decentralization 
of the Internet architecture through local mesh networks 
that  allow  for  end-to-end  encrypted  traffic  “completely 
immune” to any form of censorship. These networks “can 
be stitched together from many types of physical links—
WiFi, fiber optic, free space optical, Ethernet cables—into 
one consistently-accessible microcosm of the greater global 
network.”16

2 04

t h e   c r i si s   of   t h e   s t a t e

Mesh  networks  are  catching  on  internationally  as  well. 
The  New  Scientist  reported  on  a  meshwork  in  Catalonia, 
Spain, called Guifi that in August 2013 had more than 21,000 
nodes. Guifi can host web servers, video conferencing, and 
radio broadcasts, and would remain online even if the rest 
of Spain were to experience an Internet blackout.17 A similar 
project in Greece called the Athens Wireless Metropolitan 
Network comprises more than 1,000 rooftop antennas. As 
one of its users stated, “when you run your own network, 
nobody can shut it down.”18

Likewise, even as UN negotiations seek to regulate the 
Internet’s  domain  name  system  (DNS),  new  parallel  sys-
tems are being developed. One called the Open and Decen-
tralized DNS (ODDNS) is based on a peer-to-peer network 
that openly shares both the domain names and related In-
ternet Protocol (IP) addresses of its users. Its creator, Jimmy 
Rudolf, says he built the system to “show governments that 
it is not possible to prevent people from talking.”19 As one 
hacker told essayist Michael Gross, “The more government 
tries to regulate, the more people will try to build an Inter-
net that is uncensorable and unfilterable and unblockable.” 
They will circumvent state control.

Even  worse,  as  Yochai  Benkler  states,  fighting  against 
this tide will put governments “at odds with some of the 
most  energetic  and  wired  segments  of  society.”  This  has 
real policy consequences: “Any society that commits itself 
to eliminating what makes Anonymous possible and pow-
erful risks losing the openness and uncertainty that have 
made  the  Internet  home  to  so  much  innovation,  expres-
sion, and creativity.”20

205

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

The obvious question to emerge from both the splinter-
net and meshnet trends is where they leave the US gov-
ernment,  the  Internet  Corporation  for  Assigned  Names 
and Numbers (ICANN), and the range of Internet gov-
ernance organizations that are increasingly marginalized 
in  their  oversight  of  what  is  more  and  more  seen  as  a 
global commons. If a government cares about protecting 
and empowering individuals, then protecting their free-
dom online should be a focal point of foreign policy. Yet 
the  states  renegotiating  the  UN  Internet  treaty  oppose 
having someone at the negotiating table who represents 
those  individuals  and  groups  who  make  up  the  online 
network.

What would a state’s policy toward the Internet look like 
if it were to embrace the voices, values, and attributes of 
those who live in the networked world? What if a foreign 
policy were to assertively seek to protect the very founda-
tion of the system that powers the 21st century?

In a thoughtful essay titled “Code as Power: How the New 
World Order Is Reinforcing the Old,” Jordan McCarthy of 
the Open Technology Institute cites Internet rights pioneer 
John  Perry  Barlow’s  Declaration  of  the  Independence  of 
Cyberspace. Barlow is optimistic about the power of decen-
tralized networks to push back against the more oppressive 
systems of economic and political governance. For Barlow, 
the digital realm “is an act of nature . . . [growing] itself 
through our collective actions.” It is a place, he says, where 

2 0 6

t h e   c r i si s   of   t h e   s t a t e

“legal  concepts  of  property,  expression,  identity,  move-
ment, and context do not apply;” where “anyone . . . may 
express his or her beliefs, no matter how singular, without 
fear  of  being  coerced  into  silence  or  conformity”;  where 
“governance will emerge . . . from ethics, enlightened self-
interest, and the commonweal.”21

But as we have seen, while digital technology has en-
abled decentralized actors, digital technologies in and of 
themselves  are  not  neutral  tools.  They  empower  those 
who build and understand how to use them. The demise 
of traditional institutions is therefore not the only option 
of the digital revolution; rather, there is a possibility that 
these institutions will restructure themselves around the 
capabilities  of  new  technologies.  In  many  cases,  those 
that are best positioned to benefit from the power of code 
are  existing  institutions.  And  in  contrast  to  disruption 
theory, this is what many institutions have done: coopted 
technologies and aligned them with their core objectives. 
If  traditional  and  powerful  institutions  can  shape  the 
nature of technologies like Bitcoin then it will surely limit 
their  disruptive  potential.  But  the  crypto-anarchists  are 
not going away, and there is very little the state can do to 
stop them.

There are some things the states and their foreign poli-
cies could do to signal willingness to engage in the digital 
conversation.

First,  states  could  embrace  disruption.  Rather  than 
moving  state-based  institutions  of  a  bygone  era  online, 
states  must  promote  a  reengineering  of  the  international 
system.  To  do  this  requires  identifying  those  actors  that 

207

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

make the best use of the contemporary network and scal-
ing  them  so  as  to  engender  a  new  type  of  international 
institution. States must grasp the full range of disruption 
that  groups  like  Anonymous  represent  in  order  to  deter-
mine new ways to model institutional design and behavior. 
Our current global institutions were designed by, built for, 
and are run by the actors who had power in the 20th cen-
tury. But what would an international organization look 
like that included the actors we now know have power in 
the digital world? What would it mean to include elements 
of Anonymous and Telecomix in an international organi-
zation? For one, it would take radically different notions of 
what an institution is and how it functions.

Second, a truly networked foreign policy would seek to 
protect the network at all costs. To complement these new 
actors in the promotion of individual rights and freedoms, 
states  must  fundamentally  rethink  online  governance. 
Rather than seeing online governance as a way of regulat-
ing these private actors, states must accept that these new 
actors  are  not  only  self-regulating  (and  perhaps  beyond 
regulation)  but  also  are  key  to  the  delivery  of  individual 
rights and freedoms. They can be allies in implementing 
the collective action of the democratic state. It is thus in the 
state’s interest to protect the system that allows these new 
private actors to flourish.

Third, states should support empowering technologies. 
The contemporary international network, complex as it is, 
positions states in multiple roles: as producers, consumers, 
and mediators of technology. At the center of this role lies 
a paradox: the tools that enable autocratic governments to 

2 0 8

t h e   c r i si s   of   t h e   s t a t e

monitor and control their citizens are produced by West-
ern technology companies. States seeking an international 
agenda  that  foregrounds  the  individual  must  recognize 
these contradictions and ensure that they consistently act 
in the name of individual rights and freedoms.

There remains an alternate temptation, however, which I 
worry will prove determinative. As the earlier exploration 
of the algorithmic violence suggested, the state is able to 
marshal digital technology, often to significant effect. The 
ethical costs are very high, but the state has an option to 
seek absolute control of the digital ecosystem. But in seek-
ing to limit the perceived threats of digital empowerment, 
they will ultimately destroy the benefits. Ultimately, states 
will  have  to  choose  between  giving  up  some  power  and 
control in order to preserve the emerging system, or seek 
absolute control.

The  Treaty  of  Westphalia,  signed  in  1648,  ended  a 
 century-long period of conflict and instability between war-
ring  disparate  empires.  These  empires,  once  the  absolute 
ruling powers, were losing control, over both their territory 
and their citizens, in part because of the introduction of a 
wide range of new technologies. By legitimizing the state 
as the primary sovereign unit of the international system, 
and giving it power and responsibility over the well-being 
of its citizens, the treaty created order and stability out of 
what was an increasingly chaotic global system.

We face a similar moment today. States as the primary 
unit  of  the  international  system  are  being  challenged  for 
both power and legitimacy by a wide range of new individu-
als, groups, and ad hoc networks, all empowered by digital 

209

di s ru p t i v e   p ow e r

technology. While the state has the power to fight back, it 
does so at the risk of jeopardizing the emerging system.

What is yet to be seen is whether a similar restructur-
ing of power can take place in a digitally enabled world, 
without  its  empowering  chaos,  messiness,  and  disorder 
being lost.

210

n o t e s

c h a p t e r   1

  1.  Kelly, Brian. (2012). “Investing in a Centralized Cyberse-
curity Infrastructure: Why ‘Hacktivism’ Can and Should 
Influence  Cybersecurity  Reform,”  Boston  University 
Law Review 92.5: 1663–1710, p. 1678.

  2.  Landers,  Chris.  (2008).  “Serious  Business:  Anony-
mous Takes on Scientology,”CityPaper, April 2, www2. 
citypaper.com/columns/story.asp?id=15,543.

  3.  Benkler, Yochai. (2012). “Hacks of Valor: Why Anony-
mous Is Not a Threat to National Security,” Foreign Af-
fairs,  April  4,  www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/137382/
yochai-benkler/hacks-of-valor.

  4.  “Anonymous gain access to FBI and Scotland Yard hack-
ing call,” BBC, February 3, 2012, http://www.bbc.com/
news/world-us-canada-16875921.

  5.  “FBI  names,  arrests  Anon  who  infiltrated  its  secret 
conference  call,”  Art  Technica,  March  6,  2012,  http://
arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2012/03/fbi-names-arrests-
anon-who-infiltrated-its-secret-conference-call/.

  6.  “‘Anonymous’  Follows  Hacking  Of  FBI-Scotland  Yard 
Phone Call With Attacks,” NPR, February 3, 2012, http://
www.npr.org/blogs/thetwo-way/2012/02/03/146350626/
anonymous-follows-hacking-of-fbi-scotland-yard-phone-
call-with-attacks.

211

n o t e s

  7.  As cited in Sengupta, Somini. (2012). “The Soul of the 
New  Hacktivist,”  New  York  Times,  March  17,  www. 
nytimes.com/2012/03/18/sunday-review/the-soul-of-
the-new-hacktivist.html?_r=0.

  8.  Bower, Joseph L., and Clayton M. Christensen. (1995). 
“Disruptive  Technologies:  Catching  the  Wave,”  Har-
vard  Business  Review,  January,  http://hbr.org/1995/01/
disruptive-technologies-catching-the-wave/.

  9.  Clayton, Christensen. (2011). The Innovator’s Dilemma: The 
Revolutionary Book That Will Change the Way You Do Busi-
ness. New York: Harper Business (first published in 1997).

 10.  Christensen,  Clayton,  Heiner  Baumann,  Rudy  Ruggles, 
and  Thomas  M.  Sadtler.  (2006). “Disruptive  Innovation 
for Social Change,” Harvard Business Review, December,  
http://hbr.org/2006/12/disruptive-innovation-for-social- 
change/ar/1.

 11.  “Planet  Blue  Coat:  Mapping  Global  Censorship  and 
Surveillance Tools,” Citizen Lab, January 2013, https://
citizenlab.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/07/01-2011- 
behindbluecoat.pdf.

 12.  “Pentagon  Bans  Towleroad,  AMERICAblog  Sites  for 
Being ‘LGBT.’ Coulter, Limbaugh OK,” http://americablog.
com/2013/01/pentagon-bans-gay-web-sites.html.

 13.  Gallagher, Ryan. (2011). “Governments Turn to Hack-
ing Techniques for Surveillance of Citizens,” Guardian, 
November  1,  www.theguardian.com/technology/2011/
nov/01/governments-hacking-techniques-surveillance.

 14.  Marks,  Paul.  (2011). “Global  Surveillance  Supermarket 
Offered to Dictators.” One Per Cent, December 1, www.
newscientist.com/blogs/onepercent/2011/12/surveillance-
supermarket-offer.html.

212

n o t e s

 15.  Morozov, Evgeny. (2011). “Political Repression 2.0,” New 
York Times, September 1,www.nytimes.com/2011/09/02/
opinion/political-repression-2-0.html?_r=0.

 16.  Horwitz, Sari, Shyamantha Asokan, and Julie Tate. (2011). 
“Trade in Surveillance Technology Raises Worries,” Wash-
ington  Post,  December  1,  www.washingtonpost.com/
world/national-security/trade-in-surveillance-technology-
raises-worries/2011/11/22/gIQAFFZOGO_story.html.

 17.  “Enemies  of  the  Internet:  Surveillance  Dealerships,” 
Reporters     without     Borders,     March 2014,   http://12mars.rsf.
org/2014-en/2014/03/11/arms-trade-fairs-surveillance- 
dealerships/.

 18.  Gallagher, “Governments Turn to Hacking Techniques.”
 19.  Newton-Small,  Jay.  (2012).  “Hillary’s  Little  Startup: 
How the U.S. Is Using Technology to Aid Syria’s Rebels,” 
TIME,  June  13,  http://world.time.com/2012/06/13/ 
hillarys-little-startup-how-the-u-s-is-using-technology-
to-aid-syrias-rebels/#ixzz2dxRqAD6q.

 20.  Peterson, Andrea. (2013). “The U.S. Isn’t Bombing Syria 
Yet. But It Is Providing Tech Support to the Rebels,” Wash-
ington  Post,  September  3,  www.washingtonpost.com/
blogs/the-switch/wp/2013/09/03/the-u-s-isnt-bombing-
syria-yet-but-it-is-providing-tech-support-to-the-rebels/.

 21.  Crawford,  Jamie.  (2012). “U.S. Aid  to  Syrian  Opposi-
tion Includes Specialized Communications Equipment,” 
 CNN,   April 2,   http://security.blogs.cnn.com/2012/04/02/ 
u-s-aid-to-syrian-opposition-includes-specialized- 
communications-equipment/.

 22.  Newton-Small, “Hillary’s Little Startup.”
 23.  9/11 is the date of three related terrorist attacks in the 

United States.

213

n o t e s

 24.  Kopstein, Joshua. (2014). “The NSA Can ‘Collect-It-All,’ 
but What Will It Do with Our Data Next?” Daily Beast, 
May  16,  www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2014/05/16/
the-nsa-can-collect-it-all-but-what-will-it-do-with-our-
data-next.html.

 25.  Kopstein, “The NSA Can “Collect-It-All.”
 26.  Norton,  Quinn.  (2014). “A  Day  of  Speaking  Truth  to 
Power: Visiting the ODNI,” Medium, March 12, https://
medium.com/quinn-norton/dbc0669aa9ca.

 27.  “How  Al-Qaeda  Uses  Encryption  Post-Snowden  (Part 
2)—New Analysis in Collaboration with ReversingLabs,” 
Recorded Future, August 1, 2014, www.recordedfuture.
com/al-qaeda-encryption-technology-part-2/.

c h a p t e r   2

  1.  Lamborn, Alan C., and Joseph Lepgold. (2002). World 
Politics into the 21st Century: Unique Contexts, Endur-
ing Patterns. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.

  2.  Clark,  William  R.,  Matt  Golder,  and  Sona  N.  Golder. 
(2012). “The Origins of the Modern State,” in Principles 
of Comparative Politics. London: Sage, https://files.nyu.
edu/sln202/public/chapter4.pdf.

  3.  Hobbes, Thomas. (1994). Leviathan. Edwin Curley, ed. 

Indianapolis, IN: Hackett, pp. 75–76.

  4.  Carneiro,  Robert  L.  (1970).  “A  Theory  of  the  Origin 
of the State,” Science 169.3947: 733–738, http://abuss.
narod.ru/Biblio/carneiro_origin.htm.

  5.  Tilly, Charles. (1985). “War Making and State Making 
as  Organized  Crime,”  in  Bringing  Back  the  State,  ed. 
Peter Evans, Dietrich Rueschemeyer, and Theda Skocpol. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

21 4

n o t e s

  6.  North, Douglass. (1981). Structure and Change in Eco-

nomic History. New York: W.W. Norton.

  7.  Ahmad, Rana E., and Abida Eijaz. (2011). “Modern Sov-
ereign State System Is under Cloud in the Age of Global-
ization,” South Asian Studies 26.2: 285–297.

  8.  Held, David, and Anthony McGrew. (1998). “The End of 
the Old Order? Globalization and the Prospects for World 
Order,” Review of International Studies 24.5: 219–245.

  9.  Keohane,  Robert  O.,  and  Joseph  S.  Nye  Jr.  (1998). 
“Power  and  Interdependence  in  the  Information Age,” 
Foreign Affairs 77.5: 81–94.

 10.  Castells,  Manuel.  (2004).  “Afterword:  Why  Networks 
Matter,”  Demos,  online  archive,  http://www.demos.
co.uk/files/File/networklogic17castells.pdf.

 11.  Castells, “Afterword.”
 12.  Castells, “Afterword.”
 13.  Kahler,  Miles,  ed.  (2009).  Networked  Politics:  Agency, 
Power, and Governance. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University 
Press.

 14.  Kahler, Networked Politics.
 15.  Lake,  David A.,  and Wendy Wong.  (2009). “The  Poli-
tics  of  Networks:  Interests,  Power,  and  Human  Rights 
Norms,”  in  Networked  Politics:  Agency,  Power,  and 
Governance, ed. Miles Kahler. Ithaca, NY: Cornell Uni-
versity Press, pp. 27–150.

 16.  Shirky, Clay. (2008). Here Comes Everybody: The Power 
of Organizing without Organizations. New York: Penguin 
Press.

 17.  Benkler, Yochai. (2011). “Networks of Power, Degrees of 
Freedom,”  International  Journal  of  Communication  5: 
721–755.

 18.  Benkler, “Networks of Power.”

215

n o t e s

 19.  Slaughter, Anne Marie. (2009). “America’s Edge: Power in 

the Networked Century,” Foreign Affairs 88.1: 94–113.

 20.  Kahler, Networked Politics.
 21.  Slaughter, Anne Marie. (2004). “Sovereignty and Power 
in a Networked World Order,” Stanford Journal of Inter-
national Law 40: 283.

 22.  Slaughter, “America’s Edge.”
 23.  Slaughter, “Sovereignty and Power,” p. 283.
 24.  Ammori,  Marvin.  (2005).  “Private  Regulation,  Free 
Speech, and Lessons from the Sinclair Blogstorm,” Mich-
igan Telecommunications and Technology Law Review 
12.1: 1–75, pp. 43–46.

 25.  Froomkin,  Michael.  (1997). “The  Internet  as  a  Source 
of Regulatory Arbitrage,” in Borders in Cyberspace: In-
formation Policy and the Global Information Infrastruc-
ture, ed. Brian Kahin and Charles Nesson. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, p. 129.

 26.  Albert,  Reka,  Hawoong  Jeong,  and  Albert-László 
Barabási. (2000). “Error and Attack Tolerance of Com-
plex Networks,” Nature 406: 378–382.

 27.  Froomkin, “The Internet.”
 28.  Godin, Seth. (2001). Unleashing the Ideasvirus. Dobbs 

Ferry, NY: Hyperion.

 29.  Morozov, Evgeny. (2011). The Net Delusion: The Dark 

Side of Internet Freedom. New York: Public Affairs.

 30.  Ammori, “Private Regulation.”
 31.  Lessig,  Lawrence.  (1998). “The  New  Chicago  School,” 

 Journal of Legal Studies 27.S2: 661–691.

 32.  Benkler,  Yochai. The Wealth of  Networks: How  Social  Pro-
duction Transforms Markets and Freedom.  New Haven, 
CT:  Yale  University  Press,  http://cyber.law.harvard.edu/
wealth_of_networks/index.php?title=Text_Part_One.

216

n o t e s

 33.  Sundén, Jenny. (2003). Material Virtualities:  Approaching 

Online Textual Embodiment. New York: Peter Lang.

 34.  Castells, Manuel. (2000). “Information Technology and 
Global Capitalism,” in On the Edge: Living with Global 
Capitalism,  ed.  Will  Hutton  and  Anthony  Giddens. 
London: Jonathan Cape.

 35.  Wendt,  Alexander.  (1992).  “Anarchy  Is  What  States 

Make of It,” International Organization 46.2: 392.

 36.  boyd, danah. (2008). “Why Youth (Heart) Social Net-
work  Sites: The  Role  of  Networked  Publics  in Teen-
age Social Life,” in Youth, Identity and Digital Media, 
ed.  D.  Buckingham.  Cambridge,  MA:  MIT  Press,  pp. 
119–142.

 37.  Haythornthwaite,  Caroline.  (2005).  “Social  Networks 
and  Internet  Connectivity  Effects,”  Information,  Com-
munication & Society 8.2: 125–147.

 38.  Shirky, Clay. (2001). “Listening to Napster,” in  Peer-
to-Peer:  Harnessing  the  Power  of  Disruptive  Tech-
nologies,  ed.  Andy  Oram.  Sebastopol:  O’Reilly  and 
Associates.

 39.  Shirky, Here Comes Everybody.
 40.  Considine, Mark. (2005). “Partnerships and Collabora-
tive Advantage: Some Reflections on New Forms of Net-
work Governance,” background paper, Centre for Public 
Policy, December 14.

 41.  Castells, “Information Technology and Global Capitalism.”

c h a p t e r   3

  1.  Greenberg, Andy. (2011). “Meet Telecomix, the Hackers 
Bent  on  Exposing  Those  Who  Censor  and  Surveil  the 
Internet,” Forbes, December 26, www.forbes.com/sites/

217

n o t e s

andygreenberg/2011/12/26/meet-telecomix-the-hackers-
bent-on-exposing-those-who-censor-and-surveil-the-in-
ternet/.

  2.  Fein,  Peter.  (2011).  “Hacking  for  Freedom,”  http://i.

wearpants.org/blog/hacking-for-freedom/.

  3.  KheOps. (2011).   “#OpSyria: When   the  Internet   Does   Not   
Let   Citizens    Down,” Reflets.info,  September 11,  http:// 
reflets.info/opsyria-when-the-internet-does-not-let- 
citizens-down/.

  4.  KheOps, “#OpSyria.”
  5.  Greenberg, “Meet Telecomix.”
  6.  Fein, Peter. (2012). “Democracy Is Obsolete,” paper pre-
sented  at  the  Personal  Democracy  Forum  conference, 
www.youtube.com/watch?v=SsW4rAS1gao.

  7.  Fitri, Nofia. (2011). “Democracy Discourses through the 
Internet  Communication:  Understanding  the  Hacktiv-
ism for the Global Changing,” Online Journal of Com-
munication and Media Technologies 1.2 (April), www.
ojcmt.net/articles/12/121.pdf.

  8.  Arendt,  Hannah.  (2012).  In  der  Gegenwart:  Übungen 
im  politischen  Denken  II.  München:  Piper.  In  English: 
Arendt,  H.  (1972).  Crises  of  the  Republic:  Lying  in 
Politics,  Civil  Disobedience  on  Violence,  Thoughts  on 
Politics,  and  Revolution  (Vol.  219).  Boston:  Hough-
ton  Mifflin  Harcourt,  p.  299.  Cited  in  “Re-thinking 
Civil  Disobedience,”  by  Theresa  Züger,  in  Internet 
Policy  Review,  http://policyreview.info/articles/analysis/
re-thinking-civil-disobedience.

  9.  Philosopher and constitutional theorist Ronald Dworkin 
identifies  three  forms  of  civil  disobedience. “Integrity-
based”  civil  disobedience  occurs  when  a  citizen  dis-
obeys a law she or he feels is immoral, as in the case of 

218

n o t e s

Northerners disobeying the fugitive slave laws by refus-
ing to turn over escaped slaves to authorities. “Justice-
based” civil disobedience occurs when a citizen disobeys 
laws in order to lay claim to some right denied to her 
or  him,  as  when  blacks  illegally  protested  during  the 
civil rights movement. “Policy-based” civil disobedience 
occurs when a person breaks the law in order to change 
a  policy  he  or  she  believes  is  dangerously  wrong.  It  is 
these rationales, and the related degrees to which the law 
should be obeyed in society, which form the core of most 
debates over the bounds of civil disobedience.To Howard 
Zinn, “There is no social value to a general obedience to 
the law, any more than there is value to a general dis-
obedience to the law.” That is, “It becomes not only jus-
tifiable but necessary when a fundamental human right 
is at stake, and when legal channels are inadequate for 
securing that right.” In 1961, philosophy scholar Hugo 
Adam Bedau defined civil disobedience as “a public, non- 
violent  political  act  contrary  to  law  and  carried  out 
with the aim of bringing about change in law or policy.” 
This  articulation  was  later  broadened  by  Badau  to 
include  acts  which  fall  within  the  bounds  of  the  law. 
Also  capturing  this  sense  of  protest,  political  philoso-
phy  scholar  Robin  Celikates  defines  civil  disobedience 
as  an “intentionally  unlawful  collective  protest  action, 
which is based on principles and aims at changing (as in 
preventing or enforcing) certain laws or political steps.” 
Joseph  Raz,  who  argues  that  there  is  no  obligation  to 
obey the law, even in a society whose legal system is just,  
echoes this.

 10.  McCormick, Ty.  (2013). “A  Short  History  of  Hacktiv-
ism,”  Canberra  Times,  May  10,  www.canberratimes.

219

n o t e s

com.au/technology/technology-news/a-short-history-of-
hacktivism-20,130,510-2jbv0.html.

 11.  Norton, Quinn. (2013). “The Words of a Troll,” Medium, 
https://medium.com/quinn-norton/the-words-of-a-troll- 
d3ed1ce63615.

 12.  Ludlow, Peter. (2010). “WikiLeaks and Hacktivist Cul-
ture,” The Nation, September 15, www.thenation.com/ar-
ticle/154780/wikileaks-and-hacktivist-culture%22%20
%5Cl%20%22ixzz2VY3woFXN.

 13.  Critical Art Ensemble. (1996). “Electronic Civil Disobe-
dience  and  Other  Unpopular  Ideas,”  www.critical-art.
net/books/ecd/.

 14.  Sauter,  Molly.  (2013).  “The  Future  of  Civil  Disobedi-
ence Online,” i09, June 17, http://io9.com/the-future-of- 
civil-disobedience-online-512,193,648.

 15.  Sauter, “The Future of Civil Disobedience Online.”
 16.  In  her  political  science  PhD  thesis  on  hacktivism,  Al-
exandra  Samuel  builds  a  typology  of  hacktivism  that 
shows how damaging it is to militarize or securitize the 
language and policy around a very broad set of actions 
and actors. Samuels defines activism as “the nonviolent 
use of illegal or legally ambiguous digital tools in pursuit 
of political ends,” but then places this definition within 
a broad range of activities that each sit on a spectrum 
of illegality and potential malicious intent. This includes 
civil  disobedience  as  both  physical  and  online  virtual 
sit-ins; online activism, including everything from move-
ment building as with MoveOn.org, to formal political 
campaigning; hacking, which can be explicitly political 
or  apolitical;  and  cyberterrorism,  which  ranges  from 
transgressive  behavior  online  to  actions  intended  to 

2 2 0

n o t e s

cross over into violence in the physical world, such as 
hacking an air traffic control tower to crash a plane.

 17.  Ronfeldt, David, and John Arquilla. (2001). “Networks, 
Netwar  and  the  Fight  for  the  Future,”  First  Monday 
6.7  (October),  http://ojphi.org/ojs/index.php/fm/article/
view/889/798.

 18.  Ronfeldt and Arquilla, “Networks, Netwar and the Fight 

for the Future.”

 19.  Denning, D. E. (2000). “Cyberterrorism: Testimony before 
the Special Oversight Panel on Terrorism, Committee on 
Armed Services, US House of Representatives” (Vol. 23). 
Washington, DC, May.

 20.  Coleman, G. (2013). “Anonymous in Context: The Poli-
tics and Power behind the Mask,” Internet Governance 
Papers, 3.

 21.  Statement  by  Chris  Hedges  in  support  of  Jeremy  Ham-
mond’s  call  for  a  fair  trial,  November  29,  2012,  http://
andystepanian.tumblr.com/post/36815485693/
statement-by-chris-hedges-in-support-of-jeremy.

 22.  Vivien  Lesnik  Weisman.  (2013).  “Weev,  the  Hacker 
Who Didn’t Hack AT&T,” Huffington Post, March 25, 
www.huffingtonpost.com/vivien-lesnik-weisman/weev-
hacker-att_b_2,948,173.html.

 23.  Dishneau,  David.  (2013). “Audio  of  Bradley  Manning 
explaining  why  he  leaked  U.S.  secrets  posted  online. 
CTV  News,”  March  12,  www.ctvnews.ca/world/audio-
of-bradley-manning-explaining-why-he-leaked-u-s- 
secrets-posted-online-1.1192840#ixzz31vWOJXKK.

 24.  Worthington,  Andy.  (2013).  “UN  Torture  Rapporteur 
Accuses  US  Government  of  Cruel  and  Inhuman Treat-
ment  of  Bradley  Manning,”  Andy  Worthington  Blog, 

221

n o t e s

March  12,  www.andyworthington.co.uk/2012/03/13/
un-torture-rapporteur-accuses-us-government-of-cruel-
and-inhuman-treatment-of-bradley-manning/#sthash.
kqmmqfHZ.dpuf.

 25.  Sullivan, Margaret. (2013). “The Danger of Suppressing 
the  Leaks,”  New  York  Times,  March  3,  www.nytimes.
com/2013/03/10/public-editor/the-danger-of-suppressing-
the- leaks.html?ref=bradleyemanning.

 26.  Abrams,  Floyd,  and  Yochai  Benkler.  (2013).  “Death 
to  Whistleblowers?”  New  York  Times,  March  13,  
www.nytimes.com/2013/03/14/opinion/the-impact-of-
the-bradley-manning-case.html?_r=0.

 27.  Hanna Arendt Center. (2011). “Civil Disobedience and 
O.W.S.,” November 16, www.hannaharendtcenter.org/? 
p=2705.

c h a p t e r   4

  1.  Anderson,  Nate,  and  Cyrus  Farviar.  (2012). “How  the 
Feds Took Down the Dread Pirate Roberts,” Arstechnica, 
October  3,  http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2013/10/
how-the-feds-took-down-the-dread-pirate-roberts/.

  2.  Greenberg,  Andy.  (2013).  “Follow  the  Bitcoins:  How 
We  Got  Busted  Buying  Drugs  on  Silk  Road’s  Black 
Market,”  Forbes,  September  5,  www.forbes.com/sites/ 
andygreenberg/2013/09/05/follow-the-bitcoins-how-
we-got-busted-buying-drugs-on-silk-roads-black- 
market/.

  3.  Greenberg, “Follow the Bitcoins.”
  4.  Patrick, Brian Eha. (2013). “Could the Silk Road Closure 
Be  Good  for  Bitcoin?”  New Yorker,  October  5,  www.

2 2 2

n o t e s

newyorker.com/online/blogs/currency/  2013/10/could-
the-silk-road-closure-be-good-for-bitcoin.html.

  5.  Greenberg, “Follow the Bitcoins.”
  6.  “Silk Road Returns: New Owner Aims to ‘Double the 
Achievements’  of  the  First  Site.”  (2013).  Belfast  Tele-
graph,  November  8,  www.belfasttelegraph.co.uk/life/
technology-gadgets/silk-road-returns-new-owner-aims-
to-double-the-achievements-of-the-first-site-29736863.
html.

  7.  Patrick,  “Could  the  Silk  Road  Closure  Be  Good  for 

Bitcoin?”

  8.  Patrick,  “Could  the  Silk  Road  Closure  Be  Good  for 

Bitcoin?”

  9.  Spaven,  Emily.  (2013). “Robocoin  Bitcoin  ATM  Takes  
More Than CA$1m in 29 Days,” CoinDesk, November 
27,  www.coindesk.com/robocoin-bitcoin-atm-cad1m- 
29-days/.

 10.  Eastwood,  Joel.  (2013).  “Bitcoin  Entrepreneurs  Want 
to Put Virtual Coins in Your Wallet,” Toronto Star, No-
vember  12,  www.thestar.com/news/gta/2013/11/12/
bitcoin_entrepreneurs_want_to_put_virtual_coins_in_
your_wallet.html#.

 11.  Burgoyne, Matthew. (2014). “Does Canada View Bitcoin 
as  Currency?”  CoinDesk,  accessed  February  2,  2014, 
www.coindesk.com/canada-view-bitcoin-currency/.

 12.  Hassleback, Drew. (2014). “Governments Ponder Legiti-
macy of Bitcoins,” Financial Post, accessed February 2,  
http://business.financialpost.com/2013/11/19/
governments-ponder-legitimacy-of-bitcoins/.

 13.  Luff,  Jonathan,  and  Alec  Ross.  (2013).  “Why  Bitcoin 
Is  on  the  Money,”  Telegraph.co.uk,  June  24,  www. 

223

n o t e s

telegraph.co.uk/finance/currency/10139651/Why- 
Bitcoin-is-on-the-money.html.

 14.  Steil, Benn, and Manuel Hinds. (2009). Money, Markets, 
and Sovereignty. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

 15.  Steil and Hinds, Money, Markets, and Sovereignty.
 16.  Rousseau,  P.  (2004). “A  Common  Currency:  Early  US 
Monetary Policy and the Transition to the Dollar,” Na-
tional Bureau of Economic Research, August, www.nber.
org/papers/w10702.pdf?new_window=1.

 17.  Schwartz, Pedro. (2013). “Why the Euro Failed and How 

It Will Survive,” Cato Journal 33.3.

 18.  Cohen, B. J. (2012). “The Future of the Euro: Let’s Get 
Real.” Review of International Political Economy 19.4: 
689–700.

 19.  Davis,  Joshua.  (2011).  “The  Cryptocurrency,”  New 
Yorker,  October,   www.newyorker.com/reporting/2011/ 
10/10/111010fa_fact_davis.

 20.  Lach,  Eric.  (2011).  “Feds  Seeking  $7M  Worth  of 
Privately-Minted  ‘Liberty  Dollars,’”  Talking  Points 
Memo,  April  4,  accessed  August  16,  2012,  http:// 
talkingpointsmemo.com/muckraker/feds-seeking-7m-
worth-of-privately-minted-liberty-dollars.

 21.  Lovett,  Tom.  (2011). “Local  Liberty  Dollar ‘Architect’ 
Bernard  von  NotHaus  Convicted,”  Evansville  Courier 
& Press, March 19, www.courierpress.com/news/2011/
mar/19/local-liberty-dollar-architect-found-guilty/.

 22.  US  Department  of  Justice.  (2011).  “Digital  Currency 
Business E-Gold Indicted for Money Laundering and Il-
legal Money Transmitting,” April 27.

 23.  Bartlett,  Jamie,  Carl  Miller,  James  Smith,  and  Louis 
Reynolds.  (2013). “Heads  Up:  Bitcoin  an  Introductory 

2 2 4

n o t e s

CASM  Briefing.”  Demos,  p.  4,  www.demos.co.uk/files/
Heads_Up_-_web.pdf?1387559230.

 24.  Bartlett et al., “Heads Up.”
 25.  Nakamoto,  Satoshi.  (2008).  “Bitcoin:  A  Peer-to-Peer 

Electronic Cash System.” http://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf.

 26.  Andreessen,  Marc.  (2013).  “Why  Bitcoin  Matters,”  
NYTimes.com., January 21, accessed February 4, 2014, 
http://dealbook.nytimes.com/2014/01/21/why-bitcoin- 
matters/?_php=true&_type=blogs&_r=0.

 27.  Lee, Timothy B. (2011). “Bitcoin’s Collusion Problem,” 
Bottom-Up, April 19, accessed February 4, 2014, http:// 
timothyblee.com/2011/04/19/bitcoins-collusion- 
problem/.

 28.  Andreessen, “Why Bitcoin Matters.”
 29.  Bloomberg.  (2014).  Kenya,  http://mobile.bloomberg.

com/topics/kenya/.

 30.  Andreessen, “Why Bitcoin Matters.”
 31.  McGuire, Patrick. (2013). “Bitcoin Has Already Morphed 
Society,” Vice, November 28, www.vice.com/en_ca/read/
bitcoin-has-already-morphed-society.

 32.  Cowen, Tyler. (2011). “The Economics of Bitcoin,” Mar-
ginal  Revolution,  April  19,  http://marginalrevolution.
com/marginalrevolution/2011/04/the-economics-of- 
bitcoin.html.

 33.  Payne,  Alex.  (2013).  “Bitcoin,  Magical  Thinking,  and 
Political  Ideology,”  Alex  Payne  (blog),  https://al3x.
net/2013/12/18/bitcoin.html.

 34.  Stross,  Charlie.  (2013).  “Why  I  Want  Bitcoin  to  Die 
in  a  Fire,”  Charlie’s  Diary  (blog),  December  8,  www. 
antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/12/why-i-want-
bitcoin-to-die-in-a.html.

225

n o t e s

 35.  Lee, “Bitcoin’s Collusion Problem.”
 36.  Salmon,  Felix.  (2014).  “The  Bitcoin  Bubble  and  the 
Future  of  Currency—Money  &  Banking—Medium,” 
accessed  February  4,  https://medium.com/money- 
banking/2b5ef79482cb.

 37.  Carney,  Michael.  (2013).  “Bitcoin  Has  a  Dark  Side: 
Its  Carbon  Footprint,”  PandoDaily,   December  16, 
http://pando.com/2013/12/16/bitcoin-has-a-dark- 
side-its-carbon-footprint/.

 38.  May,  Timothy  C. 

(1994).  The  Cyphernomicon,  
www.cypherpunks.to/faq/cyphernomicron/cyphernomi-
con.txt.

 39.  “Crypto-Anarchy 

and  Libertarian  Entrepreneur-
ship—Chapter  3:  The  Killer  App  of  Liberty.”  (2013). 
The  Mises  Circle  (blog),  May  29,  http://themisescircle.
org/blog/2013/05/29/crypto-anarchy-and-libertarian- 
entrepreneurship-chapter-iii/.

 40.  The Mises Circle.
 41.  May, Timothy C. (1992). The  Crypto-Anarchist Manifesto, 
http://groups.csail.mit.edu/mac/classes/6.805/articles/
crypto/cypherpunks/may-crypto-manifesto.html.

 42.  Salmon, “The Bitcoin Bubble.”
 43.  Bohm,  Paul. 

(2011).  “Bitcoin’s  Value 

Is  Decen-
tralization,”  Paul  Bohm’s  Blog,  June  17,  accessed 
February 5, 2014, http://paulbohm.com/articles/bitcoins- 
value-is-decentralization/.

 44.  Salmon, “The Bitcoin Bubble.”
 45.  Salmon, “The Bitcoin Bubble.”
 46.  Buffet,  Warren.  (2012).  “Warren  Buffet:  Why  Stocks 
Beat  Gold  and  Bonds.”  Fortune,  http://fortune.com/ 
2012/02/09/warren-buffett-why-stocks-beat-gold-and-
bonds/.

2 2 6

n o t e s

 47.  Bitcoin  Dark  Wallet  (campaign),  www.indiegogo.com/

projects/bitcoin-dark-wallet#home.

 48.  Ramos,  Jairo.  (2014).  “A  Native  American  Tribe 
Hopes  Digital  Currency  Boosts  Its  Sovereignty,”  NPR 
Code  Switch,  March  7,  www.npr.org/blogs/codeswit
ch/2014/03/07/287258968/a-native-american-tribe-
hopes-digital-currency-boosts-its-sovereignty.

c h a p t e r   5

  1.  Brenner,  Marie.  (2012). “Marie  Colvin’s  Private  War,” 
Vanity Fair,  August, www.vanityfair.com/politics/2012/ 
08/marie-colvin-private-war.

  2.  Colvin,  Marie.  (2012).  “Final  Dispatch  from  Homs, 
the  Battered  City,”  Sunday  Times,  February  19,  www. 
thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/public/news/article874796.
ece.

  3.  Gregory, Sam. (2013). “Co-Presence: A New Way to Bring 
People  Together  for  Human  Rights  Activism,”  Witness. 
Org (blog), September 23, http://blog.witness.org/2013/09/
co-presence-for-human-rights/.

  4.  Bouchard, Stephane, Francois Bernier, Eric Boivin, Steph-
anie Dumolin, Lylene Laforest, Tanya Guitard, Genevieve 
Robillard, Johana Monthuy-Blanc, and Patrice Renaud. 
(2013). “Empathy Towards Virtual Humans Depicting a 
Known or Unknown Person Expressing Pain,” Cyberpsy-
chology, Behaviour, and Social Networking 16.1: 61–71, 
http://online.liebertpub.com/doi/abs/10.1089/cyber. 
2012.1571.

  5.  “Public  Affairs  Guidance  on  Embedding  Media 
in 
during  Possible  Future  Operations/Deployments 
the  U.S.  Central  Commands  Area  of  Responsibility”  

227

n o t e s

(February  3,  2003),  accessed  June  3,  2008,  www. 
defenselink.mil/news/Feb2003/d20030228pag.pdf,  Sec 
2.C, sourced in Kylie Tuosto. (2008). “The ‘Grunt Truth’ 
of  Embedded  Journalism:  The  New  Media/Military 
 Relationship,”  Stanford  Journal  of  International  Rela-
tions  (Fall/Winter),  https://web.stanford.edu/group/sjir/
pdf/journalism_real_final_v2.pdf.

  6.  Tuosto, “The ‘Grunt Truth.’”
  7.  Zelizer, Barbie. (2007). “On ‘Having Been There’: ‘Eye-
witnessing’ as a Journalistic Key Word,” Critical Studies 
in Media Communication 24.5: 408–428.

  8.  Lynch, Lisa. (2013). “WikiLeaks after Megaleaks,” Digital 

Journalism 1.3: 314–334.

  9.  Julian Assange himself claims that WikiLeaks practices 
“scientific journalism” based on public access to source 
documents without editing or contextualization. It is of 
course this editing and contextualizing that has histori-
cally been the core attribute of journalism.

 10.  Goodman,  Amy,  and  Juan  Gonzalez.  (2013).  “Glenn 
Greenwald:  Media  Venture  Will  Empower  Adversarial 
Journalism  to  Hold  the  Powerful  Accountable,”  De-
mocracy  Now,  www.democracynow.org/2013/10/28/
glenn_greenwald_media_venture_will_empower.

 11.  Benkler,  Yochai.  (2011).  “A  Free  Irresponsible  Press: 
Wikileaks and the Battle Over the Soul of the Networked 
Fourth Estate,” 46 Harvard Civil Rights-Civil Liberties 
Law Review 311.

 12.  Dlugoleski,  Deirdre.  (2013).  “We  Are  All  Journal-
ists  Now:  140  Journos  and  Turkey’s  ‘Counter-Media’ 
Movement,”www.cjr.org/behind_the_news/turkey_
counter_media.php.

2 2 8

n o t e s

 13.  John Maxwell Hamilton and Eric Jenner argue that in-
stead  of  seeing  the  death  of  the  foreign  correspondent, 
what we are really seeing is a new ecosystem in which 
the once-dominant parachute correspondent is now one 
among many. New members include the hired foreign na-
tionals who cover events independently and then sell their 
reports to media agencies, local media that conduct inter-
national reporting from home, non-American correspon-
dents whose work is available online through web-based 
publications,  representatives  of  international  organiza-
tions who communicate through official channels, syndi-
cated news agencies that charge premiums for news, and, 
of course, amateur correspondents and witnesses.

 14.  Timothy  Cook  studies  the  media  as  an  institutional 
actor. Through this lens the media are distinct from po-
litical actors, but in many ways they play a role like that 
of one large organizational actor. The media can be seen 
as a “fourth branch” of government, with its own role 
and responsibility, with the government playing a central 
role in its “product,” or news stories. Institutional theory 
helps us to understand how different media outlets tend 
to report the same stories in the same way. Cook defines 
institutions as “social patterns of behaviour identifiable 
across the organizations that are generally seen within a 
society to preside over a particular social sphere.”

 15.  Castells, Manuel. (2011). “A Network Theory of Power,” 
International  Journal  of  Communication  5:  773–783, 
http://ascnetworksnetwork.org/wp-content/uploads/ 
2010/02/IJoC-Network-Theory-2011-Castells.pdf.

 16.  Singer, Jane B. (2005). “The Political J-Blogger,” Journal-

ism 6.2: 173–198.

229

n o t e s

 17.  Alfred Hermida, in a study of tweets using the #Egypt 
hashtag,  similarly  found  that  while  some  traditional 
media norms are replicated on Twitter, the people who 
decide  what  is  influential  are  different—instead  of  an 
overarching media authority, influence was decided or-
ganically by a mass audience. Hermida found four new 
norms  that  shaped  the  discourse  around  #Egypt  on 
Twitter. First, there was an importance of, and constant 
desire for, immediate, instantaneous updates to the situ-
ation, a sense that was embedded in the very language of 
the tweets. Second, traditional news sources, journalists, 
and citizens combined to form a Twitter crowd-sourced 
elite that was highly retweeted and followed. These elites 
interacted with each other, but the citizen and journalist 
accounts were more emotional and open than those of 
the traditional media. Third, there was a sense of soli-
darity roughly determined by geo-location. And finally, 
and  perhaps  most  critically, Twitter  as  an  information 
platform allowed for a constant stream of information, 
which, relevant or not, contributed to the overall open-
ness  and  liveliness  of  the  news  environment.  This  re-
sulted in what Hermida calls ambient journalism, or the 
ability of consumers to immerse themselves in informa-
tion about an event.

 18.  Castells, Manuel. (2007). “Communication, Power and 
Counter-power  in  the  Network  Society,”  International 
Journal of Communication 1: 238–266.

 19.  And as media theorist danah boyd argues, social media 
networks often mirror the power structures of the so-
cieties  in  which  they  are  grounded.  Digital  tools,  she 
argues,  are  not  representative  of  society  as  a  whole, 
as they too are inaccessible to many. When the Kony 

230

n o t e s

2012 video went viral, for example, it was not because 
of the power of the message or due to the decentralized 
acts of individuals, but rather due to an orchestrated 
campaign  by  the  video’s  creators,  Invisible  Children, 
using  a  network  of  celebrities  and  university  campus 
groups. People felt as though they were part of a move-
ment, but the network had been heavily influenced by 
elites. It had structure. And that structure is a form of 
power.

 20.  Vicente, Paulo Nuno. (2013). “The Nairobi Hub: Emerg-
ing Patterns of How Foreign Correspondents Frame Citi-
zen Journalists and Social Media.” Ecquid Novi: African 
Journalism Studies 34.1: 36–49.

c h a p t e r   6

  1.  Meier,  Patrick.  (2012).  “How  Crisis  Mapping  Saved 
Lives  in  Haiti,”  National  Geographic,  July  2,  http://
newswatch.nationalgeographic.com/2012/07/02/
crisis-mapping-haiti/.

  2.  Zook, Matthew, Mark Graham, Taylor Shelton, and Sean 
Gorman. (2010). “Volunteered Geographic Information 
and Crowdsourcing Disaster Relief: A Case Study of the 
Haitian Earthquake,” World Medical and Health Policy 
2.2 (Article 2): 19.

  3.  Conneally,  Paul.  (2011).  Digital  Humanitarianism, 
November,  transcript  of  TEDTalk,  www.ted.com/
talks/paul_conneally_digital_humanitarianism/
transcript.

  4.  Meier,  Patrick.  (2011). “Theorizing  Ushahidi: An Aca-
demic  Treatise,”  iRevolution  (blog),  October  2,  http://
irevolution.net/2011/10/02/theorizing-ushahidi/.

231

n o t e s

  5.  As cited in Morozov, Evgeny. (2014). “Facebook’s Gate-
way Drug,” New York Times, August 2, www.nytimes.
com/2014/08/03/opinion/sunday/evgeny-morozov- 
facebooks-gateway-drug.html?_r=1.

  6.  Meier, Patrick. (2011). “New Information Technologies 
and Their Impact on the Humanitarian Sector,” Interna-
tional Review of the Red Cross 93.884, www.icrc.org/
eng/assets/files/review/2011/irrc-884-meier.pdf.

  7.  http://mfarm.co.ke/.
  8.  Satterthwaite, Margaret L., and P. Scott Moses. (2012). 
“Unintended Consequences: The Technology of Indica-
tors in Post-Earthquake Haiti,” Journal of Haitian Stud-
ies 18.1: 14–49.

  9.  Romijn,  H. A.,  and  M.  C.  Caniëls.  (2011). “Pathways  of 
Technological Change in Developing Countries: Review and 
New Agenda,” Development Policy Review 29.3: 359–380.
 10.  Romijn and Caniëls, “Pathways of Technological Change.”
 11.  Stephenson,  R.,  and  P.  S. Anderson.  (1997). “Disasters 
and the Information Technology Revolution,” Disasters 
21.4: 305–334.

 12.  Nathaniel, Jordan. (2011). Mapping the Sovereign State: 
Cartographic Technology, Political Authority, and Sys-
temic Change, Thesis, University of California, Berkeley.
 13.  Summerhayes,  C.  (2011). “Embodied  Space  in  Google 

Earth: Crisis in Darfur,” MediaTropes 3.1: 113–134.

 14.  Parks,  Lisa.  (2009).  “Digging  into  Google  Earth: 
An  Analysis  of  ‘Crisis  in  Darfur,’”  Geoforum  40.4: 
535–545.

 15.  As  cited  in  Meier,  Patrick.  (2010).  “Will  Using  ‘Live’ 
Satellite  Imagery  to  Prevent  War  in  the  Sudan  Actu-
ally  Work?”  iRevolution  (blog),  December  30,  http:// 
irevolution.net/2010/12/30/sat-sentinel-project/.

232

n o t e s

 16.  Harris,  Paul.  (2012). “George  Clooney’s  Satellite  Spies 
Reveal Secrets of Sudan’s Bloody Army,” Guardian.com, 
March  24,  www.theguardian.com/world/2012/mar/24/
george-clooney-spies-secrets-sudan.

 17.  Meier, Patrick. (2009). “US Calls for UN Aerial Surveil-
lance  to  Detect  Preparations  for Attacks,”  iRevolution 
(blog),  August  14,  http://irevolution.net/2009/08/14/
un-aerial-surveillance/.

 18.  Prendergast,  John.  (2007).  “Museum,  Google  Zoom 
In  on  Darfur,”  Washington  Post,  April  14,  www. 
w a s h i n g t o n p o s t . c o m / w p d y n / c o n t e n t / a r t i c l e / 
2007/04/13/AR2007041302189.html.

 19.  Hollinger, Andrew. (n.d.). “United States Holocaust Me-
morial Museum Crisis in Darfur,” Google Earth, www.
google.com/earth/outreach/stories/darfur.html.

 20.  Meier,  Patrick.  (2010). “Will  Using ‘Live’  Satellite  Im-
agery  to  Prevent  War  in  the  Sudan  Actually  Work?” 
iRevolution  (blog),  September  30,  http://irevolution.
net/2010/12/30/sat-sentinel-project/.

 21.  Heeks, R. (2010). “Do Information and Communication 
Technologies (ICTs) Contribute to Development?” Jour-
nal of International Development 22.5: 625–640.

 22.  Heeks, “Do Information and Communication Technolo-

gies (ICTs) Contribute to Development?”

 23.  Bedi, A. S. (1999). The Role of Information and Com-
munication Technologies in Economic Development: A 
Partial Survey. ZEF Discussion Papers on Development 
Policy No. 7, Center for Development Research (ZEF), 
Bonn, May 1999.

 24.  Jonathan  Donner  and  Marcela  Escobari,  for  example, 
use  a  value  chain  model  to  show  that  mobile  technol-
ogy  is  increasing  productivity  in  small  enterprises  and 

233

n o t e s

helping them grow, but they find limited wide market ef-
fects. They conclude that in “value systems where mobile 
telephony is introduced, there is currently more evidence 
suggesting  changes  in  degree  (more  information,  more 
customers) than for changes in structure (new channels, 
new businesses).” Another study argues that a minimum 
threshold of ICT density is needed to see a positive effect 
on growth, that there is also a substantial lag time be-
tween the introduction of these technologies and a posi-
tive impact. A study for the Organization for Economic 
Co-operation and Development (OECD) urges caution 
on making direct connections between ICTs and produc-
tivity, pointing to a paper reviewing 150 studies on the 
topic published in the 1980s and 1990s, which showed 
a  limited  correlation. The  challenge,  the  paper  argues, 
is  that  it  is  very  hard  to  disaggregate  the  effect  of  the 
introduction of new technologies from wider social and 
market forces. In this way, ICTs are better seen as a gen-
eral purpose technology, which can enable new forms of 
production across an entire economy. Seen in this way, 
economists have found strong links within the US econ-
omy, but few such studies have been conducted in devel-
oping countries.

 25.  Alzouma,  G.  (2005). “Myths  of  Digital Technology  in 
Africa Leapfrogging Development?” Global Media and 
Communication 1.3: 339–356.

 26.  Castells, Manuel. (1999). “Information Technology, Glo-
balization  and  Social  Development,”  UNRISD  Discus-
sion Paper No. 114, September, United Nations Research 
Institute for Social Development, Geneva, Switzerland.

 27.  Castells, “Information Technology.”
 28.  Conneally, Digital Humanitarianism, 2011.

234

n o t e s

 29.  Collins, Katie. (2013). “How AI, Twitter and Digital Vol-
unteers  Are  Transforming  Humanitarian  Disaster  Re-
sponse,” Wired, September 13, www.wired.co.uk/news/
archive/2013-09/30/digital-humanitarianism.

 30.  Palen, L., and S. B. Liu. (2007, April 7). “Citizen Com-
munications  in  Crisis:  Anticipating  a  Future  of  ICT-
Supported  Public  Participation,”  in  Proceedings  of  the 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems, San Jose, CA (pp. 727–736).

 31.  Roche, S., E. Propeck-Zimmermann, and B. Mericskay. 
(2013). “GeoWeb  and  Crisis  Management:  Issues  and 
Perspectives  of  Volunteered  Geographic  Information,” 
GeoJournal 78.1: 21–40, p. 23.

 32.  Altay, N., and M. Labonte. (2014). “Challenges in Hu-
manitarian  Information  Management  and  Exchange: 
Evidence from Haiti,” Disasters 38.1: S50–S72.

 33.  Altay and Labonte, “Challenges,” p. 52.
 34.  Giroux, Jennifer, and Florian Roth. (2012). Conceptual-
izing the Crisis Mapping Phenomenon: Insights on Be-
havior and the Coordination of Agents and Information 
in Complex Crisis. Zurich: Center for Security Studies.

 35.  “Foreign  Assistance  Briefing  Books:  Critical  Problems, 
Recommendations,  and  Actions  for  the  112th  Congress 
and   the  Obama  Administration.”  (2011).   InterAction, 
January,  www.interaction.org/sites/default/files/2011%20
InterAction%20Foreign%20Assistance%20Briefing 
%20Book_Complete_0.pdf.

 36.  Satterthwaite and Moses, “Unintended Consequences.”
 37.  Zanotti,  L.  (2010). “Cacophonies  of  Aid,  Failed  State 
Building and NGOs in Haiti: Setting the Stage for Di-
saster, Envisioning the Future,” Third World Quarterly 
31.5: 755–771.

235

n o t e s

 38.  Alzouma,  G.  (2005). “Myths  of  Digital Technology  in 
Africa Leapfrogging Development?” Global Media and 
Communication 1.3: 339–356.

 39.  Intel Corporation. (2012). “Women and the Web,” www.
intel.com/content/www/us/en/technology-in-education/
women-in-the-web.html.

 40.  Castells, “Information Technology.”
 41.  One way to look at this internal access problem is through 
Jan van Dijk’s argument that there are three class struc-
tures within a networked society. The first is the infor-
mation elite, which are the highly educated, high-income 
group with nearly 100% ICT access and the ability to 
shape  the  production  of  the  technology,  either  directly 
or  indirectly.  The  second  are  the  participating  major-
ity, which include the broadly defined middle class and 
they have near universal access, but not the same control 
over production. Finally, there are the disconnected and 
excluded, which have limited access. In a development 
or  humanitarian  context  it  is  important  to  ask  which 
groups are truly being served, and how programs could 
be exacerbating this divide.

 42.  Ndung’u,  M.  N.  (2007).  ICTs  and  Health  Technology 
at  the  Grassroots  Level  in  Africa.  African  Technology 
Policy Studies Network.

 43.  Rose  and  Miller  as  cited  in  Satterthwaite  and  Moses, 

“Unintended Consequences,” 14–49.
 44.  Parks, “Digging into Google Earth.”
 45.  Warren, J. Y. (2010). Grassroots Mapping: Tools for Par-
ticipatory  and  Activist  Cartography,  Doctoral  disserta-
tion, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, p. 20.

 46.  Morozov as cited in Warren, Grassroots Mapping, p. 23.

236

n o t e s

c h a p t e r   7

  1.  Clark,  Campbell,  Patrick  Martin,  and  Mark  Mackin-
non. (2012). “Envoys Out as Canada Abruptly Severs 
Ties with Iran,” Globe and Mail,  September 7, www.
theglobeandmail.com/news/politics/envoys-out-as- 
canada-abruptly-severs-ties-with-iran/article4526167/.
  2.  Petrou,  Michael.  (2013).  “DFAIT  Skirts  Iranian  Gov-
ernment,  Tries  to  Reach  Iranian  People,”  Maclean’s, 
May  10,  www.macleans.ca/news/dfait-skirts-iranian- 
government-tries-to-reach-iranian-people/.

  3.  Tait,  Robert.  (2013). “Nuclear  Deal  with  Iran  a ‘His-
toric  Mistake,’  Benjamin  Netanyahu  Says,”  Telegraph, 
November  24,  www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/
middleeast/israel/10470834/Nuclear-deal-with-Iran-a-
historic-mistake-Benjamin-Netanyahu-says.html.

  4.  Nye,  Joseph  Jr.  (2005).  Public  Diplomacy  and  Soft 

Power. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
  5.  Nye, Public Diplomacy and Soft Power.
  6.  Pells, R. H. (1997). Not Like Us: How Europeans Have 
Loved, Hated, and Transformed American Culture since 
World War II. New York: Basic Books, p. 33.

  7.  Nye, Public Diplomacy and Soft Power.
  8.  Nye,  Joseph  Jr.  (2009). “Who  Caused  the  End  of  the 
Cold War?”  Huffington  Post,  November  9,  www.huff-
ingtonpost.com/joseph-nye/who-caused-the-end-of-
the_b_350595.html.

  9.  Nye, Public Diplomacy and Soft Power.
 10.  Khatib, L., W. Dutton, and M. Thelwall. (2012). “Public 
Diplomacy  2.0:  A  Case  Study  of  the  US  Digital  Out-
reach Team,” Middle East Journal 66.3: 453–472. http://

237

n o t e s

cddrl.stanford.edu/publications/public_diplomacy_20_
an_exploratory_case_study_of_the_digital_outreach_
team/.

 11.  Khatib et al., “Public Diplomacy 2.0.”
 12.  Public  diplomacy  projects  under  the  Bureau  of  Infor-
mation Resource Management’s Office of eDiplomacy, 
www.state.gov/m/irm/ediplomacy/c23840.htm.

 13.  Khatib et al., “Public Diplomacy 2.0.”
 14.  Miller, Greg. (2012). “Syrian Activists Say Pledges of U.S. 
Communications Aid Are Largely  Unfulfilled,” Washing-
ton  Post, August  12,  www.washingtonpost.com/world/
national-security/syrian-activists-say-pledges-of-us- 
communications-aid-are-largely-unfulfilled/2012/08/20/ 
14dff95a-eaf8-11e1-9ddc -340d5efb1e9c_story_  
2.html.

 15.  Glanz,  James,  and  John  Markoff.  (2011). “U.S.  Under-
writes Internet Detour around Censors,” NYTimes.com, 
June 21, www.nytimes.com/2011/06/12/world/12internet.
html?pagewanted=all.

 16.  Hasan,  S.  (2013).  Designing  Networks  for  Large-Scale 
Blackout  Circumvention,  www.eecs.berkeley.edu/Pubs/
TechRpts/2013/EECS-2013-230.pdf.

 17.  Hasan, Designing Networks.

c h a p t e r   8

  1.  Schulz,  G.W.,  and Amanda  Pike.  (2014). “Hollywood-
Style  Surveillance  Technology  Inches  Closer  to  Real-
ity,” Center for Investigative Reporting, April 11, http://
cironline.org/reports/hollywood-style-surveillance- 
technology-inches-closer-reality-6228.

238

n o t e s

  2.  Bacon,  Lance  M.  (2012).  “System  Gives  Troops  360-
Degree Eye in the Sky,” Army Times.com, April 16, www.
armytimes.com/article/20120416/NEWS/204160317/
System-gives-troops-360-degree-eye-sky.

  3.  Emspak, Jesse. (2013). “Wifi Tech Sees through Walls,” 
Discovery  News,  June  28,  http://news.discovery.com/
tech/wi-fi-sees-through-walls-130628.htm.

  4.  Ward,  Sam.  (2013).  “Infographic:  How  Facial  Rec-
ognition  Works,”  Center  for  Investigative  Reporting, 
November  7,    http://cironline.org/reports/infographic- 
how-facial-recognition-works-5516.

  5.  Borison,  Rebecca.  (2014).  “This  Security   Solution 
Says  It  Can  Figure  Out  if  You  Are  Safe  or  Danger-
ous  by  Scanning  Your  Skeleton,”  Business  Insider, 
April 
26,  www.businessinsider.in/This-Security-
Solution -Says-It-Can-Figure -Out-If-You-Are-
Safe-Or-Dangerous-By-Scanning-Your-Skeleton/
articleshow/34213618.cms.

  6.  Metz,  Cade.  (2013).  “Google’s  Quantum  Computer 
Proven  to  Be  Real  Thing  (Almost),”  WIRED,  June  28,  
www.wired.com/2013/06/d-wave-quantum-computer-usc/.
  7.  Der Derian, James. (2013). “From War 2.0 to Quantum 
War: The  Superpositionality  of  Global Violence,”  Aus-
tralian Journal of International Affairs 67.5: 570–585.

  8.  Bacon, “System Gives Troops 360-Degree Eye in the Sky.”
  9.  Hambling, David. (2014). “Armed Russian Robocops to 
Defend Military Bases,” New Scientist, April 23, www.
newscientist.com/article/mg22229664.400-armed- 
russian-robocops-to-defend-missile-bases.html#.U3if-
GFhdVgR;  also  see Tarantola, Andrew.  (2012). “South 
Korea’s  Auto-Turret  Can  Kill  a  Man  in  the  Dead  of 

239

n o t e s

Night from Three Clicks,” WIRED, October 29, http://
gizmodo.com/5955042/south-koreas-auto-turret-can-
kill-a-man-in-the-dead-of-night-from-three-clicks.

10.  Metz, “Google’s Quantum Computer.”
 11.  Schneier,  Bruce.  (2014).  “Surveillance  by  Algorithm,” 
Schneier  on  Security  (blog),  March  5,  www.schneier.
com/blog/archives/2014/03/surveillance_by.html.

 12.  Human Rights Watch. (2014). Shaking the Foundations 
(Report), May 12, www.hrw.org/embargo/node/125250? 
signature=3b6d2513fd72d0b20ebb5d74af9dbb98&s
uid=6.

 13.  Amoore, L. (2008). “Risk before Justice: When the Law 
Contests Its Own Suspension,” Leiden Journal of Inter-
national Law 21.4: 847–861.

 14.  Amoore, “Risk before Justice.”
 15.  Schmitt  as  cited  in  Werner,  Wouter  G.  (2010).  “The 
Changing  Face  of  Enmity:  Carl  Schmitt’s  International 
Theory and the Evolution of the Legal Concept of War,” 
International Theory 2.3: 351–380.

 16.  Werner, 376.
 17.  Miller,  Todd.  (2014).  “How  We’ve  Created  a  Boom-
ing  Market  for  Border  Security  Technology,”  Mother 
Jones,  April  22,  www.motherjones.com/politics/2014/04/ 
border-security-state-market-booming-technology?page=2.
 18.  Priest,  Dana,  and  William M. Arkin. (2011). “A Hidden 
World,  Growing  beyond  Control,”  Washington  Post, 
September  30,  http://projects.washingtonpost.com/top- 
secret-america/articles/a-hidden-world-growing-beyond-
control/.

 19.  As cited in Stahl, R. (2010). “Becoming Bombs: 3D Ani-
mated  Satellite  Imagery  and  the Weaponization  of  the 
Civic Eye,” MediaTropes 2.2: 65–93.

2 40

n o t e s

 20.  As cited in Stahl, Roger. (2013). “What the Drone Saw: 
The  Cultural  Optics  of  Unmanned  War,”  Australian 
Journal of International Affairs 67.5: 659–674.

 21.  Williams, M. C. (2003). “Words, Images, Enemies: Secu-
ritization and International Politics,” International Stud-
ies Quarterly 47.4: 511–531.

 22.  Buzan et al. (1998:26) as cited in Williams, M. C. (2003). 
“Words, Images, Enemies: Securitization and International 
Politics,” International Studies Quarterly 47.4: 511–531.

 23.  Williams, “Words, Images, Enemies.”
 24.  Moskvitch, Katia. (2014). “Are Drones the Next Target 
for Hackers?” BBC Future, February 6, www.bbc.com/
future/story/20140206-can-drones-be-hacked.

 25.  Johnson, Robert (2011). “Both Pakistan and Iran Say They 
Have  Figured  Out  to  How  to  Hack  and  Commandeer 
US  Drones,”  Business  Insider,  December  16,  www.busi-
nessinsider.com/pakistan-says-the-downed-helicopter- 
from-the-bin-laden-enables-it-to-hack-us-drones-
2011-12#!Isddp.

 26.  Gorman,  Siobhan,  Yochi  Dreazen,  and  August  Cole. 
(2009). “Insurgents Hack U.S. Drones,” Wall Street Jour-
nal,  December  17,  http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/
SB126102247889095011.

 27.  Higgins,  Kelly  Jackson.  (2009).  “Researchers  Hack 
Faces  in  Biometric  Facial  Authentication  Systems,” 
Dark  Reading,  December  2,  www.darkreading.com/ 
vulnerabilities—threats/researchers-hack-faces-in- 
biometric-facial-authentication-systems/d/d-id/1130382.
 28.  “Surveillance Cameras Can Be Hacked—Who Is Watching 
You?” (2013). Info Security, June 18, www.infosecurity-
magazine.com/view/32991/surveillance-cameras-can-be-
hacked-who-is-watching-you/.

241

n o t e s

 29.  Madrigal,  Alexis  C.  (2013).  “Stealth  Wear:  An  Anti-
Drone  Hoodie  and  Scarf,”  Atlantic,  January  18, 
www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2013/01/
stealth-wear-an-anti-drone-hoodie-and-scarf/267330/.

 30.  Harvey, Adam. (2010). “CV Dazzle,” AH (blog), http://

ahprojects.com/projects/cv-dazzle/.

c h a p t e r   9

  1.  Kapur, Devesh. (1999). “Processes of Change in Interna-
tional Organizations,” Conference Paper Helsinki, http://
dev.wcfia.harvard.edu/sites/default/files/164__Helsinki3.
wcfia.pdf.

  2.  Falk, Richard. (2000). “The United Nations System: Pros-
pects for Institutional Renewal,” in Governing Global-
ization, ed. Deepak Nayyar, http://oxfordindex.oup.com/
view/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199254033.001.0001.

  3.  Meyer, Davis. (2012). “How the German Pirate  Party’s 
‘Liquid  Democracy’  Works,”  Tech  President,  May  7,  
https://techpresident.com/news/wegov/22154/
how-german-pirate-partys-liquid-democracy-works.

  4.  Ford, Bryan. (2002). “Delegative Democracy,” May 15, 

www.brynosaurus.com/deleg/deleg.pdf.

  5.  Meyer, “How the German Pirate Party’s ‘Liquid Democ-

racy’ Works.”

  6.  Evans, Alex. (2013). “Avaaz CEO Ricken Patel’s Com-
monwealth  Lecture,”  Global  Dashboard,  March  22, 
www.globaldashboard.org/2013/03/22/avaaz-ceo- 
ricken-patels-commonwealth-lecture/.

  7.  Teleb,  Ahmad  R.  (2014).  “The  Zeitgeist  of  Tahrir 
and  Occupy,”  TruthOut.org,  February  10,  http:// 

2 42

n o t e s

truth-out.org/opinion/item/21776-the-zeitgeist-of- 
tahir-and-occupy.

  8.  Greenwald, Glenn. (2014, May 13). No Place to Hide: 
Edward  Snowden,  the  NSA,  and  the  U.S.  Surveillance 
State. New York: Metropolitan Books.

  9.  “Embedded Governance: Downloading Laws into Ob-
jects  and  the  Environment,”  Life  in  a  Computational 
Age.  Palo  Alto:  Technology  Horizons  Program,  www.
iftf.org/fileadmin/user_upload/images/ourwork/Tech_
Horizons/SR1265EisP_Emb Governance_rdr_sm.pdf.

 10.  Diakopoulos, Nicholas. (2013). Algorithmic Account-
ing  Reporting:  On  the  Investigation  of  Black  Boxes. 
Report,  Tow  Center  for  Digital  Journalism,  Univer-
sity  of  Columbia,  http://towcenter.org/wp-content/
uploads/2014/02/78524_Tow-Center-Report-WEB- 
1.pdf.

 11.  Leonard, Andrew. (2014). “One Code to Rule them All: 
How Big Data Could Help the 1 Percent and Hurt the 
Little Guy,” Salon, January, www.salon.com/2014/01/03/
one_code_to_rule_them_all_how_big_data_could_
help_the_1_percent_and_hurt_the_little_guy/.

 12.  For a helpful discussion of algorithmic governance, see 
Barocas, Solon, Sophie Hood, and Malte Ziewitz. (2013). 
“Governing Algorithms: A Provocation Piece,” Working 
Series  Paper,  March  29,  file:///Users/taylorowen/Down-
loads/ssrn-id2245322.pdf.

 13.  “Unified  Field:  The  ‘Splinternet’  Media  Policy  Proj-
ect,”  London  School  of  Economics  and  Politi-
cal  Science,  November  18,  2013,  http://blogs.lse.
ac.uk/mediapolicyproject/2013/11/18/unified- 
field-the-splinternet/.

243

n o t e s

 14.  Meinrath, Sascha. (2013). “The Future of the Internet: 
Balkanization  and  Borders,”  TIME,  October  11, 
http://ideas.time.com/2013/10/11/the-future-of-the- 
internet-balkanization-and-borders/.

 15.  Project MeshNet: www.projectmeshnet.org.
 16.  Project MeshNet: www.projectmeshnet.org.
 17.  Hodson, Hal. (2013). “Meshnet Activists Rebuilding the 
Internet from Scratch,” New Scientist, August 8, www.
newscientist.com/article/mg21929294.500-meshnet-
activists-rebuilding-the-internet-from-scratch.html#.
U1v768eLEi4.

 18.  Kloc,  Joe.  (2013). “Greek  Community  Creates  an  Off-
the-Grid Internet,” Daily Dot, August 19, www.dailydot.
com/politics/greek-off-the-grid-internet-mesh/.

 19.  “ODDNS:  Decentralized  and  Open  DNS  to  Defeat 
Censorship.” (2012). TorrentFreak, April 7, https:// tor-
rentfreak.com/oddns-decentralized-and-open-dns-to-de-
feat-censorship-120407/.

 20.  Benkler,  Yochai.  (2012). “Hacks  of  Valor:  Why  Anon-
ymous  Is  Not  a  Threat  to  National  Security,”  Foreign  
Affairs, www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/137382/yochai- 
benkler/hacks-of-valor.

 21.  McCarthy,  Jordan.  (2010). “Code  as  Power:  How  the 
New World Order Is Reinforcing the Old,” Intersect 3.1.

2 4 4

i n d e x

#OpInfiltration, 4
140 Journos, 115
3D Journalism, 102

algorithmic accountability, 192, 

199

algorithmic violence, 186–187, 

209

alternative online media,  

115–117

Burke, Edmund, 103. See Fourth 

Estate

Buzan, Barry, 183. See  

securitization

Cablegate, 109
Castells, Manuel, 30, 44–47, 108, 

118–119, 138–144

catalytic innovation, 8
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), 

Anonymous, 1–8, 38–46, 61–62, 

131, 185

208

Anti-sec, 2
Arab Spring, 2, 10–13, 100, 202
Assange, Julian, 32, 109–110
Automated Regional Justice Infor-

mation System, 171

Automated Targeted Systems, 

171–175, 177, 184–186

Benkler, Yochai, 4–5, 32, 44,  

111, 205

biometrics technology, 171, 177, 

184–185

Bitcoin, 68–72, 82–97
Blue Coat Systems, 11, 52–53
Brown, Barrett, 61–62

Christensen, Clay, 8
civil disobedience, 54–58, 64–66, 

218

Civil Society 2.0, 161
Coinbase, 70–71
Collateral Murder, video, 108
collective capitalism, 47
Colvin, Marie, 98–101
Communities@State Project, 158
Condition One, 102
Conneally, Paul, 124, 138
contractarian view, 24–25
counterpower, 118–119
crisis mappers, 141
Critical Art Ensemble, 56
Crowdsourcing, 125

245

i n d e x

crypto-anarchists, 9, 71, 90–91
crypto-currency, 69, 80–83,  

86, 93

cyberactivism, 56–57, 60

Danfung, Dennis, 101
Dark Wallet, 96
Dataveillance, 125
decentralized currency, 82, 

 91–93

Der Derian, James, 171–172
digital diplomacy, 150, 153, 

163–167

digital humanitarians, 124, 

139–142

DigitalGlobe, 133
disruption, theory of, 7–10
disruptive power, 37–47
distributed denial of service 

(DDoS) attacks, 2, 44, 56–60

Dread Pirate Roberts, 67–68
drone technology, 103, 135, 173

E-gold, 81
E-wallets, 95
EarthViewer 3D, 131
eDiplomacy, 158
Electrohippies Collective, 57
Electronic Disturbance Theater 

(EDT), 57

Enough Project, 132–133
Extreme Reality, 171

Fein, Peter, 49–50, 53
fiat money, 75–76, 80, 84
fiduciary currency, 76, 80

Fourth Estate, 103, 111
fourth world, 144
Free Syrian Army, 10, 98, 196

Gamma International, 11–12
geographic information systems 

(GIS), 131

global networks, 34
Google Earth, 131, 134, 181
Google Glass, 102, 171
Greenwald, Glenn, 111

hacking, 54–56, 60
hacktivism, 220
Hammond, Jeremy, 61
HarassMapp, 122
horizontal networks, 119

ICT4D, 135
Innovator’s Dilemma, 8. See 

Christensen, Clay.

Internet Corporation for As-

signed Names and Numbers 
(ICANN), 204, 206

Iran Global Dialogue, 149

Johnson, Douglas, 80–81. See  

E-Gold

justus hostis, 178

Keohane, Robert, 27, 34
KheOps, 51–52
Kigali Wire, 116
Kullenberg, Chris, 50

Lanier, Jaron, 198–199
Liberty Dollars, 80

2 4 6

i n d e x

M-Farm, 126–127
M-PESA, 85
Manning, Chelsea, 62–64, 109
MATE system, 170
May, Tim, 89–91
Meier, Patrick, 123–125
mesh networks, 153, 204–206
minting, process of, 81
MIT civic media lab, 116
monetary sovereignty, 78
Morozov, Evgeny, 42–43, 145, 196
multilateral governance, 190

Nakamoto, Satoshi, 81, 93
National Security Agency (NSA), 

15, 61

network theory, 33–35
Networked Fourth Estate, 111
networked power, 30, 33,  

36–37

Norton, Quinn, 16, 56, 66
Nye Jr., Joseph, 27–28, 36, 

154–155

Oculus Rift, 102
Occupy Protests, 1, 180, 194
Ochlik, Rémi, 100–101
Okolloh, Ory, 122
Onder, Engin, 115
Open and Decentralized DNS 

(ODDNS), 205

OpenStreetMap, 124

Palantir, 168–170, 177
Patel, Ricken, 194
Pirate Party, 192–194, 198
Powers, Richard, 5

predatory view, 25, 187
Psiphon, 149

quantum computing, 171–172

Rouhani Meter, 149
Robocoin, 70

Satellite Sentinel Project, 132–133
Sauter, Molly, 57–58
Schmitt, Carl, 178
securitization theory, 182–183
Shirky, Clay, 32, 45–46
Short Message Service  

(SMS), 123

Silk Road, 67–71, 89
Singer, Jane, 117
Slaughter, Anne-Marie, 33–36, 

165–166

Snowden, Edward, 15, 17–18, 

111, 177, 196, 202

soft power, 28–29, 34–36, 45, 

154–156

sousveillance, 125
state, traditional conception of, 

18–20. See Westphalia
Steil, Benn, 72–73, 76, 79
Stewart, Patrick, 190
Stratfor, 2, 61
surveillance state, 179, 181, 192, 

198–199

Swartz, Aaron, 1
Syrian Electronic Army,  

11, 196

targeted killings, 178
Tech@State, 161

247

i n d e x

Teleb, Ahmed, 195
Telecomix, 48–54
Tor, 149

von NotHaus, Bernard, 80

War 2.0, 172
Westphalia, treaty of, 23, 34, 153, 

Ulbricht, Ross William, 67
Ushahidi, 122–123, 125–127

187, 209

WikiLeaks, 32–33, 61–62, 

vertical networks, 118
Virilio, Paul, 172
virtual reality, 102–103

108–111

Zukerberg, Mark, 125
Zuckerman, Ethan, 116

2 4 8

