J Autism Dev Disord
DOI 10.1007/s10803-014-2097-7

O R I G I N A L P A P E R

Impact of Cognitive Behavioral Therapy on Observed Autism
Symptom Severity During School Recess: A Preliminary
Randomized, Controlled Trial

Jeffrey J. Wood • Cori Fujii • Patricia Renno •
Marilyn Van Dyke

Ó Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014

Abstract This
study compared cognitive behavioral
therapy (CBT) and treatment-as-usual (TAU) in terms of
effects on observed social communication-related autism
symptom severity during unstructured play time at school
for children with autism spectrum disorders (ASD). Thir-
teen children with ASD (7–11 years old) were randomly
assigned to 32 sessions of CBT or community-based psy-
chosocial treatment (TAU) for 16 weeks. The CBT pro-
gram is based on the memory retrieval competition model
and emphasizes the development of perspective-taking
through guided behavioral experimentation supplemented
with reﬂective Socratic discussion and supported by parent
training and school consultation to promote generalization
of social communication and emotion regulation skills.
Trained observers blind to treatment condition observed
each child during recess on two separate days at baseline
and again at posttreatment, using a structured behavioral
observation system that generates frequency scores for
observed social communication-related autism symptoms.
CBT outperformed TAU at posttreatment on the frequency
of self-isolation, the proportion of time spent with peers,
the frequency of positive or appropriate interaction with
peers, and the frequency of positive or appropriate peer
responses to the target child (d effect size range 1.34–1.62).
On average, children in CBT were engaged in positive or
appropriate social
interaction with peers in 68.6 % of
observed intervals at posttreatment, compared to 25 % of

J. J. Wood (&)  C. Fujii  P. Renno  M. Van Dyke
Department of Education, University of California, Los Angeles,
Moore Hall, Box 951521, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
e-mail: jwood@gseis.ucla.edu

J. J. Wood
Department of Psychiatry, University of California, Los Angeles,
CA, USA

intervals for children in TAU. Further investigation of this
intervention modality with larger samples and follow-up
assessments is warranted.
Keywords Cognitive behavioral therapy  Autism
spectrum disorders  School-aged children  School
observations

Introduction

Affecting core autism symptoms through psychosocial
treatment has been an elusive goal in the autism literature,
particularly for school-age children. Most psychosocial
interventions that have been tested in randomized, con-
trolled trials have failed to yield measureable improvement
in core autism symptoms among school-aged children (Rao
et al. 2008), although recent interventions are beginning to
show more promise (e.g., Kasari et al. 2012). The severity
of autism spectrum symptoms exhibited during childhood
predicts the level of adaptive functioning in later years
(e.g., Szatmari et al. 2009), and therefore has important
prognostic and treatment implications. Developing treat-
ments that can signiﬁcantly reduce core autism symptom
severity in children is thus a high priority (Spence and
Thurm 2010).

Core autism symptoms are wide-ranging and multifac-
eted, spanning from impaired reciprocal communication
and pragmatic language deﬁcits, to limited friendships, to
repetitive behaviors such as insistence on nonfunctional
routines. The core symptoms tend to be stable over time
(Matson and Horovitz 2010; Matson et al. 2010) and
resistant even to some intensive interventions (e.g., Daw-
son et al. 2010). The majority of individuals diagnosed
with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) in childhood, even

123

those with high intelligence, have substantial morbidity in
adulthood, such as limited employment and social net-
works (Eaves and Ho 2008; Marriage et al. 2009). How-
ever,
individuals on the autism spectrum who have
categorically lower levels of ASD symptoms have better
overall prognoses than those with categorically higher
levels of core autism symptoms. For example, Szatmari
et al. (2009) found that although all children with ASD
demonstrated mixed to poor outcomes, those with Asper-
ger’s disorder as opposed to autistic disorder had relatively
better outcomes in adult social relationships and daily
living skills. In fact, across the three domains of adaptive
functioning in a standardized assessment scale adminis-
tered during young adulthood,
the group difference
between Asperger’s disorder and autistic disorder was 20
standard points, even after controlling for IQ. It is likely
that
interventions for children with ASD will need to
substantially reduce the severity of core autism symptoms
to improve children’s prognosis and later functioning. A
fundamental goal in the ﬁeld of autism research is the
discovery of methods that substantially mitigate the pri-
mary symptoms of ASD (e.g., Reichow and Wolery 2009;
Spence and Thurm 2010).

While behavioral and talk-based therapies are widely
used in community settings for school-aged youth with
ASD (Hess et al. 2008), the evidence base for many such
treatments is sparse. With the exception of atypical anti-
psychotic medication, no medical or psychosocial treat-
ments for children with ASD meet American Psychological
Association Division 12 (e.g., Chambless and Hollon 1998)
guidelines for possible efﬁcacy, and even antipsychotic
medication has not yielded improvement
in the social
communication domain per se. School-aged children with
high-functioning ASD have evidenced poor
treatment
response, in terms of generalization and maintenance, to
many extant psychosocial interventions. Many treatments
for the elementary school-age-group involve group-based
social skills training, but external validity and durability of
effects have been poor and efﬁcacy has not been estab-
lished (e.g., Ferraioli and Harris 2011; Rao et al. 2008).
Nonetheless,
some promising ﬁndings have recently
emerged. A social skills group treatment for the 8–12 years
old age-group-based on CBT and social learning principles
involving parents as social coaches in community settings
to address generalization problems found an effect of
treatment (vs. waitlist) on parent-reported core autism
symptoms (DeRosier et al. 2011). Without independent
ratings of outcome, however,
the efﬁcacy of this and
similar programs remains to be further evaluated.

Second, a promising peer-mediated intervention for
school-age children with ASD has also recently been
evaluated in a randomized controlled trial, with evidence of
greater improvement in observed social engagement with

123

J Autism Dev Disord

peers on the playground in comparison to a traditional
social skill intervention and waiting list conditions (Kasari
et al. 2012). Given the use of both independent ratings of
outcome as well as the use of an active control group, peer-
mediated intervention appears promising. However, many
other studies have reported a failure of generalization
effects outside of the therapy room for psychosocial and
medical interventions for core autism symptoms (McDou-
gle et al. 2005; West et al. 2009).

Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) offers one approach
that is potentially well-suited to addressing core autism
symptoms in higher functioning school-age youth. CBT is
among the most successful treatment modalities for many
childhood psychiatric disorders, achieving large, clinically
signiﬁcant outcomes in pediatric OCD, anxiety, and dis-
ruptive behavior disorders, even in studies with active or
placebo control groups. CBT has already been effectively
adapted to treat collateral behavioral and emotional prob-
lems in school-aged children with ASD (Chalfant et al.
2007; Fujii et al. 2013; Reaven et al. 2012; Sofronoff et al.
2007; Storch et al. 2013; Wood et al. 2009a, b). Children
with high-functioning ASD are verbal and have average to
above average intellectual abilities (e.g., Loveland and
Tunali-Kotoski 2005). Lickel et al. (2012) investigated
whether children with high-functioning ASD would have
prerequisite skills that might impact receptivity to CBT
(e.g., ability to discriminate between thoughts, feelings,
and behavior) and generally found no differences in com-
parison to typically developing children except in the area
of emotion discrimination, suggesting no inherent barrier to
children’s comprehension of CBT concepts.

A number of CBT-based interventions for core autism
symptoms in youth await comprehensive empirical evalu-
ation (see, e.g., Wood et al. 2011). In a randomized, con-
trolled trial of personalized CBT for elementary-aged
youth with ASD, 19 children with ASD and concurrent
anxiety (ages 7–11 years) were randomized to CBT
delivered one-on-one by a therapist, or to a waitlist (Wood
et al. 2009b). The modular CBT program consisted of 16
weekly, 90 min sessions emphasizing emotion awareness
and regulation, development of theory-of-mind skills, and
control of repetitive behaviors. The treatment approach
involved an application of cognitive behavioral principles
of memory retrieval competition (Brewin 2006) to CBT
techniques such as Socratic discussions, rehearsal, and
in vivo exposure, which were employed to address each
child’s unique constellation of autism symptoms and
emotional and behavioral difﬁculties. There was a statis-
tically signiﬁcant difference between the CBT group and
the waitlist group at posttreatment/postwaitlist on total
parent-reported autism symptoms (d = .77), with gains
maintained at 3-month follow-up. These ﬁndings were then
replicated by an independent research group in a sample of

J Autism Dev Disord

45 children aged 7–11 years randomized to the same per-
sonalized CBT program or TAU (Storch et al. 2013). The
present study builds from these initial ﬁndings.

Contemporary CBT methods explicitly promote the
development of mental schemata that guide adaptive
appraisals and behavior while suppressing previously
learned maladaptive responses (Brewin 2006). Brewin’s
model
identiﬁes three key strategies for enhancing the
retention of adaptive appraisals and behavioral responses
and the concurrent suppression of maladaptive appraisals
and responses: (1) Patients need to engage in activities that
promote deep semantic processing in the context of
learning and rehearsing adaptive thoughts and behaviors
(as opposed to passive listening) (cf. Anderson et al. 1994).
(2) Adaptive appraisals and responses should be practiced
in settings, and under conditions, that cue maladaptive
appraisals and responses (the encoding speciﬁcity princi-
ple; Craske et al. 2008; Tulving 1979). (3) There should be
positive and reinforcing features associated with memories
of adaptive appraisals and responses. A memory with a
positive valence is likely to suppress competing memories
of appraisals and behavioral responses at recall (Anderson
et al. 2000). These three principles of memory retrieval
competition have important implications for the imple-
mentation of CBT for core autism symptoms (Wood and
Schwartzman 2013).

Three core ASD symptoms involve failure to maintain
age-appropriate peer relationships, impaired social/emo-
tional reciprocity, and a deﬁcit in sustaining conversations.
To remediate conversational and perspective-taking deﬁ-
cits, a memory retrieval competition perspective suggests
that skill rehearsal should occur in the actual settings where
social deﬁcits are exhibited (e.g., school playground;
playdates), rather than in simulated social situations. This
perspective also points towards achieving integration of
skill-building behavioral tasks (e.g., initiating play with an
unknown peer at the park) with guided Socratic discussions
held right after the skill rehearsal has occurred to promote
deep semantic processing of heretofore abstract or con-
fusing concepts about others’ perspectives and the nature
of reciprocity. While therapists are limited in the amount of
time they can promote children’s skills in real-world set-
tings, parents and school caregivers can be taught these
techniques, once they have been established by the thera-
pist, to extend intervention support to a wide range of
relevant real-world situations. There is clear evidence for
the value of parent involvement in CBT for children with
ASD symptoms (e.g., Puleo and Kendall 2011; Sofronoff
et al. 2005).

In summary, the present study goes beyond previous
efforts by (1) targeting multiple core autism symptoms
within the same treatment model, many of which are
unlikely to remit without corresponding improvement in

complementary domains (e.g., social engagement and
emotion dysregulation, in which the latter tends to impede
the former); (2) focusing outcome assessment on a key
real-world setting, school, to assess for generalization; and
(3) employing a cognitive behavioral model of memory
retrieval to enhance treatment efﬁcacy. The original CBT
treatment model (Wood et al. 2009a, b) was doubled in
length to promote substantial clinical gains in core autism
symptoms. Of equal import, an independent evaluator (IE)-
administered measure (structured observations of ASD
symptoms during school recess) was employed in this
study. Measures using IEs blind to treatment condition are
considered to be a gold standard for assessing treatment
outcome because they mitigate response bias that can
interfere with interpretations of checklist measures (e.g.,
Chambless and Hollon 1998).

Method

Participants

The sample included 13 children, ranging in age from 7 to
11 years (M = 8.77, SD = 1.59), and their primary par-
ent(s), living in the greater Los Angeles area. Children
were referred by a medical center-based autism clinic,
regional centers, parent support groups, and school per-
sonnel such as inclusion specialists and school psycholo-
gists. Children met research criteria for ASD and comorbid
anxiety, and were part of a study examining the efﬁcacy of
an enhanced CBT program for anxiety and social chal-
lenges in children with high-functioning autism; details
regarding the anxiety-speciﬁc outcomes of the children in
this study have been previously reported (see Fujii et al.
2013). In contrast, the present paper documents the impact
of the intervention on children’s observed social commu-
nication-related autism symptom severity, and no outcome
measures are shared in common between the two papers.
Eligibility criteria included having a clinical diagnosis of
ASD conﬁrmed by our research evaluation (see below), an
IQ above 70 based on the KBIT-2 (see below), no con-
current psychotic episodes or physical disabilities that
would prevent participation in study activities, and an
agreement to adhere to restrictions on concurrent treat-
ments during the study: (1) A stable dosage of psychiatric
medication, if used at all, was to be maintained for at least
1 month prior to intake and throughout the duration of the
trial for all children in the CBT condition; (2) children in
the CBT condition were not to receive any concurrent
psychotherapy but were permitted to maintain the use of
school counseling or other school services such as an aide,
speech therapy, occupational therapy, social skills groups
that did not assign regular homework, or up to an hour of

123

applied behavior analysis in the home per week [children
with ASD often receive many concurrent services of
unknown or questionable efﬁcacy (Hess et al. 2008), and it
was deemed potentially unethical to require that non-psy-
chotherapy complementary services that had been ongoing
and were unlikely to affect study outcomes be dropped
simultaneously]. Children in the treatment-as-usual (TAU)
condition were allowed to maintain or seek any interven-
tion (and were given community mental health referrals for
anxiety treatment)
including altering their medication
regimen during a 16-week period.

Twenty-two children were assessed for inclusion in the
study. Three families did not complete the intake assess-
ment, two families were excluded because the child’s pri-
mary mental health diagnosis (other than ASD) was not an
anxiety disorder, and one family was excluded because the
minimum verbal IQ criterion was not met. Sixteen partic-
ipants completed the intake assessment and were random-
ized for inclusion in the study. Three participants within
the CBT condition did not complete treatment or their
posttreatment assessments due to the family’s inability to
consistently attend treatment sessions.

Of the 13 participants included in this study, seven were
randomized to the CBT condition and six were randomized
to the TAU condition. In contrast to the Fujii et al. (2013)
study, one additional participant (in the TAU condition)
was included in the present analyses because this child had
valid posttreatment observational data, but did not have
posttreatment anxiety data available. Table 1 presents
descriptive information for participating families. Most
children were boys and most primary parents had a college
degree. Ethnic/racial groups included Caucasian (n = 9;

Table 1 Demographics numbers and percentages for CBT and TAU
groups

Characteristics

Child sex (male)

Child age

CBT
(n = 7)

5 (71)

TAU
(n = 6)

5 (83)

8.7 (SD = 1.8)

8.8 (SD = 1.47)

Parent sex (female)

5 (71)

Parent graduated from college

5 (71)

Parent married/remarried

5 (71)

Child ethnic background

Caucasian

Asian/Paciﬁc Islander

African American

Latino

Multiracial

Autism diagnosis

Autism

PDD-NOS

123

6 (86)

1 (14)

0

0

0

7 (100)

0

5 (83)

3 (50)

4 (67)

3 (50)

0

1 (17)

1 (17)

1 (17)

4 (67)

2 (33)

J Autism Dev Disord

69.2 %); Asian (n = 1; 7.7 %); African American (n = 1;
7.7 %); Latino (n = 1; 7.7 %); and mixed race (n = 1;
7.7 %). Groups did not differ signiﬁcantly on these vari-
ables. Seven of the participants were fully included in
general education classrooms in regular schools. Three of
the participants were fully included in general education
classrooms in regular schools with paraprofessional aides.
One participant was partially included in a general edu-
cation classroom in a regular school, and spent part time in
a resource room. One participant was in a special day class
at a regular school and one participant attended an autism-
speciﬁc school.

All participants met criteria for one or more anxiety
disorder (separation anxiety disorder, social phobia, gen-
eralized anxiety disorder, and/or obsessive compulsive
disorder; see Fujii et al. 2013). Six CBT participants met
criteria for ADHD (one for inattentive-type and ﬁve com-
bined-type) with one of the participants with ADHD-
combined-type also meeting criteria for oppositional deﬁ-
ant disorder. Four TAU participants met criteria for ADHD
(three inattentive-type and one combined-type). In addi-
tion, one CBT participant met criteria for post-traumatic
stress disorder.

Intervention

CBT Condition

Therapists included six graduate students in clinical or
educational psychology and one postdoctoral clinical psy-
chology student. Therapists received a minimum of 8 h of
initial training, read the treatment manual, and attended
weekly hour-long supervision with the clinical supervisor.
Families in the CBT condition received 32 weekly sessions
of CBT, with most sessions (except for school-based ses-
sions) taking place at a university clinic or an associated
autism community clinic. Sessions lasted 90 min (about
30 min with the child and 60 min with the parents/family),
implementing a version of the Building Conﬁdence CBT
program (Wood and McLeod 2008) modiﬁed by the study
authors for use with children with ASD (see Wood et al.
2009a, b). The anxiety-related elements of treatment are
described in Fujii et al. (2013) and involve coping skills
training followed by in vivo exposure in which a hierarchy
is created, delineating feared situations from least to most
distressing. Children work their way up the hierarchy and
are rewarded as they attempt increasingly fearful activities.
In ASD-speciﬁc treatment modules, children and parents
are taught friendship skills (e.g., giving compliments, act-
ing like a good sport, hosting peer get-togethers success-
fully, etc.) and children are given social coaching by the
therapist, parents, and available school providers on
appropriate ways to enter peer interactions and maintain

J Autism Dev Disord

conversations with peers. Social coaching is provided on-
site immediately before attempting to join a social activity
at school or in the community and is discussed in terms of
others’ thoughts and feelings. These skills are practiced in
session, at school, and during playdates and are reinforced
with a comprehensive reward system that relies on both
daily privileges and longer-term incentives. To address the
social isolation that many children with ASD experience at
school, peer ‘‘buddy’’ and mentoring programs are set up
during the school meeting. Two meetings are scheduled at
the child’s school to teach the social intervention tech-
niques to relevant school providers (e.g., aides, teachers).
Telephone follow-up is offered to teachers on an as-needed
basis. All skill development and practice efforts are sup-
ported by guided conversations in which the therapist uses
Socratic questioning to promote conceptual development
and particularly, perspective-taking (e.g.,
immediately
before entering a playground interaction).

Children’s circumscribed interests and stereotypies are
incorporated into the intervention in two ways. To enhance
rapport, therapeutic concepts (e.g., emotion recognition,
cognitive restructuring) are taught using children’s special
interests as examples (e.g., for a child primarily interested
in a particular cartoon character, the character’s ‘‘feelings’’
and ‘‘thoughts’’ in socially awkward situations could serve
as the basis of discussion) and as rewards (e.g., granting
access to the preferred stimulus). Later in treatment, a
suppression approach is introduced, in which increasing
amounts of time per day are devoted to consciously
refraining from discussing or engaging in activities related
to the circumscribed interest or engaging in stereotypies
such as ﬂapping. To help children understand the rationale
for suppression, information about social expectations and
acceptance is provided during these modules (e.g., that
these behaviors are ﬁne in private but tend to confuse peers
and get in the way of friendship).

Treatment-as-Usual (TAU) Condition

Families randomized to TAU were given a comprehensive
list of community mental health clinics and encouraged to
seek evaluation and treatment for their child from one of
these resources, or through public/private insurance, or
through private practitioners. All children in this condition
received a psychosocial
intervention in the community
during the TAU period. After 16 weeks in the TAU con-
dition, families were given 16 weeks of the same CBT
treatment described above.

Treatment Attendance

If a session was missed, it was made up within a week or
two so that the allotted number of sessions was completed

by all families. The average number of rescheduled treat-
ment sessions was approximately 10 (out of 32 treatment
sessions). Treatment sessions were dispersed throughout
the calendar year, with start dates varying due to the rolling
nature of enrollment in the study. No pattern of differing
start dates was seen between the IT and TAU groups.

Therapist Fidelity

Therapists’ adherence to the intervention protocol was
monitored through audio recordings of each therapy ses-
sion. A random selection of three treatment sessions for
each CBT participant were coded for ﬁdelity to the treat-
ment manual by trained graduate and undergraduate stu-
dents with substantial experience. Coders listened to each
tape and noted the presence of required topics for each
module following a protocol taken from key points within
each module developed in the Wood et al. (2009a, b) RCT.
Sample items from the checklist were: ‘Planned and/or
practiced making phone calls’ (yes/no) and ‘Conducted a
social exposure immediately after social coaching discus-
sion’
study therapists
adhered to 92 % of the required topics, on average.

(yes/no). Results

showed that

Measures

ASD Diagnosis and IQ Assessment

All assessments were conducted by IEs blind to treatment
condition. ASD diagnoses were assigned using the Autism
Diagnosis Interview-Revised (ADI-R; Le Couteur et al.
2003; Lord et al. 1994) and Module 3 of the Autism
Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS; Lord et al.
2002). The ADI-R is a 93-item standardized interview that
provides a comprehensive autism spectrum diagnostic
assessment. Domains assessed by the ADI-R include
social, communication, and repetitive behaviors. All ADI-
R interviews were conducted with the child’s primary
parent. The ADOS is a semi-structured, standardized pro-
tocol for observation of social and communicative behavior
associated with autism. The ADOS assesses three domains:
social, communication, and restricted and repetitive
behaviors. Module 3 of the ADOS is designed for verbally
ﬂuent children for whom playing with toys is age-appro-
priate. The validity and reliability of the ADOS cut-off
scores have been determined to be robust (Lord et al.
2000). The ADI-R and ADOS were administered by doc-
toral and post-doctoral students who were research-certi-
ﬁed in their use. All children met criteria for ASD based on
ADOS scores as well as surpassing the clinical cut-point
for at least the social domain of the ADI-R algorithm score.
IQ was assessed using the Kaufman Brief Intelligence Test,
Second Edition (KBIT-2; Kaufman and Kaufman 2004).

123

The KBIT-2 measures verbal and nonverbal intelligence
and has strong reliability and validity (Walters and Weaver
2003).

Observed Social Communication-Related Autism Symptom
Severity

This domain was assessed using Bauminger’s (2002)
observational measure of social communication behavior
during school recess. Each observation lasted 15 min, and
two observations were conducted for each participant on
different days at each assessment point to attain a broader
sample of behavior. Coders observed the target child’s
behavior and any peer responses for 40 s intervals followed
by 20 s recording periods. Hence, a total of 30 1-min
intervals of behavior were coded for each child at each
assessment point. Two graduate students familiar with the
social interactions of children with autism were trained by
the study investigator and practice coding was conducted
and feedback provided until 85 % interrater agreement on
each code was obtained. Coders maintained close prox-
imity (within *10 feet) to the target child in order to
observe behavior and hear conversations between the child
and his or her peers on the playground.

In the coding system, intervals of behavior were initially
categorized into four main social communication types
based on the actions of the target child: solitary, initiation,
response, and interaction. When the child engaged in social
behavior with peers, the coder also recorded the peer’s
response as either positive (?), neutral (0), or negative (-).
For example, positive peer responses were coded when the
action of the target child resulted in a clear positive
response by the peer, such as an enthusiastic comment, a
smile, a high-ﬁve,
inclusion in an activity, or other
behavior that had a distinctly positive quality. Negative
responses included ignoring, criticizing, aggression, or
active exclusion. A neutral (appropriate) response was
coded when the peer’s behavior lacked a speciﬁc positive
or negative quality. If there was a question as to the nature
of the peer’s response due to a lack of sufﬁcient cues, a
neutral (appropriate) code was given.

An adaptation was made to Bauminger’s observation
system to simplify the coding process. Various types of
communication between children were collapsed and
divided into two categories on the coding sheet: functional
and social communication. Functional communication was
solely focused on obtaining information or actions from
others while social communication did not have an explicit
functional goal and was characterized by chat about a topic
of interest (e.g., video games), jokes, stories, and com-
ments about ongoing events in a game (e.g., ‘‘she’s fast!’’).
In addition to coding the behaviors of the target child and
their peer’s response, the object of the child’s behavior

123

J Autism Dev Disord

(peer vs. adult) and the number and gender of the peers the
child was interacting with were recorded.

For this study, ﬁve summary variables were created,
collapsing across one or more codes: Solitary, Any Peer
Interaction, Positive or Appropriate Interaction with Peers,
Positive or Appropriate Response to Child by Peers, and
Negative Behavior. Intervals were coded as Solitary if the
child was away from peers and caregivers for the entire
interval and this was not a result of playing in a game such
as freeze-tag. Any Peer Interaction was coded if the child
was engaged in initiation, response, or interaction with a
peer, regardless of the content/valence of the interaction.
To be coded as a Positive or Appropriate Interaction with
Peers, an interval needed to involve at least one of the
following elements in the context of initiation, response, or
interaction with a peer: affection, greeting, offering help,
social communication,
functional communication, eye
contact, eye contact with a smile, or sharing items. Positive
or Appropriate Response to Child by Peers was coded if an
interval was coded as Positive or Appropriate Interaction
with Peers and the peer’s response to the child’s social
behavior was categorized as positive or neutral (appropri-
ate). Intervals were coded as Negative Behavior if the
target child engaged in repetitive behaviors, repetitive
language, imitating others, avoidant responses (looking or
walking away from peers), or verbal or physical aggres-
sion. The majority of observations were conducted by one
coder. The second coder accompanied the primary coder
for ﬁve observations to assess for interrater reliability, and
84 % interrater agreement across all codes was obtained.
Regular coding meetings were scheduled in order to min-
imize coder drift and maintain a common set of coding
practices/decisions.

Psychiatric Services Assessment

The Service Assessment for Children and Adolescents-
Service Use Scale (SACA; Horwitz et al. 2001) was used to
track mental health services used by participants during the
CBT and TAU conditions. It is a psychometrically sound
parent interview about the use of mental health services
(supplemented with ASD-speciﬁc items as well as an item
about change of schools). It was administered at screening
and post-CBT and post-TAU assessments.

Procedure

The current study was approved by a university-based IRB
and was conducted as approved. Phone contact was initi-
ated by parents referred to the study coordinator, and an
initial screening was conducted during this phone call.
Parents who remained interested in the study, and whose
child appeared to meet basic eligibility criteria gave written

J Autism Dev Disord

informed consent and children gave written assent to par-
ticipate in the study. Children who completed the intake
assessment and met all inclusion/exclusion criteria were
block randomized by sex and age to the CBT or TAU
condition. The CBT condition entailed 32 weekly sessions,
while the TAU condition lasted just 16 weeks. Although
this led to an unequal length of time in the two conditions,
there is research precedent for this type of design in sem-
inal RCTs (e.g., Kendall 1994; Kendall et al. 1997) and it
was deemed ethically preferable to offer families in the
TAU condition the opportunity to receive CBT after
16 weeks (a waitlist period with precedent in recent RCTs;
e.g., Storch et al. 2013) as compared to 32 weeks. The
majority of the CBT treatment was conducted in a clinic
setting, though, due to the nature of CBT, some of it was
performed in community settings (e.g., parks; shopping
malls) and, as described above, several consultations were
conducted at the child’s school. During the 16 week TAU
condition, families were free to seek any kind of treatment
they chose in the community. Post-CBT assessments were
completed within one week of termination. Post-TAU
assessments were conducted 16 weeks after the baseline
assessment, but before initiating CBT. Behavioral obser-
vations using the Bauminger (2002) coding system were
conducted on two separate days at intake and on two
separate days at post-CBT/TAU for all participants. Fam-
ilies received $15 for participating in the assessments.

Results

Table 2 Behavioral observation scores for the CBT and TAU con-
ditions (number of intervals out of 30 intervals engaged in each
behavior)

Scale

Baseline

Post-treatment

CBT

TAU

CBT

TAU

Solitary

M

SD

14.71 (49.0 %)

14.65 (48.8 %)

6.71* (22.4 %)

16.25* (54.2 %)

6.40

6.44

Range

2.0–20.0

4.0–21.0

Any peer interaction

6.50

0–17.0

6.51

3.21–20.36

M

SD

10.43 (34.8 %)

10.53 (35.1 %)

20.57* (68.6 %)

9.64* (32.1 %)

9.18

9.07

7.50

8.60

Range

3.0–28.0

1.20–24.0

7.0–29.0

4.29–26.79

Positive or appropriate interaction with peers

M

SD

10.14 (33.8 %)

10.37 (34.6 %)

20.57* (68.6 %)

7.50* (25.0 %)

8.95

9.16

7.50

8.65

Range

3.0–27.0

1.20–24.0

7.0–29.0

1.07–24.64

Positive or appropriate response to child by peers

M

SD

8.86 (29.5 %)

8.87 (29.6 %)

19.0* (63.3 %)

7.32* (24.4 %)

7.45

8.41

8.72

8.77

Range

3.0–21.0

1.20–23.0

6.0–29.0

1.07–24.64

Negative behavior

3.43 (11.4 %)

3.17 (10.6 %)

1.71 (5.7 %)

2.68 (8.9 %)

M

SD

5.26

Range

0–15.0

3.43

0–9.0

1.89

0–4.0

2.0

0–5.36

For IT, n = 7; for TAU, n = 6; Cohen’s d Effect Size (d): Solitary d = 1.47; Any
Peer Interaction d = 1.36; Positive or Appropriate Interaction with Peers d = 1.62;
Positive or Appropriate Response to Child by Peers d = 1.34; Negative Behavior
d = .50
* p \ .05 for group difference

For the participating sample (N = 13), recruitment began
in 8/2008 and ended in 10/2010; posttreatment assessments
were completed by 9/2011. There were no statistically
signiﬁcant pretreatment group differences on the demo-
graphic variables or ADI-R, ADOS, KBIT, or behavioral
observation scores.

Means, standard deviations, and ranges for behavioral
observation ratings of social communication-related autism
symptom severity are presented in Table 2. Mean scores
represent the number of 1-min intervals, out of a total of
30, in which each coded behavior occurred. ANCOVA was
used to test group differences at post-CBT/TAU on
behavioral observation ratings, with the children’s baseline
scores included as covariates. There was a statistically
signiﬁcant group difference on all but one of the behavioral
observation summary codes, including Solitary, Any Peer
Interaction, Positive or Appropriate Interaction with Peers,
and Positive or Appropriate Response to Child by Peers [Fs
(1,10) = 8.38, 6.26, 8.86, and 5.95, respectively, ps \ .05].
In each case, children in CBT approximately doubled their
rate of social interactions (e.g., from 8.86 intervals out of
30 intervals at pretreatment for Positive or Appropriate

Interaction with Peers, to 19 intervals out of 30 intervals at
posttreatment, on average) and cut their rate of Solitary
behavior by more than half from pre- to post-treatment
(i.e., declining from 14.71 intervals out of 30 intervals at
pretreatment to 6.71 intervals out of 30 intervals at post-
treatment, on average). In contrast, for each of these four
variables, children’s scores in the TAU group were slightly
worse at posttreatment as compared to pretreatment.
Hence, posttreatment scores favored CBT over TAU for
each of these four variables, with large effect sizes (ds
ranged from 1.34 to 1.62; see Figs. 1, 2, 3, 4). No signif-
icant treatment effect was found for Negative Behavior
(although d = .50,
favoring CBT at posttreatment).
Because of the small sample in use, a nonparametric ver-
sion of ANCOVA was employed to test the robustness of
the treatment effects. Pre- and post-treatment scores on all
observational scales (as noted above and in Table 2) were
subjected to rank-order transformation, following conven-
tion for robust ANCOVA models (Akritas and Brunner
2003). Then, the ANCOVA tests were rerun, producing an
identical pattern of statistically signiﬁcant effects to those
found using classical ANCOVA, described above. These

123

J Autism Dev Disord

Fig. 1 Change in average number of intervals out of 30 that children
engaged in solitary behavior from baseline to post-CBT or post-TAU

Fig. 3 Change in average number of intervals out of 30 that children
engaged in any proper or appropriate peer interactions from baseline
to post-CBT or post-TAU

Fig. 2 Change in average number of intervals out of 30 that children
engaged in any peer interaction from baseline to post-CBT or post-
TAU

results suggest that extreme scores and outliers on the
continuous observational scales within this sample are not
likely to have spuriously produced the observed statisti-
cally signiﬁcant ﬁndings.

Service Use

A summary of psychosocial treatment, educational services
and psychiatric medication use by treatment condition is
presented in Table 3.

TAU Condition

The SACA interview was administered at pre- and post-
TAU. At the beginning of the TAU condition, the only
services received by TAU participants was psychotropic

123

Fig. 4 Change in average number of intervals out of 30 that children
received positive or appropriate peer
responses to their social
initiations from baseline to post-CBT or post-TAU

medication therapy, with four of
the six participants
receiving such services. Two children were taking antide-
pressants, one was receiving stimulant medication, and one
was taking an antipsychotic. During the TAU condition, all
children added at least one psychosocial or educational
intervention to their services (see Table 3). TAU Child 1
began services with a behaviorist and maintained a stable
dosage of medication. TAU Child 2 began a weekly social
skills group, began receiving individual therapy from a
school psychologist, and increased his/her dosage of anti-
psychotic medication. TAU Child 3 began a weekly social
skills group at school, and had no changes in psychotropic
medication type or dosage. TAU Child 4 received both
biweekly individual counseling from a licensed therapist as
well as 4 h a week of applied behavioral analysis at home.
TAU Child 5 received weekly therapy sessions with a
clinical social worker in a community setting, weekly small
group occupational therapy, weekly ﬂoortime intervention

J Autism Dev Disord

Table 3 Number and percentage of psychosocial, educational, and
psychiatric services received during active treatment for CBT and
TAU groups

Service

CBT
(n = 7)

TAU
(n = 6)

Educational services

Behaviorist

Inclusion specialist

Applied behavior analysis

Occupation therapy

Floortime intervention

Social skills group

Psychiatric services

School psychologist

Licensed psychologist

Social worker

Medications

Antidepressant

Stimulant

Atypical antipsychotic

Alpha 2-adrenergic agonist

0

0

0

0

0

3 (43)

0

0

0

2 (29)

2 (29)

1 (14)

1 (14)

1 (17)

1 (17)

1 (17)

1 (17)

1 (17)

3 (50)

1 (17)

1 (17)

2 (33)

2 (33)

1 (17)

1 (17)

0

at home, weekly social problem solving treatment during
school, and daily assistance from an inclusion specialist
during lunch and recess. Child 6 received weekly therapy
sessions with a clinical social worker in a community
setting.

CBT Condition

At the onset of the study, three of the seven participants in
the CBT condition were receiving outside services. Two
children were receiving individual therapy from a licensed
psychologist, with one of those children also participating
in a weekly social skills group. Both children ceased those
services before beginning the intervention. Three of the
seven children in the CBT condition were receiving stable
medication therapy before the start of the intervention. One
child was using antipsychotic medication, one was using
antidepressant and stimulant medication, and one was
using an antidepressant as well as an alpha 2-adrenergic
agonist and stimulant medication. One child out of the
three using medication changed their dosage during the
course of the intervention (he/she increased the dosage of
alpha 2-adrenergic agonist medication and reduced the
dosage of antidepressant medication). For participants in
the CBT condition, the following outside services were
received during their 32 weeks of intervention: Three
children began receiving a social skills group intervention,
with two run by community mental health providers and
the third run by a school provider.

Discussion

Children randomized to CBT evidenced a signiﬁcantly
greater improvement in observed social communication-
related autism symptom severity as compared to children
randomized to TAU. In terms of both positive or appro-
priate interactions with peers as well as positive or
appropriate responses to the child’s social communication
bids by peers, children in the CBT group approximately
doubled their rate of positive social interactions during
recess from pre- to post-treatment, ultimately spending the
great majority of their time (77.6 % on average) with
others rather than in solitary activities, and the majority of
their time (68.6 % on average) engaged in positive or
appropriate social
interaction with peers. On average,
children in the TAU group did not change in their rate of
these observed positive behaviors from pre- to post-TAU,
ending the TAU condition with notably different frequen-
cies of the same social behaviors when compared to the
CBT group (i.e., 45.8 % of intervals observed with others,
and only 25 % of intervals engaged in positive or appro-
priate social interaction with peers). Although the study has
a small sample and a number of other limitations, discussed
below, these initial results are promising and represent the
ﬁrst objective measurement approach to ascertaining the
effects of CBT on children’s core autism symptoms.

As a probe of children’s social communication-related
autism symptom severity, blinded observations of partici-
pating children at school recess represent a meaningful
sample of behavior in a socially-challenging and contex-
tually important daily situation. Numerous studies have
illustrated that children with ASD tend to become isolated
and disengaged in unstructured social settings such as
school recess (e.g., Bauminger et al. 2003; Chamberlain
et al. 2007). In these settings, a number of core autism
symptoms can be especially pronounced, including a fail-
ure to initiate interactions with peers, a lack of appropriate
responsiveness to peers’ social initiations, a lack of sus-
tained interaction and play following group entry (some-
times manifested as children quickly disengaging and
moving from area to area on the playground yard rather
than committing and sticking with a game or conversation;
Ingram et al. 2007) and excessive involvement in restricted
patterns of interest or behavior (e.g., collecting leaves,
walking around drains). For many affected children, the
lack of adult direction or other structures (e.g., a require-
ment to participate in speciﬁc social activities), combined
with the potentially confusing or unrewarding qualities that
some children with ASD attribute to the peer social
activities occurring in such settings, likely combine to elicit
or magnify deﬁcits in communication and engagement that
are core to ASD. While hardly the only relevant context for
the expression and impact of autism symptoms among

123

school-age children, behavior during school recess is an
important litmus test for intervention effects due to the
tendency for autism symptoms to be elicited consistently in
this setting (e.g., Kasari et al. 2011).

The participants in the CBT treatment were engaged in a
multifaceted range of intervention activities designed to
address emotion dysregulation and core autism symptoms.
All children in the study had a concurrent anxiety disorder
as an entry criterion, which can pose additional barriers to
social engagement for children with or without ASD
(Bellini 2004; Chang et al. 2012), and most children also
met criteria for ADHD. Emotion dysregulation and
behavioral problems were addressed using CBT strategies
developed for children with ASD (Wood et al. 2009a, b).
Both parents and teachers were recruited to help implement
both behavioral and cognitive aspects of the intervention to
achieve a wraparound effect to the greatest extent possible.
Efforts were made to introduce behavioral supports (e.g.,
reward charts linked to earning daily electronics privileges)
synchronized between school and home to maximize the
child’s motivation to regulate emotion, comply with care-
givers, and engage socially even when initially anxious or
disinterested.

With sufﬁcient remission of behavioral symptoms and
emotional dysregulation, a treatment focus on core autism
symptoms using CBT methods became viable for a
majority of children randomized to CBT. In treating core
autism symptoms in this sample, it was clinically useful to
conceptualize speciﬁc social difﬁculties as emanating
partly from at least one of two motivational states: social
anxiety or limited social interest. For example, a child who
was highly reticent to approach other children due to a
perceived likelihood of rejection, but who had exhibited
both social interest and sufﬁcient social skill in a limited
number of current peer relationships (e.g., friendships
established in earlier childhood with parental help; neigh-
bors) was considered to be especially impacted by social
anxiety. In contrast, a child who had no evident fearful
social cognitions, but expressed disinterest in interacting
with peers in many circumstances, was posited to be par-
ticularly affected by low social interest/motivation. Chil-
dren characterized by either or both of these motivational
states might or might not also have signiﬁcant social skill
challenges such as limited ability to maintain conversations
with peers, a lack of familiarity with basic social entry
behavior (e.g., joining in games), or a lack of age-typical
play skills (e.g., pretending, board game expertise, handball
skill, etc.). The intervention techniques developed for the
CBT program under investigation aimed to improve spe-
ciﬁc skills that were most relevant to rapidly promoting a
child’s social engagement within their personal social
context, while reducing anxiety and increasing motivation
to engage. The modular nature of the intervention required

123

J Autism Dev Disord

clinicians and supervisors to choose treatment modules that
ﬁt the child’s most pressing clinical needs according to an
algorithm. In future research, identifying the importance of
these two motivational barriers to social engagement to
outcomes, and determining which treatment modules are
best suited to children with either or both of these barriers
would be useful
in further personalizing care in CBT
treatment.

Exposure and reward strategies were important behav-
ioral techniques used in this CBT program, but an addi-
tional element emphasized in this treatment was co-
developing (with the child) age-appropriate rationales for
speciﬁc types of social behavior. In conjunction with
experimenting with speciﬁc new social behaviors, such as
playing with unknown children at the park, or hosting a
playdate, Socratic discussions were held to help the child
speculate about peers’ perspectives about the child’s social
behavior [e.g., ‘‘she (child with autism) is making this
playdate/game really fun, and I feel happy’’] and implica-
tions for the future [e.g., ‘‘I really want to play with her
(child with autism) again; she’s a nice new friend; I hope
we have fun like this in the future’’]. These discussions
were intended to link positive real-world experiences in
speciﬁc social interactions with theory-of-mind concepts
that might generalize to new peer interaction situations.
Hence, the social conceptual training embedded in this
CBT program, anchored to real-world social successes with
peer interactions at home, school, and the community
achieved through behavioral means (skills training, expo-
sure, reward), may have been a beneﬁcial element of the
overall treatment package.

One distinct element of this treatment was its length: 32
sessions, 90 min per session, with two school visits/con-
sultations. This was a relatively long and intense inter-
vention by the standards of many child CBT programs for
anxiety and depression (which often last 8–16 sessions).
However, 32 sessions is very brief by the standards of
applied behavior analysis, an intensive intervention often
used for children with ASD that can last years with many
hours per week (e.g., Dawson et al. 2010), particularly if it
permitted signiﬁcantly reduced service use for the child
following treatment termination. In general, service use
and costs are high for the average school-age child with
ASD in the US. Among 6–10 year-olds with mild ASD, the
average child uses about seven current services/interven-
tions (e.g., therapies, medications; Green et al. 2006; see
also Thomas et al. 2007). Hence, over the course of
childhood, even high-functioning children often receive
hundreds to thousands of hours of community treatment.
Much this treatment is not evidence-based (Hess et al.
2008). A treatment that had the potential to both substan-
tially reduce the need for future service, improve adaptive
functioning, and reduce morbidity could be an economical

J Autism Dev Disord

alternative to the actual status quo for the average service
recipient. Further research is needed to determine whether
the present treatment meets these criteria, or requires fur-
ther improvement to do so.

The limitations of this study include the small sample
size, observations conducted only in school playgrounds, a
TAU control group with a 16-week posttreatment assess-
ment, and the lack of a follow-up assessment. While sta-
tistically signiﬁcant
intervention effects were obtained,
reducing concerns about power, observations in other nat-
uralistic settings such as the home environment would offer
more satisfactory generalization probes, though as noted
school recess is a uniquely well-suited environment to test
the effects of an intervention targeted at social communi-
cation with peers. It should be noted that the observational
measure summary scores that were used emphasized broad
classes of social behaviors (e.g., positive or appropriate
initiations) as opposed to discrete communicative acts such
as giving compliments, so it is unclear which aspects of
peer interactions improved the most in response to CBT.
The 16-week posttreatment assessment period was deemed
the maximum length of time that would be clinically
appropriate to have families wait before offering a struc-
tured CBT program (they were given 16 weeks of CBT at
that point). An active control group with a credible alter-
native intervention such as social skills training is likely to
be a more stringent test of the speciﬁcity of treatment
effects and would allow for a 32-week posttreatment
assessment. It should also be noted that this CBT program
was a multicomponent
intervention, and decomposition
studies would be needed to determine which elements of
treatment are most important for which types of presenting
child characteristics.

In summary, core autism symptoms have been a difﬁcult
target of treatment in other intervention modalities (cf. Rao
et al. 2008), but there is accumulating evidence suggesting
that relatively intensive CBT (at least 16 sessions, with
signiﬁcant caregiver involvement) may be a promising
approach for reducing the severity of autism symptoms in
school-aged children. Accruing evidence points to the
relatively better level of adaptation and independence that
may be achieved by young adults with qualitatively lower
levels of ASD symptom severity, even after controlling for
IQ (Szatmari et al. 2009) and hence, such improvements
are an important goal for intervention programs. At pres-
ent, two studies based on parent-reported ASD symptom
severity, and one study based on blinded observations of
ASD symptoms have found that 16–32 sessions of CBT
may yield meaningful
reduction in autism symptom
severity as compared to a waitlist or TAU comparison
group (Storch et al. 2013; Wood et al. 2009b; and the
present study). Further research may productively build off
this initial pilot trial in exploring the potential of CBT for

treating social communication deﬁcits in high-functioning
children with ASD. In the meantime, clinicians may ﬁnd it
useful
to explore the utility of CBT approaches to
addressing presenting problems exhibited by the school-
age children with ASD with whom they work.

References

Akritas, M. G., & Brunner, E. (2003). Nonparametric models for
ANOVA and ANCOVA: A review. In M. G. Akritas & D.
N. Politis (Eds.), Recent advances and trends in nonparametric
statistics (pp. 79–92). Amsterdam: Elsevier B.V.

Anderson, M. C., Bjork, R. A., & Bjork, E. L. (1994). Remembering
can cause forgetting—retrieval dynamics in long-term-memory.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 20, 1063–1087. doi:10.1037/0278-7393.20.5.1063.

Anderson, M. C., Green, C., & McCulloch, K. C. (2000). Similarity
and inhibition in long-term memory: Evidence for a two-factor
theory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 26, 1141–1159. doi:10.1037/0278-7393.26.5.
1141.

Bauminger, N. (2002). The facilitation of social-emotional understanding
and social interaction in high-functioning children with autism:
Intervention outcomes. Journal of Autism and Developmental
Disorders, 32(4), 283–298. doi:10.1023/A:1016378718278.

Bauminger, N., Shulman, C., & Agam, G. (2003). Peer interaction
and loneliness in high-functioning children with autism. Journal
of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 33(5), 489–507. doi:10.
1023/A:1025827427901.

Bellini, S. (2004). Social skill deﬁcits and anxiety in high-functioning
adolescents with autism spectrum disorders. Focus on Autism
and Other Developmental Disabilities, 19, 78–86. doi:10.1177/
10883576040190020201.

Brewin, C. R. (2006). Understanding cognitive behaviour therapy: A
retrieval competition account. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
44, 765–784. doi:10.1016/j.brat.2006.02.005.

Chalfant, A. M., Rapee, R., & Carroll, L. (2007). Treating anxiety
disorders in children with high functioning autism spectrum
disorders: A controlled trial. Journal of Autism and Develop-
mental Disorders, 37(10), 1842–1857. doi:10.1007/s10803-006-
0318-4.

Chamberlain, B., Kasari, C., & Rotheram-Fuller, E. (2007). Involve-
ment or isolation? The social networks of children with autism in
regular classrooms. Journal of Autism and Developmental
Disorders, 37(2), 230–242. doi:10.1037/0022-006X.66.1.7.

Chambless, D. L., & Hollon, S. D. (1998). Deﬁning empirically
supported therapies. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psy-
chology, 66, 7–18.

Chang, Y., Quan, J., & Wood, J. J. (2012). Effects of anxiety disorder
severity on social functioning in children with autism spectrum
disorders. Journal of Developmental and Physical Disabilities,
24, 235–245. doi:10.1007/s10882-012-9268-2.

Craske, M. G., Kircanski, K., Zelikowsky, M., Mystkowski, J.,
Chowdhury, N., & Baker, A. (2008). Optimizing inhibitory
learning during exposure therapy. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 46(1), 5–27. doi:10.1016/j.brat.2007.10.003.

Dawson, G., Rogers, S., Munson, J., Smith, M., Winter, J., Greenson,
J., et al. (2010). Randomized, controlled trial of an intervention
for
toddlers with autism: The early start Denver model.
Pediatrics, 125(1), e17–e23. doi:10.1542/peds.2009-0958.

DeRosier, M. E., Swick, D. C., Davis, N. O., McMillen, J. S., &
Matthews, R. (2011). The efﬁcacy of a social skills group

123

intervention for improving social behaviors in children with high
functioning autism spectrum disorders. Journal of Autism and
Developmental Disorders, 41(8), 1033–1043. doi:10.1007/
s10803-010-1128-2.

Eaves, L. C., & Ho, H. H. (2008). Young adult outcome of autism
spectrum disorders. Journal of Autism and Developmental
Disorders, 38(4), 739–747. doi:10.1007/s10803-007-0441-x.

Ferraioli, S. J., & Harris, S. L. (2011). Effective educational inclusion
of students on the autism spectrum. Journal of Contemporary
Psychotherapy, 41(1), 19–28. doi:10.1007/s10879-010-9156-y.

Fujii, C., Renno, P., McLeod, B. D., Lin, C. E., Decker, K., Zielinski,
K., et al. (2013). Intensive cognitive behavioral therapy for
anxiety disorders in school-aged children with autism: A
preliminary comparison with treatment-as-usual. School Mental
Health, 5(1), 25–37. doi:10.1007/s12310-012-9090-0.

Green, V. A., Pituch, K. A., Itchon, J., Choi, A., O’Reilly, M., &
Sigafoos, J. (2006). Internet survey of treatments used by parents
of children with autism. Research in Developmental Disabilities,
27, 70–84. doi:10.1016/j.ridd.2004.12.002.

Hess, K. L., Morrier, M. J., Heﬂin, L. J., & Ivey, M. L. (2008). Autism
treatment survey: Services received by children with autism
spectrum disorders in public school classrooms. Journal of
Autism and Developmental Disorders, 38(5), 961–971. doi:10.
1007/s10803-007-0470-5.

Horwitz, S. M., Hoagwood, K., Stiffman, A. R., Summerfeld, T.,
Weisz, J. R., Costello, J., et al. (2001). Measuring youth’s use of
mental health services: Reliability of
the SACA—services
assessment for children and adolescents. Psychiatric Services,
52, 1088–1094. doi:10.1176/appi.ps.52.8.1088.

Ingram, D. H., Dickerson Mayes, S., Troxell, L. B., & Calhoun, S. L.
(2007). Assessing children with autism, mental retardation, and
typical development using the playground observation checklist.
Autism, 11(4), 311–319. doi:10.1177/1362361307078129.

Kasari, C., Locke, J., Gulsrud, A., & Rotheram-Fuller, E. (2011).
Social networks and friendships at school: Comparing children
with and without ASD. Journal of Autism and Developmental
Disabilities, 41, 533–544. doi:10.1007/s10803-010-1076-x.

Kasari, C., Rotheram-Fuller, E., Locke, J., & Gulsrud, A. (2012).
Making the connection: Randomized controlled trial of social
skills at school for children with autism spectrum disorders.
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 53(4), 431–439.
doi:10.1111/j.1469-7610.2011.02493.x.

Kaufman, A. S., & Kaufman, N. L. (2004). Kaufman brief intelligence
test (2nd ed.). Circle Pines, MN: American Guidance Service
Inc.

Kendall, P. C. (1994). Treating anxiety disorders in children: Results
of a randomized clinical trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 62(1), 100–110. doi:10.1037/0022-006X.62.1.100.
Kendall, P. C., Flannery-Schroeder, E., Panichelli-Mindel, S. M.,
Southam-Gerow, M., Henin, A., & Warman, M. (1997). Therapy
for youths with anxiety disorders: A second randomized clinical
trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 65(3),
366–380. doi:10.1037/0022-006X.65.3.366.

Le Couteur, A., Lord, C., & Rutter, M. (2003). The autism diagnostic
interview-revised. Los Angeles: Western Psychological Services.
Lickel, A., MacLean, W. E., Jr., Blakeley-Smith, A., & Hepburn, S.
(2012). Assessment of
the prerequisite skills for cognitive
behavioral therapy in children with and without autism spectrum
disorders. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders,
42(6), 992–1000. doi:10.1007/s10803-011-1330-x.

Lord, C., Risi, S., Lambrecht, L., Cook, E. H., Leventhal, B. L.,
DiLavore, P. C., et al. (2000). The autism diagnostic observation
schedule—generic: A standard measure of social and commu-
nication deﬁcits associated with the spectrum of autism. Journal
of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 30(3), 205–223. doi:10.
1023/A:1005592401947.

123

J Autism Dev Disord

Lord, C., Rutter, M., DiLavore, P. C., & Risi, S. (2002). Autism
diagnostic observation schedule. Los Angeles: Western Psycho-
logical Services.

Lord, C., Rutter, M., & Le Couteur, A. (1994). Autism diagnostic
interview-revised: A revised version of a diagnostic interview for
caregivers of individuals with possible developmental disorders.
Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 24(5),
659–685. doi:10.1007/BF02172145.

Loveland, K. A., & Tunali-Kotoski, B. (2005). In F. Volkmar, R.
Paul, A. Klin, & D. Cohen (Eds.), The school-age child with an
autistic spectrum disorder (pp. 247–287). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Marriage, S., Wolverton, A., & Marriage, K. (2009). Autism spectrum
disorder grown up: A chart review of adult functioning. Journal
of the Canadian Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry,
18(4), 322.

Matson, J. L., Hess, J. A., Neal, D., Mahan, S., & Fodstad, J. C.
(2010). Trend of symptoms in children diagnosed with autistic
disorder as measured by the autism spectrum disorders-diagnos-
tic for children (ASD-DC). Journal of Developmental and
Physical Disabilities, 22(1), 47–56. doi:10.1007/s10882-009-
9167-3.

Matson, J. L., & Horovitz, M. (2010). Stability of autism spectrum
disorders symptoms over time. Journal of Developmental and
Physical Disabilities, 22(4), 331–342. doi:10.1007/s10882-010-
9188-y.

McDougle, C. J., Scahill, L., Aman, M. G., McCracken, J. T.,
Tierney, E., Davies, M., et al. (2005). Risperidone for the core
symptom domains of autism: Results from the study by the
autism network of the research units on pediatric psychophar-
macology. American Journal of Psychiatry, 162(6), 1142–1148.
doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.162.6.1142.

Puleo, C. M., & Kendall, P. C. (2011). Anxiety disorders in typically
developing youth: Autism spectrum symptoms as a predictor of
cognitive-behavioral treatment. Journal of Autism and Develop-
mental Disorders, 41(3), 275–286. doi:10.1007/s10803-010-
1047-2.

Rao, P. A., Beidel, B. C., & Murray, M. J. (2008). Social skills
interventions for children with Asperger’s syndrome or high-
functioning autism: A review and recommendations. Journal of
Autism and Developmental Disorders, 38, 353–361. doi:10.1007/
s10803-007-0402-4.

Reaven, J., Blakeley-Smith, A., Culhane-Shelburne, K., & Hepburn,
S. (2012). Group cognitive behavior therapy for children with
high-functioning autism spectrum disorders and anxiety: A
randomized trial. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry,
53(4), 410–419. doi:10.1111/j.1469-7610.2011.02486.x.

Reichow, B., & Wolery, M. (2009). Comprehensive synthesis of early
interventions for young children with
intensive behavioral
autism based on the UCLA young autism project model. Journal
of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 39(1), 23–41. doi:10.
1007/s10803-008-0596-0.

Sofronoff, K., Attwood, T., & Hinton, S. (2005). A randomised
controlled trial of a CBT intervention for anxiety in children
with Asperger syndrome. Journal of Child Psychology and
Psychiatry, 46(11), 1152–1160. doi:10.1111/j.1469-7610.2005.
00411.x.

Sofronoff, K., Attwood, T., Hinton, S., & Levin, I. (2007). A
randomized controlled trial of a cognitive behavioural interven-
tion for anger management in children diagnosed with Asperger
syndrome. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders,
37(7), 1203–1214. doi:10.1007/s10803-006-0262-3.

Spence, S. J., & Thurm, A. (2010). Testing autism interventions:
Trials and tribulations. The Lancet, 375(9732), 2124–2125.
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(10)60757-X.

Storch, E. A., Arnold, E. B., Lewin, A. B., Nadeau, J. M., Jones, A.
M., De Nadai, A. S., et al. (2013). The effect of cognitive-

J Autism Dev Disord

behavioral
therapy versus treatment as usual for anxiety in
children with autism spectrum disorders: A randomized, con-
trolled trial. Journal of the American Academy of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, 52(2), 132–142. doi:10.1016/j.jaac.2012.
11.007.

Szatmari, P., Bryson, S., Duku, E., Vaccarella, L., Zwaigenbaum, L.,
Bennett, T., et al. (2009). Similar developmental trajectories in
autism and Asperger syndrome: From early childhood to
adolescence. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry,
50(12), 1459–1467. doi:10.1111/j.1469-7610.2009.02123.x.

Thomas, K. C., Morrissey, J. P., & McLaurin, C. (2007). Use of
autism-related services by families and children. Journal of
Autism and Developmental Disorders, 37(5), 818–829. doi:10.
1007/s10803-006-0208-9.

Tulving, E. (1979). Relation between encoding speciﬁcity and levels
of processing. In L. S. Cermak & F. I. M. Craik (Eds.), Levels of
processing in human memory (pp. 405–428). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.

Walters, S., & Weaver, K.

(2003). Relationships between the
Kaufman brief intelligence test and the Wechsler adult intelli-
gence scale-third edition. Psychological Reports, 92, 1111–1115.
doi:10.2466/pr0.2003.92.3c.1111.

West, L., Waldrop, J., & Brunssen, S.

(2009). Pharmacologic
treatment for the core deﬁcits and associated symptoms of
autism in children. Journal of Pediatric Health Care, 23(2),
75–89. doi:10.1016/j.pedhc.2008.12.001.

Wood, J. J., Drahota, A., Sze, K. M., Har, K., Chiu, A., & Langer, D.
(2009a). Cognitive behavioral therapy for anxiety in children
with autism spectrum disorders: A randomized, controlled trial.
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 50, 224–234.
doi:10.1111/j.1469-7610.2008.01948.x.

Wood, J. J., Drahota, A., Sze, K., Van Dyke, M., Decker, K., Fujii, C.,
et al. (2009b). Brief report: Effects of cognitive behavioral
therapy on parent-reported autism symptoms in school-age
children with high-functioning autism. Journal of Autism and
Developmental Disorders, 39(11), 1608–1612. doi:10.1007/
s10803-009-0791-7.

Wood, J. J., Fujii, C., & Renno, P. (2011). Cognitive behavioral
therapy in high-functioning autism: Review and recommenda-
tions for treatment development. In B. Reichow, P. Doehring, D.
V. Cicchetti, & F. R. Volkmar (Eds.), Evidence-based practices
and treatments for children with autism (pp. 197–230). Berlin:
Springer.

Wood, J. J., & McLeod, B. (2008). Child anxiety disorders: A

treatment manual for practitioners. New York: Norton.

Wood, J. J., & Schwartzman, B. C. (2013). Cognitive behaviour
therapies for youth with autism spectrum disorders. In P.
Graham & S. Reynolds (Eds.), Cognitive behaviour therapy
for children and families (pp. 189–202). Cambridge, MA:
Cambridge University Press.

123

