evolution, nature has been able to find
more than one efficient molecular mecha-
nism for maintaining a vital organismic
function.

Refrences and Nobts

1. F. Hoppe-Seyler, Virchows Arch. Pathol. Anat.
Physiol. 19, 233 (1864).
2. I. M. Klotz and S. Keresztes-Nagy, Biochemis-
try 2, 445 (1963).
3. G. Bates, M. Brunori, G. Amiconi, E. Antonini,
J. Wyman, ibid. 7, 3016 (1968); R. E. Ferrell and
G. B. Kitto, ibid. 9, 3053 (1970); W. A. Hen-
drickson and G. L. Klippenstein, J. Mol. Biol.
87, 147 (1974).
4. G. L. Klippenstein, D. A. Van Riper, E. A.
Oosterom, J. Biol. Chem. 247, 5959 (1972).
5. J. G. Joshi and B. Sullivan, Comp. Biochem.
Physiol. B 44, 857 (1973).
6. F. A. Liberatore, M. F. Truby, G. L. Klippen-
stein, Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 160, 223 (1974).
7. J. S. Loehr, K. N. Meyerhoff, L. C. Sieker, L.
H. Jensen, J. Mol. Biol. 91, 521 (1975).
8. 1. M. Klotz, D. W. Darnall, N. R. Langerman, in
The Proteins, H. Neurath and R. Hill, Eds.
(Academic Press, New York, ed. 3, 1975), vol.
1, pp. 293-411.
9. D. W. Darnall and I. M. Klotz, Arch. Biochem.
Biophys. 166, 651 (1975).
10. W. A. Hendrickson, G. L. Klippenstein, K. B.
Ward, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 72, 2160
(1975).
11. K. B. Ward, W. A. Hendrickson, G. L. Klippen-
stein, Nature (London) 257, 818 (1975).
12. S. Keresztes-Nagy and I. M. Klotz, Biochemis-
try 2, 923 (1963).
13. I. M. Klotz and S. Keresztes-Nagy, Nature
(London) 195, 900 (1962).
14. B. W. Matthews and S. A. Bernhard, Annu.
Rev. Biophys. Bioeng. 2, 257 (1973).
15. A. C. T. North and G. J. Stubbs, J. Mol. Biol.
88, 125 (1974).
16. R. E. Stenkamp, L. C. Sieker, L. H. Jensen, J.
S. Loehr, ibid. 100, 23 (1976).
17. A. R. Subramanian, J. W. Holleman. I. M.

Klotz, Biochemistry 7, 3859 (1968); G. L. Klip-
penstein, J. W. Holleman, I. M. Klotz, ibid., p.
3868.
18. G. L. Klippenstein, J. L. Cote, S. E. Ludlam,
ibid. 15, 1128(1976).
19. R. E. Ferrell and G. B. Kitto, ibid. 10, 2923
(1971).
20. G. L. Klippenstein, ibid. 11, 372 (1972).
21. F. A. Liberatore, thesis, University of New
Hampshire (1974).
22. Abbreviations of the amino acid residues are
Ala, alanine; Asp, aspartic acid; Asn, aspara-
gine; Arg, arginine; Cys, cysteine; Glu, glutamic
acid; Gln, glutamine; Gly, glycine; His, histi-
dine; Ile, isoleucine; Leu, leucine; Met, meth'io-
nine; Phe, phenylalanine; Pro, proline; Ser, ser-
ine- Thr, threonine; Val, valine; Tyr, tyrosine;
and Trp, tryptophan.

23. G. L. Klippenstein, unpublished.
24. D. W. Darnall, K. Garbett, I. M. Klotz, S.
Aktipis, S. Keresztes-Nagy, Arch. Biochem.
Biophys. 133, 103 (1969).
25. G. Holzwarth and P. Doty, J. Am. Chem. Soc.
87, 218 (1965).
26. P. Y. Chou and G. D. Fasman, Biochemistry 13,
222 (1974).
27. J. B. R. Dunn, thesis, Northwestern University
(1974).
28. M. Florkin, Arch. Int. Physiol. 36, 247 (1933);
W. E. Love, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 23, 465
(1957.
29. I. M. Klotz, T. A. Klotz, H. A. Fiess, Arch.
Biochem. Biophys. 68, 284 (1957).
30. W. A. Hendrickson and K. B. Ward, Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 66, 1349 (1975).
31. I. M. Klotz and T. A. Klotz, Science 121, 477
(1955).
32. E. Boeri and A. Ghiretti-Magaldi, Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 23, 465 (1957).
33. S. Keresztes-Nagy and I. M. Klotz, Biochemis-
try 4, 919 (1965).
34. M. H. Klapper and I. M. Klotz, ibid. 7, 223
(1968).
35. K. Garbett, D. W. Darnall, I. M. Klotz, R. J. P.
Williams, Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 135, 419
(1969).
36. M. Y. Okamura, I. M. Klotz, C. E. Johnson, M.
R. C. Winter. R. J. P. Williams, Biochemistry 8,

Hampshire (1971).
Res. Commun. 47, 472 (1972).

1951 (1969); J. L. York and A. J. Bearden, ibid.
9, 4549 (1970).
37. K. Garbett, C. E. Johnson, I. M. Klotz, M. Y.
Okamura, R. J. P. Williams, Arch. Biochem.
Biophys. 142, 574 (1971).
38. M. Y. Okamura and I. M. Klotz, in Inorganic
Chemistry, G. L. Eichhorn, Ed. (Elsevier, Am-
sterdam, 1973), chap. 11.
39. T. H. Moss, C. Moleski, J. L. York, Biochemis-
try 10, 840 (1971).
40. J. W. Dawson, H. B. Gray, H. E. Hoenig, G. R.
Rossman, J. M. Schredder, R. H. Wang, ibid.
11, 461 (1972).
41. K. S. Murray, Coord. Chem. Rev. 12, 1(1974).
42. J. A. Morrissey, thesis, University of New
43. C. C. Fan and J. L. York, Biochem. Biophys.
44. G. L. Klippenstein, ibid. 49, 1474 (1972).
45. C. C. Fan and J. L. York, ibid. 36, 365 (1969).
46. S. F. Andres and M..Z. Atassi, Biochemistry 12,
942 (1973).
47. J. L. York and C. C. Fan, Fed. Proc. Fed. Am.
Soc. Exp. Biol. 29, 463 (1970); R. L. Rill and I.
M. Klotz, Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 136, 507
(1970).
48. R. M. Rill and I. M. Klotz, Arch. Biochem.
Biophys. 147,226(1971).
49. J. L. York and C. C. Fan, Biochemistry 10, 1659
(1971).
50. J. B. R. Dunn, D. F. Shriver, I. M. Klotz, Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 70, 2582 (1973); Bio-
chemistry 14, 2689 (1975).
51. K. Garbett, D. W. Darnall, I. M. Klotz, Arch.
Biochem. Biophys. 142, 455 (1971).
52. A. L. Rao and S. Keresztes-Nagy, Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 313, 249 (1973).
53. H. A. DePhillips, Arch. Biochem. Biophys.
144, 122 (1971).
54. K. Garbett, D. W. Darnall, I. M. Klotz, ibid.
142, 471 (1971).
55. F. Bossa, M. Brunori, G. W. Bates, E. Antonini,
P. Faselia, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 207, 41
(1970).
56. R. E. Stenkamp, L. C. Sieker, L. H. Jensen,
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 73, 349 (1976).
57. Supported in part by NIH grant HL-08299, NSF
grant GB-35610, and Naval Research Laboratory.

Educational Uses of the PLATO
Computer System
The PLATO system is used for instruction,
scientific research, and communications.

Stanley G. Smith and Bruce Ame Sherwood

The PLATO (1) computer-based educa-
tional system has been specifically de-
signed to provide interactive, self-paced
instruction to large numbers of students
(2). Lesson material is displayed on a
screen 22 centimeters square and may
consist of text, drawings, graphs, and
Students interact
color photographs.

Dr. Smith is professor of chemistry at the Univer-
sity of Illinois, Urbana 61801. Dr. Sherwood is asso-
ciate professor of physics and assistant director of
the Computer-Based Eduction Research Laborato-
ry at the University of Illinois, Urbana.

344

with the material through a special key-
set that closely resembles a typewriter
keyboard, and they receive essentially
instantaneous reinforcement of correct
work and assistance where they are hav-
ing difficulty. Students can work at their
convenience in classrooms such as the
one shown in Fig. 1.

The users of PLATO range from grade
school students learning reading and
math to graduate students in the medical
sciences. The system now has 950 termi-
nals located in universities,
colleges,

community colleges, public schools, mili-
tary training schools, and commercial
organizations (3). The users have access
to more than 3500 hours of instructional
material in more than 100 subject areas
(4). We will mainly describe one area of
PLATO use-that of university science
education and research.

Examples of PLATO Lessons

The character of PLATO lesson materi-
al varies greatly since the computer sys-
tem does not impose a pedagogical struc-
ture on the authors of the materials.
Some appreciation of the breadth of ap-
proaches used may be gained by review-
ing brief segments of a few programs in
chemistry (5) and physics (6). The exam-
ples below are illustrated with photo-
graphs of the student's plasma-panel
however,
screen
these static photographs do not fully con-
vey the dynamic nature of the inter-
actively changing displays seen by the
student.

Unfortunately,

(7).

A physics lesson on oscillations con-
tains features common to many ex-
pository science lessons. The student is
given a table of contents for the lesson so
SCIENCE, VOL. 192

that he may choose to study any section
or even go directly to a final quiz that will
test his understanding of the material.
The intent of the lesson is to take stu-
dents from no knowledge of oscillating
systems up to a point where their under-
standing allows them to solve typical
homework problems.

The first part of the lesson deals with
an oscillator consisting of a block sliding
up and down two smooth inclines, a
system that the student analyzes by
simple kinematics formulas. In order to
help the student understand the system,
the computer shows an animation of the
motion and allows him to experiment
with values of the initial displacement
(Fig. 2).

After the student has experimented
with the system until he thinks he under-
stands it, the program tests his knowl-
edge by asking a number of questions
about the system. Help is provided
where necessary, but'where help is re-
quired the student must answer the same
question later with different numerical
factors. Such checkup sections follow
each expository section of the lesson.

The final quiz is constructed from
questions asked in the earlier sections
with randomly chosen numerical factors.
No help is provided. The lesson distin-
guishes between incorrect numerical re-
sults and typing errors, such as unbal-
anced parentheses. In this lesson, if the
student misses more than two out of six
questions, he must take the whole quiz
again. He can, of course, review sections
of the lesson if he wishes.

Students also have the opportunity to
study systems of their own design and to
program the computer with a special lan-
guage so that they may obtain immediate
graphical results. Figure 3 illustrates an
example of large-amplitude pendulum
motion in which the student has used s
for angle, g for gravitational accelera-
tion, I for length, v for angular velocity, t
for time, and d for a short time interval.
The graphs that have been produced for
the student correspond to running the
program with a starting angle of 45 de-
grees and with a starting angle of 179
degrees.

Since much of science is based on the
results of experiments, it seems impor-
tant to have students learn to design
experiments and interpret the experimen-
tal data. However, many of the key ex-
periments in the development of impor-
tant concepts cannot be carried out by
large numbers of students because of the
lack of adequate equipment, time, and
experimental technique. The use of com-
puter simulation can serve to provide
some experience with the concepts. For
23 APRIL 1976

Fig. 1. One of the PLATO classrooms at the University of Illinois. This classroom in the Foreign
Language Building contains 80 terminals.

example, a comparison of the sensitivity
of the rates of ethanolysis of n-butyl
bromide and t-butyl bromide as a func-
tion of ethoxide concentration serves to
clarify some aspects of the concepts of
unimolecular and bimolecular reactions.
Students can quickly discover what hap-
pens through simulated experiments in
which the computer plots the percent
reaction as a function of time as would
be observed under the experimental con-
ditions they suggest. Since the student is
free to explore the relation between ex-
perimental conditions and reaction rate,
it is important to have the program ask
questions and, if necessary, suggest addi-
tional experiments to assure that a suit-
able set of experiments has been done.
In this case, after the experimental facts
have been established and a suitable in-
terpretation has been developed, the sys-
tem provides a visual picture of the trans-
formations involved by means of an ani-
mation that shows the sequence of bond
making and breaking which occurs.

In more advanced lessons, students
are given a problem that can be solved
by conducting some simulated experi-
ments on the computer. The student is
expected to design the experiment, se-
lect the compounds and reaction condi-
tions, and then collect the experimental
data, do the mathematical analysis, and
outline the conclusions that can be de-
rived from his experiments. This ap-
proach to teaching is possible because
the computer can rapidly calculate the
outcome of experiments of a given type
from algorithms which describe the re-
sults of actual experiments that may be
beyond the experimental skills of the
students and the available laboratory fa-
cilities.

It is also necessary for students to gain
experience in dealing with problems for

which there are many possible solutions.
The synthesis of organic compounds is
an example of this type of situation, in
which there are many viable routes from
the starting materials to the designated
product. This is illustrated in Fig. 4 where
the student is given the task of converting
a given starting material into a desig-
nated product molecule. He proceeds
by suggesting a reagent for each step
in the transformation. Since there are
many possible paths between the starting
material and the product, the computer
is programmed (8) to carry out the re-
action suggested by the student and com-
pare the structure of the product with
that of the desired material. If they are
the same, the synthesis is judged com-
pleted. If not, the reagent for the next
step is requested. This approach does
not impose a specific solution to the prob-
lem on the student but recognizes a wide
range of acceptable routes.

One way to provide practice problems
for organic reactions is illustrated in Fig.
5 where the student has been given 16
compounds and ten reagents and is
asked to find at least 20 different ways of
interconverting pairs of the compounds
with the use of the reagents shown.

To cause the interaction, the student
simply points to a compound and then to
the reactant or product side of the reac-
tion arrow to indicate his choice. The
computer senses which compound the
student is pointing at by means of a
matrix of infrared light-emitting diodes
and sensors that lie in a 16 by 16 array
around the edge of the display screen.
The use of such a "touch" sensitive
display makes it easy and quick for the
student to specify the reactants and prod-
ucts. Errors are corrected by having the
computer show either the correct pro-
duct for a given reactant and reagent or

345

the required reagent for a reactant pro-
duct pair.

Additional flexibility in the use of the
computer as an aid to teaching comes
from the ability to have the computer
control the projection of color photo-
graphs on the plasma panel. This is illus-
trated in Fig. 6, which has been abstract-
ed from a lesson on the use of an analyti-
cal balance. In this example the student
must identify the function of the knob on
the side of the instrument.

Structure of Lessons

The successful application of program
segments such as those described above
to a real teaching situation involves the
integration of practice problems and as-
sociated help sequences with the devel-
opment of the necessary theoretical
framework to assist the students in un-
derstanding the material. The ability of
the PLATO system to support a one-to-
one dialogue with the student offers the

possibility of presenting the material in
unique new ways that make the student
an active participant in an effective learn-
ing situation. Well-designed lesson mate-
rial tends to be highly interactive and
requires frequent inputs from each stu-
dent in the form of answers to questions,
predictions of the outcome of some ex-
periment, parameters to be used in simu-
lated experiments, and interpretation of
a set of data or facts. In addition, since
the understanding of the subject matter

Fig. 3 (right).
Fig. 2 (left). The student can choose the amplitude of this nonlinear oscillator and study the effect of amplitude on frequency.
The student has written a numerical integration program to study the motion of a pendulum with large-amplitude swings. The two graphs
correspond to amplitudes of 45 degrees and 179 degrees.

Fig. 4 (left). Typical multistep synthesis in which the student has typed in the reagent for each step as the computer draws the structure of the
Fig. 5 (right). The student can specify the starting material, reagent, and product by simply touching the compound on the
reaction product.
screen. A 16 by 16 array of infrared light-emitting diodes and sensors determines where the student is pointing.

346

SCIENCE, VOL. 192

that a student has before starting a given
program varies enormously, it is desir-
able to structure the program to ac-
commodate students who just need a
brief review as well as those who are
learning the material for the first time.
One simple way to provide students with
flexibility in the way they study and use a
given program is to provide an index to
the lesson which allows easy access to
any section.

Since students can proceed at their
own rate, time spent in the lesson, unlike
a lecture, automatically adjusts to the
needs of the student. In fact, students
proceed at greatly different rates when
given the opportunity. For many lessons
the time required for students to com-
plete the lesson often varies (9) by a
factor of 3 to 7.

Although lesson material can make
some adjustments to meet the needs of
is important to
individual students, it
develop criteria and data that indicate
how the difficulty of the programs match-
es the abilities of the students. One crite-
rion that has been used is the percentage
of the questions posed within the pro-
gram which students answer correctly on
their first try. The assumption in this
approach is that if nearly all student re-
sponses in instructional material are cor-
rect, then the programs are not adequate-
ly challenging them, while a very small
percentage correct suggests that the les-
son is unduly discouraging. The plot of
percentage OK on the first try as a func-
tion of the number of students, shown in
Fig. 7, suggests that for most of the
students the level of the material was
adequately adjusted for the class (10).

In addition to allowing multiple entry
points and the ability to review as fre-
quently as desired, lessons should tend
to adjust to each student within each
section. For example, help should be
provided either when requested by the
student (there is a key on the keyset
labeled HELP) or when it is clear that he
is having difficulty. The number of prob-
lems presented can be easily adjusted to
the student by such simple means as
requiring that he get two right in a row of
a certain type or, perhaps, simply by
returning a given problem to the list of
those that need to be worked if the stu-
dent needed assistance in working it.
Data from lessons are used to check that
the lesson is adjusting properly to the
students' needs.

Computer-Managed Instruction

A complete lesson on PLATO has many
of the characteristics of a chapter in a
textbook. Like chapters in a book, such
23 APRIL 1976

The relations among the student, in-
structor, and the lesson author are dia-
gramed in Fig. 8. This scheme, which
is available to all instructors, provides
guidance to the student on current work,
makes it easy to review earlier lessons,
and allows students to work ahead of the
rest of the class. The result is an efficient
and effective integration of the tech-
niques of computer-based teaching and
While
computer-managed
available management
this
scheme is used by many instructors, it is
also possible to create other manage-
ment structures to meet special require-
ments.

instruction.

generally

Integration of PLATO Activities

Fig. 6. The student must give the function of
the knob on the side of the analytical balance.
The computer controls the projection of color
photographs from a microfiche onto the back
of the plasma panel.

associated

lessons need to be assembled in a form
that is easy for students to use. All of the
with a particular
lessons
course can be made available from an
index. Then, when a student signs on to
the PLATO system with his name and the
name of the course, he may choose top-
ics or lessons to study. He makes his
selection from a list of descriptive titles,
much as chapters in a book are selected
from the table of contents. (As men-
tioned above, many lessons have, in ad-
dition, a table of contents for the sub-
sections of the lesson.)

If there are a large number of lessons
associated with a particular course, it
may be desirable to provide the student
with some guidance in the selection of
lessons that are appropriate to the course
at that time. The PLATO system makes
this possible by a course management
scheme that allows an instructor to set
up an index of lessons by simply select-
ing the lessons from a catalog of lessons
displayed on the screen. Many such in-
dexes may be set up for a course. For
example, all of the lessons associated
with a given topic or concept may be
placed on one index. The instructor then
specifies the criteria for allowing stu-
dents to move from one index of lessons
to another. For example, the student
might be required to complete three of
four lessons before moving ahead to the
next topic. Or, this criterion may be
modified so that at a given date the next
set of lessons is made available even
if the specified number of earlier les-
sons has not been completed, so that
a student who has gotten behind at one
point in the course can keep up with
the new material. If on-line quizzes or
exams are included in a given module or
set of lessons, a satisfactory score can
be included in the criteria specified for
completion before new topics are pre-
sented.

PLATO has been integrated into the
structure of courses in several ways. For
example, in a classical mechanics course
(11), computer-based tutoring made it
possible to drop one of the two weekly
lectures. The remaining lecture is used
chiefly for demonstrations rather than
for basic instruction. The discussion peri-
od is spent in the physics PLATO class-
room (which has 30 terminals), where
students work individually but can get
help from the instructor. Students spend
additional study time at a terminal on a
Thirty terminals
nonscheduled basis.
used 60 hours per week, providing 4
hours of contact to each student, can
serve 450 students. Large numbers of
terminals are required to make an impact
on instruction.

There are three main components of
the PLATO aspects of the course: instruc-
tional lessons, homework, and an on-line
gradebook. Students are assigned in-
structional lessons to study, and part of
their grade is based on how many of
these lessons they complete. Homework
is graded by PLATO rather than by the in-
structors. The student is given printed
homework problems that he is encour-
aged to work at home. When the student
is ready, he goes to a terminal to enter
his results. If the problem involves nu-
merical quantities, each student has dif-
ferent numbers. A convenient calculator
is always available. The student obtains
a numerical score on the homework;
homework scores form another basis for
the course grade.

Both lesson

completion data and
homework scores flow automatically in-
to an on-line gradebook. Instructors also
enter other grades into this gradebook,
such as exam scores and lab report
scores. Each student can look at his own
scores and can see his position in a graph-
ical display of distributions throughout
the course to compare how he is doing

347

with respect to the rest of the students.
Each instructor can look at and change
the scores of his own students and can
see scores for his section marked on the
course distribution graph. The overall di-
rector of the course can look at the status
of any section. One important benefit of
this machinery is that an instructor can
plan class activities on the basis of up-to-
date information on how far students
have gotten in their studies. Instructors
also get rapid and accurate indications of
students who are falling behind.

Just as the same textbook is used in as-
sociation with many different kinds of
courses, PLATO materials are integrated
in various ways with other activities.
The same PLATO physics materials used
at the University of Illinois in the rather
structured scheme described above are
used at Carnegie-Mellon University in a
self-paced course where PLATO instruc-
tional lessons are simply another re-
source for student study. In addition, the
modularity of PLATO lessons makes them
easy to use with diverse textbooks.

courses

(including

PLATO has been integrated into instruc-
tion in many other ways. For example, in
French,
language
Spanish, German, Russian, Hebrew, Lat-
in, and Esperanto), PLATO iS used heavi-
ly to drill the student on vocabulary and
grammar and to give practice in trans-
lating sentences from one language to the
other. A two-semester course designed
to teach students how to read Russian
consists of a standard textbook plus
PLATO lessons for each chapter of the
textbook (12). This reading course is an

alternative track to the general language
course for undergraduates and graduate
students who wish only to read Russian.
Optional laboratory drills for the stan-
dard beginning Russian course are also
on PLATO.

The function of the PLATO lessons is
not only to give practice but also to test,
with instant feedback, whether the stu-
dent understands the concepts presented
in the textbook. The materials are also
used for review, either within the course,
or by persons who want to refresh their
knowledge of Russian. There is normally
a class discussion before and after each
textbook lesson, occurring every one-
and-a-half to two weeks. The student
spends the bulk of his study time at the
PLATO terminal. In all areas, PLATO les-
sons are usually integrated with addition-
al classroom activities. However, in
such environments as continuing or adult
education where, because of constraints
of time or distance, the student may not
be able to participate in scheduled class-
room activities, a course consisting only
of PLATO materials is a viable alterna-
tive.

Another

important

integration

of
PLATO into courses is illustrated by the
use in chemistry of simulated laboratory
experiments as a means of better pre-
paring the student for a real laboratory
experiment. Merely simulating an experi-
ment would be inappropriate if the manu-
al techniques themselves and not just the
intellectual content are important. A
PLATO lesson on the theory of titration is
followed by a PLATO simulation of an ac-

tual titration, in which the student must
specify all the steps, including con-
trolling the flow from the buret, and then
analyze the data. Errors made in doing
the simulated experiment lead to the
same problems that would be observed
in the laboratory. These preparatory ac-
tivities are then completed by going into
the laboratory and actually performing
the experiment, at a time when the stu-
dent has a thorough understanding of the
content of the experiment and can con-
centrate on the practical complications
that arise. PLATO lessons may also be
used to extend laboratory experience by
simulated experiments which, because
of limitations of time, facilities, and ex-
perimental skills, students are not able to
do in the laboratory. One such example
is shown in Fig. 9, which is taken from a
lesson on fractional distillation.

(14)

There are ambitious curriculum devel-
opment projects for reading (13) and
the elementary
mathematics
school. Both of these projects constitute
highly integrated packages of instruction-
al materials, with automatic routing from
one activity to another (based on per-
formance) and extensive reporting to the
teachers.

in

Writing Lesson Material in TUTOR

Lesson material for use on the PLATO
system is written in the TUTOR program-
ming language (15) which has been de-
signed to facilitate the development of in-
teractive instructional programs on a

Fig. 8 (right). Outline ofthe PLATO
Fig. 7 (left). Histogram showing the percentage of the questions which students got correct on their first try.
computer-based education system. Students who have been put on the roster have access to lesson material selected by the instructor from the
catalog of lessons. Students have access only to their own grades in the gradebook, which can automatically collect scores from lessons. Data
related to the lesson performance are stored for review by the author of the programs.

348

SCIENCE, VOL. 192

graphic computer system. As a further
aid to authors, who should be primarily
concerned with the problems of teaching
and not with learning about computers,
professional consultants can be reached
easily through a PLATO terminal. The
consultant, who can be at another termi-
nal anywhere on the system, can see the
program on the author's screen and type
and receive comments at the bottom of
the screen. In addition, a very complete
random access, cross-indexed descrip-
tion of TUTOR and its use is available by
simply typing one of more than 2000 key
words that describe the type of thing on
which information is desired (16). The
key words do not have to be spelled cor-
rectly, yet information is delivered to the
requester almost instantaneously. More
than 1600 such requests per day are an-
swered by the system. A single key press
returns the lesson author to the point in
his work where he requested informa-
tion. Another crucial feature is that an
author can construct a display consisting
of text and line drawings on the screen,
and PLATO will generate automatically
the TUTOR program corresponding to
that display. The extensive on-line help
for authors of lesson material makes the
PLATO system a programming aid to
authors as well as a learning aid to
students. One result is that it takes less
timelto create quality lesson materials
than has been typical with earlier sys-
tems.

To demonstrate some of the features
of the TUTOR programming language, be-
low is an example of the complete com-
puter program to provide a chemistry stu-
dent with a simple problem.

unit
at
write

reagent
710
Indicate the reagent required for
this reaction.
1318
at
C,H6-*C6H5Br
write
1225
arrow
FeBr3,
answer (Fe,

ferric*bromide)

<and> (Br2, bromine)
(Br2, bromine)
You also need some Fe.

wrong
write
no
writec

ntries-2,
This is an electrophilic bromina-
tion.,
Try Br2 and Fe.

The program says that "at" line 7 of the
32 lines on the screen, spaced over 10 of
the 64 horizontal spaces, the computer
should "write" "Indicate the reagent re-
quired for this reaction." Then at line 13,
space 18, the chemical reaction is drawn
on the screen. The command "arrow" in-
dicates the location on the screen where
the student's answer is to appear. With
the "answer" command are listed the

23 APRIL 1976

that

the

students
common reagents
would be expected to know. Words en-
closed in parentheses are regarded as
synonyms while words enclosed in print-
ed brackets < > may be present in the
answer but are not required to be there.
The phrase "ferric*bromide" is treated
as a single word. The "wrong" is an ex-
ample of a typical anticipated wrong an-
swer for which the response given in the
next "write" statement will be given.
The "no" followed by "writec" in-
structs the computer to judge the answer
NO if the indicated reagents are not given
a message contingent
and to
("writec") on the number of times the
student has tried ("ntries") to answer
the question. Here, the author has de-
cided to first provide a clue, then a sug-
gested correct response.

This example involved judging a stu-
dent's sentence. Other TUTOR judging
techniques used heavily in science les-
sons include judging algebraic and nu-
meric responses, with optional dimen-
sional analysis of answers involving sci-
entific units.

write

Programs dealing with chemistry and
physics often involve displaying graphs
for students to interpret or plotting func-
tions or data supplied by the student.
The short program given below will plot
the amplitude response of a driven oscil-
lator as a function of the driving fre-
quency. The student can choose the time
constant associated with the damping of
the system. Figure 10 shows the result of
this program where the student has su-
perimposed several graphs. The basic
display components of the program,
such as the positioning on the screen of
the axes and the graph titles, were
created automatically by PLATO; the au-
thor merely positioned these elements on
the screen and PLATO created the corre-
sponding program statements.

define
unit
origin
axes
scalex
scaley
labelx
labely
delta
at
write
size
rotate
at
write
size
at
write

arrow
store
ok
funct

z = vl,c = v2
resonant
75,200
360,250
2
8
1,.2
1,.5
.02
2252

90
1505
Amplitude
0
2316
Choose a value for the time con-
stant (in units of 1/co):
2720
c

1/[(Z2

1)2 + (C X Z)2], Z

For accuracy in plotting, the alterna-
tive fine grid coordinate system is used in
which (x = 0, y = 0) is the lower left cor-
ner of the screen, and (511,51 1) is the up-
per right corner of the screen. The com-
mand "origin" specifies that the origin of
the plot will be at x = 75 and y = 200.
The "axes" command defines the length
of the x and y axes. The axes are scaled
to the units of the problem by means of
the "scalex" and "scaley" commands.
The "labelx" and "labely" indicate how
the axes should be labeled, and the "del-
ta" command establishes an increment
to be used in plotting the function. The
"size" and "rotate" commands permit
writing a rotated label ("size 0" restores
normal writing options). The "store"
command evaluates mathematical ex-
pressions typed by the student and
stores the result in the variable "c." The
"funct" command instructs the comput-
er to plot the stated function of z ( = co/
coo) for values of z within the range of the
x-axis.

PLATO as a Communication Medium

The highly interactive character of the
PLATO system has promoted the devel-
opment of efficient communication sys-
tems between the users. These communi-
cation systems take several forms. There
is a general note file where authors may
ask questions or make suggestions for
changes to the system. Similar forums
for exchanging notes of general interest
among smaller groups of users, such as
all authors in a given subject area, are al-
so widely used. Perhaps the most impor-
tant communication system between
users comes from the ability to send a
personal note, which can be several
pages long, to another individual on the
PLATO system. The "letter" is delivered
instantaneously to the addressee at what-
ever terminal he is using or uses next. Al-
though the message is delivered immedi-
ately, it need not be answered until it is
convenient. It is not at all uncommon for
several exchanges of "letters" to occur
across the country within a single day.
On a typical day, more than 1000 such
personal notes are written on the PLATO
system.

If immediate discussion is desired,
Smith can page Sherwood by name. If
Sherwood is at a terminal (and has speci-
fied that he will accept calls), he receives
a message at the bottom of the screen in-
forming him that Smith (of the chemistry
group) wants to talk to him. Sherwood
has the option of accepting or rejecting
the call. Smith does not have to know
where Sherwood is located because the

349

some additional planning time spent
away from the terminal. That is, the time
or money costs of producing a PLATO
lesson, which is one "chapter" of a
PLATO course, are probably similar to
the costs of producing one chapter of a
textbook (18). Generally speaking, cur-
riculum costs have been much higher on
other
but
PLATO offers significantly improved aids
to authors.

computer-based

systems,

There has been much study of the se-
vere problems associated with distrib-
uting educational computer programs
from one institution to another. Prob-
lems include lack of compatibility from
one computer system to another and lack
of adequate communications among insti-
tutions. The PLATO system has finessed
the problem by tying large numbers of
terminals to one center, thus providing
compatibility automatically and making
possible extensive electronic communi-
cations. The intention is to tie all PLATO
systems together to form a national grid
of regional networks, thus ensuring the
same level of compatibility and commu-
nications.

Accounting procedures are now in ef-
fect which log usage of lessons, both to
provide authors with information on
which institutions are using a lesson and
to provide a basis for paying royalties to
authors. If PLATO services are suffi-
ciently widespread, a few cents per hour
of use of a lesson could provide signifi-
cant income to authors. This would stim-
ulate production and make it self-sus-
taining without artificial subsidies. There
would also be competition among similar

computer system can find him. If the call
is accepted, the two authors can con-
verse by typing at the bottom of each oth-
er's screens. To ensure privacy, neither
author can see the rest of the other's
screen unless it is explicitly offered, in
which case Smith can watch Sherwood's
screen (or vice versa). Being able to see
what is on the other person's screen is
extremely useful for discussing program-
ming and lesson design problems. Both
authors can continue to type comments
at the bottom of the screen.

Computational Uses and On-Line Data
Collection

The characteristics of the PLATO SyS-
tem which make it particularly useful for
the development of instructional materi-
al also make the system a versatile com-
puting tool in research laboratories (17).
The TUTOR language makes it easy to
write programs to do calculations to ana-
lyze the data, and special graphing com-
mands coupled with the full graphic dis-
play facilitate accurate construction of
graphs. These may be reduced to hard
copy with a special terminal (made by
Varian) which contains an electrostatic
copier.

The introduction of experimental data
from laboratory equipment is accom-
plished through a connector on the termi-
nal which allows two-way communica-
tion between the computer system and
peripheral
the
PLATO system can accept an average of
about three keys per second per terminal

equipment.

Currently

(students enter about 0.5 key per sec-
ond), so the rate of transfer of data from
peripheral equipment is limited to about
25 bits per second. This means that, for
experiments which gather large amounts
of data rapidly, a buffer is necessary be-
tween the experiment and the terminal to
avoid exceeding the bandwidth of the
computer system. The data can, of
course, be stored permanently on the
system, recalled, processed, and dis-
played in graphical form on the terminal.
The speed and ease of use gives the im-
pression of dealing with an on-line com-
puter which, however, has the extraordi-
nary calculating and graphical capability
of a very large system. It may be pos-
sible that a PLATO-like system will meet
the needs of many laboratories for an on-
line computer system.

It is also possible to run standard com-
putational jobs on the computer at the
same time that interactive PLATO ser-
vices are being provided. On the Urbana
system this additional computational ca-
pability has been used only for internal
purposes, but it is planned in the long run
to make such services more generally
available.

Development and Distribution of Lessons

The cost of the development of cur-
riculum material for the PLATO system is
mainly the time required by the teacher
to create the programs. A college teacher
experienced in the PLATO system will
spend 10 to 50 hours at a terminal while
creating an hour of instruction, with

I

Fig. 9 (left). In a lesson on fractional distillation, the computer has reminded the student that he needs to add a boiling chip before proceeding with
the distillation.
Fig. 10 (right). The student can specify a damping factor and see a plot of the frequency response of a driven oscillator. The
program required to produce this display is described in the text.

350

SCIENCE, VOL. 192

materials, which is extremely important.
Only a small fraction of published col-
lege textbooks are considered adequate.
It is likely that good computer-based ma-
terials will also be rare since similar cre-
ative processes are involved.

Electronic publishing does differ in
some interesting ways from paper pub-
lishing. Often an instructor would like to
pick chapters out of various books to as-
semble in his own preferred sequence.
This is difficult with paper but easy with
electronically published lessons.

Value of PLATO-Based Instruction

The value to an institution of the broad
range of services offered by a PLATO Sys-
tem cannot be easily quantified. It is par-
ticularly difficult to measure the value of
the direct instruction provided by PLATO
since there is an enormous number of
variables involved. It is also difficult to
make a direct comparison with other
teaching methods, partly because little
quantitative data exist of the effec-
tiveness of traditional teaching methods
and, also, because some components of
a PLATo-based course do not exist in tra-
ditional courses (one-to-one dialogues
and simulations of physical phenomena,
among others). Nevertheless, it is useful
to summarize some basic observations
about PLATo-based science instruction.
First, students do as well or better in
PLATO-based science courses compared
with similar courses that do not use
PLATO. They turn in more work: nearly
all students complete all assigned instruc-
tional lessons, and nearly all students
turn in all assigned homework exercises.
In a physics course on classical mechan-
ics, 400 students taught by traditional
methods and 200 PLATO students took
the same 3-hour final exam. The median
score of the PLATO students was slightly
higher but not statistically significant,
and the distributions of scores were very
similar. Comparable results were ob-
tained in the previous semester, with half
as many students involved.

Second, students like PLATo-based sci-
ence instruction, as reported consistent-
ly in formal questionnaires and in infor-
mal comments. Since many students
have multiple contacts with PLATO-based
courses, and since such courses typically
involve several hours of PLATO use per
week, it seems likely that student approv-
al of science instruction with PLATO iS
not due simply to its novelty. Students
report that they believe that PLATO in-
struction is helpful in learning the materi-
al.

Third, faculty like PLATo-based sci-

23 APRIL 1976

ence instruction. Discounting the enthu-
siastic authors of the materials, other in-
structors who have had the opportunity
to use PLATO materials in their courses
say that they and their students find the
materials useful. This is true not only at
the University of Illinois but also at the
many other universities and community
colleges around the country where these
materials are in regular use.

It must be emphasized that these en-
couraging results have been obtained
during a period when the techniques for
using this new medium have only begun
to be exploited. The interactive PLATO
medium is quite different from previous
passive media such as movies, televi-
sion, and lectures, and it may take many
years to develop this new medium to its
full potential.

Costs of PLATO Services

Because basic research and devel-
opment costs are intertwined with the
cost of providing direct instruction on
the experimental PLATO system, it is diffi-
cult to estimate the cost of providing
classroom instruction alone. However,
the major components that contribute to
the cost of the operation of the system
can be identified and used as a guide to
potential costs in other environments.
These are the terminals (19), the central
computer facility (20), maintenance, and
salaries for the computer center staff. In
addition, terminals that are located far
from the central computer have extra
costs for telephone connections, while lo-
cal terminals use a microwave system
(21). The actual cost of delivering instruc-
tion with such a system will depend on
the current price of these components,
the fraction of the facilities which is de-
voted to other activities such as batch
computation, and the organization oper-
ating the system.

Although the PLATO system requires a
large computer, the cost of such an instal-
lation is offset by heavy usage of more
than a million terminal hours per year
(22). Last year the average usage was
1300 hours per terminal, averaged over
all terminals in many different environ-
ments. Taken as a whole, the 300 termi-
nals at the University of Illinois averaged
about 40 hours of use per week, but the
two semesters last a total of only 30
weeks, and summer use by students is
light. Some terminals at the University
have utilization rates as high as 2000
hours per year.

The costs of establishing additional
PLATO systems are also affected by rapid
changes in technology. The Control Data

Corporation Cyber computer in use by
PLATO is basically unchanged from its in-
troduction 10 years ago so that more
modern technology could result in sub-
stantial cost reductions. The terminal,
which is also a major factor in the cost,
represents new technology in small-scale
production, so there exists the potential
for cost reductions in this area.

How PLATO Works

The terminal now being used with the
PLATO system uses a plasma display pan-
el (7) that has a grid of 512 by 512 elec-
trodes at whose intersections a neon dis-
charge can be ignited or extinguished.
Text is written on these screens at the
rate of 180 characters
per second.
Graphs and line drawings are displayed
at the rate of 60 connected lines per sec-
ond. Since any part of the display can be
changed independently of the rest of the
screen, it is possible to use animations to
illustrate important concepts in lesson
material. The plasma panel has inherent
memory and does not require repetitive
replotting of the screen as is necessary
with normal cathode-ray tubes. The flat
plasma panel also serves as a screen for
the rear projection of color photographs
that can be superimposed on text and
drawings generated by the computer.

The fact that the PLATO system han-
dles hundreds of graphical display termi-
nals is the result of an unusual structure
(23). In standard time-sharing systems,
users' programs are swapped in and out
of the computer to an electromechanical
storage file (disk or drum). PLATO, on the
other hand, uses Control Data Corpora-
tion's Extended Core Storage as the
swapping medium. A unique operating
system (which includes the TUTOR lan-
guage) takes advantage of the much high-
er performance capabilities of this elec-
tronic memory, whose transfer rate is a
hundred times faster than that of disks or
drums, and whose access time is a thou-
sand times shorter than the waiting time
to retrieve information from disks or
drums. This makes it possible to handle
hundreds of graphical display terminals,
with a response time of one-eighth sec-
ond.

Summary

The PLATO computer-based teaching
system provides individualized instruc-
tion to hundreds of students simultane-
ously. Lesson material can include natur-
al language dialogue, graphics, numeri-
cal and algebraic responses, and color

351

photographs. There now exist more than
3500 hours of tested materials in more
than 100 subject areas. There is also a
wide range of tools available for manag-
ing courses oriented to PLATO. Communi-
cations facilities include public forums,
electronic mail, and on-line consulting.
The system can be connected to laborato-
ry equipment for on-line data collection
and analysis.

There already exist three PLATO Sys-
tems (3). It is expected that additional
systems will be set up on a regional
basis, with electronic intersystem con-
nections to assure a high level of commu-
nication, including nationwide access to
curriculum materials.

References and Notes

1. D. Alpert and D. L. Bitzer, Science 167, 1582
(1970); A. L. Hammond, ibid. 176, 1110 (1972);
D. L. Bitzer, B. A. Sherwood, P. Tenczar, in
New Trends in the Utilization of Educational
Technology for Science Education (Unesco
Press, Paris, 1974).
2. People who have been involved in the devel-
opment of the "hardware" associated with the
PLATO system include D. Bitzer, J. Stifle, F.
Ebeling, M. Johnson, R. Johnson, F. Propst, D.
Skaperdas, G. Slottow, and P. Tucker. A number
ofpeople have contributed to the development of
the PLATO "software." Full-time people have
included P. Tenczar, D. Andersen, R. Blomme,
J. Carstedt, R. Chabay, C. Fugitt, D. Lee, R.
Rader, M. Secrest, B. Sherwood, D. Shirer, and
M. Walker. They have been assisted by W. Gold-
en, J. Parry, D. Brown, B. Fortner, D. Frankel, S.
Freyder, S. Gooch, D. Kopf, K. Mast, P. Mast,

M. Midden, L. North, L. Steinberg, L. White,
and D. Woolley.
3. There are additional PLATO systems in Minneap-
olis, Minn. (operated by Control Data Cor-
poration), and in Tallahassee (operated by
Florida State University).
4. E. R. Lyman, PLATO Curricular Materials
(Computer-Based Education Research Labora-
tory, Urbana, Ill., 1975), report X-41, No. 3.
5. S. G. Smith, J. Chem. Educ. 47, 608 (1970); ibid.
48, 727 (1971);
and J. R. Ghesquiere,
in Computers in Chemistry and Instrumenta-
tion, J. S. Mattson et al., Eds. (Dekker, New
York, 1974).
6. B. A. Sherwood, Am. J. Phys. 39, 1199 (1971);
, C. Bennett, J. Mitchell, C. Tenczar, in
Proceedings of the Conference on Computers in
the Undergraduate Curriculum (Dartmouth Col-
lege, Hanover, N.H., 1971), p. 463; C. D. Ben-
nett, in Proceedings of the 1972 Conference on
Computers in Undergraduate Curricula (South-
em Regional Education Board, Atlanta, 1972),
p. 369.
7. J. Stifle, Proc. Soc. Inf. Disp. 13, 35 (1972); R. L.
Johnson et al., IEEE Trans. Electron Devices
18, 642 (1971). The plasma panel is
thin,
transparent, flat display device.
8. E. J. Corey and W. T. Wiipke, Science 166, 178
(1969).
9. R. Chabay, thesis, University of Illinois (1974);
J. Ghesquiere, thesis, University of Illinois
(1973).
10. S. G. Smith, J. R. Ghesquiere, R. A. Avner, J.
Chem. Educ. 51, 243 (1974).
11. People responsible for preparing the PLATO ver-
sion of this course include C. Bennett, D. Kane,
B. Sherwood, and J. Smith.
12. C. Curtin, D. Clayton, C. Finch, D. Moor, L.
Woodruff, Mod. Language J. 56, 354 (1972).
13. P. Obertino, Educ. Technol. 14, 2 (1974); J.
Risken and E. Webber, ibid., p. 19.
14. R. B. Davis, in Proceedings of the 1974 Nation-
al Computer Conference (American Federation
of Information Processing Societies Press, Mon-
trale, N.J., 1974), p. 169; S. Dugdale and D.
Kibbey, The Fractions
Curriculum of the
PLATO Elementary School Mathematics Project
(Computer-Based Education Research Labora-
tory, Urbana, Ill., 1975).

15. P. Tenczar, Society for Information Display In-
ternational Symposium 70 (1974);
J. Ghes-
quiere, C. Davis, C. Thompson, Introduction to
TUTOR (Computer-Based Education Research
Laboratory, Urbana, Ill., 1974); B. A. Sherwood,
The TUTOR Language (Computer-Based Edu-
cation Research Laboratory, Urbana, Ill., 1974);
P. Tenczar and W. M. Golden, Spelling, Word
and Concept Recognition (Computer-Based
Education Research Laboratory, Urbana, Ill.,
1972), report X-35; E. Avner, Summary of
TUTOR Commands and System Variables (Com-
puter-Based Education Research Laboratory,
Urbana, Ill., 1974).
16. This feature of the PLATO system is the responsi-
bility of D. Chirolas, C. Davis, J. Ghesquiere, T.
Gunsalus, J. Kraatz, and J. Sherwood. Many
people have made contributions to the documen-
tation.
17. D. Walter and R. McKown, Proceedings of a
Symposium on Current Computer Technology
(MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., in press).
18. George M. Grimes, Cost ofInitial Development
of PLATO Instruction in Veterinary Medicine
(Computer-Based Education Research Labora-
tory, Urbana, Ill., 1975), report X-43.
19. Through a special purchase by the University of
Illinois, terminals cost about $6000, including
plasma panel, keyset, touch panel, and micro-
fiche projector.
20. The computer used is a Control Data Corpora-
tion Cyber 73 with 2 million words of extended
core storage.
21. The microwave distribution system costs about
$2.50 per month per terminal.
22. R. A. Avner, personal communication.
23. B. Sherwood and J. Stifle, The PLATO IV Com-
munications System (Computer-Based Educa-
tion Research Laboratory, Urbana, Ill., 1975).
24. Many people have made significant contribu-
tions to the development of the PLATO system
described here. None of the work would have
been possible without the interest and help of D.
L. Bitzer, director of the Computer-Based Edu-
cation Research Laboratory at the University
of Illinois. The work was supported by the Uni-
versity of Illinois, the National Science Founda-
tion, the Advanced Research Projects Agency,
and the Control Data Corporation.

NEWS AND COMMENT

Sulfur Pollution: Charges That EPA
Distorted the Data Are Examined

fates) were associated with a variety of
adverse health effects, including aggrava-
tion of asthma and heart and lung disease
in the elderly.

The L.A. Times reported that "exten-
sive interviews" with government and
nongovernment scientists and others had
disclosed that, in preparing this mono-
graph,

The charges were very serious-they
impugned the professional integrity of a
fast-rising government health official and
the validity of a government antipollu-
tion program.

On 29 February the Los Angeles
Times published a story asserting that a
former research administrator at the En-
vironmental Protection Agency (EPA)
deliberately distorted research reports
"in an effort to prove that pollution from
sulfur-bearing fuels had an adverse effect
on human health."

The investigative article, written by re-
porter W. B. Rood, pointed the finger at
John F. Finklea, currently director of the
National Institute for Occupational Safe-
ty and Health but previously the head of
EPA's Human Studies Laboratory in
North Carolina. In his former capacity
Finklea was a key figure in managing the

352

EPA program known as CHESS (Com-
munity Health and Environmental Sur-
veillance System), a series of epidemio-
logical studies in communities around
the country aimed at determining the
health effects of exposure to relatively
low levels of pollutants. The program
was designed to evaluate whether exist-
ing air quality standards are adequate, to
obtain data for new standards that might
be needed, and to document any health
benefits that might result from con-
trolling air pollution.

In the spring and summer of 1972, Fin-
klea was in charge of preparing the early
drafts of a monograph analyzing data
from the first year of the CHESS pro-
gram, 1970-71. That monograph, which
was eventually published in 1974, pur-
ported to find that sulfur pollutants (nota-
bly sulfur dioxide and suspended sul-

Dr. John F. Finklea rewrote the work cf
agency scientists, often deleting what the re-
searchers felt were important qualifiers on ex-
perimental results;

Finklea deleted material from the reports
that did not show a connection between sulfur
pollution and adverse health effects;

Finklea screened statistical analyses to
downplay evidence tending to weaken or con-
tradict the case against pollution; and

Finklea overrode agency scientists' objec-
tions to publishing estimates of the health im-
pact of pollution which were either statistical-
ly dubious or unsupportable.

The article viewed the consequences
as serious. "Relying heavily on the dis-
puted CHESS studies," it said, "EPA
has called for controls on sulfur pollution
that would cost power companies and ul-
timately American consumers billions of
dollars."

The evidence to support these charges
consisted largely of quotes from individ-
SCIENCE, VOL. 192

