European Journal of Industrial Relations

© The Author(s), 2009. Reprints and permissions: 
http://www.sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav

Volume 15 Number 1 pp 49–69    www.sagepublications.com

Torben Krings

Dublin City University, IRELAND

A Race to the Bottom? Trade Unions, 

EU Enlargement and the Free Movement 

of Labour

ABSTRACT ■ When eight countries from Central and Eastern Europe joined 
the EU in 2004, unions in some countries argued that significant wage 
differentials between the old and the new member states necessitated 
transitional restrictions on free movement, but others insisted that 
employment standards should be protected by the enforcement of rights, 
not by restrictions. This article explores variations in union policies in 
comparative perspective, examining Austria, Germany, Ireland and the UK. 
KEYWORDS: EU enlargement ■ free movement of labour ■ labour standards 
■ migration ■ trade unions 

Introduction

When Irish Ferries announced in autumn 2005 that it aimed to replace 
over 500 of its mostly unionized Irish staff with cheaper agency work-
ers  from  Eastern  Europe,  it  sparked  off  huge  public  protests.  At  a 
‘National  Day  of  Protest’  organized  by  the  Irish  Congress  of  Trade 
Unions  (ICTU)  100,000  people  went  to  the  streets  to  protest  against 
‘exploita tion’, ‘displacement’ and ‘a race to the bottom’. ICTU refused 
to  enter  negotiations  for  a  new  social  partnership  agreement  until 
issues  of  employment  standards  were  addressed  (Flynn,  2006).  Similar 
trans national  disputes  involving  workers  from  the  new  member  states 
(NMSs)  have  occurred  in  other  countries.  In  Vaxholm  in  Sweden,  the 
refusal of a Latvian construction company to pay its workers the local 
rates  prompted  a  union  blockade  of  a  building  site  in  2004  (Woolfson 
and Sommers, 2006). In Germany, allegations about underpayment and 
poor  working  conditions  emerged  in  the  meat  industry  where  service 
providers  from  Poland  paid  their  workers  ‘poverty  wages’  (Tenbrock 
and Wielinski, 2007).

These disputes illustrate the potential social consequences of the free 
movement of labour in an enlarged EU. Given significant cross-national 

DOI: 10.1177/0959680108100165

Downloaded from 

ejd.sagepub.com

 at Universitaet Osnabrueck on April 15, 2016

European Journal of Industrial Relations 15(1)

differences in wages and living standards between the ‘old’ EU15 countries 
and the NMSs, trade unions in the former have expressed concerns about 
a  ‘race  to  the  bottom’  resulting  from  eastern  enlargement.  They  have 
found difficulty in adapting to globalization and EU enlargement. First, 
they have to face the prospect of parts of production being relocated to 
Eastern Europe and Asia in the name of ‘competitiveness’ (or threats of 
relocation to keep wages down). Second, the inflow of migrant workers 
into service industries that cannot be ‘offshored’ can fulfil a similar pur-
pose  of  reducing  wage  costs  (Menz,  2005),  and  the  accession  of  eight 
countries from Central and Eastern Europe (CEE) to the EU in 2004 has 
created a new dynamic of labour migration that poses many challenges 
to trade unions.

Generally,  trade  unions  in  the  industrialized  world  have  ambivalent 
atti tudes towards migrant labour that can be situated ‘on a continuum 
rang ing  from  exclusion  to  inclusion’  (Kahmann,  2006:  186).  Despite  a 
tradition  of  international  solidarity,  unions  are  embedded  in  particular 
national  societies  and  tend  to  represent  primarily  the  interest  of  their 
national memberships (Penninx and Roosblad, 2000). Historically, they 
were  often  hostile  towards  the  inflow  of  migrant  labour,  as  a  surplus 
of  workers  exerts  downward  pressure  on  wages  (Goldthorpe,  1984). 
Furthermore,  the  recruitment  of  workers  from  abroad  adds  not  only 
to  the  quantitative  supply  of  labour  but  also  brings  about  qualitative 
change:  the  workforce  becomes  more  fragmented  with  language  and 
cultural  differences,  and,  it  has  to  be  said,  racism  to  which  the  labour 
movement was no stranger in the past (Castles and Kosack, 1973; Miles 
and Phizacklea, 1992).

When most West European countries started to recruit foreign labour 
in the 1950s to sustain the post-war economic boom, unions were initially 
concerned  about  this  move.  However,  when  it  became  apparent  that  to 
resist the import of foreign labour was not a viable option, unions every-
where demanded that migrants should receive the same pay and working 
conditions as indigenous work ers (Castles and Kosack, 1973). Apart from 
this  core  demand,  trade  union  responses  towards  immigration  varied 
con siderably across Europe. In some countries they actively promoted 
the  integration  of  immigrants  in  the  workplace  and  wider  society,  but 
in  others  they  took  no  initiatives  to  improve  the  situation  of  foreign 
workers (Cachón and Valles, 2003; Penninx and Roosblad, 2000).

It  is  often  assumed  that  trade  unions  today  would  favour  restrictive 
policies, as structural unemployment has become a feature of many West 
European  countries  (Penninx  and  Roosblad,  2000).  However,  some 
writers  have  recently  challenged  this  ‘conventional  wisdom’  (Watts, 
2002: 1) by arguing that in the light of globalization and the transnational-
ization of labour markets, unions are not necessarily predisposed towards 

50

Downloaded from 

ejd.sagepub.com

 at Universitaet Osnabrueck on April 15, 2016

Krings: Trade Unions, EU Enlargement and the Free Movement of Labour

restrictionism. As unions acknowledge that the movement of people is 
an inextricable part of the ‘global age’, they increasingly view restrictive 
migration  policies  as  neither  desirable  nor  feasible.  Instead,  greater 
emphasis is placed on the organization of migrants to preserve employ-
ment conditions (Haus, 2002; Milkman, 2006; Watts, 2002). These studies, 
however, are mainly confined to Mediterranean countries and the USA, 
which somewhat limits the generalizability of the argument.

Research Design and Methods

The debate about the free movement of labour in an enlarged EU is a 
good indicator of whether union attitudes to immigration have changed 
in the contemporary era. This article examines trade union policies on 
this  issue  in  Austria,  Germany,  Ireland  and  the  UK.  Cross-national 
research has the benefit of illuminating a particular social phenomenon 
by  studying  and  comparing  it  in  different  socio-cultural  contexts 
(Hantrais and Mangen, 1996). This is of particular relevance to the study 
of  trade  unions  and  immigration,  where  cross-national  research  is  still 
somewhat the exception (McGovern, 2007). The four case study coun-
tries make for interesting comparisons. While Germany and Austria have 
restricted  access  to  their  labour  markets,  the  UK  and  Ireland  adopted 
a liberal regime for workers from the NMSs in 2004. In spite of these 
dif fer ent  migration  regimes,  all  became  major  destinations  for  NMS 
mi grants (Tamas and Münz, 2006). Recent inward migration, however, 
has not been without controversy as cases of underpayment of migrants 
have occurred, accompanied by allegations about ‘social dumping’ and 
‘displacement’. Thus, trade unions face similar challenges across the four 
countries.

In exploring trade union policies on EU enlargement and the free move-
ment of labour, I conducted 30 semi-structured interviews in 2006 and 
2007 with trade union representatives from the four countries. Besides the 
central confederation in each country, I selected unions which cover the 
sectors of the labour market where the majority of recent labour migrants 
are located, particularly in construction, manufacturing, hospitality and 
other services (see Table 1). In addition, I included in my analysis a range 
of union documents, in particular policy documents and press releases, 
which  deal  with  the  free  movement  of  labour.  In  presenting  my  main 
findings, I show that trade union policies on transitional arrangements 
and the free movement of labour vary to considerable extent, depending 
upon  a  range  of  political,  economic  and  institutional  factors.  Before 
discussing  these  findings,  I  first  assess  the  impact  of  recent  East–West 
migration with a particular focus on the four case countries.

51

Downloaded from 

ejd.sagepub.com

 at Universitaet Osnabrueck on April 15, 2016

European Journal of Industrial Relations 15(1)

TABLE 1.  List of Trade Unions Interviewed

Austria
ÖGB Österreichischer Gewerkschaftsbund
GBH Gewerkschaft Bau-Holz
HGPD Hotel, Gastgewerbe, Persönlicher Dienst
GMTN Gewerkschaft Metall-Textil-Nahrung
UK
TUC Trades Union Congress
TGWU Transport and General Workers Union (now Unite)
GMB
UCATT Union of Construction, Allied Trades and Technicians
USDAW Union of Shop, Distributive and Allied Workers
Germany
DGB Deutscher Gewerkschaftsbund
IG BAU Industriegewerkschaft Bauen, Agrar und Umwelt
IG Metall
ver.di Vereinte Dienstleistungsgewerkschaft
NGG Nahrung-Genuss-Gaststätten
Ireland
ICTU Irish Congress of Trade Unions
SIPTU Services, Industrial, Professional and Technical Union
Mandate
UCATT Union of Construction, Allied Trades and Technicians

EU Enlargement, Transitional Arrangements and East–
West Migration

The free movement of capital, goods, services and people is one of the 
essential principles of the process of European integration. Community 
law guarantees that EU citizens may take up employment in any other 
Member State. However, ‘transitional arrangements’ may be part of the 
accession treaties when enlargement occurs. When Greece, Portugal and 
Spain acceded in the 1980s, the freedom of movement for their workers 
was restricted for six years. At the time of southern enlargement, the per 
capita income of Greece, Portugal and Spain in purchasing power parity 
(PPP) was around 65 percent of the then EU10 average. The gap in 2004 
was far greater: the average per capita income in the accession countries 
from  CEE  was  45  percent  of  the  EU15  level  in  2001  (NESC,  2006). 
Accordingly,  the  provisions  for  eastwards  enlargement  allowed  EU15 
states to restrict access to their labour markets for NMS citizens for up 
to seven years, and most did so.

The  significant  differences  in  wages  and  living  standards  provoked 
widespread  concerns  in  the  ‘old’  member  states  that  labour  migration 

52

Downloaded from 

ejd.sagepub.com

 at Universitaet Osnabrueck on April 15, 2016

Krings: Trade Unions, EU Enlargement and the Free Movement of Labour

from the accession countries could lead to ‘social dumping’. Traditionally, 
the notion of social dumping was linked to attempts to introduce low tax 
policies  by  EU  countries  to  increase  their  competitiveness  and  to  the 
relocation  of  multinational  companies  to  other  member  states  to  save 
labour costs. However, in the context of recent EU enlargement it is now 
increasingly associated with labour migration from the NMS. There are 
widespread fears in the EU15 that East–West migration could lead to job 
displacement and put downward pressure on wages, exemplified in popu-
lar discourses about the ‘Polish plumber’ (Donaghey and Teague, 2006).
Generally, there is only limited evidence that the presence of foreign 
labour  significantly  undermines  wages  and  employment  conditions  of 
native workers. Most studies tend to agree that the economy as a whole 
usually gains from immigration. However, there may be some sections 
of the native population, in particular the low-skilled, whose wages may 
decline as a result of immigration (Boeri et al., 2002; Münz et al., 2006). 
During the period of post-war labour migration, immigrants have been 
largely complementary to the domestic labour force. Although they usu-
ally occupied jobs at the bottom of the labour market, they were mainly 
paid in accordance with existing collective agreements (Lillie and Greer, 
2007). In the 1990s a new form of labour migration emerged involving the 
posting of workers, encouraged by the EU freedom to provide services. 
What distinguished this form of migration was that the employment of 
posted workers was at least in part not regulated by the labour and social 
welfare law of the host country but instead by the country of origin of 
the service provider (Hunger, 2000). As this migration adversely affected 
labour standards in the construction sector in high-wage countries like 
Germany, the regulation of cross-border services became a pressing polit-
ical  issue,  and  the  Posting  of  Workers  Directive  (PWD)  was  adopted 
in 1996. The PWD applies the principle of equal treatment to a core of 
employment standards. However, its national implementation has been 
poor, with weak enforcement and a lack of cooperation between member 
states (Cremers et al., 2007).

Within  the  context  of  recent  EU  enlargement,  controversies  about 
the remuneration of posted workers have re-emerged in Germany and 
Austria,  where  restrictions  on  the  free  movement  of  labour  have  not 
prevented  companies  from  the  NMSs  from  offering  their  services.  As 
a  result  of  these  concerns,  Germany  and  Austria  not  only  delayed  the 
free  movement  of  labour,  but  also  the  freedom  of  services  in  sectors 
like construction. Countries like the UK and Ireland, that opened their 
labour markets to workers from the accession countries, have not been 
affected to the same extent by the posting of workers. However, in these 
countries too, there have been controversies over labour standards and 
the underpayment of migrant workers. 

53

Downloaded from 

ejd.sagepub.com

 at Universitaet Osnabrueck on April 15, 2016

European Journal of Industrial Relations 15(1)

Migration Patterns since EU Enlargement

Since 2004, both the UK and Ireland have experienced large-scale inward 
migration  from  the  NMSs.  In  the  first  three  years,  over  680,000  NMS 
citizens arrived in the UK in what has been described as ‘almost certainly 
the  largest  single  wave  of  in-migration  .  .  .  that  the  British  Isles  ever 
experienced’  (Home  Office,  2007;  Salt  and  Millar,  2006:  335).  Ireland 
received an even higher inflow proportional to its population, with nearly 
380,000 migrants arriving in the same period (DSFA, 2007). However, the 
number of NMS migrants actually residing in both countries is likely to 
be lower as some migrants only stay for a limited period of time (Tamas 
and Münz, 2006). It is likely that restrictions in countries like Germany 
and  Austria,  the  traditional  destination  countries  for  migrants  from 
CEE, diverted some migratory flows to the UK and Ireland. However, 
the  main  dynamic  was  a  labour  shortage  in  the  latter  two  countries, 
particularly in sectors such as agriculture, construction, food-processing 
and  hospitality  that  have  a  high  share  of  labour-intensive,  less-skilled 
occupations. In contrast, Sweden, which also opened its labour market 
in 2004, received only around 10,000 migrants in the first two years after 
enlargement. This modest inflow has been explained by the presence of 
strong labour market regulation, encompassing collective agreements and 
‘general jobless growth’ (Tamas and Münz, 2006: 72).

In spite of a huge inflow of NMS migrants, the evidence suggests that 
recent inward migration has not led to any significant increase in unem-
ployment among native workers in Britain and Ireland (Doyle et al., 2006; 
Gilpin et al., 2006). However, recent labour migration may have had a 
negative, albeit modest impact upon wage growth in low-skilled occu -
pations where the majority of NMS migrants are located (Dustmann et al., 
2007). Furthermore, both countries have seen cases of underpayment and 
violations of migrant workers’ rights, sometimes linked to agency labour, 
particularly  in  sectors  like  construction,  hospitality  and  agriculture 
(O’Brien, 2007). In one of the first studies of the experiences of recent 
Eastern European migrants in Britain, Anderson et al. (2006) found that 
migrant  workers  tend  to  work  longer  hours  with  relatively  low  earn-
ings  compared  to  the  national  average.  Furthermore,  only  a  minority 
reported receiving non-wage benefits like paid holidays and sick leave. 
Like posted workers, agency workers are not directly employed by the 
company  for  which  they  work  and  often  have  worse  conditions  than 
directly employed workers. It was perhaps no coincidence that the Irish 
Ferries  dispute  involved  the  deployment  of  Eastern  European  agency 
workers,  albeit  under  maritime  law,  to  replace  more  ‘expensive’  Irish 
workers (Flynn, 2006).

Although Germany and Austria restricted access to their labour markets, 
they  continued  to  attract  sizeable  migratory  flows  from  the  acces sion 

54

Downloaded from 

ejd.sagepub.com

 at Universitaet Osnabrueck on April 15, 2016

Krings: Trade Unions, EU Enlargement and the Free Movement of Labour

countries. Most people from the NMSs enter Austria and Germany as 
part of bilateral agreements signed with a number of CEE countries in 
the  1990s  to  channel  the  rising  migration  flows  into  a  more  organized 
system. In Germany the number of these work permits, mainly issued 
to seasonal workers from Poland, has stayed around 350,000 per year. 
In  Austria,  the  number  of  permit-holders  from  NMS  countries  has 
increased slightly, from 48,000 in 2003 to nearly 57,000 in 2005 (Tamas 
and Münz, 2006). As there continues to be a demand for seasonal labour 
in particular, recent inward migration has been largely complementary 
to the domestic labour force. However, allegations of job displacement 
and wage dumping emerged in sectors like the German meat industry, 
where service providers from the NMS often pay their workers wages 
well below the local rates (Czommer and Worthmann, 2005). Thus, in 
spite of different migration regimes, trade unions face similar challenges 
across the four countries, particularly how to ensure that intra-European 
migration does not undermine established labour standards. How, then, 
do unions respond to these challenges? 

Trade Unions and the Free Movement of Labour 

Most trade unions in the ‘old’ member states supported eastern enlarge-
ment of the EU, notwithstanding some criticism of the perceived neo-
liberal  direction  that  the  European  project  has  taken  in  recent  years. 
However, whether the free movement of labour should apply immedi-
ately upon accession proved controversial. Particularly in those countries 
geographically  close  to  the  accession  countries,  unions  expressed  con-
cerns  that  enlargement  could  trigger  a  new  wave  of  migration  with 
negative  consequences  for  wages  and  employment  conditions.  Other 
union  movements,  however,  argued  that  the  free  movement  of  capital 
should be accompanied by the free movement of labour and that employ-
ment  standards  are  best  protected  by  the  enforcement  of  rights,  and 
not  restrictions.  The  European  Trade  Union  Confederation  (ETUC) 
eventually  agreed  to  support  the  free  movement  of  workers,  provided 
that  it  was  ‘based  on  the  principle  of  equal  wages  and  working  con-
ditions for equal work in the same territory’ (ETUC, 2005: 6). However, 
German and Austrian unions remained opposed to the opening of their 
labour markets to NMS nationals. 

German and Austrian Unions in Favour of Transitional 
Arrangements
German  and  Austrian  unions  were  the  strongest  supporters  of  a  tran-
sitional  period,  arguing  that  their  labour  markets  would  be  unable  to 

55

Downloaded from 

ejd.sagepub.com

 at Universitaet Osnabrueck on April 15, 2016

European Journal of Industrial Relations 15(1)

cope with an unregulated inflow of migrants in the light of their current 
economic  difficulties,  geographical  proximity  and  the  significant  wage 
gap  with  the  NMSs.  According  to  the  DGB  (German  Trade  Union 
Confederation), ‘the absorption capacity of the German labour market 
will be limited for quite some time in the face of 3.8 million unemployed 
and a silent reservoir of an additional 3 million’ (DGB, 2001). Similarly, 
its Austrian counterpart, the ÖGB, explained its support for transitional 
restrictions citing ‘problems concerning the labour markets in the new 
member  states,  huge  differences  in  welfare  and  income  between  these 
states  and  Austria  and  a  worsening  of  the  labour  market  situation  in 
Austria’ (ÖGB, 2005: 2).

Unions  in  both  countries  stressed  that  their  opposition  to  the  free 
movement of labour should not be viewed as ‘anti-immigration’ but that 
their main concern was the preservation of labour standards. According 
to one IG Metall official interviewed, this union was ‘not against immi-
gration  as  such  .  .  .  [but]  simply  opposed  to  competition  from  cheap 
labour  .  .  .  which  could  put  pressure  on  our  collective  agreements  in 
Germany  if  people  from  other  countries  work  here  for  the  bare  mini-
mum’.  Union  officials  from  both  countries  were  keen  to  emphasize 
that  concerns  about  labour  standards  and  labour  displacement  are  not 
simply an issue between native and foreign workers. According to a ver.
di representative, 

there are fewer ‘Germans’ being displaced, than to a large extent migrants 
who have worked here for many years . . . In terms of the less-qualified 
who work, for instance in slaughterhouses, on building sites etc., they 
[NMS migrants] primarily displace those migrants who are already here 
for a long time.

Such arguments are usually difficult to verify, and it cannot be ruled 
out that a reference to long-term immigrants serves the agenda of some 
unions  in  opposing  the  free  movement  of  labour.  However,  there  is 
some evidence that among the domestic workforce long-time immigrants 
are more affected by new immigration than native workers, because the 
former tend to be concentrated in the low-wage sectors of the economy 
where most of the new migrants are located (Münz et al., 2006).

As already mentioned, there is only limited evidence that immigration 
has  a  negative  impact  on  the  employment  opportunities  of  domestic 
workers. However, some recent labour migration, involving the ‘posting’ 
of  workers,  was  ‘unequivocally  substitutional’  (Hunger,  2000:  207):  as 
through out  the  1990s,  employers  in  the  German  construction  sector 
increasingly preferred posted workers to more costly domestic workers. 
Because of this experience, the German construction union IG BAU (as 
well as their Austrian counterpart BauHolz) were particularly vocal in 
their demand for transitional restrictions for service providers from the 
NMSs (IG BAU, 2000). 

56

Downloaded from 

ejd.sagepub.com

 at Universitaet Osnabrueck on April 15, 2016

Krings: Trade Unions, EU Enlargement and the Free Movement of Labour

Such concerns about the freedom of services in an enlarged EU seem not 
unwarranted: since enlargement, there is some evidence of a displacement 
effect  in  Germany  as  a  result  of  increased  competition  from  Eastern 
European service providers in sectors like the meat industry, and even in 
the metal and electronics industry that previously had not been affected 
by  the  posting  of  workers  (Czommer  and  Worthmann,  2005;  Lippert, 
2006). Austria has not been affected to the same extent by the posting of 
foreign employees because of stronger labour market regulations (Menz, 
2005); but since 2004 there has been a significant increase in the number 
of self-employed persons from the NMSs (Arbeiterkammer, 2005). For 
instance,  in  the  construction  sector  in  Vienna  between  May  2004  and 
September  2005,  Austrian  nationals  set  up  120  new  firms  while  Polish 
nationals set up a staggering 2340 new firms, most of which operate as 
one-person companies. This increase in ‘bogus’ self-employment can be 
regarded as a way of circumventing the restrictions (Tamas and Münz, 
2006).  As  East–West  migration  is  to  a  large  extent  demand-driven, 
another unintended consequence of the transitional measures may be a 
growth of the informal economy. According to one ÖGB official, ‘there 
are huge numbers of illegally employed people, particularly in home care 
and in construction . . . This shows that the strategy of simply adopting 
restrictions for the transitional period is not necessarily working, because 
an underground economy is developing’.

Thus, from a trade union perspective the outcome of the transitional 
regimes in Austria and Germany has been mixed. While it is likely that 
the  restrictions  have  diverted  some  migration  flows  to  the  UK  and 
Ireland,  they  may  have  contributed  to  an  increase  in  the  posting  of 
workers,  ‘bogus’  self-employment  and  the  informal  economy.  Indeed, 
some  DGB  officials  argued  that  such  temporary  migration,  often  in 
pre carious  conditions,  is  best  opposed  by  enabling  NMS  workers  to 
migrate through the free movement of labour. However, in spite of such 
views there is broad agreement among both trade union movements that 
the transitional arrangements have served their purpose of limiting the 
inflow of NMS migrants, and hence they demanded an extension of the 
restrictions  beyond  2006  (DGB,  2006;  ÖGB,  2005).  However,  there  is 
also  increasing  acknowledgement  of  the  limitations  of  these  measures, 
not least because transitional restrictions must end by 2011.

To  prepare  for  a  common  European  labour  market,  German  and 
Austrian unions have intensified cooperation with their NMS counter-
parts in cross-border projects such as Interregional Trade Union Coun-
cils  (ITUCs),  designed  to  facilitate  cross-border  labour  mobility  in 
regions with significant differences in wage levels and employment rights 
(Noack, 2000). This work includes providing support and legal advice to 
commuter migrants, mostly seasonal labour, who are sometimes not paid 
the prevalent local rates (Arbeiterkammer, 2005). Already in the 1990s 

57

Downloaded from 

ejd.sagepub.com

 at Universitaet Osnabrueck on April 15, 2016

European Journal of Industrial Relations 15(1)

the DGB had initiated the Migrationsdialog Ost-West to facilitate discus-
sion among trade unions from the ‘old’ EU and the accession countries 
on issues like the free movement of labour in the run-up to enlargement 
(DGB, 1999). This East–West dialogue, however, was not without some 
disagreement as unions from the NMSs would have preferred the right to 
the free movement of labour from day one of EU accession, as German 
and Austrian union officials readily admit.

British and Irish Unions in Favour of the Free Movement of Labour
As already mentioned, the UK and Ireland were, with Sweden, the only 
countries that fully opened their labour markets in 2004. However, this 
move proved controversial, particularly in Britain where the government 
came  under  pressure  by  the  tabloid  press  and  the  Conservative  Party. 
In  response  it  restricted  access  to  social  welfare  benefits  by  introduc-
ing  a  ‘habitual  residence’  condition,  an  initiative  followed  by  the  Irish 
government.

Significantly, the British and Irish trade union movements supported 
the policy of their governments not to impose barriers on NMS citizens. 
In  both  countries  there  was  agreement  among  the  social  partners  on 
the need for additional labour to sustain economic growth at a time of 
historically  low  levels  of  unemployment.  However,  it  was  not  labour 
shortage alone that led unions to support an open labour market policy. 
In particular, the British TUC has over the years not only adopted robust 
anti-discrimination policies but has also increasingly opposed restrictive 
immigration policies (Avci and McDonald, 2000; Wrench, 2004). It there-
fore took a principled stance in favour of free movement of labour. As a 
TUC official insisted, ‘we didn’t want any transitional measures put in 
place . . . Generally speaking we are for workers having choices where 
they work’.

In  Ireland,  the  free  movement  of  labour  was  one  of  the  contentious 
issues  during  the  referendum  on  the  Nice  Treaty  in  2002,  when  some 
opponents  raised  the  prospects  of  ‘floods’  of  Eastern  European  immi-
grants. However, the ICTU, campaigning for a ‘Yes’ vote in the refer-
endum, dismissed such suggestions as ‘crude scaremongering’ (Hennessy, 
2002). Irish union officials often recalled their own migration experience 
to account for their support for the free movement of labour: ‘everyone 
in  Ireland  would  have  some  family  member  who  had  to  migrate  for 
work,  whether  it  be  to  Britain,  America  or  indeed  more  recently  into 
Europe in the early 80s and late 70s’.

British  and  Irish  trade  unions,  like  most  other  political  and  social 
actors, did not anticipate the scale of migration that ensued. When cases 
of underpayment of foreign workers became more frequent, they became 
increasingly concerned about the impact of labour migration in a lightly 

58

Downloaded from 

ejd.sagepub.com

 at Universitaet Osnabrueck on April 15, 2016

Krings: Trade Unions, EU Enlargement and the Free Movement of Labour

regulated labour market. In response to these incidents, unions in both 
countries demanded a stronger enforcement of labour standards to ensure 
that migrant workers have the same rights as domestic workers. While 
unions  are  opposed  to  the  exploitation  and  discrimination  of  foreign 
workers,  it  is  also  self-interest  that  drives  such  a  policy  stance.  As  an 
official of the TGWU expressed it, ‘we know that we’ve got to get them 
exactly the same conditions of the people living here. One, because it is 
morally right and two, because they are used to undercut the conditions 
of the people who are already here.’

In Ireland concerns about possible negative effects of inward migration 
increased during the Irish Ferries dispute. Although the protest marches 
that were organized by the trade union movement had an inclusive out-
look (‘Equal rights for all workers’), individual union officials admitted 
that resentment against migrants increased among some sections of the 
domestic  labour  force.  To  counter  such  tendencies,  unions  aimed  to 
uphold employment standards and to prevent an ‘Irish Ferries situation 
on land’ (Begg, 2006). In negotiations for a new partnership agreement, 
ICTU eventually succeeded with its demands for a stronger enforcement 
regime as the new social partnership agreement ‘Towards 2016’ includes 
various  measures  such  as  stronger  penalties  for  non-compliance  with 
employment  legislation  (Department  of  Taoiseach,  2006).  In  the  UK, 
where unions do not have the same access to government, the enforcement 
of labour standards has not so far received the same attention. However, 
there  are  indications  that  the  issue  is  gaining  more  prominence  there 
too  (Ruhs,  2006),  particularly  with  legislation  regulating  gangmasters 
in 2005.

When Bulgaria and Romania joined the EU in 2007, the British and 
Irish  governments  changed  their  previous  open  labour  market  policy 
and  imposed  transitional  arrangements.  Although  the  TUC  welcomed 
the  announcement  by  the  British  government  to  become  more  active 
in pursuing the enforcement of labour standards with regard to ‘rogue 
employers’, they disagreed with the restrictions, arguing that such meas-
ures would make workers more vulnerable to exploitation (TUC, 2006). 
Individual  British  unions  argued  similarly.  According  to  one  TGWU 
official,  ‘our  concern  is  that  this  would  encourage  the  grey  economy 
where  workers,  driven  away  from  legitimate  access  to  the  workplace, 
would resort to other ways of keeping themselves together’. Similarly, 
the construction union UCATT expressed concerns about an increase in 
‘bogus’ self-employment, which is already widespread in the sector, and 
demanded  ‘employment  rights’  for  Bulgarian  and  Romanian  workers 
(UCATT, 2007). According to a TUC representative, transitional arrange-
ments would also be detrimental to the aim of unionizing workers. 

We believe that the door should have been opened immediately to 
Romanian and Bulgarian workers for both principled and pragmatic 

59

Downloaded from 

ejd.sagepub.com

 at Universitaet Osnabrueck on April 15, 2016

European Journal of Industrial Relations 15(1)

reasons, because we know actually what will happen is that lots of 
workers will come in but they will come in on a self-employed status 
which isn’t regulated rather than on an employed status which would at 
least give us the chance of organizing them.

Their Irish counterparts, however, this time abandoned the principle of 
the free movement of labour and supported the decision of their govern-
ment.  Unions  argued  that  Ireland,  which  had  proportionally  received 
more NMS migrants than any other country, would need more time to 
implement the enforcement architecture agreed in the recent partnership 
agreement. Only then should free movement of labour be granted to the 
new accession countries (SIPTU, 2006).

Explaining the Variations in Trade Union Responses

Penninx and Roosblad (2000) have identified four possible factors that 
may explain differences in trade union attitudes to labour migration: the 
labour  market  context,  unions’  institutional  position,  national  identity 
and  ideology  and  the  broader  perception  of  immigration  in  society. 
Based on these factors I assess what accounts for the variations in union 
policies on the free movement of labour. This comparison should shed 
more light on what shapes trade union responses to labour migration in 
the contemporary ‘global age’.

One obvious factor that may influence union policies on migration is 
the macro-economic context in each country. It is reasonable to assume 
that the comparatively low unemployment rates in the UK (4.7 percent) 
and Ireland (4.5 percent) in 2004, coupled with a labour shortage helped 
to  sustain  support  among  unions  for  the  free  movement  of  labour. 
Conversely,  high  unemployment  in  Germany  (9.7  percent)  is  likely  to 
have contributed to the support of unions for transitional arrangements. 
However, the Austrian case shows that even given relatively low unem-
ployment  (4.8  percent),  unions  may  still  adopt  restrictionist  policies; 
and unions in Ireland recently supported restrictions for Bulgarian and 
Romanian nationals, in spite of continuous low unemployment. Hence, 
the labour market context alone cannot account for the variation in union 
policies.

When comparing union policies on EU enlargement and transitional 
arrangements,  it  is  evident  that  the  British  trade  union  movement  has 
been the one most supportive of the free movement of labour. As indi-
cated, there is a strong view that in an open economy like the UK, labour 
standards  are  best  protected  by  improved  compliance  rather  than  by 
restrictions.  Furthermore,  over  the  years  British  unions  have  adopted 
some  fairly  strong  anti-discrimination  and  equal  opportunities  policies 
which included opposition to restrictive immigration policies (Avci and 

60

Downloaded from 

ejd.sagepub.com

 at Universitaet Osnabrueck on April 15, 2016

Krings: Trade Unions, EU Enlargement and the Free Movement of Labour

McDonald, 2000). Such a more inclusive stance on immigration and ‘race’ 
appears to be linked to a loss of union influence particularly during the 
time of the Thatcher government. In the words of John Wrench (2004: 
21), ‘as membership and power declined, it was increasingly recognized 
that the future of trade unionism dependent on a more inclusive strategy 
which took seriously the problems and interests of previously marginal-
ized groups’.

Although unions regained some influence since the return of Labour 
to  power  in  1997,  they  remain  in  a  comparatively  weak  institutional 
position (Thelen, 2001). This is shown particularly in terms of a decline 
in collective bargaining coverage (see Table 2). As centralized bargaining 
has  virtually  collapsed,  the  bargaining  position  of  unions  very  much 
depends  on  their  organizational  strength  (Frege  and  Kelly,  2004).  It  is 
against this background that the TUC and some individual unions have 
moved towards an ‘organising unionism’ (Heery et al., 2000) aiming to 
reach out to previously untapped sections of the labour force, including 
black and ethnic minority workers and more recent migrants. From this 
perspective, restrictions for NMS migrants may appear an impediment to 
a more proactive organizing approach and may channel migrants into the 
already growing informal economy, bearing in mind that only access to 
labour markets, not freedom of movement as such, can be restricted for 
citizens from the accession countries.

Although unions in Austria, Germany and Ireland have also experi-
enced a considerable decline in membership density, they remain more 
institutionally  entrenched:  collective  agreements  still  cover  a  majority 
of all employees, and systems of social partnership allow unions some 
formal  involvement  in  the  socio-economic  decision-making  process. 
Hence, if it is true that ‘the primary institutional influence on patterns 
of  union  behaviour  is  the  structure  of  collective  bargaining’  (Clegg, 
1976),  then  it  appears  that  continuous  coordinated  bargaining  in  these 
countries  has  so  far  provided  less  of  an  incentive  for  unions  to  put  a 

TABLE 2.  Labour Relations Indicators

Trade union density (%)

Collective bargaining coverage (%)

 
Austria
Germany
Ireland
UK

1980
57
35
57
51

2000
37
25
38
31

1980
95
80
na
70

Source: Ailinger and Guger (2006: 140–1).
a 2003 (Carley, 2004).

2000
95
68
66a
30

61

Downloaded from 

ejd.sagepub.com

 at Universitaet Osnabrueck on April 15, 2016

European Journal of Industrial Relations 15(1)

greater emphasis on organizing. In turn, in Britain the collapse of trad-
itional  bargaining  institutions  and  a  loss  in  union  influence  under  the 
Conservative governments propelled unions into rethinking traditional 
union strategies, not least in terms of organizing new groups of ‘atypical’ 
employees.  This  has  contributed  to  a  re-appraisal  of  union  strategies 
towards more marginalized groups such as migrant workers.

Thus, the institutional position of unions appears to be of some im-
portance. It is necessary, however, to point out that unions that are in a 
similar institutional position do not respond uniformly to labour migra-
tion.  During  the  Gastarbeiter  era,  both  Austrian  and  German  unions 
had a considerable input into government policies; but while the former 
pursued  a  protectionist  immigration  policy  (Gächter,  2000),  the  latter 
eventually  became  ‘the  major  institutional  force  for  integration,  in  the 
absence of adequate government policies’ (Penninx and Roosblad, 2000: 
197).  Thus,  as  with  labour  market  factors,  the  institutional  position  of 
unions has only limited explanatory value on its own. 

This  is  where  other  contextual  factors  can  provide  a  more  sensitive 
explanation. Given Austria’s rather protectionist tradition it is little sur-
prise that unions demanded restrictions on NMS migration. However, as 
German unions had not opposed the inflow of foreign workers after the 
Second World War, how can we explain their support for a transitional 
period? One obvious difference from the Gastarbeiter era is that unem-
ployment  at  the  turn  of  the  millennium  was  significantly  higher  than 
during the Wirtschaftswunder in the 1950s and 1960s. Another important 
difference is the changing regulatory context of inward migration. During 
the  earlier  decades,  unions  agreed  to  immigration  on  the  assumption 
that  ‘organized  capitalism’  would  prevent  it  undermining  established 
pay  and  working  conditions.  After  the  deregulation  of  labour  markets 
and the weakening of organized labour, unions increasingly struggle to 
secure ‘equal pay for equal work’. This has been made more difficult by 
an increase in the posting of workers and subcontracting arrangements 
during  which  migrants  cannot  be  integrated  in  the  workforce  on  an 
equal par with domestic workers (Hunger, 2000). It is against this back-
ground that German (and Austrian) unions feared that an inflow of NMS 
migrants would undermine labour standards and collective agreements, 
already  under  strain  with  the  shift  in  the  balance  of  power  between 
capital and labour.

Also important, and related, is the public discourse on migration. In 
Germany  and  Austria  the  enlargement  process,  and  in  particular  the 
free  mobility  of  labour,  was  highly  unpopular.  In  these  two  countries 
almost all main political and social actors were in favour of restrictions 
for citizens from the accession countries (Tamas and Münz, 2006). Con-
versely, in Ireland (and to a lesser extent in the UK) the public debate 
on EU enlargement was more in favour of an open labour market policy 

62

Downloaded from 

ejd.sagepub.com

 at Universitaet Osnabrueck on April 15, 2016

Krings: Trade Unions, EU Enlargement and the Free Movement of Labour

which was supported by the main political parties, the social partners as 
well as most parts of the media (Doyle et al., 2006). Irish unions were 
positively disposed towards the free movement of workers in the light of 
favourable labour market conditions, but also because of the country’s 
own emigration experience. However, when cases of underpayment of 
foreign  workers  became  more  frequent  following  large-scale  inward 
migration, unions became increasingly concerned about possible negative 
consequences  for  employment  conditions.  These  concerns  led  them  to 
reverse  their  policy  stance  in  favour  of  restrictions  for  Bulgarian  and 
Romanian  workers,  interestingly  in  agreement  with  the  other  main 
stakeholders in Ireland.

While British unions would certainly share the concerns of their Irish 
counterparts about labour standards, they did not perform a policy change 
in spite of similar concerns related to labour migration. When the govern-
ment imposed a transitional period for Bulgaria and Romania, the TUC 
did not side with the main political parties, the Confederation of British 
Industry and the tabloid press (TUC, 2006). This rather principled stance 
on  the  free  movement  of  labour,  promoted  by  the  TUC  in  particular, 
can  be  read  as  a  preference  for  NMS  migrants  arriving  as  dependent 
employees who can be organized, rather than as self-employed, posted 
workers or migrants submerged in the informal economy. It also shows 
that unions which only have limited involvement in the policy-making 
process ‘take on the role more of an opposition movement against the 
state’s  and  the  employers’  policies,  and  against  general  tendencies  in 
society’ (Penninx and Roosblad, 2000: 196).

Evidently  no  single  factor  can  account  for  the  variations  in  trade 
union policies on labour migration. Instead, national contextual factors 
lead to different outcomes. Thus, in spite of parallel developments such 
as European integration, economic internationalization and an increase 
in  immigration,  domestic  political,  economic  and  institutional  factors 
continue to be decisive in shaping these policies.

Conclusion

East–West  migration  has  become  the  main  form  of  labour  migration 
into Western European countries in recent years. However, when eight 
countries  from  CEE  joined  the  EU  in  2004,  most  ‘old’  member  states 
opted to impose a transitional period because of concerns about possible 
labour market disturbances. The free movement of labour in an enlarged 
EU  proved  to  be  particularly  controversial  among  trade  unions.  In 
coun tries  like  Germany  and  Austria  with  common  borders  with  some 
acces sion countries, they argued that significant income differences and 
previous migration patterns demanded a transitional period. Conversely, 

63

Downloaded from 

ejd.sagepub.com

 at Universitaet Osnabrueck on April 15, 2016

European Journal of Industrial Relations 15(1)

British and Irish unions supported the open labour market policy of their 
governments. In particular, British unions argued that labour standards 
are best protected by the enforcement of rights, rather than restrictions.
As the cases of Germany and Austria show, unions may still sometimes 
prefer restrictionist policies, thereby somewhat disproving the argument 
by Haus (2002) and Watts (2002) that they have moved away from such 
policies in the ‘global age’. However, these two writers are correct in so 
far as union movements in these two countries increasingly acknowledge 
that labour migration is likely to continue with the transnationalization 
of labour markets. The thesis of a change in trade union migration policy 
perhaps  best  applies  to  Britain  where  the  trade  union  movement  has 
adopted a policy position that is broadly in favour of the free movement 
of labour. This confirms the assumption that union movements with less 
political clout are more inclined to put greater emphasis on the organ-
ization of migrant workers as ‘an alternative strategy to restrictionism for 
improving wages and work conditions’ (Haus, 2002: 7). 

Regardless of different policies on the free movement of labour, a major 
concern  of  unions  across  Europe  is  to  ensure  that  immigration  does 
not undermine wages and employment standards. There is only limited 
evidence  that  recent  labour  migration  from  the  NMSs  has  a  negative 
impact  on  the  employment  opportunities  of  native  workers.  Although 
wage rises may have been held back in some low-skilled sectors, there 
has been no noticeable increase in unemployment. However, there have 
been many incidents in which migrants have not been paid the prevalent 
local rates. In Austria and Germany this often involves posted workers 
and  ‘bogus’  self-employment.  Hence  transitional  restrictions  in  these 
countries may have led to an increase in precarious forms of temporary 
migration  including  irregular  work  as  alternative  means  of  access  to 
labour markets, not formally restricted for NMS citizens. On the other 
hand, the migration experience of the UK and Ireland suggests that the 
free movement of labour can lead to similar cases of underpayment of 
migrants if there is no proper enforcement of employment rights. Thus, 
what is required is a new policy drive to complement the free movement 
of labour with an improved compliance regime, as a common European 
labour market including the NMSs will become a reality by 2011 (Donaghy 
and Teague, 2006).

From a trade union perspective, individual immigration during which 
migrants become integrated into the workforce of the host country, and 
indeed  wider  society,  seems  to  be  preferable  to  the  temporary  posting 
of workers under the EU freedom of services. However, in the light of 
the  planned  further  liberalization  of  service  markets,  the  provision  of 
services across borders is likely to increase. To find a balance between 
the  freedom  of  services  and  the  preservation  of  labour  standards,  the 
PWD provides a useful legal framework. However, the EU Commission 

64

Downloaded from 

ejd.sagepub.com

 at Universitaet Osnabrueck on April 15, 2016

Krings: Trade Unions, EU Enlargement and the Free Movement of Labour

increasingly subordinates the PWD to the free provision of services in 
an enlarged EU (Cremers et al., 2007), and the rulings of the European 
Court  of  Justice  (ECJ)  on  the  Viking  and  Laval  cases  in  2007  broadly 
endorsed  the  free  market  stance  of  the  Commission.  The  ECJ  ruled 
that, irrespective of national law, industrial action which interfered with 
freedom to provide services was legitimate only if it could be justified 
on  the  grounds  of  the  public  interest  in  protecting  workers  and  if  it 
satisfied a ‘proportionality’ test. Subsequently the 1968 Luxembourg case 
imposed  a  narrow  interpretation  of  the  protective  scope  of  the  PWD. 
Thus the employment conditions of posted workers remain a contested 
issue in the enlarged EU.

A defence of the principle of equal treatment, enshrined in the PWD, 
will  remain  a  cornerstone  of  union  policies  in  the  light  of  the  trans-
nationalization of labour markets. It seems unlikely, however, that equal 
pay and working conditions for indigenous and migrant workers alike 
can be achieved without the involvement of the latter. Therefore, unions 
have to engage more actively with migrants and explore more innovative 
ways of organizing them. There is already some evidence of this. The British 
TGWU,  for  instance,  has  modelled  its  ‘Justice  for  Cleaners’  campaign 
closely after the successful ‘Justice for Janitors’ campaign in Los Angeles, 
with an organizing approach that focuses on occupations across the low-
paid  sector  and  involves  some  extra-workplace  activity  like  linking  up 
with  migrant  communities  (Milkman,  2006).  Another  recent  initiative 
includes the foundation of the European Migrant Workers Union by the 
German IG BAU that specifically aims to organize migrant workers who 
are posted abroad and who often are in a particular vulnerable situation 
(Dribbusch, 2004). To be sure, the organization of migrants, particularly 
if the latter see their stay as only temporary, will not prove to be an easy 
task for trade unions. However, in times of the transnationalization of 
labour markets, membership decline and an increase in casualized, non-
standard forms of work, unions have few alternatives than to represent 
more  actively  the  increasingly  mobile  ‘birds  of  passage’  of  the  21st 
century.

REFERENCES
Ailinger, K. and Guger, A. (2006) ‘The European Socioeconomic Model’, in 

A. Giddens, P. Diamond and R. Liddle (eds) Global Europe, Social Europe, 
pp. 124–50. Cambridge: Polity.

Anderson, B., Ruhs, M., Spencer, S. and Rogaly, B. (2006) Fair Enough? 

Central and East European Migrants in Low Wage Employment in the UK. 
Oxford: COMPAS.

Arbeiterkammer (2005) Ein Jahr EU-Erweiterung: Trends und Fakten. Eine 

Umfassende Analyse der Bundesarbeitskammer. Vienna: AK.

Downloaded from 

ejd.sagepub.com

 at Universitaet Osnabrueck on April 15, 2016

65

European Journal of Industrial Relations 15(1)

Avci, G. and McDonald, C. (2000) ‘Chipping Away at the Fortress: Unions, 

Immigration and the Transnational Labour Market’, International Migration 
38(2): 191–213.

Begg, D. (2006) ‘Immigration, Integration and Cultural Identity’, available 

online at: [http://www.ictu.ie/html/news/briefcase/s170706.htm].

Boeri, T., Hanson, G. and McCormick, B. (eds) (2002) Immigration Policy and 

the Welfare System. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Cachón, L. and Valles, M.S. (2003) ‘Trade Unionism and Immigration: 

Interpreting Old and New Dilemmas’, Transfer 12(3): 469–82.

Carley, M. (2004) ‘Industrial Relations in the EU, Japan and USA, 2002’, 

eironline, available online at: [http://www.eurofound.europa.eu/
eiro/2004/01/feature/tn0401101f.html].

Castles, S. and Kosack, G. (1973) Immigrant Workers and Class Structure in 

Western Europe. London: Oxford University Press.

Clegg, H.A. (1976) Trade Unions under Collective Bargaining: A Theory Based 

on Comparisons of Six Countries. Oxford: Blackwell.

Cremers, J., Dølvik, J.E. and Bosch, G. (2007) ‘Posting of Workers in the Single 

Market: Attempts to Prevent Social Dumping and Regime Competition in 
the EU’, Industrial Relations Journal 38(6): 524–41.

Czommer, L. and Worthmann, G. (2005) Von der Baustelle auf den 

Schlachthof. Zur Übertragbarkeit des Arbeitnehmer-Entsendegesetzes auf die 
Deutsche Fleischbranche. IAT-Report 2005/3. Gelsenkirchen: Institut Arbeit 
und Technik.

Department of Social and Family Affairs (DFSA) (2007) ‘PPSN Statistics for 

the 10 EU Accession States’, available online at: [http://www.welfare.ie/
topics/ppsn/ppsstat.html#euten040506], accessed May 2007.

Department of the Taoiseach (2006) Towards 2016: Ten-Year Framework 

Social Partnership Agreement 2006–2015. Dublin: Stationery Office.

DGB (1999) Migrationsdialog Ost-West 1999. Berlin: DGB.
DGB (2001) Die Zukunft der Europäischen Union: Osterweiterung, 

Institutionelle Reformen, Soziale Grundrechte. Berlin: DGB. 

DGB (2006) Arbeitsmaterialien zur Migrationspolitik. EU Osterweiterung: 

Übergangsregelungen beibehalten. Beschluss des Bundesvorstandes des 
Deutschen Gewerkschaftsbundes vom 4.4. 2006. Berlin: DGB. 

Donaghy, J. and Teague, P. (2006) ‘The Free Movement of Workers and Social 
Europe: Maintaining the European Ideal’, Industrial Relations Journal 37(6): 
652–66. 

Doyle, N., Hughes, G. and Wadensjö, E. (2006) Freedom of Movement from 

Central and Eastern Europe. Experiences in Ireland and Sweden. Stockholm: 
Swedish Institute for European Policy Studies.

Dribbusch, H. (2004) ‘European Migrant Workers Union Founded’, eironline, 
available online at: [http://www.eurofound.europa.eu/eiro/2004/09/feature/
de0409206f.html].

Dustmann, C., Frattini, T. and Preston, I. (2007) A Study of Migrant Workers 

and the National Minimum Wage and Enforcement Issues that Arise. 
London: University College London.

66

Downloaded from 

ejd.sagepub.com

 at Universitaet Osnabrueck on April 15, 2016

Krings: Trade Unions, EU Enlargement and the Free Movement of Labour

ETUC (2005) ‘Towards Free Movement of Workers in an Enlarged EU’, 

available online at: [http://www.etuc.org/a/1898].

Flynn, G. (2006) ‘Mobile Workers Disputes Jolt Ireland’s “Social Partnership” 

Model’, Transfer 12(2): 267–72.

Frege, C. and Kelly, J. (2004) ‘Union Strategies in Comparative Context’, 

in C. Frege and J. Kelly (eds) Varieties of Unionism: Strategies for Union 
Revitalization in a Globalizing Economy, pp. 31–44. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.

Gächter, A. (2000) ‘Austria: Protecting Indigenous Workers from Immigrants’, 

in R. Penninx and J. Roosblad (eds) Trade Unions, Immigration, and 
Immigrants in Europe, 1960–1993, pp. 65–90. Oxford: Berghahn.

Gilpin, N., Henty, M., Lemos, S., Portes, J. and Bullen, C. (2006) ‘The Impact 
of Free Movement of Workers from Central and Eastern Europe on the UK 
Labour Market’, Working Paper 29, Department for Work and Pensions. 
Goldthorpe, J.H. (1984) ‘The End of Convergence: Corporatist and Dualist 

Tendencies in Modern Western Societies’, in J.H. Goldthorpe (ed.) Order and 
Conflict in Contemporary Capitalism, pp. 315–43. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Hantrais, L. and Mangen, S. (eds) (1996) Cross-National Research Methods in 

the Social Sciences. London: Pinter.

Haus, L.A. (2002) Unions, Immigration, and Internationalization: New 

Challenges and Changing Coalitions in the United States and France. New 
York: Palgrave Macmillan.

Heery, E., Simms, M., Simpson, D., Delbridge, R. and Salmon, J. (2000) 

‘Organizing Unionism Comes to the UK’, Employee Relations 22(1): 38–57.

Hennessy, M. (2002) ‘Anti-Nice Immigrant Warning Condemned’, Irish Times, 

Home Office (2007) Accession Monitoring Report A8 Countries May 2004–June 

8 August.

2007. London: Home Office.

Hunger, U. (2000) ‘Temporary Transnational Labour Migration in an 

Integrating Europe and the Challenge to the German Welfare State’, in 
M. Bommes and A. Geddes (eds) Immigration and Welfare: Challenging the 
Boundaries of the Welfare State, pp. 189–208. London: Routledge. 

IG BAU (2000) Position der Industriegewerkschaft Bauen-Agrar-Umwelt 
zur EU Osterweiterung. Beschluss des Bundesvorstandes vom 11.9. 2000. 
Frankfurt: IG BAU.

Kahmann, M. (2006) ‘The Posting of Workers in the German Construction 

Industry: Responses and Problems of Trade Union Action’, Transfer 12(2): 
183–96.

Lillie, N. and Greer, I. (2007) ‘Industrial Relations, Migration, and Neoliberal 
Politics: The Case of the European Construction Sector’, Politics & Society 
35(4): 551–81.

Lippert, I. (2006) Niedriglohnstrategien im Hochlohnsektor: Öffnung des 

Arbeitsmarktes und Beschäftigung von MOE-Arbeitskräften in der Metall- 
und Elektroindustrie. Düsseldorf: Hans-Böckler-Stiftung.

McGovern, P. (2007) ‘Immigration, Labour Markets and Employment 

Relations: Problems and Prospects’, British Journal of Industrial Relations 
45(2): 217–35.

Downloaded from 

ejd.sagepub.com

 at Universitaet Osnabrueck on April 15, 2016

67

European Journal of Industrial Relations 15(1)

Menz, G. (2005) Varieties of Capitalism and Europeanization: National 
Response Strategies to the Single European Market. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.

Miles, R. and Phizacklea, A. (1992): ‘Union Movement and Racism’, in 

P. Braham, A. Rattansi and R. Skellington (eds) Racism and Antiracism: 
Inequalities, Opportunities and Policies, pp. 30–45. London: SAGE.

Milkman, R. (2006) L.A. Story: Immigrant Workers and the Future of the U.S. 

Labour Movement. New York: Russell Sage Foundation. 

Münz, R., Straubhaar, T., Vadean, F. and Vadean, N. (2006) The Costs 

and Benefits of European Immigration. Hamburg: Hamburg Institute of 
International Economics.

National Economic and Social Council (NESC) (2006) Migration Policy. 

Dublin: NESC. 

Noack, J. (2000) ‘Interregional Trade Union Councils in the Run up to Eastern 

Enlargement of the EU’, European Trade Union Yearbook, pp. 337–54. 
Brussels: ETUI.

O’Brien, C. (2007) ‘The Rights and Wrongs of Migrant Labour’, Irish Times, 

27 May.

ÖGB (2005) EU-Erweiterung – Auswirkungen auf den Arbeitsmarkt: 

Position des ÖGB zur Überprüfung der Übergangsregelungen für die 
Arbeitnehmerfreizügigkeit sowie für einige geschützte Sektoren im Rahmen 
der Dienstleistungsfreiheit. Vienna: ÖGB.

Penninx, R. and Roosblad, J. (eds) (2000) Trade Unions, Immigration, and 
Immigrants in Europe, 1960–1993: A Comparative Study of the Attitudes 
and Actions of the Trade Unions in Seven West European Countries. Oxford: 
Berghahn.

Ruhs, M. (2006) ‘Greasing the Wheels of the Flexible Labour Market: 

East European Labour Immigration in the UK’, Working Paper No. 38, 
COMPAS, Oxford.

Salt, J. and Millar, J. (2006) ‘Foreign Labour in the United Kingdom: Current 

Patterns and Trends’, Labour Market Trends, October, pp. 335–55. 
SIPTU (2006) ‘Exploitation and Displacement: Agreed New Labour 

Standards Must Be Seen to Work before Open Border Status Granted 
to Romania and Bulgaria’, available online at: [http://www.siptu.ie/
CampaignsandCurrentIssues/ExploitationandDisplacement].

Tamas, K. and Münz, R. (2006) Labour Migrants Unbound? EU Enlargement, 
Transitional Measures and Labour Market Effects. Stockholm: Institute for 
Future Studies.

Tenbrock, C. and Wielinski, B. (2007) ‘“Kapitalismus pur”: Hungerlöhne, 

miese Arbeit: Polen in deutschen Betrieben fühlen sich getäuscht’, Die Zeit, 
10 May.

Thelen, K. (2001) ‘Varieties of Labour Politics in the Developed Democracies’, 

in P.A. Hall and D. Soskice (eds) Varieties of Capitalism: The Institutional 
Foundations of Comparative Advantage, pp. 71–103. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.

TUC (2006) ‘TUC on EU Work Restrictions’, available online at: [http://www.

tuc.org.uk/international/tuc-12560-f0.cfm].

68

Downloaded from 

ejd.sagepub.com

 at Universitaet Osnabrueck on April 15, 2016

Krings: Trade Unions, EU Enlargement and the Free Movement of Labour

UCATT (2007) ‘Romanian and Bulgarian Workers Must Be Given 

Employment Rights’, available online at: [http://www.ucatt.info/content/
view/165/30/2007/06]. 

Watts, J. (2002) Immigration Policy and the Challenge of Globalization. Ithaca, 

NY: Cornell University Press.

Wrench, J. (2004) ‘Trade Union Responses to Immigrants and Ethnic 
Inequality in Denmark and the UK: The Context of Consensus and 
Conflict’, European Journal of Industrial Relations 10(1): 7–30.

Woolfson, C. and Sommers, J. (2006) ‘Labour Mobility in Construction: 
European Implications of the Laval un Partneri Dispute with Swedish 
Labour’, European Journal of Industrial Relations 12(1): 49–68.

TORBEN KRINGS is currently completing a PhD at the School of Law and 
Government, Dublin City University.
ADDRESS: School of Law and Government, DCU, Dublin 9, Ireland. 
[e-mail: torben.krings@dcu.ie] 

69

Downloaded from 

ejd.sagepub.com

 at Universitaet Osnabrueck on April 15, 2016

