Recently Gates has, with K. Anthony
Appiah, co-edited the encyclopedia Encarta
Africana. As well as continuing his work of
recovery and retrieval of marginalized
African American texts, he has become in-
creasingly interested in investigating and
reporting on the lives of contemporary
African Americans. He is the co-author,
with Cornel West, of The Future of the
Race (1996), which reﬂects on the relation-
ship between the black elite and the larger
black community, and has written and pro-
duced a number of documentaries that ex-
plore African Americans’ history and their
present. The publications that accompany
these series include America Beyond the Color
Line (2004). In the last few years, he has
increasingly taken on the role of public
intellectual, not only broadcasting on PBS
but also publishing articles in such main-
stream publications as the New Yorker and
New York Times.

SEE ALSO: Appiah, Kwame Anthony;
Baker, Houston A., Jr.; Poststructuralism;
Saussure, Ferdinand de; West, Cornel

REFERENCES AND SUGGESTED
READINGS

Crafts, H. (2002). The Bondswoman’s Narrative.

New York: Warner.

Gates, H. L., Jr. (1987). Figures in Black: Words,
Signs, and the “Racial” Self. New York: Oxford
University Press.

Gates, H. L., Jr. (ed.) (1988a). The Schomburg Library
of Nineteenth-Century Black Women Writers, 30
vols. New York: Oxford University Press.

Gates, H. L., Jr. (1988b). The Signifying Monkey:
A Theory of African-American Literary Criticism.
New York: Oxford University Press.

Gates, H. L., Jr. (ed.) (1990). Reading Black, Reading
Feminist: A Critical Anthology. New York:
Meridian.

Gates, H. L., Jr. (2004). America Beyond the Color
Line: Dialogues with African Americans. New
York: Warner.

G E N D E R T H E O R Y 617

Gates, H. L., & Appiah, K. A. (eds.) (1986). “Race,”
Writing, and Difference. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

Gates, H. L., Jr., & Appiah, K. A. (eds.) (1993–4)
Critical Perspectives Past and Present (Amistad
Literary Series), 9 vols. New York: Amistad Press.
Gates, H. L., Jr., & Appiah, K. A. (eds.) (1999) Encarta

Africana. Redmond, WA: Microsoft Press.

Gates, H. L., Jr., & McKay, N. Y. (eds.) (1997). The
Norton Anthology of African American Literature.
New York: Norton.

Gates, H. L., Jr., & West, C. (1996). The Future of the

Race. New York: Knopf.

Joyce, A. J. (1987). The black canon: Reconstructing
black American literary criticism. New Literary
History, 18(2), 335–344.

Wilson, H. E. (1983). Our Nig: or, Sketches from the

Life of a Free Black. New York: Vintage.

Gender Theory
KAYE MITCHELL

GENDER

Historically, the term “gender” has been
used primarily as a grammatical term, re-
ferring to the classiﬁcation of nouns (in
languages including Latin, French, and
German) as masculine, feminine, or neuter.
It is derived from the Old French term for
“genre” which, in turn, derives from the
Latin genus, meaning “birth,” “family,” or
“nation,” but also referring back to older
and broader meanings such as “kind” or
“type.” The other use of “gender,” to refer to
the (human) state of being male or female,
also dates back to the fourteenth century,
but it’s not until the twentieth century that
the latter usage becomes common. In the
late twentieth century, thanks largely to the
inﬂuence of feminism, “gender” tends to be
distinguished from “sex,” with the former
seen as referring to the culturally attributed
characteristics associated with being a
woman or a man, and the latter viewed as
a matter of nature or biology, although, as

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

618 G E N D E R T H E O R Y

I’ll go on to discuss, the sex/gender distinc-
tion continues to be a source of debate
and contention both within and beyond
feminism.

Despite considerable evidence of argu-
ment and speculation on the allegedly dif-
fering characteristics of the sexes through
history, the active theorizing of gender as a
concept and category really begins in the
nineteenth century, thanks to the competing
inﬂuences of psychoanalysis and sexology,
so it’s to those discourses that I’ll turn ﬁrst,
before highlighting just a few of the contri-
butions to gender theory made by feminism,
masculinity studies, queer theory, and trans-
gender studies, respectively.

SEXOLOGY AND
PSYCHOANALYSIS

The pseudo-scientiﬁc investigations of sex-
ual behavior in the late nineteenth and early
twentieth centuries, which acquired the dis-
ciplinary name of “sexology,” have much to
say about questions of gender and are
instructive in the way that they reveal the
complex imbrication of (biological) sex,
gender, and sexuality, the difﬁculty of talk-
ing about one without invoking the others.
Sexual desire, increasingly, is viewed either
as one of the contributing factors to gender
identity, or as a product or expression of
one’s gender; either way, the relationship is
ﬁgured as causal and unorthodox sexual
practices or desires tend, in sexology, to
be associated with (or blamed on) forms
of gender dysmorphia. This is evident, for
example,
in Richard von Krafft-Ebing’s
characterization of female homosexuality
as “the masculine soul, heaving in the female
bosom,” and his assertion that “uranism
may nearly always be suspected in females
wearing their hair short, or who dress in the
fashion of men” (Bland & Doan 1998:
46–7). Writers and clinicians
such as

Krafft-Ebing, Iwan Bloch, Otto Weininger,
and Havelock Ellis, then, sought to taxono-
mize and analyze human sexual behavior,
but in doing so often helped contribute to a
developing discourse of gender difference.
Although Havelock Ellis is more liberal
than Krafft-Ebing in his treatment of female
homosexuality, suggesting that sexual in-
version need not be accompanied by
“aesthetic inversion,” the assertion of a pri-
mary difference between the genders is to
the fore in his popular 1894 publication,
Man and Woman. Here, Ellis describes
women as characterized by “a certain docil-
ity and receptiveness,” possessed of an
“emotional nature” and a tendency to
“suggestibility,” “less able than men to stand
alone” and to think and act independently;
such characteristics are, in Ellis’s assessment
of them, rooted in the physiological differ-
ences between men and women (Bland &
Doan 1998: 22). Despite being quite a rad-
ical thinker in his pronouncements on sex-
ual freedom and supposed sexual deviance
(of which he was remarkably tolerant), Ellis
reinforces a myth of women as inherently
contradictory – “the affectability of women
exposes them . . . to very diabolical mani-
festations. It is also the source of very much
of what is most angelic in women” – and of
men as signiﬁcantly more active, and as
driven primarily by libidinal
impulses –
“in men the sexual instinct is a restless
source of energy which overﬂows into all
sorts of channels” (Bland & Doan 1998: 23).
The outcome of such characterizations is
a vision of maleness and femaleness as op-
posed and complementary, interdependent
in their deﬁnitions. As Weininger asserts, in
Sex and Character (1903): “The ideas ‘man’
and ‘woman’ cannot be investigated sepa-
rately; their signiﬁcance can be found out
only be placing them side by side and con-
trasting them” (Bland & Doan 1998: 27).
However, while much of this sexological
work might appear to be quite conservative

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

in its treatment of gender, more dissonant
voices emerged under the aegis of sexology,
notably that of Jean Finot, who took issue
with the “reasoning of the biologists and of
the psychologists” and their attempt to
“derive all the qualities of woman” from
“their observation of the differences of the
two cells that produce life”; Finot suggested,
by way of a counterargument, that “woman,
morally, is only the result of the conditions
imposed upon her by life. She will be sub-
lime in goodness or odious in cruelty,
according to the surrounding environment
which makes her think and act” (Bland &
Doan 1998: 37–8). This suggestion – that
gender is shaped by environment, by forms
of cultural conditioning – was to become
central to much of the feminist theorizing of
gender that would appear later in the twen-
tieth century.

In the period of the late nineteenth and
early twentieth century, however,
the
emerging science of psychoanalysis was
also contributing to the popular and aca-
demic understanding of gendered person-
hood, and Freud’s work is pre-eminent (and
continues to be inﬂuential) in this respect.
In his essay on the subject, Freud notes that
“throughout history people have knocked
their heads against the riddle of the nature of
femininity” (1977: 146). Although he does
little to dispel this notion of femininity as
mysterious or unfathomable, Freud does
imply that the distinction between the sexes
has no ﬁrm basis in either biology or psy-
chology, leaving open the suggestion that it
is culture that enforces such distinctions. As
he had earlier claimed in the “Three essays
on the theory of sexuality,” “a certain degree
of anatomical hermaphroditism occurs nor-
mally,” and “in every normal male or female
individual, traces are found of the apparatus
of the opposite sex,” suggesting that both
men and women possess “an originally
bisexual physical disposition” which “has,
in the course of evolution, become modiﬁed

G E N D E R T H E O R Y 619

into a unisexual one” (1977: 52) This idea of
“anatomical hermaphroditism” was not a
new one, as Glover & Kaplan (2000) conﬁrm
in their assertion that, “until at least the
middle of the eighteenth century the human
body was conceived as being of one ﬂesh”
(xiii) possessing both male and female sex-
ual organs (and the “humoral” theories of
the Renaissance period, for example, suggest
that women possessed the same sexual
organs as men, only internal rather than
external to the body, due to women lacking
the “heat” that was necessary to push those
organs outwards). Despite acknowledging
that, “when you say ‘masculine,’ you usually
mean ‘active,’ and when you say ‘feminine,’
you usually mean ‘passive,’” Freud refuses
to provide any kind of evidential ground for
these meanings, beyond cultural conven-
tion, and instead sets out to inquire “how
she comes into being, how a woman devel-
ops out of a child with a bisexual dis-
position” (1977: 147–8, 149). Ultimately,
this development is facilitated both by the
Oedipus complex, and by adaptation to
social convention, in the way that Freud
represents it, yet his representation of the
female as (symbolically) castrated, and
traumatized by her awareness of this fact
(i.e., governed by “penis envy”), led, for
many years, to the rejection of Freudian
psychoanalysis by feminist theorists.

FEMINISM AND MASCULINITY
STUDIES

Mary Wollstonecraft, in her 1792 work A
Vindication of the Rights of Woman, is not
primarily concerned with offering deﬁni-
tions of gender or theorizing the sex–gender
relationship. However, her examination of
female education, and the ways in which
women are “formed in the mould of folly,”
rather than being permitted to be “rational
creatures,” does raise questions about the

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

620 G E N D E R T H E O R Y

extent to which gender (in this case, wom-
anhood) is natural, and the extent to which
it is molded by cultural expectations, edu-
cational practices, and so forth (1992[1792]:
154) In this way she is often seen as inau-
gurating a feminist investigation of the
meanings and potentialities of femininity
which achieves greater force and clarity
through the course of the nineteenth cen-
tury, and which acquires a more critical bent
in the twentieth. In 1949, Simone de Beau-
voir famously opens The Second Sex by
expressing her initial reluctance “to write
a book on woman” as “the subject is irri-
tating, especially to women; and it is not
new,” before proceeding to ask “what is a
woman?” – a question that would become
central to feminist theory in the twentieth
century, and that clearly distinguishes mat-
ters of (biological) sex from matters of
(cultural) gender (1988[1949]: 13). Accord-
ing to de Beauvoir, it is necessary to ask this
question precisely because the answer is not
at all clear, and because “woman” in fact
lacks a positive deﬁnition. This, claims de
Beauvoir, is because

Humanity is male and man deﬁnes woman
not in herself but as relative to him; she is not
regarded as an autonomous being . . . She is
deﬁned and differentiated with reference to
man and not he with reference to her; she is
the incidental, the inessential as opposed to
the essential. He is the Subject, he is the
Absolute – she is the Other. (1988: 16)

investigation

With the advent of second wave feminism
in the late 1960s and early 1970s, feminist
authors such as Germaine Greer, Kate
Millett, and others, developed de Beauvoir’s
philosophical
how
one “becomes” a woman into political,
polemical writings which addressed the
subordination of women, and sought also
to challenge the conceptions of femininity
(as passivity, as weakness, as governed by
biological imperatives) which kept women

into

in that subordinate position. As Greer
asserts, at the beginning of The Female
Eunuch:

We know what we are, but know not what we
may be, or what we might have been. The
dogmatism of science expresses the status quo
as the ineluctable result of law: women must
learn how to question the most basic assump-
tions about feminine normality in order to
reopen the possibilities
for development
which have been successively locked off by
conditioning. (1991[1970]: 16–17)

it

sphere

(1992[1963]),

De Beauvoir’s suggestion that one is not
“born,” but rather “becomes” a woman,
opens up the possibility that one might
become something quite different, or that
the process of “becoming” might be sub-
stantially altered by social and cultural
change. “Femininity,” then, takes on quite
different connotations – many of them
negative – in the feminist theory of the
1960s and 1970s: in Betty Friedan’s The
Feminine Mystique
is
linked to the “nameless aching dissatis-
faction” of middle-class women, encour-
aged into the public
through
education and the temporary opportunities
of the war years, only to be coerced back into
more limited, domestic roles (30); in Sexual
Politics (1977[1970]), Kate Millett opines
how “expectations the culture cherishes
about his gender identity encourage the
young male to develop aggressive impulses,
and the female to thwart her own or turn
them inward,” placing the emphasis ﬁrmly
upon cultural conditioning as productive
of gender (31); more generally, feminists
since the second wave have deployed a
skepticism about the traditional associa-
tions of “femininity,” and have emphasized
instead “the mutability and instability of
gender” (Glover & Kaplan 2000: 9); femi-
nism of the third wave could perhaps be seen
as taking a more tolerant view of femininity,

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

as something which is a source of pleasure
for many women, not simply a means of
their oppression.

Yet positive reconceptualizations of fem-
ininity are also evident in the work of French
feminists of the 1970s such as Luce Irigaray
and Helene Cixous: while the former
decried the Freudian perception of feminin-
ity as lack or absence, she looked to a
deﬁnitively feminine mysticism as a means
of countering the masculinist “logic of the
same”; meanwhile, Cixous attacked the
troubling binaries with which male/female
and masculine/feminine were associated
(activity/passivity,
form/
matter, and so on), seeing power imbalances
as built into such binaries which permitted
woman only a position of negativity and
otherness; she proceeded to develop a no-
tion of ecriture feminine which celebrated a
femininity associated with the poetic and
the orgasmic, with jouissance.

culture/nature,

The tendency, in feminist theory of the
late twentieth century, however, has been
toward a view of gender as culturally con-
structed and this argument reaches its apo-
gee in the work of Judith Butler. In Gender
Trouble, Butler develops a theory of gender
as performative, in which:

Acts, gestures, and desire produce the effect
of an internal core or substance . . . Such acts,
gestures, enactments, generally construed,
are performative in the sense that the essence
or identity that they otherwise purport to
express are fabrications manufactured and
sustained through corporeal
signs and
other discursive means. That the gendered
body is performative suggests that it has no
ontological status apart from the various
acts which constitute its
(1999
[1990]: 173)

reality.

It’s difﬁcult to overstate the radical na-
ture, or the impact within the ﬁeld of gender
studies, of this argument. While earlier fem-
inist theorists had viewed gender as cultural,

G E N D E R T H E O R Y 621

rather than natural (and Butler is building
on the work of theorists such as de Beauvoir
and Monique Wittig), Butler here rede-
scribes what had previously been seen as
the expressions of some innate gender iden-
tity as part of the cultural means by which,
and through which, that identity is pro-
duced as natural; so an effect is here rede-
scribed as a cause, and gender becomes an
incessant action (or series of actions), a kind
of “doing,” rather than a kind of “being.”
This is borne out by Butler’s use of drag as

an example:

The notion of an original or primary gender
identity is often parodied within the cultural
practices of drag, cross-dressing, and the sex-
ual stylization of butch/femme identities. . . .
As much as drag creates a uniﬁed picture of
“woman” (what its critics often oppose) it
also reveals the distinctness of those aspects of
gendered experience which are falsely natu-
ralized as a unity through the regulatory
ﬁction of heterosexual coherence. In imitating
gender, drag implicitly reveals the imitative
structure of gender itself – as well as its con-
tingency. (1999[1990]: 174–5)

In watching a drag act, our attention is
drawn to the disjunctions between the
“anatomical sex” of the performer, their
“gender identity,” and the gender that
they are performing and this, for Butler, is
productive of a kind of gender “dissonance”
(175). Drag, then, is not a parodic imitation
of some authentic, original femininity; in-
stead it reveals the performative nature of
all gender identities, which require almost
constant labor to uphold the impression of
that naturalness (a point which opens up
the merest possibility of gender subversion,
for Butler). Butler’s constructivist argument
ﬁgures gender as “a free-ﬂoating artiﬁce,
with the consequence that man and mascu-
line might just as easily signify a female body
as a male one, and woman and feminine a
male body as easily as a female one” (10).

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

622 G E N D E R T H E O R Y

Having severed gender from sex in this way,
Butler proceeds to ask “what is ‘sex’ any-
way?” and to suggest that “perhaps this
construct called ‘sex’ is as culturally con-
structed as gender,” a thought that she
expands and elaborates in her subsequent
book, Bodies That Matter (1993).

“constructivist

If it seems, however, as though the sex/
gender distinction has been resolved (or,
more radically, done away with), or as
though the constructivist position has de-
ﬁnitively trumped all essentialist arguments,
the situation is not as straightforward as
this. More recent feminist theorizing on
sex and gender (e.g., by the likes of Elizabeth
Grosz, Karen Barad, and Vicky Kirby) has
sought to counter a perceived “linguistic
turn” or
turn” within
feminism (under the inﬂuence of poststruc-
turalism), by returning to questions of cor-
poreality and materiality, and by making use
of the biological sciences to advance a more
sophisticated
both
“nature” and the female body than had
hitherto been available. One result of this
is that the suggested opposition between
the material and the discursive (central to
much debate about the sex/gender distinc-
tion within feminism)
substantially
problematized.

is

understanding

of

It must be conceded that much of this
overview of gender theory, so far, has been
concerned with the theorization of feminin-
ity in particular, rather than of gender in
general. There are clear reasons for this, not
least the historical conception of femininity
as a puzzle or mystery or danger requiring
attention, and of masculinity as a given, the
norm, somehow uncomplicated and un-
controversial – unless tainted (and thereby
rendered “effeminate”) by any suggestion of
homosexuality. In the 1980s, the successes
of women’s studies as a discipline were,
however, beginning to invite complaints
that questions of maleness and masculinity
were being either overlooked or viliﬁed. A

men’s movement had emerged in response
to (and largely as a reaction against) the
women’s movement, but this tended to be
separatist and regressive, so there was space
for a more interrogative study of masculin-
ity to emerge both within feminism and
beyond it. This new form of masculinity
studies is evident in the work of feminists
such as Lynne Segal (whose Slow Motion,
initially published in 1990, is a landmark
text) and R. W. Connell (whose Masculi-
nities appeared in 1995). This more positive
(rather than reactive) branch of masculinity
studies builds on, and acknowledges its debt
to, feminism, with theorists such as Carri-
gan et al. (2004) noting, in an essay ﬁrst
published in 1985, that “One of the central
facts about masculinity . . . is that men in
general are advantaged through the subor-
dination of women” (152). It has also been
centrally concerned with, and has sought to
critique, the homophobia built into tradi-
tional models of masculinity and the forms
of racism which inﬂect power relations be-
tween men and women, thus complicating
that picture of dominant men and subor-
dinate women and seeking to “[recognize] a
range of masculinities” (152).

In Slow Motion, Segal (1990: 89ff.) traces
the emergence and consolidation of a
“masculine ideal” (which Carrigan et al.
refer to as “the culturally exalted form of
masculinity, the hegemonic model” [2004:
154]), which stresses aggression, athleti-
cism, and courage, and disparages both
introspection and the outward expression
of emotion, from the nineteenth century to
the present. Segal examines the inﬂuence of
institutions (such as boys’ public schools),
global events (like the two world wars) and
iconic masculine ﬁgures (such as Ernest
Hemingway and John Wayne) in the for-
mation of this understanding of masculin-
ity, and in doing so reveals the very unstable
foundations upon which it is built. As
she writes:

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

The closer we come to uncovering some form
of exemplary masculinity, a masculinity
which is solid and sure of itself, the clearer
it becomes that masculinity is structured
through contradiction: the more it asserts
itself, the more it calls itself into question.
But this is precisely what we should expect
if . . . masculinity is not some type of single
essence, innate or acquired. As it is repre-
sented in our culture, “masculinity” is a qual-
ity of being which is always incomplete, and
which is based as much on a social as on a
psychic reality. It exists in the various forms of
power men ideally possess: the power to assert
control over women, over other men, over
their own bodies, over machines and tech-
nology. (1990: 103–4)

Segal, then, encourages more diverse mas-
culinities (in the plural) which explore
men’s positives roles as fathers and partners,
and refuse the elements of violence and
homophobia which are part and parcel of
the ideal; to follow this path would, she
suggests, “spell the end of masculinity as
we have known it” (260).

QUEER THEORY AND
TRANSGENDER STUDIES

and

Although primarily concerned with issues
around sexuality, queer theory has also
been responsible for theorizing gender
“queerness,” questions of gender crossing,
transvestism,
passing, gender bending,
transgenderism,
unintelligible
genders – anything, really, that might fall
under the heading of a non-normative
practice or presentation of gender. Anna-
marie Jagose has deﬁned “queer” as de-
scribing “those gestures or analytical mod-
els which dramatize incoherencies in the
allegedly stable relations between chromo-
somal sex, gender and sexual desire,” and
as focusing in particular on “mismatches
between sex, gender and desire” (1996: 3).

G E N D E R T H E O R Y 623

This deﬁnition reveals the fraught relation-
ship between gender and sexuality, such
that “woman” is conventionally taken as
meaning “attracted to men” (i.e., hetero-
sexual) and that supposedly unorthodox
desires or sexual practices can be seen as
disrupting or problematizing perceptions
of that person’s gender. By contrast with
the sexological models considered earlier in
this essay, this disruption is something that
queer theory generally seeks to celebrate,
with the “mismatches” of which Jagose
writes, opening up the possibility for
more diverse and challenging experiences
and expressions of gender.

As in its treatment of sexuality, queer
theory sets itself against any suggestion of
a stable or determinate identity, as far as
gender is concerned, and instead looks for
those instances of ﬂuidity, indeterminacy,
or apparent contradiction in one’s gender
presentation (as Butler’s analysis of drag,
cited earlier, exempliﬁes). Any notion of
“natural” gender is, then, complicated by
the existence of bodies, desires, and identi-
ties which counter the suggestions that
maleness should produce masculinity, and
femaleness femininity, or that both sex
and gender should be unequivocally estab-
lished. In Female Masculinity (1998), Judith
Halberstam sets out to reclaim and celebrate
masculinity as part of the overall experience
of womanhood. She presents this as a radical
project – “a seriously committed attempt
to make masculinity safe for women and
girls” – noting that, “despite at least two
decades of sustained feminist and queer
attacks on the notion of natural gender,
we still believe that masculinity in girls
and women is abhorrent and pathological”
(268). If this project involves the reimagin-
ing of
femaleness, as something which
can include forms of behavior, desire, and
self-presentation traditionally coded as
“masculine,” it also involves a reimagining
of masculinity, which distances it from the

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

624 G E N D E R T H E O R Y

discredited model of hegemonic masculin-
ity that I mentioned earlier in this essay and
which separates it from “maleness” without,
then, exclusively tying it to lesbianism. As
Halberstam asks at the outset:

of self and social expectations of gender-role
performance, and the cultural mechanisms
that work to sustain or thwart speciﬁc
conﬁgurations of gendered personhood.
(2006: 3)

If masculinity is not the social and cultural and
indeed political expression of maleness, then
what is it? I do not claim to have any deﬁnitive
answer to this question, but I do have a few
proposals about why masculinity must not
and cannot and should not reduce down to
the male body and its effects. (1998: 1)

Halberstam’s argument is centrally con-
cerned with the “immense social power that
accumulates around masculinity,” which
she sees as explaining why masculinity
“has been reserved for people with male
bodies and has been actively denied to peo-
ple with female bodies” (269) As her argu-
ment moves through a consideration of
androgyny,
lesbian
“butchness,” and the contemporary culture
of “drag kings,” Halberstam therefore works
to resignify masculinity and to reduce the
stigma attached to those women deemed to
be “manly.”

inversion,

forms of

As part of her discussion of “female
masculinity,” Halberstam explores ques-
tions around transgenderism and transsex-
uality, and in the years since the publication
of her book,
studies has
achieved a disciplinary status in its own
right, through the work of writers and acti-
vists such as Susan Stryker, Stephen Whittle,
and Jay Prosser. Stryker claims:

transgender

The ﬁeld of transgender studies is concerned
with anything that disrupts, denaturalizes,
rearticulates, and makes visible the normative
linkages we generally assume to exist between
the biological speciﬁcity of the sexually dif-
ferentiated human body, the social roles and
statuses that a particular form of body is
expected to occupy, the subjectively experi-
enced relationship between a gendered sense

In this way, transgender studies can be seen
as building on the interrogations of gender
normativity previously posited by feminism
and queer theory. The sheer range of experi-
ences that a “trans identity” can describe
includes, according to Whittle, “discomfort
with role expectations, being queer, occa-
sional or more frequent cross-dressing,
permanent cross-dressing and cross-gender
living, through to accessing major health
interventions such as hormonal therapy
and surgical
reassignment procedures”
(2006: xi). Joseph Bristow has noted “the
proliferation of sexual
identities” in the
twenty-ﬁrst century, and arguably this has
also been the case for gender (1997: 219). As
relatively new identities and descriptions
such as “transman” become available – of-
ten identities which disrupt attempts at
categorization and containment, and cele-
brate indeterminacy and inbetweenness –
discussions of gender have moved far be-
yond the taxonomical models of the sexol-
ogists and beyond any simple analysis of the
characteristics of masculinity and feminin-
ity. If we have not yet moved beyond gender
altogether (as certain advocates of techno-
cultural theory might have hoped, in the
wake of Donna Haraway’s “Cyborg man-
ifesto”), it is clear that the impetus to reﬂect
upon and theorize gender has not yet abat-
ed, and our understanding of it continues to
develop.

SEE ALSO: Butler, Judith; Feminism;
Gender and Cultural Studies; Lesbian, Gay,
Bisexual, and Transgender Studies;
Phallus/Phallocentrism; Poststructuralism;
Psychoanalysis (since 1966); Psychoanalysis
(to 1966); Queer Theory

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

REFERENCES AND SUGGESTED
READINGS

Wollstonecraft, M. (1992). A Vindication of the
Rights of Woman. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
(Original work published 1792.)

G E N R E 625

de Beauvoir, S. (1988). The Second Sex. London:

Picador. (Original work published 1949.)

Bland, L., & Doan, L. (eds.) (1998). Sexology Un-
censored: The Documents of Sexual Science.
Cambridge: Polity.

Bristow, J. (1997). Sexuality. London: Routledge.
Butler, J. (1993). Bodies

that Matter. London:

Routledge.

Butler, J. (1999). Gender Trouble. London: Routle-

dge. (Original work published 1990.)

Carrigan, T., Connell, B., & Lee, J. (2004). Toward a
new sociology of masculinity. In P. F. Murphy
(ed.), Feminism and Masculinities. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, pp. 151–164.

Cixous, H. (1996). The Newly Born Woman.
London: I. B. Tauris. (Original work published
1975.)

Connell, R. W. (1995). Masculinities. Berkeley:

University of California Press.

Ellis, H. (1894). Man and Woman. London:

W. Scott.

Freud, S. (1973). Femininity. In New Introductory
Lectures on Psychoanalysis. Harmondsworth:
Penguin, pp. 145–169.

Freud, S. (1977). Three essays on the theory of
sexuality. In On Sexuality. Harmondsworth:
Penguin, pp. 31–169.

Friedan, B.

(1992). The Feminine Mystique.
(Original work

Harmondsworth: Penguin.
published 1963.)

Glover, D., & Kaplan, C. (2000). Genders. London:

Routledge.

Greer, G. (1991). The Female Eunuch. London:

Paladin. (Original work published 1970.)

Halberstam, J. (1998). Female Masculinity. Durham,

NC: Duke University Press.

Jagose, A. (1996). Queer Theory: An Introduction.

New York: New York University Press.

Millett, K. (1977). Sexual Politics. London: Virago.

(Original work published 1970.)

Segal, L. (1990). Slow Motion. Basingstoke: Palgrave

Macmillan.

Stryker, S. (2006). (De)Subjugated Knowledges. In
S. Stryker & S. Whittle (eds.), The Transgender
Studies Reader. London: Routledge, pp. 1–17.

Whittle, S. (2006). Foreword. In S. Stryker &
S. Whittle (eds.), The Transgender Studies
Reader. London: Routledge, pp. xi–xvi.

Genre
OLIVER BELAS

From the French for “kind” or “sort,” and
etymologically derived from the Latin genus,
the word “genre” has connotations of bio-
logical kind, and its use in relation to the arts
begins in the late eighteenth century, not
long after the establishment of Linnaean
taxonomy. Theoretical and critical work
on commercial or popular genres – notably
detective and science ﬁction, but also por-
nography, the erotic thriller, the western,
the romance – are relatively recent devel-
opments, emerging in number ﬁrst in the
late 1960s and early 1970s against the back-
drop of New Left cultural politics. In liter-
ature, genre – for example, detective ﬁction
in Auster (1987) – has been used as a
metaﬁctional cast within which questions
of individual, collective, and authorial iden-
tity, as well as ideas of “textuality” and a
textual or linguistic self, are interrogated.
Notions of genre are implicated to varying
degree in all literary study; the more reﬁned
and complex the
literature
becomes, the less stable are the ideas of genre
and genres themselves. In literary studies
today, scholarly focus has to some degree
shifted away from deﬁnition: volumes in a
series such as the Cambridge Companions
to Literature dedicated to science ﬁction,
crime ﬁction, the Gothic novel suggest,
implicitly,
should be
thought of in the same terms as, say, mod-
ernism, Victorian, African American, or
even single-author studies – as broad ﬁelds
of inquiry, rather than stably deﬁned sets of
texts.

such genres

study of

that

Though the idea that the term “genre”
conveys, of coherent and distinct classes of

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

