 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

Working Paper 
OVE/WP-08/August 4, 2005    

 
 
 
The Socio-Economic Impact 
of Favela-Bairro: What do the 
Data Say? 
 

 

Fabio Soares and Yuri Soares* 
 
 
Office of Evaluation and Oversight (OVE) 
 
 
Inter-American Development Bank 
Washington, D.C. 
August 2005 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

For official use only

 

*    Fabio  Soares  is  with  the  Institute  for  Applied  Economic  Research  (IPEA)  and  the 
International Poverty Centre (IPC).  Yuri Soares is a Research Fellow at the  Inter-American 
Development  Bank  (IADB)  Office  of  Evaluation  and  Oversight  (OVE).    This  evaluation 
represents collaboration between the IADB, IPEA, and the Rio de Janeiro Municipal Housing 
Office (SMH).  The document has benefited from comments by Inder Ruprah, Kaizô Beltrão, 
Marcia Arieira, Tracy Betts, José Brakaz, Maria da Piedade Morais, Paulo Furtado, Suzanne 
Duryea and Guilherme Sedlacek.  Data and technical advice from IBGE, Databrasil, Agrar, 
the Municipal Housing and Health Offices (SMH and SMS), State Health Office, IETS, and 
the  Pereira  Passos  Institute  (IPP)  are  gratefully  acknowledged.    This  paper  was  also  made 
possible by the excellent research collaboration from Renata Guagliardi and by the assistance 
from  Dimitri  Silva.  The  findings  and  interpretations  of  the  authors  do  not  necessarily 
represent the views of the Inter-American Development Bank, or their Executive Directors. 
The usual disclaimer applies. Corresponding authors: Fabio Soares and Yuri Soares, e-mail: 
yuris@iadb.org , Office of Evaluation and Oversight, Inter-American Development Bank, Stop 
B-750, 1300 New York Avenue, NW, Washington, D.C. 20577. 

 

 

 
 

 
 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 
 

INTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................................................i 

I.  HISTORICAL AND THEORETICAL PRELIMINARIES .....................................................................1 

Public Policy, Housing, and Informal Settlements in Rio de Janeiro ..........................1 
A. 
B. 
Preliminaries on the Pattern of Informal Settlement in Rio de Janeiro ........................5 
C.  An empirical assessment of the low income housing market in Rio de Janeiro ..........8 

II.  FAVELA-BAIRRO....................................................................................................................13 

III.  EVALUATION STRATEGY: METHODOLOGY AND DATA ..........................................................15 

IV.  RESULTS ................................................................................................................................21 

A. 
Evaluating Outputs and Outcomes Using the Population Census ..............................25 
B.  Differences-in-Differences Using the Sample Census: Heterogeneity of Impact ......29 
C. 
Impact on Rents and Investment ................................................................................32 
Impact on Mortality....................................................................................................35 
D. 

V.  CONCLUSIONS........................................................................................................................40 

REFERENCES ...................................................................................................................................43 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 
 

INTRODUCTION 

 
The  first  references  to  favelas  in  Brazil  date  back  to  the  end  of  the  nineteenth  century,  when 
soldiers of the Fourth Brazilian Expeditionary force, returning from a war against the separatist 
village of  Canudos in the state of Bahia established residence in the hillsides of Rio de Janeiro, 
on the  Morro  da  Providencia.    Since  this  new  pattern  of  urbanization  resembled  precisely  the 
Morro  da  Favela settlement in  Canudos, the name  favela stuck and the  Morro  da  Providencia 
became the first shantytown settlement in Rio.  The idiosyncrasies surrounding the origins of the 
favelas  notwithstanding,  this  type  of  informal,  low-income  settlement  has  over  the  decades 
continuously  expanded  to  become,  today,  one  of  the  city’s  most  recognized  and  ubiquitous 
characteristics.  
  
The  favela’s  expansion  and  an  increased  segregation  between  formal  city  and  the  favelas have 
presented  unique  challenges  for  the  formal  city,  as  well  as  for  the  inhabitants  of  the  favelas.  
From the point of view of the city the most obvious challenge is that  favelas’ establishment in 
public  land  represented  a  failure  of  property  rights,  producing  a  “tragedy  of  the  commons”. 
Lacking the appropriate price incentives, the pattern of informal urbanization holds little relation 
with the negative externalities imposed by their expansion, both in terms of environmental and 
health hazards, and in terms of a sub-optimal utilization of public land.  On the other hand, the 
absence of state presence in the  favelas and the uncertainty in tenure of  informal  settlements—
particularly prior to the 1980s—has obvious welfare consequences to the inhabitants of  favelas.  
Although there have been initiatives at the community level to fill the vacuum produced by the 
absence of the state, such as the establishment of neighborhood associations1, most public goods, 
such as water, sewerage, electricity, and security remained underprovided.  The consequences of 
this are evident in the high rates of vector-transmitted disease in informal settlements, the high 
incidence of geological disasters (mudslides, etc.), and the relatively low quality of housing.  In 
the  case  of  security,  the  absence  of  the  state  has  opened  up  spaces  for  illicit  entities,  mostly 
related to drug trafficking, to take up functions related to policing and enforcement of norms2.  
 
Throughout this period of expansion, the nature of the relationship between the formal city and 
the favelas likewise changed, going from initial indifference, to rejection, to a more sympathetic 
and tolerant attitude.  These changes in perception were accompanied by a dynamic response to 
the urbanization challenges mentioned above, with different administrations promoting policies 
that ranged from eradication and forced removal to urbanization and inclusion.  The last of these 
policies was the  Favela-Bairro project undertaken by the municipality of Rio de Janeiro in the 
mid 1990s.  A clear break from earlier efforts to eradicate informal settlements,  Favela-Bairro’s 
expressed  objective  was  that  of  urbanizing  favelas  and  integrating  them  into  the  formal  city.   
This  document  is  an  assessment  of  the  Favela-Bairro  I  project.    It  is  structured  as  follows:   
section I describes the public policy response to the problem of informal settlements in Rio de 

                                                 
1 The nature of the functions exercised by the associações de moradores was determined in a idiosyncratic manner.  
Some of these associations simply handle mail for the favelados, while others serve as a forum of discussion, dispute 
resolution, (informal) registry of property, and even (limited) provision of public goods from resident contributions. 
2 See Vianna (2004). 

 

i 

 

Janeiro from a historical point of view, placing favela-bairro in the context of this wider policy 
space.    We  also  review  the  theoretical  and  empirical  work  surrounding  the  emergence  and 
growth  of  informal  settlements,  and  present  a  (mostly  descriptive)  characterization  of  the 
determinants  of  informal  settlement  in  Rio  de  Janeiro.    Section  II  describes  the  Favela-Bairro 
project.  Section  III  describes  the  evaluation  strategy,  as  well  as  the  data  and  conceptual 
limitations.  Section  IV  presents  the  results  of  the  evaluation  in  (i)  coverage  of  services  (ii) 
earnings 3  (iii)  conflict,  violence,  and  health4,  and  (iv)  housing  value  and  investment.  Section  V 
provides conclusions, policy implications, and discusses future research topics. 

                                                 
3 In the case of employment, the incompatibility between the employment modules of the two census make 
comparisons extremely difficult.  
4 The source data for both health outcomes and conflict and violence are from causes of death.  In this case one can 
identify death caused by diseases related to lack of sanitation, infant mortality and death by violent causes. Data on 
morbidity was available only for selected communities (participants of the  Programa Saude da Familia) and only 
for 2000 onwards, making it impossible to assess the impact of Favela-bairro due to the lack of a baseline. 

 

ii

 

 

1.1 

 
A. 
1.2 

 
1.3 

 
1.4 

I.  HISTORICAL AND THEORETICAL PRELIMINARIES 

In  this  chapter  we  will  describe  the  public  housing  policy  pursued  over  the  last  few 
decades  in  Rio  de  Janeiro  and  describe  the  theoretical  and  empirical  evidence  on  the 
emergence  of  informal  settlements.    This  will  serve  a  foundation  for  the  results  of  the 
impact evaluation of Favela-Bairro. 

Public Policy, Housing, and Informal Settlements in Rio de Janeiro 5 
The first observation to be made, widely documented in the literature, is that policy has 
been concentrated at the sub-national level; the Federal government has not had a large 
participation  in  financing  housing  solutions  or  in  developing  incentives  for  housing6.  
This  policy  vacuum  at  the  top  level  has  opened  up  space  for  states,  and  more  recent 
municipalities to develop their own housing initiatives.  This has certainly been the case 
with  respect  to  low-income  and  informal  settlements  in  Rio  de  Janeiro,  which  was 
originally  dominated  by  state-level  policy,  and 
the  decentralization 
implemented through the new constitution of 1988, by municipal-level policy7. 

then,  with 

Prior  to  the  1950s  society  and  state  response  to  the  question  of  favelas  was  only 
peripheral,  always  treated  in  the  context  of  broader  city  code  and  planning  strategies.   
They  were  also  initially  characterized  by  efforts  to  eradicate  the  settlements,  with 
relocation a very distant secondary objective.   The first example is the  Reforma Passos, 
implemented  from  1902  to  1906,  which  was  responsible  for  building  and  infrastructure 
improvements  in  the  center  of  Rio  and  in  the  emerging  middle  class  boroughs  in  the 
center  and  south  of  the  city.    The  same  treatment  was  not  accorded  to  informal 
settlements,  which  at  the  time  were  concentrated  in  the  city  center  and  were  known  as 
cortiços,  casas  de  cômodos  and  cabeças  de  porco.    During  the  Reforma  Passos  over 
3,000 households in informal settlements were destroyed.  Some of these residents were 
given  houses  in  the  city  suburbs,  but  in  most  cases  the  only  policy  was  of  eradication.   
The  emphasis  on  eradication  continued  unabated  until  the  mid-1950s,  with  the  Plano 
Agache,  and  the  1937  Building  Code  other  prominent  examples  of  policy—both at the 
rhetorical  level  and  as  part  of  initiatives—that  essentially  treated  favelas  as  a 
impediments to urban development, provided no housing alternatives to those in informal 
settlements. 

The  first  institution  that  legitimized  the  existence  of  favelas,  by  providing  them  with 
some measure of public goods services, was the Church.  By funding the Fundação Leão 
XIII,  the  Church  implemented  the  first  neighborhood  improvement  project,  providing 
urbanization  and  social  services  to  favelas.    This  initiative  serves  as  a  catalyst  for  a 
change in perception regarding the favelas, which then engenders the creation of both a 
state and a federal agency charged with providing housing solutions for the poor.  At the 

                                                 
5 This section borrows heavily from Vianna  (2004). 
6  The  few  housing  policies  that  have  been  financed  at  the  federal  level  (carta de crédito, BNH,) have in any case 
been concentrated in the middle class.  For a review see World Bank (2002). 
7 The new constitution changed the transfer scheme, increasing the budgets of municipalities. 

 

1

 

municipal  level  an  agency  to  promote  urbanization  of  favelas  is  created,  the  Serviço 
Especial  de  Recuperação  das  Favelas  e  Habitações  Anti-Higiênicas  (SERFHA),  and 
three years later a similar agencies are created at the state and national level.  The state 
and  national  initiatives  had  a  somewhat  different  mandate  of  providing  alternative 
housing solutions, and not one of urbanization8.   

These efforts are somewhat counterbalanced by an increase in the municipal eradication 
efforts,  but  nevertheless  represent  a  clear  break  from  the  previous  forty  years  of 
eradication  efforts9.    In  addition,  the  increased  role  of  the  Church,  through  not  only  the 
Fundação  Leão  XIII,  but  later  through  the  Cruzada  São  Sebastião,  created  in  1955, 
provided alternative mechanisms through which policy was articulated. 

 
1.5 

 

Period

Type of Policy

Description

Table 1.1: Public Policy in Informal Settlements 

Passos Reform (1902-06). The reform had the objective or improving the center of
Rio de Janeiro, eradicating informal settlements and cortiços. More than 3,000
households were destroyed; only 120 were built.
Plano Agache (1927).
Innovative urbanization plan attempted to transform the
southern neighborhoods of Rio into a "monumental city", providing new codes and
building norms. Although the plan called for eradication, it did attest
to the
necessity of alternative housing solutions. The plan was not fully implemented due
to the 1930 revolution.
The Building Code (1937). Favelas would not be part of the city's building code
to eliminate them the code prohibited any expansion of
map.
improvement of
instead recommending the
construction of the so called parques proletarios as housing alternatives for the
poor.
Parques Proletários (1941-42). The first Parques Proletarios, communities 
originally designed to be temporary housing while residents were being relocated,
are built in Gávea, Leblon and Caju
Leão XIII Foundation (1946). Promoted by the Church, the foundation carries out
some activities that improve living conditions for the favelas, marking the beginning
of an urbanization policies outside the government context.

existing informal

In an attempt

settlements,

Prior to 1940

Eradication

1940s

Eradication and 
Urbanization

Cruzada São Sebastião (1955).  This is the Church's second initiative in the 
favelas.  Like the Leão XIII foundation, the initiative provides for urbanization 
improvements in favelas (12 favelas are improved), but it also takes on a role as 
intermediary between the state's eradication policies and the favela  residents.
SERFHA (1956).  First governmental agency created with the objective of 
urbanizing and improving favelas.
Federal Council on Housing (1960).  Poor housing policies start to be implemented 
at the federal level, and start to attract attention at the national level.

COHAB (1960).  At the state level, the popular housing company (COHAB) is 
created with the expressed objective of creating housing for the poor.

 

1950s to 1964

Alternating 

eradication and 
urbanization

 

                                                 
8  At  the  state  level  the  Companhia  de  Habitação  Popular  (COHAB)  was  created  and  at  the  national  level  the 
Conselho Federal de Habitação (CFH). 
9 During the period two commissions for the eradication of the Favelas were created, but they were never active in 
eradication efforts. 

 

2

 

Table 1.1 (cont.): Public Policy in Informal Settlements 

Period

Type of Policy

Description

1964 to1970s

Eradication

Reformulation of the Leão XIII foundation (1963). The foundation is converted
into a state agency. This represents an attempt to exercise control over the favela 
resident's association, which have gained political presence
CODESCO (1967) and CHISAM (1968).CODESCO represented the only
initiative aimed at urbanizing the favelas during the military regime.
It was,
however, drowned by the creation of the CHISAM, which attempted to consolidate
different housing initiatives, but in practice maintained eradication as a focal point.
Between 1968 and 1975 roughly 100,000 houses would be eradicated.

Promorar (1979). The program was implemented in order to urbanize informal
settlements that were under flood conditions.
It was managed by the National
Housing Bank (BNH).  Six favelas  were intervened under Promorar.
Projeto Mutirão (1981). Implemented by the municipality, the project represented
the first of a string of municipal-level interventions aimed at urbanization. Fifteen
favelas, including the Roçinha, were partially urbanized.
Proface (1983). A state-level initiative that build on the municipality's Projeto
Mutirão, it was focused on providing water and sewerage services to favelas. 60
favelas were linked to the city's water and sewerage. This was accompanied by a
land tenure initiative, the Cada Família Um Lote program (1983), also implemented
at the state level.
Programa Qüinqüenal (1985). The plan calls for incorporation of the favelas into
the city more broadly than the provision of water and sewerage, recommending that
all neighborhood state functions (formal recognition, mail, etc) be provided. It does
not have an operative counterpart and is not implemented.
Plano Diretor (1992). The new city plan incorporates the change in focus seen in
the Programa Qüinqüenal,
from municipal
decentralization, it is able to fund broader neighborhood improvement projects.
Geap (1993). The newly created executive housing advisory board proposes six
neighborhood improvement projects, including Favela-Bairro.
Favela-Bairro I (1994). Urban upgrading program implemented in 38 favelas.
Improvements in other informal settlements are also provided for.
Favela-Bairro II (2000). The second phase introduces activities in education,
health and training, as well as community development. Property rights recognition
are also included.

new resources

and due

to

 

1980s

Urbanization

1990s

Urbanization

2000+

Urbanization

Source Vianna (2004) 

 

1.6  Much of the gains of the late forties, fifties and early sixties were reversed with the 1964 
military coup.  The first military administrations, from 1964 to the late 1970s, accelerated 
the  pace  of  eradication  and  curtailed,  at  the  national  level,  all  initiatives  aimed  at 
improving  and  urbanizing  informal  settlements.    The  efforts  of  the  only  urbanization 
initiative  during  the  period,  the  CODESCO10,  were  more  than  counterbalanced  by  the 
eradication  efforts  at  the  federal  level,  coordinated  in  Rio  by  the  Coordenação  da 
Habitação  de  Interesse  Social  da  Área  Metropolitana  do  Grande  Rio  (CHISAM). 
Between  1968  and  1975  roughly  100,000  households  were  eradicated.    The  military 

                                                 
10 The CODESCO was in a way a precursor to the Favela-Bairro, since it presented a unified urbanization approach.  
Three favelas were improved during its tenure. 

 

3

 

 
1.7 

 
1.8 

 
1.9 

dictatorship also censored the emergence of community-level political and social groups, 
the Associações de Bairros, which had proliferated during the early sixties.  This is done, 
ironically,  by  recognizing  their  legitimacy,  imposing  bureaucratic  and  legal  restrictions 
on their activities, and providing conditional funding.   

The eradication policies adopted during the dictatorship began to fragment and eventually 
disappeared  in  the  last  years  of  the  military  government  (the  years  following  the 
Abertura),  and  particularly  throughout  the  1990s,  when  favelas  gained  the  status  of 
legitimate, bonifide communities.  The first sign of change came from the federal level, 
with the  Pro-Morar  initiative,  aimed  mostly  at  urbanizing  six  favelas that posed a high 
health  hazard  to  the  city  due  to  their  geographic  location  (they  were  located  in  flood-
prone  areas).    At  the  municipal  and  state  level  two  initiatives  in  the  early  nineties,  the 
Projeto  Mutirão  and  PROFACE  were  responsible  for  providing  basic  water  and 
sanitation services to over 60  favelas,  by  hooking  them  up  to  the  state  water  company.  
These efforts were complemented at the ideological level with new strategic formulations 
regarding urban planning.  Initially in 1985 with the Programa  Quinqüenal, a five-year 
plan  for  urban  development,  and  later  with  the  1992  Plano  Diretor,  a  more 
comprehensive  urban  planning  framework,  the  city  of  Rio  clearly  established  the 
legitimacy of the  favelas  and  the  need  to  incorporate  them  fully  into  the  city’s  public 
services. 

The  formalization  of  this  new  policy  on  neighborhood  improvement  paved  the  way  for 
six  municipal  housing  initiatives  undertaken  during  the  decade,  the  most  important  of 
which was the Favela-Bairro project.  One must note, however, that this new formulation 
was developed at the sub-national level.  The federal response to housing needs had thus 
far been very marginal, and in the case of the Banco Nacional de Habitação, can only be 
regarded as a failure given that it neither addressed the housing needs of the poor, nor did 
it successfully recover resources lent to the middle class for new  housing construction.  In 
this sense, although the sub-national response to growing informality of housing among 
the  poor  explicitly  recognized  the  needs  of  these  residents,  it  had  no  response  to  the 
incentives  that  led  to  the  establishment  of  informal  settlements.    In  other  words,  the 
integration of the favelas into the city was not accompanied by a wider national policy of 
dealing with the future emergence of additional informal settlements. 

The discussion above represents a broad brush approach to characterizing public housing 
policy  for  informal  and  poor  housing  in  Rio.    The  lack  of  historical  data  on  informal 
settlements and the composition of residents in these settlements over the last 50 years do 
not allow us to identify the impact of these policies, either in the standard of living of the 
favelas  or  even  in  the  expansion  of  informal  settlements  more  broadly.    However,  it  is 
instructive,  at  least  from  an  anecdotal  point  of  view,  to  characterize  the  temporal 
evolution of the population in favelas.   

 

4

 

Figure 1.1: Growth in Rio’s Population and the share of favelas 

 

 

Inhabitants (1000s)
Share of city population

0.13

0.12

0.10

0.07

0.20
0.18
0.16
0.14
0.12
0.10
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

Year

0.19

1,200

1,000

0.16

800

600

400

200

0

 

Source: IBGE, Census, various years 

 
1.10  Figure 1.1 presents the change in the  favelas’ share of the city population, along with the 
population living in favelas. As can be seen, the increase in informal settlements has been 
dramatic,  increasing  from  7%  of  inhabitants  in  1950  to  almost  20%  by  the  end  of  the 
decade.  There is one period in which we see a slight decrease in the percentage of city 
population  residing  in  sub-normal  units,  which  corresponds  precisely  to  the  harshest 
years  of  the  dictatorship  and  the  period  with  the  most  active  eradication  policies.    This 
may  have  been  responsible  for  slightly  containing  what  would  seem  otherwise  to  have 
been  a  monotonically  increasing  informal  share  of  city  population.    However,  the  fact 
that this decrease is only seen in one of the three periods of eradication suggests that the 
results  of  the  hard-line  removal  policies  implemented  between  1950  and  1980  were 
overshadowed  by  more  powerful  incentives.    In  the  next  section  we  will  describe 
alternative  hypothesis  that  could  explain  the  dynamics  in  the  geographic  distribution  of 
housing  in  Rio  de  Janeiro,  and  relate  this  literature  to  the  more  recent  Favela-Bairro 
initiative implemented during the mid 1990s. 

Preliminaries on the Pattern of Informal Settlement in Rio de Janeiro 

 
B. 
1.11  There is actually remarkably little in the way of research on the proliferation of informal 
settlements in dense metropolitan areas.  Most of the research on the emergence of low-
income communities has been in the developed world context, looking at the sorting of 
poor into ghettos, and therefore does not take into account the fundamental differences in 
institutions, property rights, and land markets between, say, Brazil and the Unites States.  
It  is  nevertheless  instructive  to  review  some  of  the  literature  addressing  patterns  of 
urbanization  and  their  socio-economic  consequences.    Throughout  the  discussion  two 
questions  are  paramount:  (i)  what  are  the  incentives  that  determine  the  emergence  and 
growth of  favelas and (ii) what type of sorting mechanisms are responsible for the self-
selection of residents into favelas versus other low-income housing neighborhoods. 

 

5

 

 
1.12  The  literature  on  geographic  sorting  in  general  focused  on  issues  of  efficiency  and 
externalities  of  having  communities  segregated  by  income,  race,  skill,  or  other 
dimensions.    This  literature  attempts  to  characterize  the  benefits  and  consequence  of 
geographic sorting.  In most cases the evidence shows that sorting results in worse socio-
economic outcomes, ranging from schooling to crime and even faith11.   The consequence 
of  this  literature  from  a  policy  perspective  is  that  even  if  we  do  not  have  enough 
information to construct a geographical counterfactual to ethnic or income concentrated 
city,  we  do  know  that  this  pattern  of  urbanization  does  have  significant  impact  on  the 
quality of life of those who find themselves segregated. These questions do not, however, 
help  to  explain  why  people  self-select  into  particular  neighborhoods  and  what  are  the 
incentives and sorting mechanisms underlying these decisions. 

 
1.13  A  second  strand  in  this  literature  in  Urban  Economics  is  concerned,  precisely,  with 
selection  and  sorting.    This  literature  is  derived  from  the  seminal  articles  of  Alonso 
(1964), Mills (1967) and Muth (1969)—or AMM for short—that addressed the post-war 
pattern  of  sub-urbanization  observed  in  the  United  States.    The  model,  in  its  simplest 
form,  predicts  that  the  wealthy  will  select  farther  locations  if  the  income  elasticity  of 
demand  for  land  is  higher  that  the  income  elasticity  of  the  cost  of  commuting,  mostly 
determined by time of commute12. However, this model has been empirically debunked, 
given that efforts at estimating these elasticity parameters have not supported the model’s 
predictions 13. Given the empirical failings of AMM, competing hypothesis have emerged 
to explain the disparate patterns of urbanization.   

 
1.14  The most recent development that explains the emergence of sorted neighborhoods rests 
on  one  of  three  foundations:  (i)  theories  of  differential  amenities,  (ii)  theories  of 
complementarity of human capital, and (iii) discrimination theories based on preferences.  
The amenities theories are straight forward.  When public amenities are provided in the 
center the wealthy’s demand for these amenities drives up the rent on land, which makes 
these  districts  prohibitively  expensive  for  the  poor.    This  theory  is  used  to  explain,  for 
example,  why  European  cities,  characterized  by  high  levels  of  central  business  center 
amenities, have a pattern of income concentration near the city centers, while most large 
American cities exhibit exactly the opposite14.  The explanation based on human capital 

                                                 
11  Borjas  (1995)  found  that  neighborhood  ethnicity  has  an  impact  on  socio-economic  outcomes  conditional  on 
household demographics, social status, and income. Case and Katz (1991) look at the peer effects in Boston and find 
significant effect related to crime, alcohol and drug use, as well as school drop-out.  Similar impacts are found by 
Cutler and Glaeser (1995) for African Americans living in segregated neighborhoods.  Looking more specifically at 
crime, Glaeser, Sacerdote and Schneinkman find that wide regional variations of crime pockets are in part explained 
by neighborhood effects. The evidence that sorting produces negative outcomes is not, however, a consensus.  See 
for example, Wilson (1987).  He points out that sorting may serve to develop models in Black communities.  Also, 
in some cases the negative impact of geographic sorting may be confounded with the negative attributes which give 
rise to self-selection in the first place. This argument is made, for example, by Cutler et. al (2002). 
12 The argument is of course somewhat of a tautological construct.  For a review see Fujita (1989). 
13  In  particular,  research  as  early  as  1977  (Wheaton)  and  as  recent  as  2000  (Gleaser,  Kahn  and  Rappaport)  find 
relatively modest income elasticity with respect to land area. Gleaser et all’s estimates are at most 0.4. 
14  See  Brueckner,  Thisse  and  Zenou  (1997).    Also,  Baum-Snow (2004) looks at the impact of expansion in road 
infrastructure on the pattern of decentralization in the United States and finds that much of this can be explained by 
reductions in the cost of commuting. 

 

6

 

complemetarity,  rests  on  the  assumption  that  human  capital  benefits  accrue  to  others  in 
the form of lower costs of acquiring human capital.  First proposed by Benabou (1993), 
this hypothesis leads to equilibria in which individuals migrate in order to obtain better 
schooling, leading segregation based on skill15.  The last theory of sorting reviewed was 
originally proposed by Schelling (1972), in his “tipping point” formulation.  Although the 
most ad hoc theory of those presented, since it presumes asymmetric intolerance of one 
group  by  another  (say,  intolerance  of  blacks  by  whites,  for  example)  in  any  given 
neighborhood,  it  has  gained  considerable  attention  due  to  its  simplicity  and  rhetorical 
appeal.  The main result of this type of hypothesis is that sorting will occur, and that the 
end  distribution  of  ethnic  composition  in  equilibrium  will  be  bimodal.  Others  have 
developed this model further, by looking at sustainability of equilibria, as well as looking 
at  different  distributions  of  innate  individual  taste  parameters  that  can  lead  to  different 
patterns of sorting16. 

 
1.15  The strand of literature above is related to the original question posed above: why have 
favelas proliferated, only to the extent that it sheds light on the fundamental factors that 
lead  to  housing-work  decisions,  the  most  important  of  them  being  the  price  of  land, 
neighborhood amenities, and the opportunity cost of commuting.  From the point of view 
of the theories assessed above, explanations based on opportunity costs, changes in public 
amenities and income elasticities are most attractive, given that these are all variables that 
have seen significant change in Rio de Janeiro over the last few decades.  Explanations 
based  on  changes  in  tolerance  and  discrimination  do  not  seem  applicable  in  this  setting 
given  that  perceptions  surrounding  favelas  have  in  fact  “improved”  over  time,  a 
regularity  reflected  in  the  changes  in  public  policy  also.    However,  none  of  the 
explanations  given  above  consider  the  additional  complication  associated  with  the 
informal  nature  of  settlements  and  the  perceived  (and  during  many  years  real)  threat  of 
disappropriation  of  property  due  to  lacking  property  rights.    This  is  due  to  the  fact  that 
these theories have been concentrated around the developed world experience, in which 
property rights in land has not been a critical issue during the twentieth century.  The role 
of property rights in urban settings has of course been looked at by many authors.  But 
these studies tend to concentrate on the impact on investment decisions, property  value 
and  credit  availability,  derived  from  insecurity  of  claims  on  future  assets  and  on  the 
inability  to  engage  in  transactions  of  property,  rather  than  on  the  dynamics  of 
urbanization17.    The  link  between  these  two  separate  issues  is  poorly  developed  in  the 
literature.  Among the few studies that attempt to address sorting and tenure insecurity is 
the study by Jimenez (1984), who estimates hedonic housing price functions as a function 

                                                 
15 Benabou assumes that education is a club good: the cost of becoming a high-skill worker is decreasing with the 
proportion  of  the  neighborhood  that  also  becomes  a  high  skill  worker.    In  this  framework,  and  without  ex  ante 
assumptions regarding ability or initial skill conditions, he shows that these externalities in the costs of education 
can lead to equilibria in which neighborhoods sort by skill, and that eventually lead to sorting by employment and 
income. 
16 See for example, Galster (1990), Cutler, Glaeser, Vidgor (1997), Möbius (2000).  
17 See for example Lanjouw and Levy (2002), Besley (1995), Olinto (2000), Field (2003), which all found favorable, 
impacts  of  titling  on  investment.    De  Soto  (2000)  also  argues  that  increased titling allows people access to credit, 
although  much  research  has  found  that  this  effect  is  relatively  small  or  even  undetectable.    For  a  review  see 
Woodruff (2001).  One must, however, also note that authors have found that informal tenure agreements can be just 
as effective as formal agreements, as is pointed out by Kanazawa (1996) and Ellickson (1991).   

 

7

 

of land tenure characteristics18.   However, the Jimenez paper did not lead to significant 
additional work on the topic. 

 
1.16  Moving from the broader issue of residential sorting to the much more specific issue of 
sorting into  favelas  in  Rio  de  Janeiro,  reveals  that  there  is  almost  nothing  done  on  the 
subject  empirically  in  Brazil.  Although there are a number of studies that describe the 
socio-economic profile of low income housing communities in the municipality of Rio de 
Janeiro,  most  using  data  from  the  Pesquisa Socioeconomica de Comunicades de Renda 
Baixa (a survey done in the  late 1990s in select  favelas of Rio de Janeiro), virtually none 
of these papers attempt to answer questions regarding the formation of favelas or even the 
decision to live in a favela versus other low-income options 19.  One exception is the work 
done  by  Morais, Cruz and  Oliveira  (2003).  In their study the  favela  versus  non-favela 
decision is modeled by looking at the IBGE’s classification of a subnormal agglomerate 
census track as being synonymous with an informal dwelling.  The main result that falls 
out of their estimation is that dwellers of informal settlements are more likely to be non-
white, unemployed, migrant, and on average have shorter commute times20.   

 
C. 
1.17 

An empirical assessment of the low income housing market in Rio de Janeiro 
If  hypothesis  based  on  sorting  are  correct,  and  if  residents  in  favelas  are  sorted  on 
preferences  for  risk,  on  preferences  of  time  usage,  or  on  preferences  regarding  the 
availability of public amenities, one would expect some of these differences to be present 
in observables, to the extent that reduced forms of these observables are also functions of 
the unobservables on which residence is sorted.  A starting point, then, for any empirical 
exercise  of  housing choice would be to describe the characteristics of  favela  and  non-
favela  residents.    Table  1.2  presents  means  for  informal  and  formal  residents  in  three 
different  populations:    (i)  all  of  Brazil  in  the  left  panel;  (ii)  only  urban  residents  in  the 
second  panel;  and  (iii)  only  low-income  residents  of  the  municipality  of  Rio  in  the 
rightmost panel21.  The data are from stacked cross-sections of the Pesquisa Nacional por 
Amostra de Domicilio (PNAD), for the years of 1992-199522. 

                                                 
18  As  one  would  expect,  his  results  are  consistent  with  agents  with  higher  risk  characteristics  residing  in  locations 
with lower quality tenure. 
19 Other studies have stacked cross sections of the Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra Domiciliar (PNAD). 
20 Two fundamental problems qualify these results, however.  First, although the study contains dummy control for 
urban and rural areas, the two comparison groups (sub-normal agglomerates versus normal ones) are so disparate as 
to be almost meaningless.  For the question we are posing a more sensible comparison would be sub-normal areas 
within the large municipality of Rio de Janeiro versus other poor communit ies.  This reflects more appropriately a 
behavioral model in which a low-income resident can select to live in a informal dwelling within the metropolitan 
area versus other low-income options. 
21 This was done at the community level.  That is, communities within the favela per capita income common support 
were included.  One should note that “community” is defined by a census track.  This may in fact not be the case 
since some favelas are composed of more than one track and since, in rare instances, a track  will cover more than 
one  favela.  Results were not sensitive to the cutoff specification between one and two times the income level of 
favelas.  Above two times the cutoff becomes relevant. 
22 This stacking is possible since each of the PNAD household surveys resample household from the same census 
tracks each year. The PNAD samples large municipalities with probability equal to one, and smaller municipalities 
with  different  probabilities,  based  on  population.    Within  each  of  the  municipalities,  census  tracks are randomly 
chosen  and  kept  for  the  entire  period  between  census  years.    From  these  census  tracks  households  are  randomly 
chosen each year, without replacement.  The sample size is from 1992 to 1995. At this point we will abstract from 

 

8

 

Table 1.2: Means and summary statistics for various types of urbanization groups  

Brazil

Large Municipalities (1)

Municipality of RJ

Low income

Formal city

Informal

Formal city

Formal city

Informal (Favelas)

Household head characteristics
   White
   Years of education
   Age
   Single mother
   Migrated
   Proportion migrants from other state
   Employed

Age composition of members
   Children (0 to 16)
   Adults (17 to 64)
   Elderly (more than 64)
Crowding (members per room)

Predicted rental rate
Household self-reported ownership
Number of rooms
Piped city water service
City sewerage service
Garbage collection

Commute time one hour of more

Household income per capita
Proportion of households
   Per capita income quartile 1
   Per capita income quartile 2
   Per capita income quartile 3
   Per capita income quartile 4

0.56
6.1
45.2
0.16
0.70
0.36
0.78

1.60
7.01
0.72
0.84

187.7
0.71
5.5
0.69
0.38
0.63

0.11

0.61
7.7
45.0
0.20
0.72
0.42
0.75

1.30
6.76
0.83
0.79

251.8
0.68
5.5
0.90
0.60
0.85

0.13

0.42
5.1
43.0
0.19
0.74
0.43
0.77

1.75
7.68
0.30
1.16

150.3
0.84
4.3
0.81
0.34
0.58

0.14

0.67
8.5
49.0
0.23
0.51
0.41
0.69

0.92
4.49
0.43
0.69

283.2
0.70
5.5
0.97
0.75
0.90

0.19

0.50
6.2
46.5
0.20
0.47
0.34
0.71

1.21
6.02
0.26
0.83

213.3
0.75
4.7
0.94
0.58
0.91

0.29

0.50
5.1
46.7
0.19
0.60
0.50
0.74

1.19
6.52
0.27
0.87

224.0
0.80
4.6
0.90
0.76
0.60

0.19

277.93

464.80

152.44

551.48

231.17

194.04

0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25

0.13
0.19
0.27
0.41

0.28
0.32
0.25
0.14

0.09
0.17
0.26
0.48

0.15
0.26
0.33
0.24

0.14
0.28
0.30
0.26

 

(1)

 Source: PNAD, 1992-1995.  Defined as municipalities of 100,000 or more inhabitants

 
1.18  Table  1.2  presents  the  summary  statistics  for  favelas  and  non-favelas.    The  first 
observation  is  that  the  differences  between  these  two  groups  vary  depending  on  which 
population  they  are  drawn  from.    For  the  sample  of  all  large  metropolitan  areas  (center 
panel),  differences  in  commute  time  between  formal  and  informal  communities  are 
negligible,  13  percent  of  formal  communities  commuting  one  or  more  hours  to  work, 
versus 14 percent for informal communities. This is completely reversed when one looks 
at the Municipality of Rio, where the difference jumps from 1 percent to 10 percent, for 
the  comparison  between  favelas  and  other  low  income  neighborhoods.    In  terms  of 
household  head  demographics  we  see  that  overall,  most  household  heads  (70  percent) 
were  either  born  in  a  different  municipality  or  at  some  point  lived  in  a  different 
municipality.  This  number  falls  to  just  over  50  percent  for  the  municipality  of  Rio  de 
Janeiro.  Also, when comparing migration patterns within the municipality and those of 
other large metropolitan areas, we see that the differences are much greater in Rio, with 
more  migrants  living  in  informal  communities.    We  also  see  that  in  terms  of  migrants 
                                                                                                                                                             
problems arising from the possible non-stationarity of time series that may produce cointegration of variables that 
change together over time.  However, given the short nature of the census track panel, this is not expected to be a 
problem; almost all variation will be fro m the longitudinal dimension of the data. 

 

9

 

from  out  of  state,  there  is  a  greater proportion among  favelas  than  among  other  low-
income Rio communities. With respect to the race profile, once again we see differences 
across panels.  In the large city sample, informal settlements are more likely to be non-
white;  this  racial  asymmetry  is,  contrary  to  widely  held  belief,  not  true  for  poor 
settlements in Rio.  Although there is a clear racial divide among poor and non-poor (as 
expected)  this  does  not  translate  over  to  formal  and  informal  settlements.    These 
differences  suggest  that  city  idiosyncrasy  is  quite  important  in  analyzing  patterns  of 
urbanization: not all informal settlements are favelas. 

 
1.19  Concentrating  on  the  right  panel  we  see  that  the  largest  differences  in  Rio  are  between 
poor  and  non-poor  communities  and  not  between  formal  and  not formal.  In terms of 
race, schooling, as well as dwelling characteristics, poor communities, as expected, show 
depressed indicators relative to their richer counterparts.  However, the variables that are 
most markedly different between  favelas  and  non-favelas, are the distance to and from 
work  (proportion  of  household  commuting  more  than  one  hour),  which  is  substantially 
lower  for  favelas.      In  terms  of  access  to  amenities,  we  see  one  characteristic  that  set 
favelas apart from the formal city. Although favelas have lower access to piped water, the 
availability of garbage collection shows the most dramatic gap, of 34 percentage points.  
The higher sewerage coverage in  favelas  reflects  the  fact  that  this  measures  only  direct 
connections  to  the  city.    It  does  not  take  into  account  septic  sewerages,  which  may  be 
more common in the peri-urban areas—where favelas are not common.  This is consistent 
with sorting on time preferences versus public service amenities, although the observed 
differences are certainly smaller than expected. 

 
1.20  The  last  comment  in  order  is  with  respect  to  the  income  distribution  of  those  in  formal 
  Conventional  wisdom  dictates  that  favelas  are  very  poor 
and  informal  areas. 
communities, with poor sanitary and public services characteristics.  However, the table 
above shows a different reality.  The bottom panels show the proportion of households in 
each  income  quartile.    Since  the  quartiles  are  defined  based  on  the  country’s  income 
distribution, at the country level exactly 25 percent of the  population is in each quartile.  
Moving to the rightmost panel, we see that the population of  favelas is not poorer than 
the country as a whole.  Although more concentrated in the middle quartiles, favelas have 
a slightly better distribution.  Comparing  favelas  with  the  Municipality  of  Rio,  we  see 
that in this case it is true that they are much poorer; almost 50 percent of the city is in the 
top quartile.  In other words, although these communities are certainly poor vis-à-vis the 
city, they are on average just as poor as the country as a whole.  The distribution between 
favelas and other low income communities are also similar. 

 
1.21  Of course the Table above only allows for pair wise comparisons, which cannot take into 
account  the  correlation  among  the  different  variables  that  may  determine  housing 
location.    To  account  for  this—and  borrowing  from  Morais  et  al—we  model  the 
probability  that  a  resident  chooses  to  live  in  a  favela, based on personal characteristics, 
including  time-to-work.    If  the  amenities  theory  holds,  the  low-income  urbanization 
sorting in  favelas  is  driven  by  a  lack  of  public  services,  but  may  be  partly  offset  by  a 
greater proximity to work, as is suggested by the summary statistics presented above.  For 
greater  comparability,  we  have  segmented  the  housing  market,  so  that  only  poor 

 

10

communities  are  included,  where  the  income  cutoff  was  arbitrarily  established  at  the 
same income levels of favelas23.  The empirical specification is as follows: 
 

()(
pfavelaX

(1.1) 

+
)

+

bb
b
X
X
SSHHD D

=F

 

 

 

 

where  XS  denotes  characteristics  of  the  household  head,  such  as  age,  schooling  and 
ethnicity (white versus non-white), XH denotes household characteristics, and  XD denotes 
travel distance to work.  In addition to the variables described above, the probit equation 
also  includes the average rental rate for each census track, denoted neighborhood rental 
rate in the table below24.  
 

Table 1.3: Probit model for housing choice in a favela  

(versus other low-income community)  
z-statistic

dP/dx

Favela Probit 
Household head characteristics
   White
   Years of education
   Age
   Single mother
   Migrated
   Migrated from other state

Age composition of members
   Children (0 to 16)
   Adults (17 to 64)
   Elderly (more than 64)
Crowding (members per room)

Neighborhood rental rate (1000s)
Household self-reported ownership
Number of rooms
Piped city water service
City sewerage service
Garbage collection

0.017
-0.021
-0.002
0.016
0.043
0.109

0.002
0.001
-0.077
0.012

-2.766
0.149
-0.021
-0.063
0.282
-0.489

(1.05)
(-8.44)
(-1.89)
(0.68)
(1.61)
(3.87)

(0.40)
(0.72)
(-3.34)
(0.64)

(-17.20)
(7.60)
(-2.94)
(-1.82)
(16.11)
(-23.00)

mean

0.604
8.138
41.760
0.146
0.427
0.334

1.174
4.004
0.103
0.772

0.135
0.710
5.046
0.963
0.700
0.874

Commute time one hour of more

-0.138

(-7.48)

0.234

Household income p.c.  (1000s)
Pseudo R-squared
Observations

0.054
0.271
4597

(2.49)

0.235

 

 

1.22  As can be seen from Table 1.3, the probit results largely corroborate what was seen in the 
summary statistics.  Of particular note are the marked differences in education and out of 
state migration effects, as well as the different effects of amenities and the proximity to 
work:  household  heads  that  commute  less  than  one  hour  are  sixteen  percentage  points 
more  likely  to  live  in  favelas.    With  respect  to  migration,  we  see  that,  conditional  on 

                                                 
23 See footnote 21. 
24  The  neighborhood  rental  rate  for  observation  i  is  based  on  all  neighboring  observations,  but  excludes  the  ith 
observation. 

 

11

 

being  a  migrant,  those  who  arrive  from  outside  the  state  of  Rio  are  almost  eleven 
percentage points more likely to live in a  favela than in other low income communities.  
In  terms  of  amenities,  the  only  variable  that  showed  a  conditional  decrease  in  the 
probability  of  living  in  a  favela  is  garbage  collection.    The  presence  of  sewerage  is 
associated with an increase in probability, mainly due to the fact that non-city sewerage 
systems  are  not  tabulated  as  sewerage.    However,  beyond  the  direct  measurement  of 
amenities,  the  neighborhood  also  measures  the  quality  of  the  neighborhood’s  housing.   
Here  we  see  that  even  among  low  income  housing,  neighborhood  high  neighborhood 
housing prices are still associated with a lower probability of residing in the  favela.  For 
every 10 Reais in additional average neighborhood monthly rent, the probability of being 
in a favela decreases by a full 2.8 percentage points. 

 
1.23  The probit model allows one to observe how characteristics endogenous to the household 
influence  housing  decisions.    The  results  suggest  that  there  is  sorting.    However,  this 
sorting  is  not  on  basis  of  race,  as  would  be  expected  by  the  “tipping”  model  of 
asymmetric preferences.  Rather, the sorting is based on factors related to education and 
distance  from  work.  Of  course  we  cannot  separate  what  part  of  this  sorting  is  due  to 
unobserved heterogeneity; nor does the approach allow  for the estimation of relationships 
between community-level characteristics in favelas and in other communities, such as the 
availability  of  public  services.    The  negative  coefficient  both  on  age  and  on  time  of 
migration suggests that there is also sorting over the lifecycle.  In particular, it is possible 
that  favelas  may  represent  a  temporary  housing  solution  for  households  in  transit.  
Without  longitudinal  information  on  households,  however,  it  is  not  possible  to  test  this 
hypothesis. 

 
1.24  The conclusion that falls out of this analysis is that if sorting is based on distance-to-work 
(as an amenity) versus lack of public services, or even, say, lack of security (as a negative 
amenity),  this  has  important  consequences  to  the  extent  that  programs  such  as  Favela-
Bairro,  by  providing  public  service  amenities,  may  be  changing  the  incentive  structure 
that  is  driving  the  selection  of  residents  into  formal  communities  or  into  existing  (or 
newly occupied) informal communities. By altering the incentive structure one of the first 
effects  of  upgrading  neighborhood  programmes  can  be  a  stimulus  to  migration  towards 
the  recently 
into  areas  where  expectations  exist  of  future 
improvements.  Beyond  the  market  failures  that  this  entails  the  program  could  also 
provide incentives for residents to migrate to areas that already have huge concentration 
of  households.    For  this  reason,  one  of  the  outcomes  we  will  be  looking  at  in  this 
evaluation is precisely changes in population size before and after the programme.  One 
should  note  however,  that  the  expected  direction  of  change  in  this  case  is  ambiguous: 
neighborhood  improvement  could  have  a  larger  impact  on  informal  settlement  more 
broadly, and if property values are impacted, could actually hinder immigration.   

improved  areas  or 

 
1.25  This  higher  price  could  be  the  consequence  of  an  increase  in  demand  for  recently 
improved  communities,  which  in  turn  could  change  both  the  turnover  of  residents 
(housing tenure) and eventually the composition of residents. Residents in benefited areas 
could  be  well-off  in  terms  of  both  wealth  and  current  income.  A  shortcoming  that  can 
prevent  this  process  from  happening  is  the  fact  that  favelas  residents  “choose”  to  live 

 

12

 

there for its low costs25 vis-à-vis other low income area, both in terms of commuting cost 
as  seen  above  as  well  as  in  terms  of  evading  tax  and  contributions  over  public  utilities 
such as lighting, water and the property tax. Therefore, it is unclear if the increase on the 
value of the properties would really increase the wealth and income of current residents 
of  if  it  would  only  compensate  for  the  increase  in  the  cost-of-living  driven  up  for  the 
recovery cost of upgrading programmes. 

 
1.26  Other  outcomes  that  can  be  affected  by  the  infrastructure  upgrading  of  the  favelas are 
positive externalities in  relation  to  health.  It  is  well-known the link between sanitation 
and provision of quality of water (as well as quantity) in preventing a series of diseases, 
particular,  vector-borne  disease.  Additionally,  since  these  diseases  are  one  of  the  main 
causes of  child mortality, it would be interesting to investigate whether the urbanization 
programme had positive effects on reducing child mortality.  
 

 

II.  FAVELA-BAIRRO 

2.1 

 
2.2 

 
2.3 

The Favela-Bairro program was an initiative of the Municipio do Rio de Janeiro.  It grew 
out of the city’s master urbanization plan of 1992, the  Plano Diretor.  The program was 
financed  partly  with  IDB  funds,  in  the  form  of  two  investment  loans  approved  in  1995 
and 2000 and partly with the municipality funds, each for 180 million dollars (with 120 
million in counterpart).  It was coordinated by the newly created Secretaria Municipal de 
Habitação (SMH), but involved other municipal agencies including the labor and social 
development  secretariats,  the  municipal  rubbish  collection  company  (COMLURB)  as 
well as agencies at the state level—most notably the state water company, CEDAE. 

The scope of  Favela-Bairro was medium-sized communities.  As was mentioned in the 
introduction,  the  Plano  Diretor  of  Rio  contemplated  a  number  of  different  urbanization 
programs.    Favela-Bairro  was  designed  to  address  the  needs  of  communities  with 
between  500  and  2,500  households.    The  city  also  implemented  programs  to  deal  with 
smaller  favelas  (Bairrinho)  as  well  as  programs  to  urbanize  the  city’s  largest  favela 
communities  (Grandes  Favelas).  In terms of the amounts per beneficiary, the  Favela-
Bairro  program  was  the  most  ambitious,  with  an  estimated  expenditure  per  family  of 
3,500 dollars26. 

The  objective  of  the  two  programs  was  to  improve  the  living  conditions  of  the  urban 
poor,  and  in  doing  so  the  program  contained  a  rather  wide  mix  of  different  social 
infrastructure,  land  tenure,  and  social  development  components.    Specific  objectives 
included  the  reduction  in  the  risk  of  geological  and  environmental  accidents  (mostly 
landslides and floods), increased transit access, reduction in the incidence of vector-borne 
disease,  as  well  as  increases  in  utilization  of  public  services.    The  basic  infrastructure 

                                                 
25 The PCBR reveals that 46% of the head of household say that they chose to leave in a favela due to housing costs. 
Another  28%  say  that  they  live  there  because  it  is  the  same  place  where  friends  and  relatives  live  (possibly,  a 
measure of social capital), only 11% point to proximity of workplace as the main reason to live in a favela. 
26 This amount was later increased further to 4,000.  For details see the IDB, “Project Completion Report: Popular 
Housing Urbanization Project of Rio de Janeiro”, December 2001. 

 

13

 

component consisted of installing water, gutter, sewerage and lighting hardware,  as well 
as road improvements.  This infrastructure was made operative with municipal and state 
provision  of  these  public  goods,  including  rubbish  collection.    The  social  component 
varied  over  time,  and  originally  included  the  construction  of  early  child  care centers.  
However,  most  social  programs  were  delayed  until  the  second  phase  and  they  were  de 
facto absent from the first phase of  Favela-Bairro, which is the focus of this evaluation.  
In  the  first  phase,  however,  training  programs  were  included  with  other  funds,  namely 
from  the  Fundo  de  Amparo  ao  Trabalhador  (FAT).    The  project  also  involved  the 
community  in  the  selection  of  projects,  although  the  exact  mechanism  by  which  these 
choices  were  made,  as  well  as  the  de  facto  magnitude  of  local  control,  were  not  made 
clear during the evaluation interviews. 

The  selection  of  communities  into  the  program  and  the  order  in  which  favelas  were 
chosen in the project is particularly important, since this is the key to any evaluation that 
deals with endogenous program  placement.  The loan document included provisions that 
objective  criteria  be  developed  for  the  selection  and  ordering  of  communities  in  the 
project—and  this  was  done  during  project  preparation  and  the  results  of  the  ordering 
were presented in the form of a  community  matrix27.  These criteria were broadly based 
on  the  socio-economic  deficit  of  communities,  the  subjective  assessment  of  the 
difficulties  of  implementing  public  works,  and  the  public  works  (water,  sewer,  rubbish 
collection) deficits.  In all 89 communities are identified in the loan document’s matrix.  
However,  the  Municipality  developed  its  own  criteria  for  selection  which  do  not  match 
the  IDB  criteria.    The  data  reviewed  suggests  that  the  IDB  criteria  was  used  to  rank 
favelas conditional on program participation, while the Municipality criteria were used to 
select communities into the program.  This point will be discussed in more detail in the 
section dealing with methodology. 

In phase two of the project the social components were strengthened, and some that were 
originally programmed for the first phase were implemented.  The program expanded so 
that child care centers were constructed, the training and community activities program 
was  expanded,  and  specific  modalities  were  added,  including  the  creation of  agentes 
comunitarios.    These  were  members  of  the  favela  who  were  trained  in  matters  of 
community development, hygiene 28, as well as in the specifics of the program29.  Another 
difference between the two phases is that in the second phase more irregular settlements 
outside the favelas were scheduled to be urbanized, and a property titling program, which 
had been initially planned for the first phase, began execution in the second phase. 

The  changes  from  phase  one  to  phase  two,  as  expected,  also  come  with  changes  in 
specific  objectives.    Whereas  in  the  first  phase  the  project  was  mostly  focused  on 
narrowly  defined  socio-economic  outcomes  in  health  and  public  services,  in  phase  two 

 
2.4 

 
2.5 

 
2.6 

                                                 
27 In section IV we discuss the nature of selection, and how the rules that affected selection can be used to identify 
program participation. 
28 According to the Project Completion Report approximately 211,000  favela residents (in 38  favelas) and 51,000 
residents  (in  8  lotes)    in  other  irregular  settlements  received  project benefits.  One must note that land titling has 
advanced fastest among the non-favela residents, since their land was purchased from legal plots of land that had 
been sub-divided illegally, as opposed to favelas which are mostly illegal occupations of private and public land. 
29 The gari comunitario, or community garbage collector, was also trained and hired from within the community. 

 

14

 

 
2.7 

 
2.8 

 
 

3.1 

project’s objectives expanded appreciably, as did the set of indicators to be measured.  In 
phase two indicators relative to child and youth education and health, housing value, and 
integration with the city were introduced30.  

In terms of outputs, the first phase of Favela-Bairro was able to accomplish most of what 
it  set  out  to  do.    Two  hundred  and  eighty-four  public  works  and  other  projects, 
accounting for over 90 percent of the programmed activities, were executed in the target 
favelas.  In all, 38 of the targeted 54  favelas  were  intervened.    The  program  was  also 
responsible for including the improved communities into the city map, and in the process 
providing  basic  sanitation  services.    Of  the  major  components  only  the  monitoring  and 
evaluation  components  were  not  executed:    the  programmed  evaluation  activities  were 
delayed,  so  that  information  immediately  after  the  completion  of  works  was  not 
collected31. 

The difficulties with the data notwithstanding, the evaluation strategy of both the first and 
the  second  phase  of  the  program  did  not  explicitly  provide  for  a  comparator group that 
would form the basis for a counterfactual in any impact evaluation.  In all cases, the data 
collected  were  in  communities  that  were  receiving  or  were  scheduled  to  receive  project 
benefits.    This  included  the  data  generated  in  the  PCBR,  the  data  collected  by 
DATABRASIL, as well as the data collected by AGRAR as part of the baseline for the 
second phase of the project.  The consequence of this is that counterfactuals would have 
to be reconstructed  ex  post,  based  on  a  combination  of  household,  census,  and  project-
level  data.    These  data  issues,  as  well  as  the  inescapable  issue  of  endogenous  program 
placement, are discussed in the next section. 
 

III.  EVALUATION STRATEGY: M ETHODOLOGY AND DATA 

The  definition  of  precise  treatment  and  comparison  group  is  one  of  the  main  problems 
regarding  impact  evaluation  of  social  programs.  This  is  so  because  one  needs  to  find  a 
counterfactual (given by a comparison group) that could ideally represent what the output 
(or  outcome)  would  have  been  for  the  treated  group  in  the  absence  of  the  program. 
Without  this  counterfactual  very  little  can  be  said  about  the  impact  of  the  program, 
always taking impact to mean the causal effect of the program. Several techniques have 
been  developed  to  tackle  this  issue,  especially  when  good  data  is  not  available.  In 
general,  ex  post  evaluations  have  to  use  all  sources  of  data  available  (surveys, 
administrative  data,  census)  in  order  to  try  to  build  a  credible  counterfactual  in  the 

                                                 
30 Indicators were evenly divided between opinion poll data and objective measures. 
31  There  was  an  initiative  to  collect  data,  hired  by  the  SMH  through  the  firm  DATABRASIL.    However,  due  to 
problems between the SMH and DATABRASIL this data was eventually lost; it had to be recovered as part of this 
evaluation exercise. 

 

15

 

absence  of  program  specific  surveys  with  both  baseline  and  follow  up  interviews  for 
treated and control groups alike.  

The  most  credible  evaluations  try  to  build  comparison  groups  that  most  resemble  the 
treated group in both observable and unobservable dimensions.  In circumstances where 
data  is  available  before  and  after  the  intervention,  and  for  which  the  treatment  group 
represents  a  subset  of  the  population,  propensity  score  matching  with  differences-in-
differences  is  typically  used  to  model  the  impact  of  the  treatment  on  the  treated.  
Conditioning  on  the  propensity  score  can  potentially  make  the  comparison  group  as 
similar  as  possible  to  the  treated  group  as  far  as  observables  are  concerned.  As  for  the 
unobservable dimensions, the bias caused by the correlation between program assignment 
and the outcome (or output) can be wiped away via differences-in-differences, assuming 
that unobservables correlated with outcomes are time invariant.  

The logical framework of  Favela-Bairro32 allows us to identify two outcomes and three 
outputs.  The  outcomes  are  (i)  reduction  of  the  incidence  of  diseases  caused  by  lack  of 
sanitation, (ii) reduction of occurrences of land slide; and the outputs are (i) to improve 
water access, connection to sewer, access to rubbish collection and power supply, (ii) to 
facilitate the access of the benefited population to other areas of the communities and to 
the  rest  of  the  town  through  paved  streets  and  way-out;  (iii)  to  increase  the  supply  of 
nurseries.    The  general  goal  was  to  improve  the  living  standards  of  the  low-income 
population  of  Rio  de  Janeiro.    In  addition  to  the  outcomes  listed  above  we  can  also 
reasonably  expect  that  the  project  would  have  a  number  of  unanticipated  results. 
Infrastructure improvement could have an impact on the value of properties, to the extent 
that  housing  value  is  determined  by  amenities  and  public  services33.      Education  and 
income-related outcomes could be also be associated with the program, particularly since 
initiative in these sectors were incorporated into  Favela-Bairro with funds from outside 
the program. In particular, several training courses financed by the  FAT were developed 
in intervened communities34. 

The literature on program evaluation points to experimental designs as the most effective 
manner to carry out an impact evaluation. This occurs because the randomization of the 
treated group and of the control group implies that a counterfactual can be built based on 
the control group so that both observable and non-observed characteristics are balanced 
between the two groups. Since the control group is in every aspect similar to the treated 
one,  every  difference  in  the  evolution  of  the  evaluated  outcome  and  outputs  after  the 
program can be attributed to the program (treatment).35 
However,  experimental  design  is  not  always  feasible,  due  to  cost  considerations,  the 
political and ethical difficulties in leaving out potential beneficiaries of the program, or, 

 
3.2 

 
3.3 

 
3.4 

3.5 

                                                 
32 See IDB, “Brazil: Rio de Janeiro Urban Upgrading Program (BR-0182) Loan Proposal”, 1995. 
33 These indicators were introduced in phase II. 
34 Those initiatives were later included in the design of PROAP-II. 
35 This result depends on two assumptions: (i) that the occurrence of drop-outs follows a random process and (ii) that 
members of the control groups do not attend (or be subject to) a program similar to the one they were excluded. See 
Manski  (1996).  This  latter  assumption  is  particularly  important  in  the  case  of  PROAP  I  evaluation  since  some 
control  neighborhoods  may have received a similar treatment. We took care of it by excluding communities that 
received programs such as bairrinho and grandes favelas which had similar characteristics to PROAP I. 

 

16

perhaps  what  is  most  common,  lack  of  interest  or  technical  expertise  by  the  part  of 
policy-makers  designing  the  project.    In  this  circumstance  the  literature  acknowledges 
that the second best option is a quasi-experimental design where we can build  ex post a 
comparison group that most resembles the treated one in several dimensions.  

 

on 

=

for 

the 

0
it

k

|

I

0
Y
it

|

I

=

)1

the 

=I

|

)1

YE
(

1
it

0
YE it

(

before 

program 

outcome 

information 
(
YE
)1

 
3.6  We  can  build  several  comparison  groups  in  order  to  estimate  the  average  effect of the 
treatment  on  the  treated  population:
,  where  Y  is  the  outcome  (or 
output)  variable  and  the  superscript  indicates  the  participations  on  the  program,  1  for 
participants and 0 for non-participants. The missing observation on the  expression above 
is 
,  i.e.,  the  average  of  the  outcome  had  the  treated  group  (I=1)  not 
participated on the program. If we use as a counterfactual  – to replace the missing data  – 
only 
the 
the 
participants,
,  where  t<k,  one  could  argue  that  the  estimated  average 
difference  would  occur  even  in  the  absence  of  the  program,  and,  therefore,  cannot  be 
attributed to it. The technique of reflexive comparison potentially leads to upward biased 
estimates because it cannot separate out what is the effect of the program (intervention) 
and  what  is  the  effect  of  macro  changes  or  trends36.  Therefore,  the  implementation  of 
surveys that collect data before and after the intervention for treated communities such as 
the ones collected by DATABRASIL and AGRAR to evaluate PROAP I is not enough to 
establish  causal  links  between  the  program  and  changes  in  the  output  and  outcomes.  In 
order  to  establish  that  causal  link,  data  on  both  treated  and  non-treated  communities 
before and after the treatment is a necessary condition to be sure that the typical bias of a 
reflexive comparison will not contaminate the results. In order to control for this bias, the 
difference  of  the  before-after  differences  for  the  two  groups  yields  the  best  possible 
estimator (assuming that a good matching was possible between treated and comparison 
groups) of the impact of the program in the absence of an experimental design. This is so 
because  we  can  control  both  the  selection  into  the  program  due  to  non-observable and 
time invariant factors that are wiped out in the first difference (reflexive comparison), and 
also  the  observed  characteristics  (through  the  matching).  The  double  difference  also 
cancels out the bias due to changes in economic environment, i.e., common shocks that 
may  have  affected  outcomes  as  well  as  the  selection  variables  of  both  treated  and 
comparison  groups  and  that  are  not  dealt  with  in  a  simple  before  and  after  (analysis)37. 
Therefore,  the  difference-in-difference  estimator  with  a  comparison  group  defined  via 
propensity score can be written as:  
YE
(
Y
(
where P(X) is the propensity score estimate. 
 
This is not the first impact evaluation of PROAP-I based on census and with a difference-
in-difference  approach.  IPP  (2003)38  presented  a  before-and-after  evaluation  for  both 

),
IXP

),
IXP

(

YE
(

0
it

(3.1) 

-=
)1

3.7 

1
Y
it

k

|

0
it

k

|

=

)0

 

 

 

 

1
it

                                                 
36  Under  the  pessimistic  assumption  that  things  are  progressing  negatively  over  time  this  bias  may  in  fact  be 
negative (underestimated). 
37  This  result  hinges  on  the  assumption  that  both  treated  and  non-treated  group  had  a  similar  trend  before  the 
treatment. 
38 See Instituto Pereira Passos, “O Momento 2000 do Favela-Bairro: Avaliação com Base nos Censos 1991 e 2000”, 
2003. 

 

17

-
-
-
-
-
-
 

treated and comparison groups. However, the number of comparison group was limited to 
17 based on a group of communities that were selected to take part in the second phase of 
the project (PROAP II). Thirty-seven treated communities were considered in this study 
out of the 54 communities that took part in the first phase of the program. This reduction 
was necessary due to the absence39 of some treated communities in  the Census Data (such 
as  Vila  Campinho and  Morro  do  Escondidinho)  and  due  to  the  fact  that  some  of  the 
improvements had not been implemented by July of 2000, when the census interviewers 
started going to the field. The comparison group was deemed to be a good one for it was 
selected using the same criteria of the communities that took part in the first phase.  The 
output  variables  analyzed  in  that  study  were  the  ones  related  to  the  infrastructure 
improvements: water access, access to sewer, and rubbish collection.  The main findings 
of  the  IPP  study  were  that  changes  in  the  head  of  household  education,  changes  in 
illiteracy rate, and changes in the income of the head of the household were the same in 
program  and  non-program  communities.    Changes  in  outputs  such  as  water,  sewer  and 
rubbish collection were greater in program than in non-program communities.  The IPP 
study, however, did not take into account possible sources of error (other than sampling 
error,  since  in  a  census  there  is  none),  and  did  not  provide  standard  errors  for  the 
estimated mean differences.   

Our study aims to tackle two aspects that were not dealt with by IPP’s work: (i) to define 
comparison  group  based  on  a  statistical  procedure  that  allow  us  to  match  treated  and 
comparison groups in the best possible way40 and (ii) to test the statistical significance of 
the  differences  between  means  of  treated  and  comparison  communities.  To  do  this  we 
first define the comparison group based on a propensity score analysis.  We will use four 
different  estimates  to  measure  the  impact  of  the  treatment  in  a  difference-in-difference 
framework,  being  three  of  them  based  on  a  propensity  score  analysis.  In  the  Nearest 
Neighbor (NN) version for instance each treated community is matched to a comparison 
community  with  the  closest  propensity  score.  For  each  period,  before  and  after  the 
treatment,  the  difference  between  treated  and  comparison  groups  can  be  written 

as:

a

=
mcsiij

1
j
n
1

[
YW Y

]

  and  their  difference  may  be  calculated  as 

0

˛=˛ =
iIj
I

1

- a

a

t

kt

41, 

where  mcs=t  or  t-k  indexes  the  matched  cross  section,  either  before  (t-k)  of  after  the 
treatment  (t) and Wij corresponds to the weight used for the comparison group  (j). In the 
case of the nearest neighbour  Wij  is equal to one, whereas for extended versions of NN, 
say T-NN, Wij = 1/T. In the empirical part of this paper we will use the nearest neighbour 
standard version and the 5-NN. The third alternative is the Kernel matching. The kernel 
matching  builds  the  counterfactual  based  on  a  kernel  weighted  average  over  the set of 
communities in the comparison group:  

=

a

km

1
n
1

Y
i

˛ =
i
I

1

)

Y K
j
(
K

0

P P
(
j
i
h
n
P P
i
k
h
n

)

 

˛ =
j
I

0

˛ =
k I

(3.2) 

 

 
3.8 

 

                                                 
39  Actually  those  communities  were  not  identified  in  the  file  with  the  name  of  the  slums  yielded  by  the  statistics 
office with the documentation for the 1996 Population counting. 
40 This is especially important because as we will show in the next section assignment rules were not very clear. 
41 Note that this difference is equal to the one in (3.1). 

 

18

-
(cid:229)
(cid:229)
-
-
-
-
(cid:229)
(cid:229)
(cid:229)
where 

( )K .

 is a kernel function and 

nh  is a bandwidth parameter and Pi is the propensity 

 

score for individual  i. The weight, 

ijW , corresponds to 

K

(

˛ =
k I

0

P Pj
i
hn
(
K

)
P Pk
i
h
n

 in the kernel matching. 

)

0
(()1)

Heckman  et  al.  (1997)  show  that  under  standard  conditions  on  the  bandwidth  and  the 
kernel42,  the  counterfactual  generated  by  this  method  is  a  consistent  estimator  of 
|, =
EYPX I
.  The  choice  of  the  kernel  and  of  its  bandwidth  will  determine  the 
number  of  comparison  observations  used  to  match  each  treated  individual  and  the 
weight43  with  which  each  control  observation  will  enter  the  calculation  of  the 
counterfactual.  The  Gaussian  kernel,  for  instance,  is  unbounded  which  means  that  all 
control observations enter the calculation. In this paper we use the Epanechnikov kernel, 
which is bounded, with constant bandwidth of 0.06. 

The data to be used in this evaluation comes from several sources. The output and main 
socio-economical features of treated and comparison communities come from two main 
sources:  the  Population  Census  and  the  more  detailed  10%  sample  of  the  Population 
Census. The questionnaires of the General Population Census and the 10% sample differ 
in relation to the number of variables investigated44. Unfortunately, the questionnaires are 
not  entirely  comparable  between  1991  and  2000,  despite  investigating  mostly  the  same 
variables45. Access to water, for instance,  is captured in two questions in 1991 and only 
one in 2000. Nevertheless, it was possible to make the definitions compatible in the two 
censuses. 

 
3.9 

 
3.10 

In order to get data for rents after 1996 – as we did not have this information on the 2000 
Population Census - we had to rely on the data provided by the Survey on Low Income 
Community Survey (PCBR), and from data from the PNADs. The PNAD datasets were 
already described in section II. The PCBR was carried out by the Scientific Society of the 
National School of Statistics Science (SCIENCE), at the request of the Municipal Labor 
Office and was paid with funds from FAT.  The purpose of the study was to identify the 
needs of the different communities that had been assigned to PROAP I. It was part of the 
strategy  of  the  Municipality  to  take  other  social  services,  mainly,  training  to  those 
communities  in  order  to  complement  the  infra-structure  works  of    Favela-Bairro.  The 
survey was carried out in 54 communities46.  

 
3.11  Rent  information  (and  property  information  more  broadly),  was  also  available  from  the 
annual  PNAD  surveys.    The  drawback  of  the  PNADs  is  that  comparisons  between 
Favela-Bairro  communities  and  other  favelas  are  not  possible,  since  identification  of 

. 

( )K .

  integrates  to  one,  has  mean  zero  and  that 

                                                 
42These  conditions  require  that 
nnh ﬁ
43The weight of each comparison observation decreases with its distance from the treated observation as measured 
by their propensity scores. 
44 The latter brings information on durable goods, on migration pattern, religion, schooling and working status. 
45 The  10% sample of the 2000 Population Census does not investigate the value of rents paid and does not bring 
information on the quality of the roof and walls of households which could give us a hint of how improvements in 
treated communities differed from improvements in comparison ones between 1991 and 2000. 
46 They are listed in the appendix. 

  as  n ﬁ

nh ﬁ

  and 

0

 

19

-
-
(cid:229)
¥
¥
 

beneficiary communities is not feasible given the identifying  information in the dataset.  
The  only  comparisons  that  can  be  made  using  the  PNADs  are  comparisons  between  all 
favelas  in  the  surveys  and  other  low-income  communities  of  similar  characteristics.   
Also, given that we have data on all years of implementation up to 1999, we identify the 
control group through the probit equation estimated in Table 1.3, and select as a control 
group only those communities in the common support of this probit.  

 
3.12  Death  Certificates  are  another  important  source  of  information  for  this  evaluation.  This 
information  is  used  mostly  to  assess  the  program’s  impact  on  different  types  of  death 
causes,  including  those  related  to  lack  of  sanitation  and  those  related  to  homicide.  The 
data was collected from the Municipal Health Department and  it is judged to be of high 
quality.  More  details  about  the  kind  of  information  it  provides  will  be  presented  on 
section about the evaluation of health impacts of the program. 

 
3.13  Besides the data described above, data was also specifically collected for the evaluation 
of  Favela-Bairro.  This  monitoring  and  evaluation  system  was  part  of  the  contract 
between the Mayors’s Office and the IDB. The SMH contracted the firm DATABRASIL 
to  carry  out  a  field  survey  to  capture  characteristics  of  communities  that  were  to  be 
treated—this was dubbed the Moment 0 (M0). However, delay on the contracting process 
implied that some communities were interviewed when the works had already started.  In 
addition to M0, the project provided for an assessment of beneficiaries in M1 and M2000, 
which should have consisted of evaluations based on a follow-up survey (M1) and on the 
census data (M2000) when the first results where released. M2000 was carried out by IPP 
and consisted on the evaluation that we discussed in the last section.  The M1 survey was 
scheduled  to  go  to  field  within  six  months  of  benefits.    However,  due  to  problems  in 
selecting  a  firm  to  conduct  the  survey  it  only  went  to  field  in  2003  and  the  results  are 
currently being tabulated by AGRAR, the firm that was hired to conduct it47. 

 
3.14  DATABRASIL questionnaires were not homogeneous in all surveyed communities. We 
managed  to  identify  at  least  3  types  of  questionnaires.  Nevertheless,  they  follow  a 
common  pattern.  They  have  similar  question  to  the  ones  available  in  the  Population 
Census,  but  more  detailed  information  on  property  ownership  and  certificate,  questions 
about community life and participation on the social movements, as well as, a subjective 
evaluation of the facilities and public services available in the community. 

 
3.15  The goal of these surveys was to generate information on M1 as well as compare M0 to 
M1. For this latter goal the AGRAR questionnaire was designed to include some of the 
same  questions  that  were  fielded  by  DATABRASIL.    The  problem  here  is  that  only  5 
communities (one of them being a complex of 4 communities) were surveyed in both M0 
and in M1.  There was also no attempt to sample from non-treated communities, so that 
the only types of comparisons possible with these data would be a reflexive comparison 
of a reduced subset of the communities intervened.  
 

                                                 
47  As  mentioned  in  section  three,  the  microdata  of  DATABRASIL  (M0)  was  lost  by  the  SMH  and  at  the  moment 
efforts are underway to recover this data. The files that were made available so far are not documented in a manner 
that would make it comparable to the ones provided by AGRAR (M1). 

 

20

 

 

4.1 

 
4.2 

 
4.3 

IV.  RESULTS 

This  chapter  presents  the  main  results  of  the  impact  evaluation.    Further  detail  can  be 
found in the appendices.  These consist of both results using propensity scores (described 
above) as well as reflexive before and after comparisons. In all cases, the bias associated 
with  different  evaluation  strategies  will  be  related  to  the  fundamental  problem  of 
endogenous  program  placement.    In  other  words,  if  communities  are  selected  for 
treatment  non-randomly—as  may  be  the  case  here  if  one  takes  the  favela  matrix 
described  in  section  III—the  results  after  program  implementation  may  be  as  much  an 
artefact of this non-random selection that of the program’s true impact.   

In order to properly account for the nature of program placement one must understand the 
process  in  which  communities  were  selected  into  Favela-Bairro.  At  least  initially  this 
process seems to be clear cut, since it is spelled out in the Loan Document prepared by 
the IDB: communities are selected in a first stage based on their size (only those between 
500 and 2,500 are eligible) and based on the cost of urbanization (those with extremely 
high  costs  are  excluded),  and  in  a  second  stage  based  on  infrastructure  deficits,  social 
deficits  and  the  ease  of  completing  infrastructure  works48.    However,  the  criteria 
documented by the SMH are somewhat different, since they do not include, for example, 
the social deficit score.  In addition, it is not clear if even the sign with which the criteria 
are  used  to  rank  the  communities  was  the  same  in  both  methods.    A  review  of  the 
available  documentation,  however,  suggests  that  one  set  of  criteria  was  used  in  the 
selection of intervention communities and a second set was used in ranking them in the 
Favela-Bairro  matrix49.    In  any  case,  the  variety  of  potential  methodologies  used  in 
selection and in ordering motivated an  ex  post assessment of the characteristics of both 
program and non-program communities, i.e. a modelling of program participation. 

Program  participation  was  modelled  using  a  probit  specification  in  order  to  understand 
the influence of each criterion on the selection procedure. Table 1 presents the marginal 
effects of these probit models. Column [1] shows the coefficients for the criteria indicated 
by  the  IDB.  Only  the  percentage  of  illiterate  head  of  the  household  had  a  statistically 
significant impact on the probability of being selected to take part in the program, all the 
other  variables  were  not  statistically  significant  and  some  of  them  even  show  a  wrong 
sign.  The  Likelihood  ratio  test  for  the  joint  significant  of  the  model  also  shows  that 
jointly  those  variables  are  not  statistically  significant  to  explain  selection  into  the 

                                                 
48  According  to  the  IDB  documentation,  the  order  of 
favelas  would  be  based  on  the  infrastructure  deficit  as 
measured  by  the  arithmetic  average  of  (i)  %  household  without  water  access,  (ii)  %  of  household  without  proper 
sewage  and  the  social  and  on  the  socio-economical  deficit  as  measured  by  the  arithmetic  average  of    (i)  %  of 
children under 4 years old,  (ii) % of female household heads, (ii) % household head with monthly income below the 
minimum wage, e (iv) % of illiterate household head. 
49  According  to  the  methodology  identified  by  the  SMH  the  criteria  for  selection  would  be: water access, proper 
sewage,  draining  infrastructure,  land-slide and flood risk, paved streets, and spill-over potential. All communities 
that were eligible for the program (i.e. that had between 500 and 2,500 households) were ranked in a 0 to 10 scale 
according  to  those  six  criteria.  These  ratings  were  done  by  a  group  of  experts  from  several  municipal  offices.   
According  to  this  methodology  priority  would  be  given  to  communities  that  would  be  easier  to  urbanize,  either 
because  of  access  or  because  of  existing  infrastructure.    See the SMH document “Documento 2: Metodologia de 
Classificação de Favelas (proposta preliminar)”, no date. 

 

21

 

program.  Columns  [2],  [3],  and  [4]  reveal  that  the  most  important  factor  to  explain 
selection into the program is actually the size of the community. Given the threshold of 
500 households and the ceiling of 2,500, it does not come as a surprise that the size of the 
community  and  its  square  (this  one  with  a  negative  sign)  are  both  highly  significant  to 
explain the selection. The models that do not include the size of the community are never 
statistically significant regardless of the set of variables used to explain the selection, see 
Columns [1] and [5].   If one looks at the household level of each community in order to 
predict participation results are similar.  However, in this case we see some evidence that 
the IDB criteria were taken into account, but the impact is very small (see Table 4.2).  It 
is  worth  noting  that  conditional  on  program  selection,  the  communities  with  the  largest 
socio-demographic  deficits  were,  on  average,  slated  to  be  treated  before  the  other 
communities.    In  other  words,  although  the  program  did  not  target  the  neediest 
communities for possible intervention, they did give more needy communities priorities 
in  the  order  of  execution  of  public  works,  conditional  on  inclusion  in  the  intervention 
matrix. 

From  an  evaluation  point  of  view  the  fact  that  community  selection  is  mostly 
uncorrelated  with  the  purported  selection  criteria  is  actually  a  positive  finding,  to  the 
extent that it may attenuate the bias associated with selection.  This is, of course, under 
the  hypothesis  that  selection  was  not  over  unobservables  that  may,  nevertheless,  be 
correlated  with  outcomes.    This  hypothesis  is  always  a  potential  problem  with  non-
experimental design, and ruling it out entirely is conceptually impossible. 

From  the  aggregate  results  we  can  reasonably  assume  that  the  selection  process 
conditional on the size of the community was either almost random or that non-observed 
factors played a major role. Given this last possibility and the different results that we get 
when  household  microdata  is  used  instead  of  community  level  ones,  we  will  use  the 
largest  set  of  information  available  on  the  Population  Census  both  regarding  both 
infrastructure deficit and social and economical deficits of the eligible communities in 
order to build the best comparison groups via propensity score matching. We are aware 
of  the  problems  involved  in  using  output  measures  into  the  matching  criteria,  but  since 
they were stated as ranking criteria, we decided to use them50.  
 

 
4.4 

 
4.5 

 

                                                 
50 Results were the matching process is done without using output variables will also be reported for the sake of 
comparison. 

 

22

Table 4.1 - Evaluating Community Selection Criteria (Marginal Effects of  Probit Model) 

[3]

0.223
[0.615]
0.143
[0.136]

[1]

-0.068
[0.058]
0.026
[0.039]
-0.303
[0.651]
0.219
[0.206]
-0.079
[0.092]
0.653

[2]

-0.054
[0.034]
0.005
[0.020]
0.122
[0.404]
0.22
[0.134]
-0.052
[0.047]
0.348

[0.208]** [0.141]*

0.387

0.352

[5]

-0.084
[0.060]
0.01
[0.040]
0.553
[1.064]
0.02
[0.240]
-0.222
[0.159]
0.491
[0.557]

[4]
-0.05
[0.031]
0.006
[0.018]
0.405
[0.643]
0.106
[0.133]
-0.107
[0.080]
0.012
[0.313]
0.334

[0.083]** [0.084]**[0.084]**

-0.029

-0.026

-0.025

[0.007]** [0.007]**[0.007]**

-0.066
[0.191]
0.31
[0.248]
0.061
[0.031]
0.642
[0.533]
-0.026
[0.029]
0.003
[0.007]
-0.07
[0.061]
0.029
[0.031]

0.004
[0.182]
0.276
[0.388]
0.061

-0.097
[0.380]
0.188
[0.688]
0.051
[0.030]* [0.051]
1.433
[0.801]
-0.026
[0.055]
0.013
[0.012]
-0.088
[0.110]
-0.108
[0.111]
0.08
[0.063]

0.588
[0.507]
-0.013
[0.029]
0.006
[0.007]
-0.063
[0.056]
-0.042
[0.054]
0.017
[0.030]

435
73.44
0.24

435
77.15
0.25

435
82.8
0.27

435
20.76
0.07

% water network access

% sewer network access

% children younger than 4 years old

% female head of household

% head of household with income lower than 1 mw

% iliterate head of the household

ln (size of the community)

ln (size of community) squared

% head of household with less than 4 years of schooling

% illiterates among 15 years old and more

residents per household

% female population

averare years of schoold of the head of the household

average age

own house

ln (real average income of the head of the household

% rubbish collection

435
12.34
0.04

Observations
Chi2
Pseudo R2
Standard errors in brackets
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
[1] Corresponds to a model that takes into account only IDB criteria
[2] Includes the size of the household into [1]
[3] Excludes ouput variables and Includes more socio-economical variables
[4] Equal to [3] including output variables
[5] Equal to [4] but excludes the size of the household

 

23

 

 

 
 

Table 4.2 - Evaluating Community Selection Criteria (Marginal Effects of  Probit Model) 

 

[1]

-0.122

[2]
-0.06

[0.003]** [0.002]**
-0.002
[0.002]** [0.001]**

-0.009

0.004
[0.006]
0.018

0.003
[0.002]
0.006

0.002
[0.003]
0.006

[3]

[4]

[5]

-0.059

-0.118
[0.003]**[0.004]**

0

[0.001]
0.001
[0.003]
0.006

0.001
[0.002]
0.004
[0.008]
0.018

[0.002]** [0.001]** [0.001]** [0.001]**[0.003]**
-0.027
[0.001]**[0.003]**

-0.009
[0.002]** [0.001]**

-0.021

-0.008

0.003
[0.002]

0.003

[0.001]**

0.004

0.011

[0.002]**[0.004]**

1.071

1.065

1.049

[0.013]** [0.015]** [0.015]**

-0.067

-0.067

-0.066

[0.001]** [0.001]** [0.001]**

0.004

0.004
0.008
[0.002]* [0.002]** [0.004]*
-0.004
0.006
[0.005]
0.009

[0.002]** [0.002]
0.002

0.002

0

[0.000]** [0.000]**[0.001]**

0.001
[0.002]

0

0.002
[0.002]
0.001

0.008
[0.004]
0.002

[0.000]

[0.000]**[0.001]**

0

0

0

0.021

[0.000]
-0.001
[0.001]
0.005

[0.000]* [0.000]**
-0.001
[0.001] [0.003]**
0.002
-0.002
[0.001]** [0.001]* [0.002]
-0.037
[0.001]**[0.003]**
223559
150319
150319
2300.82 12891.84 8311.61 8778.37 1850.73

150319

223559

-0.007

0.01

0.22

0.21

0.22

0.01

 

% water network access

% sewer network access

% children younger than 4 years old

% female headship

% head of household with income lower than 1 mw

% iliterate head of the household

ln (size of the community)

ln (size of community) squared

% head of household with less than 4 years of schooling

% illiterates among 15 years old and more

residents per household

% female population

averare years of schoold of the head of the household

average age

own house

ln (real average income of the head of the household)

% rubbish collection

Observations
Chi2
Pseudo R2
Robust standard errors in brackets
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
 

 

24

 

A. 
4.6 

 
4.7 

 
4.8 

 
4.9 

Evaluating Outputs and Outcomes Using the Population Census 
The propensity score is constructed using a logit model with data from the 1991 census as 
the baseline of this study51. In addition to the analysis using the census track level census 
data,  we  also  estimate  models  using  the  microdata  from  the  10  percent  sample  of  the 
census.  When  analysing  the  more  detailed  information  of  the  10%  sample  of  the 
population census we are able to use individual level information and for this reason to 
analyse  whether  there  has  been  any  heterogeneity  on  the  impact  of  the  program  in 
relation  to  the  position  of  the  beneficiaries  in  the  income  distribution  of  the  treated 
incomes. 

In order to evaluate output delivery and outcome impacts based on the population census, 
we  selected  three  outputs:  water  access,  sewer  access  and  rubbish  collection,  and  three 
outcomes: illiteracy among heads of household, income of the head of the household and 
increase in the population of the community.52   

Following IPP documentation we will consider only 38 communities of the first phase for 
which the works had been completed by July 2000 and which were identifiable in both 
1991  and  2000  population  censuses.  We  also  excluded  communities  that  took  part  in 
another urbanization program (bairrinho) and the ones who were considered not suitable 
for  such  program  due  to  its  proximity  to  risky  areas  (e.g.  railway  margins)  or  to  its 
environmental potential damage (e.g. too close to water supply sources). 

The  regressors  used  in  calculating  the  propensity  scores  were  size  of  the  slum,  water 
access,  sewer  connected  to  the  city,  rubbish  collection,  proportion  of  people  with  less 
than  4  years  of  schooling,  proportion  of  people  with  more  than  15  years  of  schooling, 
overall illiteracy rate, head of household illiteracy rate, proportion of people with less that 
4 years of age, proportion of women headship, proportion of head of household earning 
less  than  1  minimum  wage,  proportion  of  women,  average  years  of  schooling,  average 
age, ownership of the house, average income, dummies for administrative areas. We run 
four  specifications  in  order  to  assess  the  robustness  of  the  results.  The  main  variant in 
calculating  the  propensity  score  is  the  inclusion  or  exclusion  of  output  and  outcome 
variables in the logit specification. Including the outputs and outcomes can be justified on 
the  grounds  that  those  variables  may  have  been  factors  in  the  selection of communities 
and  in  the  order  of  their  incorporation  into  the  program.  In  principle  the  inclusion  of 
outputs and outcomes can be problematic given that it may lead to a violation of a main 
assumption  required  in  order  to  identify  the  average  treatment  effect  on  treated  in  the 
literature on program evaluation: namely the conditional mean independence assumption, 
which maintains that conditional in a rich set of covariates, assignment to the program is 

                                                 
51 Unfortunately, the 1996 Population counting did not collect detailed information on household infrastructure and 
on several important individual characteristics. For this reason we have to rely on a baseline that is almost 5 years 
old in relation to the date of the start of the program. 
52  Actually  those  outcome  are  not  closely  linked  to  the  one  established  on  the  aims  of  the  program.  Nevertheless 
based  in  our  discussion  in  last  section  we  could  reasonably  assume  that  the  program  may  have  had  an  impact  on 
both  literacy  and  income  via  the  complementary  programs  put  in  place  by  the  municipality  on  those  treated 
communities. Moreover, the existence of the program may have had some migration effect. 

 

25

mean  independent  of  its  outcomes  in  t  and  t-k53.    For  this  reason  we  also  estimate 
propensity score without including those output and outcome variables. We also run a full 
sample model as well as a model with only eligible communities, for robustness checks. 
As  our  baseline  is  set  well  before  the  program  starts  we  decided  to  be  more  flexible  in 
relation  to  the  cut  off  points  and  included  communities  between  100  and  2600 
households, instead of sticking to the 500 and 2500 interval. 54 

 

 
4.10 

In  analyzing  the  results  we  have  to  keep  in  mind  the  small  size  of  treated  observations 
(only 38 communities) against a total of comparison observations that vary from 38 in the 
case of the Nearest Neighbor procedure to 272 in the case of the regression specification. 
Such small number of observations may produce imprecise estimates; therefore the sign 
of  the  estimate  should  be  considered  even  when  standard  errors  are  reasonable,  yet  not 
small  enough  to  allow  for  significance  at  conventional  levels.  In  the  case  of  the 
propensity  score  matching  estimates,  the  standard  errors  were  calculated  via  bootstrap 
with 1000 replications. To account for the problems of the small number of observations, 
mainly in the case of the Nearest Neighbor procedure, we report the standard errors with 
strata option, in order to guarantee that 38 treated observations will always be present in 
the replications. Table 4.3-4.5 present the results for all specifications, in addition to the 
difference-in-difference  results  (diff-in-diff), the specification based on propensity score 
matching (Tables 4.3 and 4.4)  also report the average treatment effect based on a simple 
cross-section for 2000 (ATT 2000) and the difference before the program (ATT 1991).  

 
4.11  As  for  the  specifications  based  on  propensity  score  matching  that  use  output  and 
outcomes  in  the  calculation  of  the  propensity  score,  Table  4.3  shows  that  only  the 
difference-in-difference  estimates  for  sewer  access  achieve  statistical  significance.  The 
difference-in-difference estimates show a positive effect that varies from 17% to 23.5% 
in terms of increase in access to the general sewage network in treated communities. The 
effect  on  the  other  two  outputs  seems  to  be  positive  but  not  statistically  significant  for 
water and very imprecise for rubbish collection. The estimates for water access vary from 
6.4%  to  8.1%.  As  for  rubbish  collection,  the  estimates  vary  from  –2.9%  to  7.3%. 
Similarly,  the  estimated  effect  on  the  three  outcomes—illiteracy  rate  of  head  of 
household,  income  of  the  head  of  the  household  and  population—is    never  significant. 
However, whereas, the impact on illiteracy shows in general a positive effect, the impact 
on  income  and  on  the  population  size  is  mostly  negative,  regardless  of  using  the  full 
sample or the sample of eligible communities by size. 

                                                 
53 See Rosenbaum and Rubin (1983).   
54 It is worth mentioning that there was some exceptions and very small communities were also treated, mainly when 
they conurbate with other communities. 

 

26

Table 4.3 - Impact On Outputs And Outcomes 

(Specification using outputs and outcomes on the propensity score) 

FULL SAMPLE
Nearest Neighbour

5 - Nearest Neighbour

Kernel

Nearest Neighbour -
(bootstrap with strata)

ELIGIBLE SIZE
Nearest Neighbour

5 - Nearest Neighbour

Kernel

Nearest Neighbour -
(bootstrap with strata)

Diff-in-Diff
ATT 2000
ATT 1991
Diff-in-Diff
ATT 2000
ATT 1991
Diff-in-Diff
ATT 2000
ATT 1991
Diff-in-Diff
ATT 2000
ATT 1991

Diff-in-Diff
ATT 2000
ATT 1991
Diff-in-Diff
ATT 2000
ATT 1991
Diff-in-Diff
ATT 2000
ATT 1991
Diff-in-Diff
ATT 2000
ATT 1991

water

0.081 [0.087]
0.103 [0.078]
0.022 [0.086]
0.079 [0.057]
0.045 [0.051]
-0.034 [0.050]
0.064 [0.057]
0.040 [0.052]
-0.024 [0.051]
0.081 [0.079]
0.103 [0.079]
0.022 [0.084]

water

0.073 [0.096]
0.106 [0.090]
0.033 [0.115]
0.065 [0.066]
0.054 [0.057]
-0.011 [0.063]
0.075 [0.072]
0.045 [0.063]
-0.031 [0.071]
0.073 [0.101]
0.106 [0.090]
0.033 [0.110]

Standard Errors into brackets 
* Significant at 5% **Significant at 10%

sewer

0.193 [0.128]
0.291 [0.093]*
0.098 [0.109]
0.187 [0.084]*
0.196 [0.065]*
0.009 [0.069]
0.170 [0.083]*
0.170 [0.061]*
-0.001 [0.069]
0.193 [0.129]
0.291 [0.094]*
0.098 [0.112]

rubbish

0.024 [0.068]
0.030 [0.034]
0.005 [0.078]
0.042 [0.043]
0.030 [0.023]
-0.012 [0.045]
0.051 [0.044]
0.024 [0.021]
-0.027 [0.048]
0.024 [0.066]
0.030 [0.033]
0.005 [0.074]

sewer

rubbish

-0.029 [0.086]
0.214 [0.155]
0.022 [0.039]
0.233 [0.126]**
0.050 [0.093]
0.019 [0.156]
0.073 [0.051]
0.220 [0.098]*
0.024 [0.029]
0.198 [0.079]*
-0.049 [0.052]
-0.023 [0.084]
0.071 [0.060]
0.235 [0.109]*
0.021 [0.028]
0.232 [0.087]*
-0.002 [0.097]
-0.050 [0.061]
0.214 [0.151]** -0.029 [0.077]
0.022 [0.049]
0.233 [0.126]**
0.019 [0.157]
0.050 [0.083]

illiteracy
-0.002 [0.019]
0.009 [0.018]
0.011 [0.021]
0.013 [0.013]
0.007 [0.013]
-0.006 [0.013]
0.014 [0.013]
0.008 [0.013]
-0.006 [0.012]
-0.002 [0.019]
0.009 [0.018]
0.011 [0.021]
illiteracy
0.007 [0.020]
0.003 [0.024]
-0.005 [0.027]
0.004 [0.012]
0.002 [0.013]
-0.002 [0.013]
0.001 [0.014]
-0.008 [0.016]
-0.008 [0.016]
0.007 [0.020]
0.003 [0.024]
-0.005 [0.026]

income

-0.121 [0.093]
-0.113 [0.084]
0.008 [0.090]
-0.068 [0.067]
-0.050 [0.059]
0.018 [0.054]
-0.080 [0.070]
-0.052 [0.060]
0.028 [0.058]
-0.121 [0.094]
-0.113 [0.082]
0.008 [0.093]

income

-0.105 [0.107]
-0.063 [0.102]
0.042 [0.121]
-0.061 [0.070]
-0.047 [0.060]
0.014 [0.065]
-0.045 [0.077]
-0.033 [0.064]
0.012 [0.070]
-0.105 [0.104]
-0.063 [0.093]
0.042 [0.113]

 

population
-0.164 [0.268]
0.908 [0.433]*
1.072 [0.443]*
-0.161 [0.165]
0.830 [0.288]*
0.991 [0.277]*
-0.203 [0.174]
0.774 [0.288]*
0.977 [0.278]*
-0.164 [0.275]
0.908 [0.417]*
1.072 [0.424]*

population
-0.155 [0.195]
0.117 [0.429]
0.272 [0.403]
-0.092 [0.141]
0.101 [0.261]
0.193 [0.211]
-0.035 [0.142]
0.238 [0.280]
0.274 [0.248]
-0.155 [0.204]
0.117 [0.443]
0.272 [0.405]

 

Table 4.4 - Impact On Outputs And Outcomes 

(Specification WITHOUT outputs and outcomes on the propensity score) 

FULL SAMPLE
Nearest Neighbour

Diff-in-Diff
ATT 2000
ATT 1991

5 - Nearest Neighbour Diff-in-Diff

Kernel

ATT 2000
ATT 1991
Diff-in-Diff
ATT 2000
ATT 1991

Nearest Neighbour - Diff-in-Diff
(bootstrap with strata) ATT 2000
ATT 1991

ELIGIBLE SIZE
Nearest Neighbour

Diff-in-Diff
ATT 2000
ATT 1991

5 - Nearest Neighbour Diff-in-Diff

Kernel

ATT 2000
ATT 1991
Diff-in-Diff
ATT 2000
ATT 1991

Nearest Neighbour - Diff-in-Diff
(bootstrap with strata) ATT 2000
ATT 1991

water

sewer

rubbish

0.235 [0.112]* -0.008 [0.081]
0.058 [0.077]
0.020 [0.036]
0.070 [0.081]
0.025 [0.067]
-0.166 [0.119]
0.028 [0.085]
-0.033 [0.073]
0.215 [0.086]* -0.016 [0.061]
0.098 [0.064]
0.032 [0.024]
0.173 [0.059]*
0.047 [0.047]
-0.042 [0.089]
0.048 [0.065]
-0.052 [0.060]
0.027 [0.063]
0.105 [0.063]** 0.231 [0.084]*
0.030 [0.021]
0.167 [0.051]*
0.059 [0.047]
-0.065 [0.085]
-0.046 [0.058]
0.002 [0.066]
0.235 [0.115]* -0.008 [0.085]
0.058 [0.075]
0.025 [0.061]
0.070 [0.081]
0.020 [0.033]
0.028 [0.090]
-0.166 [0.118]
-0.033 [0.074]

water

sewer

rubbish

0.136 [0.094]
-0.193 [0.123]

0.011 [0.090]
0.125 [0.072]** 0.329 [0.111]*
-0.002 [0.046]
0.023 [0.057]
-0.013 [0.094]
-0.102 [0.072]
0.034 [0.071]
0.108 [0.064]** 0.333 [0.092]*
0.167 [0.067]*
0.032 [0.034]
0.013 [0.044]
-0.167 [0.097]** -0.002 [0.072]
-0.095 [0.064]
0.119 [0.069]** 0.335 [0.096]*
0.044 [0.071]
0.023 [0.040]
0.182 [0.069]*
0.020 [0.049]
-0.021 [0.074]
-0.099 [0.065]
-0.153 [0.102]
0.011 [0.088]
0.125 [0.076]** 0.329 [0.115]*
-0.002 [0.050]
0.023 [0.056]
-0.102 [0.073]
-0.013 [0.092]

0.136 [0.093]
-0.193 [0.121]

illiteracy

-0.008 [0.018]
0.001 [0.016]
0.009 [0.018]
0.011 [0.013]
0.006 [0.011]
-0.004 [0.012]
0.006 [0.011]
0.011 [0.011]
0.004 [0.010]
-0.008 [0.019]
0.001 [0.016]
0.009 [0.019]
illiteracy
0.004 [0.019]
-0.007 [0.016]
-0.012 [0.019]
0.005 [0.012]
-0.001 [0.011]
-0.006 [0.012]
0.001 [0.013]
-0.003 [0.012]
-0.004 [0.014]
0.004 [0.018]
-0.007 [0.016]
-0.012 [0.019]

Standard Errors into brackets 
* Significant at 5% **Significant at 10%
 

 

27

income

0.684 [0.421]**
0.737 [0.393]**

population
-0.226 [0.088]* -0.053 [0.214]
-0.050 [0.079]
0.176 [0.081]*
-0.130 [0.065]* -0.092 [0.138]
0.809 [0.282]**
-0.065 [0.060]
0.901 [0.266]*
0.065 [0.055]
-0.106 [0.062]** -0.145 [0.135]
0.744 [0.278]*
-0.078 [0.052]
0.028 [0.052]
0.889 [0.257]*
-0.226 [0.092]* -0.053 [0.213]
-0.050 [0.075]
0.176 [0.082]*

0.684 [0.404]**
0.737 [0.386]**

income

-0.088 [0.010]
-0.041 [0.089]
0.047 [0.082]
-0.076 [0.067]
-0.050 [0.058]
0.026 [0.056]
-0.070 [0.072]
-0.052 [0.059]
0.017 [0.057]
-0.088 [0.096]
-0.041 [0.086]
0.047 [0.080]

population
0.062 [0.175]
0.253 [0.376]
0.191 [0.324]
0.037 [0.125]
0.272 [0.232]
0.235 [0.182]
0.018 [0.127]
0.179 [0.264]
0.160 [0.222]
0.062 [0.177]
0.253 [0.365]
0.191 [0.302]

 

 

4.12  The  difference-in-differences  results  for  the  specifications  that  exclude  outputs  and 
outcomes from the propensity score are in general much larger, basically due to the lower 
quality of the matching, and for this reason a larger number of estimates are statistically 
significant.  The  estimates  for  the  average  treatment  effect  (ATT)  in  1991,  i.e.,  for  our 
baseline,  yield  negative  coefficients  of  greater  magnitude  in  this  specification  than  the 
specification  that  includes  outputs  and  outcomes.  However,  they  are  only  marginally 
statistically  significant,  with  the  exception  of  the  estimates  for  population.  The 
difference-in-differences  estimates  according  to  this  specification  show  that  both  water 
and  sewerage  access  to  the  general  network  increased  substantially  for  treated 
communities  vis-à-vis  comparison  ones.  Estimates  suggest  that  water  access  increased 
between  5.8%  to  12.5%  and  Sewerage  access  increased  between  21%  and  33.5%.  No 
effects  are  found  for  rubbish  collection,  illiteracy  and  population  growth.    In  terms  of 
income, for the full sample, the estimates suggest a significant negative, but we interpret 
these with caution given that they are not robust across empirical specifications, and in 
particular  are  sensitive  to  the  variables  used  in  the  logit  matching.  Another  empirical 
regularity  of  note  in  this  specification  is  that  it  seems  that  there  were  instances  of  the 
“vanishing  benefits”  effect  if  we  analyze  only  the  average  treatment  effect  after  the 
treatment (ATT 2000), i.e. if we do not double difference the treatment effects. Several 
specifications of the cross-section  matching for water and sewer access are positive but 
never  statistically  significant.  However,  the  difference-in-difference  estimates  are 
positive and statistically significant.  

 
4.13 

 

 
 

 

Impact models were also estimated parametrically, primarily as a robustness check.  The 
results  in  Table  4.5  are  based  on  a  regression  model  with  interaction  between  the  year 
2000  and  the  treated  communities  in  order  to  estimate  the  effects  of  the  program.  The 
parametric  results  do  no  differ  from  the  ones  obtained  from  the  propensity  score 
matching with difference in differences.  There were effects on water and sewer access. 

Table 4.5 - Regression Specification for Difference-in-Difference estimates 

 

 

Water 
Sewer 
Rubbish 
Illiteracy 
Income  
Population 

Eligble Size 

Others Outputs and Outomes used as 
regressors 
Full 
Sample 
0.066 
0.192 
-0.026 
0.000 
-0.012 
-0.238 

[0.045] 
[0.073]* 
[0.047] 
[0.008] 
[0.040] 
[0.193] 

0.067 
0.189 
-0.005 
0.006 
0.000 
-0.155 

[0.048] 
[0.072]* 
[0.044] 
[0.008] 
[0.039] 
[0.106] 

Water 
Sewer 
Rubbish 
Illiteracy 
Income  
Population 
Standard Errors into brackets 
* Significant at 5% **Significant at 10% 

Eligble Size 

No outputs and no Outomes used as 
regressor 
Full 
Sample 
0.085 
0.210 
0.014 
0.001 
-0.018 
-0.206 

[0.052]** 
[0.075]* 
[0.049] 
[0.008] 
[0.040] 
[0.192] 

0.092 
0.220 
0.031 
0.005 
-0.007 
-0.124 

[0.049]** 
[0.074]* 
[0.045] 
[0.008] 
[0.039] 
[0.106] 

 

28

 

 

 

The difference-in-difference estimates on water access varied from 6.6% to 9.2% and the 
one for sewer varied from 19% to 22% in line with the previous results.55 

 
4.14  To illustrate the sort of bias we would get if we had implemented a reflexive comparison 
approach  (before-after  analysis),  we  report  in  Table  4.6  the  results  of  a  regression  of 
outcome  and  outputs  in  relation  to  a  year  dummy  (2000).  The  coefficient  of  the  year 
dummy gives us the mean average effect of the program when we compare 2000 results 
with 1991 ones. The constant gives us the average level of outcome and outputs in 1991 
for  the  38  treated  favelas.  The  results  reveal  that  reflexive  comparison  would 
overestimate  the  actual  effect  of  the  program  in  more  than  100%  for  water  and  sewer 
access  and  rubbish  collection.  The  results  for  illiteracy  and  income  of  the  head  of 
household would be clearly biased upwards (in absolute value) and would be statistically 
significant.  Clearly,  Before-after  analysis  is  a  very  poor  indicator  of  the  success  of  the 
program.  These  results  based  on  census  data  make  us  very  skeptical  in  relation  to  what 
kind of input longitudinal data only on treated favela can give us in an impact evaluation. 

Table 4.6   Reflexive Comparisons Using Household Microdata 
Income
0.319
[5.82]**
5.733

Illiteracy
-0.061
[5.37]**
0.202

Rubbish
0.188
[4.41]**
0.793

Water
0.139
[3.02]**
0.805

[24.74]**

Sewer
0.436
[6.96]**
0.442
[9.99]**

[26.37]**

[25.28]**

[147.82]**

[70.02]**

76
0.4

76
0.21

76
0.28

76
0.31

76
0

year==2000

constant

Observations
R-squared
Absolute value of t statistics in brackets
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

76
0.11

Population

0.054
[0.34]
7.823

 

Differences-in-Differences Using the Sample Census: Heterogeneity of Impact 

 
B. 
 
4.15  The sample census can help us to check the results of the last section and also to evaluate 
if  there  was  heterogeneity  on  the  effect  of  the  program.  Basically  we  want  to  know if 
there was any difference in the effect of the problem according to the household income. 
Table 4.7 shows the results of the effect of the program on selected characteristics of 
treated  communities.  Due  to  the  larger  sample  size  -  the  unit  of  observation  is  not  the 
community, but the individual  – the coefficient of the interaction (and its correspondent 
marginal effect) are more robust than with aggregate data.  

                                                 
55  It  is  worth  noting  that  the  specifications  with  outputs  and  outcomes  as  regressors  obviously  do  not  use  the 
dependent variable, but use the other outputs and outcomes investigated on this paper. 

 

29

 

 
 

year (2000)

treated

treated*year(2000)

Table 4.7 - Differences in Differences Estimates using household microdata 

water
-0.009

[0.001]***

-0.087

[0.004]***

0.056

[0.002]***

sewer
0.130

[0.002]***

-0.024

[0.004]***

0.158

[0.003]***

rubbish
0.109

[0.001]***

-0.021

[0.002]***

0.040

[0.002]***

illiteracy

0.039

[0.002]***

0.006
[0.005]
-0.001
[0.006]

female headship < 4 years of schooling

0.030

[0.001]***

0.001
[0.003]
0.002
[0.004]

-0.011

[0.001]***

-0.004
[0.003]
0.000
[0.004]

 

*** Signficat at 5%
sample weights used
 
4.16  The effects on water (6%) and sewer (16%) access, although marginally lower than the 
ones  found  in  the  previous  specifications  of  the  last  section56,  point  to  a  significant 
increase in water and sewer access in treated communities in comparison to non-treated 
ones. It is worth noting that for comparison communities the access to water was lower 
than  the  one  observed  in  1991  (the  dummy  for  2000  display  a  negative  coefficient),  in 
contrast sewer access also increased for them but at a lower rate than the one observed for 
treated  communities.  The  only  result  that  is  slightly  different  from  the  ones  reported  in 
last  section  refers  to  the  statistical  significant  increase  in  rubbish  collection  for  treated 
communities. There was a 4% increase vis-à-vis the comparison group. The percentage of 
illiterates,  the  percentage  of  head  of  household  with  less  than  4  years  of  schooling  and 
female headship did not evolve in different ways in treated communities. In general, there 
was a significant reduction in the number of head of household with less than 4 years of 
schooling and a substantial increase in female headship between 1991 and 2000. 

 
4.17  The microdata also allow us to look at the heterogeneity of impacts.  In other words, one 
would  like  to  test  the  hypothesis  that  the  program  had  a  symmetrical  impact  over  all 
income  and  demographic  groups.    This  heterogeneity  can  reflect  both  the  ability  of 
different  groups  to  internalize  benefits,  as  well  as  possible  capture  of  benefits  by  select 
groups.    One  cannot  a  priori  assess  what  would  lead  one  group  over  another  group  to 
exhibit more or less benefits from the program.  Ex ante, the literature on human capital 
and  education  points  to  the  impact  of  schooling  on  the  health  production  function.  
Therefore, it is possible that the more educated would be in a better position to make use 
of  the  beneneficial  impacts  of  public  goods  provision.    On  the  other  hand,  it  is  also 
possible that the more educated are better able to mitigate against not having goods like, 
for example, basic sanitation.  The same argument can be made with respect to income.  
Additionally, given that there is substantial heterogeneity in income even within  favelas 
(see introduction), looking at the differential impact by income quantile is of interest in 
order to answer wider questions of targeting and equity. 
 
 
 

                                                 
56 Is is worth noting, however, that we are not controlling for other counfunding factors. 

 

30

 

Table 4.8: Heterogeneity of impact, income quartiles, nearest neighbor method 

 

Water

Sewer

Rubbish

Illumination

Illiteracy

Population

0.081 [0.044]**
0.072 [0.040]**
-0.009 [0.021]

0.177 [0.053]+
0.170 [0.039]+
-0.007 [0.037]

0.060 [0.037]**
0.040 [0.023]**
-0.020 [0.031]

0.022 [0.029]
0.000 [0.002]
-0.022 [0.029]

-0.158 [0.040]+
-0.110 [0.030]+
-0.110 [0.030]+

0.365 [0.122]+
0.465 [0.092]+
0.100 [0.080]

0.050 [0.037]
0.055 [0.033]**
0.006 [0.017]

0.106 [0.050]*
0.101 [0.038]+
-0.006 [0.034]

0.035 [0.028]
0.014 [0.018]
-0.021 [0.025]

0.070 [0.041]**
0.043 [0.035]
-0.027 [0.018]

0.107 [0.054]*
0.109 [0.037]+
0.002 [0.035]

0.017 [0.036]
-0.002 [0.032]
-0.019 [0.020]

0.079 [0.049]
0.037 [0.034]
-0.042 [0.035]

0.014 [0.033]
0.020 [0.021]
0.006 [0.025]

0.036 [0.028]
0.010 [0.012]
-0.027 [0.024]

-0.015 [0.028]
0.000 [0.000]
0.015 [0.028]

0.031 [0.024]
0.000 [0.000]
-0.031 [0.024]

0.011 [0.028]
0.000 [0.000]
-0.011 [0.028]

0.018 [0.039]
0.028 [0.025]
0.028 [0.025]

0.041 [0.042]
0.020 [0.027]
0.020 [0.027]

0.029 [0.032]
0.025 [0.024]
0.025 [0.024]

0.660 [0.134]+
0.637 [0.099]+
-0.023 [0.077]

0.818 [0.134]+
0.754 [0.095]+
-0.064 [0.092]

0.598 [0.147]+
0.700 [0.118]+
0.102 [0.090]

Water

Sewer

Rubbish

Illumination

Illiteracy

Population

0.046 [0.050]
0.076 [0.045]**
0.030 [0.017]**

0.297 [0.065]+
0.267 [0.047]+
-0.030 [0.047]

-0.014 [0.043]
0.032 [0.040]
0.046 [0.020]*

0.159 [0.060]+
0.146 [0.046]+
-0.014 [0.043]

0.048 [0.039]
0.078 [0.034]*
0.030 [0.019]

0.155 [0.056]+
0.153 [0.045]+
-0.002 [0.035]

0.067 [0.041]
0.082 [0.032]
0.014 [0.021]

0.106 [0.049]*
0.096 [0.036]+
-0.010 [0.037]

0.042 [0.042]
0.023 [0.024]
-0.019 [0.034]

-0.004 [0.039]
0.024 [0.016]
0.028 [0.035]

0.014 [0.031]
0.012 [0.013]
-0.002 [0.028]

0.016 [0.025]
0.000 [0.012]
-0.016 [0.020]

-0.030 [0.040]
0.002 [0.002]
0.031 [0.040]

-0.104 [0.056]**
-0.048 [0.042]
-0.048 [0.042]

0.242 [0.113]*
0.243 [0.095]+
0.001 [0.068]

-0.046 [0.026]**
0.000 [0.002]
0.046 [0.026]**

-0.088 [0.024]+
0.000 [0.000]
0.088 [0.024]+

0.034 [0.042]
0.013 [0.034]
0.013 [0.034]

0.055 [0.035]
0.018 [0.028]
0.018 [0.028]

0.295 [0.129]*
0.413 [0.102]+
0.118 [0.073]

0.456 [0.118]+
0.499 [0.098]+
0.043 [0.070]

-0.018 [0.027]
0.000 [0.000]
0.018

0.027

0.042 [0.037]
0.022 [0.027]
0.022 [0.027]

0.731 [0.122]+
0.649 [0.106]+
-0.082 [0.060]

Full Sample
Quartile 1

Diff-in-diff
Att 2000
Att 1991

Quartile 2

Diff-in-diff
Att 2000
Att 1991

Quartile 3

Diff-in-diff
Att 2000
Att 1991

Quartile 4

Diff-in-diff
Att 2000
Att 1991

Eligible size
Quartile 1

Diff-in-diff
Att 2000
Att 1991

Quartile 2

Diff-in-diff
Att 2000
Att 1991

Quartile 3

Diff-in-diff
Att 2000
Att 1991

Quartile 4

Diff-in-diff
Att 2000
Att 1991

 

+ 1 percent significance; ** 5 percent significance; * 10 percent significance
 
4.18  Table 4.8 shows several patterns that were absent in the aggregate findings.  Only nearest 
neighbor  estimates  are  reported.    There  are  significant  differences  among  different 
estimation  methods,  however,  they  are  not  systemic.    Only  results  that  are  robust  are 
commented.    With  respect  to  the  provision  of  public  goods,  we  see  two  interesting 
findings.    First,  the  magnitude  of  impacts  in  sewerage  appears  to  be  greater  for  the 
poorest quartile.  This result is found both in the full sample and in the sample of eligible 
size communities.  The difference in impact from quartile one to quartile four is on the 
order  of  two  to  one  (full  sample)  and  three  to  one  (eligible  size).    The  inter-quartile 
results for rubbish collection are similar.  Here we see that among the higher quartiles the 
results  is  not  significant,  while  for  the  poorest  quartile  it  is  strongly  significant.    This 
result was not present in the aggregate data.  The results for water also follow this pattern, 
although in this case it is not robust across specifications.  The second finding regards the 
expansion of population in program  favelas.    Although  the  income  results  in  aggregate 
did not suggest any type of real economy impact, one can see that comparisons between 
favelas  and  other  communities  suggest  that  the  segment  that  has  most  grown  vis-à-vis 

 

31

 

other communities have been the higher income quartile groups.  This can be (possibly) 
because program favelas have attracted higher income residents due to the intervention at 
a higher rate than non-program communities. Another interesting result refers to the fall 
in  illiteracy  rates  for  the  lower  income  quartile  group.  This  result  holds  for  both  full 
sample  and  eligible  size  sample.  A  worrying  result  refers  to  access  to  illumination 
services which did not increase for any of the analyzed quartiles for the full sample and in 
the case of the eligible size sample displays show a negative performance vis-à-vis  non-
treated favelas. 

Impact on Rents and Investment 

 
C. 
4.19  One  of  the  possible  effects  of  an  urbanization  program  is  the  increase  in  the  value  of 
properties.  Access  to  water  and  proper  sewer,  as  well  as  road  access  are  features  that 
affect  the  value  of  the  property.  Information  from  other  surveys  shows  that  30%  of  the 
households carry out some refurbishment after PROAP I, therefore, one should see an 
increase  in  the  value  of  the  properties.  As  we  do  not  have  data  on  the  value  of  the 
properties before and after the program, we have to rely on rental rate values before and 
after the program and from different sources. The 1991 census collected information on 
rents  paid,  but  the  2000  census  did  not.  Given  this  limitation  we  have  to  rely  on 
information from one of two sources.  The first is the PCBR survey, in which case impact 
is  identified  from  the  order  in  which  communities  entered  the  program  (i.e.  some 
communities had already finished their works when the survey took place whereas others 
had not started at the time of the survey or were still in the very beginning). The second 
source are stacked cross-sections of the PNAD, in which case we have information before 
and after impact (and during), but our comparison group then becomes other non-favela 
low  income  housing  communities  matched  with  the  favelas  in  the  PNADs.    It  is 
important to note that the comparison low-income communities are identified, as with the 
case  of  a  propensity  score,  with  a  probit  on  the  probability  of  the  community  being  a 
favela: 
  only  communities  in  the  common  support  are  selected  as  treatments.  
Furthermore, given the high rates of inflation in 1992, which likely affected both relative 
prices and recall error of respondents, the initial year is taken as 1993.  This also has the 
advantage  of  being  closer  to  the  initial  implementation  of  the  Favela-Bairro  project, 
although it limits the degree of comparability with other data sources, such as the census 
estimates.  The  estimated  regression,  with  only  treatment  and  controls,  can  then  be 
represented as follows: 
=++++
abgbd
yZIXI
I
iZIT

(3.3) 

+
d
e

TTI

   

 

 

+

where Z represents control covariates, I is a dummy variable for  favela status, and T is a 
dummy  representing  post-program  years  of  1998  and  1999;  the  years  prior  to  program 
implementation, 1993 and 1995, are omitted.  The impact of the program on the treated 
between year 1993-1995 and 1998-1999 can then be represented as  

(|'(),,1)(|'(),0)
EYYP XZIEY

-=-
-=
110
ititkititk

=

0

YP X I
I

d

 

(3.4) 

where  P’(X)  can  be  interpreted  as  a  propensity  score  in  which  the  bandwidth 
encompasses all of the control observations.  It is a Nearest Neighbour estimator with an 

 

32

-
-
 

infinite neighbourhood, conditional on the common support57—in other words, all of the 
control  observations  in  the  common  support  serve  as  a  match  for  each  of  the  favela 
communities. 
 

Table 4.9: OLS regression of rental rates, using communities matched to favelas 

Favela

Observed rental rate  (2)

Formal city

Difference

Estimate

p-value

Estimate

p-value

Estimate

p-value

Crowding
Number of rooms
Piped city water service
City sewerage
Garbage collection
Concrete structure
Neighborhood distance to central district(1)
Neighborhood income level

13.450
14.852
41.119
-2.100
9.498
16.576
-116.256
0.026

(0.05)
(0.01)
(0.03)
(0.90)
(0.45)
(0.21)
(0.00)
(0.67)

9.839
31.660
-17.393
3.956
46.215
21.742
-26.474
0.272

(0.17)
(0.00)
(0.24)
(0.70)
(0.00)
(0.01)
(0.42)
(0.01)

3.610
-16.809
58.512
-6.056
-36.717
-5.166
-89.781
-0.246

(0.53)
(0.24)
(0.02)
(0.61)
(0.39)
(0.87)
(0.02)
(0.16)

1998-1999 year dummy (after program)

63.500

(0.00)

110.910

(0.00)

-47.410

(0.00)

Observations
R squared

526
0.437

1998-1999 year dummy (after program)

8.659

(0.06)

25.720

(0.00)

-17.061

(0.00)

Predicted rental rate

Observations
R squared

4417
0.013

(1) Measured by proportion of commuters who live one hour or further from work.
(2) Rent is predicted based on coeficients from 1993-1995 cross-sections

 

4.20 

 
It should be noted that the direction of effect is by no means evident.  According to the 
standard  textbook  explanation  on  rental  rates  and  property  values,  in  a  frictionless 
environment  with  no  transaction  costs  or  information  asymmetries,  the  relationship 
between the quality adjusted rental rate and the quality adjusted property value is given 
by the following: 
[
++ -
=++
RqPqittd
rE P
)
()( )(1)()(
ttPYttt
t
where R is the rental rate, P is the property value, i is the interest rate, tp and ty are the tax 
rate on property and the marginal income tax rate,  d represents the rate of depreciation, r 
represents  the  risk  premium,  and  E(P)  the  expected  change  in  property  values.    If  the 
program  changes 
the 
corresponding  rental  rate  may  fall.    That  is,  one  expects  the  program  to  have  to 

the  expectations  regarding  future  property  values, 

(4.1) 

then 

]1

+

 

 

 

 

 

                                                 
57 A “hard” common support of similar income was also included.  In other words, in a first step communities with 
incomes outside those of favelas are excluded.  In a second stage, those within 95% of the common support are 
retained for the analysis. 

 

33

 

countervailing  effects,  and  increase  in  rental  rates  due  to  increases  in  quality  and 
, the change due to expectations, 
amenities, 

, is expected to be positive, while 

tR
q

R
t
1( )
P+

E

t

may well be negative.  To deal with this problem, we also estimate hedonic rent functions 
and  predict  rental  rates  based  on  pre-program  parameters.    In  effect,  this  produces  an 
housing quality index function. 
 

4.21  The top panel of  Table 4.9 shows the results from the observed real rental rates, before 
and  after  the  program,  and  in  favelas  and  in  other  low  income  communities  in  the 
common support. The baseline is from the 1993 and 1995 years.  The negative difference 
in the post-program dummy variable between favelas and other low-income communities 
indicate favelas have not seen an appreciation in rental rates relative to the control group 
of  other  low  income  communities  in  the  common  support.    If  anything,  the  data  show 
depreciation.    If  we  then  turn  our  attention  to  the  bottom  panel,  where  predicted  rental 
rates are presented58, we see that as in the case of observed rent, there is an increase in the 
post-program  period  versus  the  baseline  period.    However,  again,  the  overall  impact 
parameter  is  shows  a  negative  sign,  indicating  that  even  as  measured  by  the  housing 
determinants  of  property  value,  there  is  no  appreciation  in  treatment  versus  control 
groups. 

 
4.22  However,  given  that  this  comparison  is  between  favela  and  comparable  non-favela 
groups, two complications arise.  First, one cannot differentiate between impact attributed 
to Favela-Bairro and to other neighborhood improvement projects such as Bairrinho and 
Grandes Favelas.  The specification also does not separate improved versus unimproved 
favleas, and therefore can be thought of as a crude measure of “intent to teat”, rather than 
as an impact of the treatment on the treated. The second, and equally serious problem is 
that  formal  communities  may  not  in  fact  be  adequate  controls,  particularly  if  these  are 
characterized by more complete land markets—in which one would expect prices to clear 
more  quickly—or  even  if  they  were  subject  to  different  public  service  interventions,  or 
even investments by the private sector that may generate positive externalities.  Lastly, as 
mentioned above, it is not clear that neighborhood  improvements in public goods would 
appreciate  rental  rates  to  the  same  extent  as  they  appreciate  property  value.    All  these 
caveats  notwithstanding,  at  the  end  of  the  day  the  absence  of  any  indication  of 
appreciation—in this specification—is a relevant finding. 

 
4.23  Table 4.10 shows that the difference-in-difference analysis for the sample of communities 
that  can  be  identified  in  both  1991  census  and  PCBR  show  no  effect  on  the  treated 
communities.  Treated  communities  had  lower  rents  in  1991  compared  to  non-treated 
ones, but the rents according to the information collected by PCBR rose in the same pace 
for both of them.  This increase was also documented using the PNADs. 
 

                                                 
58  Predicted  rents  are  based  on  an  OLS  regression  of  rents  on  number  of  rooms  and  number  of  rooms  squared, 
number of bedrooms and number of bedrooms squared, city water hookup, city sewerage hookup, type of garbage 
collection  (durect  and  indirect,  no  collection  omitted),  type  of  roof  construction  (“laje”  and  “telha”were  the  only 
included  categories,  other  types  of  construction  constitute  the  omitted  dummy),  the  presence  of  concrete  walls 
(alvenaria), and the average neighborhood comute to work time. 

 

34

¶
¶
¶
¶
Table 4.10 - Difference-in-Difference Estimates for Community rents 

(using the PCBR survey) 

 

rooms
wall
roof
concentration
toilet
water
sewer
rubbish
year(2000)
treated
treated*year(2000)
constant
N
Adj.R-squared

coef
0.145
0.503
-0.152
-0.006
-0.049
-0.314
-0.014
0.237
0.681
-0.214
0.051
3.863

4875
0.231

std. Err

[0.009]***
[0.080]***

[0.140]
[0.009]
[0.081]

[0.055]***

[0.032]

[0.044]***
[0.080]***
[0.067]***

[0.070]

[0.180]***

 

 
4.24  As with the case using the PNADs, this analysis has be taken only as exploratory, given 
that  we  were  unable  to  measure  the  time  that  each  of  the  communities  was  in  the 
program, and given the relatively small size in the PCBR analysis.  To deal with changes 
in relative prices, we deflated the reported rental value according to the month and year 
of  reference  of  the  survey.  An  additional  complication  is  that  all  communities 
interviewed  were  due  to  receive  the  program  sooner  or  later,  and  most  of  the  treated 
communities  still  had  sanitation  projects  under  way  when  the  survey  was  conducted. 
Therefore,  the  lack  of  an  observed  effect  may  be  due  to  the  very  short  period  in  which 
communities would have been in the program. Unfortunately the documentation obtained 
from  the  program  is  not  detailed  enough  to  offer  a  monthly  figure  as  to  the  progress  in 
execution  of  the  various  public  works.  For  this  reason  even  the  classification  between 
treated  and  comparison  communities  cannot  be  guaranteed  with  precision59.    However, 
the fact that the results from the PNADs and the PCBR point in the same direction lend 
more credence to our findings.  At the very least we can say that the data are consistent in 
that  there  is  no  evidence  that  Favela-Bairro  has  had  a  significant  impact  on  housing 
values in  favelas,  beyond  what  is  observed  in  both  other  favelas  and  comparable  non-
favela communities. 

Impact on Mortality 

 
D. 
4.25  One  of  the  outcomes  emphasized  among  the  goals of the program was the reduction  of 
the incidence of diseases caused by lack of sanitation. In order to assess the impact of the 
program  on  this  issue  we  will  rely  on  mortality  data  provided  by  the  Municipal  Health 
Department  based  on  death  certificates.  By  Brazilian  law  every  death  has  to  be 
documented in a form that collects information such as residential address, race, gender, 
primary death cause, etc. Such rich administrative record has been improving over time, 

                                                 
59  We  experiment  with  alternative  classifications  based  on  the  poor  information  about  work’s  progress  and  the 
results do not change 

 

35

but even so the reported addresses do not allow us to identify, with a reasonable degree of 
certainty, the community where the dead lived60.   The neighborhood where he lived, on 
the other hand, is very well documented.  This allows for a tracking of death counts by 
death causes in each one of the 153 neighborhoods. 

 

 
4.26  A  second  method  used  in  the  literature  to  assess  the  impact  of  greater  water  and 
sanitation  services  on  health  is  infant  mortality,  defined  as  the  probability  of  having  a 
child  under  the  age  of  one  die  during  the  reference  period.    This  data  is  also  available 
from  the  administrative  records,  and  is  analyzed  in  the  same  way  as  the  data  on  causes 
that are documented to have been associated with vector-borne disease.  This is done in 
part  to  account  for  cases  of  misdiagnosis,  where  the  primary  case  of  fatality  may  have 
been exacerbated by secondary parasitic or viral vector-born infections.  

 
4.27  The literature on crime and violence suggests that improvements in the access to public 
services,  as  well  as  an  increased  presence  of  the  state  more  broadly  may  also  be 
associated  with  decreases  in  violent  crime.    To  investigate  this  possibility  in  favela-
bairro, we look at causes of death by homicide. Although the theoretical underpinnings 
are perhaps weaker than those relative to health and sanitation, they with a methodology 
analogous to that used in the data on child mortality, described below.  

 
4.28  The dependent variable in our analysis is the (Pij) proportion of death in group i (i = death 
caused by lack of sanitation related disease; homicide; children younger than 1 year) in 
neighborhood j over all deaths registered in that neighborhood. In order to capture how 
changes  occurred  between  1995/1996  and  2000/200161 and how it differed according to 
the percentage of household in treated communities that were in those neighborhoods, we 
put  together  data  for  1995/199662  and  2000/2001  and  model  that  death  proportion 
according to different specifications. All specification include an interaction between the 
proportion of household treated in the neighborhood and a dummy for year 2000/2001 as 
the proportions did not change much; most of the change was due to variation between 
1995/1996 and 2000/2001. The regressions were weighted by the total number of deaths 
in each neighborhood63.  The empirical specification can then be represented as follows: 
   (4.1) 

20002000 FBFB
d

PXPP
ijjjjjj

=++++
abgh
j

+

 

 

where the impact parameter is given by  

EtE

P
i
FBFB
P

|2000|1996

=-=
t

=

P
i
P

d

. 

 

4.29  Table 4.11 presents results of cause of death due to diseases related to lack of sanitation.  
The sign and significance of most of the variables are as expected: connection to the city 

                                                 
60 This fact may me due to some “stigma” for living in communities leading to misreport or due to problems when 
recording the manuscript information into electronic format.   
61 We aggregate the 1995 and 1996 deaths and the 2000 and 2001  deaths so that we could increase the number of 
observations. 
62  Actually  the  data  on  water  and  sewer  access,  rubbish  collection,  income  and  schooling  come  from  the  1991 
census, because the 1996 Population Counting did not have detailed information on those variables. The information 
on death, however, are based on 1996 data. 
63  We  also  experiment  weighting  by  the  total  population  of  the  neighbourhood,  but  the  results  were  basically 
unaltered. 

 

36

e

 

 

¶
¶
(cid:230)
(cid:246)
(cid:230)
(cid:246)
(cid:231)
(cid:247)
(cid:231)
(cid:247)
¶
¶
Ł
ł
Ł
ł
 

sewerage  service  is  associated  with  lower  mortality  rates,  as  is  a  more  schooled 
household head. Surprisingly we did not find that the water access impacts the incidence 
of these mortality rates for most specifications, nor did the household income level in one 
of  the  specifications 64.    In  terms  of  the  program’s  impact,  the  proportion  of  treated 
households  does  not  decrease  the  mortality  rate  over  time.    The  proportion  of  diseases 
related  to  lack  of  sanitation  slightly  decreased  between  1995/1996  and  2000/2001,  but 
this fall was not significantly higher in neighborhoods with a higher proportion of treated 
communities, despite the negative sign.  

Table 4.11 – D-in-D estimates for the Proportion of Deaths caused by diseases related to lack of sanitation 

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

year==2000

prop.treated

(year==2000)*prop.treated

proportion of HH in favelas

-0.002
[7.92]**
0.015
[2.46]*
-0.007
[1.07]

-0.002
[8.01]**
0.013
[2.16]*
-0.007
[1.09]
0.002
[3.06]**

water dummy

sewerage dummy

garbage dummy

log HH income

average yrs schooling

Constant

0.004

0.004

[18.55]**

[15.48]**

306
0.30

-0.002
[7.92]**
0.015
[2.39]*
-0.007
[1.04]

-0.001
[0.41]

-0.003
[8.25]**
0.015
[2.44]*
-0.007
[1.00]

0.003
[1.03]
-0.002
[2.65]**

-0.002
[6.45]**
0.015
[2.37]*
-0.007
[0.99]

0.006
[1.91]
-0.001
[1.56]
-0.011
[2.08]*

0.006
[2.04]*

306
0.28

0.003
[1.27]
306
0.30

0.010
[2.31]*

306
0.31

-0.002
[5.90]**
0.014
[2.27]*
-0.007
[1.03]

0.005
[1.38]
-0.001
[0.61]
-0.008
[1.62]
-0.001
[2.81]**

0.013
[3.14]**

306
0.32

-0.002
[6.44]**
0.014
[2.33]*
-0.007
[1.13]

0.007
[2.08]*
-0.000
[0.17]
-0.008
[1.58]
0.002
[2.21]*
-0.001
[3.04]**
-0.002
[0.33]
306
0.34

Observations
R-squared
Robust t statistics in brackets
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

306
0.28

4.30 

 

 
Interestingly,  the  proportion  of  treated  slums  in  the  basic  specification  in  column  [1]  is 
significant,  even  when  we  introduce  the  proportion  of  households  in  all  communities 
(column[2]), it does not lose significance. This suggests that that targeting of urbanization 
program in favelas seems to be a correct in the sense that these communities have greater 
needs.    However,  as  commented  in  the  last  paragraph  the  interaction  between  the  year 
after-treatment  and  the  proportion  of  treated  households  in  the  neighbourhood  is  never 
significant,  despite  being  negative.  This  suggests  that  the  health  and  sanitation 
components of  favela-bairro  have,  surprisingly,  no  impact  on  mortality  associated  with 
vector-born disease.  A possible explanation for this puzzle may be in the fact that most 
sanitation services were already relatively high in favelas, and that the income levels (and 

                                                 
64 The positive and statistical significant estimate of the coefficient for income in specification [7] may be due to a 
high correlation between income and schooling causing some multicolinearity. 

 

37

 

overall levels of development) of  favela  residents  may  have  been  high  enough  so  that 
deficits  in  sanitation  would  not  be  a  factor  in  mortality.    Along  the  same  lines,  it  is 
possible  that  mortality  by  vector-bourn  disease  is  such  a  rare  event,  that  most  of  the 
benefits  of  increased  sanitation  may  be  reflected  in  child  morbidity  and  development 
rather than in mortality.  Given that data on these variables was not collected before 2000 
in  the  treated  and  control  communities,  one  can  only  conjecture  as  to  the  development 
impact of the program along this dimension. 

 
4.31  A  second  method  used  to  pick  up  the  effect  of  sanitation  is  to  look  at  the  incidence  of 
mortality under the age of one.  Table 4.12 shows that infant mortality fell between 1991 
and 2000, but this fall was not larger in neighborhoods with a higher proportion of treated 
communities; on the contrary, in most specifications it seems that there is a positive non-
significant effect.  However, the endogeneity of program placement could be the culprit, 
i.e, the selection of communities with higher chances of fatality, may have been driving 
the results. To the extent that this bias is stationary it would be, of course, differenced out 
in  the  double  difference  estimator,  which  as  mentioned  above  is  not  significantly 
different from zero. Most other results in the table are similar  to those of cause of death 
due to vector-bourn disease. But it is worth to notice that strong impact that connection to 
the  city  sewerage  system  has  on  bringing  down  child  mortality.  Income  and  schooling 
also  seem  to  have  a  negative  impact  on  child  mortality. 65  Nevertheless,  previous 
researches  found  very  weak  links  between  child  mortality  and  socio-economical 
conditions in Rio de Janeiro. Campos et al.  (2000) did not find a significant correlation 
between child mortality and living conditions while analyzing borough’s pattern of child 
mortality. Similarly, Szwarcwald et al. (1999) and Szwarcwald et al. (2002) do not find 
robust evidence that child mortality may be correlated with the proportion of population 
living  in  favelas,  once  one  control  for  porverty  and  inequality  index.  The  general 
conclusion  of  these  papers  is  that  the  lack  of  significant  spatial  concentration  of  child 
mortalilty indicates that public policy should focuses on improving the health services for 
deprived  communities  rather  than  expecting  that  infrastructure  upgrading  would  reduce 
child mortality on its own. In support to this recommendation, Sastry (1996) did not find 
significant effects on child mortality of improvements in community sanitation, either in 
the Northeast or in the South/Southeast of Brazil. Moreover the measures of community 
infrastructure  –  water  supply,  sanitation,  electricity,  and  the  presence  of  a  rubbish 
collection and public cleaning service – were significantly and negatively correlated with 
child  mortality  risks  only  in  the  Northeast  region.  He  argues  that  there  is  evidence  that 
after  a  certain  threshold  substitutability  between  maternal  education  and  community 
services may change to complementarities as these services become more prevalent. This 
would  be  precisely  the  case  of  the  Southeast,  in  general,  and  of  Rio  de  Janeiro  in 
particular.  In  terms  of  public  policy,  he  argues  that  larger  reduction  in  mortality  in  the 
Southeast could be achieved to exposure to messages on child care and family planning. 

                                                 
65 Again, possibly multicolinearity between schooling and income may it hard to understand its coefficient when put 
together in the model. 

 

38

Table 4.12 – D-in-D estimates for the Proportion of Deaths of Child younger that 1 year 

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

 

[7]

prop.treated

year==2000

-0.014
[4.22]**
0.016
[1.03]
(year==2000)*prop.treated 0.021
[0.91]

proportion of HH in favelas

water dummy

sewerage dummy

garbage dummy

log HH income

average yrs schooling

-0.014
[4.39]**
-0.014
[0.85]
0.021
[0.86]
0.036
[5.66]**

-0.013
[4.17]**
0.007
[0.46]
0.029
[1.23]

-0.077
[2.41]*

-0.021
[6.96]**
0.014
[0.94]
0.037
[1.72]

0.030
[1.07]
-0.055
[5.49]**

-0.015
[5.04]**
0.014
[0.99]
0.036
[1.75]

0.069
[2.54]*
-0.044
[4.90]**
-0.135
[2.97]**

-0.011
[4.42]**
-0.004
[0.30]
0.030
[1.45]

0.026
[1.01]
-0.025
[3.32]**
-0.071
[1.91]
-0.016
[7.09]**

-0.014
[5.00]**
-0.009
[0.50]
0.025
[1.07]

0.063
[2.11]*
-0.020
[2.91]**
-0.068
[1.97]*
0.016
[1.57]
-0.010
[3.27]**
0.030
[0.42]
306
0.57

Constant

0.043

0.038

[17.11]**

[12.99]**

0.064
[2.72]**

0.145
[3.51]**

0.215
[5.95]**

0.119
[3.76]**

306
0.15

306
0.12

306
0.52

306
0.36

306
0.31

306
0.22

Observations
R-squared
Robust t statistics in brackets
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
 
4.32  Although  a  reduction  in  the  incidence  of  homicide  was  never  an  intended  program 
impact,  the  literature  suggests  that  increasing  the  presence  of  the  state,  as  well  as 
increases in public services have been associated with reductions in violent crime.  Table 
4.13 shows the impact results for homicides.  As in the cases above, the estimates do not 
show  a  reduction  in  homicides  greater  in  neighborhoods  with  more  interventions 
communities.  Although the sign of the impact is negative throughout specifications, it is 
never significant at conventional levels.  We see that all of the socioeconomic variables—
schooling, income—are significant.  Higher schooled, older and wealthier neighborhoods 
can expect lower homicide rates66. We also see that the presence of the provision of state 
services also is associated with decreases in homicide rates67.   

 

 

                                                 
66 Again it seems that there is some multicolinearity going on between age profile and proportion of household in 
slums. 
67 Szwarcwald et al. (1999) also found that the homicide rate is highly correlated with that proportion of household 
in favelas. 

 

39

Table 4.13 - Difference in Difference estimates for the Proportion of Homicides 

[1] 

[2] 

[3] 

[4] 

[5] 

[6] 

 

 

year==200
0 
prop.treated 

(year==2000)*prop.treate
d 
proportion of HH in favelas 

water 
dummy 
sewerage 
dummy 
log HH 
income 
average yrs 
schooling 
Constant 

-0.005 
[1.03] 
0.037 
[3.40]** 
-0.004 
[0.14] 

-0.005 
[1.08] 
-0.010 
[0.70] 
-0.005 
[0.16] 
0.056 
[4.88]** 

-0.005 
[1.00] 
0.035 
[3.36]** 
-0.002 
[0.06] 

-0.021 
[0.62] 

-0.017 
[3.83]** 
0.046 
[4.25]** 
0.011 
[0.46] 

0.147 
[4.44]** 
-0.087 
[6.31]** 

-0.002 
[0.81] 
0.007 
[0.84] 
-0.003 
[0.14] 

0.096 
[3.72]** 
-0.036 
[4.52]** 
-0.032 
[14.82]** 

0.058 
[17.41]** 

0.050 
[13.16]** 

0.078 
[2.35]* 
306 
0.02 

-0.007 
[0.25] 
306 
0.22 

0.219 
[7.96]** 

306 
0.59 

306 
0.13 

-0.004 
[1.32] 
0.005 
[0.54] 
-0.005 
[0.25] 

0.117 
[4.17]** 
-0.033 
[4.26]** 
-0.015 
[1.64] 
-0.005 
[2.11]* 
0.117 
[2.03]* 
306 
0.60 

 

Observation
s 
R-
squared 
Robust t statistics in 
brackets 
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 
1% 

306 
0.02 

 
 
4.33  Overall, these results suggest the program had little effect on the causes of death related 
to  vector-borne  disease  and  their  primary  victims—children.      However,  as  mentioned 
previously,  the  empirical  specification  used  may  be  confounding  the effect of program 
selection with the actual program impact, at least to the extent that characteristics related 
to both selection and cause of death is not stationary, and therefore cannot be netted out 
in a double-difference.  Although the structural homicide model panned out many of our 
ex  ante  expectations,  here  too  we  see  an  absence  of  any  measurable  impact  due  to  the 
program. 

 
 

5.1 

 

V.  CONCLUSIONS 

The analysis above is an assessment of how the  Favela-Bairro program has changed the 
quality  of  life  of  the  residents  of  the  low-income  neighborhoods  intervened  by  the 
project.  There are three fundamental conclusions that fall out of the analysis.  The first 
conclusion is that given the results obtained by both the propensity score matching and by 
the exploiting  the longitudinal nature of the household surveys available, the evidence of 
a  credible  impact  of  Favela-Bairro  has  been  on  the  program’s  outputs.    During  the 
decade  we  see  a  substantial  increase  in  the  coverage  of  water  and  rubbish  collection  in 
favelas  that  outpaced  the  comparison  groups  identified.    The  impacts  on  sewerage  was 
the most significant one in the aggregate level, moreover, an analysis by income quartile 
reveals that the poorest quartiles did benefit from sewerage, while the richest quartiles did 

40

 
5.2 

5.3 

 
5.4 

 

not, or did in a lesser extent.  This result—by quartile—is also seen with respect to water, 
rubbish collection and illiteracy. 

In  both  the  value  of  property,  as  measured  by  rent,  and  the  in  most  of  the  health 
outcomes,  however,  the  data  have  not  produced  evidence  that  the  program  has 
significantly improved the quality of life of residents.  With respect to rent, the results of 
observed  rental  rates,  the  reflexive  evaluation  shows  an  increase  in  rents,  but  this  was 
actually  a  citywide  event;  the  impact  parameter  shows  a  decline  in  favelas  relative  to 
other  low-income  communities.  Whereas  the  impact  on  observed  rental  rates  was 
negative.  This is true with respect to predicted rents also, which is a measure of housing 
quality.    These  results  come  with  the  caveats  already  mentioned  in  the  text,  that  the 
control  groups  for  rents  may  not  be  properly  matched  to  the  treatment  group  in  1995, 
given that the control was low-income but not favelas.  In terms of earnings, the results 
also do not suggest that the program was able to generate any real economy impacts.  It 
should be noted that this impact was in fact never anticipated by the project’s design.  
 
The  second  result  is  that  we  see  a  marked  difference  in  the  characterization  of  the 
project’s  impact  when  no  control  group  is  used.    In  terms  of  results  a  reflexive 
comparison that does not take into account a counterfactual leads to a super-estimation of 
project benefits that varies by output and outcome analyzed but that in all cases is very 
significant.  In the case of sewer coverage and rubbish collection this over-estimation is 
in the neighborhood of 100%.  In the case of housing values, an assessment of the favelas 
based  on  a  simple  before-and-after comparison shows an impact of between 30 and 60 
percent,  depending  on  the  specification;  yet  this  impact  is  dwarfed  by  the  overall 
appreciation of housing values in the city over the second half of the 1990s.  The natural 
corollary  is  that  in  non-stationary  scenarios  reflexive  before  and  after  estimations  of 
impact  may  grossly  misrepresent  the  project  or  program  impact,  possibly  leading  to 
erroneous and costly policy recommendations. 

The  last  result  is  perhaps  the  most  important,  in  part  because  it  qualifies  most  of  the 
findings  of  this  evaluation.    Given  the  high  degree  of  geographic  targeting,  yet  the 
relatively small size of targeted units, the data available was inadequate to answer many 
of  the  fundamental  evaluative  questions  raised  in  the  introduction  and  throughout  the 
paper.    The  household  survey  data,  even  when  stacked  over  multiple  cross-sections, 
produced sample sizes that were small.  Furthermore, since only a small sample of census 
tracks  are  actually  sampled,  the  sample  of  treated—even  when  one  considers  all 
favelas—was of only 30 census tracks.  On the other hand, approaches that used census 
data were likewise problematic, since (i) the census does not contain useful information 
on  many  of  the  outcomes  of  interest,  and  (ii)  the  relatively  large  time  elapsed  between 
census years necessarily implies that project impact will be confounded with other macro 
and regional effects that occurred between the first census and actual implementation.  In 
short, the nature of the program called for a specialized sample survey structure in which 
communities both in and outside the project could be canvasses—preferably based on an 
assignment  criteria  uncorrelated  with  the  outcomes  of  interest.    Parts  of  this  approach 
were pursued at different points in the project’s execution, producing a varied collection 
of different datasets on beneficiaries.  However, these were mostly not comparable, and 

 

41

in any case did not include information on non-participants.  These characteristics of the 
data  limit  the  quality  of  comparisons  over  time  of  the  same  communities  and  make 
comparisons  over  time  between  program  and  non-program  communities  impossible.  
This implies that beyond expansion of public services, one is severely limited regarding 
what can the impact of Favela-Bairro on key development outcomes. 

 

 

42

 
REFERENCES 

 

Alonso W. Location and Land Use, 1964, Harvard University Press: Cambridge, MA. 
 
Baum-Snow,  N.  “The  Effects  of  Changes 

Infrastructure  on 
Suburbanization:  Evidence  from  the  Construction  of  the  Interstate  Highway  System”, 
mimeo, 2004. 

the  Transportation 

in 

 
Besley,  Tim  “Property  Rights  and  Investment  Incentives:  Theory  and  Evidence  from  Ghana”. 

Journal of Political Economy 1995, 103(5): 903-937. 

 
Bénabou  R.  “Workings  of  a  city:  Location,  education  and  production”,  Quarterly  Journal  of 

Economics, 1993, 108 (3): 619-652 

 
Borjas,  George  J.,  “Ethnicity,  Neighborhoods,  and  Human-Capital  Externalities”  American 

Economic Review, June 1995, 85 (3): 365-390. 

 
Brueckner J. K., J.-F. Thisse, and Y. Zenou “Why Is Central Paris Rich and Downtown Detroit 

Poor? An Amenity Based Theory”, European Economic Review, 1999, 43 (1), 91-107 

 
Campos,  T.  P.,  Carvalho,  M.  S.  and  Barcellos,  C.  C.  “Mortalidade  infantil  no  Rio  de  Janeiro, 
Brasil:  áreas  de  risco  e  trajetória  dos  pacientes  até  os  serviços  de  saúde”.  Revista 
Panamericana de Salud Publica. 2000, 8 (3): 164-171. 

 
Case,  Anne  and  Lawrence  Katz,  “The  Company  you  Keep:  The  Effect  of  Family  and 

Neighborhood on Disadvantaged Youth”, NBER Working Paper 3705, May 1991. 

 
Cutler,  D.M.  and  E.L.  Glaeser,  “Are  Ghettos  Good  or  Bad?”  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics, 

1997, 112: 827-72. 

 
Cutler, D., E. Glaeser, and J. Vigdor, “The Rise and Decline of The American Ghetto.”  Journal 

of Political Economy, 1999, 107: 455-506. 

 
Cutler, D., E. Glaeser, and J. Vigdor, “Ghetos and the Transmission of Ethnic Capital.”  mimeo, 

2002. 

 
de Soto, Hernando. The Other Path. 1989, Harper and Row, Publishers. 
 
Ellickson, R.C.  Order  without  Law:  How  Neighbors  Settle  Disputes. 1991, Harvard University 

Press, Cambridge, MA 

mimeo, 2003. 

 
Field, Erica. “Property Rights and Household Time Allocation in Urban Squatter Communities”, 

 
George Galster, "Assessing the Causes of Residential Segregation: A Methodological Critique," 

Journal of Urban Affairs, 1988, 10: 395-407. 

 

43

 
Glaeser,  Edward,  Sacerdote,  Bruce  and  Jose  Scheinkman,  “Crime  and  Social  Interactions” 

Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 1996, 111 (2): 507-548. 

 
Glaeser E. L., M. E. Kahn, and J. Rappoport “Why do the poor live in cities?” NBER Working 

 

Paper 7636, 2000. 

 
Jimenez,  Emmanuel.  “Tenure  Security  and  Urban  Squatting”  Review  of  Economics  and 

Statistics, 1984, 66 (4): 556-567. 

 
Kanazawa, Mark. “Possession is Nine Points of the Law: The Political Economy of Early Public 

Land Disposal,” Explorations in Economic History. 1996, 33: 227-49. 

 
Lanjouw, J. O. and Philip Levy “Untitled: A Study  of Formal and Informal Property Rights in 

Urban Ecuador” The Economic Journal, 2002 112(482): 986-1019. 

 
Manski, C. F. "Learning About Treatment Effects from Experiments with Random Assignment 

of Treatments." Journal of Human Resources, 1996, 31(4) p. 707-733. 

 
Mills  E.  S.  “An  aggregative  model  of  resource  allocation  in  a  metropolitan  area”,  American 

Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 1967, 57 (2), 197-210. 

 
Möbius, Markus. “The Formation of Ghettos as a Local Interaction Phenomenon” 2000, mimeo. 
 
Muth R. F. Cities and Housing, 1969, University of Chicago Press: Chicago 
 
Morais,  M.P.,  Cruz,  B.O,  and  C.  Oliveira,  “Residential  Segregation  and  Social  Exclusion  in 

Brazilian Housing Markets”, IPEA TD, 2003. 

 
Olinto, Pedro and Michael Carter. “Getting Institutions ‘Right’ for Whom: Credit Constraints 

and the Impact of Property Rights on the Quantity and Composition of Investment” 
mimeo, 2003. 

 
Rosenbaum, PR, and DB Rubin, “The central role of the propensity score in Observational 

studies for Causal Effect”, Biometrika, 1983, Vol. 70, 41-55. 

 
Sastry,  Narayan  (1996)  “Community  Characteristics,  Individual  and  Household  Attibutes,  and 

Child Survival in Brazil”. Demography, 1996, 33 (2): 211-229. 

 
Schelling,  T.  C  “A  Process  of  Residential  Segregation:  Neighborhood  Tipping,"  in  Racial 
Discrimination  in  Economic  Life,  ed.  by  A.  Pascal.  1972,  Lexington  Books,  Lexington, 
MA. 

 
Szwarcwald, C. L., Bastos, F. I. , Esteves, M. A. P., Andrade, C. L. T, Paez, M. S., Medici, E. v., 
and Derrico, M. “Desigualdade de Renda e Situacao de Saude: o Caso do Rio de Janeiro” 
Cadernos de Saude Publica, Rio de Janeiro,  1999, 15 (1): 15-28 

 

44

 

 
Szwarcwald,  C.  L.,  Andrade,  C.  L.  T  and  Bastos,  F.  I.  “Income  Inequality,  residential  poverty 
clustering  and  infant  mortality:  a  study  in  Rio  de  Janeiro,  Brazil”  Social  Science  & 
Medicine,  2002, 55: 2083-2092. 

 
Vianna, Andrea. “As Políticas de Habitação no Rio de Janeiro e Seus Resultados”, mimeo, 2004. 
 
Wheaton, W.  “Income and Urban Residence: An Analysis of Consumer Demand for Location” 

American Economic Review, 1977, 67 (4): 620-631.   

 
Wilson,  W.  J.  The  Truly  Disadvantaged:  The  Inner  City,  the  Underclass,  and  Public  Policy. 

1987, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL. 

 
World  Bank  “Brazil.  Progressive  Low-Income  Housing:  Alternatives  for  the  Poor”, December 

2002. 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 

 

45

