DAKAR

Migrants’ long-distance
relationships and social
networks in Dakar

Abdou Salam Fall

SUMMARY:  This  paper  describes  the  changes  in  the  relation-
ships between migrants in Dakar and their relatives in rural home
areas, and how traditional kin structures are gradually replaced
by new solidarity networks in the city. While remittances are an
important resource for rural households, especially during the
“hungry  months”  before  the  new  harvest,  migrants’  visits  are
not linked to regular seasonal agricultural work but rather to oc-
casional participation in family ceremonies, suggesting a decrease
in temporary migration and a more permanent urban residence.

I. INTRODUCTION

THE PERSISTENCE OF strong migratory flows from rural ar-
eas to the towns, and in particular Dakar and its suburbs, is a
key problem facing Senegal. The logic of these population move-
ments is both individual and collective and is intrinsically linked
to imbalances in the areas of origin. Migrating means enlarging
one’s  living  space  and  making  a  commitment  elsewhere  on  a
temporary,  regular  or  permanent  basis.  Through  migration,
workers  relocate  and  rearrange  themselves  in  an  area  wider
than  their  original  environment.  Rather  than  simply  a  move-
ment  of  individual  players,  groups  or  communities  are  being
formed which are bringing economic units into contact across
space.

Through complex social networks, migrants maintain relation-
ships, on an occasional but more or less permanent basis, with
their  places  of  origin.  There  are  several  reasons  for  adopting
such a strategy. In some areas where the crisis in agriculture is
most severe, household dependence on contributions from mi-
grants to the city appears to be irreversible. In Serer country,
heads of household told us that “...a family with no migrants
cannot live decently.”(1)

Migration generally involves establishing new links but with-
out breaking up former relationships of a structural or func-
tional nature. The reasons given by Pontié and Lericollais pro-
vide  an  illustration  of  this  rationale  employed  by  many  rural
societies with regard to human relations:

“The  nature  of  social  and  religious,  as  well  as  economic,
relationships between migrants and their societies of origin

Environment and Urbanization, Vol. 10, No. 1, April 1998

135

the 

Dr Abdou Salam Fall is a soci-
ologist  at 
Institut
Fondamental  d’Afrique  Noire
(IFAN), University Cheikh Anta
Diop, Dakar, where he teaches
urban  sociology.  His  main
research  interests  are  in  the
areas  of  urbanization,  migra-
tion, poverty, social networks
and 
local  development.

Address:  BP.  206, 
IFAN,
Université  Cheikh  Anta  Diop,
Dakar, Senegal.

1.  Fall, A.S. (1992), “Une réponse
à la crise de l’agriculture, la mi-
gration  des  Sereer  du  Siin
(Sénégal)  in  Société,  Espace,
Temps No.1, pages 138-148.

DAKAR

2.  Pontié,  G.  and  A.  Lericollais
(1991), “Relations à distance des
migrants sereer”, communication
at  the  seminar  on  “Processus
d’insertion  urbaine  et  itinéraires
résidentiels,  professionnels  et
familiaux”,  Sally-Portudel,  Sen-
egal, 27-30 May.

3.  Fall, A.S. (1991a), “Résaux de
sociabilité  et  insertion  urbaine
dans l’agglomération de Dakar”,
PhD Sociology thesis, University
of Cheikh-Anta Diop, Dakar.

4.  Fall, S.A. (1991c), “Du ques-
tionnaire biographique quantitatif
aux  entretiens  approfondis  sur
les  réseaux  de  sociabilité  en
ville?”  in  “Pratiques  sociales  et
travail  en  milieu  urbain”,  Les
Cahiers  No.14,  ORSTOM/SUD,
Paris, pages 37-50.

is to a large extent dependent on the opportunity they have
of returning home to farm, in the event of failing to achieve
the purpose of migration, on ‘retirement’ or if the family situ-
ation - e.g. the death of an older relative - so requires. For a
migrant, this potential access to a few fields, even after a
very long absence, is as much a mark of recognition of his
membership of the village and of lineage as of economic ne-
cessity”.(2)

This paper addresses migrants’ relationships with their home
areas from the perspective of urban networks. One way of un-
derstanding the operation of a network is to determine who the
migrant approached in order to find work and accommodation,
and in order to maintain links, or not, with his or her home of
origin. This social network constitutes a complex web of social
relations which is a basis for receiving migrants and/or a means
of social, occupational and residential integration, and of hu-
man solidarity and preferential relationships. This network may
be identified as a kind of social staging post, but one which is
set up parallel to the social apparatus and institutions and which
sometimes stands in opposition to them.(3) The significance of
urban integration networks as new social relationships imposed
by current living arrangements is compared with the persist-
ence or the development of links with home areas.

II. METHODOLOGY

THE STUDY METHODOLOGY was both quantitative and quali-
tative.  Migrants  living  in  various  parts  of  greater  Dakar  were
interviewed using a quantitative biographical questionnaire to
measure urban integration patterns. Four questions addressed
remote relationships: visits made by migrants to their places of
origin;  remittances  of  money  or  food  sent  by  migrants  or  the
support  they  receive;  ownership  of  assets  prior  to  migration;
and the possibility of resorting to migrant networks, particu-
larly through people located in Dakar, to gain access to jobs or
housing.  In  order  to  analyse  these  data  in  greater  depth,  life
history interviews were conducted with a structured sub-sam-
ple.(4)

The  two  methods  are  complementary.  They  both  start  with
the  individual  and  move  on  to  the  social  group  using  an  ex-
ploratory, in-depth approach, focusing on the survival strate-
gies adopted by individuals and groups.

III. URBANIZATION

WITH AN ANNUAL growth rate close to 3 per cent, the popula-
tion  of  sub-Saharan  Africa  is  expected  to  double  by  the  year
2020, thus becoming the fastest growing region in the world.
While the African population doubled between 1950 and 1980,
the urban population increased five-fold over the same period.
This distinctive feature is the result of two convergent phenom-

136

Environment and Urbanization, Vol. 10, No. 1, April 1998

DAKAR

ena, namely a high natural growth rate, and substantial flows
of migrants from rural to urban areas, especially to the primate
cities.

This  move  away  from  the  countryside  has  now  become
unstoppable in Senegal as a result of the deep crisis in agricul-
ture, the mainstay of its economy. Nor is Dakar shielded from
the “macrocephalic” nature of the African urban model whereby
the capital develops at breakneck speed at the expense of sec-
ondary towns. According to the last population census in 1988,
Dakar and its “mirror image”, Pikine, had 1,310,000 inhabit-
ants. Dakar and its suburbs thus held 19 per cent of country’s
total population and almost 54 per cent of the urban popula-
tion, which is estimated at 39 per cent of the total. The urban
population grew at an annual rate of 3.8 per cent between 1976
and 1988, against a figure of about 2.7 per cent for the total
population over the same period.

The bulk of modern infrastructure is found in the capital al-
though the city is unable to offer jobs in the formal sector to a
large proportion of its residents; failing other alternatives, more
than half the active population work in the informal sector and
the unemployment rate is estimated at 22 per cent.(5)

As Antoine and Savané observe:

“Urbanization, in Senegal in particular and Africa in gen-
eral, is neither the corollary of nor the driving force behind
economic development; unlike what has been seen in the
industrialized world, it has not been caused by mechaniza-
tion of agriculture leading to relative overpopulation. Rather,
it has arisen from the rapid degradation of living conditions
in the villages and thus, fundamentally, from the crisis in
agriculture.”(6)

Urbanization therefore presents a substantial challenge; the
city is not an alternative development framework but rather a
place  of  survival  for  individuals  and  for  the  households  they
form there or maintain in the village.

IV. LONG-DISTANCE RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN
URBAN AND RURAL AREAS

MIGRATION IS OFTEN rooted in traditions of spatial mobility
which sometimes go back several generations. Often, the mi-
grant belongs to an extended kinship, family and lineage group
and leaves members of his or her community in the village while
joining others long-settled in the city. Migrants thus maintain
more or less strong links with their home areas. Furthermore,
associations of people originating from the same region or the
same village are active in the city, where they play a key role in
maintaining a privileged relationship with home areas or in pre-
venting  total  assimilation  into  the  urban  environment,  some-
times by reinforcing social control as in the case of young Diola
maids.(7)

There  is  a  substantial  flow  of  trade  and  food  supplies  from

Environment and Urbanization, Vol. 10, No. 1, April 1998

137

cas  d’une 

5.  Bocquier,  P.  and  Fall,  A.S.
(1992), “Le recours aux réseaux
sociaux pour l’accès à l’emploi,
le 
ville  en
développement: Dakar, commu-
nication at the 21st Conference
of the  Canadian Association for
African Studies, Montreal 13-16
May, 1992.

6.    Antoine,  P.  and  L.  Savané
(1990), “Urbanisation et migration
en Afrique” in The Role of Migra-
tion  in  African  Development:  Is-
sues  and  Policies  for  the  90s,
UEPA  Conference,  Nairobi,
pages 55-81.

7.  Diop, M. (1989), “Un exemple
de non-insertion urbaine: le cas
des  migrantes  saisonnières  de
Basse  Casamance  à  Dakar”  in
“L’insertion urbaine des migrantes
en  Afrique”,  Colloques  et
Séminaires,  ORSTOM,  Paris,
pages 79-89.

DAKAR

home to destination areas, while cash flows from the city to the
migrants’  places  of  origin  are  also  considerable.  Cash  remit-
tances  are  voluntary  but  how  freely  the  decision  is  taken  by
migrants and some city dwellers to send money to their com-
munities of origin must be judged against the community life-
style and traditions which are still strong in Africa, where peo-
ple have enormous expectations of their children. Efforts to re-
main bound to the original group may be seen as reproducing
the social order and conforming to dominant values.

Visits by rural people to the city and by migrants to their home
areas  (villages,  smaller  towns,  country,  etc.)  are  indicators  of
the dynamism of the city/village relationship. Such visits are
made under varying circumstances. In our survey, almost 90
per cent of male and 80 per cent of female migrants maintained
links with their places of origin but the relatively large propor-
tion of people who said they no longer visited their home areas
(16.5 per cent of male migrants aged between 25 and 34 and
22.5 per cent of young female migrants) raises questions about
the type of migration involved. It is possible that some migrants
have broken with their birthplace for various reasons but, most
importantly, it appears that visits are most commonly inspired
by cultural reasons such as religious festivals and family cer-
emonies.  The  youngest  generation,  both  men  and  women,  is
more inclined to make such visits. For women aged under 35,
family ceremonies (51.6 per cent) take precedence over religious
festivals  (2.2  per  cent).  Money  is  transferred  and  exchanged
during such ceremonies. The breakdown in village group struc-
ture in urban areas does not mean renouncing socio-cultural
links between country dwellers and those living in Dakar. Tem-
porary migration to the city continues, albeit on a small scale,
or  at  least  this  is  what  the  number  of  migrants  returning  to
their villages of origin for seasonal agricultural work and simi-
lar reasons seems to indicate. This mainly affects young male
migrants (11.6 per cent), while few female migrants return to
their home areas for the purpose of seasonal agricultural work.
Few migrants take holidays in their home areas and equally few
make periodic visits.

We also looked at remittances made to help other members of
the family not living with the household. The proportion of peo-
ple who regularly help someone else is disaggregated by gen-
eration, sex and status (migrant or otherwise). The exact ques-
tion was: “Do you have dependants or people you help who do
not live with you?”

In  Dakar,  non-migrants  support  their  nuclear  households
(spouse and children) in the same city, whereas migrants send
gifts to their nuclear families in home areas. Those born in Dakar
and migrants aged between 35 and 44 are most likely to make
gifts to the family, 16.4 per cent and 20.6 per cent, respectively.
Migrants are seen to make a more substantial contribution than
non-migrants in all age groups since a proportion of migrants
have wives in the hinterland.

Young men born in Dakar and aged between 25 and 34 also
support their fathers or mothers but to a lesser extent (20.3 per
cent)  than  those  aged  between  35  and  44  (32  per  cent).  Mi-

138

Environment and Urbanization, Vol. 10, No. 1, April 1998

Table 1:  Type of Visit by Migrants to their Home Area, by Generation

REASON FOR VISIT

25-34

35-44

45-59

25-34

35-44

45-59

MEN

Age group

WOMEN
Age group

DAKAR

Seasonal work and similar reasons 11.6

5.7

5.8

0.0

2.7

29.4

26.3

17.7

14.6

12.4

Religious festivals and
family ceremonies

Holidays, religious festivals
and family ceremonies

Holidays and family ceremonies

Holidays

Family ceremonies and other

Family ceremonies

Periodic visits

Religious festivals

Other reasons

Never goes to home area

Total
Number

7.1

4.6

1.8

10.7

10.3

0.4

2.2

5.4

16.5

100.0
220

0.8

9.8

0.0

1.5

0.0

26.4

32.3

1.5

0.0

6.6

4.8

1.9

11.3

10.7

2.7

20.3

21.4

0.8

1.1

3.8

3.1

16.9

16.2

0.4

0.4

6.6

8.3

2.2

3.3

0.2

19.1

29.2

0.4

2.2

5.6

0.9

2.7

0.6

20.4

37.2

0.0

0.9

8.0

13.8

22.5

14.2

21.1

100.0
228

100.0
260

100.0
88

100.0
113

100.0
132

grants aged under 44 send more substantial gifts to their par-
ents and other relatives in home areas (68.2 per cent). Support
destined exclusively for fathers or mothers living in the home
area is largely the same for the two younger age groups (23.1
per cent for those under 35 and 25 per cent for those under 45).
Gifts intended for fathers or mothers and those living with them
involve a smaller proportion (10.9 per cent for those under 35
and 9.2 for those under 45) but reflect the many links which
migrants  continue  to  maintain  from  a  distance.  Migrants  do,
however, support their parents settled in Dakar. Such support
is greater in the case of women (5.6 per cent for those under 35
and 2.7 per cent for those under 45) than men (2.3 per cent for
those under 35 and 2.6 per cent for those under 45).

Generation  based  differences  among  men  are  reversed  for
women born in Dakar. Thus, 18.5 per cent of non-migrant women
aged between 25 and 34 support their fathers or mothers and
relatives, whereas this is the case in only 6 per cent of those
aged between 35 and 44. However, young migrant women make
a  contribution  in  their  home  areas  in  22.5  per  cent  of  cases
compared to 26 per cent of those aged between 35 and 44. Ob-
viously, amongst the recipients, it is the father or mother who
receives the most support.

The oldest migrants are more concerned with sending gifts to
wider kin. Such gifts are more important for those staying in
their places of origin. However, kin solidarity between migrants

Environment and Urbanization, Vol. 10, No. 1, April 1998

139

DAKAR

8.    Antoine,  P.,  P.  Bocquier,  O.
Barbary, A.S. Fall, Y. Guisse and
J. Nanitelamio (1992), L’Insertion
Urbaine:  Le cas de Dakar, report
on  research  funded  by  the  Re-
search and Technology Ministry,
Dakar, IFAN and ORSTOM.

still exists and is expressed, inter alia, by financial participation
in associations which operate mainly in Dakar.

As a general rule, men aged between 25 and 34 born in Dakar
do not give very much, whereas those aged between 45 and 59,
who usually have quite a large household already, also support
other  kin.  We  might  therefore  join  Antoine  in  wondering
“...whether the Independence generations (those aged between
45 and 59) might be a transition group which is bearing most of
the weight of the crisis. Young people experience the crisis, their
elders bear the weight.”(8)

Table 2: Financial Support Received by Respondents

Age group

Status

No support Support

from nuclear

family

Support
father/
mother

Support
brother/
sister

Other Association
person

or relative

Male

25-34

35-44

45-59

Female

25-34

35-44

45-59

Born Dakar

Migrant

Born Dakar

Migrant

Born Dakar

Migrant

Born Dakar

Migrant

Born Dakar

Migrant

Born Dakar

Migrant

80.1

80.1

87.2

88.2

82.8

83.1

56.8

67.4

62.0

65.5

63.0

66.3

0.6

-

-

-

6.3

3.1

11.1

6.8

6.0

6.2

29.6

18.6

6.1

4.2

1.8

3.9

-

1.1

9.9

5.6

10.0

5.3

-

6.8

6.6

9.9

7.4

3.9

4.6

5.4

6.2

11.3

10.0

13.3

3.7

3.0

6.0

4.5

2.8

1.8

6.3

6.5

16.0

1.0

2.0

1.8

3.7

2.3

0.6

1.3

0.8

2.2

-

0.8

7.4

7.9

10.0

7.9

3.7

3.0

Precarious  living  conditions  in  home  areas  explain  the  low
levels of support respondents say they receive (men in particu-
lar). Support from their father or mother, brothers or sisters is
important for young men born in Dakar (6.1 and 6.6 per cent,
respectively). Support for migrants from wider kin operates from
one generation to another but strong interest is shown by the
brothers and sisters (9.9 per cent). People aged between 45 and
59, especially men born in Dakar, are supported by their nu-
clear family (6.3 per cent). This state of affairs may be explained
by the involvement of polygamous women in managing the live-
lihood of their households. Informal inter-personal relationships
outside their groups of origin seem to be helpful to both non-
migrant and migrant men in the 45-59 age group. Support re-

140

Environment and Urbanization, Vol. 10, No. 1, April 1998

DAKAR

ceived from other people with whom no kinship or alliance ex-
ists  is  a  permanent  feature  for  all  age  groups,  although  this
seems to be less well-established for the middle age group (35-
44). Young women born in Dakar enjoy such support (16 per
cent). Migrant men and women also receive support from asso-
ciations.

V. CRITIQUE OF THE RURAL/URBAN
CONTINUUM

LIFE HISTORIES TAKEN from migrants in Dakar and Pikine
confirm  that  associations  of  people  from  the  same  villages  or
rural communities, as well as family, lineage and ethnic groups
in  the  city,  are  important  staging  posts  in  the  reception  and
integration of migrants. People linked by their common origins,
but who may belong to different social groups, rub shoulders
and share their concerns. However, like the communities back
home,  such  associations  have  a  prescriptive  rationale.  They
constitute a cumbersome operating system which is conserva-
tive in terms of the values it conveys. They are not really in a
position to handle members’ day-to-day needs. It may also be
that the socio-cultural values they sustain come up against the
modernizing impulses brought out by members’ needs for ad-
aptation or creativity in an urban setting.

As a result, the potential development of networks and seg-
ments of networks occurs on the fringes of the system. O’Deye
considers such associations of people from the same area as a
means of integration within the lineage, while also acting as a
repository for opposite tendencies within the migrant group con-
cerned.  In  this  way,  “the  city  reconstructs  associations”.(9)  In
opposition  to  this  approach,  with  its  rural  bias,  the  city  and
Dakar in particular should not be seen as favouring an exten-
sion of traditional village relationships. Rather, we have observed
the emergence of new forms or relationships resulting from ur-
ban social dynamics. Urban players are network builders and
the permanent restructuring of social networks seems to be a
basic characteristic of urbanization in Dakar. In fact, faced with
the worsening economic crisis and the constraints of urban liv-
ing, people develop strategies to broaden their sphere of social
interaction. The emergence of new relationships in the city il-
lustrates the dynamic process of integration of migrants in Dakar
and Pikine. Specifically, urban social networks help to weaken
links between town and village.

VI. MAINTAINING RURAL NETWORKS AND THE
IMPORTANCE OF URBAN NETWORKS

RESEARCH IS INCREASINGLY focusing on the privileged roles
of social networks as structures facilitating the reception and
urban integration of migrants. Their function as “shock absorb-
ers” of the overall economic and social crisis comes up against

Environment and Urbanization, Vol. 10, No. 1, April 1998

141

9.  O’Deye, M. (1985), Les asso-
ciations  en  villes  africaines,
Dakar 
Brazzaville,
l’Harmattan, Paris.

et 

DAKAR

10.  See reference 6, page 56.

the problems of their continuity and renewal. Rural networks
(family structures, ethnic and village communities, etc.) are cru-
cial  in  the  preparation  of  the  departure  of  migrants  and  also
during the first stages of settlement in the city before they give
way  to  typically  urban  networks.  This  transition  from  village
based networks to more specifically urban networks, although
a dominant feature in the process of urban integration, has re-
ceived inadequate attention in recent work on migration in Af-
rica.

Social, kin, cultural and religious networks have been set up
and consolidated on the basis of the spirit of solidarity and on
the survival needs of the communities involved. They effectively
provide newly arrived migrants with mutual support and help
in finding employment and housing. Although organized around
traditional relationships involving solidarity as well as hierar-
chy  and  inequality  between  members,  networks  are  to  some
extent “modernizing”, drawing in other types of solidarity and
relations created by new affiliations: informal, neighbourhood,
political, religious, sporting, trade union and working links.

a. The Continuity of Rural Networks

The context of migration from rural to urban areas highlights
the  role  of  rural  networks,  at  least  as  far  as  the  reception  of
migrants in Dakar is concerned. In the same way, kinship and
ethnic networks and other types of networks built around the
same regional, socio-cultural area of origin (region, department,
rural community, village, etc.) are involved to a greater or lesser
extent in arranging initial accommodation and the first job or
occupation. Obviously, these networks are more accessible than
integrated urban networks or those which have been longer es-
tablished in the city. However, rural networks are not pre-exist-
ing social staging posts which need only be tapped into as re-
quired. They are elaborate phenomena, constructed differently
depending on the possibilities offered by the type of relation-
ship in which people are involved or on whether communities
are structured or informal. Nevertheless, rural networks ensure
some  continuity  in  the  process  of  migration  and  this  is  why
Antoine and Savané say that “migration sustains migration”.(10)
According to these authors, migration is in fact the result of a
collective strategy to diversify household income sources. Mi-
grants  rely  on  networks  of  social  relations  to  establish  them-
selves in the city. A bridge is thus established between rural
areas and the city. Migrants sometimes reinvest, in economic
and  social  terms,  in  their  regions  of  origin:  they  help  to  con-
struct  schools,  dispensaries  and  new  housing  and  purchase
agricultural equipment, as well as participating in political and
social life. Relationships with the home areas lead to substan-
tial financial flows between town and countryside.

The family develops outposts, as circuits for the reception and
integration of migrants are established in the city. Money, food,
medicine and so on are transferred and the extended family is
mobilized. In Senegal, women in polygamous households take
turns  to  live  in  the  city  and  village  while  their  husbands  are

142

Environment and Urbanization, Vol. 10, No. 1, April 1998

DAKAR

engaged in urban activity. There is therefore an urban compo-
nent in rural strategies and vice versa.

b. The Emergence of New Forms of Relationship in Dakar

Networks are not equivalent to organized structures with ex-
plicit modes of operation, and a closer analysis reveals the im-
portance of a number of informal relationships. In the city, sev-
eral examples of informal groupings can be found: neighbours
who  have  sat  together  in  front  of  a  tailor’s  workshop  almost
every day for years; a square where people have been playing
belote (a card game) or draughts for 30 years or more; brokers
who charge for their skills as intermediaries in selling and rent-
ing accommodation; executives playing boules at the weekend.
Some scenarios are touched on below to illustrate the range of
core  relationships  which  may  be  activated  to  generate  social
networks.

As a result of the gradual shrinkage of the job market caused,
inter alia, by structural adjustment policies, the informal eco-
nomic sector is increasingly becoming the favoured entry point
for migrants into the economic fabric of Dakar. To some extent,
this is due to new migrants’ lack of professional qualifications.
The informal sector is sufficiently flexible to accommodate them
and to ensure long-term urban integration, whereas access to
training tends to be provided by kin networks.

Throughout  their  apprenticeship,  migrants  gain  access  to
networks generated through their links as service providers for
some  of  the  clients  of  the  workshop.  Setting  up  on  their  own
depends largely on their ability to develop customer loyalty to
the detriment of their bosses and, especially, on the opportu-
nity to take advantage of the network of relationships built up
throughout their apprenticeship.

Migrants who succeed in the informal sector are actively in-
volved in other confraternity networks, groups of economic op-
erators  and  even  networks  of  traders.  In  order  to  succeed  in
the informal sector, it seems essential to play an important part
in upwardly mobile networks. The socio-economic nature of re-
ligious confraternities explains the strong interdependence be-
tween the networks they have developed and the informal sec-
tor. In this regard, their function as a socio-political lobby at-
tracts  an  increasingly  large  membership,  especially  amongst
those who need to reposition themselves and acquire new sta-
tus.

The principle of communicating vessels may be applied to the
informal  sector,  migration  and  confraternity  networks,  which
almost naturally converge, encouraging movement from one to
the other. Networks based on religious affiliation can be consid-
ered as networks of origin, since belonging to a religion is part
of the socialization process. Religion is not chosen but inherited
from one’s parents. It is an original cultural aspect. On the other
hand, belonging to religious associations and, increasingly, to
religious  confraternities  may  reflect  both  the  origins  and  the
personal choices of a migrant. The shift from village to optional
networks here may be ascribed to the flexibility of confraternity

Environment and Urbanization, Vol. 10, No. 1, April 1998

143

DAKAR

11.    Diop,  M.C.  (1982),  “Le
phénomène  associatif  mouride
ville:  expression  du
en 
dynamisme 
confrérique”,
Psychopathologie  Africaine
Vol.XVIII,  No.3,  pages  293-317;
also Ndiaye, A.M.I. (1989), “Les
associations  dans  l’entreprise
industrielle: le cas des daayira du
Port  Autonome  de  Dakar”,
mimeo,  Department  of  Philoso-
phy,  University  of  Cheikh-Anta
Diop, Dakar.

12.  Fall, S.A. (1991b), “‘Une au-
tre famille?’ Les réseaux féminins
de voisinage en ville” at the con-
ference  on”Femme,  Famille  et
Population” (Woman, Family and
Population), Burkina-Faso 24-29
April,  Union  pour  l’Etude  de  la
Population Africaine Vol.2, pages
54-67.

networks and the popular, open nature of the informal sector in
Dakar and Pikine.

In the formal sector, contacts tend to be made at work, thus
generating typically urban social networks. Trades unions give
opportunities for social interaction, fostering the emergence of
networks at company level and beyond. If appointed as a staff
delegate, a worker may have access to confidential information
giving him a bit of power within the company. This role as me-
diator is often a way of gaining favours, enabling him to place
parents  and  friends  when  jobs  become  available  and  to  have
clients and patrons at both management and employee level.
The  militant  style  of  trade  union  activity,  like  the  convergent
interests of workers in different companies, is amongst the ob-
jective and subjective factors helping to create space for social
interaction and social networks in urban areas. Working class
culture is a component of typically urban culture.

The intensity of corporate working life and closeness between
individuals  both  foster  networks  built  on  friendship.  In  fact,
workers in a company often experience all kinds of hardships
which bind them more closely together. When employment is
continuous, workplaces allow sustained relationships to develop
and, as individuals get to know each other better, their friend-
ships  extend  beyond  the  company,  leading  the  way  to  dense
social networks of unsuspected vitality.

Religious associations, or daayira, within companies are also
a common way of making connections at work. Social networks
set up on the basis of belonging to the same confraternity are
useful in establishing small group connections within the com-
pany. They are a way of “socializing” corporate life and, recipro-
cally, of extending privileged professional contacts beyond the
company.(11) Like working relationships, incidental neighbour-
hood contacts may undergo transformation or development, giv-
ing rise to networks for mutual advancement. It has been es-
tablished that neighbourhood is an integral element in the net-
works to which those born in the city belong and is therefore
part of their social identity. One may also consider that migrants,
especially  those  who  have  lived  in  Dakar  for  a  long  time,  are
happy to identify themselves in this way.(12) Neighbourhood, in-
formal and religious confraternity networks move into spaces
opening up in the city. Because of their ease of access, they are
a favoured means of social integration into Dakar’s urban con-
text. Another, no less important, characteristic of these networks
is the greater anonymity they allow and their consolidation of
an ethnic, cultural and social mix which reveals their potential
as a resource within everyone’s reach.

VII. CONCLUSION

THE SHIFT FROM rural to urban networks is not linear, since
networks are a result of strategies adopted by individuals both
within and outside social institutions in order to meet their needs.
Networks are set up and become stronger, drawing where nec-
essary  on  the  existing  or  potential  institutional  resources  or,

144

Environment and Urbanization, Vol. 10, No. 1, April 1998

DAKAR

conversely, bypassing these by developing on the fringes as if to
challenge the rigidity of the institutions, allowing them to change
and either re-adjust or break down. Networks fade away as the
needs of the protagonists are met or require other social staging
posts. They can thus be diverted from the purpose for which
they were set up.

Social  networks  become  necessary  when  the  strategy  is  to
control “areas of power” within or at the level of several institu-
tions.  Networks  cut  across  institutions  and  go  beyond  their
boundaries. The role of networks is not to replace institutions
but, rather, to try to surpass and breathe new life into them.

Migrants do not need to rebel against original social institu-
tions  to  achieve  urban  integration.  Urban  networks  are  built
upon social interaction as a way of tapping into other areas of
opportunity which facilitate the integration of migrants into the
city. Movement from one to another occurs concomitantly with
the broadening and greater complexity of migrants’ sphere of
social interaction in the city. Village and urban networks retain
their informal, implicit rationale but original networks are not
exactly the same as village networks which are just one part of
them. The continuity of original networks is only equalled by
the vitality of urban social networks which are now an impor-
tant focus in analysing the dynamics of migrant integration in
Dakar and Pikine. As Pontié and Lericollais point out “...struc-
tural solidarity networks are not marginalized by migration.”(13)
In the same way, there is no argument that the extremely rapid
development  of  new  social  networks  helping  to  “cushion”  the
crisis goes hand in hand with the fragmentation of earlier group
structures.

13.  See reference 2.

Environment and Urbanization, Vol. 10, No. 1, April 1998

145

DAKAR

146

Environment and Urbanization, Vol. 10, No. 1, April 1998

