This article was downloaded by: [Seoul National University]
On: 14 January 2015, At: 07:05
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

Polymer Reviews
Publication details, including instructions for authors and
subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/lmsc20
X-ray Scattering for the Monitoring of
Processes in Polymer Materials with
Fiber Symmetry
Norbert Stribeck a
a Department of Chemistry , University of Hamburg , Hamburg,
Germany
Published online: 22 Feb 2010.

To cite this article: Norbert Stribeck (2010) X-ray Scattering for the Monitoring of
Processes in Polymer Materials with Fiber Symmetry, Polymer Reviews, 50:1, 40-58, DOI:
10.1080/15583720903503478

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15583720903503478

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the
“Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis,
our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to
the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors,
and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content
should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources
of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims,
proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or
howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising
out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,
systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &
Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-
and-conditions

Journal of Macromolecular Science R(cid:1)
Copyright © Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
ISSN: 1558-3724 print / 1558-3716 online
DOI: 10.1080/15583720903503478

, Part C: Polymer Reviews, 50:40–58, 2010

X-ray Scattering for the Monitoring of Processes

in Polymer Materials with Fiber Symmetry

NORBERT STRIBECK

Department of Chemistry, University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany

Synchrotron facilities with improved equipment will grant the execution of very advanced
scattering experiments to every interested polymer scientist. The patterns recorded
are two-dimensional, high-resolution, and low-noise images. They permit to monitor
structure evolution during the processing of polymer materials with repeat rates of
several Hertz. In a different class of novel experiments the structure gradient inside
of graded polymer materials will be determined with a spatial resolution of less than
1 µm. Scattering patterns must be complete. In order both to record complete patterns,
and to evaluate them within tolerable time it appears reasonable to study parts with
ﬁber symmetry. In the present paper a review of corresponding methodical work and
the results of test experiments is presented that has recently been compiled in the group
of the author.

Keywords

polymers, ﬁbers, WAXD, SAXS, tomography

1. Introduction

Presently we are experiencing that intense, reliable X-ray sources and fast detectors become
generally available. At DESY in Hamburg PETRA III will provide one of the most brilliant
X-ray sources worldwide. There less than a second will be sufﬁcient to expose a low-
noise two-dimensional (2D) scattering pattern of a polymer sample. Moreover, in detector
development a similar breakthrough has been achieved. Cycle times of less than a second
can easily be realized with the novel PILATUS1, 2 detectors.

It may be objected that for a long time low-noise scattering curves can be recorded with
repeat frequencies of several Hertz. Nevertheless, the value of those older data is limited.
Either the material is exhibiting isotropic scattering—in this case a comprehensive analysis
requires assumptions on the structure (e.g. the assumption of an ideal lamellar stack).
Or the material is anisotropic—then a measured curve does not describe the complete
scattering pattern or the old 2D pattern is noisy. On the other hand, by application of the
new technology it will become possible for many polymer scientists to monitor the structure
evolution in oriented polymer materials in real time. The results of such experiments offer
the potential to strengthen the understanding of structure evolution mechanisms in polymers.
Moreover, the new instruments provide very narrow X-ray beams with diameters of less
than 1 µm (“microbeams”) that permit to study the variation of structure inside the material
with respective spatial resolution. A complete sweep of a polymer ﬁber by a microbeam

Received September 21, 2009; accepted November 5, 2009.
Address correspondence to Norbert Stribeck, Department of Chemistry, University of Hamburg,

D-20146 Hamburg, Germany. E-mail: norbert@stribeck.de

40

Downloaded by [Seoul National University] at 07:05 14 January 2015 Monitoring of Processes in Polymer Materials

41

will take ca. 30 s. Thus, spatial resolution and time resolution may be combined to study
the response of different annular zones in a polymer ﬁber to, e.g. mechanical or thermal
load.

Parts with ﬁber symmetry, like ﬁbers, rods, or tubes, are not only of practical interest
because they are ubiquitous in everyday life. Moreover, they appear particularly suited
for investigation by means of scattering methods. As the part is rotated about its axis, the
2D scattering pattern does not change. Thus, there is no need to take patterns at different
rotation angles, as it would be necessary for materials with less symmetry. The recorded
2D scattering pattern of a ﬁber is oriented and contains all the accessible information on
the structure of the sample.

Nevertheless, it will not be sufﬁcient to simply engage the novel instruments—the
anticipated data must be adequately evaluated in due time, as well. In this connection
two big problems are arising. On the one hand, the data ﬂood is increasing to such an
extent that automated evaluation methods must be developed. On the other hand, the data
structure has changed, in principal. Instead of scattering curves scattering images must be
evaluated. In fact, reasonable scattering curves can be extracted from scattering images
as well,3 if loss of information is accepted. Nevertheless, it appears more reasonable to
develop evaluation methods adapted to the processing of images as a whole. This goal
can be achieved by combining digital image processing and scattering theory.4 In this
review several methods are presented that have recently been developed in our group
in order to quantitatively evaluate extensive sets of 2D scattering patterns from polymer
materials with ﬁber symmetry. Two previously published reviews deal with other aspects
of the scattering experiments from polymer materials, namely a presentation of scattering
theory5 from the point of view of the materials scientists and a presentation of instrumental
development.6

2. Practice of Experiment and Data Analysis

It is not seldom that users who have carried out experiments at a synchrotron source return
with incomplete data. In the worst case only images (the TIFF ﬁles from the detector)
have been collected and relevant environmental data are missing. Such data are the primary
beam intensities before and after the sample, exposure time, exposure mode, time stamp,
etc. More frequently the user has forgotten to record a machine background or parameters
of the setup are incomplete. Such errors could be reduced if the operator of the synchrotron
source would offer a data pre-evaluation service. The required data and the steps of data pre-
evaluation are described in a text book4 of the author. With respect to the description given
in the book the procedure of machine-background elimination has recently been changed
so that it becomes consistent with tomographic experiments, as well. Now the intensity in
the scattering pattern is divided by the linear absorption factor of the sample and from this
image the measured machine background is subtracted. This method compensates intensity
loss by absorption inside the sample.

For the professional analysis of anisotropic 2D scattering patterns of polymer materials
there are no user-friendly standard computer programs, because materials scientists do
not carry out standard experiments (like, e.g. protein crystallographers). Therefore some
program modules must be adapted to the experiment in order to reﬂect the actual setup or
the actual mode of operation. After adaption and proper combination of modules the data
can be evaluated automatically. The other option is cumbersome frame-by-frame manual
evaluation that is prone to inconsistency or incompleteness.

Downloaded by [Seoul National University] at 07:05 14 January 2015 42

N. Stribeck

The sequence of evaluation steps is a function of several parameters like the setup,
the individual scattering power of the studied material, and the features of the anisotropic
scattering pattern. New program modules must be constructed if the experimental procedure
is fundamentally changed. Complex correction modules may be required if experimental
shortcomings are detected during data evaluation. A typical shortcoming is insufﬁcient
synchronization among the different recorders of the experiment. Thus, the acquisition
of programming skills is recommended. Moreover, it is helpful to choose a computing
language that is optimized for the processing of multidimensional data. Suitable commercial
platforms are, e.g. PV-WAVE, IDL or MatLab. If free programming tools shall be used,
ImageJ offers a good starting point for arduous programmers. Actual references are readily
found by search engines on the worldwide web. Our group uses PV-WAVE.7 The sources
of the modules are free and available.8

3. WAXD Fiber Mapping

3.1 Motivation and Method Design

In wide-angle X-ray diffraction (WAXD) experiments the diffraction patterns must be
mapped into reciprocal space before they can be analyzed quantitatively. For this purpose
interactive computer programs9, 10 are utilized that rest upon unnecessary11 approximations.
Such a design is no disadvantage in crystallography, because sophisticated interactive
reﬁnement methods are required anyway for the exact determination of crystal structure
parameters in manageable series.

In contrast, in materials science frequently time-resolved experiments are carried out,
and voluminous series of diffraction patterns must be processed. The materials scientist
already knows the unit cell parameters. Thus, minor inaccuracy of the mapping can be
tolerated, if in the experiment variation of peak intensity or shape shall be monitored.
Here it is important to carry out the mapping fast and automatically. Because the ﬁber tilt
may change during the experiment, the algorithm must be able to track and to compensate
such variation. By revisiting the theoretical treatment of the ﬁber mapping it has been
demonstrated11 that there is no principal reason to reﬁne an approximate center of the ﬁber
pattern iteratively. Moreover, instead of an approximation12, 13 of the tilt angle β of the ﬁber
an exact equation11 can be employed. In the methodical paper14 an algorithm is presented
by which the mapping can be performed automatically. Its design rests on the application
of the mentioned ﬁndings. Intricate parametrization is simpliﬁed, and slow trigonometric
functions are avoided to a large extent. The method is unsuitable for diffuse scattering
patterns. If inaccuracies of 2 pixels can be tolerated, a pattern is automatically mapped into
reciprocal space in real time.

3.2 Actions Required by The User

For each series of diffraction patterns from a time-resolved experiment, some mapping
parameters must once be determined interactively. Our procedure wf premap assumes that
the studied material exhibits a sharp reﬂection that is located neither on the equator nor on
the meridian. In the example we investigate polypropylene and select the (131) reﬂection
of the crystallographic α2-modiﬁcation as the internal standard. With the crystallographic
c-axis parallel to the meridian, the reﬂection is characterized by the parameters15 dhk(cid:3) =
d131 = 0.406 nm and by c/(cid:3) = 0.6504 nm that deﬁnes the position of the reﬂection ring

Downloaded by [Seoul National University] at 07:05 14 January 2015 Monitoring of Processes in Polymer Materials

43

Figure 1. (a) Interactive mode of wf premap: Draw the reﬂection circle through the centers of the
reﬂection spots of an internal standard reﬂection (here: polypropylene (131) reﬂection), and widen
the circle into a belt that contains the maxima of the reﬂection spots. Finally input 4 circles (one
indicated at bottom right). (b) The procedure wf map has mapped the ﬁber diffraction pattern into
reciprocal space.

on the Polanyi sphere.11, 16, 17 The wavelength of X-radiation (here: λ = 0.15 nm) must be
known, too. In this case the ﬁrst pre-mapping run of the series is started by

wave> ab = wf premap(ss,a,0.15,0.406,0.6504)

The procedure requires a diffraction pattern as input (a). It generates output both in a “save-
set” (ss), and in a background-corrected diffraction pattern (ab). If the provided save-set
has never been used before, the procedure enters interactive mode and the user is presented
the pattern as shown in Fig. 1.

Obviously, in Fig. 1a the meridian is not vertical and the ﬁber is tilted. By means of
the pointing device the user draws the reﬂection circle through the maxima of the reﬂection
spots of the (131)-reﬂection. Thereafter he transforms the circle into a belt that is wide
enough to contain the maxima of the spots (Fig. 1a). Now the procedure cuts out this belt
and presents it to the user, who ﬁnally speciﬁes 4 disjoint clips (regions of interest on the
reﬂection circle). This is done by punching out circular regions from the belt (the bottom
right one is shown in Fig. 1a. The clips are the intersections of the belt (white double-band)
and the smaller circles. The program determines the positions of the maxima in the clips.
From these 4 maxima-positions the best reﬂection circle is determined by regression. The
error of determination is computed. In general, it is below 1 pixel. After that the orientation
of the meridian is computed both from the upper and from the lower pair of spots. The
difference is, in general, approximately 0.1o. Based on this information the diffraction
pattern is centered and aligned. Finally, the program computes the tilt angle β of the ﬁber
(cid:2)
of the spots using the exact equation11
from the orientation angles11 δ and δ
(cid:1)
4 − λ2s2
2λsr

(cid:2) − cos δ).

tan β =

Here sr = 1/d131 is the radius of the Polanyi sphere of the reference (131)-reﬂection.
Finally, the save-set ss is ﬁlled with several data: the tilt angle β; the true radius pr

r

(cos δ

Downloaded by [Seoul National University] at 07:05 14 January 2015 44

N. Stribeck

of the reference-reﬂection circle on the detector; the crystallographic data of the ref-
erence reﬂection; the wavelength λ; and the geometrical data of the 4 clips. This in-
formation is sufﬁcient for an automatic processing of the complete series of diffraction
patterns recorded in a time-resolved X-ray diffraction experiment of materials with ﬁber
symmetry.

3.3 Automated Mapping

If the procedure wf premap is called with a ﬁlled save-set, the interactive part is skipped,
and the geometry of the 4 clips is taken from the save-set. For each clip the position of the
spot maximum is computed. From these positions the ﬁber tilt angle β is computed, and the
image is centered and aligned. Finally, the mapping into reciprocal space is accomplished
by the routine wf map. The function call

wave> rec=wf map(ss,ab)

maps the diffraction pattern ab into reciprocal space using the save-set ss. The result is
called rec. A more detailed description is in the original paper.14 Figure 1b shows a typical
result obtained by automatic direct mapping. In the example the computed tilt angle is
β = 5.85
◦
. Because the result pattern is in reciprocal space, it should exhibit symmetry in 4
quadrants. Thus, the quality of the mapping can be assessed by comparison to a 4-quadrant
average of the pattern.

◦

∗

◦

-set crystallites melt at 158

C. The c-set melts at 170

3.4 Application
In a study18 that applies the method, uniaxially oriented polypropylene (PP) is molten and
crystallized isothermally from the oriented, quiescent melt. The results show that nucleation
-set) are decoupled. After
and growth of differently oriented sets of crystallites (c-set and a
shallow quench crystallization is preceded by (spinodal) decomposition. Peak integrals
(crystallinity) and minimum crystallite size are tracked. In the commercial starting material
∗
C furnace temperature. After
a
◦
C. Isothermal crystallization is divided in two distinct
recrystallization both sets melt at 170
phases. During nucleation the crystallinity stays low. The second phase is dominated by
◦
-oriented
crystallinity growth. At 150
crystallites are the ﬁrst. The ﬁrst-seeded set starts to grow ﬁrst, as well. c-set crystallinity is
-set crystallinity. The evolution of the corresponding SAXS19
always growing faster than a
cross-diagram in the growth phase can both be explained by lamellae growing at right
angles, and by block merging.

◦
C the c-set is seeded ﬁrst. At 145
∗

◦
C and 140

∗

C a

Figure 2 shows β (t, T ) of one of the experiments. The tracking curve appears smooth
and demonstrates the reliability of the tilt-angle determination. Tilt-angle variation is an
issue, because the oriented PP ﬁlm is heated until it becomes a viscous melt. Therefore the
material shrinks and bends in the synchrotron X-ray beam.

After the mapping the intensity distribution is known almost everywhere in reciprocal
space except for a wedge region near the meridian (cf. Fig. 1b). Thus, reﬂection intensities
can readily be integrated in reciprocal space. In reciprocal space the relation between
scattering and structure is clear from scattering theory,4, 18 and structural data can be
computed,18 e.g., from total intensities (crystallinity) and integral breadths (crystallite
sizes).

Figure 3 shows the evolution of the weight crystallinities of the two sets of crystallites at
3 different crystallization temperatures. As shown by Ruland,20 such reﬂection integrals that

Downloaded by [Seoul National University] at 07:05 14 January 2015 Monitoring of Processes in Polymer Materials

45

20

10

0

-10

]
°
[
 
)
t
(
β

T(t)

-20

-20

-10

0

10

t [min]

20

30

200

150

]

C
°
[
 
 

T

100

50

40

Figure 2. Tilt-angle tracking curve β (t, T ) from the automatic ﬁber-mapping procedure in an ex-
C
periment in which β is changing considerably (hard-elastic polypropylene; melt-annealing at 171
◦
and recrystallization at 150

C) ( c(cid:1)Reproduced18 with permission of the ACS).

◦

are complete in reciprocal space are proportional to the weight crystallinity of the perfect
crystallites that produce the reﬂections. Latency periods between the quench and the start of
the crystallization, as well as crystallization velocities of the two kind of crystallites can be
extracted from these data. Finally, conclusions concerning the crystallization mechanisms
can be drawn.18

∗

∗

Figure 3. Evolution of relative weight crystallinities S, and S
of c-oriented crystallites (dashed
-oriented crystals (solid regression lines), resp. during isothermal, oriented
regression lines) and a
crystallization of hard-elastic PP from a quiescent melt as a function of crystallization temperature.
-set (full arrow head),
Double-head arrows pointing at the t-axis indicate the ﬁrst sighting of the a
and of the c-set (open arrow head), respectively.

∗

Downloaded by [Seoul National University] at 07:05 14 January 2015 46

N. Stribeck

4. X-Ray Scattering Fiber Tomography

4.1 Motivation

The structure inside a polymer part is not necessarily homogeneous. With ﬁbers, extrudates,
and latex particles21 frequently a core-shell structure is reported. Moreover, engineers
deliberately generate structure gradients in polymer parts for special functionality.22, 23 If
such a part is irradiated by an X-ray beam, the recorded pattern is an integral superposition
of all the SAXS patterns emerging from the sequence of volume elements (voxels) along
the beam path. From the mathematical point of view such a superposition is a projection,
and a single projection is of little use for the study of graded materials.

A ﬁrst step towards a study of structure gradients has been the development of the X-ray
microbeam technique.24–26 Here only the diameter of the beam is limiting the lateral spatial
resolution. Nevertheless, the longitudinal spatial resolution is simply the thickness of the
sample. Microbeam scanning experiments, in particular of ﬁbers, have been performed for
many years and the raw data have been discussed, although the corresponding shortcoming
has been known (Paris et al.:27 “The long-term goal is to proceed from microbeam scan-
ning experiments to a real imaging technique”). The solution of the problem is tomographic
reconstruction. Problems arise from the fact that scattering patterns are multidimensional
but not simply a number (like the absorption in classical tomography). Thus, approximate
tomographic reconstruction of scattering data with a manageable amount of artifacts is dif-
ﬁcult. An exception is the case of part with uniaxial symmetry. In this case a reconstruction
of the scattering patterns is possible that would have emerged from individual voxels in
a plane perpendicular to the “ﬁber” axis.28 Nevertheless, this method is only of academic
value. The exposure time for the recording of scattering data of one cross-section of the
part is in the order of days. The computing time for the tomographic reconstruction of the
scattering patterns is at least a week.28

4.2 Introduction of the Method

A more practical tomographic method can be applied, if the part to be studied both exhibits
macroscopic ﬁber symmetry, and the structure only varies as a function of the distance
from its central axis. By means of this method ﬁbers, pipes, and extruded strands can be
investigated. Thus, we call it “X-ray scattering ﬁber computer tomography” (XSF-CT). A
complete set of projected scattering patterns is collected in a single microbeam scan across
the ﬁber, because the set of projections does not change as the sample is rotated about its
axis. Such an experiment is completed in about 30 min. Moreover, compared to the general
tomography the mathematics of image reconstruction is simpliﬁed considerably and the
computational effort decreases by 5 orders of magnitude. A set of 40 measured scattering
patterns is reconstructed in typically less than 10 min. From medicine and other ﬁelds of
science the considerable potential of information increase after tomographic imaging is
well-known.

In a general tomographic X-ray experiment,29 a voluminous sample is scanned by a thin
X-ray beam. As a function both of the position x of the scanning beam on the sample, and of
the sample rotation angle φ, projections (notation: {}) of the absorption {A} (x, φ) or even
of complete scattering patterns {I} (s, x, φ) are measured, in order to analyze the structure
variation in the plane of the sample that is scanned by the X-ray beam.28, 30, 31 Here s is
the scattering vector with |s| = s = (2/λ) sin θ, the X-ray wavelength λ and the scattering
angle 2θ. In the examples mentioned, a tomographic image reconstruction29, 32, 33 returns

Downloaded by [Seoul National University] at 07:05 14 January 2015 Monitoring of Processes in Polymer Materials

47

(cid:3)

(cid:2)
ρf

Figure 4. (a) Fiber cross-section irradiated by an X-ray beam at an offset x from its center. The
shows ﬁber symmetry. From all structures along the beam path a superposition is
structure ρ
probed. y is the variable of the integration. (b) One-dimensional tomographic reconstruction turns the
measured series of projected scattering patterns that carry the accumulated the structure information
passed by the beam (vertical bars) into the image patterns from voxels (quadratic boxes) residing on
the ﬁber radius.

either the spatial variation of the absorption in the plane, or of the scattering emanating
from the resolved voxels in the plane. The smearing caused from projection is eliminated
by application of the Fourier transform theory, and a clear image of the inner structure is
obtained.

If the studied material shows cylindrical symmetry, the results of the measurement are
no function of φ any more, and the complete image information is in a single microbeam
scan. The fundamental geometry is sketched in Fig. 4a. The information in the measured
signal {A} (x) or {I} (s, x), respectively, does not represent the sought information A (x) or
I (s, x) originating from the small square (voxel) around the position x. Instead, to a ﬁrst
approximation it is represented by the projection integral

{I} (s, x) = 2

= 2

ˆ ∞
ˆ ∞

x

x

(cid:1)

I (s,

x2 + y2) dy

(cid:4)

I (s, ρf ) ρf dρf
− x2

ρ2
f

.

(1)

(2)

In the equation only the accumulated attenuation of the primary beam by X-ray absorption
is not accounted for. This is no problem for very thin polymer parts with low absorption.
For thicker samples the absorption correction from Section 2 is sufﬁcient to account for it.
The sought information in image space (I (ρf )) along the radius ρf of the ﬁber has to be
reconstructed from the information in projection space ({I} (x)).

Equation (1) is the deﬁnition of the Abel transform.33 In X-ray scattering Eq. (1) is
established textbook knowledge.4, 34–39 There it describes the slit smearing. Even the inverse
Abel transform

I (s, x) = − 1

π
= − 1
π

ˆ ∞
ˆ ∞

0

d{I}(s, ρf )

dρf

d{I}(s, ρf )

x

dρf

dy

ρf
dρf(cid:4)
ρ2
f

− x2

,

(3)

(4)

Downloaded by [Seoul National University] at 07:05 14 January 2015 48

N. Stribeck

Figure 5. Sketch of local ﬁber symmetry inside the cross-section of the ﬁber. Each voxel has its own
ﬁber axis. Inside the voxel there is only axial grain.

which ﬁrst has been derived by Niels Abel40 is found in scattering textbooks since Guinier41
and DuMond.42 Similar to the ﬁltered backprojection algorithm of the general tomography,
low-noise reconstruction algorithms43–45 for the tomography of materials with cylindrical
symmetry are readily available in the ﬁeld of “one-dimensional tomography.” The principle
of one-dimensional tomographic reconstruction is sketched in Fig. 4b. It must be mentioned
that here we implicitly assume that the scattering from every irradiated voxel in the ﬁber
shows ﬁber symmetry itself (local ﬁber symmetry). Otherwise characteristic reconstruction
aberrations are expected.28, 46 The meaning of local ﬁber symmetry is sketched in Fig. 5.
Deviations from local ﬁber symmetry (i.e. tangential or radial grain, resp.46) cause restricted
or shifted visibility of scattering features along the ﬁber radius. These aberrations can be
detected and result in additional information on the structure inside the ﬁber.46

4.3 Application
In an application-oriented feasibility study46 precursors of polymer microﬁbrillar-
reinforced composites (MFC) containing poly(ether)-block-amide (PEBA) and poly
(ethylene terephthalate) (PET) with varying cold-draw ratio are studied. The studied strands
are relatively thick, because presently the achievable “microbeam” at HASYLAB in Ham-
burg is relatively wide. The results from a direct analysis of the smeared measured patterns
are compared to results obtained after tomographic reconstruction. Ideas for advanced
practical applications of the XSF-CT method are discussed.
Data are presented from a cold-drawn (draw ratio λd ≈ 3) co-extrudate of 70 wt.-%
PEBA and 30 wt.-% PET (abbreviated: MFC73). In the scanning-microbeam experiment

Downloaded by [Seoul National University] at 07:05 14 January 2015 Monitoring of Processes in Polymer Materials

49

Figure 6. Cold-drawn (λd ≈ 3) MFC73 in a scanning microbeam experiment. Measured scattering
intensity {I}(s12, s3, ρf ) (top row) and reconstructed scattering I (s12, s3, ρf ) (bottom row) for short
distances ρf from the ﬁber axis. The patterns display the range −0.1 nm
−1 in
uniform logarithmic scale (s = (2/λ) sin θ).

−1≤ s12, s3 ≤ 0.1 nm

the strand shows an isotropic long period and an equatorial streak at almost every beam
position (Fig. 6, top row). Only the tomographically reconstructed patterns (bottom row)
exhibit that the long-period ring-reﬂection is not present in the core of the ﬁber. As the
feature becomes visible, it ﬁrst shows up at the equator. With increasing distance from the
ﬁber axis, reﬂection arcs are growing towards the meridian. Above ρf = 300 µm the arcs
join into a closed circle. Because such behavior has been observed with neat PEBA as well,
this orientation phenomenon is not indicating some interaction between the PEBA and
the PET microﬁbrils. The reconstructed central voxel (ρf = 0) is dominated by one of the
reconstruction aberration effects (from voxels with tangential grain).46 Examination of the
equatorial streak exhibits only in the reconstruction that it grows broader towards the center
of the ﬁber. The streak is allocated to needle-shaped domains, and is only observed with
strands from co-extruded blends. If these needles are thin PET microﬁbrils, the tomography
shows that in the center of the ﬁber these microﬁbrils are shorter than in an intermediate
region. The structure gradient in the outer region of the strand is discussed in the original
paper.46

5. SAXS Monitoring of Mechanical Tests

5.1 Motivation and Method Development

Advanced polymer materials are urgently sought after e.g. in the automotive industry in
order to accomplish the goals of climate protection by reduction of weight. Such newly
engineered materials have to prove their serviceability in mechanical tests. Classical tensile
tests are performed to determine the modulus and ultimate properties. Load cycling exper-
iments are carried out to determine the fatigue behavior. In order to reveal the mechanisms
of, e.g., failure or fatigue, it is desirable to monitor mechanical tests by SAXS. In this
way the response of the nanostructure to mechanical load is revealed. Since about 2005
the advance of instrumentation at synchrotron beamlines facilitates considerable reduction
of the exposure required for the recording of low-noise SAXS patterns. Such quality is

Downloaded by [Seoul National University] at 07:05 14 January 2015 50

N. Stribeck

required for a quantitative analysis by, e.g., the CDF method.47, 48 Concerning the monitor-
ing of tensile tests by SAXS this advance has meant that change-over from the stretch-hold
technique49 to the more practical continuous straining has become possible,50 although
the achievable strain rate is frequently still by a factor of 100 lower than that relevant in
industry and service. With the advent of very high-brilliance synchrotron sources even this
limitation is presently being abolished.
In order to gain full control on tensile and load-cycling tests a tensile tester has been
built for operation at synchrotron beamlines.50 The control program written in LabVIEW R(cid:1)
is continuously adapted to more complex experiments. Presently it can handle different
kinds of continuous load-cycling programs that now are strictly synchronized with both the
SAXS detector and a video grabber module (recording sequences of pictures of the sample
with ﬁducial marks).

The latest methodical development51 is an automatic evaluation method of the video
frames, by which the true macroscopic elongation of the sample can be determined with
an accuracy of 3 decimals. Such high accuracy is required for thermoplastic materials that
fail at low elongations (ca. 0.1). The method extracts the grating of the ﬁducial marks on
the sample from the actual video image, computes the 1D correlation function,52, 53 and
evaluates its “long period.”

5.2 Results
In a study50 of hard-elastic polypropylene (PP), scattering patterns recorded during con-
tinuous straining differ considerably from those recorded in the step-hold technique. Even
though during exposure the elongation is no longer constant when applying the dy-
namic technique, the images collected in stretch-hold technique appear much more blurred
(Fig. 7).

This result indicates relaxation of nanostructure while the extensometer stands still.
Quantitative analysis shows that during relaxation the extension of crystalline lamellae

Figure 7. Oriented PP ﬁlms in tensile tests. Comparison between SAXS patterns I (s12, s3) recorded
during continuous straining (top row, ˙ε ≈ 10
−1) and patterns from an experiment in stretch-hold
technique (bottom row). Straining direction and meridian is vertical (s3). Equator (s12) is horizontal
( c(cid:1)Reproduced50 with permission of Wiley Interscience).

−3s

Downloaded by [Seoul National University] at 07:05 14 January 2015 Monitoring of Processes in Polymer Materials

51

Figure 8. Oriented PP. Load cycling monitored by SAXS. Circular dots show where SAXS patterns
have been recorded. Numerical labels indicate their sequence. The highlighted part of the curve near
label 11 indicates the part traversed during the recording of pattern 11. The drawing direction with
respect to the patterns, s3, is indicated by a double-head arrow ( c(cid:1)Reproduced48 with permission of
Wiley-VCH).

is increasing. Lamellae thicknesses are becoming non-uniform. The range of order is
shortening. Cross-hatched lamellae are formed.

In another study48 slow continuous mechanical tests of oriented PP are monitored
by SAXS and quantitatively evaluated by the CDF method.47 A continuous-strain test
exhibits fracture and release of weak lamellae (2 – 10% strain). Beyond that conversion
of lamellae into needles is observed. As all layers are consumed, the material breaks.
Fatigue is studied in a load-reversal experiment (between 10% and 35% strain, Fig. 8).
In each cycle crystallization, layer break, and relaxation melting are observed. Figure 9
presents the result. The top chart shows the true elongation, ε (t), imposed to the material
and measured at the point of X-ray irradiation. The four load-reversal cycles are easily
identiﬁed. The chart in the middle reports the extracted nanostructure parameters, L (t),
ecac (t), and S (t). The bottom diagram presents the macroscopic resistance, σ (t), which
the material is opposing to strain. The ﬁgure shows that crystallization, rupture of lamellae,
and melting of fragments are continuously reshaping the domains of the PP material in the
cycles of the fatigue test. The long-period cycle exhibits a phase shift with respect to the
imposed strain cycling. Moreover, there is an indication of amplitude attenuation. Fatigue
is demonstrated in the curve σ (t) by decreasing stress peaks. An in-depth discussion of
the zones indicated in Fig. 9 is in the original paper.48 In particular, the combination of
SAXS and fatigue test shows the transition from stress-induced crystallization to crystallite
rupture σ (t) ≈ 20 MPa.

In a recent study51 of microﬁbrillar reinforced blends based on polyethylene we have
switched from hard-elastic materials to materials that fail at the low elongations typical
for plastic polymers. Because of the much lower elongation at break (εb ≈ 0.1), now the
macroscopic elongation εm and nanoscopic elongation εn must be determined with high
precision. Respective methods are presented. The results show that the hardest materials
exhibit a very inhomogeneous nanodomain structure. During straining their domains appear
to be wedged together and inhibit transverse contraction on the nanometer scale.

Downloaded by [Seoul National University] at 07:05 14 January 2015 52

N. Stribeck

Figure 9. Dynamic load-reversal mechanical test of hard-elastic PP ﬁlm. As a function of the elapsed
time t the macroscopic parameters elongation, ε (top graph), and tensile stress, σ (bottom graph)
are displayed together with topological nanostructure parameters (middle). In the middle diagram
the solid line shows the long period, L. The broken line displays the lateral extension, ecac, of a
sandwich made from two crystalline lamellae. The line with circular dots exhibits the variation of
the strength, S, of the CDF. Vertical bars indicate zones of strain-induced crystallization (dark bars)
and relaxation-induced melting (light gray bars), respectively ( c(cid:1) Reproduced48 with permission of
Wiley-VCH).

or Cloisite R(cid:1)

Further components are polyamides (PA6, PA12) (20–30%) and as compatibilizer
Yparex R(cid:1)
8102 (YP) (0–10%). Some HDPE/PA6 blends are additionally loaded with nano-
clays (Nanomer R(cid:1)
). Blending of HDPE with PA12 causes no synergistic effect.
In the absence of nanoclay, PA6 and HDPE form a heterogeneous nanostructure with
high Young’s modulus. After addition of YP a more homogeneous scaffold structure is
observed in which some of the PA6 microﬁbrils and HDPE crystallites appear to be rigidly
connected, but the modulus has decreased. Both kinds of nanoclay induce a transition from
a structure without transverse correlation among the microﬁbrils into a macrolattice with 3D
correlations among HDPE domains from neighboring microﬁbrils. For extensions between
0.7% and 3.5% the scattering entities with 3D correlation exhibit transverse elongation
instead of transverse contraction. The process is interpreted as overcoming a correlation
barrier executed by the crystallites in an evasion-upon-approaching mechanism. During
continued straining the 3D correlation is reduced or removed.

The true macroscopic elongation εm is determined from video frames taken of the
sample that carries ﬁducial marks (see Fig. 10a). Once for an experiment the user has to
provide some input. It is based on the ﬁrst image (Fig. 10a) of the series. The center of the
X-ray beam on the sample is marked by a cross in the image. Close to this center the user
(cid:2)
m (x, y). In Fig. 10a this region is bordered
deﬁnes a rectangular region of interest (ROI), ρ
by a dashed line. x and y are pixel coordinates in the direction of strain and perpendicular
to it, respectively. The same ROI is applied to all video frames of the experiment. The ROI
is structured by the ﬁducial marks running perpendicular to the straining direction. As is
known from scattering theory,4 from such a structure function ρm (x, y) the 2D correlation

Downloaded by [Seoul National University] at 07:05 14 January 2015 Monitoring of Processes in Polymer Materials

53

Figure 10. Elongation from recorded video frames. Inset a: In the ﬁrst video frame a region of
interest (ROI) with ﬁducial marks is deﬁned. Inset b: From the ROI the 2D correlation function
γ2 (x, y) is computed. Main drawing: The center of the long-period peak in γ1 (x) = γ2 (x, 0) is ﬁtted
by a parabola (dashed line) to compute the distance between the ﬁducial marks ( c(cid:1) Reproduced51
with permission of Wiley Interscience).

function

can be computed, with

γ2 (x, y) = ρ(cid:13)2
m (x, y)
ρ(cid:13)2
m (0, 0)

m (x, y) − ¯ρm
(cid:2)

f (cid:13)2 (x, y) =

representing the ﬂuctuation of ρ
deﬁned by the integral

ρm (x, y) = ρ
(cid:2)
m (x, y) about its average ¯ρm, and the autocorrelation being
¨ ∞
−∞ f (u, v) f (u + x, v + y) dudv.
In Fig. 10b the colored caps demonstrate, where γ2 (x, y) is positive. The macroscopic
elongation εm in straining direction is the section γ1 (x) = (cid:8)γ2 (x, y)(cid:9)
1 (x) of γ2 in straining
direction. Figure 10 presents this curve and its analysis. Its ﬁrst positive peak is the long-
period peak that is related to the actual average distance of the ﬁducial marks, (cid:3). A
parabola (dashed line) is ﬁtted to the long-period maximum, and the position of its vertex
is determined (arrow). Thus, (cid:3) can be determined with an accuracy of 0.01 pixels. Let (cid:3)0
the initial distance between the marks, then the macroscopic elongation is εm = (cid:3)/(cid:3)0 − 1.
Concerning the scattering patterns, similar analysis is possible. Nevertheless, the peaks
observed in the scattering pattern or in the CDFs47 computed from the pattern are no
longer one-dimensional but two-dimensional – positioned in the plane (s12, s3) or (r12, r3),
respectively. Again, the user deﬁnes a ROI in which the analysis procedure searches for the
peak maximum, extracts the peak cap, and ﬁts now a bivariate54 polynomial of 2nd order to
it. From the coefﬁcients of the polynomial several parameters are readily determined. Most
important are the peak position and the widths of the peak in meridional and equatorial

Downloaded by [Seoul National University] at 07:05 14 January 2015 54

N. Stribeck

Figure 11. MFC precursor blends from HDPE, two different polyamides (PA12, PA6) and a com-
patibilizer (YP) in tensile tests. Evolution of macroscopic stress and strain (σ , ε) as well as of
nanostructure parameters. εnano is the nanoscopic elongation computed from the HDPE long period.
DL is the relative change of the width of the long period distribution. DM is the relative change of the
extension of the microﬁbrils in transverse direction.

directions, respectively. Thus, the evolution of these parameters during the experiment can
be tracked automatically.

Figure 11 presents the results of a quantitative nanostructure analysis for the blends
which do not contain nanoclays. Elongations are illustrated by dashed lines. Bold lines
show the macroscopic elongation, ε. Thin lines report the nanoscopic elongation εnano
of the HDPE matrix. Circular marks indicate regions in which ε ≈ εnano. All materials
reinforced by PA12 exhibit this similarity of macroscopic and nanoscopic deformation.
Dashed-dotted lines show DL, the relative variation of the breadth of the long-period

Downloaded by [Seoul National University] at 07:05 14 January 2015 Monitoring of Processes in Polymer Materials

55

distribution. The increase of all curves demonstrates increasing inhomogeneity of the
long periods with increasing elongation. Dotted lines show DM, the relative variation of
the microﬁbrillar diameter during the straining process. In all materials the elongational
deformation causes the microﬁbrils to thin. Variation of the material composition does
not cause considerable changes. This is different with the samples reinforced by PA6
(Fig. 11d-f). Here an increase of the PA6 content to 30% causes strong thinning of the
microﬁbrils. In the PA6 blends the strong transverse decrease is going along with only
moderate nanoscopic elongation εnano of the HDPE. An explanation for this ﬁnding could
be microﬁbrillation by fracture of crystalline domains of the polyethylene. Moreover, the
diagrams in Fig. 11d-f demonstrate a considerable difference (vertical arrows) between
the two dashed curves. In Fig. 11e-f (εnano < ε) the nanoscopic elongation of the HDPE
phase is considerably lower than the macroscopic elongation. Similarity is only observed
during the initial deformation in Fig. 11f (circular mark). In the 80/20 HDPE/PA6 blend
(Fig. 11d) the nanoscopic elongation of the HDPE microﬁbrils is considerably longer than
the macroscopic elongation (εnano > ε). Although this ﬁnding appears to be unreasonable,
an indication for a possible mechanism is in the strong increase of DL (Fig. 11d). This is
discussed in the original paper.51

6. Conclusions

Considering the present instrumental development at synchrotron radiation facilities the de-
velopment of advanced data evaluation methods appears to be both promising and necessary
in order to master the future data ﬂood. The three presented methods demonstrate the poten-
tial of such work. In order to discharge the user, a part of the data evaluation may be carried
out at the synchrotron facility. Such added service would require not only considerable
computing power, but also additional manpower. In addition to the beamline scientist an
evaluation specialist would become necessary. It would be his job to detect if raw data must
be smoothed. He would have to eliminate the machine background, would generate detector
masks, would center and align each scattering pattern, and would ﬁll blind areas from con-
sideration of symmetry. As an added service, the community of the evaluation specialists
could select some standard experiments for which complete user-friendly programming
environments could be built. Nevertheless, for the predominant fraction of individually de-
signed setups it will remain necessary for the polymer scientist himself to familiarize with
adapted programming techniques. This will be of particular importance, if methods shall
be developed that grow with the growth of instrumental capacity. Ultimately, it is expected
that an increase of the quality of results returned from scattering experiments will be closely
correlated to the manpower dedicated to the programming of data evaluation modules.

Acknowledgment

The author thanks the Hamburg Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory (HASYLAB) for beam time
granted in the frame of project II-20080015. Development of the reported methods has been supported
by the 7th framework program of the European Union (Project NANOTOUGH FP7-NMP-2007-
LARGE-2.1.1).

References

1. Broennimann, C.; Eikenberry, E. F.; Henrich, B.; Horrisberger, R.; H¨ulsen, G.; Pohl, E.; Schmitt,
B.; Schulze-Briese, C.; Suzuki, M.; Tomizaki, T.; Toyokawa, A.; Wagner, A. “The PILATUS 1M
detector,” J. Synchrotron Rad., 2006, 13, 120–130.

Downloaded by [Seoul National University] at 07:05 14 January 2015 56

N. Stribeck

2. H¨ulsen-Bollier, G. The PILATUS 1M Detector. A Novel Large Area Pixel Detector, Ph.D. thesis,

Dept. Physics, University of Erlangen-N¨urnberg, Germany 2005.

3. Stribeck, N. “Analysis of SAXS Fiber Patterns by Means of Projections,” ACS Symp. Ser., 2000,

739, 41–56.

4. Stribeck, N. X-Ray Scattering of Soft Matter, Springer, Heidelberg, New York, 2007.
5. Stribeck, N. “Scattering of Soft Condensed Matter. From Fundaments to Application,” In Applica-
tions of Synchrotron Light to Scattering and Diffraction in Materials and Life Sciences, Ezquerra,
T. A.; Garci´a Guti´errez, M.; Nogales, A.; G´omez, M., eds., Springer, Berlin Heidelberg, 2009,
volume 776 of Lect. Notes Phys. pp. 25–62.

6. Stribeck, N. “Deformation behavior of nanocomposites studied by X-ray scattering: Instrumen-
tation and methodology,” In Nano- and Micromechanics of Polymer Blends and Composites,
Karger-Kocsis, J.; Fakirov, S., eds., Hanser Publisher, M¨unchen, 2009, volume 1 pp. 269–
300.

7. VNI “PV-WAVE Manuals,” V 7.5, Houston, TX, 2007.
8. Stribeck, N. “Downloads,” http://www.chemie.uni-hamburg.de/tmc/stribeck/dl 2008.
9. Rajkumar, G.; AL-Khayat, H.; Eakins, F.; He, A.; Knupp, C.; Squire, J. “FibreFix—A new

integrated CCP13 software package,” Fibre Diffraction Rev., 2005, 13, 11–18.

10. Bian, W.; Wang, H.; McCullough, I.; Stubbs, G. “WCEN: a computer program for initial pro-

cessing of ﬁber diffraction patterns,” J. Appl. Cryst., 2006, 39, 752–756.

11. Stribeck, N. “On the determination of ﬁber tilt angles in ﬁber diffraction,” Acta Cryst., 2009,

A65, 46–47.

12. Franklin, R. E.; Gosling, R. G. “The structure of sodium thymonucleate ﬁbres. II. Cylindrically

symmmetrical patterson function,” Acta Cryst., 1953, 6, 678–685.

13. Fraser, R. D.; Macrae, T. P.; Miller, A.; Rowlands, R. J. “Digital processing of ﬁbre diffraction

patterns,” J. Appl. Cryst., 1976, 9, 81–94.

14. Stribeck, N.; N¨ochel, U. “Direct mapping of ﬁber diffraction patterns into reciprocal space,”

J. Appl. Cryst., 2009, 42, 295–301.

15. Mencik, Z. “Crystal structure of isotactic polypropylene,” J. Macromol. Sci. Phys., 1972, B6,

101–115.

16. Polanyi, M. “Das R¨ontgen-Faserdiagramm I. (The X-Ray Fiber-diagram I.),” Z. Phys., 1921, 7,

149–180.

17. Polanyi, M.; Weissenberg, K. “Das R¨ontgen-Faserdiagramm II. (The X-Ray ﬁber-diagram II.),”

Z. Physik, 1923, 9, 123–130.

18. Stribeck, N.; N¨ochel, U.; Funari, S. S. “Melting and crystallization of differently oriented sets of

crystallites in hard-elastic polypropylene,” Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 2093–2101.

19. Stribeck, N.; N¨ochel, U.; Almend´arez Camarillo, A.; Roth, S. V.; Dommach, M.; B¨osecke,
P. “SAXS study of oriented crystallization of polypropylene from a quiescent melt,” Macro-
molecules, 2007, 40, 4535–4545.

20. Ruland, W. “X-ray determination of crystallinity and diffuse disorder scattering,” Acta Cryst.,

1961, 14, 1180–1185.

21. Dingenouts, N.; Bolze, J.; Potschke, D.; Ballauff, M. “Analysis of polymer latexes by small-angle
X-ray scattering,” Adv. Polym. Sci., 1999, 144, Epoxide Resins, Polyampholytes), 1–Epoxide
Resins, Polyampholytes), 47.

22. Kieback, B.; Neubrand, A.; Riedel, H. “Processing techniques for functionally graded materials,”

Mater. Sci. Eng. A Struct. Mater. Prop. Microstruct. Proces., 2003, 362, 81–106.

23. Pompe, W.; Worch, H.; Epple, M.; Friess, W.; Gelinsky, M.; Greil, P.; Hempel, U.; Scharnweber,
D.; Schulte, K. “Functionally graded materials for biomedical applications,” Mater. Sci. Eng. A
Struct. Mater. Prop. Microstruct. Proces., 2003, 362, 40–60.

24. Riekel, C.; Engstr¨om, P. “Diffraction and diffuse scattering from materials with microfocussed

X-rays,” Nuclear Instr. Meth. Phys. Res., 1995, B97, 224–230.

25. Waigh, T. A.; Donald, A. M.; Heidelbach, F.; Riekel, C.; Gidley, M. J. “Analysis of the native
structure of starch granules with small angle x-ray microfocus scattering,” Biopolymers, 1999,
49, 91–105.

Downloaded by [Seoul National University] at 07:05 14 January 2015 Monitoring of Processes in Polymer Materials

57

26. Kolb, R.; Wutz, C.; Stribeck, N.; V. Krosigk, G.; Riekel, C. “Investigation of secondary crystal-
lization of polymers by means of microbeam X-ray scattering,” Polymer, 2001, 42, 5257–5266.
27. Paris, O.; Li, C.; Siegel, S.; Weseloh, G.; Emmerling, F.; Riesemeier, H.; Erko, A.; Fratzl, P. “A
new experimental station for simultaneous X-ray microbeam scanning for small- and wide-angle
scattering and ﬂuorescence at BESSY II,” J. Appl. Cryst., 2007, 40, s466–s470.

28. Stribeck, N.; Almendarez Camarillo, A.; N¨ochel, U.; Schroer, C.; Kuhlmann, M.; Roth, S. V.;
Gehrke, R.; Bayer, R. K. “Volume-resolved nanostructure survey of a polymer part by means of
SAXS microtomography,” Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2006, 207, 1239–1249.

29. Bonse, U.; Busch, F. “X-ray computed microtomography (µCT) using synchrotron radiation,”

Prog. Biophys. Molec. Biol., 1996, 65, 133–169.

30. Schroer, C. G.; Kuhlmann, M.; Roth, S. V.; Gehrke, R.; Stribeck, N.; Almendarez Camarillo, A.;
Lengeler, B. “Mapping the local nanostructure inside a specimen by tomographic small-angle
x-ray scattering,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 164102.

31. Schroer, C. G.; Kuhlmann, M.; G¨unzler, T. F.; Benner, B.; Kurapova, O.; Patommel, J.; Lengeler,
B.; Roth, S. V.; Gehrke, R.; Snigirev, A.; Snigireva, I.; Stribeck, N.; Almend´arez Camarillo, A.;
Beckmann, F. “Full-ﬁeld and scanning microtomography based on parabolic refractive x-ray
lenses,” Proc. SPIE, 2006, 6318, 6318H.

32. Kak, A. C.; Slaney, M. Principles of Computerized Tomographic Imaging; IEEE Press: New

York, 1999.

33. Bracewell, R. The Fourier Transform and Its Applications; 3rd Ed. Mc Graw-Hill: New York,

1999.

34. Guinier, A.; Fournet, G. Small-Angle Scattering of X-Rays, Chapman and Hall: London, 1955.
35. Hosemann, R.; Bagchi, S. N. Direct Analysis of Diffraction by Matter; North-Holland: Amster-

dam, 1962.

36. Alexander, L. E. X-Ray Diffraction Methods in Polymer Science; Wiley: New York, 1979.
37. Glatter, O.; Kratky, O., eds., Small Angle X-ray Scattering; Academic Press: London, 1982.
38. Feigin, L. A.; Svergun, D. I. Structure Analysis by Small-Angle X-Ray and Neutron Scattering;

Plenum Press: New York, 1987.

39. Balt´a Calleja, F. J.; Vonk, C. G. X-Ray Scattering of Synthetic Polymers; Elsevier: Amsterdam,

1989.

40. Abel, N. H. “Auﬂ¨osung einer mechanischen Aufgabe,” J. Reine Angew. Math., 1826, 1, 153–157.
41. Guinier, A.; Fournet, G. “Correction of measurments of low-angle X-ray scattering,” Nature,

1947, 160, 501.

42. DuMond, J. W. M. “Method of correcting low angle X-ray diffraction curves for the study of

small particle sizes,” Phys. Rev., 1947, 72, 83–84.

43. Bitter, I.; Kaufman, A. E.; Sato, M. “Penalized-distance volumetric skeleton algorithm,” IEEE

Trans. Visualization and Computer Graphics, 2001, 7, 195–206.

44. Dasch, C. J. “One-dimensional tomography: a comparison of Abel, onion-peeling, and ﬁltered

backprojection methods,” Applied Optics, 1992, 31, 1146–1153.

45. Dribinski, V.; Ossadtchi, A.; Mandelshtam, V. A.; Reisler, H. “Reconstruction of Abel-
transformable images: The Gaussian basis-set expansion Abel transform method,” Rev. Sci.
Instr., 2002, 73, 2634–2642.

46. Stribeck, N.; N¨ochel, U.; Fakirov, S.; Feldkamp, J.; Schroer, C.; Timmann, A.; Kuhlmann,
M. “SAXS-ﬁber computer-tomography. Method enhancement and analysis of microﬁbrillar-
reinforced composite precursors from PEBAX and PET,” Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 7637–7647.
47. Stribeck, N. “Extraction of domain structure information from small-angle X-ray patterns of bulk

materials,” J. Appl. Cryst., 2001, 34, 496–503.

48. Stribeck, N.; N¨ochel, U.; Funari, S. S.; Schubert, T.; Timmann, A. “Nanostructure evolution in

polypropylene during mechanical testing,” Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2008, 209, 1992–2002.

49. Wu, J.; Schultz, J. M.; Yeh, F.; Hsiao, B. S.; Chu, B. “In-situ simultaneous synchrotron small- and
wide-angle X-ray scattering measurement of poly(vinylidene ﬂuoride) ﬁbers under deformation,”
Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 1765–1777.

Downloaded by [Seoul National University] at 07:05 14 January 2015 58

N. Stribeck

50. Stribeck, N.; N¨ochel, U.; Funari, S. S.; Schubert, T. “Tensile tests of polypropylene monitored by
SAXS. Comparing the stretch-hold technique to the dynamic technique,” J. Polym. Sci. Polym.
Phys., 2008, 46, 721–726.

51. Denchev, Z.; Dencheva, N.; Funari, S. S.; Motovilin, M.; Schubert, T.; Stribeck, N. “Nanostruc-
ture and mechanical properties studied during dynamical straining of microﬁbrillar reinforced
HDPE/PA blends,” J. Polym. Sci. Part B: Polym. Phys., 2009, in print.

52. Vonk, C. G.; Kortleve, G. “X-ray small-angle scattering of bulk polyethylene,” Colloid Polym.

Sci., 1967, 220, 19–24.

53. Strobl, G. R.; Schneider, M. “Direct evaluation of the electron density correlation function of

partially crystalline polymers,” J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 1980, B18, 1343–1359.

54. Hall, E. L. Computer Image Processing and Recognition; Academic Press: London, 1980.

Downloaded by [Seoul National University] at 07:05 14 January 2015 