R E V I E W S

BACTERIOCINS: DEVELOPING 
INNATE IMMUNITY FOR FOOD
Paul D. Cotter*, Colin Hill* and R. Paul Ross‡
Abstract | Bacteriocins are bacterially produced antimicrobial peptides with narrow or broad host 
ranges. Many bacteriocins are produced by food-grade lactic acid bacteria, a phenomenon 
which offers food scientists the possibility of directing or preventing the development of specific 
bacterial species in food. This can be particularly useful in preservation or food safety 
applications, but also has implications for the development of desirable flora in fermented food. 
In this sense, bacteriocins can be used to confer a rudimentary form of innate immunity to 
foodstuffs, helping processors extend their control over the food flora long after manufacture.

F O O D  M I C R O B I O LO G Y

 

Perhaps the oldest and most widespread antimicrobial 
strategy in living systems is the use of antimicrobial 
peptides by the innate immune systems of many forms 
of life, from insects to plants to humans. Antimicrobial 
peptides can be fast acting and have broad-spectrum 
activity, which diminishes the possibility of resis-
tance developing in target species. One example of 
anti microbial peptides are the defensins, such as the 
α-defensins, which are produced by neutrophils in the 
small intestine and which act to reinforce the physical 
barriers of the mucosal surface. However, the pro-
duction of antimicrobial peptides is not confined to 
multi cellular organisms. BACTERIOCINS are ribosomally 
synthesized antimicrobial peptides produced by one 
bacterium that are active against other bacteria, either 
in the same species (narrow spectrum), or across 
genera (broad spectrum) and, as with host defence 
peptides1, cell signalling mechanisms can also be 
involved. Producer organisms are immune to their own 
bacteriocin(s), a property that is mediated by specific 
immunity proteins.

It has been suggested that between 30–99% of the 
Bacteria and Archaea make at least one bacteriocin2,3, 
although genome analyses should ultimately provide 
a more definitive figure4,5. Many bacteriocins are 
produced by food-grade lactic acid bacteria (LAB), 
and this offers the possibility of manipulating food 
microbial ecosystems in a deliberate fashion — for 

example, by using bacteriocins to protect food against 
contamination with, or prevent the growth of, specific 
pathogenic bacteria. Alternatively, narrow-host-range 
bacteriocins can be used to influence a microbial 
population in a specific ecosystem towards a particu-
lar outcome in which a desirable strain predominates 
(competitive exclusion). In this sense, bacteriocins can 
potentially be used as a form of innate immunity in 
food to augment physical, physiological (for example, 
pH) and chemical preservatives, and to influence the 
probable final population in complex food systems.

The first description of bacteriocin-mediated inhi-
bition was reported 80 years ago, when antagonism 
between strains of Escherichia coli was first disco vered6. 
Originally called ‘colicins’, to reflect the original pro-
ducer organism, gene-encoded antimicrobial peptides 
produced by bacteria are now referred to as ‘bacterio-
cins’. Although the deliberate use of bacteriocins as 
preservatives in food was formally proposed in 1951 
REF. 7, it is likely that mankind has benefited from 
the serendipitous production of bacteriocins in food 
in the 8,000 years since cheese and other fermented 
foods were first manufactured. Many studies have 
revealed that the LAB used in cheese manufacture to 
convert lactose to lactic acid also produce bacteriocins 
that can influence the composition of the complex 
cheese microflora and potentially inhibit adventitious 
spoilage or pathogenic bacteria. Importantly, in 1928 

BACTERIOCINS
Bacterially produced, small, 
heat-stable peptides that are 
active against other bacteria and 
to which the producer has a 
specific immunity mechanism. 
Bacteriocins can have a narrow 
or broad target spectrum.

Alimentary Pharmabiotic 
Centre, *Microbiology 
Department, University 
College Cork, Cork, Ireland.
‡Moorepark Biotechnology 
Centre, Teagasc, Cork, 
Ireland.
Correspondence to C.H. 
e-mail: c.hill@ucc.ie
doi:10.1038/nrmicro1240

NATURE REVIEWS | MICROBIOLOGY 

© 2005 Nature Publishing Group 

 VOLUME 3 | OCTOBER 2005 | 777

R E V I E W S

Timeline | Milestones in the commercial development of nisin

Colicins first described6.  Nisin discovered9.

Nisin first marketed 
in England.

European Union 
approval11.

1925 

1928 

1933 

1947 

1953 

1969 

1983 

1988

LAB bacteriocins 
first described8.

Nisin named10.

Food and Agriculture Organization/
World Health Organization approval.

US Food and Drug 
Agency approval.

it was observed that certain lactococcal strains had an 
inhibitory effect on the growth of other LAB8. A pro-
teinaceous antimicrobial was also described in 1933 in 
New Zealand9 and, in 1947, the responsible bacteriocin 
was named nisin (or group N inhibitory substance)10 
TIMELINE. Nisin was first marketed in England in 1953 
and has since been approved for use in over 48 coun-
tries. Notably, nisin was assessed to be safe for food 
use by the Joint Food and Agriculture Organization/
World Heath Organization Expert Committee on Food 
Additives in 1969. In 1983, this bacteriocin was added 
to the European food additive list as number E234 
REF. 11 and, in 1988, it was approved by the US Food 
and Drug Agency (FDA) for use in pasteurized, 
processed cheese spreads.

The successful development of nisin from an initial 
biological observation through regulatory approval to 
commercial application is a model that has stimulated 
a marked resurgence in bacteriocin research in recent 
years, but similar success with other bacteriocins has 
yet to be repeated on the same scale. In spite of this 
sobering fact, we remain convinced that bacteriocins 
can be exploited in food in various imaginative and 
commercially important applications. However, to 
fully realize this potential, it is first necessary to under-
stand the biology of bacteriocins, and, in particular, 
to elucidate their structure–function relationships, 
production, immunity, regulation and mode of action.

Biology of bacteriocins
Bacteriocins can be defined as bacterially produced, 
small, heat-stable peptides that are active against 
other bacteria and to which the producer has a spe-
cific immunity mechanism. The bacteriocins that will 
probably have the most immediate potential in food 
applications will be those produced by food-grade 
LAB, as they are more likely to meet with regula-
tory approval owing to their origin, and they can be 
readily introduced into fermented foods without any 
concentration or purification. Bacteriocins that are 
produced by LAB can be broad or narrow spectrum, 
but in general, activity is directed against low-GC 
Gram-positive species. Activity against Gram-negative 
bacteria has been shown, but usually only in situations 
where the integrity of the outer membrane has been 
compromised.

LANTIBIOTIC
Lanthionine-containing 
bacteriocins. Lanthionines are 
formed when a dehydrated 
serine or threonine is covalently 
bridged (through the sulphur 
atom) with a cysteine.

BACTERIOLYSINS 
Large, heat-labile, lytic proteins 
produced by bacteria.

LIPID II
Lipid II (Undecaprenyl-
pyrophosphate–
MurNAc(pentapeptide)–
GlcNAc) has an essential role in 
peptidoglycan synthesis by 
translocating the peptidoglycan 
subunits across the cell 
membrane. Lipid II is also the 
target of vancomycin, the drug 
of last resort in the treatment of 
MRSA.

Bacteriocins are a heterogeneous group of peptides 
and proteins and as many as five main classes of LAB 
bacteriocins have been mooted12–14. We propose that 
this classification scheme should be revised and sug-
gest such a revision in TABLE 1. The proposed revised 
classification scheme divides the bacteriocins into two 
distinct categories: the lanthionine-containing LANTI
BIOTICS (class I) and the non-lanthionine-containing 
bacteriocins (class II), while moving the large, heat-
labile murein hydrolases (formerly class III bacterio-
cins) to a separate designation called ‘BACTERIOLYSINS’. It 
has recently been proposed that circular LAB bacterio-
cins should be regarded as class V bacteriocins14. We 
suggest that these should be included in the non-
lanthionine-containing class II category. Class IV 
was a classification reserved for bacteriocins that 
require non-proteinaceous moieties for activity, but 
no members of this class have been convincingly 
demonstrated as yet, and so we have not included 
this class in the new proposal.

Class I bacteriocins (lantibiotics). The lantibiotics 
(lanthionine-containing antibiotics) are small peptides 
(19–38 amino acids in length) that possess the epony-
mous lanthionine or β-methyllanthionine residues 
(FIG. 1). These unusual residues form covalent bridges 
between amino acids, which results in internal ‘rings’ 
and gives lantibiotics their characteristic structural 
features. Furthermore, lantibiotics can contain other 
unusual residues that result from post-translational 
modification, including the substitution of d-alanines 
for l-serines15–17.

The lantibiotics can be divided on the basis of their 
structure and mode of action. In general, the elon-
gated amphiphilic cationic lantibiotics (for example, 
nisin) are active through the formation of pores, 
leading to the dissipation of membrane potential and 
the efflux of small metabolites from sensitive cells. 
By contrast, the globular lantibiotics (for example, 
mersacidin) were originally defined as those lantibi-
otics that act through enzyme inhibition18. However, 
it has now been established that nisin possesses 
both mechanisms of action and that others, such 
as lacticin 3147, a two-peptide lantibiotic, function 
through the cooperative activity of two lanthionine-
containing peptides. Their complex structures make 
the lantibiotics a difficult group to subclassify; this 
is illustrated by a recent suggestion that they can be 
subdivided into 11 subgroups based on the sequences 
of the unmodified pro-peptides19. Some lantibiotics 
are active in the single nanomolar range; that is, their 
activity is several orders of magnitude higher than that 
displayed by the antimicrobial peptides encountered 
in the innate immune system.

Although a precise mechanism of action has not 
been elucidated for every lantibiotic, it is apparent 
that a docking molecule or target is involved, which 
has been established as LIPID II in several cases20–24. The 
binding of nisin to lipid II facilitates a dual mechanism 
of action involving the prevention of peptidoglycan 
synthesis and pore formation20,21. Nisin seems to have 

778 | OCTOBER 2005 | VOLUME 3 

© 2005 Nature Publishing Group 

 www.nature.com/reviews/micro

R E V I E W S

Table 1 | Suggested classification scheme for bacteriocins

Classification*
Class I

Lanthionine-containing 
bacteriocins/lantibiotics

Class II

Non-lanthionine-containing 
bacteriocins

Bacteriolysins

Remarks/suggestions

Examples

Includes both single- and two-peptide 
lantibiotics; up to 11 subclasses have been 
proposed19

Single-peptide: nisin, mersacidin, 
lacticin 481; two-peptide: lacticin 
3147, cytolysin

Heterogeneous class of small peptides; 
includes pediocin-like (subclass a bacteriocins), 
two-peptide (subclass b bacteriocins), cyclic 
(subclass c; formerly class V), non-pediocin 
single linear peptides (subclass d) 

Class IIa: pediocin PA1, 
leucocin A; class IIb: 
lactacin F; class IIc: enterocin 
AS48, reuterin 6; class IId: 
lactococcin A, divergicin A

Non-bacteriocin lytic proteins‡ Large, heat-labile proteins, often murein hydrolases Lysostaphin, enterolysin A
* Class IV bacteriocins (bacteriocins with non-proteinaceious moieties) are not included as no members have been demonstrated.
‡ Suggested that these are no longer considered bacteriocins (see main text).

a modular structure in that several N-terminally 
located residues, which are also present in other nisin-
like, epidermin-like and streptin-like lantibiotics, have 
been shown to form a binding cage that is essential 
for the binding of nisin to the pyrophosphate of lipid II 
REF.  22.  The  C-terminus  and  intervening  hinge 
region, which is responsible for the movement of the 
two termini relative to one another, are essential for 
pore-formation21,25. It is also thought that the indi-
vidual peptides of some two-peptide lantibiotics might 
represent discrete receptor-binding and pore-forming 
modules26. The combined activity of these modules 
helps to explain the extraordinarily high activity of at 
least some lantibiotics (FIG. 2).

The cinnamycin-like lantibiotics represent the only 
other class I bacteriocins for which a binding site — the 
membrane phospholipid phosphatidylethanolamine 
— has been identified27,28.

It is pertinent to note that there are examples of 
bacteriocins of Gram-positive bacteria that also act 
as virulence factors. The enterococcal two-peptide 
lantibiotic cytolysin exerts activity against a broad 
spectrum of cell types, including a wide range of 
Gram-positive bacteria, eukaryotic cells such as 
human, bovine and horse erythrocytes, retinal cells, 
polymorphonuclear leukocytes and human intestinal 
epithelial cells, and is associated with acute, terminal 
outcomes in human infection29. Furthermore, another 
non-lanthionine-containing peptide haemolysin, 
streptolysin S, is involved in invasive infection by 
some group A streptococci30.

Class II bacteriocins (non-lanthionine-containing 
bacteriocins). The more common non-lanthionine-
containing bacteriocins are also small (<10 kDa) 
heat-stable peptides but, unlike lantibiotics, they are 
not subject to extensive post-translational modifica-
tion. The majority of class II bacteriocins are active 
(also in the nanomolar range) by inducing membrane 
permeabilization and the subsequent leakage of mol-
ecules from target bacteria (FIG. 2). Several different 
groupings have been suggested13,31,32, but their hetero-
geneous nature makes rational classification difficult. 

Two types are common to all classification systems and 
are retained in our proposed classification scheme: the 
class IIa pediocin-like or Listeria-active and the class IIb 
two-peptide bacteriocins.

Pediocin-like bacteriocins have a narrow spectrum 
of activity but display a high specific activity against 
the food pathogen Listeria monocytogenes33,34. These 
bacterio cins range from 37 (leucocin A and mesente-
ricin Y105 REFS 35,36 to 48 residues (carnobacteriocin 
B2; REF. 37) and possess one or two disulphide bridges. 
Conservation between peptides is most evident in 
the hydrophilic, cationic N-terminal ‘pediocin box’ 
region, which contains the amino-acid sequence motif 
YGNGVXCXXXXVXV, (in which X is any amino 
acid)38,39, and is thought to facilitate nonspecific bind-
ing to the target surface40,41. The C-terminal domains, 
which are located after a hinge region, are less con-
served and are thought to determine the non-listerial 
antimicrobial spectrum. The C-terminal domains 
have been used as a basis for the formation of three 
further subdivisions42. The indications that these ter-
mini represent distinct modules has been confirmed 
by the generation of hybrid class IIa bacteriocins, 
which confirmed that the target specificity is deter-
mined by the C-terminal domain42–44. A link has been 
established between the expression of the mannose 
permease of the phosphotransferase system EIIt
Man in 
L. monocytogenes and sensitivity to class IIa bacterio-
cins. Mesentericin Y105- and leucocin A-resistant 
mutants of L. monocytogenes  display reduced expres-
sion of the mptACD genes that encode this perm-
ease45–48. Although a physical interaction between 
a class IIa peptide and this mannose permease has 
not been established, the sensitisation of Lactococcus 
lactis strains as a consequence of the introduction of 
the mpt operon49 is consistent with the theory that 
this permease functions as a receptor for class IIa 
bacteriocins.

The two-peptide bacteriocins require the combined 
activity of both peptides with a mechanism of action that 
again involves the dissipation of membrane potential, 
the leakage of ions and/or a decrease in intracellular ATP 
concentrations50. These peptides display very low, if any, 

NATURE REVIEWS | MICROBIOLOGY 

© 2005 Nature Publishing Group 

 VOLUME 3 | OCTOBER 2005 | 779

R E V I E W S

a

Ser

Pro

Arg

Ile

Thr

Ser

Ile

Ser

Leu

Cys

Thr

Pro

Gly

Cys

Lys

Thr Gly

Leader

OH

OH

OH

SH

OH

23 amino acids

SH

Dehydration of selected
serines and threonines

Ser

Pro

Arg

Ile

Dhb

Dha

Ile

Dha

Leu

Cys

Dhb

Pro

Gly

Cys

Lys Dhb Gly

Cleavage

Dha

Ile

Leu

SH

SH

Lanthionine
formation

Pro

Gly

Ser

Pro

Arg

Ile

Dhb

Ala

S

Ala

Abu

S

Ala

Lys

Abu Gly

Lanthionine

β-methyl-
lanthionine

S

b  Nisin

Dha

Ile

Leu

Pro

Gly

Leu

Ala

Met

Gly

Gly

Ala

Abu

S

Ala Ser

Ile His Val Dha Lys

Ile Dhb Ala

S

Ala

Abu S Ala

Lys

Abu S

Ala

Asn

Met

Lys

Abu S

Ala

His

c  Lacticin 3147

Lacticin A1

Asn

Gly

Asn

Trp

Tyr

Asp

Gly

Ala

Trp

Lys

Ala

Trp

Ala

Met

S

Abu

His

Leu

Glu

Ala Ala

Dhb

Asn

Dhb

Phe

D-Ala

Leu

Ala

S

Ala

Abu

S

Ala

S

Lacticin A2

2-ob Dhb Pro Ala Dhb Pro Ala Ile D-Ala Ile

Leu D-Ala Ala Tyr

Thr Asn
S

Ile Ala

Thr

Thr Lys

Arg Ala

Ala

Pro

Abu S Ala Abu S Ala

Figure 1 | Lanthionine synthesis and lantibiotic structure. As shown in a, lanthionine residues are formed when an 
enzymatically dehydrated serine (dehydroalanine, Dha) condenses with the sulphydryl group of a neighbouring cysteine (Cys). 
This forms a bridge between the two residues, thereby creating a ring within the modified peptide or lantibiotic. When the 
partners are threonine (Thr) and cysteine, the novel residue is a β-methyllanthionine. The resulting lanthionine and 
β-methyllanthionine bridges are indicated in pink as Ala–S–Ala (alanine–S–alanine) and Abu–S–Ala (aminobutyrate–S–alanine), 
respectively. Many lantibiotics also contain dehydrated serines (Ser) and threonines (dehydrobutyrine, Dhb). Lantibiotics can be 
composed of a single peptide (nisin, panel b) or two peptides acting in synergy (lacticin 3147, panel c). The dehydration and 
ring formation reaction can be catalysed by two enzymes (NisB and NisC in the case of nisin) or a single enzyme (LcnM in the 
case of lacticin 481). Several additional modified residues can be found in lantibiotics, including lysinoalanine, lanthionine 
sulphoxide, D-alanine, allo-isoleucine, erythro-3-hydroxyaspartate, 2-oxopyruvate, 2-oxobutyrate, hydroxypyruvate, 
S-(2-aminovinyl)-D-cysteine and S-(2-aminovinyl)-3-methyl-D-cysteine.

bacteriocin activity when tested individually. Although 
members of this subgroup are relatively heterogeneous, 
it has been proposed that they could be subdivided into 
type E (enhanced) and type S (synergistic) peptides51.

The class IIc (formerly class V) bacteriocins are 
grouped on the basis that their N- and C-termini are 
covalently linked, resulting in a cyclic structure52,53. 
Although relatively few class IIc bacteriocins have been 
identified, we propose two subdivisions designated 

subclass c(i) (comprising enterocin AS48 and the 
non-LAB circularin A) and subclass c(ii) (comprising 
gassericin A, reutericin 6, the non-LAB butyrivibriocin 
AR10 and, although a circular structure has not yet 
been established, acidocin B) on the basis of percentage 
amino-acid sequence identity52. The class IIc bacterio-
cins gassericin A and reutericin 6 are the only examples 
of non-lantibiotic LAB bacteriocins that contain 
d-amino acids54.

780 | OCTOBER 2005 | VOLUME 3 

© 2005 Nature Publishing Group 

 www.nature.com/reviews/micro

Class II
(Sakacin)

Class I
(Nisin)

Bacteriolysins
(Lysostaphin)

Cell wall

Lipid II

Cell membrane

Peptidoglycan subunit

Figure 2 | Mode of action of lactic acid bacteria bacteriocins. Lactic acid bacteria (LAB) 
bacteriocins can be grouped on the basis of structure, but also on the basis of mode of action. 
Some members of the class I (or lantibiotic) bacteriocins, such as nisin, have been shown to have 
a dual mode of action. They can bind to lipid II, the main transporter of peptidoglycan subunits 
from the cytoplasm to the cell wall, and therefore prevent correct cell wall synthesis, leading to 
cell death. Furthermore, they can use lipid II as a docking molecule to initiate a process of 
membrane insertion and pore formation that leads to rapid cell death. A two-peptide lantibiotic, 
such as lacticin 3147, can have these dual activities distributed across two peptides, whereas 
mersacidin has only the lipid-II-binding activity, but does not form pores. In general, the class II 
peptides have an amphiphilic helical structure, which allows them to insert into the membrane of 
the target cell, leading to depolarisation and death. Large bacteriolytic proteins (here called 
bacteriolysins, formerly class III bacteriocins), such as lysostaphin, can function directly on the cell 
wall of Gram-positive targets, leading to death and lysis of the target cell.

The remaining bacteriocins are usually combined in 
a ‘miscellaneous’ or ‘one-peptide non-pediocin linear’ 
group (class IId). In some instances, these have been 
further subdivided on the basis of leader sequences31.

Non-bacteriocin  lytic  proteins  (bacteriolysins). 
Bacteriolysins (formerly class III bacteriocins) are 
large, heat-labile antimicrobial proteins. They have a 
domain-type structure, in which different domains have 
functions for translocation, receptor binding, and lethal 
activity. Only four LAB bacteriolysins55–59 have been 
genetically characterized so far, although other non-
LAB bacteriolysins that are of interest to food micro-
biologists have been identified51,60,61. Their mechanism 
of action is distinct from that of bacteriocins as they 
function through the lysis of sensitive cells by catalys-
ing cell-wall hydrolysis (FIG. 2). These proteins are also 
modular in structure and have a catalytic domain at 

BACTERIOCINOGENIC
Bacteriocin-producing strains 
are said to be bacteriocinogenic.

R E V I E W S

the N-terminus that shows homology to endopepti-
dases, and a C-terminus that probably represents the 
target recognition site62,63. Unlike the ‘true’ bacteriocins, 
they do not always have specific immunity genes that 
accompany bacteriocin structural genes, but might rely 
on modifications of the producer cell wall to impart 
resistance (see below).

Molecular biology of bacteriocins
The widespread phenomenon of bacteriocin production 
among LAB is undoubtedly partly due to the fact that 
the relevant genes are often associated with transferable 
elements such as conjugative transposons or plasmids. 
This natural association can be exploited to facilitate 
heterologous bacteriocin production. For example, the 
10 genes that are required for the production of, and 
immunity to, the two-peptide lantibiotic lacticin 3147 
are located on a 60-kb conjugative plasmid, which has 
allowed this trait to be transferred in a non-recombinant 
manner from the parent strain L. lactis DPC3147 to a 
wide variety of commercial starter strains, by simply 
selecting for bacteriocin immunity as a marker for 
plasmid transfer64. Bacteriocins are usually synthesized 
as an inactive pre-peptide that includes an N-terminal 
leader sequence. The leader sequence presumably 
maintains the bacteriocin in an inactive form within 
the producer cell, facilitates interaction with the trans-
porter and, probably in the case of lantibiotics, has a 
role in recognition by the modification machinery65–68. 
This leader is usually cleaved during export by a dedi-
cated bacteriocin-transport system or, less frequently, 
by the general secretion (Sec) pathway of the cell. It is 
notable that a few bacteriocins that seem to lack leader 
sequences have also been identified31. The genes that 
encode the structural pre-peptides are usually closely 
associated with genes that encode products involved in 
regulation, export, self-immunity and — in the case of 
the lantibiotics — modification.

The export of bacteriocins is usually achieved by a 
dedicated membrane-associated ATP-binding cassette 
(ABC) transporter that can also contain a proteolytic 
N-terminal domain belonging to the family of cysteine 
proteases that is responsible for cleavage of the leader 
peptide69,70. In the case of some lantibiotics, cleavage 
might be due to a specific serine protease71. For class II 
peptides, accessory proteins are thought to facilitate 
membrane translocation and/or leader peptide cleav-
age, but their specific role has yet to be established. It 
should be noted that there are several variations to this 
general scheme, which involve both N- and C-terminal72 
or extracellular cleavage73,74.

Regulation of bacteriocin production and immunity 
is most frequently mediated through two-component 
signal-transduction systems, often as part of a quorum-
sensing mechanism (FIG. 3). In certain instances, more 
than one response regulator can be involved75,76. Other 
types of regulators, such as repressors of the Xre family, 
have also been described77,78.

BACTERIOCINOGENIC bacteria also have genes that 
encode immunity mechanisms. These systems enable 
a distinction between ‘self’ (producer) and ‘non-self’ 

NATURE REVIEWS | MICROBIOLOGY 

© 2005 Nature Publishing Group 

 VOLUME 3 | OCTOBER 2005 | 781

R E V I E W S

Enterocin A

Enterocin F

EntD

EntT

Pent

EntK

EntR

+

0

1

2

3

ent

A I F

K

R

5

6

T

7

D

8 kb

Figure 3 | Regulation by quorum sensing. In several instances it has been established that 
bacteriocin production is regulated by quorum sensing. In the case of the lantibiotics nisin and 
subtilin, the structural peptide itself functions as a pheromone to induce its own production to 
high levels once a cell-density-dependent autoinduction loop is activated163–165. Although there 
is an example of a class II bacteriocin acting as a pheromone144, the presence of another 
induction peptide, which often shows many of the physico-chemical properties of bacteriocins 
and can function at concentrations at low as 10–17 M REF. 166, is more common. As illustrated 
in the figure, the regulation of enterocin A production involves one such three-component 
system. The genes that encode the structural protein enterocin A (EntA) and the induction 
factor enterocin F (EntF) are co-transcribed from the Pent promoter and these proteins are 
transported by a putative ATP-binding cassette transporter (EntT) through a mechanism that 
might involve the accessory protein (EntD). As with other bacteriocins, the other two-
component system involved is a membrane-bound histidine kinase (EntK), which detects 
extracellular EntF, and a cytoplasmically located response regulator (EntR) that mediates a 
response — induction of transcription from the Pent promoter, which leads to increased 
bacteriocin production. In some cases, additional factors such as co-culture with potential 
target cells167–169 or even gastric transit170 can be required for successful induction. An 
understanding of quorum sensing and inducible bacteriocin production has facilitated the 
development of systems that permit inducible overexpression of desirable proteins164,171,172.

(for example, food spoilage or pathogenic target 
bacteria). Two distinct systems are involved in class I 
and class II immunity, although there are some excep-
tions79. Protection can be provided by a dedicated 
immunity protein and/or a specialised ABC-trans-
porter system involving two or three subunits that 
probably pumps the bacteriocin from the producer 
membrane76,80–83. For class I bacteriocins, immunity is 
provided by one or both of these systems82, for class 
IIa, IIb and IId bacteriocins, immunity is provided by 
an immunity protein alone, and class IIc bacteriocins 
rely on an ABC-transporter system84. Although immu-
nity proteins rarely resemble one another, the general 
mechanism through which they function is prob-
ably similar, involving either the sequestration of the 
structural protein or an antagonistic competition for 
a receptor85,86. Such immunity mechanisms are highly 
specific and usually do not provide protection against 
other bacteriocins82,87,88, although again, there are some 
exceptions39,89,90. It has been shown that immunity to 
bacteriolysins is brought about through the alteration 
of interpeptide cross-bridges in peptidoglycan91.

Resistance to bacteriocins
The  potential  for  the  development  of  resistance 
among target species is an obvious cause for concern 
if bacterio cins are to be used extensively in food 
preservation strategies. Most research in this area 
has focused on specific bacteriocins, such as nisin 
and some of the class IIa peptides. The frequency of 
spontaneous resistance to nisin in L. monocytogenes 
varies from 10–2 to 10–7 in a strain-dependent manner92, 
whereas stable, nisin-resistant mutants of Streptococcus 
pneumoniae can arise (MIC increases from 0.4 to 
6.4 mg l–1) following serial exposure to the lanti biotic93. 
In these spontaneous mutants, resistance correlates 
with cell envelope changes such as alterations in mem-
brane charge and fluidity94,95, cell wall thickness96, cell 
wall charge97–99 and combinations thereof100, which 
arise after direct exposure to a low level of lantibiotic 
or as part of an adaptive response to another stress101. 
The specific mechanism(s) by which cells become 
resistant to nisin is not well understood although it is 
apparent that variations in the lipid II content are not 
responsible102. Genetic loci that are associated with the 
development of enhanced nisin resistance103–105, or an 
innate tolerance of nisin, have been identified98,106,107. 
In the latter example, cell envelope charge seems to be 
the most important consideration.

The most well-studied mechanism of resistance 
to class II bacteriocins is that observed in class IIa-
resistant L. monocytogenes, in which resistance 
seems to be linked to reduced expression of a man-
nose permease of the phosphotransferase system. 
Similar to nisin-resistant mutants, other factors such 
as cell membrane fluidity108 and cell surface charge109 
impact on resistance. With further research, additional 
mechanisms will undoubtedly become apparent. The 
production of a bacteriocin by a Streptococcus mutans 
strain is inhibited by Streptococcus gordonii through 
the inactivation of the corresponding induction 
peptide, which provides an interesting example of 
bacteriocin-mediated communication that involves 
competing species110.

Further studies will be required to determine the 
frequency with which resistance to other bacteriocins 
occurs. The risk of the development of large-scale, 
industrially significant resistance might best be lim-
ited by the intelligent use of hurdle technology, that 
is, the concept of combining several factors (including 
pH, osmolarity and temperature) to preserve food. 
Although the combined use of different bacteriocins 
can be successful, cross-resistance to class I and class II 
bacteriocins has been found in some instances100,104,111. 
It is worth noting that bacteriocins used correctly in 
a hurdle approach should only have to control low 
levels of contaminating organisms, as they should 
be used only to augment, and not replace, good 
food manufacturing practice. This creates a different 
situation to the use of antibiotics in clinical settings, 
where these inhibitors are used to eliminate estab-
lished infections and usually high numbers of target 
bacteria, thereby greatly increasing the probability 
of resistance development.

782 | OCTOBER 2005 | VOLUME 3 

© 2005 Nature Publishing Group 

 www.nature.com/reviews/micro

Recent developments in bacteriocin biology
Many exciting developments have contributed to our 
understanding of bacteriocin biology and have high-
lighted innovative ways in which these peptides can 
be used; for example, cell-signalling systems involved 
in the induction of bacteriocin production have been 
investigated and used as biological tools (FIG. 3).

One of the most significant developments has been 
the discovery that the activity of nisin is mediated by 
the binding of lipid II REFS 20,21. Whereas lipid II 
is also the target for therapeutic antibiotics such as 
vancomycin, it has been established that a set of core 
amino acids at the N-terminal domain of nisin bind 
to an invariable region of lipid II REFS 22,112, thereby 
militating against resistance like that observed in 
vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE). These 
results indicate that nisin could act as a template 
for the design of novel drugs that bind an essential, 
invariable antimicrobial target. Although the defini-
Man as the target or docking molecule 
tive role of EIIt
for class IIa bacteriocins has yet to be established, an 
ever-improving appreciation of the modular nature of 
these bacteriocins will facilitate the creation of hybrid 
proteins with different antimicrobial spectra as a 
consequence of C-terminal variation42. Attempts to 
create bioengineered derivatives of bacteriocins have 
met with some rare, but notable, successes113–116. The 
absence of post-translational modifications in class II 
bacteriocins makes them more amenable to change, 
a fact that is best illustrated by the creation of hybrid 
bacteriocins43,44. Whereas bioengineered peptides 
are usually expressed from a derivative of the origi-
nal bacteriocin-producing strain, it has been shown 
that class II peptides can be produced heterologously 
by Gram-negative bacteria or yeast117,118. Although 
the heterologous production of a fully modified 
lanti biotic by non-Gram-positive microorganisms 
has yet to be achieved, it has recently been shown 
that purified modification enzymes can be used to 
introduce lanthionines into synthetic peptide sub-
strates68. We predict that by combining novel insights 
into structure–function relationships with enhanced 
mutagenesis and production technologies, the bio-
engineering of bacteriocins will enter a new era in 
which the identification of derivatives with enhanced 
activity will be a more frequent event.

One should note, however, that although some of 
this newly generated knowledge will undoubtedly result 
in novel and exciting applications, a significant suite of 
applications have already been demonstrated, even if, 
in many instances, only at the laboratory scale.

GRAS
An acronym for substances that 
are ‘generally recognized as safe’. 
This group includes several 
hundred substances that experts 
consider safe for use in food on 
the basis of either a history of 
safe use before 1958 or on 
published scientific evidence. 

Industrial applications
Food systems. Food processors face a major challenge 
in an environment in which consumers demand safe 
foods with a long shelf-life, but also express a prefer-
ence for minimally processed products that do not 
contain chemical preservatives. Bacteriocins are an 
attractive option that could provide at least part of the 
solution. They are produced by food-grade organisms, 
they are usually heat stable and they can inhibit many 

R E V I E W S

of the primary pathogenic and spoilage organisms that 
cause problems in minimally processed foodstuffs. 
However, at present, only nisin and pediocin PA1/AcH 
have found widespread use in food. The form of nisin 
used most widely in food is Nisaplin (Danisco), which 
is a preparation that contains 2.5% nisin with NaCl 
(77.5%) and non-fat dried milk (12% protein and 6% 
carbohydrate). The use of pediocin PA1 for food bio-
preservation has also been commercially exploited in 
the form of ALTA 2431 (Quest), which is based on LAB 
fermentates generated from a pediocin PA1-producing 
strain of Pediococcus acidilactici119. Its use is covered by 
several US and European patents119,120.

When screening for a bacteriocin with a food appli-
cation in mind, there are several important criteria: 
first, the producing strain should preferably have ‘gen-
erally recognized as safe’ (GRAS) status; and second, the 
bacteriocin should have a broad spectrum of inhibition 
that includes pathogens, or have activity against a par-
ticular pathogen. Third, the bacteriocin should be heat 
stable; fourth, have no associated health risks; fifth, its 
inclusion in products should lead to beneficial effects 
such as improved safety, quality and flavour; and sixth, 
it should have high specific activity121. Bacteriocins have 
been shown to have potential in the biopreservation 
of meat, dairy products, canned food, fish, alcoholic 
beverages, salads, egg products, high-moisture bakery 
products, and fermented vegetables, either alone, in 
combination with other methods of preservation, or 
through their incorporation into packaging film/food 
surfaces (for comprehensive reviews, see REFS 122124).
Bacteriocins can be introduced into food in at least 
three different ways: in fermented food, bacteriocins 
can be produced in situ by bacterial cultures that sub-
stitute for all or part of the starter culture; purified or 
semi-purified bacteriocins (for example, Nisaplin) can 
be added directly to food; or an ingredient based on 
a fermentate of a bacteriocin-producing strain can be 
used (for example, ALTA 2431). Although bacterio-
cins with a wide spectrum of activity are usually the 
most sought after, other factors including pH optima, 
solubility and stability are as important and are major 
considerations in choosing a particular inhibitor for a 
particular food or target bacterium. Furthermore, the 
antimicrobial spectra of a variety of LAB bacteriocins 
can be extended to encompass Gram-negative bacteria 
through their use in combination with measures that 
affect the integrity of the outer membrane, such as tem-
perature shock, high pressure, chelators and eukaryotic 
antimicrobial peptides125–133. There are also rare natu-
ral (for example, AS48 REF. 134) and bioengineered 
bacteriocins114 that possess inherent activity against 
Gram-negative microorganisms.

There is also a niche for narrow-spectrum bac-
teriocins. This is true of fermented foods, in which 
contamination with L. monocytogenes is a problem. 
L. monocytogenes is the cause of approximately 25% 
of deaths caused by food-borne pathogens in the US 
annually135 and, as a consequence of the zero-tolerance 
standards for the organism in ready-to-eat (RTE) food, 
was responsible for 71% of all recalls of food products 

NATURE REVIEWS | MICROBIOLOGY 

© 2005 Nature Publishing Group 

 VOLUME 3 | OCTOBER 2005 | 783

R E V I E W S

owing to bacterial contamination in the US between 
1993 and 1998 REF. 136. In mid-2003, the Food Safety 
and Inspection Service (FSIS) announced a ruling that 
required the manufacturers of RTE food to take further 
steps to address the problem posed by the presence of 
L. monocytogenes in consumables. This ruling encour-
ages the implementation of technologies that can kill 
the bacteria or prevent its growth after cooking or 
packaging. The Listeria-active class IIa bacteriocins 
seem to provide an ideal solution for such applica-
tions, especially with respect to fermented foods, as 
any potential L. monocytogenes contamination can be 
negated without impacting on the success of the fer-
mentation itself owing to the low activity of class IIa 
bacteriocins against lactococci39.

Bacteriocins can also be used to promote quality, 
rather than simply to prevent spoilage or safety prob-
lems. For example, bacteriocins can be used to control 
adventitious non-starter flora such as non-starter 
lactic acid bacteria (NSLAB) in cheese and wine. 
The uncontrolled growth of NSLAB can cause major 
economic losses owing to calcium-d-lactate form-
ation137 and slit defects in cheeses, and the production 
of detrimental compounds in wine. Bacteriocin-
producing starters and adjuncts (one- or two-strain 
strategies) have been found to significantly reduce 
these problems138–142. However, as some NSLAB such 
as lactobacilli and other starter adjuncts in cheese, and 
Leuconostoc oenos and Pediococcus damnosus in some 
red wines can improve flavour, the complete elimina-
tion of NSLAB is not always desirable143. This problem 
has been overcome through the use of a three-strain 
system in which an adjunct strain with reduced bac-
teriocin sensitivity (obtained on repeated exposure to 
increasing concentrations of the bacteriocin) is used 
with a bacteriocin-producing starter144 (FIG. 4).

Bacteriocins can also be applied in other ways to 
enhance food fermentation. This has been shown dur-
ing semi-hard and hard cheese manufacture in which 
bacteriocin production brings about the controlled 
lysis of starter LAB, which results in the release of intra-
cellular enzymes and ultimately accelerated ripening 
and even improved flavour139,140,145,146.

Although traditionally, the use of bacteriocins is 
associated with the preservation of food, in the near 
future food might merely act as a vehicle for the deliv-
ery of bacteriocin-producing probiotic bacteria. The 
production of antimicrobials by a probiotic culture is 
a desirable trait as they are thought to contribute to 
the inhibition of pathogenic bacteria in the gut147–149. 
Whereas bacteriocins in food are degraded by the 
proteolytic enzymes of the stomach, probiotic bac teria 
might be ingested in a form that facilitates gastric tran-
sit, allowing the in vivo production of the bacteriocin 
in the small or large intestine. It has also been specu-
lated that recombinant probiotic strains that can be 
induced to produce bacteriolysin could be developed 
to facilitate the in vivo delivery of bioactive compounds 
that are produced intracellularly150.

Unlike most other preservation methods such as 
heat or low pH, which are essentially indiscriminate in 

their antimicrobial effect, it is this ability to precisely 
influence the developing flora in an otherwise perish-
able food that led us to describe the use of bacteriocins 
as a form of ‘innate immunity’ for food. As already 
described, the inclusion of Listeria-active class IIa 
bacteriocins can specifically prevent the growth of this 
pathogen, without affecting harmless LAB, or bacterio-
cin-tolerant strains can be introduced into an otherwise 
hostile food environment. It is unlikely that the use of 
bacteriocins in food will negatively impact on the natu-
ral flora of either the human (or animal) host, or on 
the environment. The low level of bacteriocins required 
to eliminate or reduce small numbers of pathogenic 
or spoilage organisms in food are unlikely to have an 
impact on more microorganism-rich environments. In 
any event, bacteriocins are unlikely to survive gastric 
transit, as they are sensitive to proteolytic degradation.

Clinical  applications.  Although  this  review  has 
emphasized the role (existing and potential) of LAB 
bacteriocins in food, the non-toxicity of lantibiotics 
and their activity against Gram-positive human and 
animal pathogens has led to research investigating 
their potential clinical application. In particular, the 
elucidation of the precise mechanism of action of 
some lantibiotics and their activity against multidrug-
resistant pathogens by a novel mechanism makes them 
an attractive option as possible therapeutic agents. The 
broad-spectrum lantibiotics could theoretically be of 
use against any clinical Gram-positive human or ani-
mal pathogen. For example, the two-peptide lantibiotic 
lacticin 3147 has in vitro activity against Staphylococcus 
aureus (including methicillin-resistant S. aureus 
(MRSA)), enterococci (including VRE), streptococci 
(S. pneumoniae, Streptococcus pyogenes, Streptococcus 
agalactiae, Streptococcus dysgalactiae, Streptococcus 
uberis, Streptococcus mutans), Clostridium botulinum, 
and Propionibacterium acnes151. Initial in vivo trials 
with animal models have demonstrated the success 
of lantibiotics in treating infections caused by S. pneu-
moniae152, and MRSA153,154, and in preventing tooth 
decay and gingivitis155–159. The use of nisin for human 
clinical applications has been licensed to Biosynexus 
Incorporated  by  Nutrition  21  and  ImmuCell 
Corporation has licensed the use of the anti-mastitic 
nisin-containing product Mast Out to Pfizer Animal 
Health. Bovine mastitis is defined as an inflammation 
of the udder and is the most persistent disease in dairy 
cows. Nisin is also used as an active agent in Wipe-
Out (a teat wipe), and lacticin-3147-containing Teat 
Seals (Cross Vetpharm Group Ltd) have been shown to 
prevent deliberate infection by mastitic staphylococci 
and streptococci in animal challenge trials159 (FIG. 4). 
A strain that produces the lantibiotic mutacin 1140 is 
entering Phase I clinical trials in the US with a view 
to replacement therapy, and the dietary supplement 
BLIS K12 throat guard, which contains a Streptococcus 
salivarius that produces two lantibiotics salivaricin A2 
and B, is sold in New Zealand as an inhibitor of the 
bacteria responsible for bad breath160. From a non-
antimicrobial medical perspective, the cinnamycin-like 

784 | OCTOBER 2005 | VOLUME 3 

© 2005 Nature Publishing Group 

 www.nature.com/reviews/micro

a  Food quality

Bac–

Bac+

R E V I E W S

b  Food safety

c  Veterinary medicine

s
e
n
e
g
o
t
y
c
o
n
o
m

 
.
L

104

103

102

nd

1

Bac–

Bac+

4

5

2

3

Number of days

80,000

20,000

10,000

s
u
e
r
u
a
 
.

S

Bacteriocins

d  Human medicine

Dha

Trp

Leu

Pro

Gly

Phe Lys Ala

S

Ala

Abu

S

Ala

Ala Arg Dhb Gly

Ala

S

Ala

Teat seal

Teat seal and
lacticin 3147

Asn

Ala

S

CH

Phe

Tyr

CH

N
H

Figure 4 | Selected applications of bacteriocins. a | Food quality. A cheese made with a commercial starter culture (Bac–) will 
develop an undefined flora called non-starter lactic acid bacteria (typified by different fingerprints generated by random amplified 
polymorphic DNA patterns). However, a cheese inoculated with the same commercial strain that can produce a bacteriocin 
(Bac+) (lacticin 3147, in this example) and a resistant adjunct strain of Lactobacillus, chosen for a flavour attribute, will develop a 
single defined culture once the starter culture has died off, offering the cheese manufacturer control over previously adventitious 
flora development. b | Food safety. A simple example of the role of bacteriocins in food safety is the production of cottage 
cheese with a starter culture that produces a bacteriocin with activity against Listeria monocytogenes, which results in a cheese 
that is inherently anti-Listeria. c | Veterinary medicine. A teat seal is a physical barrier against infection. Here, a bacteriocin was 
incorporated into the teat seal and the teat was challenged with Staphylococcus aureus. The number of staphylococci 
recovered from 14 teats with or without bacteriocin is shown. d | Human medicine. A Streptococcus mutans strain that cannot 
produce acid, but that produces the lantibiotic mutacin (shown), can competitively exclude acidogenic S. mutans, thereby 
offering protection against tooth decay173. 

lantibiotics have attracted interest owing to their novel 
activities against the functions of medically important 
specific human enzymes, such as phospholipase A2 
and angiotensin-converting enzyme, and nisin has also 
been found to have contraceptive efficacy161,162.

Conclusions
For the past 50 years, bacteriocins have frequently 
been proposed as the solution to a myriad of food-
contamination problems, but nisin and, to a lesser 
extent, pediocin PA1, remain the only examples of 
the large-scale deliberate use of these peptides in food 
applications. The under-utilization of bacteriocins in 
food can perhaps be ascribed to a combined lack of 
awareness of what bacteriocins can achieve in food 
systems and a lack of enthusiasm to move away from 
existing food-preservation techniques. However, 
although there have been several ‘false dawns’ herald-
ing the bacteriocin revolution, modern consumer and 
regulatory demands associated with minimal pro-
cessing might now provide an opportunity for their 
more widespread application. Bacteriocin screening 

programmes have yielded a large arsenal of bacterio-
cins with different properties, target species and 
producer organisms. Furthermore, if even the most 
conservative of estimates concerning the percentage of 
bacteria that produce bacteriocins are confirmed, then 
many other bacteriocins remain to be identified and 
exploited. Whether deliberately added or produced 
in situ by food bacteria, bacteriocins can play a benefi-
cial role in the control of undesirable flora and in the 
establishment of desirable microbial populations. It is 
this ability of bacteriocins to direct microbial flora that 
can be described as a type of programmable innate 
immunity for food.

Genomic advances will also contribute to the identi-
fication of novel bacteriocins, and enhanced under-
standing of regulatory mechanisms will allow us to 
determine how to switch on production when desired 
and even how to generate overproducing strains. By 
determining the specific activity of bacteriocins 
against particular spoilage/pathogenic bacteria, ensur-
ing stability and assessing the likelihood of emerging 
resistance, it should be possible to pre-determine 

NATURE REVIEWS | MICROBIOLOGY 

© 2005 Nature Publishing Group 

 VOLUME 3 | OCTOBER 2005 | 785

R E V I E W S

which bacteriocin is best suited to a particular food 
application. Such an application has been exemplified 
by the tailored use of class IIa bacteriocins in the treat-
ment of L. monocytogenes. From a clinical perspective, 
the emergence of drug-resistant pathogens makes 
the identification of novel antimicrobials even more 
important. Indeed, the adoption of protein-engineer-
ing strategies using existing bacteriocin structures as a 
blueprint provides an attractive approach to tailoring 
the biological activity and spectrum of inhibition of 
bacteriocins. Given the enormous challenges faced 

by both the food and pharmaceutical industries, the 
biggest question might not be whether bacteriocins 
will be used more extensively, but rather which of 
these fields will more passionately embrace their use. 
We believe that the food industry is well positioned, 
given the exacting demands for safe and natural foods 
imposed by consumers, to use the arsenal of bacterio-
cins produced by food-grade bacteria to develop foods 
with innate immunity that can influence complex, 
adventitious microbial populations in a predictable 
and beneficial manner.

1.   Bowdish, D. M., Davidson, D. J. & Hancock, R. E. 

A re-evaluation of the role of host defence peptides in 
mammalian immunity. Curr. Protein Pept. Sci. 6, 35–51 
(2005).

2.   Klaenhammer, T. R. Bacteriocins of lactic acid bacteria. 

Biochimie 70, 337–349 (1988).

3.   Riley, M. A. Molecular mechanisms of bacteriocin 
evolution. Annu. Rev. Genet. 32, 255–278 (1998).

4.   Dirix, G. et al. Peptide signal molecules and bacteriocins in 
Gram-negative bacteria: a genome-wide in silico screening 
for peptides containing a double-glycine leader sequence 
and their cognate transporters. Peptides 25, 1425–1440 
(2004).

5.   Nes, I. F. & Johnsborg, O. Exploration of antimicrobial 

potential in LAB by genomics. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 15, 
100–104 (2004).

6.   Gratia, A. Sur un remarquable exemple d’antagonisme 
entre deux souches de Colibacille. C. R. Soc. Biol. 93, 
1040–1041 (1925) (in French).

7.   Hirsch, A., Grinsted, E., Chapman, H. R. & Mattick, A. T. 
R. A note on the inhibition of an anaerobic sporeformer in 
Swiss-type cheese by a nisin-producing Streptococcus. 
J. Dairy Sci. 18, 205–206 (1951).

8.   Rogers, L. A. & Whittier, E. D. Limiting factors in lactic 

fermentation. J. Bacteriol. 16, 211–229 (1928).

9.   Whitehead, H. R. A substance inhibiting bacterial growth, 

produced by certain strains of lactic streptococci. 
Biochem. J. 27, 1793–1800 (1933).

10.   Mattick, A. T. R. & Hirsch, A. Further observations on an 

inhibitory substance (nisin) from lactic streptococci. 
Lancet 2, 5–7 (1947).

11.   European Economic Community. European Economic 
Community Commission Directive. Official J. European 
Union 255, 1–6 (1983) 83/463/EEC.

12.   Klaenhammer, T. R. Genetics of bacteriocins produced by 

lactic acid bacteria. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 12, 39–85 
(1993).
A seminal review that proposed four classes of LAB 
bacteriocins. 

13.   Nes, I. F. et al. Biosynthesis of bacteriocins in lactic acid 

bacteria. Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek 70, 113–128 
(1996).

14.   Kemperman, R. et al. Identification and characterization of 
two novel clostridial bacteriocins, circularin A and closticin 
574. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 69, 1589–1597 (2003).

15.   Xie, L. & van der Donk, W. A. Post-translational 

modifications during lantibiotic biosynthesis. 
Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 8, 498–507 (2004).

16.   Jack, R. W. & Jung, G. Lantibiotics and microcins: 

polypeptides with unusual chemical diversity. 
Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 4, 310–317 (2000).

17.   Pag, U. & Sahl, H. G. Multiple activities in lantibiotics — 
models for the design of novel antibiotics? Curr. Pharm. 
Des. 8, 815–833 (2002).

18.   Jung, G. Lantibiotics — ribosomally synthesized 

biologically active polypeptides containing sulfide bridges 
and α, β-didehydroamino acids. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 
Engl. 30, 1051–1192 (1991).

strategies to improve therapeutic potential. Curr. Protein 
Pept. Sci. 6, 61–75 (2005).

20.   Breukink, E. et al. Use of the cell wall precursor lipid II by a 
pore-forming peptide antibiotic. Science 286, 2361–2364 
(1999).

21.   Wiedemann, I. et al. Specific binding of nisin to the 

peptidoglycan precursor lipid II combines pore formation 
and inhibition of cell wall biosynthesis for potent antibiotic 
activity. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 1772–1779 (2001). 
Study that established that nisin has dual 
mechanisms of action.

22.   Hsu, S. T. et al. The nisin–lipid II complex reveals a 

pyrophosphate cage that provides a blueprint for novel 
antibiotics. Nature Struct. Mol. Biol. 11, 963–967 (2004).
23.   Brotz, H., Bierbaum, G., Leopold, K., Reynolds, P. E. & 

Sahl, H. G. The lantibiotic mersacidin inhibits 
peptidoglycan synthesis by targeting lipid II. 
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 42, 154–160 (1998).

41.   Kazazic, M., Nissen-Meyer, J. & Fimland, G. Mutational 

analysis of the role of charged residues in target-cell 
binding, potency and specificity of the pediocin-like 
bacteriocin sakacin P. Microbiology 148, 2019–2027 
(2002). 
Analysis of the role of the class IIa bacteriocins to 
explain C-termini variations in target species.

24.   Brotz, H. et al. Role of lipid-bound peptidoglycan 

42.   Johnsen, L., Fimland, G. & Nissen-Meyer, J. 

precursors in the formation of pores by nisin, epidermin 
and other lantibiotics. Mol. Microbiol. 30, 317–327 (1998).
Identification of lipid II as the target or docking 
molecule for nisin.  

25.   van Heusden, H. E., de Kruijff, B. & Breukink, E. Lipid II 

induces a transmembrane orientation of the pore-forming 
peptide lantibiotic nisin. Biochemistry 41, 12171–12178 
(2002).

26.   Martin, N. I. et al. Structural characterization of lacticin 
3147, a two-peptide lantibiotic with synergistic activity. 
Biochemistry 43, 3049–3056 (2004).

27.   Hosoda, K. et al. Structure determination of an 

immunopotentiator peptide, cinnamycin, complexed with 
lysophosphatidylethanolamine by 1H-NMR1. J. Biochem. 
(Tokyo) 119, 226–230 (1996).

28.   Machaidze, G. & Seelig, J. Specific binding of cinnamycin 
(Ro 09–0198) to phosphatidylethanolamine. Comparison 
between micellar and membrane environments. 
Biochemistry 42, 12570–12576 (2003).

29.   Cox, C. R., Coburn, P. S. & Gilmore, M. S. Enterococcal 

cytolysin: a novel two component peptide system that 
serves as a bacterial defense against eukaryotic and 
prokaryotic cells. Curr. Protein Pept. Sci. 6, 77–84 (2005).

30.   Datta, V. et al. Mutational analysis of the group A 

streptococcal operon encoding streptolysin S and its 
virulence role in invasive infection. Mol. Microbiol. 56, 
681–695 (2005).

31.   Diep, D. B. & Nes, I. F. Ribosomally synthesized 

antibacterial peptides in Gram positive bacteria. Curr. 
Drug Targets 3, 107–122 (2002).

32.   van Belkum, M. J. & Stiles, M. E. Nonlantibiotic 

antibacterial peptides from lactic acid bacteria. Nat. Prod. 
Rep. 17, 323–335 (2000).

33.   Hechard, Y. & Sahl, H. G. Mode of action of modified and 

unmodified bacteriocins from Gram-positive bacteria. 
Biochimie 84, 545–557 (2002).

34.   Montville, T. J. & Chen, Y. Mechanistic action of pediocin 

and nisin: recent progress and unresolved questions. 
Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 50, 511–519 (1998).

35.   Hastings, J. W. et al. Characterization of leucocin A-UAL 

187 and cloning of the bacteriocin gene from Leuconostoc 
gelidum. J. Bacteriol. 173, 7491–7500 (1991).

36.   Hechard, Y., Derijard, B., Letellier, F. & Cenatiempo, Y. 

Characterization and purification of mesentericin Y105, an 
anti-Listeria bacteriocin from Leuconostoc mesenteroides. 
J. Gen. Microbiol. 138, 2725–2731 (1992).

37.   Quadri, L. E., Sailer, M., Roy, K. L., Vederas, J. C. & 

Stiles, M. E. Chemical and genetic characterization of 
bacteriocins produced by Carnobacterium piscicola 
LV17B. J. Biol. Chem. 269, 12204–12211 (1994).

Nes, I. F. Purification and amino acid sequence of a 
bacteriocin produced by Pediococcus acidilactici. 
J. Gen. Microbiol. 138, 1985–1990 (1992).

39.   Eijsink, V. G., Skeie, M., Middelhoven, P. H., Brurberg, M. 

The C-terminal domain of pediocin-like antimicrobial 
peptides (class IIa bacteriocins) is involved in specific 
recognition of the C-terminal part of cognate immunity 
proteins and in determining the antimicrobial spectrum. 
J. Biol. Chem. 280, 9243–9250 (2005).

43.   Fimland, G. et al. New biologically active hybrid 

bacteriocins constructed by combining regions from 
various pediocin-like bacteriocins: the C-terminal region 
is important for determining specificity. Appl. Environ. 
Microbiol. 62, 3313–3318 (1996).
Describes the creation of hybrid class IIa 
bacteriocins.

44.   Miller, K. W., Schamber, R., Osmanagaoglu, O. & Ray, B. 

Isolation and characterization of pediocin AcH chimeric 
protein mutants with altered bactericidal activity. Appl. 
Environ. Microbiol. 64, 1997–2005 (1998).

45.   Dalet, K., Cenatiempo, Y., Cossart, P. & Hechard, Y. 

A σ54-dependent PTS permease of the mannose family is 
responsible for sensitivity of Listeria monocytogenes to 
mesentericin Y105. Microbiology 147, 3263–3269 
(2001).

46.   Robichon, D. et al. The rpoN (σ54) gene from Listeria 

monocytogenes is involved in resistance to 
mesentericin Y105, an antibacterial peptide from 
Leuconostoc mesenteroides. J. Bacteriol. 179, 
7591–7594 (1997).

47.   Xue, J. et al. Novel activator of mannose-specific 

phosphotransferase system permease expression in 
Listeria innocua, identified by screening for pediocin AcH 
resistance. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 71, 1283–1290 
(2005).

48.   Ramnath, M., Beukes, M., Tamura, K. & Hastings, J. W. 

Absence of a putative mannose-specific 
phosphotransferase system enzyme IIAB component in a 
leucocin A-resistant strain of Listeria monocytogenes, as 
shown by two-dimensional sodium dodecyl sulfate-
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Appl. Environ. 
Microbiol. 66, 3098–3101 (2000).
First link between the absence of EIIt
resistance to class IIa bacteriocins.

Man and 

49.   Ramnath, M., Arous, S., Gravesen, A., Hastings, J. W. & 

Hechard, Y. Expression of mptC of Listeria 
monocytogenes induces sensitivity to class IIa bacteriocins 
in Lactococcus lactis. Microbiology 150, 2663–2668 
(2004).

50.   Garneau, S., Martin, N. I. & Vederas, J. C. Two-peptide 
bacteriocins produced by lactic acid bacteria. Biochimie 
84, 577–592 (2002).

51.   Marciset, O., Jeronimus-Stratingh, M. C., Mollet, B. & 
Poolman, B. Thermophilin 13, a nontypical antilisterial 
poration complex bacteriocin, that functions without a 
receptor. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 14277–14284 (1997).

52.   Kawai, Y., Kemperman, R., Kok, J. & Saito, T. The circular 

bacteriocins gassericin A and circularin A. Curr. Protein 
Pept. Sci. 5, 393–398 (2004).

19.   Cotter, P. D., Hill, C. & Ross, R. P. Bacterial lantibiotics: 

38.   Nieto Lozano, J. C., Meyer, J. N., Sletten, K., Pelaz, C. & 

B. & Nes, I. F. Comparative studies of class IIa bacteriocins 
of lactic acid bacteria. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 64, 
3275–3281 (1998).

53.   Maqueda, M. et al. Peptide AS-48: prototype of a new 
class of cyclic bacteriocins. Curr. Protein Pept. Sci. 5, 
399–416 (2004).

40.   Chen, Y., Ludescher, R. D. & Montville, T. J. Electrostatic 

interactions, but not the YGNGV consensus motif, govern the 
binding of pediocin PA-1 and its fragments to phospho lipid 
vesicles. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 63, 4770–4777 (1997).

54.   Kawai, Y. et al. Structural and functional differences in two 
cyclic bacteriocins with the same sequences produced by 
lactobacilli. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 70, 2906–2911 
(2004).

786 | OCTOBER 2005 | VOLUME 3 

© 2005 Nature Publishing Group 

 www.nature.com/reviews/micro

55.   Joerger, M. C. & Klaenhammer, T. R. Cloning, expression, 

75.   Diep, D. B., Myhre, R., Johnsborg, O., Aakra, A. & Nes, I. 

95.   Verheul, A., Russell, N. J., Van, T. H. R., Rombouts, F. M. 

R E V I E W S

and nucleotide sequence of the Lactobacillus helveticus 
481 gene encoding the bacteriocin helveticin J. 
J. Bacteriol. 172, 6339–6347 (1990).

56.   Simmonds, R. S., Simpson, W. J. & Tagg, J. R. Cloning 

and sequence analysis of zooA, a Streptococcus 
zooepidemicus gene encoding a bacteriocin-like inhibitory 
substance having a domain structure similar to that of 
lysostaphin. Gene 189, 255–261 (1997).

57.   Hickey, R. M., Twomey, D. P., Ross, R. P. & Hill, C. 

Production of enterolysin A by a raw milk enterococcal 
isolate exhibiting multiple virulence factors. Microbiology 
149, 655–664 (2003).

58.   Nilsen, T., Nes, I. F. & Holo, H. Enterolysin A, a cell wall-
degrading bacteriocin from Enterococcus faecalis LMG 
2333. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 69, 2975–2984 (2003).

59.   Beukes, M., Bierbaum, G., Sahl, H. G. & Hastings, J. W. 

Purification and partial characterization of a murein 
hydrolase, millericin B, produced by Streptococcus milleri 
NMSCC 061. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 66, 23–28 (2000).

60.   Valdes-Stauber, N. & Scherer, S. Isolation and 

characterization of Linocin M18, a bacteriocin produced 
by Brevibacterium linens. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 60, 
3809–3814 (1994).

61.   Eppert, I., Valdes-Stauber, N., Gotz, H., Busse, M. & 

Scherer, S. Growth reduction of Listeria spp. caused by 
undefined industrial red smear cheese cultures and 
bacteriocin-producing Brevibacterium lines as evaluated 
in situ on soft cheese. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 63, 
4812–4817 (1997).

62.   Lai, A. C., Tran, S. & Simmonds, R. S. Functional 

characterization of domains found within a lytic enzyme 
produced by Streptococcus equi subsp. zooepidemicus. 
FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 215, 133–138 (2002).

63.   Johnsen, L., Fimland, G. & Nissen-Meyer, J. The 

C-terminal domain of pediocin-like antimicrobial peptides 
(class IIa bacteriocins) is involved in specific recognition of 
the C-terminal part of cognate immunity proteins and in 
determining the antimicrobial spectrum. J. Biol. Chem. 
280, 9243–9250 (2004).

64.   Coakley, M., Fitzgerald, G. & Ros, R. P. Application and 

evaluation of the phage resistance- and bacteriocin-
encoding plasmid pMRC01 for the improvement of dairy 
starter cultures. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 63, 1434–1440 
(1997).

65.   van der Meer, J. R. et al. Influence of amino acid 

substitutions in the nisin leader peptide on biosynthesis 
and secretion of nisin by Lactococcus lactis. J. Biol. 
Chem. 269, 3555–3562 (1994).

66.   Neis, S. et al. Effect of leader peptide mutations on 

biosynthesis of the lantibiotic Pep5. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 
149, 249–255 (1997).

67.   Chen, P., Qi, F. X., Novak, J., Krull, R. E. & Caufield, P. W. 
Effect of amino acid substitutions in conserved residues in 
the leader peptide on biosynthesis of the lantibiotic 
mutacin II. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 195, 139–144 (2001).

68.   Xie, L. et al. Lacticin 481: in vitro reconstitution of 

lantibiotic synthetase activity. Science 303, 679–681 
(2004).
This landmark study describes the in vitro activity of 
a lantibiotic synthetase and has important 
implications for the creation of novel antimicrobials.

69.   Havarstein, L. S., Diep, D. B. & Nes, I. F. A family of 
bacteriocin ABC transporters carry out proteolytic 
processing of their substrates concomitant with export. 
Mol. Microbiol. 16, 229–240 (1995).

70.   Venema, K. et al. Functional analysis of the pediocin 

operon of Pediococcus acidilactici PAC1.0: PedB is the 
immunity protein and PedD is the precursor processing 
enzyme. Mol. Microbiol. 17, 515–522 (1995).

71.   van der Meer, J. R. et al. Characterization of the 

Lactococcus lactis nisin A operon genes nisP, encoding a 
subtilisin-like serine protease involved in precursor 
processing, and nisR, encoding a regulatory protein 
involved in nisin biosynthesis. J. Bacteriol. 175, 2578–
2588 (1993).

72.   Brede, D. A. et al. Molecular and genetic characterization 

92.   Gravesen, A., Jydegaard Axelsen, A. M., 

of propionicin F, a bacteriocin from Propionibacterium 
freudenreichii. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 70, 7303–7310 
(2004).

73.   Corvey, C., Stein, T., Dusterhus, S., Karas, M. & Entian, K. 

D. Activation of subtilin precursors by Bacillus subtilis 
extracellular serine proteases subtilisin (AprE), WprA, and 
Vpr. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 304, 48–54 
(2003).

Mendes da Silva, J., Hansen, T. B. & Knochel, S. 
Frequency of bacteriocin resistance development and 
associated fitness costs in Listeria monocytogenes. Appl. 
Environ. Microbiol. 68, 756–764 (2002).

93.   Severina, E., Severin, A. & Tomasz, A. Antibacterial efficacy 

of nisin against multidrug-resistant Gram-positive 
pathogens. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 41, 341–347 
(1998).

74.   Stein, T. & Entian, K. D. Maturation of the lantibiotic 

94.   Li, J., Chikindas, M. L., Ludescher, R. D. & Montville, T. J. 

subtilin: matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-
of-flight mass spectrometry to monitor precursors and 
their proteolytic processing in crude bacterial cultures. 
Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom. 16, 103–110 (2002).

Temperature- and surfactant-induced membrane 
modifications that alter Listeria monocytogenes nisin 
sensitivity by different mechanisms. Appl. Environ. 
Microbiol. 68, 5904–5910 (2002).

NATURE REVIEWS | MICROBIOLOGY 

© 2005 Nature Publishing Group 

 VOLUME 3 | OCTOBER 2005 | 787

F. Inducible bacteriocin production in Lactobacillus is 
regulated by differential expression of the pln operons and 
by two antagonizing response regulators, the activity of 
which is enhanced upon phosphorylation. Mol. Microbiol. 
47, 483–494 (2003).

76.   Guder, A., Schmitter, T., Wiedemann, I., Sahl, H. G. & 

Bierbaum, G. Role of the single regulator MrsR1 and the 
two-component system MrsR2/K2 in the regulation of 
mersacidin production and immunity. Appl. Environ. 
Microbiol. 68, 106–113 (2002).

77.   McAuliffe, O., O’Keeffe, T., Hill, C. & Ross, R. P. Regulation 

of immunity to the two-component lantibiotic, lacticin 
3147, by the transcriptional repressor LtnR. Mol. 
Microbiol. 39, 982–993 (2001).

78.   Kreth, J., Merritt, J., Bordador, C., Shi, W. & Qi, F. 
Transcriptional analysis of mutacin I (mutA) gene 
expression in planktonic and biofilm cells of 
Streptococcus mutans using fluorescent protein and 
glucuronidase reporters. Oral Microbiol. Immunol. 19, 
252–256 (2004).

79.   Gajic, O. et al. Novel mechanism of bacteriocin secretion 

and immunity carried out by lactococcal multidrug 
resistance proteins. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 34291–34298 
(2003).

80.   Otto, M., Peschel, A. & Gotz, F. Producer self-protection 
against the lantibiotic epidermin by the ABC transporter 
EpiFEG of Staphylococcus epidermidis Tu3298. 
FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 166, 203–211 (1998).

& Abee, T. Modifications of membrane phospholipid 
composition in nisin-resistant Listeria monocytogenes 
Scott A. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 63, 3451–3457 
(1997).

96.   Maisnier-Patin, S. & Richard, J. Cell wall changes in nisin-

resistant variants of Listeria innocua grown in the presence 
of high nisin concentrations. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 140, 
29–35 (1996).

97.   Mantovani, H. C. & Russell, J. B. Nisin resistance of 
Streptococcus bovis. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 67, 
808–813 (2001).

98.   Abachin, E. et al. Formation of D-alanyl-lipoteichoic acid is 

required for adhesion and virulence of Listeria 
monocytogenes. Mol. Microbiol. 43, 1–14 (2002).

99.   Bierbaum, G. & Sahl, H. G. Autolytic system of 

Staphylococcus simulans 22: influence of cationic 
peptides on activity of N-acetylmuramoyl-L-alanine 
amidase. J. Bacteriol. 169, 5452–5458 (1987).

100.  Crandall, A. D. & Montville, T. J. Nisin resistance in Listeria 
monocytogenes ATCC 700302 is a complex phenotype. 
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 64, 231–237 (1998).

101.  van Schaik, W., Gahan, C. G. & Hill, C. Acid-adapted 
Listeria monocytogenes displays enhanced tolerance 
against the lantibiotics nisin and lacticin 3147. 
J. Food Prot. 62, 536–539 (1999).

102.  Kramer, N. E. et al. Resistance of Gram-positive bacteria 

to nisin is not determined by lipid II levels. FEMS Microbiol. 
Lett. 239, 157–161 (2004).

81.   Rince, A., Dufour, A., Uguen, P., Le Pennec, J. P. & Haras, 

103.  Cotter, P. D., Guinane, C. M. & Hill, C. The LisRK signal 

D. Characterization of the lacticin 481 operon: the 
Lactococcus lactis genes lctF, lctE, and lctG encode a 
putative ABC transporter involved in bacteriocin immunity. 
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 63, 4252–4260 (1997).

transduction system determines the sensitivity of Listeria 
monocytogenes to nisin and cephalosporins. Antimicrob. 
Agents Chemother. 46, 2784–2790 (2002).

104.  Gravesen, A. et al. pbp2229-mediated nisin resistance 

82.   Stein, T., Heinzmann, S., Dusterhus, S., Borchert, S. & 
Entian, K. D. Expression and functional analysis of the 
subtilin immunity genes spaIFEG in the subtilin-sensitive 
host Bacillus subtilis MO1099. J. Bacteriol. 187, 822–828 
(2005).

83.   Peschel, A. & Gotz, F. Analysis of the Staphylococcus 

epidermidis genes epiF, -E, and-G involved in epidermin 
immunity. J. Bacteriol. 178, 531–536 (1996).

84.   Diaz, M. et al. Characterization of a new operon, 

as-48EFGH, from the as-48 gene cluster involved in 
immunity to enterocin AS-48. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 69, 
1229–1236 (2003).

85.   Hoffmann, A., Schneider, T., Pag, U. & Sahl, H. G. 

Localization and functional analysis of PepI, the 
immunity peptide of Pep5-producing Staphylococcus 
epidermidis strain 5. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 70, 
3263–3271 (2004).

86.   Venema, K. et al. Mode of action of LciA, the lactococcin A 

immunity protein. Mol. Microbiol. 14, 521–532 (1994).

87.   van Belkum, M. J., Kok, J. & Venema, G. Cloning, 

sequencing, and expression in Escherichia coli of lcnB, a 
third bacteriocin determinant from the lactococcal 
bacteriocin plasmid p9B4–6. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 58, 
572–577 (1992).

88.   van Belkum, M. J., Hayema, B. J., Jeeninga, R. E., Kok, J. 

& Venema, G. Organization and nucleotide sequences of 
two lactococcal bacteriocin operons. Appl. Environ. 
Microbiol. 57, 492–498 (1991).

89.   Heidrich, C. et al. Isolation, characterization, and 

heterologous expression of the novel lantibiotic epicidin 
280 and analysis of its biosynthetic gene cluster. 
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 64, 3140–3146 (1998).
90.   Franz, C. M., van Belkum, M. J., Worobo, R. W., 

Vederas, J. C. & Stiles, M. E. Characterization of the 
genetic locus responsible for production and immunity of 
carnobacteriocin A: the immunity gene confers cross-
protection to enterocin B. Microbiology 146, 621–631 
(2000).

91.   Beukes, M. & Hastings, J. W. Self-protection against cell 
wall hydrolysis in Streptococcus milleri NMSCC 061 and 
analysis of the millericin B operon. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 
67, 3888–3896 (2001).

mechanism in Listeria monocytogenes confers cross-
protection to class IIa bacteriocins and affects virulence 
gene expression. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 70, 1669–1679 
(2004).

105.  Gravesen, A., Sorensen, K., Aarestrup, F. M. & Knochel, S. 

Spontaneous nisin-resistant Listeria monocytogenes 
mutants with increased expression of a putative penicillin-
binding protein and their sensitivity to various antibiotics. 
Microb. Drug Resist. 7, 127–135 (2001).

106.  Peschel, A. et al. Inactivation of the dlt operon in 

Staphylococcus aureus confers sensitivity to defensins, 
protegrins, and other antimicrobial peptides. J. Biol. 
Chem. 274, 8405–8410 (1999).

107.  Cao, M. & Helmann, J. D. The Bacillus subtilis 
extracytoplasmic-function σX factor regulates 
modification of the cell envelope and resistance to cationic 
antimicrobial peptides. J. Bacteriol. 186, 1136–1146 
(2004).

108.  Vadyvaloo, V., Hastings, J. W., van der Merwe, M. J. & 

Rautenbach, M. Membranes of class IIa bacteriocin-
resistant Listeria monocytogenes cells contain increased 
levels of desaturated and short-acyl-chain 
phosphatidylglycerols. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 68, 
5223–5230 (2002).

109.  Vadyvaloo, V. et al. Cell-surface alterations in class IIa 
bacteriocin-resistant Listeria monocytogenes strains. 
Microbiology 150, 3025–3033 (2004).

110.  Wang, B. Y. & Kuramitsu, H. K. Interactions between oral 
bacteria: inhibition of Streptococcus mutans bacteriocin 
production by Streptococcus gordonii. Appl. Environ. 
Microbiol. 71, 354–362 (2005).

111.  Bouttefroy, A. & Milliere, J. B. Nisin-curvaticin 13 

combinations for avoiding the regrowth of bacteriocin 
resistant cells of Listeria monocytogenes ATCC 15313. 
Int. J. Food Microbiol. 62, 65–75 (2000).

112.  Bonev, B. B., Breukink, E., Swiezewska, E., De Kruijff, B. & 

Watts, A. Targeting extracellular pyrophosphates 
underpins the high selectivity of nisin. FASEB J. 18, 
1862–1869 (2004).

113.  Rollema, H. S., Kuipers, O. P., Both, P., de Vos, W. M. & 
Siezen, R. J. Improvement of solubility and stability of the 
antimicrobial peptide nisin by protein engineering. 
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 61, 2873–2878 (1995).

114.  Yuan, J., Zhang, Z. Z., Chen, X. Z., Yang, W. & Huan, L. D. 
Site-directed mutagenesis of the hinge region of nisinZ and 
properties of nisinZ mutants. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 
64, 806–815 (2004). 
Creation of nisin derivatives with activity against 
certain Gram-negative bacteria.

115.  Liu, W. & Hansen, J. N. Enhancement of the chemical and 

antimicrobial properties of subtilin by site-directed 
mutagenesis. J. Biol. Chem. 267, 25078–25085 (1992).
116.  Johnsen, L., Fimland, G., Eijsink, V. & Nissen-Meyer, J. 

Engineering increased stability in the antimicrobial peptide 
pediocin PA-1. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 66, 4798–4802 
(2000).

R E V I E W S

117.  Richard, C., Drider, D., Elmorjani, K., Marion, D. & 

138.  Ryan, M. P., Rea, M. C., Hill, C. & Ross, R. P. 

160.  Tagg, J. R. Prevention of streptococcal pharyngitis by 

Prevost, H. Heterologous expression and purification of 
active divercin V41, a class IIa bacteriocin encoded by a 
synthetic gene in Escherichia coli. J. Bacteriol. 186, 
4276–4284 (2004).

An application in cheddar cheese manufacture for a strain 
of Lactococcus lactis producing a novel broad-spectrum 
bacteriocin, lacticin 3147. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 62, 
612–619 (1996).

118.  Schoeman, H., Vivier, M. A., du Toit, M., Dicks, L. M. & 

139.  Oumer, A., Garde, S., Gaya, P., Medina, M. & Nunez, M. 

Pretorius, I. S. The development of bactericidal yeast 
strains by expressing the Pediococcus acidilactici pediocin 
gene (pedA) in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Yeast 15, 
647–656 (1999).

The effects of cultivating lactic starter cultures with 
bacteriocin-producing lactic acid bacteria. J. Food Prot. 
64, 81–86 (2001).

140.  O’Sullivan, L., Ross, R. P. & Hill, C. A lacticin 

141.  Daeschel, M. A., Jung, D. S. & Watson, B. T. Controlling 

164.  Kleerebezem, M. & Quadri, L. E. Peptide pheromone-

anti-Streptococcus pyogenes bacteriocin-like inhibitory 
substances (BLIS) produced by Streptococcus salivarius. 
Indian J. Med. Res. 119, 13–16 (2004).

161.  Aranha, C., Gupta, S. & Reddy, K. V. Contraceptive 

efficacy of antimicrobial peptide nisin: in vitro and in vivo 
studies. Contraception 69, 333–338 (2004).

162.  Reddy, K. V., Aranha, C., Gupta, S. M. & Yedery, R. D. 

Evaluation of antimicrobial peptide nisin as a safe vaginal 
contraceptive agent in rabbits: in vitro and in vivo studies. 
Reproduction 128, 117–126 (2004).

163.  Kleerebezem, M. Quorum sensing control of lantibiotic 

production; nisin and subtilin autoregulate their own 
biosynthesis. Peptides 25, 1405–1414 (2004).

dependent regulation of antimicrobial peptide production 
in Gram-positive bacteria: a case of multicellular behavior. 
Peptides 22, 1579–1596 (2001).
Review of the involvement of cell signalling in 
bacteriocin production.

165.  Kleerebezem, M., Kuipers, O. P., de Vos, W. M., Stiles, M. E. 

& Quadri, L. E. A two-component signal-transduction 
cascade in Carnobacterium piscicola LV17B: two signaling 
peptides and one sensor-transmitter. Peptides 22, 
1597–1601 (2001).

166.  Nilsen, T., Nes, I. F. & Holo, H. An exported inducer 

peptide regulates bacteriocin production in Enterococcus 
faecium CTC492. J. Bacteriol. 180, 1848–1854 (1998).

167.  Maldonado, A., Jimenez-Diaz, R. & Ruiz-Barba, J. L. 

Induction of plantaricin production in Lactobacillus 
plantarum NC8 after coculture with specific gram-positive 
bacteria is mediated by an autoinduction mechanism. 
J. Bacteriol. 186, 1556–1564 (2004).

168.  Maldonado, A., Ruiz-Barba, J. L. & Jimenez-Diaz, R. 

Production of plantaricin NC8 by Lactobacillus plantarum 
NC8 is induced in the presence of different types of 
gram-positive bacteria. Arch. Microbiol. 181, 8–16 (2004).

169.  Coburn, P. S., Pillar, C. M., Jett, B. D., Haas, W. & 

Gilmore, M. S. Enterococcus faecalis senses target cells 
and in response expresses cytolysin. Science 306, 
2270–2272 (2004).

170.  Gomez, A., Ladire, M., Marcille, F. & Fons, M. 

Trypsin mediates growth phase-dependent transcriptional 
regulation of genes involved in biosynthesis of 
ruminococcin A, a lantibiotic produced by a 
Ruminococcus gnavus strain from a human intestinal 
microbiota. J. Bacteriol. 184, 18–28 (2002).

171.  Hickey, R. M., Twomey, D. P., Ross, R. P. & Hill, C. 

Potential of the enterocin regulatory system to control 
expression of heterologous genes in Enterococcus. 
J. Appl. Microbiol. 95, 390–397 (2003).

172.  Mathiesen, G. et al. High-level gene expression in 

Lactobacillus plantarum using a pheromone-regulated 
bacteriocin promoter. Lett. Appl. Microbiol. 39, 137–143 
(2004).

173.  Hilman, J. D. Genetically modified Streptococcus mutans 

for the prevention of dental caries. Antonie Van 
Leeuwenhoek 82, 361–366 (2002).

Acknowledgements
The authors are supported by the Irish Government under the 
National Development Plan (2000–2006) and by Science 
Foundation Ireland.

Competing interests statement
The authors declare no competing financial interests.

  Online links

DATABASES
The following terms in this article are linked online to:
Entrez: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Entrez
Escherichia coli | Lactococcus lactis | Leuconostoc oenos | 
Listeria monocytogenes | Staphylococcus aureus | 
Streptococcus gordonii | Streptococcus mutans | 
Streptococcus pneumoniae

FURTHER INFORMATION
Alimentary Pharmabiotic Centre: 
http://apc.ucc.ie/content/bacteriocins.htm
Gateway to Government Food Safety Information: 
http://www.foodsafety.gov/~dms/lmr2-toc.html
Access to this interactive links box is free online.

119.  Rodriguez, J. M., Martinez, M. I. & Kok, J. Pediocin PA-1, 

a wide-spectrum bacteriocin from lactic acid bacteria. 
Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 42, 91–121 (2002).

120.  Ennahar, S., Sashihara, T., Sonomoto, K. & Ishizaki, A. 

Class IIa bacteriocins: biosynthesis, structure and activity. 
FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 24, 85–106 (2000).

121.  Holzapfel, W. H., Geisen, R. & Schillinger, U. Biological 

preservation of foods with reference to protective cultures, 
bacteriocins and food-grade enzymes. Int. J. Food 
Microbiol. 24, 343–362 (1995).

122.  Chen, H. & Hoover, D. G. Bacteriocins and their food 

481-producing adjunct culture increases starter lysis while 
inhibiting nonstarter lactic acid bacteria proliferation during 
cheddar cheese ripening. J. Appl. Microbiol. 95, 
1235–1241 (2003).

wine malolactic fermentations with nisin and nisin-resistant 
strains of Leuconostoc oenos. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 
57, 601–603 (1991).

142.  Radler, F. Possible use of nisin in winemaking. 

II. Experiments to control lactic acid bacteria in the 
production of wine. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 41, 7–11 (1990).

applications. Comp. Rev. Food Sci. Food Safety 2, 82–100 
(2003).
Reviews the contribution of bacteriocins to food 
safety.

143.  Fox, P. F., McSweeney, P. L. H. & Lynch, C. M. Significance 

of non-starter lactic acid bacteria in cheddar cheese. 
Aust. J. Dairy Technol. 53, 83–89 (1998).

144.  Ryan, M. P., Ross, R. P. & Hill, C. Strategy for 

123.  O’Sullivan, L., Ross, R. P. & Hill, C. Potential of bacteriocin-

producing lactic acid bacteria for improvements in food 
safety and quality. Biochimie 84, 593–604 (2002).

124.  Ryan, M. P., Hill, C. & Ross, R. P. Exploitation of Lantibiotic 

Peptides for Food and Medical Uses (eds Dutton, C. J., 
Haxell, M. A., McArthur, H. A. I. & Wax, R. G.) (Marcel 
Dekker, New York/Basel, 2002).

125.  Luders, T., Birkemo, G. A., Fimland, G., Nissen-Meyer, J. & 

Nes, I. F. Strong synergy between a eukaryotic 
antimicrobial peptide and bacteriocins from lactic acid 
bacteria. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 69, 1797–1799 (2003).
126.  Boziaris, I. S. & Adams, M. R. Temperature shock, injury 

and transient sensitivity to nisin in Gram negatives. 
J. Appl. Microbiol. 91, 715–724 (2001).

127.  Masschalck, B., Deckers, D. & Michiels, C. W. 

Sensitization of outer-membrane mutants of Salmonella 
typhimurium and Pseudomonas aeruginosa to 
antimicrobial peptides under high pressure. J. Food Prot. 
66, 1360–1367 (2003).

128.  Boziaris, I. S. & Adams, M. R. Transient sensitivity to nisin 

in cold-shocked Gram negatives. Lett. Appl. Microbiol. 31, 
233–237 (2000).

129.  Stevens, K. A., Sheldon, B. W., Klapes, N. A. & 

Klaenhammer, T. R. Nisin treatment for inactivation of 
Salmonella species and other Gram-negative bacteria. 
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 57, 3613–3615 (1991).
First indication that disruption of the outer 
membrane sensitizes Gram-negative bacteria to 
bacteriocins.

130.  Kalchayanand, N., Sikes, A., Dunne, C. P. & Ray, B. 

Interaction of hydrostatic pressure, time and temperature 
of pressurization and pediocin AcH on inactivation of 
foodborne bacteria. J. Food Prot. 61, 425–431 (1998).

131.  Baker, S. H., Ekinci Kitis, F. Y., Quattlebaum, R. G. & 

Barefoot, S. F. Sensitization of gram-negative and 
gram-positive bacteria to jenseniin G by sublethal injury. 
J. Food Prot. 67, 1009–1013 (2004).

132.  Suma, K., Misra, M. C. & Varadaraj, M. C. Plantaricin 

LP84, a broad spectrum heat-stable bacteriocin of 
Lactobacillus plantarum NCIM 2084 produced in a simple 
glucose broth medium. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 40, 17–25 
(1998).

133.  Delves-Broughton, J., Blackburn, P., Evans, R. J. & 
Hugenholtz, J. Applications of the bacteriocin, nisin. 
Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek 69, 193–202 (1996).

134.  Abriouel, H., Valdivia, E., Martinez-Bueno, M., Maqueda, 

M. & Galvez, A. A simple method for semi-preparative-
scale production and recovery of enterocin AS-48 derived 
from Enterococcus faecalis subsp. liquefaciens A-48-32. 
J. Microbiol. Methods 55, 599–605 (2003).

135.  Mead, P. S. et al. Food-related illness and death in the 

United States. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 5, 607–625 (1999).

136.  Wong, S., Street, D., Delgado, S. I. & Klontz, K. C. Recalls 

of foods and cosmetics due to microbial contamination 
reported to the U. S. Food and Drug Administration. 
J. Food Prot. 63, 1113–1116 (2000).

137.  Thomas, T. D. & Crow, V. L. Mechanism of D-lactic acid 
formation in cheddar cheese. N. Z. J. Dairy Sci. Technol 
18, 131–141 (1983).

manipulation of cheese flora using combinations of 
lacticin 3147-producing and-resistant cultures. 
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 67, 2699–2704 (2001).

145.  Martinez-Cuesta, C., Requena, T. & Pelaez, C. Effect of 
bacteriocin-induced cell damage on the branched-chain 
amino acid transamination by Lactococcus lactis. 
FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 217, 109–113 (2002).

146.  Garde, S., Tomillo, J., Gaya, P., Medina, M. & Nunez, M. 

Proteolysis in Hispanico cheese manufactured using a 
mesophilic starter, a thermophilic starter, and bacteriocin-
producing Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis INIA 415 
adjunct culture. J. Agric. Food Chem. 50, 3479–3485 
(2002).

147.  Dunne, C. et al. Probiotics: from myth to reality. 

Demonstration of functionality in animal models of disease 
and in human clinical trials. Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek 76, 
279–292 (1999).

148.  Marteau, P. & Rambaud, J. C. Potential of using lactic acid 

bacteria for therapy and immunomodulation in man. 
FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 12, 207–220 (1993).

149.  Tannock, G. W. Probiotic properties of lactic-acid bacteria: 
plenty of scope for fundamental R & D. Trends Biotechnol. 
15, 270–274 (1997).

150.  Hickey, R. M., Ross, R. P. & Hill, C. Controlled autolysis 
and enzyme release in a recombinant lactococcal strain 
expressing the metalloendopeptidase enterolysin A. 
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 70, 1744–1748 (2004).

151.  Galvin, M., Hill, C. & Ross, R. P. Lacticin 3147 displays 

activity in buffer against gram-positive bacterial pathogens 
which appear insensitive in standard plate assays. 
Lett. Appl. Microbiol. 28, 355–358 (1999).

152.  Goldstein, B. P., Wei, J., Greenberg, K. & Novick, R. 
Activity of nisin against Streptococcus pneumoniae, 
in vitro, and in a mouse infection model. J. Antimicrob. 
Chemother. 42, 277–278 (1998).

153.  Niu, W. W. & Neu, H. C. Activity of mersacidin, a novel 

peptide, compared with that of vancomycin, teicoplanin, 
and daptomycin. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 35, 
998–1000 (1991).

154.  Kruszewska, D. et al. Mersacidin eradicates methicillin-

resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) in a mouse 
rhinitis model. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 54, 648–653 
(2004).

155.  Blackburn, P. & Goldstein, B. P. Applied Microbiology 

Inc. International Patent Application WO 97/10801 
(1995).

156.  McConville, P. Smithkline Beecham Plc. International 

Patent Application WO 97/06772 (1995).

157.  Patel, M. M. William Wrigley Jr Co. International Patent 

Application WO 97/20473 (1995).

158.  Howell, T. H. et al. The effect of a mouthrinse based on 
nisin, a bacteriocin, on developing plaque and gingivitis 
in beagle dogs. J. Clin. Periodontol. 20, 335–339 
(1993).

159.  Ryan, M. P., Flynn, J., Hill, C., Ross, R. P. & Meaney, W. J. 
The natural food grade inhibitor, lacticin 3147, reduced the 
incidence of mastitis after experimental challenge with 
Streptococcus dysgalactiae in nonlactating dairy cows. 
J. Dairy Sci. 82, 2625–2631 (1999).

788 | OCTOBER 2005 | VOLUME 3 

© 2005 Nature Publishing Group 

 www.nature.com/reviews/micro

