Cheat Sheet: How to structure and write

academic text

J¨org Krywkow

EU-B¨uro, Hochschule Osnabr¨uck

j.krywkow@.hs-osnabr¨uck.de

June 8, 2016

1 Introduction
(cid:140)is cheat sheet is intended to help you organise and write academic text in an organised way.
However, this requires some knowledge about principle concepts and rules of academic writing.
Hence, the following advice provides procedural instructions that guide you through the initial
steps of preparing, structuring, writing and editing your academic text.

2 Formulate your topic and the most relevant issues
Brie(cid:131)y sketch out your research topic, concept, methods, results and, if applicable suggestions for
further research. (cid:140)e purpose of this is to formulate your thoughts about the research topic in
summary form. (cid:140)is approach forces you to put your core idea in words and helps you to focus.
Furthermore, this condensed version of your ideas is the basis for your abstract, which will be
wri(cid:138)en when your writing e(cid:130)ort is complete.

3 Structure
(cid:140)e next step is to sketch out your structure or skeleton including some main functions of your
article, e.g. introduction, hypothesis, research questions, problem formulation, literature research,
methodology, results, uncertainties, discussion, outlook for further research, etc..

3.1 Functions and sections
(cid:140)e design of functions and sections may be accomplished with the following steps:

1. Write down all (!) of the functions that you want to include in your text in the same sequence

that you wish them to recur in the (cid:128)nal version of your text.

2. Write down key words, text snippets, thoughts and ideas in an as yet informal way. (cid:140)e

result should be that each of the functions should has some text with the main ideas.

1

3. Check conventions and norms of the journal to which you are submi(cid:138)ing your manuscript,
or the regulations of the organisation for which you are writing with a(cid:138)ention to the speci(cid:128)c
instructions for structuring your text.

4. according to the formal requirements identi(cid:128)ed above decide which of the functions will be-
come sections and which become subsections, and where to place the remaining functions.

3.2 Bibliography database
Build up a new bibliography or enter your available references in a bibliography database. It may
be more e(cid:129)cient to begin and maintain this database while undertaking your literature research.
(cid:140)e choice of database so(cid:137)ware depends on your text processing or type se(cid:138)ing so(cid:137)ware:

Text processor

LaTeX
Libre O(cid:128)ice (5.2)
Microso(cid:129) Word

Bibliography database

BibTeX, (RefWorks)
Zotero, Refworks, Citavi
Zotero, Refworks, Citavi, EndNote

Be aware of the di(cid:130)erences among these so(cid:137)ware packages including licensing, costs and applica-
tion.

4 Writing
You do not need to write consecutively from introduction to conclusion. Begin with what you
are most comfortable with, e.g. results or methodology. From there you can continue (cid:128)lling the
’gaps’ throughout the document.
Check spelling, grammar, register and vocabulary, use hedging devices, meta genres, linking words
based upon your current knowledge and writing skills. At this stage, do not put much e(cid:130)ort into
formulating nice-sounding sentences or correct your writing. However, focus on the content and
general consistency of your text. In addition, bear in mind the theme-rheme sentence structure of
English academic writing.
A(cid:137)er (cid:128)nishing the entire text including the introduction through to the conclusions write a (cid:128)rst
version of the abstract (if required).

5 Self editing
Read through the entire text and continue checking the theme-rheme structure and the linear
form of argumentation of the text. (cid:140)is sentence structure forces you to use the active voice
and apply a more appropriate choice of verbs.
At the same time check:

• collocations (e.g. correct use of prepositions);
• cohesion, linking words, metadiscourse;
• mini genres and
• authoritative voice.

2

Keep the register formal, but not overly technical.
Having made all necessary corrections, leave the text unread for a number of days. (cid:140)en read
the text again applying all self-editing steps.

6 External reviewer (before submission)
Reading someone else’s text and commenting on it is a vital part of the academic discourse. (cid:140)is
person should be capable of reading the text from an unbiased point of and have su(cid:129)cient
expertise to understand the text and adequate English language skills. A native speaker is always
a preferable option. However, even a native speaker is no guarantee for a perfectly wri(cid:138)en academic
text.
Once the text is reviewed by this person, modi(cid:128)cations can be applied and a (cid:128)nal self editing check
should be applied.

3

