This article was downloaded by: [Universität Osnabrueck]
On: 22 October 2013, At: 08:54
Publisher: Routledge
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer
House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

Journal of European Public Policy
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjpp20
The constitution of a European immigration policy
domain: a political sociology approach
Virginie Guiraudon a
a Chargée de recherches au CNRS , CRAPS, Faculté de droit , 1 place déliot, BP 629,
F-59024 Lille cedex, France
Published online: 04 Feb 2011.

To cite this article: Virginie Guiraudon (2003) The constitution of a European immigration policy domain: a political
sociology approach, Journal of European Public Policy, 10:2, 263-282, DOI: 10.1080/1350176032000059035

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/1350176032000059035

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the “Content”) contained
in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no
representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of
the Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors,
and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied
upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall
not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other
liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or
arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic
reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any
form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://
www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions

Journal of European Public Policy 10:2 April 2003: 263–282

The constitution of a European
immigration policy domain: a
political sociology approach
Virginie Guiraudon1*

ABSTRACT At the 1999 Tampere summit, EU member states committed
themselves to developing a comprehensive immigration and asylum policy. Although
directives harmonizing border controls or anti-discrimination instruments have
been adopted, it remains an incomplete and complex European policy area. This
article seeks to explain the timing, form and content of this new domain. It
combines the insights of March and Olsen’s ‘garbage can’ model with a sociological
approach that emphasizes power competition among actors in the same ﬁeld.
Diverse actors have seized upon EU opportunities. Law and order ofﬁcials in charge
of migration control seeking to gain autonomy in intergovernmental settings linked
their action to the single market and transnational crime. NGOs providing expertise
to Commission units seeking competence in non-economic areas jumped on the
‘social exclusion’ bandwagon by proposing anti-discrimination legislation. These
developments – superimposed on policies regarding free movement of workers and
services – are thus often contradictory and adhocratic.
KEY WORDS Amsterdam Treaty; anti-discrimination policy; bureaucratic politics;
‘garbage can’ model; immigration and asylum; policy frames and venues.

While ‘ﬁrst generation’ European Community (EC) policies such as the
common agricultural policy are under ﬁre, new policy domains are emerging
in the European Union (EU) framework. At the 1999 Tampere summit, EU
leaders declared that the development of a comprehensive immigration and

*EDITOR’S NOTE An earlier version of this article was presented as a paper to the 2001
EUSA conference and was awarded the prize for the best 2001 EUSA conference paper.

The prize selection committee (Dorothe´e Heisenberg, James Holliﬁeld, George Ross) noted
that Guiraudon’s paper ‘captures the complexity of contemporary EU policy formation in the
immigration area . . . [and] is remarkable for its recognition and mastery of different streams of
policy-making over time. It foregrounds real EU politics in an unstable, constantly changing set
of institutional arenas without imposing artiﬁcial social science parsimony. Reading the paper
we enter the EU as it is, not as we would like it to be in our a priori models. Guiraudon’s
refreshing theoretical quest instead goes toward the sociology of organizations, borrowing from
March and Olson’s ‘‘garbage can’’ approach.’

ISSN 1350-1763 print; 1466-4429 online © 2003 Taylor & Francis Ltd

Journal of European Public Policy

http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals

DOI: 10.1080/1350176032000059035

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 08:54 22 October 2013 264

Journal of European Public Policy

asylum policy was a top priority and the EU’s next large-scale enterprise after
the single market and European monetary union (EMU).2 Three years later,
the June 2002 Seville summit was still largely dedicated to immigration as
European leaders invoked populist electoral breakthroughs in various European
elections to step up the ‘ﬁght against illegal migration’.

The ofﬁcial narratives behind the development of this common policy have
taken two forms. Before 1992, the predominant discourse within the ‘Schengen
laboratory’ and the ‘ad hoc immigration group’ was that free movement within
the EC required compensatory measures at the external borders lest Europe
become a ‘sieve’. This political version of the ‘spillover’ theory of integration
was largely replaced in the 1990s by a more securitarian perspective (Bigo
1996), as the number of asylum-seekers and persons displaced by war rose.
‘Asylum shopping’ and ‘immigration risks’ were now common ‘problems’ that
could best be dealt with through co-ordination. The view here resembles
liberal intergovernmentalism, which poses that major member states co-operate
to upgrade common interests and reduce transaction costs.

The reconstruction of the rationale behind the rise of immigration on the
political agenda masks the complexity and incompleteness of current EU-level
policies and considers them to be an inevitable solution to a commonly deﬁned
problem. They postulate a rationality long criticized when analysing national
policy processes. Among them, March and Olsen (1989) focused on situations
of organized anarchy whereby the elements of decision-making are thrown
into the process as they appear as in a ‘garbage can’. The elaboration of an EU
immigration policy presents similarities with their model.

My main claim is that, regarding both immigrant and migration control
policy, only one side of the debate ‘venue shopped’ at the international level
to pursue their own ends, primarily to escape domestic adversaries. In the case
of migration control, bureaucrats sitting in interior ministries sought to regain
the discretion taken away by courts and the leeway lost to inter-ministerial
arbitrage. Regarding immigrant policy, the domestic challenge came from
electoral politics that forestalled policy change and innovation. The migration
policy domain cannot be understood as the bargaining outcome among states
with a coherent or aggregated set of preferences on these issues. Instead, only
one ‘camp’ in the national policy ﬁeld went transnational, and this article
provides an account of the ways they did so.

It thus examines the dynamics of the constitution of this policy domain to
better apprehend its timing, form and content. After setting out the analytical
framework that focuses on power struggles among groups seeking legitimacy
(I), I turn to the main chapters of the story so far: the bureaucratic rivalry
that led to Title IV of the EU Treaty and the incorporation of Schengen via
protocol at Amsterdam which sets the frame for a common immigration and
asylum policy (II); the rivalry of non-governmental organizations (NGOs) that
carved out a space for EU policy in the area of migrant incorporation, which
resulted in Article 13 on anti-discrimination and a ‘race directive’ in 2000
(III); and, ﬁnally, the parallel activities of the European Court of Justice (ECJ)

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 08:54 22 October 2013 V. Guiraudon: A European immigration policy domain

265

and the Commission Trade directorate in the area of freedom of services that
affect migration ﬂows within and into the EU.

I. THEORETICAL AND CONTEXTUAL PREMISES
The story of the rise of immigration on the EU policy agenda is that of
governmental and non-governmental actors arriving on the European scene to
escape domestic constraints and open up new spaces for action. In this motley
crew, we ﬁnd law and order ofﬁcials from Interior, Justice and Foreign Affairs
ministries, international NGOs, activists and Commission fonctionnaires from
different directorates. Although each came to believe that there should be a
European immigration policy, they exploited different policy venues and
frames resulting in a set of policy instruments involving varying degrees of
supranationalization and distinct decision-making rules. These groupings are
not monoliths. National and EU bureaucrats, NGOs compete among their
own kind as much as they ﬁght among themselves in a struggle for legitimacy
and autonomy. In this respect, the Bourdieusian notion of ‘ﬁeld’ (Bourdieu
1981) is helpful since it focuses on the power struggles within each group of
actors (see also Favell 2000).

This actor-oriented approach generates several research questions: why did
certain groups decide to ‘go transnational’? Who were they competing with at
the national and transnational level? Why did certain groups gain a monopoly
of expertise in the European sphere? What policy venues and frames did they
exploit? What opportunities could they seize upon (allies in EU institutions
or member states, actors in other policy areas, treaty revisions, changes in the
global economic or strategic context)? The empirical study of these mobilization
strategies explains the particular timing, form and content of EU policies that
affect both migration ﬂows and the conditions of immigrant minorities in
Europe. In other words, our approach should be able to explain:
Ω when international co-operation started and when competence was shifted

Ω why certain rules and procedures for EU decision-making were adopted

to the EU (timing);

( form);

Ω why a particular policy toolbox was adopted (content).

The insights of public policy studies can be fruitfully combined with that
of political sociology to grasp the development of a European policy domain.3
March and Olsen suggest that, although the choices made by the various self-
interested actors can be said to be rational from their perspective, one should
not reconstruct a non-linear policy process as inevitable. Contingencies and
reversals closed certain paths and cleared others along the way. The ‘garbage
can’ model underlines that interests, institutions, ideas, problems and solutions
appear in the process in no preordained sequence as ‘exogenous streams ﬂowing
through a system’ (Olsen 2001: 191),4 yet, as we will see, the order in which
each element appears has a bearing on the eventual outcome.5

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 08:54 22 October 2013 266

Journal of European Public Policy

I build upon the public policy agenda-setting literature, including John
Kingdon’s work (1995) which was directly inﬂuenced by the garbage can
model and Frank Baumgartner and Bryan Jones’s concept of policy frames and
venues (1993). If a solution is deﬁned before a problem is identiﬁed, issue
framing will be crucial to reconstitute a ‘causal story’ (Stone 1989). Similarly,
the success of a particular frame will depend upon windows of opportunities.
This implies that, once actors have decided to shift their strategies to a
European policy venue, their ability to do so will depend on the availability
of relevant frames and their seizing of opportunities.

In methodological terms, I have consequently favoured a genealogical
approach that starts before the rise of immigration on the European agenda.
To capture the cross-national and cross-sectoral dynamics of EU policy-making,
I chose a comparative approach. I focused on immigration politics in three
founding members of Schengen (France, Germany and the Netherlands) since
the 1970s to apprehend the relative position and constraints of national
migration policy players before and during the start of European co-operation.
To understand the choices and the fate of the various groups that mobilized
transnationally and that of EU institutional actors, I interviewed the national
civil servants in charge of immigration issues in international forums and also
conducted research in Brussels among NGOs and EU institutional actors.

Before analysing the scope of EU immigration policy, the contours of
national policy-making in this area should be drawn. Migration as a policy
issue was never conﬁned to a single ministry since it had implications for
labour, economics, foreign affairs, social affairs and internal affairs (etc.). In
federal systems, the division of labour is even more complex. There is no
tradition in Europe of ‘immigration ministries’ as there is for agriculture or
defence. Immigration is a transversal issue where cross-sectoral conﬂicts often
arise. Cross-national convergence was signiﬁcant in the 1990s, yet there remain
different models of incorporation, different priorities in migration control
based on previous colonial and labour market histories or geopolitical position.
Therefore, for immigration scholars, the question regarding the policy sectors
and the national models and priorities that prevail in the European sphere is
a fascinating one. Not all sectoral and national interests were weighed in the
policy process and not all actors were deemed legitimate to set the agenda.

The shift of competence to the EU greatly narrowed the scope of migration-
related policies. With regard to migration control, the European Economic
Community (EEC) was limited by the treaty to the free movement of EC
workers, later EU citizens, although the ECJ has extended some aspects of free
movement to the families of Community nationals and to citizens of countries
that have signed association treaties with the EC such as Turkey. One of the
possible routes that an EU policy could still take but has not, in spite of a
1997 Commission proposal,6 is to extend free movement to resident third-
country nationals.

Instead, migration management in the EU context is focused on preventing
unwanted migration, through visa policy and carrier sanctions, the establish-

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 08:54 22 October 2013 V. Guiraudon: A European immigration policy domain

267

ment of buffer zones on the east of Europe, the constitution of a database of
inadmissible aliens (the Schengen Information System) and of asylum-seekers’
ﬁngerprints (EURODAC). European asylum policies aim at preventing migra-
tion with accelerated procedures for examining asylum requests, a common
deﬁnition of a refugee, the notion of ‘safe third country’ and the 1990 Dublin
Convention which organized a system to determine which contracting party
is responsible for examining an asylum request.

Regarding immigrant policy at the EU level, it has taken two forms. First,
the Commission funds projects for the integration of workers and anti-racism,
or gives grants to cities and regions that target initiatives at ethnic minorities.
Second, in the Amsterdam Treaty, an article on anti-discrimination has been
added and two directives have since been approved: one covers all forms of
discrimination in employment, and the other counter-discriminations on the
grounds of race and ethnic origin in many spheres.7 To understand why these
particular outcomes and not others such as the extension of free movement
or EU citizenship to third-country nationals can be observed, I now turn
to the history of EU mobilization around migration, asylum and anti-
discrimination.

II. IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM: BUREAUCRATIC RIVALRY
AND SECURITY FRAMES
‘When policemen replace diplomats’: the emergence of intergovernmental
co-operation on migration control
‘Quand les policiers succe`dent aux diplomates’: the title of this French Senate
report (Turk 1998) sums up in a nutshell the increasing involvement of law
and order personnel at the European level since the early 1980s and, among
them, civil servants in charge of migration management.

Migration control experts took advantage of new organizational models: the
transgovernmental working groups on security-related issues such as the 1970s
Trevi group. These groupings with varied membership were ﬂexible, informal
and secretive. This built trust among ofﬁcials who set the agenda of transgovern-
mental co-operation by emphasizing the kind of technical solutions that
required their expertise. They became inevitable interlocutors at the ﬁrst
negotiation stage, that of the Schengen Implementation Agreement (SIA).
While the 1985 Schengen agreement only contained three articles on immigra-
tion, the issue came to dominate the discussion of the four Schengen groups
in charge of the SIA. During the 1985–90 period when the SIA was drafted,
inter-ministerial quarrels in the founding Schengen countries ﬂourished. Michel
Portal at the French Ministry of Interior recalls that ‘the inter-ministerial
conﬂicts were and still are considerable, terrible, especially when the political
leaders totally lost interest’.8 Vendelin Hreblay, a negotiator from the French
police, admits that Foreign Affairs ministries – and in Germany the Chancel-
lery – were progressively ousted by Justice and Interior ministries (1998: 28).9

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 08:54 22 October 2013 268

Journal of European Public Policy

Given that an international agreement was being negotiated and that Foreign
Affairs ministries deliver visas through consulates abroad (visa policy being a
cornerstone of European co-operation on remote border control), there was
no a priori reason to expect a monopoly of Interior and Justice personnel.
Notwithstanding, their domination accounts for the security-oriented content
of the SIA and subsequent decisions. It also explains the emphasis on technical
issues, border control and surveillance technologies such as the Schengen
Information System.

Migration control bureaucrats went transnational at that particular moment
because they had seen their action increasingly constrained in the early 1980s
(Guiraudon 2000a). First, landmark court decisions in the main European
receiving countries that date from the late 1970s had circumscribed administra-
tive discretion. They established in particular the right to normal family life
and to secure residence for long-term residents. In effect, governments could
no longer prevent family reuniﬁcation, diminish the ‘stock’ of legal residents
except by ﬁnancial incentives as the new Kohl government did in 1983, and
certain categories of foreigners could no longer be expelled. This period also
saw the ﬁrst major clashes between agencies in charge of the integration of
settled foreigners and those in charge of migration control. The incentive to
seek new policy venues sheltered from national legal constraints and conﬂicting
policy goals thus dates from the beginning of the 1980s (see Guiraudon 2000c
on this case of ‘venue shopping’). This explains the timing of transgovernmental
co-operation and its character: an emphasis on non-binding decisions and
secretive arrangements. Rather than creating an ‘international regime’, i.e. a
constraining set of rules with monitoring mechanisms (Ruggie 1982), national
civil servants sought to avoid domestic legal constraints and scrutiny.

In 1990, only some elements of March and Olsen’s ‘garbage can’ were to be
found in the migration policy domain at the European level. ‘Solutions’ had
been devised before ‘problems’ had been deﬁned. The solution was police co-
operation and reinforced controls. The problem that these means were meant
to address soon became apparent after the end of the Cold War in the form
of an inﬂux of asylum-seekers in Germany and many emotional debates over
immigration in other core member states, largely covered in the media which
prophesized ‘tides’ of ‘bogus refugees’. International migration was also added
to the list of transnational phenomena considered by a plethora of experts as
the ‘new threats’ which replaced Cold War ideology: Islamic fundamentalism,
global maﬁas and terrorism (Huysmans 2000).

While the 1980s had seen the emergence of a particular group of policy
actors seeking to further their interests in transgovermental forums on migration
and asylum, ideas and institutions were still in their infancy. The ideas that
framed intergovernmental co-operation hinged on linking migration and crime
and considering that they constituted the dark side of ‘globalization’ requiring
a supranational response. The lack of an alternative policy frame can be
attributed not only to the end of the Cold War security paradigm but also to
economic slump and high unemployment, which demobilized business

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 08:54 22 October 2013 V. Guiraudon: A European immigration policy domain

269

interests, which traditionally lobby for openness. These conjectural elements
should not be neglected in understanding why migration became a ‘security’
(as opposed to a labour market) issue in the 1990s.

The institutional framework set up at the EU level with the creation of a
Third Pillar on Justice and Home Affairs (JHA) conﬁrmed that European co-
operation allowed Justice and Interior personnel to regain a certain margin of
manoeuvre and can be described as ﬂexible multilateralism. One full group
(GD1) of the K4 committee of the Third Pillar was dedicated to asylum, visa
and migration yet the framework required unanimous decisions by the Council
and remained outside the community legal order, thereby excluding the ECJ
and the European Parliament. The Commission did not have a right of
initiative and thus could not play its agenda-setting ‘entrepreneurial’ role.

Although a small task force was set up within the General Secretariat of
the Commission to liaise with the Council on JHA migration discussions,
they did not come from the units that had always defended the rights of third-
country nationals (the Employment and Social Affairs and the Internal Market
Directorate-Generals (DGs)), which task force personnel considered ‘old-
fashioned’ and ‘maximalist’. According to Wenceslas de Lobkowicz of the task
force, they wanted to leave the ﬁeld to the discretion of member states and
avoid debates over sovereignty (1994). Jean-Louis de Brouwer, now head of
the Commission unit ‘External Borders, Immigration and Asylum’, also points
out that ‘one need[ed] to talk to the big players, the ministers of Interior of
the member states who usually are political heavyweights in their respective
governments’.10

From Maastricht to Amsterdam, the JHA Council only agreed on one joint
position on the common deﬁnition of a refugee and on ﬁve legally binding
joint actions, for instance, on school travel for third-country national children
and airport transit procedures. The lack of
formal agreements has been
attributed to the complicated decision-making structure of the Third Pillar.
Yet, it is the same large member states (France, Germany) most concerned with
immigration that stalled the process by insisting on labyrinthine procedures and
unanimous voting, thus undermining Ugur’s intergovernmentalist account of
the upgrading of common interests in the face of massive asylum requests
(1995). The only operative agreements, the 1990 Dublin and Schengen
agreements, were in fact adopted outside the EU framework and their
implementation delayed respectively until 1997 and 1995.

Moreover, a number of parallel forums on migration and asylum were set
up during this period, making the ‘Third Pillar’ one of many other venues:
among them and aside from the Schengen executive committee, Intergovern-
mental Consultations on Asylum, Refugees and Migration Policies, the Vienna
Club (Germany, Austria, Switzerland, France and Italy), the Vienna Group
and Budapest process, the Central European initiative, the Ad Hoc Committee
of experts for identity documents and the movement of persons, the Council
of Europe Committee of Experts on the Legal Aspects of Territorial Asylum,
Refugees, and Stateless People, the UN Commission on Crime Prevention,

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 08:54 22 October 2013 270

Journal of European Public Policy

and the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE). The
institutions of the EC were not considered as the legitimate set of institutions
to develop common policies, thus contradicting the neo-functionalist account
of a spillover of the creation of the EC single market.11

The diplomats strike back? Amsterdam and beyond
The decisions to shift co-operation on migration into the Community frame-
work and incorporate Schengen via protocol during the last stage of the
Amsterdam negotiations came as a surprise. The Commission negotiating team
headed by Michel Petite won a battle if not the war in Amsterdam. Interior
ofﬁcials were taken aback since they themselves were unclear about the content
of the Schengen acquis, 3,000 pages of various legal standing. They did not
want the acquis published and given a legal character. The Treaty actually came
into force in May 1999 before member states had agreed on its content and
its incorporation.

To understand the Amsterdam outcome, one must remember that ministries
of Foreign Affairs negotiate treaty revisions in the EU. They were not concerned
with the consequences of the Schengen protocol, a task that their colleagues
sitting in Interior and Justice ministries would have to undertake.12 Having
seen their negotiating role diminished during the Schengen process, Foreign
Affairs were keen to rein in transgovernmental processes dominated by law
and order civil servants which had multiplied and run amok. By neglecting
the Third Pillar and preferring the Schengen group, the bureaucrats in the
Schengen founding member states had unwittingly contributed to that out-
come. They could not count on the support of later Schengen members such
as Italy or Greece who had not been treated as equal partners. Among the
three founding Schengen members studied, only the Dutch favoured a
‘communitarization’ of asylum and immigration. Given that the interests of
the larger member states (France and Germany) were better preserved in a
ﬂexible multilateral setting such as Schengen, the Dutch preference for the
inclusion of Community actors and a more constraining framework should
not be surprising. Even less so given that the French in particular had bullied
the Dutch in the Schengen context over drugs policy.

Notwithstanding, the German and French delegations successfully lobbied
for provisions that limited the role of EC institutions in the new Title IV of the
Amsterdam Treaty on the progressive establishment of an ‘area of freedom,
security and justice’. The Germans obtained unanimous voting in the Council
of Ministers and, under French pressure, the role of the ECJ was circumscribed.
The application of preliminary rulings to the ECJ in areas covered by Title IV
is restricted since only courts of last instance will be able to use Article 177.
Furthermore, the Court of Justice cannot rule on national measures adopted in
relation to the crossing of borders to safeguard internal security, and its rulings
‘shall not apply to judgments of courts or tribunals of the Member States which
have become res judicata’. The defended position reﬂects the original motivation

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 08:54 22 October 2013 V. Guiraudon: A European immigration policy domain

271

of intergovernmental co-operation, which was to avoid judicial scrutiny that
had undermined migration control policy at the domestic level.13

It remains puzzling that the state most concerned with the issue (Germany)
did not wish to shift competence to the Community or ‘lock in’ commitments,
and lobbied for unanimity, given that their priority was refugee ‘burden-
sharing’.14 We know that, during negotiations,
like-minded ofﬁcials and
national governments do not share the same ‘preferences’ (Lord and Winn
2000) and here it seems that the German Interior ofﬁcials’ reluctance to depart
from a Schengen model of secretive inter-bureaucratic co-operation led to a
sub-optimal outcome for Germany, the main recipient of asylum-seekers and
displaced persons. Yet this only points to the lack of domestic co-ordination
on the issue in the German case. This is why the Interior–Foreign Affairs–
Chancellery rivalry that dated from the Schengen negotiations still mattered
at Amsterdam. It led to what Andrew Moravcsik has termed an ‘aggregation
failure’ whereby the emergence of a coherent national position out of disparate
demands is blocked, a situation that,
in his view, allows supranational
entrepreneurs to play the role of ‘two-level network manager’ (1999: 283):
here the rejoicing Michel Petite who could claim victory for the policy shift
from the Third to the First Pillar, although with limitations on the role of EC
institutions.

Amsterdam has also not solved the question of ‘opt-outs’. Amsterdam
consecrates the idea of a Europe a` la carte. The UK, Northern Ireland and,
consequently, the Republic of Ireland have opted out of the new area of
freedom, security and justice. Denmark, albeit a member of Schengen, is not
bound by the new title and co-operates only on visa policy – a legal nightmare
since it requires the signing of a separate Danish–EU treaty every time a
decision is taken.

Since Amsterdam, developments suggest that, given the rules of the game,
the logic of the policy process has not drastically changed. The Commission
2000 Communication on a community immigration policy resubmitted texts
that had been discussed under the Third Pillar framework.15 It faces competi-
tion from member states that have a right of co-initiative. Typically, the
country that holds the Presidency of the Union uses this platform to push its
pet projects to satisfy its domestic electoral interests. Law enforcement measures
such as those proposed by the French Presidency in the fall of 2000 have been
more successful than those emphasizing migrants’ rights. The French proposals
on carrier sanctions, expulsion of third-country nationals or the ﬁght against
smuggling were adopted in May 2001 under the Swedish Presidency, while
the latter had to accept a much watered down version of its own text on
temporary protection status to ensure passage.

What has been conﬁrmed is the importance of migration in the foreign
relations of the EU. For instance, all concerned parties agree that the JHA
acquis has gone up the agenda in the accession negotiations in which Justice
and Interior ministers take a large part (Lavenex 2001). Ten per cent of
PHARE funding (130.7 million Euros in 2000) goes to JHA issues, half of

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 08:54 22 October 2013 272

Journal of European Public Policy

which concern border issues (House of Lords Select Committee on European
Union 2000, part 3, p. 4). ‘Preventing migration at the source’ has become an
EU mantra.16 It has resulted in an number of initiatives including the Dutch-
inspired cross-pillar High-Level Working Group (HLWG) set up in December
1998. The latter drew up action plans for the six main countries of origin of
unwanted migrants in Europe to assess, inter alia, the possibility of readmission
agreements, ‘safe returns’ and ‘transit zones’. The HLWG’s 1999 report stressed
the ‘general recognition that a cross-pillar and comprehensive approach [was]
needed’ and stated that ‘the expertise of the Member States needs to be made
available in various policy ﬁelds’.17 The group’s ‘trans-pillar’ approach seemed
to herald a new era when the prevailing ‘prevention-by-policing’ policies would
be accompanied by policies that addressed the root causes of migration. Yet,
the country reports simply restated the six ‘action points’ set out by the JHA
K4 Committee in March 1998 regarding immigration from Iraq in which
Turkey was expected to prevent Iraqis from arriving in the EU.

Thus, although diplomats at Amsterdam took their revenge on Interior and
Justice personnel, the latter still dominate and are becoming more involved in
diplomatic forums. For instance, in February 2000, during the negotiations of
the revision of the fourth Lome´ Convention between the EU 15 and seventy-
one African, Caribbean and Paciﬁc countries, Interior ministers insisted that a
clause of readmission of illegal migrants be included in the ﬁnal text at the
risk of blocking the agreement.

In sum, transgovernmental co-operation allowed law and order ofﬁcials to
gain autonomy and devise policies without accommodating judges or con-
ﬂicting sectoral
interests. They successfully deﬁned a frame that equated
migration with transnational security threats and favoured intergovernmental
secretive forums. Over time, they were perhaps too successful and, after
Amsterdam, they have to co-operate with EU institutions and publish their
decisions. They do remain key players.

III. PRO-MIGRANT FORCES GO TRANSNATIONAL TOO: NGO
RIVALRY AND THE SOCIAL EXCLUSION PARADIGM
In 1985, when the ﬁrst Schengen agreement was signed, the Commission
issued new guidelines on migration (CEC 1985) and argued that European
integration entailed a better access to rights for foreign residents. In July, it
adopted a Decision setting up a procedure for prior consultation of new policy
in this area. Five member states contested the move and the ECJ annulled the
Decision in 1987.18 The Commission’s competence was conﬁned to the free
movement of EU citizens. Yet, this did not deter the Commission unit that
had been pushing for this change and pro-migrant transnational organizations
such as the Churches’ Commission for Migrants from carving out a space for
the defence of the rights of ethnic minorities in Europe.

The unit (D.4) within the Commission Directorate for Employment and
Social Affairs now called ‘Free Movement of Workers, Migrant Integration and

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 08:54 22 October 2013 V. Guiraudon: A European immigration policy domain

273

Anti-racism’ was created in 1958 to handle issues related to free movement of
labour and later handled many budget lines related to the integration of
migrants and refugees and, since 1986, anti-racism.19 Annette Bosscher, the
head of the unit until the late 1990s, and Giuseppe Callovi, who later moved
to other directorates, ﬁrmly believed that European integration should go hand
in hand with the integration of non-Europeans.

Their unit has faced many challenges, given the thin treaty basis for its
actions. Its ‘institutional activists’ (Ruzza 1999) had to ﬁnd other bases for
intervention. As Adrian Favell recalls:

as a ‘political’ as opposed to ‘economic’ agenda began to differentiate itself
in the Commission’s corridors, certain DGs less powerfully placed in the
central drive towards EMU, seized on alternative European ‘public interest’
agendas, following the path pioneered by the highly active and progressive-
minded DG XI (Environment).

(Favell 2000: 167)

Indeed the attitude of civil servants in the Employment and Social Affairs
DG resembled the ‘purposeful opportunism’ (Cram 1997) found in other
directorates whereby larger policy agendas are instrumentalized to increase
their scope for action.

A few individuals committed to a progressive agenda in fairly marginal parts
of the Commission could become ‘policy entrepreneurs’ (Geddes 2000a,
2000b) precisely because their activities were sheltered from public scrutiny.
Daniel Cohn-Bendit, a Member of the European Parliament (MEP) who once
headed the Frankfurt Bureau for Multicultural Affairs, has thus analysed the
situation: ‘Europe is full of promises for the future because the Commission
and the Parliament are not exposed to immediate electoral pressures.’20
Similarly, the successful initiatives in the area of immigrant policy concerned
a few Commission insiders and small NGO structures that may have publicly
decried the ‘democratic deﬁcit’ yet practised top-down e´lite politics.

The ﬁrst opportunity before Maastricht was to build upon the notion of
‘European citizenship’ that was meant to herald a ‘people’s Europe’ and the
end of the ‘democratic deﬁcit’. To help mobilization on this agenda, the
Commission sought to increase its legitimacy as a spokesperson for ‘civil
society’ by engineering an ofﬁcial channel of interest representation. In 1991,
the European Commission acting upon an initiative of the European Parliament
founded the Migrants’ Forum that spoke for 130 migrant associations that
held an annual general assembly. Yet, the Migrants’ Forum failed to ﬁnd
common ground (Kastoryano 1994; Geddes 1998).21 Turks and Moroccans
vied for control of the organization, with the Moroccans eventually winning
out and giving the organization a Francophone cast that set it apart from the
largely Anglophone NGO world of Brussels. The Forum’s activists also had
different conceptions of citizenship and cultures of contention depending on
the nation states in which they had settled.

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 08:54 22 October 2013 274

Journal of European Public Policy

In any case, using the concept of citizenship to further the rights of third-
country nationals failed in 1992. The gap between EU and non-EU citizens
widened when the Treaty on European Union granted special rights to EU
citizens residing in other member states such as local voting rights. Both the
Commission and the Brussels-based NGO Migration Policy Group (MPG)
refocused their agenda.22 They jumped on the bandwagon of the EU war on
‘social exclusion’ (Article 137 of the Treaty of Amsterdam). Commission
documents insist that migrants and their descendants are prime victims of
social exclusion and that NGOs know best how to ﬁght it.23 Social exclusion
encompasses a wide range of programmes and the MPG promptly responded
to this signal by linking migrant integration in the 1996 Intergovernmental
Conference (IGC) to this agenda rather than to the debates on European
citizenship, which had focused the energies of the Migrants’ Forum (Geddes
2000b). Indeed, the ‘social exclusion’ frame beneﬁted pre-existing transnational
networks that could draw upon their credentials and expertise in the area of
anti-discrimination.24 In fact, the Starting Line Group (SLG) founded in 1992
by academic and NGO legal experts and co-ordinated by the MPG to draft
an anti-discrimination article for the pre-Amsterdam IGC included members
from national anti-discrimination boards: the British Commission for Racial
Equality and the Dutch National Bureau against Racism.

Citizenship or social exclusion, EU citizenship for third-country nationals
or anti-discrimination policies? In the NGO battle for legitimacy, the SLG
supported by the MPG clearly had the organizational structure, and the local
and legal knowledge to successfully lobby for its anti-discrimination agenda
while the Migrants’ Forum with its cumbersome structure remained focused
on citizenship. Moreover, the SLG matched EU technocratic standards. The
anti-discrimination clause project was reminiscent of Article 119 and the 1976
Equal Treatment Directive on gender equality in a very Euro-correct way.
Leading up to the 1996 IGC, initiatives that showed a gentler, kinder Europe
were welcome. The timing was ripe for the SLG initiative. With Commission
ofﬁcials, they were able to informally set the agenda at the 1996 IGC, thereby
conﬁrming accounts of Amsterdam negotiations that build upon Kingdon’s
model, such as Mark Pollack’s (1999), and those that focus on the importance
of ‘policy framing’, such as Mazey and Richardson’s (1997).

Policy framing was key because, if the problem is deﬁned as ‘social exclusion’,

the range of solutions is wide. As Andrew Geddes has pointed out:

it can be advantageous that the terms inclusion and cohesion are vague and
their meanings unclear because it implies that the quest for inclusion is
likely to be able to sustain itself in the long term and potentially be
institutionalized at the European level.

(Geddes 2000a: 224)
Like ‘sustainable development’, ‘social inclusion’ is an objective that one can
hardly oppose. ‘Anti-discrimination’ for its part presented the advantage of not
being solely targeted at migrants. Article 13 protects people with disability,

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 08:54 22 October 2013 V. Guiraudon: A European immigration policy domain

275

the elderly and other groups – a plus given that measures speciﬁcally protecting
migrants are a hard sell. Most member states that did not want to shift
competence on immigrant policy to the EU level nevertheless did because they
were led to believe that in fact the issue was social exclusion of a number of
groups.

The ambiguity of the ‘anti-discrimination’ frame also partly explains the
rapid adoption of the so-called ‘race directive’ in June 2000 (directive 2000/
43/EC) seven months after the Commission’s proposal – ‘a record for the
adoption of a piece of Community law requiring substantial legislative changes
at national level’ (Tyson 2001: 112). The directive also required a unanimous
decision in the Council and had an inter-sectoral character that implied inter-
ministerial co-ordination making it a ‘least likely case’. The single factor most
often mentioned by the Council Social Affairs working group interviewed in
Brussels is Jorg Haı¨der.25 France was most vocal at condemning the Austrian
government for integrating the Freedom Party in February 2000. Ironically,
their enthusiasm towards a directive that resembled Dutch or British tools for
integrating ethnic minorities stemmed from an event, the success of a far-right
leader who had praised the Waffen SS, that easily ﬁtted the French conception
of anti-racist measures as a means of ﬁghting ideas inspired by Nazi Germany.
In a classic ‘Baptist-bootlegger coalition’ situation, the German delegation was
also extremely co-operative lest it be associated with the Austrians. The initial
policy linkage between the anti-discrimination package and the Austrian far
right ensured the passage of a directive.

Just as law and order ofﬁcials, NGOs expanded the realm of competence of
the EU to include immigrant-related issues. Their agenda had more chances
of succeeding through lobbying techniques sheltered from public scrutiny than
at the national level where public opinion, media coverage and the mobilization
of anti-immigrant parties made the advancement of migrant rights unlikely.
Even in the Council, negotiations focused on reaching compromises on
technical issues and legal wording rather than on the normative underpinnings
of immigrant policy and can be contrasted to the emotional partisan debates
observed in many European countries. This closed venue of debate allowed
policy change in favour of migrants that is arduous in open national venues.

IV. INDIRECT POLICY EFFECTS: MIGRATION AND FREEDOM
OF SERVICES
Beside conscious efforts to mobilize around migration at the European level,
one must take into account decisions by EU institutions and transnational
non-state actors that indirectly bear on migration ﬂows to complete the
complex and contradictory set of EU rules that affect migration within and
into the EU.

The ECJ has traditionally been concerned with extending its jurisdiction.
The Court has had to strike a balance between expanding EC competence and
remaining within the legitimate bounds of its sphere of duty (economic rights

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 08:54 22 October 2013 276

Journal of European Public Policy

rather than people’s rights and EC citizens rather than non-EC citizens).
Therefore, its jurisprudence on third-country nationals has not been based on
human rights but on freedom of services or association treaty provisions. In
the Rush Portuguesa decision of 27 March 1990 (C-113/89, ECR I-1417),
the ECJ reiterated that the provisions for the suppression of restrictions to the
freedom to deliver services entailed that a company could move with its own
staff. If the company employs third-country nationals, member states cannot
refuse them entry to protect
their labour market on the grounds that
immigration from non-EU states is a matter of national sovereignty.

The Court decision was in line with the drive towards the single market,
which resulted in the 1993 liberalization of service provision. It stirred a contro-
versy in Germany given the important number of posted workers in the con-
struction industry denounced by trade unions as a form of ‘social dumping’.
Indeed, no comprehensive supranational regulation has been passed on the social
and wage conditions applicable to posted workers. Instead, a 1996 directive has
allowed member states to apply a minimum level of national regulations to these
posted workers and the Commission has proposed two directives to implement
this derived right of third-country nationals (OJ 1999 C 67/9).

Meanwhile, at the Trade Commission directorate, developments suggest that
the mobility of personnel in the services sector will be extended at the global
level and thus affect ﬂows into the EU. Co-optation strategies are at work
between the Trade Commission staff and business interests. One particular
non-governmental forum supported by the Trade Commission is the European
Services Forum (ESF), an ofﬁcial NGO in the Seattle EU delegation whose
focus is to support the Commission’s viewpoint during the General Agreement
on Trade in Services (GATS) negotiations. At a conference of the ESF under
the patronage of the Commission, Trade Commissioner Pascal Lamy expressed
this sentiment: ‘I particularly welcome the participation of . . . NGOs. The
key to the success of the ESF is that it is a forum, open to all stakeholders,
including civil society.’26

Pascal Lamy has experience in setting up ‘partnerships’ that short-circuit
member states since this was a key strategy of Jacques Delors when Lamy was
his chef de cabinet (Ross 1995). Lamy’s reference to civil society is misleading.
In fact, the ESF, based at UNICE, the European employers’ federation,
includes thirty-six European trade federations and ﬁfty EU-based international
companies in sectors such as banking, insurance, telecommunications, postal
services, aviation, shipping, tourism, retail, legal services, accountancy, manage-
ment consulting, architecture, engineering, IT services, publishing, audio-
visual, energy and environmental services.

Part of their agenda is lobbying against ‘barriers to the movement of people’
and in particular the ‘complex, cumbersome, and time-consuming procedures to
obtain work permits and visas’ (ESF 2000) and they favour a GATS visa or
passport.27 The adversaries are clearly identiﬁed: the ESF managing director
describes them as ‘the understandably defensive interests of WTO Member
Countries’ immigration and labor market developments ofﬁcials’ (Kerneis 2000).

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 08:54 22 October 2013 V. Guiraudon: A European immigration policy domain

277

At an MPG meeting on this issue organized in Brussels in March 2001,28
immigration ofﬁcials’ jaws dropped in silent disbelief when they heard multi-
national corporations proposing ‘their’ passport. The meeting also showed that
strange bedfellows emerge at the European level. European pro-migrant NGOs
are not used, as are their American counterparts, to engaging in client politics
with business interests (on the US case, see Freeman 2001). Yet there seems
to be a fast learning curve, which is fostered by the MPG’s ‘transatlantic
dialogue’ with US think-tanks. Strategic alliances between NGOs and business
interests are signs that some of the actors in our story are trying to co-ordinate
their scripts to seize upon the opportunity of the new economic climate and
the older free movement and neo-liberal agenda of European integration.

CONCLUSION
The coexistence of conﬂicting discourses that do not speak to one another,
competition among like-minded actors, diverse modes of decision-making
(depending on their level of supranationalization), in a period of numerous
and rapid EU constitutional changes explains the adhocratic and contradictory
character of law-making in EU immigration-related policies.

Both in the case of migration and asylum and that of anti-discrimination
policies at the EU level, we observe parallel dynamics. First, a group of actors
vie to become the legitimate policy interlocutors against other similar groups:
interior civil servants vs. their foreign affairs counterpart, MPG and the SLG
vs. the Migrants’ Forum. Each group has a pre-formatted set of policy solutions
based on their expertise: policing for the former, anti-discrimination for the
latter. They succeeded by momentously seizing upon an emergent broader
policy frame: immigration ofﬁcials built upon the post-1989 new security
agenda while NGOs joined calls for the ﬁght against ‘social exclusion’ during
the 1996 IGC. They were helped by their adversaries’ weaknesses or errors,
respectively the lack of supervision of other key ministries whose attention was
ﬁxed on the fall of the Berlin Wall when Schengen was being negotiated, and
the structural and chronic problems of the Migrants’ Forum. It is telling that
initially there was little supervision of these experiments that grew on the
margins of the core market-driven project of European integration.

Our goal has been to account for the particular timing, form and content
of the immigration policy domain. Our focus on the actors who prevailed and
the interests that they represented explains the content and form of the
European immigration policy domain. Immigration ofﬁcials sought to avoid
national
judicial constraints and conﬂicting bureaucratic views that were
experienced in the early 1980s. They consequently favoured a secretive
intergovernmentalism where they could exclude other ministries and escape
judicial monitoring. Similarly, they have privileged informal co-operation and
‘soft law’. Their own professional identity explains the bias towards control
and policing. Pro-migrant groups knew that, as in a national context, the
institutions most receptive to defending migrant interests are restricted venues

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 08:54 22 October 2013 278

Journal of European Public Policy

of debate sheltered from electoral fallout such as social administrations and
courts. They found European ‘functional equivalents’ in the Commission and
the ECJ and have focused on legal solutions such as the inclusion of Article
13 in the Treaty. At the European level, small lobby-like structures are the
most efﬁcacious which explains the success of the Dutch–British activists and
therefore the emphasis on anti-discrimination. Success only came once they
could co-ordinate with Commission ofﬁcials, who had ﬁrst sought to build
upon free movement to expand their competence and later had tried to foster
a more representative assembly.

The timing of the constitution of the immigration policy domain itself
depends on the windows of opportunity constituted by the emergence of new
frames, changes in the strategic or economic context, or constitutional openings
such as IGCs or Schengen negotiation working groups. In this respect, this is
not a straight ‘path-dependent’ account. Today’s winners may yet face challenges
if the context changes or at the next constitutional moment. Notwithstanding,
they have accumulated a legitimacy capital and the policy domain has been
institutionalized in a way that cannot be easily undone. For instance, we have
seen that the diplomats’ ‘revenge’ at Amsterdam has not altered the predomin-
ance of Interior and Justice interests in the management of EU migration
policy.

It cannot be denied that following 9/11 and the concert of European leaders’
calls for a European border police prior to the Seville summit, a security/
restrictive take may prevail. For politicians, this is a convenient way of shifting
blame and responsibility. Yet, few concrete decisions were taken at Seville and
harmonization is slow and EU measures have not resulted in a decrease in
illegal immigration. In the end, this strategy may be as dangerous as ‘activating
xenophobia’ at the national level. Populist parties, which are generally both
anti-immigrant and anti-EU, will be further strengthened by the failure of
European leaders to support more proactive immigration and integration
policies.

Address for correspondence: Virginie Guiraudon, Charge´e de recherches au
CNRS, CRAPS, Faculte´ de droit, 1 place De´liot, BP 629, F-59024 Lille cedex,
France. Tel: 33 3 20907451. Fax: 33 3 20907700. email: vguiraudon@mailsc.
univ-lille2.fr

NOTES

1 The author thanks Martin Schain and participants of the 2001 EUSA meeting
who commented on an earlier version of this paper, Andrew Moravcsik for his
incisive reading, as well as the two anonymous referees for their insightful
suggestions.

2 Before 2004, the Council should unanimously adopt measures on asylum, refugees
and displaced persons, on the absence of any controls on persons crossing internal
borders and on external border control (including rules on visas for stays of less
than three months), and on the free travel of third-country nationals within the

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 08:54 22 October 2013 V. Guiraudon: A European immigration policy domain

279

EU for short-term stays. After 2004, measures should be adopted with respect to
refugee ‘burden-sharing’, and the harmonization of the conditions of entry and
residence, standards for the issue of long-term visas and residence permits, or the
right of residence for third-country nationals wishing to stay in EU states other
than their country of residence.

3 For a fuller treatment of the application of political sociology to EU studies, see

Guiraudon (2000b).

4 ‘The central idea of the garbage can models is the substitution of a temporal order
for a consequential order’ (March and Olsen 1986: 17) and thus our research paid
particular attention to temporal ordering.

5 Given the recent debate in the American Political Science Review on the ‘garbage
can’ (see Bendor et al. 2001 and the reply by Olsen 2001), I clarify that my
reference to Cohen et al.’s famed 1972 article respects the spirit of their work: the
metaphor was not meant as ‘the’ theory but rather as ‘a’ model to ‘comprehend
some features of decision-making . . . to extend, rather than replace, understandings
gained from other perspectives’ (March and Olsen 1986: 12).

6 Proposal for a Council Act establishing the convention on rules for the admission
of third-country nationals to the member states. COM/97/0387 ﬁnal – CNS
97/0227 [Doc 597PC0387].

7 Respectively, Council Directive 2000/43/EC of 29 June 2000 [Ofﬁcial Journal
L 180, 19/07/2000, pp. 22–6] and Council Directive 2000/78/EC of 27 November
2000 [O. J. L 303, 02/12/2000, pp. 16–22].

8 Interview with Michel Portal, chef de bureau, Sous-Direction de la Circulation
Transfrontie`re et des Visas, Ministry of Interior, Paris, December 1994. Also
interviews with M. Malwald, German Federal Ministry of Interior, Bonn, April
1995, with Ju¨rgen Haberlandt, German Federal Ministry of Interior, Berlin, June
1995, and with Nicolas Franzen, Immigration and Naturalization Department,
Ministry of Justice, The Hague, February 1995. The lack of political leadership
was heightened by glasnost and Germany’s unwillingness to build a wall to its east.
9 Transport ministries had also signed the original 1985 agreement and later

disappeared.

10 Interview, General Secretariat of the European Commission, Brussels, March 1999.
11 See Guiraudon (2000c) for a fuller analysis of alternative explanations.
12 Interview with Michel Petite, chief negotiator for the 1996 IGC, European

Commission, Cambridge, MA, April 1999.

13 Stetter (2000) refers to these decisions as ‘principals’ seeking to prevent ‘agency
loss’ when delegating authority. I would add that, once delegation had occurred
against their views, migration bureaucrats did indeed seek to limit agency loss but
that the rules and procedures adopted to do so seem to have been counterproductive
given what he views as the motivation for shifting competence, which, again, was
not the ex ante preferred option for French and German ofﬁcials.

14 For a thorough test of alternative theories of EU burden-sharing in this area, see

Thielemann (2002).

origin’.

Migration’, 18/9/1999.

15 COM(2000) 757 ﬁnal, 22/11/2000.
16 COM(2000) 757 ﬁnal, 22/11/2000, section 2.1 ‘partnership with countries of

17 Press release, ‘Final Report of the High-Level Working Group on Asylum and

18 See 9 July 1987 decision in joint cases 281, 283–5, 287/85, Rec. 1987, 3023.
19 The Unit administers about 10 million ECUs for refugee integration, 6 million
for migrants, and 7 million for anti-racism every year. A 1995 report assessing 200
of the 560 projects on migrant integration that DG V funded between 1991 and
1993 demonstrates that only 32 (16 per cent) were migrant-led (CEC 1995: 10).
NGOs, churches, trade unions, etc., made up the rest of the beneﬁciaries. After

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 08:54 22 October 2013 280

Journal of European Public Policy

1995, Brussels-based NGOs that had submitted 2.6% of the proposals received
6.8% of the total funding – a clear success (CEC 1998).

20 Interview, Brussels, May 1995.
21 After several mismanagement crises, the Forum has been suspended.
22 The MPG staff acknowledged that supranational competencies that would affect
diverse national concepts of citizenship or change nationality law were anathema
to member states (Hix and Niessen 1996).

23 See Guidelines on Preparatory Measures to Combat Social Exclusion (CEC 1998).
24 French or German national activists were interested in citizenship issues yet were

rarely present among the personnel of pro-migrant Brussels NGOs.

25 Interviews in Brussels with Claire Aubin, Social Affairs attache´, French permanent
delegation to the EU, 5 December 2001, Porﬁrio Silva, Social Affairs attache´ (in
charge of presiding Social Affairs and Employment Council working group),
Portuguese permanent delegation to the EU, 6 December 2001, John Kittmer,
Social Affairs attache´, British permanent delegation to the EU, 6 December 2001.
26 Speech given at the conference ‘The GATS 2000 Negotiations: new opportunities
of trade liberalization for all services sectors’, Hotel Sheraton Brussels Airport,
Brussels (Zaventem), 27 November 2000.

27 The idea of a ‘GATS visa’ emerged in 1993 at the end of the Uruguay Round and
is understood as a passport for different categories of natural persons permitted
entry under the schedule of commitments at the horizontal and sectoral levels like
Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs), business visitors, contract
personnel.

28 Transatlantic Workshop on High Skilled Migration (Brussels, 5–6 March 2001).

REFERENCES

Baumgartner, Frank and Jones, Bryan (1993) Agendas and Instability in American

Politics, Chicago: Chicago University Press.

Bendor, Jonathan, Moe, Terry and Shotts, Kenneth (2001) ‘Recycling the garbage can:
an assessment of the research program’, American Political Science Review 95(1):
169–90.

Bigo, Didier (1996) Polices en re´seaux. L’expe´rience europe´enne, Paris: Presses de la

Fondation Nationale de Sciences Politiques.

Bourdieu, Pierre (1981) ‘La repre´sentation politique: e´le´ments pour une the´orie du

champ politique’, Actes de la recherche en sciences sociales 36/37: 3–24.

CEC (Commission of the European Communities) (1985) Orientations pour une

politique communautaire des migrations, COM(85) 48 def. Brussels: CEC.

CEC (Commission of the European Communities) (1995) Assistance Given to Migrant

Associations, Brussels: DG V.

CEC (Commission of the European Communities) (1998) European Year Against

Racism Directory of Projects, Brussels: DG V.

Cohen, Michael, March, James and Olsen, Johan (1972) ‘A garbage can model of

organizational choice’, Administrative Science Quarterly 17 (March): 1–25.

Cram, Laura (1997) Policy-Making in the European Union: Conceptual Lenses and the

Integration Process, London and New York: Routledge.

European Services Forum (ESF) (2000) Second Position Paper on the Temporary Movement

of Key Business Personnel, Brussels: ESF, 24 October. Available at www.esf.be

Favell, Adrian (2000) ‘L’Europe´anisation ou l’e´mergence d’un nouveau ‘‘champ poli-
tique’’: le cas de la politique d’immigration’, in Virginie Guiraudon (ed.), Sociologie
de l’Europe: e´lites, mobilisations et conﬁgurations institutionnelles, special issue of
Cultures et conﬂits 38(9): 153–85. Available at www.conf lits.org

Freeman, Gary (2001) ‘Client politics or populism? The politics of immigration

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 08:54 22 October 2013 V. Guiraudon: A European immigration policy domain

281

reform in the United States’, in Virginie Guiraudon and Christian Joppke (eds),
Controlling a New Migration World, London: Routledge, pp. 65–95.

Geddes, Andrew (1998) ‘The representation of ‘‘migrants’ interests’’ in the European

Union’, Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies 24(4): 695–713.

Geddes, Andrew (2000a) ‘Thin Europeanisation: the social rights of migrants in an
integrating Europe’, in Michael Bommes and Andrew Geddes (eds), Immigration and
Welfare. Challenging the Borders of the Welfare State, London: Routledge, pp. 209–26.
Geddes, Andrew (2000b) ‘Lobbying for migrant inclusion in the European Union:
new opportunities for transnational advocacy?’, Journal of European Public Policy
7(4): 632–49.

Guiraudon, Virginie (2000a) Les politiques d’immigration en Europe. Allemagne, France,

Pays-Bas, Paris: L’Harmattan.

Guiraudon, Virginie (2000b) ‘L’espace sociopolitique europe´en, un champ encore en
friche?’, in Virginie Guiraudon (ed.), Sociologie de l’Europe: e´lites, mobilisations et
conﬁgurations
issue of Cultures et conﬂits 38(9): 7–37.
Available at www.conﬂits.org

institutionnelles, special

Guiraudon, Virginie (2000c) ‘European integration and migration policy: vertical policy-

making as venue shopping’, Journal of Common Market Studies 38(2): 249–69.

Hix, Simon and Niessen, Jan (1996) Reconsidering European Migration Policies, Brussels:

Churches’ Commission for Migrants in Europe.

House of Lords Select Committee on European Union (2000) Seventeenth Report on
Enlargement and EU External Frontier Controls, London: House of Lords, published
24 October.

Hreblay, Vendelin (1998) Les accords de Schengen. Origine, fonctionnement, avenir,

Lavenex, Sandra (2001) ‘Migration and the EU’s new eastern border: between realism

and liberalism’, Journal of European Public Policy 8(1): 24–42.

Lobkowicz, Wenceslas de (1994) ‘Intergovernmental cooperation in the ﬁeld of
migration – from the Single European Act to Maastricht’ in Joerg Monar and
Roger Morgan (eds), The Third Pillar of the European Union: Cooperation in the
Fields of Justice and Home Affairs, Brussels: European University Press, pp. 99–122.
Lord, Christopher and Winn, Neil (2000) ‘Garbage cans or rational decision? Member
governments, supranational actors and the shaping of the agenda for the IGC’,
Current Politics and Economics of Europe 9(3): 237–56.

March, James and Olsen, Johan (1986) ‘Garbage can models of decision making in
organizations’, in James March and Roger Weissinger-Baylon (eds), Ambiguity and
Command. Organizational Perspectives on Military Decision Making, Marshﬁeld,
MA: Pitman, pp. 11–35.

March, James and Olsen, Johan (1989) Rediscovering Institutions. The Organizational

Basis of Politics, New York: Free Press.

Mazey, Sonia and Richardson, Jeremy (1997) ‘Policy framing: interest groups and the
lead up to the 1996 Intergovernmental Conference’, West European Politics 20(3):
111–33.

Moravcsik, Andrew (1999) ‘A new statecraft? Supranational entrepreneurs and inter-

national cooperation’, International Organization 53(2): 267–306.

Brussels: Bruylant.

Huysmans, Jef (2000) ‘The European Union and the securitization of migration’,

Journal of Common Market Studies 38(5): 751–77.

Kastoryano, Riva (1994) ‘Mobilisations des migrants en Europe: du national au

transnational’, Revue europe´enne des migrations internationales 10(1): 169–81.

Kerneis, Pascal (2000) ‘Letter to Pascal Lamy dated 8 November 2000’, Brussels: ESF.

Kingdon, John (1995) Agendas, Alternatives and Public Policies, 2nd edn, New York:

Available at www.esf.be

HarperCollins.

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 08:54 22 October 2013 282

Journal of European Public Policy

Olsen, Johan (2001) ‘Garbage cans, new institutionalism, and the study of politics’,

American Political Science Review 95(1): 191–8.

Pollack, Mark (1999) ‘Delegation, agency and agenda setting in the Treaty of
Amsterdam’, European Integration online Papers (EIoP) 3/6 at http://eiop.or.at/eiop/
texte/1999-006a.htm

Ross, George (1995) Jacques Delors and European Integration, Oxford: Oxford Univer-

Ruggie, John (1982) ‘International regimes, transactions, and change: embedded liberal-

ism in the postwar economic order’, International Organization 36(2): 379–415.

Ruzza, Carlo (1999) ‘Normal protest: social movements and institutional activism’.

sity Press.

Unpublished ms.

Stetter, Stefan (2000) ‘Regulating migration: authority delegation in justice and home

affairs’, Journal of European Public Policy 7(1): 80–103.

Stone, Deborah (1989) ‘Causal stories and the formation of policy agendas’, Political

Science Quarterly 104: 281–300.

Thielemann, Eiko (2002) ‘Between interests and norms: explaining burden-sharing in
the European Union’. Paper for the UACES Workshop on European Burden-
Sharing and Forced Migration, London: LSE, 12 January.

Turk, Alex (rapporteur) (1998) Quand les policiers succe`dent aux diplomates. Rapport

d’information 523 (97–8) de la Commission des lois du Se´nat, Paris: Se´nat.

Tyson, Adam (2001) ‘The negotiation of the European Community Directive on

Racial Discrimination’, European Journal of Migration Law 3: 111–229.

Ugur, Ehmet (1995) ‘Freedom of movement versus exclusion: a reinterpretation of the
‘‘insider–outsider’’ divide in the European Union’, International Migration Review
29(4): 964–99.

Final version accepted for publication 9/10/02

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 08:54 22 October 2013 