Environment and Planning A 2011, volume 43, pages 988 ^ 997

doi:10.1068/a43505

Guest editorial

Commodity chains and the uneven geographies of global capitalism: a disarticulations
perspective
Over the course of the last decade, the commodity chain construct has informed
many studies of international trade and production networks in sociology, geography,
history, and, more recently, anthropology. The interdisciplinary appeal of the chain
heuristic lies in its ability to ground abstract-prone analysis of economic globalization
in the everyday practices of firms, workers, households, states, and consumers. The
commodity chain concept was developed by Terence Hopkins and Immanuel
Wallerstein in the late 1970s to differentiate their understanding of capitalism’s territo-
rial scope from methodologically nationalist approaches to economic change. Instead of
understanding economic development as a sequential process whereby national markets
evolve in the direction of expanded foreign trade, the authors suggested

‘‘[starting] with a radically different presumption. Let us conceive of something
we shall call, for want of a better conventional term, ‘commodity chains.’ What we
mean by such chains is the following: take an ultimate consumable item and trace
back the set of inputs that culminated in this item, including prior transformations,
the raw materials, the transportation mechanisms, the labor input into each of the
material processes, the food inputs into the labor. This linked set of processes we
call a commodity chain. If the ultimate consumable were, say, clothing, the chain
would include the manufacture of the cloth, the yarn, etc, the cultivation of the
cotton, as well as the reproduction of the labor forces involved in these productive
activities’’ (1977, page 128).

For Hopkins and Wallerstein a final commodity is the outcome of linked processes
connecting actors and activities across space; by studying the processes constituting a
particular commodity chain, it is possible to get analytical purchase on the complex
and concrete determinations of the global economy.

World-systems theorists mobilized the chain construct to reveal the emergence of
an international division of labor incorporating core and peripheral countries alike
into a global capitalist economy. Later iterations, including Gereffi’s global commodity
chains (GCC) framework (Gereffi and Korzeniewicz, 1994) and the global value chains
(GVC) approach (Gereffi et al, 2005; Gibbon and Ponte, 2005), have shifted from
the long-range, macrohistorical perspective of world-systems theory to a more
industry-centred and firm-centered model of organizational analysis.(1)

In reaction to this recent turn, several scholars sympathetic to the overall thrust of
the commodity chain project have called for the need to ‘embed’, ‘territorialize’, or
‘spatialize’ studies of transnational commodity production (Bair, 2005; Dicken et al,
2001; Dussel Peters, 2008). As evident from these disparate terms, these critiques do
not represent a coherent theoretical agenda; rather they indicate a shared skepticism
about the influence of microsocial network analysis and transaction cost economics on
the study of commodity cum value chains (see Bair, 2005).

Just as the original commodity chain framework burst disciplinary bounds, so too
has the ambit of its critique. Economic geographers argue that the empirical focus on

(1) While the GCC and later GVC approaches share an interest in the chain as an analytic for
comprehending the connections between various kinds of economic activities, there are important
differences between them which have been discussed elsewhere (Bair, 2005; Gibbon and Ponte, 2005).

Guest editorial

989

firms as mesolevel actors, although yielding valuable insights into the governance
dynamics internal to production networks, has translated into a flattening of power
relations and an even further relegation of space to the empirical background
(Dicken and Malmberg, 2001). Feminist scholars argue that the chain heuristic freezes
complex and relational circuits of economic activity into a fixed territorial framework
where consumption is presumed to be located in the ‘core’, while production takes
place in the ‘periphery’ (Leslie and Reimer, 1999; Ramamurthy, 2004). Furthermore,
both world-systems theory and commodity chain analysis largely externalize social
difference when tracing macrodivisions of labor, giving short shrift to the gendered
and racialized forms of labor central to the shifting geographies of commodity produc-
tion (Ferna¤ ndez-Kelly, 1983; Mullings, 2004; Ramamurthy, 2004; Werner, 2010). In
addition to the specific insights described above, what we take from these critical
engagements with the commodity chains framework is its generative if largely unreal-
ized potential for interdisciplinary theorizing of the on-going processes by which global
networks of production, trade, and consumption are continually given expression in
concrete historical and geographical relations (see Peck, 2005).

Our own collaboration has been nursed by this potential and by our respective
experiences researching the volatile trajectories and shifting geographies of garment
and textile production over the past decade. The work that we have done on the
changing configuration of the apparel commodity chain led us to the conclusion
that the commodity chains literature evidences a general and systematic bias: specifi-
cally, the extant literature is characterized by a theoretical and empirical emphasis on
incorporation. This is manifest in the tendency of researchers to pursue the newest
production frontier of a particular commodity in order to analyze how a region
becomes linked into a chain and how this incorporation impacts local actors. We
became increasingly aware that the commodity chains approach tends to downplay, if
not ignore, the fact that changing geographies of global production reflect moments of
inclusion and exclusion. The latter refer to those processes by which regions and actors
become disconnected or expulsed from commodity chains that may be incorporating
new regions and actors elsewhere. Production volatility, precipitous booms and busts,
and historical patterns of dis/investment and dispossession are effaced by the litera-
ture’s ‘inclusionary bias’ towards expanding production frontiers. How would our
understanding of commodity chains, networks, and,
indeed, the ‘global economy’
be different if analytical attention focused upon the layered histories and uneven
geographies of capitalist expansion, disinvestment, and devaluation?

The theme issue that we have the pleasure to introduce here is the result of both
our own efforts to respond to this question and those of talented scholars from the
diverse disciplinary locations of sociology, geography, and feminist studies. In our role
as conveners of this conversation and guest editors, we frame these contributions
under the concept of ‘disarticulations’: in the broadest sense, an approach to commod-
ity production through the lens of the reproduction of uneven geographies. In this
introduction we draw out the theoretical lineages of disarticulation and briefly sum-
marize the contents of the theme issue. In the five papers that follow our introduction,
the concept of disarticulations is taken up through empirically rich, theoretically
informed, and grounded studies. The collection affords a processual understanding of
commodity chains as expressions of an ongoing and continuous interaction between
the production of goods, places, and subjects and their iterative incorporation and
expulsion from primary circuits of capital accumulation. Taken together, these studies
demonstrate how connections across space and time are forged through processes of
disjuncture and disruption that selectively transform, or disarticulate, existing social
relations and forms of production.

990

Guest editorial

Disarticulations and the uneven geographies of commodity chains
The power of a disarticulations perspective lies in connecting an analysis of global
commodities to the politics of disinvestment, devaluation, place-making, and subject-
making which make their production possible. In elaborating this concept, we draw
insights selectively from recent revisions of the Marxist concept of ‘primitive accumula-
tion’, feminist analyses of gender and production, and long-standing debates surrounding
the question of ‘articulation’.

Recent Marxist scholarship interrogates the complex geographies of what were
hitherto considered historically distinct stages of capitalism in classical Marxist
approaches: that is, of expanded reproduction, on the one hand, and primitive (or
originary) accumulation, on the other. In the classical view, the era of capitalist
accumulation based on the appropriation of surplus value from exploited labor
is premised on a prior phase of separating labor from its means of production
through extra-economic means such as violence, fraud, and theft (see de Angelis,
2001; Perelman, 2000). The intensification of market forces worldwide, and the rolling
back of the commons in the broadest sense of noncommodified social relations, has
foregrounded a rethinking of these processes and their historical and geographical
connections [see Glassman (2006) for an excellent review]. Rather than conceiving of
capitalist relations of production as a ‘‘second stage’’ of accumulation, Massimo de
Angelis describes the common character of accumulation and primitive accumulation.
‘‘The divorcing embedded in the definition of primitive accumulation’’, he argues, ‘‘can
be understood ... as a reassertion of capital’s priorities vis-a' -vis those social forces that
run against this separation’’ (2001, page 14). This play of forces, between what is
constituted as within capitalist relations of production and what is positioned as their
interior limit, is not confined to the prehistory of capital, but is rather an ongoing
dynamic of capitalism which repeatedly reproduces the spatial and social boundaries
of ‘regular’ accumulation.

A rethinking of primitive accumulation and its geographies has gained broad
attention in Anglo-American academia via the work of David Harvey and his notion
of accumulation by dispossession. Harvey (2003) emphasizes capital’s imperative to
create its own exteriority as a means to guarantee the reproduction of accumulation.
He draws inspiration from Karl Marx’s notion of the industrial reserve army, created
through the expulsion of labor from capitalist relations of production. ‘‘Modern
industry’s whole form of motion ... depends’’, Marx concluded, ‘‘on the constant trans-
formation of a part of the working population into unemployed and semi-employed
‘hands’’’ (1976, page 787). Generalizing from this imperative of capital to create its own
provisional outside, Harvey trains our attention on processes that render both workers
and resources external to capital’s primary relations of production in order to seize
upon them again in an ‘original accumulation’ sort of way. Specifically, crises of over-
accumulation, he argues, release assets at close to zero cost in circumstances where the
holders of overaccumulated capital appear as buyers of last resort, frequently related
to, as Luxemburg writes, the open display of ‘‘force, fraud, oppression, [and] looting’’
(quoted in Harvey, 2003, page 137).

At the heart of Harvey’s and de Angelis’s distinct engagements with primitive
accumulation is an attention to the relationship between capitalist relations of produc-
tion and the forces that define their social and spatial contours. These engagements
are central to our notion of disarticulations. In our view, and in contrast to Harvey’s
formulation linking dispossession to moments of crisis, the contours of capital
accumulation and those people and places provisionally externalized from its relations
are best understood through everyday practices and struggles over value. Processes
of devaluation, for example, are an inherent dynamic of capitalism, but they cannot

Guest editorial

991

be reduced to the logic of capital. For one thing, capital alone does not determine
whose labor will be exploited and where. The availability of labor and its differential
valuation are inseparable from constructions of social difference based on interlocking
and overdetermined hierarchies of race, gender, nation, and class. Returning to Marx’s
observations about the industrial reserve army, consider that labor thrown out of
primary circuits of commodity production or made available through dispossession is
most often not the same labor ‘ready to hand’ at a subsequent moment of expanded
reproduction.

The case of women in export factories in the global South is here exemplary.
Harvey discusses the impact of rapid industrialization in the global South on women
who ‘‘provide the bulk of labour power’’ in light manufacturing industries. While
acknowledging the exploitative and punishing conditions in which many such women
work, he asks ‘‘whether the problem in Indonesia, for example, was the impact of rapid
capital industrialization on life chances during the 1980s and 1990s or the devaluation
and deindustrialization occasioned through the financial crisis of 1997 ^ 98 that demol-
ished much of what industrialization had achieved’’ (2003, pages 163 ^ 164). Contending
that the second development ‘‘did far more damage to the long-term hopes, aspira-
tions, and possibilities of the mass of the impoverished population than did the first’’,
Harvey draws out the implication that ‘‘primitive accumulation that opens up a path to
expanded reproduction is one thing, and accumulation by dispossession that disrupts
and destroys a path already opened up is quite another’’ (page 164).

Our interest here is not in evaluating which is better for women workers and their
communities: expanded reproduction through the incorporation of feminized labor
into capitalist relations of production, or the expulsion of that labor from wage
employment. Rather, our point is that the disposability of women workers is not an
inexorable consequence of capitalist crisis, but rather an ongoing outcome of reproduc-
ing capitalist relations of production within specific historical contexts that are shaped
by social difference (Bair, 2010; Wright, 2006). Particular episodes, like the Asian finan-
cial crisis, may throw the relationship between gender and capital into particularly
sharp relief, but this relationship is irreducible to such moments of crisis.

An anecdote from our fieldwork in a region of Mexico called La Laguna is
illustrative here: in an interview with a large garment firm, the owner recounted the
company’s growth and decline in rich detail, explaining its considerable investments in
new technologies and new departments, the precipitous downturn in production
in recent years, and the impact on employment, which had fallen by half. When we
asked how the proportion of women in the workforce had changed over this period,
given that women workers formed the majority of the factory workforce in the late
1990s, the owner himself was surprised by the low figure (30% female) that the man-
ager next to him cited in response to the question. Upon learning that more than two
thirds of the bodies seated behind sewing machines on his production floor were male,
he looked around the table at his six male colleagues and exclaimed with surprise,
‘‘strange, isn’t it guys, that we’ve become a company of men!’’

To be sure, significant shifts in the global garment trade have occurred over the
past decade, precipitated in large measure by trade liberalization and the phase-out of
quotas on clothing imports. The changing geography of textile and clothing production
globally is reflected in the local crisis in La Laguna’s apparel industry, as our interview
with the struggling garment firm described above suggests. But neither the causes
of this crisis, be they fluctuating currencies and/or a new trade regime, nor its conse-
quences, be they factory closures and/or massive lay-offs, are sufficient for explaining
the way in which this and other remaining export factories in La Laguna have become
companies of men. It is the particularity of dispossession, we suggest, as a structurally

992

Guest editorial

contingent process stretched over and reproducing the terrain of social and geographical
difference, which explains this outcome and underwrites capital accumulation more
generally. In other words, while dispossession gestures towards the tendency of capital
to conditionally exclude certain kinds of resources, like labor power, from circuits
of accumulation, this concept alone cannot explain whose labor will be provision-
ally externalized where. Disarticulations, we argue,
lend dispossession its concrete
geographical and social form, reworking the uneven geographies of capitalism.

Addressing the contours of social and spatial difference and how these are selec-
tively disconnected from circuits of commodity production is thus a central part of our
concern. It is insufficient, however, simply to extend commodity chain analysis by
studying the people and places that have been excluded from them. In our view,
moments of exclusion or expulsion are not simply obverse instances of the moments
of incorporation that are studied in much of the literature; what is needed, rather, is
closer analytical attention to the relationship between inclusion and exclusion as
ongoing processes that are constitutive of commodity chains. Thus, we call for a deeper
engagement with the processes that engender the forging and breaking of links between
circuits of commodity production, people, and places. In order to address these
dynamics, we turn briefly to the concept of articulation that emerged from a set of
debates which partly prefigured the current reengagement with primitive accumulation.
At the time that Wallerstein and other world-systems theorists were formulating
their commodity chains framework, the term ‘articulation’ was central to the modes of
production controversy at the heart of Marxist development debates [see Foster-Carter,
(1978); also Hart (2007) for a recent review]. French Marxist economic anthropology and
neo-Marxist anticolonial scholars were debating how links are forged, or articulated,
between capitalist and noncapitalist modes of production. World-systems theorists staked
a decidedly negative position in these debates, rejecting the very premise of multiple
modes and insisting that, since the long 16th century, the world economy expressed a
single, capitalist mode of production differentiated into core, periphery, and, later,
semiperiphery. Commodity chains were one way that world-systems theorists under-
stood relationships between these three regions of differentiated, but singular, capitalist
development.

We do not know whether the rejection of the modes of production premise influ-
enced the original formulation of the commodity chains framework by Hopkins and
Wallerstein, nor do we suggest any theoretical homology between links in commodity
chains and links between modes of production. Our point is simply to note that the
world-systems tradition of commodity chain research has paid relatively little attention
to how links in these chains are forged. This omission seems to have left the framework
especially vulnerable to functionalist interpretations of the circuits of commodity
production that are studied through it.

If world-system theorists attempted to move beyond the vexing question of capi-
talist ^ noncapitalist connections by redefining the totality of uneven geographies as a
single world capitalism, Stuart Hall seized upon the problematic of linking itself,
that is, ‘‘articulation’’. In his famous essay on the topic, ‘‘Race, articulation and
societies structured in dominance’’ (1980), Hall reinterpreted debates on colonial
capitalism(cid:246)and specifically the relationship between race, class, and capital accu-
mulation(cid:246)through articulation as both the material and ideological work to link up
relations of production and complexly structured social formations. Drawing on
Althusser and Gramsci, Hall called for an understanding of articulation as the forging
of a unity out of difference. Such a unity is not the expression of an identity, but
rather a contingent structure maintained by the on-going, and relatively autonomous,
material and ideological processes of linking different social and structural elements.

Guest editorial

993

For example, rather than reduce race to class or theorize race outside material relations,
Hall argued that ‘‘One must start ... from the concrete historical ‘work’ which racism
accomplishes under specific historical conditions(cid:246)as a set of economic, political and
ideological practices ... concretely articulated with other practices in a social formation’’
(page 338).

Rethinking the links in commodity chains through processes of articulation and
disarticulation trains our attention on the kind of on-going work that Hall signals.
As our discussion of primitive accumulation, gender, and export manufacturing above
suggests, such an analysis requires thinking through both the concrete work of histor-
ically particular sets of social relations to secure commodity production, and the related
processes of devaluation and exclusion that facilitate the remaking of these networks
and chains. In bringing these insights to bear on the study of commodity networks and
chains, we make an important corrective to Hall’s generative framework: the work of
linking is both social and spatial. It is not only the work of linking up constructions
of social difference with processes of valuation and capital accumulation, but also
that of reproducing geographical difference by linking and delinking places to com-
modity chains that are formed and reformed through these moments of connection
and severance. In attending to disarticulations in this sense, as dynamic processes
that iteratively reproduce the subjects and places included within and excluded from
global commodity production, the study of commodity chains can more fully grasp
the uneven geographies that condition their possibility.

^

^

^

The papers presented in this theme issue take up the challenge of rethinking commodi-
ties through disarticulations via research into the linking and unmooring of people and
places to and from transnational circuits of commodity production. The collection
assembled here grows out of ongoing conversations at two paper sessions at the 2008
annual meeting of the Association of American Geographers and a spring 2009 work-
shop at Florida Atlantic University. As will be clear to readers of this theme issue, the
original call for work on commodity disarticulations that inspired this conversation
yielded diverse contributions drawing upon varied theoretical orientations. Each of the
papers skillfully weaves together rich, empirical studies of commodity production
with the author’s (or authors’) unique interpretation of a disarticulations perspective.
Moreover, contributors engage with questions of power and politics in their studies,
gesturing towards the difference a disarticulations perspective can make towards both a
new understanding of commodity chains and critical notions of the politics surrounding
them.

In the first paper of the theme issue (Bair and Werner, 2011) we deploy the concept
of disarticulations in order to make sense of a dramatic but short-lived surge in
garment exports from La Laguna, a region of north-central Mexico that fashioned
itself the ‘blue jeans capital of the world’ during the 1990s. We historicize the blue jeans
boom and the bust that followed it by locating both within the region’s long involve-
ment in extraterritorial circuits of textile trade and production. For most of the 20th
century, La Laguna’s economic and social landscape was dominated by cotton. After a
dramatic episode of land redistribution in the mid-1930s, much of this cotton was
grown on collective farms called ejidos that were created from expropriated hacienda
lands. In explaining how Mexico’s most important cotton-growing region became a
center for the production of jeans made from imported (cotton) denim, we emphasize
the confluence of two factors: first, the legacy of the 1936 agrarian reform, which
created a class of landed smallholders in La Laguna, but then slowly dispossessed
these farmers, initially by cultivating their economic and political dependence on the

994

Guest editorial

ruling party, and later by withdrawing state support in the context of a sweeping
restructuring of the country’s land tenure policies that created a new property rights
regime for ejidal land. The dislocations we describe in La Laguna’s agricultural sector
coincided with a second factor highlighted in our analysis, a protracted crisis among
industrial producers following the collapse of Mexico’s state-led industrialization
model. La Laguna’s NAFTA-era export dynamism thus relied both on trade policies
that encouraged a reorientation of domestic firms from the national market towards
export-oriented production for US buyers, and on processes of disinvestment that
made devalued assets, both human and material, available to fuel a short-lived but
ultimately ephemeral blue jeans boom. We argue that a specific rural industrialization
program that established cooperative sewing factories on a number of La Laguna’s
ejidos represented the crystallization of these disarticulations in both the agricultural
and the industrial sector, and the way in which La Laguna continues to be produced
through the various moments of linking and delinking to the cotton ^ textile ^ apparel
chain.

In a similar vein, Phil Hough (2011) examines three episodes of disarticulation in
the Cagua¤ n region of Colombia. Hough shows that the process by which the region
becomes linked into each new chain emerges from and reflects the contradictions
engendered by the previously dominant mode of capital accumulation. In the 1950s
the Cagua¤ n became incorporated into a domestically oriented cattle commodity chain
producing meats and hides for the national market. This form of cattle raising was
land intensive but labor expulsive, and the political and economic marginalization of
the peasantry on which it relied set the stage for the Cagua¤ n’s incorporation into the
cocaine commodity chain in the late 1970s, under the auspices of the FARC. By
the 1990s cattle ranching was again dominant, but the incorporation of the Cagua¤ n
into a dairy commodity chain producing dry milk depended on the expulsion of the
FARC by the Colombian government and the heightened, on-going militarization
of the region. Hough emphasizes the relationship between these moments of linking,
delinking, and relinking, and the exercise of politico-military force, either by the state
or by parastate organizations. The dialectical and processual understanding of the
disarticulations concept developed by Hough highlights the relations of domination
and occasionally force that undergird commodity chains, and argues for a view of such
chains as political constructions rather than the natural expressions of sectoral logics
or market dynamics.

Intricately weaving together the articulation of new subjectivities with changing
forms of commodity chains, Priti Ramamurthy (2011) explores the concrete historical
work that caste accomplishes in relations of production of cotton seed. The author
traces these connections through a study of upper caste, large landowners’ abandon-
ment of the commodity, on the one hand, and the incorporation of Dalit (formerly
untouchable castes) smallholders, on the other, as the global cotton seed commodity
chain is reworked over complex social and spatial terrain in rural Andhra Pradesh,
India. Through subtle and rich ethnographic analysis, her contribution explores the
paradoxes of exploitation and opportunity that mark the participation of these small-
holders in the global cotton seed network. Ramamurthy interprets these paradoxes
through smallholders’ narratives and presentations of self, crystallized in an affect of
‘‘perplexity’’. Own-account farmers describe cotton seed production on their small
plots as a sign of caste advancement, lending a degree of status connoted by what
they describe as ‘‘our labor for us’’, in contrast to their experiences of tied and poorly
remunerated labor and humiliating practices of caste domination. At the same time,
cotton seed production brings with it intensified exploitation and significant indebted-
ness, yielding slim to no returns, one of the reasons why large, upper-caste landholders

Guest editorial

995

have abandoned the commodity. High aspirations and ambivalent outcomes constitute
what Ramamurthy describes as smallholders’ vernacular calculus of the economic,
‘‘the matrix through which smallholder’s consent to labor and their incorporation in the
global commodity chain becomes intelligible’’ (page ...). This framing of smallholders’
experiences demonstrates the shortcomings of economistic frameworks, including World
Bank discourses on productivity and small land tenure. The disarticulations and reartic-
ulations of class and caste evidenced in new production arrangements and emergent
caste-based political movements create new conditions of subjection and exploitation in
this global commodity chain.

In their contribution, Christian Berndt and Marc Boeckler (2011) reinterpret a
disarticulations perspective as the ambivalent ‘play’ of framing and overflowing that
underpins commodity chains. Drawing on science and technology studies and actor-
network theory, the authors argue that the making of commodity chains always implies
framing(cid:246)or the severing of connections(cid:246)and, simultaneously, the management of
related overflows: those human and nonhuman relations that interrupt the uniformity
of the commodity and the possibility for its exchange. Their case is made through the
analysis of that inveterate North ^ South traveler, the tomato. What connections must
be made and cut in order for a seemingly uniform tomato to supply Northern con-
sumer markets year-round? The authors train our attention on at least two systems:
first, the controlled opening and closing of borders to Mexican and Moroccan toma-
toes timed to protect domestic production during the growing season in the US and the
EU. The management of borders produces fragmented agrarian spaces in Mexico
and Morocco, where export agricultural enclaves are framed as modern markets, and
marginalized areas appear as both their exterior and as justification for liberalizing
land regimes. Second, the authors analyze supply chain systems that, on the one hand,
set and enforce standards along the chain, seemingly dissolving North ^ South differ-
ences, and, on the other, create borders to reinstantiate this difference in order to
contain overflow. Racism and nationalism combine with chain surveillance technologies
to reinscribe the southern tomato as an alien commodity when overflows like Salmo-
nella are to be managed. Overall, Berndt and Boeckler’s contribution demonstrates how
framing and overflowing, similar to disarticulations, reproduces uneven power relations
and geographies through the on-going work of constructing and stabilizing the tomato
commodity chain.

The final contribution by Lieba Faier (2011) similarly interprets disarticulations as
a host of relationships that are both effaced by commodity chains and repeatedly
interrupt their organization. Faier focuses on the unstable and complex natural ^
cultural ecologies and human ^ nonhuman interactions that both constitute and disrupt
commodity exchange. Her insights draw upon ethnographic work with collectors and
traders of the matsutake (or pine) mushroom in Japan. The possibilities for matsutake
exchange are shaped by changing weather patterns, forest use practices, geopolitics,
and the related spread of pine wilt disease that has attacked the mushrooms’ tree hosts
in many regions in Japan. These contingent relationships condition the participation
of particular areas and peoples in matsutake exchange in highly unequal ways. For
example, matsutake pickers in a rural region with few economic opportunities experi-
ence these ecologies as part of a more general feeling of vulnerability to ‘the global’
(global warming, global trade, global nature, etc). Their experience stands in contrast
to centrally positioned traders in Tokyo who transform these uncertainties into busi-
ness opportunities, and narrate their actions in terms of ‘mastery’ over the instabilities
introduced by matsutake ecologies. Thus, matsutake commodity chains are revealed to
be far more than the linking of various regions and actors (human and nonhuman).

996

Guest editorial

Rather, they are shaped by shifting ecologies that delink places and people from these
chains on the one hand, and condition the position and power of human actors on
the other. Faier’s contribution gestures towards the challenge of considering how
nonhuman relations and ecological differences shape inclusions and exclusions in
commodity chains and thus offers much to the development of a disarticulations
perspective.

^

^

^

These papers, and the general notion of a disarticulations perspective that underpins
them, offer an important corrective to the study of commodity chains. As long as these
chains are imagined as positive nodes in global production networks that are assumed
to reflect taken-for-granted uneven geographies(cid:246)rather than links shot through with
disconnections that reproduce these geographies(cid:246)both our understanding of com-
modity production and the possibilities for forging progressive politics around them
will remain limited. Perhaps, by bringing dis/articulations to the fore, new, creative
possibilities can emerge for creating counter-hegemonic connections across the vast
social and spatial differences that make much commodity production possible.
Acknowledgements. This paper represents a fully collaborative project. We are grateful to the
discussants at the two AAG panels on Disarticulations, Eric Sheppard and Melissa Wright, to
the contributors, and to the Sociology department at Florida Atlantic University, especially
Farshad Araghi and Phil Hough, for graciously hosting the workshop that led to this theme issue.
We are also grateful to Melissa Wright and Jim Glassman for comments on an earlier version of
this paper.
Jennifer Bair, Department of Sociology, University of Colorado at Boulder
Marion Werner, Department of Geography, University at Buffalo
References
Bair J, 2005, ‘‘Global capitalism and commodity chains: looking back, going forward’’ Competition

and Change 9 153 ^ 180

Bair J, 2010, ‘‘On difference and capital: gender and the globalization of production’’ Signs: Journal

of Women in Culture and Society 36(1) 203 ^ 226

Bair J,Werner M, 2011,‘‘The place of disarticulations: global commodity production in La Laguna,

Mexico’’ Environment and Planning A 43 998 ^ 1015

Berndt C, Boeckler M, 2011, ‘‘Performative regional (dis)integration: transnational markets,

mobile commodities, and bordered North ^ South differences’’ Environment and Planning A
43 1057 ^ 1078

de Angelis M, 2001, ‘‘Marx and primitive accumulation: the continuous character of capital’s

‘enclosures’’’ The Commoner 2 1 ^ 22

Dicken P, Malmberg A, 2001, ‘‘Firms in territories: a relational perspective’’ Economic Geography

Dicken P, Kelly P, Olds K, Yeung H W C, 2001, ‘‘Chains and networks, territories and scales:

towards a relational framework for analysing the global economy’’ Global Networks 1 89 ^ 112
Dussel Peters E, 2008, ‘‘GCCs and development: a conceptual and empirical review’’ Competition

77 345 ^ 363

and Change 12 11 ^ 27

Faier L, 2011, ‘‘Fungi, trees, people, nematodes, beetles, and weather: ecologies of vulnerability

and ecologies of negotiation in matsutake commodity exchange’’ Environment and Planning A
43 1079 ^ 1097

Ferna¤ ndez-Kelly M,1983 ForWe Are Sold, I and My People:Women and Industry in Mexico’s Frontier

(SUNY Press, Albany, NY)

Foster-Carter A, 1978, ‘‘The modes of production controversy’’ New Left Review issue 107, 47 ^ 77
Gereffi G, Korzeniewicz M, 1994 Commodity Chains and Global Capitalism (Greenwood Press,

Westport, CT)

Gereffi G, Humphrey J, Sturgeon T, 2005, ‘‘The governance of global value chains’’ Review of

International Political Economy 12 78 ^ 104

Gibbon P, Ponte S, 2005 Trading Down: Africa, Value Chains, and the Global Economy (Temple

University Press, Philadelphia, PA)

Glassman J, 2006, ‘‘Primitive accumulation, accumulation by dispossession, accumulation by

‘extra-economic’ means’’ Progress in Human Geography 30 608 ^ 625

Hall S, 1980, ‘‘Race, articulation and societies structured in dominance’’, in Sociological Theories:

Race and Colonialism (UNESCO, Poole, Dorset) pp 305 ^ 345

Hart G, 2007, ‘‘Changing concepts of articulation: political stake in South Africa today’’ Review

of African Political Economy 111 85 ^ 101

Harvey D, 2003 The New Imperialism (Oxford University Press, Oxford)
Hopkins T, Wallerstein I, 1977, ‘‘Patterns of development of the modern world-system’’ Review

Hough P A, 2011, ‘‘Disarticulations and commodity chains: cattle, coca, and capital accumulation

along Colombia’s agricultural frontier’’ Environment and Planning A 43 1016 ^ 1034

Leslie D, Reimer S, 1999, ‘‘Spatializing commodity chains’’ Progress in Human Geography

1 111 ^ 145

23 401 ^ 420

Marx K, 1976 Capital, Volume I (Penguin Classics, London)
Mies M, 1982 The Lace Makers of Narsapur (ILO, Geneva)
Mullings B, 2004,‘‘Globalization and the territorialization of the new Caribbean service economy’’

Journal of Economic Geography 4 275 ^ 298

Ong A, 1987 Spirits of Resistance and Capitalist Discipline (SUNY Press, Albany, NY)
Peck J, 2005, ‘‘Economic sociologies in space’’ Economic Geography 81 129 ^ 176
Perelman M, 2000 The Invention of Capitalism: Classical Political Economy and the Secret History

of Primitive Accumulation (Duke University Press, Durham, NC)

Ramamurthy P, 2004,‘‘Why is buying a ‘Madras’cotton shirt a political act? A feminist commodity

chain analysis’’ Feminist Studies 30 734 ^ 769

Ramamurthy P, 2011,‘‘Rearticulating caste: the global cottonseed commodity chain and the paradox

of smallholder capitalism in south India’’ Environment and Planning A 43 1035 ^ 1056

Werner M, 2010, ‘‘Embodied negotiations: identity, space and livelihood after trade zones in the

Dominican Republic’’ Gender, Place and Culture 17 725 ^ 741

Wright, M, 2006 Disposable Women and Other Myths of Global Capitalism (Routledge, New York)

