Journal of European Public Policy, 2014
Vol. 21, No. 10, 1541 –1554, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13501763.2014.941534

The voter says no, but nobody listens:
causes and consequences of the
Eurosceptic vote in the 2014
European elections
Oliver Treib

ABSTRACT The 2014 European Parliament elections saw an unprecedented
surge of support for Eurosceptic parties. This article provides an overview of the
ideologically highly diverse Eurosceptic camp in the European Parliament and
addresses the causes and consequences of the Eurosceptic vote. Based on an analysis
of aggregate election results and opinion-poll data, it argues that the electoral success
of Eurosceptic parties cannot be dismissed as a mere protest vote against unpopular
governments. Instead, fundamental worries about the effects of European Union
(EU) policies and dissatisfaction with mainstream politics lie at the heart of the Euro-
sceptic success. The selection of Jean-Claude Juncker as President of the Commis-
sion, backed by overwhelming majorities in the European Council and the
European Parliament, suggests that Eurosceptics, despite their considerable electoral
support, will continue to be excluded from the EU’s corridors of power. This strategy
of exclusion provides the ideal breeding ground for an even stronger Eurosceptic
backlash in ﬁve years’ time.

KEY WORDS Anti-establishment politics; EU issue voting; European Parliament
elections; Euroscepticism; populism; second-order elections.

INTRODUCTION

When the polling stations closed in the evening of 25 May 2014, a European
Parliament (EP) election that was in many ways unprecedented had come to
an end. It was the largest election for the European Parliament that has ever
been held in Europe. More than 12,000 candidates from almost 450 parties
and lists competed for the 751 seats in the European Parliament, and about
400 million voters from 28 member states were called upon to choose their
respective national delegates to the European Parliament.1

For the ﬁrst time since 1979, when direct elections for the European Parlia-
ment were introduced, the major European party federations made an effort to
tie the election to the decision on who should be the next President of the
European Commission. They drew up lead candidates who were considered
contenders for the position of Commission President. The idea underlying

# 2014 Taylor & Francis

Downloaded by [MPI Max-Planck-institute Fur Gesellschaftsforschung] at 05:14 20 March 2015 1542

Journal of European Public Policy

the nomination of what soon came to be known by the German term Spitzen-
kandidaten was that the candidate whose European party group gained most
votes should become the next Commission President.

Those who had placed high hopes in the nomination of rivalling Spitzenkan-
didaten, expecting increased public interest in the elections, higher turnout
rates, and a transnational debate about the future of the European Union
(EU) (e.g., Beck 2014), were soon brought back down to earth, however.
Although several TV debates between the Spitzenkandidaten were held, public
interest in these debates and in the candidates themselves remained dismal.
Turnout levels did not increase either. Instead, electoral participation remained
at the record low levels of 2009, with only 43 per cent of eligible voters
bothering to cast their votes.

Finally, and most importantly, more voters than ever cast their votes for political
parties that advocated radical reforms of the EU, campaigned for an exit of their
countries from the EU, or even pushed for scrapping the whole project
of European integration altogether. Rather than jumping on the train of the Spit-
zenkandidaten, EU citizens voted a record number of candidates from Eurosceptic
parties into the European Parliament. This article addresses the causes and conse-
quences of this surge of support for Eurosceptic parties. It argues that the Euroscep-
tic vote cannot be dismissed as a mere protest vote against unpopular governments.
Instead, fundamental worries about the effects of EU policies and dissatisfaction
with mainstream politics lie at the heart of the Eurosceptic success. As it is
highly unlikely that these grievances will be taken into account by the overwhelm-
ing majorities of pro-integrationist parties that control the European Council, the
European Parliament and the European Commission, we are likely to see an even
stronger Eurosceptic, anti-establishment backlash in ﬁve years’ time.

The next section starts out with a descriptive account of the Eurosceptic
parties that have gained seats in the European Parliament. The article then
addresses the causes underlying the success of Eurosceptic parties. In a ﬁrst
step, it discusses to what extent the Eurosceptic vote was a sign of short-term
protest against unpopular domestic governments or an expression of discontent
with the institutional set-up and the policies of the EU. Second, it analyses the
extent to which the success of Eurosceptic parties can be seen as the upshot of a
more fundamental process of disaffection with the political programmes, leaders
and modes of decision-making of mainstream politics. The article concludes
with some thoughts on the implications of this analysis for the future direction
of EU politics and policy-making.

AN OVERVIEW OF THE 2014 EUROSCEPTIC VOTE

Eurosceptic parties won seats in the European Parliament in 23 out of 28
member states. The only countries whose EP delegations do not comprise Euro-
sceptic deputies are Estonia, Luxembourg, Malta, Romania and Slovenia.
Everywhere else, parties that at least voiced major concerns about the current
set-up of the European Union or some of its main policies made their way

Downloaded by [MPI Max-Planck-institute Fur Gesellschaftsforschung] at 05:14 20 March 2015 O. Treib: Causes and consequences of the 2014 Eurosceptic vote

1543

into the European Parliament. Taken together, 212 of the 751 Members of the
European Parliament (MEPs) belong to a Eurosceptic party. That equals a seat
share of more than 28 per cent, which is a signiﬁcant increase to the previous
European Parliament, where Eurosceptics made up less than 20 per cent of
MEPs (Tiemann et al. 2011: 98).

Not all Eurosceptic parties are the same, though. One of the most widely used
categorizations distinguishes between hard and soft Euroscepticism (Szczerbiak
and Taggart 2004). Hard Euroscepticism relates to parties that reject the whole
project of European integration or membership of their country in the Euro-
pean Union in principle. Parties belonging to the group of soft Eurosceptics,
in contrast, accept the idea of European integration but oppose speciﬁc policies
or institutional aspects of the EU. Although more ﬁne-grained typologies have
been proposed (Kopecky´ and Mudde 2002), the distinction between principled
rejection of integration and EU membership on the one hand and qualiﬁed
opposition to certain aspects of the EU and its policies on the other is used
here to give a rough indication of the magnitude of EU criticism voiced by
different parties (see Table 1).

and left-wing

than right-wing Euroscepticism,

Table 1 also classiﬁes Eurosceptic parties according to their positions on the
left –right scale. This is important since left-wing Euroscepticism has different
roots
and right-wing
Eurosceptics have fundamentally divergent views on important issues like the
economy, immigration or the equal treatment of sexual and religious minorities.
The table distinguishes between radical left, centrist, moderate right and radical
right Eurosceptics. The political right is divided in two groups to distinguish
between relatively moderate right-of-centre parties and more extremist, often
heavily xenophobic or even racist parties. The left-wing spectrum of Euroscepti-
cism is more homogeneous, comprising parties that are all further to the left
than Social Democracy. Since there are no prominent examples of Eurosceptic
parties in the moderate left, Table 1 does not include this category.

Eurosceptic parties of the radical left have seen remarkable vote and seat gains
in the 2014 European elections. The biggest winner was Syriza in Greece, whose
leader, Alexis Tsirpas, also acted as the Spitzenkandidat of the Party of the Euro-
pean Left in the European Parliament elections. Syriza won 26.6. per cent of the
vote and ﬁnished on top of the Greek polls, leaving the two traditional parties
Nea Demokratia and Pasok in the dust. In Spain, Eurosceptic left parties were
also highly successful. United Left received 10 per cent of the vote, more than six
percentage points more than 2009, and a new party called ‘Podemos’, rooted in
the protest movement against the austerity policies the Spanish government
implemented in the context of the eurozone crisis, gained 8 per cent of the
vote. Almost all of the EU-critical parties on the left can be classiﬁed as soft
Eurosceptics, accepting the principle of European collaboration but rejecting
the economic and monetary policies of the EU, which they consider far too
pro-market and restrictive. Only the Greek Communist Party still holds on
to its fundamental opposition to the European Union, which it sees as an
‘imperialist union’ devoted to ‘Capitalist exploitation’ (KKE 2014).

Downloaded by [MPI Max-Planck-institute Fur Gesellschaftsforschung] at 05:14 20 March 2015 Table 1 Eurosceptic parties in the 2014 European Parliament

Radical Left

Centrist

Moderate Right

Radical Right

Hard Eurosceptics 2 – Communist Party (GR)

1 – People’s Movement

Sum: 2 seats

against the EU (DK)

Sum: 1 seat

24 – Ukip (UK)
4 – Danish People’s

Party (DK)

2 – Finns Party (FI)
2 Order and Justice (LT)
1 – Party of Free Citizens

(CZ)

1 – Independent Greeks

(GR)

1 – Reformed Political

Party (NL)

Sum: 34 seats

24 – National Front (FR)
5 – Lega Nord (IT)
4 – Freedom Party (AT)
4 – Party for Freedom

(NL)

4 – Congress of the New

Right (PL)

3 – Golden Dawn (GR)
3 – Jobbik (HU)
2 – Bulgaria without

Censorship (BG)

2 – Sweden Democrats

(SE)

1 – Vlaams Belang (BE)
1 – National Democratic

Party (DE)

1 – Right Wing of the

Republic (PL)

Sum: 55 seats

1
5
4
4

J
o
u
r
n
a

l

o
f

E
u
r
o
p
e
a
n
P
u
b

l
i

c
P
o

l
i

c
y

Downloaded by [MPI Max-Planck-institute Fur Gesellschaftsforschung] at 05:14 20 March 2015 Soft Eurosceptics

7 – The Left (DE)
6 – United Left (ES)
6 – Syriza (GR)
5 – Podemos (ES)
4 – Left Front (FR)
3 – Communist Party (CZ)
3 – Sinn Fe´in (IE)
3 – The Other Europe (IT)
3 – Democratic Unitarian

Coalition (PT)

2 – Progressive Party of

Working People (CY)
2 – Socialist Party (NL)
1 – Left Alliance (FI)
1 – Socialist Party of Latvia

(LV)

1 – Left Bloc (PT)
1 – Left Party (SE)
1 – Sinn Fe´in (UK)

Sum: 49 seats

17 – Five Star Movement

20 – Conservative Party

(IT)

Sum: 17 seats

(UK)

18 – Law and Justice

(PL)

7 – Alternative for

Germany (DE)

2 – Civic Democratic

Party (CZ)

1 – Party of Rights
A. Starcˇevic´ (HR)

1 – Democratic Unionist

Party (UK)

1 – Electoral Action of

Poles (LT)

1 – National Alliance

(LV)

1 – Christian Union (NL)
1 – Nova (SK)
1 – Ordinary People (SK)

Sum: 54 seats

Notes: Seat share of hard Eurosceptic parties: 92 of 751 seats: 12.3 per cent.
Seat share of soft Eurosceptic parties: 120 of 751 seats: 16.0 per cent.
Seat share of all Eurosceptic parties: 212 of 751 seats: 28.3 per cent.
Parties were classiﬁed on the basis of internet-based research on their main programmatic stances.
Sources: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/European_Parliament_election,_2014 (accessed: 10 June 2014).
http://www.results-elections2014.eu/en/seats-member-state-absolut.html (accessed: 10 June 2014).

O

.

T
r
e
b
:

i

C
a
u
s
e
s

a
n
d

c
o
n
s
e
q
u
e
n
c
e
s

o
f

t
h
e
2
0
1
4
E
u
r
o
s
c
e
p
t
i
c

v
o
t
e

1
5
4
5

Downloaded by [MPI Max-Planck-institute Fur Gesellschaftsforschung] at 05:14 20 March 2015 1546

Journal of European Public Policy

Despite the remarkable performance of leftist Eurosceptics in Southern
Europe, the biggest winners in the anti-EU camp were on the political right.
Among the moderate right, the United Kingdom Independence Party (Ukip)
and the Danish People’s Party, two hard Eurosceptic parties, topped the polls
in their respective countries, receiving exactly the same vote share as Syriza in
Greece: 26.6 per cent. Further successful parties in this category include the
Lithuanian party Order and Justice, which took more than 14 per cent of the
vote, and the Finns Party, which received 12 per cent of the vote in Finland.
Among the soft Eurosceptic parties of the moderate right, Alternative for
Germany made their electoral breakthrough with 7 per cent of the German
vote. Unlike these relatively young, non-mainstream parties, the two biggest
parties in this category, the British Conservatives and the Polish Law and
Justice party, are established mainstream parties and have thus a much larger
support base. While Law and Justice gained votes, receiving more than 31
per cent of the ballot, the British Conservatives suffered a bitter defeat. With
23 per cent of the vote, they were beaten by Ukip and the Labour Party.

Further major gains were made by radical right parties, all of which can be
classiﬁed hard Eurosceptics. Marine Le Pen’s National Front topped the polls
in France, gaining 24.9 per cent of the vote. In Austria, the Freedom Party
gained almost 20 per cent of the vote. Geert Wilders’ Party for Freedom lost
votes compared to their very good result in 2009, but they still received more
than 13 per cent of the Dutch ballot. In Hungary and Greece, two far-right,
fascist parties gained considerable electoral support: Jobbik received more
than 14 per cent of the Hungarian vote, ﬁnishing on second place, and more
than 9 per cent of Greek voters opted for Golden Dawn.

A relatively new phenomenon is Euroscepticism at the centre of the political spec-
trum. This space was traditionally ﬁlled by a few small anti-EU parties from
Denmark and Sweden. Their electoral support has dwindled in recent years,
however. After the 2014 elections, only the Danish People’s Movement against
the EU could still hold on to one seat in the European Parliament. At the same
time, centrist Euroscepticism was reinvigorated by the impressive electoral
success of the Five Star Movement in Italy. Led by Beppe Grillo, the Five Star
Movement received more than 21 per cent of the vote. The Movement considers
itself to be neither left nor right. It speaks out against corruption and the lack of
direct democratic control of traditional politics, advocating instead ideas of grass-
roots democracy and direct political participation of citizens through the internet.
It is a soft Eurosceptic party which is heavily critical of the negative effects of EU-
induced austerity policies on Italy and the lack of transparency of EU-level decision-
making, but seeks to transform the EU rather than abolish it or withdraw from it.

A VOTE AGAINST DOMESTIC GOVERNMENTS OR AGAINST
THE EU?

How can the surge of votes for Eurosceptic parties be explained? This section
discusses how far the two main theoretical approaches in the literature on

Downloaded by [MPI Max-Planck-institute Fur Gesellschaftsforschung] at 05:14 20 March 2015 O. Treib: Causes and consequences of the 2014 Eurosceptic vote

1547

European Parliament elections can shed light on the rise of Eurosceptic parties:
the second-order elections model and the theory of EU issue voting. The next
section then turns to a third explanation, which has its roots in the literature on
populism and anti-establishment politics.

The theory of second-order elections was originally formulated by Reif and
Schmitt (1980) and has found ample support in empirical analyses of European
elections (Hix and Marsh 2007; Marsh and Mikhaylov 2010). The theory
argues that European elections are not about Europe but about national
issues. Just like mid-term elections in the United States (US), by-elections in
the United Kingdom (UK) or regional elections in federal countries, they are
considered less relevant than the main national elections in which voters
decide on who will form the next government. Given their second-order
nature, European elections are expected to have lower turnout rates, and
voters are likely to use them as an opportunity to express their discontent
with government performance. Seen from this angle, rising support for Euro-
sceptic parties is an expression of protest against unpopular domestic govern-
ments.

The EU issue voting approach was developed in response to the dominant
second-order election model (de Vries et al. 2011; Ferrara and Weishaupt
2004; Hobolt et al. 2009; Tillman 2004). It argues that European Parliament
elections are not exclusively about domestic issues but have increasingly
become contests over different visions of the European Union. The preferences
of voters on European integration are thus seen to play a major part in their vote
choices. Proponents of the theory of EU issue voting thus interpret the success
of Eurosceptic parties as a vote against the EU and its policies.

Aggregate election results match the expectations of the second-order model.
Many of the Eurosceptic parties were elected in countries in which government
parties suffered. The most severe losses had to be accepted by governing parties
in the UK and the Netherlands. Taken together, the Conservatives and the
Liberal Democrats in the UK received 30 percentage points less than in the
last general election in 2010. The two Dutch government parties together
lost the same number of percentage points compared to their performance in
the 2012 national election. The Socialist Party of the French President, Franc¸ois
Hollande, lost almost 27 percentage points compared to the parliamentary elec-
tion in 2012. And the governing Partido Popular in Spain received 18 percen-
tage points less than in the 2011 general election. Not all Eurosceptic successes
went along with government losses, though. Most notably, the Democratic
Party of Italian Prime Minister Renzi even improved its performance consider-
ably, gaining 15 percentage points more than in the 2013 national election.

In general, however, aggregate election results are not a good indicator for
voter motivations. The observed government losses could be motivated by dom-
estic protest voting, but they could also be a sign of opposition to the policies
pursued by governments at the European level. As a consequence, we need
survey data that provide direct measures of voter motives. Since the comprehen-
sive data collected in the framework of the European Election Study will only be

Downloaded by [MPI Max-Planck-institute Fur Gesellschaftsforschung] at 05:14 20 March 2015 1548

Journal of European Public Policy

made available to the public in a couple of years, we have to rely on alternative
data of domestic origin. Among the countries with major Eurosceptic vote
gains, meaningful opinion-poll data about voters’ motives are only available
for France and the UK. The following analysis will thus focus on these two
countries.

In France, a survey taken immediately after the election found that more than
two-thirds of National Front voters (68 per cent) said that they had based their
vote choice mainly on national issues (Opinionway 2014a). The most impor-
tant of these national motives was dissatisfaction with the Socialist President
Hollande. Hollande’s overall popularity had hit a record low in early May
2014, when a survey showed that only 18 per cent of French respondents
were satisﬁed with his performance as French President. Approval rates were
much lower among National Front supporters, only 4 per cent of which were
satisﬁed with Hollande’s performance (Opinionway 2014b). After the elections,
almost two thirds of National Front voters (63 per cent) said that their vote was
an expression of opposition to Hollande and his government (Opinionway
2014a). Asked for the issues that were most important in their vote choice,
National Front voters most often mentioned immigration (85 per cent of
them mentioned this issue), security (53 per cent), employment (48 per
cent), and the cost of living (44 per cent). Most of these are primarily domestic
issues, although immigration has a strong European dimension as well, as the
National Front campaigned not only against Muslim immigrants from North-
ern Africa but also against ‘uncontrolled’ immigration of EU citizens from
Romania and Bulgaria.

Even though the surge of support for Marine Le Pen’s National Front was
very much spurred by dissatisfaction with domestic politics, it also had a pro-
foundly European dimension. An overwhelming majority of National Front
voters shares hard Eurosceptic attitudes, agreeing that French membership in
the European Union is a bad thing, that France should exit the eurozone and
return to the Franc, and that the project of European integration should be
scrapped altogether (Opinionway 2014c). It comes as little surprise, then,
that large parts of the National Front electorate saw their vote not only as an
instrument to punish Hollande for his poor performance, but also as a means
to articulate their disapproval of EU politics. Asked whether their vote was an
expression of support for, or opposition to, the way the EU is currently being
run, or whether it was neither the one nor the other, an overwhelming majority
of 75 per cent of National Front voters said they wanted to express their dissa-
tisfaction with the way the EU is currently run. These strong anti-EU senti-
ments may be one of
the reasons why so many voters opted for the
Eurosceptic National Front and not for the Union for a Popular Movement
(UMP), the traditional opposition party on the right.

In the UK, the main driving force behind Ukip’s success clearly was opposi-
tion to the EU. Ukip’s election campaign focused on two main issues: putting
an end to ‘uncontrolled’ mass immigration, in particular from Eastern Euro-
pean member states like Bulgaria and Romania, and regaining national

Downloaded by [MPI Max-Planck-institute Fur Gesellschaftsforschung] at 05:14 20 March 2015 O. Treib: Causes and consequences of the 2014 Eurosceptic vote

1549

sovereignty by ending the UK’s membership in the EU. A survey taken shortly
before the elections demonstrated that Ukip succeeded in getting across these
two messages to their voters. 80 per cent of them said that they knew, or had
at least a good idea of, Ukip’s policies on immigration, and 77 per cent of
them said the same about Ukip’s approach to European Union. In contrast,
about two-thirds of Ukip voters said that they did not know anything about
the party’s policies on domestic issues like crime, the economy, health policy,
or education (YouGov 2014).

Given the high salience of anti-EU issues in Ukip’s campaign and the predo-
minance of these anti-EU issues in voters’ perceptions, it comes as little surprise
that most Ukip voters said that their vote was mainly motivated by European
issues. A post-election survey commissioned by Lord Ashcroft, a Conservative
backbencher in the House of Lords who also frequently runs polls on various
issues of British politics, asked respondents about the reasons underlying their
vote choice. They could select multiple of altogether six answers. Seventy-
nine per cent of Ukip voters said that their party’s stance on the EU played a
major part in their decision to opt for the party, while only 48 per cent
pointed to the party’s domestic programme (Lord Ashcroft 2014). Another
survey asked respondents to name the single most important reason underlying
their vote choice. A majority of Ukip voters pointed to EU-related issues, with
39 per cent saying that they were unhappy with the UK’s membership in the EU
and Ukip were against this, and 22 per cent arguing that they were unhappy
with the current level of immigration and thought that Ukip would change
this (YouGov 2014).

In sum, the surge of support for the National Front and for Ukip cannot be
dismissed as a mere sign of short-term protest against two unpopular govern-
ments. Although frustration with the performance of President Hollande
played a role in orchestrating the victory of the National Front in France,
support for both the National Front and Ukip was also heavily driven by funda-
mental dissatisfaction with the EU and the impact of its policies at the domestic
level.

Further research will have to show to what extent this ﬁnding also applies to
the electoral success of Eurosceptic parties in other countries. It seems plausible
to assume that part of the support for right-wing Eurosceptic parties in the afﬂu-
ent Continental and Nordic countries has its roots in similar types of anxieties
related to immigration from poorer Eastern European member states. Given the
high salience of the eurozone crisis in many countries, we can also expect that an
important part of the Eurosceptic vote across Europe was motivated by opposi-
tion to the crisis-related policy decisions many voters directly or indirectly
associated with the EU. On the one hand, public discontent with the austerity
policies implemented in the Southern European crisis countries is likely to have
spurred the surge of support for left-wing or centrist Eurosceptic parties in
Greece Spain, Portugal and Italy. On the other hand, fears of high ﬁnancial
risks associated with credit guarantees for the struggling South are likely to be
among the main driving force behind the success of moderate-right Eurosceptic

Downloaded by [MPI Max-Planck-institute Fur Gesellschaftsforschung] at 05:14 20 March 2015 1550

Journal of European Public Policy

parties in afﬂuent European countries such as the German Alternative for
Germany or the True Finns party in Finland.

A VOTE AGAINST THE ESTABLISHMENT?

The surge of support for Eurosceptic parties was not only a sign of opposition to
the policies pursued by the European Union, though. The French and British
examples underline that there is also a second important driving force. The lit-
erature on populism and anti-establishment politics has shown that outsider
parties with programmatic stances that radically depart from the political main-
stream, pinpointing the will of ‘the people’ against the egoistic motives of a
corrupt political e´lite and advocating quick, direct
forms of democratic
decision-making as an alternative to the long and complex decision modes of
representative democracy, are able to attract voters who are deeply disenchanted
with the programmes, procedures and styles of conventional politics (Barr
[2009]; Me´ny and Surel [2002]; Mudde [2004]; for an overview, see Deiwiks
[2009]).

Both the National Front in France and Ukip in the UK derive an important
part of their electoral support from such populist and anti-establishment appeals
(Ford and Goodwin 2014; Rydgren 2004). This was noticeable in the recent
European Parliament elections, too. Individuals who are dissatisﬁed with
their personal situation in society and who are convinced that society needs
to change radically were highly overrepresented among National Front suppor-
ters. At the same time, the typical National Front voter neither trusted the pol-
itical left nor the political right to guide the country (Opinionway 2014c). In
the UK, a signiﬁcant proportion of Ukip voters showed deep disaffection
with mainstream parties as well. Asked to what extent a range of motivations
played a large part, a small part or no part at all in their vote choice, 62 per
cent of Ukip voters said that unhappiness with all established political parties
played a large part in their electoral choice (Lord Ashcroft 2014). In another
poll, respondents were asked to name the single most important reason for
their vote choice. As already mentioned above, Ukip voters most frequently
pointed to dissatisfaction with immigration and EU membership. Yet 14 per
cent of Ukip voters said that frustration with the main parties was the most
important motivation underlying their vote (YouGov 2014).

We can also locate the social strata in which such sentiments primarily prevail.
Both Ukip and the Front National attract votes from remarkably similar groups
in society. The typical Ukip supporter is male, older than 55, has left school at
the age of 16 or earlier, and belongs to the working class (Ford and Goodwin
2014: 152– 62). The National Front has a more evenly spread support base
in terms of gender and age, but it also draws its main support from poorly edu-
cated working-class voters (Opinionway 2014c). These groups beneﬁt the least
from economic globalization and European market integration. They are
instead ridden by fears of losing their jobs and no longer trust that the main-
stream parties are willing and able to improve their situation, which makes

Downloaded by [MPI Max-Planck-institute Fur Gesellschaftsforschung] at 05:14 20 March 2015 O. Treib: Causes and consequences of the 2014 Eurosceptic vote

1551

them highly receptive for anti-EU and anti-immigrant agitation (e.g., Kriesi
et al. 2006).

This general political disenchantment is also rooted in a growing feeling of
alienation from the styles and appearances of mainstream politicians. Many
low-educated working-class people just cannot identify with the slick, highly
educated professionalism displayed by the leaders of conventional parties,
both on the left and on the right. Instead, they are attracted by the straight-
talking, down-to-earth appearance of leaders like Ukip’s Nigel Farage or the
National Front’s Marine Le Pen.

While the social base of support for left-wing, centrist and other right-wing
Eurosceptic parties may be different from the supporters of Ukip and the
National Front, it seems that all of them owe part of their success to this populist
appeal. Leaders like Alexis Tsirpas in Greece, Beppe Grillo in Italy or Geert
Wilders in the Netherlands all attract support from people who are fed up
with the ‘all talk, no action’ style of conventional politicians, and they all
bolster their populist appeal by favouring direct, plebiscitary forms of political
participation over the procedures of representative democracy.

CONCLUSIONS

This analysis has demonstrated that the surge of electoral support for Euroscep-
tic parties in the recent European Parliament elections cannot be dismissed as a
mere protest vote against unpopular governments. The success of Eurosceptic
parties underlines that a signiﬁcant part of the electorate is deeply worried
about the domestic effects of EU membership. On the left, austerity measures
imposed in the context of the eurozone crisis were a major source of discontent.
On the right, concerns over the ﬁnancial risks of credit guarantees for crisis
countries and economic anxieties resulting from Eastern European immigrants
boosted support for Eurosceptic parties. At the same time, the populist appeal of
Eurosceptic parties made them attractive for voters who feel profoundly alie-
nated from the political programmes, leaders and modes of decision-making
of mainstream politics.

All of this suggests that Eurosceptic parties are here to stay. Yet they are likely
to be excluded from the corridors of power in Strasbourg and Brussels. Although
they have won 28 per cent of the seats in the European Parliament, they are unli-
kely to play a major role in EU policy-making over the next ﬁve years. The
European Parliament is still made up of a wide majority of pro-integrationist
parties, and it is likely that most decisions in the European Parliament will con-
tinue to be taken with the support of an informal grand coalition of Socialists
and Christian Democrats, sometimes joined by either the Liberals or the
Greens. The vast majority of Eurosceptic parties were also effectively excluded
from the talks on who should become the next Commission President. After the
nomination of Jean-Claude Juncker by the European Council, the stage is set
for a politician to take control of the EU’s executive who many Eurosceptics
consider
federalist pro-integrationism and traditional

the incarnation of

Downloaded by [MPI Max-Planck-institute Fur Gesellschaftsforschung] at 05:14 20 March 2015 1552

Journal of European Public Policy

behind-closed-doors decision-making. Since only one (soft) Eurosceptic party,
the British Conservative Party, holds a prime minister position in a domestic
government, moreover, all but one Commissioner are likely to come from
mainstream pro-EU parties.

Eurosceptic and anti-establishment voters across Europe will thus have to
learn that their votes left no imprint on the formation of the Commission,
and that the parties they voted for will be side-lined in everyday parliamentary
decision-making over the next ﬁve years. This scenario, which appears highly
likely at the moment, would be a most fertile breeding ground for an even stron-
ger Eurosceptic, anti-establishment backlash in future elections. Against this
background, it would have been wiser to select a Commission President who
is less of a pro-integrationist ﬁgurehead than Juncker. Even with Juncker at
the helm, however, at least a few (moderate) Eurosceptic ﬁgures could be inte-
grated in the College of Commissioners, and the Commission could present a
work programme for the next ﬁve years that signals to Eurosceptic voters that
their concerns and fears are taken serious at the European level. Judging from
how political debates have evolved since the European elections, however, it
is rather unlikely that Juncker and the leaders of Europe’s mainstream parties
will go down the road of integrating, rather than excluding, Eurosceptic forces.

Biographical note: Oliver Treib is professor of comparative public policy
analysis and research methods at the University of Mu¨nster.

Address for correspondence: Prof. Dr Oliver Treib, University of Mu¨nster,
Department of Political Science, Scharnhorststr. 100, 48151 Mu¨nster,
Germany. email: oliver.treib@uni-muenster.de

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The author wishes to thank the Department of Government at the London
School of Economics and Political Science for hosting him as a visiting fellow
while working on this article.

NOTE

1 Information on the number of candidates and parties was taken from an overview
published by European Voice, available online at http://www.europeanvoice.com/
election-2014-candidates (accessed 20 June 2014).

REFERENCES

Barr, R.R. (2009) ‘Populists, outsiders and anti-establishment politics’, Party Politics

15(1): 29 – 48.

Beck, U. (2014) ‘Wa¨hlt Europa!’, Die Zeit 10: 10.
de Vries, C.E., Edwards, E.E. and Tillman, E.R. (2011) ‘Clarity of responsibility
beyond the pocketbook: how political institutions condition EU issue voting’, Com-
parative Political Studies 44(3): 339 – 63.

Downloaded by [MPI Max-Planck-institute Fur Gesellschaftsforschung] at 05:14 20 March 2015 O. Treib: Causes and consequences of the 2014 Eurosceptic vote

1553

Deiwiks, C. (2009) ‘Populism’, Living Reviews in Democracy 1, available at http://www.

livingreviews.org/lrd-2009-3 (accessed 20 June 2014).

Ferrara, F. and Weishaupt, J.T. (2004) ‘Get your act together: party performance in

European Parliament elections’, European Union Politics 5(3): 283 – 306.

Ford, R. and Goodwin, M. (2014) Revolt on the Right: Explaining Support for the Radical

Right in Britain, Abingdon: Routledge.

Hix, S. and Marsh, M. (2007) ‘Punishment or protest? Understanding European Par-

liament elections’, The Journal of Politics 69(2): 495 –510.

Hobolt, S.B., Spoon, J.-J. and Tilley, J. (2009) ‘A vote against Europe? Explaining
defection at the 1999 and 2004 European Parliament elections’, British Journal of
Political Science 39(1): 93 – 115.

KKE (2014) ‘Declaration of the CC of the KKE on the EU Parliamentary elections May
at http://inter.kke.gr/en/articles/Declaration-of-the-CC-of-the-

2014’,
KKE-on-the-EU-Parliamentary-Elections-May-2014 (accessed 20 June 2014).

available

Kopecky´, P. and Mudde, C. (2002) ‘The two sides Of Euroscepticism: party positions
on European integration in East Central Europe’, European Union Politics 3(3):
297 – 326.

Kriesi, H. et al. (2006) ‘Globalization and the transformation of the national political
space: six European countries compared’, European Journal of Political Research
45(6): 921 – 56.

Lord Ashcroft

(2014)

at http://lord
ashcroftpolls.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/05/Post-Euro-election-poll-Full-tables-
weighted.pdf (accessed 20 June 2014).

‘Post-European election poll’,

available

Marsh, M. and Mikhaylov, S. (2010) ‘European Parliament elections and EU govern-
in European Governance 5(4), available at http://www.

ance’, Living Reviews
livingreviews.org/lreg-2010-4 (accessed 20 June 2014).

Me´ny, Y. and Surel, Y. (eds) (2002) Democracies and the Populist Challenge, New York:

Palgrave Macmillan.

at

Mudde, C. (2004) ‘The populist zeitgeist’, Government and Opposition 39(4): 542 – 63.
Opinionway (2014a) ‘Elections europe´ennes 2014: sur quels crite`res les Franc¸ais ont-ils
http://www.opinion-way.com/pdf/opinionway_pour_le_
(accessed 20

vote´?’,
ﬁgaro_-_sondage_jour_du_vote_-_elections_europeennes_2014.pdf
June 2014).

available

Opinionway (2014b) ‘Le barome`tre CLAI/Metronews/LCI du changement dans
l’action politique: Mai 2014’, available at http://www.opinion-way.com/pdf/
opinionway_-_le_barometre_clai_metro_lci_du_changement_dans_l_action_
politique_mai_2014.pdf (accessed 20 June 2014).

Opinionway (2014c) ‘Sociologie du vote aux e´lections europe´ennes 2014’, available
at http://www.opinion-way.com/pdf/opinionway_pour_le_ﬁgaro_-_sociologie_du_
vote_avec_abstentionnistes_-_elections_europeennes_2014.pdf (accessed 20 June
2014).

Reif, K. and Schmitt, H. (1980) ‘Nine second-order national elections: a conceptual fra-
mework for the analysis of European election results’, European Journal of Political
Research 8(1): 3 – 44.

Rydgren, J. (2004) The Populist Challenge: Political Protest and Ethno-nationalist Mobil-

ization in France, New York: Berghahn Books.

Szczerbiak, A. and Taggart, P. (2004) ‘Contemporary Euroscepticism in the party
systems of the European Union candidate states of Central and Eastern Europe’,
European Journal of Political Research 43(1): 1 – 27.

Tiemann, G., Treib, O. and Wimmel, A. (2011) Die EU und ihre Bu¨rger, Wien: UTB/

Facultas WUV.

Downloaded by [MPI Max-Planck-institute Fur Gesellschaftsforschung] at 05:14 20 March 2015 1554

Journal of European Public Policy

Tillman, E.R. (2004) ‘The European Union at the ballot box? European integration and
voting behavior in the new member states’, Comparative Political Studies 37(5):
590 – 610.

YouGov (2014) ‘YouGov/Sunday Times survey results: ﬁeldwork 15 – 16 May 2014’,
available at http://cdn.yougov.com/cumulus_uploads/document/eh81zosob6/YG-
Archive-Pol-Sunday-Times-results-140516.pdf (accessed 20 June 2014).

Downloaded by [MPI Max-Planck-institute Fur Gesellschaftsforschung] at 05:14 20 March 2015 