The Myth of Personal Security: Criminal Gangs, Dispute Resolution, and Identity in Rio de
Janeiro's Favelas
Author(s): Enrique Desmond Arias and Corinne Davis Rodrigues
Reviewed work(s):
Source: Latin American Politics and Society, Vol. 48, No. 4 (Winter, 2006), pp. 53-81
Published by: Distributed by Blackwell Publishing on behalf of the Center for Latin American Studies
at the University of Miami
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/4490492 .
Accessed: 18/05/2012 07:46

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Blackwell Publishing and Center for Latin American Studies at the University of Miami are collaborating with
JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Latin American Politics and Society.

http://www.jstor.org

The Myth of Personal Security: 
Criminal Gangs, Dispute Resolution, 
and Identity in Rio deJaneiro's Favelas 
Enrique Desmond Arias 
Corinne Davis  Rodrigues 

ABSTRACT 

This article examines the politics of how drug traffickers resolve dis- 
putes and maintain order in the favelas of Rio de Janeiro. Much 
popular discourse and some scholarly studies argue that drug traf- 
fickers play a major role in controlling crime and minimizing con- 
flicts there. This article shows that traffickers enforce community 
norms under a variable political calculus in which well-connected 
and respected residents are less likely to be punished for rule vio- 
lations than are individuals who are marginal to the life of the com- 
munity. This allows many favela residents who conform to local 
norms to feel a degree of control over their own safety, a "myth of 
personal security" in otherwise violent neighborhoods. 

n the film Orfeu negro (Black Orpheus, 1959), a retelling of the Greek 
myth of Orpheus and Eurydice set in a fictional Rio de Janeiro favela 
(slum),  a disturbing scene  occurs. A man accused  of raping a young  girl 
is forced to leap to his death by Lucinho, the leader of the favela's drug 
gang, while  members of the community watch and voice  their approval. 
This fictional portrayal of favela dispute resolution reinforces the widely 
held  belief  that traffickers are the de  facto administrators of  "justice" in 
Rio's favelas. But even  in this fictional portrayal, trafficker justice is noth- 
ing more than a myth. As the story progresses, the violence  in the hands 
of the traffickers gradually turns against residents and ultimately, as the 
trafficker pursues  his  passions,  results in  Eurydice's death.  Lucinho is 
transformed into the character of Death and eventually  is himself killed. 
This story, part of  an ongoing  discourse  about  the  role  of traffick- 
ers in Rio's favelas,  illustrates an essential  dilemma in the life of territo- 
rial criminals. As long  as the residents of these  tightly knit communities 
offer traffickers silence  and protection, it is very difficult for state agents 
to penetrate the community and bring the criminals to justice.1 Unfortu- 
nately,  the  business  of  narcotics  dealing  (and,  the  makers  of  Orfeu 
would  argue,  the  human  and  divine  passions  of  the  criminal)  bring 
misery and suffering to residents not involved  in the drug business.  Reg- 
ular shoot-outs  between  traffickers and  police  and  other  criminals, as 
well  as assorted illegal activities, lead to murder rates in excess  of 40 per 

53 

54 

LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY 

48: 4 

100,000 inhabitants in the city of Rio and much higher rates in some  Rio 
favelas  (Dowdney  2003,  112-13).  Residents can  seek  the  help  of  other 
traffickers or  police  to  displace  criminals who  they  believe  endanger 
their lives,  and  these  efforts  can  result in  the  expulsion  and  eventual 
murder of the  traffickers. How,  then,  do  traffickers maintain local  sup- 
port in the face of the overwhelming  violence  that their business  brings 
to their communities? 

Residents of favelas and the academics who  study them suggest that 
traffickers maintain  a  degree  of  order  in  favelas  by  enforcing  certain 
basic rules. The truth, however,  is somewhat  more complex.  Traffickers 
do  not  enforce  such  rules  uniformly  Instead,  as  shown  by  evidence 
from the favelas in this study, by skillfully providing for dispute  resolu- 
tion  and  maintaining local  order with  an  eye  to  their political,  social, 
and emotional  relationships with residents, traffickers create a "myth of 
personal  security" in which  individual residents believe  they  can guar- 
antee their own  safety through their actions and political connections  to 
traffickers. As this article will  show,  traffickers are less  likely  to punish 
respected  and politically connected  residents than those  who  are mar- 
ginal  to  the  political  life  of  the  favela  community.  This  very  specific 
process  of  maintaining  order  reflects  broader  trends  of  continuing 
reliance on hierarchical and personalistic relationships in Brazil's politi- 
cal system and suggests  that increased policing  is unlikely to bring drug 
trafficking under control. 

Over the  last decade,  Latin America has  become  the world's  most 
violent  region (Tulchin and Fagan 2003,  13-29).  High levels  of fear and 
insecurity  have  led  to  profound  social  and  political  changes,  ranging 
from increased  reliance  on  private security guards and walled  commu- 
nities to calls for mano  dura policing  and mass incarceration. As Teresa 
Caldeira has  argued, stunning  increases  in violence  have  resulted  in a 
social  reaction that stymies democracy  and limits basic rights (Caldeira 
2000,  1-5;  see  also  Rotker 2002,  236).  None  of  those  protections,  of 
course,  have  reduced  the violence,  and, after huge  expenditures,  inse- 
curity remains high among  much of the population. 

In the context  of  Rio de Janeiro, studies  have  shown  that residents 
of  favelas  deal  with  their  insecurity  by  relying  on  drug  traffickers to 
resolve  many neighborly disputes and enforce local norms. As Elizabeth 
Leeds  notes,  "The community  as  a  whole  benefits  from  the  internal 
security system provided  by the drug group.  In most favelas  and hous- 
ing projects, robbery, rape, and other kinds of interpersonal violence  are 
often  met by equally violent  reactions by the  dono, who  may mete  out 
his own  form of justice" (Leeds 1996, 61; also see  Barcelos 2003, 210-11, 
215; Grynszpan 2004,  13).  Donna  Goldstein  provides  solid  analysis  of 
the  types  of  punishments  that traffickers use  in their efforts to  enforce 
local order (2003,  190-97). 

ARIAS AND RODRIGUES: FAVELAS 

55 

While these works provide evidence of traffickers' efforts to main- 
tain order and resolve disputes, they have yet to provide a compelling 
analysis of the dynamics of how traffickers accomplish this or a nuanced 
interpretation of how trafficker efforts to maintain order fit into local 
favela politics. Building on Caldeira's argument that narratives of exclu- 
sion and inclusion play a fundamental role in supporting Brazil's "dis- 
junctive democracy," this study argues that the way traffickers maintain 
order plays an essential role in constituting the political identity of favela 
residents and reflects broader trends in the politics of insecurity in Brazil. 
This study suggests that trafficker dispute resolution and crime con- 
trol activities focus on building support in the particular segments of the 
favela community that traffickers depend on most, thereby ensuring that 
they maintain a critical base of support to guarantee their protection and 
safety. They do this by maintaining order in the favela through the con- 
text of narratives of reciprocity and respect, which are part of the tightly 
knit social networks that dominate favela life. They attempt to enforce 
local norms in the context of  a political logic focused on respecting 
those residents who either follow norms or are closely associated with 
those who do. In this way, traffickers create an environment in which 
critical segments of the local population feel safe despite continuing 
high levels of violence. We call this sense of safety the "myth of per- 
sonal security." When traffickers crassly violate these norms, this myth 
is shattered, and residents will act against traffickers. 

This article examines the mechanisms involved in the creation and 
maintenance of this myth through the analysis of specific examples of 
trafficker and resident interaction. It intends to show, furthermore, how 
these specific mechanisms used by traffickers and residents to increase 
perceptions of safety exemplify more general strategies of negotiation in 
contexts of inequality and oppression: In Brazil, where the right to secu- 
rity is not evenly distributed, these mechanisms used by favela residents 
can be seen as a reasonable means to navigate this inequality and pro- 
vide for greater security. In a broader context, these examples demon- 
strate the hierarchical and personalistic nature of rights in Brazil. The 
right to security is reserved for certain groups and is secured through 
processes of  demarcation of and membership in these groups. More 
than simply a favela practice, this selective marginalization permeates 
the politics of security in a variety of contexts. 

More than six hundred favelas exist in Rio. This study focuses on 
five favelas of various sizes located in different parts of the city and 
reflects, from the perspective of  general ethnographic work, a wide 
sample. That said, it should be noted that there is considerable  variation 
among  favelas  in  Rio, and  the  findings  from this  study  should  not  be 
indiscriminately applied to all other favelas in the city. Rather, this study 
attempts to provide  an outline  for how  the residents of some  favelas  in 

56 

LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY 

48: 4 

the city discuss and act on the issue of personal security, an outline that 
can provide a model for other scholars to understand similar phenom- 
ena in other parts of Rio, Brazil, and Latin America. 

Favela residents' "myth of  personal security" is  constructed and 
maintained through discourse and interaction between residents and 
traffickers, particularly in three areas: definition of and adherence to 
favela norms; management of crime; and resolution of disputes. Using 
data from observations and interviews collected during three-and-a-half 
years of fieldwork in five different favelas in Rio de Janeiro between 
1997 and 2001, this study examines the specifics of resident and traf- 
ficker interaction that contribute to and expose this "myth of personal 
security." The favelas included in this study are Rocinha, an extremely 
large favela located in the wealthy southern zone; Tubardo and Ceuz- 
inho, neighbhoring favelas with a total population of about 20,000, also 
in the southern zone; Santa Ana, a small favela of about 4,000 located 
near downtown; and Vigairio Geral, a  community of  about 10,000, 
where police massacred 21 residents in 1993 and where, subsequently, 
a social movement emerged to control violence.2 

EMOTIONAL DISCOURSE AND THE 
POLmTICS OF PERSONAL SECURITY 
In the context of the power and violence of drug traffickers, how do 
people who have no choice but to live in dangerous places deal with the 
ongoing fear of physical violence? How does this fear play out in the 
complex relationship between those who have control over the means 
of violence and those who do not? As Rossana Reguillo notes, "fear is 
not only a way of talking about the world, it is also a way of acting" 
(Reguillo 2002). The failure of civil society and the state to deal with 
these issues effectively, especially in the context of poor neighborhoods, 
has led to the emergence of localized strategies to maintain order that 
depend on criminals, often elevating them to the status of local heroes.3 
Perceptions of insecurity have long had effects on political move- 
ments and institutions in Latin America. Manuel Garret6n argues that 
order and domination under authoritarian regimes stemmed directly 
from how  societies  manufactured and  tried to  dissipate fear. The 
bureaucratic-authoritarian dictatorships of the 1970s and 1980s built up 
fear in order to control populations (Garret6n 1992, 13-16). Sofia Sal- 
imovich, Elizabeth Lira, and Eugenia Weinstein argue that during this 
period, reality and fantasy mixed together to create insecurities (Sal- 
imovich  et al.  1992, 73-74). 

The constant anxiety [of experiencing political repression] tended 
progressively to confuse the analysis of real risks and of the threat 

ARIAS AND RODRIGUES: FAVELAS 

57 

to personal security. People devoted a major portion of their time 
to the attempt to control fear. With this goal personal activities and 
social participation became limited. (Salimovich et al. 1992, 89) 

Indeed, under extremely high levels of  repression, people  were 
drawn inward to live almost exclusively within their families (Salimovich 
et al. 1992, 85). In the midst of the pervasive violence that characterized 
some of the later-twentieth-century authoritarian regimes, people held 
strongly  to  the  hope  that through  individual  actions,  by  withdrawing 
from the public sphere and carefully choosing friends and acquain- 
tances, they could avoid violence against themselves. This, of course, 
does not mean that people realistically assessed their overall security or 
that their behavior made them safer. In reality, isolation may have put 
them in more danger, and probably only strengthened the authoritarian 
regimes that threatened them. Nevertheless, withdrawal, isolation, and 
the  careful choice  of  friends and social  activities designed  to minimize 
chances  of  violence  increased  feelings  of  safety  among  these  groups. 
Individuals' collective activities, their perception of safety in a danger- 
ous  place,  and the ways  that they  engage  with  those  who  have  access 
to  the  means of  violence  affect how  security operates in  particular 
places.  Internalized  norms  and  practices,  played  out  through  social 
activities, influence political outcomes. These same dynamics operate in 
Rio's favelas today. 

PERSONAL SECURITY IN THE FACE 
OF VIOLENCE 

The  Brazilian police  stand  out  even  in  Latin America for their use  of 
lethal violence.  Data from 1995 show  that 9.3 percent (358)  of all homi- 
cides. in Rio de Janeiro were  attributed to law enforcement  officers, with 
most  of these  lethal confrontations  occuring  in favelas  (Cano 1997, 32, 
45). In 2003, homicides  attributed to Rio's police  numbered  1,159 (Lem- 
gruber 2004, 8).  The  concentration  of  homicides  in favelas  contributes 
to homicide  rates eight times higher in the western  and northern zones 
of the  city (where  most favelas  are located)  than in the wealthy  south- 
ern zone.  (Excellent  data on  homicide  rates in Rio can be  found  on  the 
Cesec website.  See  Cesec  n.d.) 

The  situation that favela residents face  is different from that which 
social  actors faced  under military regimes.  Repression now  takes place 
at the  hands  of violent  social  actors  themselves,  along  with  rogue  police, 
who,  through their involvement  in the drug trade or its repression, visit 
huge  amounts  of  violence  on  the  communities  least  able  to  defend 
themselves.  Thus, simply changing the ruling political regime has done 
little actually to  improve  security  for much  of  the  population.  Rather, 

58 

LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY 

48: 4 

where insecurity runs high, individual residents continue to focus on 
creating their own spaces of safety within their particular communities. 
In her powerful book Laughter Out of Place, Goldstein provides an 
interesting perspective on how the disempowered deal with violence. 
She argues that extremely poor women living in one favela on Rio's 
periphery use humorous stories and jokes to deal emotionally with the 
violence that surrounds them. 

The protagonists in this ethnography find themselves at the bottom 
of a number of complex and interacting hierarchies, a situation that 
makes it difficult, if not impossible, to find their way out from under 
these oppressive structures in any straightforward manner. ....  Yet 
these women communicate in an oppositional aesthetic style-a 
constant form of spontaneous black humor-that seems to belie 
their everyday struggles. This black humor, one of the many off- 
shoots  described by  Freud as  intimately related to  the  human 
aggressive impulse and defined by Breton as the ability to find 
laughter in human tragedy, is significant because it is perhaps one 
of the few ways of escaping pain and human suffering. (Goldstein 
2003,  15) 

What Goldstein suggests is that favela residents overcome fear by 
devising emotional strategies to minimize the extent to which they feel 
afraid. When they work through stories and tell jokes, threats become 
more manageable and are brought to a human scale. In a similar way, 
favela residents also engage in discourses about violence and order, 
through which they perceive that they gain some control over the vio- 
lence in their community. Goldstein's approach builds on, and advances 
in complex new ways, Nancy Scheper-Hughes' discussion of how poor 
women in Brazil's Northeast use linguistic conventions to deal with the 
death of infants in an environment with extremely high child mortality 
rates (Scheper-Hughes 1992, 360-99). These practices, she argues, rein- 
force mortality rates. In the same way, while the discourse of Goldstein's 
favela women may enable them to manage violence, these discourses 
ultimately leave this violence unchallenged, thus reinforcing it. As a 
result, emotional discourses in both settings lead to practices with sub- 
stantial implications for mortality in particular communities. 

For Goldstein, the support of criminals in favelas, local dependence 
on them to resolve problems, and the rejection of this strategy by other 
residents reflects the emergence of multiple oppositional cultures in fave- 
las. Many favela residents confirm their rejection of the state's treatment 
of them by offering support and protection to traffickers. Other residents, 
particularly women,  who  reject trafficker violence,  register their dissent 
from these  norms by joining evangelical churches (Goldstein 2003, 219). 
Traffickers, however,  have  a  certain  respect  for evangelical  Christians. 
Those  who  publicly  take on  the  outward trappings of  religious reform 

ARIAS AND RODRIGUES: FAVELAS 

59 

(long pants and skirts, not drinking or taking drugs, and spending most 
social time in the homes of other members of their faith) often have a 
high degree of consideration in the favela. Indeed, conversion to a Pen- 
tecostal faith is one of the few ways that someone can safely leave the 
drug trade. Thus individual order and security in an unsafe environment 
are built out of choices the resident makes and how these choices affect 
the person's participation in particular communities. People engage with 
the traffickers, be  it through religious conversion or other changes in 
their behavior, in an emotional response to the violence they face and 
the lack of hope that the state will resolve the problem. 

Caldeira has made similar observations about Brazil's middle and 
upper classes. In a discriminatory democracy beset by rapid growth in 
violence and disorder, different groups have attempted to secure their 
own  political and civic identities by  differentiating themselves from 
other marginal social groups. 

Crime and criminals are associated with the spaces that supposedly 
engender them, namely favelas and cortigos (tenements) . 
[F]avelas and cortigos are considered unclean and polluting. ... 
Excluded from the universe of the proper, they are symbolically 
constituted as spaces of crime, spaces of anomalous, polluting, and 
dangerous qualities. (Caldeira 2000, 78-82) 

She continues, 

Predictably inhabitants of such spaces are also conceived of as mar- 
ginal. . .  . Their behavior is condemned: they are said to use bad 
words, to be immoral, to consume drugs, and so on. In a way, any- 
thing that breaks the patterns of propriety can be associated with 
criminals, crime, and its spaces. (2000, 78-82) 

These distinctions are essential in overcoming individual insecurity: 
"To protect themselves they have to rely on their own means of isola- 
tion, control, separation, and distancing. In order to feel safe, that is, 
they have to build walls" (2000, 101). While the well-off build fortified 
enclaves, Caldeira argues, their newfound fear of the poor leads them 
to advocate policing and penal policies that criminalize the poor and 
give police a free hand to use high levels of violence against "marginal" 
elements of the population (2000, 210). For Caldeira, then, these dis- 
tinctions and discriminations result in high levels of human rights abuse 
and prevent democracy from deepening. 

Caldeira and  Goldstein  are describing  similar processes.  Caldeira's 
Paulistanos  and Goldstein's favela residents both  use  emotional  strate- 
gies  to frame the social context  of violence  in their communities  in such 
a way  that some  classes  of  individuals are excluded  from that violence 
and other groups  are responsible  for it. Through discourses  focused  on 

60 

LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY 

48: 4 

differentiation, particular individuals, and the safety of specific spaces as 
opposed to the more dangerous city at large, these two groups create a 
sense  of  safety in dangerous places. The specific strategies they use 
focus on distinguishing themselves from other groups that they see as 
truly dangerous. 

CONSTRUCTING THE MYTH 
OF PERSONAL SECURITY 

As the focus of much discourse on marginality, favela residents face spe- 
cial  challenges  in  distinguishing  themselves  in  such  a  way  as  to  feel 
secure  in  their surroundings.  If they  are marginal to  the  discourse  of 
society  at large and, as a result, subject to high levels  of police  violence, 
favela  residents  need  to  find  different ways  not  to  be  marginal. One 
major strategy they  use  is to  invert the  social  order by decrying  police 
violence  and suggesting  that the traffickers with whom  they have to live 
provide  a higher  degree  of  security in  their community  than exists  in 
surrounding areas. Thus the favela, seen  as dangerous  and marginal by 
society  as whole,  is seen  as a place  of refuge and safety by its residents. 
Maintaining this  view  in  the  midst  of  all  the  violence  from  both 
police  and  traffickers, however,  is  a  tall order. The  perception  of  the 
favela  as  a  safe  place  arguably depends  on  the  creation  and  mainte- 
nance of certain beliefs about social relations there, particularly between 
traffickers and other residents.  The degree  of  safety  that residents per- 
ceive  in  favelas  is  tied  heavily  to  the  specific  ways  that residents  and 
traffickers interact. The perceptions  of  safety that make  up the basis  of 
the myth of personal security rely on the assumption that the use of vio- 
lence  in these  interactions is reserved for specific  acts or persons under- 
stood  as  marginal.  Using  the  same  techniques  of  differentiation that 
Caldeira argues are used in middle-class neighborhoods,  favela residents 
establish  their  nonmarginality  through  the  "marginalization" of  other 
people.  Someone  with respect  or connections  in the favela is not mar- 
ginal; someone  who  is unconnected  or who  engages  in certain types  of 
behavior becomes  marginal. 

Discourse,  Violence,  and Favela Norms 

Perhaps the most complex  question  facing researchers who  study fave- 
las  today  is  the  nature of  the  norms  that govern  local  social  life.  The 
huge  influx of  drugs and high-powered  weapons  into these  communi- 
ties  over  the  last  generation  has,  in  many  ways,  both  built  on  and 
destroyed  the  bases  of  the  communal  structures that governed  favela 
social  life between  the  1950s (when  residents' associations,  associag6es 

ARIAS AND RODRIGUES: FAVELAS 

61 

de moradores, or AMs, began to form) and the early 1980s, when local 
organizing reached the peak of its power in making demands on the 
state government. During this period, AM leaders resolved conflicts 
through systems of legal reasoning internal to favelas and presided over 
dramatic mutirdo (cooperative building) projects that provided basic 
infrastructure to these places (on dispute resolution see. Santos 1995). 
The norms and institutions that governed favela life during this period 
emerged from a combination of the historical norms of poor communi- 
ties in Rio, the role of populist politicians in channeling funding to par- 
ticular client communities, and the activities of the Catholic Church's 
Pastoral defavelas. 

Of course, this whole system began to unravel as drug traffickers' 
power grew and criminals built ties to politicians and developed a larger 
role within the favelas. The startling increases in violence over the 1980s 
and 1990s dramatically transformed the institutional life of favelas as many 
nonprofits pulled out, AMs developed close relations with traffickers, the 
Catholic Church's role  shrank, and  the  political role  of  evangelical 
churches grew. These changes established a new set of dispute resolution 
practices which, once again, overlaid a history of continuing local customs. 
Before the 1980s, drug trafficking played only a minor role in Rio's 
favelas. The most important criminals operating in favelas engaged in a 
number of other illegal activities, including, above all, the jogo do bicho 
(animal game, numbers game), which has long funded the city's most 
important samba schools. Drug traffickers, for the most part, dealt in mar- 
ijuana and were lightly armed, carrying knives, navalbas (straight-edged 
razors), and, occasionally, 38-caliber revolvers (Dowdney 2003, 27-28). 
This all began to change in the mid-1980s with emergence of Rio as 
a transshipment hub for Andean cocaine en route to Europe and North 
America (Gay 2005, 55). As narcotics poured into the city, small-time drug 
dealers rapidly gained access to heavier arms and began to compete vig- 
orously over control of  increasingly valuable bocas de fumo  (literally 
"mouths of smoke," drug sale points). Those criminals who possessed the 
best organizations generally fared better during this period, and drug 
dealing consolidated over the next ten years under the umbrella of a 
handful of prison-based fac!6es (factions). The most prominent of these 
was the Comando Vermelho (Red Command), a gang that had formed in 
the Ilha Grande Prison during the waning years of Brazil's military dicta- 
torship (Dowdney 2003, 29-32; also see Gay 2005, 55-56). 

Despite the consolidation of gangs into the large facq6es, most of 
the power has remained concentrated in the gangs that dominate par- 
ticular favelas  (Dowdney  2003,  46).  These  organizations  have  histori- 
cally provided favela residents with some  minimal social  services,  such 
as financial assistance  for funerals, water service,  and vans to take resi- 
dents  to  and  from stores  and  hospitals  (Gay  2005,  56; Arias 2004,  3). 

62 

LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY 

48: 4 

Residents have also expected these gangs to maintain some semblance 
of order. In practice, however, the types and extent of the services have 
depended heavily on the particular drug traffickers who led the gangs. 
In addition, there is some evidence that with declines in the resources 
available to drug traffickers, and with generational changes that have 
brought to leadership positions dealers with few ties to local favela com- 
munities, the gangs have curtailed some of these services. 

At the heart of today's favela norms is the lei do silkncio (law of 
silence). This lei essentially says that residents of favelas should not 
publicly discuss crimes or acts of violence that take place in the favela 
that can be  linked to traffickers. Underlying the lei do silkncio is  an 
understanding that traffickers will severely punish those who disclose 
their activities to the police. In practice, the lei do silOncio is far from 
perfectly enforced. Because favelas are tightly knit, closed, and closely 
related communities, an attack on  one  resident can create antipathy 
toward traffickers from the victim's friends, family, and neighbors. Traf- 
fickers must be sensitive to residents' concerns and create a sense of 
order without alienating the population. In this process, traffickers and 
other favela residents are very concerned with specific relationships to 
individuals and those persons' historical behavior. 

Residents of favelas spend a large amount of  time talking about 
local violence among themselves. As a result, the lei is honored more in 
the breach than in practice. This can be seen clearly in an interaction 
with an older woman and a representative of the local AM in the favela 
of Tubardo. Responding to an interview request from a researcher, the 
woman said, 

I won't talk about the AM because it has been sold out (esta ven- 
dido). Nothing in the community should be sold to anyone. The 
community shouldn't have an owner but now it does. Bernardo [the 
president of TubarAo's AM] makes it pretty (bonito) for him [the 
dono; literally, owner]. Talking about the community could get you 
in jail. It is very dangerous. . .  . There is lots of stuff that you can't 
talk about and I will only talk about things if I can talk about all of 
it. (Zinha and C6sar 1998) 

Zinha made this statement in front of Ce6sar, the representative of 
the AM, who had introduced us, almost as if she were challenging him 
to respond. She believed that the affiliation between Bernardo, the AM 
president, and the community's "owner," or dono (a common way Car- 
iocas refer to the head trafficker in a favela) created a situation in which 
she  did not feel  comfortable discussing  how  the community worked.  In 
this  statement  Zinha publicly  honors  the  law  of  silence  in  refusing  to 
speak  about the  close  relationship between  the  drug trafficker and the 
president  of  the  AM,  but  at  the  same  time  uses  the  statement  to 

ARIAS AND RODRIGUES: FAVELAS 

63 

denounce this relationship to  an outsider. Despite stating the  open 
secret of  Bernardo's relationship with the trafficker, Zinha incurs no 
punishment. Zinha is safe because she is a respected older woman and 
proves her position and safety in the community by publicly talking 
about its secrets. 

Residents regularly discuss violence and push the envelope of what 
can and cannot be said in order to reinforce their own ideas of their 
safety. When someone is killed, residents of the favela incessantly dis- 
cuss the murder. The conversations usually hover around the issue of 
the  deceased's often tenuous involvement in  trafficking. By talking 
about violence and finding explanations for murders, residents help to 
normalize events and augment their feelings of personal safety. 

A story from one resident of Vigairio Geral elaborates on this analy- 
sis. Visiting with a longtime resident from one of the poorest parts of 
the favela late one  Saturday night, our discussion turned to trafficker 
violence. From late 1996 to mid-1999, Vigairio experienced a peaceful 
period. Recalling the brutality of the earlier period, following the 1993 
massacre, the  resident remembered one  particular murder. Another 
favela resident was friendly with a man from outside the favela who 
worked for the police as a clerk. The man was not a police officer, but 
simply did paperwork; he was essentially a government bureaucrat. His 
job did not pay much, however, so he started a small business selling 
beach sandals in Vigirio. Seeing that his friend, the Vigairio resident, was 
also short of cash, he "took his friend . ..  to the factory [where he pur- 
chased his supplies] and said he could sell flip-flops but not in Vigirio 
because it was his territory." Eventually the Vigario resident decided he 
wanted the whole business and arranged for the murder of his partner 
by spreading rumors that his partner was an X-9 (informant) for the 
police. Soon afterward, on one of the man's trips to the favela, the traf- 
fickers had him killed. Eventually the truth came out, however, and the 
traffickers forced the resident to leave the favela (Evanildo 1998). 

This story shows the other side of the rule that protected Zinha from 
punishment for talking about trafficker behavior. An older, well-con- 
nected woman can speak her mind about the problems in the favela 
with little risk of violence against her. A young, poorly connected man 
with a suspect job, on the other hand, risks being killed on the basis of 
a spurious allegation, since his lack of contacts in the community means 
that traffickers will have to deal with very few local political problems 
as a result of the homicide. 

Favela ethics, however,  go  beyond  the  lei do sildncio. Marcos Alvito 
has  written  that  in  one  Rio  favela,  residents  distinguished  between 
"good" traffickers and "bad" traffickers by the way  traffickers respected 
local  understandings  of  honor  and  reciprocity.  Good  traffickers, he 
writes,  protected  women  from sexual  assault, did  not  involve  children 

64 

LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY 

48: 4 

in drug dealing, and generally did their best to prevent residents from 
suffering from the effects of the drug trade. The traffickers, he notes, set 
up certain places where addicts could use drugs and prohibited them 
from consuming drugs in other places (Alvito 1996, 148-58). Further, 
residents expected traffickers to maintain order, resolve disputes, pre- 
vent  theft,  and  distribute certain basic  goods  to  the  community. 
Although all traffickers did not do this at all times, traffickers who made 
a  habit of  doing these  things with some  regularity would generally 
maintain a higher level of support among residents. This is also reflected 
in residents' memories and statements about past traffickers. Comments 
of residents of Rocinha and Vigairio Geral, as well as reports about traf- 
fickers in Acari, Vigirio, and Santa Marta testify to the support received 
by traffickers who publicly maintained basic local norms (Alvito 2001, 
219-46; Weffort 1991, 20). 

Rules,  however,  are  flexible.  Jorginho,  an  ex-trafficker from 
stated, "the basis of the law [of the hill] is your respect in the 
Tubar.o, 
community." He continued, "respect is based on whether you drink, 
smoke [marijuana], sniff [cocaine] in public or go  after women who 
aren't your own. ...  Those who do not do these things earn the respect 
of other residents. Those who engage in these activities lose respect." It 
is notable that men and women who hold positions of respect in fave- 
las are rarely seen drinking at the innumerable bars that dot community 
streets. Jorginho said, "it would appear as if this was not a big deal but 
it is. ...  If you get yourself in trouble but are respected no one will do 
anything to you. If you get yourself in trouble but are not respected 
people  might beat you  up" (Jorginho 2001). This perspective was 
echoed in the statements of Joselino, an Evangelical Christian and life- 
long  resident of  Santa Ana: "many in  the  community are complicit 
because they have fear," but "as long as traffickers respect you, you 
have no  problem. To maintain respect it is necessary that you  don't 
become involved in drugs." Asked if those who have recently moved to 
the favela also have respect, Joselino said, "If a resident has lived in the 
community five years he has just as much ability to deal with the traf- 
fickers as long as they have respect" (Joselino 1997). 

Different categories of residents, however, have more prestige than 
others. The  trabalhador (worker), pai  de familia  (family man), or 
mulber de idade (older woman) generally has more protection than a 
viciado (addict), bebado (drunk), or vagabundo (criminal, bum). Resi- 
dents express a high degree of anger when someone from a respected 
category is injured in conflicts, whereas they express a smaller amount 
of  concern  when  someone  from  a  less  respected  category  is  hurt. As 
shown  in the story about the murder of the police  clerk in Vigirio,  traf- 
fickers are more likely to kill someone  from a less  respected  group than 
a well-connected  resident. 

ARIAS AND RODRIGUES: FAVELAS 

65 

Discussion also plays an important role in preparing a community 
for a murder or some other type of violation of local norms. Jorginho, 
the former trafficker, noted, "When traffickers want to  kill someone 
people begin to talk about it .  .  . 'Joriginho is going to die,' they say, 
or 'they are going to get Tiago.' . . . Everyone on the hill talks about 
it.... The idea passes from one person to another" until it gets back to 
the person they intend to kill (Jorginho 2001). Through a process of dis- 
cussion, traffickers prepare the community for the murder and explain 
why a particular person is likely to be killed. These conversations and 
stories make those who will be killed marginal to the favela. Through 
them, residents develop understandings that reduce their fear of the vio- 
lence by considering why traffickers will kill a particular person. These 
discourses fail, however, when traffickers act well outside the local eth- 
ical framework or murders follow no specific logic that residents can 
use to understand them, or understand how they can protect themselves 
from that type of violence. 

Traffickers implement rules inconsistently but within a political dis- 
course focused on defusing tensions and shoring up support among 
particular groups in the community. Thus traffickers will pay more than 
lip service to favela norms, but in significant cases will violate those 
norms to undertake other actions that may support their political posi- 
tion. In compensation, traffickers will publicly support local norms and 
undertake other concrete actions to build resident support. 

Crime Management 

While the specifics  of trafficker involvement  in activities of crime man- 
agement  varied  from place  to  place,  there  was  consensus  among  the 
residents in each  of the communities  studied that traffickers were  either 
partially or wholly  responsible  for crime management. As one  favela res- 
ident  put  it,  "we  live  in  a  state  within  a  state  . .  .  the  law  that  operates 
is the 'law without law.' That is the law of the other side, that of the traf- 
fickers. If people  have a problem they go  to them" (Lucas 2000).  Or, as 
one  favela AM president closely  associated with traffickers said, "We are 
the government  here" (Sergio 1996). 

The "governance" activity of criminals is generally divided into three 
areas: punishment  related to  drug trafficking; control of  other criminal 
activities,  such  as  theft and  rape; and  keeping  order by,  for example, 
calming  domestic  violence  or  breaking  up  street  fighting.  Trafficker 
reactions  to  residents'  behavior  in  these  three  areas  and  residents' 
knowledge  of these  reactions amounts to a general set of "rules" regard- 
ing appropriate behavior in the favela; that is, behavior that would  avoid 
trafficker involvement.  As one  resident explained,  "we know  our obli- 
gations,  what  to  do  so  that it [violence  against  them  from traffickers] 

66 

LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY 

48: 4 

does not happen" (Danilo 2000a). In using the concept of obligations, 
this resident works within the logic of patron-client relations. Just like 
the rural peasant living on the dono's land, the favela resident lives with 
certain obligations to the dono of the favela. 

Residents are expected not to steal from other residents or from res- 
idents of surrounding communities. Rape and other extreme violence 
against women and children is also prohibited. Causing public "confu- 
sion" (disorder) by heavy drinking, harassment, or fighting is also not 
allowed. Anyone owing a debt to traffickers or interfering with traffick- 
ing is punished. 

Residents' understanding of  punishment for  breaking the  rules 
varied. Robbery, for example, could bring about a  range of  punish- 
ments. One Rocinha resident said, "in the case of robbery, they come in 
for sure to wipe out [the offender], they don't want to know [the details]. 
Or they kill or beat up [the offender]" (Cosme 2000). Another colorfully 
added, "the first time they are likely to hear both sides and just talk ... 
the second time they are called [results in a] surra [beating] and the third 
time it would be to detonar ["go off," or brutally and explosively attack]" 
(Virginia 2000a). A third agreed: "it is not that nothing is ever stolen, but 
if that person is found, he is killed" (Sergio 2000). To summarize this 
perception, one  succinctly added, "if one  robs, he will die" (Solange 
2000). While death was mentioned as a possible sanction for stealing, 
beating seemed to be more common. Examples of sanctions for robbery 
recounted during the course of the research were beatings with bricks, 
forcing an accused thief to walk the length of an open sewage canal 
while being beaten with rocks and sticks, and cutting off of the ears or 
hands of accused thieves. 

Punishments varied with the crime. Penalties for rape were severe. 
This was graphically noted by one female Rocinha resident during a 
focus group: "their way  [of punishing rape] is terrible. They take a 
broomstick and put it up [the accused's anus] . . . or order [the rapist] 
walk in a bra and underwear through the entire favela, being beaten up 
by everyone. They shoot [the rapist] in the leg, in the arm . ..  usually 
they don't use  bullets, but beat [him] up" (Solange 2000). For other 
offenses, such as domestic violence, fighting in public, and harassment, 
punishments were less severe, ranging from beatings and house arrest 
to a "talking to." Punishment of drug-related offenses, specifically steal- 
ing drugs, not paying incurred debt, or informing on traffickers to the 
police, was always severe, usually death. 

Beyond knowledge of punishments for breaking "the rules," resi- 
dents  had clear notions  of  how  traffickers enforced  them. There was  a 
general  understanding  that the  traffickers would  "judge" an  offender. 
The  following  explanation  offered  by  Danilo,  a  19-year-old male  resi- 
dent, makes this clear. 

ARIAS AND RODRIGUES: FAVELAS 

67 

For example, like this: [I do] something bad. They are going to go 
after me. If they think that, if they can say something to frighten me 
so  that I don't do  that anymore, they are going to  talk to  me, 
friendly-like (numa boa) and let me go home. If they do not know 
what to do, if they do not know how they should act, certainly they 
are going to take me and bring me up [to the top of the hill] so that 
the boss (chefe) can decide. [The boss] is going to hear [my] story 
from the mouth of the traffickers themselves, he is not going to hear 
it from [my] mouth and he will decide what he is going to do. If he 
is going to recommend that [I] no longer do it, to frighten [me], so 
that [I] start to walk a straight line (andar legalzinho na linha), or 
if he is going to order something done [to me]. (Danilo 2000b) 

This idea of passing  judgment was  confirmed by other favela residents. 
Cosme,  a 24-year-old male resident, put it this waiy: 

[H]e [the trafficker] is going to analyze [the case] and see who is 
right and who is wrong . ..  he is going to see and argue, this, this 
and this happened. And he is going to try to find out with the other 
person [involved in the case] what is going on ...  within his judg- 
ment and from hearing from other people, he is going to analyze 
[the case]. (Cosme 2000) 

Lucas, another male  resident, also  emphasized  that traffickers pass 
judgment, even using the term verdict to describe the trafficker's decision. 

[W]hen somebody errs, he  [a trafficker] takes him to  the  boss 
(chefe). Then the boss, who is in command, has to know what is 
going on. So they [the traffickers] take the person [to the boss] in 
order to analyze the case. . .  . So then he [the boss] gives the ver- 
dict. (Lucas 2000) 

The  premise  of  these  accounts  is  that traffickers' actions  are  not 
arbitrary or based  on  personal  reasons,  but  based  on  some  notion  of 
right and wrong  that conforms  to  shared beliefs  about  criminal behav- 
ior.  Residents'  understanding  of  these  rules  and  their  enforcement 
amounts  to  a general  code  of  conduct  for the  favela. While  adherence 
to  these  rules  is not  an absolute  guarantee  of  one's  safety,  it provides 
residents with a perceived  level  of predictability and security in an area 
known  for high rates of violence,  contributing to the  "myth of personal 
security." That is,  if one  follows  these  rules, the  chances  of becoming 
the object of trafficker violence  are minimal. 

Another important characteristic of  these  observations  is  the  clear 
effort by traffickers to build political support for their decisions. For exam- 
ple, Danilo notes that traffickers will generally approach in a friendly way 
(numa  boa) when  opening  a discussion about rules enforcement. It is fur- 
ther clear from both statements that residents perceive that traffickers will 

68 

LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY 

48: 4 

listen to both sides of the story before pronouncing judgments and that 
traffickers give serious thought to their decisions. 

Residents' combined perception of traffickers as seemingly friendly 
and open when discussing local issues and introspective in deciding 
punishments resonates with Boaventura Santos's observations of how 
AM leaders in the 1970s approached favela dispute resolution. Santos 
notes that AM leaders had little sanctioning power, and instead relied on 
arguments, claims of knowledge, and threats to gain residents' compli- 
ance  (Santos  1995,  242-46).  While  traffickers clearly  have  more 
resources at their disposal to force residents to comply with their deci- 
sions, the residents' statements quoted here indicate that they attempt to 
work within a framework of outward friendship and listening to gain 
compliance, The reason for this is the necessity of maintaining resident 
support. If traffickers behaved otherwise, it could undermine their posi- 
tion in these tightly knit communities. 

Although residents have clear ideas about these rules and how and 
when they are applied, actual enforcement often directly contradicts 
residents' expressed understandings. Punishments are at times nego- 
tiable, and traffickers' actions are often conditioned by social relation- 
ships with residents. For example, the traffickers' armed guards, the 
"soldiers" of Rocinha, were called to a residence to break up a domes- 
tic dispute in October 1999. Marcos, a 14-year-old resident, was threat- 
ening his uncle with a knife. According to neighbors, Marcos was angry 
because his uncle had confronted him about the robbery of some CDs, 
a cell phone, and beauty products on consignment for sale from the 
house.  The  "soldiers" refrained from beating Marcos, at  his  aunt's 
request. None of the family mentioned the robbery to the traffickers. 
The traffickers ordered Marcos to pack his things and leave his aunt's 
house.  The traffickers were  called to  the  residence a  second  time, 
around Christmas the same year, because Marcos had been accused of 
stealing from another area of  Rocinha. According to  neighbors, the 
stolen goods were in his house, but the traffickers did not search it 
because other neighbors vouched for Marcos's whereabouts on  the 
night in question (Field notes 1999; 2000). 

In another instance, the punishment for theft was negotiated down 
to a lesser sanction. Reynaldo, a 25-year-old resident, was stopped on 
the way home from work and taken to the chefe. He was informed that 
his nephew had stolen a cellular phone and, when found, would get his 
hand chopped off. Reynaldo negotiated with the traffickers to reduce 
the punishment for his nephew, who actually was his brother's stepson. 
The traffickers agreed to set the nephew's  hand on fire instead, and not 
to  exact  any punishment  from the  rest of  the  family. This penalty  was 
not actually carried out, because  the family moved  out of  Rocinha that 
night. Reynaldo's sister-in-law was  aware that her son  was  getting  into 

ARIAS AND RODRIGUES: FAVELAS 

69 

trouble and had arranged the move to  avoid just such an  incident, 
apparently none too soon. 

Commenting on an incident in Tubaraio, one resident made clear that 
different people were punished in different ways. In April 1999, one of 
the authors of this study discovered that a can of potato chips and a dig- 
ital alarm clock had been stolen from the room he was renting. His land- 
lady was the wife of an imprisoned drug trafficker, and the room was in 
the home of the father of  another, important trafficker. After making 
some inquiries into the theft, the researcher made clear to neighbors that 
he was not interested in any form of retribution for the crime but simply 
wanted it not to happen again. Later, when the lease was about up, the 
researcher ran into the landlady and, for reasons unrelated to the theft, 
said he was not interested in renting the room again. The woman replied 
that if the researcher was concerned about the theft, the traffickers had 
caught a boy who had been stealing and led him away with his hands 
tied. Later the researcher, talking with a contact, expressed concern that 
his  comments may have  led  to  the  boy's punishment. The  contact 
assured him not to worry about it. The boy was from the other side of 
the  favela and had nothing to  do  with the theft of  the researcher's 
belongings. That robbery, said the resident, had probably been commit- 
ted by a boy who lived in the same house and was a nephew of one of 
the important drug traffickers in the favela; as a result of his connections, 
nothing would happen to him (Arnaud 1999). 

These observations about the role of  respect in punishments are 
confirmed by  one  event  in  Ceuzinho. After an  AM meeting,  one 
researcher ran across traffickers brutally beating a man accused of rape 
in front of a crowd. Later a distraught Jorge, a former Ceuzhino AM pres- 
ident, who also witnessed the beating, said, "the guy is a drunk who 
loses  himself but isn't a rapist," noting, "he will probably get himself 
killed" (Alexandre and Jorge 1999). Jorge was also a member of Alco- 
holics Anonymous. Clearly, one of the factors affecting this attack was 
the man's alcoholism. 

Even in the extreme case of sexual assault, trafficker punishments 
are haphazard and based in personal connections. One winter afternoon 
Amilia, a very poor woman, told the following troubling story. Amilia 
was the mother of a trafficker's child, but had broken off their relation- 
ship after he went to jail. She told the tale while manicuring the finger- 
nails of her close friend Elizete, a former occasional drug dealer, ex- 
convict, and now-divorced wife  of  a  member of  a  powerful local 
drug-trafficking family. 

Amdlia: I was attacked by ten of the jiu-jitsu boys [informal gangs 
who practiced this martial art]. They grabbed me, they sucked my 
tits and stuck their fingers in me but didn't do anything to me. I had 
been bothered by them before back when I was with Lucio [her ex- 

70 

LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY 

48: 4 

boyfriend] and he would talk to them. Things got so bad with them, 
the feud (rixa) between the traffickers and the jiu-jitsu boys that 
Lucio fired bullets into their little school and ended that little school 
of theirs. It's not like this now. They assault women all the time and 
the traffickers don't do much about it. I was assaulted one night 
while I was drinking. I was upset and went home. One of their girl- 
friends asked me not to say anything so I didn't. The next day my 
aunt went to complain ... 

Interviewer To whom? The police? 

Amalia: No, not the police, I would be afraid to do that. We went 
to the comando. They talked to the guys but they said that I had 
been drinking and that I had asked for it. The comando agreed with 
them and said that I had been drinking and had drunk away my 
conscience, that I had asked for that. I told them that I drink with 
my mouth not my conscience but they didn't do anything. (Amilia 
and Elizete 2005) 

This story demonstrates several important points  about the person- 
alistic  nature of  trafficker punishment.  The  first is  that the  traffickers 
used  Amilia's  status as a drinker and possible  drug abuser as justifica- 
tion to deem  her story less  credible than that of the men who  assaulted 
her. The second  is that the  current traffickers seemed  generally unwill- 
ing to resolve  this type  of problem. According to Amilia,  these  men  do 
this  often,  but  the  traffickers have  not  moved  against them.  This may 
reflect  something  specific  about  this  current group  of  traffickers and 
their relationship to this particular group  of  men  in the  community,  or 
it may  reflect  a broader generational  shift among  Rio traffickers and  a 
decreasing  concern  with  maintaining  order  (this  interview  was  con- 
ducted  in 2005, as opposed  to the late  1990s). Perhaps most important 
is  Amilia's  relationship with  Lucio, who  previously  had  protected  her 
from these  types  of  problems  through the  use  of  force.  Now  she  was 
not involved  with him and, without  that personal connection  to a pow- 
erful local trafficker, the other traffickers were  unwilling  to take her side 
in a dispute  with this group of men. 

These  stories  show  that well-connected  residents,  or those  whom 
respected  residents will vouch  for, are not likely to receive punishments 
for the  crimes they  commit. Traffickers will  create exceptions  or other- 
wise  ignore what these  residents  do  out of respect  for the  people  will- 
ing  to  testify  in  favor of  the  accused  or account  for their movements. 
The  reason  for this is simple.  If someone  is willing  to  come  to the aid 
of the suspect,  or if the suspect  is well  connected  to powerful  criminals, 
hurting or killing the suspect  will  lead to greater animosity in the com- 
munity  against the  traffickers who  enforce  the  rules.  In general,  then, 
those  most likely to suffer punishment  are those  least connected  to the 

ARIAS AND RODRIGUES: FAVELAS 

71 

community and those who individually, as in the case of an alcoholic, 
have the least respect. 

Residents vacillate between affirming that traffickers "judge" and 
pointing out that rule enforcement is arbitrary and individualistic. In a 
large favela, such as Rocinha, gerentes (managers) at the middle level of 
the drug hierarchy are responsible for drug sales and distribution in spe- 
cific areas. They are also expected to handle crime control and maintain 
order in those  areas. Approaches to  rule enforcement differ among 
these gerentes and even among individual traffickers in the same area. 
Residents made distinctions between traffickers who  were "calm," or 
willing to resolve conflict through discussion, and those who were "sin- 
ister," or cheio de marra (full of courage) and willing to use violence. 
In the example of Marcos, neighbors commented that he was lucky that 
"calm" soldiers came rather than one particular soldier who was known 
for resolving such incidents through violence (Field notes 1999). 

Although the enforcement of these rules may have been contextu- 
alized by social relations in the favela, the rules themselves are based 
on beliefs and values shared by both residents and traffickers. Stealing, 
rape, and public disorder are disapproved of not just by the traffickers 
but also by residents. Residents perceive those punished by traffickers 
as deserving of their pain. In the example of Reynaldo's nephew, Rey- 
naldo told the traffickers that if he knew where his nephew was, he 
would turn him in himself, because "there will be  no  thieves in my 
family" (Reynaldo 2001). In addition, residents approve of the low levels 
of theft and assault created by this enforcement; many mentioned that 
they "feel safer here in Rocinha than outside [Rocinhal" (Cosme 2000). 
One resident active in community projects commented, "Here you do 
not have to lock your door and [you] can hang your clothes on the line 
without worrying about someone taking anything." Referring to severe 
forms of trafficker punishment for stealing, this resident added, "it is the 
way to be sure that not everyone is stealing everything" (Se&rgio 2000). 
An older woman, who had raised four daughters in the favela and had 
supported the traffickers' efforts, said she never worried about anything 
happening to her daughters in the favela (Regina 2000). 

Dispute  Resolution 
Residents often seek out traffickers to solve disputes with other resi- 
dents. Most of these conflicts are over construction, property ownership 
and rentals, or neighbor relations. Recourse to traffickers in these dis- 
putes  is particularly telling of traffickers' authority in conflict resolution, 
because  other agencies  often exist to handle such disputes.  Rocinha, for 
example,  has  three  AMs, a  municipal  regional  administrative office,  a 
legal  aid  project,  and  a  small  claims  court where  residents  can  go  to 

72 

LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY 

48: 4 

resolve civil disputes. Residents mention that going to the traffickers is 
"something more certain, quick and efficient. Or [the other person] does 
[what the trafficker says] or dies" (Solange 2000). Community agencies, 
especially the AMs or the municipal administrative region, are sought 
after to resolve these disputes, but lack the ability to enforce decisions. 
Yet in spite of the general recognition of a trafficker role in these dis- 
putes, traffickers rarely intervene in such cases. Often the traffickers 
send residents to other agencies, such as the residents' association or, in 
some cases, even the legal system. 

Trafficker involvement in resolving these types of disputes, then, is 
often just symbolic. It is common for one party in a conflict to threaten 
to seek out trafficker intervention, saying that he or she would "call in 
the guys (caras)." The credibility of this threat depends on both the rela- 
tionship between the parties in conflict and the relationship the threat- 
ening party has with the traffickers. For example, a threat to solicit traf- 
ficker intervention from someone  involved with  drug trafficking is 
usually more credible than a similar threat from someone not connected 
to  traffickers. Invoking the  threat of  seeking  trafficker intervention, 
especially when residents deem the threat credible, often helps get the 
other party to resolve the dispute. 

When traffickers do  intervene in such cases, they take pains to 
ensure that their intervention further legitimates their authority by seem- 
ing impartial and conforming to local norms. For example, traffickers 
decided to mediate a dispute in which two residents had been sold the 
same house; they did so partly to preempt a violent resolution by mar- 
ginal members of the trafficking gang. Concerned about the repercus- 
sions of allowing the case to be resolved by "mercenary" factions, the 
dono communicated to his gang that traffickers would broker a peace- 
ful solution. As the trafficker who handled the mediation explained to 
the two parties in the dispute, 

[T]his is why I want you to come to an agreement, because those 
people [the mercenary element], myself for example, I would [not] 
do something like that, but there are guys there along [the canal, at 
the drug sale point], because they need the money to  snort 
[cocaine], they will kill [for anything] and then abscond. So then it 
happens, it becomes a vicious circle, why? Because if they kill you 
[two], the boss will want to kill them ...  we know that you [two] 
are [working people] (trabalhadores), are honest people, so we 
want you [two] to come to an agreement. ...  (Paraphrase of com- 
ments by Claudio, as related by Solange 1999) 

The unjustified killing of  "honest" people  falls outside  the  code  of 
conduct  understood  by  both  traffickers and  residents.  The  trafficker 
takes pains to valorize workers over other traffickers and to create a sit- 
uation in which workers will not get killed. However,  the trafficker sug- 

ARIAS AND RODRIGUES: FAVELAS 

73 

gests that if the residents do not come to an agreement, they themselves 
will  lose  their standing  as  trabalhdores and  become  criminals. At this 
point it would be within local norms for the residents to be killed. The 
trafficker, in this statement,  is pointing  out  that he  does  not want  that, 
because it could create a "vicious circle" leading to escalating violence, 
which  could  undermine  his own  position  in the favela. 

In a large favela like Rocinha, where other agencies are available to 
intervene, traffickers' decision to get involved in noncriminal conflicts 
also  becomes  strategic. One  such  example  is the case  of Joseleni,  who 
wanted  to evict  a tenant for failing to pay rent. The tenant, a low-level 
drug dealer, sought  trafficker intervention. Rather than decide  the case, 
the  traffickers, on  hearing  that Joseleni  had  begun  legal  proceedings, 
told  the  parties that they  would  let the  court decide.  The  rationale, as 
Joseleni's  godson  explains,  was  the following: 

He [the trafficker deciding the case] knows that she [the tenant] is 
wrong and in consideration of her [the tenant], he did everything 
[not to decide the case], that is, he "washed his hands." He was not 
favorable to my godmother [Joseleni], who in this case was right, 
and also did not want to offend his acquaintance. That is, whatever 
the courts decide is fine. (Cosme 2000) 

Siding with the tenant for personal reasons would have conflicted 
with  the  understanding  that traffickers are  "impartial judges" in  these 
cases;  but the trafficker did not want to act against a personal  acquain- 
tance either. The availability of  other means of dispute resolution in 
Rocinha frees  traffickers from acting in situations in which  their legiti- 
macy could be compromised. 

BREAKING DOWN THE MYTH: 
Loss  OF LEGITIMACY 
In  general,  resident-trafficker relations  are  built  on  a  mutual  under- 
standing of a set of rules of conduct  and an expectation  that these  rules 
will be  enforced  in deference  to certain groups  of residents. When traf- 
ficker violence  falls outside  these  norms,  the  incidents  provoke  anger 
and  outrage (revolta) among  residents.  It is in these  moments  that the 
coercive  force underlying trafficker power  is most clearly revealed. 

A  clear  example  is  the  murder of  a  teenage  girl by  her  trafficker 
boyfriend in Rocinha one  April morning in 2001. The murder was  moti- 
vated  by  the  girl's alleged  infidelity, and  it occurred at the  boyfriend's 
house, where the girl had stopped  to visit. After the incident, the boy fled 
the  scene,  and  other traffickers secured  the  area, prohibiting the  girl's 
family from seeing  or touching the body and firefighters (the agency usu- 

74 

LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY 

48: 4 

ally called in to  remove a corpse) or anyone else  from entering the 
house. The traffickers continued to deny everyone access to the body 
until well into the afternoon, when they moved it to the entrance of 
Rocinha, where firefighters promptly removed it. Residents expressed 
outrage at the traffickers' behavior. One 30-year-old female resident who 
knew the girl said that she "could not believe that they [the traffickers] 
did not even allow the family access to the body" (Virginia 2001). 

Usually such incidents provoke no more than negative comments 
and outrage on the part of residents. When trafficker actions are con- 
sistently seen as an abuse of power that affects protected groups of res- 
idents, however, traffickers risk losing their limited legitimacy. Residents 
may respond with public protests that provoke a police response or, 
more often, efforts by some residents to help a rival group of traffickers 
take power in the community. 

The politics of trafficker dispute resolution focus intensely on main- 
taining support among the critical segment of the population closest to 
drug dealers. This group has a large amount of information about crim- 
inal activity and could  prove threatening to  traffickers should they 
decide to pass that information to police or rival criminals. The story of 
the police massacre in Vigairio Geral provides one illustration of how 
this happens. The murder of  21 residents on the night of August 29, 
1993 was conducted in supposed retaliation for the murder of several 
police officers by traffickers the night before. Knowing that they had 
provoked the police, the traffickers warned residents of the impending 
trouble and then went into hiding outside the community. Without the 
traffickers to return fire, nothing restricted police access. Of those who 
died in the massacre, some were  Evangelical Christians, some were 
young children, and others were soccer fans who had stayed out that 
night celebrating Brazil's victory in a World Cup qualifying match. None 
were traffickers. 

The next day, as residents coped with the enormity of their loss, 
they turned first on the traffickers and, in a stunning display of courage, 
walked up to  traffickers, took their weapons from their hands, and 
threw them on the ground. Politically weakened and lacking local sup- 
port, traffickers allowed residents to organize to promote peace in the 
community. Three years later, this led to a police occupation and the 
exile of the favela 's traffickers to other parts of the city, where, within a 
year and without the protection afforded by the community, most were 
murdered by the police. 

On the afternoon of March 10, 1998, a group of police raided the 
favela of Santa Ana, in one  of a continuing  series of attacks designed  to 
apprehend  low-level  traffickers.  Seeing  the  police  coming  into  the 
favela,  the traffickers fled up the main street. The police  responded  by 
opening  fire, and a bullet struck Nelsinho,  a middle-aged pai  defamilia, 

ARIAS AND RODRIGUES: FAVELAS 

75 

in the head. Residents quickly surrounded the police and began scream- 
ing, and threatening to attack them. The police fired in the air to dis- 
perse the crowd, but failed. Eventually cooler heads prevailed, and the 
police left the favela with the ambulance that took Nelsinho to the hos- 
pital, where he was pronounced dead. Residents then walked out of the 
favela and blocked a major roadway in the city. The next day the killing 
and protest made the papers. 

For months, residents had been upset about the presence of traf- 
fickers in the street. Many believed that the regular police raids this pro- 
voked would eventually lead to shootings in this highly frequented area 
of the community. After the killing of Nelsinho, Joselino, long-time res- 
ident known to be a serious business owner as well as a devoted father, 
talked to the head trafficker and demanded that he move the drug sale 
point to a safer location. In the interest of preserving safety in the com- 
munity, the traffickers complied with the resident's request. 

In 1986, a drug trafficker operating in the favela of Tubardo became 
paranoid and began to threaten and expel residents from the commu- 
nity. Eventually his paranoia grew so deep that he expelled the presi- 
dent and vice president of the local AM. The angry vice president bro- 
kered an agreement with a powerful, expanding drug gang and, with 
the support of other residents, facilitated their takeover of the commu- 
nity, forcing out the original trafficker. 

On the evening of May 20, 2000, a group of police murdered five 
residents of the Ceuzinho favela. While the police declared that those 
killed were drug traffickers, residents claimed they were not, and rioted 
in the streets. Film of the riot was broadcast on national television. The 
murder of these residents allowed one local leader to work with state 
officials to  implement an  innovative community policing program, 
which resulted in a long-term police occupation that significantly inter- 
fered with trafficking (Arias 2004, 21). 

During the first months of 2000, residents of Rocinha criticized traf- 
fickers after multiple robberies occurred at the local branch of BANERJ 
(Bank of the State of Rio de Janeiro) and other commercial establish- 
ments. Residents complained that traffickers were not "doing their job" 
and were "being made fools of by outside criminals" (Virginia 2000b). 
Traffickers, failing to control this crime, embarrassed themselves and 
showed that they could not adequately protect the community. If they 
could not protect a single bank, residents reasoned, how could they 
protect the homes where people lived? 

Each of these vignettes shows that when drug traffickers fail to con- 
trol violence  to  residents' satisfaction, they  face  serious  challenges  to 
their power. With one exception,  all the stories show that when  drug traf- 
fickers, or police  responding  to trafficker activities, kill or hurt residents 
who  are not  involved  with  trafficking, residents will  take  some  action 

76 

LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY 

48: 4 

against traffickers, demand reforms in traffickers' behavior, or engage in 
protests that attract unwanted attention to the favela. As the case from 
Santa Ana makes clear, although the police killed Nelsinho, the residents 
allotted a certain degree of blame to traffickers and demanded that they 
relocate their sales area in order to stave off further retaliation. 

These stories also show, however, that residents will hold traffick- 
ers accountable in these circumstances by making demands on them or, 
in some cases, collaborating with police to establish some degree of 
positive state presence in the community. In the case of Vigairio, this led 
to the expulsion of traffickers from the favela and their eventual murder. 
The Tubardo case tells a slightly different story. There, residents became 
so  angered with the unpredictability of one  trafficker's behavior that 
they chose to work with other traffickers to depose one set of criminals 
and bring in a new one. All of this shows the reverse side of trafficker 
efforts to maintain order and resolve disputes. 

The evidence presented here suggests that while residents perceive 
a degree of regularity in trafficker behavior, trafficker dispute resolution 
and efforts to maintain order fluctuate depending on who is being pun- 
ished or who is demanding redress. The implementation of these rules 
varies significantly according to the particular status of the individual in 
the community. As Jorginho and Joselino mentioned above, if someone 
has respect in the community, they are unlikely to be punished, even 
though they might have broken a rule. Well-connected individuals and 
those who might have friends or relatives speak in their favor are much 
less  likely to  receive severe punishment than those who  are uncon- 
nected or who occupy a low-status position in the favela, such as being 
a narcotics addict, an alcoholic, or a police clerk. 

On its face, this apparent capriciousness in rule enforcement would 
suggest a degree of uncertainty that would undermine residents' per- 
ceptions of their safety. This, however, is not the case. The vast majority 
of favela residents work hard to maintain the respect of their neighbors 
and do their best to avoid the type of activity that could undermine their 
position in the community. By minimizing violence against those who 
are respected, traffickers create conditions under which residents can 
immunize themselves against certain types of violence. This, combined 
with trafficker rule enforcement, creates an environment in which the 
vast majority of favela residents believe that through their own efforts 
and those of the traffickers, they are actually relatively safe in a highly 
violent environment. This occurs even in the face of still relatively high 
chances that residents could be killed by a stray bullet, as Nelsinho was. 
Traffickers' adherence to favela norms of respect and neutrality in meting 
out punishments and resolving disputes creates conditions  under which 
many residents feel  that they  can  protect themselves  and their families 
through minor changes  in behavior. 

ARIAS AND RODRIGUES: FAVELAS 

77 

This approach to controlling violence in favelas suggests that traf- 
fickers maintain order within a political logic. Traffickers may use vio- 
lence to resolve problems for residents, but only if it reinforces their 
political position. As the examples here demonstrate, in some circum- 
stances, traffickers do not follow this logic. However, when choosing 
not to follow such logic, they run the risk of residents' turning against 
them, effectively breaking down the myth of personal security through 
which their control operates. 

TRAFFICKER VIOLENCE AND DEMOCRACY 

Violence by drug traffickers in Rio de Janeiro today constitutes part of 
the type of democracy that has evolved in Brazil. The events in the fave- 
las are a kind of mirror image of the increasing reliance on private secu- 
rity among members Latin America's upper classes and more general 
demands for harsher government policies toward the poor. Without the 
resources to hire their own security guards or buy armored sedans, and 
without the middle-class confidence that their vote can make a differ- 
ence, the poor are forced to turn to their own local violence entrepre- 
neurs, who  provide them with a  sense  of  security by  occasionally 
enforcing local norms. They enforce those norms in a politically astute 
way that gives the core residents in a favela the sense that they can take 
action to increase their safety. Unlike the wealthy, the urban poor have 
virtually no way to opt out of this situation and little choice of which 
gangs will provide the "protection." Yet this arrangement, like armored 
sedans and the political support of mano dura strategies by the upper 
classes, creates a "myth of personal security" for the poor. 

Latin American democracy today is also problematic. It can be char- 
acterized as incomplete, partial, or disjunctive. In much of the region, 
people  with  resources have  access  to  government institutions and 
sources of private protection that allow them to enjoy political and civil 
rights despite rising levels of violence. The less well off have the same 
constitutionally guaranteed rights but less ability to take advantage of 
them, because they have to live in dangerous places, they suffer dis- 
crimination by the police and others, and they lack the resources to con- 
test these conditions. 

Teresa Caldeira has shown that many of  the  repressive policies 
adopted in Brazil are part of an effort by the upper classes to protect 
themselves in  an  increasingly violent environment characterized by 
armed gangs and ineffective policing. The wealthy, Caldeira argues, 
manage  their fear of  violence  by  marginalizing the  less  well  off.  In  a 
sense,  then,  policies  that  support  police  brutality in  Brazil  and  the 
expansion  of fortified enclaves  as housing  options  are part of  an effort 
to  create a feeling  of personal  security in a dangerous  environment  by 

78 

LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY 

48: 4 

securing one's own identity as a respectable citizen not subject to police 
or criminal violence. 

Favela residents' reliance on  traffickers to  resolve disputes and 
maintain order is part of the same process. Traffickers allow residents of 
favelas, through personal relationships and local respect, to  escape 
being marginal. By enforcing order within local parameters in the con- 
text of social position, traffickers' efforts place favela residents at the 
center of a social order and allow them to imagine that they are secure 
despite the violence around them. Thus favela residents, too, engage in 
actions aimed to decrease their fear of violence. 

The  traffickers, then,  through their political  use  of force,  construct 
an "in-group" in favelas, drawing a line between  those  who  are accept- 
able and unacceptable in places marginalized from the rest of society. 
This is consistent  with  what  other segments  of  society  do  through the 
media  and by  buying  into  closed  communities.  In Brazil today,  where 
violent  conditions  emanate  from  both  political  and  social  actors  and 
institutions, traffickers play a necessary role in building favela residents' 
identity in a system that marginalizes them. We all tell ourselves stories 
about  why  we  are safe.  In the  violent  world  that is  Brazil's imperfect 
democracy, the poor, who suffer most of that violence, turn to traffick- 
ers, in some ways, for a degree of reassurance. 

CONCLUSIONS 

This  article has  described  and  analyzed  ways  that traffickers and  resi- 
dents interact to create feelings  of safety in the face of ongoing  violence. 
Just as citizens  under the authoritarian regimes  of  the  1960s and  1970s 
sought  to  decrease  their chances  of suffering violence  through careful 
choice  of  friends  and  activities,  favela  residents  today,  by  construing 
traffickers' violent  incidents as legitimate responses  to particular behav- 
iors  or persons,  can  exert  some  degree  of  control  over  their personal 
safety. However, as this study demonstrates, the basis of personal safety 
is precarious, and actual trafficker violence  is not always limited to these 
prescribed  roles.  This  "myth of  personal  security," then,  is  valid  only 
insofar as both resident and trafficker behavior is constrained by under- 
stood  and accepted  uses  of force. 

Moreover, this role  of  traffickers in maintaining order in the  favela 
contributes to building and maintaining the political regime that exists in 
Brazil. The incomplete  or disjunctive nature of Brazilian democracy pro- 
vides for unequal access to universally guaranteed rights, leaving citizens 
to negotiate  these  rights, such as the right to security, according to their 
own  means.  As  this  study  has  shown,  in  the  favela,  this  leads  to  a 
reliance on  traffickers and, in some  recent cases,  vigilante groups.  The 
more violence  the  state directs at communities  and the  more  such  vio- 

ARIAS AND RODRIGUES: FAVELAS 

79 

lence  excludes  them,  the  more  dependent  favela  residents become  on 
traffickers for  reassurance  and  some  sense  of  inclusion.  While  it may 
then  appear that traffickers are in conflict with the state, that they  are a 
parallel force, they actually are part of the existing political system. The 
activities traffickers engage  in  help  to  incorporate favela  residents,  an 
excluded  group, into the broader social narrative. They may be  discrim- 
inated against in society  but they are, as many residents say, em casa (at 
home)  when  they are in their community. Greater exclusion  of the poor 
and  lack  of  access  to  other  means  to  maintain their security will  only 
increase trafficker power. A serious  answer  to  the  problem of  trafficker 
violence  and criminality must go  well  beyond  the simplistic solution  of 
police  violence  and must contain a deeper  notion  of the links between 
the  political organization of  favelas,  the  political identity of  favela resi- 
dents,  and the broader political organization of Brazilian society. 

NOTES 

This article was  a coauthorship,  and would  not have been  possible  without 
the equal efforts of both writers. The authors would  like to acknowledge  Anna 
Gade and Daniel  Goldstein for their advice,  as well  as the helpful  comments  of 
the  anonymous  reviewers  of  LAPS. Data  collection  for  this  article would  not 
have been possible without the generous research support of the Institute for 
World Politics; the Brazilian Fulbright Commission; the International Institute at 
the University of Wisconsin, Madison; a Scott Kloeck-Jensen International Prac- 
titioner Fellowship; the PSC-CUNY Research Award Program; a Tinker Summer 
Research Award from the Latin American, Caribbean, and Iberian Studies Center 
at the University of Wisconsin, Madison; a Mellon Doctoral Fellowship in the 
Sociology of Latin America; the Mellon Foundation Program in Brazilian Demog- 
raphy and Area Studies; and a Ford Foundation Social Science Concepts in Area 
Studies Grant from the Teresa Lozano Long Institute of Latin American Studies 
at the University of Texas, Austin. 

1. On the role of popular groups in undermining neighborhood gangs, see 
Centro de  Defesa  dos  Direitos Humanos "Bento Rubido" 1993, 55-58,  63; 
Sanchez-Jankowski 1991, 180-93. 

2.  Rodrigues conducted research in Rocinha, Arias in Tubardo, Cenzinho, 
Santa Ana, and Vigirio Geral. Rodrigues's data were based on recorded con- 
versations and handwritten notes of observations. What appears in this text are 
primarily direct transcriptions of  conversations. Arias's research is  based on 
handwritten notes written shortly after conversations took place. As such, they 
reflect the subject and tone of the conversation but without the accuracy of 
recording. Rocinha and Vigirio Geral are the real names of specific places in 
Rio. Tubardo, Cenzinho, and Santa Ana are pseudonyms, as are all personal 
names. Confidentiality was guaranteed to all informants because of the sensitive 
nature of the data being elicited. 

3.  On this phenomenon in Caracas, see Sanjuan 2002, 91; in Rio see Leeds 

1996, 50; Goldstein 2003, 174-225. 

80 

LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AND SOCIETY 

48: 4 

REFERENCES 

Alvito, Marcos. 1996. A honra de Acari. In  Cidaddnia  e violdncia, ed.  Gilberto 

Velho and Alvito. Rio de Janeiro: Editora FGV. 147-64. 
. 2001. As cores de Acari: umafavela  carioca.  Rio de Janeiro: Editora FGV. 
Arias, Enrique Desmond.  2004.  Faith in  our  Neighbors:  Networks  and  Social 
Order in Three Brazilian Favelas. Latin American Politics and  Society 46,  1 
(Spring): 1-38. 

Barcelos, Caco. 2003. Abusdado: 0  Dono do Morro Dona Marta. Sio  Paulo: Edi- 

tora Record. 

Caldeira, Teresa. 2000.  City of Walls: Crime, Segregation, and  Citizenship in Sao 

Paulo.  Berkeley: University of California Press. 

Cano, Ignacio.  1997.  The Lethal Use of Force by Police  in Rio deJaneiro.  Rio de 

Center for Studies  in  Security and  Citizenship  (Cesec).  n.d.  Data sets.  <www. 

Janeiro: ISER. 

ucam.edu.br/cesec> 

Centro de  Defesa  dos  Direitos  Humanos  "Bento Rubido." 1993.  Favelas  e  as 

organizagoes  comunitdrias. Petropolis: Vozes. 

Dowdney,  Luke. 2003.  Children of the Drug  Trade: A Case Study of Children in 
Organised Armed Violence in Rio deJaneiro. Rio de Janeiro: Editora 7 Letras. 
Garret6n, Manuel Antonio. 1992. Fear in Military Regimes: An Overview. In Fear at 
the Edge. State Terror and Resistance in Latin America, ed. Juan Corradi, Patri- 
cia Weiss Fagen, and Garret6n. Berkeley: University of California Press. 13-16. 
Gay,  Robert.  2005.  Lucia:  Testimonies of  a  Brazilian  Drug  Dealer's  Woman. 

Philadelphia: Temple University Press. 

Goldstein,  Donna.  2003. Laughter Out of Place: Race, Class, Violence, and  Sex- 

uality in a Rio Shantytown. Berkeley: University of California Press. 

Grynszpan,  Mario. 2004.  As favelas  cariocas  como  espago  de  disputas: poder 
pUblico, terceiro setor, associag6es  de moradores e trifico  de drogas. Paper 
presented  at the  23rd Meeting  of  the  Latin American Studies Association, 
Las Vegas, October 7-9. 

Leeds,  Elizabeth.  1996.  Cocaine  and  Parallel Polities  on  the  Brazilian Urban 
Periphery:  Constraints on  Local  Level  Democratization.  Latin American 
Research Review 31, 3: 47-83. 

Lemgruber, Julita. 2004. Viol&ncia, omissio  e  inseguranga puiblica: o  p~o nosso 
de cada dia. Paper presented  at the Academia Brasileira de Ciencias, Rio de 
Janeiro, June. 

Orfeu negro  [Black Orpheus].  1959.  Directed  by  Caci  Diegues.  Rio Vermelho 

Filmes/Globo  Filmes/Cine-Source. 

Reguillo, Rossana. 2002. The Social Construction of  Fear: Urban Narratives and 

Practices. In Rotker and Goldman 2002.  187-206. 

Rotker, Susana. 2002. We Are the Others. In Rotker and Goldman 2002. 224-39. 
Rotker, Susana, and Katherine Goldman, eds.  2002.  Citizens ofFear:  Urban Vio- 

lence  in Latin America. New  Brunswick: Rutgers University Press. 

Salimovich, Sofia, Elizabeth Lira, and Eugenia Weinstein.  1992. Victims of Fear: 
The Social Psychology  of Repression. In Fear at the Edge: State Terror and 
Resistance  in  Latin America,  ed.  Juan  Corradi, Patricia Weiss  Fagen,  and 
Manuel Antonio Garret6n. Berkeley: University of California Press. 72-89. 

ARIAS AND RODRIGUES: FAVELAS 

81 

Sanchez-Jankowski,  Martin. 1991.  Islands  in  the Street: Gangs  and  American 

Urban Society. Berkeley: University of California Press. 

Sanjuan, Ana Maria. 2002. Democracy,  Citizenship, and Violence  in Venezuela. 

In Rotker and Goldman  2002. 87-101. 

Santos, Boaventura de  Souza.  1995.  Towards a  New Common Sense: Law, Sci- 

ence,  and  Politics in the Paradigmatic  Transition. New  York: Routledge. 

Scheper-Hughes,  Nancy.  1992. Death  Without Weeping: The Violence of Every- 

day Life in Brazil.  Berkeley: University of  California Press. 

Tulchin, Joseph,  and Graig Fagan. 2003. Perfil actual de la seguridad ciudadana 
e  impacto en  la gobernabilidad democrntica. Aportes desde  Latinoamerica. 
In Entre el crimen y  el castigo: seguridad ciudadana  y  control democrdtico 
en America Latina y  el Caribe, ed.  Lilian Bobea.  Caracas: Nueva  Sociedad. 
13-29. 

Weffort, Francisco. 1991. America Astray. Working Paper 162. Notre Dame: Kel- 

logg  Institute. 

INTERVIEWS AND FIELD NOTES 

Alexandre and Jorge.  1999. January 9, and observations  in Ceuzinho. 
Amdlia and Elizete. 2005. Ceuzinho  residents. July 5. 
Arnaud. 1999. Tubardo resident. April 18. 
Cosme.  2000. Rocinha resident. Author conducted  focus  group, July 22. 
Danilo.  2000a. Rocinha resident. Author conducted  focus  group, July 22. 

Evanildo. 1998. Longtime resident of Vigario Geral, once  active in social  move- 

Field notes  of observations  in Rocinha. 1999. October 24. 

Jorginho.  2001.  Resident  of  Tubardo,  ex-trafficker,  member  of  evangelical 

. 2000b. June  14. 

ments. January 10. 

. 2000. January 12. 

church. August 2. 

Joselino.  1997. Santa Ana resident. July 3. 
Lucas. 2000. Rocinha resident. Author conducted  interview, July 22. 
Regina. 2000. Rocinha resident. April 22. 
Reynaldo. 2001. Rocinha resident. January 25. 
Se'rgio. 1996. Former President of Ceuzinho AM. August. 
Sergio. 2000. Rocinha resident. July 10. 
Solange.  1999. Rocinha resident. September 26. 

-.  2000. Author conducted  focus  group, July 22. 

Virginia. 2000a. Rocinha resident. January 12. 
-. 
Zinha and Cesar. 1998. Tubardo residents. October 7. 

2000b. March 3. 

