AELP Writing: Theme & Rheme 

 

 

 

 

Theme & Rheme: Giving your Text Cohesion 

 
Over  the  course  of  this  term,  your  Lektor  will  be  providing  you  with  advice  on  how  to  construct 
introductions  and  conclusions,  and  how  to  package  information  and  argument  into  paragraphs 
(including  the  use  of  topic  sentences).  A  further  crucial  element  on  our  journey  through  the 
technicalities of writing is how to package information at the clause level. This topic is important to 
you because English clause structures are less flexible than German ones. The following explanations 
and examples are taken from Mona Baker In Other Words (2011) pp133 ff. and Bloor & Bloor The 
Functional Analysis of English (2013) pp 74 ff. 
 
 
Theme & Rheme: A clause is made up of two “segments”: theme and rheme. 
 

 
I. Theme is basically “what the sentence is all about” and serves two main purposes: 
 
• 
 
 
• 
 

it tells you where the sentence is heading, referring forwards to the addition of new 
information which has yet to be stated. 

It  acts  as  a  point  of  orientation,  referring  backwards  to  what  has  been  stated  in 
previous sentences, and 

heavenly bodies in the sky. 

 
 
E.g.   Ptolemy’s model provided a reasonably accurate system for predicting the positions of 
 
 
In this sentence, Ptolemy’s model is the theme because it is what the sentence is all about. It is (in this 
case) also at the front of the sentence as is common in the S + V structure of English sentences. 
 
 
See  how  the  positioning  of  theme  works  in  the  following  extract  (Bloor  74).  Here,  the  themes  are 
highlighted in bold type for ease of identification: 
 

Madrid underwent significant  social changes in  the late 19th century. The city  began to expand 
north,  with  the  construction  of  Chamberi  and  Salamanca,  and  the  railway  came  along  with 
electricity, trams and a new canal. 

 

 
 
II. Rheme is basically what the writer wants to say about the theme. It is the most important 
part of a clause/sentence because it is actually what the writer or speaker wants to say about the topic 
(theme)  they  have  introduced.  So  the  rheme  in  the  first  example  above  is:  provided  a  reasonably 
accurate system for predicting the positions of heavenly bodies in the sky. 
 

AELP Writing: Theme & Rheme 

 

 

 

 

Two Types of Theme -  But this is not the whole story. Two main types of theme/rheme patterning 
have been identified by linguists interested in the structure of language. These are as follows: 
 

a)  Constant theme 

Please read the following text from Lott (1986) quoted in Bloor (2013): 
 

Wole Soyinka, dramatist and scholar, is a Nigerian. He was born in 1934, and [elliptical “he”] has 
devoted his life to drama for the theatre, both as a dramatist and as a university teacher of drama 
and English in his own country. He is also an accomplished writer of stories, novels and poetry. 
His  background and  his professional life have made him uniquely  able to write plays with an 
African setting which can absorb the conflict between past and present, tradition and novelty, tribal 
beliefs and the ideologies of the Western world today. 

 
Pattern: Theme A + rheme A. Theme A + rheme B. Theme A + rheme C. etc.  
Beginning  each  sentence  with  the  same  theme  (“Wole  Soyinka”  or  a  pronoun  or  linked  reference) 
keeps the reader’s attention and is commonly used in factual writing such as encyclopedia entries or 
instruction manuals. It also appears in academic writing in the methods/results sections which lay out 
step-by-step explanations.  
 
Task: Look at the following text from a Ministry of Defence pamphlet Jungle Survival (1967) quoted 
by Bloor (2013, 90) and highlight or underline the theme: 
 

The saw-scaled viper is found in dry sandy areas where there is little vegetation. Its length is about 
two feet, and it is sandy in colour with darker spots. It is aggressive and very poisonous. It may be 
found in the full blaze of the sun or beneath hot stones and in crannies heated by the sun. 

 

b)  Linear Theme 

 
Here, in the first sentence of a text, the writer will state a theme and elaborate on it with a rheme. 
This is the case in the sentence about Ptolemy quoted above. The next sentence will start with a new 
theme which refers back to the rheme in the previous sentence, before adding new information in a 
new rheme. So we have text which looks something like this: 
 
Theme A + rheme B. Theme B + rheme C. Theme C + rheme D. etc. 
This creates an interlocking continuity from one sentence to the next. Take a look at the following 
text  taken  from  Martin  et  al.  The  Penguin  Book  of  the  Natural  World  (1976)  and  quoted  in  Bloor 
(2013, 91): 
 

The stomach produces gastric juice, which contains dilute hydrochloric acid. The acid kills most of 
the bacteria in the food. The partly digested food passes next into the duodenum, the first part of 
the  small  intestine.  This  is  a  coiled  tube  about  eight  metres  long,  which  is  as  wide  as  a  man’s 
thumb.  

 
As you can clearly observe, the rheme in sentence one (“hydrochloric acid”) becomes the theme of 
sentence 2 (“acid”). Similarly, the rheme of sentence 2 (“food”) becomes the theme of sentence three 
(“the  partly  digested  food”),  and  finally  the  last  pairing  is  the  rheme  in  sentence  three  (“the  small 
intestine”) which becomes the theme (“this”) in the final sentence. Linear theme is most often used in 
explanatory and chronologically ordered tests to form linear explanations or narratives.  

AELP Writing: Theme & Rheme 

 

 

 

 

Questions: 
 
Examine the following short text and analyse its structure. What do you notice? Would you say it has 
a good theme-rheme structure or not? 
Newspaper article (from The Daily Telegraph, Feb 10, 1999)  
Theme 

Parts of Northern Britain 

Scotland 

Two hundred schools 

and more than seven inches of snow 

An injured climber 

Lawrence Reeve, 40, a computer operator 
from Chessington, Surrey, 

The lone walker 

Rheme 
were  brought  to  a  standstill  by  heavy  snow  and 
ice  yesterday  with  roads  closed  and  dangerous 
driving conditions. 
was worst hit. 
were  closed in  Aberdeenshire,  where  roads were 
impassable, 
was recorded at Aberdeen airport. 
survived  18  hours  in  sub-zero 
temperatures 
clinging  to  an  ice-covered  ledge  after  falling 
400ft in Glencoe. 
was 
in  hospital  yesterday  after 
recovering 
suffering  severe  facial  injuries,  a  punctured  lung 
and frostbite. 
was  making  his  way  along  a  ridge  when  he  fell 
into  Glen  Cam,  striking  a  boulder  which  saved 
him from a further drop of 300ft. 

 
 
Please analyse the following short extracts for theme and rheme: 
 

String bending 
This is one of the  most  basic of  all techniques.  It is used to some degree by virtually  every 
guitarist  playing  a  melody  line  or  a  lead  break,  and  it  is  one  of  the  most  recognizable 
characteristics of modern guitar styles. James Burton, the pioneering country and rock session 
guitarist, is often credited as one of the first influential players to use string bending to alter 
one  note  in  a  chord.  It  was  originally  employed  to  imitate  the  sound  of  pedal-steel  and 
bottleneck guitarists, and, as such, has its roots in blues and country music. Over the years, the 
technique  has  also  been  one  of  the  major  factors  in  the  use  of  progressively  lighter-gauge 
strings.  
Denyer, R. 1982: The Guitar Handbook. London: Pan, 142. 
 
 
How to make a Paper Airplane 
Get a sheet of paper. Standard letter size paper is all you need. Fold it in half, lengthwise. This 
means folding the two long sides together. Fold the top corners in to the center. Make the fold 
nice and crisp, using your nail. Fold the angled edge into the center. Take the new angled sides 
and fold them both in to meet at the center fold. Fold along the center line. This fold should hide 
all  of  the  other  folds  inside.  Fold  down  the  wings.  Fold  down  the  two  top  flaps  to  make  the 
wings. These  folds will  also need to be  crisp, so use a hard edge to  make the  fold (like  your 
nail). 
http://www.wikihow.com/Make-a-Paper-Airplane 23.09.2014 15.45 

AELP Writing: Theme & Rheme 

 

 

 

 

 

A study on relapse prevention in cases of alcohol dependence syndrome 
Amitabh Saha  
 
The study was carried out in a tertiary care hospital. The study was conducted on the following: a) 
100 consecutive patients admitted to the psychiatric center who were diagnosed to be having alcohol 
dependence syndrome (diagnosed  as per  ICD -10 Diagnostic criteria). b)  These 100 patients were 
initially managed by detoxification strategies. c) They were randomly assigned into the two groups 
wherein  one  received  anticraving  medication  i.e.  Tab  Acamprosate  (333mg)  in  therapeutic  doses. 
The other group was placed on psychotherapy sessions. d) The data were collected and studied over 
a  one  year  period.  They  were  studied  at  0,  6  and  12  month  intervals.  The  patients  were  regularly 
followed  up  in  the  outpatient  department  every  month.  A  comprehensive  examination,  data 
collection,  and  observation  for  evidence  of  relapse  was  done  at  6  monthly  intervals  wherein  the 
scales  were  administered  and  clinical,  hematological  and  biochemical  parameters  were  assessed. 
Tests like MCV. GGT, LFT were done. Ultrasonographic findings of abdomen were done and the 
individual’s  unit  report  for  his  alcohol  use  was  studied.  Purposive  sampling  was  done  as  only 
diagnosed patients who met the ICD -10 diagnostic criteria for alcohol dependence syndrome were 
taken.  
American Journal of Life Sciences 2013; 1(4): 184-188 
 
 

Will the U.S. Auto Market Come Back? 
 
TED H. CHU and YINGZI SU 
 
The Great Recession that began in 2007 signaled the end of an era when the U.S. economy seemed 
to  have  ditched  the  business  cycle,  with  an  average  real  GDP  growth  rate  of  3.3  percent  between 
1992  and  2006  and  nominal  domestic  demand  growth  hovering  around  5.5  percent.  However,  the 
collapse of the subprime mortgage market quickly turned into the worst financial crisis in 75 years. 
Though extraordinary measures by the Federal Reserve Bank prevented a systematic breakdown of 
the financial system, wildfires on Wall Street engulfed Main Street as credit conditions tightened up 
enormously  and  credit  flows  contracted  significantly.  The  flow  of  consumer  credit  went  from  the 
cycle peak of $173 billion in 2007:Q3 to -$166 billion in 2009:Q2; and even as of 2010:Q1, it was 
still negative. As a result, U.S. consumption expenditure declined 1.9 percent over the six quarters 
from 2007:Q4 to 2009:Q2. This marks the longest decline in post-WWII history. 

In  this  credit-driven  recession,  one  of  the  hardest  hit  sectors  was  the  automotive  industry, 
along  with  the  housing  and  financial  markets.  Chrysler  and  General  Motors  were  pushed  into 
bankruptcy; and 276,000 jobs in the automobile and parts industry were destroyed, a whopping 36 
percent of the total employment in the sector. The collapse of the auto market in turn exacerbated the 
downturn. Hamilton [2009] argues it would be hard to defend the claim that the recession began in 
2007:Q4 had it not been for the contribution from auto sector. 
Business Economics Vol. 45, No. 4 
 

