5

Emotions, Thoughts, and Feelings

Emotions as Engagements with the World

robert c. solomon

I have been arguing, for thirty years now, that emotions are a kind of

judgment—or rather, a complex of interlocking judgments, desires, and
intentions. Back in the seventies, it was an argument that attracted some
attention but little sympathy. What provoked me then—and still provokes
me now—is what I call the primitivist conception of emotions, the idea
that emotions are basically physiological or (now) neurological syndromes
conjoined with feelings that have only marginally to do with cognition or
our engagements in the world. William James’s well-known theory, or at
least that aspect of it he famously italicized, stated this view concisely: “Our
feeling of [bodily changes] as they occur IS the emotion.” An emotion might
be “triggered” by a disturbing perception, but its essence was physiology
plus feeling. Thus my own analysis of emotion challenged this primitivism
and maintained that emotions were, to employ a precocious word, intelli-
gent. This meant also challenging the sharp divide between emotions and
rationality, and I further insisted (inspired by Jean-Paul Sartre) that we
question the established notion that the emotions happen to us, render us
passive, and are essentially involuntary. Some aspects of this theory, notably
the idea that emotions are in some sense “cognitive” and consist (at least
in part) of evaluative judgments and thus display a kind of
intelligence
have become mainstream, even popular.1 Other aspects of the theory, my
voluntarist thesis in particular, continue to attract incredulousness.2 But it
is the “cognitivist” thesis that I would like to pursue here.

My bumper-sticker

slogan, my walk-away-from-the-lecture catch
phrase, has always been “Emotions are judgments.” The abbreviated slogan
has too often been mistaken for a full-blown theory in itself, as if the emo-
tions are nothing but judgments, and the particular term judgment has often

76

been misunderstood as overly detached and intellectual. But I have long
argued that emotions as judgments should not be confused with singular
summary judgments (such as might be used to brieﬂy deﬁne them or dis-
tinguish one emotion from another), nor should a judgment be thought to
be something deliberative, articulate, or fully conscious (Solomon 1988). To
say that emotions are intelligent is not to say that an emotion is an aspect
of
intellect, and to insist that emotions are judgments is not to say that
emotions are what some philosophers call “propositional attitudes.” Thus
when Paul Grifﬁths took on what he misleadingly characterized as “prop-
ositional attitude” theories of emotion as the enemy of all that was true
and scientiﬁc, I was both ﬂattered and appalled—appalled as several of us
had long insisted that propositions (or propositional contents) were not what
emotions are essentially about, ﬂattered because Grifﬁth’s abuse was surely
a sign that our collective view of emotions had shifted, in Kuhnian terms,
from being revolutionary to becoming the “normal” paradigm.3 The current
counterrevolution of affect programs and neuroreductionism says a lot
about who we are and how far we have come. The cognitive theory is now
the target—high praise for research that was once considered marginal.
Progress in philosophy, I hesitate to say, is furthered more by the “dialectic”
of one outrageous thesis after another than by cautious, careful, “normal”
argument.

Emotions, I have always insisted, are about the world. With my concept
of
judgment I had tried to make clear that this was not a marginal fact
about (some) emotions but the essence of all of them (including oneself, of
course, as part of the world). Jamesian perceptions of the world are not
mere triggers for emotion but are already shot through with the concepts
and perspectives that constitute the emotion itself. The scholastic concept
of “intentionality” was also an attempt to make this explicit, to insist that
the emotions are always “about” something (their intentional object). Thus,
judgments have intentionality, but I think that the traditional notion of
intentionality—and, I now suspect, the concept of
judgment, too—still
lacks the keen sense of engagement that I see as essential to emotions, keep-
ing in mind that thwarted or frustrated engagements characterize many
emotions. Emotions are not just about (or “directed to”) the world but ac-
tively entangled in it. So I now want to improve my analysis by making
this point central, that emotions are subjective engagements in the world. I still
favor the use of “judgment” to make this point, but I now want to stress
even more than I have before the idea that a judgment is not a detached
intellectual act but a way of cognitively grappling with the world. It has at
its very basis and as background a complex set of aspirations, expectations,
evaluations (“appraisals”), needs, demands, and desires (which says some-
thing about why the reigning “belief-desire” analysis of emotions and in-
tentions is so hopelessly impoverished).

The emotions-as-judgments view that I have defended is too often re-

emotions as engagements with the world

77

ferred to as a “cognitive theory of emotions,” a borrowing from psychology
and “cognitive science.” It is not a happy term. For one thing it would seem
to leave out any essential role for desire or active engagement in the world
in favor of the intellect or affectless “information.” I try to be very clear in
my judgment-view that desire and engagement in the world (or the thwart-
ing of our engagements) are essential to emotion. But the cognitive theory
has become the touchstone of all philosophical theorizing about emotion,
for or against. It used to be the battering ram (in its various guises) against
the primitivist theories of James and his successors. Now it is the target of
neurologically based “precognitivist” theories of emotion (as in the new
slogan “Emotion precedes cognition”). But what exactly is a “cognitive”
theory of emotions? The label “cognitive theory” is not mine, and I fought
it for years, not just because it was misleading but also because “cognition”
is so variously or ill deﬁned. But it seems as if we’re stuck with it, so in
self-defense I would like to take on “cognition” directly and try to say what
I think it is and what it isn’t. What is a cognitive theory if one thinks of
emotions as engagements in the world? In answering this question, I would
also like to look once again at the role of feelings or “affect” in emotions
and suggest in passing why I think that emotions are, at least some-
times, “chosen” and voluntary. As engagements (as opposed to things that
happen to us), emotions would certainly seem to be good candidates for the
role of “existentialia” through which we deﬁne ourselves.

what is an emotion? emotions as
“thoughts” (and related views)
I do not want to rehearse the long and fascinating history of James’s classic
question, but it seems to me that there is a disagreement right from the
beginning of our discussion as to what sort of a phenomenon an emotion
might be. I want to reject, or at any rate call into question, the very di-
mensions of the emotional phenomena that are now under investigation
and the subject of a great many contemporary theories. In his Encyclopedia
Britannica article on emotions (1989), Carroll Izard begins by deﬁning them
as “brief ” responses. In recent work by Joe LeDoux, Jaak Panksepp, and
Antonio Damasio, an emotion is sometimes presented as if
it is more or
less over and done with in 120 milliseconds, the rest being mere aftermath
and cerebral embellishment (LeDoux 1996, Panksepp 1992, Damasio 1999).
An emotion, so understood, is a brief, preconscious, precognitive, more or
less automatic excitation of an affect program. Now, I do not deny for a
moment the fascinating work that these researchers have done and are
doing, but I am more interested in substantial processes that last a long
time—lifelong love, for instance. I am interested, in other words, not in
those brief “irruptive” reactions or responses but in the long-term narra-
tives of Othello, Iago, Lily Bart, and those of my less drama-ridden but

78

emotion, appraisal, and cognition

nevertheless very emotional friends. I am interested in the meanings of life,
not short-term neurological arousal.

Those bold and intriguing discoveries in the neurobiology of emotion
have stimulated a mantra of sorts, “Emotion before cognition,” which rather
leaves the cognitive theory with its pants down, so to speak. (A fair turn,
one might argue, from my old slogan, “Emotions are judgments,” i.e., “No
emotion without cognition.”) But the very statement of the new mantra
provokes a cognitivist rejoinder: Surely the very fact of a response indicates
some form of recognition, and (just to say the obvious) recognition is a
form of cognition. What gets thrown into question, therefore, is not the
intimate connection between emotion and cognition but the nature of cog-
nition itself. Cognition is not to be understood only as conscious and artic-
ulate. There are primitive preconceptual forms of cognition, “a cognitive
neuroscience of emotion” (Lane 1999). These are not the forms of cognition
or emotion that primarily interest me, perhaps, but they are extremely im-
portant in understanding not only the very brief phenomena studied by
the neuroscientists but also the long-term emotional psycho-dramas that
do interest me. Whatever else I may have meant or implied by my slogan
“Emotions are judgments,” I was not thinking of necessarily conscious—
or self-conscious—reﬂective, articulate judgments.

So, emotions are cognitive and they are processes, often long-term pro-
cesses (and not merely “dispositions” to have brief emotional “episodes”).
But “cognition” is a not very informative technical term, and there has
been a lively debate (within the “cognitivist” camp) whether the type of
cognition in question is best thought of as a belief, a thought, a judgment,
or as something else. Many authors, Jeffrey Murphy and Kendall Walton,
for example, suggest beliefs. Jerome Neu (1977) suggests that the cognitive
elements that matter most are thoughts, a view that (at least nominally)
goes back to Descartes and Spinoza. Several philosophers join me in de-
fending the theory that emotions are evaluative judgments, a view that can
be traced back to the Stoics. Cheshire Calhoun has suggested “seeing as”
and Robert Roberts has offered us “construal” as alternative, more percep-
tual ways of understanding cognition in emotion (Calhoun 1984, Roberts
1988). Other theorists, especially in psychology and cognitive science, play
it safe with “cognitive elements” or “cognitive structures” (e.g. Ortony,
Clore, and Collins 1988; Gordon 1987). Some psychologists have argued
that “appraisals” are “cognitions” (Lazarus 1970, 1994).

Many philosophers still prefer the technical term intentionality, al-
though interpretations of this technical concept are often even less helpful
than “cognition” (Kenny 1963). Patricia Greenspan has employed “belief
warrant” while rejecting the “cognitive” theory in its more committal forms
(Greenspan 1988). Michael Stocker (1996) is more directly combative when
he rejects all of this in the defense of “affect” and “affective states,” al-
though I have always suspected and will again here that Stocker’s “affect”

emotions as engagements with the world

79

sneaks in a lot of what others portray as cognition. Ronald de Sousa (1987)
suggests “paradigm scenarios,” an intriguing and more contextual and be-
havioral conception that is intended (among other things) to undermine
the cognitive theory.

I think the common linkage between emotion and belief is misleading.
Beliefs and emotions are related in many important ways: belief as precon-
dition or presupposition of emotion, and belief as brought about by emotion
(say, by way of wishful thinking or rationalization). But belief isn’t the right
sort of psychological entity to constitute emotion. Beliefs are necessarily
dispositions, but an emotion is, at least in part, an experience. A belief as
such is not ever experienced. Belief may be perfectly appropriate in explain-
ing emotion but it is inappropriate in the analysis of emotion. Moreover,
belief is too loosely tied to perception to account for those cases where one
has an emotion immediately upon coming into a situation, and it is too
tightly tied to the logic of propositions to explain, for example, how it is
that we can often hold conﬂicting (but not literally contradictory) emotions
at the same time. Moreover, beliefs are propositional attitudes while many
emotions are not (which is what’s wrong with Grifﬁths’s characterization).
If Fred loves Mary and hates spinach, the objects of his emotions are Mary
and spinach, respectively, not propositions. If Mary believes that spinach is
good for you (and that, perhaps, is why she loves it) the object of her belief
(but not her emotion) is the proposition that spinach is good for you.

In his early work—and I see little evidence of radical change since—
Jerome Neu took the deﬁning element of emotion to be the very Spinozistic
notion of a “thought.” He makes it quite clear that one cannot have an
emotion (or a particular kind of emotion) without certain types of
thoughts. Emotions, simply stated, are thoughts, or dispositions to have
thoughts, or deﬁned by thoughts. (I am not considering here the very gen-
eral Cartesian sense of cogitationes that would include virtually any mental
process, state, or event, making the claim that emotions are thoughts ut-
terly uninformative.) At the very least, Neu is correct when he says that
thoughts are indicative of emotions and are typically produced during emo-
tions. But I think that the notion of a “thought” is too speciﬁc and involves
too much intellect to provide a general account of the emotions. To be sure,
a person with an emotion will have thoughts appropriate to the emotion
and the context shaped and constrained by his or her language and culture.
In the case of adult human emotions, I think that this may necessarily be
so. But if belief
is too dispositional to capture the essence of emotion,
thoughts are too episodic for emotions, which often turn out to be enduring
processes rather than mere episodes. Thus a thought may punctuate and
manifest an emotion, but it is in itself not a process. (Thinking, of course,
is a process, but thinking is clearly too cerebral to characterize most emo-
tions.)

80

emotion, appraisal, and cognition

I would thus challenge Jerome Neu’s Blake-inspired title, “A Tear Is an
Intellectual Thing” (Neu 2000), on the grounds that it is not the intellect
that is typically engaged in emotion. But it is often charged (from the other
side) that cognitive theory—which is conﬂated with the view that emotions
are products of the intellect—excludes affect. The fact that many if not most
emotions are nonreﬂective, however, has no bearing on the question
whether (so-called) affect might be an essential part of the cognitive aspect
of emotional experience. Thus what continues to exercise me are the am-
biguity and confusion sown by both the overly vague notion of a “cogni-
tive” theory of emotion and the accusation (made, for instance, by Michael
Stocker [1976] and more recently by Peter Goldie [2000]) that such theories
are pathologically dissociative insofar as they deny or neglect affective feel-
ings. I want to argue that a cognitive theory can include affect, or much
of what is intended by that misleading term.

Doubts about belief and thoughts explain the appeal of “perception”
as the “cognitive element” most appropriate to the analysis of emotion.
Ronnie de Sousa makes this case, as did John Dewey years ago, and I think
that perception does indeed capture the heart of one kind of emotional
experience, that which I would call “immediate” (though without bringing
in the heavy philosophical baggage that term conjures up in the history of
epistemology)—that is, those examples in which I have an emotional re-
action to a situation unfolding right in front of my eyes, as in the sorts of
examples employed (for obvious reasons) by William James in his classic
analysis of emotion. Pointing out the close link between emotion and per-
ception seems to me a plausible way of proceeding. Indeed one of its virtues
is that it blocks the insidious distinction (still favored by some positivistic
psychologists) that perception is one thing, while appraisal, evaluation,
interpretation, and emotional response are all something else. Again, I
prefer the concept of judgment precisely because it maintains these close
ties to perception but at the same time is fully conceivable apart from per-
ception.

De Sousa also introduces the tantalizing and very fruitful idea of a
“paradigm scenario.” In his book The Rationality of Emotion (1987), de
Sousa does not take this as a speciﬁcation of cognition so much as an
alternative to cognition. His notion has an explicitly developmental and
evolutionary bent, and his shift from emotional content to emotion context
and behavioral training has always seemed to me a huge step forward in
philosophical emotions research. De Sousa’s theory also has two more vir-
tues: its explicit bringing in the body in a behavioral (not physiological)
mode and its explicitly social nature, where other people are not just objects
of our emotions or those who (in some sense) share our emotions but, in
a critical sense, coconspirators in the cultivation of our emotions.

emotions as engagements with the world

81

emotions as judgments reconsidered

Back there in ancient history, in “Emotions and Choice” (1973) and The
Passions (1976), I suggested “judgment” to capture the close but not essen-
tial link between emotions and perception, leaving lots of room for emotions
that were evoked by memories or associations and even emotions that could
be cultivated through thought and reﬂection. If Neu had the camaraderie
of the neo-Stoical Spinoza, I could claim a linkage with the original Stoics,
although I obviously rejected their conclusion that emotions as judgments
are as such irrational. I confess that I became wedded to the term judgment,
and I spent a good many years insisting on all of the things I did not mean
by that. In particular, I denied that judgments had to be magisterial or
detached, that they were essentially episodic as opposed to processes devel-
oped over time (although, to be sure, one can make a judgment at a par-
ticular moment), that they were necessarily articulate or for that matter
conscious. I took it as uncontroversial that animals make all sorts of judg-
ments (e.g., whether something is worth eating, or worth chasing, or worth
courting), but none of these are articulated or “spelled out,” nor are they
subject to reﬂection. And I insisted that we make nonreﬂective, nondeliber-
ative, inarticulate judgments, for instance, kinesthetic judgments, all the
time. Kinesthetic judgments are rarely deliberative and rarely merit con-
scious attention, but they characterize an essential aspect of our ongoing
engagement in the world. Michael Stocker has a poignant story about his
falling on the ice, thus making both his fear and his bodily awareness
painfully conscious. But the example only illuminates the fact that such
judgments are not usually conscious at all.

Judgments, unlike thoughts, are geared to perception and may apply
directly to the situation we are in, but we can also make all sorts of judg-
ments in the utter absence of any object of perception. Thus while I ﬁnd
the language of “thought” just too intellectual, too sophisticated, and too
demanding in terms of linguistic ability, articulation, and reﬂection to apply
to all emotions, “judgment” seems to me to have the range and ﬂexibility
to apply to everything from animal and infant emotions to the most so-
phisticated and complex adult human emotions such as jealousy, resent-
ment, and moral indignation. In other words, I argued the following to be
essential features of emotion and judgment: they are about the world (in-
cluding oneself in the world). They are episodic but possibly long-term pro-
cesses as well. They must span conscious and nonconscious awareness. (In
fact, I would argue, these are ill conceived as a simple polarity. There are
many “levels” of consciousness.) Emotions as judgments must accept as
their “objects” both propositions and ordinary objects of perception (imag-
ination, memory, etc.). They must be appropriate both in the presence of
their objects and in their absence. They must involve appraisals and eval-
uations without necessarily involving (or excluding) reﬂective appraisals

82

emotion, appraisal, and cognition

and evaluations. They must stimulate thoughts and encourage beliefs (as
well as being founded on beliefs) without being nothing more than thoughts
or beliefs themselves. And, of considerable importance to my larger view,
they must artfully bridge the categories of the voluntary and the involun-
tary.

Thus emotions are like judgments, and emotions necessarily involve
judgments. Does this entitle me to say that emotions arejudgments? Well,
not by logic alone, needless to say, and not if saying that emotions are
judgments is intended to preclude emotions involving desires, intentions,
feelings, and so on. But as a heuristic analysis and a way of understanding
the peculiarities of emotion, I think it is of value. But, of course, an emotion
is not a single judgment. An emotion is rather a complex of
judgments
and, sometimes, quite sophisticated judgments, such as judgments of re-
sponsibility (in shame, anger, and embarrassment) or judgments of com-
parative status (as in contempt and resentment). Emotions as judgments
are not necessarily (or usually) conscious or deliberative or even articulate,
but we certainly can articulate, attend to, and deliberate regarding our emo-
tions and emotion-judgments, and we do so whenever we think our way
into an emotion, “work ourselves up” to anger, or jealousy, or love. But the
idea that we can and do “work ourselves” into an emotional state suggests
a way that “judgment” is still inadequate to capture the nature of (at least
some) emotions. When we make ourselves angry or “fall” (leap) into love
it is not as if we simply come to “see” the world differently. We become
deeply engaged in it. We produce in ourselves powerful demands and ex-
pectations and we project onto the “object” (the other person) the possible
fulﬁllment or frustration of those demands and expectations. “Judgment”
is less than adequate not because it is too detached or cerebral but because
it fails to make fully explicit our active engagement in the world.

What has always attracted me to de Sousa’s notion of a “paradigm
scenario” is the fact that it embeds an emotion and its cultivation in a
social context. It makes clear that an emotion is not just an individual
creation but is in essence “political”—that is, it has to do with our relations
with other people (Solomon 1998). So, too, I excitedly read Jonathan Lear’s
admirable interpretation of Freud (Lear 1990), which rightly excoriates
Freud for his ill-deﬁned conviction that emotions are biological “drives” and
suggests instead the thesis that emotions are engagements in the world. I
think that this is essentially right, although when Lear goes on to insist
that the essence of all such engagements is “love,” I ﬁnd his argument
considerably less compelling. But I continued to realize that the core of the
theory I had been developing for decades was the dynamic nature of emo-
tions. It was always driven by my existentialism. That is why I have been
so adamantly opposed to “primitivism” and insistent on the degree to which
we should think of our emotions as our “doing” and as our responsibility.
The idea that emotions are judgments supports that thesis, but meekly. (The

emotions as engagements with the world

83

fact that we “make” judgments does not yield the conclusion that we choose
or are responsible for our emotions.) But the existential idea that through
our emotions we are engaged in the world (or as Heidegger wrote, we are
“tuned into” the world) not only supports the possibility of choice and
responsibility but also has built into it just that ambiguity between willfully
engaging and “getting caught up in” that captures the fundamental am-
biguity of the emotions themselves.

I am willing to acknowledge that different cognitive candidates may
work better or worse for different emotions, and here I see further reason
to heed and embellish the warning that Amelie Rorty and Paul Grifﬁths
(for very different reasons) have issued—that “emotion” is not an adequate
category for across-the-board analysis. Different emotions employ different
kinds of cognition and require different kinds of analysis. There are more
or less active emotions and more or less passive emotions (e.g., anger and
grief, respectively). This is the virtue, perhaps, of such noncommittal no-
tions as “cognitive elements” or “cognitive structures.” They are elastic
enough to cover just about anything vaguely conceptual, evaluative, or
perceptual. But while these seem to me to be useful conceptual tools for
working out the general framework of cognitive theory, they clearly lack
the phenomenological speciﬁcity that I am calling for here. Judgment seems
to me to be, all in all, the most versatile candidate in the cognitive analysis
of emotion. Engagement, however, seems to me an apt interpretation of
the kind of judgment I want to pursue in a dynamic analysis of emotions.
But by embracing the whole host of cognitive candidates, it is left open
whether some emotions might be better analyzed in terms of perception,
others in terms of thoughts or judgments, others in terms of construals,
still others in yet more dynamic terms. The real work will continue to be
with regard to particular emotions, and often with speciﬁc regard for the
particular instance of a particular sort of emotion. Thus a “theory of emo-
tion” might be too much to expect, as Amelie Rorty has argued (and argues
in this volume), but it is always a good place to start, if only to appreciate
the fascinating variety of phenomena we want to understand.

what is affect? emotional experience,
feelings, and the body
Michael Stocker and, more recently, Peter Goldie have accused the cognitive
theory of neglecting feelings, or “affect.” I have said that in The Passions I
was dismissive of the “feeling theory” that then seemed to rule what pass-
ing interest there was in the emotions (particularly in the work of William
James and his successors). I argued that whatever else it might be, an
emotion was no mere feeling (interpreting this, as James did, as a bodily
set of sensations). But what has increasingly concerned me ever since and

84

emotion, appraisal, and cognition

brought me back to James is the role of the body in emotion, and not only
the brain. In my original theory, it was by no means clear that the body
had any essential role in emotion. I presumed, of course, that all emotional
experience had as its causal substratum various processes in the brain, but
this had little to do with the nature of emotion as such, as experienced.
But as for the various physiological disturbances and disruptions that serve
such a central purpose in James’s analysis and in later accounts of emotion
as “arousal,” I was as dismissive as could be, relegating all such phenomena
to the causal margins of emotion, as merely accompaniments or secondary
effects.

Much of what makes up emotional experience, of course, are the com-
plexes of our experiences of the world (including ourselves), shaped and
colored by appraisals and judgments and the peculiarities of this or that
particular emotional perspective. I used to think that this was all that was
essential to emotional experience, and again, I treated the feelings of
arousal and the like as experiential marginalia, of little importance to the
phenomenological experience that could be understood only via the cog-
nitive complexes that shaped emotional experience as such. But what led
me to an increasing concern about both the role of the body and the nature
and role of bodily feelings in emotion was the suspicion that my judgment
theory had been cut too thin, that in the pursuit of an alternative to the
feeling theory I had veered too far in the other direction. I am now coming
to appreciate that accounting for the bodily feelings (not just sensations) in
emotion is not a secondary concern and not independent of appreciating
the essential role of the body in emotional experience. By this I do not
mean anything having to do with neurology or the tricky mind-body re-
lationship linked with Descartes and Cartesianism but rather the concern
about the kinds of bodily experience that typify emotion and the bodily man-
ifestations of emotion in immediate expression. These are not mere inci-
dentals, and understanding them will provide a concrete and phenome-
nologically rich account of emotional feelings in place of the fuzzy and
ultimately content-free notion of “affect.”

The role of physiology in feeling is not straightforward. On the one
hand, many physiological changes (including autonomic nervous system
responses) have clearly experiential consequences—for instance ﬂushing
and the quickening of the heartbeat. Many others (including most neuro-
logical activities) do not. James was rather indiscriminate in his speciﬁcation
of bodily and “visceral” disturbances, but when he clearly referred to just
those bodily processes (not necessarily disturbances) that had clear experi-
ential or phenomenological effects, he did indeed capture something of im-
portance even if he short-changed the nature of the emotion itself. I now
agree that bodily feelings have been “left out” of the cognitive account, but
I also believe that “cognition” or “judgment” properly construed captures

emotions as engagements with the world

85

that missing ingredient. The analogy with kinesthetic judgments suggests
the possibility of bringing feelings of the body into the analysis of emotion
in a straightforward way.

What are the bodily feelings in emotion (though, to be sure, an emotion
may last much longer than any given feelings, and feelings may outlast an
emotion by several minutes or more)? The workings of the autonomic ner-
vous system (quickened pulse, galvanic skin response, release of hormones,
sweating) have obvious phenomenological manifestations (feeling excited,
“tingly,” feeling ﬂushed). Moreover, the whole range of bodily preparations
and postures, many of them but not all of them within the realm of the
voluntary, have phenomenological manifestations. Here too the well-
cataloged realm of
facial expression in emotion plays an important role.
The feelings of our “making a face” in anger or disgust constitute an im-
portant element in our felt experiences of those emotions. So do other forms
of emotional expression. The category of “action readiness” defended by
Nico Frijda and others seems to me to be particularly signiﬁcant here, not
only in terms of a dispositional analysis of emotional behavior but rather
in an account of emotion feelings. What is commonly called “arousal”
might much better be considered as an aspect of “action readiness.” Anger
involves taking up a defensive posture, and some of the distinctive sensa-
tions of getting angry have to do with the tensing of the various muscles
of the body and bodily preparation for physical aggression. All of these are
obviously akin to kinesthetic feelings, the feelings through which we nav-
igate and “keep in touch with” our bodies. But these are not just sensations
or perceptions of goings-on in the body. Both arousal and action readiness
should be subsumed under the more general phenomenological rubric of
getting engaged in the world.

The voluntary status of these various emotion preparations and ex-
pressions is intriguing. Many gestures are obviously voluntary and the feel-
ings that go along with them are the feelings of activity and not passivity.
Some bodily preparations, even those that are not autonomic nervous sys-
tem responses, are not voluntary, and our feelings are more of “what’s
happening” than of “I’m doing this.” Facial expressions are an especially
intriguing category in this regard. Paul Ekman and others have analyzed
what most of us have recognized: the difference between (for example)
smiles that are genuine (that is, to a certain extent involuntary) and smiles
that are “forced” (that is, voluntary but to some extent incompetent).
Action-readiness includes both autonomic (involuntary) as well as quite
conscious and reﬂective posturing—for example, adopting a face and stance
ﬁt for the occasion, a darkened frown and threatening gesture in anger, a
“shame-faced” expression and a gesture of withdrawal or hiding in shame,
a sentimental, even teary-eyed smile and a tender gesture in love. And each
of these has its phenomenological manifestations, its characteristic sensa-

86

emotion, appraisal, and cognition

tions or feelings that are part and parcel of emotional experience (whether
noticed or recognized as such or not).

To put my current thinking in a nutshell, I think that a great deal of
what is unhelpfully called “affect” and “affectivity” and is supposedly miss-
ing from cognitive accounts can be identiﬁed with the body, or what I will
call (no doubt to howls of
indignation) the judgments of the body. George
Downing has put the matter quite beautifully in some of his recent work.
He writes of “bodily micro-practices” and suggests that emotions are to a
very extent constituted by these (Downing 2001). This could, of course, be
taken as just another attempt at behavioral reductionism, but Downing also
insists that an emotion is essentially an experience. He also is quite happy
to insist that cognitions (judgments) are also an essential part of any emo-
tional experience. But he adds, and I agree, that a good deal of cognition
is of a radically prelinguistic (very misleadingly called “precognitive”) na-
ture. Building on the work of Hubert Dreyfus and suggestions in Heidegger
and Bourdieu, Downing insists that a good deal of emotional experience
and even emotional knowledge can be identiﬁed in the development of these
bodily micropractices.

Does it make sense to call these judgments? I am sure the answer is
yes, and I would defend this in two steps. First, I have already insisted that
judgments are not necessarily articulate or conscious and so the sorts of
discriminations we make and the construals that we perform are sometimes
(often) made without our awareness of, much less reﬂection on, our doing
so. Second, a relatively small store of human knowledge is of the form
“knowing that.” Philosophers, of course, are naturally concerned with such
knowledge, and that leads them not unnaturally to the prejudice that only
such propositional knowledge is important. Not that they deny the need for
all sorts of nonverbal skills of the “knowing how” variety, but these are
hardly the stuff of philosophical analysis. First, perhaps, because there may
be nothing distinctively human about them (animals display such nonver-
bal skills at least as impressively as humans) and second, it is well known
that “knowing how” cannot be reduced to any number of “knowing that”–
type propositions. But it is a distortion of cognition and consciousness to
suggest that “knowing that”–type propositional knowledge is in any way
primary or independent of “knowing how.” The thesis here obviously takes
us back to Heidegger and Merleau-Ponty (and to a lesser extent, to Heideg-
ger’s onetime disciple Gilbert Ryle). But since I have already insisted that
emotional judgments are not necessarily propositional but rather ways of
engaging the world, the way is open to make the further claim that they
are not necessarily “knowing that”–type cognitions either.

It goes without saying that many of our most “knowing” responses to
the world and the ways in which we bring meaning to our world may have
more to do with the habits and practices we perform than with the ways

emotions as engagements with the world

87

in which we think about and describe the world. Feelings of comfort (and
discomfort) have a great deal to do with doing the familiar and ﬁnding
ourselves acting in familiar ways with familiar responses. Feelings of com-
fort and discomfort range from satisfaction, frustration, and low-level anx-
iety to exuberant joy, full-blown anxiety, rage, and panic. Anger often in-
volves feelings of discomfort, but to be anger (and not just frustration or
irritation), the emotion must be further directed by way of some sort of
blame, which in turn involves feelings of aggression and hostility that may
themselves be readily traced (as James did) to speciﬁc modes of arousal in
the body (tensing of muscles, etc). So, too, shame is at least in part a feeling
of discomfort with other people, a feeling of rejection, as love is (in part) a
feeling of unusual oneness with another. Feelings are not just sensations,
nor are they mysterious “affects,” but felt bodily engagements with the
world.

Thus the judgments that I claim are constitutive of emotion may be
nonpropositional and bodily as well as propositional and articulate. They
manifest themselves as feelings. They may become reﬂective and self-
conscious. What is cognition? I would still insist that it is basically judg-
ment, both reﬂective and prereﬂective, both knowing how (as skills and
practices) and knowing that (as propositional knowledge). A cognitive the-
ory of emotion thus embodies what is often referred to as “affect” and
“feeling” without rendering these unanalyzable. They may not be analyz-
able in the mode of propositional analysis, but neither are they simply
manifestations of the biological substratum, as James and Grifﬁths suggest.
There are feelings, “affects” if you like, critical to emotion, but they are not
distinct from cognition or judgment and they are not mere “read-outs” of
processes going on in the body. They are judgments of the body, and this is
the “missing” element in the cognitive theory of emotions. They are pro-
found manifestations of our many ways of emotionally engaging with the
world.

NOTES

1. See, e.g., Coleman 1990,
2. See Solomon 2002.
3. See Grifﬁths 1997; Baier 1977; Solomon 1988.

88

emotion, appraisal, and cognition

