pates the Holocaust; Wallace Stevens’s short
poem of 1942, “The man on the dump,”
preﬁgures our present situation in which the
whole earth is becoming a garbage dump.
Miller has inﬂuenced several generations
of critics. He describes his vocation as the
responsibility to account for literary works
by teaching them or by writing essays about
them that are attentive to their linguistic
complexities, to what might be called their
“rhetoric.”

SEE ALSO: Bloom, Harold; Deconstruction;
Derrida, Jacques; Ethical Criticism;
de Man, Paul; Yale School

REFERENCES AND SUGGESTED
READINGS

Bloom, H., Derrida, J., Miller, J. H., de Man, P., &
Hartman, G. (1979). Deconstruction and Criti-
cism. New York: Continuum.

Miller, J. H. (1958). Charles Dickens: The World of
His Novels. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.

Miller, J. H. (1963). The Disappearance of God: Five
Nineteenth-Century Writers. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.

Miller, J. H. (1965). Poets of Reality: Six Twentieth-
Century Writers. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.

Miller, J. H. (1970). Thomas Hardy: Distance and
Desire.Cambridge,MA:HarvardUniversityPress.
Miller, J. H. (1977). The critic as host. Critical

Inquiry, 3(3), 439–447.

Miller, J. H. (1982). Fiction and Repetition: Seven
English Novels. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.

Miller, J. H. (1985). The Linguistic Moment: From
Wordsworth to Stevens. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.

Miller, J. H. (1986). The Ethics of Reading: Kant, de
James, and Benjamin.

Man, Eliot, Trollope,
New York: Columbia University Press.

Miller, J. H. (1987). Presidential Address 1986:
The triumph of theory, the resistance to reading
and the question of the material base. PMLA,
102(3), 281–291.

M I M I C R Y 709

Miller,

J. H.

(1990). Versions of Pygmalion.

Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Miller, J. H. (1991). Hawthorne and History: Defa-
cing It. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.

Miller, J. H. (1992a). Ariadne’s Thread: Story Lines.

New Haven: Yale University Press.

Miller, J. H. (1992b). Illustration. Cambridge, MA:

Harvard University Press.

Miller, J. H. (1994). Topographies. Stanford: Stan-

ford University Press.

Miller, J. H. (1998). Reading Narrative. Norman:

Oklahoma University Press.

Miller, J. H. (2001a). Others. Princeton: Princeton

University Press.

Miller, J. H. (2001b). Speech Acts in Literature.

Stanford: Stanford University Press.

Miller,

J. H.
Routledge.

(2002). On Literature. London:

Miller, J. H. (2005). Literature as Conduct: Speech
in Henry James. New York: Fordham

Acts
University Press.

Miller, J. H. (2009a). For Derrida. New York: Ford-

ham University Press.

Miller, J. H. (2009b). The Medium is the Maker:
Browning, Freud, Derrida and the New Telepathic
Ecotechnologies. Brighton: Sussex Academic.

Miller, J. H., & Asensi, M. (1999). Black Holes.

Stanford: Stanford University Press.

Norris, C. (1988). Deconstruction and the Interests

of Theory. London: Pinter.

Mimicry
STEPHEN MORTON

Mimicry in its conventional sense is the
action, practice, or art of copying or closely
imitating, or reproducing through mime
(OED). In this deﬁnition, mimicry is closely
related to mimesis or the practice of repre-
sentation in literature, performance, and
the visual arts. Yet in contrast to mimesis,
which often seeks to reproduce an image of
the object that is being copied, mimicry can
have a humorous and even subversive po-
tential that deliberately sets out to challenge
the meaning of the object that is being
copied or represented. This is not to say

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

710 M I M I C R Y

and the
the

that the act or practice of imitation is re-
stricted to literature
visual
arts, however,
imitation of
since
other human beings is also one of the for-
mative processes through which children
learn to speak, act, and perform as socialized
human subjects. Furthermore, in biology,
the practice of mimicry denotes the close
external resemblance of an animal or plant
to another, or to an inanimate object
(OED), in some instances as a tactic of
self-defense.

The

French

psychoanalyst

Jacques
Lacan has provided a signiﬁcant account
of mimicry, which has inﬂuenced some of
the most well-known theories of mimicry,
especially that of the postcolonial theorist
Homi K. Bhabha, the feminist philosopher
Luce Irigaray, and the social
theorist
Judith Butler. In his Seminar XI, pub-
lished in English as The Four Fundamental
Concepts of Psychoanalysis (1998[1973]),
Lacan invoked the concept of mimicry
to formulate his theory of the gaze. In
his deﬁnition, the gaze is synonymous
with the object of looking or the scopic
drive. For Lacan, the gaze refers to the gaze
of another who looks at a subject and the
subject who gazes at the other person in
the act of gazing at them. As he puts it:
“You never look at me from the place from
which I see you” (103). Lacan develops
this idea in a chapter from his Seminar XI
titled “The line and light,” in which he
argues that “the facts of mimicry” provide
the subject with a “phenomenal domain”
that “enables us to view the subject in
absolute overview” (98). He does not elab-
orate on what he means by the “facts of
mimicry” in this chapter; instead, he con-
ﬁnes himself to the question of how im-
portant “the function of adaptation” is in
mimicry (98). To address this question,
Lacan begins by invoking an example from
biological science, in which “an animal-
cule” adapts to the colour of the natural

environment
against the light. As he puts it:

in order to defend itself

In an environment in which, because of
what is immediately around, the colour green
predominates, as at the bottom of a pool
containing green plants, an animalcule – there
are numerous ones that might serve as exam-
ples – becomes green for as long as the light
may do it harm. It becomes green, therefore,
in order to reﬂect the light qua green, thus
protecting itself, by adaptation,
from its
effects. (98)

For

Lacan,

however, mimicry

is
something “quite different” (99) from ad-
aptation. Citing the example of a small
crustacean that imitates the particular phase
of a quasi-plant animal known as brio-
zoaires, which resembles the shape of a stain,
Lacan asserts that this crustacean demon-
strates the “origin of mimicry” because “[i]t
becomes a stain, it becomes a picture, it is
inscribed in the function of the picture”
(99). In so doing, Lacan draws a parallel
between the function of mimicry in the
natural world and the function of mimicry
or imitation in the visual arts. Furthermore,
drawing on Roger Callois’s theory of mim-
icry in The Mask of Medusa, Lacan argues
that mimicry “reveals something in so far as
it is distinct from what might be called an
itself that is behind” and that “the effect of
mimicry is camouﬂage, in the strictly tech-
nical sense.” In other words, “It is not a
question of harmonizing with the back-
ground but, of becoming mottled – exactly
like the technique of camouﬂage practiced
in human warfare” (99).

Lacan’s account of mimicry as a form of
camouﬂage is particularly crucial to the
postcolonial
theorist Homi K. Bhabha,
who applies this idea to colonial discourse.
In Bhabha’s argument, “colonial mimicry is
the desire for a reformed, recognizable Oth-
er, that is almost the same, but not quite”
(1994:
is

86). Mimicry

for Bhabha

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

by

it

in

on

“Minute

displaying

“constructed around an ambivalence,” and,
as a consequence, colonial discourse is
“stricken by an ambivalence” whereby the
colonized subject threatens to destabilize
the authority of colonial discourse (86).
Invoking Charles Grant’s “Observations
on the state of society among the Asiatic
subjects of Great Britain” (1792) and Thom-
as Macaulay’s
Indian
Education” (1835), Bhabha asserts that
these texts exemplify the radical instability
of colonial mimicry in their attempt to
produce a “reformed” colonial
subject
through institutions of European learning
and colonial power. To elucidate this insta-
bility of mimicry, Bhabha refers to Lacan’s
theory as a form of camouﬂage: “[M]imicry
is like camouﬂage, not a harmonisation of
repression of difference, but a form of re-
semblance, that differs from or defends
presence
part,
metonymically” (90). A metonym denotes
a particular kind of rhetorical ﬁgure in
which a particular object is evoked by its
parts. In Bhabha’s explanation of Lacan,
mimicry operates as a form of metonymy
because the subject of mimicry mimics a
particular aspect of the subject being imi-
tated, such as the cultural habits, speech,
non-verbal physical gestures, or costume of
that subject. For Bhabha, the place of the
subject of mimicry is beyond representa-
tion, and in that precise sense the subject
may not seem to exist as a positive presence.
In this sense, Bhabha seems to follow
Lacan’s rather elliptical observation that
mimicry “reveals something in so far as it
is distinct from what might be called an itself
that is behind” (Lacan 1998: 99). Signiﬁ-
cantly, Bhabha’s account of mimicry also
resonates with the increasingly politicized,
bhadralok class in early twentieth-century
colonial Bengal. Members of this young,
upper-middle-class elite group were trained
in the British colonial education system in
India and imitated the cultural manners of

M I M I C R Y 711

the British, while, at the same time, they
plotted against the British Empire through
the establishment of seditious newspapers
and secret societies. Such a subversive form
of mimicry could be understood as an ex-
ample of what Bhabha elsewhere refers to as
“sly civility.” in that it imitates the cultural
signs and practices associated with British
colonial civility, while secretly plotting its
demise.

Bhabha’s theory of mimicry bears a con-
ceptual resemblance to the French feminist
philosophy of Luce Irigaray. In This Sex
Which is Not One (1985[1977]), Irigaray
argues that in the masculine logic of gen-
dered representation there is only one role
available to “the feminine” – “that of
mimicry” (76). In Irigaray’s argument, the
critical task for the feminine subject deﬁned
by the masculine logic of European thought
and representation is to strategically assume
the “feminine role” of mimic deliberately so
as to “convert a form of subordination into
afﬁrmation, and thus to begin to thwart it”
(76). As she goes on to explain:

To play with mimesis is thus, for a woman, to
try to recover the place of her exploitation by
discourse, without allowing herself to be sim-
ply reduced to it. It means to resubmit herself
– inasmuch as she is on the side of the
“perceptible,” of “matter” – to “ideas,” in
particular to ideas about herself, that are
elaborated in/by a masculine logic, but so
as to make “visible,” by an effect of playful
repetition, what was supposed to remain
invisible: the cover-up of a possible operation
of the feminine in language. It also means “to
unveil” the fact that, if women are such good
mimics, it is because they are not simply
absorbed in this function. (76)

If mimicry for Irigaray offers a mode of
subverting the masculine order of mimesis,
for social theorist Judith Butler, mimicry
can in some circumstances offer a rhetorical
strategy for subverting predominant hetero-

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

712 M I M I C R Y

its

reveal

normative gender roles. Butler describes
how “the parodic repetition of gender
exposes . . . the illusion of gender identity
as an intractable depth and inner substance”
(1990: 146). In Butler’s argument, gender is
“an ‘act’ . . . that is open to splittings, self-
parody, self-criticism, and those hyperbolic
exhibitions of ‘the natural’ that, in their very
exaggeration,
fundamentally
phantasmatic status” (147). Here, mimicry,
or the radical restaging of gender as an act,
may seem to destabilize the discursive con-
struction of sex as a natural, biological fact.
Such a destabilization is particularly exem-
pliﬁed for Butler in “the cultural practices of
drag, cross-dressing, and the sexual styliza-
tion of butch/femme identities.” As she puts
it, “In imitating gender, drag implicitly
reveals the imitative structure of gender itself
– as well as its contingency” (137; emphasis
original).

a

key

sequence

Another example of mimicry that both
combines and develops Bhabha’s account of
mimicry with that of Irigaray can be found
in Ranjana Khanna’s analysis of Algerian
women’s role in the Algerian war. Khanna
examines
in Gillo
Pontecorvo’s 1966 ﬁlm The Battle of Algiers
in which three Algerian women remove
their veils in front of a mirror and assume
the guise of European women in order to
pass through a military checkpoint, inﬁl-
trate the French colonial city, and carry out a
bomb attack.
this
sequence, Khanna describes how the Alger-
ian women perform a version of Western
femininity that denies a sense of their his-
torical being and agency: “In the process of
transformation we get very little sense of
what these women are. They seem to be no
more than the images that have been created
. . . in the imagination of the French by . . .
Pontecorvo” (2008: 122). Instead of reﬂect-
ing an image of the Algerian women imi-
tating a European image of
femininity,
Khanna argues that the representation of

In her account of

Algerian women breaks down at the precise
moment that they unveil themselves on the
cinematic screen and in front of a mirror:
“The mirror scene in The Battle of Algiers,
where women, like actresses, dress and re-
hearse as they prepare to act, reﬂects the
drama of revolution and of ﬁlmmaking,
forming a space . . . where representation
breaks down because it turns in on itself”
(123).

What Khanna’s analysis of The Battle of
Algiers reveals is one of the limitations with
mimesis, both as a representational and as a
political strategy. For in restaging the ap-
pearance of European women, the political
identity, desire, and interests of the Algerian
women in this sequence are subordinated to
the cause of the Algerian national struggle, a
struggle that may not lead to the emanci-
pation of Algerian women. Alan Sinﬁeld
makes a similar criticism of mimicry in
his essay titled “Diaspora and hybridity”
(1996). In Sinﬁeld’s account, “Bhabha and
Butler are proposing that the subtle imper-
fection in subaltern imitation of colonial
discourse, or in the drag artist’s mimicking
of gender norms, plays back the dominant
manner in a way that discloses the precar-
iousness of its authority.” Yet Sinﬁeld is
sceptical of the subversive potential that
both Butler and Bhabha seem to assign to
mimicry/imitation:

I fear that imperialists cope all too conve-
niently with the subaltern mimic – simply,
he or she cannot be the genuine article be-
cause of an intrinsic inferiority; and gay pas-
tiche and its excesses may be easily pigeon-
holed as illustrating all too well that lesbians
and gay men can only play at true manliness
and womanliness. To say this is not to deny
resistance; only to doubt how far it may be
advanced by cultural hybridity” (282–3)

Mimicry may offer a space for agency
socially marginalized,

resistance for

or

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

“subaltern” groups to contest the authority
of a dominant class or group. Yet, as Judith
Butler suggests, this space is always contin-
gent and provisional.

SEE ALSO: Bhabha, Homi; Butler, Judith;
Irigaray, Luce; Lacan, Jacques;
Postcolonial Studies and Diaspora Studies

REFERENCES AND SUGGESTED
READINGS

Bhabha, H. (1994). The Location of Culture. London:

Routledge.

Butler, J. (1990). Gender Trouble: Feminism and the

Subversion of Identity. London: Routledge.

Irigaray, L. (1985). This Sex Which Is Not One (trans.
C. Porter). Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
(Original work published 1977.)

Khanna, R. (2008). Algeria Cuts: Women and Re-
presentation, 1830 to the Present. Stanford: Stan-
ford University Press.

Lacan, J. (1998). Seminar XI: The Four Fundamental
Concepts of Psychoanalysis. (ed. J.-A. Miller;
trans. A. Sheridan). New York: Norton. (Orig-
inal work published 1973.)

Sinﬁeld, A. (1996). Diaspora and hybridity: Queer
identities and the ethnicity model. Textual Prac-
tice, 10(2), 271–293.

Young, R. J. C. (1995). Colonial Desire: Hybridity in
Theory, Culture, and Race. London: Routledge.

Mitchell, W. J. T.
JONATHAN HENSHER

W. J. T. Mitchell (b. 1942) is a scholar and
theorist of media, visual art, and literature
and is Gaylord Donnelly Distinguished
Service Professor of English and Art
History at the University of Chicago. He
is also editor of Critical Enquiry. His
extremely wide-ranging output examines
the relations between text and image across
the frontiers of era and genre, from illumi-
nated manuscripts to Jurassic Park. Firmly
poststructuralist in his approach, Mitchell

M I T C H E L L, W. J. T.

713

consistently seeks to question the deﬁni-
tions and boundaries of the verbal and
the visual, rather than formulating any
monolithic
and
visuality.

textuality

theory

of

and

literature

Having begun his career as a scholar of
English
romanticism,
Mitchell’s work on the illustrated poems
of William Blake led him to engage more
generally with issues of the relation between
verbal and visual representation. In Iconol-
ogy (1986), certainly his most programmatic
work, Mitchell examines the work of four
theorists of verbal–visual relations: semio-
tician Nelson Goodman, art historian Ernst
Gombrich, and the
eighteenth-century
aesthetic and political theorists Gotthold
Lessing and Edmund Burke. He then
analyzes the role of visual
images and
technologies in the writings of political
philosopher Karl Marx. By historicizing
the ﬁeld of discourse on the verbal–visual
divide in this way, he problematizes such
engrained categories as the distinctions be-
tween conventional and natural signs, time
and space, and beauty and power that are
routinely left unquestioned in our dealings
with images.

Rather than proposing an “iconology” in
the sense of a “science of images,” then,
Mitchell seeks to elucidate the political
stakes invested in approaches to the visual.
Speciﬁcally, he points to an undeclared
“iconophobia” that pervades a vast range
of critical thought, from structuralist semi-
otic attempts to subsume images within a
“language” of the visible, through the im-
plicitly gendered accounts of the passive,
voiceless, feminized image (as opposed to
the sublime, masculine power of poetic
language) found in Enlightenment theories
of representation, to postmodern critiques
by theorists such as Jean Baudrillard of the
proliferation of “simulacra” in today’s mul-
timedia world. Mitchell argues, however,
that an uncritical celebration of the power

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

