02 Chapter 6.qxd  10/27/2008  1:54 PM  Page 77

SIX

social acceleration:
ethical and political consequences
of a desynchronized high-speed society

Hartmut Rosa

I. Social Acceleration in the Process of Modernization

In 1999, James Gleick, exploring everyday life in contemporary American
society, noted the “acceleration of just about everything”: love, life, speech,
politics, work, TV, leisure, etc.1 In this observation he certainly is not alone.
In popular as well as scientiWc discourse about the current evolution of West-
ern societies, acceleration Wgures as the single most striking and impor-
tant  feature.2 But  despite  the  noticeable  increase  in  the  discourse  about
acceleration and the shortage of time in recent years, the feeling that history,
culture, society, or even “time itself” in some strange way accelerates is not
new at all; it seems to be a constitutive trait of modernity as such. As his-
torians such as Reinhart Koselleck have persuasively argued, the general
sense of a speedup has accompanied modern society since at least the mid-
dle  of  the  eighteenth  century.3 And  indeed,  as  many  have  observed  and

1. James Gleick, Faster: The Acceleration of Just About Everything (New York: Pantheon Books,

1999).

2. William E. Scheuerman, “Liberal Democracy and the Empire of Speed,” Polity 34, no.
1 (2001): 41: “Any attempt to make sense of the human condition at the start of the new cen-
tury must begin with an analysis of time and space compression.” “Time-and-space compres-
sion” is David Harvey’s term for acceleration; see The Condition of Postmodernity: An Enquiry
into the Origins of Cultural Change (Cambridge, Mass.: Blackwell, 1989).

3. Cf. Reinhart Koselleck, Futures Past: On the Semantics of Historical Time (Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press, 1985). Koselleck demonstrates that complaints about the overwhelming
speed of modern history start well before the French Revolution and long before there is a
noticeable development of technological speed. The discourse on acceleration then periodically
peaks again and again during the following centuries. For example, in 1877 W. G. Greg observed

02 Chapter 6.qxd  10/27/2008  1:54 PM  Page 78

78

theoretical foundations

empirical evidence clearly suggests, the history of modernity seems to be
characterized by a wide-ranging speedup of all kinds of technological, eco-
nomic, social, and cultural processes and by a picking up of the general
pace of life. In terms of its structural and cultural impact on modern soci-
ety, this change in the temporal structures and patterns of modernity appears
to  be  just  as  pervasive  as  comparable  processes  of  individualization  or
rationalization. Like them, it seems, social acceleration is not a steady pro-
cess but evolves in waves (most often brought about by new technologies
or forms of socioeconomic organization), with each new wave meeting con-
siderable resistance as well as partial reversals. Most often, a wave of accel-
eration is followed by a rise in the “discourse of acceleration,” in which cries
for deceleration in the name of human needs and values are voiced but
eventually die down.4

However, contrary to the other constitutive features of the modernization
process, which have all been the object of extensive analysis—individual-
ization, rationalization, di¤erentiation (both functional and structural), and
the instrumental domestication of nature—the concept of acceleration still
lacks a clear and workable deWnition and a systematic sociological analysis.
Within systematic theories of modernity or modernization, acceleration is
virtually absent, with the notable exception of Paul Virilio’s “dromological”
approach to history, which, alas, hardly amounts to a theory. This surpris-
ing absence in the face of the empirical and discursive omnipresence of
processes of acceleration is arguably a reXection of the neglect of the tem-
poral  dimension  and  processual  nature  of  society  in  twentieth-century
sociological theory—a neglect noted by many authors, most famously per-
haps by Anthony Giddens and Niklas Luhmann.5 In the history of sociology,
modernization has mainly been analyzed from four di¤erent perspectives,

that the most signiWcant feature of his age was its high speed and the pressure it put on life,
and he voiced severe doubts whether this gain in speed was a good that was worth its price.
In 1907, Henry Adams formulated his famous “law of acceleration” (of history; reprinted in
this volume); cf. Robert Levine, A Geography of Time (New York: Basic Books, 1997) for fur-
ther historical observations of social acceleration. The subtitle of Douglas Coupland’s cele-
brated  novel  Generation  X Wts  perfectly  with  this  long  tradition.  Generation  X:  Tales  for  an
Accelerated Culture (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1991).

4. Thus, the protests and anxieties relating to the introduction of the steam engine, the
railway, the telephone, or the personal computer mirror in many respects the various “com-
munitarian” anxieties and protests against manifestations of individualization, or traditionalist
opposition against ensuing waves of rationalization—with rationalization generally being vic-
torious in the process of modernization.

5. See  Barbara  Adam,  Time  and  Social  Theory  (Cambridge:  Polity  Press,  1990),  for  an
attempt to systematically and comprehensively introduce the temporal dimension into social
theory.

02 Chapter 6.qxd  10/27/2008  1:54 PM  Page 79

Differentiation

(Paradox: Disintegration)

(Durkheim)

social acceleration

79

Rationalization

(Paradox: The iron cage)

(Weber)

Structure

Culture

Personality

Stance toward

nature

Individualization

(Paradox: Mass culture)

(Simmel)

Domestication

(Paradox: Environmental disaster)

(Marx)

Figure 1. The process of modernization I

prevalent, for example, in the works of Weber, Durkheim, Simmel, and
Marx, respectively: culture, social structure, personality type, and relation
to nature.6 From these perspectives, or material dimensions, the process of
modernization is identiWable as a process of rationalization, di¤erentiation,
individualization, or instrumental domestication, respectively (Wg. 1).

My claim here is that we cannot adequately understand the nature and
character of modernity and the logic of its structural and cultural develop-
ment unless we add the temporal perspective to our analysis. Of course,
the temporal dimension runs across the four material dimensions of soci-
ety and cannot neatly be separated from them in phenomenological terms;
there is no “social time” independent of these dimensions. The dominant
changes in them are closely linked to the cardinal change in temporal pat-
terns (acceleration), which alternatingly appears as their cause or their e¤ect.
In fact, it can be argued that many instances are actually driven by the logic
of acceleration. As I will brieXy try to demonstrate in the closing section of

6. This conceptualization of sociological attempts to grapple with processes of modern-
ization is suggested by Hans van der Loo and Willem van Reijen in Modernisierung. Projekt
und Paradox, 2nd ed. (Munich: Deutscher Taschenbuch, 1997), loosely adhering to Talcott
Parsons’s (notoriously static) outline of a “general system of action.”

02 Chapter 6.qxd  10/27/2008  1:54 PM  Page 80

80

theoretical foundations

this chapter, the drive toward social acceleration in modern societies might
in  fact  be  so  overriding  that  we  might  actually  Wnd  phenomena  of  de-
di¤erentiation and deindividualization in cases where di¤erentiation and
individualization have become hindrances to social acceleration.

Interestingly, Van der Loo and Van Reijen state that for each of the four
central processes of modernization there is a paradoxical Xipside that has
also frequently been the focus of social analysis. For example, individual-
ization goes hand in hand with the evolution of “mass culture,” the result
of rationalization could be imprisonment in a thoroughly irrational “iron
cage” (doomed to economic growth even when the only scarcity is the scarcity
of scarcity), and the instrumental control and domination of nature could
lead to a backlash in which manmade natural disasters wipe out our entire
civilization. And sure enough, such a Xipside is evident for social acceler-
ation  as  well.  Hence,  no  analysis  of  social  acceleration  will  be  complete
unless  it  takes  into  account  those  strange  corresponding  phenomena  of
social deceleration and slowdown that have become particularly visible toward
the turn of the twenty-Wrst century, with the rise of theories of “hyperac-
celeration,” “turbo-capitalism,” and the “digital speed revolution” on the one
hand, and conceptions of “polar inertia,” the “end of history,” the “closing
of  the  future,”  and  the  sclerotic  inescapability  of  the  “iron  cage”  on  the
other.7 From the latter perspective, all the apparent speed and transforma-
tion of society appear to be only changes on the “user surface,”8 beneath
which processes of paralysis and sclerosis predominate.

But what is social acceleration? Does it refer to an acceleration of society
itself, or does it only capture accelerating processes within (a static) soci-
ety? In what sense can we talk of social acceleration in the singular, when
all we see is a host of possibly unrelated processes of acceleration, such as
in sports, fashion, video editing, transport, and job succession, as well as
some phenomena of social deceleration? In the following I present an ana-
lytic framework that will allow, at least in principle, a theoretically thorough

7. Paul Virilio, “Polar Inertia,” in The Virilio Reader, ed. James Der Derian (Oxford: Black-
well, 1998), 117–33; Francis Fukuyama, The End of History and the Last Man (New York: Free
Press, 1992); Jean Baudrillard, The Illusion of the End (Cambridge: Polity Press, 1994); Charles
Taylor,  “Marx  statt  Tocqueville:  Über  Identität,  Entfremdung  und  die  Konsequenzen  des 
11. September: An Interview with Hartmut Rosa and Arto Laitinen,” Deutsche Zeitschrift für
Philosophie 50, no. 1 (2002): 9.

8. Lothar Baier, Keine Zeit! 18 Versuche über die Beschleunigung (Munich: A. Kunstmann,
2000). This sense is strongly expressed in the novels of Douglas Coupland too. I have explored
this at length in “Am Ende der Geschichte: Die Generation ‘X’ zwischen Globalisierung und
Desintegration,” in Neustart des Weltlaufs? Fiktion und Faszination der Zeitenwende, ed. Karsten
Fischer (Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp, 1999).

02 Chapter 6.qxd  10/27/2008  1:54 PM  Page 81

social acceleration

81

and empirically justiWable (or at least contestable) deWnition of what it could
mean for a society to accelerate and of the ways in which Western societies
can be understood as acceleration societies.

II. What Is Social Acceleration?

It is obvious that contrary to Gleick’s observation of the “acceleration of
just about everything,” there is no single, universal pattern of acceleration
that speeds up everything. To the contrary, many things slow down, like traªc
in a traªc jam, while others stubbornly resist all attempts to make them
go faster, like the common cold. Nevertheless, there are certainly a great
many social phenomena to which the concept of acceleration can properly
be applied. Athletes seem to be running and swimming faster and faster,
computers compute at ever-higher speeds, transport and communication
need only a fraction of the time they took a century ago, people appear to
sleep less and less (some scientists have found that the average sleeping
time has decreased by two hours since the nineteenth century and by thirty
minutes since the 1970s9), and even our neighbors seem to move in and
out of their apartments more frequently.

But even if we can prove these changes are not accidental but follow a
systematic pattern, is there anything these very di¤erent processes have in
common so that they can be brought under the one concept of social accel-
eration? Not directly, I want to claim. Rather, when we look more closely
at this range of phenomena, it becomes apparent that we can separate them
into three analytically as well as empirically distinct categories, which I will
present in the rest of this section. In the next section, I will explore the con-
nection between the di¤erent spheres of acceleration and the mechanisms
or motors that lie behind them. In the fourth section, I will discuss some
problems for the sociological analysis of “acceleration societies” that arise
from the fact that we have to account for a range of social phenomena that
remain constant or even decelerate. I will then discuss some of the most
pressing  and  transformative  political  and  ethical  consequences  of  social
acceleration before returning in the conclusion to the problem of the proper
conceptualization of the process of modernization.

9. Manfred Garhammer, Wie Europäer ihre Zeit nutzen: Zeitstrukturen und Zeitkulturen im

Zeichen der Globalisierung (Berlin: Edition Sigma, 1999), 378.

02 Chapter 6.qxd  10/27/2008  1:54 PM  Page 82

82

theoretical foundations

1. Technological Acceleration

The Wrst, most obvious, and most measurable form of acceleration is the
speeding up of intentional, goal-directed processes of transport, commu-
nication, and production that can be deWned as “technological acceleration.”
Although it is not always easy to measure the average speed of these pro-
cesses, the general tendency in this realm is undeniable. Thus, the speed
of communication is said to have increased by 107, the speed of personal
transport by 102, and the speed of data processing by 106.10

It is predominantly this aspect of acceleration that is at the center of Paul
Virilio’s “dromology,” a narrative of historical acceleration that proceeds
from the revolution in transport to that in transmission and Wnally to the
“transplantation” revolution dawning in the emergent possibilities of bio-
technology.11 The e¤ects of technological acceleration on social reality are
certainly tremendous. For example, the “natural” (that is, anthropological)
priority of space over time in human perception (rooted in our sense organs
and the e¤ects of gravity, which allow for an immediate distinction of “above”
and “below,” “in front of” and “behind,” but not “sooner” and “later”) seems
to have been inverted: in the age of globalization of the Internet, time is
increasingly conceived as compressing or even annihilating space.12 Space,
it seems, virtually “contracts” and loses its signiWcance for orientation in the
late modern world. Processes and developments are no longer located, and
locations become “non-lieux,” without history, identity, or relation.13

2. Acceleration of Social Change

Whereas phenomena of the Wrst category can be described as acceleration
processes  within  society,  the  phenomena  of  this  second  category  can  be
classiWed as accelerations of society itself. When novelists, scientists, and
journalists since the eighteenth century have observed the dynamization of
Western culture, society, or history—and sometimes of time itself 14—they 

10. Karlheinz  Geißler,  Vom  Tempo  der  Welt:  Am  Ende  der  Uhrzeit (Freiburg:  Herder,

1999), 89.

11. Paul Virilio, Open Sky (London: Verso, 1997), 9–15.
12. See Harvey, The Condition of Postmodernity, 201–10.
13. Marc Augé, Non-lieux: introduction à une anthropologie de la surmodernité (Paris: Seuil,
1992). Harvey, however, referring to an inverse spatialization of time, cautions us to not dis-
miss space too quickly (The Condition of Postmodernity, 272).

14. See, e.g., Georges Gurvitch, “Social Structure and the Multiplicity of Time,” in Socio-
logical Theory, Values, and Sociocultural Change, ed. E. A. Tiryakian (London: Free Press of Glen-
coe, 1963); or Gerhard Schmied, Soziale Zeit: Umfang, “Geschwindigkeit” und Evolution (Berlin:
Duncker and Humblot, 1985), 86–90.

02 Chapter 6.qxd  10/27/2008  1:54 PM  Page 83

social acceleration

83

have been concerned not so much with the spectacular technological ad-
vancements as with the (often simultaneous) accelerated processes of social
change that rendered social constellations and structures as well as patterns
of action and orientation unstable and ephemeral. The underlying idea is
that rates of change themselves are changing. Thus, attitudes and values as
well as fashions and lifestyles, social relations and obligations as well as
groups, classes, or milieus, social languages as well as forms of practice and
habits, are said to change at ever-increasing rates. This has led Arjun Appa-
durai to replace the symbolization of the social world as consisting of sta-
ble social aggregates that can be localized on maps with the idea of Xuid,
Xickering screens representing cultural Xows that only occasionally crys-
tallize into “ethno-, techno-, Wnan-, media- and ideoscapes.”15

However, empirically measuring rates of social change remains an unre-
solved challenge. There is little agreement in sociology as to what the rele-
vant indicators of change are and when alterations or variations actually
constitute a genuine or “basic” social change.16 Here sociology might avail
itself of approaches developed in social philosophy. The German philoso-
pher Hermann Lübbe claims that Western societies experience what he calls
the “contraction of the present” (Gegenwartsschrumpfung) as a consequence
of the accelerating rates of cultural and social innovation.17 His measure is
as simple as it is instructive: for Lübbe, the past is deWned as that which no
longer holds/is no longer valid, while the future denotes that which does
not yet hold/is not yet valid. The present, then, is the time span for which
(to use an idea developed by Reinhart Koselleck) the horizons of experi-
ence  and  expectation  coincide.  Only  within  these  time  spans  of  relative
stability can we draw on past experiences to orient our actions and infer
conclusions from the past with regard to the future. Only within these time
spans is there some certainty of orientation, evaluation, and expectation. In
other words, social acceleration is deWned by an increase in the decay rates
of the reliability of experiences and expectations and by the contraction of

15. Arjun Appadurai, “Disjuncture and Di¤erence in the Global Cultural Economy,” in
Global  Culture:  Nationalism,  Globalization,  and  Modernity,  ed.  Mike  Featherstone  (London:
Sage, 1990), 295–310.

16. Cf. Pjotr Sztompka, The Sociology of Social Change (Oxford: Blackwell, 1993), or Hans-
Peter Müller and Michael Schmid, eds., Sozialer Wandel: Modellbildung und theoretische Ansätze
(Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp, 1995). In “Social Structural Time: An Attempt at Classify-
ing Types of Social Change by Their Characteristic Paces,” The Rhythms of Society, ed. Michael
Young and Tom Schuller (London: Routledge, 1988), 17–36, Peter Laslett distinguishes nine-
teen (!) di¤erent rates of internal social change (economic, political, cultural, etc.).

17. See chapter 9 of this volume.

02 Chapter 6.qxd  10/27/2008  1:54 PM  Page 84

84

theoretical foundations

the time spans deWnable as the “present.” Now, according to Lübbe, we can
apply this measure of stability and change to social and cultural institu-
tions and practices of all kinds: the present contracts in the political as well
as the occupational, the technological as well as the aesthetic, the norma-
tive as well as the scientiWc or cognitive dimensions—that is, in cultural as
well as in structural respects.

But how could we verify this empirically? There seems to be fairly gen-
eral agreement in the social sciences that the basic structures of society are
those that organize the processes of production and reproduction. For West-
ern societies since the early modern period, these have essentially included
the family and the occupational system. And in fact, most studies of social
change focus on exactly these domains, along with political institutions and
technology. I will later turn to the question of how technological and social
change, and hence technological acceleration and the acceleration of social
change, are interrelated. For the moment I want to suggest that change in
these two realms—family and work—has accelerated from an intergenera-
tional pace in early modern society to a generational pace in “classical” moder-
nity to an intragenerational pace in late modernity. Thus, the ideal-typical
family structure in agrarian society tended to remain stable over the cen-
turies, with generational turnover leaving the basic structure intact. In clas-
sical modernity, this structure was built to last for just a generation: it was
organized around a couple and tended to disperse with the death of the
couple. In late modernity, there is a growing tendency for family life cycles
to last less than an individual lifespan: increasing rates of divorce and remar-
riage are the most obvious evidence for this.18 Similarly, in the world of
work, in premodern societies the father’s occupation was inherited by the
son—again, potentially over many generations. In classical modernity, occu-
pational structures tended to change with generations: sons (and daughters)
were  free  to  choose  their  own  profession,  but  they  generally  chose  only
once, that is, for a lifetime. In late modernity, occupations no longer extend
over the whole of a work life; jobs change at a higher rate than generations.19
If we try to formulate the argument more generally, the stability of social
institutions and practices could serve as a yardstick for the acceleration (or
deceleration) of social change. In the work of authors like Peter Wagner
and Beck, Giddens, and Lash, theoretical as well as empirical support can

18. Laslett, “Social Structural Time,” 33.
19. For some empirical evidence on this, cf. Garhammer, Wie Europäer ihre Zeit nutzen,
and Richard Sennett, The Corrosion of Character: The Personal Consequences of Work in the New
Capitalism (New York: Norton, 1998).

02 Chapter 6.qxd  10/27/2008  1:54 PM  Page 85

social acceleration

85

be found for the thesis that institutional stability is generally on the decline
in late modern societies.20 In a sense, the whole discourse about postmoder-
nity and contingency hinges on this idea, although for now it is only meant
to serve as a starting point for future empirical research.

3. Acceleration of the Pace of Life

Interestingly, there is a third type of acceleration in Western societies that
is neither logically nor causally entailed by the Wrst two, but rather seems,
at least at Wrst glance, paradoxical with respect to technological accelera-
tion. The “acceleration of the pace of (social) life, which has been postu-
lated again and again in the process of modernity (e.g., by Simmel or, more
recently, by Robert Levine),21 is the central focus of much of the discussion
about cultural acceleration and the alleged need for deceleration. Now, if
we assume that the “pace of life”—an admittedly fuzzy concept—refers to
the speed and compression of actions and experiences in everyday life, it is
hard  to  see  how  it  relates  to  technological  acceleration.  Since  the  latter
describes the decrease of the time needed to carry out everyday processes
and actions of production and reproduction, communication and transport,
it should entail an increase in free time, which in turn would slow down
the pace of life. If less time is needed, time should become abundant. But
if, quite to the contrary, time becomes more and more scarce, this is a par-
adoxical e¤ect that calls for a sociological explanation22

But  Wrst  we  must  be  able  to  measure  the  pace  of  life.23 In  my  view,
attempts to do so could follow a subjective or an objective approach, with

20. Peter Wagner, A Sociology of Modernity: Liberty and Discipline (London: Routledge, 1994);
Ulrich Beck, Anthony Giddens, and Scott Lash, ReXexive Modernization: Politics, Tradition and
Aesthetics in the Modern Social Order (Cambridge: Polity Press, 1994).

21. Georg Simmel, “The Metropolis and Mental Life,” in On Individuality and Social Forms,
ed. Donald N. Levine (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1971); and chapter 2 of this vol-
ume. See also Levine, A Geography of Time.

22. For a very interesting economic explanation, see Sta¤an B. Linder, The Harried Leisure
Class (New York: Columbia University Press, 1970). I take up some of his arguments in the
following.

23. American sociologist Robert Levine and his team recently conducted a cross-cultural
comparative empirical study in which three indicators for the speed of life were used: the
speed of walking in inner cities; the time it takes to buy a stamp in a post oªce; and the exact-
ness  of  public  clocks.  For  a  number  of  reasons  I  have  discussed  at  length  elsewhere,  this
approach can at best serve as a very rough preliminary attempt. See “Temporalstrukturen in
der Spätmoderne: Vom Wunsch nach Beschleunigung und der Sehnsucht nach Langsam-
keit: Ein Literaturüberblick in gesellschaftstheoretischer Absicht,” Handlung, Kultur, Interpre-
tation 10, no. 2 (2001): 335–81. It certainly remains very unsatisfactory as an instrument in a
thorough sociological analysis of the temporal structures of late modernity.

02 Chapter 6.qxd  10/27/2008  1:54 PM  Page 86

86

theoretical foundations

the most promising route probably being a combination of the two. On the
subjective side, an acceleration of the speed of life (as against the speed of
life itself) is likely to have e¤ects on individuals’ experience of time: it will
cause  people  to  consider  time  as  scarce,  to  feel  hurried  and  under  time
pressure and stress. Typically, people will feel that time goes by faster than
before and they will complain that “everything” goes too fast; they will worry
that they might not be able to keep up with the pace of social life. Hence,
the fact that this complaint has accompanied modernity ever since the eigh-
teenth century does not prove that the speed of life was high all the time—
in fact it does not help to determine the speed of life at all—but it does hint
at its continuous acceleration. As we might expect, recent studies indicate
that in fact people in Western societies do feel under heavy time pressure
and they do complain about the scarcity of time. These feelings seem to
have increased over recent decades,24 making plausible the argument that
the “digital revolution” and the processes of globalization amount to yet
another wave of social acceleration.25

On the objective side, an acceleration of the speed of life can be measured
in two ways. First, it should lead to a measurable contraction of the time
spent on deWnable episodes or “units” of action like eating, sleeping, going
for a walk, playing, talking to one’s family, etc., since acceleration implies
that we do more things in less time. This is a domain where time-use stud-
ies are of the highest importance. And in fact, some studies have found
plenty of evidence for this: thus, for example, there appears to be a clear
tendency to eat faster, sleep less, and communicate less with our families
than our ancestors did.26 Nevertheless, one needs to be very careful with
such results—Wrst, because the data for longitudinal time-use studies are
extremely limited; second, because we always Wnd counterinstances (such
as that the time fathers spend with their children in at least some sections
of Western societies is clearly increasing) without being able to adequately
determine the signiWcance of these Wndings; and third, because it is fre-
quently unclear what drives the measured accelerations (for example, that
people on average sleep less today than previous generations might simply

24. Geißler, Vom Tempo der Welt, 92; Garhammer, Wie Europäer ihre Zeit nutzen, 448–55;

Levine, A Geography of Time, 196.

25. It thus remains rather doubtful that John P. Robinson and Geo¤rey Godbey’s diagnosis
of the beginning of “The Great American Slowdown” can be conWrmed by further investiga-
tion. See American Demographics 18, no. 6 (1996): 42–48. In January 2002, Robinson con-
Wrmed to the author by personal communication that he didn’t yet have conclusive evidence
in either direction.

26. Cf. Garhammer, Wie Europäer ihre Zeit nutzen.

02 Chapter 6.qxd  10/27/2008  1:54 PM  Page 87

social acceleration

87

be attributable to the fact that they reach an older age and don’t work as
hard physically). The second way to objectively explore the acceleration of
the pace of life consists in measuring the social tendency to “compress”
actions and experiences, that is, to do and experience more within a given
period of time by reducing the pauses and intervals or by doing more things
simultaneously, like cooking, watching TV, and making a phone call.27

III. What Drives Social Acceleration?

When we look for the social forces that drive the wheels of acceleration, it
becomes necessary to rethink the connection between the three spheres of
acceleration discussed so far. The major problem here lies in the paradox
of the simultaneity of technological acceleration (1) and the increasing scar-
city of time (3). If free time decreases in spite of technological acceleration,
the only possible explanation is that the quantum of work itself has changed,
or, more precisely, has risen faster than the corresponding technological
rate of acceleration. Thus, free time is produced when the technological accel-
eration rate is above the rate of growth, where “growth” refers to all kinds
of time-consuming actions and processes. Conversely, time becomes scarce
when growth rates are higher than the acceleration rates. For example, when
between two points in time (t1, t2) the speed of transport increases by the
factor 4, and the average distance crossed in a given period of time rises by
the factor 2, half of the time used for transport at t1 is available as “free time”
at t2. However, if the speed rate only doubles between t1 and t2 whereas
the distance crossed rises by the factor 4, twice as much time is needed for
transport; hence, at t2 twice as many time resources are needed: time gets
scarce. The same holds for processes of production, communication, and
so on. It is important to note that growth and acceleration are neither log-
ically nor causally interconnected, since only the acceleration of constant
processes logically entails a corresponding augmentation, whereas processes
of transport, communication, or production are not necessarily constant.
Hence, we should apply the term “acceleration society” to a society if and
only if technological acceleration and the growing scarcity of time (that is,
an acceleration of the pace of life) occur simultaneously, that is, if growth
rates outgrow acceleration rates.

27. See  also  Friederike  Benthaus-Apel,  Zwischen  Zeitbindung  und  Zeitautonomie:  Eine
empirische  Analyse  der  Zeitverwendung  und  Zeitstruktur  der  Werktags-  und  Wochenendfreizeit
(Wiesbaden: Deutscher Universitätsverlag, 1995).

02 Chapter 6.qxd  10/27/2008  1:54 PM  Page 88

88

theoretical foundations

Now this, interestingly, is one way in which the acceleration of the pace
of life and technological acceleration are interconnected: technological accel-
eration can be seen as a social answer to the problem of scarce time, that
is, to the acceleration of the pace of life. Examining the causal relations be-
tween the three spheres of social acceleration reveals a surprising feedback
loop: technological acceleration, which is frequently connected to the intro-
duction of new technologies (like the steam engine, the railway, the auto-
mobile, the telegraph, the computer, the Internet), almost inevitably brings
about a whole range of changes in social practices, communication struc-
tures, and corresponding forms of life. For example, the Internet has not
only increased the speed of communicative exchange and the virtualization
of economic and productive processes; it has also established new occupa-
tional, economic, and communicative structures, opening up new patterns
of social interaction and even new forms of social identity.28 Hence, it is
easy to see how and why technological acceleration is prone to go hand in
hand with the acceleration of change in the form of changing social struc-
tures and patterns, orientations, and evaluations of action. Furthermore, if
the acceleration of social change entails a contraction of the present in the
sense discussed above, this naturally leads to an acceleration in the pace of
life. The explanation for this is to be found in the “slippery-slope” phenom-
enon, well known in the realm of capitalist production: the capitalist can-
not pause and rest, stop the race, and secure his position, since he either
goes up or goes down; there is no point of equilibrium because standing
still is equivalent to falling behind, as Marx and Weber pointed out. Similarly,
in a society with accelerated rates of social change in all spheres of life,
individuals always feel that they stand on a slippery slope: taking a prolonged
break means becoming old-fashioned, outdated, anachronistic in one’s expe-
rience and knowledge, one’s equipment and clothing, one’s orientations,
and even one’s language.29 Thus, people feel pressed to keep up with the
speed  of  change  they  experience  in  their  social  and  technological  world 
in order to avoid the loss of potentially valuable options and connections
(Anschlußmöglichkeiten). This problem is aggravated by the fact that in a
world of incessant change it gets increasingly diªcult to tell which options
will eventually turn out to be valuable. Hence, accelerated social change
will in turn lead to an acceleration of the pace of life. And Wnally, as we saw

28. Sherry Turkle, Life on the Screen: Identity in the Age of the Internet (New York: Simon

and Schuster, 1995).

29. Thus, elderly people in Western society are frequently unable to understand the “tech-

nobabble” the young use when talking about their Game Boys, e-mails, DVDs, etc.

02 Chapter 6.qxd  10/27/2008  1:54 PM  Page 89

social acceleration

89

at the outset, new forms of technological acceleration will be called for to
speed up the processes of productive and everyday life. Thus, the accelera-
tion cycle is a closed, self-propelling process (Wg. 2).

Yet the acceleration cycle by itself is not suªcient to explain the inherent
dynamics of Western societies, or to understand its origins and the speciWc
ways in which the logic and dynamic of speed and growth are interwoven.
When looking for the driving forces of acceleration beyond the feedback
cycle  itself,  one  Wnds  that  there  are  three  (analytically  independent)  pri-
mary factors that can be identiWed as the external key accelerators behind
the three dimensions of social acceleration. In each of them, the logics of
growth and speed are connected in a particular way characteristic of one of
the dimensions of social acceleration.

1. The Economic Motor

The most obvious source of social acceleration in Western societies is, of
course, capitalism. Within a capitalist economy, labor time Wgures as a cru-
cial factor of production, such that saving time is equivalent to making (rel-
ative) proWt, as expressed in Benjamin Franklin’s famous equation of time
and money. Also, time leads over competitors in the introduction of new
technologies or products are a key element of market competition because
they allow for crucial extra proWts before competitors catch up. Finally, the
accelerated reproduction of invested capital is crucial with respect to what
Marx called the “moral consumption” of technology and to the credit system.
As a consequence, the circle of production, distribution, and consumption
constantly accelerates. This certainly explains the restless competition for
technological acceleration in capitalist societies. In short, the functioning of
the capitalist system rests on the accelerating circulation of goods and cap-
ital in a growth-oriented society. Thus, the logic of capitalism connects growth
with acceleration in the need to increase production (growth) as well as pro-
ductivity (which can be deWned in terms of time as output per unit time).
It  is  therefore  not  surprising  that  many  authors  concerned  with  the
problem of social acceleration have attributed not only technological but all
forms of acceleration to capitalism.30 However, this assumption of enforced

30. Sennett, The Corrosion of Character; Fritz Reheis, Die Kreativität der Langsamkeit: Neuer
Wohlstand durch Entschleunigung, 2nd ed. (Darmstadt: Primus, 1998); Harvey, The Condition
of Postmodernity; also Scheuerman, “Liberal Democracy and the Empire of Speed,” 43–49.
See Moishe Postone, Time, Labor, and Social Domination: A Reinterpretation of Marx’s Critical
Theory (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996), for a contemporary Marxist reinter-
pretation of the roles of growth and time in capitalist societies.

02 Chapter 6.qxd  10/27/2008  1:54 PM  Page 90

90

theoretical foundations

capitalist acceleration by itself seems insuªcient to explain a whole range
of acceleration phenomena in dimensions two and three (see Wg. 2), some
of which reveal that processes of acceleration are by no means always or
even usually enforced by competition, but are frequently associated with
eudaimonistic or even eschatological undertones.31 This is where the cul-
tural motor of acceleration comes in, a motor that seems indispensable for
explaining the very success of capitalist forms of production.

2. The Cultural Motor

The acceleration of social change in Western societies is indissolubly linked
to the dominant cultural ideals of modernity. These have gradually shifted
the balance between tradition and innovation toward the priority of change,
such that “real life,” as Friedrich Ancillon observed in 1828, is to be sought
in “change for the sake of change.”32 Now, without denying that the evolu-
tion of industrial and capitalist forms of production and the accompanying
social practices played a key role in the institutionalization of this idea, it is
important to see that its roots reach further back. The ideal formulated by
Ancillon is the consequence of a conception of life in which the good life
is the fulWlled life, a life that is rich in experiences and developed capaci-
ties. This dominant modern cultural ideal evolved in the secularization of
time and of conceptions of human happiness, analyzed at length by Hans
Blumenberg  and  more  recently  by  Marianne  Gronemeyer  and  Gerhard
Schulze.33 The idea of the fulWlled life no longer supposes a “higher life”
waiting for us after death, but rather consists in realizing as many options 

31. The clearest expression of the “eudaimonism of speed” is probably Marinetti’s Futur-
ist Manifesto, where speed is celebrated as a glorious new, omnipresent, and immortal god-
dess. See chapter 2 of this volume.

32. “Everything has begun to move, or has been set in motion, and with the intention or
under the pretense of fulWlling and completing everything, everything is placed in question,
doubted, and approaches a general transformation. The love of movement in itself, without
purpose and without speciWc end, has emerged and developed out of the movement of the
time. In it, and in it alone, one seeks and sets real life” (quoted in Koselleck, Futures Past, 251).
It is remarkable how closely these observations resemble Marx and Engels’ famous passage
from the Communist Manifesto, where “all that is solid melts into air.” However, whereas in
the Manifesto this transformation appears to be simply an unintended by-product of economic
relations, Ancillon (and Koselleck) point out that it is also driven by cultural currents. The
question of the “prime mover” can safely be set aside at this point.

33. Hans Blumenberg, Lebenszeit und Weltzeit (Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp, 1986); Mari-
anne Gronemeyer, Das Leben als letzte Gelegenheit: Sicherheitsbedürfnisse und Zeitknappheit, 2nd ed.
(Darmstadt: Primus, 1996); Gerhard Schulze, “Das Projekt des schönen Lebens: Zur soziologis-
chen Diagnose der modernen Gesellschaften,” in Lebensqualität: Ein Konzept für Praxis und Fos-
chung, ed. A. Bellebaum and K. Barheier (Opladen: Westdeutscher, 1994). On the secularization
of time, cf. Charles Taylor, Modern Social Imaginaries (Durham: Duke University Press, 2004).

02 Chapter 6.qxd  10/27/2008  1:54 PM  Page 91

social acceleration

91

as possible from the vast possibilities the world has to o¤er. To taste life in
all its heights and depths and in its full complexity becomes a central aspi-
ration of modern man.34 But, as it turns out, the world always seems to
have more to o¤er than can be experienced in a single lifetime. The options
o¤ered always outgrow those realizable in an individual’s life; or, in Blumen-
berg’s terms, the perceived time of the world (Weltzeit) and the time of an
individual life (Lebenszeit) dramatically diverge for individuals in the mod-
ern world. Acceleration of the pace of life appears to be a natural solution
to this problem: if we live twice as fast, if we take only half the time to real-
ize an action, goal, or experience, we can double what we can do within our
lifetime. Our “eªcacy,” the proportion of realized options to potentially real-
izable options, doubles. It follows that in this cultural logic, too, the dynam-
ics of growth and acceleration are intricately interwoven.

Now, by this cultural logic, if we kept increasing the speed of life, we
could eventually live a multiplicity of lives within a single lifetime by tak-
ing  up  all  the  options  that  would  deWne  them.  Acceleration  serves  as  a
strategy to erase the di¤erence between the time of the world and the time
of our life. The eudaimonistic promise of modern acceleration thus appears
to be a functional equivalent to religious ideas of eternity or eternal life,
and the acceleration of the pace of life represents the modern answer to the
problem of Wnitude and death.

However, due to the self-propelling dynamic of the acceleration cycle,
the promise of acceleration never is fulWlled, for the very same techniques,
methods, and inventions that allow for an accelerated realization of options
simultaneously increase the number of options (of “world time” or “world
resources,” so to speak) at an exponential rate. For example, the Internet not
only speeds up information and communication, it also opens up wholly new
domains of exchange, service, communication, and entertainment. Hence,
whenever we surf the Net, we could potentially surf hundreds and thou-
sands of other sites that might even better serve our purposes. The same
holds true for cable TV: whereas thirty years ago we missed only two or
three other programs by watching one channel, we now miss hundreds.35
This, of course, has created the cultural phenomenon of “zapping.” As a

34. Famous literary illustrations of this idea can be found in the work of Goethe, such as

in Faust or Wilhelm Meister.

35. Of course, this multiplication of options is only a cultural problem if the options are
considered to be (at least potentially) valuable. An increase in uninteresting options would not
a¤ect the pace of life. However, as we will see in Section 4 of this chapter, one problem of
“acceleration societies” is that the (future) relevance of present options becomes increasingly
unpredictable. We don’t know what we will need, like, own and use tomorrow.

02 Chapter 6.qxd  10/27/2008  1:54 PM  Page 92

92

theoretical foundations

consequence, our share of the world, the proportion of realized world options
from potentially realizable ones, decreases (contrary to the original prom-
ise of acceleration) no matter how much we increase the pace of life. And
this is the cultural explanation for the paradoxical phenomenon of simul-
taneous technological acceleration and increasing time scarcity.

3. The Structural Motor

Apart from the economic and the cultural explanations for the dynamics of
modern Western acceleration, some sociologists have identiWed a third ex-
ternal engine in the social structure of modern society. According to this view,
which is advocated predominantly in the context of Niklas Luhmann’s sys-
tems theory, social change is accelerated by modern society’s basic struc-
tural principle of functional di¤erentiation. In a society that is not primarily
segregated into hierarchical classes but rather structured along the lines of
functional systems, such as politics, science, art, the economy, and law, com-
plexity increases immensely. As a result, the future opens up to almost unlim-
ited contingency and society experiences time in the form of perpetual change
and acceleration.36 Now, increasing complexity and contingency create an
abundance of options and possibilities. Since these cannot be handled simul-
taneously, Luhmann argues that complexity in modern societies is “tempo-
ralized” in order to enable the sequential processing of a higher number of
options and relations than could be processed simultaneously. The ensuing
needs for synchronization and selection of increasing (future) options can in
turn only be satisWed if the processing itself is accelerated. Thus, we Wnd a sur-
prising structural duplication or “reXection” of the cultural dilemma outlined
in the preceding paragraph (or vice versa). Here, too, we Wnd a variant of the
internal dialectics of growth and acceleration that is characteristic of mod-
ern societies, here as a driving motor for (structural) social change (Wg. 2).

IV. The Form and Relevance of Social Deceleration

Even if we Wnd convincing evidence for acceleration in all three spheres
deWned  above,  it  is  crucial  not  to  be  drawn  into  a  logic  of  subsumption 

36. Otthein Rammstedt, “Alltagsbewußtsein von Zeit,” Kölner Zeitschrift für Soziologie und
Sozialpsychologie 27 (1975): 50; Niklas Luhmann, The Di¤erentiation of Society, trans. Stephen
Holmes and Charles Larmore (New York: Columbia University Press, 1982); Armin Nassehi,
Die Zeit der Gesellschaft: Auf dem Weg zu einer soziologischen Theorie der Zeit (Opladen: West-
deutscher, 1993).

02 Chapter 6.qxd  10/27/2008  1:54 PM  Page 93

social acceleration

93

(A) The economic motor:

Time = Money

1. Technological

acceleration

The acceleration cycle

3. Acceleration of the

pace of life

2. Acceleration of social

change

(C) The cultural motor:

The promise of acceleration

(B) The structural motor:
Functional differentiation

Figure 2. Motors of acceleration

where every social process or phenomenon is seen as determined by the
dynamics of acceleration. Hence, before we can adequately determine the
sense in which we can speak of the acceleration of Western societies, we need
to understand the status, function, and structure of those phenomena that
escape dynamization or even represent forms of slowdown and decelera-
tion. Analytically, we can distinguish Wve di¤erent forms of deceleration
and inertia, which cut across the spheres of acceleration identiWed so far.

1. Natural and anthropological speed limits. Some things cannot be accel-
erated in principle. Among these are most physical processes, like the
speed of perception and processing in our brains and bodies or the time
it takes for most natural resources to reproduce.

02 Chapter 6.qxd  10/27/2008  1:54 PM  Page 94

94

theoretical foundations

2. Territorial as well as social and cultural niches that have not yet been 
touched by the dynamics of modernization and acceleration. They have
simply been (totally or partially) exempted from acceleration processes,
although they are accessible to them in principle. In such contexts, time
seems to be “standing still,” as the saying goes: forgotten islands in the
sea, socially excluded groups or religious sects such as the Amish, or
traditional forms of social practice (like producing whiskey in the famous
Jack Daniels commercial). Arguably, these “oases of deceleration” come
under increasing pressure in late modernity unless they are deliberately
protected against acceleration, and thus they fall under category 4.

3. Slowdown as an unintended consequence of acceleration and dynamiza-
tion.  This  frequently  entails  dysfunctional  and  pathological  forms  of
deceleration. The best-known version of the former is the traªc jam,
whereas recent scientiWc Wndings identify the latter in some forms of
psychopathological depression that are understood as individual (decel-
eratory) reactions to overstretched pressures of acceleration.37 This cat-
egory could also include the structural exclusion of workers from the
sphere  of  production,  which  is  often  a  consequence  of  their  inability 
to keep up with the Xexibility and speed required in modern Western
economies. The excluded thus su¤er extreme deceleration in the form
of long-term unemployment.38 Economic recessions—called economic
slowdowns—could also be interpreted along these lines.

4. Intentional forms of (social) deceleration, contrary to the unintentional
forms of slowdown. These include ideological movements against mod-
ern acceleration and its e¤ects. Such movements have accompanied more
or less every new step in the history of modern acceleration, and in par-
ticular of technological acceleration. Thus, the steam engine, the rail-
way, the telephone, and the computer were met with suspicion and even
hostility;  in  all  cases,  the  oppositional  movements  eventually  failed.39
Hence, within this fourth category, we need to distinguish between two
forms of deliberate deceleration:

37. Cf. Levine, A Geography of Time; several articles in Psychologie Heute 26, no. 3 (1999);

or Baier, Keine Zeit! 147–62.

38. Sennett, The Corrosion of Character, chap. 7; Marie Jahoda, “Time: A Social Psycho-
logical Perspective,” in The Rhythms of Society, ed. Michael Young and Tom Schuller (London:
Routledge, 1988), 154–72.

39. Cf. Levine, A Geography of Time; Wolfgang Schivelbusch, Geschichte der Eisenbahnreise:
Zur Industrialisierung von Raum und Zeit im 19. Jahrhundert, new ed. (Frankfurt am Main: 
Fischer Taschenbuch, 2000).

02 Chapter 6.qxd  10/27/2008  1:54 PM  Page 95

social acceleration

95

(a) Limited or temporary forms of deceleration that aim at preserving
the  capacity  to  function  and  further  accelerate  within  acceleratory
systems. On the individual level, we Wnd such accelerating forms of
deceleration as people taking time out in monasteries or taking yoga
courses, which promise a rest from the race; these have the purpose
of allowing a more successful participation in acceleratory social sys-
tems afterwards. Similarly, there is a huge self-help literature sug-
gesting a deliberate slowdown in work or learning in order to increase
the volume of overall work or learning in a given period of time, or
recommending pauses in order to increase energy and creativity.40
On the social and political level, too, moratoria are sometimes sug-
gested to solve technological, political, legal, environmental, or social
obstacles that stand in the way of modernization.41

(b)Diverse, often fundamentalist, antimodernist social movements for
(radical) deceleration. This is hardly surprising given that accelera-
tion appears to be one of the fundamental principles of modernity.
Among these we Wnd radical religious as well as “deep ecological” or
politically ultraconservative or anarchist movements. Thus, for Ger-
man politician and scholar Peter Glotz, deceleration has become the
new ideological focus of the victims of modernization.42 However, to
straightforwardly dismiss the cry for deceleration as ideological is dan-
gerously simplistic, for the more important arguments for intentional
deceleration are those that follow the lines of thought of the Wrst form,
4(a). The central insight here is that the enormous processes of accel-
eration that have shaped modern society were Wrmly grounded and
enabled by the stability of some central modern institutions like law,
democracy, the industrial work regime, and the standardized or insti-
tutionalized biographies or life trajectories of modernity.43 Only within

40. For such accelerating forms of deceleration, see Lothar J. Seiwert, Wenn Du es eilig
hast, gehe langsam: Das neue Zeitmanagement in einer beschleunigten Welt, 5th ed. (Frankfurt am
Main: Campus, 2000).

41. Cf. Matthias Eberling, Beschleunigung und Politik (Frankfurt am Main: P. Lang, 1996).
42. Peter Glotz, “Kritik der Entschleunigung,” in Die Beschleunigungsfalle oder der Triumph
der Schildkröte, 3rd ed., ed. Klaus Backhaus and Holger Bonus (Stuttgart: Schä¤er-Pöschel,
1998), 75–89; Levine, A Geography of Time.

43. See Rosa, “Temporalstrukturen in der Spätmoderne”; Martin Kohli, “Lebenslauf und
Lebensalter  als  gesellschaftliche  Konstruktionen:  Elemente  zu  einem  interkulturellen  Ver-
gleich,”  in  Im  Lauf  der  Zeit:  Ethnographische  Studien  zur  gesellschaftlichen  Konstruktion  von
Lebensaltern, ed. G. Elwert, M. Kohli, and H. K. Müller (Breitenbach: Saarbrücken, 1990), 11–32;
Holger Bonus, “Die Langsamkeit der Spielregeln,” in Backhaus and Bonus, Die Beschleunigungs-
falle, 41–56.

02 Chapter 6.qxd  10/27/2008  1:54 PM  Page 96

96

theoretical foundations

a stable framework formed by such institutions can we Wnd the nec-
essary preconditions for long-term planning and investment and thus
for long-term acceleration. Furthermore, as Lübbe argues, the precon-
ditions of cultural reproduction in an accelerating society are such
that  Xexibility is only possible on the basis of some stable and un-
changing cultural orientations and institutions. Institutionally as well
as individually—or structurally as well as culturally—there seem to
be certain limits to Xexibilization and dynamization that may be in
danger of erosion in late modernity.44 Hence, it is quite possible that,
much more than the antimodernist radicals, it is the very success and
ubiquity of acceleration that undercuts and erodes the preconditions
for future acceleration. In this sense, deceleration in some respects
could be a functional necessity of acceleration society rather than an
ideological reaction to it.

5. Finally, we Wnd the perception that in late modern society, despite wide-
spread acceleration and Xexibilization (which create the appearance of
total contingency, hyperoptionality, and unlimited openness), real change
is in fact no longer possible: the system of modern society is closing in
and  history  is  coming  to  an  end  in  a  “hyperaccelerated  standstill”  or
“polar inertia.” Advocates of this diagnosis include Paul Virilio, Jean Bau-
drillard, and Francis Fukuyama. They claim that there are no new visions
and energies available to modern society, and hence the enormous speed
of events and alterations is a superWcial phenomenon barely covering
up deep-rooted cultural and structural inertia.45 For a sociological theory
of acceleration society, it is vital to account for this possibility of (extreme)
paralyzation in its very conceptual scheme.

The fundamental question that arises at this point is the relationship
between processes of social acceleration and deceleration in modern soci-
ety. Two general possibilities are conceivable. First, the processes of accel-
eration and deceleration are by and large in balance such that we Wnd both
types of changes in the temporal patterns of society without a clear and
sustained dominance of one or the other. Second, the balance in fact shifts
toward the powers of acceleration such that the categories of deceleration

44. See chapter 9 of this volume. See also above, section II.2 and below, section IV.2.
45. Fukuyama, in fact, takes part in the discourse on “post-histoire” that follows a long tra-
dition going back to Kojève and Hegel. For Lothar Baier (Keine Zeit!), acceleration and change
only happen on the “user interface” of modern societies while their deep structures remain
unchanged.

02 Chapter 6.qxd  10/27/2008  1:54 PM  Page 97

social acceleration

97

have to be interpreted either as residual or as reactions to acceleration. I would
suggest that the second is in fact correct, though this is rather diªcult to
prove empirically. My claim rests on the supposition that none of these
forms of deceleration amounts to a genuine and structurally equal coun-
tertrend to modern acceleration. The phenomena listed under categories 1
and 2 merely denote the (retreating) limits of social acceleration; they are
not counterpowers at all. The decelerations of category 3 are e¤ects of accel-
eration and as such derivative of and secondary to it. Category 4(a) identi-
Wes phenomena that, on closer examination, turn out to be either elements
of  acceleration  processes  or  enabling  conditions of  (further)  acceleration.
The intentional resistance to the speedup of life and the ideology of decelera-
tion 4(b) clearly are reactions to pressures of and for acceleration; as pointed
out above, all of the main tendencies of modernity have met considerable
resistance, but so far all forms of resistance have turned out to be rather short-
lived and unsuccessful. Thus, the only form of deceleration that seems not to
be derivative or residual is category 5. This dimension seems to be an inher-
ent, complementary feature of modern acceleration itself; it is the paradoxical
Xipside characteristic of all the deWning forces of modernity (individual-
ization, di¤erentiation, rationalization, domestication, and acceleration).

V. Ethical and Political Implications

For the analysis of the temporal structures of society, it is of central impor-
tance to realize that the speedup of processes frequently amounts to more
than a mere quantitative change that leaves the nature of those processes
untouched. To the contrary, just as speeding up a sequence of images can
bring them to life in the transition from photography to Wlm, or the accel-
eration of molecules can transform ice into water into steam, changes in
the temporal structures of modern societies transform the very essence of
our culture, social structure, and personal identity (and, of course, our expe-
rience of nature, too). Thus, the much-discussed but little-agreed-upon dis-
tinction between modernity and post- or late modernity may in fact be best
captured with reference to the temporal dimension: we can say that late
modernity is nothing other than modern society accelerated (and desyn-
chronized) beyond the point of possible reintegration. I would like to show
this by exploring two major and related transformations: the transition in
personal identities and the decline of politics in late modernity.

02 Chapter 6.qxd  10/27/2008  1:54 PM  Page 98

98

theoretical foundations

1. Situational Identity and the Detemporalization of Life

Of the three dimensions of social acceleration, the acceleration of the pace
of life is most directly linked to personality. Since the notion of “personal-
ity” has become rather obscure in the social sciences and humanities (prob-
ably owing to its essentialist ring), the relevant changes are instead most
often discussed in terms of shifting patterns of identity.46

From  the  model  developed  above,  the  acceleration  of  the  pace  of  life
could be explained by two di¤erent factors. On the one hand, individuals
could feel pressed to speed up in response to the social change around them,
because of what I have called the “slippery-slope” phenomenon. Accelera-
tion in this sense would be enforced by the fear of losing out in light of the
speed and Xexibility demands of the social and economic world. On the other
hand, speeding up the pace of life could be a (voluntary) response to “the
promise of acceleration,” that is, a consequence of people’s conception of
the good life. Of course, fear and promise might well both be driving fac-
tors of acceleration (as they are, following Max Weber’s famous Protestant
ethic thesis, the driving factors of capitalism).47 Common parlance might
serve as a guide for testing the slippery-slope hypothesis: even a casual look
at how people explain or justify their use of time is puzzling in light of the
dominant ideology of individual freedom. In a strange opposition to the
idea that individuals in Western societies are free to do whatever they please,
the rhetoric of obligation abounds: “I have to read the newspaper, exercise,
call and visit my friends regularly, learn a second language, scrutinize the
market for job opportunities, have hobbies, travel abroad, keep up with con-
temporary computer technologies, etc.”48 However, we have to be careful
to scrutinize the source of this kind of “must”—it might well stem from an
underlying cultural ideal as well as from social and economic pressures.
Interestingly, we Wnd an analogous semantic slip in contemporary politics:
whereas in early and classical modernity processes and technologies of accel-
eration were legitimized in the rhetoric of “progress,” which mirrored the
promise of acceleration, in late modernity political language has adopted

46. See my Identität und kulturelle Praxis: Politische Philosophie nach Charles Taylor (Frank-

furt am Main: Campus, 1998).

47. Cf. Hartmut Rosa, “Wachstum und Beschleunigung—Angst und Verheißung der kapi-
talistischen Gesellschaft,” Erwägen, Wissen, Ethik 13, no. 3 (2002): 330–33, review of Elmar Alt-
vater,  “Kapitalismus:  Zur  Bestimmung,  Abgrenzung  und  Dynamik  einer  geschichtlichen
Formation,” Erwägen, Wissen, Ethik 13, no. 3 (2002): 281–92.

48. For an impressive list of such “musts,” see Horst W. Opaschowski, Freizeitökonomie:

Marketing von Erlebniswelten, 2nd ed. (Opladen: Leske and Budrich, 1995), 85–86.

02 Chapter 6.qxd  10/27/2008  1:54 PM  Page 99

social acceleration

99

the terminology of “inherent necessity” and “unavoidable adjustment” (to 
a Wercely competitive world)—a clear indication of the felt pressures of the
slippery slope.

However, common parlance might serve as an indicator of the nature of
subtle connections between the di¤erent spheres of social acceleration in
yet another sense. The acceleration of rates of social change to an intra-
rather than intergenerational pace is mirrored in language that avoids iden-
tity predicates and uses temporary markers instead. People speak of working
(for the time being) as a baker rather than being a baker, living with Mary
rather than being Mary’s husband, going to the Methodist Church rather
than being a Methodist, voting Republican rather than being a Republican,
and so on. This use of language indicates that the awareness of contingency
has increased even where the actual rates of change have not yet done so:
things (jobs, spouses, religious, political commitments) could be otherwise,
they could change at any time because of either my own or other people’s
decisions. Although increased contingency is not equivalent to acceleration,
it surely contributes to the perception of slippery slopes and time pressure.
The introduction of temporary markers in identity statements (I was a Meth-
odist, I am married to Mary, I will be a consultant after my next degree) re-
Xects a temporal contraction of identity reXecting the contraction of the
present identiWed above. It is measurable, to some degree, by indicators for
the deinstitutionalization of biographies and life trajectories.

Accordingly, a number of recent studies suggest a signiWcant change in
the time perspectives by which people organize their lives. As Martin Kohli
has convincingly argued, modernity was characterized by a “temporaliza-
tion of life”: people were no longer absorbed with handling their life on a
day-to-day basis but started to conceive their lives along the lines of a three-
tiered temporal pattern (the modern standard biography of education, work
life, retirement or childhood, adult life, old age) that deWned an institution-
alized, reliable structure and orienting perspective around which individu-
als could plan their lives.49 Classical modern identities were consequently
long-term projects supposed to evolve like a bildungsroman. In late moder-
nity, however, this pattern no longer holds: neither work nor family life can
be foreseen or planned for a lifetime. Instead, people develop a new per-
spective that has been oddly termed the “temporalization of time”: time spans
and the duration of activities or commitments are no longer planned ahead 

49. Kohli, “Lebenslauf und Lebensalter”; above, Section II.2.

02 Chapter 6.qxd  10/27/2008  1:54 PM  Page 100

100

theoretical foundations

but left to evolve.50 Such a temporalization of time, however, is equivalent
to the detemporalization of life: life is no longer planned along a line that
stretches from the past into the future; instead, decisions are taken from time
to time according to situational and contextual needs and desires. As Richard
Sennett argues, stability of character and adherence to a time-resistant life
plan are incompatible with the demands of the late modern world.51 Thus,
a conception of the good life based on long-term commitments, duration,
and stability is thwarted by the fast pace of social change.52

But even when this new perspective is depicted in neutral or even posi-
tive terms, it is evident that a new form of situationalism is replacing the
temporally  extended  identity  characteristic  of  classical  modernity.53 This
new situationalism in a way resembles premodern forms of existence in
which people had to cope with unforeseeable contingencies on a day-to-day
basis without being able to plan for the future; however, whereas the dan-
gers,  events,  and  contingencies  that  threatened  the  earlier  forms  of  life
(natural disasters, wars, diseases, etc.) were exogenous to society, the new
situationalism is an endogenous product of social structures themselves.
However we evaluate this phenomenon, the incompatibility of situational
identities with the modern ideal of individual ethical autonomy is apparent.
The ideal of the autonomous and reXective leading of a life requires adopt-
ing long-term commitments that bestow a sense of direction, priority, and
“narratability” to life.54

50. Cf. Mike Sandbothe, Die Verzeitlichung der Zeit: Grundtendenzen der modernen Zeitde-
batte in Philosophie und Wissenschaft (Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1998);
and Karl H. Hörning, Daniela Ahrens, and Anette Gerhard, Zeitpraktiken: Experimentierfelder
der Spätmoderne (Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp, 1997).

51. See, e.g., Hörning, Ahrens, and Gerhard’s characterization of the late modern Wgure
they term “the gambler”; this character resembles the “drifter” described by Richard Sennett,
although Sennett is much more critical with respect to the desirability of such a time perspec-
tive. For a philosophical critique of such a “reduced” sense of time that exclusively focuses on
the present, see Dieter Sturma, “Die erweiterte Gegenwart: Kontingenz, Zeit und praktische
Selbstverhältnisse  im  Leben  von  Personen,”  in Die  Wiederentdeckung  der  Zeit:  ReXexionen,
Analysen, Konzepte, ed. A. Gimmler, M. Sandbothe, and W. C. Zimmerli (Darmstadt: Primus,
1997), 63–78. For a further discussion of the causes and consequences of the “temporaliza-
tion of time,” see Rosa, “Temporalstrukturen in der Spätmoderne.”

52. For this, see my “On DeWning the Good Life: Liberal Freedom and Capitalist Neces-

sity,” Constellations 5, no. 2 (1998): 201–14.

53. Hörning, Ahrens, and Gerhard, Zeitpraktiken.
54. Interestingly, the Wndings of some authors suggest that there is a tendency toward a
“new fatalism” that assumes that we cannot control or plan the conditions of our lives (e.g.,
Garhammer, Wie  Europäer  ihre  Zeit  nutzen).  This,  too,  could  be  read  as  evidence  for  the
increasingly “situational” instead of “temporal” perspective. Hörning, Ahrens, and Gerhard
also point out that the incapacity to develop a persistent sense of relevance, direction, and pri-
ority is a serious problem for the late modern “gambler” personality type. See Zeitpraktiken;

02 Chapter 6.qxd  10/27/2008  1:54 PM  Page 101

social acceleration

101

The incapacity to engage in long-term commitments and to develop a 
frame of time-resistant priorities and long-term goals frequently seems to
lead to a paradoxical backlash in which the experience of frantic change and
temporalized time gives way to the perception of “frozen time” without (a
meaningful) past and future and consequently of depressing inertia. Ger-
man philosopher Klaus-Michael Kodalle has tried to explain this phenom-
enon philosophically, while Douglas Coupland’s Generation X illustrates it
metaphorically in the stories of “Texlahoma,” a place in which time is eter-
nally frozen in the year 1974—making for a nice contrast with the book’s
subtitle: “Tales for an Accelerated Culture.” Finally, Peter Conrad observes
that historically, the problem of l’ennui (boredom) became vexing precisely
at the moment when the Industrial Revolution “increased velocity in all areas
of human experience” and created a climate of “hectic, propulsive dyna-
mism” in which history itself was imagined as a fast-running railway.55

In sum, the individual’s reaction to social acceleration in late modernity
seems to result in a new, situational form of identity, in which the dyna-
mism of classical modernity, characterized by a strong sense of direction
(perceived as progress), is replaced by a sense of directionless, frantic motion
that is in fact a form of inertia.

2. The “End of Politics” and the Detemporalization of History

Interestingly, an exactly analogous phenomenon can be observed in late
modern politics. Here we have the same constellation of a political tempo-
ralization of time that results in a detemporalization of politics. Politics in
classical modernity had a temporal index in the very labels “progressive”
versus “conservative” (or left versus right), while history was perceived of
as (directed) progress: progressive politics sought to accelerate progress,
whereas conservative politics was “reactionary” in opposing the forces of
change and acceleration. Today, ironically, if the distinction between left
and right has retained any discriminatory power at all, “progressives” tend
to sympathize with the advocates of deceleration (stressing locality, political

and “Do Technologies Have Time? New Practices of Time and the Transformation of Com-
munication Technologies,” Time and Society 8 (1999): 293–308.

55. Peter Conrad, Modern Times, Modern Places (New York: Knopf, 1999), 16–17; Klaus-
Michael Kodalle, ed., Zeit-Verschwendung: Ein Symposion (Würzburg: Königshausen and Neu-
mann, 1999), 12; cf. Garhammer, Wie Europäer ihre Zeit nutzen, 482; Sennett, The Corrosion
of Character, 121; at length in Rosa, “Am Ende der Geschichte.”

02 Chapter 6.qxd  10/27/2008  1:54 PM  Page 102

102

theoretical foundations

control of the economy, democratic negotiation, environmental protection,
etc.), whereas “conservatives” have become strong defenders of the need
for further acceleration (embracing new technologies, rapid markets, and fast
administrative decision making). This is yet another example of how the
forces of acceleration have outgrown the very agents and institutions that
set them in motion: bureaucracy, the nation-state, the strict time regime of
the factory, democratic politics, stable personal identities—all of these insti-
tutions historically played a key role in enabling social acceleration by pro-
viding stable and calculable background conditions, but are now in danger
of being eroded by the very forces of acceleration they set in motion.56 In
late modernity, they have become obstacles to further acceleration. The very
idea of an “institution,” whose Latin root indicates its static, durable char-
acter, is incompatible with the idea of total acceleration (table 1).

As a result, politics, too, has become situationalist: it conWnes itself to
reacting to pressures instead of developing progressive visions of its own.
Very often, political decisions no longer aspire to actively steer (accelera-
tory) social developments, but are defensive and deceleratory. It seems that
just as it has become virtually impossible to individually plan one’s life in
the sense of a life project, it has become politically impossible to plan and
shape society over time; the time of political projects, it seems, is also over.
Individually as well as politically, the sense of a directed movement of his-
tory has given way to a sense of directionless, frantic change. For Armin
Nassehi, a German author in the systems-theoretic tradition, this loss of
political autonomy (corresponding to the loss of individual autonomy dis-
cussed above) is an inevitable consequence of the temporal structures of
modern society:

The present . . . loses its capacity for planning and shaping. As the
present of action it is always oriented toward the future, but it can-
not  shape  this  future  because  of  the  dynamics,  risks,  and  vast
amount of simultaneity within the present, which it cannot con-
trol at all. Early modernity promised the capacity to shape and con-
trol world and time and to initiate and historically legitimate future
progress. But in late modernity, time itself has come to destroy the

56. Thus, the neoliberal cry for deregulation is clearly a reaction to the perceived slowness
of a bureaucracy that was once hailed by Max Weber as the fastest and most eªcient institu-
tion conceivable. Similarly, the power of the nation-state seems to be on the decline because
its reactions are too slow in a world of high-speed global transactions. The slowness of the
state was arguably a key factor in the fall of the Soviet Empire.

02 Chapter 6.qxd  10/27/2008  1:54 PM  Page 103

social acceleration

103

Table 1.
ators as late modern decelerators

The dialectics of acceleration and institutional stability: Modern acceler-

Societal core 
institutions

As accelerators in 
classical modernity

As decelerators in

late modernity

Bureaucracy

Nation-state

Representative
democracy
Political regulation

Deceleration of social and
economic processes
Deceleration of supranational
circulatory processes

Acceleration of 
administrative processes
Acceleration via 
standardization (time,
language, law)
Accelerated adaptation to Deceleration of vital
sociopolitical needs
Acceleration through
progressive politics

decision making
Deceleration through the
claim to regulation
Inhibited acceleration of
the lifeworld

Spatial and temporal Uninhibited acceleration
separation of work
and life/leisure
Stable personal
identities
Individual life plans

of productive economic
processes
Acceleration through
individualization
Acceleration through the Decelerated adaptation to
temporalization of life

Deceleration/inhibited
change through inflexibility

social change

potential for any form of social or substantial control, inXuence,
or steering.”57

The structural problem at the heart of this disappearance of politics is
the political system’s fundamental inability to accelerate. Here we touch on
a central structural feature of late modern societies: the desynchronization
of social and functional spheres, which takes two forms. First, there is a
desynchronization of di¤erent groups and segments of society. Not all social
groups accelerate equally: some, like the sick, the unemployed, the poor,
or, in some respects, the elderly, are forced to decelerate, while others, like
the Amish, refuse to adopt the temporal structures and horizons of moder-
nity. This desynchronization entails an increasing “simultaneity of the non-
simultaneous”: high-tech and stone-age methods of warfare, transport, or
communication persist side by side, not only between di¤erent countries,
but even within the same society, and fast and slow paces of life can be

57. Nassehi, Die Zeit der Gesellschaft, 375. Similarly, Baudrillard holds that history has lost
its sense of (linear) progression: it is no longer moving toward an imaginary end point (which
is why Baudrillard argued the “symbolic year 2000” would never be reached), but rather “is
disintegrating  into  its  simple  elements  in  a  catastrophic  process  of  recurrence  and  turbu-
lence” (The Illusion of the End, 11). Cf. Baier, Keine Zeit! 17–18.

02 Chapter 6.qxd  10/27/2008  1:54 PM  Page 104

104

theoretical foundations

observed on one and the same street.58 The result of this “multitemporality”
is likely to be a progressive disintegration of society. At Wrst, the desynchro-
nization of various segments might aggravate the problem of ghettoization,
transforming  society  into  a  mosaic  of  temporal  ghettos.  Some  of  these
ghettos may resist the forces of acceleration, but wherever these forces are
in operation, they will eventually enforce the dissolution of the boundaries
between groups and segments, since these boundaries are e¤ective speed
limits (the increasing irrelevance of state borders is just the most striking
example of this tendency). The resulting postmodern dedi¤erentiation, how-
ever, may lead not to reintegration, but to a fast-paced, atomized, kaleido-
scopic social amalgam in which highly volatile associations and lifestyle
milieus replace the mosaic of ghettos.

This, in turn, may aggravate the political problem of desynchronization
in its second form. Contrary to a widespread opinion, modernity has not
just established a single, unitary form of abstract, linear time that synchro-
nizes its various subsystems. Rather, the process of functional di¤erentiation
has resulted in a series of almost autopoietic subsystems like the economy,
science, law, politics, the arts, and so on, all of which follow their own tem-
poral rhythms, patterns, and horizons. Just as there is no unifying social
or substantial center governing the subsystemic operations, there is also no
integrating temporal authority, and this, in turn, results in increasing tem-
poral desynchronization.

For the political system, this entails truly paradoxical temporal horizons.
On the one hand, the time needed for democratic political decision making
is not just hard to accelerate, since processes of deliberation and aggregation
in a pluralistic democratic society inevitably take time;59 it is actually increas-
ing for a number of reasons. First, the less consensus there is within soci-
ety, the less conventionalist the legitimating principles of society are, the
longer it takes to reach consensus—and disintegrated modern acceleration
societies  tend  to  become  both  more  pluralistic  and  less  conventionalist,

58. Of course, the acceleration thesis presented in this chapter can only be upheld if it can
be shown that the predominance of processes of deceleration and time abundance (if they can
be found at all) is a phenomenon characteristic of socially excluded or underprivileged groups
like the old, the unemployed, and the poor or sick rather than the trend-setting elites. Decel-
eration, then, is a sign of deprivation and exclusion and thus plays a dysfunctional rather than
a functional role in modern societies, which can partially be explained as an unintended e¤ect
in the sense of category three above.

59. See Scheuerman, “Liberal Democracy and the Empire of Speed,” 56–63. Scheuerman
points out that there is a long-standing trend in politics toward shifting political powers from the
legislative to the executive branches of government in order to accelerate decision-making
processes and retain political control in the “empire of speed.”

02 Chapter 6.qxd  10/27/2008  1:54 PM  Page 105

social acceleration

105

making it hard to know in advance even which social groups or associa-
tions are going to be relevant for negotiations. Hence, in a volatile political
world, the time needed for the e¤ective organization of collective interests
increases.60 Second, the less certainty there is about future conditions, the
longer it takes to plan for the future and to make decisions.61 Due to the
acceleration of social change and the contraction of the present, background
conditions become increasingly contingent; instead of providing yardsticks
for decision-making process, they become complicating factors. Third, the
e¤ects of political decisions tend to extend further and further into the future—
most visibly in the area of nuclear power or genetic engineering, where deci-
sions seem to be irreversible. The longer the temporal range of a particular
decision, the more time it takes to make it rationally. Here, perhaps, the par-
adoxical nature of policy making today is most visible: the e¤ects of crucial
decisions extend in time just as the time available for making them shrinks.
On the other hand, contrary to this need for more time for political deci-
sion making, the acceleration of the surrounding systems—especially eco-
nomic circulation and technological-scientiWc innovation—decreases the
time given to politics to decide an issue. If politics aspires to steer and con-
trol the basic conditions of technological and economic development, it must
either keep up with their accelerating pace or seriously infringe on their
autonomy, virtually ending functional di¤erentiation. At present, policy mak-
ers are always in danger of making completely anachronistic decisions: when,
after years of deliberation and negotiation, they Wnally pass a law regulat-
ing the use of, say, some forms of stem-cell research or cloning, techno-
logical progress may already have made it obsolete.62 Second, because of
the contraction of the present and the increase in contingency, not just the
rate, but also the number and range of social issues in need of political reg-
ulation rise, leaving less time for each decision.

60. “How can a public be organized, we may ask, when literally it does not stay in place? . . .
Without abiding attachments associations are too shifting and shaken to permit a public readily
to locate and identify itself,” John Dewey noted in 1927 in The Public and Its Problems (Chi-
cago: Swallow Press, 1954), 140–41; cf. Scheuerman, “Liberal Democracy and the Empire of
Speed,” 60–62.

61. Thus, it might be diªcult to develop a good pension plan even in the face of stable
demographics when the proportion of old-age pensioners to working people is known. But
this task is almost impossible when it is uncertain (a) how long future generations will live,
(b) how long they will work, (c) what percentage of the population will work at what time, (d)
whether the insurance system will be privatized anyway, (e) whether the nation-state will lose
its power to decide over pension schemes altogether, etc.

62. This was the argument of the supporters of a Swiss proposition called the Beschleuni-
gungsinitiative (acceleration initiative), which sought to reduce democratic processes in order
to speed up lawmaking. It was rejected in a March 2000 referendum.

02 Chapter 6.qxd  10/27/2008  1:54 PM  Page 106

106

theoretical foundations

Third, since, as we have seen, background conditions change quickly and
the temporal horizon for which political e¤ects can be rationally planned
and controlled continuously contracts, fewer and fewer things can be durably
and e¤ectively regulated. Instead, politics shifts to “muddling through” (de-
scribed by Luhmann as the primacy of the short term) with increasingly
temporary and provisional solutions, which ensure that issues keep reap-
pearing on the agenda. The result of these contradictory and incompatible
time pressures seems to be consistent with our Wnding above: politics not
only becomes situationalist and loses its sense of direction; it also tends to
shift the decision-making process toward other, faster arenas: the legal sys-
tem (juridiWcation), or the economy and individual responsibility (privati-
zation and deregulation). Thus, precisely at a point in history where the
human power to steer and control its own fate seems to reach an unprece-
dented technological zenith (foremost, of course, in the shape of genetic
engineering), society’s political capacity to do so reaches its nadir. The delib-
erate and democratic political shaping of our society and form of life, the
political project and promise of enlightened modernity, may be becoming
obsolete in the late modern “acceleration society” (Wg. 3).63

As a result, the inability to control social change has brought about an
overwhelming sense of directionless change in an “iron cage” that itself has
become fundamentally inert. Within its structures, parallel to the individ-
ual experience of time and life delineated above, the frantic pace of political
events covered in the news can barely cover up the virtual standstill of the
history of ideas—or of history itself. As Baudrillard puts it:

This is the most signiWcant event within [our] societies: the emer-
gence, in the very course of their mobilization and revolutionary
process (they are all revolutionary by the standards of past centuries),
of an immense indi¤erence and the silent potency of that indif-
ference. This inert matter of the social is not produced by a lack of
exchanges, information or communication, but by the multiplica-
tion and saturation of exchanges. . . . It is the cold star of the social
and, around that mass, history is also cooling. Events follow one
upon another, canceling each other out in a state of indi¤erence.
The  masses,  neutralized,  mithridatized  by  information,  in  turn

63. Scheuerman, “Liberal Democracy and the Empire of Speed,” 67. Scheuerman, how-
ever, is still somewhat optimistic about the possibility of resynchronizing socioeconomic and
political processes by way of institutional reform; cf. Scheuerman, “ReXexive Law and the
Challenges of Globalization,” Journal of Political Philosophy 9, no. 1 (2001): 81–102.

02 Chapter 6.qxd  10/27/2008  1:54 PM  Page 107

social acceleration

107

Contraction of the temporal horizon/
Increasing scarcity of time resources

Time span for decisions decreases (speed of technological and social
innovation increases)

(cid:127)
 
  Number of necessary decision increases, reducing the available time per
(cid:127)
  Horizon of calculability decreases (contraction of the present)
(cid:127)

decision

Political decisions

Consequence:

Transfer of decision making

to faster systems:
 
(cid:127)
 
(cid:127)
 
(cid:127)

Juridification
Economic deregulation
Ethical privatization

Expansion of the temporal horizon/
Increasing demand for time resources

 
(cid:127)
 
(cid:127)
 
(cid:127)

 
(cid:127)

Increasing temporal range of effects of decisions
Increasing demand for political regulation in consequence of growing
contingencies
Erosion of cultural and sociostructural common ground for decision
making (disintegration) results in increasing demand on time resources
per decision
Increasing demand for information and planning in consequence of the
increase in variability of background conditions increases demand on
time resources per decision

Figure 3. Paradoxes of political time

neutralize history and act as an écran d’absorption. . . . Political events
already lack suªcient energy of their own to move us. . . . History
comes to an end here, not for want of actors, nor for want of vio-
lence . . . , nor for want of events . . . , but by deceleration, indif-
ference and  stupefaction.  . . .  It  is  being  buried  beneath  its  own
immediate e¤ect, worn out in special e¤ects, imploding into cur-
rent events. Deep down, one cannot even speak of the end of history
here, since history will not have time to catch up with its own end.
Its e¤ects are accelerating, but its meaning is slowing inexorably.

02 Chapter 6.qxd  10/27/2008  1:54 PM  Page 108

108

theoretical foundations

It will eventually come to a stop and be extinguished like light and
time in the vicinity of an inWnitely dense mass.64

VI. Conclusion

At the outset of this chapter, I tried to pinpoint the relevance of the logic of
acceleration for the overall process of modernization. I noted that in the
sociological tradition, modernization has been analyzed from four di¤erent
perspectives, relating to society’s structure, culture, personality type, and
relation to nature. Now, when we try to reconceptualize the acceleration
process along the lines of these four dimensions, it appears that change in
the temporal structures is relevant to each of them (fig. 4). While all seg-
ments of the world’s population are certainly not equally a¤ected by social
acceleration—to the contrary, in some parts of the world and some segments
of Western societies many processes in fact appear to decelerate—the logic
of social acceleration is decisive for the structural and cultural evolution of
contemporary society. Thus, it is evident that technological acceleration is
a crucial feature of modern society’s relation to nature, while the accelera-
tion of the pace of life is of overriding importance for the late modern per-
sonality. Furthermore, the overall acceleration of social change is intimately
related to both cultural and structural transformation.

With respect to social structure, two distinct but related aspects of accel-
eration were identiWed. On the one hand, if we take functional di¤erentia-
tion to be the main structural feature of modern societies, there clearly is
a  speedup  of  (sub)systemic  processing:  Wnancial  transactions,  economic
production and distribution, scientiWc discoveries, technological inventions,
artistic productions, and even lawmaking65 have unmistakably sped up fol-
lowing their own logics without much outside interference. This has led to
desynchronization, since not all subsystems are equally capable of acceler-
ation.66 On the other hand, if we take the basic structure of society to be the

64. Baudrillard, The Illusion of the End, 3–4.
65. See  chapter  5  of  this  volume;  see  also  Scheuerman  “The  Economic  State  of  Emer-

gency,” Cardozo Law Review 21 (2000): 1891.

66. It remains an open question whether at some point in the future the drive for further
acceleration will cause an eventual dedi¤erentiation, as some advocates of postmodernity argue,
since strict systemic boundaries might eventually become obstacles to “total” acceleration. If
this should happen, functional di¤erentiation could be a further feature in the dialectics of
acceleration and stability (fig. 3): it accelerated social processes in “classical” modernity but
comes to function as a decelerator in late modernity. Some authors suggest that postmodernity

02 Chapter 6.qxd  10/27/2008  1:54 PM  Page 109

social acceleration

109

Structure

Culture

Speedup and
desynchronization of systemic
processes; accelerated social
change (groups, roles)

Acceleration of cultural change/
contraction of the present

Temporal dimension
(Paradox: deceleration)

Acceleration and fragmentation
of the pace of life

Technological
acceleration

Personality

Stance toward
nature

Figure 4. The process of modernization II

structure of its associations, groups, and collectivities and the corresponding
role structures—as suggested, for example, by Parsons67—then processes
of  social  acceleration  have  clearly  increased  the  speed  of  social  change;
family and occupational structures as well as associations and milieus have
become highly volatile, shifting, and contingent, making it diªcult to iden-
tify politically and socially relevant and stable associational structures at all.
This, as we have seen, further aggravates the problem of social integration
for late modern societies.

With respect to the cultural dimension, the contraction of the present—
that is, the shortening of the time spans within which action orientations
and social practices remain stable—is the most important e¤ect of social

has to be understood as a process of dedi¤erentiation in which the borders between science
and religion, art and technology, economy and politics, etc. are crumbling; see Harvey, The
Condition of Postmodernity, 291; Fredric Jameson, The Cultural Turn: Selected Writings on the
Postmodern, 1983–1998 (London: Verso, 1998).

67. Talcott Parsons, The System of Modern Societies (Englewood Cli¤s, N.J.: Prentice-Hall,

1971), 4.

02 Chapter 6.qxd  10/27/2008  1:54 PM  Page 110

110

theoretical foundations

acceleration. Lifestyles, fashions, practices, occupational, familial, territorial, 
political, and religious commitments all change at a faster pace and become
increasingly  contingent  and  revisable.  Late  modern  culture  thus  clearly
appears to be highly dynamic.

However, as pointed out throughout this chapter, in at least three of the
four dimensions (structure, culture, and personality) we also Wnd comple-
mentary signs of deceleration or inertia—the paradoxical Xipside of social
acceleration. Thus, individuals at times, despite the frantic pace of events,
experience their loss of direction, priorities, and narratable “progress” as
“frozen time” or virtual inertia, just as the entrenched logics of subsystemic
operations appear to be so reiWed that notions of the “end of history,” the
“exhaustion of utopian energies,” and the “iron cage” abound amidst the
discourse of permanent and total social change.68 Similarly, with respect to
culture, what from one perspective appears to be a vast contingency of value
orientations and lifestyles in which “anything goes” can be interpreted from
another perspective as an entrenchment of the basic value orientations of
modernity, that is, as strict adherence to the values of activity, universality,
rationality, and individuality.69 From the deceleratory perspective, Western
societies’  apparently  fast  pace  of  change  is  only  a  surface  phenomenon
beneath which we Wnd inertia. Only with respect to nature does there seem
to be no complementary deceleration. Here, only the looming possibility of
environmental disaster Wgures as a potential for (exogenous) deceleration.
A Wnal question concerns whether acceleration really is an independent
feature of modernity or just a perspective from which its core processes (indi-
vidualization, domestication, rationalization, di¤erentiation) can be reinter-
preted. After all, all four processes traditionally associated with modernization
are intricately connected with increases in speed: thus, individualization
can  be  a  cause  as  well  as  an  e¤ect  of  acceleration,  since  individuals  are
more mobile and adaptive to change and faster in making decisions than
collectivities.  Similarly,  one  of  the  main  reasons  for,  as  well  as  a  conse-
quence of, organizational di¤erentiation is the speeding up of systemic pro-
cesses, and the same holds true for rationalization as the improvement of

68. Even if there is eventually a postmodern dedi¤erentiation of social subsystems, this
will, in my view, not alter the perception of inertia and powerlessness, since the resulting
“kaleidoscopic chaos” will be even less controllable. The operative blundering of systemic bor-
ders will not reverse the uncontrollable, nonintentional functioning of systemic processing.
69. For this argument, see Gerd Günter Voß, “Wertewandel: Eine Modernisierung der
protestantischen Ethik,” Zeitschrift für Personalforschung 3 (1990): 263–75; and Schulze, “Stei-
gerunglogik und Erlebnisgesellschaft,” Politische Bildung 30, no. 2 (1997): 79.

02 Chapter 6.qxd  10/27/2008  1:54 PM  Page 111

social acceleration

111

means-ends relationships and domestication as an improvement of instru-
mental control. Nevertheless, I would suggest that we regard modernization
as a process of social acceleration for at least three reasons. First, individual
as well as collective human existence is in its very essence temporal and
processual; changes in temporal structures are changes in individual and
social existence.70 Hence, it is only with respect to the signiWcant changes
in  its  temporality  that  the  nature  and  impact  of  modernization  become
fully visible. Second, social acceleration reveals the unitary logic underlying
all four dimensions of modernization. And third, it is only from a tempo-
ral perspective that we can fully understand the fundamental transforma-
tions in contemporary society, which are the result of social acceleration
within the unaltered framework of modernity but beyond the limits of indi-
vidual and social integration and autonomy. As such, they amount to a silent
but sweeping qualitative social revolution by a mere quantitative change in
the realm of speed.

70. “The self is process; the temporal dimension is fundamental. To neglect the temporal
dimension is to neglect the essence. We shall never understand the human by simply ana-
lyzing the individual as a stable conWguration of traits, qualities, or attitudes,” argues, Robert
Lauer, reminiscent of Heidegger, in Temporal Man: The Meaning and Uses of Social Time (New
York: Praeger, 1981), 56. He convincingly adds that exactly the same is true for social inter-
actions and society as well (86–88).

