Updated March 2004 
© March 2004, Davis Malm & D'Agostine, P.C 

An Introduction To Business Organizations 

William F. Griffin, Jr. 

Davis, Malm & D'Agostine, P.C. 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

The following outline is intended to acquaint the reader with the different forms in which 

businesses are commonly conducted.  It is greatly simplified.  
 

I. 

COMMON FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANIZATIONS 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The seven most common forms of business organizations are: 

 

 

 

 

 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

the sole proprietorship; 

the general partnership; 

the limited partnership; 

the business trust with transferable shares;  

the business corporation;  

the limited liability company; and  

the limited liability partnership. 

Each of these forms of business organizations differs from the others in terms of 
(a) governing law, (b) the formalities of organization, (c) control and management of the 
business, (d) personal liability of the owners, (e) continuity of legal existence and 
(f) transferability of interests in the business.  Each has distinctive tax advantages and 
disadvantages. 
 

The distinguishing characteristics of each form of business organization under 

Massachusetts law are discussed in Sections II-VIII below.  The principal tax consequences of 
each form of business organization are discussed in summary fashion in Section IX. 
 

II. 

THE SOLE PROPRIETORSHIP 

 

The simplest form of a business organization is the sole proprietorship.  A sole 

proprietorship consists of an individual doing business for himself or herself.  For example, an 
individual attorney, practicing alone or with a hired associate, paralegal, or secretary, is a sole 
proprietor. 
 

A. 

Governing Law 

 

No specific statute governs the formation of a sole proprietorship.  A sole proprietorship, 

like every other form of business organization, is, of course, subject to any licensing or other 
requirements applicable to the kind of business or the particular activities in which it may 
engage.  Sole proprietorships, like any other form of business not specifically exempted, must 
comply with the "business name statute,"  G. L. c. 110.  The business name statute is discussed in 
greater detail in Section XI infra. 
 

B. 

Formalities of Organization 

 

 

 

No formal document or filing is required for the creation of a sole proprietorship.   

C. 

Control and Management 

The owner of a sole proprietorship is in full and absolute control of the business.  No one 

else has a right to participate in management, although the owner may by contract delegate 
authority to employees or agents.  A sole proprietor does not share profits and must bear all 
losses of the business. 
 

D. 

Liability of Owner 

 

In the absence of a contract to the contrary, a sole proprietor is personally liable for all 

obligations of the business to the full extent of his personal and business assets.  He or she is also 
liable for any torts which he personally commits, as well as for those committed by his 
employees within the scope of their employment.  Certain potential tort liabilities may, of course, 
be covered by insurance. 
 

E. 

Continuity of Existence 

 

A sole proprietorship terminates on the death of the proprietor.  Thus, a sole 

proprietorship, technically, has no continuity of existence. 
 

 
 

2

F. 

Transferability of Interests 

 

The business of a sole proprietor may be transferred as a whole.  However, fractional 

interests in the business may not be transferred to others without adopting a new form of 
organization. 
 

III. 

THE GENERAL PARTNERSHIP 

 

A partnership is an association of two or more persons to carry on as co-owners, a business 
for profit.  (G. L. c. 108A, §6).  Two or more attorneys, for example, may conduct their practice as a 
general partnership. 
 

A. 

Governing Law 

 

General partnerships are governed by the Uniform Partnership Act (G. L. c. 108A), which 

has been adopted, with some variations, in 48 states.   
 

B. 

Formalities of Organization 

 

A partnership may be formed either by agreement or by conduct of the parties, express or 

implied.  Although no written agreement is necessary to establish a general partnership, it is 
usually desirable to define the rights and duties of the partners to one another in a written 
partnership agreement.  
 

C. 

Control and Management 

 

In the absence of an agreement to the contrary, each partner has an equal voice in the 

management and control of the partnership; in the event of disagreement, a numerical majority of 
the partners controls.  This general principle may be varied by agreement. 
 

D. 

Liability of Owners 

 

Each partner in a general partnership has full personal liability for all partnership 

obligations.  The partners are jointly and severally liable for the damages caused by any tort or 
breach of trust committed by a partner within the scope of the partnership business and are jointly 
liable for all other partnership obligations.  (G. L. c. 108A, §15).  Newly admitted partners are 
liable only for future obligations; retired partners only for past obligations.  (G. L. c. 108A, §§17 
and 36). 
 

 
 

3

E. 

Continuity of Existence 

 

When any partner ceases to be a member of the firm, whether through withdrawal, 

expulsion or death, a technical dissolution of the partnership occurs.  (G. L. c. 108A, §§29 and 
31).  Dissolution may also be occasioned by a number of other events, including, in some 
instances, a court decree.  (See G. L. c. 108A, §§31 and 32 for the causes of dissolution.)  Thus, 
like the sole proprietorship, the partnership does not, at least theoretically, possess perpetual life. 
 

F. 

Transferability of Interests 

Partners have three types of property rights: 

 

 

 

1. 

rights in specific partnership property; 

interests in the partnership (i.e., their respective shares of partnership 

2. 
capital and profits); and 

3. 

rights to participate in management.  (G. L. c. 108A, §24). 

 

 

 

 

 

A partner's rights in specific partnership property are not assignable except in connection 

with the assignment of the rights of all the parties to the same property.  (G. L. c. 108A, 
§25(2)(b)).   
 

A partner's interest in the partnership (i.e., his share of the partnership capital and profits) 
may be assigned; but, in the absence of agreement by the other partners, the assignment does not 
entitle the assignee to participate in the management or administration of the partnership 
business, or to require any information or account of partnership transactions, or to inspect the 
partnership books.  It merely entitles the assignee to receive in accordance with his  
contract the profits to which the assigning partner would otherwise be entitled.  (G. L. c. 108A, 
§27(1)).  Thus, general partnerships have only limited transferability of interests. 
 

IV. 

THE LIMITED PARTNERSHIP 

 

A limited partnership is a partnership formed by two or more persons under a special 

statute, having as members one or more "general partners" and one or more "limited partners."  
The basic distinction between a general partnership and a limited partnership arises from the 
presence and status of limited partners.  The status of a limited partner differs from that of a 
general partner in two principal respects:  (i) the liability of each limited partner is limited to the 
amount of his capital contribution to the partnership; and (ii) a limited partner may not 
participate in the control and management of the partnership.  A limited partnership thus 
encourages capital investment by persons not wishing to risk more than the amount they invest. 
 

 
 

4

A. 

Governing Law 

 

In Massachusetts, limited partnerships are governed by the Revised Uniform Limited 

Partnership Act.  (G. L. c. 109). 
 

B. 

Formalities of Organization 

 

 

 

 

A limited partnership is formed by substantial compliance with two requirements: 

1. 

each of the general partners desiring to form a limited partnership must 

execute a certificate containing the information set forth below; and 

2. 

the certificate must be filed in the office of the Secretary of the 

Commonwealth.  (G. L. c. 109, §8).  The current filing fee in Massachusetts is $200.  

Most limited partnerships are governed by a comprehensive limited partnership 

agreement which need not be a part of the public record. 
 

C. 

Control and Management 

 

Except for the exercise of certain limited rights, a limited partner may not take part in 

control and management of the partnership without risking the loss of limited liability. 
G. L. c. 109, §19).  Accordingly, virtually all limited partnership agreements vest exclusive 
power over the business in the general partners.  The general partners of a limited partnership 
have all the powers and duties of partners in a general partnership.  (G. L. c. 109, §24). 
 

D. 

Liability of Owners 

 

In every limited partnership there must be at least one general partner with full personal 
liability.  (G. L. c. 109, §1(7)).  A limited partner is not liable to the creditors of the partnership 
beyond the amount of his contribution to the partnership unless, as indicated above, he takes part 
in the control of the business.  (G. L. c. 109, §19). 
 

E. 

Continuity of Existence 

 

Under G. L. c. 109, §44, a limited partnership is dissolved and its affairs shall be wound 

up upon the happening of the first to occur of the following: 
 

1. 

at the time or upon the happening of events specified in the certificate of 

limited partnership; 

 

 

 
 

2. 

3. 

written consent of all partners; 

an event of withdrawal of a general partner unless at the time there is at 

least one other general partner and the certificate of limited partnership permits the 

5

business of the limited partnership to be carried on by the remaining general partner and 
that partner does so, but the limited partnership is not dissolved and is not required to be 
wound up by reason of any event of withdrawal, if, within 90 days after the withdrawal, 
all partners agree in writing to continue the business of the limited partnership and to the 
appointment of one or more additional general partners if necessary or desired; or 

4. 

entry of a decree of judicial dissolution.  (G. L. c. 109, §45). 

 

 

Unless the certificate provides otherwise, however, the withdrawal of a limited partner 

does not bring about a dissolution of the partnership.  (G. L. c. 109, §44). 
 

F. 

Transferability of Interests 

 

Except as provided in the limited partnership agreement, a partnership interest  

is assignable in whole or in part.  An assignment of a partnership interest does not dissolve a 
limited partnership or entitle the assignee to become or to exercise any rights of a partner 
G. L. c. 109, §40).  The assignee, may, however, be substituted as a limited partner only if and to 
the extent that (1) the assignor gives the assignee that right in accordance with authority 
described in the certificate of limited partnership, or (2) all other partners agree.  Unless the 
assignee is substituted as a limited partner, an assignment entitles the assignee to receive, to the 
extent assigned, only the distributions to which the assignor would be entitled.  Except as 
provided in the partnership agreement, a partner ceases to be a partner upon the assignment of all 
his partnership interest.  (G. L. c. 109, §§ 40 and 42). 

 
V. 

 

THE BUSINESS TRUST 

The business (or "Massachusetts") trust is, essentially, a business organization in the form 

of a trust.  More precisely, the business trust is an unincorporated business organization created 
by an instrument by which property is held and managed by trustees for the benefit of the holders 
("shareholders") of transferable certificates evidencing the beneficial interests in the trust estate.  
Many public utility holding companies in Massachusetts (for example, NStar, the parent holding 
company for Boston Edison and Commonwealth Energy System) are organized as business 
trusts. 
 

A business trust partakes of many of the characteristics of a trust, a corporation, and of a 
partnership.  For example, as a general rule, the instrument creating the business trust should be 
executed to conform to the law of trusts.  Like a corporation, however, the shares of beneficial 
interest in the trust corpus may be made fully transferable and shareholders may elect the 
trustees.  In addition, like a limited partnerships, the beneficial owners of the trust may not 
engage in the management and control of the business without risking personal liability for debts 
of the trust.   
 

 
 

6

A. 

Governing Law 

 

Business trusts are governed by Chapter 182; but this statute is far less comprehensive 

than those governing partnerships or corporations.  Most of the attributes of a business trust are 
defined by Massachusetts case law. 
 

B. 

Formalities of Organization 

 

A business trust is formed under a written declaration or agreement of trust.  The 

declaration of trust and amendments thereto should be recorded in the registry of deeds (if the 
trust owns real estate), and copies must be filed with the Secretary of the Commonwealth and 
with the clerk of every municipality where the trust has a usual place of business.  
(G. L. c. 182, §2). 
 

C. 

Control and Management 

 

The trustees are, customarily, the body charged with the control and management of the 

business trust.  Management responsibilities may, of course, be delegated to one or more officers 
or employees.  If shareholders participate in control and management, they risk being subjected 
to personal liability for the debts of the trust, on the analogy of limited partners who participate in 
control of a limited partnership.  A specific stipulation to the contrary is frequently included in 
contracts signed by the trust.  Unfortunately, the degree of control that will subject shareholders 
to personal liability is rather unclear.  Some Massachusetts cases speak of "ultimate power of 
control" as the test, while others have held business trusts to be, in fact, partnerships by virtue of 
indirect control no greater than that available to corporate stockholders, such as the power to 
elect trustees or to terminate the trust.  Hence, shareholders in a business trust always face the 
danger, however remote, of being held personally liable for the debts of the trust if they do 
anything more than act as mere beneficiaries to receive the income distributed to them.  For this 
reason, many declarations of trust frequently provide that the beneficiaries have no power to elect 
the trustees.  
 

D. 

Liability of Owners and Trustees 

 

Unlike a corporation, a business trust cannot, in Massachusetts, own property or make 

contracts as an artificial person.  Legal title to all trust property is in the trustees, and the trustees 
alone have power to make contracts.  The rule in regard to such contracts is that debts may be 
enforced against the trust assets, but not against the trustee personally, nor against the 
shareholders. G. L. c. 182, §6 allows suit against the trust itself, as though it were a corporation.  
Shareholders who participate in the exercise, control or management of the trust may be subject 
to personal liability for the debts of the trust (see discussion in Section IV(C), supra). 
 

 
 

7

E. 

Continuity of Existence 

 

The existence of a business trust, unless the declaration of trust provides otherwise, is not 

interrupted by death or withdrawal of a shareholder. 
 

F. 

Transferability of Interests 

 

Shares of a business trust are freely transferable, subject to any restrictions that the 

declaration of trust may impose upon their transfer. 
 

VI. 

THE BUSINESS CORPORATION 

 

A corporation is a special legal entity created by statute.  Its principal characteristics are 

centralized management in a board of directors, limited liability of stockholders, free 
transferability of interests by stockholders and perpetual existence.  Most large business 
organizations, and many small ones, are conducted in the corporate form. 
 

A. 

Governing Law 

 

Each state has its own separate corporation law.  In Massachusetts, business corporations 

are governed by G. L. c. 156B, the Massachusetts Business Corporation Law.  "Foreign" 
corporations organized under the laws of other states must qualify to do business in 
Massachusetts under Chapter 181.  Effective July 1, 2004, Massachusetts business corporations 
will be governed by new Chapter 156D, the Massachusetts Business Corporation Act.  
Qualifications of foreign corporations will be Part 15 of the new Act. 
 

B. 

Formalities of Organization 

 

A business corporation is created by the filing of articles of organization with the 

Secretary of the Commonwealth.  (G. L. c. 156B, §13; G.L. c. 156D, § 2.01). 
 

C. 

Control and Management 

 

Theoretically, the board of directors is responsible for the governance of the corporation, 

the officers carry out the directives of the board, and the stockholders elect the directors to 
manage the corporation's business.  In most small corporations, however, the owners actively 
participate in the management of the corporation.  Furthermore, the articles of organization, by-
laws or separate agreements among stockholders, such as voting agreements or voting trusts, may 
vary the traditional roles of the players.  For example, stockholder agreements or voting trust 
agreement may limit the ability of the stockholders to exercise free choice in the election of 
directors and officers, or the articles of organization may require a stockholder vote for matters 
which in the absence of a requirement, could be determined by the board of directors without 
stockholder approval (such as the mortgage of substantially all of the assets of the corporation). 
 

 
 

8

D. 

Liability of Owners 

 

Liability of stockholders is generally limited to the consideration paid for their stock, 

provided that shares are fully paid and the corporation is adequately capitalized.  Limited liability 
can be eroded by business necessities (e.g. banks may require stockholders to co-sign notes or 
guarantee corporate debts).  In some cases, neglect of corporate recordkeeping or procedures, 
severe undercapitalization, or fraudulent conduct can result in loss of limited liability, a 
phenomenon called "piercing the corporate veil."   
 

To maintain limited liability, corporate formalities must be observed, including the 
maintenance of corporate minutes, the holding of meetings, and the separation of financial 
records.  Additional costs may be involved in establishing a business as a corporation, including 
incorporation and filing fees, legal and accounting expenses and the cost of preparing and filing 
separate tax returns. 
 

E. 

Continuity of Existence 

 

A corporation has perpetual life unless otherwise provided in its articles of organization.  

(G. L. c. 156B, §9; G.L. c. 156D, §3.02).  The death or incapacity of a stockholder does not 
terminate a corporation's existence. 

 
F. 

 

Transferability of Interests 

Shares of corporate stock are freely transferable.  Capital formation by corporations is 

thus facilitated since evidence of ownership can be transferred or pledged.  The transferability of 
shares is, however, limited by federal and state securities laws and may be restricted by 
agreements among the stockholders.  In a large, publicly traded company, free transferability of 
shares is essential; in a small corporation, transferability of shares may be disadvantageous, as 
when it is considered desirable to keep control within a small number of persons. 
 

VII.  THE LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY 

 

A limited liability company ("LLC") is a special unincorporated legal entity organized 

under a state statute that offers limited liability to all of its owners.  The LLC form is flexible and 
can provide for centralized or decentralized management, free or restricted transferability of 
interests, and perpetual or limited existence.  Accordingly, LLCs may have both partnership and 
corporate characteristics.  LLCs were first authorized by statute in Massachusetts effective 
January 1, 1996 (St. 1995, c. 281, §18). 
 

A. 

Governing Law 

 

LLCs are governed by the Massachusetts Limited Liability Company Act (G. L. c. 156C). 

All fifty states have now enacted LLC statutes.  "Foreign" LLCs organized under the laws of 
other states must register to do business in Massachusetts under G. L. c. 156C, §48. 
 

 
 

9

B. 

Formalities of Organization 

 

An LLC is created by the filing of a certificate of organization with the Secretary of the 
Commonwealth. (G. L. c. 156C, §12).  Like limited partnerships, most LLCs are governed by a 
comprehensive written operating agreement, which need not be part of the public record. 
 

C. 

Control and Management 

 

An LLC may be managed by its owners, or "members", in a manner similar to a general 

partnership, or by one or more "managers", who may or may not be members.  The degree of 
centralization of management of a given LLC is therefore subject to the choice of the persons 
organizing the LLC. 
 

D. 

Liability of Owners 

 

None of the members or managers of an LLC is personally liable for any debts, 

obligations or liabilities of the LLC. (G. L. c. 156C, §22).  Unlike a limited partner of a limited 
partnership, a member of an LLC may take part in the operation of the business of the LLC 
without becoming personally liable for its debts. 
 

E. 

Continuity of Existence 

 

Under G. L. c. 156C, §43, an LLC is dissolved and its affairs wound up upon the first to 

occur of the following: 
 

 

 

 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

the time specified in the operating agreement; 

the happening of any event specified in the operating agreement; 

written consent of all members; 

except as otherwise provided in a written operating agreement, the death, 

insanity, retirement, etc., of a member which terminates his membership in the LLC, 
unless the LLC is continued either by the consent of the remaining members within 90 
days after the withdrawal or pursuant to a right to continue stated in a written operating 
agreement; or 

 

5. 

a decree of judicial dissolution. 

 

 

 

 

 

The existence of an LLC is therefore limited in the same manner as a limited partnership 
(see Section IV(E) above), unless the parties otherwise provide in a written operating agreement. 
By eliminating the events of dissolution in the operating agreement, it is possible for an LLC to 
have in effect a perpetual existence. 
 

 
 

10

F. 

Transferability of Interests 

 

A member’s interest in an LLC is freely assignable in whole or in part except as provided 
in a written operating agreement, but an assignee has no right to participate in the management of 
the LLC or otherwise exercise a member’s rights except upon compliance with procedures set 
forth in a written operating agreement or with the approval of all members.  (G. L. c. 156C, §39). 
 

Thus, the operating agreement can provide for complete or limited freedom of 

transferability of interests.  An LLC interest may be evidenced by a transferable certificate 
similar to a stock certificate.  (G. L. c. 156C, §39(c)). 
 

VIII.  THE LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP 

 

A registered limited liability partnership ("LLP") is a general partnership which files with 

the Secretary of the Commonwealth a brief registration form.  (G. L. c. 108A, §45).  An LLP is 
basically a general partnership in all respects, except that the partners in an LLP are not liable for 
the debts, obligations or liabilities of the LLP.  LLPs were first authorized in Massachusetts by 
legislation effective January 1, 1996 (St. 1995, c. 281, §13).  Many law firms and accounting 
firms formerly organized as partnerships have converted to the LLP form. 
 

A. 

Governing Law 

 

LLPs are governed by various provisions of the Uniform Partnership Act (G. L. c. 108A), 
particularly §§45-47.  "Foreign" LLPs organized under the laws of other states are recognized in 
Massachusetts and are required to register with the Secretary of the Commonwealth in the same 
manner as domestic LLPs. 
 

B. 

Formalities of Organization 

 

An LLP must file a simple registration form with the Secretary of the Commonwealth and 
pay a $500 filing fee.  In order to retain its status, an LLP must also file an annual report with the 
Secretary of the Commonwealth and pay an annual $500 fee (G. L. c. 108A, §45).  Special 
requirements apply in the case of an LLP which provides professional services, including a 
requirement that such LLPs carry professional liability insurance or provide an escrow or letter of 
credit in an amount designated by the appropriate regulatory board.  (G. L. c. 108A, §45). 
 

C. 

Control and Management 

 

 

 
 

Identical to a general partnership.  (See Section III(C) above). 

11

D. 

Liability of Owners 

 

The partners in an LLP, unlike those in a general partnership, have no personal liability 

for any of the debts, obligations or liabilities of the LLP so long as it is registered.  
(G. L. c. 108A, §15(2)). 
 

E. 

Continuity of Existence 

 

 

 

 

Identical to a general partnership.  (See Section III(E) above). 

F. 

Transferability of Interests 

Identical to a general partnership (see Section III(F) above). 

The following table summarizes the various characteristics of the common forms of 

business organizations. 
 

Form of 
Business 

Sole 
Proprietor-
ship 

General 
Partnership 

Governing 

Law 

Formalities of 
Organization 

Control of 
Management 

Liability of 
Owner(s) 

Continuity of 

Transferability 

Existence 

of Interests 

None (see 
G. L. c. 110 
re:  business 
name) 

None 

Vested in 
owner 

Full personal 
liability 

Terminates 
on death 

None 

G. L. c. 108A 

None 

Each general 
partner 

Full personal 
liability of all 
partners 

Limited 

Limited 

Terminates 
on death, 
withdrawal 
or change of 
partner 

Terminates 
on 
withdrawal 
of general 
partner 

Limited 
Partnership 

G. L. c. 109 

File with 
Secretary of 
State 

General 
partner(s) 

Full personal 
liability of 
general partner 

Business 
Trust 

G. L. c. 182 

Corporation  G. L. c. 156B; 
G.L. c. 156D 

LLC 

G. L. c. 156C 

LLP 

G. L. c.108A, 
   §45 

File with 
Secretary of 
State 

File with 
Secretary of 
State 

File with 
Secretary of 
State 

File with 
Secretary of 
State 

 

 
 

Free 
transferability 
of shares 

Free 
transferability 
of stock 

Free or limited 
transferability 
of interests 

Limited 

Trustee(s) 

Potential liability 
of beneficiaries 

Rule against 
perpetuities 

Board of 
directors 

None 

Perpetual 

Perpetual or 
limited 

Terminates 
on death, 
withdrawal 
or change of 
partner 

Manager(s) 
or member(s) 

None 

Each general 
partner 

None 

12

TAX CHARACTERISTICS OF THE COMMON FORMS OF BUSINESS 

IX. 
ORGANIZATIONS 

 

 

A. 

Sole Proprietorship 

Because no separate entity is involved in the operation of a sole proprietorship, all items 

of income, gain, loss, deduction and credit for tax purposes are directly reported by a sole 
proprietor on Schedule C of his or her Federal and Massachusetts income tax returns.   
 

Individuals are taxed on their taxable income at graduated rates for Federal income tax 

purposes, with a maximum rate for 2004 of 35% on ordinary income and 15% on most dividends 
and capital gains.  For 2004, Massachusetts imposes a 5.3% tax on earned income, interest, 
dividends and long-term capital gains and a 12% tax on short-term capital gains. 
 

B. 

General Partnership 

 

A general partnership is a "pass through" entity for Federal and Massachusetts income tax 
purposes.  Thus, a partnership does not itself pay income taxes.  Instead, each partner reports his 
or her share of the partnership's income or loss on his or her individual return.  A partnership 
files a Federal information return on Form 1065 and distributes to each partner a Schedule K-1 
containing the tax information each partner needs to complete his or her personal return.  
Massachusetts partnerships must file a Form 3 with the Department of Revenue and distribute a 
Schedule 3K-1 to its partners. 
 

A non-resident partner of a partnership doing business in Massachusetts is taxable on his 

or her share of income received by the partnership and allocable to Massachusetts. 
 

C. 

Limited Partnership 

 

Generally speaking, a limited partnership is taxed in the same manner as a general 
partnership for Federal and Massachusetts income tax purposes.  Until the adoption of the 
"check-the-box" regulations by the IRS on January 1, 1997, some limited partnerships could be 
treated as corporations for tax purposes, if corporate characteristics (limited liability, 
centralization of management, free transferability of interests and continuity of life) 
predominated.  See §7701 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.  However, these new 
regulations—summarized in Section X(B) below—eliminate this risk. 

 
D. 

Business Trust 

 

A business trust is usually taxed as a corporation for Federal income tax purposes.  It 

may, if qualified, elect to be an S corporation. 
 

Under Massachusetts law, business trusts are subject to a special tax system applicable to 

"corporate trusts".  (G. L. c. 62, §8).  Corporate trusts with certain exceptions are subject to 
taxation in Massachusetts on the same basis as individuals, (i.e., 5.3% on earned income, interest, 

 
 

13

dividends and long-term capital gains and 12% on short-term capital gains).  Certain corporate 
trusts, such as mutual funds, REITs, REMICs and holding companies are exempt from 
Massachusetts tax.  Corporate trusts file Form 3F with the Massachusetts Department of 
Revenue.  Significantly, shareholders of corporate trusts are not taxed in Massachusetts on 
dividends received from the trust.  (G. L. c. 62, §8).  For Massachusetts purposes, therefore, a 
corporate trust is not subject to double taxation and is the "mirror image" of an S corporation, 
taxable on the corporate level, but not on the shareholder level. 
 

E. 

Business Corporation 

 

For Federal income tax purposes, business corporations can be classified as "S 

corporations" (those qualifying corporations electing favorable tax treatment under Subchapter S 
of the Internal Revenue Code) or "C corporations" (all others). 
 

C corporations are subject to a Federal income tax at graduated rates with a maximum 

rate of 38% for 2004.  Since a C corporation's shareholders are taxed again on the distribution of 
corporate earnings in the form of dividends, C corporation income is subject to "double 
taxation", first at the corporate level, and then at the shareholder level.  For this reason, many 
corporations elect to be taxed as S corporations, which, generally speaking, are treated as 
"passthrough" entities similar to partnerships.  S corporation income is thus subject to a single 
tax at the shareholder level.  S corporation elections are discussed in greater detail in 
Section X(D) below. 
 

C corporations doing business in Massachusetts are subject to the Massachusetts 

corporation excise tax under Chapter 63.  This tax consists of two components:  a 9.5% tax on 
corporate net income attributable to Massachusetts plus a tax equal to $2.60 per $1,000 of 
tangible property not subject to local taxation and situated in Massachusetts.  A minimum tax of 
$456 per year is imposed. 

 
Under Massachusetts law, "large" S corporations are subject to tax on their net income at 

a 3% rate if their total receipts exceed $6 million, 4.5% if total receipts exceed $9 million.   
 

F. 

Limited Liability Company 

 

Under the "check-the-box" regulations described in Section X(B) below, an LLC will be 
classified as a partnership for Federal and Massachusetts income tax purposes, unless it elects to 
be taxed as a corporation. 
 

G. 

Limited Liability Partnership 

 

Under the "check-the-box" regulations described in Section X(B) below, an LLP will be 
classified as a partnership for Federal and Massachusetts income tax purposes, unless it elects to 
be taxed as a corporation. 
 

 
 

14

X. 

A. 

 

 

SOME IMPORTANT TAX CONSIDERATIONS 

Federal Employer Identification Number 

Every business organization must obtain from the Internal Revenue Service a Federal 
employer identification number ("EIN").  This involves the filing with the Internal Revenue 
Center in Andover of an IRS Form SS-4 (Application for Employer Identification Number).  
Massachusetts business organizations will receive a nine-digit number.  In the past, EINs for 
Massachusetts taxpayers were assigned the prefix “04.”  For this reason, EINs are sometimes still 
referred to in Massachusetts as "04 numbers." 
 

As a practical matter, you should ascertain at the time of formation of any business entity 

whether the taxpayer, its lawyer, or its accountant will be applying for the EIN.  Failure to 
coordinate the process can result in embarrassing situations where the client has either no EIN or 
more than one. 
 

The IRS Service Center will usually process a Form SS-4 application received by mail in 

4 to 5 weeks.  It is possible to obtain an EIN on an expedited basis by calling the IRS's "Tele-
TIN" phone number ((800) 829-4933).  However, the person calling the IRS must be authorized 
to sign Form SS-4 (i.e., the president, vice president, or "other principal officer" of a corporation, 
or a person authorized as a “Third-Party Designee” by the officer signing Form SS-4). 
 

B. 

"Check-the-Box" 

 

For many years, the question of whether a non-corporate entity with limited liability (e.g., 

a limited partnership or LLC) should be classified as a corporation or a partnership for Federal 
income was a complex one, depending upon an evaluation of the four corporate attributes 
(limited liability, continuity of life, free transferability of interest and centralization of 
management) of the entity. 
 

New IRS regulations effective January 1, 1997 eliminated the four factor test and 
substituted a simple elective system, under which most business organizations other than 
corporations may elect to be classified either as a partnership or a corporation for Federal income 
tax purposes.  (Treas. Reg. §§301.7701-1 et seq.). 
 

These regulations provide clear rules for classifying domestic business organizations.  

Certain entities are always taxable as corporations: these include domestic corporations, certain 
entities engaged in specialized industries (such as banking and insurance) and certain foreign 
entities.  Business organizations that are not so classified as corporations (so-called "eligible 
entities") can elect their tax classification.  An eligible entity with more than one member (such 
as a partnership, limited partnership or LLC; can elect either to be taxed as a corporation or a 
partnership.  An eligible entity with only one member can elect either to be taxed as a corporation 
or to be disregarded for tax purposes.  Significantly, the regulations contain certain "default" 
rules under which a domestic eligible entity will be deemed to be a partnership if it has more than 
one member. 

 
 

15

 

IRS Form 8832 (Entity Classification Election) may be used by an eligible entity to elect 
classification as a corporation or partnership by "checking-the-box" on the form.  An election on 
Form 8832 may be made any time, but an election can take effect no earlier than 75 days prior to 
filing and no later than 12 months thereafter. 
 

Since the default rules provide that partnerships, limited partnerships, LLC’s and LLP’s 

will automatically be classified as partnerships, it is necessary to file Form 8832 only if you wish 
to have an eligible entity classified as a corporation. 
 

C. 

Section 1244 Stock 

 

Section 1244 of the Internal Revenue Code permits an individual or partnership investing 
in certain corporations to claim any loss on an investment in corporate stock as an "ordinary loss" 
fully deductible against taxable income, rather than a "capital loss," deductible only against 
capital gain or a very limited amount of ordinary income ($3,000 per year for Federal income tax 
purposes). 
 

Stock issued by a corporation will qualify as Section 1244 stock if: 

 

 

1. 

the corporation is a domestic business corporation which has issued 

$1,000,000 or less in capital stock; 

 
2. 

the stock is common stock issued for money or other property (but not for 

stock, securities or services); 

 
3. 
 
4. 

the stock is issued to an individual or partnership; 

the corporation has derived less than 50% of its gross receipts from 

investment activities for the previous five years (or such shorter period as the corporation 
is in existence); and 

 
5. 

stock. 

the taxpayer claiming loss is an original investor and not a transferee of the 

A shareholder filing an individual tax return may not deduct more than $50,000 of 

ordinary loss per year ($100,000 for a husband and wife filing jointly).  If the loss exceeds this 
amount, it is treated as a capital loss. 
 

No formal "plan" to issue Section 1244 stock is required, as was the case under the law 

prior to the Revenue Act of 1978.   
 

 
 

16

D. 

S Corporation Elections 

 

In order to secure the benefits of S corporation status, an election on Form 2553 must be 

filed with the Internal Revenue Service. 
 

Under tax legislation effective January 1, 1997, a corporation must meet certain tests in 

order to qualify for S corporation status: 
 

1. 

it must have 75 or fewer shareholders (a husband and wife are treated as 

one shareholder); 

 
2. 

all stockholders must be individuals (or certain permitted trusts, estates or 

tax-exempt organizations); 

 
3. 
 
4. 

no shareholder may be a non-resident alien; and 

the corporation may have only one class of stock (differences in voting 

rights are permissible). 

 

The previous rule that prevented an S corporation from owning more than 80% of the 

stock of another corporation has been repealed.  S corporations can now have subsidiaries. 
 

An S corporation election must be filed on or before the 15th day of the third month of its 

tax year.  A corporation's first fiscal year is considered to start on the date on which the 
corporation (a) has shareholders, (b) acquires assets, or (c) begins doing business, whichever is 
earliest. 
 

An S corporation, in general, must adopt a calendar year as its taxable year.  For example, 

if an S corporation is incorporated and commences business on January 25, 2004, its first fiscal 
year will be a "short year" of eleven months and seven days ending December 31, 2004.  In this 
example, Form 2553 must be filed by April 9, 2004.  If the form is filed on a later date (say, 
April 10, 2004), the election will not be effective until the following tax year (ending 
December 31, 2005). 
 

Note that Form 2553 must be signed by all shareholders of the corporation, a requirement 

which is sometimes overlooked. 
 

E. 

Qualified Small Business Stock 

 

For non-corporate investors who hold stock of a "qualified small business corporation" 

("QSB Stock") for five years or more, the Federal capital gain rate is effectively reduced to 14%, 
rather than the normal 20% (§1202).  In addition, gain on the sale of QSB Stock held for more 
than six months may be rolled over tax-free into another QSB stock within 60 days (§1045). 
 

 
 

17

In order to qualify for special tax treatment as QSB Stock, the following requirements 

must be met: 
 

1. 
 
2. 
 
3. 

QSB stock); 

 
4. 

stock of a domestic C corporation; 

issued after August 10, 1993; 

original issue only (may be issued for cash, property, services or other 

gross assets of corporation must not be in excess of $50 million 

immediately after issue of QSB stock; 

 
5. 

corporation must be in the active conduct of a "qualified business" 

(definition excludes most service businesses, banking and finance, farming, extractive 
industries, hotels and restaurants); and 

 
6. 

corporation may not make certain stock redemptions. 

 

 

F. 

Massachusetts Taxpayer Registration 

Every corporation which is required to withhold income, employment or sales taxes must 

file with the Department of Revenue an Application for Registration on Form TA-1.  The 
Department will assign the corporation a special Massachusetts identification number which 
must be used for filing tax returns. 
 

G. 

Massachusetts Manufacturing Corporations 

 

Corporations which have manufacturing operations in Massachusetts may request 

"manufacturing corporation" classification on Form 355Q.  This classification exempts the 
corporation's property from local taxation by the municipality in which the corporation is located. 
These assets are instead included in the tangible property measure of the corporation excise tax 
base and are taxed at a rate usually much less than the local property tax rate.  A corporation with 
manufacturing corporation classification is also eligible for the Massachusetts investment tax 
credit. 
 

 
 

18

XI. 

SELECTING A BUSINESS NAME 

 

 

A. 

In General 

The overriding legal concern in selecting a name for a corporation or other business 

organization is whether the name selected conflicts with a name used by another business 
organization.  The consequences of carelessly selecting a name which infringes on the rights of 
another person are all unpleasant and range from embarrassment at one extreme to significant 
legal liability at the other. 
 

The task of selecting a "free" name is complicated by the fact that infringement may arise 

by "confusing similarity" of names that are not identical, and by the fact that there exists no 
infallible central register of available names to guide the conscientious businessman. 
 

In thinking about adopting a corporate name, it is important to distinguish several 

categories of business names: 
 

•  A corporate name identifies a corporation and distinguishes it from all other 

corporations.  The Massachusetts Secretary of State requires that corporate names for 
business corporations in most cases include the word "incorporated," "corporation", 
"limited," or their abbreviations.  950 CMR 104.03(1)(b).  The new Business 
Corporation Act will allow the use of the word “Company.”  G. L. c. 156D, §4.01(a) 

•  A trade name, in contrast, identifies an incorporated or unincorporated business and 

may be different from the corporate name of the business.  For example, "Bank of 
Boston" was for many years the well-known trade name for the business conducted by 
the corporation known as The First National Bank of Boston.  Any type of business 
organization may call itself a "company." 

•  A trademark is a name or symbol which is used to identify and distinguish goods sold 

by a business.  For example, "Cadillac" is a trademark for certain automobiles 
manufactured by General Motors Corporation.  A service mark is a name or symbol 
which identifies services provided by a business.  For example, "Greyhound" is a 
service mark for the transportation services provided by Greyhound Lines, Inc. 

Selecting a name for a business corporation requires an awareness of several systems of 

 

 

 

regulation applicable to the different types of names. 
 

B. 

Corporate Names 

 

Under G. L. c. 156B, §11, c. 156D, §4.01(b) and 950 CMR 104.03-104.06, the 

Massachusetts Secretary of State will not permit a corporation to adopt a corporate name which 
is (a) the same as any corporate name or trade name of any corporation, firm, association or 
person carrying on business in Massachusetts at present or within the past three years, or 

 
 

19

(b) under reservation with the Secretary of State, or (c) so similar to the foregoing as to be likely 
to be mistaken for it, unless (d) the corporation, firm, association or person consents in writing. 
 

In practice, this statute provides only limited protection against adopting the name of 
another entity.  This is because the Secretary of State's Corporations Division, in approving 
corporate names, checks the proposed corporate name only against its database of Massachusetts 
corporations and foreign corporations doing business in Massachusetts.  The Corporations 
Division does not as a rule check its records of names of limited partnerships, business trusts, or 
trade marks and service marks filed in Massachusetts.  Moreover, the Secretary of State's records 
would not necessarily show trade names adopted by individuals, partnerships, business trusts or 
corporations unless filed as trade marks or service marks.  In addition, the Secretary of State's 
records will not show names used in other states. 
 

Thus, the "clearance" by the Secretary of State of a corporate name provides only partial 

protection against the possibility of infringement. 
 

C. 

Limited Partnership Names 

 

Under G. L. c. 109, §2(1), the name of each Massachusetts limited partnership must 

contain the words "limited partnership" without abbreviation ("L.P." will not suffice).  A limited 
partnership name may not contain the name of a limited partner (unless it is also the name of a 
general partner or the limited partnership’s name existing prior to the admission of the 
eponymous limited partner.  (G. L. c. 109, §2(2)).  A limited partnership name may not contain 
any word or phrase implying that it is organized for a purpose other than that stated in its 
certificate of limited partnership (G. L. c. 109, §2(3)), or be the same as or deceptively similar to 
the name of any Massachusetts corporation or limited partnership or any foreign corporation or 
limited partnership registered in Massachusetts, without the consent of that entity.  
(G. L. c. 109, §2(4)).  A foreign limited partnership may do business in Massachusetts under any 
name which could be assumed by a Massachusetts limited partnership (G. L. c. 109, §51). 
 

D. 

LLC Names 

 

Under G. L. c. 156C, §3(1), the name of any LLC must contain the words "limited 

liability company", "limited company", or the abbreviation "L.L.C.", "L.C.", "LLC" or "LC".  The 
name of an LLC may contain the name of any member or manager (G. L. c. 156C, §3(2)), but 
may not be the same as or deceptively similar to the name of any Massachusetts corporation, 
limited partnership or LLC or any foreign corporation, limited partnership or LLC registered in 
Massachusetts, without the consent of that entity.  (G. L. c. 156C, §3(3)).  A foreign LLC may 
register under any name that could be assumed by a Massachusetts LLC.  (G. L. c. 156C, §50). 
 

 
 

20

E. 

LLP Names 

 

Under G. L. c. 108A, §46, the name of every registered LLP shall end with the words 

"registered limited liability partnership," "limited liability partnership," or the abbreviation 
"L.L.P." or "LLP". 
 

F. 

Trade Names 

 

G. L. c. 110, §§4-6 (the "Business Name Statute") regulates the use of trade names by 

business organizations in Massachusetts. 
 

Section 4 of the Business Name Statute provides that a person shall not use in its business 

the name of a person formerly connected with him in partnership or the name of another person, 
alone or in connection with his own or another name, without the consent of that person. 
 

Section 4A provides that no individual, unincorporated association, or partnership shall 
use a name including the words "corporation" or "incorporated" or abbreviations thereof, or any 
other word or phrase which would lead the public to believe the business is a corporation. 
 

Section 4B provides that no business may use the words "Army", "Navy", "Marine 

Corps", "Coast Guard", "Government", "Post Exchange", "P.X.", or "G.I.", or other name which 
may lead the public to believe the business is owned or operated by the U.S. Government or an 
agency thereof.  It also provides that no business may use the words "Massachusetts State Fair." 
 

Section 5 is the heart of the statute.  It provides that any person conducting business in 
Massachusetts, whether individually or as a partnership under any title other than his or its real 
name, must file in the office of the clerk of every city and town where an office of the person or 
partnership is situated a certificate stating: 
 

(a) 
 
(b) 

the full name and residence of each person conducting the business, and 

the place, including street and number, where the business is conducted 

and the title under which it is conducted. 

 

This "business certificate" must be executed under oath by each person whose name 

appears thereon as conducting the business. 
 

A person who has filed such a certificate must, upon discontinuing, retiring or 

withdrawing from the business, or upon changing his residence, file a statement under oath to 
that effect.  Changes in the location where the business is conducted must also be filed.  A 
business certificate is effective for four years and may be renewed indefinitely for additional four 
year periods. 
 

Violations of the filing provisions are punishable by a fine of not more than $100 for each 

month during which the violation continues. 

 
 

21

 

 

 

Section 6 provides that the filing requirements of §5 shall not apply to: 

(a) 
 
(b) 

any corporation doing business under its true corporate name; 

any partnership doing business under any title which includes the true 

surname of any partner; 

 
(c) 

any business trust, provided that a business certificate is filed containing 
the names of such trustees with a reference to the relevant instrument or declaration of 
trust; or 
 
(d) 

any limited partnership doing business under its true name which contains 

(without abbreviation) the words "limited partnership." 

The following table, adopted from the Secretary of State's useful publication, "Choosing a 

Name for Your Business", summarizes the applicable filing requirements for business names. 
 

Type of Business 

 

Sole Proprietorship 
General Partnership 
Limited Partnership 
Business Trust 
Corporation 
Limited Liability Company 
Limited Liability Partnership 

Secretary 
of State 

X(1) 
X(1) 

X 
X 
X 
X 
X 

Filing 

Local City or 
Town Hall 

 
 
 

X(2) 
X(3) 
X(3) 
X(1) 

No filing required unless business name is different from true surname of 

 
Note 1:  
proprietor or does not contain surname of any partner. 
 
Note 2:  
 
Note 3:  
 

Names of trustees must be filed. 

No filing required unless business name is different from corporate or LLC name. 

G. 

1. 

 

 

Trademarks and Service Marks 

Common Law Protection 

Trade names, trademarks and service marks are protected by the state common law of 
"unfair competition."  Generally speaking, common law rights are determined by actual use of 
the name or mark in commerce. 
 

 
 

22

2. 

Federal Registration 

 

No federal or Massachusetts registration is available for trade names, as opposed to 

trademarks and service marks.  No federal or state registration is necessary to acquire rights to a 
trademark or service mark, but registration has some advantages. 
 

Recent amendments to the Lanham Act permit the owner of trademark or service mark to 

apply for federal registration prior to actual use, provided he has a "bona fide intention" to use 
the mark in commerce within six months.  Federal registration also gives constructive notice of 
the registrant's claims, permits nationwide enforcement of rights and after five years grants so-
called "incontestable" rights (subject to certain exceptions) to use of the mark. 
 

Federal trademark or service mark registration is obtained by filing with the U.S. Patent 

and Trademark Office (the "PTO") of an application form and the payment of a $335.00 
registration fee.  The PTO will examine the application and, upon proper compliance with 
procedural steps, will issue a certificate of registration. 
 

3. 

State Registration 

 

Numerous states, including Massachusetts, permit registration of trademarks and service 

marks.  Trademark registration in Massachusetts is governed by G. L. c. 110B and is 
administered by the Trademark Division of the Secretary of State.  Applicable regulations are 
contained at 950 CMR 62.01 et seq. 
 

Trademark and service mark registration in Massachusetts is very simple process, 

involving the filing of a simple form and payment of a $50.00 fee.  Registration is effective for 
ten years and is renewable.  Although the benefits of registration in Massachusetts are limited, 
state registration does provide evidence of use of the mark and can be helpful. 
 

H. 

Trade Mark and Trade Name Searches 

 

There are a number of service companies which will perform searches of various 

databases for prospective trade names or marks. 
 

For example, a "full search" performed by Thompson & Thompson, a large international 

trademark research company based in Quincy, involves the search of trademark records in the 
PTO, all fifty states and Puerto Rico, trade journals, telephone directories, catalogs, and other 
sources, including the index of 9,000,000 company names maintained by Dun & Bradstreet.  
Even so, Thompson & Thompson's report does not cover corporate names filed with the various 
secretaries of state. 
 

A company seeking maximum protection against infringement would be well advised to 

perform a full trademark search as well as a corporate name check with the Secretary of State. 

 
 

 
###### 

23

