 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 
 
Guidelines for Gender Sensitive Research 
Prepared by Brigitte Leduc  
 
November 2009 

 

What is a gender sensitive research? 
Gender sensitive research is not research on women or on 
gender relationships; it is research that takes into account 
gender  as  a  significant  variable  in  environmental  and 
development  studies.  Men  and  women  have  different 
roles,  which  impact  differently  on  the  environment  and 
development. Moreover, the power relations between men 
and women can greatly influence the perspective of men 
and women on environmental and development problems. 
Thus,  gender  sensitive  research  pays  attention  to  the 
similarities and the differences between men and women’s 
experiences  and  viewpoints,  and  gives  equal  value  to 
each. 

What is the problem with traditional research? 
Remembering  that  women  constitute  the  other  half  of  the 
population is important. Overlooking women’s experiences 
and points of view leads to the wrong conclusions, or at 
least an incomplete picture of the problem. 
In  the  Hindu  Kush-Himalayan  region,  research  on  the 
environment and development seldom considers gender as 
a  significant  variable.  Environmental  research  often  pays 
little  attention  to  the  human  and  social  dimensions.  The 
impact of the population on the environment is examined 
in  relation  to  ‘population  activities’,  but  rarely  taking  into 
account the gender dimension: ‘population’ is treated as a 
homogenous  group.  Poverty  assessment  also  bases  its 
analysis  on  household  incomes  and  expenditures;  the 
differential  experiences  of  poverty  among  household 
members  is  rarely  analysed.  Moreover,  only  productive 
paid work is taken into account and valued in economic 
analysis,  while  household  and  unpaid  work  –  mainly 
performed by women – is overlooked, even if it makes up 
a  large  part  of  food  security.  Therefore,  in  traditional 
research,  women’s  experiences  and  contributions  remain 
invisible, and, consequently, important aspects of an issue 
remain undocumented and underestimated and, therefore, 
may be misunderstood. 
Gender  has  only  recently  been  considered  a  significant 
variable in research. However, although it is starting to be 
recognised in social sciences, it is seldom acknowledged 
and applied in natural sciences or economics. The choice 
of 
and 
methodology, analysis  framework,  and  language  used in 
scientific  articles  tends  to  reflect  male  biases  and 
patriarchal values.  

conceptual 

framework 

research 

topic, 

Scientists often argue that they do distinguish between men 
and  women  and,  thus,  do  not  discriminate  and  are 
objective. Women researching on women’s issues are still 
often  accused  of  subjectivity,  while  men  who  overlook 
women’s perspectives and generalise their findings to the 
overall  population  related  to  their  issue  are  considered 
objective. 

What are the benefits of engendering 
research? 

into 

improve 

research  can 

A better understanding of the problem 
Engendering  research  does  not  change  the  scope  of  the 
research;  it  provides  new  perspectives,  raises  new 
questions,  and  uses  new  analysis  tools  to  create  a  more 
complete picture of the problem. As men and women have 
different roles and different power, their perspectives on a 
problem can be quite different. By combining their different 
experiences and viewpoints, researchers can enhance the 
comprehension  of  a  problem.  Therefore,  integrating  a 
gender  perspective 
its 
relevance, coverage, and quality (ADEA Working Group 
on Higher Education 2006, p. 4). For example, research 
to  identify  the  impacts  of  global  climate  change  in  the 
Hindu  Kush-Himalayas  would  be  more  precise  if  it 
integrates in its analysis framework the impacts on human 
activities, livelihoods, and vulnerability to natural hazards. 
As  men  and  women  have  different  roles,  and  as  their 
respective  social  status  and  the  power  relations  could 
impact on their capacity to adapt to climate change, the 
gender  dimension  is  quite  relevant  and  will  enhance  the 
results  of  the  research  and  increase  its  usefulness  to 
policymakers.  
A  study  on  the  value  chain  of  medicinal  plants  that 
includes a gender perspective would contribute not only to 
identifying who is doing what and what needs to be done 
to increase the producers’ benefits, it could also contribute 
to  identifying  measures  to  ensure  equitable  benefits  for 
producers  and  processors  for  both  men  and  women, 
increasing its impact to reduce poverty. 

Methodologies that empower 
A  gender  sensitive  research  methodology  is  usually  more 
participatory  and  can  contribute  greatly  to  empowering 
people,  notably  women.  It  helps  both  men  and  women 
concerned by a problem to analyse an issue, understand 
its causes, and find solutions. 

( 1 ) 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 
In  research  aiming  to  identify  the  vulnerabilities  of 
mountain  people  to  natural  disasters,  a  gender  sensitive 
participatory  approach  helps  men  and  women 
to 
understand  the  natural  and  social  factors  –  beliefs, 
practices, behaviours – that put them at risk when a natural 
disaster  occur.  It  can  also  help  them  to  understand  that 
some social practices may increase women and children’s 
vulnerabilities and that in order to reduce these risks they 
may have to modify their behaviour.  
A  gender  sensitive  methodology  can  also  contribute  to 
making visible and giving a value to women’s contribution 
to  biodiversity  and  natural 
resources  management. 
Eventually, this can contribute to raising awareness about 
women’s capacities and to boosting their self-confidence.  

research 

Sustainable environmental policies 
Gender-sensitive 
that  highlights  men’s  and 
women’s  perspectives,  contributions,  and  needs  can 
influence  policymakers  and  contribute  to  gender  sensitive 
policies that address both men’s and women’s needs and, 
thus, leads to more efficient and effective policies.  
A survey on watersheds could contribute to identifying both 
men’s  and  women’s  needs  and  to  recommendations  for 
watershed  policy  that  ensures  equitable  access  to  water 
resources and equitable participation of men and women 
in watershed management. 

technical  and 

requires  not  only 

Sustainable mountain development  
It  is  important  that  research  focusing  on  mountain 
development  and  the  preservation  of  natural  resources 
integrates social aspects. Even when research seems more 
technical,  integrating  a  gender  dimension  can  be  very 
useful,  because  it  brings  a  social  dimension  to  the 
problem.  Research  to  identify  appropriate  solutions  to 
protect  biodiversity  in  the  Hindu  Kush-Himalayas,  for 
example, 
legal 
examination,  but  also  a  look  at  the  social  aspects, 
notably,  the  gender  dimension.  If  ignored,  the  solutions 
identified may be negative for the populations: they could 
deprive men of income opportunities or increase women’s 
workload,  and,  consequently,  the  populations  work 
against  the  solutions  recommended  by  the  research  in 
order  to  exploit  the  resources.  However,  if  the  social 
dimensions of the problem and the gender perspective are 
properly  taken  into  account,  the solutions identified could 
make the populations more responsible and even play an 
active role in ensuring the protection and regeneration of 
natural resources. 
Research  should  also  identify  the  impacts  of  proposed 
solutions on men and women; on their workload; on their 
capacities to access resources; on their social status; and 
on social and power relations. This analysis could be very 
helpful when it is time to choose the solutions that will be 
the most efficient, socially accepted, and, thus, viable.  

Guidelines for engendering research 
Engendering research means that the gender dimension is 
mainstreamed  into  every  component  of  the  research: 
identifying  the  problem;  defining  the  conceptual  and 
analytical 
the  methodology; 
analysing the findings; and disseminating the results. 

framework; 

choosing 

Acknowledge our own bias 
Scientific  research  is  not  neutral.  The  position  of  the 
researcher, their interests, and values affect how and what 
research topics are chosen, who they work with, and the 
perspective and method of research. Even the researcher’s 
position in society (in term of gender, class, ethnicity, and 
age)  may  influence  the  way  in  which  the  research  is 
conducted, how the information is analysed, and how the 
results  are  interpreted.  Deciding  what  information  is 
relevant  is  not  always  an  objective  process:  local 
knowledge  and  information  provided  by  marginalised 
groups is often given less value than information provided 
by decision makers, other scientists, or like-minded people.  
In  order 
to 
acknowledge  our  own  bias,  preferences,  values,  and 
socio-cultural background, and to be constantly aware that 
these  factors  could  influence  the  process  of  the  research 
and its findings. 

to  achieve  objectivity, 

important 

it 

is 

Define a conceptual framework reflecting 
men’s and women’s experiences 
There  are  many  aspects  to  take  into  consideration  in  the 
conceptual framework to avoid a male bias and to ensure 
an inclusive and gender sensitive approach.  

Ensure gender sensitive formulation of the 
research question 
The formulation of the research question should integrate a 
gender perspective: i.e., how are men and women 
currently affected by the issue and how are they involved 
in the issue? 

Use inclusive definitions of concepts; avoid 
male bias, prejudices and generalisations 
If  men  and  women  have  different  experiences  related  to 
the  field  of  research,  it  is  likely  that  they  have  different 
definitions  of  concepts.  Gender  sensitive  research  should 
pay attention to and integrate different perspectives when 
defining concepts. It can be useful to try to identify if male 
and female scientists give the same definition and use the 
same  conceptual  framework.  Including  publications  by 
both male and female scientists in the review of literature 
could be useful for this purpose. 
It is important not to generalise the concepts to the ‘overall 
population’ if the issue concerns only men or if only men’s 
perspectives have been documented. For example, men’s 

( 2 ) 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

should  be  considered 

 
experience  of  migration  may  be  very  different  from 
women’s;  however,  this  does  not  mean  that  one  is  more 
important than the other. Differences in women’s migration 
experiences 
important  and 
meaningful and, moreover, women migrants should not be 
considered only as ‘spouses’. 
Another  problem  often  faced  in  research  is  the  use  of 
general  concepts  that  ‘hide’  gender  specific  realities. 
When  talking  about  ‘farmers’  we  often  assume  that  the 
farmers are men. However, women play an important role 
in  farm  production,  but  their  work  is  different.  In  some 
contexts women spend more hours than men in production 
work,  but  more  importance  is  given  to  men’s  role  as 
owners and income generators. 
Hypotheses,  analytical  frameworks,  and  models  must  be 
based on reality, not on assumptions about gender roles, 
capacities,  and  cultural  values.  Double  standards,  and 
overrating  or  underrating  activities  related  to  men  or 
women must be avoided including: 

(cid:120)

(cid:120)

(cid:120)

prejudices about the capacities of men or women, or 
about  which  activities  are  better  suited  to  one  or 
another 
placing  more  value  on  men’s  contribution  compared 
to women’s in the same field 
placing  more  value  on  women’s  work 
the 
household,  while  neglecting  the  value  of  women’s 
work outside the household 

in 

It  is  also  important  to  recognise  the  diversity  of  women’s 
and  men’s  experiences:  do  not  judge  who  is  a  ’real’ 
woman  and  who  is  most  representative  of  men’s  role 
according to your own values. 

Develop a gender sensitive methodology 
Questioning  the  conventional  approach  to  research  is 
important.  The  usual  distant  and  hierarchical  position  of 
researchers has been criticised in recent years, because it 
often  eliminates  a  wide  range  of  knowledge  and  raises 
ethical issues about who is benefiting from the results of the 
research,  and  how  and  for  what  purpose  the  results  are 
used. A gender sensitive methodology not only takes into 
account  gender  differences 
the  conceptual  and 
analytical  framework,  it  also  uses  methods  and  tools  that 
are participatory, respectful, and accountable. 

in 

Use qualitative tools to capture people’s 
perspectives and diversity of viewpoints 
If  quantitative  tools  are  useful  for  identifying  ‘what’  and 
‘how many’, qualitative tools are interesting because they 
help us to understand ‘how’ and ‘why’. They give a voice 
to  people,  even  for  issues  that  seem  very  technical, 
recognising 
from  any 
socioeconomic  background  have  valuable  experiences 
and knowledge. 

that  both  men  and  women 

( 3 ) 

Ensure equitable representation and 
participation of men and women 
How  information  is  collected  and  analysed  and  who  is 
collecting it is important because it influences the quality, 
authenticity, and value of the information itself. 
Unless  the  research  is  specifically  focused  on  men’s 
experience  (e.g.,  men’s  migration;  men’s  vulnerability  to 
flash flood; men’s role in natural resources management), 
making sure that women are equitably represented in the 
sample population is essential.  
It  is  important  to  include  female  scientists  in  the  research 
team as it facilitates the participation of women, especially 
in  a  conservative  context.  It  is  also  useful  to  have  the 
perspective  of  female  scientists  in  the  analysis  process.  It 
could  be  very  challenging  to  involve  women  if  the 
research 
interviews  and  consultations  with 
government representatives, senior managers, technicians, 
engineers,  or  natural  scientists,  as  there are  still  very  few 
women working in these areas and at these levels in the 
Hindu Kush-Himalayan region. An additional effort must be 
made to identify women working in the field of research. If 
there are none, it could be useful to expand the sample to 
include  some  women’s  organisations  or 
institutions 
dedicated  to  women  in  order  to  capture  women’s 
perspectives and experiences. The very limited number of 
women  in  the  research  field  should  be  considered 
significant information to be considered and reported. 
Finally,  it  is  important  to  ensure  the  qualification  of  the 
research team to conduct gender analysis. 

involves 

Use gender sensitive research tools 
It is important to use research’s tools that are not seen as 
threatening or embarrassing for women or men. It can be 
very  challenging  for  some  women  to  talk  about  some 
issues  in  front  of  men  from  their  family  or  community,  or 
men  from  outside.  Some  places  or  times  may  be 
convenient for men, but not for women; this will contribute 
to  the  exclusion  of  women.  Written  materials  are  not 
appropriate when working with illiterate or people with a 
low-level  of  education  –  and  few  women  are  well 
educated in the Hindu Kush-Himalayas– and can place a 
barrier  between 
sample 
population. 
In  some  contexts  women  have  very  few  opportunities  to 
express  their  ideas;  consequently  their  knowledge  and 
opinions  are  often  neglected,  even  by  themselves.  They 
are  not  used  to  talking  in  public  or  to  being  consulted. 
Thus,  it  is  important  to  show  interest  in  their  roles  and 
views, to value their experiences, and to have patience. 
Even  if  women  and  men  have  different  roles  and 
experiences, it is important to give them the opportunity to 
present their points of view on the same subject and pay 
attention  to  the  similarities  and  the  differences.  Often 

researchers  and 

the 

the 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 
researchers  ask  different  questions  to  men  and  women, 
assuming  that  they  have  different  levels  of  interest  in  the 
topic. For example, women and men have different roles 
in  the  utilisation  and  management  of  water;  hence,  it  is 
often assumed that women are only interested in water for 
household  needs,  while  men  are  mainly  interested  in  the 
use of water for productivity. However, women could also 
have  a  strong  interest  in  the  utilisation  of  water  for 
agricultural production, notably for family gardens, as they 
also participate in farm production and in raising livestock. 

Take gender perspective into account in analysis and 
interpretation 

related 

roles  and 

to  gender 

Use and produce gender disaggregated data 
and conduct a gender analysis 
Gender  sensitive  research  uses  and  produces  gender 
disaggregated  data  and  gender  analysis.  Documenting 
differences  based  on  gender  does  not  provide 
comprehension  of  gender  issues,  or  why  there  are 
differences,  inequities,  or  inequalities.  A  gender  analysis 
should explain the differences in experiences, viewpoints, 
and 
impacts 
roles  and  power 
relationships.  
It is particularly important not to assume the universality of 
gender 
transforming  statistical 
differences  into  innate  differences  (Eichler  &  Lapointe 
1985,  p  9).  Gender  roles  and  power  relations  between 
men  and  women  are  not  ‘natural’  or  due  to  the  intrinsic 
‘nature’  of  men  or  women;  they  are  constructed  in  a 
particular socioeconomic and cultural context. This is why 
the contextualisation of the research is important: it should 
indicate  where  the  research  was  conducted;  who  was 
involved;  who  is  concerned  with  the  topic;  what  are  the 
beliefs and practices related to it, and so forth. 
A  gender  analysis should  provide  information  about  how 
men and women are related to, or affected by, the subject 
of  the  research.  It  should  take  into  account  the  following 
factors: 

to  avoid 

(cid:120)

the  division  of  labour,  roles,  and  responsibilities 
between  men  and  women:  who  is  doing  what  and 
what is the link with the research’s topic 

(cid:120)

financial 

resources, 

(cid:120) women  and  men’s  access  to  and  control  over 
resources, 

resources:  natural 
information, decision making processes 
the  power  relations  in  the  household,  community, 
society, workplace, and so forth 
the legal and social status of men and women 

(cid:120)
 
These factors are likely to influence how men and women 
relate to the problem. 

Anticipate impacts of new policies or practices 
on men and women 
Gender sensitive research should also identify the impacts 
of new practices or policies on men and women; who will 
benefit  from  these;  who  will  be  disadvantaged;  and  the 
impacts on men and women’s activities and relationships. 

Reporting the findings 

reporting  process  should  highlight 

Highlight the gender dimension 
the  gender 
The 
dimension  of  the  research  topic.  It  should  make  visible 
gender  differences:  different  roles,  different  involvements, 
different  experiences,  different  opinions,  and  different 
needs. It should also provide as much visibility to women’s 
contributions and experiences as men’s. 

Using gender sensitive language in the 
research report 
An effective way to highlight the gender dimension of the 
research’s  topic  is  to  use  gender  sensitive  language. 
Language  itself  is  not  neutral  and,  in  most  cultures,  has 
largely  been  forged  by  men  and,  therefore,  reflects  the 
values of patriarchal society.  
Generic  terms  should  be  used  to  translate  generic 
situations and gender specific terms to make visible men’s 
or women’s roles and perspectives. For example, if we are 
talking about men’s role in rangeland activities, it is better 
to specify that we are talking about ‘male herders’. If you 
use the term ‘herders’ to talk about men’s work only, you 
contribute to hiding women’s role as herders – a role that 
might be quite different to men’s. 

Advocating for gender sensitive practices 
If  the  research  has  been  gender  sensitive,  the  findings 
should  also  highlight  the  gender  dimension  of  the  topic. 
The  findings could  have  a great  impact on  policies and, 
therefore,  should  propose  equity  measures,  and  promote 
equality and social inclusion.  

( 4 ) 

 
Photo: Tahweed Gul  

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 
Checklist for gender sensitive research 
1. Acknowledge our own bias 
2.

Identify the human and social components of the 
research object  

3. Define a conceptual framework reflecting men’s and 

women’s experiences 

4. Avoid male bias, prejudices and double standards 
5. Develop a gender sensitive methodology 
6. Build a gender balanced research team 
7. Choose a gender balanced sample 
8. Give value to both men’s and women’s experiences 
9. Use and produce gender disaggregated data 
10. Conduct a gender analysis 
11. Anticipate impacts of new policies or practices on 

men and women 

12. Use gender sensitive language in the research report 

 
 

11 

pages. 

Available 

Additional reading 
ADEA  Working  Group  on  Higher  Education/Association 
of  Africa  Universities.  (2006)  Module  5  Research  and 
Gender  Sensitive  Research  Methods  (.pdf  590  KB). 
2006. 
at: 
http://www.adeanet.org/publications/en_pubs_wghe.ht
ml 
Eichler,  M;  Lapointe,  J  (1985)  On  the  treatment  of  the 
sexes in research. Ottawa Social Sciences and Humanities 
Research Council of Canada. 
INSTRAW  Gender  research:  A  how-to  guide.  Available 
at: www.un-instraw.org (Accessed 20 August 2009) 
Pasteur,  K  Gender  analysis  for  sustainable  livelihoods 
frameworks,  tools  and  links  to  other  sources.  Sussex: 
Livelihoods  Connect,  Institute  for  Development  Studies, 
University 
Available 
at: 
www.livelihoods.org/info/tools/pas-GENDER.rtf 
(Accessed 20 August 2009) 
Status  of  Women  Canada  Gender-based  analysis:  a 
guide 
for  policy  making.  Available  at:  www.swc-
cfc.gc.ca/pubs/gbaguide/gbaguide_e.html    (Accessed 
20 August 2009) 
Vernooy,  R  &  al.  (2006)  Social  and  gender  analysis  in 
natural 
IDRC.  Available  at: 
www.idrc.ca/openebooks/218-X/ (Accessed 20 August 
2009) 

resources  management. 

of 

Sussex. 

 
Photo: Robert Zomer 

( 5 ) 

