GE46CH10-Jakes

ARI

3 October 2012

17:51

Border Crossings: Colicins
and Transporters
Karen S. Jakes1,∗ and William A. Cramer2

1Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx,
New York 10461; email: karen.jakes@einstein.yu.edu
2Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907;
email: waclab@purdue.edu

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2012. 46:209–31

First published online as a Review in Advance on
August 28, 2012

Keywords
outer membrane receptor, outer membrane translocator

The Annual Review of Genetics is online at
genet.annualreviews.org

This article’s doi:
10.1146/annurev-genet-110711-155427
Copyright c(cid:2) 2012 by Annual Reviews.
All rights reserved

0066-4197/12/1201-0209$20.00
∗Corresponding author

Abstract
Colicins are protein toxins produced by Escherichia coli to kill related
bacteria. They must cross the target cell outer membrane (OM), and
some must also cross the inner membrane (IM). To accomplish cel-
lular import, colicins have parasitized E. coli nutrient transporters as
well as IM and periplasmic proteins normally used to maintain cell wall
integrity or provide energy for nutrient uptake through transporters.
Colicins have evolved to use both transporters and other membrane
proteins through mechanisms different from those employed in phys-
iological substrate uptake. Extended receptor-binding domains allow
some colicins to search by lateral diffusion for binding sites on their
OM translocators while bound to their primary OM receptor. Trans-
port across the OM is initiated by entry of the unstructured N-terminal
translocation domain into the translocator. Periplasmic and IM net-
works subsequently accomplish insertion of the colicin cytotoxic do-
main into or across the IM.

209

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2012.46:209-231. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitaet Osnabrueck on 12/02/13. For personal use only.GE46CH10-Jakes

ARI

3 October 2012

17:51

stress

INTRODUCTION
Escherichia coli bacteria can engage in biological
warfare against related bacteria by making
plasmid-encoded protein toxins called colicins,
which efﬁciently kill closely related bacteria
that would otherwise compete for
scarce
nutrients under conditions of
(77).
Colicins have different modes of cytotoxicity;
some make ion-conducting channels in the
cytoplasmic (inner) membrane (IM) of suscep-
tible cells, thereby deenergizing those cells,
whereas others enzymatically degrade RNA
or DNA in the cytoplasm or peptidoglycan
precursors
in the periplasm. Nonetheless,
all colicins must bind to and cross the outer
membrane (OM) of target E. coli. In order to
accomplish that, the colicins have parasitized
a small group of OM proteins (OMPs) whose
normal role in the life of E. coli is to serve as
transporters for essential nutrients, such as
metals (e.g., siderophore-bound iron), vitamins
(e.g., cobalamin), and sugars, or, in the case
of the porins, to allow small molecules to pass
while acting as a permeability barrier against
large foreign molecules. The mechanisms by
which these large protein toxins have co-opted
systems normally used for the transport of small
molecules across the cell envelope have been
the subject of extensive genetic, biochemical,
and structural studies, which are reviewed here.
With the exception of colicin M, which acts
in the periplasm (38), the colicins act enzymat-
ically as nucleases in the cytoplasm of sensitive
cells or as pores in the IM. The nucleases must
therefore also cross the IM barrier.

Regardless of their mode of killing, all
twenty or so colicins that have been identiﬁed
thus far share a common modular domain
structure (Figure 1a). (For recent reviews,
including details of killing mechanisms, which
are not within the scope of this review, see
References 14, 30, 58, 60, 72, 74, 85, 117.) In
the order of the steps required for invasion
and cytotoxicity, the speciﬁc functions of the
domains are (a) the middle domain, responsible
for receptor-binding (R), which binds with
high afﬁnity to cell surface receptors, thereby

Jakes· Cramer

IM: inner membrane
OM: outer membrane
OMP: outer
membrane protein
Tol: tolerant

210

to

extracellular milieu

transferring the colicin from the three-
dimensional
the
two-dimensional surface of the OM; (b) the
N-terminal translocation (T) domain, which
functions in transferring the colicin from its
initial binding site on the OM to or through
the periplasm; and (c) the C domain (cat-
alytic, carboxy-terminal, or channel-forming),
which carries the cytotoxicity function—pore-
forming or enzymatic (2, 50, 103, 109, 113,
121).

Colicins are divided into groups using crite-
ria related to all three of the basic steps in the
killing process (Table 1): (a) the receptor used
to bind at the cell surface (e.g., E colicins use
BtuB as their primary receptor); (b) the group
of IM and periplasmic proteins used to effect
translocation from the OM into the periplasm
and IM, either Tol (tolerant) A,B,Q,R (group
A colicins) (31) or TonB, ExbB, ExbD (group
B colicins) (32); and (c) their killing mechanism
(e.g., RNase, DNase, peptidoglycan degrading,
or pore forming). Recently, as they have been
identiﬁed, colicins have also been characterized
by the target cell translocator used to cross the
OM after binding to their primary receptor.

CRYSTAL STRUCTURES
OF COLICINS
Crystal structures have been obtained of the
colicins B, Ia, N, E3, and M (Figure 1b–
f ). These colicins exert three different cyto-
toxic functions: pore formation/depolarization
of the cytoplasmic membrane (Ia, B, and N)
(50, 109, 113), endoribonuclease (E3) (103),
and periplasmic phosphatase (M) (121). Struc-
tures have also been obtained of an iso-
lated C-terminal 175–200-residue layered he-
lical channel-forming domain of colicin A (86)
and E1 (39) and of the catalytic domain of the
tRNase colicin D complexed with its immunity
protein (46).

The extended helical coiled-coil 160- ˚A-long
R domain of colicin Ia (113), the 100- ˚A-long
R domain of E3 (103), and the 74- ˚A single
helix R domain of colicin B (50) (Figure 1)
are prominent features of the structures of the

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2012.46:209-231. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitaet Osnabrueck on 12/02/13. For personal use only.GE46CH10-Jakes

ARI

3 October 2012

17:51

T

R

C

COOH

c  Colicin Ia

a

H2N

b  Colicin E3

Imm
mm

d  Colicin M

e  Colicin N

f  Colicin B
f Colicin B

Figure 1
Ribbon diagrams of solved structures of colicins. (a) Typical domain arrangement of colicins. T, translocation domain (blue); R,
receptor-binding domain ( green); C, catalytic or channel-forming domain (red ). All structures shown have their domains colored
according to the arrangement in panel a. (b) Colicin E3 (pdb, 1JGH; resolution, 3.02 ˚A), an rRNase, is shown with its tightly bound
immunity protein (Imm) in yellow (103). (c) Colicin Ia (pdb, 1CII; resolution, 3.00 ˚A) is a channel-forming colicin (113). (d ) Colicin M
(pdb, 2XMX; resolution, 1.67 ˚A) is a periplasmic phosphatase (121). (e) Colicin N (pdb, 1N87; resolution, 3.10 ˚A) is a channel-forming
colicin (109). ( f ) Colicin B (pdb, 1RH1; resolution, 2.50 ˚A) is a channel-forming colicin (50). Note the extended coiled-coil R domains
of colicins E3 and Ia and the shorter single α-helical R domain of colicin B.

intact colicins. The functional signiﬁcance of
this structure, unusual for a receptor-binding
domain, is discussed below. The N-terminal
peptide domain of all ﬁve colicins shown in
Figure 1 is disordered and is involved in
translocation across the OM (52, 53, 85), as
discussed below. Colicin E1 is an exception;

only 40 residues of its 190-residue N-terminal
domain that binds to its TolC translocator
have a disordered secondary structure, but they
display tertiary structure (119). The nuclease
colicin E3 is unique among the set of ﬁve
colicins shown here in having an extremely
tightly bound immunity protein (Kd ≈ 10−14

www.annualreviews.org • Colicins and Transporters

211

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2012.46:209-231. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitaet Osnabrueck on 12/02/13. For personal use only.GE46CH10-Jakes

ARI

3 October 2012

17:51

Table 1 Host protein requirements and killing mechanisms used for classiﬁcation of colicins

Colicin
E1
E2, E7, E8, E9
E3, E4, E6
E5
A
K
5, 10
B
D
Ia, Ib
N
M

Outer membrane
primary receptor
BtuB
BtuB
BtuB
BtuB
BtuB
Tsx
Tsx
FepA
FepA
Cir
OmpF
FhuA

Translocator
TolC
OmpF
OmpF
OmpF
OmpF
OmpF
TolC
??
??
Cir
OmpF
??

Translocation

“machine”

TolA,R
TolA,B,Q,R
TolA,B,Q,R
TolA,B,Q,R
TolA,B,Q,R
TolA,B,Q,R
TonB, ExbB,D
TonB, ExbB,D
TonB, ExbB,D
TonB, ExbB,D
TolA,Q,R
TonB,ExbB,D

S4

OmpW

OmpF

TolA,B,Q,R

Mode of killing

Pore-forming
DNase
rRNase
tRNase
Pore-forming
Pore-forming
Pore-forming
Pore-forming
tRNase
Pore-forming
Pore-forming
Peptidoglycan
precursor
degradation
Pore-forming

Note that this table reﬂects requirement by E1 only of TolA and R, but not TolQ. This is in contradiction to results
described earlier (8, 75, 105); careful studies with gene knockouts by Sharma et al. explain discrepancies (96).

M) (85, 103), which is removed upon entry of
the colicin into the OM through a mechanism
that, although unknown in detail, is energy
dependent (108).

Most colicins use as their primary, high-
afﬁnity OM receptor one of a few OM proteins
called TonB-dependent transporters (TBDTs),
namely BtuB, Cir, FepA, and FhuA (Table 1)
(69, 81, 114). These proteins are 22-stranded β-
barrels with a plug formed by the ﬁrst 160 or so
residues folded inside the barrel (Figure 2a,b).
Near their amino termini, all of those recep-
tors have a sequence, the TonB box, that inter-
acts with the IM-anchored, periplasm-spanning
protein TonB at the periplasmic side of the OM
(87, 100). The interaction of the TonB box with
TonB is necessary for uptake of the natural sub-
strate of the receptors—ferric siderophores for
FepA and FhuA, 2,3-dihydroxybenzoylserine
or 2,3-dihydroxybenzoic acid for Cir (48, 80),
or cobalamin in the case of BtuB. TonB and its
IM and periplasmic partners, ExbB and ExbD,
somehow interact via their IM-anchored do-
mains to provide the energy for substrate up-
take. These interactions and those of the cor-
responding Tol proteins are discussed below.
Somewhat paradoxically, the E colicins and

Jakes· Cramer

colicin A, which include both enzymatic and
pore-forming colicins, although using a TonB-
dependent receptor, BtuB (Table 1), as their
primary high-afﬁnity receptor, do not have a
TonB box and do not need the interaction with
TonB to kill. Instead, they have, near their N
termini, a short sequence or sequences (TolA
box and TolB box) that bind to TolA and TolB
(Table 1) (20). For these colicins, mutation of
the Tol box reduces or abolishes killing activ-
ity, although the mutant colicins still bind their
receptor (11, 12). E. coli bearing mutations in
any of the proteins involved in the translocation
step of a particular colicin—TolA, TolB, TolQ,
TolR, TonB, ExbB, or ExbD—are termed tol
for tolerant; they can tightly bind that colicin on
their OM but are not killed and do not demon-
strate reduced killing-associated activity (92).

A caveat regarding the structure of the TonB
box in BtuB is that it is dependent on the
method of crystallization. Thus, the orientation
of the TonB box, starting with Asp6-Thr7, is
in the opposite direction in the structure ob-
tained by crystallization in detergent (27) com-
pared with crystallization done in the lipid cu-
bic phase (LCP) (26). The conformation of
the TonB box in the complex of BtuB and the

TBDT:
TonB-dependent
transporter
LCP: lipid cubic
phase

212

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2012.46:209-231. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitaet Osnabrueck on 12/02/13. For personal use only.GE46CH10-Jakes

ARI

3 October 2012

17:51

a

b

c

d

e

Figure 2
TonB-dependent transporter structures. (a) The side view of BtuB in lipid cubic phase (pdb, 2GUF; resolution, 1.95 ˚A) (26), with
22-stranded β barrel shown in green, the N-terminal plug domain shown in red, and the TonB box shown in blue. (b) The view of
BtuB from the top (i.e., outside of the cell). (c) The BtuB structure with bound E3R domain (pdb, 1UJW; resolution, 2.75 ˚A) (71).
(d ) The BtuB with bound E2R domain (pdb, 2YDU; resolution, 3.50 ˚A) (97). (e) The Cir structure with bound Ia R domain (pdb,
2HDI, resolution, 2.50 ˚A) (16). Note that in none of the latter three structures has the plug domain moved appreciably out of the barrel.

receptor-binding R domain of colicin E3 (71)
is superimposable with the LCP structure with-
out the colicin peptide.

TolA, TonB, AND ENERGY
SOURCES FOR COLICIN
TRANSPORT
TolA, B, Q, R and TonB, ExbB, and ExbD are
two homologous groups of proteins involved
in maintaining membrane integrity in E. coli
and in transducing energy from the IM to ef-
fect substrate uptake through the TBDT. They

have been cannibalized by colicins to assist in
their entry into the periplasm. Both TolA (421
residues) and TonB (239 residues) (94) are an-
chored in the IM by a single transmembrane
segment at their N termini (33); they extend
across the periplasm to varying extents to in-
teract with OMPs at or near the periplasmic
side of the OM (69, 94).

One key difference between the Tol sys-
tem and the TonB trio is that there are two
additional proteins involved in the Tol sys-
tem: TolB and Pal. TolB is a 44-kDa soluble
periplasmic protein consisting of two domains:

www.annualreviews.org • Colicins and Transporters

213

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2012.46:209-231. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitaet Osnabrueck on 12/02/13. For personal use only.GE46CH10-Jakes

ARI

3 October 2012

17:51

 ˜μH+:
transmembrane proton
electrochemical
potential gradient
(units, kcal mol−1),
also described as
proton motive
force (pmf)

214

an N-terminal α/β domain and a six-bladed β-
propeller domain (1, 19). Pal (peptidoglycan-
associated lipoprotein) is an OM lipoprotein
that can bind either to the peptidoglycan or
to TolB (10); dynamic Tol-Pal complexes are
part of the cell division machinery (43), but
they have been co-opted by colicins to assist
in their uptake. Colicins, such as E3 or E9,
that use TolB can competitively displace TolB
from Pal, although colicin A cannot (9), and
then TolB can associate with TolA to provide
the energy necessary for the uptake steps dis-
cussed below. By contrast, TonB plays the roles
of both TolB and TolA for TonB-dependent
colicins: It can bind to an OM receptor pro-
tein through the TonB box of the receptor (87,
100) and can also bind directly to the colicin
via the TonB box of the colicin, as discussed
below.

TolQ and ExbB are both IM proteins pre-
dicted to have three transmembrane domains;
TolR and ExbD are inferred to each have a sin-
gle transmembrane domain. Under certain con-
ditions, mutants of members of one pair can be
complemented by overexpression of plasmid-
encoded proteins of the other (13, 73). Dynamic
interactions between the members of each trio
harvest energy from the IM  ˜μH+ and transfer
it to TolA or TonB to power colicin translo-
cation. Homologies to the ﬂagellar motor sys-
tem have been described (22). Mutational and
cross-linking studies have identiﬁed how part-
ners interact—most likely as oligomers—and
the dependence of those interactions on the
energized state of the IM (21, 44, 73, 82, 83,
90, 122). It was recently shown that, as with
TolA, TonB does not leave the IM, or shuttle,
to transduce energy to the OM (47). There are
some fundamental differences between TolA
and TolB, however. No OMP is known to have
a TolA box comparable to the TonB boxes on
TBSTs. In fact, it seems that, in contrast to
TonB function, TolA does not need to span
the periplasm in all instances. Although full-
length TolA is needed to maintain membrane
integrity, cytotoxicity of colicins E1, E3, N, and
A is barely affected by deletion of approximately
half the periplasmic domain of TolA (94).

Jakes· Cramer

Further details on these systems are contained
in the references cited.

THE OUTER MEMBRANE
CONUNDRUM
Until the ﬁrst structures of colicin receptor-
binding domains bound to their cognate recep-
tors were solved, the problem of how such large
molecules might pass through the OM seemed
relatively simple. The plugged β-barrels have
a relatively wide extracellular-side diameter
when the plug is removed [an elliptical opening
of ∼25 ˚A × 35 ˚A for Cir (16), and ∼28 ˚A ×
37 ˚A for BtuB, measured between backbone
atoms (26)]. Thus, models for OM transloca-
tion included proposals that binding of the R
domain would somehow trigger the exit of the
plug domain, and the colicin would simply pass
through the barrel in an unfolded state (113).
However, once there were crystal structures of
colicin R domains bound to their receptors, the
problem became more complicated (Figure 2c–
e) (16, 71, 97). BtuB binds colicin E3 through
a “Venus ﬂy-trap mechanism” exerted by its
disordered extramembrane extracellular loops,
which show a conformational change upon the
binding of the R domain (71), resulting in a tight
binding with a Kd ≤ 10−9 M for the R domain of
colicin E3 (71) and E9 (89). However, in none of
the solved structures did the plug domain move
appreciably, and no path was exposed minimally
wide enough (>10 ˚A) for a protein with an un-
folded structure. Using the case of Cir, even
with the plug removed, colicin Ia could not
pass through the barrel without signiﬁcant un-
folding, as dramatically illustrated in Figure 3.
These structures also explained earlier in vivo
experiments (18) that suggested colicin bind-
ing does not lead to movement of the plug out
of the barrel. Whereas addition of cobalamin,
its natural substrate, exposed the N-terminal
plug of BtuB to a labeling reagent, addition of
the colicin E3 R domain caused no such in-
creased exposure. In light of the crystal struc-
tures of BtuB with a bound E2 or E3 R domain
(71, 97), these results make sense because the
plug doesn’t move upon colicin binding. The

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2012.46:209-231. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitaet Osnabrueck on 12/02/13. For personal use only.GE46CH10-Jakes

ARI

3 October 2012

17:51

a  Cir

b  β-domain

c  DHBS

d  Colicin Ia

e

f

g

h

i  Cir/colicin Ia overlay

Colicin Ia

Cir β-domain

Figure 3
Colicin Ia cannot ﬁt through its Cir receptor even with the plug removed. (Top row) Space-ﬁlling depictions,
as seen from outside the cell, of (a) the Cir 22-stranded β barrel in green with the plug domain in yellow
(16), (b) Cir with plug domain removed, (c) a natural substrate of Cir, dihydroxybenzoylserine (DHBS), and
(d) colicin Ia (113) in pink. (Second row) Ribbon depictions as seen from the membrane of (e) Cir, with its
barrel domain in green and its plug domain in yellow, ( f ) the Cir barrel with the plug removed, ( g) DHBS,
and (h) colicin Ia. It is obvious that DHBS cannot ﬁt through the pore of Cir without some rearrangement of
the plug domain; the bottom ﬁgure (i ) shows that even removing the plug entirely would not allow passage
of the colicin without considerable unfolding of its tertiary and possibly secondary structure.

orientation of the coiled-coil R domain bound
to the receptor, 45◦ relative to the plane of the
membrane, suggested an answer to the prob-
lem, at least for the two Tol-dependent colicins,
E2 and E3 (Figure 2c,d) (71, 97).

RECEPTOR-BOUND
COLICIN SEARCHES
FOR A TRANSLOCATOR:
TOL-DEPENDENT COLICINS
For all of the Tol-dependent (Group A) col-
icins, E. coli mutations had been identiﬁed in
proteins required for killing, which were dis-
tinct from both the primary receptor and the
Tol pathway. For colicins A and E2–E9 (23,

52, 91), the trimeric porin, OmpF, is required
(Figure 4a); for E1, TolC is required, solely or
in addition to BtuB. The role of these proteins,
sometimes referred to as coreceptors, was ob-
scure. It was clear from in vivo experiments that
the colicin could still bind to ompF mutants, for
instance, but killing was nonetheless impaired
(91). The extended (≥100 ˚A) length of the R
domain of colicin E2 or E3 (Figure 1) was pro-
posed to be relevant to the mechanism of OM
import through a “ﬁshing pole” mechanism, by
which the extended colicin, bound to its pri-
mary receptor, can use its T domain as a ﬁshing
hook to ﬁnd its translocator, OmpF in this case,
in the OM (71) (Figure 2c,d and Figure 4c).

www.annualreviews.org • Colicins and Transporters

215

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2012.46:209-231. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitaet Osnabrueck on 12/02/13. For personal use only.GE46CH10-Jakes

ARI

3 October 2012

17:51

a

c

b

Colicin

R

OmpF

T

BtuB

TolC

Outer membrane

Peptidoglycan

Periplasm

Inner membrane

+

_

TolB

TolARQ

Figure 4
OmpF is the translocator for enzymatic E colicins. (a) The OmpF trimer, a
16-stranded antiparallel β barrel, seen from the top (cell exterior) and from the
membrane (29). (b) The side view of an OmpF monomer showing the inserted
segment of colicin E3 T83 N-terminal peptide (115). (c) Colicin E3 searches
for its OmpF translocator after binding, via its R domain, to BtuB. The
intrinsically disordered part of the T domain searches for OmpF and initiates
translocation through one of its pores, after which the TolB box displaces TolB
from Pal and binds TolA, which leads ultimately to uptake of the colicin into
the periplasm. TolC, which forms a homotrimeric transperiplasmic “channel
tunnel” (68) and serves as the translocator for colicin E1, is also shown; colicin
E1 does not require TolB for cytotoxicity.

diffusion

Single-molecule

experiments
with ﬂuorescently labeled colicin bound to
BtuB showed that colicin bound to BtuB can
search the OM landscape for its translocator.
The effective diffusion coefﬁcient over short
distances is ≈10−9 cm2 s−1(104), implying that,
in the absence of a barrier, in one second, the
colicin-BtuB complex can move a net distance
of approximately 0.5 μm, a signiﬁcant fraction
of the length of an E. coli cell.

Jakes· Cramer

216

This mechanism also explains experiments
in which mutating the TonB box of BtuB re-
duced the efﬁciency of cobalamin uptake by
several orders of magnitude while not affecting
sensitivity to colicins E1 or E3 (17). Because
no interaction of the plug domain of BtuB with
TonB is needed once the colicin has bound to
the receptor and can search for its translocator,
Tol-dependent colicin killing is not affected by
mutations to the TonB box of their receptor.
However, this is very different from the effect of
TonB box mutations on the Group B, or TonB-
dependent, colicins as discussed below.

Occlusion of OmpF channels in planar lipid
bilayer membranes by the T domain of colicin
E3 (116) implied that the T domain could bind
to, and possibly insert into, the OmpF porin.
This was conﬁrmed by cocrystallization and
subsequent crystal structures obtained for a
complex of OmpF and disordered N-terminal
domains of the RNase colicin E3 (115) and
the DNase colicin E9 (53). Electron density
consistent with a seven-residue segment of
the colicin E3 T domain, whose sequence was
not determined in the original study (115),
overlapped a 15-residue T domain peptide
of colicin E9 that spans the aqueous channel
(Figure 4b).
running through OmpF (53)
These structures deﬁne the anchor formed by
these colicins with the OmpF porin protein
through which their cytotoxic C-terminal seg-
ment must presumably be inserted. The ability
of the E3 C-terminal domain to also insert
into OmpF was shown by occlusion of OmpF
channels by an immunity protein-depleted 96-
residue C-terminal peptide, but this insertion,
discussed at greater length below, is not known
to be relevant to cytotoxicity (120).

By four criteria, colicin E1, which has
traditionally been placed in a group with other
Tol-dependent colicins (Table 1) (31), differs
from the other colicins in this group: (a) Its
afﬁnity for BtuB is lower by 1–2 orders of mag-
nitude (106); (b) deletion of residues 54–287
of TolA, virtually its entire periplasmic helical
domain, has relatively little effect on the cyto-
toxicity of E1 or E1-induced K+ efﬂux, whereas
these activities are drastically reduced for

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2012.46:209-231. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitaet Osnabrueck on 12/02/13. For personal use only.GE46CH10-Jakes

ARI

3 October 2012

17:51

colicins E3, A, and N (94); (c) in contrast
to colicins E3 and E9, as well as Ia, the N-
terminal T domain, consisting of 190 residues,
has a mostly ordered structure, as shown
by far/near-UV circular dichroism spectra
(119); and (d ) the OM passage of an ordered
N-terminal domain of E1 seems allowed by
its unique utilization of TolC, which has a
much larger OM aperture than OmpF (4, 88),
as its translocator. The accessible entry portal
from the OM is approximately 27 × 27 ˚A,
signiﬁcantly larger than the OmpF pore, which
is <11 ˚A (29). Thus, the helical N-terminal
domain of colicin E1 can enter the TolC portal.
However, the putative colicin exit portal of
TolC is much smaller, ≈5 ˚A. Mechanisms for
a closed-to-open transition of this portal to
allow drug export have been proposed (88).
In the case of colicin, exit at this site must be
driven by cellular energy. Use by colicin E1
of TolC, a transperiplasmic “channel tunnel,”
normally involved in drug efﬂux from E. coli,
(68) apparently obviates the requirement for
the periplasmic TolB protein, required by the
other E colicins, for its uptake (Table 1) and
ultimate engagement with TolA.

What Happens After Nuclease
Colicins Find the OmpF
Translocator? What is Translocated?
One can imagine two scenarios by which the
initial contact/embedding of the T domain
with OmpF initiates the necessary transloca-
tion of the colicin C domain. The ﬁrst scenario
involves an N-terminal peptide that is translo-
cated through the OmpF pore and forms a
complex with TolB in the periplasm (53, 84);
the whole colicin, with C domain trailing,
is then pulled through that pore into the
periplasm, from which it interacts with the IM
TolQRA complex that allows it to reach the IM
(Figure 4c). A major problem with this sce-
nario is the formidable energy requirement,
in addition to the unknown energy required
for translocation of the T domain through
OmpF, which is necessary to free colicin that
is very tightly bound to BtuB via its R domain

(Figure 4c) (discussed further below). The sec-
ond scenario involves the occlusion in vitro of
OmpF channels by the unfolded C domain of
colicin E3 (120), which suggests the possibility
that the C domain itself, after cleavage (possibly
by OmpT protease at the outer surface of the
OM or OmpF), would be translocated through
a second porin unit of the trimeric porin after
that OmpF was located and anchored by the
T domain. On the one hand, this two-pore
mechanism would avoid the energy crisis
implied by the total thread mechanism in the
ﬁrst scenario and discussed below; on the other
hand, there are no known signaling sequences
in the C-terminal peptide, comparable with
the TolA, TolB, or OmpF binding sites that
have been identiﬁed in the T domain, to direct
it to the IM TolQRA guiding system.

TonB-DEPENDENT COLICINS:
HOW DO THEY TRANSLOCATE?
Until recently, no second receptor or translo-
cator had been identiﬁed genetically for any of
the TonB-dependent colicins, such as Ia, B, D,
or M. Mutant E. coli lacking OmpF, OmpC,
and TolC are all sensitive to colicin Ia (16).
For these colicins, after binding to their high-
afﬁnity cell surface receptor, it was inferred that
two distinct interactions with the TonB protein
are required for killing the target cell. If either
the TonB box of the receptor or the TonB box
on the colicin itself was mutated, binding of the
colicin to the OM occurred normally, but cy-
totoxicity was impaired. The in vitro channel-
forming killing activity and receptor binding of
these mutant colicins were shown to be normal
(7, 16, 79), leading to the conclusion that they
were impaired in the translocation step. Cer-
tain compensatory tonB mutations could restore
a degree of colicin sensitivity (7, 95). Thus, it
was suggested that the receptor and the colicin
must each interact with TonB (14, 16).

For colicin Ia with its receptor, the Cir
protein, it was recently shown that the colicin
uses two copies of Cir for killing—one copy
as the primary high-afﬁnity binding site and
a second copy as its translocator (57). Hybrid

www.annualreviews.org • Colicins and Transporters

217

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2012.46:209-231. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitaet Osnabrueck on 12/02/13. For personal use only.GE46CH10-Jakes

ARI

3 October 2012

17:51

colicins, in which the R domain of colicin Ia
was replaced by the R domain of colicin E3,
became dependent on the E3 receptor, BtuB, to
kill target cells. btuB mutant strains were killed
much less efﬁciently than wild-type strains but
still retained measurable activity (∼0.01% of
the activity on wild-type cells). However, the
chimeric colicin IaE3R still absolutely required
the Cir protein for killing, suggesting that Cir
plays another role in addition to that of primary
receptor. The residual level of killing of btuB
mutants by the IaE3R protein suggested that
the T domain of Ia could initiate binding to
Cir, albeit with much lower efﬁciency because
the isolated C, or pore-forming, domain has no
in vivo toxicity by itself (57). In fact, a deletion
mutant of colicin Ia that was missing its entire R
domain killed wild-type E. coli with low, but still
signiﬁcant, efﬁciency, demonstrating that the T
domain could initiate killing. Cloned T domain
by itself was shown to protect E. coli from killing
by intact colicin Ia, conﬁrming that, indeed,
T domain must bind to Cir, although the data
suggest that the binding is much weaker than
the primary binding of the R domain to Cir (57).
Taken together, all of these experiments
suggest a model (Figure 5) in which the col-
icin Ia R domain binds with high afﬁnity to
one copy of Cir on the OM. From its perch
there, at an angle of approximately 45◦ rela-
tive to the membrane plane (16), the very same
pitch as that of the R domain of colicins E2
and E3 (71, 97), the largely unstructured part
of the T domain searches for another nearby
copy of Cir, to which it also binds. Although the
geometry of the complex of colicin Ia bound,
via its R domain, would place the T domain
∼100 ˚A above the OM surface (Figure 2e) (16,
98), the unstructured N terminus of the T do-
main should be long enough to reach the mem-
brane (6), particularly if thermal motion is al-
lowed. Then, in a reaction that is postulated
to mimic the action of binding of the natural
substrate, the T domain triggers movement of
the plug domain of Cir (Figure 5). That move-
ment would allow the TonB box of Cir to bind
to an energized copy of the TonB protein in
the periplasm, which would move the Cir plug

Jakes· Cramer

either partially or entirely out of the barrel, al-
lowing the unstructured N terminus of the T
domain to pass through the Cir barrel. Once
that has happened, the TonB box of the colicin
is available on the periplasmic face of the OM
and can either displace the same copy of TonB
from its complex with Cir or bind a second copy
of TonB.

As discussed in other sections, energy trans-
duced from the IM via the interactions of TonB
with ExbB and ExbD is assumed to unwind
the colicin and is inferred to pull the entire
molecule through the barrel of Cir. Then, the
channel-forming domain at the other end of
the polypeptide chain from the TonB box ends
up in the periplasm where, as inferred from in
vitro experiments, it can spontaneously insert in
the IM, form a channel, and kill its target (58,
64). At least for the case of colicin Ia, a second
copy of its primary receptor, Cir, plays the role
that OmpF and TolC play for the enzymatic E
colicins and colicin E1, respectively. Thus, the
colicin would pass through Cir from its seat on
the outside of the OM to reach the periplasm
and interact with the protein machinery that en-
ergizes the rest of the translocation across the
membrane. The energy requirement to pull Ia
off its receptor (67) is formidable, as it is for
the enzymatic E colicins. For group B colicins,
as for group A colicins, the role of the high-
afﬁnity primary receptors to which the R do-
mains of colicins bind is to transfer the colicins
from the three-dimensional extracellular milieu
to the OM surface, allowing their T domains
to search for their cognate translocator protein
(Figure 4c and Figure 5). As was recently
shown for E9, which has two binding sites for
OmpF in its disordered T domain (53), such
sites should exist in the T domain of Ia for Cir
and in colicin E1 for TolC.

Studies on this problem (57) have not an-
swered the question of whether a single copy of
TonB energizes the whole translocation pro-
cess (Figure 5c,d ), or whether two separate
copies of TonB bind, one to the TonB box of
the receptor and a second to the TonB box of
the colicin (Figure 5a,b). TonB has been shown
to form dimers in vivo (62, 63, 93).

218

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2012.46:209-231. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitaet Osnabrueck on 12/02/13. For personal use only.GE46CH10-Jakes

ARI

3 October 2012

17:51

Colicin Ia 

Cir 

Cir 

Cir plug 

a

OM 

Periplasm 

b

c

d

TonB
protein

One  TonB
protein

Two  TonB
proteins

Figure 5
Diagram model for colicin Ia binding and translocation through Cir. Two models of colicin Ia translocation
and the binding of TonB boxes of colicin Ia and Cir to TonB. (a) Colicin Ia has bound via its R domain
( green) to one copy of Cir, and the unstructured N terminus of its T domain (red ) has found a nearby second
copy of Cir. (b) One copy of TonB (orange) has bound to the N-terminal plug domain of Cir ( purple trans-Cir
domain) via the TonB box on Cir ( green cylinder), causing the plug to rearrange and allow passage of the
N-terminal end of Ia through the barrel of Cir, where its own TonB box ( green cylinder) has found a second
copy of TonB. In a different model, (c) the N terminus of Ia ﬁnds a second copy of Cir, triggering the
rearrangement of Cir’s plug ( purple trans-Cir domain) and binding of its TonB box ( green cylinder) to TonB.
(d ) Further pmf-driven rearrangement allows the T domain of the colicin to pass through Cir, where its own
TonB box displaces that of Cir from the same copy of TonB. Note that this is simply a cartoon model; the
relative sizes and angles of the colicin, Cir, and TonB molecules are not accurate and are represented by
shapes, not actual solved structures.

Do Other TonB-Dependent
Colicins Also Use a Second Copy
of Their Primary Receptor as
Their Translocator, as Colicin Ia
Does? Insights from Colicin N,
a Tol-Dependent Colicin
As does colicin Ia, other TonB-dependent
colicins, such as B, D, and M, have a TonB box
sequence near their N termini and depend on
an interaction both of their receptor with TonB
and of the colicin itself with TonB for efﬁcient
killing. Experiments with colicin Ia in which
very high colicin-to-receptor concentrations
inhibit killing in liquid culture were explained
by the idea that if all of a cell’s copies of Cir
are occupied by colicin Ia tightly bound via
its R domain, then there are no free copies of
Cir available to bind the T domain and act as

translocators (57). Similar experiments were
performed with both colicin M (K.S. Jakes,
unpublished data) and colicin B (K. Postle,
unpublished data). In neither case did very high
concentrations of the colicin inhibit efﬁcient
killing of the target bacteria. These exper-
iments, although not decisive, suggest that
neither colicin M nor colicin B (and probably
also not colicin D, which is nearly identical to
B in its T and R domains) uses a second copy of
its receptor as its translocator. As is clear from
other examples discussed in this review, colicins
have evolved different ways to use the same or
related machinery for their uptake. Colicin M
has a very compact structure with only a short
(∼35 residues) T domain (121) (Figure 1);
colicin B, although it has a better separated
dumbbell-like three-domain structure (50)
(Figure 1),
lacks the very long coiled-coil

www.annualreviews.org • Colicins and Transporters

219

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2012.46:209-231. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitaet Osnabrueck on 12/02/13. For personal use only.GE46CH10-Jakes

ARI

3 October 2012

17:51

that separates the R domain from the T and
C domains that is seen in the structures of
colicins E3 and Ia. Thus, neither colicin M nor
colicin B may be able to use the ﬁshing rod
search mechanism for the T domain to reach a
translocator remote from its primary receptor
envisioned for colicin Ia or the E colicins.

Perhaps colicins M and B are more like
the more compact colicin N (109) (Figure 1),
which uses the porin OmpF as both its recep-
tor and as its translocator (Table 1) (40, 42).
We suggest that there are likely two different
interactions of colicin N with OmpF—one in
which the R domain of the colicin binds at one
site on OmpF and a second in which the un-
structured T domain reaches around and ini-
tiates a pathway, either through another pore
of the trimeric OmpF, analogous to E3 or E9,
as discussed above, or, alternatively, down the
outside of the OmpF trimers, through the lipid-
lipopolysaccharide bilayer of the OM. Thus,
the OmpF translocator mechanism employed
by colicin N may be different than that used by
other OmpF-dependent colicins.

There is now genetic, crystallographic, and
electrophysiological evidence that the T do-
mains of the enzymatic E colicins and colicin
A move through the inside of the OmpF pore,
as described above (53, 61, 115, 116, 120), and
that colicin E1 moves through the TolC chan-
nel (78, 116). The G119D mutation that nar-
rows the pore inside OmpF signiﬁcantly re-
duces killing by colicin N relative to wild-type
OmpF (61). However, those experiments failed
to distinguish whether the mutation inhibited
binding of the colicin to the cell surface or in-
hibited killing at some step beyond initial bind-
ing, i.e., moving through or alongside of the
translocator, and the crystal structure of colicin
N is inconsistent with its R domain reaching
as deep inside OmpF as the location of G119
(109). If, in fact, colicin N can bind normally to
the mutant G119D OmpF and is inhibited at
some later stage of killing, then that would sup-
port the notion that translocation occurs via the
inside of the pore, in the way that the enzymatic
E colicins have been shown to do. Studies with
other mutants in the same L3 loop of OmpF,

Jakes· Cramer

with both colicins N and A, also support the idea
that at least some part of the colicin must move
into the open pore channel (15, 101). However,
the fact that colicin N does not require TolB
for translocation (45) (Table 1) also supports
the idea that there is, indeed, something unique
about the mechanism of its OmpF-dependent
translocation.

It has recently been shown, using electron
microscopy analysis of 2D crystals (3) and
neutron scattering (28), that some part of the
colicin N molecule binds on the outside of
OmpF trimers. The colicin appears to displace
lipopolysaccharide from the OM when it binds
to OmpF, consistent with a genetic screen that
identiﬁed LPS core biosynthesis as having a
role in colicin N activity (96). Clifton et al.
(28) propose a model in which the density seen
in the membrane and in the spaces between
OmpF trimers is the C domain of colicin
N. However, their data may also support a
different mechanism in which the R domain
binds at the opening formed by one of the
trimer pores and provides a seat from which the
unstructured T domain then seeks a pathway
to move down the outside of the OmpF trimer
through the membrane, thus allowing its TolA
box to contact TolA in the periplasm, which
transduces energy to move the rest of the
colicin molecule across the OM (45, 92). The
existence of a thinner membrane near part of
OmpF, discussed in detail for the case of BtuB
(26, 41), is an example in the OM of hydropho-
bic mismatch (66) and could facilitate the
insertion of colicin N through the membrane
adjacent to OmpF, as proposed in the neutron
diffraction studies of this complex (28).

A similar mechanism could be imagined for
colicins B and M in which their R domains
bind their respective TonB-dependent recep-
tors, FepA and FhuA, anchoring the colicin at
the cell surface and allowing their T domains
to move down the outside of the receptor bar-
rel, through the membrane, to initiate contact
with TonB. However, for these colicins, such
a model does not explain the role of the TonB
box of the receptor itself, which is necessary
for colicin cytotoxicity (14, 16). There are also

220

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2012.46:209-231. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitaet Osnabrueck on 12/02/13. For personal use only.GE46CH10-Jakes

ARI

3 October 2012

17:51

conﬂicting experiments to determine whether
or not colicin B causes signiﬁcant movement
of the FepA plug domain. Signiﬁcant TonB-
dependent movement of the FepA plug induced
by colicin B has been reported (34), whereas
studies with different conditions and a differ-
ent labeling reagent found no colicin B–induced
movement of the plug into the periplasm (102).
The very different architectures of colicin Ia
and colicins B and M may be associated with
different modes of translocation. However, the
fact that high concentrations of neither colicin
B nor M inhibit killing supports the notion that
killing and translocation may proceed through
the same molecule of the receptor for these
colicins, distinguishing them from colicin Ia.
Certainly, the much more compact structures
of both colicins B and M place their T do-
mains much closer to the opening of the recep-
tor, once bound via the R domain. Determin-
ing crystal structures of these colicins bound to
their cognate receptors might deﬁne their mode
of translocation.

Obviously, experiments must be designed
to resolve these uncertainties: (a) whether the
plug domain of any of the TonB-dependent col-
icins actually fully or partially exits the recep-
tor or merely rearranges within the barrel in
order to open a passageway for the colicin and
(b) whether any of the TonB-dependent colicins
or colicin N uses the outside of its receptor as a
pathway through the membrane to reach the cy-
toplasm, which would obviate the need for the
plug to rearrange. However, the latter mecha-
nism would require some other explanation for
the role of the TonB box of the receptor in col-
icin intoxication.

CROSSING THE INNER
MEMBRANE: THE NUCLEASE
COLICINS
Based on planar lipid bilayer experiments, it is
inferred that after crossing the OM into the
periplasm, the pore-forming colicins sponta-
neously bind to the IM, where the hydrophobic
hairpin, which is a common feature, can sponta-
neously insert into the membrane (65, 76). The

transmembrane potential of the IM drives in-
sertion of the additional transmembrane helices
needed for channel formation (58) and opens
the channel that ultimately depolarizes and kills
the target bacteria. Thus, there is no require-
ment for further involvement of any target cell
proteins in the killing process. In contrast, the
nuclease colicins, both DNases and RNases, act
in the cytoplasm, and therefore must also some-
how cross the IM.

When and How is the Immunity
Protein Removed?
All E. coli strains that produce a colicin produce
a second protein encoded by the same plasmid,
the immunity protein, which protects the
synthesizing population speciﬁcally from the
effects of the toxin it produces but not from
other colicins. The immunity proteins of the
pore-forming colicins are membrane proteins,
with either three or four membrane-spanning
domains, that prevent the opening of lethal
channels in the producing cultures (reviewed
in 20); they are not discussed further in this
review. Because the nuclease colicins act on
substrates, either DNA, rRNA, or tRNA, that
reside in the cytoplasm, synthesizing cells must
protect themselves against the lethal activity
of their own making. Their immunity proteins
are small, highly acidic proteins that bind
exceptionally tightly to their cognate colicin
with equilibrium dissociation constants in the
femtomolar range. The immunity proteins ei-
ther bind to the catalytic site of the colicin itself
or block access to the site (85). These colicins
leave the producing cells as heterodimers with
their tightly bound immunity protein (59, 85).
Thus, for the colicin to act, the immunity pro-
tein must be removed from the colicin at some
point before it reaches its substrate in target
cells. Given that it takes only one or very few
molecules of colicin to kill a cell, until recently
it was impossible to determine the fate of the
immunity protein during actual lethal events in
vivo, although there was evidence of release of
the immunity protein of the Enterobacter cloacae
toxin DF13, which is highly homologous to

www.annualreviews.org • Colicins and Transporters

221

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2012.46:209-231. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitaet Osnabrueck on 12/02/13. For personal use only.GE46CH10-Jakes

ARI

3 October 2012

17:51

colicin E3,
into the culture medium (70).
Recently, using more sensitive methods and
a ﬂuorescently labeled immunity protein to
colicin E2, it was shown that the immunity
protein is released into the culture medium and
that its release requires both a functional BtuB
receptor and translocation through OmpF or
OmpC (36). In addition to functional TolA and
TolB proteins, energy must be supplied, via the
 ˜μH+, in order for the immunity protein to be
released (108). It has been shown that immunity
protein dissociation, although dependent on
colicin unfolding and the proton-conducting
pathway of the TolQRA complex, is not rate
limiting for cell killing (36, 107, 123). Despite
an expected dissociation time on the order
of days, colicin E3 and its immunity protein
diffuse apart on agarose plates (59), and the
complex dissociates quite readily upon strong
anion exchange chromatography (120). The
latter study also revealed that the colicin C
domain free of its immunity protein becomes
extensively unfolded, which surely plays a role
in translocation of that domain across both the
OM and IM.

Are Colicins Cleaved Prior to
Entering the Periplasm or Cytoplasm?
Colicins may need to be cleaved at some point
during or after their translocation into target
cells, freeing the active C terminus from the
rest of the molecule that guides it into its target.
Given that the primary receptors are in the OM,
it is tempting to speculate that such cleavage
might occur at the OM, so only the C domain
would need to enter the cell, although such a
model is inconsistent with known T domain in-
teractions in the periplasm (52, 53, 84). OmpT,
an OM protease, was shown to cleave colicins A,
E1, E2, and E3, with release of the products into
the culture medium (24). The tightly bound
E2 immunity protein protects colicin E2 from
OmpT cleavage, which is dependent upon prior
binding of the colicin by BtuB (37), and colicin
E7 is cleaved in vitro in an OmpT-dependent
reaction that requires residue R447 (99), all of
which made OmpT an attractive candidate to

Jakes· Cramer

participate in freeing the C domain for entry
into the cell. However, it was shown that OmpT
cleavage is really an epiphenomenon that is not
required for colicin killing (78). Rather, it is a
means by which E. coli seek to protect them-
selves from assault by exogenous toxins such
as colicins by degrading them while they are
bound at the cell surface. In fact, ompT deletion
mutants are still fully sensitive to high concen-
trations of colicins, although OmpT cleavage
and inactivation of dilute colicin solutions ap-
pear protective (78).

Processing and Transport
of Enzymatic Colicins at
the Inner Membrane
It has been suggested that there should exist
mutants of E. coli that are sensitive to pore-
forming colicins but are tolerant to killing by
enzymatic colicins that use the same receptor
and Tol or TonB family of translocators (56).
Thus, one might imagine a mutant that is killed
normally by colicin B, a pore former that uses
FepA as its receptor and TonB/ExbB and ExbD
for translocation, and is not killed by colicin D,
a tRNase that uses the same proteins for binding
and translocation and is 96% identical to col-
icin B in its ﬁrst 313 residues. Such a mutation
should identify a protein involved in a step re-
quired for transfer of the whole enzymatic col-
icin or the enzymatic moiety across the IM, a
step not needed for the activity of pore-forming
colicins. Such a mutation has been identiﬁed
(35): E. coli bearing a nonlethal mutation in lepB,
an essential gene that is a signal peptide pepti-
dase, are not killed by colicin D but are killed
normally by colicin B. Wild-type LepB protein
was shown to be necessary, but not sufﬁcient,
for processing of colicin D in vitro to gener-
ate a C-terminal enzymatic fragment from col-
icin D from which the immunity protein had
been previously removed. Another unidentiﬁed
component from extracts of E. coli was shown in
that work to be required for in vitro processing
(35). One puzzling aspect of the requirement
for LepB was that it was not essential for killing
by other enzymatic colicins, such as colicin E3.
The puzzle has now been resolved.

222

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2012.46:209-231. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitaet Osnabrueck on 12/02/13. For personal use only.GE46CH10-Jakes

ARI

3 October 2012

17:51

FtsH appears to be the elusive protein re-
sponsible for the last step of enzymatic col-
icin processing and transport across the IM.
FtsH is an essential ATP-dependent protease
required for degradation and dislocation back
into the cytoplasm of misfolded membrane pro-
teins. It is a homohexameric transmembrane
protein that is postulated to form a channel
in the IM into a cytoplasmic chamber bear-
ing the protease activity (55). Wild-type FtsH
was shown to be required for in vivo activity
of a variety of enzymatic colicins that act in
the cytoplasm, including E3, E9, and D, but
is not required for sensitivity to pore-forming
colicins or colicin M, an enzyme that acts in the
periplasm (110). More recently, processed C-
terminal fragments of both colicin D and col-
icin E3, presumably bearing catalytic activity,
were isolated from cytoplasmic extracts from in
vivo colicin-treated E. coli by ﬁshing for the cog-
nate colicin domain with His6-tagged immunity
protein expressed in the treated cells (25); those
fragments detected in vivo were larger than
fragments generated in vitro by the combined
presence of LepB and OmpT protease. Inter-
estingly, FtsH acts only on unfolded proteins,
supporting the idea that colicin molecules must
unfold as they transit through their transloca-
tors from the OM into the periplasm. The role
of LepB in colicin D killing is proposed to be
that of an anchor at the IM to bring the colicin
close to FtsH, which then processes it (25). Ad-
ditionally, a role for the anionic charge on the
membrane has been identiﬁed in promoting the
attraction of the positively charged colicin en-
zymatic domains to the IM (110), a concept pre-
viously invoked for pore-forming colicins (49,
118). ftsH was not identiﬁed in a genome-wide
screen for E. coli mutants that are necessary for
colicin killing (96) because deleting the gene
without also inactivating another gene that af-
fects fatty acid biosynthesis is lethal (110). It is
important to note that FtsH-based processing
of nuclease colicins and transport across the IM
occur both with TonB-dependent colicins (col-
icin D) and with Tol-dependent colicins (E3)
(25). As such, it plays a more universal role in
colicin transport in which the mechanism by

which the colicin ﬁrst crosses the OM is not
relevant.

It has been inferred from various lines of ev-
idence detailed above that considerable unfold-
ing occurs during colicin transport across the
OM. There is more direct evidence of unfold-
ing for colicin M. The periplasmic peptidyl-
prolyl-cis-trans-isomerase/chaperone FkpA is
required for colicin M activity in vivo (54),
even when the colicin is engineered to be ex-
ported directly into the periplasm (5). If the
enzymatic domain alone was exported directly
into the periplasm, FkpA was not required, sug-
gesting that passage through the FhuA/TonB-
dependent import machinery unfolds the col-
icin in such a way as to render it inactive unless
it is assisted in refolding by FkpA (5).

ENERGY COST TO TARGET
ESCHERICHIA COLI TO ALLOW
ITSELF TO BE KILLED BY
COLICIN
Several categories of events in colicin import
are documented or inferred to require energy
derived from the  ˜μH+ (Table 2), depending
on whether the colicin is a nuclease that must
be freed from its bound immunity protein. For
most of the energy-requiring events, energy is
supplied via the TolAQR or TonB/ExbB/ExbD
groups of proteins described above. These
events are (a) release from the receptor; for
group A nuclease colicins, the Kd for R domain
binding is <10−9 M (71), so at 37◦C the energy
required is approximately 12.5 kcal mol−1 and
for a group B colicin such as Ia, with Kassoc ∼
1010 M−1 (67), the energy required is approxi-
mately 14 kcal mol−1; (b) for a nuclease colicin,
extracellular release of immunity protein with a
Kd of 10−14 M represents a binding free energy
of −20 kcal mol−1, a minimum for this class of
colicins, some of which have even more tightly
bound immunity proteins, implying a binding
energy as large as −24 kcal mol−1 (36, 51,
108, 111, 112); and (c) transfer of the colicin
polypeptide through its translocator—OmpF
for E nuclease colicins, TolC for colicin E1,
and Cir for colicin Ia—with concomitant

www.annualreviews.org • Colicins and Transporters

223

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2012.46:209-231. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitaet Osnabrueck on 12/02/13. For personal use only.GE46CH10-Jakes

ARI

3 October 2012

17:51

Table 2 Energy-requiring steps in the cellular import of colicins

Estimated energy requirementG0

(kcal mol−1, 37◦C)

Step
Extracellular shedding of immunity protein
Release of nuclease colicins from BtuB
Release of pore-forming colicin Ia from Cir
Translocation of nuclease colicins through OmpF
Translocation of colicin E1 through TolC
Translocation of nuclease colicin through inner membrane
FtsH

−20
−12.5
−14
Unknown
Unknown
Unknown

energy requirements for unwinding colicin
structure and the need to open the cytoplas-
mic aperture of TolC for E1 (88). These three
energy-requiring events are inferred, from the
genetic and biochemical experiments cited,
to depend on mechanical energy transduction
from the IM by the Tol proteins or TonB group
described above. An additional energy require-
ment derives from the translocation across the
IM by FtsH, the ATP-dependent protease (55)
discussed above.

The major component of the  ˜μH+ at
pH 7 is an electrical potential across the IM of
approximately −120 mV (inside negative) and
a pH gradient of 0.5 (alkaline inside) for E. coli,
for a molar free energy  ˜μH+ ≈ 3.5 kcal mol−1.

Thus, there would appear to be a consider-
able disparity between the  ˜μH+ and the in-
ferred energy requirements for colicin uptake
(Table 2). This disparity may be reconciled by
the fact that the energy is applied to only one or
a few colicin molecules required to kill a single
cell.

In summary, an understanding of the bio-
chemical and biophysical mechanisms involved
in cellular import of colicins is presumably
relevant to many of the processes that are fun-
damental to a general understanding of the
membrane crossing mechanisms of other
macromolecules, such as toxins, as well of the
natural substrates of the transporters they have
co-opted for their uptake.

SUMMARY POINTS
1. Colicins parasitize E. coli OM nutrient transporters as their cell surface receptors.
2. After binding to their receptors, colicins search for another OM protein, either a second

copy of the receptor or a different protein, that serves as their translocator.

3. Solved crystal structures of ﬁve different colicins have provided information on the molec-
ular basis of the three functional domains that were originally deﬁned by genetic analysis.
4. The extended (≥100 ˚A) receptor-binding domain is a prominent feature of three solved
colicin structures complexed with their receptors and suggests a ﬁshing pole mechanism
by which the colicin ﬁnds its translocator.

5. The colicin translocation network usually includes a protein in the periplasm, such as
TolB, that binds the N terminus of the colicin and presumably facilitates its transfer
across the OM.

6. Cellular import of colicins requires a high level of energy input for at least two steps,
including release from the OM receptor, transfer across the OM through the translocator,
and, for nuclease colicins, shedding of tightly bound immunity protein.

Jakes· Cramer

224

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2012.46:209-231. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitaet Osnabrueck on 12/02/13. For personal use only.GE46CH10-Jakes

ARI

3 October 2012

17:51

7. Transport of colicins across the OM involves interactions between colicin-handling
proteins—TolA, TolB, and TonB—in the periplasm and the interaction of those proteins
with IM-embedded protein complexes—TolQ and TolR, or ExbB and ExbD.
8. Colicin E1 is unique in the use of the drug export protein TolC for its import.

FUTURE ISSUES
1. Do Tol-dependent colicins cross the OM as a single unfolded chain through their trans-

porter (either OmpF or TolC)?

2. For colicin Ia, does the whole colicin polypeptide pass through its Cir translocator, and
does the plug domain of Cir exit the barrel or merely rearrange to allow passage of the
colicin?

3. What is the mechanism by which a colicin or a domain is ratcheted through the narrow

pore provided by a translocator such as OmpF or Cir?

4. What are the molecular mechanisms by which energy is transduced from the IM to the

OM or to colicin in the periplasm?

5. Does TonB-dependent colicin translocation involve a single copy of the TonB protein
binding to both the plug’s TonB box and to the colicin’s TonB box, or are two separate
TonB molecules involved?

6. Do the other TonB-dependent colicins use a second copy of their receptor as a translo-

cator, as colicin Ia does?

7. Does colicin N translocate through the lipid bilayer adjacent to its OmpF recep-

tor/translocator, and if so, what is the driving force for this translocation?

8. How does colicin E1 exit its TolC translocator, and at what point does it interact with

an IM-proximal domain of TolA?

DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The authors are not aware of any afﬁliations, memberships, funding, or ﬁnancial holdings that
might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful to Drs. Nicolas Noinaj (NIH/NIDDK), Onkar Sharma (Harvard Medical School),
Eshwar Udho (Albert Einstein College of Medicine), and Mr. Rodney McPhail for invaluable help
preparing the ﬁgures and for helpful discussions. We thank Dr. Kathleen Postle (Pennsylvania
State University) for sharing unpublished results; Dr. Colin Kleanthous for sharing results in
press; S.D. Zakharov, M.V. Zhalnina, and Dr. Alan Finkelstein for helpful discussions; and Dr.
Alan Finkelstein for critically reading the manuscript.

This work was supported by R01AI091633 from the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases to K.S.J., and by R01-GM018457 from NIH General Medical Sciences and the Henry
Kofﬂer Professorship to W.A.C. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does
not necessarily represent the ofﬁcial views of the NIAID or the NIH.

www.annualreviews.org • Colicins and Transporters

225

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2012.46:209-231. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitaet Osnabrueck on 12/02/13. For personal use only.GE46CH10-Jakes

ARI

3 October 2012

17:51

LITERATURE CITED

1. Abergel C, Bouveret E, Claverie JM, Brown K, Rigal A, et al. 1999. Structure of the Escherichia coli TolB

protein determined by MAD methods at 1.95 ˚A resolution. Structure 7:1291–300

2. Arnold T, Zeth K, Linke D. 2009. Structure and function of colicin S4, a colicin with a duplicated

receptor-binding domain. J. Biol. Chem. 284:6403–13

3. Baboolal TG, Conroy MJ, Gill K, Ridley H, Visudtiphole V, et al. 2008. Colicin N binds to the periphery

of its receptor and translocator, outer membrane protein F. Structure 16:371–79

4. Balakrishnan L, Hughes C, Koronakis V. 2001. Substrate-triggered recruitment of the TolC channel-

tunnel during type I export of hemolysin by Escherichia coli. J. Mol. Biol. 313:501–10

5. Barneoud-Arnoulet A, Barreteau H, Touze T, Mengin-Lecreulx D, Lloubes R, Duche D. 2010. Toxicity
of the colicin M catalytic domain exported to the periplasm is FkpA independent. J. Bacteriol. 192:5212–19
6. Basilio D, Jennings-Antipov LD, Jakes KS, Finkelstein A. 2011. Trapping a translocating protein within
the anthrax toxin channel: implications for the secondary structure of permeating proteins. J. Gen. Physiol.
137:343–56

7. Bell PE, Nau CD, Brown JT, Konisky J, Kadner RJ. 1990. Genetic suppression demonstrates interaction

of TonB protein with outer membrane transport proteins in Escherichia coli. J. Bacteriol. 172:3826–29

8. Benedetti H, Frenette M, Baty D, Lloubes R, Geli V, Lazdunski C. 1989. Comparison of the uptake
systems for the entry of various BtuB group colicins into Escherichia coli. J. Gen. Microbiol. 135:3413–20
9. Bonsor DA, Grishkovskaya I, Dodson EJ, Kleanthous C. 2007. Molecular mimicry enables competitive

recruitment by a natively disordered protein. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 129:4800–7

10. Bouveret E, Derouiche R, Rigal A, Lloubes R, Lazdunski C, Benedetti H. 1995. Peptidoglycan-associated
lipoprotein-TolB interaction. A possible key to explaining the formation of contact sites between the
inner and outer membranes of Escherichia coli. J. Biol. Chem. 270:11071–77

11. Bouveret E, Rigal A, Lazdunski C, Benedetti H. 1997. The N-terminal domain of colicin E3 interacts

with TolB which is involved in the colicin translocation step. Mol. Microbiol. 23:909–20

12. Bouveret E, Rigal A, Lazdunski C, Benedetti H. 1998. Distinct regions of the colicin A translocation
domain are involved in the interaction with TolA and TolB proteins upon import into Escherichia coli.
Mol. Microbiol. 27:143–57

13. Braun V, Herrmann C. 1993. Evolutionary relationship of uptake systems for biopolymers in Escherichia
coli: cross-complementation between the TonB-ExbB-ExbD and the TolA-TolQ-TolR proteins. Mol.
Microbiol. 8:261–68

14. Braun V, Patzer SI, Hantke K. 2002. Ton-dependent colicins and microcins: modular design and evo-

lution. Biochimie 84:365–80

15. Bredin J, Simonet V, Iyer R, Delcour AH, Pages JM. 2003. Colicins, spermine and cephalosporins: a

competitive interaction with the OmpF eyelet. Biochem. J. 376:245–52

16. Buchanan SK, Lukacik P, Grizot S, Ghirlando R, Ali MM, et al. 2007. Structure of colicin I receptor

bound to the R-domain of colicin Ia: implications for protein import. EMBO J. 26:2594–604

17. Cadieux N, Bradbeer C, Kadner RJ. 2000. Sequence changes in the Ton box region of BtuB affect its

transport activities and interaction with TonB protein. J. Bacteriol. 182:5954–61

18. Cadieux N, Phan PG, Caﬁso DS, Kadner RJ. 2003. Differential substrate-induced signaling through the

TonB-dependent transporter BtuB. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100:10688–93

19. Carr S, Penfold CN, Bamford V, James R, Hemmings AM. 2000. The structure of TolB, an essential
component of the Tol-dependent translocation system, and its protein-protein interaction with the
translocation domain of colicin E9. Structure 8:57–66

20. Cascales E, Buchanan SK, Duche D, Kleanthous C, Lloubes R, et al. 2007. Colicin biology. Microbiol.

Mol. Biol. Rev. 71:158–229

21. Cascales E, Gavioli M, Sturgis JN, Lloubes R. 2000. Proton motive force drives the interaction of the

inner membrane TolA and outer membrane Pal proteins in Escherichia coli. Mol. Microbiol. 38:904–15

22. Cascales E, Lloubes R, Sturgis JN. 2001. The TolQ-TolR proteins energize TolA and share homologies

with the ﬂagellar motor proteins MotA-MotB. Mol. Microbiol. 42:795–807

23. Cavard D, Lazdunski C. 1981. Involvement of BtuB and OmpF proteins in binding and uptake of colicin

A. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 12:311–16

Jakes· Cramer

226

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2012.46:209-231. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitaet Osnabrueck on 12/02/13. For personal use only.GE46CH10-Jakes

ARI

3 October 2012

17:51

24. Cavard D, Lazdunski C. 1990. Colicin cleavage by OmpT protease during both entry into and release

from Escherichia coli cells. J. Bacteriol. 172:648–52

25. Chauleau M, Mora L, Serba J, de Zamaroczy M. 2011. FtsH-dependent processing of RNase colicins D
and E3 means that only the cytotoxic domains are imported into the cytoplasm. J. Biol. Chem. 286:29397–
407

26. Cherezov V, Yamashita E, Liu W, Zhalnina M, Cramer WA, Caffrey M. 2006. In meso structure of the

cobalamin transporter, BtuB, at 1.95 ˚A resolution. J. Mol. Biol. 364:716–34

27. Chimento DP, Mohanty AK, Kadner RJ, Wiener MC. 2003. Substrate-induced transmembrane signaling

in the cobalamin transporter BtuB. Nat. Struct. Biol. 10:394–401

28. Clifton LA, Johnson CL, Solovyova AS, Callow P, Weiss KL, et al. 2012. Low resolution structure and

dynamics of a colicin-receptor complex determined by neutron scattering. J. Biol. Chem. 287:337–46

29. Cowan SW, Schirmer T, Rummel G, Steiert M, Ghosh R, et al. 1992. Crystal structures explain functional

properties of two E. coli porins. Nature 358:727–33

30. Cramer WA, Heymann JB, Schendel SL, Deriy BN, Cohen FS, et al. 1995. Structure-function of the

channel-forming colicins. Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 24:611–41

31. Davies JK, Reeves P. 1975. Genetics of resistance to colicins in Escherichia coli K-12: cross-resistance

among colicins of group A. J. Bacteriol. 123:102–17

32. Davies JK, Reeves P. 1975. Genetics of resistance to colicins in Escherichia coli K-12: cross-resistance

among colicins of group B. J. Bacteriol. 123:96–101

33. Derouiche R, Benedetti H, Lazzaroni JC, Lazdunski C, Lloubes R. 1995. Protein complex within Es-
cherichia coli inner membrane. TolA N-terminal domain interacts with TolQ and TolR proteins. J. Biol.
Chem. 270:11078–84

34. Devanathan S, Postle K. 2007. Studies on colicin B translocation: FepA is gated by TonB. Mol. Microbiol.

65:441–53

35. de Zamaroczy M, Mora L, Lecuyer A, Geli V, Buckingham RH. 2001. Cleavage of colicin D is necessary

for cell killing and requires the inner membrane peptidase LepB. Mol. Cell 8:159–68

36. Duche D, Frenkian A, Prima V, Lloubes R. 2006. Release of immunity protein requires functional

endonuclease colicin import machinery. J. Bacteriol. 188:8593–600

37. Duche D, Issouf M, Lloubes R. 2009. Immunity protein protects colicin E2 from OmpT protease. J.

Biochem. 145:95–101

38. El Ghachi M, Bouhss A, Barreteau H, Touze T, Auger G, et al. 2006. Colicin M exerts its bacteriolytic
effect via enzymatic degradation of undecaprenyl phosphate-linked peptidoglycan precursors. J. Biol.
Chem. 281:22761–72

39. Elkins P, Bunker A, Cramer WA, Stauffacher CV. 1997. A mechanism for toxin insertion into membranes

is suggested by the crystal structure of the channel-forming domain of colicin E1. Structure 5:443–58

40. el Kouhen R, Fierobe HP, Scianimanico S, Steiert M, Pattus F, Pages JM. 1993. Characterization of the

receptor and translocator domains of colicin N. Eur. J. Biochem. 214:635–39

41. Ellena JF, Lackowicz P, Mongomery H, Caﬁso DS. 2011. Membrane thickness varies around the cir-

cumference of the transmembrane protein BtuB. Biophys. J. 100:1280–87

42. Fourel D, Hikita C, Bolla JM, Mizushima S, Pages JM. 1990. Characterization of ompF domains involved

in Escherichia coli K-12 sensitivity to colicins A and N. J. Bacteriol. 172:3675–80

43. Gerding MA, Ogata Y, Pecora ND, Niki H, de Boer PA. 2007. The trans-envelope Tol-Pal complex
is part of the cell division machinery and required for proper outer-membrane invagination during cell
constriction in E. coli. Mol. Microbiol. 63:1008–25

44. Goemaere EL, Cascales E, Lloubes R. 2007. Mutational analyses deﬁne helix organization and key

residues of a bacterial membrane energy-transducing complex. J. Mol. Biol. 366:1424–36

45. Gokce I, Raggett EM, Hong Q, Virden R, Cooper A, Lakey JH. 2000. The TolA-recognition site of
colicin N. ITC, SPR and stopped-ﬂow ﬂuorescence deﬁne a crucial 27-residue segment. J. Mol. Biol.
304:621–32

46. Graille M, Mora L, Buckingham RH, van Tilbeurgh H, de Zamaroczy M. 2004. Structural inhibition

of the colicin D tRNase by the tRNA-mimicking immunity protein. EMBO J. 23:1474–82

47. Gresock MG, Savenkova MI, Larsen RA, Ollis AA, Postle K. 2011. Death of the TonB shuttle hypothesis.

Front. Microbiol. 2:206

www.annualreviews.org • Colicins and Transporters

227

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2012.46:209-231. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitaet Osnabrueck on 12/02/13. For personal use only.GE46CH10-Jakes

ARI

3 October 2012

17:51

48. Hantke K. 1990. Dihydroxybenzoylserine: a siderophore for E. coli. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 55:5–8
49. Heymann JB, Zakharov SD, Zhang YL, Cramer WA. 1996. Characterization of electrostatic and non-

electrostatic components of protein-membrane binding interactions. Biochemistry 35:2717–25

50. Hilsenbeck JL, Park H, Chen G, Youn B, Postle K, Kang C. 2004. Crystal structure of the cytotoxic

bacterial protein colicin B at 2.5 ˚A resolution. Mol. Microbiol. 51:711–20

51. Housden NG, Kleanthous C. 2011. Thermodynamic dissection of colicin interactions. Methods Enzymol.

488:123–45

52. Housden NG, Loftus SR, Moore GR, James R, Kleanthous C, et al. 2005. Cell entry mechanism of
enzymatic bacterial colicins: porin recruitment and the thermodynamics of receptor binding. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 102:13849–54

53. Housden NG, Wojdyla JA, Korczynska J, Grishkovskaya I, Kirkpatrick N, et al. 2010. Directed epitope
delivery across the Escherichia coli outer membrane through the porin OmpF. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
107:21412–17

54. Hullmann J, Patzer SI, Romer C, Hantke K, Braun V. 2008. Periplasmic chaperone FkpA is essential

for imported colicin M toxicity. Mol. Microbiol. 69:926–37

55. Ito K, Akiyama Y. 2005. Cellular functions, mechanism of action, and regulation of FtsH protease. Annu.

Rev. Microbiol. 59:211–31

56. Jakes KS. 2001. The importance of being cleaved: an essential step in killing by enzymatic colicins. Mol.

Cell 8:4–6

57. Jakes KS, Finkelstein A. 2010. The colicin Ia receptor, Cir, is also the translocator for colicin Ia. Mol.

Microbiol. 75:567–78

58. Jakes KS, Kienker PK, Finkelstein A. 1999. Channel-forming colicins: translocation (and other deviant

behaviour) associated with colicin Ia channel gating. Q. Rev. Biophys. 32:189–205

59. Jakes KS, Zinder ND. 1974. Highly puriﬁed colicin E3 contains immunity protein. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.

USA 71:3380–84

60. James R, Penfold CN, Moore GR, Kleanthous C. 2002. Killing of E. coli cells by E group nuclease

colicins. Biochimie 84:381–89

61. Jeanteur D, Schirmer T, Fourel D, Simonet V, Rummel G, et al. 1994. Structural and functional al-
terations of a colicin-resistant mutant of OmpF porin from Escherichia coli. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
91:10675–79

62. Khursigara CM, De Crescenzo G, Pawelek PD, Coulton JW. 2004. Enhanced binding of TonB to a
ligand-loaded outer membrane receptor: role of the oligomeric state of TonB in formation of a functional
FhuA·TonB complex. J. Biol. Chem. 279:7405–12

63. Khursigara CM, De Crescenzo G, Pawelek PD, Coulton JW. 2005. Kinetic analyses reveal multiple

steps in forming TonB-FhuA complexes from Escherichia coli. Biochemistry 44:3441–53

64. Kienker PK, Jakes KS, Finkelstein A. 2000. Protein translocation across planar bilayers by the colicin Ia

channel-forming domain: Where will it end? J. Gen. Physiol. 116:587–98

65. Kienker PK, Qiu X, Slatin SL, Finkelstein A, Jakes KS. 1997. Transmembrane insertion of the colicin

Ia hydrophobic hairpin. J. Membr. Biol. 157:27–37

66. Killian JA. 1998. Hydrophobic mismatch between proteins and lipids in membranes. Biochim. Biophys.

Acta 1376:401–15

67. Konisky J, Cowell BS. 1972. Interaction of colicin Ia with bacterial cells. Direct measurement of Ia-

receptor interaction. J. Biol. Chem. 247:6524–29

68. Koronakis V, Andersen C, Hughes C. 2001. Channel-tunnels. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 11:403–7
69. Krewulak KD, Vogel HJ. 2011. TonB or not TonB: Is that the question? Biochem. Cell Biol. 89:87–97
70. Krone WJ, de Vries P, Koningstein G, de Jonge AJ, de Graaf FK, Oudega B. 1986. Uptake of cloacin
DF13 by susceptible cells: removal of immunity protein and fragmentation of cloacin molecules. J.
Bacteriol. 166:260–68

71. Kurisu G, Zakharov SD, Zhalnina MV, Bano S, Eroukova VY, et al. 2003. The structure of BtuB with

bound colicin E3 R-domain implies a translocon. Nat. Struct. Biol. 10:948–54

72. Lakey JH, Slatin SL. 2001. Pore-forming colicins and their relatives. Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol.

257:131–61

Jakes· Cramer

228

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2012.46:209-231. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitaet Osnabrueck on 12/02/13. For personal use only.GE46CH10-Jakes

ARI

3 October 2012

17:51

73. Larsen RA, Thomas MG, Postle K. 1999. Protonmotive force, ExbB and ligand-bound FepA drive

conformational changes in TonB. Mol. Microbiol. 31:1809–24

74. Lazdunski CJ. 1995. Colicin import and pore formation: a system for studying protein transport across

membranes? Mol. Microbiol. 16:1059–66

75. Lazzaroni JC, Dubuisson JF, Vianney A. 2002. The Tol proteins of Escherichia coli and their involvement

in the translocation of group A colicins. Biochimie 84:391–97

76. Lindeberg M, Zakharov SD, Cramer WA. 2000. Unfolding pathway of the colicin E1 channel protein

on a membrane surface. J. Mol. Biol. 295:679–92

77. Majeed H, Gillor O, Kerr B, Riley MA. 2011. Competitive interactions in Escherichia coli populations:

the role of bacteriocins. ISME J. 5:71–81

78. Masi M, Vuong P, Humbard M, Malone K, Misra R. 2007. Initial steps of colicin E1 import across the

outer membrane of Escherichia coli. J. Bacteriol. 189:2667–76

79. Mende J, Braun V. 1990. Import-defective colicin-B derivatives mutated in the TonB box. Mol. Microbiol.

4:1523–33

80. Nikaido H, Rosenberg EY. 1990. Cir and Fiu proteins in the outer membrane of Escherichia coli catalyze
transport of monomeric catechols: study with β-lactam antibiotics containing catechol and analogous
groups. J. Bacteriol. 172:1361–67

81. Noinaj N, Guillier M, Barnard TJ, Buchanan SK. 2010. TonB-dependent transporters: regulation,

structure, and function. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 64:43–60

82. Ollis AA, Manning M, Held KG, Postle K. 2009. Cytoplasmic membrane protonmotive force energizes

periplasmic interactions between ExbD and TonB. Mol. Microbiol. 73:466–81

83. Ollis AA, Postle K. 2012. ExbD mutants deﬁne initial stages in TonB energization. J. Mol. Biol. 415:237–

47

84. Papadakos G, Housden NG, Lilly KJ, Kaminska R, Kleanthous C. 2012. Kinetic basis for the competitive
recruitment of TolB by the intrinsically disordered translocation domain of colicin E9. J. Mol. Biol.
418:269–80

85. Papadakos G, Wojdyla JA, Kleanthous C. 2011. Nuclease colicins and their immunity proteins. Q. Rev.

Biophys. 45:1–47

86. Parker MW, Pattus F, Tucker AD, Tsernoglou D. 1989. Structure of the membrane-pore-forming

fragment of colicin A. Nature 337:93–96

87. Pawelek PD, Croteau N, Ng-Thow-Hing C, Khursigara CM, Moiseeva N, et al. 2006. Structure of

TonB in complex with FhuA, E. coli outer membrane receptor. Science 312:1399–402

88. Pei XY, Hinchliffe P, Symmons MF, Koronakis E, Benz R, et al. 2011. Structures of sequential open
states in a symmetrical opening transition of the TolC exit duct. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108:2112–17
89. Penfold CN, Garinot-Schneider C, Hemmings AM, Moore GR, Kleanthous C, James R. 2000. A 76-
residue polypeptide of colicin E9 confers receptor speciﬁcity and inhibits the growth of vitamin B12–
dependent Escherichia coli 113/3 cells. Mol. Microbiol. 38:639–49

90. Pramanik A, Hauf W, Hoffmann J, Cernescu M, Brutschy B, Braun V. 2011. Oligomeric structure of
ExbB and ExbB-ExbD isolated from Escherichia coli as revealed by LILBID mass spectrometry. Biochem-
istry 50:8950–56

91. Pugsley AP. 1985. Escherichia coli K12 strains for use in the identiﬁcation and characterization of colicins.

J. Gen. Microbiol. 131:369–76

92. Raggett EM, Bainbridge G, Evans LJ, Cooper A, Lakey JH. 1998. Discovery of critical Tol A-binding

residues in the bactericidal toxin colicin N: a biophysical approach. Mol. Microbiol. 28:1335–43

93. Sauter A, Howard SP, Braun V. 2003. In vivo evidence for TonB dimerization. J. Bacteriol. 185:5747–54
94. Schendel SL, Click EM, Webster RE, Cramer WA. 1997. The TolA protein interacts with colicin E1

differently than with other group A colicins. J. Bacteriol. 179:3683–90

95. Schofﬂer H, Braun V. 1989. Transport across the outer membrane of Escherichia coli K12 via the FhuA
receptor is regulated by the TonB protein of the cytoplasmic membrane. Mol. Gen. Genet. 217:378–83
96. Sharma O, Datsenko KA, Ess SC, Zhalnina MV, Wanner BL, Cramer WA. 2009. Genome-wide screens:

novel mechanisms in colicin import and cytotoxicity. Mol. Microbiol. 73:571–85

www.annualreviews.org • Colicins and Transporters

229

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2012.46:209-231. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitaet Osnabrueck on 12/02/13. For personal use only.GE46CH10-Jakes

ARI

3 October 2012

17:51

97. Sharma O, Yamashita E, Zhalnina MV, Zakharov SD, Datsenko KA, et al. 2007. Structure of the complex
of the colicin E2 R-domain and its BtuB receptor: the outer membrane colicin translocon. J. Biol. Chem.
282:23163–70

98. Sharma O, Zakharov SD, Zhalnina MV, Yamashita E, Cramer WA. 2012. Colicins. In Handbook of

Biologically Active Peptides, ed. AJ Kastin. San Diego, CA: Academic

99. Shi Z, Chak KF, Yuan HS. 2005. Identiﬁcation of an essential cleavage site in ColE7 required for import

and killing of cells. J. Biol. Chem. 280:24663–68

100. Shultis DD, Purdy MD, Banchs CN, Wiener MC. 2006. Outer membrane active transport: structure of

the BtuB:TonB complex. Science 312:1396–99

101. Simonet V, Mallea M, Pages JM. 2000. Substitutions in the eyelet region disrupt cefepime diffusion

through the Escherichia coli OmpF channel. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 44:311–15

102. Smallwood CR, Marco AG, Xiao Q, Trinh V, Newton SM, Klebba PE. 2009. Fluoresceination of FepA

during colicin B killing: effects of temperature, toxin and TonB. Mol. Microbiol. 72:1171–80

103. Soelaiman S, Jakes K, Wu N, Li CM, Shoham M. 2001. Crystal structure of colicin E3: implications for

cell entry and ribosome inactivation. Mol. Cell 8:1053–62

104. Spector J, Zakharov S, Lill Y, Sharma O, Cramer WA, Ritchie K. 2010. Mobility of BtuB and OmpF in
the Escherichia coli outer membrane: implications for dynamic formation of a translocon complex. Biophys.
J. 99:3880–86

105. Sun TP, Webster RE. 1987. Nucleotide sequence of a gene cluster involved in entry of E colicins and
single-stranded DNA of infecting ﬁlamentous bacteriophages into Escherichia coli. J. Bacteriol. 169:2667–
74

106. Taylor R, Burgner JW, Clifton J, Cramer WA. 1998. Puriﬁcation and characterization of monomeric

Escherichia coli vitamin B12 receptor with high afﬁnity for colicin E3. J. Biol. Chem. 273:31113–18

107. Vankemmelbeke M, Healy B, Moore GR, Kleanthous C, Penfold CN, James R. 2005. Rapid detection
of colicin E9-induced DNA damage using Escherichia coli cells carrying SOS promoter-lux fusions. J.
Bacteriol. 187:4900–7

108. Vankemmelbeke M, Zhang Y, Moore GR, Kleanthous C, Penfold CN, James R. 2009. Energy-dependent
immunity protein release during Tol-dependent nuclease colicin translocation. J. Biol. Chem. 284:18932–
41

109. Vetter IR, Parker MW, Tucker AD, Lakey JH, Pattus F, Tsernoglou D. 1998. Crystal structure of a

colicin N fragment suggests a model for toxicity. Structure 6:863–74

110. Walker D, Mosbahi K, Vankemmelbeke M, James R, Kleanthous C. 2007. The role of electrostatics in

colicin nuclease domain translocation into bacterial cells. J. Biol. Chem. 282:31389–97

111. Wallis R, Leung KY, Pommer AJ, Videler H, Moore GR, et al. 1995. Protein-protein interactions in
colicin E9 DNase-immunity protein complexes. 2. Cognate and noncognate interactions that span the
millimolar to femtomolar afﬁnity range. Biochemistry 34:13751–59

112. Wallis R, Moore GR, James R, Kleanthous C. 1995. Protein-protein interactions in colicin E9 DNase-
immunity protein complexes. 1. Diffusion-controlled association and femtomolar binding for the cognate
complex. Biochemistry 34:13743–50

113. Wiener M, Freymann D, Ghosh P, Stroud RM. 1997. Crystal structure of colicin Ia. Nature 385:461–64
114. Wiener MC. 2005. TonB-dependent outer membrane transport: going for Baroque? Curr. Opin. Struct.

Biol. 15:394–400

115. Yamashita E, Zhalnina MV, Zakharov SD, Sharma O, Cramer WA. 2008. Crystal structures of the

OmpF porin: function in a colicin translocon. EMBO J. 27:2171–80

116. Zakharov SD, Eroukova VY, Rokitskaya TI, Zhalnina MV, Sharma O, et al. 2004. Colicin occlusion of

OmpF and TolC channels: outer membrane translocons for colicin import. Biophys. J. 87:3901–11

117. Zakharov SD, Kotova EA, Antonenko YN, Cramer WA. 2004. On the role of lipid in colicin pore

formation. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1666:239–49

118. Zakharov SD, Rokitskaya TI, Shapovalov SL, Antonenko YN, Cramer WA. 2002. Tuning the membrane

surface potential for efﬁcient toxin import. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99:8654–59

119. Zakharov SD, Zhalnina M, Cramer WA. 2012. Insertion of colicin E1 into Omp TolC is mediated by

the ordered segment of translocation domain. Biophys. J. 102:524a

Jakes· Cramer

230

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2012.46:209-231. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitaet Osnabrueck on 12/02/13. For personal use only.GE46CH10-Jakes

ARI

3 October 2012

17:51

120. Zakharov SD, Zhalnina MV, Sharma O, Cramer WA. 2006. The colicin E3 outer membrane translocon:
Immunity protein release allows interaction of the cytotoxic domain with OmpF porin. Biochemistry
45:10199–207

121. Zeth K, Romer C, Patzer SI, Braun V. 2008. Crystal structure of colicin M, a novel phosphatase specif-

ically imported by Escherichia coli. J. Biol. Chem. 283:25324–31

122. Zhang XY, Goemaere EL, Seddiki N, Celia H, Gavioli M, et al. 2011. Mapping the interactions between

Escherichia coli TolQ transmembrane segments. J. Biol. Chem. 286:11756–64

123. Zhang Y, Vankemmelbeke MN, Holland LE, Walker DC, James R, Penfold CN. 2008. Investigating
early events in receptor binding and translocation of colicin E9 using synchronized cell killing and
proteolytic cleavage. J. Bacteriol. 190:4342–50

www.annualreviews.org • Colicins and Transporters

231

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2012.46:209-231. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitaet Osnabrueck on 12/02/13. For personal use only.GE46-FrontMatter

ARI

10 October 2012

7:42

Contents

Annual Review of
Genetics

Volume 46, 2012

Noncoding Transcription at Enhancers: General Principles and

Functional Models
Gioacchino Natoli and Jean-Cristophe Andrau p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p 1

Transposable Elements: An Abundant and Natural Source

of Regulatory Sequences for Host Genes
Rita Rebollo, Mark T. Romanish, and Dixie L. Mager p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Disentangling the Many Layers of Eukaryotic

Transcriptional Regulation
Katherine M. Lelli, Matthew Slattery, and Richard S. Mann p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Biosynthesis and Function of Posttranscriptional Modiﬁcations

of Transfer RNAs
Basma El Yacoubi, Marc Bailly, and Val´erie de Cr´ecy-Lagard p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Genetics of Reproduction and Regulation of Honeybee

(Apis mellifera L.) Social Behavior
Robert E. Page Jr, Olav Rueppell, and Gro V. Amdam p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p21

p43

p69

p97

Chromosome Replication and Segregation in Bacteria

Rodrigo Reyes-Lamothe, Emilien Nicolas, and David J. Sherratt

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Genetics of Aggression

Robert R.H. Anholt and Trudy F.C. Mackay p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

The Unfolded Protein Response in Secretory Cell Function

Kristin A. Moore and Julie Hollien p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Genetics of Climate Change Adaptation

Steven J. Franks and Ary A. Hoffmann p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Border Crossings: Colicins and Transporters

Karen S. Jakes and William A. Cramer p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p 121

p 145

p 165

p 185

p 209

The Biosynthetic Capacities of the Plastids and Integration Between

Cytoplasmic and Chloroplast Processes
Norbert Rolland, Gilles Curien, Giovanni Finazzi, Marcel Kuntz, Eric Mar´echal,

Michel Matringe, St´ephane Ravanel, and Daphn´e Seigneurin-Berny p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p 233

v

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2012.46:209-231. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitaet Osnabrueck on 12/02/13. For personal use only.GE46-FrontMatter

ARI

10 October 2012

7:42

Fusion and Fission: Interlinked Processes Critical

for Mitochondrial Health
David C. Chan p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Regeneration and Transdetermination in Drosophila Imaginal Discs

Melanie I. Worley, Linda Setiawan, and Iswar K. Hariharan p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

The CRISPRs, They Are A-Changin’: How Prokaryotes Generate

Adaptive Immunity
Edze R. Westra, Daan C. Swarts, Raymond H.J. Staals, Matthijs M. Jore,

Stan J.J. Brouns, and John van der Oost

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Evolutionary Implications of Horizontal Gene Transfer

Michael Syvanen p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Plant Virus Metagenomics: Biodiversity and Ecology

Marilyn J. Roossinck p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Probing Mechanisms That Underlie Human Neurodegenerative

Disease in Drosophila
M. Jaiswal, H. Sandoval, K. Zhang, V. Bayat, and H.J. Bellen p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Uncovering the Molecular and Cellular Mechanisms of Heart

Development Using the Zebraﬁsh
David Staudt and Didier Stainier p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p 265

p 289

p 311

p 341

p 359

p 371

p 397

5-Methylcytosine DNA Demethylation: More Than Losing

a Methyl Group
Don-Marc Franchini, Kerstin-Maike Schmitz, and Svend K. Petersen-Mahrt

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p 419

RNA as a Structural and Regulatory Component of the Centromere

Jonathan I. Gent and R. Kelly Dawe p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Mutations Arising During Repair of Chromosome Breaks

Anna Malkova and James E. Haber

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Recessively Inherited Forms of Osteogenesis Imperfecta

Peter H. Byers and Shawna M. Pyott

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Neural Regeneration in Caenorhabditis elegans
Rachid El Bejjani and Marc Hammarlund p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Genetics of Borrelia burgdorferi

Dustin Brisson, Dan Drecktrah, Christian H. Eggers,

and D. Scott Samuels p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Dosage Compensation of the Sex Chromosomes

Christine M. Disteche

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Memories from the Polycomb Group Proteins

Chiara Lanzuolo and Valerio Orlando p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p 443

p 455

p 475

p 499

p 515

p 537

p 561

vi

Contents

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2012.46:209-231. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitaet Osnabrueck on 12/02/13. For personal use only.GE46-FrontMatter

ARI

10 October 2012

7:42

Understanding the Relationship Between Brain Gene Expression and

Social Behavior: Lessons from the Honey Bee
Amro Zayed and Gene E. Robinson p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Identity by Descent Between Distant Relatives: Detection and

Applications
Sharon R. Browning and Brian L. Browning p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Paleopopulation Genetics

Jeffrey D. Wall and Montgomery Slatkin p

Active Transposition in Genomes

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Cheng Ran Lisa Huang, Kathleen H. Burns, and Jef D. Boeke

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Rules of Engagement: Molecular Insights from Host-Virus Arms Races

Matthew D. Daugherty and Harmit S. Malik p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Brassinosteroid Signaling Network and Regulation

of Photomorphogenesis
Zhi-Yong Wang, Ming-Yi Bai, Eunkyoo Oh, and Jia-Ying Zhu p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Errata

An online log of corrections to Annual Review of Genetics articles may be found at
http://genet.annualreviews.org/errata.shtml

p 591

p 617

p 635

p 651

p 677

p 701

Contents

vii

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2012.46:209-231. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitaet Osnabrueck on 12/02/13. For personal use only.