R E P O R T S

Sparse Coding and

Decorrelation in Primary Visual
Cortex During Natural Vision

William E. Vinje1,2 and Jack L. Gallant1,3*

Theoretical studies suggest that primary visual cortex (area V1) uses a sparse
code to efﬁciently represent natural scenes. This issue was investigated by
recording from V1 neurons in awake behaving macaques during both free
viewing of natural scenes and conditions simulating natural vision. Stimulation
of the nonclassical receptive ﬁeld increases the selectivity and sparseness of
individual V1 neurons, increases the sparseness of the population response
distribution, and strongly decorrelates the responses of neuron pairs. These
effects are due to both excitatory and suppressive modulation of the classical
receptive ﬁeld by the nonclassical receptive ﬁeld and do not depend critically
on the spatiotemporal structure of the stimuli. During natural vision, the
classical and nonclassical receptive ﬁelds function together to form a sparse
representation of the visual world. This sparse code may be computationally
efﬁcient for both early vision and higher visual processing.

Although area V1 has been studied for over
40 years, little is known about how V1 en-
codes complex natural scenes. Theoretical stud-
ies suggest that natural scenes can be efficient-
ly represented by a sparse code based on
filters that resemble neurons found in area V1
(1, 2). Sparse codes lie along a continuum
ranging from dense codes, where neurons
respond to most stimuli, to local codes, where
neurons give extremely selective responses
(3). Both of these extremes are inefficient in
several important respects. Dense codes are
highly redundant and each neural response
carries little information, whereas local codes
require an implausibly large number of neu-
rons and are computationally intractable. In
contrast, neurons that are tuned to match the
sparsely distributed, informative components
of the natural world can produce sparse codes.
Sparse codes transmit information with min-
imal redundancy and relatively few spikes.
Consequently, they are both informationally
and metabolically more efficient than dense
codes (4). There have been a few studies of
sparse coding in inferior temporal visual ar-
eas (5). We have addressed this issue in area
V1.

Recent

theoretical studies suggest

that
nonlinear interactions between neurons may
increase coding sparseness in area V1 (2, 6).
These interactions are predominantly reflect-
ed in modulation of classical receptive field
(CRF) responses by the surrounding nonclas-
sical receptive field (nCRF) (7). Previous ex-

1Program in Neuroscience, 2Department of Molecular
and Cellular Biology, and 3Department of Psychology,
University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA
94720 –1650, USA.
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-
mail: gallant@socrates.berkeley.edu

periments have demonstrated that nCRF stim-
ulation strongly modulates responses during
free viewing of natural scenes (8). This report
demonstrates that V1 employs a sparse code
to represent natural scenes and shows that the
nCRF plays a crucial role in this process.

We have addressed this issue by using
controlled stimuli that simulate natural vi-
sion. The stimuli were sequences of images
simulating the spatial and temporal patterns
occurring in and around the CRF when an
animal freely views a static natural scene (see
Fig. 1A). Eye scan paths were generated with
a statistical model of eye movements made
during free viewing (9). Image patches were
extracted from a natural scene along the sim-
ulated scan path and converted to gray scale
(10). Each natural vision movie was com-
posed of a series of simulated fixations sep-
arated by brief simulated saccadic transitions.
In the experiments described here, we ma-
nipulated the size of the extracted image
patches. Patch size varied from one to four
times the diameter of the CRF. To reduce
potential boundary artifacts, the outer 10% of
each image patch was blended smoothly into
the neutral gray background. Data reported
here are from 61 well-isolated neurons re-
corded in area V1 of two awake behaving
primates (11).

The sparseness of V1 responses increases
dramatically with larger natural image patch-
es that encompass both the CRF and the
nCRF. This effect is illustrated in Fig. 1,
which compares responses obtained with
stimuli confined to the CRF (Fig. 1B) with
those obtained with stimuli four times the
diameter of the CRF (Fig. 1C). To quantify
sparseness we used a nonparametric statistic
(12): S ⫽ {1 ⫺ [(⌺ri/n)2/⌺(ri
2/n)]}/[1 ⫺ (1/n)],
where ri is the response to the ith frame of a

movie (averaged across trials) and n is the
number of movie frames. Values of S near
0% indicate a dense code, and values near
100% indicate a sparse code.

Distributions of S across the sample of
neurons are shown in Fig. 2 for each stimulus
size. As stimulus size increases, sparseness
increases systematically (P ⬍ 0.01) (13). The
sparseness statistic saturates when stimuli are
three to four times the size of the CRF,
consistent with the spatial extent of V1 nCRF
modulation reported in other studies (7). The
high sparseness values produced by large
stimuli suggest that area V1 uses a sparse
code during natural vision, when stimuli span
the entire visual field.

The simulated saccades in our natural vi-
sion movies often produce large transient re-
sponses followed by rapid adaptation during
the course of the fixation. To assess the con-
tribution of this fine temporal structure to
sparseness, we recomputed the sparseness
statistic after averaging all responses within
each fixation. Absolute sparseness values are
significantly lower in the fixation-based anal-
ysis (P ⬍ 0.05), but sparseness still increases
with increasing nCRF stimulation (14). Thus,
transient responses and adaptation contribute
to sparseness but do not account for all of the
observed nCRF effects.

We reanalyzed a subset of cells to deter-
mine whether these sparsening effects were
due to nCRF suppression, excitation, or both
(n ⫽ 36 cells; stimuli four times the CRF
diameter). Twenty-nine percent of all
the
frames in this sample are significantly mod-
ulated (P ⬍ 0.05), and the ratio of suppres-
sion to excitation is about 4.5 to 1. Excitation
is often concentrated in the onset transients
that occur after simulated saccades, whereas
suppression reduces responses across an en-
tire fixation. Thus, natural nCRF stimulation
appears to increase sparseness by both en-
hancing and suppressing specific epochs of
the response.

It

is unlikely that

these results are an
artifact of incorrect CRF definition (15). We
defined the CRF as the circular region cir-
cumscribing all locations where stimuli evoked
action potentials. Overestimation of CRF siz-
es would cause inadvertent nCRF stimulation
by movies confined to the nominal CRF,
thereby increasing estimates of CRF sparse-
ness and decreasing the apparent sparsening
effects of nCRF stimulation.

We also performed a control experiment
to ensure that our sparseness estimates did
not depend on the position of the patch
boundary, which necessarily varied with patch
size. The control stimulus consisted of a nat-
ural vision movie four times the CRF diam-
eter on which a sharp, white ring was super-
imposed along the exterior boundary of the
defined CRF. The ring provided a strong
artificial edge to enhance the magnitude of

www.sciencemag.org SCIENCE VOL 287 18 FEBRUARY 2000

1273

R E P O R T S

modulation by extraretinal factors such as eye
movements and attention (16). We examined
how these extraretinal factors affect sparse-
ness by comparing responses obtained during
free viewing of natural scenes (17) to re-
sponses obtained with natural vision movies
that re-created the visual stimulation occur-
ring in the CRF and the surround during the
same free-viewing episodes (18). Both free-
viewing and natural vision movie data were
acquired in 11 V1 neurons (17 separate free-
viewing episodes). Sparseness values ob-
tained during free viewing and with natural
vision movies are highly correlated (r ⫽
0.91). However, the slope of the regression
line is 1.2, which suggests that free viewing
produces a slightly more sparse response than
do natural vision movies simulating free
viewing. Given that the movies may not fully
stimulate the nCRF of some cells, this small

difference is expected, but we cannot rule out
the possibility of weak extraretinal effects.

As a final control, we examined sparse-
ness values obtained with dynamic grating
sequences (n ⫽ 22 neurons) (19) to see if
sparsening is specific to natural stimuli. To
compare response sparseness for
random
grating sequences and natural vision movies,
we computed S for both stimulus types and
for stimuli one and two times the size of the
CRF. The sparseness values obtained with
gratings and natural vision movies are not
significantly different from each other, which
suggests that sparseness might be induced by
oriented energy present in both natural stim-
uli and grating sequences.

The sparse coding hypothesis also pre-
dicts that responses will be sparse when ex-
amined across the population of neurons in
V1. To investigate this, we evaluated the
kurtosis of the response distribution (RD)
obtained with each stimulus size. The RD is
the histogram of responses (i.e., action poten-
tials per movie frame) pooled over all cells
and all stimuli; it is an estimate of the popu-
lation response of V1 to an ensemble of

any potential edge effects. Ring trials were
randomly interleaved with non-ring trials.
The addition of the CRF-diameter ring in-
creases sparseness by an average of 8% (n ⫽
12 neurons) relative to that observed without
the ring. Thus, sparseness estimates for CRF-
diameter stimuli may be inflated slightly be-
cause of the presence of the sharp border,
which suggests that our estimates of the
sparsening effects of nCRF stimulation prob-
ably underestimate the true size of this effect.
The data presented above were acquired
with controlled stimuli that simulate natural
vision. During natural free viewing, V1 ac-
tivity reflects both visual stimulation and

A

B

e
s
n
o
p
s
e
R

C

e
s
n
o
p
s
e
R

CRF

4xCRF

0

1.5

3.0

Time (s)

4.5

Fig. 1. Natural vision movie and representative
responses. (A) Example of a natural scene used
as the source image for natural vision movies.
White line represents simulated visual scan
path. Image patches centered on the scan path
were extracted to form the movie. Small white
circle gives the CRF size; larger circle is four
times the CRF diameter. (B) Raster plot of
action potentials during 20 presentations of a
movie conﬁned to the CRF. The number of
action potentials during each 13.8-ms movie
frame is indicated by intensity. Solid line is the
peri-stimulus
time histogram (PSTH). The
sparseness of these data is 16%, which implies
a dense distribution of responses across the
stimulus set. (C) Raster plot of action potentials
during 20 presentations of a movie with a
stimulus size four times the CRF diameter. Dark
line again gives the PSTH. Stimulation of the
nCRF increases sparseness to 53%.

Fig. 2. Stimulation of the nCRF increases
sparseness in single neurons. Effects of stimulus
size on distribution of the sparseness statistic
across the sample of cells. Expressed as a per-
centage, S is 0% when a neuron responds
equally to all frames of a movie and 100%
when a neuron responds to only a single frame.
An increase in S indicates an increase in the
sparseness of neural coding across the stimulus
ensemble. Mean sparseness values are 41%,
52%, 61%, and 62% for stimuli one, two, three,
and four times the CRF diameter, respectively.
To quantify sparseness changes in single neu-
rons we computed the ratio of the observed
shift in S to the maximum possible shift as a
function of nCRF stimulation: Sshift ⫽ (SnCRF ⫺
SCRF)/(1 ⫺ SCRF). Average Sshift values are 18%,
32%, and 36% for stimuli two, three, and four
times the CRF diameter, respectively. Neurons
with statistically signiﬁcant (P ⬍ 0.01) shifts
are black and are stacked on top of those with
insigniﬁcant shifts.

Fig. 3. Stimulation of the nCRF decorrelates
responses across the population of neurons in
area V1. (Upper) Distribution of upper limits of
the separation angles between pairs of neurons
tested with similar natural vision movies con-
ﬁned to the CRF. Separation angle is inversely
proportional to the similarity of responses be-
tween randomly selected V1 neurons recorded
in separate sessions [see text and (21) for de-
tails]. The mean separation angle is 51°, indi-
cating substantial response similarity. (Lower)
Distribution of upper limits of the separation
angles between neuron pairs obtained with
natural vision movies four times the CRF diam-
eter, plotted as in (Upper). The mean of this
distribution is 67°, which is signiﬁcantly larger
than the mean of the distribution obtained
from CRF stimulation alone (P ⱕ 0.001). This
increase in separation angle reﬂects decorrela-
tion across the population of V1 responses.

1274

18 FEBRUARY 2000 VOL 287 SCIENCE www.sciencemag.org

natural images. Kurtosis is the fourth moment
of this distribution about its mean value. As
the RD becomes more sparse the proportion
of moderate responses decreases and the pro-
portion of both small and large responses
increases; this is reflected by an increase in
RD kurtosis. For this reason, theorists have
used kurtosis as an index of sparseness (2, 20,
21).

RD kurtosis is 4.1 when stimuli are con-
fined to the CRF, consistent with theoretical
studies suggesting that the CRF of V1 neurons
produces a moderately sparse code (1). How-
ever, when stimuli are two, three, or four
times the CRF diameter, kurtosis values in-
crease significantly to 5.2, 8.7, and 10.2,
respectively (P ⱕ 0.001). This result further
confirms that nonlinear nCRF interactions
increase sparseness and demonstrates that
this effect occurs across the population of
cells in V1.

We also tested whether nCRF stimulation
increased the independence of responses across
the population of V1 neurons. We accom-
plished this by examining the similarity of
responses between randomly selected pairs of
neurons presented with nearly identical stim-
uli during different recording sessions. This
similarity reflects the distribution of correla-
tions across the entire population of cells in
V1. If neurons carry independent informa-
tion, then randomly selected pairs will be
weakly correlated, whereas if they carry re-
dundant information responses will be strongly
correlated.

We selected neuron pairs stimulated with
natural vision movies created from the same
eye scan path and natural scene (patch sizes
varied slightly because of differences in CRF
size). For this analysis the average responses
across movie frames were treated as a vector
in a high-dimensional space. We quantified
response similarity by computing the angle
between the response vectors of each neuron

R E P O R T S

pair (22). Using this metric, cells with similar
tuning properties have small separation an-
gles and those with different tuning proper-
ties have large separation angles.

Figure 3 shows the distribution of separa-
tion angles between neuron pairs recorded
with natural vision movies confined to the
CRF (Fig. 3, Upper) and four times larger
than the CRF (Fig. 3, Lower). Stimulation of
the nCRF significantly increases the separa-
tion angle between cells (P ⱕ 0.001) (23).
This is direct evidence that nCRF stimulation
decorrelates responses between pairs of V1
neurons and it suggests that one consequence
of increasing sparseness is increased indepen-
dence of the responses across cells.

In a final experiment we investigated the
nCRF mechanisms that might be responsible
for sparsening and decorrelation. We accom-
plished this by mapping the spatial domains
of the nCRF via reverse correlation. The
stimulus was a dynamic, compound grating
sequence consisting of a CRF conditioning
grating and an nCRF probe extending to two
times the CRF size [see Fig. 4A and (24)].
The strength, sign, and spatial distribution of
nCRF domains vary widely across cells (n ⫽
19 neurons) (see Fig. 4, B to D). Many cells
have irregular nCRF domains (Fig. 4, B and
C), although some have a fairly uniform
structure (Fig. 4D). These patterns are similar
to those reported recently for area 17 of the
anesthetized cat (25). The diversity of the
nCRF structure may be responsible for de-
correlating the responses of V1 neurons dur-
ing natural vision.

Our experiments provide direct experi-
mental evidence that V1 uses a sparse code
matched to the underlying sparse structure of
natural scenes. During natural vision, CRF
and nCRF mechanisms function together as a
single computational unit. Although CRF re-
sponses during natural vision are already
moderately sparse, nCRF stimulation elicits

Fig. 4. Identiﬁcation of nCRF subdomains by reverse correlation. (A) Example of a single frame from
the compound grating sequence. An optimal conditioning grating ﬁlled the CRF while a probe
grating appeared in the annulus between the CRF and twice the CRF diameter. Probe position,
orientation, spatial frequency, and phase varied randomly across frames (24). Spatial modulatory
nCRF domains were identiﬁed by reverse correlation with respect to the position of the probe
within the nCRF. (B) Anisotropic inhibitory nCRF modulation. Solid curves indicate mean response
as a function of probe position. Dashed lines give mean responses to the conditioning grating alone.
Plots are rotated so the preferred orientation of the CRF lies along the vertical axis. This cell is
suppressed by nCRF stimulation; side suppression is larger than end suppression. (C) A cell that is
enhanced by nCRF stimulation; side enhancement is larger than end enhancement. (D) A cell that
is weakly and uniformly suppressed by nCRF stimulation. For all three neurons shown here, nCRF
stimulation with natural vision movies signiﬁcantly increases sparseness (P ⬍ 0.01).

nonlinear interactions (2, 6) that dramatically
increase sparseness and decorrelate responses
between neurons. Consequently, each neuron
appears to carry statistically independent in-
formation. Between the retina and lateral
geniculate nucleus, the visual system encodes
information to optimize information trans-
mission given the limited bandwidth of the
optic nerve (26). V1 then recodes this infor-
mation into a sparse representation. One in-
teresting possibility is that these cells repre-
sent the independent components of natural
scenes (20, 27). This would facilitate the
development of associations between visual
stimuli in higher visual areas and increase the
efficiency of pattern recognition (1).

Sparse coding provides a unifying frame-
work for understanding the diverse functions
claimed for the nCRF: such as contrast gain
control; the potential representation of extended
contours,
junctions or corners; and figure-
ground segmentation (28). Our studies demon-
strate how experiments with natural images can
complement those with conventional stimuli.
When used carefully, natural stimuli allow us to
test our current understanding of sensory sys-
tems and to interpret known effects in terms of
their natural function.

References and Notes

1. H. B. Barlow, in Sensory Communication, W. A. Rosen-
blith, Ed. (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1961), pp. 217–
234; Neural Comput. 1, 295 (1989); J. G. Daugman,
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 36, 107 (1989); D. J. Field, J.
Opt. Soc. Am. A 4, 2379 (1987); Neural Comput. 6,
559 (1994).

2. B. A. Olshausen and D. J. Field, Nature 381, 607

(1996); Vision Res. 23, 3311 (1997).

3. P. Foldiak and M. P. Young, in The Handbook of Brain
Theory and Neural Networks, M. A. Arbib, Ed. (MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA, 1995), pp. 895–898.

4. W. Levy and R. A. Baxter, Neural Comput. 8, 531
(1996); S. B. Laughlin, R. R. de Ruyter van Steveninck,
J. C. Anderson, Nat. Neurosci. 1, 36 (1998).

5. M. P. Young and S. Yamane, Science 256, 1327
(1992); E. T. Rolls and M. J. Tovee, J. Neurophysiol. 73,
713 (1995); R. Baddeley et al., Proc. R. Soc. London
Ser. B 264, 1775 (1997).

6. E. P. Simoncelli and O. Schwartz,

in Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems 11, M. I. Jor-
dan, M. J. Kearns, S. A. Solla, Eds. (MIT Press, Cam-
bridge, MA, 1998).

7. J. Allman, F. Miezin, E. McGuinness, Annu. Rev. Neu-

rosci. 8, 407 (1985) pp. 153–154.

8. J. L. Gallant, C. E. Connor, D. C. Van Essen, Neurore-

port 9, 2153 (1998).

9. We generated saccadic eye scan paths by using a
model of natural macaque eye movements. We ac-
quired eye movement data from a scleral search coil
during free-viewing experiments (8, 17). The model
chose random saccade directions from a uniform
distribution of angles. We chose saccade lengths
randomly from a distribution based on a b-spline ﬁt
to the measured distribution of free-viewing saccade
lengths. The eye velocity versus time proﬁle for each
saccade was obtained from a lookup table of b-spline
ﬁts to actual velocity/time proﬁles (as a function of
saccade length). We chose ﬁxation durations from a
gaussian distribution (mean, 350 ms; standard devi-
ation, 50 ms).

10. We extracted image patches from 1280 ⫻ 1024 pixel
images obtained from a high-resolution, commercial
photo-CD library (Corel Inc.). Images included nature
scenes as well as man-made objects and animals as
well as humans. To avoid aliasing artifacts that might
result from displaying movies on a monitor with

www.sciencemag.org SCIENCE VOL 287 18 FEBRUARY 2000

1275

72-Hz refresh we used an antialiasing algorithm in
which each 13.8-ms frame of a movie was construct-
ed by averaging 14 images representing the position
of the CRF at about 1-ms resolution.

11. All animal procedures were approved by the Univer-
sity of California, Berkeley, Animal Care and Use
Committee and conformed to or exceeded all rele-
vant National Institutes of Health and U.S. Depart-
ment of Agriculture standards. Single neuron record-
ings were made from two awake, behaving macaque
monkeys (Macaca mulatta) with extracellular elec-
trodes. Additional details about recording and surgi-
cal procedures are given in [C. E. Connor et al.,
J. Neurosci. 17, 3201 (1997)]. All data reported here
were taken under conditions of excellent single-unit
isolation. Eye position was monitored with a scleral
search coil and trials were aborted if the eye deviated
from ﬁxation by more than 0.35°. Movie duration
varied from 5 to 10 s. During recording sessions each
movie was divided into 5-s segments; segments were
then shown in and around the CRF on successive
trials while the animal performed a ﬁxation task for a
juice reward. Each trial consisted of a stimulus of a
single size with differently sized stimulus conditions
randomly interleaved across trials.

12. A well-established and useful description of how
sparsely a neuron responds across stimuli is given by
its activity fraction, A ⫽ ( ⌺ri/n)2/ ⌺(ri
2/n). For further
discussion see [E. T. Rolls and M. J. Tovee, J. Neuro-
physiol. 73, 713 (1995)]. Our sparseness statistic is a
convenient rescaling of A that ranges from 0% to
100%: S ⫽ (1 ⫺ A)/(1 ⫺ AMIN) ⫽ (1 ⫺ A)/(1 ⫺ 1/n).
13. Throughout this report we measured signiﬁcance
with randomization tests using 1000 random permu-
tations of the relevant data. For further discussion
see [B. F. J. Manly, Randomization and Monte-Carlo
Methods in Biology, (Chapman & Hall, New York,
1991)].
If responses are averaged within a ﬁxation, sparse-
ness declines from 41 to 23%, 52 to 34%, 61 to 42%,
and 62 to 45% for stimuli one, two, three, and four
times the size of the CRF, respectively.

14.

15. The boundaries of the CRF were estimated with bar
and grating stimuli whose characteristics were con-
trolled interactively. For 38 of 61 neurons we con-
ﬁrmed these manual estimates by reverse correlation
on responses evoked by a dynamic sequence of small
white squares distributed in and around the CRF
(square positions were chosen randomly for each
frame). Reliable CRF estimates were obtained with
150 to 300 s of data (30 to 60 behavioral ﬁxation
trials). Generally there is excellent agreement be-
tween the CRF proﬁle estimates obtained with the
two methods. Our CRF estimates ranged from about
20 to 50 min of arc, which is entirely consistent with
the range of receptive ﬁeld diameters obtained in
awake behaving macaques by other researchers; for
example, see [D. M. Snodderly and M. Gur, J. Neuro-
physiol. 74, 2100 (1995)].

16. S. J. Judge, R. H. Wurtz, B. J. Richmond, J. Neuro-
physiol. 43, 1133 (1980); B. C. Motter, J. Neuro-
physiol. 70, 909 (1993).

17. Animals viewed high-resolution natural images digi-
tized on commercial photo-CDs (Corel Corp.) and
shown at a resolution of 1280 ⫻ 1024 pixels. Images
were shown for 10 s each. Neural responses and eye
position were recorded continuously during this free
viewing (8). Natural vision movies that simulated
these speciﬁc free-viewing episodes were construct-
ed by using the eye position records to determine the
position of the recorded CRF during free viewing. In
six cells the diameter of the reconstructed movies
was four times the CRF, and in 11 cells it was three
times the CRF. These data have been combined in
this report.

18. Each free-viewing episode produced a single-spike
train evoked by a unique pattern of exploratory eye
movements. In contrast, natural vision movies were
repeated many times. To obtain comparable sparse-
ness estimates for these data, we separately analyzed
the spike train evoked by each repetition of the
natural vision movie. The average of this distribution
of sparseness values was then compared with the
single sparseness value obtained from the free-view-
ing data. To ensure matched stimulus conditions, we

R E P O R T S

made all comparisons on a movie-by-movie basis.
Note that sparseness values based on single-spike
trains are biased upward because of the discrete
nature of spike generation.

19. The random sinusoidal grating sequence was similar
to that used by D. L. Ringach, M. J. Hawken, R.
Shapley [Nature 387, 281 (1997)]. The orientation,
spatial frequency, and phase of the grating were
chosen randomly on each video frame (at 72 Hz).
Gratings were shown at a Michelson contrast of 0.5.
Before analysis, stimuli were binned into 10° orien-
tation steps and 6 to 12 spatial frequency steps.
Responses were analyzed by parametric reverse cor-
relation on orientation and spatial frequency, aver-
aging over phase. The mean responses across stimu-
lus bins (at the peak response latency) were used to
estimate the sparseness statistic.

20. A. J. Bell and T. J. Sejnowski, Vision Res. 37, 3327

(1997).

21. Several theoretical studies of sparse population cod-
ing have reported the kurtosis of the distribution of
responses observed across a set of linear ﬁlters, with
respect to a particular stimulus ensemble (2, 20). This
measure is not directly applicable to our data be-
cause the responses of area V1 neurons are asym-
metric: cells typically exhibit low spontaneous rates
and appropriate stimuli elevate these rates. To esti-
mate kurtosis we converted each response distribu-
tion to a symmetric distribution by reﬂecting the
data about the origin. The resulting symmetric dis-
tributions are unimodal with zero mean and decrease
smoothly to zero. Our kurtosis statistic is well be-
haved and directly comparable to the results of the-
oretical studies.

22. Let P1 and P2 be the PSTH response vectors for a pair
of neurons. Then cos(␪) ⫽ P1P2/㛳P1㛳 ⫻ 㛳P2㛳, where
㛳Pn㛳 is the norm of the appropriate vector. This
measure is sensitive to changes across the basis
dimensions of the movie time stream and is insensi-
tive to differences in absolute rate.
It is difﬁcult to choose a scalar measure of response
similarity appropriate for all situations; see [P. Di
Lorenzo, J. Neurophysiol. 62, 823 (1989)]. To validate

23.

our results we performed two alternative versions of
the population decorrelation analysis. For each neu-
ron pair we also computed both the linear correlation
coefﬁcient and the neural discrimination index of Di
Lorenzo.
In both cases, nCRF stimulation leads to
signiﬁcant decorrelation (P ⱕ 0.001). To ensure that
the slightly different stimulus sizes do not inﬂuence
our results, we also performed all similarity analyses
on a data set restricted to neuron pairs with identical
CRF sizes (and thus identical stimulation). Under
these conditions the decorrelating effect of the nCRF
remains signiﬁcant (P ⱕ 0.001).

24. The compound grating stimulus consisted of a CRF
conditioning grating and a probe grating. We set the
conditioning grating’s orientation and spatial fre-
quency to the neuron’s preferred values [as deter-
mined by reverse correlation on responses to a dy-
namic grating sequence (19) presented in the CRF].
The phase of the conditioning grating varied random-
ly with each video frame. Both gratings were present-
ed at a Michelson contrast of 0.5 and their edges
were blended into one another and into the back-
ground. We performed reverse correlation on the
position of the probe grating within the nCRF annulus
(collapsing over all other parameters). To measure
baseline responses we presented interleaved trials
containing only the conditioning grating.

25. G. A. Walker et al., J. Neurosci. 19, 10536 (1999).
26. Y. Dan, J. J. Atick, R. C. Reid, J. Neurosci. 16, 3351

(1996).

27. M. S. Lewicki and B. A. Olshausen, in Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems 10, M. I. Jor-
dan, M. J. Kearns, S. A. Solla, Eds. (MIT Press, Cam-
bridge, MA, 1997) pp. 815–821.

28. D. J. Heeger, Visual Neurosci. 9, 181 (1992); C. D.
Gilbert, Neuron 9, 1 (1992); A. M. Sillito et al., Nature
378, 492 (1995); C. D. Gilbert et al., Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 93, 615 (1996); M. Carandini et al., J. Neu-
rosci. 17, 8621 (1997); J. J. Knierim and D. C. Van
Essen, J. Neurophysiol. 67, 961 (1992).

20 August 1999; accepted 27 December 1999

Mitochondrial FtsZ in a

Chromophyte Alga

Peter L. Beech,1,3* Thao Nheu,3†

Thomas Schultz,3‡ Shane Herbert,1 Trevor Lithgow,4

Paul R. Gilson,2,3 Geoffrey I. McFadden2,3

A homolog of the bacterial cell division gene ftsZ was isolated from the alga
Mallomonas splendens. The nuclear-encoded protein (MsFtsZ-mt) was closely
related to FtsZs of the ␣-proteobacteria, possessed a mitochondrial targeting
signal, and localized in a pattern consistent with a role in mitochondrial division.
Although FtsZs are known to act in the division of chloroplasts, MsFtsZ-mt
appears to be a mitochondrial FtsZ and may represent a mitochondrial division
protein.

Mitochondria are ubiquitous organelles that
form networks, reticulae, or punctate struc-
tures in eukaryotic cells. Mitochondria in
many cells appear to constitutively fuse with
one another and divide (1), but we know little
about the proteins involved in these process-
es, particularly mitochondrial division. Eu-
karyotes depend on mitochondria for respira-
tion and adenosine triphosphate synthesis and
rely on them to divide before daughter mito-
chondria can be apportioned to each new cell
generation. In chloroplasts, homologs of the
bacterial cell division protein FtsZ are essen-

tial components of the organellar division
machinery (2). FtsZ is found in nearly all
prokaryotes, is structurally related to tubulin,
and accumulates at the furrow between divid-
ing cells, playing a critical role in cell divi-
sion (3). No potential mitochondrial FtsZ has
been identified in the complete genomes of
Caenorhabditis elegans or Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. However, because both mitochon-
dria and chloroplasts arose from endosymbi-
otic bacteria, we anticipated that early in
evolution, mitochondrial division might also
have been regulated by FtsZ. Here we de-

1276

18 FEBRUARY 2000 VOL 287 SCIENCE www.sciencemag.org

