Making success work for 
the poor:  Package tourism 
in Northern Tanzania

Jonathan Mitchell, Jodie Keane and Jenny Laidlaw 

16 January, 2009

Final report

For more information, please contact:
SNV Office Arusha, Sekei Area, P.O. Box 13304, 
Arusha, Tanzania
Tel:  
 

  +255 27 250 8155
  +255 27 250 4709 

Contact:   Ms. Birgit Steck, SNV Tourism Adviser
Email: 
Cell:  

  snv@birgit-steck.de 
  +255 753 008 588

Contact:   Mr. Elibariki Mtui 
Email: 
Cell:  

  emtui@snvworld.org
  +255 754 888 346

Key Findings

•	 Tanzania’s	 strategy	 of	 maintaining	 a	 high-value	 tourist	 product	 and	 attracting	 large	 numbers	 of	 foreign	
tourists is clearly working - with the delivery of significant benefits to Tanzania as a whole and poor people  
living near tourist destinations

•	 Tanzania	is	capturing	about	half	of	the	total	value	of	the	global	value	chain	for	Mount	Kilimanjaro	climbing	
and Northern Safari Circuit package holidays sold in Europe – a reasonable proportion given the cost of 
long-haul flights

•	

International	package	tourists	climbing	Mount	Kilimanjaro	and	visiting	the	Northern	Safari	Circuit	deliver	
significant benefits to the poor. Approximately 28% and 18% of in-country tourist spending respectively 
is reaching poor people at the destination. International comparisons suggest that poor Tanzanians are 
capturing a relatively large share of tourist spending

•	 There	are	a	series	of	simple	and	practical	steps	that	could	be	taken	to	increase	the	pro-poor	benefits	of	
Mount	Kilimanjaro	climbing	and	Northern	Safari	Circuit	package	holidays.	These	findings	were	validated	
during a consultation process with stakeholders which is summarised at the end of this document

•	 At	Mount	Kilimanjaro,	the	key	is	in	ensuring	that	climbing	staff	gain	a	reasonable	share	of	the	value	they	
are creating, principally by strengthening the Porters & Guides Association.  Supporting the Tanzanian 
National Parks Authority to spend its community development fund effectively and encouraging multi-
stakeholder dialogue would also increase benefit flows to the poor

•	

In	the	Northern	Safari	Circuit	there	is	room	for	improving	the	effectiveness	of	the	flow	of	benefits	to	
the poor from park fees that are ear-marked for community and household development – particularly 
in the Ngorongoro area. Also better linking poor local producers into the hotel food supply chain and 
improving the quality of hospitality training will enhance the transfer of resources from international 
tourists to the poor 

A success story

Tourism in Tanzania is a success. In one of the poorest countries in the world, a tourist destination has been 
created that is both growing and maintaining a high quality product. Combining increasing visitor numbers, 
high  spending  tourists  and  a  respectable  length  of  stay  is  a  real  achievement  (and  one  that  has  eluded 
several more affluent African countries with much larger tourism sectors). 

Figure 1:   

International tourism in Tanzania 1990–2007

Foreign exchange 
earning

Tourist numbers

1,000

900

800

700

600

500

400

300

200

100

0

0
9
9
1

1
9
9
1

2
9
9
1

3
9
9
1

4
9
9
1

5
9
9
1

6
9
9
1

7
9
9
1

8
9
9
1

9
9
9
1

0
0
0
2

1
0
0
2

2
0
0
2

3
0
0
2

4
0
0
2

5
0
0
2

6
0
0
2

7
0
0
2

Year

s
r
e
b
m
u
n
 
t
s
i
r
u
o
T

1,000,000

900,000

800,000

700,000

600,000

500,000

400,000

300,000

200,000

100,000

0

2

i

g
n
n
r
a
e
e
g
n
a
h
c
x
e
n
g
i
e
r
o
F

 

 

)
n
o

i
l
l
i

 

m
$
S
U
(
 

As  a  result,  tourism  is  very  important 
to the Tanzanian economy. In 2007, the 
tourism  sector  directly  and  indirectly 
contributed  US$1.6billion  –  or  almost 
11%  of  the  entire  Tanzanian  economy. 
This  equates  to  US$43  for  every  man, 
woman and child in the country.

foreigners. 

International 

Perhaps  even  more  striking 
is  the 
effect  of  tourism  on  Tanzanian  exports 
because most tourist spending is made 
by 
tourists 
spending  money  in  Tanzania  are  an 
‘export’ because they bring money into 
the  country  from  overseas.  In  2008 
it  is  estimated  that  foreign  tourists 
contributed  US$1.1billion  of 
foreign 
exchange – nearly 33% of all the goods 
and services sold by Tanzania abroad.

What does this tourism success mean for the poor?

This  question  is  important  because,  despite  impressive  recent  economic  performance,  Tanzania 
remains a very poor country. The gross national income per head is US$300, which places Tanzania 
183rd in the world ranking. At birth, the average Tanzanian can expect to live for 46 years, and 44% of 
children under the age of 5 are stunted through malnutrition. This is why it is so urgent for Tanzania to 
find ways to grow the economy that benefits all of its population.

The Government of Tanzania has recognised the potential of tourism to contribute to the growth of the 
economy and reduce poverty. This question is whether this potential is being realised?. Government 
documents have warned that tourism growth is having 
little effect on poverty reduction, other than increasing 
government revenue. This downbeat assessment has 
been supported by a number of recent analyses into 
the  links  between  tourist  spending  and  the  local 
economy.

•	 This	summary	report	is	concerned	with	how	tourism	does	(and	could)	
benefit  Tanzanians.  It  focuses  on  the  tourist  spending  that  reaches 
Tanzania,  rather  than  becoming  side-tracked  by  the  volume  of  funds 
that are absorbed by foreign tour operators and airlines. This is mainly 
for the pragmatic reason that there is little that Tanzanians can do about 
the distribution of money that never reaches the Country;

for  several  years  with 

SNV1  has  worked 
the 
Government, through the Tanzanian Tourist Board and 
the Tourist Division to develop policies and practices 
that  enable  tourism  to  significantly  contribute  to 
poverty  alleviation. Through  this  report, SNV  hopes 
to inform the discussion on the impact of tourism on 
the poor and enhance pro-active decision-making to 
implement pro-poor tourism within Tanzania.

SNV  commissioned  ODI2  to  assess  whether,  and 
how  much,  international  tourism  is  benefiting  the 
poor in Tanzania. Two of Tanzania’s premier tourism 
attractions	 –	 Mount	 Kilimanjaro	 and	 the	 Northern	
Safari Circuit – are targeted in this study.

•	 Our	approach	is	driven	by	economics	and	identifying	tangible	flows	of	
benefits (and costs). This is driven by our focus on the material well-
being of Tanzanians; and

•	 Our	approach	is	based	upon	action	research.	It	does	not	describe	the	
winners  and  losers  from  tourist  activity  as  an  interesting  academic 
debate, but rather aims to change this reality in favour of Tanzania’s poor. 
Sufficient data were collected to understand how the Tanzanian tourism 
economy  operates,  to  form  a  robust  empirical  basis  for  progressive 
recommendations.  The  primary  data  upon  which  this  report  is  based 
was collected during a 14 day mission to Tanzania in May 2008. 

The practical approach applied to determining who benefits from tourism at the destination by, literally, 
tracing	the	tourism	dollar.	For	package	holiday	tourists,	such	as	those	climbing	Mount	Kilimanjaro	or	
going on safari in the Northern Safari Circuit, this involves gathering information from a wide range of 
service providers (including in-bound tour operators, hotel staff, guides, market stall owners, transport 
companies and crafters, etc), tourists, policy-makers and other stakeholders. The aim of the approach 
is to map the tourism economy, its revenue streams, and beneficiaries at the destination – and then 
identify the changes that are possible which will benefit the poor without damanging the financial 
viablity of the tourist sector.

Mount Kilimanjaro climbing value chain

Mount	Kilimanjaro	is	the	highest	peak	in	Africa	and	is	located	inside	Kilimanjaro	National	Park.	There	
are six routes to climb the Mountain. Climbers generally camp on the Mountain, although on one route 
it is possible to stay in huts every night.

Although	Kilimanjaro	National	Park	is	not	the	most	visited	of	Tanzania’s	National	Parks,	visitors	stay	
in it for longer than those visiting the more popular National Parks of the Northern Safari Circuit. This 
results in its position as the highest earning of all Tanzania’s National Parks.

1	 SNV	–	The	Nether	lands	Development	Organisation	is	dedicated	to	a	society	in	which	all	people	enjoy	the	freedom	to	pursue	their	
own sustainable development. SNV contributes to this by strenghtening the capacity of local organisations. By providing advisory 
services, SNV directs activities at improving access to basic services and increasing income, production and the employment of 
poor people. SNV strongly believes in creating synergy with other development organisations and actively engages in partnerships 
that can accelerate impact and create sustainability.

2   ODI is Britain’s leading independent ‘think tank’ on international development and humanitarian issues. ODI’s mission is to inspire 
and inform policy and practice which lead to the reduction of poverty, the alleviation of suffering and the achievement of sustainable 
livelihoods in developing countries.

3

Visitor	numbers	are	increasing	rapidly.	In	2006/07	the	Kilimanjaro	National	Park	had	just	over	40,000	visitors,	
of which almost 39,000 were non-residents. We estimate that approximately 35,000 tourists attempt to climb 
the	Mount	Kilimanjaro	each	year	–	the	others	being	day-visitors	to	the	Park.		This	estimate	may	be	dated,	
others have estimated 40,000 climbers per year in 2007/08.

Tracing the tourist dollar on Mount Kilimanjaro

Mount Kilimanjaro 
tour operators market
There  are  many  tour  operators  in 
Tanzania	 offering	 Mount	 Kilimanjaro	
climbing  packages.  There  are  half  a 
dozen long-established operators that 
each  sell  about  3,000  packages  per 
year, and the other half of the market 
comprises  of  packages  that  are  sold 
by smaller, niche and less-established 
operators. There is a steady increase 
in  the  number  of  packages  sold  by 
emerging  tour  operators  –  often 
established by former tourist guides. 
Emerging  operators 
typically  sell 
about 300 climbing packages a year.

To  climb  the  Mountain,  tourists  must  use  a  TANAPA  registered  guide.  Almost  all 
climbers  book  their  climb  as  a  package,  which  means  that  a  local  tour  operator 
organises  the  climbing  staff  (guides,  porters  and  cooks),  park  fees,  food  and 
equipment. Some tourists buy their package directly from a Tanzania in-bound tour 
operator, but most book their climb with a tour operator in their home country and 
the international tour operator then sub-contracts a local operator.

A typical climb package is sold by local tour operators for an average of US$1,205 for 
a seven day tour itinerary. This is an all-inclusive arrangement and includes five days 
on the mountain with a night in a hotel before and after the climb (normally in the 
neighbouring towns of Moshi or Arusha). In addition to this package cost, interviews 
with tourists revealed an average of US$171 of out-of-pocket or discretionary spending 
is made during the climb – a total in-country spend of US$1,376 per tourist.

Figure  2  illustrates  the  breakdown  of  total  (package  and  discretionary)  climber 
expenditure, based on information obtained from tour operators, accommodation 
provider and tourist surveys.

Figure 2:   

Cost  components  of  a  typical  Mountain-
climbing holiday (US$1,376 in-country)

4%

3%

6%

6%

18%

16%

4

47%

Park fees

Tour operator margins

Wages & Tips

Accommodation

Food & Beverages

Transport

Cultural goods & services

The largest single item of tourist expenditure 
is National Park fees at 47% of the total cost. 
Each  climber  pays  an  average  of  US$649  in 
National Park fees as part of their tour operator 
package.

The  second  largest  item  of  expenditure  is 
payments  for  climbing  staff,  which  amounts 
18% of total spending when wages from tour 
operators and tips from tourists are combined. 
Mount	 Kilimanjaro	 climbing	 staff	 receive	 an	
average annual income (including both wages 
and tips) of US$1,830 for guides, US$842 for 
porters, and US$771 for cooks.

Porters  wages  vary  significantly  between 
different  tour  operators  and  routes.    Using 
a	 large	 sample	 in	 2007/08,	 the	 Kilimanjaro	
Porters	 Assistance	 Project	
found	 very	
widespread  abuses  of  porters  working 
conditions  and  day  rates  that  vary  from 
US$3.50 to $10.60 per day.

There are two reasons that climbing staff capture such a large share of 
the	benefits	from	tourism	on	Mount	Kilimanjaro.	Tips	from	tourists	to	
climbing staff are a very important supplement to the wages received 
from the tour operator. Tips typically boost climbing staff wages by over 
50%.	 Also,	 climbing	 Mount	 Kilimanjaro	 is	 extremely	 labour-intensive,	
with  a  typical  group  of  ten  climbers  supported  by  two  guides,  forty 
porters and two cooks. We estimate that 35,000 tourists each spending 
a week on the Mountain generate, albeit irregular and highly seasonal, 
jobs	for	about	400	guides,	10,000	porters	and	500	cooks.

Kilimanjaro National Park fees
Kilimanjaro	 National	 Park	 fees	 include	 a	 US$60	
daily entrance fee, a US$40 daily camping fee (or 
US$50 daily hut accommodation fee if ascending 
the Marangu route) and a US$20 rescue fee.

Table 1:  

Average  Mount  Kilimanjaro  climbing  staff  pay  (wages  plus 
tips)

The  third  largest  item  of 
climber  expenditure  is  the 
estimated  US$223  margin 
made by local tour operators 
on  each  package  sold  – 
calculated  as  16%  of  the 
package price.

Staff 

Guide

Daily wage 

(US$)

10.00

Daily tip 
(US$)

5.38

Pay / trip 

(US$)

Trips / year

Staff annual 
income (US$)

108

17

most 

Porter

tourist 
Unlike 
destinations, 
hotel 
accommodation  is  a  minor 
element  of 
the  Mount 
Kilimanjaro	 climbing	 value	
chain. This is because climbers typically spend only two nights in hotels – the night before their climb starts 
and the night after their climb ends. Interviews with tour operators (some of whom run hotels) and hotel 
surveys indicate that accommodation costs an average of US$84 for each climber.

14

14

60

55

5.00

5.00

3.59

2.87

Cook

The average expenditure on food and beverages is US$80 per climber (most tour operator packages are 
priced on the basis that US$10 per climber will be spent per day).  

US$58 per climber per trip is spent on average on cultural goods and services, including US$24 on souvenirs, 
other shopping and donations.

Local transport costs, including airport transfers and the trip to and from the hotel to the Park gate are an 
average of US$40 per climber.

Pro-poor impact of Mount Kilimanjaro

Extrapolating	the	average	Mount	Kilimanjaro	climber	expenditure	to	the	estimated	35,000	annual	climbers,	
the	result	is	a	total	in-country	tourist	expenditure	of	just	under	US$50million	per	year.	This	is	a	significant	
economic input in a rural context.

Of this total, 28%, or over US$13million, is considered pro-poor expenditure, this is the most successful 
transfer of resources from international tourists to poor people living around the destination that we have 
seen in Africa or Asia. The basis for this estimate of pro-poor expenditure is as follows:
•	

We consider all the wages and tips received by climbing staff to be 100% pro-poor. All guides and porters 
interviewed were from poor backgrounds. Even though climbing staff wages are high relative to other 
unskilled  employment  in  rural  Tanzania,  they  are  unlikely  to  raise  an  average  household  above  the 
international poverty line of US$2 per person per day without being supplemented by other sources of 
income;
90% of food and beverage expenditure is considered to be both pro-poor and locally-sourced. Surveys 
suggest	that	almost	all	food	consumed	on	Mount	Kilimanjaro	is	sourced	from	the	local	market	in	Moshi,	
and the suppliers to this market are overwhelmingly local small-holder farmers;
50% of expenditure on cultural goods and services is considered to be pro-poor. Interviews with craft 
shop  retail  outlets  suggest  that  poor  producers  are  receive  approximately  50%  of  the  retail  price  –  a 
typical retail mark-up for the craft sector;
16% of accommodation costs are paid in non-managerial wages and are therefore considered pro-poor;
We estimate that 5% of National Park fees expenditure is pro-poor. Although TANAPA staff are well-paid, 
the Authority employs local casual labour for cleaning operations and significant funds are also distributed 

•	

•	

•	
•	

1,830 

842 

771 

5

Figure 3:   Mount Kilimanjaro climber expenditure

Transport

Cultural goods & services

Food & beverage
Accommodation

Tour operator margins

Wages & tips

Park fees
Total expenditure

Non Pro-poor expenditure

Pro-poor expenditure

the  Authority’s  Support 
through 
for	 Community	
Initiated	 Projects	
(SCIP)  programme  (amounting  to 
$1.4million  in  2006).  This  pro-poor 
percentage  may  be  higher,  and  we 
would  welcome  input  from  TANAPA 
to allow us to revise our calculations; 
and
Expenditure on tour operator 
•	
margins  and  local  transport  is  not 
considered pro-poor.

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

0

5

10

15

US$ million

The main direct beneficiaries of the 
Mount	 Kilimanjaro	 climbing	 value	
chain are climbing staff, who receive 
62% of pro-poor expenditure, as well as non-managerial accommodation staff. Indirect beneficiaries of the 
Mount	Kilimanjaro	climbing	value	chain	include	those	who	benefit	from	TANAPA’s	Support	for	Community	
Initiated	Projects	programme	and	those	providing	food	and	beverages	and	cultural	goods	and	services	to	
the climbers.

Boosting the pro-poor impact of Mount Kilimanjaro

This analysis provides a clear basis to assist policy-makers, tourism stakeholders, development partners and 
the public to focus on changes to the value chain that are most likely to benefit the poor. For instance, whilst 
transport and tour operators margins have very limited pro-poor impact, this is unlikely to change because of 
the inherent characteristics of the activities. These operations are vital to the functioning of the value chain 
but are not a rich source of latent pro-poor impact.

Accommodation is also not a rich source of pro-poor impact, beyond the wages 
paid to non-managerial hotel staff. The 16% of accommodation turnover which is 
accruing to the poor is relatively high by international standards – so the scope for 
increase is likely to be limited.

Cultural goods and service sales are relatively pro-poor and retail margins of 50% 
are very typical – so there are only two ways to increase the pro-poor impact. 

One  is  to  increase  the  share  of  the  poor  from  each  US$  sale  by,  for  example, 
seeking a direct linkage between craft producers and tourists. Under this scenario, 
craft  producers  assume  the  additional  role  of  retailers  and  capture  this  retail 
margin	for	themselves.	In	the	context	of	the	Mount	Kilimanjaro	tourism	product,	
where tourists spend most of their time up the Mountain and two nights resting in 
a hotel, the prospects for bringing producers and tourists together are limited. 

More promising might be a different kind of initiative to increase the volume of 
craft sales through improving hotel and airport craft outlets. The rationale for this 
is	that	craft	spending	amongst	Mount	Kilimanjaro	climbers	is	currently	low	and	the	
current provision has room for improvement.

Park  fees  are  already  a  means  of  transferring  resources  from  tourists  to  poor 
communities	 through	 the	 TANAPA	 Community	
Initiative	 Support	 Projects	
programme. There is potential for development specialists to work with TANAPA 
to ensure that the development impact of these community funds is maximised. 
There	is	also	a	more	subtle	pro-poor	impact	through	the	cross-subsidy	that	Kilimanjaro,	as	a	financial	viable	
National Park, is providing for other protected areas which are not able to recover their operating costs through 
entrance revenue. Through this internal cross-subsidy TANAPA ensures that all protected areas under TANAPA 
are maintained. The key pro-poor issue relating to Park fees is the need to ensure that the funds ear-marked 
for	community	 projects	 are	spent	 effectively.	This	 is	 an	area	where	there	is	 potential	 for	TANAPA	to	work	
with other stakeholders in development to complement each other’s skill sets and ensure the development 
impact of these community funds are maximised.

6

Almost	all	the	food	and	beverages	consumed	by	tourists	in	hotels	and	on	Mount	Kilimanjaro	are	sourced	from	
small-holder	farmers	in	the	Kilimanjaro	area.	The	scope	to	increase	this	already	excellent	pro-poor	result	is	
therefore limited.

Finally, payments made to climbing staff as wages and tips account for over 60% of pro-poor benefits from 
the	 Mount	 Kilimanjaro	 climbing	 value	 chain	 and	 so	 should	 be	 the	 focus	 of	 attention.	 In	 May	 2008,	 the	
Tanzanian Government announced a significant increase in the daily minimum wage for guides, porters and 
cooks to US$20, US$10 and US$15 respectively – roughly double the existing average wage. Tour operators 
raise  concerns  about  the  change  being  introduced  without  consultation  or  a  planned  lead-in  period,  the 
result of which being that tour operators were unable to pass on their additional costs (about US$130 per 
tourist) for already contracted packages – reducing their margins by approximately 60%. This event clearly 
signals the need to Government, tour operators, climbing staff, hoteliers, development interests and other 
stakeholders	to	recognise	their	shared	interests	in	the	viability	of	tourism	at	Mount	Kilimanjaro.	Initiating	
participatory stakeholder processes in tourist destinations often requires skilful outside facilitation from an 
external agency who is able to act as a ‘honest broker’.

From a pro-poor perspective, the minimum wage initiative should be welcomed. If all other elements of the 
climbing package are unchanged, this 10% increase in average package cost would raise the pro-poor share 
of destination tourist expenditure from the current 28% to approximately 35%. However, there are ways that 
this progressive initiative could be undermined that need attention:
•	

Tour  operators  generally  pay  wages  for  the  whole  climbing  team  to  the  head  guide  for  distribution 
amongst the team the guide recruits. Not infrequently, guides will take kick-backs on wages that should 
be handed to their porters and cooks. Some tour operators have ended this practice by requiring that 
wages and tips are distributed at their offices at the end of each trip –  ‘best practice’ that should be 
extended across all service providers;
Porters cite experiences where some tour operators and guides overload porters at the Park gates at 
the	start	of	climbs	–	where	loads	are	subject	to	a	25kg	maximum	–	in	return	for	a	share	in	the	wages	
saved. The recent increase in the minimum wages and the new directives from the MNRT may sharpen 
the financial incentive for this kind of malpractice;
Minimum wages may be ignored by employers in a rural area where US$2 a day for seasonal agricultural 
labour is the norm. While undertaking hotel surveys it became clear that minimum wage legislation in 
the accommodation sector, enacted before the proposals for climbing staff were announced, is not 
widely implemented; and
Porters claim that some tour operators withhold wages from climbing staff.

•	

•	

•	

With a relatively weak regulatory framework, the best-intentioned Government initiatives can be undermined 
by	actors	in	the	tourism	value	chain	who	have	more	economic	power	than	the	porters	(i.e.	just	about	everyone).	
The key issue to address is the lack of economic power of the porters. One of most effective ways to begin 
to tip the power imbalance is for representative bodies such as the Porters and Guides Associations to be 
strengthened so that they – not bodies acting on their behalf – can begin to address abuses against their 
membership. Engaging with and empowering these Associations may be the most important action point to 
increase	the	pro-poor	impacts	of	mountain-climbing	at	Kilimanjaro.

Northern Safari Circuit value chain

The Northern Safari Circuit, stretching from Arusha to the Serengeti National 
Park in Northern Tanzania, is one of the most valuable strips of tourism real 
estate in Africa. It accounts for more than half of Tanzania’s total foreign 
earnings  from  tourism  and  in  addition  is  one  of  the  few  destinations  in 
Sub-Saharan Africa, outside of South Africa, which operates at a scale to 
attract mainstream international tour operators.

In 2006/07 almost 700,000 people visited the National Parks in Tanzania, 
and  of  these,  415,000  were  non-residents.  Although  National  Parks  are 
located throughout Tanzania, there is a clustering of tourist flows along the 
Northern Safari Circuit. We estimate that about 300,000 foreign tourists 
travel on safari packages in this part of Tanzania each year.

7

Figure 4:  

Northern  Safari  Circuit  routes  and  ratio 
of visitor numbers

Nairobi

Serengeti

Ngorongoro

Lake 

Manyara

Arusha

Tarangire

The Northern Safari Circuit comprises Serengeti, 
Lake  Manyara  and  Tarangire  National  Parks 
and  the  Ngorongoro  Conservation  Area  (which 
contains  the  Ngorongoro  Crater).  There  are 
several  entry  points  to  the  circuit,  the  most 
common	being	Arusha	and	Nairobi,	Kenya.

Ngorongoro Crater is managed by the Ngorongoro 
Conservation Authority (NCA) and is independent 
of TANAPA. Unlike the National Parks, where the 
colonial  administration  relocated  all  residents, 
the  Conservation  Authority  was  established  as 
a  unique  experiment  which  aimed  to  cater  for 
wildlife conservation needs and humans on the 
same land.

The Ngorongoro Crater received around 360,000 
visitors in 2007, 70% of whom were non-residents. 
Given rapid recent growth, it is likely that visitor 
numbers to the Ngorongoro crater for 2008 will be 
at least 400,000, with an estimated 300,000 non-
resident  visitors.  About  80%  of  all  non-resident 
visitors to National Parks are on a safari package, 
suggesting around 300,000 international tourist 
on Northern Circuit Safari packages in 2008.

It  is  a  challenge  to  survey  a  tourist  destination  which  is  300km  long  and  involves  300,000  international 
tourists, visiting multiple combinations of three National Parks, one Conservation Area and a multitude of 
hotels, lodges and tented camps. This is why we sampled tourist activity at two points along the circuit (Lake 
Manyara and Ngorongoro) and at Arusha – the point of origin for most Northern Safari Circuit packages.

Tracing the tourist dollar on the Northern Safari Circuit 

Tour operator surveys revealed a remarkable variety of safari tours involving different durations, locations, 
accommodation, degrees of exclusivity and price tag. Amidst this almost infinite variety is a fairly standard 
safari package lasting six days and five nights. The average price charged by a local tour operator for this 
standard	safari	is	US$1,600.	As	with	climbing	packages	at	Kilimanjaro,	some	local	tour	operators	retail	some	
safari  packages  directly  to  international 
tourists, however, wholesaling packages to 
international  tour  operators  in  the  source 
markets is a much more common distribution 
channel.  The  average  discretionary  spend 
per tourist is US$226.

Cost  components  of  a  typical  safari  holiday 
(US$1,826 in-country spend)

1%

37%

Accommodation

Park fees

Tour operator margins

Transport

Wages

Cultural goods & services

Food & beverages

19%

Based on the information obtained from the 
tour  operator,  accommodation  and  tourist 
surveys, Figure 5 traces the tourism dollar 
for the Northern safari circuit.

the	

Unlike	 Kilimanjaro,	
largest	 cost	
component  of  the  Northern  Circuit  safari 
tourists  is  accommodation  –  averaging 
US$141  per  tourist  per  night.  This  reflects 
the  high  level  of  demand  for  bed  space, 
particularly around the Ngorongoro Crater, 
which featured in all safari packages. 

Park  fees  are  the  second  highest  cost  to 
tourists.  Results  suggest  that  each  safari 

Figure 5:   

7%

9%

13%

14%

8

tourist package includes an average of US$345 in 
fees per safari.

The  third  largest  cost  to  tourists  on  the  typical 
Northern  Safari  package  price  is  represented  by 
tour operator margins. At 14% of the typical safari 
tourist  expenditure,  this  margin  is  very  similar  to 
that	 observed	 in	 Kilimanjaro.	This	 result	 suggests	
that,  even  though  there  are  some  very  large 
local  tour  operators  serving  the  safari  market, 
the  market  appears  to  be  competitive.  There  are 
several  established  and  sizeable  tour  operators 
based in Arusha, which own several hundred safari 
vehicles and employ several hundred support staff, 
including driver guides and mechanics. Two of the 
safari tour operators surveyed account for 10% of 
the total Northern Safari Circuit market.  

Transport  costs  are  a  significant  element  of  the 
Northern Safari Circuit value chain – as one would 
expect given the mileage undertaken by specialist 
4x4  safari  vehicles.  The  labour  intensity  of  the 
Northern Safari Circuit value chain is low compared 
with	Mount	Kilimanjaro	climbing	value	chain.	

Table 2:  

Northern Safari Circuit National Park fees

Fee per 24 hours
Serengeti entrance fee (over 16 years old)
Lake Manyara/Tarangire entrance fee (over 16 years old)
Vehicle permit (up to 2,000kg)
Camping permit (public campsite)
Camping permit (special campsite)
Camping permit (premium campsite)

Table 3:  

Ngorongoro Conservation Area fees

Fee per 24 hours
Entrance fee (over 16 years old)
Vehicle permit (up to 2,000kg)
Crater service fee (per vehicle)
Camping permit (public campsite)
Camping permit (special campsite)

US$
50
35
40
30
50
100

US$
50
40
200
30
50

Tourist discretionary expenditure on crafts and other cultural goods and services is very much higher than for 
mountain-climbing tourists at US$134 per tourist. 

Three safari tour operators surveyed purchased tourism services from the Cultural Tourism Program (CTP), 
either in Arusha or Mto-wa-Mbu. These usually include a guided tour through the community  and lunch 
hosted by a community member.

Pro-poor impact of the Northern Safari Circuit 

Figure 6:  

Northern Safari Circuit tourist expenditure (extrapolated upwards 
for 300,000 tourists)

the 

Extrapolating 
the 
cost 
elements 
of 
individual 
tourist  safari  to  the 
estimated  300,000 
annual 
Northern 
Safari Circuit tourists, 
the  result  is  a  total 
in-country 
tourist 
expenditure	 of	 just	
under US$550million 
per year.

Food & beverage

Cultural goods & services

Wages & tips

Transport

Tour operator margins

Park fees

Accommodation

Total expenditure

0

50

100

150

Non Pro-poor expenditure

Pro-poor expenditure

300

350

400

450

500

550

200

250
US$ million

We estimate that 18% 
of  total  safari  tourist 
expenditure	is	pro-poor	expenditure,	which	amounts	to	just	over	US$100million	per	year.	The	basis	for	the	
estimates of pro-poor expenditure is as follows: 
•	
•	

We estimate that 12% of all tourist expenditure on hotels and accommodation is pro-poor;
We estimate 5% of park fees revenue to be pro-poor. This is  based on the estimate of US$1.2m disbursed by 
the Ngorongoro Crater Conservation Authority to the Pastoral Council (representing the local communities 
living	within	the	protected	area)	each	year	and	the	US$1.4m	disbursed	by	TANAPA	on	community	projects	
2006/7; 
All tourist expenditure on wages and tips for the driver guides is considered pro-poor expenditure;
At least half of all expenditure on cultural goods and services (including the CTP), and food and beverages, 
is considered pro-poor;

•	
•	

9

•	

Expenditure absorbed by  tour operator margins and transport costs is not considered pro-poor.

The Cultural Tourism Programme has been highly successful, attracting around 30,000 tourists a year to the 
total 25 enterprises and generating up to US$0.5million for poor communities. However, this achievement is 
dwarfed by the pro-poor benefit flows from Northern Safari Circuit tourists.

The  direct  beneficiaries  of  the  Northern  Safari  value  chain  are  driver  guides  and  non-managerial 
accommodation staff. Indirect beneficiaries include those supplying local hotels and restaurants with local 
produce (food) as well as those providing cultural goods and services.

 Boosting the pro-poor impacts of the Northern Safari Circuit

As with mountain-climbing tourism, this analysis suggests that there are areas which are unlikely to be a good 
source of additional pro-poor impact. Transport services and tour operators are critical parts of the tourism 
value chain but are not, in themselves, inherently pro-poor. The same conclusion is true for the wages and 
tips paid to driver guides – but for the opposite reason. Payments to driver guides are already 100% pro-poor. 
Unlike	the	Kilimanjaro	climbing	teams,	driver	guides	are	relatively	well-paid	with	monthly	gross	wages	in	the	
region of US$167 to US$333 – so the need to increase their level of remuneration is much less critical.

A  pro-poor  strategy  for  the  Northern Safari  Circuit value  chain  should  focus  on  park  fees,  food  supplies, 

cultural goods and services and accommodation.

In addition to the TANAPA SCIP programme, the NCA is transferring 
very significant resources from tourists to the 62,000 Maasai living 
in the Ngorongoro Conservation Area. The bulk of this transfer is a 
reallocation of the Park fees, but there is also income generated 
for the community from tourists visiting cultural sites and watching 
local  dance  troupes  at  hotels.  It  is  particularly  important  that 
this  redistribution  mechanism  works  effectively  because  of  the 
scale  of  resources  involved  (reliable  estimates  suggest  NCA  is 
redistributing US$1.2million of fee income alone each year to the 
Pastoral  Council  for  the  benefit  of  the  Maasai)  and  the  obvious 
need of the local beneficiary community, and this is an area where 
the NCA may benefit from the support of a dedicated development 
organisation.

Unlike	Mount	Kilimanjaro,	where	almost	all	food	is	sourced	locally,	
only about half the food eaten by tourists on the Northern Safari Circuit is supplied by local small-holders – 
the remainder is purchased from wholesalers in Arusha or Dar es Salaam. These wholesalers distribute some 
food stuffs which are imported and for which there are local alternatives. This represents a clear welfare loss 
to the Tanzanian economy. Discussions with hoteliers and wholesalers suggest that small-scale producers 
are being bypassed due to issues such as quality, reliability dependability of agricultural supplies. However, 
hotels demonstrate a diversity of procurement practice and some top-end establishments successfully buy 
almost all their food from the local area. This suggests real potential for a linkage study to strengthen the 
supply chain between the agriculture and tourist sectors.

Our analysis suggests that there are at least 3,500 small crafts and souvenirs stalls meeting tourist demand 
on the Northern Safari Circuit. These stalls generate a livelihood for around 28,000 workers (7000 retailers 
and around 21,000 crafters) – considerably more than the formal employment generated by accommodation 
providers	serving	both	the	Northern	Safari	Circuit	and	Mount	Kilimanjaro	climbing	value	chains.	It	is	not	clear	
whether there potential to increase craft and souvenir expenditure on the safari circuit – existing expenditure 
is already reasonable (US$118 per tourist per trip) and there may be limited scope for increasing it. However, 
the quality of most craft retail outlets is quite low and the sector has received little support in the past. It is 
well worth exploring whether craft spend can be increased on the Northern Safari Circuit because, if it can, it 
will have significant pro-poor impact.

Accommodation is unlikely to ever be a huge source of pro-poor impact on the safari circuit. However, given 
the scale of accommodation spending (US$200milion per year) and the fact that 12% of this turnover is pro-
poor, even a small change in this percentage would translate into a significant pro-poor impact. A number 
of  hotels  on  the  Northern Safari  Circuit  have  adapted  strategies  deliberately  designed  to  empower  local 

10

communities. These range from building schools and roads to preferential recruitment for local community 
members. Whilst these are relatively modest actions, the aggregate effect on poor communities of all hotels 
on the Northern Safari Circuit adopting these practices would be significant. So, working with hotels to spread 
this ‘best practice’ to a greater number of accommodation suppliers would be a positive initiative. 

reported  by  hospitality  employers 

A	 lack	 of	 skills	 is	 often	 a	 barrier	 to	 poor	 people	 accessing	 better-paid	 jobs	 in	 hotels.	 In	 addition,	 the	
ubiquitous  problem 
in 
accessing skilled labour increases the cost of doing business. It 
also potentially threatens to trigger the response from employers 
to import skilled labour from the more-established tourist industry 
in	 Kenya	 –	 which	 could	 reduce	 the	 already	 limited	 pro-poor	
impact of accommodation on the safari circuit. For these reasons, 
government  should  be  supported  to  review  the  accreditation  of 
very  low  quality  private  sector  hospitality  training  providers  and 
the operation of the vocational education scheme. The Vocational 
Training and Education Authority curriculum is designed to provide 
additional  resources  to  tourism  industry  training  but  is  widely-
regarded by the industry to be failing to deliver.

Reflecting  the  rapid  growth  in  safari  tourism,  there  is  an 
accommodation  building  boom  underway  in  the  Northern Safari 
Circuit.  New  build  accommodation  provides  the  opportunity  to 
‘build in’ pro-poor benefit streams into the development. For instance, developers can be encouraged by 
development control authorities to demonstrate their linkages to the local community whilst the planning 
application is being considered. Seemingly inconsequential decisions, like choice of building materials or 
provision of an area for cultural performances, can have an important impact on future pro-poor benefits. 
Where  new  accommodation  is  being  built  or  redeveloped  inside  National  Parks  or  on  Government  or 
community land, international experience from Southern Africa demonstrates that innovative community–
private sector partnerships could generate large and sustainable pro-poor benefit flows.

Tracing the tourism dollar beyond Tanzania

Table 4:       Tracing the Mount Kilimanjaro tourist’s dollar

%

62
38
41

US$
3,150
1,945
1,205
1,376
389

US$ %

3,019

1,419

1,600

1,892

345

47

53

63

11

The main focus of this analysis has been to explore the Tanzanian part of the tourism global value chains 
–  which  stretches  from  the  international  tourists’  country  of  origin  to  Northern  Tanzania.  The  reason  for 
this  is  simple:  Tanzanian  stakeholders  cannot 
directly  influence  the  value  chain  overseas.  In 
addition,  tourism  research  has  often  been  so 
preoccupied by the extent of the value captured 
by  international  interests,  that  the  host  country 
is  forced  into  the  unhelpful  role  of  powerless 
‘victim’  of  globalisation.  As  demonstrated  in 
this report, the opposite is true. There are many 
very practical steps which Tanzanians can take to 
strengthen tourism and its links to poor people in 
their Country.

International package including flights
Total out of country expenditure on package
Total within country expenditure on package
Total tourist expenditure including discretionary spend
Pro-poor expenditure

However,  as  a  result  numerous  high-profile 
stories  of  extravagant  rates  of  ‘leakage’,  many 
people genuinely believe that developing country 
destinations benefit little from tourism because 
these  benefits  are  captured  by  the  countries  of 
origin. To explore this issue, we examined the cost 
of	Mount	Kilimanjaro	climbing	and	Northern	Safari	
Circuit  holiday  packages  sold  to  international 
customers in the main source markets in Europe.

Approximately	 38%	 of	 a	 Mount	 Kilimanjaro	
climbing  holiday  package  sold 
in  Europe 
(including flights) accrues within Tanzania. When 

Table 5:  

Tracing the Safari tourist dollar

International package including flights

Total out of country expenditure on package

Total within country expenditure on package

Total tourist expenditure including discretionary spend

Pro-poor expenditure

a tourist’s discretionary spend is included, the in-country share of total package cost rises to over 41%. 12% 
of total tourist expenditure (including the international package cost and discretionary spend) is pro-poor.

Out of the total Northern Safari Circuit holiday package sold in Europe (including flights), 53% of expenditure 
accrues  within  Tanzania.  When  a  tourist’s  discretionary  spend  is  included,  the  in-country  share  of  total 
package cost rises to over 56%. 11% of total tourist expenditure (including the international package cost 
and discretionary spend) is pro-poor.

To  some  people,  the  fact  that Tanzania  is  only  capturing  about  half  of  the  global  value  chain  in  holiday 
packages sold in Europe may sound like exploitation. For a long-haul tourist destination (where the flights 
normally constitute about 40% to 50% of total package costs) this is to be expected. To a Tanzanian selling 
that other great export commodity, coffee, it would sound like a dream.  A recent global value chain analysis 
of	coffee	produced	in	Tanzania	shows	farmers	growing	coffee	on	the	slopes	of	Mount	Kilimanjaro	can	expect	
to receive 4.1% of the final retail price of coffee sold in supermarkets in Europe. Even taking into account the 
basic processing, packaging and transportation to the export harbour, Tanzania only captures 8% of the final 
retail price of a bag of coffee. 92% of the retail value of coffee is absorbed by the coffee roasters, wholesalers 
and retailers that are based in Europe. So, each US$1 spent on a package holiday to Tanzania in Europe 
generates	about	three	times	the	pro-poor	impact	(11%	for	safari	to	12%	for	Kilimanjaro	compared	with	4%	
coffee) and five times the value for Tanzania (41% to 53% compared with 8%) compared with US$1 spent on 
a bag of Tanzanian coffee in Europe.

Concluding remarks 

Climbing	Mount	Kilimanjaro	is	more	pro-poor	than	visiting	the	Northern	Safari	Circuit	in	terms	of	the	percentage	
of in-country spending that reaches the poor (28% and 18% respectively).

Both types of holiday perform well in terms of their ability to transfer tourist spending at the destination into 
income for the poor, especially when compared with middle-income African countries with a similar tourist 
product	and	when	compared	with	the	vibrant	local	economies	in	South	East	Asia.	The	Mount	Kilimanjaro	climbing	
value chain has the highest proportions of pro-poor expenditure as a percentage of total in-country tourist 
expenditure of any tourist destination studied to date by ODI.

The	 total	 pro-poor	 impact	 of	 Kilimanjaro	 (US$13million)	 is	 dwarfed	 simply	 by	 the	 numbers	 of	
tourists  who  go  on  safari  in  Northern  Tanzania  (US$103million).  The  implications  of  this  are  that, 
if  the  aim  is  to  use  tourism  to  help  lift  people  out  of  poverty  at  scale,  then  mainstream  tourism 
should  be  the  primary  target  for  pro-poor 
in  the 
distribution of benefits in a large tourist flow can have a larger pro-poor impact than a large change in a niche 
tourist product.

interventions.  A  small, 

incremental  change 

This exercise has identified activities in-country that are most susceptible to change, most likely to have a 
pro-poor impact and, in addition, are most realistic.

Figure 7:  

Pro-poor tourist expenditure by tourist destination

Tanzania	-	Kilimanjaro

Laos - Luang Prabang

Vietnam - Central

South Africa

Tanzania - Northern Circuit Safari

Namibia - Protected Areas

The Gambia

Central Africa

Cambodia

12

0%

5%

10%

15%

% of tourist expenditure at the destination reaching the poor

20%

25%

30%

Summary of the ‘Tracing the Tourism 
Dollar’ Stakeholder Workshop 
Held at Kibo Palace Hotel in Arusha on 29th October 2008

The key findings of the study were presented to participants (from Government, parastatals, development 
partners, tour operators, hoteliers, private sector associations, academics and community groups) with the 
aim of:
•	
•	
•	

Validating the findings of the study; 
Discussing the implications of the study for pro-poor tourism development strategies; and 
Agreeing a way forward. 

SNV presented a summary of the study findings.

Validating the findings of the study

Participants endorsed the study overall. They highlighted the uniqueness of the approach and the holistic 
view of the tourist industry. In particular, the way in which the study looks beyond the economic contribution 
of tourism and examines how local people benefit from tourist activity was appreciated.

Implications of the study

The discussion focused around six key areas:

•	

•	

•	

How can Porters and Guides Associations be strengthened to improve service levels and benefits? 
Porters are a poor target group. Training was suggested to enhance the skills of the leadership of the 
associations to improve management and organisation skills. The membership of organisations should 
receive support to improve language skills, customer care, health and hygiene and entrepreneurship. The 
associations should receive financial support from external sources as well as members. Government 
support  in  the  form  both  of  recognition  of  the  associations  and  also  enforcement  of  the  regulations 
relating	to	wages	and	working	conditions	on	Kilimanjaro	is	a	priority.

How to improve TANAPA and NCAA support to communities? 
Whilst participants recognised that management authorities were allocating resources from gate fees to 
support local communities, it was felt that more could be done to contribute to poverty reduction. It was 
suggested that the percentage share of park fees allocated for local communities should be increased; 
the accountability and transparency of park revenues should be raised; authorities should gain a clearer 
understanding of community interests, values and roles and support initiatives to encourage this aim.

What can be done to improve the quality and availability of food supplied by local producers to tourist 
hotels? 
Improve farmers skills in technical areas (i.e. irrigation, packaging, etc) and market requirements. Improve 
coordination  between  smallholder  organisations  to  improve  the  interface  with  the  market.  Support 
farmers with better physical and credit infrastructure.

 •	 How to improve the quality of hospitality training? 

It was agreed that the current state of tourism training is very poor. This can be improved by effective 
regulation to ensure that the proliferation of tourism training institutions do not dilute the quality required 
by qualifications. The lack of qualified trainers can be addressed by introducing a qualification framework 
and accreditation system and improving the training of trainers. In addition, the remuneration of trainers 
should be increased to attract more competent staff. In addition, the curriculum should be improved 
to better align with the needs of the market. Although many hotels are providing in-house training, this 
should be formalised, improved and integrated within a national accreditation and qualification system. 
Starting from school aged children, a more positive attitude towards hospitality and tourism should be 
inculcated amongst the youth.

13

•	

•	

How to improve the quality and volume of crafts and cultural services to tourists?
 
It was suggested that support should be provided to enhance the marketing, promotion and branding of 
cultural services. Crafters should work more closely with associations and better understand the needs of 
the market, in terms of quality, innovation and diversity.

What policy issues need to be addressed in order to further pro-poor tourism in Tanzania? 
Sustainability should be emphasised in the National Tourism Policy. There should be a more harmonised 
and  transparent  approach  to  the  transfer  of  resources  from  park  fees  to  local  communities  –  a  Task 
Force should be set up to investigate this issue. The awareness and participation of a broader range of 
stakeholders in the tourist sector should be encouraged. Specifically, the involvement of the private sector 
should be encouraged and support to SMEs should be enhanced. A trust fund should be established 
to  fund  local  communities  from  the  tourist  sector.  National  economic  surveys  should  include  greater 
consideration of the tourist sector and the creation of tourism satellite accounts was suggested. 

Way Forward

Workshop participants, and readers of this report who were not able to participate in this workshop, are 
encouraged to submit their comments and suggestions to the two SNV tourist advisors who work in Arusha 
and are identified on the front cover - Birgit Steck or Elibariki Mtui.

14

