Introduction to English and American 

Literary and Cultural Studies

Session 5: 

Analysis of Drama:

Arthur Miller's The Crucible

WS 2013-14

Rouven Brinkmann

Jucker/Nünning: Analysis of Drama

Work with your neighbor and answer the following questions:

1. What are the major differences between poetic and dramatic texts?
2. Describe the communicative situation in dramatic texts!
3. What are the differences between dialogue, monologue, and soliloquy?  
    What is an “aside“? What are their functions?
4. What are the differences between primary text and secondary text?
5. Elaborate on the different techniques of characterization in drama!

 

Jucker/Nünning: Analysis of Drama

Techniques of Characterization in Drama

Pfister, Manfred. The Theory and Analysis of Drama. Cambridge, Cambridge UP: 1988. 4. Print.

Dramatic Channels and Codes

Pfister, Manfred. The Theory and Analysis of Drama. Cambridge, Cambridge UP: 1988. 4. Print.

The Fourth Wall

Approaching/Analyzing Drama

 

Keep in mind the 
specificities of 
dramatic texts, e.g.:
- inherent performative     
  quality
- dialogical focus
- drama-specific codes and 
  channels
- primary and secondary   
  text
- etc.

 

The Crucible: General Impressions

1. What is the drama about, what are its major themes?

2.  How  is  the  atmosphere  of  the  play  (also  considering  its 
dramatic structure)?

3. Which historical event is portrayed in the drama? What is 
the contemporary historical/political frame in which the drama 
was written? 

4.  How  are  these  distinct  historical  frames  juxtaposed  and 
correlated, to what purpose/effect?

5. Can you think of any reasons why the  Salem Witch Trials 
provide such a suitable frame for a play/dramatic text?

Classical Dramatic Form

Hamartia (flaw, error)For next week...
Read and analyze the excerpts from The Crucible uploaded on 
Stud.IP. Your analysis should focus on the following issues:

● Communicative 

situation:  Who 

and 
addressees? What are they talking about and in what modes of 
speech 
(dialogue,  monologue,  dialogue  with  monological 
tendencies, etc)? What is the function of these particular modes? 
Consider dramatic irony!

are 

addressers 

● How does characterization commence? Consider the modes of 
characterization  against  the  backdrop  of  staging/performative 
quality of dramatic texts!

● What seem to be central conficts in the play/in these excerpts, 

and how are they conveyed?

The Crucible: Communication

Hamartia (flaw, error)

Who are addressers and addressees? What are they talking about 
and in what modes of speech (dialogue, monologue, dialogue with 
monological  tendencies,  etc)?  What  is  the  function  of  these 
particular modes? Consider dramatic irony!

Hamartia (flaw, error)

The Crucible: Characterization
How does characterization commence? Consider the modes of 
characterization  against  the  backdrop  of  staging/performative 
quality of dramatic texts!

Hamartia (flaw, error)The Crucible: Conficts

What seem to be central conficts in the play/in these excerpts, and 
how are they conveyed?

