The Definite Determiner and the Inalienable Constructions in French and in English
Author(s): Jean-Roger Vergnaud and Maria Luisa Zubizarreta
Source: Linguistic Inquiry, Vol. 23, No. 4 (Autumn, 1992), pp. 595-652
Published by: The MIT Press
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/4178791
Accessed: 09/12/2008 12:13

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.

Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=mitpress.

Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.

JSTOR is a not-for-profit organization founded in 1995 to build trusted digital archives for scholarship. We work with the
scholarly community to preserve their work and the materials they rely upon, and to build a common research platform that
promotes the discovery and use of these resources. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

The MIT Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Linguistic Inquiry.

http://www.jstor.org

Jean-Roger Vergnaud 
Maria Luisa Zubizarreta 

Iis 

The Definite Determiner and 
te  Ina ienable Constructions 
in French and in English 

In this article we examine some central aspects of the inalienable constructions in French 
and in English and argue that an adequate account of these constructions requires making 
a distinction between definite referential expressions that give rise to a type interpretation 
and those that give rise to a token interpretation. This constitutes our flrst basic hy- 
pothesis. The distinction between types and tokens is  defined at a level of  sentence 
grammar that we call L-Structure and that we identify with domain D in the sense of 
Chomsky (1981, 324). Given domain D, it is possible to define a notion of expletive with 
respect to that level: an expletive in that sense is a category that has no representation 
in domain D. We then use this notion of expletive to characterize the syntactic categories 
that are not opaque for a certain relation central to the account of inalienable structures. 
Our second basic hypothesis is that the relation between domain D so defined and syn- 
tactic structure is governed by a Correspondence Law: a token in domain D corresponds 
to a DP headed by a nonexpletive determiner, whereas a type corresponds either to a 
bare NP or to a DP headed by an expletive determiner. An important topic discussed 
in this article is the existence of systematic differences between French and English in 
the realm of inalienable constructions. We locate these differences in the status of the 
definite determiner: in French, but not in English, the definite determiner may function 
as an expletive from the point of view of domain D.  We offer independent evidence 
based on the behavior of generics in support of this hypothesis. Our analysis is developed 
within the general framework of Government-Binding Theory. To the extent that it is 
successful, it can then be viewed as a defense and illustration of the fundamental concepts 
and principles of that theory. 

[Editor's note: The authors' names are alphabetical, but this in no way reflects the primacy of authorship.] 
Preliminary versions of this article were presented at the syntax seminar at the University of Southern 
California (Fall 1989), at Cornell University (Fall 1989), at the Laax Workshop on Phrase Structure (June 1990), 
at Trondheim University (February 1991), at the Ier Coloquio de Gramatica Generativa at Miraflores/Madrid 
(March 1991), and at Universite de Geneve (May 1991). We thank all of the participants for their reactions 
and comments. Special thanks are due to J. Aoun, A. Belletti, R. Huybregts, the late 0.  Jaeggli, L. Johnsen, 
M. Prinzhorn, H. van Riemsdijk, L. Rizzi, A. Rouveret, B. Schein, T. Stowell, and A. Szabolsci, for useful 
discussions, as well as to G. Carlson for written comments on an earlier draft. Our gratitude to B. Schein and 
T. Stowell for discussion of some of the English data and to F. Dell, Y. Mathieu, and A. Rouveret for discussion 
of some of the French data. 

Linguistic  Inquiry, Volume  23,  Number 4,  Fall  1992 
595-652 
(D 1992 by The  Massachusetts  Institute  of Technology 

595 

596 

JEAN-ROGER 

VERGNAUD 

AND  MARIA 

LUISA 

ZUBIZARRETA 

The article is organized as follows. In section 1 we examine two inalienable con- 
structions in French and discuss their properties. In section 2 we introduce the type/ 
token distinction on which our analysis is based. In section 3 we analyze the syntax and 
the interpretation of the inalienable constructions presented in section 1, and in section 
4 we  analyze the differences between French and English with respect to inalienable 
constructions, as well as to generics. In section 5 we deal with generics again and some 
residual issues. 

1.  Properties of the French Inalienable Constructions 
As is well known, there are some intriguing differences between inalienable constructions 
in French and in English. Consider the examples in (1). 

(1) a.  Les enfants ont leve la main. 
b.  The children raised the hand. 

The French example in (la)  is ambiguous between an inalienable interpretation and an 
alienable interpretation. In the inalienable interpretation, la main is understood as re- 
ferring to  an integral part of each of  the individuals referred to by the argument les 
enfants in subject position. Under this interpretation, the sentence in (1) can be para- 
phrased as Each of the children raised his or her hand. The English counterpart to (la) 
in (lb)  lacks this interpretation. (lb) has only the alienable interpretation, in which the 
hand is understood as referring to an object that is not part of the children's bodies. 

The notion inalienable possession referred to in the above description is, in essence, 
a notion of semantic dependency. An inalienable object is a dependent entity in the sense 
that it is inherently defined in terms of another object, of which it is a part. For example, 
human body parts are defined with respect to  a typical individual "human," which 
consists of a nose, two eyes, a mouth, a stomach, two hands, two arms, and so on. We 
shall assume that the semantic dependency of inalienable possession is reflected in formal 
grammar as an argumental dependency in lexical representations. Specifically, our hy- 
pothesis is that: 

(2)  An inalienable noun, but not an alienable one, takes a possessor argument. 

Given this hypothesis, a body-part noun like nose or hand is then lexically ambiguous. 
It corresponds in reality to two distinct lexical entries: one that defines an inalienable 
entity and takes a possessor argument, and another one that defines an alienable entity 
and does not take a possessor argument.' To illustrate, a word such as gorge 'throat' 
will  be  analyzed  lexically  as  one  of  the two  items  in (3).2 

1 Authier (1988) and Tellier (1988) have also reached the conclusion that an inalienable noun takes a 

possessor argument. An alienable noun, by contrast, does not take a possessor argument. 

2  As we shall demonstrate in section 3, the external argument of inalienable nouns must be syntactically 
realized. Basic nominals thus contrast with derived nominals, whose external argument need not be syntact- 
ically  present  (e.g.,  the  (government's)  destruction  of  the documents).  We can  speculate  that the  optionality 
of the external argument in derived nominals is due to the addition of a morphological head. 

THE  DEFINITE 

DETERMINER 

IN  FRENCH  AND 

IN  ENGLISH 

597 

(3) a.  gorge(x) 

b.  gorge 

We assume that the two lexical entries in (3) are grammatically related by a lexical 
redundancy rule. According to this view, then, the relationship between the alienable 
and the inalienable versions of a body-part noun is formally comparable to the relation- 
ship between, for example, the causative verb sink (which is transitive) and the inchoative 
verb sink (which is intransitive). As we shall demonstrate, the characteristic semantic 
property of inalienables formally construed as above has far-reaching grammatical con- 
sequences. Although it is an inherent, universal property of body-part nouns that they 
may function as inalienables (i.e.,  as semantically dependent entities), there are other 
nouns that may function as inalienables only by extension. In that category are nouns 
for clothes,  kinship terms, picture nouns, and still others, like computer and car. As 
might be expected, there is much variation among speakers concerning the membership 
in the class of extended inalienables. For example, some speakers may be able to treat 
computer as an inalienable, but others may not. Extended inalienables will turn out to 
be instrumental in understanding inherent inalienables. They will be discussed in section 
2. 

We shall call a structure such as (la),  in which an argument may be interpreted as 
an  inalienable dependent of  another argument that is  external to  it,  an  ext(ernal)- 
poss(essor) construction. Besides the structure illustrated in (la), French exhibits a sec- 
ond kind of ext-poss construction, illustrated in (4) and (5). 

(4) a.  Le medecin leur 

a radiographie 1' 

the doctor  to them X-rayed 
'The doctor X-rayed their stomachs.' 

estomac. 
SING DEF  DET stomach 

b.  Le medecin leur 

gorge. 
the doctor  to them examined SING DEF  DET throat 
'The doctor examined their throats.' 

a examine la 

(5) a.  Le medecin a radiographie I' 

estomac aux enfants. 

the doctor  X-rayed 
'The doctor X-rayed the children's stomachs.' 

SING DEF  DET  stomach to the children 

b.  Le medecin a examine la 

gorge aux enfants. 

the doctor  examined SING DEF  DET throat to the children 
'The doctor examined the children's throats.' 

In this type of ext-poss construction, as in the first, the inalienable argument is a direct 
object. The two types differ, however, in that the possessor argument in the second type 
is realized, not as a subject, but as a dative complement of the verb that governs the 
inalienable argument. In (4) that dative complement surfaces as a clitic on the verb, and 

598 

JEAN-ROGER 

VERGNAUD 

AND  MARIA 

LUISA 

ZUBIZARRETA 

in (5) it surfaces in postverbal position as a full-fledged nonpronominal argument. No 
comparable construction exists in English.3 

In this section we examine the properties of the ext-poss construction in French. 

We shall contrast this construction with the one illustrated in (6). 

(6) a.  Le medecin a radiographie [leurs 

the doctor  X-rayed 

estomacs]. 
Poss(3RD  PERS PL)IPOSS-ED(PL)  stomachs 

b.  Le medecin a examine [leurs 

gorges]. 
the doctor  examined  Poss(3RD  PERS PL)/POSS-ED(PL)  throats 

The structures in (6) are also inalienable constructions involving an inalienable argument 
in direct object position. However, contrary to what is the case in the ext-poss con- 
struction illustrated in (1), (4), and (5), the possessor argument in the structures in (6) 
is  not a  separate argument of the verb governing the inalienable, but is realized in a 
position internal to the nominal phrase headed by the inalienable noun. We shall refer 
to  such  structures  as  those  in (6) as  int(ernal)-poss(essor)  constructions.4 

1.1.  Interpretation  and  Grammatical  Number 

There is a subtle but important aspect of the interpretation of the ext-poss construction 
that has hitherto remained unnoticed. Consider the examples in (4) and (5) again. The 
singular inalienable "body-part" argument in these examples is associated with a plural 
possessor  argument.  We observe  a distributivity effect  in the following  sense.  Although 
the inalienable argument estomac 'stomach' in (4a) and (5a) is singular, the interpretation 
of (4a) or (Sa) nevertheless implies the existence of a plurality of stomachs X-rayed, by 
virtue of the inalienable phrase being associated with the plural possessor argument. 
Similarly, although the inalienable noun gorge 'throat' in (4b) and (5b) is singular, the 

3 In some cases the dative clitic is strongly preferred: 
(i) a. 

a fr6le  la tete. 

La balancoire leur 
the swing 
'The swing brushed their heads.' 

to them brushed the head 

b.  ??La balancoire a fr6ld  la tete  aux enfants. 

the swing 
'The swing brushed the children's heads.' 

brushed the head to the children 

We omit from this discussion deictic inalienable phrases, which do not require a possessor within the 
sentence (see (ii)), as well as the generic examples discussed by Authier (1988, 248-251) (see (iiia), which 
contrasts with (iiib)). 

(ii)  Le medecin (lui) 

a radiographid ce bras,  et ensuite cette jambe. 

the doctor  (to him) X-rayed 

this arm, and then this leg 

(iii) a.  Pendant le saut, les mains ne doivent pas toucher les cuisses. 
the thighs 

during the dive, the hands must not touch 
b. *Pendant le saut, les mains ont dui toucher 

les cuisses. 
during the dive, the hands must have touched the thighs 

Note that (iiib) becomes acceptable when it is uttered in a situation in which the definite inalienable phrase is 
used deictically (as in a report on a particular parachute test, for example). See footnote 13 for further discussion 
of the deictic and generic examples. 

4 The inalienable phrase in this construction may also coexist with a dative benefactive/malefactive com- 

plement: for example, La sorciere (lui) a voM sa voix 'The witch (to her) stole her voice'. 

THE  DEFINITE 

DETERMINER 

IN  FRENCH  AND 

IN  ENGLISH 

599 

interpretation of (4b) or (5b) implies the existence of a plurality of throats examined. 
That such implied pluralities are indeed properties of the structural description of the 
sentences is shown by the fact that there are speakers for whom implied pluralities may 
be manifested as plural pronouns in subsequent sentences. For example, for those speak- 
ers, (4a) can be followed by a sentence in which a plural pronoun refers back to a plurality 
of stomachs, as shown in (7a), and (4b) can be followed by a sentence in which a plural 
pronoun refers back to a plurality of throats, as shown in (7b).5 

(7) a.  Le medecin leur 

a radiographie 1' 

estomac 'a toutes 

to  them X-rayed 

the  doctor 
et il a constate qu'ils avaient des images normales. 
and he saw 

that they looked normal 

SING  DEF  DET stomach  to  all 

b.  Le  medecin  leur 

a examine  la 

gorge  'a tous 
the doctor  to them examined SING  DEF  DET throat to all 
et il a constate qu'elles etaient tres rouges. 
and he found  that they were very red 

Note that the phenomenon of "implied coreference" illustrated in (7) is strictly cross- 
sentential. In other words, the implied plural in (4) or (5) is not part of the set of referents 
associated with the sentence. This is shown by the ungrammaticality of the following 
example, where the intended interpretation is the one in which the italicized pronoun 
refers back to a plurality of throats: 

(8) *Le medecin leur 

a examine la 

gorge a tous 
the doctor  to them examined SING  DEF  DET throat to all 
parce qu'il pensait  qu'elles pouvaient etre infectees. 
because he thought that they could be infected 

The distributive interpretation illustrated in (7) may also be observed in examples 

like (9), in which the inalienable body-part phrase is plural. 

(9)  On leur 

mains. 
we  to  them washed  PL  DEF  DET hands 

a lave 

les 

Here, the distributivity effect is manifested in the interpretive relation that holds between 
the two  plural categories leur and les  mains. Suppose, for example, that the dative 

5Not  all speakers accept these sentences. We attribute this to the fact that some speakers have difficulty 

perceiving inalienable body parts as referentially independent entities. 

Those speakers who accept the forms in (7) also accept examples such as those in (i)-(ii). 
(i)  Le mddecin leur 

estomac a toutes et il a constate 

a radiographid 1' 

SING  DEF  DET  stomach  to all 

and he saw 

the doctor  to them X-rayed 
qu'aucun n'avait une image normale. 
that none looked normal 

(ii)  Le medecin leur 

a examine la 

the doctor  to them examined SING  DEF  DET  throat to all  and he saw 
qu'aucune n'dtait vraiment rouge. 
that none was very red 

gorge a tous et il a constate 

600 

JEAN-ROGER 

VERGNAUD 

AND  MARIA 

LUISA 

ZUBIZARRETA 

complement leur in (9) refers to a set of three individuals {ij,k}.  Then (9) means that 
for each individual i, j,  k, both hands were washed. It cannot be the case that one hand 
was washed per individual, nor can the sentence have a vague interpretation (one hand 
or two hands having been washed for any one individual). 

The distributivity effect that characterizes the ext-poss construction is reminiscent 
of what one observes in structures where a universally quantified phrase has scope over 
a singular nominal expression. Compare the examples in (7a-b) to the discourse in (10). 

(10)  Every woman brought a pet to the party. Surprisingly, they were all mammals. 

The first sentence in (10) is interpreted with the universal quantifier having wide scope 
over the indefinite a pet. That interpretation implies the existence of a plurality of pets, 
which plurality is manifested as a plural pronoun in the second sentence. As in the case 
of the ext-poss construction, the phenomenon of "implied coreference" at play in (10) 
is strictly cross-sentential: the implied plural in (10) is not part of the set of referents 
associated with the first sentence. This is shown by the ungrammaticality of (11), where 
the intended interpretation is the one in which the italicized pronoun refers back to a 
plurality of cats. 

(11) *Every woman brought a cat to the party so that they could chase the mice. 

(11) is on a par with (8). Note that the plural pronouns in (10) and in (7a-b) are comparable 
to E-type pronouns in the sense of Evans (1980), illustrated in (12). 

(12)  There is a sailor at the front door. He is wearing a red shirt. 

Like an E-type pronoun, the plural pronoun in (10), (7a), or (7b) refers to a set of referents 
"created" or "induced" by a previous sentence. 

What is particularly puzzling about the distributivity effect found in the ext-poss 
construction is that, contrary to what is the case in a structure with a universal quantifier, 
it does not seem that it can be ascribed to any scopal dependency. For example, the 
inalienable phrase in such structures as (1), (4), and (5) can be pronominalized backward: 

(13) a.  Parce qu'elle est en general tres sensible, le medecin a decide de 
the doctor decided to 
tete  d'une cagoule. 

because it is generally very sensitive, 
leur 
to them protect 

proteger la 

SING DEF  DET head with a hood 

b.  Parce qu'il doit toujours etre protege des radiations, le medecin 
because it must always be protected from radiations, the doctor 
leur 
front  d'un masque. 
to them covered  SING DEF DET front  with a mask 

a couvert  le 

As is well known, backward pronominalization may only arise with referential expres- 

THE  DEFINITE 

DETERMINER 

IN  FRENCH 

AND 

IN  ENGLISH 

601 

sions.6 Thus, the structures in (14a-b), where the antecedents are nonreferential, are ill 
formed.7 

(14) a.  *Because she had overheard laughs, a woman came in that was dressed as 

a clown. 

b.  *Because he has the winning sweepstakes ticket, someone is going to be a 

very rich man. 

By the test of backward pronominalization given in (13a-b), then, the inalienable ar- 
gument in such examples as (1), (4), and (5) unambiguously qualifies as referential, which 
seems to preclude any account in terms of a standard scopal dependency. Still, we shall 
argue in section 2 that the possessor and the inalienable arguments in the ext-poss con- 
struction are tied by a dependency that is of the same general form (referential properties 
apart) as that existing between a universally quantified expression and nonreferential 
phrases within its scope. To wit, we  shall argue that the inalienable argument is syn- 
tactically bound to the possessor argument.8 

Besides the "distributivity effect," an inalienable phrase in the ext-poss construction 
displays another interesting property, which has to do with grammatical number. As 
noted by Kayne (1975, 164-169), an inalienable body-part noun like 'stomach', 'throat', 
'nose',  'mouth' in the ext-poss construction is obligatorily singular, whether it is asso- 

6 We should emphasize here that the notion of "reference" used in the text is a strictly grammatical 
notion. In particular, it should be distinguished from the notion of "reference" found in the philosophical 
tradition. The latter tradition in essence espouses Russell's view (see for example Russell (1905)) and defines 
a referential expression as an "object-dependent" expression (as opposed to quantified expressions, which 
are "object-independent"). See Neale (1990) for discussion of the notion of reference within that tradition. 
A referential expression in our sense is grammatically defined as an expression that has scope over the 
entire sentence (see Fodor and Sag (1982), Hornstein (1984)) and may therefore give rise to backward pro- 
nominalization (this definition treats sentences with psychological predicates as exceptional). Within gram- 
matical theory, referentiality may be characterized as an S-Structure property by postulating a special kind 
of root scope marker that binds referential expressions at this level of representation. For further discussion 
of backward anaphora as a test for referentiality, see Hornstein (1984), Vergnaud and Zubizarreta (1990), 
Zubizarreta and Vergnaud (1992), and Wasow (1972). Note that Neale (1990) questions the reality of the 
correlation between referentiality and backward pronominalization (see Neale (1990, chap. 5, n. 30)). We reply 
to Neale's criticism in forthcoming work. 
7  In a presentational sentence such as (14a) in which a constituent of the subject has been extraposed, 
(14b) is from Wasow (1972). The specific (referential) and nonspecific (nonreferential) interpretations are 
not equally available with this example (see Fodor and Sag (1982) for discussion). The nonspecific interpretation 
is strongly favored over the specific interpretation. This is why (14b) is perceived as ill formed. 

that subject must be nonspecific (nonreferential). 

between the inalienable argument and the possessor argument. 

8  Specifically, we  shall argue that the relation of Predication, construed as a binding relation, holds 
Our remark concerming the analogy between the dependencies at play in the ext-poss construction and in 
a structure with a universal quantifier requires some comment. The formalization of scopal dependency that 
is presupposed here is slightly different from that put forth by the current avatars of Chomsky's original proposal 
(see Chomsky (1976)). Specifically, we assume that the relative scope of a phrase is represented, not by applying 
the rule of "Quantifier Raising," but by means of an indexing procedure. The notation proposed is reminiscent 
of that introduced originally by Skolem (1928), as well as of that proposed by Van Riemsdijk and Williams 
(1980). 

602 

JEAN-ROGER 

VERGNAUD 

AND  MARIA 

LUISA 

ZUBIZARRETA 

ciated with a singular or a plural possessor. Compare the forms in (15), where the plurality 
of the inalienable phrase gives rise to infelicity, with those in (4). 

(15)  a.  *Le  medecin  leur 

a radiographie [les 

the doctor  to them X-rayed 

estomacs]. 
[PL  DEF  DET stomachs] 

b.  *Le  medecin  leur 

gorges]. 
the doctor  to them examined [PL  DEF  DET throats] 

a examine  [les 

In the int-poss construction, by contrast, the inalienable body-part noun may be 
singular or plural when it is associated with a plural possessor (Kayne (1975)). The forms 
in (16) thus alternate freely with those in (6).9 

(16) a.  Le medecin a radiographie [leur 

the doctor  X-rayed 

estomac]. 
[Poss(3RD  PERS PL)/POSS-ED(SING)  stomach] 

b.  Le medecin a examine [leur 

gorge]. 
the doctor  examined [Poss(3RD  PERS PL)/POSS-ED(SING)  throat] 

As  in the case of the ext-poss construction, the examples in (16) may give rise to an 
implied plurality. The examples in (17) are comparable to the ones in (7). 10 

(17) a.  Le medecin a radiographie leur 

the doctor  X-rayed 
Poss(3RD  PERS  PL)/POSS-ED(SING) 
et il a constate  qu'ils avaient une apparence normale. 
and he observed that they had a normal appearance 

estomac 
stomach 

b.  Le medecin a examine leur 

gorge 
the doctor  examined Poss(3RD  PERS PL)IPOSS-ED(SING)  throat 
et il a constate  qu'elles etaient tres rouges. 
and he observed that they were very red 

Interestingly, the int-poss construction does not impose a strictly distributive in- 

terpretation in cases like (18), which thus contrasts with (9). 

(18)  On a lave 

leurs  mains. 
we  washed  their  hands 

In effect, if there is no pragmatic context biasing the interpretation of (18), then it has 
a meaning in which the number of hands washed per individual is vague: it may be the 
case that for each individual i, j,  k only one hand was washed, or it may be the case 
that both hands were washed, or it may be the case that for some individuals only one 
hand was washed and for other individuals both hands were washed. 

I  We have questioned a substantial number of native speakers, and we have found that French speakers 
living in an English-speaking community have a strong preference for (6) over (16). We attribute this to the 
influence of English, which disallows forms comparable to (16). We are grateful to F. Dell for this observation. 
See section 4 for further discussion of the English facts. 

'1 Those speakers who do not accept (7a-b) do not accept (17a-b) either. See footnote 5. 

THE  DEFINITE 

DETERMINER 

IN  FRENCH 

AND 

IN  ENGLISH 

603 

1.2.  Modifiers 
Kayne (1975) noted that although there are no restrictions on the sort of adjective that 
may modify the inalienable noun in the int-poss construction (as shown in (19)), there 
are restrictions on the sort of adjective that may modify the inalienable noun in the ext- 
poss construction (as shown in (20)). 

(19) a.  Le coiffeur 

a peigne ses cheveux soyeux. 

the hairdresser combed her silky hair 

b.  Pierre a lave 

ses  mains  sales. 
Pierre washed  his dirty hands 

(20)  a.  *Le  coiffeur  lui a peigne  les  cheveux  soyeux. 

b.  *Pierre lui a lave  les  mains  sales. 

Authier (1988, 173-176) suggests that the constraint should be formulated in terms 
of  appositive versus restrictive modifiers: an inalienable in the ext-poss construction 
may be  modified by  a  restrictive adjective, but not by  an appositive adjective. The 
ungrammaticality of (20) thus contrasts with the grammaticality of (21). In (20) the ad- 
jective is construed as an appositive modifier, whereas in (21) the adjective is construed 
as a restrictive modifier. (21a) implies that not all of the fingers were frozen and (21b) 
implies that only one of the two cheeks was dirty. The adjectives geles and sale pick 
out a subset of fingers and cheeks, respectively, in (21). 

(21)  a. 

a bande 

Il  lui 
les  doigts  geles. 
he  to  himlher bandaged the fingers  frozen 
'He bandaged his/her frozen fingers.' 

b.  Elle lui 

a nettoye la  joue  sale  avec un mouchoir. 

she  to himlher cleaned  the cheek dirty with a  handkerchief 
'She cleaned his/her dirty cheek with a handkerchief.' 

The constraint on modification applies strictly to the ext-poss construction. It does not 
apply to the int-poss construction, whether the inalienable is plural or singular." This 
is illustrated by the contrast in (22). In (22a) the singular inalienable is associated with 
an internal plural possessor and can be modified, whereas in (22b) the singular inalienable 
is associated with an external plural possessor and cannot be modified. 

(22) a.  Le medecin a examine leur 

the doctor  examined Poss(3RD  PERS PL)/POSS-ED(SING) 
estomac  rempli de jus  d'orange. 
stomach  full  of  orange juice 

b.  *Le medecin  leur 

a examine l' 

estomac 
the doctor  to them examined SING DEF DET stomach 
rempli de jus  d'orange. 
full  of  orange juice 

lThis  difference, which was made clear to us in a discussion with F. Dell, has reshaped to some extent 

our view of French inalienable phrases, as readers of earlier versions of this article will notice. 

604 

JEAN-ROGER 

VERGNAUD 

AND  MARIA 

LUISA 

ZUBIZARRETA 

It appears, then, that although inalienables in the int-poss construction may be modified 
by restrictive or appositive adjectives, inalienables in the ext-poss construction may be 
modified only by restrictive adjectives.12"13 

To summarize, we have examined a cluster of properties that differentiate the ext- 

poss construction from the int-poss construction in French: 

(23)  a.  The distributive interpretation 

A strictly distributive interpretation obtains in the ext-poss construction, 
but not necessarily in the int-poss construction. 

b.  Grammatical  number 

Certain inalienable body-part nouns (like 'stomach', 'throat', and 'nose') 
are obligatorily singular in the ext-poss construction, whether they have 
a plural possessor or not, whereas they may be singular or plural in the 
corresponding context in the int-poss construction. 

c.  Modification 

The inalienable phrase in the ext-poss construction may only be modified 
by a restrictive adjective, whereas there are no restrictions on the kinds 
of adjectives that may modify the inalienable phrase in the int-poss con- 
struction. 

In the next section we introduce a system of hypotheses that provides a basis for a formal 
account of the properties summarized in (23). 

12 Based on the grammaticality of (i), Authier (1988, 175, fn. 3) concludes that the constraint applies only 

to adjectives and must therefore be syntactic in nature. 

(i)  Pierre lui 

a lave 

les 

mains,  qui pourtant  etaient  propres. 

Pierre to him/her washed PL  DEF  DET  hands, which however were clean 
'Pierre washed his/her hands, although they were clean.' 

Note that examples with an appositive relative located between the inalienable subject and the VP are worse 
than (i): 

(ii)  ??Les  yeux,  que  le  medecin  lui avait examines, 

lui piquent. 

the  eyes,  which  the doctor  to himlher examined,  to  him/her itch 

(iii)  ?Le  pied droit,  qui etait  reste  longtemps  immobile, 

lui demangeait. 

the  right foot,  which had  remained  immobile for  a  long  time,  to  him/her was  itching 

This difference might result from the fact that an appositive at the end of the sentence can be reanalyzed as 
a continuative relative (in the sense of Jespersen (1924)). But it is not clear to us whether the distinction is of 
a grammatical or a processing nature. 

13 When inalienables are used deictically as discussed in footnote 3, it seems that appositive modification 

is possible: 

(i)  Voyons 

cette gorge enflammee. 

let us look at that swollen throat 

This further confirms that deictic inalienables must be analyzed differently from the cases discussed in this 
article. On the other hand, in the generic examples discussed by Authier (1988) in which the possessor is 
absent (see footnote 3), the inalienable phrase may not be modified by an appositive adjective (Authier (1988, 
256)): 

(ii)  Le visage (*sale/*noirci au bouchon) doit rester au ras du sol 

quand on rampe. 

the face  (dirty/cork blackened)  must remain close to the ground when crawling 

This suggests that the inalienable phrase in such structures is related to a phonologically null generic dative 
clitic. 

THE  DEFINITE 

DETERMINER 

IN  FRENCH 

AND 

IN  ENGLISH 

605 

2.  Toward an Analysis of the French Inalienable Constructions: On Types and Tokens 
To gain some insight into the properties of the French inalienable constructions discussed 
in section 1, it is useful to look at other kinds of singular nominal phrases in French that 
are not inherently inalienables, yet give rise to an implied plurality in certain contexts. 

2.1.  Syntactic Constraints on the Distributivity Effect and the TypelToken Distinction 
Consider the following examples:'4 

(24)  On 

a donne le 

meme ordinateur 
SING  DEF DET same  computer 

someone gave 
a Sophie, a Justine, et a Clea. 
to Sophie, to Justine, and to Clea 

(25)  On 

a donne le 

meme chemisier 

someone gave 
a Sophie, a Justine, et a Clea. 
to Sophie, to Justine, and to Clea 

SING DEF DET same  blouse 

Both of these sentences are ambiguous. Let us consider (24). Under one interpretation, 
this sentence means that there is one physical computer that was given to Sophie, to 
Justine, and to Clea. Consequently, these three persons will be competing for the own- 
ership of a single computer or will own that one computer at different times. Under a 
second interpretation, the preferred one in the absence of any other context, (24) has 
no such implication and is compatible with a situation in which Sophie, Justine, and Clea 
have been given three distinct physical computers, which happen to be of the same type, 
that is,  of the same brand and make. This interpretation can be paraphrased as On a 
donne le meme type d'ordinateur a Sophie, a Justine, et a' Clea 'Sophie, Justine, and 
Clea were given the same kind of computer'. Under the first interpretation the nominal 
expression le meme ordinateur is construed as referring to a token, whereas under the 
second interpretation the same noun phrase is  construed as referring to  a type. In a 
similar fashion, we can distinguish two interpretations of (25). Under the token inter- 
pretation of le chemisier, the meaning of (25) corresponds to a situation in which there 
is one single blouse, for which Sophie, Justine, and Clea may be competing or which 
they will own at different times. Under the type interpretation, the meaning of (25) is 
compatible with a situation in which there may be a plurality of blouses, which are of 
the same kind and appearance. As in the case of the ext-poss construction, the distrib- 
utive interpretation that is  observed in such examples as (24) or (25) under the type 
interpretation must be treated as a property of the structural description of the sentence. 
This is evidenced by the fact that there are speakers for whom the plurality implied by 
the distributive interpretation in such examples may be manifested as a plural pronoun. 

14 In this article we consider only nominal phrases that do not contain bound pronouns or quantified 
phrases. Any development and any statement that concerns definite noun phrases should be understood with 
this proviso in mind. 

606 

JEAN-ROGER 

VERGNAUD 

AND  MARIA 

LUISA 

ZUBIZARRETA 

For example, for these speakers, (24) and (25) could be continued as in (26) and (27), 
respectively. 15 
(26)  On 

a donne le 

meme ordinateur 
SING  DEF  DETsame  computer 

someone  gave 
'a Sophie, a Justine, et a Clea, 
to Sophie, to Justine, and to Clea, and I suspect 
qu'ils sont tres vite tombes en panne. 
that they rapidly broke down 

et je crois savoir 

(27)  On 

a donne le 

meme chemisier 

SING  DEF  DET  same  blouse 

someone  gave 
a Sophie, a Justine, et a Clea, 
to Sophie, to Justine, and to Clea, and I suspect 
qu?ils  ont  retreci au premier lavage. 
that they shrank at the first wash 

et je crois savoir 

We then have a generalization of the following form: 

(28)  Given the right context, a nominal expression that has the type interpretation 
gives rise to a distributivity effect that is similar to the one found in the ext- 
poss construction or to the one found with a universal quantifier. 

Two central questions arise at this point: 

(29) a.  What is the source of the correlation between the type interpretation and 
the distributive interpretation observed in such structures as (26) and (27)? 
b.  What are the syntactic environments in which a nominal expression that 

has the type interpretation may give rise to a distributivity effect? 

We consider question (29b) first. To answer this question, we  shall examine the 
acceptability judgments of those speakers who accept forms like (26) and (27), that is, 

Is We give more examples in (i)-(iii) with the noun ordinateur. 
(i)  On 

a donnd le 

meme ordinateur a Sophie, a Justine, et a Clda, 

someone gave 
et je  crois  savoir  qu'aucun  (d'entre  eux) n'a marche. 
and I suspect 

that none (of them) worked 

SING  DEF  DET  same  computer  to Sophie, to Justine, and to Clea, 

(ii)  On 

a donne le 

meme ordinateur a Sophie, a Justine, et a Clda, 

someone gave 
et je crois savoir que chacun (d'eux) a eu des problemes. 
and I suspect 

that each one (of them) had problems 

SING  DEF  DET  same  computer  to Sophie, to Justine, and to Clea, 

(iii)  On 

a donne le 

meme ordinateur a Sophie, a Justine, et a Clea, 

someone gave 
et je crois 
and I believe that they were IBM PCs from the same store 

que c'etaient des IBM PC qui venaient du meme magasin. 

SING  DEF  DET  same  computer  to Sophie, to Justine, and to Clda, 

Speakers' judgments vary depending on the choice of noun. Thus, certain speakers will accept (i)-(iii) as 
grammatical, as well as (26) and (27). Others will reject the examples with the noun chemisier, while accepting 
those with the noun ordinateur. Possibly, others will reject all examples. These variations are expected and 
have to do with the variable extension of the class of lexical items to which the characteristic grammatical 
property of inalienables can be attributed, as mentioned in section 1. 

THE  DEFINITE 

DETERMINER 

IN  FRENCH  AND 

IN  ENGLISH 

607 

speakers who can express the implied pluralities perceived in such structures as (24) 
and (25) as overt pronouns in later sentences. Let us call that class of speakers S. The 
study of the dialect of S shows that a singular definite expression gives rise to an implied 
plurality only when it is associated with a plural argument that is not "too far away." 
To illustrate, consider (30) under the interpretation where meme is understood as related 
to the subject Sophie, Justine, et Clea in the higher clause. 

(30)  Sophie, Justine, et Clea  ont demande a Paul d'acheter le 

Sophie, Justine, and Clea asked Paul to buy 
meme ordinateur. 
same  computer 

SING DEF DET 

This example is grammatical under the assumed interpretation (with either the token or 
the type reading). However, it does not give rise to any implied plurality, as is shown 
by the fact that (31) is infelicitous for S. 

(31) *Sophie, Justine, et Clea  ont demande a Paul d'acheter le 

Sophie, Justine, and Clea asked Paul to buy 
meme ordinateur, et je crois savoir qu'ils sont tres vite tombes en panne. 
same  computer  and I suspect 

that they rapidly broke down 

SING DEF DET 

In fact, it turns out that an implied plurality may arise only when a strictly local structural 
relation holds between the singular definite phrase and the associated plural argument. 
Compare (32), which is ungrammatical in the dialect of S, to (26), which is grammatical 
in the same dialect. 

(32) *Sophie, Justine, et Clea  ont donne le 

Sophie, Justine, and Clea gave 
a Paul,  et je crois savoir qu'ils sont tres vite tombes en panne. 
to Paul, and I suspect 

that they rapidly broke down 

meme ordinateur 
SING DEF DETsame  computer 

The contrast between (26) and (32) suggests that the distributive interpretation can arise 
only if some specific grammatical relation holds between the singular definite argument 
and the plural one, such as the relation that ties together the two complements of a verb 
like donner 'to give'. The paradigm in (33)-(34) confirms that it is a specific grammatical 
relation, and not mere linear ordering of categories, that provides the context for the 
distributive interpretation. Compare (33) with (26) and (34) with (32). 

(33)  Le 

me&me ordinateur a ete remis par Paul 
SING DEF  DET same  computer was handed by Paul 
a Sophie, a Justine, et a Clea, 
et je crois savoir 
to Sophie, to Justine, and to Clea, and I suspect 
qu'ils sont tres vite tombes en panne. 
that they rapidly broke down 

(34) *Le 

meme ordinateur a ete remis a Paul 

SING  DEF  DET same  computer was handed to Paul 

608 

JEAN-ROGER 

VERGNAUD 

AND  MARIA 

LUISA 

ZUBIZARRETA 

par Sophie, par Justine, et par Clea, et je crois savoir 
by Sophie, by Justine, and by Clea,  and I suspect 
qu'ils sont tres vite tombes en panne. 
that they rapidly broke down 

On the basis of the paradigm constituted by the examples (26), (27), (31), (32), (33), and 
(34), and of similar data in the dialect of S, we propose the following hypothesis: 

(35)  A singular definite nominal expression may give rise to a distributive inter- 
pretation only if it is associated with a plural expression by the Predication 
relation. 16 

The Predication relation mentioned in (35) is the grammatical relation that may hold in 
syntax between a subject-taking category and its subject (the external argument in the 
sense of Williams (1981)). Following Williams (1980), we assume (36). 

(36)  Predication is a binding relation. 

The theory behind (36) stems from the observation that there is no unique structural 
relation in syntax that is associated with the relation subject-of. Sometimes the external 
argument is realized in [Spec,X], where X is the argument-taking predicate. However, 
there is often no direct structural relation in syntax between a category and its subject; 
instead, the relation is indirect, mediated either by a functional node like Inflection or 
by a morpheme like the nominative Case marker or the dative Case marker. It follows 
that, contrary to what happens in the case of a governed argument, the saturation relation 
between a category and its subject is not always "visible" as a particular constituent 
structure configuration and must be marked otherwise. It is the role of the binding relation 
that constitutes Predication to function as the syntactic projection of the subject-of re- 
lation in such cases. In essence, then, there are two cases: either the subject is realized 
within the maximal projection of the argument-taking category as the Specifier of that 
category, in which case Predication does not apply; or the subject is realized outside 
the maximal projection of  the argument-taking category and Predication does apply, 
binding that maximal projection to its subject. Thus, with Williams (1980), we assume 
that only maximal projections give rise to Predication, because it is only in such cases 
that the notion of subject is not identified as a particular constituent structure configu- 
ration. (See also the discussion in section 3.2.)"7 

Note that the theory just sketched does not state that there is no structural constraint 
on Predication. It merely states that there exists no particular constituent structure con- 

16 This statement is to be construed with the proviso in footnote 14. 
17 We should note that the interpretation of Predication proposed in the text in fact differs to some extent 
from that in Williams (1980). The latter work assumes that there is a primitive notion "predicate" and defines 
Predication as the relation between a predicate and its subject. By contrast, we are not postulating any primitive 
notion of "predicate." We recognize the existence of such objects as "predicates," but take "predicate" to 
be defined derivatively in terms of more primitive notions. See the discussion in section 3.4. Accordingly, we 
assume that "Predication" is not a relation restricted to predicates so defined. It really is what we say in the 
text, namely, the syntactic "signature" of the lexical argumental relation subject-of. 

THE  DEFINITE 

DETERMINER 

IN  FRENCH 

AND 

IN  ENGLISH 

609 

figuration that would uniformly function as the syntactic projection of subject-of. There 
are actually tight locality constraints on Predication (see Williams (1980)): 

(37)  Given a subject-taking category YP(u) and its subject XPu such that Predication 
holds between YP(u) and XPu, YP(u) and XPu must m-command each other. '8 
In other words, no maximal projection may intervene between two categories related 
by Predication. Note that the locality defined above should be understood in an extended 
sense. Specifically, nodes that may be separated by projections of nonlexical categories, 
such as  Inflection, governed Case markers (like dative), governed prepositions, and 
determiners with no denotational content ("expletive determiners"), will nevertheless 
qualify as m-commanding each other. Given our construal of "Predication" as a non- 
primitive notion (see footnote 17), the locality constraint in (37) really is a condition on 
the syntactic realization of the subject outside the maximal projection of the subject- 
taking head. That is, (37) entails that, given a subject-taking maximal projection YP(u) 
and its subject XPu, YP(u) and XPu must m-command each other. 

The import of defining Predication as a binding relation in the present context derives 
from the following general account of distributive interpretations, which we adopt in 
this article: 

(38)  A distributive interpretation is the interpretation that arises when a singular 
nominal expression is bound to a plural one or to a universally quantified one 
at S-Structure.19 

Note that the above hypothesis is intended as a "reductionist" explanation of the phe- 
nomenon of distributive interpretation. What we are claiming is that a distributive in- 
terpretation merely is the phenomenological correlate of the existence of a certain binding 
relation in syntax, and that this syntactic relation in fact exhausts the content of the 
phenomenon. In particular, (38), together with (35), means that the distributive inter- 
pretation that is found in forms such as (26) and (27) is merely an effect of the particular 
binding relation at play in Predication. 

To summarize, we adopt the reductionist account of distributive interpretations in 
(38) and the generalization in (35) concerning the interpretation of singular definite nom- 
inal phrases.20 With Williams (1980), we assume that Predication is defined as the binding 
relation that holds between a subject-taking category and its subject (see (36)) when the 

18 In a previous version of this article, we characterized the locality restriction on Predication as a sis- 
terhood requirement on the two related categories. In the present version, we adopt a suggestion by L. Rizzi, 
using mutual m-command instead of sisterhood as the proper locality requirement for Predication. M-command 
is defined as follows: 

(i)  x m-commands y iffx does not dominate y and every maximal projection z that dominates x dominates 

y- 

See Chomsky (1986, 8), Aoun and Sportiche (1983). Nothing crucial hinges on this particular choice of the 
locality restriction for Predication (but see footnotes 34, 48, and 49). 

19 This general hypothesis of course assumes a nonstandard view of the formalization of relative scopes; 

see footnote 8. 

20 Again keeping in mind the proviso in footnote 14. 

610 

JEAN-ROGER 

VERGNAUD 

AND  MARIA 

LUISA 

ZUBIZARRETA 

latter is  realized outside the maximal projection of the former.21 Furthermore, Predi- 
cation is governed by the m-command constraint (see (37)). 

Having provided a  description of  the  syntactic context that permits distributive 
interpretations in general, as well as in the more particular case of definite expressions, 
we now turn to the central question in (29a), repeated here. 

(29) a.  What is the source of the correlation between the type interpretation and 
the distributive interpretation observed in such structures as (26) and (27)? 
This question in fact concerns the relation between the form and the interpretation of 
nominal phrases. Therefore, we shall divide our discussion into two parts. In section 
2.2 we shall discuss and formalize the interpretive notions "token" and "type," and in 
section 2.3 we shall turn to the basic syntax of nominal phrases and its relation to the 
token/type distinction. 

2.2.  On  Types and  Tokens 
We shall assume that the distinction between type interpretation and token interpretation 
is described in terms of an autonomous level of representation of sentence grammar that 
we shall call L-Structure. L-Structure is defined as follows: 

(39)  L-Structure  is a set  of elements  D  =  {i,j,k,  .  .  .} such that each  element  of D 

is associated with some nominal phrase in the sentence. 

Following Zubizarreta and Vergnaud (1992), we shall call the elements of L-Structure 
denotata. For concreteness, we may assume that denotata are integers, or letters, or 
both (see below). Given some nominal expression XP in a sentence s  such that XP is 
associated with the denotatum n in the L-Structure representation of s, we say that "XP 
denotes n." 22  As an illustration, consider (40). 

(40)  The children dislike Disneyland. 

The L-Structure representation associated with this sentence is  the set of  indices in 
(41a), where i and j  are integers and where the mapping between nominal expressions 
and denotata is as shown in (41b). 

(41) a. 
b. 

{i, j} 

{([NP 

the children],i), ([NP  Disneyland],j)} 

Thus,  in (40) the  children denotes  i and Disneyland  denotes j. 

21 The view that Predication is a binding relation obviously requires some expounding. Note that this view 
has implications for the treatment of anaphors (in the technical sense of that notion; see Chomsky (1981)). 
Specifically, the coindexing of a subject and its predicate will be excluded by the i-within-i Condition (see 
Chomsky (1981, 212)) whenever that subject binds an anaphor. 

22 The term denotation defined here then has a different meaning from the one (ones) found in the philo- 
sophical tradition. There, the word denotation has been used to express a variety of relations between linguistic 
and nonlinguistic entities. On the contrary, the notion in the text refers to a relation among linguistic entities. 

THE  DEFINITE 

DETERMINER 

IN  FRENCH 

AND 

IN  ENGLISH 

611 

It appears, then, that L-Structure will in fact function as an indexing of nominal 
categories. We argue elsewhere that L-Structure is to be identified with domain D  in 
the sense of Chomsky (1981); see Zubizarreta and Vergnaud (1992). Henceforth, we shall 
then refer to L-Structure as domain D. We should point out, however, that the notion 
of denotation assumed here is more abstract than the one assumed in relation to the 
usual and intuitive notion of domain D. In fact, the notion of denotation assumed here 
is intended to be independent of the notion of reference: there are nonreferential denoting 
expressions  as  well as  referential ones.  Although the distinction between  denotation  and 
referentiality will not play a central role in this article, we mention it for the sake of 
precision (but see the analysis of the "PP construction" at the end of section 4). This 
of  course raises the  question of  which nominal expressions denote. To  answer that 
question would take us far beyond the scope of this article. Suffice it to say that the 
class of denoting expressions includes referential expressions and possibly certain non- 
referential definite and indefinite expressions.23 

As things now stand, an elementary formalization such as the one in (41) is a no- 
tational variant of one that would include no notion of domain D,  but instead would 
postulate a syntactic feature [D] and assign that feature to expressions that denote in 
the above sense. The import of domain D derives from the existence of relations between 
denotata that cannot be reduced to S-Structure relations. Of particular relevance is the 
distinction between types and tokens. We assume that we are dealing here with a dis- 
tinction among elements in domain D.  Specifically, domain D is partitioned into two 
classes  of  entities, entities of the kind "type" and entities of the kind "token."  We 
postulate that: 

(42)  The typeltoken distinction is a primitive distinction within grammatical theory 

that is represented in domain D. 

Given our assumptions, types and tokens are mental entities, in fact grammatical entities. 
We are not dealing here in any way with the question of how these entities are associated 
with objects in the world. Clearly, a complete theory of mental capacities will have to 
consider this issue.  Here we  shall note only that whereas tokens may or may not be 

23 The status of domain D with respect to sentence grammar has never been precisely defined. Our hy- 

pothesis means that domain D should be construed as a level of representation of sentence grammar. 

The distinction between reference and denotation pointed out in the text is reflected as a difference in 
theoretical status within the present model. Although a special level is allocated to the formalization of de- 
notation, there is no equivalent level for reference. In fact, we assume that: 

(i)  Grammar does not include any autonomous level of representation that would be the set of entities 

referred to by the nominal expressions in the sentence. 

See footnote 6 as well. 

At an abstract level, there is some similarity between positing the notion of domain D that is assumed 
here and introducing a notion of discourse domain, in the sense of Kamp (1984) and Heim (1982). Note however 
that domain D in the sense of the text is intended as a level of sentence grammar and not, strictly speaking, 
as a discourse representation. There are other significant differences between the notion of domain of denotata 
in the sense of the text and that of discourse representation, which have to do with the representation of 
quantified expressions. We discuss these points in further detail in forthcoming work. 

612 

JEAN-ROGER 

VERGNAUD 

AND  MARIA 

LUISA 

ZUBIZARRETA 

directly associated with objects in the world, types may not be so associated. A type 
may be associated with an object in the world only indirectly, by instantiation as a token: 

(43)  Instantiation is a primitive relation between tokens and types in domain D. 

Each token is an instantiation of some type. 

The distinction between types and tokens has been argued to be grammatically relevant 
by Carlson (1977). Roughly, Carlson argues that, in English, generic bare plural noun 
phrases refer to  "kinds" (e.g.,  Whales are mammals), whereas existential bare plural 
noun phrases refer to temporal/spatial "stages" of kinds (e.g.,  Whales are swimming in 
my pool). Here, we extend the notion of "kind" or "type" to subsume such nongeneric 
noun phrases as those discussed in section 2.1 and some of the inalienable noun phrases 
that we shall analyze in section 3. 24 

2.3.  The Structure  of Nominal  Expressions  and  the Correspondence  Law 

Following Abney (1987), Brame (1981; 1982), Chomsky (1986), Fukui and Speas (1986), 
Hellan (1986), Kolb and Thiersch (1986), Thiersch (1985), and others, we assume that 
the  category D(eterminer), like  other functional categories such as  I(nflection) and 
C(omplementizer), falls under the X-bar schema. More precisely, we assume that D is 
a  head  giving  rise  to  a  maximal projection and  taking the  NP  projection as  a 
complement. This hypothesis is embodied in the diagram in (44). 

(44) 

DP 

D 

NP 

Second, we  shall assume that the Correspondence Law in (45) governs the rela- 
tionship between syntactic categories and semantic types in the case of nonpronominal 
definite nominal expressions.25 

(45)  Correspondence  Law 

When a DP or an NP denotes, the DP denotes a token and the NP denotes a 
type.26 

In a structure of the form in (44), the DP may bear a token-index and the NP may bear 

24  See Zubizarreta and Vergnaud (1992) for further discussion of generic nominal expressions, as well as 
for a discussion of the differences and similarities between our type/token distinction and Carlson's. See also 
section 5 below for a brief discussion of generics. 

25  Stowell (1987) has also proposed a correspondence law for DPs and NPs. He suggests that DPs are 
referential arguments, whereas NPs are nonreferential predicates. This hypothesis provides an elegant and 
insightful account of certain structures. We believe, however, that the behavior of French inalienables as well 
as the behavior of certain generics in English (briefly discussed in section 5) supports a Correspondence Law 
along the lines of (45) over the version that Stowell proposes. 

26 Given the existence of the Correspondence Law, one might question the necessity of the hypothesis 
in (42), according to which the distinction between types and tokens is a primitive one within domain D. We 
shall argue in section 5 that, indeed, that distinction cannot be reduced to a syntactic one (between DPs and 
NPs). 

THE  DEFINITE 

DETERMINER 

IN  FRENCH 

AND 

IN  ENGLISH 

613 

a type-index. We shall use numbers (1, 2, 3,  . . .) to designate tokens and lower-case 
letters  (i, j,  k,  .  .  .)  to  designate  types.  To  illustrate,  (46)  is  the  indexed  constituent 
structure for the token-denoting (nonpronominal) definite nominal expression ce  chat 
'this cat'. 

(46) 

DP, 

DI 

ce 

NPj 

chat 

Although it is generally assumed that the complementation relation between a lexical 
head and its sister encodes a thematic relation, what semantic relation, if any, is encoded 
by the complementation relation between D and NP is often left undiscussed. Our hy- 
pothesis is that the complementation relation between D and NP in structures like (46) 
is the projection of the instantiation relation that holds in domain D between the token 
I denoted by DP and the type j denoted by NP. In (46) the token I instantiates the type 
chat  'cat'.  We are thus claiming that the NP  contained within a token-denoting DP 
denotes and, furthermore, that it denotes a type. This claim finds motivation in examples 
of backward pronominalization like (47). 

(47)  Parce que leurs griffes peuvent devenir acerees avec l'age, Marie 
Marie 

because their nails can become sharp with age, 
a decide d'acheter des chaussettes a ce chaton. 
decided to buy socks for this kitten 

Recall that we assume that the pronoun in a backward pronominalization structure re- 
quires a referential antecedent (see footnote 6 and the discussion of (13) and (14)). In 
(47) the generic pronoun leursltheir has as antecedent the referential NP chatonlkitten 
contained within the DP ce chatonlthis kitten. Since a referential expression necessarily 
denotes, (47) establishes that the NP component in ce chaton denotes.27 

27  (i) and (ii) give other examples illustrating that an NP contained within a DP may pronominalize back- 

ward. 

(i)  Because they are usually well illustrated, every child bought a book on animals. 
(ii)  Because they are usually well illustrated, John decided to buy the book on animals on the shelf. 

Note that the pronoun in (47) and in (i)-(ii) is plural despite the fact that the NP antecedent is singular. Such 
examples contrast with the ones in (iii)-(iv), where a singular generic NP pronominalizes backward as a singular 
pronoun. 

(iii)  Quand il est affamd, le lionlun lion peut etre dangereux. 
(iv)  When it is hungry, the tionla lion can be dangerous. 

An additional relevant fact is that an NP associated with a genitive possessor may not pronominalize backward: 
(v)  *Parce qu'ils ont beaucoup de succes aupres des enfants, on a ddcide d'acheter le livre de Gallimard 

(vi) *Because they are usually popular with children, we decided to buy Gallimard's book on animals for 

sur les animaux pour notre fils. 

our son. 

We address these issues in forthcoming work. 

614 

JEAN-ROGER 

VERGNAUD 

AND  MARIA 

LUISA 

ZUBIZARRETA 

As a further illustration, consider (24) again. 

(24)  On 

a donne le 

meme ordinateur 
SING DEF DETsame  computer 

someone gave 
'a Sophie,  'a Justine,  et  'a Cle'a. 
to Sophie, to Justine, and to Clea 

Recall that this sentence is ambiguous between a token and a type interpretation. Under 
the token interpretation, the DP l'ordinateur in (24) denotes a token that instantiates the 
type denoted by the NP ordinateur (for the sake of simplicity, we ignore the adjective 
meme). The denotational relations associated with such a token-denoting expression can 
be depicted by means of the diagram in (48), where the arrow a 
d  b represents the 
relation "a denotes b" and where the arrow a 
b represents the relation "b instan- 
tiates a." 

(48) 

i 

d ( 

/d 

[DP  le 

[NP  ordinateur]] 

By contrast, under the type interpretation of (24), the nominal expression l'ordinateur 
denotes the type "computer" but is not associated with any token instantiation of that 
type, by definition. Given the Correspondence Law, it must then be the case that, under 
the type  interpretation of  l'ordinateur, the definite determiner le  does  not bear any 
denotational index. In other words, under the type interpretation, le functions as an 
expletive from the point of view of denotation. The corresponding constituent and de- 
notational structure of the nominal phrase l'ordinateur in (24) is depicted in (49). 

(49) 

i 

d 

[DP  le  [NP  ordinateur]] 

Since the determiner D in (49) bears no denotational index (does not denote), there is 
no instantiation relation within domain D that could license the head/complement relation 

THE  DEFINITE 

DETERMINER 

IN  FRENCH 

AND 

IN  ENGLISH 

615 

between D and NP in (49) by projection.28 The question then is, What licenses the head/ 
complement relation in such a structure? We would like to suggest that (49) is a case 
where the complementation relation between D and NP is morphologically licensed, by 
the overt person, number, and gender agreement relation that holds between the deter- 
miner and its complement NP (as in the case of Agr and VP). If correct, this hypothesis 
makes some interesting predictions concerning cross-linguistic variations, which we shall 
discuss in section 4. 

We have just put forth a hypothesis that will turn out to be crucial for our account 
of  the correlation between the type interpretation and the distributive interpretation 
observed with such structures as (26) and (27). We restate this hypothesis in (50). 

(50)  In French the definite determiner le may function as an expletive from the 

point of view of denotation. 

We are now in a position to answer the first question in (29): Why is there a correlation 
between the type interpretation and the distributive reading (as in (26) and (27))? Recall 
that in section 1 we suggested that inalienables are subject-taking nouns. Other nouns 
like ordinateur and chemisier may function as inalienables by extension. This means 
that they may be analyzed as  taking an external argument. We represent the corre- 
sponding structure for ordinateur in (51).29 

(51) 

DP 

D 

NP(x) 

N(x) 

le 

ordinateur(x) 

formal level of description: both items fail to denote. 

28  Note that the definite determiner in a type-denoting expression is comparable to a quantifier at this 
In a previous version of this article, we had assumed that the grammatical relation holding between an 
expletive determiner and the NP was different from that holding between a denotational determiner and the 
NP. Namely, we had assumed that, whereas a denotational determiner governs the NP, an expletive determiner 
is adjoined to it; see Vergnaud and Zubizarreta (1990). We have abandoned this hypothesis, essentially because 
we could not find any independent evidence to support it. 

29 The alternative analysis in (i) is excluded because a determiner is not an argument-taking category. 
(i) 

DP(x) 

D(x) 
I 
le(x) 

NP 
I 

ordinateur 

616 

JEAN-ROGER 

VERGNAUD 

AND  MARIA 

LUISA 

ZUBIZARRETA 

Given the representation in (51), the VP in (26) will then be analyzed as in (52), with 
the category DP, binding NPj(x).30 We choose here to represent the VP as a left-binary- 
branching structure. At this point, nothing essential hinges on this particular decision 
(but see section 3.4 for further discussion, as well as footnotes 34, 48, and 49). We use 
a slash index to indicate binding.3' 

(52) 

VP 

V 

' 

V 

DP 

PPdat 

/\\\\NPNj(x)/, 

D> 

P, 

D 
I 
le 

donner 

Nj(x) 
I 

ordinateur(x) 

dative 
I 
a 

Sophie, etc. 

By (37), the structure in (52) will be well formed to the extent that the DP Sophie, Justine, 
et Clea and the NP ordinateur m-command each other. As a nonlexical category, the 
dative Case marker in (52) does not define a barrier for m-command.32 But what about 
the determiner le in the direct object l'ordinateur? For mutual m-command to obtain 
between the dative complement and the NP ordinateur in (52), that determiner must be 
an expletive from the point of  view of  denotation (i.e.,  it must bear no denotational 
index). This means, by the Correspondence Law, that the nominal expression in direct 
object position must receive the type interpretation. Conversely, the structure in (52) 
would be ill formed under the token interpretation. Under that interpretation, the de- 
terminer would bear a denotational index and Predication would fail to apply, by failure 
of  mutual m-command. As  a  consequence, the argument-variable of  the  inalienable 
phrase would not receive any interpretation: the structure would be ruled out by the 
Principle of Full Interpretation (see Chomsky (1986)). 

30 It is not necessarily the case that the subject-of relation will hold between the complements of a verb 

such as donner 'give'. Consider the following example: 

(i)  La France a vendu le 

meme char a l'Iran et a l'Irak. 
SING  DEF  DET  same  tank to Iran and to Iraq 

France 

sold 

In the absence of any other context, this sentence clearly has the type interpretation. On the other hand, 
contrary to what happens in (24) or (25), it does not give rise to any distributive interpretation. On our view, 
this reflects the fact that no argument relation holds between the direct object and the dative complement in 
(i). 

31  For convenience, we have omitted the adjective meme from the direct object of donner. 
32 The term barrier here should be understood in its everyday sense, not in the technical sense defined 

in Chomsky (1986). 

THE  DEFINITE 

DETERMINER 

IN  FRENCH 

AND 

IN  ENGLISH 

617 

To summarize so far, we have identified a remarkable property of certain definite 
phrases in French, which we have analyzed as inalienable phrases in an extended sense. 
These are phrases headed by lexical items such as the kinship terms mother, uncle, sister 
.  . .,  as well  as  computer,  car,  office,  house,  bedroom  .  . 
,  shirt, shoes  .  .  .,  picture, 
portrait..  .  Such phrases in the singular will give rise to an implied plurality by virtue 
of being associated with a plural possessor. We have provided an analysis of this property 
based on three basic hypotheses: 

(53) a.  A singular definite expression (see the proviso in footnote 14) will give rise 
to an implied plurality only if it has the type interpretation: a singular phrase 
that gives rise to an implied plurality is a type-denoting expression. 

b.  A singular definite expression (see the proviso in footnote 14) will give rise 
to an implied plurality only if a semantic dependency obtains: a singular 
phrase that gives rise to an implied plurality is a semantically dependent 
phrase (i.e.,  a phrase with an unsaturated argument-variable). 

c.  A Correspondence Law holds, which implies that a type-denoting expres- 
sion cannot be analyzed as a denoting DP. The definite determiner in a 
type-denoting expression is then an expletive from the point of view of 
denotation. 

Given the above hypotheses, if a definite phrase in direct object position denotes a type, 
its determiner will have the status of an expletive and will be transparent to the rule of 
Predication. The NP  complement of  the expletive determiner (or more precisely, its 
argument-variable) will then become accessible to binding-via  Predication-by  an ar- 
gument external to the direct object (namely, by the dative complement of the verb). 
Our central claim is then that the distributive interpretation arises as a consequence of 
the binding relation that exists between the dative argument of the verb and the variable 
contained in the definite phrase in direct object position. 

3.  The Syntax and Interpretation of the Inalienable Constructions 
We now turn to constructions with inalienable body-part phrases. In section r we pointed 
out that some of these constructions give rise to the distributivity effect. In section 2 
we examined other constructions that give rise to the same effect. Instead of body-part 
nouns, the latter constructions contain nouns that we classify as "extended inalienables' 
(because, like body-part nouns, they may be analyzed as taking an external argument). 
On the basis of the "extended inalienable" constructions, we have motivated an analysis 
of the distributivity phenomenon that is founded on the central hypothesis that definite 
nominal phrases that give  rise to  the distributivity effect are type-denoting nominal 
phrases concatenated with an expletive determiner (i.e.,  a determiner with no denota- 
tional content). According to this analysis, type-denoting expressions but not token- 

3  Tellier (1988) also argues, on the basis of an analysis of a different phenomenon, that such nouns may 

be analyzed as inalienables by extension. 

618 

JEAN-ROGER 

VERGNAUD 

AND  MARIA 

LUISA 

ZUBIZARRETA 

denoting expressions may give rise to the distributivity effect. This analysis leads to the 
following conjecture concerning inalienable constructions: 

(54)  In those cases in which the inalienable construction gives rise to the distrib- 
utivity effect, the inalienable phrase denotes a type. In the other cases,  the 
inalienable phrase denotes a token. 

We  shall now proceed to  flesh  out the above conjecture. We examine the ext-poss 
construction in section 3.1 and the int-poss construction in section 3.2. In section 3.3 
we analyze the behavior of modifiers in the different constructions. 

3.1.  The Ext-Poss  Construction 
We showed in section 1 that the inalienable phrase in the ext-poss construction gives 
rise to the distributivity effect (see (7)). According to (54), this implies that the inalienable 
phrase denotes a type. The logic of the analysis of the "extended inalienable" cases in 
section 2 applies to the ext-poss construction in exactly the same way. As an example, 
consider  the  VP  structure  (55) of  the  example  in (Sb): Le  medecin  a  examine' la  gorge 
aux enfants. (We shall not discuss the status of the dative complement in such examples 
here.  Kayne (1975) shows that this complement is  to  be  analyzed as  a  malefactive/ 
benefactive complement of the verb (i.e.,  a complement affected by the action or state 
referred to), and not as a possessor moved out of the direct object and into the VP. We 
shall use a "small clause" representation. At this point, nothing hinges on this particular 
choice, but see section 3.4 for discussion.)34 

(55) 

V 

VP 

DP 

SCdat 

PPdat 

examiner 

D 

NP3(x)/1 

Pdat 

DP, 

NA(x) 

a 

les enfants 

la 

gorge(x) 

3  L. Rizzi (personal communication) points out that a small clause analysis will possibly explain the fixed 
order between the direct object and the dative complement in a structure like (55). Thus, the following form 
is ungrammatical, contrasting with (5): 

(i)  *Le medecin a examine aux enfants 

gorge. 
the doctor  examined to the children SING  DEF  DET  throat 

la 

THE  DEFINITE 

DETERMINER 

IN  FRENCH  AND 

IN  ENGLISH 

619 

Recall that Case markers (like the dative preposition) and expletive elements (like the 
indexless determiner in la gorge) do not constitute "barriers" for Predication. Therefore, 
Predication may associate the NP gorge with the dative complement in (55). Thus, NPj(x) 
is interpreted as bound to DP,. This binding relation creates or gives rise to a new token 
denotatum, which is a plurality of instantiations of the inalienable type ('stomach' in (4) 
and 'throat' in (5)). This plurality of inalienable tokens is not part of the domain D of 
the given sentence, but is part of the domain D of subsequent sentences, as illustrated 
by the fact that, for some speakers, such sentences may contain pronouns manifesting 
the implied plurality (see the contrast between (7) and (8)). 

As in (52), the inalienable phrase in direct object position may not be analyzed as 
a token-denoting DP. If it were so analyzed, the denoting determiner would block the 
Predication relation between NPj(x) and the dative complement. The argument-variable 
of the inalienable phrase would remain uninterpreted and the structure would then be 
ill formed. 

Independent motivation for analyzing the inalienable phrase in the ext-poss con- 
struction as a type-denoting expression is provided by another property of this construc- 
tion discussed in section 1. Recall that, as attested by the ungrammaticality of (15), in 
the ext-poss construction an inalienable phrase headed by a noun like estomac 'stomach' 
or gorge  'throat' is necessarily singular, whether it is associated with a singular or a 
plural possessor.  We believe that this is due to the inherent semantics of human in- 
alienable body parts as types. As we noted at the outset, inalienables are semantically 
dependent  entities.  Specifically,  human  inalienable  body-part  types  are  defined  with 
respect  to a typical individual "human,"  which has two hands, two arms, two legs,  etc., 
but one stomach, one throat, one nose, etc. This means, in particular, that the number 
of a body-part noun is regulated by its interpretability with respect to the typical indi- 
vidual "human": a body-part noun in the singular (resp. plural) will be well formed if 
and only if the corresponding singular (resp. plural) denotation is defined as a body-part 
type within the mental representation of  the typical individual "human." Thus, the 
singular form hand and the plural form hands are both interpretable because both denote 
body-part types: there is a body part called hand, as well as one called hands. By contrast, 
a plural form such as stomachs cannot be interpreted as denoting a plural type, because 
there is no part of the human body that is so called within the mental representation of 
the individual "human" (a plural such as stomachs will show up only in association with 
a plural token-denoting determiner; see the agreement rule (72) in section 3.2.2). In other 
words, inalienable types  such as  estomac 'stomach', gorge  'throat', nez 'nose',  and 
bouche 'mouth' are inherently singular, whereas inalienable body parts such as main 
'hand', bras 'arm', and jambe 'leg' may be either singular or plural. Note that the body 

The behavior of the dative in the ext-poss construction thus differs from that of the dative complement of a 
verb like donner 'to give'. The latter can be permuted around the direct object: 

(ii)  On 

a donne a Sophie et a Justine 

le 

someone gave 

to Sophie and to Justine SING  DEF  DET  same  computer 

meme ordinateur. 

620 

JEAN-ROGER 

VERGNAUD 

AND  MARIA 

LUISA 

ZUBIZARRETA 

part denoted by the plural form mains 'hands' is the indivisible set of two hands in the 
mental representation of the individual "human." This explains the observation that we 
made with respect to the interpretation of (9), repeated here as (56). 

(56)  On leur a lave  les  mains. 

Since the plural form les mains denotes a type, it is understood as denoting an indivisible 
set of two hands, which, when bound to a plurality of possessors, must be indivisibly 
distributed among them. For example, if there are three token possessors, the inalienable 
type denoted by les mains implies three instantiations of a pair of hands. 

If we are correct that the binding relation between the inalienable phrase and the 
possessor is established via Predication in the ext-poss construction, then we expect 
that this construction will obey strict locality constraints. The local nature of the con- 
struction has, in effect, been extensively discussed in the literature (see Kayne (1975), 
Gueron (1985), Authier (1988), and Tellier (1988), among others). This point is illustrated 
by the ill-formedness of the examples in (57). 

(57) a.  *Pierre est tombe et 

la 

tete  a heurte le trottoir.35 

Pierre fell 

and SING  DEF  DET  head hit 

the curb 

b.  *Pierre pense  que le 

bras est casse. 

Pierre thinks that SING  DEF  DET  arm  broke 

c.  *La 

main lui 

a semble etre tres enflee. 

SING  DEF  DET  hand to him seemed  to be very much swollen 

Predication adequately captures the local nature of the ext-poss construction. In other 
words, the  inalienable phrase and the  associated possessor  must m-command each 
other.36 

3  But see section 5 and footnote 63 for further discussion. 
36 As noted by Kayne (1975), the dative complement that is construed with the inalienable internal argument 

of the verb may be provided by a higher causative verb such as faire. Compare (i) and (ii). 

(i)  Le soleil lui 

a fait rougir la peau. 
the sun  to him made redden the skin 

(ii) *La peau lui 

a rougi. 

the skin to him reddened 

This phenomenon is possible only to the extent that faire and the verb embedded under it undergo reanalysis. 

Examples like (iii) are presumably unaccusative constructions, as suggested by Gudron (1985). 
(iii)  La tete  lui 

tourne. 

the head to him spins 
'His head spins.' 

Thus, the mutual m-command relation between the dative and the inalienable phrase would be established at 
D-Structure, as in passive structures like (iv). 

(iv)  La dent cariee 

a etd arrachee par le dentiste. 
the decayed tooth to him was pulled out by the dentist 

lui 

But the facts are somewhat more complex, as the following contrast (noted by Authier (1988, 184-185)) 

shows: 

(v)  *La tete  lui 

a heurte le plafond du cockpit. 

the head to him hit 

the ceiling of the cockpit 

THE  DEFINITE 

DETERMINER 

IN  FRENCH 

AND 

IN  ENGLISH 

621 

There is  however one type of prima facie counterexample to the Predication hy- 
pothesis-namely,  the example in (la), where the subject is interpreted as the possessor 
of the inalienable phrase in object position. But as noted by Kayne (1975) and Gueron 
(1985), this construction is lexically restricted. In French it is found only with verbs that 
denote body movements, such as lever 'raise', bouger 'move', ouvrir 'open', claquer 
'snap', and froncer 'frown'. Thus, compare the examples in (58), which are well formed, 
with the ones in (59), which are ill formed. 

(58) a.  Les hommes ont lev6 le 

the men 

raised 

bras. 
SING  DEF  DET  arm 

b.  Les hommes ont claque les 

c.  Les hommes ont ouvert les 

b.  *Les hommes ont rase la 

c.  *Les hommes ont casse la 

(59) a.  *Les hommes ont lave le 

visage. 

the men 

the men 

the men 

the men 

the men 

doigts. 
snapped  PL  DEF  DETfingers 
yeux. 
PL  DEF  DET  eyes 

opened 

washed  SING  DEF  DET  face 

barbe. 
shaved  SING  DEF  DET  beard 
tete. 
SING  DEF  DET  head 

broke 

Following Gueron (1985), we may assume that the verbs in (58) differ from those in (59) 
in that they trigger reanalysis. The reanalysis hypothesis coupled with the hypothesis 
that the definite determiner in French may have the status of an expletive (and as such 
is transparent to the rule of Predication) gives rise to the appropriate structural con- 
figuration for Predication to relate the subject not only to the verb but also to the in- 
alienable noun in object position. For example, consider the VP lever le bras in (58a). 
The determiner le is an expletive and is therefore transparent with respect to Predication. 
Furthermore, because of reanalysis, the VP is interpreted as a projection of the complex 

(vi)  Les genoux lui 

ont heurtd le menton. 

the knees 

to him hit 

the chin 

We will not attempt to account for (v)-(vi) here; we simply note that the "closeness" of the dative clitic to 
the inalienable phrase in subject position is a necessary (but not sufficient) prerequisite for the well-formedness 
of (vi). The dative clitic is  probably attached to Infl (as suggested by Authier (1988)) and thus counts as 
m-commanding the subject. This observation is supported by the ill-formedness of (vii), where les  genoux  is 
interpreted as belonging to Pierre. 

(vii) *Les genoux ont heurte le menton de Pierre. 
the chin  of Pierre 

the knees  hit 

As one reviewer points out, the structure in (vi) is reminiscent of constructions with parasitic gaps, in the 
sense that there is one binder (lui)  for two bindees (genoux  and menton).  The import of the observation is 
weakened by the fact that clitics are known not to license parasitic gaps (see Chomsky (1982)). 

See also section 4 for a discussion of PP constructions of the kind in (viii). 

(viii)  Marie a embrasse les enfants  sur la joue. 

Marie kissed 

the children on the cheek 

622 

JEAN-ROGER 

VERGNAUD 

AND  MARIA 

LUISA 

ZUBIZARRETA 

predicate lever le bras. Predication then binds the external argument-variable of lever 
le bras to the subject les hommes, giving rise to the distributivity effect.37 

3.2.  The Int-Poss  Construction 
As we observed in section 1. 1, an int-poss construction with a plural possessor does not 
necessarily give rise to a distributivity effect. We shall present the analysis of the struc- 
ture that gives rise to the distributivity effect in section 3.2.1, and the analysis of the 
structure that lacks this property in section 3.2.2. We shall claim that the inalienable 
phrase in the former structure denotes a type, and we shall refer to the corresponding 
structure as the type construction. On the other hand, we shall claim that the inalienable 
phrase in the latter structure denotes a token, and we shall refer to the corresponding 
structure as the token construction. 

We begin with some general preliminaries concerning the analysis of prenominal 

possessors in French. Consider the following forms: 
chevaux 

leurs 
Poss(3RD  PERS PL)/POSS-ED(PL)  horses 

(60) a. 

b. 

cheval 
leur 
Poss(3RD  PERS PL)/POSS-ED(SING)  horse 

In French the pronominal possessor is morphologically marked for two distinct number 
features: the number corresponding to the possessor and the number corresponding to 
the possessed object. This can be clearly seen in the paraphrases given in (61), where 
the possessor and the object of possession are realized as distinct morphemes. 

(61) a. 

b. 

chevaux a 

eux 
les 
PL  DEF  DET horses  DAT their 
eux 
le 
SING  DEF  DET horse  DAT their 

cheval a 

37 In Norwegian the class of verbs that trigger reanalysis is somewhat different from that in French. In 
Norwegian there is a class of verbs that allow the short form of the reflexive (the clitic seg).  As in Dutch, 
these verbs can be characterized as the verbs that take an "affected" object (see Zubizarreta (1987)). It is this 
class of verbs that allow for a definite inalienable phrase in direct object position (we owe this observation to 
L. Johnsen): 

(i)  De  vasket  seg/ansiktet. 
they washed self/the face 

(ii)  De  barberte seg/skjegget. 
they shaved  self/the beard 

(iii)  De  reiste seg/hodet. 

they raised self/the head 

Compare these examples with (iv)-(v). 
(iv)  Han stolte pa seg selv/*seg. 
trusted  himself/*self 

he 

(v)  Han stolte pa sitt hode/*hodet. 
trusted  his head/*the head 

he 

THE  DEFINITE 

DETERMINER 

IN  FRENCH 

AND 

IN  ENGLISH 

623 

In (60a) the possessor and the possessed arguments are both plural, as shown by the 
paraphrase in (61a). In (61a) the plural possessor surfaces in postnominal position as a 
dative. Plurality of the possessed argument is indicated by the plurality of the determiner, 
as well as by the plurality of the noun with which it agrees. In (60b) the possessor is 
plural, but the possessed argument is singular. This is shown by the paraphrase in (61b), 
where the plural possessor is realized as a postnominal dative. The singularity of the 
possessed argument is indicated by the singular mark on the noun and on the agreeing 
determiner.3 

The paraphrases in (61) suggest that the prenominal possessive determiner illustrated 
in (60) should be analyzed as the product of a transformation that conflates the definite 
determiner (which carries the token index of the possessed argument) and the genitive 
pronominal possessor in [Spec,DP]. Accordingly, we shall posit the rule of morphological 
conflation in (62), which we shall call Suppletion. 

(62)  IDP pronoun [D'  determiner]] --> suppleted form 

To illustrate, (60a) will be analyzed as in (63a) and (60b) as in (63b). Suppletion spells 
out eux  +  les  as leurs and eux  ?  le as leur. 

(63) a. 

DP, 

b. 

DP, 

Spec 

D 

SpecD' 

eux2 

DI 

les 

NPj 

N 

chevaux 

eux2 

DI 

le 

NPj 

N 

cheval 

38 The following table gives the complete paradigm for the pronominal possessor in French (Foss  stands 

for possessor and Foss-ed  for object of possession): 

Sing  Foss-ed 

Sing Poss 

P1 Poss 

1  mon 
2 
ton 
3 
son 
1  notre 
2  votre 
3 
leur 

FI Foss-ed 
mes 
tes 
ses 

nos 
vos 
leurs 

624 

JEAN-ROGER 

VERGNAUD 

AND  MARIA 

LUISA 

ZUBIZARRETA 

In French (as in other Romance languages) prenominal possessors are always pronom- 
inal. Full-fledged lexical possessors appear only in postnominal position. This could be 
attributed to the fact that in French (as in other Romance languages) genitive Case is 
not assigned to the left; it is assigned to the right of the nominal head. The morphological 
conflation rule could then be seen as a rule that allows the prenominal pronominal pos- 
sessor in the [Spec,DP] position to escape the Case Filter. Because of this suppletion 
process, the pronoun is  exempted from the Case Filter.39 Of course, nonpronominal 
lexical items, which constitute an open class, cannot undergo such a suppletion process 
by definition. In order to reduce the number of possible analyses, we shall assume that, 
in  the  unmarked case,  functional categories license  Case by  Spec-head agreement, 
whereas lexical categories license Case under government.40 Accordingly, we assume 
that, in French, genitive Case is assigned to an XP either if it is the complement of N 
or if it is in the [Spec,DP]. We formulate the rule in (64) (genitive Case surfaces as the 
preposition de). 

(64)  Genitive  Case  Assignment 

Genitive Case is assigned to XP if XP is to the right of D/N and either XP is 
in the [Spec,DP] or XP is governed by N. 

It is reasonable to assume that a possessor 0-role is never realized as an internal argument 
of the noun, just as an agent 0-role is never realized as an internal argument of the verb 
(due to general mapping constraints). This mapping constraint, in conjunction with the 
structural conditions on the rule of genitive Case assignment formulated in (64), implies 
that a possessor is unambiguously analyzed as the [Spec,DP]. More precisely, it is never 
analyzed as the [Spec,NP] at S-Structure. Furthermore, given the directionality of gen- 
itive Case assignment, a nonpronominal lexical possessor will surface to the right of D. 
This is illustrated in (65). 

(65)  a. 

b. 

chevaux  des  enfants 

les 
PL  DEF  DET  horses 
le 
SING  DEF  DET  horse  of  the children 

cheval  des  enfants 

of  the  children 

Note that in the structures in (63) the noun is analyzed as an alienable noun (i.e., 

3  Italian differs from French and other Romance languages in this respect. In Italian a prenominal pos- 

sessor coexists with the determiner: 

(i) 

la 
SING  DEF  DET  POSS  FEM  3RD  SING/PL  house 

sualloro 

casa 

It could be that Italian uses a process of "possessor incorporation" instead of morphological suppletion. Thus, 
in Italian the determiner and the possessor would both be dominated by the node D. This idea is supported 
by the fact that no lexical material may intervene between the determiner and the prenominal possessor in 
Italian. It remains to be seen what the implications of such a hypothesis are for the structure of noun phrases 
in that language. We thank A. Belletti for a discussion of this point. 

40 We assume that X governs YP if the first branching node that dominates X dominates YP and no maximal 

projection intervenes. 

THE  DEFINITE 

DETERMINER 

IN  FRENCH 

AND 

IN  ENGLISH 

625 

it does not take an argument). The pronoun in [Spec,DP] is not semantically related to 
the noun; instead, it is interpreted as bearing a semantic relation of  "possessor" with 
the DP token index (a relation that has often been identified in the literature as the 
"POSS relation"; see Williams (1981), Rappaport (1983), Zubizarreta (1987), and Grim- 
shaw (1990), among others). This thematic position, however, is  not one to  which a 
lexical role is assigned, since a determiner has no argument structure. Rather, the Spec- 
ifier of a token DP must be assumed to be a position of structural role assignment. 
3.2.1.  The Type Construction  What we  call the type construction  is exemplified  in (16), 
repeated here as (66). 

(66) a.  Le medecin a radiographie leur estomac. 

b.  Le medecin a examine leur gorge. 

In these examples the singular inalienable nouns estomac and gorge are construed with 
a plural possessor leur, implying a plural set of tokens, which can be manifested as a 
plural pronoun in a subsequent sentence (see (17)). The presence of a distributive effect 
suggests that the determiner that underlies such inalienable phrases has no denotational 
content. The structure of these phrases is then as shown in (67). 

(67) 

DP 

Spec 

D' 

eux1  D 

NPj(x) 

le 

estomac(x) 

Given the status of the determiner as an expletive, Predication can associate the in- 
alienable NP with the pronoun in [Spec,DP]. Thus, eux1 binds NPj(x), giving rise to an 
implied plurality of inalienable tokens. 

We assume that an analysis that involves movement from [Spec,NP] to [Spec,DP] 
rather than Predication (as in (68)) is excluded by the Law of the Economy of Derivation 
(Chomsky (1991)). Following Chomsky, we assume that if there is an analysis A that 
involves movement and an analysis B that does not, then B is chosen over A, all other 
things being equal.4" 

41 Assuming the approach to the relation subject-of advocated in this article, we expect a situation anal- 
ogous to the one described in the text with respect to the type construction to arise with clauses. That is, we 
should encounter clauses in which the external argument of the verb is realized directly outside the maximal 
projection of the verb and is identified by the relation of Predication. Duffield (1991) argues that such cases 
are attested in Irish. 

626 

JEAN-ROGER 

VERGNAUD 

AND  MARIA 

LUISA 

ZUBIZARRETA 

(68)  * 

DP 

Spec 

Dr 

eux1 

D 

NPj(x) 

le 

Spec 

N 

t, 

estomac 

The examples in (66) have counterparts with a postnominal possessor. As expected, 
the definite expletive determiner (which is overt in this case) is singular, since the NP 
type is singular: 

(69)  a.  Le  medecin  a radiographie 1' 

estomac  des  enfants. 

the  doctor  X-rayed 

SING  DEF  DET  stomach  of  the children 

b.  Le  medecin  a examine  la 

gorge  des  enfants. 

the  doctor  examined  SING  DEF  DET  throat of  the children 

There also exist  "extended inalienables" that follow the pattern of the type con- 
struction. Thus, leur echarpe 'Poss(3RD PERS PL)/POSS-ED(SING)  scarf  and leur voiture 
'Poss(3RD  PERS PL)/POSS-ED(SING)  car' may be interpreted as denoting a plurality of to- 
kens-"scarves" 

and  "cars,"  respectively. 

3.2.2.  The Token Construction  We now turn to the sentences in (6), repeated here as 
(70), which exemplify what we call the token construction. 

(70) a.  Le medecin a radiographie leurs estomacs. 

b.  Le medecin a examine leurs gorges. 

The striking property of this construction is that the inalienable nouns estomac 'stomach' 
and gorge 'throat' appear in the plural form. As noted earlier, however, these nouns are 
inherently singular. We would like to suggest that, in these examples, the inalienable 
nouns estomac and gorge are semantically singular but grammatically plural. Specifi- 
cally, in such structures, in which the DP denotes a plural token, the NP agrees with 
the determiner in number by virtue of a purely formal agreement process. The inalienable 
phrases in (70) will then have the structure in (71), in which 2, 1, and j are denotational 
indices. 

THE  DEFINITE 

DETERMINER 

IN  FRENCH 

AND 

IN  ENGLISH 

627 

(71) 

DP, 

Spec 

D' 

eux2  DI 

NPj 

les 

Spec 

N' 

t2 

estomac(x) 

In (71) the DP denotes a token-namely,  1-that  instantiates the inalienable type es- 
tomac(x),  represented as j.  The pronoun eux2 cannot be associated with the argument 
of estomac(x)  via Predication. The determiner bears a denotational index and therefore 
blocks Predication from applying between the pronoun in [Spec,DP] and NPj. The pro- 
noun eux2 is construed as the argument of estomac(x)  by virtue of being linked to the 
trace in the [Spec,NPj]. Note that the noun estomac  is singular in (71) (recall that this 
is an inherent property of inalienable nouns like 'throat', 'stomach', 'nose',  'mouth'). 
The reason that these inalienable nouns surface in the plural in (70) is that the NP agrees 
with the determiner in grammatical number in these cases. In other words, if D denotes, 
then it determines grammatical number, and reciprocally. We make this explicit in the 
following Agreement Rule:42 

42  The statement in (72) expresses a syntactic generalization, not a principle of formal grammar. A formal 
account of (72) would presumably have to refer to the functional category [number], introduced by Ritter 
(1991). Adopting Ritter's account, we might posit the structure in (i) for a DP, where nb is the functional head 
[number] and nbP is the maximal projection of that category. 

(i) 

DP 

Spec 

D 

nbP 

nb 

Spec 

NP 

Assuming the structure in (i), agreement between NP and D will ultimately arise via Spec-head agreement 
between nb and its Specifier and head movement of nb to D. The inherent number specification of NP will 
be represented as a lexical feature on N. The adoption of a representation such as (i) would involve further 
hypotheses concerning the relation between morphological form and syntactic structure and would take us 
beyond the scope of this article. 

628 

JEAN-ROGER 

VERGNAUD 

AND  MARIA 

LUISA 

ZUBIZARRETA 

(72)  If D and NP are sisters and D denotes, then NP agrees with D in number. 

Otherwise, D agrees with NP. 

In conclusion, then, the inalienable nouns in (70) are semantically singular, but gram- 
matically plural. 

Our analysis of the construction exemplified in (70) implies that this construction 
should not give rise to a distributivity effect. The reason is that the possessor and the 
inalienable noun phrase are not associated via Predication. Recall that it is Predication, 
as a binding relation, that gives rise to distributivity. Interestingly, the prediction is borne 
out. This can be shown with forms like the one in (18), repeated here in (73).43 

(73)  On a lave  leurs mains. 

As mentioned in section 1, (73) differs from (56) in that the former does not impose a 
distributive interpretation. Given the formalization proposed here, a form such as (73) 
has multiple possible underlying structures. The inalienable noun can be a semantically 
plural noun (i.e., it may denote an indivisible pair of type "hands") concatenated either 
with an expletive determiner or with a denoting determiner. But according to the analysis 
sketched in the previous paragraph, the inalienable noun in (73) can also be semantically 
singular, with its overt grammatical number derived by (72) in the context of a plural 
token-denoting determiner. In this second situation, the underlying structure of (73) is 
as shown in (74). 

(74) 

DP, 

Spec 

D' 

euX2  DI 

NPj 

les 

Spec 

t2 

N' 

N 

main(x) 

43 Even though the plural morpheme is not phonetically overt in (73), native speakers are perfectly able 
to establish a grammatical distinction between that form and its singular counterpart On  a  lave  leur  main 
'Someone washed their hand' when they read. Speakers contrast the two cases exactly as they would if the 
plural number were phonetically marked, as in On a  lave  leur aissellelleurs  aisselles  'Someone washed their 
armpits'. 

THE  DEFINITE 

DETERMINER 

IN  FRENCH 

AND 

IN  ENGLISH 

629 

The plural DP in (74) instantiates the singular type "main." It therefore denotes a plu- 
rality of individual hands (rather than of pairs of hands). Furthermore, the pronoun eux 
in (74) is interpreted as the argument of main by virtue of being linked to the [Spec,NP] 
position, rather than by being construed with the NP via Predication. The structure in 
(74), which is well formed, thus contrasts with the one in (68), which is excluded by the 
Law of Economy of Derivation. Since the subject-of relation is identified structurally 
in (74), rather than via Predication, there is no binding relation between eux2 and main(x). 
This means that the semantic relation that holds between eux2 and the plurality of in- 
dividual tokens "hand" (represented by the token index 1) is merely an instance of the 
POSS relation and should not give  rise to  any distributivity effect  (since there is  no 
binding). In other words, the set of token possessors may be construed freely (in fact, 
globally rather than distributively) with the set of token hands (one or two hands may 
be construed with any one individual possessor). We thus obtain the "vague" interpre- 
tation described in section 1.44 

Note that if the determiner were singular in (74), the structure would give rise to 
an anomalous interpretation. The DP would denote a singular inalienable hand belonging 
to a plurality of individuals, an impossible situation since an inalienable "body part" 
may belong to one and only one individual. In that respect, a body-part noun differs 
from a kinship term like, say, mother. Strictly speaking, this property is independent of 
the formal model developed in this article. It seems to have to do with a selectional 
restriction on the argument of the dependent noun. In the case of a body-part noun, the 
argument-variable x  of that noun represents the typical individual "human" (see  the 
remark at the end of section 5.1), so that one instantiation of that body part should be 
associated with one instantiation of the typical individual "human." No such restriction 
holds in the case of a kinship term such as mother. 

Finally, note that the sentences in (70) have counterparts with a postnominal pos- 

sessor and that, as expected, the definite determiner is plural in these cases.45 

(75) a.  Le medecin a radiographie les 

estomacs des enfants. 

the doctor  X-rayed 

PL  DEF  DET stomachs of the children 

b.  Le medecin a examine les 

gorges des enfants. 

the doctor  examined PL  DEF  DET throats of the children 

As expected, the example in (76a) has the same vague interpretation as (73) and thus 
contrasts with both (56) and (76b), which have a strictly distributive interpretation. 

(76)  a.  On a lave 

les 

mains  des  enfants. 

we  washed  PL  DEF  DET  hands  of  the children 

44 We might want to assume that structural roles (like Poss), unlike lexical roles, are assigned at S-Struc- 
ture, rather than at D-Structure. The reason is that at D-Structure the pronoun in constructions like (74) is 
not in [Spec,DP] but in [Spec,NP], from where it is moved between D-Structure and S-Structure. 

45 Some speakers have a  strong preference for the singular form over the plural form to express the 
inalienable meaning. This means that such speakers prefer the type-analysis over the token-analysis to express 
the inalienable relation in French. This is also true for many Spanish speakers. 

630 

JEAN-ROGER 

VERGNAUD 

AND  MARIA 

LUISA 

ZUBIZARRETA 

b.  On a lave 

la 

main des  enfants. 

we  washed  SING  DEF  DET  hand of  the children 

3.3.  Modifiers 
In section 1 we pointed out that there are constraints on the kind of adjective that may 
modify the inalienable phrase in the ext-poss construction (analyzed in section 3.1). As 
illustrated below, restrictive adjectives (see (78)), but not appositive adjectives (see (77)), 
may modify the inalienable phrase in this construction. 

(77) a.  *Le medecin leur 

belle bouche. 
the doctor  to them examined SING  DEF  DET pretty mouth 

a examine la 

b.  *La fille leur 

a lave 

le 

visage sale. 

the girl to them washed SING  DEF  DET dirty face 

(78) a.  Le medecin leur 

a examine le 

doigt coupe. 

the doctor  to them examined SING  DEF  DET cut finger 

b.  La fille leur 

main sale. 
the girl to them washed SING  DEF  DET dirty hand 

a lave 

la 

On the other hand, no constraint exists with respect to the kind of adjective that may 
modify the inalienable phrase in the int-poss construction, either in the type construction 
or in the token construction. In particular, appositive adjectives may modify the in- 
alienable phrase in these cases. Thus, compare (77) with (79) and (80) (type construction), 
on the one hand, and with (81) and (82) (token construction), on the other. 

(79) a.  Le dentiste a examine leur 

the dentist  examined their(Poss[PL]/PoSS-ED[SING]) 

b.  Le dentiste a examine la 

belle bouche des enfants. 

the dentist  examined SING DEF  DET pretty mouth of the children 

belle bouche. 
pretty  mouth 

(80) a.  La fille a lave 

leur 

the girl washed their(Poss[PL]/PoSS-ED[SING]) 

visage sale. 
dirty face 
visage sale des enfants. 

b.  La fille a lave 

le 

the girl washed SING  DEF  DET dirty face  of the children 

(81) a.  Le dentiste a examine leurs 

the dentist  examined their(Poss[PL]/Poss-ED[PL])pretty 

b.  La fille a lave 

leurs 

the girl washed their(Poss[PL]/PoSS-ED[PL]) 

visages sales. 
dirty faces 

(82) a.  Le dentiste a examine les 

belles bouches des enfants. 

the dentist  examined PL DEF  DET pretty mouths  of the children 

b.  La fille a lave 

les 

visages sales des enfants. 

the girl washed PL  DEF  DET dirty faces 

of the children 

belles bouches. 
mouths 

The analyses of the ext-poss and int-poss constructions presented in the previous sections 
provide the basis for an account of the phenomenon observed above with respect to 
adjectival modifiers. Note that the phenomenon seems to be independent of the type/ 

THE  DEFINITE 

DETERMINER 

IN  FRENCH 

AND 

IN  ENGLISH 

631 

token distinction, as shown by the grammaticality of the forms in (79)-(82). Rather, the 
restriction seems to be sensitive to the "open" versus "closed" nature of the nominal 
expression the adjective modifies. Specifically, it appears that the appositive adjectives 
may modify the inalienable phrases in (79)-(82) because these phrases are "closed" 
expressions, their argument-variables being saturated within the DP. On the other hand, 
the appositive adjectives may not modify the inalienable phrases in (77) because these 
phrases are "open" expressions, their argument-variables not being saturated within the 
DP. Note,  incidentally, that an analysis of the ext-poss construction based on control 
would fail to capture such a property (even if it can be made to express the strictly local 
nature of the construction), since such an analysis would describe the inalienable phrase 
in the ext-poss construction as "closed," and thus on a par with the int-poss construction. 
A possible way of formally capturing the generalization expressed above is by as- 
suming that appositive adjectives are argument-taking predicates (as in Higginbotham 
(1985)): sale(x), belle(x), and so on. The inalienable phrases in the ext-poss construction 
are "open" expressions and therefore cannot function as arguments, whereas the in- 
alienable phrases in the int-poss construction are "closed" expressions and therefore 
can function as arguments. Such an analysis implies that restrictive adjectives are not 
argument-taking predicates, since they can modify the inalienable phrase in the ext-poss 
construction (as shown in (78)). The mechanisms of modification would then be different 
for restrictive adjectives. The relation between modifier and modified element would 
not be an argument relation in that case, but would be on a par with compounding: the 
meaning of the restrictive modifier is "compounded" with that of the modified element, 
thus creating a new denotatum.46 

3.4.  Conclusion 
We have shown that the analysis presented in section 2 (based on the three hypotheses 
in (53)) can be extended to the inalienable body-part phrases in the ext-poss construction. 
From the interpretive point of view, the inalienable phrase in that construction denotes 
a type. Syntactically, the inalienable phrase is headed by an expletive determiner that 
is transparent to Predication. This analysis was extended to the inalienable body-part 
phrases in the int-poss construction that exhibits the distributivity property (the type 
construction). On the other hand, an inalienable body-part phrase in the token construc- 
tion does not give rise to the distributive interpretation because it is a token-denoting 
DP. Furthermore, we have shown that the above analysis of inalienable phrases provides 
the basis for an account of the restriction on adjectival modification found in the ext- 
poss construction, as well as for the lack of such a restriction in the case of the int-poss 
construction (in both its type and its token version), based on the notions "open" versus 
"closed" expressions. Appositive adjectives may modify "closed" expressions (the in- 
alienable phrase in the int-poss construction) but not "open" expressions. We suggested 

46  Accordingly, an adjective that is semantically compounded with an NP gives rise to a new type. 

632 

JEAN-ROGER 

VERGNAUD 

AND  MARIA 

LUISA 

ZUBIZARRETA 

that this constraint can be attributed to the fact that appositive adjectives function as 
argument-taking predicates and that only "closed" expressions can function as argu- 
ments. 

It is worthwhile to state clearly the implications of our analysis with respect to the 
relation between the property of being an "open" expression and the notion of reference 
(as defined in this article), on the one hand, and the notion of argumenthood, on the 
other hand. In the ext-poss construction, the inalienable phrase is an "open" expression 
(i.e., it contains an unsaturated argument-variable). Still, such an inalienable phrase can 
license backward coreference, which means that it has scope over the entire sentence. 
This shows that an "open" expression may be referential.47 With respect to the notion 
of argumenthood, we note that our analysis of the ext-poss construction as involving a 
small clause is compatible with the "strong" position, namely, the position that only 
closed expressions may function as arguments. Under that analysis, it is the small clause, 
rather than the inalienable phrase, that functions as the syntactic complement of the 
verb;48 and the argument-variable of the inalienable noun is saturated within that small 
clause complement (by the dative complement). Indeed, the restrictions on modification 
discussed in section 3.3 (and mentioned in the previous paragraph) would seem to argue 
in favor of the "strong" position. On the other hand, the analysis given for the com- 
plements of a verb like donner is not compatible with the "strong" position (see footnote 
34). One could accommodate the case of donner by relativizing the property open versus 
closed  to  the  syntactic domain of  the argument-taking category. Specifically, for an 
adjective within some NP, open versus closed would be defined with respect to the NP 
that it modifies, whereas an argument of a verb would count as closed to the extent that 
it would be closed within a projection of that verb.49 

A general and fundamental question arises at this point, namely, whether the dis- 
tinction between types and tokens argued for in sections 2 and 3 is required at all. For 
example, one could propose that the constructions that do and do not exhibit the dis- 
tributivity effect differ in that the inalienable DP in the former is really a predicate, and 
not a true argument, whereas the inalienable DP in the latter is a true argument. Call 
this the predicate hypothesis. Despite the prima facie appeal of such a hypothesis, we 

47 The reason why an open inalienable phrase may function as a referential expression is probably related 
to the fact that estomac(x) denotes the type "stomach" (defined with respect to the typical individual I) 
independently of the value assigned to x. This requires that the relation between "denotation" and "reference" 
be further articulated. 

48  Note however that this analysis implies that the relation between thematic structure and syntactic 
structure is not as transparent as the Projection Principle would suggest (see Chomsky (1981)). It could be 
claimed that the dative argument of a verb like examiner in the ext-poss construction has the status of an 
added argument and, for that reason, may be syntactically realized as the subject of a small clause complement. 
On the other hand, the dative argument of a verb like donner 'give' cannot be analyzed as an added argument. 
The small clause hypothesis in such cases would therefore require a more indirect relation between thematic 
structure and syntactic structure. For further differences between examiner and donner, see footnote 34. 

49 Alternatively, one could analyze the complements of donner as constituting a small clause and thus 
preserve the "strong" position. One would then have to derive the contrast between donner and the ext-poss 
construction mentioned in footnote 34 (the contrast concerning the relative ordering of the complements) from 
some other property of the structures. 

THE  DEFINITE 

DETERMINER 

IN  FRENCH 

AND 

IN  ENGLISH 

633 

believe that it is incorrect for the following reasons. First, within the general descriptive 
framework assumed standardly in the syntactic literature, predicates are characteristi- 
cally nonreferential, unlike true arguments. Since the inalienable phrase in the ext-poss 
construction can be referential, as its behavior with respect to backward pronominali- 
zation in examples like (13) shows, it follows that such a phrase could not in general be 
analyzed as a predicate in the standard sense.50 Second, the semantic number of the 

50 Of relevance here is the following contrast, brought to our attention by R. Clark (personal communi- 

cation): 

(i) *Pauli is hisi enemy. 
(ii) a.  Pauli is hiss worst enemy. 
b.  Pauli is hisi only enemy. 
c.  Pauli is hisi own enemy. 

Suppose that the standard characterization of predicative nominals as nonreferential holds. More precisely, 
let us assume the following: 

(iii)  A predicative nominal has no independent reference and must be coindexed with its subject. 

Since the expression his enemy in (i) is most naturally construed as a predicative nominal, it must be coindexed 
with Paul by (iii). Then the ungrammaticality of (i) will follow from the i-within-i Condition (see Chomsky 
(1981, 212)). (i) contrasts with (iv). 

(iv)  Pauli is hisi father's only son. 

The sentence in (iv) is an equative sentence. The postcopular nominal expression his father's only son is 
construed as having an independent denotation and does not require any coindexing with the subject: the form 
in (iv) is interpreted as asserting that two elements that are denotationally distinct within the structural de- 
scription of the sentence correspond to the same entity in the world (see Vergnaud and Zubizarreta (1990)). 
We claim that the forms in (ii) are on a par with (iv). In these forms, the postcopular noun phrase can naturally 
be construed as having an independent denotation, and it does not require any coindexing with the subject. 
The nonreferential character of his enemy in a structure such as (i) is confirmed by the oddness of the 

form in (v). 

(v)  ?His enemy is Mary. 

Compare (v) with (vi). 

(vi) a.  His worst enemy is Mary. 
b.  His only enemy is Mary. 

The acceptability of (v) is improved when the pragmatic context forces an interpretation in which there is one 
relevant enemy, and only one. In the same context, (i) becomes felicitous. 

Note that elements that are used as "propredicates" such as so  or the null string also behave like non- 

referential elements. The examples in (vii) illustrate the propredicative use of so. 

(vii) a.  Peter is clever, but Mary is so to a greater degree. 

b.  Because Peter was so to a lesser degree, John appeared more determined than he is. 

That the interpretation of the propredicative so  does not involve any relation of coreference is shown by the 
fact that, contrary to elements that are clearly referential or anaphoric, so  may not enter into "circular de- 
pendencies" of the kind illustrated in (viii) (on circular readings, see Brody (1980)). For example, the forms 
in (ix), with the readings corresponding to the anaphoric dependencies indicated, contrast with those in (viii). 

(viii) a.  The man that wanted it got the prize he deserved. 

b.  A boy that wanted one got a prize another one deserved. 
c.  Max saw the movies you did. 

(ix) a.  *To be (x pleased to be soy) is better than to be (y proud to be sox). 

b. *Max was (x pleased to discover that you were sox). 

At first sight, a construction such as the French one in (x), where a clitic definite pronoun-le-appears 
to stand for a predicate, might seem to raise a problem for the standard assumption concerning predicates. 

(x)  Max est stupide et 

ils 

le sont aussi. 

Max is  stupid  and they it-are  too 
'Max is stupid and so are they.' 

634 

JEAN-ROGER 

VERGNAUD 

AND  MARIA 

LUISA 

ZUBIZARRETA 

inalienable phrase in the constructions that give rise to the distributivity effect is certainly 
determined by extra syntactic properties, since it is governed by the properties of the 
typical individual on which the inalienable body part depends and accordingly varies 
within the class of inalienable nouns. This is an unexpected feature under the predicate 
hypothesis, if one considers that predicates typically have no inherent number and, in 
the absence of agreement, acquire an invariant unmarked grammatical number. Finally, 
it is  commonly assumed that predicates are "open" expressions and arguments are 
"closed" expressions. But we have shown in section 3.3 that the distributivity property 
cuts across this distinction. In effect, the DP inalienable phrase in the int-poss construc- 
tion is a "closed" expression. This is shown by the lack of restrictions on the kinds of 
adjectival modifiers that modify the inalienable phrase in this construction. Still, the int- 
poss construction may give rise to the distributivity effect under certain conditions (as 
discussed  in section  3.2.1).51 

4.  The English Definite Determiner and the Inalienable Construction 

4.1.  On the English  Definite  Determiner 
We have shown that in French the definite determiner may or may not bear a denotational 
index. If the definite determiner is an expletive, the nominal expression denotes a type. 
We have suggested that, in such a case, the government relation between the determiner 
and the NP is licensed, not by semantic interpretation, but by morphophonological in- 
terpretation (see section 2.3): an agreement relation holds between the determiner and 
the NP. If this analysis is on the right track, we might expect that in a language in which 
the definite determiner is morphologically invariant, it could not function as an expletive, 

Note however that the propredicative clitic pronoun le, like the propredicative so in English, does not enter 
into circular dependencies. For example, the forms in (xi) are ungrammatical with the readings corresponding 
to the anaphoric dependencies indicated. 

(xi) a.  *Max est (x content que tu lex sois). 
that you are so 

Max is 

glad 

b. *Etre (x soucieux  de l'yetre) vaut mieux qu'etre (y fier de lx'etre). 
is better than to be  proud to be so 

to be  concerned to be so 

This suggests that the propredicative clitic le,  like the propredicative so,  is not a referential element. The 
definite clitic pronoun here really behaves as a formal marker identifying an empty category. 

The hypothesis that the propredicative le in such structures as (x) or (xi) is not a referential element 
anaphorically linked to the antecedent predicate is supported by the fact that, in general, a predicate cannot 
be the antecedent of a definite pronoun. For example, the English forms in (xii) are ungrammatical. 

(xii) a.  *Peter is not the fool  that you said, and nobody actually believes that he is himlit. 

b. *Peter is your best friend, and everybody knows that he is himlit. 

51  Tellier (1988) proposes an analysis of the ext-poss construction based on Predication. But her analysis 
of the inalienable phrase is fundamentally different from ours. In essence, it treats the inalienable phrase in 
the ext-poss construction as an operator-headed predicate (analogous to an operator-headed CP such as a 
relative clause, for instance). Thus, her analysis is subject to the criticism against the predicate hypothesis 
summarized in this section. Furthermore, it is unclear how Tellier's analysis would extend to the type con- 
struction (discussed in section 3.2.1), or how it would account for the differences between French and English 
(see section 4). 

THE  DEFINITE 

DETERMINER 

IN  FRENCH 

AND 

IN  ENGLISH 

635 

since the government relation between D and NP would then receive no interpretation. 
We believe that this case is exemplified by English. 

First, note that the definite determiner is  absent in the following type-denoting 

expressions: 

(83) a.  Dogs are mammals. 

b.  Whales are becoming extinct. 

Second, there is a remarkable difference between the French definite determiner 
and the  English definite determiner. Compare the French sentence in (84a) with its 
English counterpart in (84b). 

(84) a.  Les baleines sont en train de disparaitre. 

b.  The whales are becoming extinct. 

The French example in (84a) is ambiguous. The plural noun phrase in this example may 
be interpreted either as denoting the species "whales" or as denoting the set of sub- 
species of  "whales" (white whale or beluga, California grey whale, Greenland whale, 
etc.). Of course, the two interpretations are truth-conditionally equivalent. Still, native 
speakers have a clear intuition that they are distinct interpretations and that they are 
both available. On the other hand, the plural noun phrase in the English example in (84b) 
lacks the "species interpretation"; it has only the "subspecies interpretation." For ex- 
ample, if we assume that the subspecies "grey whale" is not further classifiable into 
subsubspecies, then (85b) is definitely odd. Only the bare plural option (85a) is available. 

(85)  a.  Grey whales are becoming extinct in California. 

b.  *The grey whales are becoming extinct in California. 

By contrast, since the presence of the definite determiner in French does not impose 
the subspecies interpretation, the French sentence corresponding to (85b) is perfectly 
fine: 

(86) Les baleines grises sont en train de disparaitre des cotes californiennes. 

The difference between French and English here would seem to reside in the status of 
the definite determiner. We would like to  suggest that the definite determiner the in 
(84b) and (85b) gives rise only to the subspecies interpretation because it cannot function 
as an expletive determiner. Whereas the species interpretation arises via direct deno- 
tation to a type, the subspecies interpretation arises via denotation of a token within a 
prototype, a notion that we introduce and develop to some extent in section 5. For the 
moment, the hypothesis that we  want to propose is that the above contrast between 
French and English is due to the following parameter: 

(87) The definite determiner may function as an expletive from the point of view 

of denotation in French but not in English. 

In other words, in English the definite determiner must be absent in a type-denoting 

636 

JEAN-ROGER 

VERGNAUD 

AND  MARIA 

LUISA 

ZUBIZARRETA 

expression.52 The presence of a definite determiner in English generally indicates that 
the nominal expression denotes a token (but see below for discussion of bound deter- 
miners).53 

We suggest furthermore that (87) accounts for the contrast between (la) and (lb), 
as well as for the contrast between (88) and (89). Like (lb),  the examples in (89) lack 
the inalienable interpretation. 

(88) a.  Les enfants ont leve la main. 

b.  Les enfants ont ouvert les yeux. 
c.  Les enfants ont bouge le bras. 
(89) a.  The children raised the hand. 
b.  The children opened the eyes. 
c.  The children moved the arm. 

Structures such as  (lb)  and (89) in English cannot be interpreted as inalienable con- 
structions. Because the definite determiner may not be an expletive in English, an ar- 
gument-variable contained within the definite direct object in (lb)  or (89) cannot be 
associated with a possessor external to that direct object (whether reanalysis between 
the verb and the direct object takes place or not) and will then remain uninterpreted, 
violating the Principle of Full Interpretation; see section 3.54 

The hypothesis that the lack of inalienable interpretation in (89) is due to the pres- 
ence of the definite determiner is confirmed by the examples in (90). The indefinite deter- 
miner, unlike the definite determiner, does not block the inalienable interpretation.55 

(90) a.  The children raised a hand. 
b.  The children opened an eye. 
c.  The children moved an arm. 

52  In a language like French a definite determiner may cooccur with an unmodified proper name. For 
example, the proper name Marie in French may be preceded by the determiner la, as in la Marie 'SING  DEF 
DET  Mary'. The same phenomenon is found in Portuguese and German. These languages thus contrast with 
English, where such structures may not arise. One might assume that an unmodified proper name denotes a 
type that is instantiated by exactly one token and that this property precludes cooccurrence with a denotational 
definite determiner. 

5  Our generalization concerning the English definite determiner is not compromised by superlative nominal 
expressions  such as the one found in There is the fattest  man in town in this restaurant.  These  may be analyzed 
as nonreferential token-denoting expressions. 

5" Examples like those in (5) are excluded in English independently of the fact that the cannot function 
as an expletive  (cf.  *The doctor  examined  the throat tolfor the children).  Whereas the dative  preposition  a in 
French is a Case marker with the status of a functional head, the dative preposition to/for in English actually 
functions as a full-fledged lexical head (see Vergnaud (1974), Jaeggli (1982)). Therefore, Predication could not 
apply between the object of tolfor and a sister constituent of the indirect object. 

5S We discuss indefinite and quantified inalienables in detail in forthcoming work. Gudron (1985) also 
attributes the contrast between (88) and (89) to the difference in status between the French and English definite 
determiners. In particular, she argues that the definite determiner in French, but not in English, can function 
as an anaphoric pronoun. As an anaphoric pronoun, the definite determiner falls under the theory of control. 
As noted in section 3.3, an analysis based on control cannot account for the restrictions on modification, nor 
does it say anything about the "distributivity property" of the inalienable phrase in the ext-poss construction 
(section 3.1) and the type construction (section 3.2.1). 

THE  DEFINITE 

DETERMINER 

IN  FRENCH 

AND 

IN  ENGLISH 

637 

In English the only construction in which a definite inalienable phrase can be found 

in direct object position is the int-poss construction with a prenominal possessor: 

(91) a.  The children raised their hands. 
b.  The children opened their eyes. 
c.  The children moved their arms. 

Recall that in French there are two kinds of int-poss construction: the type construction 
(92a) and the token construction (92b). 

(92) a.  Le medecin a radiographie leur estomac. 

b.  Le medecin a radiographie leurs estomacs. 

As shown in section 3.2, the inalienable phrase in the type construction is a type-denoting 
expression with an expletive definite determiner, whereas the inalienable phrase in the 
token construction is  a token-denoting expression with a denoting determiner. Given 
the hypothesis that English lacks an expletive definite determiner, we predict that this 
language should also lack the type construction. The prediction is borne out. Only the 
token construction exists in English. In that construction the plural possessor must be 
associated with a grammatically plural inalienable noun:56 

(93) a.  *The doctor X-rayed their stomach. 
b.  The  doctor  X-rayed  their stomachs. 

As expected, lexical nouns that are analyzed as inalienables by extension (kinship 
terms, picture, clothes, house, office, etc.) cannot give rise to the distributivity effect 
in English either. Thus, the French example in (94) contrasts with the English example 
in (95). In the English example the singular phrase in direct object position (their scarf) 
cannot give rise to an interpretation that involves a plurality of tokens; therefore, there 
is no "implied plurality" that could be manifested by a plural pronoun in a subsequent 
sentence. 

(94)  Les invites ont mis leur e'charpe dans la penderie. Quelques minutes plus tard, 

on s'est apergu qu'elles avaient toutes disparu. 

(95) *The guests hung their scarf in the closet. Minutes later, we realized that they 

had all disappeared. 

The question arises at this point why bare plurals in English, which can function 
as type-denoting expressions, cannot show up in the ext-poss construction. For example, 
the following forms are ungrammatical: 
(96) a.  *The children raised hands. 
b.  *The children opened eyes. 
c.  *The children moved arms. 

56 English also lacks postnominal possessors, probably because genitive Case via Spec-head agreement 

applies leftward in English: 

(i)  The doctor X-rayed the children's stomachs. 
(ii) *The doctor X-rayed the stomachs of the children. 

638 

JEAN-ROGER 

VERGNAUD 

AND  MARIA 

LUISA 

ZUBIZARRETA 

We would like to suggest that bare plurals, as type-denoting expressions, are mass nouns. 
In fact, Chierchia (1982) has argued that mass nouns (water, gold, etc.) and bare plurals 
have similar semantics.57 On the other hand, inalienable body-part nouns are not in- 
herently mass or count nouns. As we have argued, an inalienable body-part noun is a 
semantically dependent lexical item, and whether such a noun is mass or count will then 
depend on the typical individual with respect to which it is defined. Inalienable nouns 
like hand(s), eye(s), arm(s) are count, but hair and blood are mass. The suggestion then 
is that the sentences in (96) are ungrammatical because bare nouns are necessarily mass 
nouns, whereas hands, eyes, and arms, being inalienable nouns, must be analyzed as 
count nouns. Then, whereas the forms in (96) are ill formed as ext-poss constructions 
because of the dependent count character of the inalienable noun involved, there do 
exist corresponding well-formed ext-poss constructions with an inalienable mass noun 
in direct object position, as predicted:58 

(97) a.  John has white hair. 
b.  Peter has  bad  blood. 

4.2.  The PP  Construction 
More seriously, our explanation for the ungrammaticality of (89) under the inalienable 
reading would seem to be challenged by examples like those in (98). Verbs like kiss, 
punch, tickle, touch allow their inalienable argument to surface as a locative prepositional 
complement associated with the direct object. 

(98) a.  John kissed the children on the cheek. 

b.  John hit/punched the children on the nose. 
c.  John tickled/touched the children on the foot. 

Of course, the inalienable reading with these verbs can also be expressed by means of 
the int-poss construction: 

(99) a.  John kissed the children's cheeks. 

b.  John hit/punched the children's noses. 
c.  Mary tickled/touched the children's feet. 

57 More precisely, Chierchia argues that bare plurals and mass nouns are property-denoting expressions 

transformed into proper names. 

58  In constructing the examples, one must also choose the verb with care. For example, a verb like to 
lose (perdre in French) imposes an existential interpretation on its inalienable direct object. Therefore, unlike 
the direct objects in (97), the direct objects in (i) have only an existential interpretation. 

(i)  John lost hairlblood. 

The contrast is directly accessible in French: 

(ii)  Jean a perdu des cheveuxl*les cheveux. 

'Jean lost hair/*the hair.' 

Compare also (ii) and (iii). 

(iii)  Pierre a des cheveux blancslles cheveux blancs. 

'Pierre has white hair/*the white hair.' 

THE  DEFINITE 

DETERMINER 

IN  FRENCH 

AND 

IN  ENGLISH 

639 

On the other hand, the verbs in (89), raise, open, move, and others like snap, stretch, 
wash, examine, and X-ray do not allow their inalienable argument to appear in the PP 
construction, as shown by the contrast between (100) and (101). 

(100) a.  John raised the children's hands. 

b.  John examined/X-rayed the children's stomachs. 
c.  John stretched the children's legs. 
d.  John washed the children's faces. 

(101) a.  *John raised the children at the hand(s). 

b.  *John examined/X-rayed the children in/at the stomach(s). 
c.  *John stretched the children on/at the leg(s). 
d.  *John washed the children on/at the face(s). 

The same contrast that we find in English between (98) and (101) exists in French. 
Verbs like embrasser 'kiss', frapper 'hit',  chatouiller 'tickle' may appear in the PP 
construction, whereas verbs like lever 'raise', laver 'wash', examiner 'examine' may 
not: 

(102) a.  Pierre a embrasse les enfants sur la joue. 

b.  Pierre a frappe les enfants sur le nez. 
c.  Pierre a chatouille les enfants sur le pied. 

(103) a.  *Pierre a leve les enfants dans/sur le/au bras. 
b.  *Pierre a lave les enfants dans/sur/a la figure. 
c.  *Pierre a examine les enfants dans/sur le/au pied. 

We shall refer to the construction illustrated in (98) and (102) as the PP construction. 
It appears that the direct object in that construction saturates the argument-variable of 
the inalienable NP inside the PP and binds that NP. That the inalienable phrase in the 
PP construction is indeed an "open" expression (i.e.,  one saturated from outside the 
DP) is shown by the fact that it cannot be modified by an appositive adjective; see the 
discussion in section 3.3. This property is illustrated by the contrast in (104). In (104a) 
the adjective is interpreted as a restrictive modifier, whereas in (104b) the adjective is 
interpreted as an unrestrictive modifier. The same contrast is found in English, as shown 
in (105). 

(104) a.  Pierre a embrasse les enfants sur la joue gauchelsale. 

b.  *Pierre a embrasse les enfants sur le nez sale. 

(105) a.  John kissed the children on the leftldirty cheek. 

b.  *John kissed the children on the dirty nose. 

The contrasts between (98)/(102) and (101)/(103) show that some verbs, but not 
others, allow the complement of a locative preposition to be associated with the direct 
object via Predication. We would like to suggest that the verbs that can appear in the 
PP construction are verbs that license metonymy. More precisely, such verbs allow the 
part (the PP complement) to be identified with the whole (the direct object). Thus, there 

640 

JEAN-ROGER 

VERGNAUD 

AND  MARIA 

LUISA 

ZUBIZARRETA 

is an entailment relation between the propositions expressed by the sentences in (98) 
and (99) and those expressed by the corresponding sentences in (106) (the same is true 
in French). 

(106) a.  John kissed the children. 

b.  John hit/punched the children. 
c.  Mary tickled/touched the children. 

On the other hand, there is  no such entailment relation between an example in (100) 
(involving a verb like raise, stretch, or wash) and the corresponding example in (107). 
A  sentence in (107) implies that the "whole" was raised/stretched/washed, not just a 
"part of the whole" (the same is true in French).59 

(107) a.  John raised the children. 

b.  John stretched the children. 
c.  John washed the children. 

We shall propose a syntactic analysis of the PP construction that embodies the idea of 
metonymic licensing. Concretely, we  suggest that the inalienable phrases in (98) and 
(102) have a different analysis from the ones in (4), (5), and (88). Observing that a definite 
determiner, like a pronoun, may be free or bound, we shall assume that in (98) and (102) 
the inalienable  phrase  is a DP  bound to the direct object.  The import of the  metonymic 
relation is  that it is a constraint on the establishment of  such a binding relation. We 
express this in (108). 

(108)  A D that heads an inalienable phrase is bound to the category denoting the 
whole if and only if a metonymic relation holds at the interpretive level be- 
tween the inalienable part and the whole. 

To illustrate, consider (98a). The VP in this example has the structure in (109). Once 
more we assume a small clause analysis of the verbal complement (but see the discussion 
in section 3.4). 

59 Examine and X-ray are problematic. Thus, prima facie, (i) may be used when (ii) holds. 
(i)  The doctor X-rayed/examined the children. 
(ii)  The doctor X-rayed/examined the children's stomachs. 

Interestingly, in Norwegian the counterpart to the English example in (lOlb) is well formed: 

(iii)  Doktoren unders0kte barna 

i magen. 

the doctor examined  the children in the stomach 

Possibly, then, the ill-formedness of the English and French examples is a lexical idiosyncrasy. 

In Norwegian the counterpart to the English example in (lOld) is also well formed: 
(iv)  John wasket barna 

i ansiktet. 
John washed the children in the face 

But here Norwegian differs from English and French in another respect. In Norwegian John wasket barna 
'John washed the children' may mean that only a specific part of the children's body (for example, the hands) 
was washed. 

THE  DEFINITE 

DETERMINER 

IN  FRENCH 

AND 

IN  ENGLISH 

641 

(109) 

VP 

V 

DP, 

v~ 

PP 

~~~ I 

P 

PP 

DP2 

kiss 

the children 

on 

D2/1 

NPj(x)/ 

N(x) 

cheek 

the 

Our assumption concerning the English definite determiner (see  (87)) entails that the 
determiner D in the expression the cheek in (109) must denote. The relation between 
the inalienable and its  possessor is  established via binding. The D  that governs the 
inalienable phrase in (109), then, is not referential, but is bound to the direct object. 
Note  that this binding relation has a special character, since it involves categories at 
distinct bar levels: the binder is a maximal projection, whereas the bindee is a head. 
Such a metonymic binding chain has two crucial aspects: 

(110) a.  By definition, the elements in a metonymic binding chain are equivalent 
from the point of view of binding relations. Hence, one can speak of the 
binding properties of the chain as a whole. 

b.  The elements in a metonymic binding chain are not equivalent from the 
point of view of argument relations. Hence, a metonymic binding chain 
is not an argument chain. 

It follows from (110) that the metonymic binding chain in a structure like (109) has the 
following properties: 

(111) a.  Predication may hold between NPj(x) and any element in the chain in- 
dexed 1, because one element of the chain 1, namely D2,1, is in the relation 
of  mutual m-command with the  argument-taking category NPj(x); see 
(1 lOa). 

b.  The argument-variable x is not satisfied within the DP, since the external 
argument is the direct object and the chain is not an equivalence class 
for argument satisfaction; see (1 10b). 

642 

JEAN-ROGER 

VERGNAUD 

AND  MARIA 

LUISA 

ZUBIZARRETA 

It is the existence of a Predication relation between the inalienable NP and the plural 
direct object that gives rise to the distributivity effect in (109). Let us emphasize again 
that the analysis of the PP construction just sketched is lexically governed. The binding 
chain at play in that analysis is only available to the extent that the structure is headed 
by a verb that licenses metonymy.60 Note that the proposed description in fact provides 
a syntactic formalization of the notion "metonymy." Indeed, in a structure such as (109) 
the whole (denoted by the phrase the children,) is interpreted as instantiating the part 
(denoted by the phrase cheekj). This is because NPj in (109) is the complement of D,l, 
a relation that reflects the instantiation relation in domain D. It is this particular relation 
between the inalienable phrase and its possessor argument that may be responsible for 
a puzzling property of the PP construction, namely, the fact that despite the existence 
of an implied plural (e.g.,  a plural set of token "cheeks") at the interpretive level, the 
implied plurality is only marginally manifested as a pronoun in a subsequent sentence. 
Thus, speakers seem to have a hard time accepting such discourses as the one in (112). 
We attribute this to the metonymic relation that the prepositional complement entertains 
with the direct object (in other words, to the denotational relation that exists between 
a part and the whole in such cases). 

(112)  ??Le pretre a embrasse les lepreux sur la joue. 

the priest kissed 
Elles etaient toutes tres  froides. 
they  were  all 

very cold 

the lepers  on the cheek 

To conclude, the inalienable phrase in the PP construction has a different analysis from 
the inalienable phrase in direct object position. The relation between the possessor (ex- 
ternal to the PP) and the inalienable phrase (within the PP) is indirectly established via 
D(eterminer) binding, a process that requires metonymic licensing by the verb. 

4.3.  Summary 
We have shown in this section that there is a fundamental difference between the definite 
determiner in French and the definite determiner in English. In French, but not in En- 
'  French also has a more complex structure (noted by Gross (1986)) involving an inalienable within a PP 

complement associated with a dative possessor that cooccurs with an independent direct object: 

(i)  Marie lui 

a noue  une echarpe autour du cou. 

Marie to him wrapped a scarf 

around SING  DEF  DET  neck 

It remains to be seen whether the hypothesis that a small clause is formed by the dative and the PP is viable 
in this case. 

The structure in (ii) is comparable to the one illustrated in (58). 
(ii)  Marie a mis le 

doigt  dans la tarte. 

Marie put  SING  DEF  DET  finger into the pie 

As in the case of (58), we assume that the verb mettre 'to put' in (ii) triggers reanalysis. Note that the structures 
in (i) and (ii) are combined in the following example: 

(iii)  Marie leur 

a mis le 

oeil. 
Marie to them put  SING  DEF  DET  finger into  SING  DEF  DET  eye 
'Marie put her finger into their eyes.' 

doigt  dans 1' 

THE  DEFINITE 

DETERMINER 

IN  FRENCH 

AND 

IN  ENGLISH 

643 

glish, the definite determiner may function as an expletive from the point of view of 
denotation. We argued that this property of the English definite determiner explains why 
the inalienable phrase in direct object position cannot be bound by an external possessor 
and why the distributivity effect is absent in examples such as (95). Furthermore, we 
suggested that the same parameter should account for the lack of ambiguity in (84b), as 
well as for the oddness of (85b) (we return to this issue in the next section). The inalien- 
able phrase in the prepositional construction, which appeared to be problematic for our 
analysis, was accounted for via a process of determiner binding. Finally, we argued that 
this process requires metonymic licensing by the verb. Note that given the logic of our 
analysis, a bound determiner must be analyzed as a denoting category. In effect, the 
existence of the PP construction in English is compatible with the basic assumptions of 
our analysis concerning the differences between French and English if and only if bound 
determiners (like bound pronouns) denote, although they do not refer. This implies that, 
as suggested in section 2.2, the notion of reference (i.e.,  the property of having scope 
over the entire sentence; see  footnote 6) should be distinguished from the notion of 
denotation (see also footnote 53). 

5.  Some Residual Issues 

5.1.  Prototypes 
We have argued that the definite determiner cannot function as a denotational expletive 
in English. What, then, are the denotational properties of the singular definite nominal 
expressions in the following sentences? 

(113) a.  The owl is common in this forest. 

b.  The Bengal tiger is fast disappearing/becoming extinct. 

Carlson (1977) argues that the subject of predicates such as to be common, to be fast 
disappearing, to become extinct denotes a kind or a type. We would add that the subject 
of these predicates must furthermore denote a species. This is shown by the contrast 
between  (1 13b) and (114).  Whereas  the Bengal  tiger is a  species,  the  wounded  tiger  is 
not. 

(114) *The wounded tiger is fast disappearing/becoming extinct around here. 

The feature [ + species] of these noun phrases suggests to us that the facts in (113) should 
be accommodated by introducing the notion of prototype in domain D. More precisely, 
both tokens and types may be classified as [+ species], but [+ species] tokens give rise 
to prototypes. A  prototype can be an innate structure (like the prototype for the in- 
alienable parts of the human body) or a cognitive structure produced by a particular 
cultural environment. Often, the elements in a prototype will share some generic prop- 
erty, like "being an animal," "being a mammal," "being a whale," or "being part of 
a human body." We may think of a prototype as a subdomain of tokens organized as a 
classificatory tree. For example, in a prototype of animals, the classificatory tree will 

644 

JEAN-ROGER 

VERGNAUD 

AND  MARIA 

LUISA 

ZUBIZARRETA 

contain kinds of animals represented by token labels such as "owl," "whale," "Bengal 
tiger," "mammal," and "bird." 

The crucial property that distinguishes a token in a prototype from a nonprototypical 

token is that the former can be taken as standingfor  the type it instantiates.  A prototype 
in fact is a particular model for a class of types. Formally, given a prototype K, there 
is a one-to-one mapping PK between K and the class of types instantiated in K such that 
PK preserves denotation. We accordingly revise the definition of the denotation relation 
as follows: 

(115)  Let e be a nominal expression and K a prototype such that e denotes a token 
X in K. Let i be the instantiation mapping and n be the type instantiated by 
X: X  =  i(n). Let PK  be the one-to-one mapping between tokens and types 
that defines K as a prototype. We have the relation in (a). 

(a)  n  =  PK(X) 

Then, by definition, the nominal expression e also denotes n. In other words, 
we have the relation in (b), where d is the denotation mapping, "i"  is the 
composition of mappings, and "<"  is the inclusion relation between map- 
pings. 

(b)  d*P  <  d 

The significance of the relation in (b) in (115) is that the mapping P really defines the 
prototype as  an image  of  a  class of  [+ species] types.  A  token in a prototype then 
functions as a mediator between the denoting expression and the associated type. Within 
a complete model, the relation "d*P <  d"  should of course follow from the definition 
of the mappings P and d. We are not in a position to provide such a demonstration at 
this stage, and we must take the relation as an axiom. 

Then, a token-denoting expression may be interpreted as a generic if its denotatum 
belongs to a prototype. A necessary condition to be a member of a prototype is to be 
[+species].  This is why the form in (114) is ungrammatical: "wounded tiger" is not a 
species. For the same reason, the forms in (116) do not allow for the generic reading 
('Any tiger, when it is wounded, is dangerous'): 
(116) a.  The wounded tiger is dangerous. 

b.  The wounded tigers are dangerous. 

The forms in (1 16a) and (1 16b) contrast with the French sentences in (1 17a) and (1 17b), 
respectively, which do have the generic interpretation. 

(117) a.  Le tigre blesse est dangereux. 

b.  Les tigres blesses sont dangereux. 

Again, the contrast between French and English is to be traced back to the difference 
between the English and the French definite determiners. The generic reading is available 

THE  DEFINITE 

DETERMINER 

IN  FRENCH 

AND 

IN  ENGLISH 

645 

in each of the forms in (117), because the definite determiner can be analyzed as an 
expletive in these forms, thus permitting direct denotation of a type. 

To illustrate the relation "d*P <  d"  in (115), consider the interpretive structure 
associated with the DP the owl in (1 13a) (where the letter indices have the same meaning 
as in (115)). 

(118) 

P 

1 

j 

d 

d 

d 

[DP  the 

[NP  owl]] 

Given the above extension of the notion of denotation, we must slightly revise the Cor- 
respondence Law in (45). For we must now distinguish two kinds of denotation. On the 
one  hand, there is  what we  can call direct denotation, which is the case  where the 
denotation relation cannot be decomposed into more elementary mappings. This is the 
normal situation when no prototype is involved. On the other hand, there is  indirect 
denotation, which arises when an expression denotes a type via a prototypical token. 
We then revise the Correspondence Law as follows: 

(119)  When a DP or an NP denotes, the DP directly denotes a token and the NP 

directly denotes a type. 

We may now say that the DP subjects in (113) directly denote a token and indirectly 
denote a type, via the prototypical interpretation. The selectional properties of the predi- 
cates  to  be  common,  to  be fast  disappearing,  to  become  extinct  are  thus  satisfied  in 
(113). In this manner, the facts in (113) can be reconciled with our hypothesis that the 
definite determiner in English is never an expletive from the point of view of denotation. 
Note that the extension of the notion of denotation proposed in (115) requires that the 
distinction between tokens and types be taken as a primitive distinction within domain 
D, as was postulated in (42), because this distinction cannot be reduced to a syntactic 
one between DPs and NPs (see footnote 26). 

An important aspect of the distinction between tokens and types that we shall not 
analyze here is the fact that plurality is not realized in the same way with tokens and 
with types  (among the  alienable denotata). A  plural type is  a  type with the feature 
[+ plural], whereas a plural token is a set of singular tokens. In other words, plurality 

646 

JEAN-ROGER 

VERGNAUD 

AND  MARIA 

LUISA 

ZUBIZARRETA 

is intensional for types and extensional for tokens (see Vergnaud and Zubizarreta (1990) 
for some discussion). Since a plural token is necessarily a set of tokens, it follows that 
a token that is not a set is necessarily singular. Consider in this light the following pair 
of sentences: 

(120) a.  The owls are common in this forest. 

b.  *The Bengal tigers are fast disappearing/becoming extinct. 

The form in (120a) is felicitous, with the "subspecies interpretation," whereas the form 
in (120b) is infelicitous (see the discussion of (84) and (85)). It is easy to show that these 
facts follow from the framework sketched in this article. Let us note first that the generic 
reading required by the predicates  to be common,  to be fast  disappearing,  to be extinct 
is obtained in (120) by means of a prototypical construal. Second, by definition, a pro- 
totype for the class of animals contains only one token instantiating the type "Bengal 
tiger" and, similarly, the same prototype or a prototype for the class of birds contains 
only one token instantiating the type "owl." This is because a prototype is an image of 
a class of types, and there is one type "Bengal tiger" and one type "owl," by definition. 
And, as noted earlier, such a token is necessarily singular. It therefore follows that the 
owls in (120a) (the plural counterpart to (1 13a)) cannot denote in the prototype for ani- 
mals or birds, but must denote in the prototype for owls-hence  the lack of  species 
interpretation in (120a). Whereas (120a) and (1 13a) are truth-conditionally identical, they 
have different semantics. The owl in (1 13a) denotes the species owl, whereas the owls 
in (120a) denotes the set of subspecies of owls within the prototype of owls. This analysis 
is  confirmed by the ill-formedness of  (120b). For the same reasons given above,  the 
Bengal tigers in (120b) cannot denote in the prototype for animals, and must denote in 
the prototype for Bengal tigers. To the extent that the subspecies "Bengal tiger" is not 
further subdivided into subsubspecies, the plural form the Bengal tigers then lacks a 
denotatum.61'62 

The forms in (121) contrast with those in (120). 
(121) a.  Owls are common in this forest. 

b.  Bengal tigers are fast disappearing/becoming extinct. 

A bare plural in English differs from a nominal expression headed by the definite de- 
terminer the in that it is analyzed as an NP that may directly denote a type. As expected, 
then, the bare plural counterpart to (113a) has the species interpretation: owls in (121a) 
directly denotes the [+species]  type "owls."  In the same way, the bare plural coun- 

61 As  expected,  the form  *The wounded  tigers  are  common  around here is  also  ungrammatical. 
62  B. Schein (personal communication) points out that (120b) becomes possible if the adjective is focused: 
The BENGAL  tigers  (as  opposed  to the MADRAS  whales)  are becoming  extinct.  As  noted  by Higgins  (1973), 
focus is typically associated with a list interpretation. One could then speculate that focus here facilitates the 
construction of a "prototype" of tigers, despite the fact that the noun tigers is plural. It is as if, in that sentence 
and for that speaker, the feature [ + species] was borne by Bengal, but not by tigers. 

THE  DEFINITE 

DETERMINER 

IN  FRENCH 

AND 

IN  ENGLISH 

647 

terpart to (1 13b) is well formed: Bengal tigers in (12 ib) directly denotes the [+ species] 
type "Bengal tigers." 

To conclude this section, we examine inalienable body-part nouns in the context of 
the notion of prototype. Inalienable body-part nouns may be classified [ + species] and, 
as  such, will give rise to  a prototype. The prototype of inalienable body-part nouns 
contains the tokens "head," "eye,"  "nose," "mouth," "ear(s)," "arm(s)," "hand(s)," 
"leg(s)," and so on. These are interpreted as inalienable possessions of the prototypical 
individual "human." The notion of prototype might help us understand a peculiar fact 
concerning inalienables (brought to our attention by T. Stowell). Consider the examples 
in (122). 

(122) a.  John cut his finger. 

b.  John punished his dog. 

Like definite expressions in general, his dog in (122b) must refer to a unique, identifiable 
dog (that belongs to John or someone else). By contrast, his finger in (122a) may refer 
to any one of John's (or someone else's) fingers. This fact will follow if one assumes 
that the inalienable phrase is interpreted as denoting the token finger in the prototype. 
The referent of his will be identified with the prototypical individual (the possessor of 
finger in the prototype) by transitivity. 

5.2.  Residual  Cases 

More intriguing are perhaps the examples noted by Ebert (1982). We cite two of her 
texts in (123)-(124). 

(123)  He was the most pitiful object that you could set eyes on. His head was big 
and his body terribly small and thin, the elbows and knees stood out like 
knots on a stick and both his legs were covered with deep running sores from 
the thigh to the heel.... 
In his flat,  angular, harassed,  and infinitely patient 
face, the eyes were without glance, dim like the eyes of a dead person. 

(124)  If the injured person is in imminent danger, it is far safer to leave him lying 
where he is. A rolled-up jersey or coat placed under the head, and a coat or 
blanket over him is the best treatment you can give while waiting for help. 
If the person is unconscious, loosen the clothing, especially around the neck. 
The cases illustrated here (which we shall call the "residual" cases) are in complemen- 
tary distribution with the ones discussed in earlier sections (which we  shall call the 
"core"  cases).  In the core  cases,  the body-part phrase  and its possessor  are part  of the 
same  nuclear  sentence  (or argument complex)  (where  "argument complex"  includes  all 
and only those constituents that are arguments within the same clause). In the residual 
cases,  by contrast, the body-part phrase is construed with a possessor contained in a 
preceding sentence or within an adjunct (like an if-clause or a locative). The question 

648 

JEAN-ROGER 

VERGNAUD 

AND  MARIA 

LUISA 

ZUBIZARRETA 

arises whether the body-part phrases in the residual cases function as inalienables (i.e., 
as argument-taking nouns). The test based on modification suggests that they do not. 
Thus, we observe that, in the residual cases, the body-part noun may be modified by 
an appositive adjective (as in the case of deictics mentioned in footnote 13): 

(125) 
(126)  "A rolled-up jersey or coat placed under the injured head . .  ." 

. the bonylbloody  elbows  and knees  stood out like knots on a stick  ..." 

... 

The understood relation between the whole and the part in such cases will be derived 
presumably by the same pragmatic mechanism that relates a French restaurant and the 
chef in the following sentence: 

(127)  We went to a French restaurant last night. To our surprise, the chef turned 

out to be Chinese. 

It remains of  course to  characterize the exact discourse context that allows for the 
residual cases.63 

6.  Conclusion 
A central objective of this article was to provide an analysis of the French inalienable 
construction that explains the following clusterings of properties: 

(128)  a. 

b. 

(129) a. 

In  ext-poss  constructions  and  type int-poss  constructions  (with prenom- 
inal  or  postnominal  possessor):  Only  the  distributive  interpretation  is 
available and an inherently singular inalienable noun must be grammat- 
ically singular. 
In  token int-poss  constructions  (with prenominal  or postnominal  posses- 
sor): The set (nondistributive) interpretation for plurals is available and 
an inherently singular inalienable noun may surface as grammatically plu- 
ral. 
In ext-poss constructions: There are constraints on modification. 

b.  In int-poss constructions: There are no constraints on modification. 

The proposed analysis is based on the interaction of two hypotheses. On the one hand, 
we argued that two kinds of arguments are to be distinguished among nonpronominal 
definite concrete nominal expressions: those that denote types and those that denote 
tokens. On the other hand, we suggested that there is a correspondence between this 
interpretive notion and syntactic form: when denotational, DPs (directly) denote tokens 
and NPs (directly) denote types (see the Correspondence Law in (45)). Among the in- 

63 Note that the form in (i) is not as acceptable as the examples in the text. 
(i)  ?Un vieillard est tombe. La tete  a heurte le trottoir. 

an old man fell 

the head hit 

the curb 

However, (i) is better than (ii), where the antecedent of the body part is definite. 

(ii) *Le vieillard est tombe. La tete  a heurte le trottoir. 

the old man fell 

the head hit 

the curb 

THE  DEFINITE 

DETERMINER 

IN  FRENCH  AND 

IN  ENGLISH 

649 

alienable constructions mentioned above, we found that the inalienable phrase in the 
ext-poss construction is  a  type-denoting phrase headed by  an expletive determiner, 
whereas the inalienable phrase in the int-poss construction may be analyzed either as a 
token-denoting phrase headed by a denotational determiner or as a type-denoting phrase 
headed by an expletive determiner. 

This analysis has the following important implications: 
(130) a.  The type/token distinction cuts across the generic/nongeneric distinction. 
There are type-denoting expressions that do not give rise to  a generic 
interpretation. 

b.  The subject-predicate relation in the sense of the standard literature (see, 
for example, Higginbotham (1987)) is insufficient to characterize the re- 
lations between determiners and their NP complement. The relation of 
instantiation emerges as fundamental in characterizing the cases discussed 
in this article. 

A  second objective of this article was to explain why English lacks the ext-poss 
inalienable construction. We argued that the difference between French and English is 
located in the status of the definite determiner. In English the definite determiner can 
never function as an expletive. This entails the required property, since the inalienable 
phrase in the ext-poss construction must be headed by an expletive determiner. Among 
the int-poss constructions, the type construction is also headed by an expletive deter- 
miner. And, as predicted, English also lacks the type construction. We showed that the 
hypothesis that the definite determiner cannot function as an expletive in English is 
further supported by the syntax and interpretation of definite generic phrases in this 
language. Perhaps the well-known fact that the "definiteness effect" in the cases  of 
extraction out of nominal phrases is stronger in English than in Romance can also be 
related to the same parameter (e.g.,  ??The person  who you  bought  the picture  of vs. La 
personne  dont  tu as  achete  la photo). 

Finally, we argued that the inalienable phrase in the prepositional construction in 
French and English involves a bound determiner, which must be licensed by metonymy. 
Metonymic licensing in this construction is lexically governed by the verb. This analysis 
implies that definite determiners function like pronominal elements in cases in which 
the instantiation relation between the determiner and the NP is licensed by metonymy. 
An important implication of the proposed analysis of the PP construction is  that the 
notion of  denotation must be  distinguished from the notion of  reference: the bound 
determiner in a PP construction denotes, but is not necessarily referential (cf. The Rev- 
erend Dodgson  kissed  every  girl on  the forehead).  The ultimate  implication  is  that the 
usual and intuitive notion of domain D must be revised and that a more abstract view 
of denotation must be taken. This is the position we take here: see footnote 23. As we 
hint in that footnote, although grammar allocates a special level to the denotata in the 
abstract sense of our theory, it does not provide any such level for the referents in a 
sentence. 

Cambridge, Massachusetts. 

Massachusetts. 

Southern California, Los Angeles. 

Aoun, J. and D. Sportiche (1983) "On the Formal Theory of Government," ms., MIT, Cambridge, 

Authier, J.-M. (1988) The Syntax of  Unselective Binding, Doctoral dissertation, University of 

Brame, M. (1981) "The General Theory of Binding and Fusion," Linguistic Analysis 7, 277-325. 
Brame, M. (1982) "The Head-Selector Theory of Lexical Specifications and the Nonexistence of 

Coarse Categories," Linguistic Analysis 10, 321-325. 

Brody,  M.  (1980)  "On  Circular Readings,"  Journal  of Linguistic  Research  1, 95-105. 
Carlson, G. (1977) Reference to Kinds in English, Doctoral dissertation, University of Massa- 

chusetts, Amherst. 

650 

References 

JEAN-ROGER 

VERGNAUD 

AND  MARIA 

LUISA 

ZUBIZARRETA 

Abney,  S.  (1987)  The English  Noun  Phrase  in Its  Sentential  Aspect,  Doctoral  dissertation,  MIT, 

Chierchia, G. (1982) "Bare Plurals, Mass Nouns, and Nominalization," in Proceedings of  the 
First  West Coast  Conference  on Formal Linguistics,  Linguistics  Department,  Stanford Uni- 
versity, Stanford, California. 

Chomsky, N. (1970) "Remarks on Nominalization," in R. Jacobs and P. Rosenbaum, eds., Read- 

ings  in English  Transformational  Grammar, Ginn,  Waltham,  Massachusetts. 

Chomsky, N.  (1976) "Conditions on Rules of Grammar," Linguistic Analysis 2, 303-351. 
Chomsky,  N.  (1981) Lectures  on  Government  and Binding,  Foris,  Dordrecht. 
Chomsky,  N.  (1982) Some  Concepts  and Consequences  of the Theory of Government and Binding, 

MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts. 

Chomsky,  N.  (1986) Knowledge  of Language:  Its Nature,  Origin, and  Use,  Praeger,  New  York. 
Chomsky, N. (1991) "Some Notes on Economy of Derivation and Representation," in R. Freidin, 
ed.,  Principles  and  Parameters  in  Comparative  Grammar,  MIT Press,  Cambridge,  Mas- 
sachusetts. 

Duffield, N.  (1991) Particles and Projections, Doctoral dissertation, University of Southern Cal- 

ifornia, Los Angeles. 

Ebert, K. H.  (1970) Referenz,  Sprechsituation  und die bestimmten Artikel in einem nordfriesischen 
Dialekt, Doctoral dissertation, Christian-Albrechts-Universitat zu Kiel, published in the 
series  Studien  und Materialien  veroffentlicht  im Nordfriisk Instituut Nr.  4. 

Ebert,  K.  H.  (1982) "The  Definite Articles with Inalienables in  English and German," in 
W.  Lohnes  and E.  Hopkins,  eds.,  The Contrastive  Grammar of English  and  German,  Ka- 
roma Publishers, Ann Arbor, Michigan. 

Evans, G. (1980) "Pronouns," Linguistic Inquiry 11, 337-362. 
Fodor, J. D.  and I.  Sag (1982) "Referential and Quantificational Indefinites," Linguistics and 

Philosophy  5,  355-398. 

Frege,  G.  (1879) Begriffsschrift,  eine der arithmetischen  nachgebildete  Formelsprache  des  reinen 
Denkens, L.  Nebert, Halle. Translated by T. W. Bynum as Conceptual Notation,  1972, 
Oxford University Press, Oxford. 

Frege,  G.  (1893)  "Uber  Sinn  und  Bedeutung,"  Zeitschrift fur  Philosophie  und  Philosophische 
Kritik, 25-50.  Translated by H.  Feigl as  "On Sense and Nominatum," in H.  Feigl and 
W.  Sellars,  eds.  (1949) Readings  in Philosophical  Analysis,  Appleton  Century Crofts. 

Fukui, N. and M. Speas (1986) "Specifiers and Projections," in MIT Working Papers in Linguistics 

6, Department of Linguistics and Philosophy, MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts. 

Giorgi, A.  and G. Longobardi (in press)  The Syntax of Noun Phrases:  Configuration,  Parameters, 

and Empty Categories, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 

THE  DEFINITE 

DETERMINER 

IN  FRENCH 

AND 

IN  ENGLISH 

651 

Grimshaw, J. (1990) Argument  Structure,  MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts. 
Gross, M. (1986) Grammaire transformationnelle  dufrancais:  Syntaxe de l'adverbe,  Asstril, Paris. 
Gueron, J.  (1985) "Inalienable Possession, PRO-Inclusion and Lexical Chains," in J.  Gueron, 
H.-G. Obenauer, and J.-Y. Pollock, eds., Grammatical Representation,  Foris, Dordrecht. 
Heim, I. (1982) The Semantics  of  Definite  and  Indefinite  Noun  Phrases,  Doctoral dissertation, 

University of Massachusetts, Amherst. 

Hellan, L. (1986) "The Headedness of NPs in Norwegian," in P. Muysken and H. van Riemsdijk, 

eds., Features  and Projections,  Foris, Dordrecht. 

Higginbotham, J. (1985) "On Semantics," Linguistic  Inquiry 16, 547-593. 
Higginbotham, J. (1987) "Indefiniteness and Predication," in E. Reuland and A. ter Meulen, eds., 

The Representation  of  (In)definiteness,  MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts. 

Higgins, F. R. (1973) The Pseudo-cleft  Construction in English,  Doctoral dissertation, MIT, Cam- 

bridge, Massachusetts. 

Hornstein, N.  (1984) Logic  as  Grammar, MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts. 
Husserl, E. (1922) Logische  Untersuchungen:  Untersuchungen  zur Phanomenologie  und Theorie 
der Erkenntnis,  rev. ed.,  Halle. In Husserliana  XIX, vol.  1, 1984, Martinus Nijhoff, The 
Hague. 

Jaeggli, 0.  (1982) Topics  in Romance  Syntax,  Foris, Dordrecht. 
Jespersen, 0.  (1924) The Philosophy  of  Grammar, George Allen & Unwin, London. 
Kamp, H. (1984) "A Theory of Truth and Semantic Representation," in J. Groenendijk, T. M. V. 
Janssen, and M. Stokhof, eds.,  Truth, Interpretation,  and Information,  Foris, Dordrecht. 

Kayne, R. (1975) French  Syntax,  MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts. 
Kolb, H.-P. and C. Thiersch (1986) "Strict X-Bar Parsing," ms., University of Brabant. 
Neale, S. (1990) Descriptions,  MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts. 
Rappaport, M. (1983) "On the Nature of Derived Nominals," in L.  Levin, M. Rappaport, and 
A.  Zaenen, eds.,  Papers  in Lexical-Functional  Grammar, Indiana University Linguistics 
Club, Bloomington. 

Riemsdijk, H. van and E. Williams (1980) "NP-Structure," The Linguistic  Review  1, 171-217. 
Ritter, E. (1991) "Evidence for Number as a Nominal Head," in GLOW Newsletter  26. 
Rizzi, L. (1990) Relativized  Minimality,  MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts. 
Russell, B. (1905) "On Denoting," Mind  14, 479-493. 
Skolem, T.  (1928) "Uber die mathematische Logik," Norsk  Matematisk  Tidskrift 10, 125-142. 
Translated in J. van Heijenoort, ed. (1966) Source Book in Mathematical  Logic,  1879-1931, 
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts. 

Stowell, T.  (1987) "Subjects, Specifiers, and X-Bar Theory," ms., UCLA, Los Angeles, Cali- 

Tellier, C.  (1988)  Universal  Licensing:  Implications  for  Parasitic  Gap  Constructions,  Doctoral 

dissertation, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec. 

Thiersch, C.  (1985) "VP and Scrambling in the German Mittelfeld," ms.,  University of  Con- 

fornia. 

necticut, Storrs. 

sachusetts. 

sachusetts. 

Vergnaud, J.-R. (1974) French  Relative  Clauses,  Doctoral dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, Mas- 

Vergnaud, J.-R. and M. L. Zubizarreta (1990) "On the Form and Interpretation of Definite Noun 

Phrases," ms., University of Southern California, Los Angeles. 

Wasow, T. (1972) Anaphoric  Relations  in English,  Doctoral dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, Mas- 

Williams, E. (1980) "Predication," Linguistic  Inquiry 11, 203-238. 
Williams, E. (1981) "Argument Structure and Morphology," The Linguistic  Review  1, 81-114. 

652 

JEAN-ROGER 

VERGNAUD 

AND  MARIA 

LUISA 

ZUBIZARRETA 

Williams, E. (1982) "The NP Cycle," Linguistic Inquiry 13, 277-295. 
Zubizarreta,  M.  L.  (1987)  Levels  of  Representation  in  the  Lexicon  and  in  the  Syntax,  Foris, 

Dordrecht. 

Zubizarreta, M. L. and J.-R. Vergnaud (1992) "Generics and Existentials in French and in En- 

glish," paper presented at the 1992 GLOW Colloquium, Lisbon. 

Department  of Linguistics 
University  of  Southern  California 
University Park 
Los  Angeles,  California  90089-1693 
Vergnaud@ USCVM.BITNET 
Zubizarr@ USCVM.BITNET 

