 

 

EUROPEAN COMMISSION 

MEMO 

Brussels, 28 February 2013 

'Smart Borders': for an open and secure Europe 

Why do we need 'smart borders'? 
Travel flows at the external borders of the EU are increasing and are expected to increase 
even more in the future. Border crossings at the air borders alone could increase by 80%, 
from  400  million  in  2009  to  720  million  in  2030.  This  will  result  in  longer  delays  and 
queues for travellers if border checking procedures are not modernised in time. Member 
States cannot address this only by hiring additional border guards and expanding border 
crossing points. The 'Smart Borders' package leads the way towards a next generation of 
border checks relying on new, much more effective technologies. 
The Entry/Exit System  (EES) and the Registered Travellers Programme (RTP) will speed 
up border check procedures for third country nationals entering the EU while at the same 
time enhancing security. 
Meeting  these  two  objectives  of  facilitating  access  and  enhancing  security  would  make 
sure that the EU remains open to the world and attractive as a destination for non EU-
travellers.  

What are the current rules? 
Under the current rules, the Schengen Borders Code requires a thorough check at entry of 
all travellers crossing the external border; there is no flexibility in the system. The same 
checks are applied to all third country nationals, regardless of the level of risk associated 
with them or their frequency of travel.  
Moreover, there are currently no means to record a traveller’s cross-border movements. 
The period of time a traveller has stayed in the Schengen area is calculated based solely 
on the stamps affixed in the travel document. There is no European data base in which 
such  travellers  are  recorded.  As  a  result  there  is  no  effective  way  for  the  relevant 
authorities  to  address  the  issue  of  'overstayers'  (i.e.  travellers  who  stay  beyond  the 
authorised period of time). This lack of information affects the capacity of Member States 
to carry out returns and reduces the extent to which EU border and visa policy is based on 
evidence. 

Registered Traveller Programme 

How will an EU Registered Traveller Programme be working?  

The  Registered  Traveller  Programme  will  facilitate  border  crossings  for  frequent,  pre-
vetted and pre-screened third country travellers at the Schengen external borders.  

MEMO/13/141 

 

The Commission is proposing to make use of new technologies such as Automated Border 
Control systems, thus giving Member States tools to manage their passenger flows more 
efficiently  and  releasing  human  resources  needed  at  the  external  border  for  checking 
higher risk travellers or serve other travellers. Third country nationals having access to the 
RTP would  be able  to  use Automated  Border  Control facilities whenever  available at the 
Schengen border crossing point.  
In  practice  the  RTP  would  work  at  the  border  the  following  way:  A  Registered  Traveller 
would be issued a token in the form of a machine-readable card containing only a unique 
identifier (i.e. application number), which is swiped on arrival and departure at the border 
using an automated gate. The gate would read the token and the travel document (and 
visa sticker number, if applicable) and the fingerprints of the travellers, which would be 
compared to the ones stored in the Central Repository and other databases, including the 
Visa Information system (VIS) for visa holders. If all checks are successful, the traveller is 
able  to  pass  through  the  automated  gate.  In  case  of  any  issue,  the  traveller  would  be 
assisted  by  a  border  guard.  All  in  all,  passing  the  external  border  will  be  a  matter  of 
seconds.  

Who could become a Registered Traveller? 
While citizens from some non-EU countries are required to hold a visa when travelling to 
the Schengen area, others are not1 (see also DG Home infographics). 
Visa  holders  and  non-visa  holders  from  all  third-countries  would  be  eligible  to  apply  for 
access to the RTP and after successful vetting and pre-screening process would be able to 
benefit  from  this  type  of  travel  facilitation  arrangement  at  any  external  border  crossing 
point of the Schengen area. 
Third-country nationals of at least 12 years of age should be able to lodge an application 
for the RTP at the consulate of any Member State or at any external border crossing point. 
Examination  of  applications  would  be  aligned  with  the  criteria  for  issuing  multiple-entry 
visa.  
A  maximum  €20  application  fee  covering  the  administrative  cost  of  handling  RTP 
applications  by  the  Member  States  could  be  asked  to  applicants.  Initial  access  to  the 
Registered Traveller Programme should be granted for one year. 

Entry-Exit System 

How has the Entry/Exit System been designed? 

The Entry/Exit System will permit the accurate and reliable calculation of authorised stays 
as well as identification and verification of travellers. It will do so by replacing the current 
system of calculation based on the stamps in the passports by the electronic registry of 
the dates and place of entry and exit of third-country nationals admitted for short stays. 
The Commission proposal for an EES Regulation foresees to start with the registration of 
alphanumeric data (e.g. names, type and number of travel document(s), date and time of 
entry/exit, etc.) and after three years of operation also biometrics (fingerprints). The data 
retention is foreseen for a period of 6 months in 'ordinary cases' and for 5 years in cases 
of 'overstay'. Access to the database will be granted to authorities responsible for border 
control, issuing visas and authorities competent for verifying the identity of third country 
nationals within the territory of a Member State.  
                                          
1 There are currently 42 countries and entities whose citizens do not need a visa. Further to a recent  
Commission proposal this list could soon include an additional 16 Caribbean and Pacific Island Nations –  
IP/12/1179 

 

2

 

How will travellers' personal data be protected? 
The  RTP  and  EES  will  comply  with  the  relevant  legislation  on  the  protection  of  personal 
data. Furthermore, privacy by design will be promoted by the system –i.e. the system will 
be designed in a way that limits its data protection impacts. 
Data would be collected and handled only by the designated competent authorities (RTP: 
visa  and  border  authorities;  EES:  visa,  border  and  immigration  authorities)  as  far  as  is 
necessary  for  the  performance  of  their  tasks.  Access  to  the  data  is  strictly  defined  and 
limited in both regulations.  
Measures for redress will be put in place so that travellers can rectify any data contained 
in their Registered Traveller application and/or their Entry/Exit record.  
Measures  are  taken  to  ensure  that  the  data  is  stored  securely  and  is  not  subject  to 
misuse. Data processing will be supervised by the European Data Protection Supervisor as 
far as EU institutions and bodies are involved, and by national data protection authorities, 
as far as Member States' authorities are involved.  

What is the cost of such systems? 
The  maximum  estimated  costs  for  the  development  and  operation  of  the  two  systems 
between 2015-2020 (€ 513 million for the EES and € 587 million for the RTP) has been 
earmarked by the Commission (under the Internal Security Fund 2014-2020)2 to cover: - 
one-time  development  costs  at  central  level  and  in  all  Member  States;  -  costs  for  four 
years of business-critical maintenance of both central and national components.  
Implementing the RTP in practice will also mean that Member States would increase their 
investments in automated gates at the border.  
The substantial costs need of course to be considered alongside the benefits: for example, 
as  well  as  automating  a  substantial  share  of  all  border  crossings,  the  RTP  could  reduce 
border  control  resources  needed  by  around  40%  (estimated  to  be  around  €500 
million/year). This would enable Member States to make more effective use of their border 
guards. Even if we assume that savings would be more modest (i.e. €250 million/year), 
Member States would still start making considerable cost savings as of their second year 
of operations. 
Furthermore, the RTP applicant will have to pay a fee of 20 EUR for administrative costs of 
examining  applications.  The  fee  could  be  reduced  to  10  EUR  if  a  multiple-entry  visa 
application  and  an  RTP  application  are  examined  at  the  same  time  based  on  the  same 
supporting documents. 

Why do we need specific systems at EU level? 
The establishment of a European EES will record the entries and exits of all third country 
nationals admitted for short stays within the Schengen area, including those not subject to 
the  visa  requirement.  Therefore,  it  will  provide  accurate  data  on  travel  flows  and 
movements  of  third-country  nationals  across  all  external  border  crossing  points  of  the 
Schengen area. Moreover, the system will automatically calculate the authorised stay and 
issue an alert to the competent national authorities when there is no exit record on the 
expiry  of  the  authorised  stay.  Finally,  the  EES  will  allow  for  accurate  and  reliable 
identification  and  verification  of  non-visa  holders  both  at  the  external  border  and  within 
the territory. 

                                          
2 COM (2011) 750. 

 

3

 

Thirteen  Member  States3  are  currently  implementing  national  Entry/Exit  systems,  which 
systematically  collect  all  entry  and  exit  records  of  third  country  nationals  crossing  their 
respective  external  borders.  However  these  national  systems  are  not  linked  to  similar 
systems in other Member States. The entry and exit records cannot therefore be matched 
when persons leave the Schengen area through another Member State than the one from 
which they entered and in which their entry was recorded.  
The  EES  will  not  only  bring  benefits  by  allowing  more  evidence-based  policymaking,  for 
example, in the domain of visa policy and visa facilitation, but also in the framework of the 
Partnership for Migration, Mobility and Security with certain neighbouring countries. 
An  EU  Registered  Traveller  Programme  (RTP)  will  allow  for  a  faster  and  simpler  border 
check process for frequent, pre-screened and pre-vetted third country travellers at every 
external border crossing point. Some Member States are successfully speeding up border 
checks for EU/EEA/CH citizens by implementing automated border checks based on the e-
passports4 or based on the pre-registration5. But these systems cannot be used for third 
country  nationals  and  membership  of  a  national  RTP  in  one  Member  State  does  not 
automatically  allow  the  traveller  to  benefit  from  facilitated  border  crossing  in  another 
Member State. 

Would an Entry-Exit System be duplicating other tools? 
No. There are already measures and tools available at EU border crossing points, such as 
the  Schengen  Information  System  (SIS)  and  Visa  Information  System  (VIS).  However, 
none is intended for the purpose of recording border crossings and keeping track of the 
time people stay within the EU territory.   
The  SIS  is  used  by  border  guards  as  well  as  by  police,  customs,  visa  and  judicial 
authorities  throughout  the  Schengen  Area,  in  particular  to  carry  out  checks  on  persons 
who may have been involved in a serious crime or may not have the right to enter or stay 
in the EU. 
The  main  purpose  of  the  VIS  is  to  allow  the  verification  of  a  traveller's  visa  application 
history and, at entry level, verify whether the person presenting the visa at the border is 
the  same  person  to  whom  the  visa  has  been  issued.  It  has  not  been  designed  to  keep 
track of the entries and exits of third country nationals nor is it meant to allow checking 
whether  a  person,  after  entering  the  EU  legally,  does  or  does  not  stay  longer  than 
permitted. In addition, of course, the VIS concerns only countries whose nationals need a 
visa to enter the Schengen area.  

                                          
3  Finland,  Estonia,  Spain,  Latvia,  Lithuania,  Poland,  Slovakia,  Hungary,  Romania,  Bulgaria,  Cyprus,  Portugal, 
Malta. 
4 For example, Austria, Belgium, Czech Republic, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, the Netherlands, Norway,  
Portugal, Spain and the United Kingdom have already implemented ABC for EU/EEA/CH citizens or will soon  
implement it. 
 
5 For example, the Netherlands (Privium), France (PARAFES), the United Kingdom (Iris) and Germany (ABG) have 
this kind of programme.  

 

4

 

Would the Entry-Exit System be a kind of EU ESTA? 
No. The EES will mainly contribute to border management and whereas an EU Electronic 
System for Travel Authorisation (ESTA) would entail a pre-travel screening system of all 
non EU citizens not requiring a visa travelling to the Schengen area, which has no direct 
relation with the functioning of the EES or the RTP. The Commission has decided to not 
proceed  with  proposing  an  EU  ESTA  at  this  stage,  but  will  further  analyse  this  issue  in 
2014 in relation to the future of visa policy. 

 

5

