Sun, E., Petetz, E., & Baer, U. (eds.) (2007).
The Claims of Literature: The Shoshana Reader.
New York: Fordham University Press.

Feminism
KATIE GARNER & REBECCA MUNFORD

the

Feminism describes
campaigns,
activities, and texts concerned with chal-
lenging and transforming how women are
treated and represented in society. It is a
political movement and discourse that
encompasses a diverse range of perspectives,
theories, and methods. As well as analyzing
patriarchal structures, feminist theory seeks
to propose new ways for women to bring
about social change. This drive underlies
much feminist activity, from public cam-
paigns for new political rights, to the search
for a new “feminine” writing. Current An-
glo-American models often conceptualize
the history of Western feminism in terms
of three movements, or “waves.” The ﬁrst
wave of activity dates from the end of the
eighteenth century through to the beginning
of collective female political action in the
form of the Suffragette and New Women’s
movements in Britain and the US, and the
granting of partial (1918) and full (1928)
franchise for women in Britain. The 1960s
signal the beginnings of the “second wave,”
when women collectively campaigned on a
broad range of issues including sexual health
and contraception, pornography, domestic
and gender discrimination in
abuse,
the workplace. This chapter of
feminist
theory is marked by the emergence of three
different models of feminist politics: liberal
feminism, which focuses on achieving
full equality and opportunities within
existing social structures; radical feminism,
which is revolutionary rather than refor-
mative in its conviction that creating
alternative, woman-centered institutions
and realities will bring
social
change; and socialist feminism, which sees

about

F E M I N I S M 595

“femaleness” and “femininity” as socially
and historically contingent, and is con-
cerned with the economic and cultural con-
texts of women’s oppression. Following the
decline of organized second-wave activities
in the 1980s, different accounts of feminism
from black and Third World women began
to readdress the First World bias of the ﬁrst
and second waves. These differing positions,
alongside developments in the ﬁelds of gen-
der studies, postcolonial theory, queer the-
ory, and postmodernism,
inform third-
wave feminism, which accordingly takes a
more global and plural view of the relation-
ship between power and subjectivity.

The history of feminism does not have a
deﬁnitive origin. As early as the beginning of
the ﬁfteenth century Christine de Pizan was
cataloguing the achievements of women and
challenging female stereotypes in The Book
of the City of Ladies (1983[1404–5]). How-
ever, Mary Wollstonecraft’s A Vindication of
the Rights of Woman (1992[1792]) is often
regarded as heralding the beginning of mod-
ern feminism in Britain. Written in the form
of a philosophical essay, Wollstonecraft’s
provocative call for reform foregrounded
the social, political, and economic margin-
alization of women at a time when the
question of the “rights of man” was being
debated in France and the US. Key to
Wollstonecraft’s argument was her belief
that social structures constructed female
inequality as “natural” and that women
do not choose to behave as they do, but
are instead enslaved by a society that forces
them to behave in certain “sentimental”
ways. In particular, Wollstonecraft identi-
ﬁed gallantry and sensibility as major social
fabrications which had been developed (by
men) to encourage women’s subordination.
The overarching problem,
she argued,
was women’s lack of access to education,
which held them in a “state of perpetual
childhood” (1992[1792]: 11). She proposed
that Enlightenment principles of rational

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

596

F E M I N I S M

thought and the ability to acquire knowl-
edge should be extended to women, and
that, in line with Enlightenment logic, it was
irrational
to exclude women from the
social sphere and to curtail their political
citizenship.

The Vindication had an immediate inter-
national inﬂuence. It was quickly translated
into French and published in three separate
editions in the US. Wollstonecraft’s articu-
lation of femininity as a condition resem-
bling slavery also provided a springboard
from which American women involved in
antislavery campaigns could turn their at-
tention to female suffrage. In the 1840s,
American suffragettes Lucretia Mott and
Elizabeth Cady Stanton jointly campaigned
for the abolishment of slavery and the
granting of suffrage. Stanton’s “Declaration
of Sentiments,” which imitated the Ameri-
can Declaration of Independence (1776),
extending the equal rights doctrine to in-
clude women, was issued at the Seneca Falls
women’s rights convention in July 1848. In
1869 Stanton founded the National Woman
Suffrage Association (NWSA) with Susan B.
Anthony, whose roots were also in antislav-
ery activities. The NWSA merged with the
American Woman Suffrage Association
(AWSA) to form the National American
Woman Suffrage Association (NAWSA)
in 1890. The NAWSA played a vital role
in ratifying the Nineteenth Amendment,
also known as the Susan B. Anthony amend-
ment, which granted American women full
suffrage in 1920.

In Britain, in the second half of the nine-
teenth century, debates about women’s lack
of access to education expanded into a wider
questioning of women’s political inequality,
and the terms “feminism” and “feminist”
entered public usage by the 1890s. The
British philosophers and political theorists
John Stuart Mill and Harriet Taylor devel-
oped aspects of Wollstonecraft’s liberal fem-
inist thought, campaigning for women’s

suffrage and equal access to education.
“The subjection of women” (1869), which
Mill worked on with his wife, was published
three years after he ﬁrst introduced a par-
liamentary bill calling for the extension of
enfranchisement to women. The essay ar-
gued that all women were repressed citizens.
It also blamed British marriage laws – which
denied women their own rights to children,
land, and property – for producing and
sustaining inequality between men and
women. Although “The subjection” is rec-
ognized as a progressive feminist text in its
call for gender equality, Mill’s stance has
been criticized for its refusal to question
women’s position in the domestic sphere.
By the latter part of the nineteenth cen-
tury, underground female discontent had
begun to translate into more radical, public
statements and women formed a number of
activist groups. Incorporating both the lob-
bying strategies of the National Union of
Women’s Suffrage Societies (NUWSS), led
by Millicent Fawcett, and the direct action of
the Women’s Social and Political Union
(WSPU), founded by Emmeline Pankhurst
and her daughters,
the British suffrage
movement represented a demand for equal-
ity, grounded in political and legislative
reform. The passing of the 1928 Represen-
tation of the People Act marked the culmi-
nation of over six decades of political and
social agitation, and extended the partial
suffrage that women had received ten years
previously in 1918. The same decades
marked a period of literary experimentation
and innovation, with writers such as Virgi-
nia Woolf, H. D., Edith Wharton, Zola
Neale Hurston, and Djuna Barnes subject-
ing the relationship between women and
literature, and gender and language, to
new focuses. The most inﬂuential of these
was Woolf’s A Room of One’s Own (1929).
Developed from two lectures that Woolf
had delivered to women students at Newn-
ham and Girton Colleges in Cambridge in

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

1928, and playfully crossing the boundaries
between ﬁction and polemic,
the essay
tackles the question of “women and ﬁction”
and the various ways in which this relation-
ship might be imagined. Her underlying and
much celebrated assertion is that “a woman
must have money and a room of her own
if she is to write ﬁction” (1929: 4). She
is concerned, then, with the relationship
between economics, education, and creati-
vity. “Women,” she argues, “have served all
these centuries as looking-glasses possessing
the magic and delicious power of reﬂecting
the ﬁgure of man at twice its natural size”
(1945[1929]: 5). Placing questions of repre-
sentation and literary agency ﬁrmly within a
broader social, economic, and historical
context, Woolf highlights how woman’s
disenfranchisement – her exclusion from
electoral and civil privilege – is not only
the result of political legislation and eco-
nomic inequity, but also of cultural mores.
Woolf’s essay, then, foregrounds why wom-
en need to undertake critical and creative
activity alongside political activity. Sketch-
ing out a critical language for addressing
questions about gender and sexuality, the
canon and literary production, and lan-
guage and subjectivity, A Room of One’s
Own presaged many of the debates that
characterize the “second wave” of feminist
activity, and remains one of
the most
inﬂuential texts of the twentieth century.

World War II and its aftermath separate
the activities of ﬁrst- and second-wave fem-
inism. In Britain and the US, women’s war
work and the labors of home-front living
had expanded responsibilities and free-
doms, but at the war’s end, government
propaganda expected women to return to
their prewar roles – roles which were in-
creasingly seen as conﬁning. Just as liberal,
socialist, and radical politics coexisted in the
women’s movement, the 1960s onward saw
the emergence of a diverse, and often dis-
cordant, body of theoretical analyses of the

F E M I N I S M 597

social-economic, cultural, and linguistic
experiences of women and the complex
and various operations of patriarchal ide-
ologies, as well as innovatory moves to
transform extant structures. In 1963, Betty
Friedan, one of the pioneers of the US
women’s movement, published The Femi-
nine Mystique, an investigation of the cul-
tural construction of femininity and the
manacles of domesticity. This landmark
study of “the problem that has no name”
drew attention to the home as a prison
rather than a stronghold for women and
the psychological distress experienced by
unwaged and bored housewives. What Frie-
dan termed the “mystique” stood for the
inconsistency between women’s real expe-
rience in the home and the idealization of
domesticity in marketing and the media.
Focused on individual experience and
autonomy, Friedan’s work belongs to a
tradition of liberal feminist thinking that
has been criticized for privileging the
experiences of white, middle-class women.
Nevertheless, in foregrounding the signiﬁ-
cance of ideological processes, it does share
aspects of Marxist and socialist feminist
thought. Marxist feminist critics, however,
are concerned with analyzing the ways in
which women’s subordination is related to
the organization of social class – a relation-
ship that was often sidelined or ignored in
mainstream Marxist theory – as well as
the ways in which capitalist relations of
production (e.g., the division of
labor)
were gendered (see Barrett 1980).

The 1960s were also a period of direct
feminist action, and formed part of the
broader cultural questioning and collective
challenges to authority made by civil rights,
student, and antiwar movements. Drawing
on previous suffragette activities, women
once again began to form organized political
bodies, including the liberal National Orga-
nization for Women (NOW) in 1966, of
which Friedan was a co-founder. Rooted in

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

598

F E M I N I S M

a conviction that sexism – women’s subor-
dination to the class of men – is the cause of
women’s oppression, radical feminism fo-
cused on women’s experiences of subjuga-
tion as women. A key aim was to encourage
all women to become involved in political
activity and to challenge the separation be-
tween the personal and the political
(see Morgan 1970; Whelehan 1995). Con-
sciousness raising (CR) – the practice of
women speaking openly about their lives
to one another – was viewed as an important
tool for social change. From the 1960s on-
wards, many all-women CR groups formed
to share and analyze personal experiences
and issues as a starting point for collective
political action. This emphasis on the indi-
vidual sphere and private experience meant
that early feminist agendas focused on such
issues as housework, abortion, contracep-
tion, the family, and division of labor; the
phrase “the personal is political” quickly
became
second-wave
activity.

epigram for

the

CR groups also served as platforms for
organizing large-scale public demonstra-
tions. The most famous of these took place
in September 1968, when the New York
Radical Women demonstrated against the
Miss America Beauty Pageant in Atlantic
City. Throwing such items as bras, girdles,
high heels, and fashion magazines into a
“freedom trash can,” the pageant protesters
challenged traditional deﬁnitions of femi-
ninity and the oppressive paraphernalia of
the beauty industry – giving birth, at the
same time, to one of the most resilient myths
of feminist history: the caricature of the
militant bra-burner. In 1968, then, culture
was clearly identiﬁed as a site for challenging
repressive representations of gendered iden-
tity – and, speciﬁcally, for destabilizing and
overcoming male authored deﬁnitions of
femininity.

Of pressing concern to many Anglo-
American and European theorists from

the late 1960s onward were the androcentric
scripts of Freudian psychoanalysis and, in
particular, a representation of woman as
“lacking a sexual organ” (Greer 1970). Con-
structions of woman as lack or absence
are addressed in two seminal texts of sec-
ond-wave feminist criticism, Kate Millett’s
Sexual Politics and Germaine Greer’s The
Female Eunuch (both published in Britain in
1970). Millett in particular established an
inﬂuential reading of Freudian penis envy as
a misogynist model which disallowed the
little girl any desire of her own other than to
become a man. Alternatively, the British
psychoanalyst Juliet Mitchell presented a
feminist revision of Freudian psychoanaly-
sis in her study Psychoanalysis and Feminism
(1974), which argued Freud’s
theories
opened up new ways of thinking about
the construction of sexual subjectivity for
women (see also Rose 1986).

Millett’s Sexual Politics created a long-
lasting trend for identifying evidence of
misogyny in texts, as Millett looked at works
by male authors (including D. H. Lawrence
and Henry Miller) and illustrated how each
enacted a sexual power politics which forced
women to occupy negative positions. Mill-
ett was not concerned with how Lawrence
and Miller chose to present women; rather,
she undertook to illustrate how the reader
responded to the gender structures inherent
in their texts. Greer’s The Female Eunuch
was in part an extension of Wollstonecraft’s
offensive against “pretty feminine phrases”
and social frames in a modern context.
Greer argued that romance novels were
the “opiate of the supermenial” as they
prescribed false models of experience for
women (Greer 1970: 188). These texts, along
with Mary Ellmann’s
groundbreaking
Thinking About Women (1968), offered cut-
ting analyses of dominant scripts of femi-
ninity, placing them in the political context
of patriarchy. Their focus on the sexist
ideologies underlying the male authored

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

canon provided the foundations for what is
referred to as “images of women” criticism.
The 1970s saw serious critical attention
paid to women’s writing and its traditions
by Anglo-American academics. The focus
on the sexist ideologies underlying the male
authored canon integral
to “images of
women” criticism was followed by a fe-
male-centered approach or,
in Elaine
Showalter’s coinage, “gynocritics,” that is,
an approach that was engaged with “woman
as writer – with woman as the producer of
textual meaning, with the history, themes,
genres, and structures of
literature by
women” (Showalter 1979: 25). In the second
half of the decade, three key texts appeared:
Ellen Moers’s Literary Women (1976),
Elaine Showalter’s A Literature of
their
Own: British Women Novelists from Bront€e
to Lessing (1977), and Sandra Gilbert and
Susan Gubar’s The Madwoman in the Attic:
The Woman Writer and the Nineteenth-Cen-
tury Literary Imagination (1979). Offering
revisionist literary histories, these works
were concerned with rereading women
writers with established literary reputations
(such as Jane Austen, the Bront€es, Emily
Dickinson, and Ann Radcliffe), but also
with extending the female canon to recover
forgotten or marginalized female writers.
Moers’s Literary Women saw women’s
literature as a deﬁnitive movement, “apart
from, but hardly subordinate to the main-
stream”
Showalter’s
Literature of Their Own opens with the
claim that “women have had a literature
of their own all along” (1977: 10). Showalter
disagreed with Moers’s claim that women’s
writings could be said to form a “move-
ment,” by stressing that as each past female
writer was relatively unaware of the fact that
other women wrote alongside herself, she
saw herself as an individual rather than as
part of a collective.

(1978[1976]:

42).

Revising Harold Bloom’s concept of the
male author’s “anxiety of inﬂuence,” Gilbert

F E M I N I S M 599

and Gubar’s Madwoman in the Attic argues
that the female author suffers from a similar
and yet more distressing “anxiety of
authorship”: “a radical fear that she cannot
create” (2000[1979]: 49). Their redeploy-
ment of Bloom’s model has been criticized
for appearing to conﬁrm the idea that the
feminist critic must write from within the
already established structures of patriarchy
(here, male dominated literary criticism).
Thus, Gilbert and Gubar’s text illustrates
one of the most pressing problems within
feminism: the question of how to critique
and transform male models without
remaining within their frameworks. Nine-
teenth-century women writers also provid-
ed the focus for the Marxist-Feminist Lit-
erature Collective, a group of women who
met between 1976 and 1979, and whose
critical practice was informed by a convic-
tion that a synthesis between Marxism and
psychoanalysis was necessary to “unfold the
crucial interdependence of class structure
and patriarchy” (1996[1978]: 330; see also
Kaplan 1986).

One of the most frequent accusations
leveled at second-wave feminist criticism
is that it attempts to speak on behalf of all
women by universalizing the experience of
some. Speciﬁcally, it has been taken to task
for its failure to attend to the ways in which
experiences of gender intersect with and are
shaped by experiences of class, race, sexu-
ality, religion, nationality, and ethnicity,
alongside other categories of identity. In
trying to reclaim a past for “women,” gyno-
critics met opposition from black feminists
and women of color, as well as lesbian
feminists, for whom the “new history” of
women bore the familiar hallmarks of ex-
clusivity and monolithic assumptions – the
very principles feminists detested about
male histories. In her groundbreaking essay,
“Toward a black feminist criticism” (1977),
Barbara Smith discusses the ways in which
the literary world ignores or relegates the

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

600

F E M I N I S M

existence of black women writers and black
lesbian writers and calls for a more rigorous
treatment of the complex ways in which
race,
sexuality,
class, and gender are
interconnected.

The work of bell hooks has played a
pioneering role in deﬁning a position for
black feminists. In Ain’t I a Woman (1982)
and Feminist Theory (1984), hooks exposes
and redresses two key political blind spots in
white feminisms: “drawing endless analo-
gies between ‘women’ and ‘blacks’”; and
assuming that the word woman “is synon-
ymous with white woman” (hooks 1982:
139). Feminist Theory opens by highlighting
how Friedan’s The Feminine Mystique con-
structs a white, middle-class feminism as a
universal feminism that suppresses the link
between race and class – and thus privileges
the misery of the bored, middle-class sub-
urban housewife while ignoring the needs
and experiences of women without homes
(hooks 1984). hooks argues that the prac-
tices of sexist oppression in developing
countries call for a feminism that recognizes
how the practices of sati and genital muti-
lation oppressed women’s bodies in a more
physical way than the social discrimination
encountered in Britain and the US. This
prompted other black feminists to propose
new theoretical terms to better express their
position, and to challenge the wave model
for its Anglo-American bias. In In Search of
Our Mothers’ Gardens (1983), Alice Walker
coined the term “womanist” to refer spe-
ciﬁcally to black feminist activities. Walker
emphasized that “womanist” is not a sepa-
ratist term, but encompasses both male and
female concerns, as well as those of race.

An analysis of the complex dynamics
of domination and subordination, exclusion
and inclusion, underpins feminist postcolo-
nial studies and US Third World feminisms.
This vitalline of questioningis exempliﬁed by
the work of Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak, who
asks “not merely who am I? but who is the

other woman? Howam I naming her?” (1987:
150). Spivak relates these questions not only
to literary texts, but also to the relations
between First and Third World feminists,
and between French and Anglo-American
models. Chandra Talpade Mohanty (1991),
for example, has foregrounded the ways in
which some Western feminist texts enact a
form of discursive colonization in their con-
struction of “Third World women” as an
ostensibly coherent and uniﬁed category.
The pioneering anthology This Bridge Called
My Back (1981), edited by Chicana feminists
Cherrıe Moraga and Gloria E. Anzaldua,
represented a move to expand the meanings
of “feminism” and feminist
solidarity.
Moving across a range of genres, the contri-
butions redeﬁned the meanings and modes
of feminist theoretical discourse. Anzaldua’s
Borderlands/La Frontera (1987) articulates
what she describes as a “new mestiza con-
sciousness,” a hybrid and plural conscious-
ness that expresses the tensions between
different identities.

As adumbrated by Barbara Smith, a need
to articulate a lesbian feminist discourse
intersected with the rise of black feminism.
Adrienne Rich’s “Compulsory Heterosexu-
ality and Lesbian Existence” (1980) and
Bonnie Zimmerman’s “What has never
been: An overview of
lesbian feminist
criticism” (1981) were central to deﬁning
the relevance of lesbianism for feminism.
Zimmerman took issue with the gynocritics’
construction of a female canon for not
recognizing lesbian texts and argued that
lesbian literary history is doubly repressed
by both patriarchy and heterosexuality.
Rich was similarly concerned with how
heterosexuality is always
the assumed
(and preferred) sexual orientation in texts,
and the ways in which the institution of
“compulsory heterosexuality” structures
patriarchal culture more broadly. Calling
straight feminism to account for its hetero-
sexist assumptions, Rich emphasizes the

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

and

“lesbian

relationships,

wider political and social importance of
various interconnections and bonds be-
tween women (see Whelehan 1995). Reject-
ing the term “lesbianism,” which historical-
ly belongs to the vocabulary of sexology,
Rich proposes instead the terms “lesbian
existence”
continuum,”
which include a range of woman-identiﬁed
experiences and relationships (including
mother–daughter
female
friendships, and networks). Following a
similar line, the French theorist Monique
Wittig advocated an exclusive lesbian fem-
inism and encouraged feminists to adopt a
lesbian identity. Concerned with locating a
lesbian subject outside of androcentric lin-
guistic registers, she stressed the need for
women to drop the label “woman” in ex-
change for “lesbian.” For Wittig, lesbianism
offers the capacity for a woman-deﬁned
identity, which can transfer the power to
name the subject from the patriarchal order
over to women (Wittig 1992). Works such
as Jane Rule’s Lesbian Images (1975) and
Lillian Faderman’s Surpassing the Love of
Men (1981) played a vital role in developing
a tradition of
lesbian-feminist criticism.
Judith Butler’s Gender Trouble (1990) was
also signiﬁcant for lesbian feminism and is
acknowledged as a founding text of queer
theory. Gender Trouble proposes that it is
only because heterosexist society deﬁnes
heterosexuality as normal and authentic
that it functions as the dominant trend –
but this much could be inferred from the
writings
and Rich.
Where Gender Trouble is radical is in its
debunking of the belief that heterosexuality
is grounded in anatomy; rather, it argues
that both gender and sexuality should be
considered as impersonations rather than
part of a “true” integral biologism. Butler’s
notion of gender as a performative effect
has been hugely inﬂuential in terms of con-
temporary
feminist understandings of
subjectivity.

of Zimmerman

F E M I N I S M 601

The importance of French thought to the
history of feminist criticism cannot be over-
estimated. It was the French philosopher
Simone de Beauvoir’s Le Deuxieme Sexe
(1949), translated into English as The Second
Sex in 1953, which began work on the
demystiﬁcation of “woman” and female
stereotypes that became the theoretical fo-
cus of much feminism in the second half
of the twentieth century. De Beauvoir sep-
arated “human females” from “women”
and made the famous proclamation that
“[o]ne is not born, but rather becomes, a
woman” (1953[1949]: 295), which estab-
lished a binary distinction between sex
and gender. Her existentialist philosophy
informed her argument that women do
not possess an essential characteristic of
“femininity”;
of
“femininity” is itself constructed through
certain cultural, social, and linguistic prac-
tices. Her assertion that gender was cultur-
ally constructed produced a marked shift in
feminism, away from previous essentialist
arguments that viewed gender as biologi-
cally determined and toward a social con-
structionist understanding of gender. Al-
though Anglo-American writers such as
Millett and Greer were inﬂuenced by de
Beauvoir’s ideas, it was in France that her
socialist
feminism became synonymous
with the nation’s perception of feminism
and its political orientation.

notion

rather,

the

“New French feminisms” emerged from
the politicized intellectual and activist
events of 1968, and the radical women’s
groups that were referred to as the Mouve-
ment de Liberation des Femmes from
1970 (Marks & de Courtivron 1981). New
French feminist thinkers such as Helene
Cixous, Luce
Julia Kristeva,
and Monique Wittig do not represent a
theoretically coherent body of
thought,
nor do they represent the totality of French
feminist
thought. They are,
however, committed to a radical critique

intellectual

Irigaray,

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

602

F E M I N I S M

that

throughout

and deconstruction of phallocentrism –
which places man as the central reference
point of Western thought and the phallus as
a symbol of male cultural authority. Making
use of Lacanian psychoanalysis and Derri-
dean deconstruction,
their work moves
across
the domains of psychoanalysis,
linguistics, and philosophy, attacking an-
drocentric linguistic and cultural regimes.
In spite of their divergences from its
existentialist feminism, de Beauvoir’s The
Second Sex remains an important corner-
stone for new French feminist thinking. Her
argument
history
“woman” has been constructed as the
“other” of man and, as such, she has been
denied the right to her own subjectivity,
informs Helene Cixous’s and Luce Irigaray’s
explorations of otherness. Cixous’s land-
mark essay “Sorties: out and out: attacks/
ways out/forays” (1986[1975]) opens with a
series of binary oppositions
arranged
around the central opposition of “man/
woman.” Cixous proposes that this system
of ordering and understanding the world is
hierarchical in structure. In other words, it
consists of two poles – and one of these poles
is always more privileged; it is given more
status and more power than the other. For
Irigaray, woman is not only “other” to man,
but also “indeﬁnitely other in herself”
(1985a[1977]). Like Cixous, she identiﬁes
“difference” as deﬁned by and within the
woman’s body. In Speculum of the Other
Woman (1985b[1974]), Irigaray interrogat-
ed the work of Western philosophers from
Freud to Plato in order to demonstrate how
philosophy places woman outside of the
capacity for representation. Her use of the
terms “speculum” and “specularization” is a
deliberate play on the word’s dual signiﬁ-
cation for a mirror, and an instrument for
examining the female genitals.
Irigaray
argues that philosophers are caught up in
the act of speculating, but never speculate
upon the female. On a wider scale, Irigaray’s

female

investigations into the masculinity of the
dominant gaze – and its impact for consid-
ering
– provided
a springboard for subsequent work by
feminist theorists in the ﬁelds of ﬁlm and
feminist art history.

subjectivity

Perhaps the most signiﬁcant proposal by
the French feminists was their search for a
mode of feminine discourse that could dis-
rupt or subvert phallocentric language, and
bring the body back into discourse. The
French-Bulgarian linguist and psychoanalyst
Julia Kristeva proposes a distinction between
the semiotic and the symbolic order. The
semiotic is a pre-Oedipal, bodily drive char-
acterized by rhythmic pulses and the move-
ment of signifying practices, and associated
with the maternal body. It precedes the
subject’s entry into the symbolic order, as-
sociated with the structure of signiﬁcation
(that which makes meaning possible), but
erupts into and is present in the symbolic
(Kristeva 1984[1974]). For Cixous, an alter-
native mode could be found in “ecriture
feminine,” a term which translates as either
“female/feminine writing,” or “writing on
the body.” The duality of the phrase encap-
sulates Cixous’s belief, expressed in her essay
“The laugh of the Medusa,” that “woman
must write her self: must write about women
and bring women to writing” (1976[1975]:
875). Cixous argues that every instance of
female writing is a new, or even ﬁrst,
“utterance” and implies that women’s en-
trance to language is always a painful strug-
gle. This essay is both an exploration and an
example of ecriture feminine. By embracing
the Lacanian concept of jouissance and the
body as a site of subversion, Cixous practices
a language which aims to break from the
linearity of phallocentrism (1976[1975]).
Irigaray proposed an alternative concept in
“parler femme,” or “womanspeak.” Where
ecriture feminine refers to the act of writing,
womanspeak is the speciﬁc discourse pro-
duced when women speak together. If men

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

are present, womanspeak cannot be per-
formed (Irigaray 1985a[1977]). The idea
of a distinct feminine discourse is not with-
out its problems, however, as any overtly
“feminine” model is ripe for criticism as
separatist or, at the very worst, nonsensical.
Owing to their emphasis on developing al-
ternative modes of expression outside of
phallocentrism, French feminist writings
can often appear frustratingly elusive and
poetic.

What has been described as a “third
wave” of feminist activity and theorizing
emerged in the late 1980s and early 1990s.
Moving away from second-wave feminist
identity politics, third-wave feminist ideas
about identity embrace notions of contra-
diction, multiplicity, and ambiguity, and
emphasize the need for new feminist mo-
dalities in the twenty-ﬁrst century. Third-
wave feminism is inﬂuenced and informed
by postmodern theory, as well as other
such as
anti-foundationalist discourses,
postcolonialism and
poststructuralism.
Some feminists have expressed concern
that theoretical moves to deconstruct the
female subject pose a threat to the politics of
a feminism founded on a conception of
women as social subjects (see Soper 1990).
Nancy Fraser and Linda Nicholson argue
that,
inevitable tensions, an
alliance between postmodernism and fem-
inism could be politically advantageous,
especially in redressing the universalizing
tendency in feminist thought which privi-
leges heterosexist and ethnocentric claims
about female identity (Fraser & Nichol-
son 1988). Donna Haraway’s landmark es-
say “A cyborg manifesto” (1985; collected in
Haraway 1991) offers an irreverent critique
of feminist orthodoxies and essentialist cat-
egories. Combining postmodernism and
politics, Haraway conceptualizes the ﬁgure
of the “cyborg” as one that embraces oth-
erness and difference. Foregrounding the
idea of “oppositional consciousness,” and

in spite of

F E M I N I S M 603

feminist

echoing some of the concerns articulated
by Mohanty, Chela Sandoval’s work on
US Third World feminisms has played
an inﬂuential role in the development of
third-wave
and
activity. Sandoval argues that
the third
wave of the women’s movement needs a
“differential consciousness” that will pro-
vide “grounds for alliance with other deco-
lonizing movements
for emancipation”
(Sandoval 1991: 5).

thinking

Insofar as thinking about and describing
a “third wave” implies that second-wave
feminism is over, it is sometimes conﬂated
with “postfeminism” (or post-feminism).
An ambiguous and contested term, post-
feminism has two key meanings. Within an
academic context, it is sometimes used to
describe feminism’s intersection with post-
structuralist, postmodernist, and postco-
lonial theorizing (see Brooks 1997). How-
ever, this account is often eclipsed by the
media-deﬁned notion of postfeminism
which, since the 1980s, has been used to
imply that (radical) feminism is outdated
and no longer a productive practice for a
society which offers women varied chan-
nels of expression. The third-wave model
has also come under criticism for forcing
inauthentic
cut-off points within the
movement, and for alienating current fem-
inists from their feminist foremothers (see
Henry 2004). Nonetheless, the tendency of
feminist criticism to deconstruct its own
theories is especially clear to feminists
themselves, and is undoubtedly a strength
of the movement. Feminism is not a mono-
lithic category; rather, feminisms are mul-
tiple, complex, and diverse.

SEE ALSO: de Beauvoir, Simone;
Cixous, Helene; Ecriture Feminine; Gender
and Cultural Studies; Gender Theory;
hooks, bell; Phallus/Phallocentrism;
Postmodernism; Spivak, Gayatri Chakravorty;
Woolf, Virginia

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

604

F E M I N I S M

REFERENCES AND SUGGESTED
READINGS

Anzaldua, G. (1987). Borderlands/La Frontera:
The New Mestiza. San Francisco: Aunt Lute
Books.

Barrett, M. (1980). Women’s Oppression Today:
Problems in Marxist Feminist Analysis. London:
Verso.

de Beauvoir, S. (1953). The Second Sex (trans.
H. M. Parshley). London: Jonathan Cape. (Orig-
inal work published 1949.)

Belsey, C., & Moore, J. (eds.) (1989). The Feminist
Reader: Essays in Gender and the Politics of
Literary Criticism. Basingstoke: Macmillan.

Brooks, A.

(1997). Postfeminisms: Feminism,
Cultural Theory and Cultural Forms. London:
Routledge.

Butler, J. (1990). Gender Trouble: Feminism and the

Subversion of Identity. New York: Routledge.

Cixous, H. (1976). The laugh of the Medusa. Signs,
1(4), 875–893. (Original work published 1975.)
Cixous, H. (1986). Sorties: out and out: attacks/
ways out/forays. In H. Cixous & C. Clement,
The Newly Born Woman (trans. B. Wing).
Manchester: Manchester University Press, pp.
63–132. (Original work published 1975.)

Eagleton, M. (ed.) (1995). Feminist Literary Theory:

A Reader. Oxford: Blackwell.

Ellmann, M. (1968). Thinking About Women.

New York: Harcourt.

Faderman, L. (1981). Surpassing the Love of Men:
Romantic Friendship and Love between Women
from the Renaissance to the Present. New York:
HarperCollins.

Fraser, N., & Nicholson, L. (1988). Social criticism
without philosophy: An encounter between
feminism and postmodernism. Theory, Culture
and Society, 5(2–3), 373–394.

Friedan, B.

(1963). The Feminine Mystique.

New York: Norton.

Gilbert, S., & Gubar, S. (2000). The Madwoman in
the Attic: The Woman Writer and the Nineteenth-
Century
edn.
New Haven: Yale University Press. (Original
work published 1979.)

Imagination,

Literary

2nd

Henry, A.

(2004). Not My Mother’s Sister:
Generational Conﬂict and Third-Wave Femi-
nism. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.

hooks, b. (1982). Ain’t I a Woman: Black Women

and Feminism. Boston: South End Press.

hooks, b. (1984). Feminist Theory: From Margin to

Center. Boston: South End Press.

Irigaray, L. (1985a). This Sex Which Is Not One
(trans. C. Porter). Ithaca: Cornell University
Press. (Original work published 1977.)

Irigaray, L. (1985b). Speculum of the Other Woman
(trans. G. C. Gill). Ithaca: Cornell University
Press. (Original work published 1974.)

Kaplan, C. (1986). Sea Changes: Culture and

Feminism. London: Verso.

Kristeva, J. (1984). Revolution in Poetic Language
(trans. M. Waller). New York: Columbia
University Press. (Original work published
1974.)

Marks, E., & de Courtivron, I. (eds.) (1981).
New French Feminisms: An Anthology. Brighton:
Harvester Press.

Marxist-Feminist Literature Collective

(1991).
Women’s writing: Jane Eyre, Shirley, Villette,
Aurora Leigh. Ideology and Consciousness. In T.
Eagleton & D. Milne (eds.), Marxist Literary
Theory: A Reader. Oxford: Blackwell, pp.
328–350. (Original writings published 1978.)

Mill, J. S. (1869). The subjection of women. In The
Collected Works of John Stuart Mill. Vol. 21:
Essays
and Education
(ed. J. M. Robson). Toronto: Toronto University
Press, pp. 259–340.

on Equality, Law,

Millett, K. (1970). Sexual Politics. New York:

Doubleday.

Mitchell, J. (1974). Psychoanalysis and Feminism.

Harmondsworth: Penguin.

Moers, E.

(1978). Literary Women. London:
(Original work published

Women’s Press.
1976.)

Mohanty, C. T. (1991). Under Western eyes: Fem-
inist scholarship and colonial discourses. In
C. Mohanty, A. Russo, & L. Torres (eds.),
Third World Women and the Politics of Feminism.
Bloomington:
Press,
pp. 51–80.

Indiana University

Moi, T. (1985). Sexual/Textual Politics. London:

Greer, G. (1970). The Female Eunuch. London:

Routledge.

MacGibbon and Kee.

Haraway, D. (1991). Simians, Cyborgs and Women:
of Nature. New York:

The Reinvention
Routledge.

Moraga, C., & Anzaldua, G. E. (eds.) (1984). This
Bridge Called My Back: Writings by Radical
Women of Color, 2nd edn. New York: Kitchen
Table: Women of Color Press.

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

Morgan, R. (1970). Sisterhood Is Powerful: An
Anthology of Writings from the Women’s Libera-
tion Movement. New York: Vintage.

de Pizan, C. (1983). The Book of the City of Ladies
(trans. E. J. Richards). London: Picador. (Orig-
inal work published 1404–5.)

Rich, A. (1980). Compulsory heterosexuality and
lesbian existence. In Blood, Bread and Poetry:
Selected Prose 1979–1985. London: Virago, pp.
23–76.

Rose, J. (1986). Sexuality in the Field of Vision.

London: Verso.

Rule,

J.

(1975). Lesbian Images. New York:

Doubleday.

Sandoval, C. (1991). US Third World feminism:
The theory and method of oppositional con-
sciousness in the postmodern world. Genders,
10, 1–24.

Showalter, E. (1977). A Literature of Their Own:
British Women Novelists from Bront€e to Lessing.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Showalter, E. (1979). Towards a feminist poetics. In
M. Jacobus (ed.), Women Writing and Writing
about Women.
London: Croom Helm,
pp. 22–41.

Smith, B. (1977). Toward a black feminist criticism.
In E. Showalter (ed.), The New Feminist Criti-
cism: Essays on Women, Literature and Theory.
London: Virago, pp. 168–185.

Soper, K. (1990). Troubled Pleasures: Writings on
Politics, Gender and Hedonism. London: Verso.
Spivak, G. C. (1987). In Other Worlds: Essays in

Cultural Politics. London: Methuen.

Walker, A. (1983). In Search of Our Mothers’

Gardens. London: Women’s Press.

Weedon, C. (1997). Feminist Practice and Poststruc-

turalist Theory, 2nd edn. Oxford: Blackwell.

Whelehan, I. (1995). Modern Feminist Thought:
From the Second Wave to Post Feminism.
New York: New York University Press.

Wittig, M. (1992). The Straight Mind and Other

Essays. Boston: Beacon.

Wollstonecraft, M. (1992). A Vindication of the
Rights of Woman, 2nd edn. (ed. M. Brody).
London: Penguin. (Original work published
1792.)

Woolf, V.

(1945). A Room of One’s Own.
(Original work

London: Hogarth Press.
published 1929.)

Zimmerman, B. (1981). What has never been: An
overview of lesbian feminist criticism. Feminist
Studies, 7(3), 451–475.

F I S H, S T A N L E Y 605

Fish, Stanley
ROBERT EAGLESTONE

Stanley Fish (b. 1938) is one of the founders
of reader-response criticism, an approach
to literature that emphasizes the reader’s
role in constructing literary meaning.
He was educated at
the University of
Pennsylvania and Yale University, where
he took his PhD in 1962. He taught
English for many years at Johns Hopkins
University, served as Dean at the Univer-
sity of Illinois at Chicago, and ended his
teaching career at Duke University. He
has also written on contemporary political
issues and law. He is an outspoken oppo-
nent of the move to make literary study
more socially responsible and is a fervent
advocate of a neo-Humean skepticism
regarding values.

Fish’s early work was on medieval liter-
ature and on the poet John Skelton in
particular. His second book, Surprised by
Sin (1967), argued that
the “center of
reference” of Paradise Lost was not Adam
or Satan, but, rather, the reader of the poem,
and that the purpose of the work was to
“educate the reader to an awareness of his
position and responsibilities as a fallen
man” by recreating in the “mind of the
reader (which is, ﬁnally, the poem’s scene)
the drama of the Fall, to make him Fall
again, exactly as Adam did and with Adam’s
troubled clarity” (1). This argument, in-
spired by theorists like Wolfgang Iser and
Roman Ingarden, was the basis for a new
school of criticism in the US, referred to as
“reader response” because it focused on the
effects that the literary text has on readers.
Fish went on to develop what he called
“affective stylistics,” a way of thinking about
interpretation that lent more weight to the
way readers constructed meaning in texts.
Affective stylistics, a decisive move away
from formalism and the new critical as-
sumption that the text was an autonomous

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

