681

Definitions

Although the word selfis probably spoken by nearly every(cid:173)
one every day, especially if one includes part-word usages
(e.g. yourself), it is quite difficult to define, Probably the
term is rooted in such widespread common experience and
basic linguistic, communicative needs that linguistic

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

THE SELF

ROY F. B A U M E I S T E R, Case Western Reserve University

INTRODUCTION

What is the self? In some ways, the thousands of journal
articles dealing with the self have seemed to make the an(cid:173)
swer to that fundamental question more elusive rather than
clearer. Even finding a way to sort and group that mass of
information is intimidating. This overview of the social
psychology of self begins with the proposition that there
are three important roots of selfhood. These are powerful,
prototypical patterns of experience in which people grasp
the basic meaning of self.

The first is the experience of reflexive consciousness,
that is, conscious attention turning back toward its own
source and gradually constructing a concept of oneself.
When you lie awake in bed late at night, thinking about
your failures and inadequacies, or glorying in your tri(cid:173)
umphs; when you look in the mirror or step on the scale or
read your resume; when after hearing about someone else's
heroic or heinous action, you pause to wonder whether you
are the sort of person who could ever do such a thing;
when you contemplate your future or your spiritual center
or your dwindling resources; or when you try to answer
some questions honestly about your opinions, traits, habits,
qualifications, and past experiences-these are the sort of
experiences that involve reflexive consciousness. Without
them, self would have no meaning or value and would
hardly exist at all. Self begins when awareness turns
around in a circle, so to speak,

I thank NIMH Grant 51482 for support, Steve Hastings and Brenda
Wilson for research assistance, and Todd Heatherton, Kristin Sommer,
Dianne Tice, and social seminar members for comments on a draft.

The second root is the Interpersonal

When someone looks into your
says your name, and you have a
or the same happens and you feel
join a group, or quit it; when you
celebrate an anniversary; when you
pression on someone or live up to
tions; when you discover that someone
you and you blush; when you keep
when you attend your Chil~,'~~s~:~;i?~~
humiliated and jealous upon
had romantic contact with
after defeating a major rival in an
or despair after losing same-c-tnese
ences reveal the interpersonal aspect of
most unthinkable outside a social
vital for making interpersonal ,e,aw,,'~
tions possible. Selves are handles
other people.

The third is the executive function,

troller, the origin. When you
when you drag yourself out of
morning; when you decide what it
to buy or work on or become; when
acting on an impulse, such as to
to hit someone, or to sleep with
you vote, or when you take out a
sist fatigue and temptation and
maximum effort, beyond the
experiences involve the executive
tive agent and decision-maker. Without
would be a mere helpless spectator
use or importance.

680

682

PartFour / Personal Phenomena

Chapter 15 ! The Self

Unity versus Multiple Selves Although most theories of
self and identity have emphasized unity as a defining crite(cid:173)
rion, several
treatments in social psychology have dis(cid:173)
cussed multiple selves. But the concept of self loses its
meaning if a person has multiple selves, and the discus(cid:173)
sions of multiplicity should be regarded as heuristics or
metaphors. The essence of self involves integration of di(cid:173)
verse experiences into a unity. As Loevinger (1969) wrote,
"to integrate ... experience is not one ego function among
many bnt the essence of the ego" (p. 85).

In a famous, often-quoted passage, William James
wrote, "A man has as many social selves as there are indi(cid:173)
viduals who recognize him and carry an image of him in
their mind" (1892, p. 179). Taken literally, the sentence is
plainly absurd. If each person who knew the man knew a
different self,

684

Part Four I Personal Phenomena

Chapter 15 / The Self

text or situations. The self is always situated. You can be
aware of self riding a bicycle or losing an argument or

686

PartFour / Personal Phenomena

Chapter 15 / The Self

passing certain standards. Following success or other

Part Four I Personal Phenomena

Chapter 15 /

690

Part Four / Personal Phenomena

Chapter 15 ! The Self

important decision to make. Gollwitzer and Kinney (1989)
showed that people seem to become quite accurate and re(cid:173)
alistic when they are in the frame of mind

692

PartFour / Personal Phenomena

Chapter 15 I The 5elf

crepant from their self-conceptions. They found that peo(cid:173)
ple generally rejected that feedback and reasserted their
prior beliefs about themselves. Only when people were un(cid:173)
able to make such contrary assertions did they show any
malleability of self-concept.

Swann (1985,1987) went on to coin the term self-verifi(cid:173)
cation to describe people's quest for feedback that would
confirm their views about themselves. In Swann's view,
people desire stable predictability above all else, and
changes to one's self-concept are therefore unwelcome(cid:173)
even including changes toward a more positive view of
self. He contended that people seek out confirmatory feed(cid:173)
back, especially with regard to self-schernas about which
they are certain. When people do not have clear and defi(cid:173)
nite views about themselves, they may be receptive to dis(cid:173)
crepant (and favorable) information.

The consistency motive overlaps with the enhancement
motive in many cases. As already noted, most people think
well of themselves, and so the widespread preference for
favorable feedback-like the common tendencies to dis(cid:173)
miss and discredit bad feedback-may serve both the

694

Part Four / Personal Phenomena

Chapter 15 / The Self

other ohligations ahout what one should try to he). Hig(cid:173)
gins's full theory has added that people actually have to
grapple with occasional differences between what
they
themselves think they ought to be and what someone else
(e.g., a parent) thinks they ought to he. Differeutsituatious
can activate either the ought self or the ideal self.

A particularly important aspect of Higgins's theorizing
is that different emotions are implicated as a function of
which self-guide is operating. When people believe they
are falling short of their ideal selves-that is, when they
perceive a discrepancy between their actual self and their
ideal self-they tend to feel aversive emotions with low
arousal levels, such as sadness, dejection, and depressed
mood. In contrast, a discrepancy between actual self and
ought self leads to aversive but high arousal emotions, such
as anxiety and guilt.

The notion that people vary in the organization of self(cid:173)
kuowledge was iutroduced hy Linville (1985, 1987). She
proposed that some people have simple organizations of
self-knowledge, which means that different features of the
self-concept are interrelated. In contrast, other people have
complex organizations, in which the different facets are
largely unrelated. Linville developed a method for assess(cid:173)
ing these differences, although some researchers have

Part Four / Personal Phenomena

Chapter 15 / The Self

697

more likely to give answers that contradicted what they had
already said about themselves.

Fifth, people with high self-esteem show more self(cid:173)
serving biases in their responses to feedback and other
events. A review by Blaine aud Crocker (1993) showed
several patterns. High self-esteem is associated with a ten(cid:173)
dency to take credit for success and deny blame for failure,
as well as with memory biases that exaggerate successes
and minimize failures, and with a tendency to exaggerate
one's control over events (especially ones that turn out
well). They found that people with low self-esteem and de(cid:173)
pressed people do not seem to have those self-serving

698

Part Four / Personal Phenomena

Chapter 15 / The 5elf

vulnerability is reflected in their high emotional reactivity.
People with high self-esteem have firm and favorable
views of themselves, which they seem to protect vigor(cid:173)
ously by processing information in biased, self-serving
ways, and which keep them on an even emotional keel
amid the slings and arrows of daily life.

Social and Interpersonal Patterns
Self-esteem is also
associated with different patterns of social behavior, apart
from the cognitive and affective differences. (In principle
these belong in the next part of this chapter, along with in(cid:173)
terpersonal patterns, but for the reader's convenience these
are presented here with the rest of the self-esteem mater(cid:173)
ial.) Indeed, such differences were one of the original
sources of research interest

Part Four / Personal Phenomena

Chapter 15 ! The Self

701

Are Self-Views Affected By Others?

rtant set of processes concerns how interpersonal
hape and alter the self. The tabula rasa view of
ture that is occasionally popular holds that selves
cducts of interpersonal relations. Although such
elegant and sometimes politically appealing, they
est too passive or simple a role of the self.
oader issue is how selihood is maintained in an
al environment. It seems essential to postulate
f the self exists in other people's minds-or, at
people form an important repository for knowl(cid:173)

most of what is known about the self is derived from oth(cid:173)
ers. One learns about oneself from others. The process of
reflected appraisals (i.e., how other people's appraisals of
you shape your Self-understanding) is often described with
Cooley's (1902) term the looking-glass self.

An influential

literature review by Shrauger and
Schoeneman (1979) sought to compile the evidence to see
whether the symbolic interactionist view was correct, at
least with regard to the basic prediction that how people
perceive themselves should be essentially similar to how
they are perceived by others. They found, however, that the
correlations tended to be rather low. Self-concepts do not
closely resemble the way those same people are perceived
by others who know them. Subsequent studies have man(cid:173)
aged to find some positive correlations, although these gen(cid:173)
erally remain small (Edwards & Klockars, 1981; Felson,
1981; Funder, 1980; Kemick & Stringfield, 1980; Koestner,
Bernieri, & Zuckerman, 1989; Malloy & Albright, 1990),
and even some of these weak links can be questioned on
methodological grounds, as noted by Felson (1989).

On the other hand, Shrauger and Shoeneman found (and
subsequent work has replicated) that self-concepts were
highly correlated with how people believed that others per(cid:173)
ceived them. There was a link after an (although the causal
direction is unclear and probably bidirectional) between
self-perceptions and other-perceptions. The discrepancy
arises between how people actually perceive Fred and how
Fred thinks other people perceive him. But his view of
himself is quite similar to how he thinks others see him.

There seem to be two major causes that contribute to
the discrepancy between how people believe others regard
them and how the others actually regard them (see Felson,
1989). The first is that people do not generally tell some(cid:173)
one precisely what they think of him or her (Jones & Wort(cid:173)
man, 1973). The exchange of interpersonal evaluations is
highly distorted by such factors as the desire to make a
good impression on others and to win the liking of others,
as well as the desire to avoid hostile or distressed re(cid:173)
sponses. When refusing a date, for example, people tend to
give false and misleading explanations, often resulting in
their being unable to discourage further invitations from
the same person (e.g., Folkes, 1982). Even when people are
engaging in deliberate self-presentation, they are not very
accurate at estimating the impression they actually make
on another person (e.g., Depaulo. Kenny, Hoover, Webb, &
Oliver, 1987). Given that people do not tell a person pre(cid:173)
cisely what they think of him or her, it is no surprise that
the person's self-concept remains blissfully unaffected by
those concealed opinions and appraisals.

The other source of distortion is self-deception. As ex(cid:173)
plained earlier in this chapter, people do not accept infor(cid:173)
mation directly into their views of themselves. Instead, they
filter it, bias it, and adapt it to fit in with what they already
believe and what they prefer to believe. Hence even if oth-

702

Part Four I Personal Phenomena

Chapter 15 / The 5elf

ers do tell Fred exactly what they think of him, he may dis(cid:173)
count or ignore the unwelcome parts of the message.

Influence of Others' Expectancies
ply internalize what others think of them, perhaps they

If people do not sim(cid:173)

704

Part Four I Personal Phenomena

Chapter 15 ! The Self

identity unless it is validated by others, which means that
others must recognize and acknowledge one's self.

Concern over self-presentation is extremely pervasive.
Baumeister (1982) showed that many of social psychol(cid:173)
ogy's effects only were obtained as a result of self-presen(cid:173)
tation: that is, people only showed many of the effects
when others were watching. Cognitive and intrapsychic
theories that explained many effects seemed to be missing
something, because the effects depended on interpersonal
contexts. Thus, helping, attitude change, emotion, aggres(cid:173)
sion, attributional patterns, and other responses seemed to
change when the individual's acts would be seen by others.
Leary (1995) has furnished an even longer and more im(cid:173)
pressive list, showing effects of self-presentation in con(cid:173)
texts ranging from sports teams to business meetings to the
beach to mental hospitals.

Hence it was necessary to reappraise how social the
person was. Unfortunately, some of the early efforts were
carried out in a hostile, antagonistic fashion, such as the fa(cid:173)
mous assertion that cognitive dissonance did not actually
produce attitude change but merely reflected a superficial
tendency of people to pretend they were changing in order
to make a good impression (Tedeschi, Schlenker, &
Bonoma, 1971). Later work however adopted a more mod(cid:173)
erate tone and concluded that actual attitude change does
occur as a result of self-presentational factors, and indeed
that some dissonance can occur without self-presentational
motivations, although self-presentation is quite a

706

Part Four / Personal Phenomena

Chapter 15 / The Self

In one of the earliest and most cited experiments on
self-presentation, Schlenker (1975) gave subjects feedback
about their abilities on a novel task prior to a group perfor(cid:173)
mance session. Then they were asked to describe them(cid:173)
selves to the group members. Schlenker wanted to see
whether subjects would describe themselves consistent
with the (sometimes negative) feedback or in more

708

Part Four / Personal Phenomena

Chapter 15 / The Self

stimulus person as more masculine and more like

710

PartFour I Personal Phenomena

Chapter15 / The Self

emotion. Tangney and Fischer (I

also predicted greater stability and durability of the rela(cid:173)
tionship. In this view, then, there is good reason for love to
be blind (or at least nearsighted enough to wear rose-col(cid:173)
ored glasses when looking at one's beloved), Idealization
and positive illusions about one's partner seem to
strengthen the relationship, making it more pleasant and
more likely to last. Seeing the real you beneath the facade
is not always the beginning of real intimacy; sometimes it
is the beginning of the end.

These somewhat discrepant results do at least agree that
it is quite important for people to believe that their friends
and lovers appreciate their good points. Whether they want
their partners to see their faults and flaws too is less clear.
One possible moderator is that most of the self-consistency
work has emphasized traits about which the person is
highly certain of and committed to having, whereas the en(cid:173)
hancement effects tend to emphasize a broader spectrum of
less central and less certain traits. Possibly people want
their close relationship partners to recognize one or two fa(cid:173)
vorite faults but otherwise maintain a highly favorable
view of them.

There is also intriguing but preliminary evidence that
relationship partners can help sustain consistency. Swann
and Predmore (1985) gave people feedback tbat was dis(cid:173)
crepant from their self-concepts and watched how they and
their romantic partners responded. When the partner saw
the subject as the subject saw himself or herself, the pair
tended to join forces to reject the feedback: they discussed
its flaws and decided how best to refute or dismiss it. In
contrast, when the partner's view of the subject differed
from the subject's self-concept, the discrepant feedback led
to further disagreements within the couple. Although this
study's sample was small and the emotionally potent dis(cid:173)
tinction between positive (idealizing) and negative (dis(cid:173)
paraging) discrepancies was glossed over, the implications
are important and worthy of further study. It may be that
one vital function of close relationship partners is to help
maintain and defend one's self-concept against the attacks
of the outer world.

Emotionality of Interpersonal Self

Emotion is undoubtedly linked to interpersonal relations.
In a review of evidence about the motive to form and main(cid:173)
tain close attachments, Baumeister and Leary (1995) pro(cid:173)
vided evidence that a broad assortment of negative affects
result from threat or damage to relationships, whereas in(cid:173)
creasing attachment generally brings positive affect. One
function of emotion is apparently to alert the self to
changes in its interpersonal relations.

Emotions often reflect value judgments relevant to the
self. Recent work has increasingly emphasized interper(cid:173)
sonal determinants and processes of emotion. Thus, it ap(cid:173)
pears that the interpersonal self is prominently involved in

Part Four / Personal Phenomena

Chapter 15 /

714

Part Four / Personal Phenomena

Chapter 15 / The Self

control motivations. DeCharms (1968) distinguished

716

PartFour / Personal Phenomena

Chapter 15 / The Self

Active versus Passive Responses An underused but
promising way to study the executive function is differ(cid:173)
ences between active and passive responses. The executive
function is by nature active, and so one would expect active
responses to have different consequences than passive

718

Part Four / Personal Phenomena

Chapter 15 / The Self

self-regulation, and so researchers interested

720

Part Four I Personal Phenomena

Chapter 15 ! The Self

rarely become alcoholic, presumably because their cultural
emphasis on personal responsibility does not exempt
drinkers.

A recent review of the literature on self-control has
yielded a conclusion that self-control failure involves miti(cid:173)
gated acquiescence (Baumeister & Heatherton, 1996;
Baumeister, Heatherton, & Tice, 1994). That is, people do
not simply and freely choose (in most cases) to abandon
self-control, but there is abundant evidence that they do go
along and participate actively in the abandonment,

722

PartFour / Personal Phenomena

Chapter 15 / The Self

comes, for destructive persistence can

sistence. People become entrapped in persistence situations
because of concern about how others will evaluate them.
Sometimes people are reluctant to back out because they
think others will think poorly of them. If they believe that
the audience will think well of them for withdrawing, they
are more willing to withdraw and hence can resist the per(cid:173)
sistence trap (Brockner, Rubin, & Lang, 1981).

The concern with others' perceptions of one's decision
brings up an interpersonal aspect to the self's executive
function. As noted earlier, action brings a sense of respon(cid:173)
sibility, which is often merely increased by the awareness
of others. Staw (1976) showed that people are more prone
to persist in a losing investment paradigm if the initial de(cid:173)
cision had been their own instead of someone else's, which
shows the importance of feelings of personal responsibil(cid:173)
ity. In particular, if the initial investment turned out badly,
the person who made the initial decision will feel responsi(cid:173)
ble for the bad outcome, which heightens the tendency to
persist. Bazerman, Giuliano, and Appelman (1984) showed
that such feelings of personal responsibility foster a sense
of commitment, and the person may become determined to
continue until eventual success, which the person refuses
to doubt.

The interpersonal aspect of responsibility was high(cid:173)
lighted by Fox and Staw (1979), who found that people
were especially likely to persist if the initial decision had
been made in the face of other people's objections. Appar(cid:173)
ently people are loath to expose themselves to the possibil(cid:173)
ity of someone telling them that "I told you so." Teger
(1980) noted that even when self-presentational or inter(cid:173)
personal concerns are largely irrelevant to the initial deci(cid:173)
sion, persistence may come to be mediated by them later
on, because losing face becomes increasingly salient as
one's responsibility for bad outcomes increases.

For the purposes of understanding the role of the execu(cid:173)
tive function of the self, one of the most relevant papers
was by Brockner, Shaw, and Rubin (1979). Their experi(cid:173)
ment manipulated whether quitting or persisting was the
passive option; that is, some subjects had to respond ac(cid:173)
tively to quit but could continue by doing nothing (similar
to letting one's stock investment ride), whereas others
were in the reverse situation in which they had to make an
active response to continue (akin to placing a new bet).
The passive option was the more common response in
both situations. Thus, destructive persistence was more
common when it did not require the self to do anything.
When the executive function of the self is mobilized, it
seems to reduce some of the tendency toward excessive
persistence.

The notion of the passive option shows that sometimes
the involvement of the executive function is merely op(cid:173)
tional. The next generation of self researchers may begin to
study the factors that determine whether the self adopts an
active response or not. As this section has shown, active
participation by the self is no guarantee of positive out-

724

Part Four / Personal Phenomena

Chapter 15 / The Self

People do respond strongly to immediate, salient pressures
when making decisions. They are often sorry later.

Aversive emotional states seem to mediate many

726

Part Four / Personal Phenomena

Chapter 15 / The Self

to discover and express their unique attributes, and to try to
stand out in important ways. In contrast, Asian cultures
emphasize interdependence. Asians are expected to attend
to others, to conform to group demands and role obliga(cid:173)
tions, and to try to fit in to the group in important, harmo(cid:173)
nious ways. At bottom is a fundamental difference in the
conception of selfhood: to the Western mind, the self is an
autonomous unit

PartFour / Personal Phenomena

Chapter 15 I

730

Part Four / Personal Phenomena

Chapter 15 / The Self

Beach, S. R. H. (1992, May). Self-evaluation maintenance and
marital functioning. Presented at the conference of the
Midwestern Psychological Association, Chicago, IL.

Beaman, A. L., KIentz, B., Diener, E., & Svanum, S. (1979).
Self-awareness and transgression in children: Two field
studies. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37,
1835-1846.

Becker, E. (1973). The denial ofdeath. New York: Free Press.
Becker, E. (1986). When the war was over. New York: Simon

& Schuster.

Bednar, R., Wells, G., & Peterson, S. (1989). Self-esteem:
Paradoxes and innovations in clinical theory and practice.
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.

Beggan, J. K. (1992). On the social nature of nonsocial per(cid:173)
ception: The mere ownership effect. Journal of Personality
and Social Psycholagy, 62, 229-237.

Beggan, 1. K. (1994). The preference for gain frames in con(cid:173)
sumer decision making. Journal ofApplied Social Psychol(cid:173)
ogy, 24, 1407-1427.

Bern, D. I. (1965). An experimental analysis of self-persua(cid:173)
sion. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 1,
199-218.

Bern, D. I. (1972). Self-perception theory. In L. Berkowitz
(Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 6,
pp.

732

Part Four / Personal Phenomena

Chapter 15 / The Self

people know what kinds of impressions they convey? Jour(cid:173)
nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52, 303-315.

Diener, E., & Wallbom, M. (1976). Effects of self-awareness
on antinormative behavior. Journal of Research in Person(cid:173)
ality, 10, 107-111.

Dunbar, J. M., & Stunkard, A. J. (1979). Adberence to diet and
drug regimen. In R. Levy, B. Rifkind, B. Dennis, & N.
Ernst (Eds.), Nutrition, lipids, and coronary heart disease
(pp. 391-423). New York: Raven Press.

734

Part Four / Personal Phenomena

Chapter 15 ! The Self

Hull, J. G., & Young, R. D. (1983). Self-consciousness, self(cid:173)
esteem, and success-failure as determinants of alcohol con(cid:173)
sumption in male social drinkers. Journal of Personality
and Sacial Psychology, 44, 1097-1109.

Hull, J. G., Young, R. D., & Jouriles, E. (1986). Applications
of the self-awareness model of alcohol consumption: Pre(cid:173)
dicting pattems of use and abuse. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 51,790-796.

Hurne, D. (1739/1890). A treatise ofhuman nature. Cleveland,

OH: Langmans, Green, & Co.

Ingram, R. E. (1990). Self-focused attention in clinical disor(cid:173)
ders: Review and a conceptual model. Psychological Bul(cid:173)
letin, 107, 156-176.

James, W. (1948/1892). Psychology. Cleveland, OH: World

Publishing.

Janis, I. L. (1954). Personality correlates of susceptibility to

persuasion. Journal ofPersonality, 22,

736

Part Four / Personal Phenomena

Chapter15 / The Self

(1978). Salience of ethnicity in the spontaneous self-con(cid:173)
cept as a function of one's ethnic distinctiveness in the

738

Part Four / Personal Phenomena

Chapter 15 I The Self

(Ed.), Public self and private self (pp. 21-62). New York:
Springer-Verlag.

Schlenker, B. R., Dlugolecki, D. w., & Doherty, K. (1994).
The impact of self-presentations on self-appraisals and be(cid:173)
havior: The roles of commitment and biased scanning. Per(cid:173)
sonality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 20, 20-33.

Schlenker, B. R., & Leary, M. R. (1982). Social anxiety and
self-presentation: A conceptualization and model. Psycho(cid:173)
logical Bulletin, 92, 641-669.

Sedikides, C, (1993). Assessment, enhancement, and verifica(cid:173)

tion determinants of the self-evaluation process. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 65, 317-338.

Sedikides, c., & Skowronski, J. J. (1993). The self in impres(cid:173)
sion formation: Trait centrality and social perception. Jour(cid:173)
nal ofExperimental Social Psychology, 29, 347-357.

Seligman, M. E. P. (1975). Helplessness: On

Part Four / Personal Phenomena

tration on the structure of the field, rather than on compil(cid:173)
ing results, helps differentiate among projects and illumi(cid:173)
nate the lines along which historical change has occurred.
It also makes developmental studies more intelligible to
anyone not immersed in the field. (It must be said, how(cid:173)
ever, that we have also benefited from the exercise.)

Third, we have drawn from studies of development in
both childhood and adulthood. Past reviews have stopped
with young adults, and there has been little integration of
that material with what happens over the rest of the life
course. This is regrettable. It contributes to the misleading
view of developmental studies as being "all about chil(cid:173)
dren" (one more reason for social psychologists to feel that
developmental studies are not relevant to their interests). In
addition, reviewing both literatures-even selectively(cid:173)
turns out to be a way of heightening our understanding of
what is happening at anyone age. Overall, the larger share
of our examples comes from studies of

741

