         Reform Without Justice     

This page intentionally left blank 

     Reform Without Justice  

  Latino Migrant Politics and the Homeland 

Security State  

    A L FO NSO     G O N Z A L E S            

1

1

        Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. 

 It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship, 

 and education by publishing worldwide.  

  Oxford  New York 

 Auckland  Cape Town  Dar es Salaam  Hong Kong  Karachi 
 Kuala Lumpur  Madrid  Melbourne  Mexico City  Nairobi 

 

 

 New Delhi 

 Shanghai 

 Taipei  Toronto 

  

 Argentina  Austria  Brazil 

  With offi  ces in 
 Chile  Czech Republic  France  Greece 

 Guatemala  Hungary 
Japan  Poland  Portugal  Singapore 
 South Korea  Switzerland  Th  ailand  Turkey  Ukraine  Vietnam  

Italy 

 

 

  Oxford is a registered trademark of Oxford University Press 

 in the UK and certain other countries.  

  Published in the United States of America by 

 Oxford University Press 

 198 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016  

  © Oxford University Press 2014  

  All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a 
 retrieval system, or transmitt ed, in any form or by any means, without the prior 
 permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly permitt ed by law, 

 by license, or under terms agreed with the appropriate reproduction rights organization. 
 Inquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the above should be sent to the 

Rights   Department, Oxford University Press, at the address above.  

  You must not circulate this work in any other form 

 and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer.  

  Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Gonzales, Alfonso, 1977–

Reform without justice : Latino migrant politics and the homeland security state / Alfonso Gonzales.

Includes bibliographical references and index.

pages cm

ISBN  978–0–19–997339–2 (hardback)—ISBN  978–0–19–934293–8 (paperback) 

 

1.  Hispanic Americans—Politics and government—21st century.  2.  Migrant labor—Government 
 

policy—United States.  3.  Migrant agricultural laborers—Government policy—United States. 
4.  Illegal aliens—Legal status, laws, etc.—United States.  5.  Immigration enforcement—United 

States.  6.  United States—Emigration and immigration—Government policy. 

I.  Title.

E184.S75G644 2013
305.868’073—dc23

2013015066

  

  1  3  5  7  9  8  6  4  2  

  Printed in the United States of America 

 on acid-free paper      

   Para mis abuelos, mis padres y mis hijos   

This page intentionally left blank 

    CO N T E N T S        

     Preface   

  ix       

     Introduction   

  1    

   1.   

    Th  e State–Civil Society Nexus and the Debate over the Border Protection, 
Antiterrorism, and Illegal Immigration Control Act of 2005   

  21    

   2.   

    Th  e 2006 Mega-Marches in Greater Los Angeles: A Counterhegemonic 
Moment and the Limits of Mass Mobilization   

  48    

   3.   

    Race, Domestic Globalization, and Migration Control in Riverside 
County   

  75    

   4.   

    Th  e Geopolitics of the Homeland Security State and Deportation 
in El Salvador   

  99    

   5.   

    Resisting “Passive Revolution”: Th  e Migrant Rights Movement in 
Washington, D.C., and New York City    

  121    

   6.   

    Beyond “Immigration Reform”: Th  e Latin Americanization of Latino Politics, 
Authoritarian Statism, and Democracy from Below   

  152       

    Appendix:      Toward a Neo-Gramscian Approach to Latino Politics 

Research: Th  eory and Methods   

  175    

  183    

    Notes   
    Selected Bibliography   
  Index  

  209          

  203    

vii

This page intentionally left blank 

    P R E FA C E     

  Th  is  project  was  born  out  of  a  frustration  that  I  share  with  a  generation  of 
Chicano and Latino intellectuals and activists, most of whom either migrated 
to the United States as children or are the children of migrants, who came of age 
in the context of what historian Rodolfo Acuña calls the anti-immigrant hyste-
ria of the last thirty years. Collectively, we have witnessed the intensifi cation 
of state violence against our communities in the form of deaths at the border; 
mass detentions; families devastated for generations by deportation; racial pro-
fi ling on streets and public places; young men gunned down by state authori-
ties; people denied their valid asylum claims; the dehumanizing experience of 
being asked for “papers”; and many more quotidian injustices too detailed to 
list. But we have also witnessed the intensifi cation of Latino migrant activism 
in many forms over the last several decades, from marches and voter registra-
tion drives to civil disobedience actions and the formation of coalitions with 
progressive allies in what has become a multiethnic and multisector migrant 
rights movement. 

 Th  is  book  is  on  the  relationship  between  Latino  migrant  activism  and  on 
state migration control policies and practices between 2001 and 2012, but its 
genesis is in California during the fi ght against Proposition 187 in 1994, a law 
that  would  have  banned  undocumented  people  from  most  public  services, 
among other provisions. At this time, as a teenager and noncitizen, I fi rst began 
to  grapple  with  understanding  how  and  why  injustices  toward  migrants  and 
Latinos come about and what it would take to stop them. Although these ques-
tions have been burning inside me for almost twenty years, this book is writt en 
from the privileged position of a political scientist and participant-observer who 
has lived and studied in Southern California and New York City with the goal of 
thinking about how to stop the injustices that have marked my generation. I do 
not claim that this book will provide the defi nitive answer to this problematic or 

ix

x

Preface

that it will satisfy everyone who reads it. Rather, it explains the challenges facing 
those Latinos and their allies alike who, regardless of race or nationality, seek 
emancipation from human suff ering in the face of a powerful and entrenched 
police  state,  even  amid  all  the  celebration  around  “immigration  reform”  and 
Latino political power on the horizon. 

 I  am  bound  to  make  some  mistakes  and  omissions  in  my  eff ort  to  think 
through the relationship between Latino migrant activism and the post-9/11 
security  state  that  has  emerged.  Such  shortcomings  are  entirely  my  own. 
However, the insights, knowledge, and conceptual clarity that may be gained 
from this book are the product of many people who have been helpful in this 
project in a deeply dialogical way. First and foremost among those on this long 
list are the more than sixty people I interviewed for this book. Indeed, these 
migrant activists, deportees, and policy makers shared their thoughts and time 
with me, oft en allowing me into their homes, meetings, organizations, and lives. 
Although it will be theoretical and challenging at times, this book is for you, for 
us, and for the movement of our time. 

 Th  is book is also for my mentors, colleagues, and students. I want to thank 
Ray Rocco, Mark Sawyer, and Bill Robinson, all of whom have challenged me to 
think and rethink my approach to this project from its earliest stages, during my 
days at UCLA in the Department of Political Science. Ray has been an outstand-
ing adviser, mentor, and friend to me, and I proudly consider myself his student. 
Mark has challenged me in many ways that ultimately made me a bett er scholar. 
Bill provided enthusiastic and receptive feedback while always reminding me to 
stay committ ed to my ideas. 

 My senior colleagues and mentors from the post doc that I completed in the 
Latino Studies program in the Department of Social and Cultural Analysis at 
New York University had a tremendous imprint on this project. While at NYU, 
I had the great honor of having Renato Rosaldo, René Francisco Poitevin, and 
Joseph Nevins provide feedback on the entire manuscript. Each provided a very 
specifi c type of feedback. Renato helped me to develop my voice and the ethno-
graphic aspects of this project. René Francisco drew on his expertise in critical 
theory and encouraged me to do my “Gramsci pushups.” And Joseph Nevins, an 
expert in the fi eld of migration control, provided precise advice and encourage-
ment. I also want to thank Arlene Dávila, Juan Flores, Neil Brenner, and Josie 
Saldaña for sharing their time and resources with me. Arlene provided help with 
my book proposal and early chapters, and Juan provided important feedback on 
diff erent draft s of the project. Lastly from NYU, I would like to thank Cristina 
Beltrán for her example and for paving the way forward for my generation of 
theorists. 

 I am immensely indebted to my friends and colleagues Adrián Félix, Mark 
Jimenez, Aidé Acosta, Andres Garcia, Chris Zepeda, and Raul Moreno for their 

Preface

xi

critical and heavy conceptual feedback on many draft s of my work at diff erent 
stages in its development. I will be forever be grateful to Adrián and Andres for 
reading several draft s of this book cover to cover. I also want to thank Miguel 
Chavez,  Steven  Osuna,  Yoseph  Crownhead,  Victor  Rios,  Elana  Zilberg,  Juan 
de  Lara,  Susan  Coutin,  Mario  Barrera,  Silvia  Zamora,  Albert  Ponce,  Arely 
Zimmerman, Ulla Berg, Opal Tometi, Monica Novoa, and Zachariah Mampilly 
for  reading  parts  of  the  manuscript  or  book  proposal.  Not  to  be  forgott en, 
I want to thank the undergraduate researchers who provided assistance along 
the development of this project, including Janet Perez, Mathew Pinero, Jee Eun 
Mae, Diana Hernandez, Johana Rodriguez, and Fernando Venancio of Lehman 
College; Jazmin Molina of NYU; and Maribel Meza, Araceli Gonzalez-Flores, 
and Eduardo Maximo of UCLA. I also want to thank Pablo Morales, Allison 
Brown, Mario Rocha, and Sandy Andes. 

 Several individuals at various institutions helped me develop this project. 
Foremost among these institutions, I would like to thank Shawn Plant at the 
offi  ce of the Dean of School of Natural and Social Sciences, Victoria Sanford 
at the Center for Human Rights and Peace Studies, and my colleagues in the 
Department  of  Political  Science,  especially  Jeannett e  Graulau  for  her  intel-
lectual  solidarity,  Tom  Hatt ori  for  giving  me  a  semester  off ,  and  Chiseche 
Mibenge for reading the entire manuscript and providing generous feedback. 
I also want to thank Arlene Torres of the CUNY Latino Initiative and all of 
my  colleagues  from  the  Latino  Caucus  of  the  American  Political  Science 
Association. 

 I am also grateful to have been invited to share aspects of this project at numer-
ous institutions. For this I am grateful to Linda Green at the Center for Latin 
American Studies at the University of Arizona, Ediberto Roman at the College 
of Law at Florida International University, Mark Noferi and his colleagues at 
Brooklyn Law School, and to the Department of Latin American Studies at the 
University of Florida. To be sure, I am immensely grateful to Oxford University 
Press and my editor, Angela Chnapko, for their enthusiastic support of this proj-
ect. I am also indebted to the three anonymous reviewers who provided insight-
ful and energetic suggestions on my manuscript. 

 Th  ere are several community members and mentors whom I would like to 
thank for supporting me along this journey. First and foremost, I would like to 
thank Jorge Hernandez, who led me to the path of higher education through a 
community-based Raza Studies program. Over the years many have provided 
me a sense of community and a sense of family from the West Coast to the East 
Coast,  including  Rosa  Martha  Zarate,  Ward  Schinke,  Dariush  Haghighatand, 
Manuela  Sosa,  Elizabeth  Iglesias,  Rossana  Reguillo,  Miriam  Jimenez,  Hector 
Perla Jr. Nimmi Gowrinathan, Jason Javier, Gladys Ivonne Garcia y su familia, 
Maria Huerta y su familia, and Citlali Negrete y su familia. 

xii

Preface

 Last  but  not  least,  I  want  to  thank  my  family.  Words  cannot  express  the 
deep-felt  love  that  I  have  for  my  siblings,  nephews,  and  my  parents,  John 
J.  Gonzales  and  Maria  Guadalupe  Toribio-Gonzales.  Completing  this  book 
would have been impossible without all of their love, support, and guidance. My 
brothers, Chris and Martin, taught me many valuable life lessons, and my sister, 
Jazmin, led the way forward as the fi rst to graduate high school and att end col-
lege in our family. She is my original intellectual mentor. Th  is book is also dedi-
cated to my  sobrinos  Johnny, Felix, and Vicente, and my  sobrinas  Alyssa, Vanessa, 
and Naillila; even as children you have taught me the power of laughter and love. 
My father, or  jefi to , as I aff ectionately called him, left  me many wise teachings and 
passed on to me his work ethic, love for  norteñas , and sense of humor. He and my 
brother Chris will be missed forever. I am especially beholden to my mother, for 
she has taught me the value of family, perseverance, and human solidarity since 
I was a child in Tijuana. Indeed, it is these values that are at the heart of this book 
and my everyday pedagogy. 

 Finally, this project could not have come to fruit ion without the support of 
my brilliant and beautiful wife, Esther Maria Portillo-Gonzales, and her family. 
Th  ey raised her to be a humble and well-respected defender of human rights, 
from Southern California to New York City, from El Salvador to Mexico, and 
beyond. Esther’s actions and intellectual interventions are writt en throughout 
this book and on my heart. Last but not least, this work is dedicated to my cher-
ished daughter, Alitzel Guadalupe Gonzales. Your mother and I dedicate our-
selves to what we do so that you may inherit a world that is more just than the 
one we have lived in.   

    Reform Without Justice     

This page intentionally left blank 

          Introduction    

    I met Bernardo, a deportee and veteran of the 1991 US war in Iraq (Operation 
Desert Storm), in November 2010 at a protest in front of the US Embassy in 
Mexico City to denounce US immigration policies. Bernardo told his story of 
removal:

  I was born in Cancún and I was taken to the States when I was one year 
old, me and my twin sister. I lived an American life since I was one year 
old. I’m thirty-eight. I went to the Persian Gulf in 1991 and in 1993. 
I  made  a  mistake  in  ’93—tres  cervezas,  eighteen  years  ago. . . . Seven 
months  ago  ICE  [Immigration  and  Customs  Enforcement]  agents 
went to pick me up from LA to San Diego, from San Diego to Eloy, 
Arizona, because I got this misdemeanor DUI under California law.   1     

 Bernardo concisely explained how under the 1996 immigration laws passed by then 
president Bill Clinton, Legal Permanent Residents became retroactively deportable 
for prior convictions for any of the newly designated federal immigration “felonies.” 
He then described how he was racially profi led and caught by an ICE raid in a furni-
ture store and was detained for six months until tried before a judge:

  Th  ey lied to us! When ICE came inside this matt ress company, it was 
like, “Anybody Latino? Get over here!” You know, separating people. 
“You never had a problem with the law?” “Yeah, in ’93, I am not going 
to lie to you guys,” I said. “Th  at is probable cause for the judge to see 
you. Come, you are going to court tomorrow!” Th  ey lied to us! From 
LA they took us to San Diego. Th  ey kept telling us that we were going to 
court. Th  ey fl ew us to Eloy, Arizona. Six months fi ghting my papers, the 
judge kept telling me, “Sign the volunteer [departure].” “Your Honor, 
I am not going to give up my papers. I got kids to feed.”   2      

 Bernardo’s is a tragic and complex tale that involves many points of contact 
between  Latinos  and  state  agencies,  including  being  policed,  detained,  and 
deported. He went from being profi led based on his phenotypic features and 

1

2

r e f o r m   w i t h o u t   j u s t i c e

cultural characteristics—in other words, because he “looked Latino”—to being 
detained and processed in an immigration detention center, where he was held 
for months, only to be deported. 

 What makes Bernardo’s story even more tragic is that he is just one of mil-
lions of Latinos and other people of color who are subjected to a racial gaze 
from government offi  cials and private individuals who view them as perpetual 
suspect foreigners under what anthropologist Nicholas De Genova and others 
have called the homeland security state.   3    De Genova uses this term to refer to a 
national security state similar to the one built around the specter of Communism 
at the beginning of the Cold War but this time with a new focus on  migration con-
trol  and anti-terrorism.   4    

 Th  e homeland security state was symbolically consolidated in the aft ermath 
of 9/11 with the Patriot Act and the formation of the Department of Homeland 
Security (DHS) in 2003. However, its formation resists any facile date of birth, for 
it was built upon many previous eff orts to increase the migration and social control 
capabilities of the US government, including the 1986 Immigration Reform and 
Control Act and the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility 
Act of 1996, among other congressional and executive acts.   5    Yet, for reasons that 
I will expand upon later, any serious analysis of the homeland security state can 
not be reduced to its institutional features, nor could it avoid the war on drugs of 
the 1980s and 1990s. Rather, it is a deeply social and economic set of relationships. 
 Since  1990,  the  United  States  has  deported  roughly  four  million  people, 
with the vast majority being deported aft er 9/11.   6    Under the homeland secu-
rity state, the number of deportations from the year 2000 to the year 2012 has 
more than doubled. For instance,   Figure 1   shows the rise in deportation from 
roughly 188,000 removals per year in fi scal year 2000 to 410, 000 people in 2012. 
If trends continue, two million people will have been deported under the Obama 
administration alone. To put this in historical perspective, the United States has 
removed more people in the last ten years than in the last 110 years combined.   7    
Moreover, the United States currently spends more on immigration enforcement 
than it does on all other federal law enforcement combined.   8    Today, the US gov-
ernment spends fi ft een times more on migration control than it did in 1986, 
when the Immigration Reform and Control Act was passed in Congress.   9    As a 
result of such legislation, executive policies, and resources dedicated to enforce-
ment, Latinos now make up one-half of those sentenced to federal prison.   10      

 Yet as suggested by Bernardo’s presence at an international protest in front of 
the US Embassy in Mexico City organized by the International Migrant’s Alliance, 
a  global  grassroots  migrant  organization  comprised  of  100  organizations  and 
based in over 25 countries from the major migrant sending regions of the world in 
2010, Latino  migrant  activists and the broader global migrant movement have not 
been passive subjects.   11    Th  e migrant rights movement is a multiethnic and mul-
tisector constellation of actors that overlap and intersect with the even broader 

Introduction

3

450,000

400,000

350,000

300,000

250,000

200,000

188

189

319

281

241

246

211

165

393

385

392

410

360

150,000

100,000

50,000

0

2000

2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

   Figure 1   Removals, Fiscal Years 2000–2012.
 Source : Data for this fi gure is drawn from two sources. Th  e United States Department of Homeland 
Security, Removals Statistics, 2011 Year Book of Immigration Statistics, Table 39. ALIENS 
REMOVED OR RETURNED: FISCAL YEARS 1892 TO 2011 htt p://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/
fi les/publications/immigration-statistics/yearbook/2011/ois_yb_2011.pdf. And from Department of 
Homeland Security, Immigration and Customs Enforcement, Press Release, FY 2012: ICE announces 
year-end removal numbers, highlights focus on key priorities and issues new national detainer 
guidance to further focus resources December 21, 2012.  htt p://www.ice.gov/news/releases/1212/12
1221washingtondc2.htm  

US and global Left , which includes party organizations, labor unions, faith-based 
organizations, nongovernmental organizations, hometown associations, affi  nity 
groups, and what scholars call the new social movements of youth, students, and 
racial, ethnic, and sexual minorities. Indeed, Latinos and their allies in the move-
ment have fought back—albeit with limited success—against the encroaching 
homeland security state at almost every step of its development, from its embry-
onic stages in the 1980s and most defi nitely in the aft ermath of 9/11. 

 Perhaps  the  most  spectacular  example  of  this  resistance  was  during  the 
mega-marches  of  2006.  In  this  series  of  massive  and  peaceful  pro-migrant 
marches that took place across the country, protesters demanded legalization 
and voiced their opposition to the Border Protection, Antiterrorism, and Illegal 
Immigration Control Act of 2005 (HR 4437), which was passed in the House 
of  Representatives  of  the  109th  Congress.  During  these  mass  mobilizations, 
between 3.7 and 5 million protesters, most of whom were Latino, shocked the 
world by taking to the streets of over 160 cities across the United States to demand 
justice for migrants.   12    Th  e movement has been able to organize mass mobiliza-
tions and actions every year aft er the 2006 marches. Latino migrant activists 
and their allies have developed a variety of tactics beyond mass mobilizations, 
including unprecedented naturalization, voter-registration, and get-out-the-vote 

4

r e f o r m   w i t h o u t   j u s t i c e

drives, oft en aided by the ethnic media.   13    Undocumented youth activists have 
used direct action and civil disobedience tactics to pressure the executive offi  ce 
to  implement  policies  that  would  bring  temporary  relief  from  deportation 
through Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) program.   14    Indeed, it 
is the accumulation of more than a decade of organizing by Latino migrant activ-
ists and their allies that has brought us to the historic negotiations over immigra-
tion reform in the 113th Congress advanced by the so-called Gang of Eight (the 
group of senators who are draft ing such legislation). 

 Despite the recent celebratory talk about Latino political power, the migrant 
movement and its allies have not been able to move beyond short-term solu-
tions  such  as  DACA  or  to  push  through  a  sweeping  immigration  reform  bill 
that will guarantee a simple and fair path toward citizenship for the undocu-
mented, curtail the power of the homeland security state, and address the root 
causes of migration. At best, the Border Security, Economic Opportunity, and 
Immigration Modernization Act (S. 744) and other bills like it will bring much- 
needed temporary relief from deportation and the right to have a work permit for 
those that qualify. But it will reduce most of the eleven million undocumented 
people living in the United States to temporary workers and place them on a ten- 
year path toward a green card that is fi lled with legal trip wires and hurdles and 
that is contingent upon border security. In fact, Bernardo, and perhaps millions 
of others, would not benefi t from this bill because of minor convictions from 
their past and other requirements. Most critically, most comprehensive immi-
gration reform (CIR) proposals that have emerged in recent years are bound to 
preserve the very homeland security state and global economic system that has 
brought about mass migration over the decades. 

  Reform Without Justice  seeks to explain what led us to this moment through 
an analysis of the conjuncture between 2001 and 2012 leading up to the immi-
gration reform debate. During this period under study, through a series of con-
testations,  Latino  migrant  activists  and  their  allies  have  att empted  to  secure 
social justice victories for migrants in the face of mounting state violence against 
migrants under the auspices of the homeland security state. An analysis of any 
conjuncture att empts to understand the confl uence of forces that defi ne the ter-
rain of the struggle between dominant groups and subordinate groups in any 
given historical moment and location. 

 In this regard, the book seeks to explain the complex constellation of forces 
and structures driving migration control policies and the challenges that they 
present  for  Latino  migrant  activists  and  their  allies  between  2001  and  2012. 
Beyond  immediate  short-term  victories  such  as  the  DACA  or  any  CIR  bill, 
I seek to unearth why Latino migrant activists and their allies have not been 
able to win sustainable and transformative social justice victories that actually 
change the structures that cause migration and state violence toward migrants. 
My reference to justice is in the sense put forth by political theorist Iris Marion 

Introduction

5

Young—the elimination of domination and human suff ering.   15    Moreover, later 
in the book, I discuss how Latino migrant activists and their allies could poten-
tially turn the tide against authoritarian solutions to the so-called immigration 
crisis and democratize the United States. 

 Readers who are interested in gaining greater understanding of my theoretical 
framework and methods are encouraged to read the appendix. For now it should 
suffi  ce to indicate that to answer my research questions, I draw upon the ideas of 
twentieth-century political theorist Antonio Gramsci and neo-Gramscian thinkers 
to develop my theoretical framework. In addition, my methodological approach is 
built upon critical discourse analysis and critical ethnography, a method of study 
that  combines  ten  years  of  participant  observation;  over  sixty  interviews  with 
migrant activist and policy makers in Los Angeles, Washington, D.C., and New York 
City; and interviews with deportees and policy makers in Mexico and El Salvador. 
 Based on this theoretical framework and methods, I argue that between 2001 
and 2012, Latino migrant activists and their allies could not move beyond iso-
lated and short-term victories because they were up against a form of political 
power that I call anti-migrant hegemony. Th  is is a type of ideological leadership 
that naturalizes the idea that we should adopt novel authoritarian solutions to 
the “immigration crisis,” not just within the state but in civil society—the media, 
religious and intellectual institutions, and other private associations located out-
side of the offi  cial jurisdiction of the state. While authoritarian solutions have 
become naturalized, there is nothing natural or inevitable about them. Th  is form 
of consensual domination is the work of concrete political actors whom I con-
ceptualize  as  an  anti-migrant  bloc,  a  contradictory  and  fl uid  constellation  of 
forces composed of elected offi  cials, state bureaucrats, think tanks, intellectuals, 
and charismatic media personalities who, under the infl uence of strategic frac-
tions of global capital, have set the boundaries of the immigration debate around 
narrow questions of criminality and anti-terrorism. Th  is narrow debate conceals 
the racial politics of migration control, guarantees the reproduction and expan-
sion of the homeland security state, and obfuscates the structural causes that 
have displaced millions of people in the Americas and other parts of the world 
into the migrant stream over the last thirty years. 

 Anti-migrant  hegemony  is  not  a  stagnant  form  of  political  power  that  is 
merely predicated on a majority in Congress, brute force, or pure domination. 
Rather, as Antonio Gramsci writes, hegemony is a dynamic form of power that 
rests upon the “combination of force and consent” in which “the fact of hege-
mony presupposes that account be taken of the interests and the tendencies of 
the groups over which hegemony is to be exercised.”   16    Th  us even some liberals 
and Latino migrant activists have come to support what the Migration Policy 
Institute accurately called “a strong bipartisan pro-enforcement consensus” that 
has resulted “in the creation of a well-resourced, operationally robust, modern-
ized enforcement system.”   17    More so than any one policy or act of Congress or 

6

r e f o r m   w i t h o u t   j u s t i c e

the executive, this form of consensual domination is the linchpin of this modern 
system of migration control, and it is what leaves many elected offi  cials, state 
personnel, intellectuals, and activists who are sympathetic to migrants silenced 
or struggling to propose a kinder, gentler version of the homeland security state 
rather  than  seeking  to  dismantle  it.  Indeed,  it  is  this  type  of  fl uid  and  dispa-
rate ideological power that normalizes state violence, or what scholars Cecilia 
Menjivar and Leisy Abrego call “legal violence” against migrants and their fami-
lies, many of whom were born in the United States.   18    

 Th  e anti-migrant bloc acts against migrants and their families in many ways; 
however, in this study of specifi c sites and localities of the homeland security 
state, it does so through the criminalization of migrants. I use this term in two 
ways  throughout  the  book.  Criminalization  in  the  discursive  sense  serves  as 
the ideological glue of the homeland security state; it is a process in which a 
set of discourses att ribute criminal characteristics to a targeted group, in this 
case Latinos, to win consent for legal violence.   19    In the legal sense, criminaliza-
tion also expands the grounds for removal in order to facilitate detention and 
deportation. Rather than being one single stagnant discourse, the exact language 
used to criminalize Latinos shift s in diff erent contexts, such as in the halls of 
the US House of Representatives, municipal governmental bodies, in the State 
Department, the executive offi  ce, or in the media and in popular culture. 

 Despite  these  shift s,  the  criminalization  of  Latinos  functions  to  legitimize 
state violence against women and entire Latino families and maps out polemi-
cal but simple “common sense” and “race neutral” “solutions” to a complex prob-
lem rooted in the evolution of US-led global capitalism and the displacement of 
millions of people from Latin America and the Caribbean from their traditional 
means of survival. Regardless of the context, the criminalization of migrants is 
what makes it easy, almost dutiful (i.e., “common sense”), for a judge to deport 
someone like Bernardo, without thinking about the impact of the deportation on 
his wife, children, mother, community, or even his very life. It also leaves some 
liberals asking what  else  did someone like Bernardo do to be deported instead of 
questioning the system of mass deportation that cast him and millions of other 
migrants away from their families and communities in the name of the “law.” Th  is 
process allows for the advocates of the homeland security state and novel police 
practices to make post-racial claims that enforcement is colorblind and that it is 
just about “enforcing the law,” even when, as indicated by fi gure 2, Mexicans and 
Latin Americans comprised 97% of all removals in 2010.  

 Yet the most insidious consequence of the criminalization of migrants is that 
it allows the anti-migrant bloc to set the boundaries of the immigration debate 
within a binary opposition, in which they advance a one-dimensional image of 
“the bad immigrant” who, based solely on a few “exaggerated, simplifi ed, and nat-
uralized characteristics,” deserves to be detained and deported and in which the 
traditional opposition att empts to counter with more simplifi ed images of the 

7

Introduction

Removals

Other
3%

Other
Latin
America

24%

Mexico
73%

   Figure 2   Pew Hispanic Center, Removals by Country of Origin 2010.
 Source : Julia Preston, “Record Number of Foreigners Deported in 2011, Offi   cials Say” 
New York Times, September 7, 2012. htt p://www.pewhispanic.org/2011/12/28/
ii-recent-trends-in-u-s-immigration-enforcement/  
immigrant who deserves to stay.   20    Th  is simplistic characterization forces Latino 
migrant activists and their allies into a false binary opposition in which the rights 
of the “good immigrant”—the poster child image of the palatable assimilated 
American kid who came to the United States—as a child may potentially stay 
at the expense of the “bad immigrant.” Th  e latt er of whom, like Bernardo, may 
have made a few mistakes in their lives, must be policed, detained, and deported. 
 Once Latino migrant activists and their allies accept this binary, they subtly 
consent to the production of legal violence against migrants. Moreover, advo-
cating for the rights of the good immigrant within the binary serves to silence 
potentially counterhegemonic discourses that challenge the structural causes of 
migration and that take an unequivocally anti-racist stance to defend the human 
rights of Latinos (and other people of color), who, regardless of legal status or 
history with the law, are perpetually suspected to be deportable by virtue of their 
phenotypic and cultural characteristics. Th  us, the ideological leadership of the 
anti-migrant bloc sets the boundaries of the debate and divides and disorganizes 
Latino  migrant  activists  and  the  broader  migrant  rights  movement  between 
immigration reformers and oppositional forces.  

 Before elaborating on how the Latino migrant movement and its allies are 
divided and disorganized by anti-migrant hegemony, I must elaborate on the 
cleavages of the anti-migrant bloc. I developed this term from Gramsci’s notion 
of  the  historic  bloc.  Th  e  anti-migrant  bloc  is  a  contradictory  and  discordant 
ensemble of forces operating at the level of the state, civil society, and the global 
economy that seek to expand and reproduce the homeland security state. Th  e 
exact  cleavages— factions   and   fr actions —of  the  anti-migrant  bloc  are  too  vast 
and dynamic to lay out in any one study.   21    

 In the period under study, some of the main sectors of the bloc include aca-
demics, charismatic television and radio personalities, elected offi  cials, and state 

8

r e f o r m   w i t h o u t   j u s t i c e

personnel within the bureaucracy such as DHS that have the support of strategic 
fractions of capital. Many of these actors take on the role of organic intellec-
tuals whose vocation it is to educate society into supporting the expansion of 
the homeland security state. According to Gramsci, such a corps of intellectuals 
gives their particular social group awareness and greater homogeneity.   22    From 
this  perspective,  nativist  academics  such  as  the  late  Samuel  P.  Huntington—
who wrote the infamous article “Th  e Hispanic Challenge” and the book  Who 
Are We? Th  e Challenge to America’s National Identity,  among others—take on a 
critical role within the anti-migrant bloc as organic intellectuals of the home-
land security state.   23    Huntington’s writings in the early 1970s were a thinly veiled 
defense of Jim Crow racism and authoritarian state practices.   24    His more recent 
writings on “Hispanics” in his tradition reifi ed the fantasy of a static and homog-
enous Anglo-American national identity based on Protestant values that he saw 
as being undermined by Latino and Mexican migration in particular at the dawn 
of the homeland security state. Organic intellectuals of the homeland security 
state are not just academics. It also includes a broad range of intellectuals includ-
ing  journalists  and  television  and  talk  radio  personalities  Lou  Dobbs,  Glenn 
Beck, Fred Savage, and Rush Limbaugh. 

 Beyond academics and media personalities, there are set of civil society based 
institutions  that  are  at  the  core  of  the  anti-migrant  bloc’s  intellectual  power. 
Indeed,  organizations  such  as  the  Federation  for  American  Immigration 
Reform,  the  Center  for  Immigration  Studies,  the  Heritage  Foundation,  and 
the Manhatt an Institute, among others, are dedicated to shaping immigration 
policy by educating people on the virtues of the homeland security state (see 
 chapter 1). Th  ese think tanks are funded by a select fraction of capital, such as 
the Scaife foundations funded by the billionaire Richard Mellon Scaife, heir to 
the Mellon family fortune. Th  e Scaife foundations have given these and other 
ultra-Right organizations millions of dollars over the years.   25    

 Operating at the level of the state, elected offi  cials and state bureaucrats also 
function as organic intellectuals in a sense. Indeed, this stratum of intellectuals is 
strategic because they have direct decision-making power over the bureaucracy 
and the distinct sites of local, state, national, and transnational levels of gover-
nance.  Outside  of  planning  and  codifying  migration  control  policies,  elected 
offi  cials and state personnel shape and educate society about immigration issues 
through their connections to the media and in the halls of power. Regardless of 
the sector, intellectuals and intellectual power are essential to the anti-migrant 
bloc as it functions to shape and exploit ordinary people’s common-sense think-
ing about immigration politics and Latinos. By “common sense,” I am referring 
to what Gramsci described as the contradictory forms of consciousness held by 
ordinary people that are shaped by the dominant class’s ideology and that make 
things appear normal and unchangeable. 

Introduction

9

 Th  e  anti-migrant  bloc  operating  at  the  level  of  the  state  and  civil  society 
divides  and  disorganizes  Latino  migrant  activists  and  the  broader  migrant 
rights movement. Indeed, the movement is also not a homogenous force but 
rather a constellation of actors who are divided over how to respond to the good 
immigrant–bad immigrant binary, and they diff er in their vision of what consti-
tutes immigration reform. At the risk of oversimplifi cation, the migrant rights 
movement should be conceived of as having two major factions: immigration 
reformers  and  oppositional  forces.  Immigration  reformers,  a  label  developed 
by  political  theorists  Luis  Fernandez  and  the  late  Joel  Olson,  seek  to  defend 
the rights of migrants by reforming the current immigration system within the 
dominant policy framework, whereas the oppositional sector seeks transforma-
tive  change  that  breaks  with  the  good  immigrant–bad  immigrant  binary  and 
addresses the structural causes of migration.   26    

 Immigration reformers are oft en led by a class of professional middle-class 
to affl  uent Latino brokers who mediate between the state and the broader base 
of working-class Latinos in society. Many Latino immigration reformers come 
from the ranks of the Congressional Hispanic Caucus or other elected govern-
ment bodies; the dominant Latino policy organizations in Washington, D.C., 
such as the National Council of La Raza, the Center for American Progress, the 
Center for Community Change, America’s Voice, and the National Immigration 
Forum; the heights of the labor establishment; the Catholic Church; and select 
circles of academics and policy experts, among other groups. 

 Some  Latino  immigration  reformers  come  from  the  ranks  of  the  migrant 
working class and progressive movements and may even share much in com-
mon  with  their  oppositional  counterparts.  But  they  are  willing  to  accept  the 
established terms of the debate on immigration reform within the good immi-
grant–bad  immigrant  binary.  Th  us  immigration  reformers  reject  using  argu-
ments  around  racial  justice  or  human  rights  and  favor  a  moderate  discourse 
designed to “win over the middle,” not to “off end” people who are potentially on 
“our side.” Th  is strategy oft en leads them to embrace the good immigrant–bad 
immigrant binary and thus focus on att empting to counter the anti-migrant bloc 
with the static image of the good immigrant—the straight-A undocumented stu-
dent with a perfect record “who can’t wait to join the Air Force,” for instance—
or with “data” showing that Latinos are indeed assimilating or that Latinos are 
more patriotic than whites. 

 Immigration reformers oft en fi ght for important changes that would have a 
real and positive impact on the lives of migrants, but they are structurally locked 
into a game of perpetual compromise with the dominant bloc, which oft en forces 
them to accept the established terms of the debate on migration control. Th  is 
position requires immigration reformers to accept and lobby for state practices 
and policy proposals that include the further militarization of the US–Mexico 

10

r e f o r m   w i t h o u t   j u s t i c e

border and interior enforcement as a “fair compromise” for immigration reform, 
without challenging the homeland security state, racism, and the forces of global 
capitalism that have displaced millions of people in the Americas. Many immi-
gration reformers point out that the only way to win any type of legalization for 
some—at the moment—is to concede to the enforcement provisions proposed 
by mainstream political parties. Yet as we will see in the chapters that follow, 
CIR as it has been proposed will establish a pathway to temporary legal status 
and toward citizenship for only a portion of the eleven million undocumented 
people in the United States while entrenching the homeland security state and 
will lead to the mass deportation of millions through novel modes of social con-
trol at the local, national, and transnational levels of governance. 

 Th  e anti-migrant bloc establishes the terms of the debate on migration con-
trol from which immigration reformers respond accordingly. Yet the immigra-
tion  reformers  rarely  challenge  the  underlying  forces  driving  migration  on  a 
global scale, nor do they eff ectively question the racial politics of the homeland 
security  state.  Rather  they  keep  their  critique  limited  to  questions  of  tactics; 
the nativists propose an iron fence at the border and mandatory detention for 
those caught there, and they propose a smart wall and ankle bracelets for those 
“released”; DHS proposes a new program to deport people from communities, 
and the loyal opposition proposes human rights training for the police. In the 
most recent example of this dynamic, some immigration reformers scoff ed at 
the idea that S. 744 would allow drones to be used by the Border Patrol up to 
ninety miles from the border. Instead they demanded that Border Patrol drones 
be limited to thirty miles from the US-Mexico border. Rarely do immigration 
reformers eff ectively question the logic of the homeland security state, global 
capitalism, and white supremacy. 

 Any eff ort to understand the positions taken by immigration reformers and 
the cleavages in the migrant rights movement cannot be reduced solely to the 
diff erence in the discourse between the two groups. Although language or dis-
course was important to Gramsci, he held that hegemony “must also be eco-
nomic” and “must necessarily be based on the decisive function exercised by the 
leading group in the decisive nucleus of economic activity.”   27    Capital undeni-
ably sets the boundaries of the immigration debate among the Right and some 
sectors of the Left . Just as major foundations such as Scaife support sectors of 
the anti-migrant bloc, many of the leading immigration-reform organizations 
in the United States are directly funded by the leading corporate foundations 
or sponsored by major corporations. For example, the National Council of La 
Raza (NCLR) has a corporate board of sponsors, which is headed by Johnson 
&  Johnson  and  includes  powerful  transnational  corporations  such  as  Coca 
Cola, AT&T, Bank of America, and Coors, among many more.   28    Th  is sponsor-
ship is not limited to NCLR; it is the norm for most of the infl uential migrant 

Introduction

11

organizations  across  the  United  States.  While  there  are  many  diff erences 
between immigration reformers and the anti-migrant bloc, they have reached 
a consensus on the boundaries of migration control that preserves the social 
reproduction  of  the  global  capitalist  system  and  the  institutionality  of  the 
homeland security state as a necessary and nonnegotiable part of any US migra-
tion control strategy. 

 While certain migrant rights organizations and corporations may seem like 
strange bedfellows, one must be clear on the nature of their alliances.   29    Outside 
the nativists and those fractions of capital that directly profi t from the business 
of homeland security, there is a large sector of capital that seeks contained solu-
tions to the “immigration problem” and that wants to preserve their highly fl ex-
ible labor force and consumer bases. Th  us the associations of growers in Alabama, 
select corporations in Arizona, the meatpacking industry in the Midwest, and 
the American Apparel company in California have come out against the most 
draconian immigration legislation, not because they are “pro-immigrant” or for 
social justice reasons—as any analysis of their labor practices would reveal—but 
because they seek to preserve their labor force and consumer base. Th  e unstable 
and delicate coalition of convenience between these forces, and others like them, 
prevents immigration reformers from openly taking a position that calls into ques-
tion the driving force behind migration over the last thirty years—US-led global 
capitalism—and divides them from the oppositional sectors of the movement. 

 Outside of immigration reformers, there is an oppositional faction composed 
of Latino migrant activists and their allies. Th  e oppositional forces, as sporadic 
and  disorganized  as  they  may  be,  reject  the  good  immigrant–bad  immigrant 
binary and argue that such a binary requires that activists adopt a vision of immi-
gration reform in which thousands of people like Bernardo would not benefi t 
because of minor past convictions or other requirements. Moreover, the oppo-
sitional sector of the movement seeks to create an autonomous pole of political 
power that does not have to compromise with the authoritarian practices of the 
homeland security state and that could secure social justice for all migrants and 
their families. 

 Th  e oppositional faction involves multiple sectors; it is oft en composed of 
grassroots organizations, small nonprofi t organizations (many of which strug-
gle to even pay staff  members), rank-and-fi le union members, rebellious labor 
leaders,  independent  migrant  workers,  left ist  intellectuals,  independent  labor 
centers, anti-globalization and anti-war activists, and a sector of the youth and 
student groups. Th  e oppositional faction generally does not have the institu-
tional  resources,  corporate  sponsors,  budgets,  and  salaries  that  immigration 
reformers have. Despite such disadvantages, this sector is closely linked to, or 
oft en led by, the base of migrant workers and their children who are directly 
aff ected by the homeland security state. Th  is sector of the migrant movement is 

12

r e f o r m   w i t h o u t   j u s t i c e

oft en fi ercely independent of the labor hierarchy and partisan politics. Most crit-
ically, this sector of the migrant rights movement oft en advances a self-conscious 
critique of global capitalism and US foreign policy and argues that unless these 
structural conditions are changed, no immigration reform legislation will ever 
get to the root of the problem. 

 Both ideological poles or factions among Latino migrant activists and the 
migrant rights movement have their organic intellectuals too, but they are not 
as powerful or infl uential as the intellectuals of the anti-migrant bloc (in most 
cases). Moreover, they do not have the same degree of organization and ideo-
logical unity as their counterparts in the anti-migrant bloc. Th  ere are certainly a 
host of groups that are in the middle of these two factions, and there are certainly 
groups that fl uctuate between these two fl uid ideological currents in the migrant 
rights  movement.  Nonetheless,  these  are  the  forces  that  have  defi ned  Latino 
migrant activism and the migrant rights movement that has emerged during the 
conjuncture under study, 2001 to 2012.    

      Th  e Homeland Security State and Latinos   

 Th  is study requires a careful conceptual analysis of the state. Indeed, it is part of 
the terrain where both the anti-migrant bloc and Latino migrant activists orga-
nize to either constrain or expand migration control policies and practices. In 
the particular case of the United States, analysis requires that we have concep-
tual clarity on what “the state” refers to and on its relationship to the politics of 
race in general and to Latinos in particular. Th  ere are competing theories on the 
nature of the state and political power that I will not fully engage here. For now 
it will suffi  ce to say that postmodern theories emphasize the role of discourse 
and knowledge, while Weberian accounts accentuate the bureaucratic aspects 
of the state. Although language is central to any analysis of migration control 
(including this one), we must remember that it is not the discourse alone that 
kicks down the door to deport brown bodies in the middle of the night: it is the 
state. Th  us my analysis of migration control and migrant social movements rests 
on a particular neo-Gramscian understanding of the state and its relationship 
with Latinos. 

 Antonio Gramsci conceived of the state as something deeper and more com-
plex than simply its legislative, juridical, and bureaucratic forms, such as DHS 
and  other  police  agencies.  Rather,  Gramsci  conceptualized  what  he  calls  the 
“integral state,” which “contains both the apparatuses of government and the 
judiciary and the various voluntary and private associations and para-political 
institutions which make up civil society.”   30    Gramsci uses this concept to refer 
to  a  contradictory  constellation  of  institutions  that  were  rooted  in  a  nexus 

Introduction

13

between the state, civil society, and the fundamental social group, the capitalist 
class. Like Nicholas De Genova and others, I view the homeland security state 
as the most recent confi guration of a national security state that seeks to control 
migrant labor in the United States that includes the traditional institutions of 
governance, such as the Supreme Court, Congress, and the presidency, together 
with the bureaucracy, including DHS among other military and police institu-
tions.   31    But departing from these scholars, I view the homeland security state as 
an integral state, which exists in a state–civil society nexus with other strategic 
sites of ideological production in civil society (such as the media, think tanks, 
academic experts, art, religion, and entertainment) and with fractions of capital 
that depend on undocumented migrant labor and the policing of migrants and 
people of color. 

 Yet as Gramsci and neo-Gramscian scholars have warned, there can never be 
a general theory of the state, for each state is a condensation of the specifi c social 
relations  of  a  historically  specifi c  society.   32     When  writing  about  the  develop-
ment of the state in the particular case of the United States, we must recognize its 
unique history based on a system of racialized class relations, that is, a class sys-
tem with undeniable racial dimensions. Sociologist Aníbal Quijano writes that 
“in Anglo-America,” there was “a racist distribution of labor and the forms of 
exploitation of colonial capitalism. Th  is was, above all, through a quasi-exclusive 
association of whiteness with wages and, of course, with the high-order posi-
tions in the colonial administration.”   33    Even though colonialism formally ended 
in 1776, the racial axis in the United States (and Latin America) has “proven to 
be more durable and stable than the colonialism.”   34    

 Indeed, the US state is the institutional and ideological condensation of social 
relations built upon a system of capitalism and white supremacy that emerged in 
the seventeenth century and evolved into the modern homeland security state. 
From this perspective, the latt er is a racial state that cannot be separated from 
the unique history of the United States, a history in which various racial ideolo-
gies have been used to justify the dynamic system of white supremacy and the 
subordination of nonwhite groups throughout specifi c moments in history until 
the present.   35    By white supremacy, I am referring to what sociologist Eduardo 
Bonilla Silva calls “racially based political regimes that emerged post-fi ft eenth 
century”  in  which  people  “participate  in  race  relations  as  either  benefi ciaries 
(members of the dominant race) or subordinates (members of the dominated 
race  or  races).”   36     Th  e  homeland  security  state  is  an  integral  racial  state  that 
emerged from a contentious history over the politics of race in general and with 
Latinos in particular. 

 As political theorist Cristina Beltrán emphasizes, there is nothing existen-
tially natural about the formation of this group of peoples that we have come to 
call Latinos in the United States.   37    “Latinos” are a multilingual and multiracial 

14

r e f o r m   w i t h o u t   j u s t i c e

constellation of nationalities, ethnicities, and cultures that come from all over 
the  Americas,  including  the  US  Southwest  and  the  Caribbean.  However, 
departing  from  Beltrán,  I  maintain  that  Latinos  have  distinct  class  interests, 
ranging from a small—but signifi cant—group of corporate and political elites 
and a growing middle class of professionals and business owners. Th  e largest 
sector of Latinos, however, is the working class, which is made up of people 
who oft en live in mixed-status families and at the margins of society. In fact, 
the splits in the Latino migrant movement and its allies are a manifestation of 
two class projects: one that refl ects the Latino migrant working class’s popular 
demands and strategy for mobility, or what Fernandez and Olson call the free-
dom to “live, work, and love wherever you please,” and one that refl ects middle 
and affl  uent classes’ demands and strategy of fi ghting for inclusion and social 
mobility  through  conventional  politics  and  a  corporate-backed  immigration 
reform.   38    

 In addition to these class cleavages, many Latinos share a history of racializa-
tion and confl ict with the United States, starting with Mexicans in the 1830s 
and Puerto Ricans in the 1890s, and including the oft en dark-skinned and heav-
ily working-class Latinos from Central America and the Dominican Republic 
who mostly came aft er 1965. While not all Latinos experience racialization in 
the same way, the ironic outcome of anti-migrant hegemony is that as it racial-
izes most Latinos as “foreigners” and “immigrants,” including even those born 
in the United States, because of their phenotypic and cultural characteristics. 
Th  is racialization, in turn, contributes to the further crystallization of a racial-
ized working-class Latino identity. It is precisely because of the last few decades’ 
anti-migrant policies and climate that we are beginning to see a strengthening 
of a pan-ethnic solidarity among native-born Latinos and migrants from Latin 
America in the United States. Hence, many—but certainly not all—US citizen 
Puerto Ricans and second- and third-generation Chicanos share a sense of soli-
darity with recently arrived Latino migrants. 

 It is precisely at this nexus between the state and civil society, history and the 
present, where the batt le over immigration is being fought. Indeed, at all the sites 
of state power, there is a struggle rooted in a nexus with civil society for ideo-
logical leadership over the direction of the state’s repressive apparatuses and for 
the rights and benefi ts of racialized migrants vis-à-vis the state. Th  is state–civil 
society nexus is present at nearly every level of governance, from debates over 
immigration legislation in Congress, to the approval of local anti-migrant ordi-
nances, to providing military aid to El Salvador to police deportees, to the tight-
ening of possibilities for asylum in immigration court. At nearly every instance 
in which there is an eff ort to expand the repressive fi eld of the state, there are 
groups operating in civil society that ultimately seek to make Latinos and other 
racial minorities the legal objects of state violence. Conversely, there are also 

Introduction

15

groups, albeit less powerful ones, that seek to resist or ameliorate state violence 
against those perpetually suspected of being detainable and deportable.  

    Th  e Organic Crisis of North American Capitalism 

and Race Relations   

 Although  this  study  is  focused  on  the  conjuncture  between  2001  and  2012, 
a  Gramscian  method  of  analysis  requires  us  to  study  the  day-to-day  struggle 
between the Latino migrant activists and the homeland security state as part 
of a deeper historical process.   39    As alluded to earlier, Latino migrant activism 
and migration control did not start on September 11, 2001. To understand the 
conjuncture under study, it must be contextualized by what I call the organic 
crisis of North American capitalism and race relations, which has emerged over 
the last thirty years. 

 Th  is crisis is marked by the transition between the Fordist model of develop-
ment in which capital and labor relations were organized within a nation-state 
system to a post-Fordist model of development and the emergence of a truly 
global capitalist economy, or what scholars call globalization. Along the lines of 
William I. Robinson, I view globalization as the latest phase in the evolution of 
the fi ve hundred-year-old process of capital accumulation in which new forms of 
production and fi nance displace older ones across the globe.   40    Th  is reorganiza-
tion of production is at the heart of global migration over the last three decades 
in which, according to the United Nations, there were over 214 million migrants 
living across the globe in 2010.   41    

 Globalization is the primary dynamic driving migration from Latin America 
and the Caribbean, which have become the largest migrant-sending regions to 
the United States in the world. Th  is migration relationship came about through 
the dual process of economic restructuring in the United States and in Latin 
America and the Caribbean. Th  e reorganization of production has led to the 
deindustrialization  of  the  United  States  and  the  relocation  of  production,  in 
search of greater profi ts, to the Global South. In Mexico and Central America, 
states adopted structural adjusment programs backed by the World Bank and 
International  Monetary  Fund  that  were  aimed  specifi cally  at  transitioning 
national  economies  based  on  an  import-substitution  industrialization  model 
into export-led models at the service of global capital. In the process of making 
this transition from a national system of production to a global one, millions of 
people in rural Latin America and the Caribbean faced massive unemployment, 
forcing them to either migrate or live in misery. Economically displaced people, 
and those displaced by war, migrated either to the overpopulated urban centers 
of Latin America or to El Norte. 

16

r e f o r m   w i t h o u t   j u s t i c e

 Th  e  reorganization  of  production  in  El  Norte  gave  rise  to  a  post-Fordist 
economy, which is characterized by deindustrialization and the ascendancy of a 
massive service sector. Th  e service sector, in turn, is dependent on a highly fl ex-
ible labor force, which is made up of unskilled, nonunionized migrant workers. 
Th  e reorganization of production has set the material conditions for the mas-
sive displacement of millions of Latin Americans into the US labor market and 
for the emergence of a transnational model of society and economy. Th  is set of 
social and economic relations is the product of the nearly thirty years of neolib-
eral restructuring that began in the 1970s. Th  e transnational economy is com-
posed of previously separate national economies, like those of the United States, 
Mexico, and Central American countries, which are integrated via remitt ances, 
trade, labor supplies, and a series of binding free trade agreements. Th  us, rather 
than being an anomaly or self-propelling force based simply on social networks, 
migrant labor is a central component of the integrated global economy of the 
Americas. 

 Globalization and the emergence of the transnational model of society and 
economy under asymmetrical geopolitical relations between the United States 
and Latin America set the groundwork for the massive infl ux of Latinos into the 
country over the last thirty years. Almost immediately following the 1982 debt 
crisis, labor migration from Mexico to the United States began to increase. Th  e 
pace of labor migration accelerated with the introduction of a series of neoliberal 
reforms in Mexico, including when it signed the General Agreement Trade and 
Tariff s in 1986. Moreover, the rate of labor migration from Mexico to the United 
States intensifi ed with the deepening of the neoliberal model with the signing 
of the North American Free Trade Agreement. In fact, between 1990 and 1995, 
Mexico  was  the  country  with  the  largest  number  of  emigrants  in  the  world. 
According to Raúl Delgado Wise and Humberto Márquez Covarrubias, from 
2000 to 2005, Mexico lost an average of 400,000 people per year.   42    Moreover, 
from  2000  to  2005,  the  Mexican  annual  exodus  grew  to  560,000  per  year.   43    
Th  ese numbers held steady until the global recession of 2008. 

 Although  Mexican  migration  to  the  United  States  in  the  aft ermath  of  the 
North American Free Trade Agreement surpasses that of any other part of Latin 
America, one must also take note of the sheer magnitude of the number of Latin 
American and Caribbean people displaced by neoliberal policies, too. With the 
ascendancy of neoliberalism, many Central Americans continued to migrate to 
the United States despite the end of the civil wars of the 1980s. Salvadorans, the 
largest of the Central American groups, now represent the third-largest Latino 
group  in  the  United  States  aft er  Mexicans  and  Puerto  Ricans,  respectively.   44    
Th  e 1990s also witnessed an increase in mass migration from South American 
nations. Th  e fi rst modest wave of South American migration took place in the 
1970s. Before this wave, the relatively few South American migrants living in 

Introduction

17

the United States were primarily middle-class professionals who came on work 
visas. With the onslaught of neoliberal reforms in South America in the 1990s, 
however, there has been a dramatic increase in South American migrants arriv-
ing to the United States. For instance, the number of South Americans living in 
the United States went from 1,035,602 in 1990 to 1,847,811 in 2000.   45    Th  e two 
decades of mass migration from Latin America to the United States are the prod-
uct of the transition from nation-based economic systems to a global capitalist 
system. 

 Th  e organic crisis of North American capitalism marked by a shift  from the 
Fordist  model  of  production  to  a  global  economy  occurred  during  a  shift   in 
racial politics. Scholars like Howard Winant, Eduardo Bonilla-Silva, and others 
note that aft er the civil rights movement, racial politics shift ed from an openly 
racist discourse to an ostensibly race-neutral one.   46    Th  is post-racial discourse, 
sometimes reff ered to as colorbliness, argues that racism is no longer a major 
impediment for racial minorities. Th  is shift  has set the foundation for post–civil 
rights race relations. Th  us, rather than using such terms as “subhuman,” “geneti-
cally inferior,” “wetbacks,” or “spics,” the contemporary discourse that is used 
in multiple sites of state power and civil society racializes Latinos through the 
process  of  criminalization.  Although  apparently  race-neutral,  criminalization 
att ributes historical stereotypes about Mexican male criminality to all Latino 
groups in the North American imaginary, an imaginary that is shaped by two 
hundred years of confl ict and colonization.   47    Th  is characterization explains how 
many Central Americans and Ecuadorans, for instance, are oft en suspected of 
being undocumented Mexicans, with deadly consequences in the most extreme 
cases, such as the young Ecuadoran father of two who was killed by a group of 
teens who wanted to go “Mexican hunting.”   48    As I demonstrate in the chapters 
to come, post–civil rights racism and globalization are two sides of the same 
organic crisis that has defi ned the terrain of struggle in which Latino activists 
and the migrant rights movement operates.  

    Reform Without Justice: A Chapter Road Map   

 Th  e chapters in this book should be read as case studies in which the specifi c 
confi gurations  of  the  anti-migrant  bloc  exert  their  hegemony  over  migration 
control in multiple sites of state power at the local, federal, and transnational 
levels of governance. Th  e chapters are also meant to illustrate how immigration 
reformers and the oppositional faction of the Latino migrant movement could 
either sustain or challenge the hegemony of the dominant bloc. For instance, 
 chapters 1, 3, and 4 are primarily focused on illustrating how dominant groups 
wield hegemony at distinct levels of governance, such as the US Congress, the 

18

r e f o r m   w i t h o u t   j u s t i c e

Riverside  County  Board  of  Supervisors,  and  US  foreign  policy  institutions. 
Th  ese studies are not meant to be an exhaustive list of the institutions in which 
hegemony is exerted; there are many more sites that could easily be included, 
such as the US Supreme Court, academia, popular culture, etc. Regardless of the 
site, hegemony is always contested; thus  chapters 2 and 6 focus on the struggles 
of Latino migrant activists and the migrant rights movement to resist and miti-
gate migration control policies and practices. Th  e chapters take place at two dis-
tinct geographic and historical junctures:  chapter 2 centers on the 2006 migrant 
marches in Los Angeles under the Bush administration, and  chapter 6 looks at 
the migrant mobilizations in Washington, D.C., and in New York City under the 
Obama administration in 2010. 

 In  chapter 1, I explain how the anti-migrant bloc congealed in the aft ermath 
of 9/11 and how it sought to expand the police power of the homeland secu-
rity state in the 109th Congress. Th  rough the use of critical discourse analysis, 
I show how the Republican-dominated House of Representatives of the 109th 
Congress sought to expand the repressive capabilities of the state by passing the 
Border  Protection,  Antiterrorism,  and  Illegal  Immigration  Control  Act  (HR 
4437),  the  most  repressive  immigration  legislation  considered  in  a  hundred 
years. I examine the passage of HR 4437 on December 16, 2005, by contextual-
izing the debate over the bill through the discourse of the “war on terror” and by 
exploiting historical stereotypes that associate migrants, and Mexicans in partic-
ular, with crime. I also show how the leadership of the Democratic Party, as well 
as immigration reformers in civil society, adopted many of the policy proposals 
and the discourse of their Republican counterparts in the House fl oor debate 
over HR 4437 despite their opposition to the bill. 

 While  it  may  seem  that  the  hegemony  of  the  power  bloc  is  a  dominant 
force, it is not totalizing and stagnant. It was momentarily challenged by Latino 
migrant  activists  during  the  2006  mega-marches.  Chapter  2  is  writt en  from 
the front lines of the Latino migrant struggle in Greater Los Angeles. I argue 
that the mega-marches were a counterhegemonic act that momentarily broke 
the hegemony of the anti-migrant bloc by briefl y shift ing the national debate 
on immigration reform and advancing policy proposals that went beyond the 
bounds of the acceptable policy proposals. I show how Latino migrant activ-
ists in Los Angeles helped their allies around the country galvanize a national 
movement  powerful  enough  to  prevent  HR  4437  from  becoming  law.  I  also 
illustrate how despite their ability to mobilize millions, the marches were not 
enough to stop the subsequent onslaught of anti-migrant policies at multiple 
levels of governance. I also draw upon fi eld research and interviews with a range 
of leaders of the 2006 mega-marches that emerged in opposition to HR 4437 
in  Greater  Los  Angeles,  including  labor  organizers,  community  organizers, 

Introduction

19

Mexican and Central American leaders, male and female leaders, and youth and 
student leaders. 

 In  chapter 3, I illustrate how in the immediate aft ermath of the mega-marches, 
federal authorities and the Riverside County Board of Supervisors implemented 
migration control policies at the local level that adversely aff ected Latino com-
munities in inland southern California. Th  e county has recently experienced a 
dramatic demographic shift  from being an Anglo-majority county in the 1990s 
to almost having a Latino majority in 2010. Th  rough critical discourse analy-
sis of the Riverside County Board of Supervisors’ meetings and interviews with 
Latino migrant activists from the region, I show how the Riverside County gov-
ernment implemented a pilot program to conduct deportations of migrants from 
its jails and how Latino migrant activists sought to challenge this policy aft er the 
2006 mega-Marches. I also illustrate how anti-migrant hegemony in Riverside 
County serves to conceal the impact of global capitalism and its dependency on 
Latino labor in the region. 

 To illustrate the complexity and transnational dimensions of what the move-
ment is facing, in  chapter 4, I focus on the geopolitics of the war on terror and 
deportation  in  El  Salvador.  Indeed,  I  explain  how  the  discursive  continuum 
among gangs, migration, and terrorism has been used by forces located within 
the  state–civil  society  nexus  in  the  United  States  and  El  Salvador  to  forge  a 
transnational system of migration control with disastrous human rights conse-
quences for deportees. To develop this argument, I draw upon testimony of the 
US military’s Southern Command before the 109th Congress, policy briefs by 
the Heritage Foundation, and interviews with policy makers and deportees in 
El Salvador. 

 As a way to highlight the agency of Latino migrant activists and the resiliency 
of the state in the face of pressures from below,  chapter 5 draws on interviews 
with Latino migrant rights activists and policy makers in Washington, D.C., and 
in New York City during the fi rst term of President Obama. Looking at migrant 
activists’ responses to New York senator Charles Schumer’s blueprint for CIR 
in 2010, I examine how some groups within the movement (the oppositional 
forces) resist hegemonic proposals and how others lend them active support 
(immigration reformers). 

 To  conclude,  in   chapter  6,  I  question  the  celebratory  accounts  of  Latino 
political power in light of the 2012 election and the emergence of a new class 
of Latino politicians that includes Cuban American senators Marco Rubio, Ted 
Cruz, and Mel Melendez, among others. I also interrogate the Border Security, 
Economic Opportunity, and Immigration Modernization Act (S. 744) subse-
quently considered by the Gang of Eight in the US Senate. I advance the thesis 
that this proposal, and most like it, would under the best circumstances bestow 

20

r e f o r m   w i t h o u t   j u s t i c e

citizenship upon only a small fraction of the eleven million undocumented peo-
ple living in the United States, while entrenching the homeland security state for 
generations to come. While focusing on the democratic potentiality of Latino 
youth and the migrant movement, I advance a vision for building Latino politi-
cal power and a multiracial working-class coalition for transforming the debate 
on US migration control beyond immigration reform and the good immigrant–
bad immigrant binary.             

      1 

 Th  e State–Civil Society Nexus and the 
Debate Over the Border Protection, 
Antiterrorism, and Illegal Immigration 

Control Act of 2005    

    On  December  16,  2005,  just  two  weeks  before  Christmas,  the  House  of 
Representatives of the 109th Congress, with the aid of its conservative allies in 
civil  society,  gave  migrants  a  cruel  gift ,  the  Border  Protection,  Antiterrorism, 
and Illegal Immigration Control Act (HR 4437). Th  e bill, widely known as the 
Sensenbrenner  bill  aft er  the  Republican  congressman  from  Wisconsin  who 
introduced it, sought to do the following: make it a felony to be undocumented; 
expand  border-security  measures;  increase  cooperation  between  federal  and 
local police agencies on immigration-law enforcement; broaden the defi nition of 
aggravated felony to include certain misdemeanor charges; and expand the defi -
nition of human traffi  cking to include anyone who transports an undocumented 
person in an automobile, among other provisions. Th  e bill passed in the House 
on December 15, 2005. 

 Th  e Sensenbrenner bill was part of a series of anti-migrant bills in the 109th 
Congress, which lasted from January 2005 to January 2007. Th  is session was a 
unique Congress in which a Republican president with Republican majorities in 
both the House and Senate had the opportunity to advance a partisan legislative 
agenda. Th  e 109th Congress passed the Real ID Act and the Secure Fence Act, 
both of which eventually became law, and expanded the power of the home-
land security state to police migrants in unique ways.   1    Th  e Real ID Act changed 
visa laws for temporary workers, introduced national regulations for state-issued 
identifi cation  to  prevent  states  from  giving  undocumented  people  driver’s 
licenses, and waived potential barriers to building the border wall, among other 
provisions. Th  e Secure Fence Act sought to build an additional seven hundred 
miles of fencing at the US-Mexico border and to increase the amount of money 

21

22

r e f o r m   w i t h o u t   j u s t i c e

and number of agents dedicated to border enforcement. Th  e bill also sought to 
expand the use of advanced technology, such as satellites and aerial drones, at 
the border. Combined, these laws sought to reinforce the homeland security 
state by mapping out a new terrain of policing that would eventually criminalize 
Latino migrants and nonmigrants alike. 

 Th  e Sensenbrenner bill had deep roots in civil society–based nativist organiza-
tions and a corps of organic intellectuals who used the post-9/11 security context 
to help forge the convergence of contradictory groups that would compose the 
anti-migrant bloc. Th  is bloc of interests was able to wield hegemonic leadership 
over immigration control issues in the 109th Congress and in other sites of power 
at the nexus between the state and civil society. Th  e case of the Sensenbrenner bill 
demonstrates how the narrow ideological discourse of the nativist Right, which 
was once on the margins of US immigration policy in the early 1980s, was turned 
into the leading ideological force for passing anti-migrant legislation during the 
109th Congress and beyond. Indeed, conservative politicians armed with data 
and talking points from their civil society allies acted en bloc to create a discourse 
that criminalized Latino migrants at every opportunity. Th  is discourse limited 
the parameters of the debate over HR 4437 between the “good immigrant” and 
“bad immigrant,” which ultimately led Democratic members of the House and 
civil society–based immigration reformers to reproduce the discourse of their 
conservative counterparts and propose similar policy solutions.    

      Th  e Nativist Right, Organic Intellectuals, and the 

War of Position   

 Perhaps  no  other  force,  besides  conservative  members  of  the  House  of 
Representatives, played a more prominent role in passing HR 4437 than the 
nativist Right. Th  is sector of the anti-migrant bloc is composed of a constellation 
of think tanks, intellectuals, grassroots organizations, and politicians operating 
at the levels of both the state and civil society. Th  e nativist Right shares an ide-
ology in which, as it claims, the rights of native-born Americans should be put 
before the rights of the foreign born. Yet as we will see in the sections that follow, 
the nativist faction of the anti-migrant bloc is concerned with much more than 
people’s legal status and birthplace. 

 Although many groups make up the broad constellation of actors that con-
stitute the nativist right wing and an even broader set of actors are part of the 
anti-migrant bloc, this chapter focuses on the most infl uential nativist organiza-
tions—the Federation for American Immigration Reform (FAIR) and its affi  li-
ate, the Center for Immigration Studies (CIS), their links with the Republican 
Party,  and  select  fractions  of  capital.  Th  ese  highly  developed  and  politically 

The State–Civil Society Nexus

23

sophisticated  conservative  organizations  are  at  the  vanguard  of  Washington, 
D.C.’s nativist Right. As Jean Stefancic and Richard Delgado noted, an analysis 
of FAIR and its affi  liate organizations must be placed in the context of the early 
stages  of  a  broader  conservative  movement.   2     While  liberals  and  progressives 
were talking to themselves in academic journals and conferences throughout the 
1980s, conservatives were speaking to policy makers and the media. Th  rough 
foundations and think tanks, they built a political and ideological infrastructure 
to roll back the gains of the civil rights movement. 

 Th  e nativist Right cannot be separated from this broader conservative move-
ment  and  its  thirty-year  trajectory.   3     Its  proponents  regrouped  aft er  the  civil 
rights movement, organized in the late 1970s, and then began to wage intense 
culture wars in the 1980s. Funded by billionaires, right-wing foundations, and 
its  own  internal  funding  structure,  the  conservative  movement  built  a  politi-
cal and ideological infrastructure to shape the political culture of the United 
States  and  the  globe  through  a  series  of  public  and  private  institutions  such 
as  the  Hoover  Institute  at  Stanford  University,  the  Heritage  Foundation,  the 
Manhatt an  Institute,  the  CATO  Institute,  the  Project  for  the  New  American 
Century, the Center for Strategic Studies, and the American Enterprise Institute, 
among others. Combined, these institutions fought for an expansion of neolib-
eral policies throughout the globe and an aggressive US military project and 
against  affi  rmative  action  and  what  they  perceived  as  rabid  multiculturalism. 
Th  roughout the 1990s and right up to the fi rst year of the twenty-fi rst century, 
groups like FAIR and CIS aggressively advocated for English to be the offi  cial 
language of the United States and for a crackdown on migrants in places such 
as  California,  New  York,  and  Arizona,  while  their  conservative  allies  in  the 
Heritage  Foundation  and  the  Manhatt an  Institute  pushed  for  zero-tolerance 
policing in cities. 

 Following 9/11, a corps of organic intellectuals within the nativist Right and 
other factions of the broader conservative movement saw the opportunity to 
make their long-standing agenda on migration control common sense by linking 
immigration to antiterrorism. Common sense in the Gramscian sense is a con-
tradictory vision of the world that contains not only elements of good sense—
that is, some truth—but also elements of folklore and myth. It ultimately refl ects 
the ideas and values of the dominant classes, which make their domination over 
the working class seem natural and unchangeable. Indeed, Gramsci wrote, “one 
of the commonest totems in the belief about everything that exists, that it is ‘nat-
ural’ that it should exist, that it could not do otherwise than exist.”   4    Th  e common 
sense of any society, however, does not develop on its own. It is the product of 
the batt le of ideas that takes place in multiple sites of power. 

 Intellectuals  are  central  to  the  organization  of  common  sense  and  to  the 
maintenance of the hegemonic leadership of any group. For Gramsci, there are 

24

r e f o r m   w i t h o u t   j u s t i c e

two types of intellectuals: traditional intellectuals (such as academics, priests, 
lawyers, and men and women of lett ers who “put themselves forward as autono-
mous and independent of the dominant social group”) and “organic intellectu-
als that every new class creates alongside itself and elaborates in its course of 
development.”   5    In fact, the task of any social class seeking to become hegemonic 
is to elaborate its own corps of organic intellectuals and to assimilate traditional 
intellectuals.  Combined,  traditional  and  organic  intellectuals  have  the  power 
to organize a conception of the world that sustains the hegemony of dominant 
groups by shaping the common sense of the average person. Th  e nativists and 
the other sectors of the Right were able to elaborate a corps of organic and tra-
ditional intellectuals who were pivotal to passing HR 4437 and to the broader 
project of building the homeland security state. 

 Developing the intellectual power necessary to shape a society and prepare 
it for consenting to authoritarian state practices cannot be reduced to any one 
essay,  book,  or  intellectual.  Nonetheless,  the  writings  of  the  corps  of  intel-
lectuals,  both  organic  and  traditional,  associated  with  FAIR,  CIS,  Numbers 
USA, and the broader conservative movement played a crucial role in creating 
the conditions that would see the passage of HR 4437 and the forging of the 
homeland  security  state.  For  instance,  Mark  Krikorian,  executive  director  of 
CIS, and Dr. Steven Camarota, director of research of CIS, are just two of the 
leading intellectuals among the corps of intellectuals of the anti-migrant bloc. 
Both of them have testifi ed before Congress, and they have appeared more oft en 
in the leading sectors of the global media on immigration issues than any lib-
eral intellectual or expert.   6    Th  ey articulated their vision for US migration con-
trol in a CIS document published in November 2001 titled Immigration and 
Terrorism: What Is to Be Done?   7    Pointing out that most of the 9/11 hijackers 
were immigrants, Krikorian and Camarota argued that the United States must 
develop a more aggressive migration control strategy as a way to prevent another 
terrorist att ack on the United States.   8    Th  is document was presented in a testi-
mony by Dr. Camarota before Congress in October 2001, just one month aft er 
9/11, and the document was distributed to members of Congress, the Offi  ce of 
the President, the Immigration and Naturalization Service, and other elite sec-
tors of the bureaucracy and major media outlets. 

 While there are some elements of truth in the argument (e.g., the hijackers 
were indeed immigrants), the idea that all terrorists are foreigners and that all 
foreigners are potential terrorists is built on myths. Despite politically correct 
gestures made by the authors to say that immigrants should not be scapegoated, 
the discourse in their document builds on racial myths and stereotypes that sug-
gest an intrinsic link between Islam and terrorism. Moreover, by locating the 
Mexican border as the place from which this supposed terrorist att ack will come 
next, the CIS document constructs a continuum of threats to national security 

The State–Civil Society Nexus

25

among terrorism, Islam, immigration, and the US-Mexico border. As noted by 
Katheleen R. Arnold, this type of discourse, advanced by anti-migrant groups 
in civil society such as the Minutemen and FAIR, supports what she calls pre-
rogative power, “a particular deployment of sovereign power, indicating the act 
of suspending the law and establishing a less determinate political status of the 
subjects of this power.”   9    

 Aft er  President  Bush’s  declaration  of  a  war  on  terror,  the  nativist  Right 
moved  its  troops  in  a  disciplined  and  organized  fashion  onto  the  political 
batt lefi eld with a new zeal, providing critical civil society support for the Real 
ID Act, the Secure Fence Act, and HR 4437, among other policies at the state 
and  local  levels  of  governance.  However,  one  cannot  understand  how  these 
laws were passed simply by studying the 109th Congress. Granted, a certain 
number of votes were required to pass each bill in the exact conjuncture of 
the 109th Congress. But HR 4437 and other anti-migrant bills should be seen 
as part of a larger organic transformation in society that was the product of 
a three-decade-long war of position in American racial politics. “War of posi-
tion” describes how groups seeking to become hegemonic must struggle over 
a prolonged period to create the political conditions for implementing their 
agenda.   10    Since the late 1970s, the nativist Right has engaged in a prolonged 
cultural-ideological  batt le  in  civil  society  to  prepare  the  political  terrain  for 
implementing its agenda at the level of the repressive state apparatus.   11    Using a 
policy language consistent with the norms of post–civil rights racial discourse, 
it armed its allies in Congress with a communications and mobilization strategy 
that framed the drive to build up the repressive capabilities of the state to police 
Latinos and other suspect groups in ostensibly nonracist terms.   12    Unearthing 
the roots of these civil society organizations reveals that much more was at 
stake than people’s legal status. 

    Eugenicist Roots and Anti-Latino Racism   

 Th  e modern nativist Right started with FAIR, founded in Washington, D.C., in 
1979. Since its inception, FAIR has become a fi xture on Capitol Hill, where, 
along with its affi  liates, it has helped shape most immigration legislation, and it 
was an infl uential lobby when Congress began debating the Simpson-Mazzoli 
bill, also known as the Immigration Reform and Control Act, in 1986.   13    FAIR’s 
stated goal has always been to keep immigration levels, legal and undocumented, 
consistent with the “national interest.” FAIR’s founder, John Tanton, stated, “We 
felt that the overall volume of legal immigration needed to be looked at from 
time to time to make sure it was consistent with other national goals.”   14    Th  e key 
part of this statement is the reference to “other national goals.” Tanton tries to 
avoid direct discussion of these goals throughout an oral history conducted by 

26

r e f o r m   w i t h o u t   j u s t i c e

historian and FAIR founding member Otis L. Graham Jr.—a nativist and for-
mer professor emeritus at the University of California Santa Barbara. FAIR takes 
great pains to argue that it is simply concerned with immigration policy; it even 
claims to be a “pro-immigrant” organization.   15    Yet the origins of FAIR’s ideology, 
as well as the writings of its founders, suggest that the “other national goals” to 
which Tanton was referring include the preservation of whites’ racial hegemony 
in the face of the demographic growth of those whom FAIR members see as 
racially inferior, especially Latinos. 

 To understand how immigration is fundamentally about race for groups like 
FAIR, one must start with the founder of the organization. Tanton subscribes to 
a nativist ideology with a deep-seated racial paranoia over Latino demographics 
and, in particular, the growth of the Mexican community in the United States. 
Tanton came out of the conservationist movement of the 1960s and 1970s but 
eventually distanced himself from the movement around 1977 because it did 
not “make the conceptual leap” to work on immigration issues.   16    Tanton was on 
the board of an organization called Zero Population Growth (ZPG), a group 
ideologically nurtured by the neo-Malthusian writings of Paul Ehrlich, whose 
infl uential book  Th  e Population Bomb  argued that economic gains in the third 
world  were  being  undermined  by  overpopulation.   17     Th  omas  Robert  Malthus 
argued that population grows exponentially while natural resources grows arith-
metically and that humanity would eventually reach a moment when resources 
would deplete and bring civilization to a crash. According to this logic, human-
kind must make eff orts to check this population ceiling, either through contra-
ceptive use or by allowing natural checks such as war and disease. Bankrolled by 
major foundations, ZPG funded a body of research that called for population 
control as the solution for poverty and underdevelopment in Latin America and 
Africa. Accordingly, a body of “scholarly literature” was circulated to members 
of Congress, who eventually set up a population commission to study the prob-
lem. Th  e commission’s recommendation, which was later implemented through 
groups such as Planned Parenthood, was to encourage “voluntary” sterilization 
of women in Latin America and Africa.   18    In states like California, eugenicist poli-
cies were responsible for horrifi c crimes against Mexican American women. For 
instance, one recent study has noted Mexican women in California were dispro-
portionately targeted for forced sterilization in the early part of the twentieth 
century.   19    

 In his interview with Graham, Tanton recalls struggling to get fellow ZPG 
board  members  to  see  the  importance  of  immigration  in  relation  to  ZPG’s 
concerns  over  population  control.  Tanton  and  other  disgruntled  ZPG  mem-
bers,  including  Planned  Parenthood  employee  Sherry  Barnes,  former  chair-
man of Gulf Oil Sidney Swensrud, and Graham, among others, composed the 
fi rst board members of FAIR.   20    Tanton and the other founders subscribed to 

The State–Civil Society Nexus

27

a nativist ideology that was rooted in neo-Malthusian and eugenicist thought. 
For instance, in an interview with Wall Street Journal reporter Tucker Carlson, 
FAIR board member Garrett  Hardin expressed fear over ‘‘the next generation of 
breeders . . . in third-world countries.’’   21    Carlson noted that for Garrett  Hardin, 
“the problem is not simply that there are too many people in the world, but that 
there are too many of the wrong kind of people,” aft er Hardin reportedly told 
him that “it would be bett er to encourage the breeding of more intelligent people 
rather than the less intelligent.”   22    Hardin is embracing the age-old racist idea that 
people from Europe are genetically superior and naturally more intelligent than 
those from Asia, Africa, and Latin America. He sees these latt er groups as the 
“the wrong kind” of people, who must be less intelligent and whom he ascribes 
an animalistic quality to as “breeders.” When Carlson asked former executive 
director of FAIR Dan Stein about Hardin’s comments, Stein retorted, “What is 
your problem with that? Should we be subsidizing people with low IQs to have 
as many children as possible, and not subsidizing those with high ones?”   23    Stein 
defended the ideas of his colleague and advanced the historically inaccurate and 
racist idea that genetically superior whites are somehow subsidizing less intel-
ligent “third-world” people. Th  ese views are not limited to Stein and Hardin. 

 Such  views  att ract  a  particular  type  of  supporter  to  FAIR,  such  as  Peter 
Brimelow, who wrote  Alien Nation , a book that became a classic in conserva-
tive circles and among the nativist Right. Brimelow, a British immigrant himself, 
wrote, “Suppose I had proposed more immigrants who look like me. So what? 
As late as the 1950s, somewhere up to nine out of ten Americans looked like me. 
Th  at is, they were of European stock . . . And in those days, they had another name 
for  this  thing  dismissed  so  contemptuously  as  the  ‘racial  hegemony  of  white 
Americans.’ Th  ey called it America.”   24    Th  e fact that Brimelow is an immigrant 
of British heritage is not epiphenomenal to his argument. Rather, it refl ects the 
racial politics of the modern nativist Right. When Brimelow raises the question 
about immigrants who look like him and says “so what,” he is candidly acknowl-
edging that he and his colleagues have no problem with immigrants who are 
of Anglo or Western European stock but that they are opposed to immigration 
from Latin America and third-world regions. Th  ere are many more statements 
from FAIR board members and associates that could be drawn upon to illustrate 
their neo-Malthusian and eugenicist beliefs. 

 However, my focus here is on the fundamental assumption built into their 
worldview and how it relates to Latinos. Th  e founders of the modern nativist 
Right believed that overpopulation and the overconsumption of resources are 
a major problem facing mankind and that those causing the crisis are from the 
third world and those bearing the brunt of the problem are of Western European 
stock. Th  is belief stems from the historical stereotypes rooted in the colonial 
beliefs  that  Latinos,  particularly  Mexicans,  Puerto  Ricans,  and  other  people 

28

r e f o r m   w i t h o u t   j u s t i c e

of color, are genetically inferior, hyperfertile, and irresponsible and are conse-
quently pillaging the earth of its natural resources. By contrast, they see them-
selves as responsible and thus superior Europeans who are burdened with having 
to manage the globe and its inferior peoples. 

 When  groups  from  the  nativist  Right  argue  that  immigration  will  lead  to 
overpopulation, they really mean that there are too many Latinos, both migrants 
and native-born, in the United States, and this (according to their view) over-
population destroys the social fabric and greatness of American society. Such 
a nativist perspective suff ers from historical amnesia built around a fantasy of 
what scholar Ali Behdad describes as a presumed transhistorical national cohe-
sion.   25     Th  is  view,  Behdad  reminds  us,  conveniently  overlooks  the  history  of 
hostility toward migrants, genocide against Native Americans, the enslavement 
of African Americans, and, last but certainly not least, an imperialist war with 
Mexico. 

 FAIR’s anti-Latino views were explicitly expressed in a memo that was cir-
culated at an annual retreat founded by Tanton. Known as the WITAN (an Old 
English term for a council of wise men), these retreats were essentially strategy 
meetings  on  how  to  infl uence  the  national  debate  on  immigration.  A  series 
of memos writt en by Tanton for the WITAN retreats was leaked to the pub-
lic. In one of the three memos, Tanton asked the group, “Will the newcomers 
vote  Democratic  or  Republican,  liberal  or  conservative,  and  what  diff erence 
does it make? A lot, if you’re one or the other.”   26    Here Tanton is concerned with 
problematic and imaginary relations of force between whites and Latinos. Th  is 
view is built on the essentialist vision of whites as Republicans and Latinos as 
Democrats and what he envisions as an almost natural confl ict between the two 
groups. 

 Tanton  also  raises  the  topic  of  the  relationship  between  population  and 
governance in the WITAN memo. He made the following point, ironically in 
Spanish: “ ‘Gobernar es popular’ translates ‘to govern is to populate.’  . . . In this 
society  where  the  majority  rules,  does  this  hold?  Will  the  present  majority 
peaceably hand over its political power to a group that is simply more fertile?”   27    
Once again, Tantan assumes that Latinos and the Euro-American majority could 
never peacefully coexist and live under the same political community. Rather, 
he  dismisses  Latinos  as  an  inferior  and  hyperfertile  horde  that  is  a  threat  to 
an imagined Euro-American political community. In another WITAN memo, 
Tanton raised the following question: “As Whites see their power and control 
over  their  lives  declining,  will  they  simply  go  quietly  into  the  night? . . . Can 
homo  contraceptivus  compete  with  homo  progenitiva  if  borders  aren’t  con-
trolled?”   28    By “ homo  contraceptivus,” Tanton is referring to a human species of 
Western European stock that is at a presumed demographic disadvantage with 
“homo progentiva,” a hyperfertile species from Latin America that he sees as 

The State–Civil Society Nexus

29

undergoing  a  demographic  explosion.  Again, the  very  suggestion  that  whites 
and Latinos constitute diff erent species is disturbingly inaccurate and racist in 
and of itself. Either way, Tanton’s words refl ect the deep-seated racial paranoia 
about becoming a white minority in the face of Latino demographic growth that 
partially drives the nativist faction of the anti-migrant bloc. 

 Despite the neo-Malthusian and eugenicist origins of their nativist ideol-
ogy and the explicitly anti-Latino nature of the WITAN memos, CIS vehe-
mently  denies  that  its  members  or  ideology  are  racist.  CIS  oft en  touts  its 
“diverse” board of directors, which includes a prominent conservative African 
American and a Hispanic chair of the board of directors, Peter Nunez, a former 
federal prosecutor and Reagan appointee based out San Diego.   29    Moreover, in 
March 2010 it organized a panel and published material in which it brought 
Carol Swain, a prominent, conservative African American professor, to defend 
the position that CIS is not a racist organization.   30    Swain, who was invited to 
defend the ostensibly race-neutral credentials of CIS, took the time to point 
out  that  former  CNN  anchor  Lou  Dobbs,  on  whose  show  she  frequently 
appeared,  is  not  a  racist.  CIS  also  hired  prominent  Pulitzer  Prize–winning 
journalist Jerry Kammer as a senior fellow and has published a document in 
which it denounces the Southern Poverty Legal Center (SPLC) for what it 
calls a smear campaign.   31    Th  e document and the panel essentially tried to dis-
credit the SPLC and to distance CIS from Tanton. Besides the narrow and 
problematic defence of the nativist Right as non racist, the panel and docu-
ments  associated  with  it  do  not  confront  the  racial  politics  of  the  enforce-
ment-through-att rition strategy proposed by its fellows, nor do they confront 
the politics of racial profi ling and the mass deportation of Latinos that have 
resulted  because  of  the  policies  that  they  fought  to  implement.  Yet  these 
well-calculated moves to defend the ostensibly race-neutral positions of CIS 
and  its  sister  organizations  must  be  seen  in  the  context  of  post–civil  rights 
relations. 

 Following  the  civil  rights  movement,  in  which  Black  and  Latino  activists 
and other minority groups challenged the openly racist racial order, it became 
increasingly diffi  cult for dominant groups to express racist beliefs and ideology 
openly in the public sphere. Knowing this, the founders of the modern nativ-
ist Right opted for a political war of position in which they would create, over 
the  long  run,  the  ideological  and  political  conditions  needed  to  bring  their 
agenda from the margins of society into the mainstream of contemporary pol-
icy debate. A central component of this war of position has been to frame their 
agenda in ostensibly nonracial terms—the hallmark of post–civil rights racism. 
For  instance,  in  one  of  the  WITAN  memos,  Tanton  suggested  an  alternative 
language to avoid direct reference to race: “Novak’s term ‘unmeltable ethnics’ 
is probably bett er than some of the others [terms] that have been suggested. 

30

r e f o r m   w i t h o u t   j u s t i c e

Similarly,  ethnicity  is  a  more  acceptable  term  than  race . . . LANGUAGE  IS 
VERY important here.”   32    Th  e context of the memo shows clearly that in refer-
ring to “unmeltable ethnics,” Tanton is speaking about Latinos, whom he sees 
as a group that could never assimilate into the American melting pot because 
they are racially diff erent from people of Western European heritage. Th  is dis-
tinction gets to a central concern with the nativist Right that was pointed out 
by Devin Burghart: “For the essentialists involved in the contemporary nativist 
movement—men and women like John Tanton, Wayne Lutt on, Barbara Coe, 
and Peter Brimelow—the batt le against immigrants is a batt le over identity. In 
their view, non-European immigrants are laying false claim to an American iden-
tity that they can never achieve because they lack the essential prerequisite of 
European ancestry.”   33    Th  is issue of identity is why language is so important to 
people like Tanton and to the nativist Right in general. 

 When Tanton emphasized that language is important, he was acknowledging 
that it is bett er to conceal the racial politics that are at the epicenter of his cause to 
make it more palatable for an American public that had grown sensitive to issues 
around race thanks to the civil rights movement. Th  us the nativist Right and its 
corps of intellectuals learned to speak about immigration in such ostensibly non-
racial terms as national identity, language, economics, crime, and national secu-
rity; in other words they learned to use the language of post–civil rights racism.   34    
In fact, Tanton understood that this shift  in language would be vital to his cause; 
if it were ever to become mainstream, it needed to be able to win over moderates 
from the other side of the political spectrum. Tanton once wrote, “Th  e issues 
we’re touching on here must be broached by liberals. Th  e conservatives simply 
cannot do it without tainting the whole subject.”   35    Th  is principle would be indis-
pensible for forging the anti-migrant bloc that would include other factions that 
do not necessarily share the nativist ideology of Tanton and his colleagues but 
that embrace similar policies.  

    Organization and Strategy   

 Before HR 4437 was introduced on the House fl oor in December 2005, liberals 
had begun to couch their concerns about immigration in the terms established 
by the anti-migrant bloc. Leading members of the Democratic Party and some 
of the leading national immigrant-advocacy organizations in Washington, D.C., 
had begun to speak of broken borders, criminal aliens, and, correspondingly, the 
need to have strong borders and to be tough on crime. Achieving this moral and 
intellectual leadership over the immigration debate required sophisticated orga-
nization and political strategy. 

 One of FAIR founders’ guiding principles in building the infrastructure of the 
nativist Right was the importance of issue-based organizations that could focus 

The State–Civil Society Nexus

31

on one issue at a time for the broader nativist movement. Tanton and his allies 
built three types of organizations: those focused on creating the ideological con-
ditions for implementing their agenda, those directly involved in legal and politi-
cal batt les over immigration, and those devoted to funding and coordinating the 
activities of the nativist Right. 

 Based  on  his  convictions  that  “ideas  rule  the  world”  and  that  “the  pen  is 
mightier  than  the  sword,”  Tanton  created  CIS  in  1985  to  focus  on  produc-
ing research that could infl uence the policy debate on immigration.   36    CIS has 
full-time fellows who function as organic intellectuals of the nativist Right and 
produce research and policy analysis that promote its worldview. In addition 
to  maintaining  a  staff   of  in-house  policy  analysts,  CIS  provides  conservative 
university  faculty  and  researchers  across  the  country  who  are  allied  with  the 
anti-migrant bloc with grants and fellowships to produce books, policy analysis, 
articles, op-eds, and blogs. Numerous CIS fellows have spoken before Congress 
in immigration hearings held throughout the country. FAIR also created its own 
publishing operation, the Social Contract Press, which serves as a clearinghouse 
for  books  by  conservative  academics  and  right-wing  public  intellectuals  who 
advance the policy agenda of FAIR and its affi  liates. 

 On the political and legal front, FAIR created US English in 1983 to fi ght 
bilingual education and promote English as the offi  cial language of the United 
States.  In  1989,  FAIR  also  created  the  Immigration  Reform  Law  Institute  
(IRLI), which itself as “America’s only public interest law organization working 
exclusively to protect the legal rights, privileges, and property of US citizens 
and their communities from injuries and damages caused by unlawful immi-
gration.”   37    Former chief counsel at the IRLI Kris W. Kobach was the intellec-
tual author of legislation such as Arizona’s SB 1070. Kobach studied at Harvard 
University under the mentorship of the late Samuel Huntington and became 
an adviser to John Ashcroft  on legal matt ers related to immigration.   38    During 
the 2012 election he became an adviser to former Republican presidential can-
didate Mitt  Romney and is currently the Secretary of State in Kansas and an 
att orney for the IRLI.   39    

 To fund its activities and those of its allies, FAIR also created the American 
Immigration Control Foundation, which provides funds to the leading nativ-
ist  organizations  and  to  local  anti-migrant  projects  across  the  country.  For 
instance, it funded Voices of Citizens Together, the civil society group that put 
Proposition 187 on the California ballot, and border vigilante groups such as 
Ranch Rescue and the Minutemen Project.   40    All of these organizations are dedi-
cated to fi ghting, albeit on diff erent fronts, for the implementation of a migra-
tion  control  strategy  known  as  enforcement  through  att rition.  Outlined  in  a 
CIS document writt en by CIS research fellow Jessica Vaughn, the enforcement-
through-att rition strategy “encourages voluntary compliance with immigration 

32

r e f o r m   w i t h o u t   j u s t i c e

laws rather than relying on forced removal.”   41    Vaughn proposed that in addi-
tion to “securing the border,” such an approach also include the following ele-
ments: “mandatory workplace verifi cation of immigration status; measures to 
curb the misuse of social security and IRS identifi cation numbers; partnerships 
with state and local law enforcement offi  cials; expanded entry-exit recording; 
increased  non-criminal  removals;  and  state  and  local  laws  to  discourage  ille-
gal sett lement.”   42    In other words, this strategy aims to block the employability 
of  undocumented  migrants,  advance  the  localization  of  federal  enforcement 
through  programs  such  as  Immigration  and  Nationality  Act  Section  287(g) 
and Secure Communities, increase the policing of hardworking Latino migrant 
families (regardless of criminal activity), and encourage the proliferation of state 
laws like Arizona’s SB 1070 and local ordinances that prevent day laborers from 
fi nding work and undocumented migrants from renting homes. Th  is ostensibly 
nonracial strategy translates into the racial harassment and policing of Latino 
families and other migrants, coercing them into self-deportation. 

 Having this enforcement-through-att rition agenda implemented in Congress 
and other sites of state power required a sophisticated mobilization strategy. One 
such organization advancing this charge was Numbers USA, a nongovernmental 
organization founded and partially funded by Tanton and his allies. Numbers 
USA organizes a mobilization system and communication structure designed 
to have the membership base of nativist groups make phone calls and e-mail 
prewritt en lett ers to Congress in support of an enforcement-only agenda. Angela 
Maria Kelley, vice president of immigration policy at the Center for American 
Progress, a Washington, D.C.–based liberal think tank, said in an interview, “Our 
opponents have huge lists. Th  ey could put in tens of thousands of contacts like 
that [ snaps fi ngers ]—e-mails, texts, faxes, phone calls. Th  ey could shut down the 
phone system! I would always go into Hill offi  ces, and the staff er would come out 
with a fi le this big [ hand gesture indicating a large fi le ] and then ten pieces of paper 
and say these are the faxes against immigrants and these are the pro-immigrant 
[hand gesture indicating a small fi le].”   43    Th  is anecdote is indicative of the sophis-
ticated lett er-writing and phone-banking campaign orchestrated by the nativist 
faction of the anti-migrant bloc to show mass support for the Sensenbrenner bill 
and other similar bills. Another part of the mobilization strategy included lobby 
days  in  which  anti-migrant  groups  such  as  the  Minutemen  and  other  groups 
with ties to FAIR, CIS, and Numbers USA and its membership base met with 
members of Congress to push an enforcement-only agenda.   44    

 Th  e  base  of  these  organizations  comes  primarily  from  working-class  and 
middle-class  whites  who,  under  the  conditions  of  neoliberalism,  can  no  lon-
ger maintain the privileges that were aff orded to them during the Fordist era of 
production. As sociologist Robyn M. Rodriguez has argued, under such condi-
tions, “there is a resurgence of varieties of xenophobia and nationalism that are 

The State–Civil Society Nexus

33

partly . . . a response to the new kinds of insecurities citizens of diff erent coun-
tries around the world experience as a consequence of neoliberalism.”   45    If this 
sector followed its class interest, it could potentially become a progressive force 
that challenges the negative eff ects of global capitalism. However, this challenge 
is unlikely to occur as long as the nativist Right and its allies in the broader con-
servative movement are essentially mobilizing large sectors of the white work-
ing and middle classes through a hypernationalism—or what De Genova has 
described as US parochial nationalism—and racism.   46     

    Funding and the Anti-Migrant Bloc   

 Some scholars argue that the leading nativist organizations emulate the fund-
raising tactics of the Christian Right. According to Burghart and Gardiner, many 
of their projects are supported by small donations from their members through 
direct-mail  programs.   47     According  to  them,  roughly  a  dozen  of  the  leading 
anti-migrant organizations have a combined budget of $12 million and a donor 
base of over six hundred thousand.   48    

 Burghart  and  Gardiner  recognize  that  Tanton  and  his  supporters  also  use 
traditional sources of funding, such as grants from foundations and philanthro-
pists.   49    Th  is point has been developed by scholars such as Stefanic and Delgado 
and others. Th  is body of research has revealed that the leading nativist organiza-
tions received grants from the Pioneer Fund, a eugenicist foundation that has 
sponsored research that suggests Europeans have a higher IQ than non-European 
people, among other racist causes. Like most foundations, it provides support 
to academics and think tanks that promote its worldview.   50    Between the early 
1980s and the end of the 1990s, the Pioneer Fund provided FAIR with over 
$190,000.   51    

 While  this  connection  is  certainly  repulsive,  we  must  understand  that  the 
leading nativist organizations and the elected offi  cials that are politically aligned 
with them are factions of a broader anti-migrant bloc that is rooted in power-
ful transnational corporations and their foundations. One must also understand 
how the nativist Right gets much of its funding from entities such as the Pioneer 
Fund and the Scaife foundations. Th  e Scaife foundations are run by the Scaife 
family, heirs to the Mellon family fortune, and consist of four foundations: the 
Sara Scaife Foundation, the Carthage Foundation, the Alleghnny Foundation, 
and the Scaife Family Foundation.   52    Richard M. Scaife, who owns and manages 
three of the four Scaife foundations, was turned on to the conservative move-
ment during the 1960s and early 1970s. He watched angrily as black and Latino 
activists and anti-war protesters challenged the status quo. To counter what he 
perceived as an assault on the very system that provided him wealth, power, and 
privilege, he began to fund conservative politicians and think tanks to promote 

34

r e f o r m   w i t h o u t   j u s t i c e

conservative ideas. For instance, he provided a seed grant of over $2 million to 
the Heritage Foundation and has been a trustee of the organization since its 
founding in 1974. Th  ese foundations fund and essentially organize the corps of 
organic intellectuals of the nativist and neoconservative Right.   53    

 Combined, the Scaife foundations have provided over $1.4 billion to con-
servative civil society–based organizations to foster conservative ideas around 
immigration, free trade, and a militaristic US foreign policy, among other issues. 
  Table 1.1   shows that the Scaife foundations have provided funds to the lead-
ing nativist organizations such as FAIR, CIS, and Numbers USA and have also 
funded the leading neoliberal and neoconservative think tanks in the United 
States, including the Cato Institute, the Heritage Foundation, and the Manhatt an 
Institute, to name just a handful of grantees.      

 Th  is discussion is not to suggest that the nativists are simply the mouthpiece 
of a unifi ed and undiff erentiated capitalist class, as some might be prone to sug-
gest. Rather, these groups form part of a contradictory (dialectical) relationship 
of interests. Th  e nativist organizations provide a reactionary but indispensable 
base of support for corporate factions of the anti-migrant bloc, and the corporate 
factions provide crucial fi nancial support to the nativist Right, even if these sec-
tors may disagree from time to time over long-term goals and immediate ques-
tions around strategy and tactics. Despite the tensions that exist between these 
factions of the anti-migrant bloc, they facilitated the emergence of a political 

    Table 1.1   Select Scaife Foundation Grants   

 Amount of Scaife Foundation grant ($) 

 Federation for 
American Immigration 
Reform 
 Center for Immigration 
Studies 
 Numbers USA 
 Cato Institute 
 Heritage Foundation 
 Manhatt an Institute for 
Policy Research 

 2001 
 100,000 

 90,000 

 — 
 60,000 
 150,000 
 90,000 

 2006 
 — 

 2011 
 275,000 

 150,000 

 125,000 

 50,000 
 60,000 
 80,000 
 240,000 

 37,000 
 40,000 
 1,200,000 
 150,000 

   Source :  Department  of  Treasury,  Internal  Revenue  Service,  990,  Sarah  Scaife  Foundation, 
 htt p://990fi nder.foundationcenter.

Incorporated,  2001,  2006,  and  2012.  Available  online, 
org/990results.aspx?990_type=&fn=Scaife+Foundation&st=&zp=&ei=&fy=&action=Find   

The State–Civil Society Nexus

35

and ideological unity that would prove pivotal during the 109th Congress and 
beyond.  

    Th  e Nativist Right and the 109th Congress   

 Th  e 109th Congress provided almost perfect conditions for the nativist Right 
to advance its enforcement-through-att rition strategy. Vaughn noted in the CIS 
position paper, “Some of these measures [of the enforcement-through-att rition 
strategy] are included in HR 4437.” With respect to the strategic goal of pro-
moting cooperation between local and federal law enforcement, Vaughn wrote, 
“the Sensenbrenner bill would advance this strategy by clarifying state and local 
offi  cers’ authority to help enforce immigration laws.”   54    Despite not being hard 
enough on migrants for some members of the House Immigration Reform Caucus 
(HIRC), who wanted to amend the bill to limit the Fourteenth Amendment to 
apply only to citizens, the Sensenbrenner bill, as an enforcement-only bill, was a 
thirty-year dream come true for the nativist Right. 

 FAIR and the nativist Right knew that in addition to building the ideologi-
cal groundwork and organizational infrastructure to move their agenda through 
Congress, they also had to build political capital within the state’s juridical appa-
ratus to bring their vision into the mainstream of American politics. For instance, 
in one of the WITAN memos, Tanton proposed a war of position in which the 
nativists “infi ltrate the judiciary committ ees.” He explained:

  Th  is is a long-range project. We should make every eff ort to get legis-
lators sympathetic to our point of view appointed to the House and 
Senate Judiciary Committ ees, and their immigration subcommitt ees. 
Th  ink how much diff erent our prospects would be if someone espous-
ing our ideas had the chairmanship! If we secure the appointment of 
our people as freshmen members of the committ ee, we will eventually 
secure the chairmanship. Remember: we’re in this for the long haul.   55      

 An increase in committ ee appointments is indeed the strategic mission that 
FAIR has pursued since the 1980s. During the 109th Congress, FAIR and its 
affi  liates launched a legislative off ensive to pass HR 4437. Th  e HIRC became 
the epicenter of anti-migrant politics in the 109th Congress. It served as a critical 
nodal point in the state–civil society nexus between the civil society–based nativ-
ist Right and the nativist Republicans in Congress. In a groundbreaking public 
policy report by the Center for a New Community, researchers exposed the links 
between nativist organizations and the caucus.   56    Th  e HIRC was founded and 
headed by Colorado’s Sixth District representative, Tom Tancredo, a fanatical 
nativist (and former middle-school teacher) who had received funds from FAIR 

36

r e f o r m   w i t h o u t   j u s t i c e

and its affi  liated organizations. A longtime conservative and appointee to the 
Reagan White House, Tancredo supported Proposition 187 in California and 
radical right-wing legislation in Congress before 9/11. For instance, in August 
2001, Tancredo introduced HR 2712, a bill that would have put a moratorium 
on  immigration—even  legal  immigration.  Although  the  bill  never  passed,  it 
refl ected the nativist agenda that Tancredo and his allies had long supported. 

 Before 9/11, Tancredo and the HIRC were relatively isolated. However, aft er 
9/11 the nativist Right seized the moment to swell the caucus’s ranks and push 
for HR 4437. Tancredo said, “9/11 happened and everything changed. We got 
sixty members overnight.”   57    By the start of the 109th Congress, the HIRC had 
eighty-two members, including several Democrats, and by January 2006, it had 
ninety members—one out of fi ve members of the House of Representatives was 
in its ranks. By 2007, the HIRC had 110 members and played a strategic role in 
pushing anti-migrant legislation beyond HR 4437, such as the Real ID Act of 
2005 and the Secure Fence Act of 2006. 

 Tancredo, FAIR, and their allies used a variety of tactics to pressure Congress, 
such as strategically placing former staff ers where they could exert infl uence, 
developing a mobilization strategy, and holding hearings before the Judiciary 
Committ ee. For instance, Numbers USA lobbyists worked for Rep. Tancredo 
when  he  was  in  offi  ce,  and  former  FAIR  staff ers  worked  for  the  Judiciary 
Committ ee, where they used their connections and infl uence on behalf of their 
former  employers  and  the  nativist  cause.  When  Tancredo  stepped  down  as 
head of the HIRC in 2007, Rep. Brian Bilbray, a Republican from San Diego, 
California, took over the leadership. Before running for Congress, Bilbray was a 
lobbyist for FAIR.   58    Indeed, with Tancredo and Bilbray at the head of the HIRC 
for two consecutive terms, the anti-migrant bloc composed of nativist civil soci-
ety organizations, elected offi  cials operating directly within the state, and funded 
in large part by billionaire foundations could not have been stronger. 

 Th  e nativist Right and the corporate factions of the anti-migrant bloc cre-
ated political action committ ees (PACs) to fund the HIRC. FAIR used PACs 
to fund candidates who shared its views. In 2004, for example, Tancredo cre-
ated the Team America PAC, which supported candidates who shared an agenda 
identical to that of FAIR and their affi  liates and who, upon election, joined the 
HIRC.  Beyond  nativist  PACs,  other  committ ees  also  shared  the  goal  of  pro-
viding major donations to the HIRC to help infl uence it members to support 
HR 4437 and other anti-migrant bills. For instance, the HIRC received funds 
from a variety of corporate sources through PACs. According to the Building 
Democracy Initiative of the Center for a New Community, the top PACs that 
donated money to the HIRC were the National Beer Wholesalers Association 
($833,500), the National Homebuilders Association ($796,500), the National 
Automobile  Dealers  Association  ($784,500),  the  National  Association  of 

The State–Civil Society Nexus

37

Realtors  ($760,050),  the  American  Bankers  Association  ($677,050),  the 
National  Restaurant  Association  ($549,371),  United  Parcel  Service  Inc. 
($533,118), the Credit Union Legislative Action Council ($520,620), and the 
American Medical Association ($496,000).   59    

 Th  e House members who received funds from the PACs were notoriously 
anti-labor. Th  e Center for a New Community stated, “Although these politicians 
have oft en couched their anti-migrant positions in terms of concern about the 
earning  power  of  native-born  Americans,  their  voting  record  on  labor  issues 
averages a mere six percent. As measured by the American Federation of State, 
County,  and  Municipal  Employees,  eighty-six  members  of  the  HIRC  scored 
zero in support of labor.”   60    In other words, the nativists found support from frac-
tions of capital that oppose organized labor and that depend on a large fl exible 
undocumented labor force. Indeed, the National Homebuilders Association, the 
National Automobile Dealers Association, the National Association of Realtors, 
and the National Restaurant Association represent industries that depend on 
having a pool of highly fl exible, undocumented labor. 

 Th  ese fractions of capital oft en align themselves with the nativist Right not for 
the same narrow ideological reasons (i.e., keeping America white) but for mate-
rial interests. By supporting the nativist Right, these fractions of the anti-migrant 
bloc are maintaining a large undocumented population that is highly fl exible 
because of their deportability. Capital, resources, and mobilization structures all 
helped to set the stage for the civil society debate over immigration reform that 
took place in front of the United States Judiciary Committ ee.  

    Judiciary Committ ee Hearings   

 Among  the  tactics  that  the  anti-migrant  bloc  used  to  prepare  the  ideological 
conditions  for  passing  legislation  in  the  109th  Congress  was  the  holding  of 
Judiciary  Committ ee  hearings.  Designed  to  bring  the  nation’s  policy  experts 
before  Congress  to  educate  representatives  on  the  salience  of  immigration 
reform, these hearings provide another concrete example of the nexus between 
civil society organizations and state actors at the national level. Th  e commit-
tee held several dozen hearings during its tenure, at least sixteen of which were 
directly related to reforming aspects of the immigration system. While civil soci-
ety organizations from a variety of political persuasions spoke before Congress, 
nativist right-wing organizations advanced their agenda in a remarkable fash-
ion. Senior staff ers from FAIR, CIS, and Numbers USA, among other nativist 
groups,  oft en  spoke  alongside  leading  national  law  enforcement  offi  cers  and 
Department  of  Homeland  Security  prosecutors  urging  Congress  to  pass  leg-
islation that would provide them more police power. High-ranking state per-
sonnel—including  spokespeople  for  the  Department  of  Homeland  Security, 

38

r e f o r m   w i t h o u t   j u s t i c e

Immigration and Customs Enforcement, Border Patrol, Department of Justice, 
and  the  police  departments  of  Los  Angeles  and  New  York  City—also  play  a 
role as organic intellectuals of the anti-migrant bloc. Th  rough their access to the 
media and prestige, they are called upon to comment and thus educate Congress 
and the rest of civil society on threats to national security, usually in support 
of some type of coercive law or practice. Regardless of their status as objective 
members of the law enforcement community, they too took part in maintaining 
the hegemony of the anti-migrant bloc and of the homeland security state in the 
hearings over HR 4437. 

 Th  e  hearings  set  the  tone  for  defi ning  immigration  as  a  national  security 
problem in ways that would benefi t the anti-migrant bloc and lend support to 
the solutions it proposed. For instance, in a September 1, 2006, hearing, Michael 
Cutler, a CIS research fellow and former Immigration and Naturalization Service 
offi  cer, testifi ed before the Senate Judiciary Committ ee, urging its members to 
strengthen the homeland security state and oppose any eff ort toward legaliza-
tion, or what the nativist Right calls “amnesty”: “Terrorists would not fi nd gam-
ing this system the least bit challenging and our government will have become 
their  unwitt ing  ally,  providing  them  with  offi  cial  identity  documents  in  false 
names and then, ultimately, providing them with the keys to the kingdom by 
conferring resident alien status and then, United States citizenship upon those 
who would destroy our nation and slaughter our citizens. I hope that this dooms-
day scenario will not be permitt ed to play out.”   61    Th  e CIS fellow constructed a 
quasi-Christian “doomsday scenario” in which an immigrant would be handed 
the “keys to the kingdom” to “destroy our nation and slaughter our citizens.” Th  is 
scenario speaks to the binary thinking and almost apocalyptic racial paranoia of 
the nativist Right. 

 Th  is  type  of  argument  put  immigration  reformers  on  the  defensive  in 
2005.  Rather  than  challenge  the  basic  premise  that  we  need  more  enforce-
ment,  immigration  reformers  began  to  concede  to  the  argument  that  more 
enforcement  was  necessary.  As  a  case in  point,  Frank  Sharry,  the  executive 
director of the National Immigration Forum, one of the oldest migrant rights 
organizations in Washington, D.C. argued at the House Judiciary Committ ee 
meeting  on  CIR:  “And  while  we  certainly  need  tighter,  more  targeted,  and 
more  eff ective  enforcement  as  part  of  a  comprehensive  overhaul,  the  fact 
is  that  over  the  last  two  decades  the  enforcement-only  approach  has  failed 
miserably . . . Instead  of  enforcement  only  or  enforcement  fi rst,  we  need  an 
enforcement-plus approach.”   62    Although Sharry opposed HR 4437, like many 
immigration  reformers,  he  capitulated  to  the  anti-migrant  bloc  when  he 
stated that we need an “enforcement-plus approach” in exchange for a path 
toward regularizing the status of undocumented people. Th  is position was a 
common one, not limited to Sharry, and led many immigration reformers to 

The State–Civil Society Nexus

39

applaud President Bush and President Vicente Fox of Mexico for backing the 
Comprehensive Immigration Reform Act of 2005, commonly known as the 
Kennedy-McCain bill or S 2611. Sharry stated, “Th  e two presidents imagined 
a system based on improved border security and widened legal channels.” Th  e 
goal of such a proposal, he explained before the House Judiciary Committ ee, 
was  to  “make  the  healthy,  positive,  and  predictable  movement  of  workers 
to  available  jobs  safe,  legal,  and  orderly.”  Sharry  argued  that  “the  president 
deserves considerable credit for gett ing this big idea and sticking with it.” As 
did most of the national migrant and Latino advocacy organizations, Sharry 
then got behind the Kennedy-McCain bill on the grounds that it captured the 
spirit of the immigration system Bush and Fox negotiated, to bring about what 
Sharry summarized as “(1) enhanced enforcement to ensure the immigration 
system is eff ectively policed; (2) widened legal channels for the future fl ow 
of workers and families; and (3) a workable solution for the eleven million 
undocumented immigrants currently working and living the in the US; and 
(4) support for the successful integration of newcomers in the communities 
where  they  sett le.”   63     Although  the  Kennedy-McCain  bill,  unlike  HR  4437, 
contained a pathway to legalization, it would have resulted in the creation of 
a more sophisticated and entrenched homeland security state and system of 
labor control, without challenging the structural causes of migration and with-
out affi  rming the human rights of migrants. 

 For all of his good intentions, Sharry conceded, as did the Kennedy-McCain 
bill, that more enforcement must be part of any legalization package. Just as the 
good immigrant–bad immigrant binary played out in the civil society debate 
over HR 4437, it would play out in the debate on the House fl oor.   

    Th  e House Debate Over HR 4437   

 Th  e debate in the House didn’t go beyond the discursive parameters already used 
by the nativist Right and immigration reformers in civil society. Th  e debate that 
took place on the House fl oor was preconditioned by the civil society organiza-
tions that had created the cultural and ideological conditions that led members 
of the traditional opposition to adopt a similar discourse and make comparable 
demands. To study the debate over HR 4437, I systematically studied hundreds 
of pages of the transcript of the debate and evaluated the language used to sup-
port or challenge the bill. Th  is analysis illustrates that the dominant discourse 
was one that criminalized migrants and that overwhelmingly portrayed them as 
Mexican.   64    

 While  there  are  many  examples  of  this  dominant  discourse  in  the  debate 
transcript, I elaborate on representative quotations. Th  e following statements 

40

r e f o r m   w i t h o u t   j u s t i c e

from the bill’s sponsor, Congressman James Sensenbrenner, exemplify how the 
discourse criminalized immigrants: “Th  is legislation, which I introduced with 
Homeland  Security  Committ ee  Chairman  King . . . will  reestablish  respect  for 
our laws by holding violators accountable, including human traffi  ckers, employ-
ers who hire illegal aliens, and alien gang members who terrorize communities 
throughout the country.”   65    Rep. Sensenbrenner deployed a common discursive 
tactic that equates human traffi  cking and gang activity with terrorism. By doing 
so, he elevated the issue of undocumented immigration to the level of a national 
security  threat.  Th  e  following  statement  from  Iowa  congressman  Steve  King 
is a clear att empt to make this link among national security, the war on terror, 
and undocumented immigration: “Mr. Speaker, again, it is important for us to 
bring some stability to this immigration issue. It is a national security issue. Th  is 
is a national security issue as much as the war on terror is a national security 
issue . . . We have a slow-motion terrorist att ack going on in the United States 
that comes across our southern border.”   66    In Rep. King’s formulation, Mexican 
immigration to the United States is a “slow motion terrorist att ack” and thus 
requires an expansion of the homeland security state through bills such as HR 
4437. Moreover, by equating Mexican immigration with terrorism, he denied 
Mexicans any sort of humanity and absolved the United States from any respon-
sibility for Mexicans having to the leave their country to the United States. Th  ese 
are but a few examples of how House representatives used a discourse that over-
whelmingly criminalized and racialized immigrants throughout the debate over 
HR 4437. 

 Racialization  is  a  complex  process  that  att ributes  racial  characteristics  to 
a  target  group  through  a  variety  of  both  subtle  and  overt  discursive  tactics. 
Republican  congresswoman  Ginnery  Brown-Waite  overtly  att ributed  crimi-
nality  to  Mexican  immigrants:  “Back  in  November,  Homeland  Security  offi  -
cials found and deported eighty-fi ve illegal aliens from Mexico. Sixty-three of 
eighty-fi ve  of  them  had  previously  committ ed  such  crimes  as  burglary,  drug 
possession,  sexual  assault,  and  murder.  In  September  ’99,  illegal  aliens  were 
arrested in a sting operation in my home state of Florida. All of them had violent 
criminal backgrounds. If these violent criminals could break through our bor-
ders, how do we know that terrorist groups have not also?”   67    Rep. Brown-Waite 
associated Mexicans with illegal aliens, burglary, drug possession, sexual assault, 
murder,  violent  criminal  backgrounds—in  short,  undesirables  who  must  be 
kept out of the nation. In this sense Mexicans stand in for the elusive terrorist 
threat. 

 In a similar fashion, Rep. John Carter, a Republican from Texas, continued the 
criminalization of immigrants by connecting narcotics traffi  cking, immigration, 
crime, terrorism, Mexico, Mexicans, and a state of crisis in the country: “Th  ese 
narcoterrorists are so bold, Mr. Chairman, and lawlessness is so pervasive on 

The State–Civil Society Nexus

41

the border that the narcoterrorists have set up, according to the FBI, at least one 
narcoterrorist training camp outside of Matamoros, operating in the open, run 
by the Zetas to train gun runners [and] human smugglers.”   68    By advancing the 
term “narcoterrorist,” Rep. Carter clinched narcos in Mexico with the proverbial 
threat of terrorism. He later went out of his way to make it clear that the targets 
of legislative actions should, indeed, be Mexican: “Where would the American 
public defi ne the crisis to be as we deal with people who are coming into this 
country from other countries? And when I say other countries . . . predominantly 
I am addressing today the crossing of our southern border out of Mexico.”   69    Rep. 
Carter made it clear that from his point of view, which he conveniently identifi es 
with that of the politically homogenous “American people,” the “crisis” is to be 
located in Mexico and by default with Mexicans. Such a discourse advanced by 
this particular faction of the anti-migrant bloc is essentially calling or the use of 
prerogative power against Mexican migrants. 

    Th  e Nation of Laws vs. Mexicans   

 Even though all migrants, regardless of their country of origin, are potential tar-
gets of the homeland security state, the focus on Mexicans is no coincidence-
and exposes the underlining ideological current that permeates the anti-migrant 
bloc. Th  is ideology poses a binary between the “nation of laws” and criminal 
Mexicans—the  quintessential  “illegal  aliens,”  the  perennial  pariahs.  Th  e  fol-
lowing  statement  from  Sensenbrenner  illustrates  this  binary  opposition  in 
action:  “Mr.  Chairman,  our  nation  has  lost  control  of  its  borders,  which  has 
resulted in a sharp increase in illegal immigration and has left  us vulnerable to 
infi ltration by terrorists and criminals. . . . Large majorities of Americans support 
eff orts to restore the security of our nation’s borders and to assure accountabil-
ity of those who illegally enter the United States. America is a compassionate 
nation that welcomes legal immigrants from all corners of the world. But it is 
also a nation of laws.”   70    Like his civil society–based colleagues, he continued to 
criminalize migrants by evoking an image of the border as a lawless region over 
which “we” have lost control. He then tried to characterize the vast majority of 
members of the body politics as being in favor of enforcing the law and actually 
constructed an image of a nation of laws to be juxtaposed with the image of law-
lessness at the border and of the undocumented person. 

 Th  e concept of a “nation of laws”—which allowed House Republicans to call 
for an expanded border fence, troops along the US-Mexico border, and greater 
interior enforcement strategies to defend the “nation of laws” against an enemy—
merits careful analysis. Who composes the nation? And from whom does it need 
protection? From the perspective of the anti-migrant bloc, the nation is com-
posed of white Americans and those willing to assimilate uncompromisingly into 

42

r e f o r m   w i t h o u t   j u s t i c e

their way of life. And the “enemy” is the “alien” who symbolically is presented as 
foreign, criminal, and most oft en Mexican.   71    According to the logic of the binary, 
criminal aliens are terrorists whom the nation of laws must exclude, expel, and 
police  by  any  means  necessary.  Sett ing  up  the  symbolic  border  between  the 
insider and outsider does two things. First, it rationalizes the organization of 
state violence against outsiders, especially those “foreign, criminal, and terrorist 
Mexicans,” as the anti-migrant bloc labels us. Second, it neutralizes and silences 
any criticism of state repression as a threat to the “nation of laws.” Th  e following 
statement from Rep. King illustrates the fi rst point: “We could also electrify this 
wire with the kind of current heat that would not kill somebody, but it would be 
a discouragement for them to be fooling around with it. We do that with live-
stock all the time.”   72    King’s proposal suggests that treating undocumented immi-
grants like animals (livestock) is acceptable behavior in defense of the nation of 
laws. As sociolinguist Ott o Santa Ana has noted, comparing migrants to animals 
has become a contemporary feature of public discourse on Latinos.   73    

 Th  e act of criminalizing Latinos and ascribing to them animalistic character-
istics prepares the ideological groundwork for novel forms of violence against 
them. For instance, Brown-Waite gave the impression that the situation at the 
border is so out of control that it merits the enactment of prerogative power and 
therefore justifi es extralegal acts of violence against brown bodies: “Everyday 
citizens have had to virtually consider taking matt ers into their own hands.”   74    
It  is  important  to  note  that  these  statements  were  made  at  a  time  when  the 
Minutemen Project and other paramilitary anti-migrant organizations operating 
along various parts of the US-Mexico border were in full force. 

 While Rep. Brown-Waite did not condone the Minutemen Project, Rep. King 
did. He went as far as talking about his involvement with the Minutemen Project. 
“Americans are being personally impacted piece by piece,” he said. “Th  ey are 
standing up and saying what can I do within the jurisdiction that I have, within 
the resources that I have? How can I step in and fi x this? . . . And the Minutemen, 
I had the privilege to go down to the border and help get that project started.”   75    
To illustrate how the anti-migrant bloc has factions both at the level of the state 
and civil society, Rep. King proudly claimed to be one of the founders of the 
Minutemen Project and lauded the civic-patriotism of its members. 

 Th  e discourse of Reps. King, Senssenbrenner, Grown-Waite, and many more 
must be conceptualized as part of a broader hegemonic discourse that permeates 
the homeland security state, not just in Congress but in other sites of state power 
and in the integral state that also includes civil society. In this respect these rep-
resentatives are a special strata of organic intellectuals of the anti-migrant bloc 
because they are elected offi  cials who, by virtue of their direct infl uence over 
the 109th Congress, had the power to expand the repressive fi eld of the state. 
Th  ey exerted their infl uence on the state not just by casting a vote for a bill that 

The State–Civil Society Nexus

43

eventually died in the Senate but through cultivating a new moral and intellec-
tual leadership that allows for undocumented people and anyone to be exposed 
to the prerogative power of the homeland security state. From their point of view, 
it is perfectly fi ne for those suspected of being undocumented, such as Mexicans, 
to be equated with terrorists, treated like animals to be shocked with electric 
wire, and hunted by paramilitary organizations. Regardless of their intentions, 
their discourse had implications beyond HR 4437; they were creating a new 
consciousness in civil society that allows for growth and reproduction of the 
homeland security state and the myth of a postracial society. 

 Th  e ultimate power of this discourse is that it constructed a binary opposition 
between the nation of laws and the criminal alien. Moreover, it gained ascen-
dancy among some of the most infl uential House Democrats, and it silenced 
many  members  of  the  Congressional  Hispanic  Caucus.  Th  us  the  traditional 
opposition conceded the discursive terrain—and with it, the moral and intel-
lectual leadership—needed to eff ectively challenge the position advanced by the 
anti-migrant bloc. 

 Th  e majority of Democrats rejected only the most draconian aspects of the 
original bill submitt ed by the Republican leadership, such as the clauses that 
would have turned millions of undocumented people into felons and criminal-
ized those that work with them. Few among them, however, challenged the racist 
nature and origins of the Sensenbrenner bill, nor did they object to the human 
tragedy of people separated through deportation or of the thousands of people 
who have died at the border. Still fewer were those who addressed the struc-
tural foundation for mass migration over the last thirty years—US-led global 
capitalism. On the contrary, the majority of House Democrats went out of their 
way to make it clear that they could be just as tough as Republicans on “illegal 
immigrants.” For instance, Rep. Gene Green, a Democrat from Texas, who was 
purportedly sympathetic to migrants, read a banner writt en by children, mostly 
Mexican, from his district on the House fl oor asking for immigration reform. 
Indeed, Green voted against HR 4437 but while also exhorting his colleagues 
that “we need . . . increased border security, more detention beds to prevent catch 
and release, requiring applicants to go through criminal background checks, to 
learn English, and also pay a penalty.”   76    Rep. Green failed to realize or care that 
the children and their family members whom he was invoking would be targeted 
by the new border security system to fi ll those detention beds that he was so 
kindly endorsing. 

 Rep. Green seemed to be following the party line. Th  e following statement 
from  House  minority  leader  Nancy  Pelosi  best  illustrates  the  Democratic 
Party’s thinking on immigration reform: “Broken borders—that is an oxymo-
ron, something we cannot tolerate. Borders, by their nature, are our defi nition 
as a nation and our protection as a country. Broken borders, they do not exist. 

44

r e f o r m   w i t h o u t   j u s t i c e

We cannot tolerate them. Democrats also support enforcing laws, current laws, 
against those who came here illegally, and those who hire illegal immigrants. 
Democrats have led the way to meet our urgent homeland security needs as well. 
Not only at our borders but in all aspects.”   77    Here Pelosi argued that the nation is 
defi ned by borders, not a shared political community built around ideas such as 
justice and solidarity. Moreover, rather than defend civil liberties and the rights 
of migrants, which include the right to work, she reaffi  rmed on the House fl oor 
that the Democratic Party supports “enforcing laws” and that it has historically 
and consistently sided with “our homeland security needs,” a subtle discursive 
formation that indicates an insider who must be protected from the outsider. 
In other words, Pelosi bought in to the good immigrant–bad immigrant binary 
and posited a policy scenario in which the nation of laws must be protected from 
those criminal aliens. Th  e only diff erence between Pelosi and her Republican 
counterparts in this case was over tactics; whereas Republicans wanted to pass 
HR 4437 to deport people, Pelosi was assuring them that the homeland security 
state was strong enough to get the job done without passing the bill. 

 Pelosi was not alone in this binary thinking. Rep. Sheila Jackson Lee, one of the 
more progressive Democrats in Congress and a member of the House Judiciary 
Committ ee, argued, “We have laws on the books to prosecute these individu-
als. We have laws on the books to prevent them from coming into the United 
States.”   78    Moreover, Rep. Jackson Lee stated: “It is all a question of resources. 
How do we use our resources? In this bill, we do not have suffi  cient dollars for 
prosecutors, for court systems, for detention systems and for jails. . . . We should 
be  focusing  today  on  comprehensive  immigration  reform.”   79     Much  like  Rep. 
Pelosi, Rep. Jackson Lee did not challenge the fundamental premise behind the 
racist enforcement-through-att rition strategy at the heart of HR 4437; instead 
she reaffi  rmed that “we have laws on the books” to get the job done, and she 
reduced the rights of undocumented workers vis-à-vis the homeland security 
state to questions of resource allocation. 

 Th  ese  statements,  taken  from  a  sample  of  hundreds  of  similar  remarks  by 
House  Democrats,  refl ect  how  the  Democratic  Party  failed  to  challenge  the 
underlying logic and presuppositions that sustained HR 4437. Although most 
Democratic members of the House voted against HR 4437, and many such as 
Rep. Jackson Lee found the bill repulsive, very few challenged the racist nature 
of the bill or of the forces that backed it. Th  is challenge did not happen because 
they are unsympathetic or anti-migrant per se, but rather because they had lost 
the ideological and discursive batt le over the politics of migration control in civil 
society long before the Sensenbrenner bill came to the House fl oor. 

 As Gramsci notes in his writings, hegemony is never a complete and total-
izing force. As we will see in the next chapter, a massive civil society–based 
migrant  rights  movement  emerged  to  challenge  the  bill.  Moreover,  within 

The State–Civil Society Nexus

45

Congress  some  Democrats  and  members  of  the  Congressional  Hispanic 
Caucus  att empted  to  fundamentally  challenge  HR  4437.  For  instance,  Rep. 
Raúl Grijalva lamented, “HR 4437 is unrealistic, it is based on fear, and it is 
fi nancially irresponsible and even unconstitutional at times. It joins rank with 
the Chinese Exclusion Act and the Depression-era repatriation of US citizens 
to Mexico.”   80    Grijalva rejected the binary of the anti-migrant bloc and relegated 
HR 4437 to a long list of shameful state practices against racial minorities done 
in the name of the law. Following Rep. Grijalva, Rep. Charles Gonzalez added, 
“First of all, let us get it straight, this is not about border protection, and it is not 
about anti terrorism. But instead, that bill has been hijacked and now is a vehi-
cle used to promote ineff ective and hypocritical so-called illegal immigration 
control.”   81    In this speech, Rep. Gonzalez rejected the bill on principle, broke 
with the pragmatism of post–civil rights racial politics, and exposed the bill’s 
authors’ use of antiterrorism discourse to push through a hypocritical enforce-
ment agenda. 

 Remarkably, most members of the Congressional Hispanic Caucus did not 
even att empt to counter the Republican discourse. In fact, out of the caucus’s 
twenty-one members of the 109th Congress, only eleven—slightly more than 
half—appear as making remarks in the Congressional Record in the documents 
that were consulted in this study.   82    Hispanic Democrats in the House, including 
Xavier Becerra and then caucus chair Grace Napolitano, voted against HR 4437, 
and they likely quietly lobbied their colleagues to vote against it also. However, as 
some rights organizations have correctly pointed out, a champion for Latinos or 
migrant rights never emerged from the Southern California Mexican American 
congressional delegation. House Democrats from this region of the state came 
under intense criticism from local immigration groups in Los Angeles for not 
being vocal enough against the Sensenbrenner bill, despite being in safe dis-
tricts.   83    Among the Latinos in Congress, it was the Puerto Rican representa-
tives from Chicago and New York, Rep. Luis Gutierrez, Rep. Nydia Velázquez, 
and Rep. José Serrano, who were among the most vocal and active members of 
Congress against the Sensenbrenner bill. Th  is list of primary advocates is ironic 
given that Puerto Ricans are US citizens. 

 Th  e post-9/11 security climate created an atmosphere in which eight House 
Democrats voted for HR 4437, and politicians seeking election reached out to 
voters by appealing to insecurities about terrorism and immigration. In fact, sev-
eral Democratic Party candidates running for the Senate in the November 2006 
elections reproduced the same anti-migrant discourse of their Republican coun-
terparts while on the campaign trail. For example, the campaign materials of 
Arizona Democrat Jim Pederson declared, “Illegal immigration is endangering 
our security, putt ing a huge burden on our communities’ schools and hospitals.” 
In Missouri, Democrat Claire McCaskill advocated for building a border fence, 

46

r e f o r m   w i t h o u t   j u s t i c e

and in Montana, Democrat Matt  McKenna stated he was against “amnesty” for 
“illegal immigrants.”   84    

 Th  e Democratic Party’s leadership failed to forcibly challenge HR 4437 as 
a bill that would have led to novel forms of policing against Latino communi-
ties and other groups treated as perpetual suspects. On the contrary, during the 
debate the Democrats and their allies, with few exceptions, reinforced and natu-
ralized the idea that state violence against undocumented people is an accept-
able practice in the nation of laws. Unwitt ingly, they reinforced post–civil rights 
racial ideology by deliberately avoiding open discussion about race and racism 
in the House debate in the name of pragmatism—a code word for conforming 
to the powerful cultural-ideological norms of Washington, D.C., politics. It may 
be the case that most House Democrats voted against the bill and that many 
found the bill repugnantly racist, but in the name of pragmatism, they chose not 
to challenge the bill for what it was: the brainchild of a racist anti-migrant bloc. 
Rather, the Democrats and their allies tried to show that they are just as tough on 
immigrants as, and in some cases tougher than, their Republican counterparts. 

 * 

* 

* 

 Th  e debate over HR 4437 in Washington, D.C., was lost in civil society long 
before the bill was even introduced on the House fl oor. Th  e bill was the legislative 
fruit of the nativist Right’s thirty-year war of position in which a corps of organic 
intellectuals  such  as  Tanton,  Brimelow,  Stein,  Graham,  Hardin,  Camarota, 
Vaughn, and Kobach formed not just in universities but in the nativist move-
ment alongside traditional intellectuals such as Samuel Huntington. Th  is corps 
sought to perfect their vision of a society built around an Anglo-American pol-
ity and culture protected by a security apparatus that could “cleanse” the United 
States of twelve million undocumented people, that were in the United States 
in 2006, through force or att rition. Th  e Sensenbrenner bill was just one part of 
the enforcement-through-att rition strategy to be implemented in various sites of 
power of the homeland security state. 

 Th  e bill passed in December 2005, facilitated by an anti-migrant bloc that 
took  advantage  of  the  post-9/11  political  context  and  used  the  moment  to 
play its hand in the House of Representatives of the 109th Congress. Indeed, 
the anti-migrant bloc had direct ties to the HIRC and the nearly 110 members 
of the House of Representatives that helped pass HR 4437. Th  e anti-migrant 
bloc was able to advance its agenda in the 109th Congress with a discourse that 
clinched together crime, immigration, Mexicans, and terrorism while conceal-
ing its neo-Malthusian and eugenicist views about Latinos. 

 Although  the  focus  on  this  chapter  has  been  on  the  109th  Congress, 
anti-migrant  hegemony  cannot  be  reduced  to  a  single  site  of  power.  It  exists 

The State–Civil Society Nexus

47

in  multiple  sites  of  power,  including  the  Supreme  Court,  the  presidency,  the 
Department  of  Homeland  Security,  and  in  the  integral  state—that  complex 
superstructure  of  relationships,  including  those  considered  part  of  the  pri-
vate  realm  of  civil  society,  that  has  characterized  modern  capitalist  societies. 
Nonetheless, HR 4437 helped to set the terms of the debate on immigration 
reform and policy well beyond the 109th Congress. From that point forward, 
almost all legislation at the local, national, and transnational levels would have to 
include aspects of the enforcement through att rition agenda of the nativist Right 
and its corporate allies in the anti-migrant bloc, even when proposed by liberals 
and backed by immigration reformers. 

 Th  e terms of the debate were steered away from addressing the root causes 
of migration or the human and civil rights of Latinos, most of whom are sus-
pected of being undocumented because of their physical features and culture. 
Rather, the debate was constructed around a good immigrant–bad immigrant 
binary that assumed that there are some immigrants who may “pass” and others 
who must be policed and cleansed from the nation. For those who subscribe to 
this binary, the massive security apparatus of the homeland security state has 
become common sense, part of a natural and accepted conception of the world 
that appears unchangeable. From this perspective, the best immigration reform-
ers can do is save the good immigrant who may pass while rendering deportable 
those bad immigrants who cannot pass. Th  us, immigration reformers and their 
allied House Democrats subscribe to an “enforcement plus” solution rather than 
questioning the legitimacy of the homeland security state and its use of racial 
profi ling and state violence to enforce the “law.” 

 As noted by political scientist Chris Zepeda-Millán, as problematic as HR 
4437  may  have  been,  it  served  as  a  catalyst  for  a  civil  society–based  Latino 
migrant movement.   85    In the next chapter, we will see how Latino migrant activ-
ism, born not in Washington, D.C., but in the barrios of the United States, was 
capable of momentarily challenging the hegemony of the anti-migrant bloc and 
preventing the Sensenbrenner bill from becoming law in the spring of 2006.         

      2 

 Th  e 2006 Mega-Marches in Greater Los 
Angeles: A Counterhegemonic Moment 

and the Limits of Mass Mobilization    

       You may think that we don’t have rights, but we have rights. And that’s 
OK  because  la  raza  is  coming  at  you  like  a  tsunami  and  you  can’t 
stop us!    1     

 Th  e  above  words  were  shouted  by  a  Chicano  day  laborer  and  Vietnam  vet-
eran during a clash at a day laborer site in the parking lot of a San Bernardino, 
California, Home Depot, where a group calling itself Save Our State, with ties 
to the Federation of American Immigration Reform (FAIR) and neo-Nazi skin-
heads,  was  protesting  the  presence  of  the   jornaleros   (day  laborers).   2     Th  e  day 
laborer’s  words  were  almost  prophetic  coming  just  months  before  the  mega-
marches, a series of mass mobilizations that took place across the country in 
the spring of 2006 to oppose the Border Protection, Antiterrorism, and Illegal 
Immigration  Control  Act  of  2005  (HR  4437).  As  discussed  in  the  previous 
chapter,  this  bill  would  have  turned  undocumented  migrants  into  felons  and 
further militarized the US-Mexico border and interior enforcement policies and 
practices. Moreover, it would have criminalized any individual or organization 
that provides services to undocumented migrants. 

 In response, millions of Latinos—migrant and US born, documented and 
undocumented—and  their  allies  took  to  the  streets  of  almost  every  major 
US  metropolitan  area  and  nearly  one  hundred  small  towns  to  repudiate 
HR 4437 and to advocate for a humane and just immigration bill. Beyond the 
immediate issue of HR 4437, most migrants and their allies took to the streets 
to protest the anti-migrant policies, practices, and sentiments that have plagued 
migrant communities and nonmigrant Latinos in the United States for the past 
two decades. 

48

The 2006 Mega-Marches in Greater Los Angeles

49

 Most of the political science scholarship on the mega-marches has focused 
on empirical questions such as the role of the mass media in the historic mobi-
lizations.   3    A notable recent study, by political scientist Chris Zepeda-Millán, 
draws  upon  more  traditional  social  movement  literature  to  examine  the 
dramatic  increase  aft er  the  marches  in  anti-migrant  ordinances  and  raids 
in  migrant  communities  by  DHS.   4     Th  eoretically  driven  scholarship  on  the 
marches, however, is scarce.   5    Two exceptions come from anthropologist Leo 
Chavez and political theorist Cristina Beltrán. Chavez argues that protesters 
were  citizen  subjects  calling  for  inclusion  into  the  American  polity.  Beltrán 
argues that the marches are a uniquely twenty-fi rst-century phenomenon that 
should not be conceptualized as directly linked to older Latino social move-
ments. Still, there is litt le theoretical work in the fi eld of Latino politics to date 
that  explores  the  roots,  dynamics,  and  impact  of  the  mega-marches  from  a 
structuralist perspective. 

 Th  is chapter tackles the development and signifi cance of the mega-marches in 
the Greater Los Angeles Area (the series of actions on March 25, April 10, April 
15, and May 1, 2006, along with student walkouts and actions throughout the 
last week of March) as a case study. While the focus is on Greater Los Angeles, 
I also briefl y discuss the marches in the national and transnational context of 
Latino migrant activism and the migrant rights movement. I am interested in 
unearthing how the mega-marches were a radical moment that illustrated the 
organic capacity of the Latino migrant working class. Indeed, the marches were 
built upon three generations of Latino activism and social movement organizing 
that briefl y but eff ectively challenged the eff orts of the anti-migrant bloc to build 
a more powerful and omnipresent homeland security state through HR 4437. 
Th  is action was a moment of a profoundly democratic and transformative poten-
tial. Th  e marches provide clues for those interested in advancing an oppositional 
migrant politics that makes demands beyond those normally considered accept-
able policy proposals (and thus confi ned to the good immigrant–bad immigrant 
binary). 

 To  achieve  this  goal,  I  draw  upon  Antonio  Gramsci’s  notion  of  organic 
intellectuals in a slightly diff erent way than presented in the previous chapter, 
where I speak about the organic and traditional intellectuals of the anti-migrant 
bloc. In this chapter the focus is on the corps of Latino organic intellectuals 
who made the marches possible. Gramsci argued that it is precisely the task 
of organic intellectuals formed outside the traditional sites of intellectual pro-
duction to grapple with the common sense of ordinary people and raise their 
consciousness to a more critical level. In fact, Gramsci argues that although 
it may seem absurd that a factory worker or peasant could become an intel-
lectual, it was precisely the task of radicals to raise the consciousness of the 
working class and turn them into a fi ghting force. To be sure, he argued that 

50

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

the  only  way  to  counter  the  hegemonic  leadership  of  the  dominant  classes 
in the state and in civil society was by cultivating organic intellectuals of the 
working class. While Gramsci did not use the term  counterhegemony  in his own 
writings, I am using it to distinguish the political and ideological leadership of 
Latino migrant activists from the hegemony of the anti-migrant bloc. 

 From this perspective I argue that the 2006 mega-marches were a counter-
hegemonic moment: for the fi rst time since the rise of the war on terror and 
the homeland security state, Latino migrant activists and their allies were able 
to briefl y counter the hegemonic leadership of the anti-migrant bloc. Indeed, a 
relatively small corps of Latino organic intellectuals was capable of articulating 
a message that could resonate with the common sense—or in this case, “good 
sense”—of millions of migrants and their allies who heeded the call to take to 
the streets to protest HR 4437 in the spring of 2006. Th  ese Latino migrant activ-
ists motivated a shift  in the national debate on immigration that helped to pre-
vent HR 4437 from becoming law. Before the marches immigration reformers 
would either embrace or capitulate to elements of the enforcement-through- 
att rition agenda of the anti-migrant bloc in exchange for the legalization of some 
migrants. Yet during the spring of 2006, oppositional Latino migrant activists 
were  boldly  able  to  go  beyond  the  usual  demands  of  immigration  reformers 
and break with the good immigrant–bad immigrant binary to demand the full 
legalization of twelve million undocumented workers. Th  ey also demanded an 
end to militarized state migration control in the halls of Congress. Moreover, 
rather than stick to the same safe and acceptable policy solutions built on the 
assumption that the “immigration problem” could be “fi xed,” Latino migrant 
activists  called  into  question  the  driving  force  behind  the  mass  migration  of 
people from Latin America over the last thirty years, namely US-backed neo-
liberal globalization. 

 Th  e counterhegemonic moment did not emerge spontaneously or because 
of the media or new technologies, as some scholars have suggested. Rather it 
was organized by a group of Latino organic intellectuals whose ideas formed 
through unique genealogies of struggle. Th  is genealogy refers to a historically 
and geographically specifi c knowledge and style of organizing that emerges from 
diverse moments of struggle of Latinos in the United States, Latin America, and 
elsewhere.   6    Each genealogy—whether the Chicano movement of the 1960s and 
1970s, the struggle against the repressive measures in the Simpson–Mazzoli bill 
or the Central American peace movement of the 1980s, the Proposition 187 
generation of the 1990s, or others—provided a body of knowledge that con-
tributed to the development of the 2006 mega-marches. To be sure, these gene-
alogies of struggle allowed for Latino organic intellectuals to draw upon their 
experience and informal education as organizers with deep ties to the Mexican 

The 2006 Mega-Marches in Greater Los Angeles

51

and Central American working class to articulate a message that would resonate 
with the base of migrants in Greater Los Angeles. 

 By  mobilizing  a  great  mass  of  Mexican  and  Central  American  migrants, 
Latino migrant activists were able to build the political capital necessary to 
build a historic coalition that I term the Latino social bloc. Th  is bloc com-
bined both oppositional forces and immigration reformers into a short-lived 
multisectoral coalition of forces that emerged in the spring of 2006 to chal-
lenge HR 4437. It united a socially diverse constellation of actors—men and 
women,  documented  and  undocumented—who  hailed  from  a  variety  of 
national  backgrounds  and  social  sectors.  It  was  comprised  of  workers,  stu-
dents,  indigenous  groups,  clergy,  media  personalities,  and  groups  such  as 
hometown  associations,  unions,  community-based  nonprofi t  organizations, 
and left ist parties.   7    

 Although the mega-marches constituted a counterhegemonic moment, they 
should not be mistaken for a sustainable and successful counterhegemonic proj-
ect that could completely turn the tide against the anti-migrant bloc and lead 
society toward a radical democracy where there is a sustainable and transfor-
mative  justice  for  all  migrant  workers.  Rather,  the  Latino  social  bloc  disinte-
grated almost as quickly as it congealed, owing to a familiar set of contradictions 
plaguing social movements: divisions over the substantive content of the leg-
islative proposals being considered in Congress, internal class and ideological 
diff erences, co-optation by traditional political parties, lack of political clarity, 
lack of resources, and good old-fashioned  caciquismo .   8    Most important, how-
ever, the Latino social bloc was not able to maintain the momentum needed to 
mount a sustained challenge to draconian migration control policies. As noted 
by Zepeda-Millán, the movement nationally may have contributed to the defeat 
of HR 4437, but it prompted a backlash against migrants that the organizers of 
the 2006 marches were not ready to confront.   9    Indeed, I argue that the orga-
nizers of the Latino social bloc underestimated the capacity of the anti-migrant 
bloc to shift  its strategy in the aft ermath of the mega-marches from one set on 
passing a single bill in Congress to one pushing for a barrage of anti-migrant 
policies and practices at the federal and local level. At the federal level, the state 
deployed National Guard troops to the US–Mexico border, expanded the border 
wall, increased military aid to Mexico to control the fl ow of Central American 
migrants  att empting  to  enter  the  United  States  through  Mexico,  and  began 
implanting new technologies of governance for migration control such as Secure 
Communities and E-Verify (further discussed in  chapters 4 and 5). At the same 
time, state and local governments oversaw a proliferation of anti-migrant bills 
and ordinances.   10    

 In Gramscian terms, the Latino social bloc was able to win the war of maneu-
ver—that is, a frontal att ack—against HR 4437 becoming the law of the land, 

52

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

but  it  failed  to  win  the  war  of  position—that  is,  long-lasting  struggle  in  the 
trenches—against the anti-migrant bloc operating at the level of the state and 
civil  society.  Withstanding  the  disintegration  of  the  Latino  social  bloc,  when 
all accounts are sett led, the mega-marches represent a monumental feat in the 
history of social movements in the United States, one that we can only begin 
to  appreciate.  Although  this  chapter  examines  the  conditions  that  led  to  the 
mega-marches and the collapse of the Latino social bloc, I am not arguing that 
Latino migrant activism and the broader migrant rights movement was defeated, 
nor am I suggesting that a new social bloc cannot rise again. Rather, I am critically 
explaining what happened to the particular constellation of forces that made the 
mega-marches in the Greater Los Angeles area possible. In the chapters to fol-
low, we will consider other contestations within the broader movement and the 
ongoing att empts to advance the migrant rights struggle in Washington, D.C., 
and New York City. 

 Th  is chapter is based on twelve semi-structured interviews with key leaders of 
some of the organizations in the Greater Los Angeles area comprising the Latino 
social bloc. Although hundreds of organizations played a role in the marches, 
I chose individuals from these organizations for several reasons. First, during the 
course of my participant observation, I observed that these individuals played 
a leading role within the Latino social bloc during the mega-marches. Second, 
they represent the diff erent sectors that helped make the marches materialize, 
including labor, community-based organizations, hometown associations, left ist 
political parties, Mexicans and Central Americans, youth, students, and veterans. 
Finally, I chose some of these individuals to illustrate the complex relationship 
between gender and organizing and to avoid the mistakes of previous studies on 
the Chicano movement, which oft en omitt ed the contributions of women. As 
we will see, women played a leading role in organizing for the mega-marches. 

 Individuals  interviewed  for  this  chapter  were  Arturo  Carmona,  then  the 
executive director of the Council of Mexican Federations in North America; 
Angelica Salas of the Coalition for Humane Immigrant Rights of Los Angeles; 
Isaura Rivera, leader of the Frente Continental, which during the marches rep-
resented organizations from fi ve Central American nations; Juan José Gutiérrez, 
executive director of Latino Movement USA; Gloria Saucedo, executive direc-
tor of the Hermandad Mexicana Nacional of the San Fernando Valley; Nativo 
Lopez,  director  of  Hermandad  Mexicana  Latinoamericana  and  president  of 
the  Mexican  American  Political  Association;  Mario  Martínez,  fi eld  organizer 
for Hermandad Mexicana Latinoamericana; Manuel Roman of UNITE HERE 
Local 11; Victor Narro of the UCLA Downtown Labor Center; Rosalio Muñoz 
of  the  People’s  Weekly  World;  Esther  Portillo  of  the  Salvadoran  American 
National Association; and Ron Gochez, member of Unión del Barrio, the Raza 
Graduate  Student  Association,  and  the  Coordinadora  Estudiantil  de  la  Raza 

The 2006 Mega-Marches in Greater Los Angeles

53

during  the  mega-marches.  I  also  drew  on  an  extensive  published  interview 
with Jesse Díaz and Javier Rodríguez, the two spokespeople of the March 25 
Coalition, one of the leading coalitions for making the marches materialize.   11    
While the focus is on activists in Greater Los Angeles, I also briefl y draw upon 
interviews conducted with advocates from the national migrant organizations 
in Washington, D.C., including Ali Noorani of the National Immigration Forum 
and Angie Kelly of the Center for American Progress to illustrate the dialectic 
between the movement in California and the broader migrant rights movement. 
Th  is chapter is also based on my participation in and observation of movement 
activities: I spent hundreds of hours in community strategizing sessions, press 
conferences, meetings, and summits before, during, and aft er the mega-marches 
of 2006.    

      Genealogies of Struggle and Roots of the 

Latino Social Bloc   

 Various genealogies of struggle set the ideological groundwork and organiza-
tional infrastructure that allowed the corps of Latino migrant activists in Greater 
Los Angeles to congeal around a national campaign to defeat HR 4437. Political 
theorist Albert Ponce correctly points out that contemporary migrant resistance 
movements are linked to a broader history of Mexican and Latino resistance to 
colonialism, dating back to 1848.   12    While this assessment is fundamentally true, 
for the sake of understanding the organizations that were part of the conjuncture 
from 2001 to 2012, I focus on the Chicano movement of the 1960s and 1970s; 
the  Central  American  peace  movement,  especially  the  sanctuary  movement 
of the 1980s; and the brief period of Mexican and Latino migrant activism in 
California during the early and mid-1990s.   13    Th  ese genealogies served as politi-
cal schools, so to speak, for the formation of the organic intellectuals who helped 
to organize the mega-marches.   14    

 Th  e  Chicano  movement  of  the  1960s  and  1970s  provided  the  Latino 
social  bloc  with  its  nuclei  of  leadership.  In  particular,  bloc  leaders  (includ-
ing Javier Rodríguez, Nativo Lopez, Armando Navarro, and Carlos Montes) 
came from two organizations, Centro de Acción Social Autónoma (CASA) 
and the Brown Berets.   15    Th  at a substantial part of the bloc came from CASA is 
no coincidence: the organization was founded by Bert Corona, a true organic 
intellectual in his own right, whose approach to organizing and forming lead-
ers infl uenced a generation of activists who would eventually become major 
players in Los Angeles and, indeed, national politics.   16    A Mexican activist from 
El Paso, Texas, Corona came to Los Angeles, where he founded CASA and 
began training a host of cadres to do what many of the Chicano movement 

54

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

organizations  before  them  could  not  do  well:  organize  Mexican  migrant 
workers.   17    CASA emphasized the need for autonomous social action, a form 
of mass-based organization that could be free to act without constraints put 
on  them  by  political  parties  or  other  forms  of  external  power.  Corona  cre-
ated CASA to begin working with undocumented workers around 1969 and 
advanced the idea that Mexicans were one people on two sides of the US–
Mexico border. Indeed, he “waged an ideological batt le that focused on the 
contributions  of  Mexican  immigrants  in  the  United  States,”  according  to 
Lopez.   18     Among  those  infl uenced  by  CASA  was  Rudy  Lozano,  whose  fam-
ily went on to create Centro Sin Fronteras in Chicago; the Centro, in turn, 
became the epicenter of the migrant rights movement in Chicago and a lead-
ing  organization  in  the  Chicago  Mega-Marcha  on  March  10.  Even  Rosalio 
Muñoz, who was never a CASA member but played a leading role in organiz-
ing the mega-marches, admitt ed that Corona’s method of organizing Mexican 
migrants  had  an  important  impact  on  him  during  his  years  as  head  of  the 
Chicano Moratorium Committ ee in the early 1970s. 

 Although  the  Chicano  movement  and  the  legacy  of  Corona  in  particular 
set the foundation for the emergence of the Latino social bloc, other genealo-
gies of Latino struggle had an important impact on its development. Indeed, 
in the 1980s Central American activists infl uenced a generation of Chicano 
and Latino labor and community organizations across the United States at a 
time when most scholars agreed that the Chicano movement was over. Central 
American  migrants,  mostly  from  Guatemala  and  El  Salvador  entered  the 
United States en masse in the 1980s as refugees.   19    Many of the refugees had 
organizational, leadership, and political skills that they brought with them from 
Central America. Th  ese Central American leaders played a critical role in chal-
lenging US foreign policy and in fi ghting for the legalization provisions in the 
Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986.   20    Th  roughout the 1980s, many 
Central American activists were entering the labor movement and developing 
community-based  organizations  that  provided  desperately  needed  services 
for Central American asylum-seekers and migrant workers. Th  e resources and 
knowledge acquired during the fi ght for a pathway toward legalization in the 
Immigration Reform and Control Act and the overall struggle for the rights of 
Central American refugees were vital to the formation of the Latino social bloc. 
Moreover, many of the individuals and leaders who made the Latino social bloc 
viable came directly from the Central American activist community. Central 
American  leadership  also  had  a  tremendous  impact  on  Mexican  American 
activists. For instance, Isaura Rivera, leader of the Frente Continental, although 
Mexican, came from Central American community organizations, as did Angela 
Sambrano,  a  Chicana  organizer  who  at  the  time  of  the  mega-marches  was 

The 2006 Mega-Marches in Greater Los Angeles

55

executive director of the Central American Resource Center of Los Angeles. 
Other key leaders from the Latino social bloc, such as Javier Rodríguez, Gloria 
Saucedo,  and  Juan  José  Gutiérrez,  also  gained  invaluable  experience  in  the 
1980s struggle for amnesty for Central American refugees and other migrants. 
 Th  e third important set of leaders came from what I term the Proposition 
187 generation. Th  is cohort of young Latino leaders came of age politically in 
the struggle against Proposition 187, a 1994 California state ballot initiative that 
would have banned undocumented people from state health and educational ser-
vices. In response, Chicano students and community activists launched a series 
of walkouts and protests.   21    Th  ese actions coincided with a period of growing 
student militancy over demands for Chicano studies programs at UCLA and at 
high schools throughout Southern California.   22    Th  e Proposition 187 generation 
provided an indispensable source of batt le-tested leadership and organizational 
skills in conducting walkouts, running voter registration drives, and organizing 
labor and communities. Key leaders from the Proposition 187 generation par-
ticipated in a series of meetings and conferences that led to the mega-marches, 
and many more became teachers and youth organizers who were able to draw 
upon a recent history of activism to reach out to young people from San Diego 
to Los Angeles and from Long Beach to Oxnard. Proposition 187 generation 
leaders  include  Mario  Martínez,  fi eld  organizer  for  Hermandad  Mexicana 
Latinoamericana;  Arturo  Carmona  of  the  Council  of  Mexican  Federations 
in  North  America;  Ron  Gochez,  one  of  the  founders  of  the  Coordinadora 
Estudiantil de la Raza; and Esther Portillo, one of the leading Salvadoran women 
organizers who worked with the March 25 Coalition during the height of the 
marches. Th  is sector of organizers and leaders brought the energy to do the gru-
eling legwork needed to pull off  the mega-marches and to reach out to the youth 
sector, which played a critical role in the spring of 2006. 

 Clearly, there is a degree of overlap across these three traditions, and some of 
the leading activists could be said to come from more than one genealogy. For 
instance, Esther Portillo came from a Salvadoran organization with its roots in 
the 1980s, but she came of age politically aft er Proposition 187. Others, such as 
Javier Rodríguez, were active during the Chicano movement during the 1980s 
and during the fi ght against Proposition 187.   23    

 Beyond  the  constellation  of  movement  leaders,  a  central  condition  that 
allowed for the mega-marches to materialize was the lack of credibility of the 
Democratic  Party  with  the  oppositional  sectors  of  the  movement.  Scholars 
such as Armando Navarro, Robert Smith, and Paul Frymer remind us that the 
Democratic Party has proven to be a stubborn vehicle for advancing a working- 
class black and Latino agenda.   24     

56

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

    Congealing of the Latino Social Bloc   

 Th  e Latino social bloc was formed by a cadre of organic intellectuals who were 
able to mobilize Mexican and Central American migrant workers and their allied 
classes  and  second-generation  working-  and  middle-class  Latinos  and  other 
migrant communities. As in all social movements, groups with competing and 
contradictory views jockeyed for leadership, but despite tendencies among some 
movement leaders to claim ownership over the movement, no single group or 
individual leader could take credit for its congealing. Rather, the congealing of 
the bloc was a product of the organizational experience and political knowledge 
acquired by three generations of activists and the structural and demographic 
transformations brought about by thirty years of neoliberal globalization and 
intensifying anti-Latino racism. 

 Many meetings, conferences, actions, batt les, and failures took place for the 
bloc to congeal. With that said, there is no doubt that the core set of organic 
intellectuals hailed from the oppositional sector and that they were responsible 
for integrating the immigration reformers into the bloc. Central to the forma-
tion of the Latino social bloc were two summits that took place in Southern 
California: La Tierra Es de Todos (Th  e Land Belongs to Everyone) Summit 
held in Riverside in March of 2005 and the Beyond the Minutemen Summit 
held at the UCLA Downtown Labor Center in December 2005. Th  ese sum-
mits, organized by grassroots organizations before HR 4437 had captured the 
att ention  of  the  migrant  rights  movement  nationally,  were  designed  to  forge 
a coalition to confront the Minutemen and to address a growing anti-Latino 
migrant climate. Aft er the passage of HR 4437 on December 16, 2005, many of 
the grassroots groups active in the summits began to meet with some traditional 
community-based migrant rights organizations. Calling themselves La Placita 
Working Group, in January 2006 they started holding meetings in the basement 
of Nuestra Señora de Los Angeles Church. Th  e organizations that comprised La 
Placita Working Group would become the heart of the mega-marches. Gloria 
Saucedo, executive director of Hermandad Mexicana Nacional, indicated, “At 
the beginning there were just a few of us; soon, however, the meetings would 
be att ended by hundreds of people and dozens of organizations.”   25    La Placita 
Working Group would become the main forum for organizing the fi rst major 
mobilization on March 25, 2006. It is in the Placita meetings that most (although 
not all) movement organizations convened and publicly debated strategy and 
tactics. 

 Perhaps  no  other  conference  was  more  pivotal  in  congealing  the  Latino 
social  bloc,  however,  than  the  Mexicano/Latino  Leadership  Summit  held 
in  the  Riverside  Convention  Center,  att ended  by  over  550  migrant  activ-
ists.   26    Th  e Summit was organized by the National Alliance for Human Rights, 

The 2006 Mega-Marches in Greater Los Angeles

57

an  oppositional  organization  led  by  political  scientist  and  veteran  organizer 
Armando Navarro. Th  e National Alliance for Human Rights summit was the fi rst 
to convene with the explicit purpose of building a new movement at a national 
level to defeat HR 4437. Out of this conference came an agreement on a set of 
demands and actions that would be adopted by organizations across the United 
States. Without these eff orts by grassroots organizations to agree upon dates and 
actions, the Latino social bloc could not have emerged, and the mega-marches 
would not have materialized. 

 Moreover,  the  National  Alliance  for  Human  Rights  summit  successfully 
brought together multiple sectors of the movement across the nation and with 
leaders from Mexico and Central America. In att endance were activists from all 
over California and from Arizona, New Mexico, and Chicago, including those 
who convened La Tierra Es de Todos Summit, the organizers of the Beyond the 
Minutemen Summit, community-based organizations, labor unions such as the 
Service Employees International Union and the United Farm Workers (UFW), 
and student and international organizations. Th  e summit drew up explicit plans 
to  transnationalize  the  movement  by  having  a  series  of  delegations  of  move-
ment leaders meet with members of prominent social movements around Latin 
America. Delegations were sent to Mexico City to meet with Mexican presiden-
tial candidate Andrés Manuel López Obrador and the Popular Assembly of the 
Peoples of Oaxaca. Activists also agreed to gain support from Central American 
social movements. 

 By  the  summit’s  end,  most  groups  were  on  board  for  the  fi rst  action  on 
March 25, 2006; these groups, primarily oppositional, comprised the heart of 
the Latino social bloc. Although traditional nonprofi t and labor organizations 
such as the Coalition for Humane Immigrant Rights of Los Angeles, the Central 
American Resources Center, and the UFW played an important role within the 
Latino social bloc (and were represented at the summit), they did not provide 
the leadership for the mega-marches to materialize. Rather, they were skeptical 
of focusing all of their energy on big marches and emphasized using traditional 
lobbying and advocacy tactics.   27    

 Indeed, organized labor, although a major sector of the Latino social bloc, 
remained divided and ambiguous about its support of the mega-marches. Th  e 
base of UNITE HERE Local 11, Justice for Janitors, actively participated in the 
marches, and rank-and-fi le members and some union organizers att ended the 
aforementioned meetings leading to the mega-marches. Nevertheless, the labor 
bureaucracy never fully committ ed to moving its base and union machinery to 
make the mega-marches happen. Th  e UFW, meanwhile, along with the Catholic 
Church,  organized  an  alternative  action  on  Sunday,  March  26,  2006,  which 
would culminate with a mass in honor of the late César Chávez, but the majority 
of groups did not congeal around this plan. 

58

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

 Th  e  Archdiocese  of  Los  Angeles,  however,  did  provide  support  for  the 
mega-marches in other ways, playing a critical role in bringing legitimacy to the 
fi rst planned march. Th  e Nuestra Señora de Los Angeles Church lent its base-
ment  for  the  meetings  of  La  Placita  Working  Group,  and  Cardinal  Mahony 
brought att ention to HR 4437 when he publicly told reporters that the Church 
would not comply with federal laws that would criminalize their parishes and 
that it would be calling for Catholics to peacefully protest against the proposed 
bill. As Victor Narro and Rosalio Muñoz both noted, without the support of the 
Church at the beginning, the mass media probably would not have felt it was safe 
enough to promote the protest action on March 25, 2006.   28    

 Another key sector of the Latino social bloc was the youth and student 
sector.  It  is  important  to  distinguish  between  youth  and  student  organiza-
tions; the former tends to be community based and the latt er, campus based. 
Th  e  majority  of  youths  who  participated  in  the  protest  activities  were  not 
directly part of the student organizations to come out of the Chicano move-
ment. Th  ere were also large contingents of youths that did not belong to any 
organization.  Among  the  student  groups,  various  chapters  of  Movimiento 
Estudiantil  Chicano  de  Aztlán  (MEChA)  sporadically  played  a  supportive 
role during the mega-marches, especially during the student march that took 
place on April 15, 2006. Since 1969 MEChA was in the vanguard of Chicano 
student  organizing  in  Southern  California;  it  provided  political  direction, 
and  a  regional  organizational  structure.  However,  MEChA  as  a  regional 
organization did not assume its traditional role as the vanguard of the stu-
dent movement in Greater Los Angeles.   29    While there are important excep-
tions, over-bureaucratization and lack of political clarity prevented the Los 
Angeles–area chapters of MEChA from taking on their historic role as the 
vanguard of the student movement during the mega-marches. Th  e vacuum in 
the traditional student leadership structure was fi lled by alternative student 
and youth organizations, including the Raza Graduate Student Association 
of UCLA, the youth and student component of the organization Act Now to 
Stop War and End Racism (ANSWER), and youths from the International 
Socialist  Organization  (ISO).  Th  e  ISO  and  ANSWER,  along  with  select 
MEChA chapters, played a major role in organizing a youth and student march 
of roughly 15,000 participants that took place on April 15, 2006. Th  e Raza 
Graduate Student Association worked to forge the Coordinadora Estudiantil 
de  la  Raza,  a  coalition  of  student  organizations  spreading  from  Oxnard  to 
San Diego, that would eventually play a major role in the mega-marches and 
in  the  Southern  California  student  movement.  Although  these  groups  did 
not always agree, they had two things in common. First, they did not receive 
funds  from  any  major  foundation  or  university.  Second,  combined,  they 

The 2006 Mega-Marches in Greater Los Angeles

59

formed the core of oppositional youth and student organizations within in 
the Latino social bloc. 

 Last but not least, the Spanish-language media provided a vital resource for 
disseminating the call to mobilize.   30    Organizers of the mega-marches reached 
out to Ricardo “El Mandril” Sánchez of La Que Buena 105.5 FM, who on March 
15,  2006,  put  out  a  call  to  other  radio  personalities  in  the  Los  Angeles  area. 
Sánchez reportedly announced, “ Si estamos pidiendo que la gente se una a una 
marcha, por qué los locutores no ponemos el ejemplo y nos unimos a esta causa? ” (If 
we are asking people to unite to be part of a march, why don’t we disc jockeys 
unite for the cause?).   31    El Mandril’s call was met by the two leading personali-
ties on Spanish-speaking radio, Eddie “El Piolín” Sotelo of La Nueva 101.9 FM 
and Renán “El Cucuy” Almendárez Coello of the La Raza 97.9 FM. Aft er these 
leading personalities began to support the fi rst action on March 25, 2006, other 
radio personalities followed suit, and by the beginning of the fi rst march, over 
twenty-fi ve radio stations had begun supporting the fi rst mega-marcha, includ-
ing Tijuana radio stations Radio “W” 690 AM and La Formula.   32    In addition to 
the radio personalities, Spanish-language television networks such as Univisión, 
Telemundo, and Azteca América played a critical role in disseminating the word 
about the protests, especially the fi rst major action on March 25, 2006.  

    Th  e Counterhegemonic Moment   

 Th  e Latino social bloc’s thunderous rejection of HR 4437 disrupted the increas-
ingly intolerant and punitive national discourse on migration control. Th  is coun-
terhegemonic moment extended in the Greater Los Angeles area across a series of 
mass mobilizations, which were amplifi ed by regional, national, and transnational 
actions. In the following discussion, I describe a series of marches and actions 
organized, or inspired by, the Latino social bloc that took place in the spring of 
2006.  In  particular,  I  focus  on  March  25  mega-marcha,  the  student  walkouts 
of March 27–31, the April 10 national day of action, and the Great American 
Boycott  of May 1. I write about these actions with an eye toward understand-
ing how these mobilizations helped to prevent HR 4437 from becoming law and 
changing the national discourse to consider briefl y the legalization of the twelve 
million undocumented migrants in the United States in 2006. 

    March 25, 2006: Th  e  fi rst  of the Los Angeles mega-marches   

 Based on the turnout at the March 10 protest in Chicago, which was att ended 
by 100,000 to 300,000 people, organizers knew that the Los Angeles protest 

60

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

scheduled for March 25 would be well att ended.   33    None, however, expected the 
march to galvanize over half a million workers, families, and youths. Indeed, the 
permit secured for the protest was writt en for 5,000 protesters to convene on 
Olympic and Broadway and to travel north en route to city hall. In the few days 
before the March, Victor Narro indicated that he had to call the LAPD to ask 
them to increase the number of expected protesters to 50,000. Organizers had 
no idea that hundreds of thousands would take to the streets. 

 Th  at Saturday morning, countless workers and their children, overwhelm-
ingly of Mexican and Central American origin, could be seen walking to the con-
vening points on Olympic and Broadway from South Central Los Angeles and 
across the bridge that connects downtown to East Los Angeles. Th  e march was 
so large that protesters took three parallel streets as they marched north toward 
city hall.   34    Unlike most Los Angeles protests, which tend to att ract the usual set 
of hardcore activists that I recognized from years of participant observation, this 
action was overwhelmingly dominated by families and working-class migrants. 
Victor Narro, who was one of the fi rst organizers present on the day of the march, 
related how surprised he was by the massive turnout:

  I  remember  waking  up  with  a  weary  feeling  about  the  march.  As 
I  caught  the  train  to  Olympic  and  Broadway  from  the  labor  center 
[located in MacArthur Park], I noticed all kinds of people dressed in 
white huddled in the park. I saw masses of people dressed in white and 
with signs heading to downtown on the buses and trains. Since I had 
fi led the permit, the LAPD called to tell me that there was no way they 
could provide security for so many people. Th  ey told me that they can 
only provide security for 50,000 people. By 7  a.m . it was clear that there 
were more than 50,000 people ready to march. Most of the organiz-
ers had not even got there. Some had not even woken up yet. I had to 
quickly recruit people to do crowd control. I remember asking random 
people to help with security as they got off  the bus and training them 
on the spot.   35     

 Th  e  success  of  the  March  25  demonstration  gave  the  organizers  an  unprec-
edented level of social capital to galvanize the nation on both sides of the immi-
gration debate. As expected, the anti-migrant pundits focused on the Mexican 
fl ags of many protesters as proof of their unwillingness to assimilate. Moreover, 
these pundits characterized marchers as gang members and thugs, even though 
the marches were peaceful. Migrants and their allies across the United States 
viewed March 10 in Chicago and March 25 in Los Angeles as a national call to 
action. Th  e fi rst to take heed in the Greater Los Angeles area were Latino youth 
and students.  

The 2006 Mega-Marches in Greater Los Angeles

61

    March 27–March 31, 2006: A week of youth and student resistance   

 Perhaps nothing symbolizes the momentum created by the fi rst major march 
more  than  the  student  walkouts  that  took  place  on  March  27,  2006,  in  the 
Greater  Los  Angeles  area.  As  in  the  Chicano  movement  of  the  1960s,  youth 
from the barrios represented the bulk of protesters and evoked the greatest fears 
in the state.   36    What particularly scared the authorities was that barrio youth were 
unpredictable  and  seemingly  outside  the  formal  control  of  any  organization. 
Indeed, they did not always participate within the protest framework that liberal 
Latino organizations wanted them to adopt. On the contrary, they represented 
the most militant and volatile sector within the movement. In fact, most youth 
heard of the walkout through text messages and through the Internet message 
system MySpace. For instance, on April 15, 2006, a short-lived student wing of 
the March 25 Coalition called for a student protest. Th  e protest was organized 
with the explicit vision of channeling the energy of the walkouts into an orga-
nized and sanctioned student march and discouraging more walkouts.   37    While 
it was certainly a successful, large march, it was dwarfed by the size and scope of 
the student walkouts. 

 During the student protests tens of thousands of young people walked out of 
their classrooms and took to the streets of major Latino cities and regions. In Los 
Angeles, student protesters descended onto the busy 101 Freeway near down-
town.   38    In Montebello, students raised the Mexican fl ag above an upside-down 
US fl ag, and in Riverside, Latino students walked out from several area high 
schools and convened at Riverside City Hall for a rally.   39    Students in Long Beach 
coordinated walkouts in which even middle school and elementary school chil-
dren took to the streets. Th  e most organized set of walkouts during the general 
week of youth and student resistance occurred in San Diego and Oxnard. On 
March 28, 2006, thousands of students in San Diego walked out of school and 
convened at the historic Chicano Park, where they heard speakers and watched 
Aztec dancers perform. 

 Perhaps no other action represents the rawness of the student and youth sector 
than the walkouts that took place in Santa Ana, California, on Monday, March 27. 
Santa Ana is a unique city; in the 1960s it was a mostly white suburb but became 
a  major  site  of  international  migration  from  Mexico  in  the  1970s  and  1980s, 
quickly becoming a Mexican enclave in the notoriously Anglo and Republican 
stronghold of Orange County. Today, Santa Ana is a city with one of the highest 
concentrations of Mexican-born residents in the United States, and it is the cul-
tural and demographic hub of the Mexican community in Orange County. 

 In  the  immediate  aft ermath  of  the  massive  protest  on  March  25,  tens  of 
thousands of youths walked out of nearly every high school in Santa Ana and 
took over the busy thoroughfare of Bristol, whose mini-malls are the shopping 

62

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

and  cruising  destination  for  Chicano  youth.  Youth  in  the  area  engaged  in 
protests  that  resulted  in  a  twelve-hour  standoff   with  the  Santa  Ana  Police 
Department. Santa Ana police went on tactical alert on Monday March 27. 
Between  four  and  fi ve  hundred  police  offi  cers  from  the  city  of  Santa  Ana, 
sheriff s from Orange County, and police from surrounding counties and cit-
ies occupied Bristol. Like a scene from a war zone, police had full riot gear, 
“nonlethal” weapons, armored vehicles, and contingents of offi  cers mounted 
on  horseback.  Th  e  Santa  Ana  Police  Department  on  Civic  Center  Drive 
and Broadway had a barricade with offi  cers in riot gear surrounding it with 
crowd-control weapons and armored vehicles, as if protesters were going to 
take over police headquarters.   40    

 During  the  protests,  dozens  of  people  were  arrested,  and  prisoners  in 
Orange County jails were put on lockdown. Among those arrested, several were 
deported.  Jailed  protesters  also  reported  that  Orange  County  sheriff s  abused 
them for their protest activities and threatened to kill one of the protesters. For 
example, Mario Martínez, a day-laborer organizer at the time, recalled the physi-
cal and verbal abuse he faced while in police custody:

  I had my genitals grabbed and my arms pulled behind me while a deputy 
att empted to interrogate me; he had me bent over with my head against 
the wall and my arms twisted behind me asking if I was American or 
Mexican. . . . Th  e deputy made gestures of bashing in my face with his 
fi st and told me . . . that Mexicans are pieces of shit, they hate us, fuck 
Mexicans. . . . Th  e demeanor was racist and hateful.   41      

 Th  e  type  of  violence  described  by  Martinez  toward  Mexican  and  Latino 
activists  and  community  members  by  law  enforcement  has  become  all  too 
familiar in Santa Ana and in Orange County. But what makes this a particu-
larly disturbing moment is that the Santa Ana Police Department and Orange 
County  Sheriff s—the  local  repressive  apparatus  of  the  homeland  security 
state—were taking retaliatory action against what they perceived to be unruly 
and unassimilated protesters (hence the question hurled at Martinez about his 
nationality). 

 Meanwhile in Los Angeles on day two of the walkouts (March 28), between 
5,000 and 7,000 high school students converged on city hall aft er spending 
the  day  staging  militant  protests  against  the  draconian  legislation.   42     Mayor 
Antonio Villaraigosa gave students a patronizing speech about practicing their 
First Amendment rights, then asked them to go home and att end school the 
next day. According to Ron Gochez, who was present at this action,   43    students 
heckled the mayor and began to chant typical movement slogans such as “ Aquí 
estamos y no nos vamos ” (We are here and we will not leave); “ Somos un pueblo 

The 2006 Mega-Marches in Greater Los Angeles

63

sin fr onteras ” (We are a people without borders); and “ Esta es mi tierra, esta 
es mi lucha ” (Th  is is my land, this is my struggle). Th  e more politically savvy 
student organizations, such as the Raza Graduate Student Association, used 
the mayor’s opposition and media presence at the action to call for the forma-
tion of a Southern California student coordinating committ ee, which would 
eventually become the fi rst general meeting of the Coordinadora Estudiantil 
de la Raza.   44     

    April 10, 2006: Local fi ssures on the national day of action   

 Aft er the week of student walkouts, the next major action to take place in the Los 
Angeles area was the April 10 protest, which was part of a national day of action. 
Nationally, the day of action was a dramatic success, with hundreds of cities tak-
ing part; over 50,000 people took to the streets in Chicago and over 200,000 in 
New York City. In Phoenix, Arizona, activists organized the largest protest in the 
state’s history, with over 100,000 taking part. Ironically, however, in Los Angeles, 
which along with Chicago was one of the epicenters for the movement nation-
ally, the April 10 action was relatively small, with approximately 5,000 to 10,000 
protesters.   45    According to Victor Narro, the April 10 protest was never meant to 
be a large march but rather a rally and a media bite to get the Somos America 
coalition’s position out.   46    Somos America was a coalition of immigration reform-
ers that opposed HR 4437 and that was willing to support the Kennedy-McCain 
bill. Others such as Nativo Lopez would argue that the low turnout—despite 
the tremendous amount of resources and connections that immigration reform-
ers who spearheaded the action had with the media, unions, and Democratic 
Party establishment in Los Angeles—was symptomatic of major problems with 
the Somos America coalition, namely, they did not have a program that would 
resonate with the common sense of migrant workers to mobilize hundreds of 
thousands to downtown Los Angeles.   47    

 As immigration reformers within the Latino social bloc were organizing for 
April  10,  the  opposition  sector  announced  its  plans  for  the  Great  American 
Boycott , a national mobilization in which people were asked not to att end work 
or school in protest to HR 4437 and to demand the legalization of the eleven to 
twelve million undocumented workers in the United States. Th  e announcement 
coupled with the powerful but controversial student walkouts led the immigra-
tion reformers to break publicly with the Latino social bloc over the boycott .   48    
For instance, Cardinal Mahony issued a statement opposing the boycott , say-
ing, “Personally, I believe that we can make the May 1 a win-win day here in 
Southern California: go to work, go to school and then join thousands of us at a 
major rally aft erwards.”   49    Similarly, Angelica Salas, director of the Coalition for 
Humane Immigrant Rights of Los Angeles, argued that a boycott  would backfi re 

64

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

and create a backlash against migrant communities; on Telemundo and other 
Spanish-language media, Angela Sambrano of the Central American Resource 
Center called on potential migrant protesters to go to school and to work. 

 What was occurring in Los Angeles was also occurring at a national level. For 
example, the vice president of the National Council of La Raza, Cecilia Muñoz, 
took an anti-boycott  stance. In an ironic historical twist, the UFW, which had 
called for a national boycott  of grapes in the 1980s and 1990s, did not support 
the  Great  American  Boycott .  As  expected  by  most  activists,  President  Bush 
came out against the boycott , as did Senator Mel Martínez, Republican from 
Florida, who went on record in the national media, stating, “Boycott s, walkouts, 
or protests are not going to get this done. . . . Th  is is an issue that isn’t going to get 
fi xed on the streets. It’s going to take thoughtful action by Congress.”   50    Mayor 
Villaraigosa, who in the 1970s worked with CASA, the very organization that 
provided a key source of leadership for the Latino social bloc, came out against 
the boycott  along with other national Hispanic fi gures.  

    May 1: Th  e Great American Boycott    

 Despite eff orts by immigration reformers to dissuade people from participat-
ing, the Great American Boycott  was a monumental event in the Greater Los 
Angeles  area,  nationally  and  transnationally.  As  immigration  reformers  of 
the bloc backed away from the boycott , new groups began to support it. For 
instance, the Frente Continental and the Coordinadora Estudiantil de la Raza 
att empted to counter church and union leaders’ call to ignore the boycott  by 
holding a press conference to express their support. At the press conference, they 
expressed their support for the action by having religious leaders from smaller 
churches stand with them and by invoking the image of César Chavez. Th  ey 
argued that if Chavez would have been alive he would have supported the Great 
American Boycott . In a separate press conference held on April 25, 2006, the 
Coordinadora Estudiantil de la Raza, which ironically had been meeting in the 
basement of Nuestra Señora de Los Angeles (a historic Catholic church in Los 
Angeles), held a press conference on April 25, just before the May Day action. 
Church administrators responded by banning the group of mostly high school 
students from using its basement and prohibited them from having the press 
conference on the premises. Aft er being forced off  church grounds, the students 
held their press conference across the street from La Placita, despite harassment 
by church offi  cials and what organizers perceived as undercover police agents. 

 May  1,  2006,  International  Workers  Day,  was  the  date  set  for  the  Great 
American Boycott . Th  e action on this date represented the apex of the coun-
terhegemonic moment at the local, national, and transnational levels. Locally, 
Los Angeles witnessed a massive protest, in which at least 400,000 marched to 

The 2006 Mega-Marches in Greater Los Angeles

65

city hall on Monday morning, and 500,000 marched along the city’s Wilshire 
Corridor that evening.   51    Th  e entire port of Los Angeles came to a standstill when 
the truckers and port workers refused to work. Workers also shut down the gar-
ment and produce sectors, two of the largest industries in the Los Angeles area. 
Nearly 20,000 students throughout Southern California did not att end school. 
Most of the hotel and restaurant sectors faced shortages for the day. One  Los 
Angeles  Times   article  read,  “Dolls  from  China,  DVD  players  from  Japan  and 
shirts  from  Malaysia  piled  up  the  ports.  Lett uce  wasn’t  picked  in  Blythe  and 
strawberries languished in Oxnard.” Th  e article also quoted the president of the 
Economic Roundtable, Daniel Flaming: “Th  is was a reality check. . . . You can’t 
wish away these workers, they are rooted in the community.”   52    Nearly 90 per-
cent of the 10,000 truckers who work at the port of Los Angeles did not report 
to work, and Los Angeles schools experienced a 27% drop in att endance. One 
Los Angeles news report featured a story titled “Boycott  Turns Panorama City 
Mall into a Ghost Town.”   53    In the agricultural sector, farms from the Central 
Valley to the Imperial Valley and back to northern California came to a halt. In 
fact, according to the UFW spokesperson, the protests in the agricultural sector 
were the largest in California’s history, overshadowing the grape boycott s of the 
1970s.   54    

 May Day actions were coordinated throughout the entire country. Chicago 
was the site of another of the largest protests, with about 300,000 demonstrators 
marching downtown.   55    Across the country, schools with a large Latino popu-
lation  experienced  a  10%  to  33%  drop  in  student  att endance.   56     In  New  York 
City, thousands of people turned out to form eight human chains throughout 
Manhatt an, Brooklyn, Queens, and the Bronx symbolizing their opposition to 
HR 4437. Th  e day’s actions culminated in a rally in front of the Federal Building 
in downtown’s federal district. In San Francisco, 55,000 took to the streets chant-
ing and waving fl ags, and most businesses in the Mission District closed. San 
José experienced a large protest of at least 30,000 people.   57    

 On  the  transnational  level,  there  was  a  wave  of  solidarity  actions  across 
Mexico and Central America. In Mexico, activists urged citizens not to buy any-
thing “gringo” on May 1, and while Mexican politicians aligned with the Partido 
Revolucionario Institucional and the Partido Acción Nacional walked a delicate 
and hypocritical tightrope as they tried to appear supportive of migrant rights 
but not too critical of the United States, grassroots activists and the members of 
the Partido de la Revolución Democrática handed out pro-boycott  fl yers in soli-
darity with “ los mexicanos del otro lado ” (Mexicans on the other side). Moreover, 
in Ciudad Juárez, Monsignor Renato Ascencio called on Catholics in northern 
Mexico to support the boycott , arguing, “Los mexicanos que vivimos de este lado 
nos debemos solidarizar con los inmigrantes, como lo estan haciendo los guate-
maltecos, nicaraguenses, y otros paises de Centroamerica” (Th  e Mexicans who 

66

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

live on this side should show solidarity with the immigrants, just as are people in 
Guatemala, Nicaragua, and other Central American countries).   58    Other bishops 
in the border communities of Tijuana, Tecate, Mexicali, Nuevo Laredo, Reynosa, 
and  Piedras  Negras  supported  the  actions,  as  did  the  Consejo  Coordinador 
Empresarial  de  Ciudad  Juárez  (Business  Council  Coordinator  of  the  City  of 
Juarez) and the Cámara de Comercio de Tijuana (Chamber of Commerce of 
Tijuana).   59    Groups like the Council of Mexican Federations in North America 
also held binational press conferences, where activists in Los Angeles and Chicago 
would inform major Mexican newspapers such as  La Reforma  and  La Jornada  
about the demands of protesters.   60    Activists in Tijuana blocked the US–Mexico 
border for hours before being removed by the Mexican police. And in El Salvador 
and Guatemala, youth and labor organizations also held solidarity actions. 

 Beyond the number of people who att ended these protests and scope of the 
mega-marches, there are several reasons why they should be conceived of as a 
counterhegemonic moment. First, the boycott  and demonstrations of May 1, 
2006, exemplify what Gramsci called an organic crisis, in which a constellation 
of strategic political forces led by organic intellectuals emerges to defy the tra-
ditional political institutions of power. Th  ese organic intellectuals were able to 
articulate a simple message around full rights for workers that resonated with 
the masses of Latino migrant workers who heeded the call to support the boy-
cott  and to take to the streets. Th  e crisis is further manifested in the refusal of 
millions of Latino migrant workers and their allies across the nation to heed the 
call to ignore the boycott  made by elected offi  cials and immigration reformers. 
Th  e call made by elected offi  cials, the Catholic Church, unions, and some of the 
nonprofi ts did not resonate with the common sense of the masses of the migrant 
workers and their allies, who fl ooded the streets of Los Angeles, the nation, and 
the transnational cities in Mexico and Central America that are connected to the 
global city region of Greater Los Angeles. 

 Th  e second reason why the mega-marches were a counterhegemonic moment 
relates to the unity that Gramsci describes in his writings on the philosophy 
of praxis. Th  e unity achieved between organic intellectuals and the masses of 
Latino migrant workers of the Latino social bloc allowed for them to gain moral 
and intellectual leadership on the issue of immigration reform in the public and 
political sphere for a brief moment. An indicator of this achievement could be 
seen in the brief shift  in the national discourse on migration control. Th  e national 
discourse went from one in which members of the dominant Anglo-American 
society would speak about migrants as criminals, gang members, diseases, and 
a burden to the economy to one in which major newspapers momentarily fea-
tured positive headlines.   61    For instance, the May 2 front-page headline of the  Los 
Angeles Times  read, “Marchers Fill LA’s Streets: Next Converting the Energy of 
Protest to Political Clout,” and other articles were titled “When I See Th  is I See 

The 2006 Mega-Marches in Greater Los Angeles

67

Strength,” “Migrants Demonstrate Peaceful Power,” and “Th  rongs Show Th  eir 
Potent Role in the Economy.”   62    Th  ese stories invoke images of political agency 
and oft en focused on specifi c life histories, presenting readers with the names, 
occupations, and current struggles of migrant workers. For instance, the front 
page of that same issue of the  Los Angeles Times  had a picture of Max Amenero, 
a Peruvian migrant who came to the United States when he was sixteen and 
contracted polio and now sits in a wheelchair. Hundreds of similar stories that 
humanized migrants were writt en all over the nation. 

 Furthermore, the mega-marches were a counterhegemonic moment because 
the Latino social bloc was able to make powerful corporate and state interests 
concede to support the boycott . Protesters were also able to win concessions 
from  local  governments  and  multinational  corporations.  Th  e  fi rst  concession 
came from the California State Senate, where Gil Cedillo and Gloria Romero 
sponsored a resolution to endorse the May 1 boycott . Th  en, in the weeks leading 
up to the May 1 protest, it became evident that powerful multinational corpora-
tions would concede to giving workers the day off , in some cases with pay. For 
instance, Tyson Food Inc., Purdue Farms, and Swift  Inc.—three of the largest 
meat and poultry plants in the United States—granted workers the day off .   63    
Th  e marches had a similar impact nationally. For instance, the New York City 
Hispanic Chamber of Commerce heeded the call for the boycott . “We are call-
ing it a day of solidarity with migrants,” said Eduardo Giraldo, chairman of the 
New York Statewide Coalition of Hispanic Chambers of Commerce. “We are 
asking for compassion from the employers towards the employees.”   64    

 Finally, the Latino social bloc was able to expand the scope of policy propos-
als seriously considered in the 109th Congress. Not until aft er the fi rst action 
on March 25 did the Senate gain the courage to vote on S 2611, a less puni-
tive bill which would have included a limited path toward  citizenship for about 
half of the twelve million people undocumented living in the United States at 
that  time.  Th  e  late  Senator  Edward  Kennedy  made  the  following  statements 
on the Senate fl oor just four days aft er the March 25 protest: “Th  ose who have 
peacefully demonstrated their dedication to justice and comprehensive immi-
gration reform should not be relegated back into the shadows. . . . I had hoped 
we would recognize the lawful, heartfelt protests of millions against the harsh 
House-passed criminalization measures. . . . Criminalizing that status was puni-
tive  and  wrong. . . . Th  ese  policies,  which  were  included  in  the  House-passed 
bill  and  supported  there  by  congressional  Republicans,  understandably 
sparked  nationwide  protests.”   65     As  the  words  of  the  late  senator  indicate,  the 
mega-marches gave the Democrats the ability to argue against HR 4437 and 
propose an alternative bill, one that although not entirely supported by all sec-
tors of the Latino social bloc—especially the oppositional sector—was able to 
prevent the Sensenbrenner bill from becoming law. Even some of the leading 

68

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

immigration reformers in Washington, D.C., conceded that had it not been for 
the mega-marches, HR 4437 may not have been defeated. For instance, Angela 
Maria Kelly of the Center for American Progress remarked:  

  As  the  marches  were  just  rolling  through  the  country  members  [of 
Congress]  started  showing  up  and  we  got  the  bill  moving—the 
Kennedy-McCain  bill.  It  came  out  with  four  Republicans  and  all  of 
the Democrats supporting it. And that is what sustained us, we actu-
ally had pulled the bill off  the fl oor and thought it was dead. We got 
the  bill  off   the  fl oor  with  twenty-four  Republicans  supporting  the 
Kennedy-McCain bill. But what got people there were people on the 
streets. I have never seen such a direct line of how people could force 
lawmakers to act. It was beautiful!   66      

 As  the  words  of  Kelly  suggest,  the  marches  created  the  pressure  on  the 
Democratic Party to propose an alternative bill and essentially prevent HR 4437 
from passing in the Senate. Th  e Kennedy-McCain bill, or S 2611, as problem-
atic as it may have been to some sectors of the Latino social bloc, helped dig 
the grave for HR 4437. Eff orts to move forward with the Kennedy-McCain bill 
had been abandoned until the mega-marches put the pressure on Senate to act. 
Indeed, had it not been for the congealing of the Latino social bloc and its abil-
ity to galvanize a movement across the United States, in small towns and major 
cities and in Mexico and Central America, a Senate version of HR 4437, the 
legislative baby of the anti-migrant bloc, would have passed in both houses and 
been sent to President Bush. Paradoxically, this victory for the Latino social  bloc 
was also its undoing.   

    Disintegration of the Latino Social Bloc   

 Despite  the  ascendency  of  the  Latino  social  bloc,  the  counterhegemonic 
moment was lost almost as fast as the bloc congealed. A defi ning characteris-
tic of hegemony, according to Gramsci, is that when the political leadership of 
dominant groups is threatened, they reassert their leadership through a delicate 
balance of co-optation and repression. In Greater Los Angeles, the bloc was dis-
integrated through a similar balance of forces. 

 Aft er the success of the half-million march on March 25, 2006, and the raw 
acts of resistance that took place in Santa Ana on March 27 and in the imme-
diate aft ermath of the May 1 boycott , the Latino social bloc began to disinte-
grate  rapidly.  As  described  by  Kelly,  Congress  saw  that  the  masses  of  Latino 
migrant workers and their allies would not go quietly into the night and began to 

The 2006 Mega-Marches in Greater Los Angeles

69

move forward with the Kennedy-McCain bill (S 2611). Th  e new bill removed 
the most draconian aspects of HR 4437, including turning all undocumented 
migrants into felons and criminalizing those who provide services to undocu-
mented migrants as aiding and abett ing the crime of “illegal entry”—but it still 
divided Latino migrant activists and the migrant rights movement. With this 
bill on the table, the tensions between the oppositional groups and immigration 
reformers deepened the fi ssures in the Latino social bloc. Th  e Catholic Church, 
labor unions, and moderate nonprofi t organizations completely broke with the 
oppositional side of the bloc and adopted the position of the Somos America 
coalition, which was taking the lead of Congressman Luis Gutiérrez of Chicago 
and backing the Kennedy-McCain bill. Angelica Salas, the executive director of 
the Coalition for Humane Immigrant Rights of Los Angeles, expresses the views 
of immigration reformers: “We felt that this was our best chance to be able to 
bring all the diff erent sectors and diff erent parties on board to be able to fi ght for 
this reform.”   67    From the perspective of Salas and other immigration reformers in 
Los Angeles, 2006 was a watershed moment but also a missed opportunity. For 
instance, Ali Noorani, director of the National Immigration Forum, refl ecting on 
the 2006 marches and the proposed Kennedy-McCain bill, which did not pass 
in the Senate, said “I do think we missed an opportunity. I think as a result there 
has been a lot of pain and suff ering . . . Th  at was a big mistake on our part.”   68    Th  e 
position put forth by Salas and Noorani, both of whom were part of the Somos 
America coalition, was representative of the position put out by immigration 
reformers in Los Angeles and across the country in 2006. 

 Oppositional forces such as the March 25 Coalition and other groups such as 
the Frente Continental and the Coordinadora Estudiantil de la Raza argued that 
the Kennedy-McCain bill betrayed the spirit of the million or so activists who 
took to the streets on March 25, 2006. Th  ey held this position because the bill 
would have provided a punitive and complex path toward legalization for some 
migrants in exchange for more border security and interior enforcement. Other 
national  groups,  such  as  the  National  Network  for  Immigrant  and  Refugee 
Rights,  also  denounced  Somos  America  and  the  Democratic  Party  establish-
ment for essentially riding the wave of protest to push through an immigration 
bill that would have resulted in a punitive and unreasonably long legalization 
process in addition to the continued militarization of the border and interior 
enforcement eff orts. 

 Th  e power of hegemony lies precisely in its ability to make groups believe 
that the current state of aff airs is natural and fi xed. Many of the well-intentioned 
immigration reformers failed to see beyond the limits of the Somos America 
strategy. In other words, they accepted the terms of the debate in Congress that 
essentially  called  for  legalization  in  exchange  for  more  enforcement  without 
having the vision and power to propose a more just immigration reform bill. 

70

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

Th  e oppositional forces of the Latino social bloc demanded an immediate and 
unconditional legalization for the twelve million undocumented workers in the 
United States and committ ed to struggle against the forces of global capitalism 
that displace workers in Latin America. However, they did not have a concrete 
strategy on how to get what they wanted and they were marginalized from the 
beltway policy discussions occurring in Washington, D.C. 

 Immigration reformers being led out of Washington, D.C.–based civil-society 
organizations such as the Center for Community Change and Service Employees 
International  Union  (SEIU)  had  a  plan  and  strategy  to  push  the  Kennedy–
Mcain Bill and to court Latino voters. Nativo Lopez refl ected on how this plan 
occurred.  

  Th  e  Democratic  Party  apparatus  and  the  party  activists  didn’t  see  it 
early in the year, but aft er March 10 in Chicago and March 25 in Los 
Angeles . . . [they] began providing infrastructure and logistical support 
and messaging throughout the country. Th  rough liberal foundations all 
of a sudden money started appearing to organizations that had been 
involved. By May 1 we started hearing this “Today We March, Tomorrow 
We Vote” slogan. It surfaced from the We Are America Coalition. Th  ey 
saw how the movement could be channeled toward an electoral push. 
Th  e party started pushing the movement in this direction, and that is 
OK because ultimately we defeated Sensenbrenner . . . But we ultimately 
didn’t get the kind of immigration reform that we wanted in 2006, but 
neither did the right wing.    69      

 Lopez  was  partially  right,  and  he  was  wrong.  Th  e  movement  defeated 
HR 4437 and the Democratic Party was able to court the Latino vote and chan-
nel the movement into electoral politics, but the anti-migrant bloc got to build 
up the homeland security state by passing the Secure Fence Act of 2006 and by 
expanding enforcement eff orts in other parts of the country.   70     

 Th  e second reason why a large sector of the Latino social bloc disintegrated 
is material. One should recall that the fi rst HR 4437 was so draconian that it 
would have converted twelve million undocumented workers into felons and 
criminalized anyone who works with them. Th  us, the unions, nonprofi ts, the 
Catholic Church, and even the Congressional Hispanic Caucus were not going 
to be able to work with a large part of their constituencies. Th  ese major insti-
tutional players were at risk fi nancially by HR 4437, which would have cost 
them  through  fi nes,  legal  batt les,  loss  of  donations,  or  dues  in  some  cases. 
Nonetheless, once these draconian elements were dropped from the negotiat-
ing table, the Latino social bloc began to disintegrate further, as immigration 
reformers fl ocked to the congressional negotiating table under the leadership 

The 2006 Mega-Marches in Greater Los Angeles

71

of  the  Democratic  Party  in  favor  of  the  Kennedy-McCain  bill.  Immigration 
reformers made these decisions because they thought this bill was the best bill 
that they could possibly get. 

 Labor  had  to  oppose  the  boycott   for  practical  reasons.  Manuel  Roman  of 
UNITE HERE Local 11 during the marches explained, “Th  ere’s absolutely no 
fucking way because any tacit support . . . by any union, saying we support the 
May 1 [boycott ], right, would be in direct violation of prett y much every exist-
ing union contract in this country.”   71    Th  e union did not support the boycott  to 
avoid breaking its contracts. Th  e union’s refusal to support the boycott  created a 
tension in which the base of the union wanted to att end the May 1 boycott , but 
the union leadership was opposed to participating in the boycott  and instead 
organized  an  aft erwork/school  march  along  with  other  immigration  reform-
ers for the evening of May 1. Roman noted, “Our members, our housekeepers, 
our cooks,  our meseros  [waiters], who were coming and saying, ‘So what’s up?’ 
you know, ‘are we going to take out our picket signs or are we going to take our 
banners?’ ” Although Roman and several local union leaders and rank-and-fi le 
members att ended the May 1 boycott  “on their own,” as he emphasized in our 
interview,  he  admitt ed  that  offi  cially  the  Los  Angeles  County  Federation  of 
Labor “didn’t use the machinery, you know, we didn’t, and anyone who tells oth-
erwise is lying!”   72    Nativo Lopez of the Mexican American Political Association 
contends that labor, especially the UFW, opposed the boycott  and supported 
the  Kennedy-McCain  bill  because  it  contained  a  guest-worker  program  for 
which the farmworkers’ union would have won millions of dollars in contracts.   73    
 As Gramsci pointed out, however, co-optation is just one face of hegemony. In 
fact, he wrote that “the apparatus of state coercive power which ‘legally’ enforces 
discipline on those groups who do not ‘consent’ either actively or passively” is 
always reserved for “moments of crisis of command and direction when sponta-
neous consent has failed.”   74    Indeed, much like the Chicano movement before it, 
the Latino social bloc was unraveled and disrupted by state coercion. Organizers 
reported being followed, receiving threatening phone calls, having their pictures 
taken, and facing direct physical abuse by law enforcement.   75    Perhaps the most 
visible incident occurred a year aft er of the Great American Boycott , on May 1, 
2007, during the notorious MacArthur Park incident. As the world watched, the 
LAPD att acked thousands of protesters for nearly thirty minutes. Police fi red 
tear  gas  and  rubber  bullets  into  crowds  of  peaceful  protesters  who  included 
women and children and members of the television media. Regardless of the 
offi  cial intentions, the repression, which was televised all over the world, sent 
a chilling message to the base of supporters of the migrant rights social move-
ment: participating in protest activities could be met with state violence. 

 In  August  2007  federal  agents  captured  Chicago  activist  Elvira  Arellano 
in Los Angeles. Arellano, the mother of a US citizen child, Saul Arellano, had 

72

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

become an icon of the migrant rights movement in 2006 when she, in an act of 
resistance against a federal judge’s orders, refused her deportation and sought 
sanctuary inside a Chicago church.   76    Arellano left  her sanctuary and traveled 
to Los Angeles, evading authorities from the DHS and ICE. Nonetheless, she 
was  captured  by  authorities  in  Los  Angeles  as  she  traveled  with  some  of  the 
leaders of the 2006 mega-marches to speak at a rally. Another incident of state 
repression occurred on April 19, 2007, when DHS and ICE offi  cials used force 
to  break  up  organizational  eff orts  to  protest  the  further  militarization  of  the 
US–Mexico border at the No Borders Camp in San Diego. In the brutal att ack, 
Border Patrol agents used pepper spray on a group of peaceful protesters as they 
conducted a binational protest against the US–Mexico border wall in San Ysidro. 
Th  e intensifi cation of state repression aimed at Latino migrant communities and 
at the migrant social movement should not be viewed as simple, isolated acts of 
state violence. Rather, it should be conceptualized as a shift  in hegemony, which 
relied  on  consensual  domination  before  the  mega-marches,  to  one  that  still 
used co-optation, but that also used state violence, deportation, and the threat 
of force. 

 Notwithstanding the severity and brutality of these actions, the disintegra-
tion of the Latino social bloc cannot be explained simply by state repression. 
State repression can destroy movements, but it can also inject a sense of urgency 
and vigor that allows movements to take the struggle to the next level. Social 
movement leaders must anticipate and have a strategy for responding to state 
repression and infi ltration. Well-prepared organizers can turn tragic incidents of 
state repression and intimidation on their heads, as was the case in Litt le Village 
in Chicago. In a classic display of how organized communities can respond to 
repression, a mass protest took place in the Latino community of Litt le Village 
aft er the ICE conducted a raid in a busy shopping mall as a reprisal for the 2006 
marches. 

 In  addition  to  state  repression,  a  set  of  internal  contradictions  facilitated 
the disintegration of the Latino social bloc. First, there were serious divisions 
within the oppositional faction of the Latino social bloc. Moreover, there was 
oft en a batt le among charismatic personalities for leadership. As Chicana femi-
nist  scholars  have  pointed  out,  these  divisions  have  been  a  historic  problem 
among men in the Chicano movement.   77    Th  e Latino social bloc was no excep-
tion.  Male  leaders  oft en  had  dramatic  macho  power  struggles  for  leadership 
over the movement. Th  e main problem was with a few key male leaders who 
used authoritarian tactics that alienated many potential allies. Th  ere were oft en 
divisions over who would get credit for the mega-marches, who would be the 
spokesperson of the movement, and in some cases, who could participate in the 
meetings. A notable diff erence between the male and female leadership is that 
most of the women belonged to well-established organizations with a mass base, 

The 2006 Mega-Marches in Greater Los Angeles

73

democratic structure, and a system of accountability, whereas the main nuclei 
of the male leadership, with few exceptions, did not. But personality confl icts, 
gender dynamics, and possible infi ltration that divided the Latino social bloc 
cannot fully account for its demise; such problems are, unfortunately, part of the 
reality of building social movements in the United States. A challenge for forg-
ing a new social bloc is building the necessary organizational sophistication and 
internal democratic structures to deal with these internal problems while build-
ing a sustainable and eff ective social movement.  

    Th  e Counterhegemonic Moment and the Limits of 

Mass Mobilization   

 Th  is chapter argues that the 2006 mega-marches in Greater Los Angeles material-
ized through the work of organic intellectuals who were able to organize a broad 
coalition of forces into what I term the Latino social bloc. Th  e bloc was built on 
the culmination of three generations of Chicano and Central American politi-
cal organizing, as well as the militancy of the Proposition 187 generation. Th  ese 
genealogies of struggle served as a sort of school for the formation of organic 
intellectuals or Latino migrant organizers who were educated in political strategy 
and tactics and understood the nature of the conjuncture at hand. Unlike a typi-
cal coalition or united front, the Latino social bloc was able to lead diverse and 
at times contradictory factions of the Latino migrant movement and its allies to 
overcome their immediate interests in support of the mega-marches. Th  e result 
was the defeat of a draconian immigration reform bill that was the brain child 
and legislative baby of the anti-migrant bloc in Congress during the spring of 
2006. Th  e mega-marches also resulted in a brief shift  in the national discourse 
on migration control from one that criminalized migrants to one that humanized 
them and placed legalization on the congressional negotiating table and in the 
national psyche. Th  e mega-marches stand as an unprecedented benchmark in 
Latino migrant politics and social movements more broadly. Indeed, as Gramsci 
writes about Red Sunday in Italy, when tens of thousands of workers took over 
the factories, “For the workers, one day like this is worth ten years of normal 
activity.”   78    Th  e same could be said about the mega-marches, for they illustrated 
that Latino social movements could transcend traditional local coalition poli-
tics and defeat draconian legislation in Congress. Th  ey also illustrate that these 
movements can potentially mobilize millions of migrants and their supporters in 
the United States and transnationally. In the words of organizer Esther Portillo, 
“One of the lessons that the mega-marches has showed us is that using traditional 
lobbying, brokering, and advocacy is not enough. Th  ese tactics alone have failed. 
Th  e people aff ected by these issues have to take the streets and make demands.”   79    

74

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

Portillo  is  not  suggesting  a  complete  abandonment  of  traditional  tactics  but 
rather emphasizing that unless a mass movement to create the political pressure 
on state leaders emerges, such tactics alone are bound to fail. 

 Despite the historical magnitude of the marches and their immediate impact 
on HR 4437, one must note that there are serious limits to mass mobilization 
as a sole tactic for creating sustainable social change. Indeed, the 2006 marches 
in Greater Los Angeles were just a few among many contestations between the 
migrant rights movement and the anti-migrant bloc for intellectual and ideo-
logical leadership over the direction of state migration control and the rights of 
migrants. Indeed, perhaps one of the greatest shortcomings of the Latino social 
bloc was that it was ill prepared for the success of the mega-marches. Bloc lead-
ers did not have the foresight and capacity to organize a signifi cant portion of 
the millions of people who came to the mass mobilization into a sustainable, 
long-term organizational structure. Without cultivating this type of mass-based 
power in civil society, oppositional forces within the migrant rights movement 
and its allies will not have the capacity to meet their more far-reaching demands 
for social justice. 

 Latino migrant activists and organizers in 2006 did not foresee the resiliency 
of the anti-migrant bloc that was operating in distinct sites of state power and 
in civil society. Th  ese forces shift ed their approach from a top-down strategy 
of  a  sweeping  “immigration  reform”  bill  to  implementing  their  enforcement- 
through-att rition agenda through a piecemeal strategy. Concretely, this shift  was 
manifested in a barrage of migration-control policies in multiple sites of power. 
For instance, just six months aft er the Great American Boycott , President Bush 
signed the Secure Fence Act of 2006, a bill for expanding the border wall by 
700 miles and adding additional security personnel and measures for border 
enforcement. Following the marches, raids into migrant communities and work 
sites dramatically increased, more National Guard troops were deployed to the 
border,  and  local  anti-migrant  ordinances  and  repressive  practices  aimed  at 
Latino communities proliferated, at times aimed directly at organizers from the 
Latino social bloc. In the following chapter, I illustrate the impact of local migra-
tion control on the Latino communities of Riverside, California, and elaborate 
on the challenges that such policies have for the Latino migrant movement more 
broadly.     

      3 

 Race, Domestic Globalization, and 

Migration Control in Riverside County    

       287(g) in our community is basically SB 1070, like the one they have 
in Arizona.  

  —Emilio Amaya   1      

 Since the 2006 marches, the Latino migrant activists and their allies have been 
unable  to  roll  back  the  barrage  of  anti-migrant  policies  and  practices  imple-
mented at the local, state, and federal levels. Alarmed by the massive turnout in 
streets across the United States, the anti-migrant forces operating at the nexus 
between  the  state  and  civil  society  stepped  up  their  push  for  state  and  local 
governments to control the fl ow of migrants.   2    Th  e number of anti-migrant bills 
at the state level doubled between 2006 and 2007.   3    In 2007, there were 1,562 
immigration-related  bills  in  all  of  the  fi ft y  states.  A  total  of  240  bills  became 
law  in  forty-six  states.  In  addition  to  legislation  at  the  state  level,  local  ordi-
nances have also become popular among municipal and city governments from 
Hazelton,  Pennsylvania,  to  Farmers  Branch,  Texas,  to  Escondido  and  Costa 
Mesa, California, and many other localities across the country.   4    Indeed, local 
governments have att empted to regulate migrants through a variety of measures, 
including  barring  undocumented  migrants  from  renting  homes,  revoking  the 
business licenses of employers that hire undocumented workers, and banning 
and shutt ing down day-labor centers. 

 Clearly, not all local and municipal governments’ policies conform to this 
trend. Major cities such as San Francisco and New York City have—at least sym-
bolically—declared themselves sanctuaries for migrants in the face of federal 
ICE raids. Moreover, small cities in California such as Southgate, Huntington 
Park, and Coachella have provided city services to migrants regardless of their 
legal status. Nonetheless, the vast majority of local policies covered by the media 

75

76

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

following the mega-marches have been those designed to discourage migrants 
from sett ling in communities or to expand the power of local police offi  cials to 
cooperate with federal immigration authorities. Most important, however, the 
decision of local and municipal governments to regulate the fl ow of migrants, or 
integrate them, is the product of the relations of force between groups with com-
peting interests and visions over the direction of the local governing apparatus 
and the rights of migrants vis-à-vis the state. 

 To illuminate how such struggles take place, in this chapter I look at migra-
tion control in Riverside County, California, and Latino migrant activists’ eff orts 
to mitigate the human rights consequences of the county’s draconian policing 
practices. To conduct this analysis, I examined the proceedings of a meeting 
of the Riverside County Board of Supervisors and conducted interviews with 
Latino  migrant  rights  activists  in  the  region.  Th  e  Riverside  County  Board  of 
Supervisors governs the County of Riverside, and, next to the state of California 
and the federal government, it is the most powerful governmental institution 
in the area. Th  e County Board “enacts ordinances and resolutions, adopts the 
annual  budget,  approves  contracts  appropriates  funds,  determines  land  use 
zoning for the unincorporated area, [and] appoints certain County offi  cers and 
members of various boards and commission,” among other duties.   5    As the fol-
lowing discussion shows, the county government represents the convergence of 
corporate interests linked to the emergence of a global capitalist economy and 
reactionary conservative forces in civil society. 

 I also draw upon interviews with leading Latino migrant activists who work 
in Inland Empire, a region of Southern California comprised of Riverside and 
San Bernardino counties. Organizers and activists interviewed for this chap-
ter include those from the National Day Laborers Network, San Bernardino 
Community  Service  Center,  and  religious  organizations  including  the 
Archdiocese  of  San  Bernardino.  My  observations  and  interpretation  of  the 
material are also guided by my own auto-ethnographic knowledge from grow-
ing up most of my youth in the community of Mira Loma, located in the west-
ern part of the county. 

 Riverside County, located one hour from the city of Los Angeles, is one of 
the largest counties in the United States. It experienced a rapid demographic 
transformation during the 1990s that has accelerated in the early twenty-fi rst 
century.   6     Th  ere  are  now  nearly  two  million  Latinos  in  the  Inland  Empire,  a 
region of over four million people, and, in fact, Latinos are expected to become 
the majority by 2015.   7    It is an area that has dramatically transformed from a 
rural  backwater  of  Southern  California  to  an  extension  of  the  Los  Angeles 
greater metropolitan region and thus a critical nodal point in the infrastructure 
of global capitalism. 

Race, Globalization, and Migration Control

77

 While  the  Inland  Empire  area  of  Southern  California  is  growing  overall 
demographically, Latinos—migrant, as well as second- and third-generation—
constitute  the  largest  group  driving  the  growth.  Th  e  majority  of  the  Latino 
population in Riverside County is Mexican, refl ecting both the indisputable fact 
that the county was once part of Mexico and the long history of Mexican labor 
in the region’s agricultural sectors.   8    Th  ere is also a relatively small but emerg-
ing Salvadoran and Guatemalan community. Salvadorans are spread throughout 
the county, and the Guatemalan community is overwhelmingly concentrated 
in the neighborhood of Casa Blanca, where thousands of indigenous Q’anjob’al 
Mayans reside. Given these conditions, Riverside County is a prime locality to 
study the policing of migrants  and Latino migrant politics under the conditions 
produced by global capitalism and post–civil rights race relations.   9    

 Following the mega-marches Riverside County’s municipal government was 
one of the fi rst in the nation, and the second in Southern California, to sign a 
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with DHS.   10    Th  e MOU in Riverside 
County was made possible by section 287(g) of the Illegal Immigration Reform 
and  Immigrant  Responsibility  Act  of  1996  (IIRIRA  ),  which  was  signed  by 
President Clinton two years aft er signing NAFTA. Section 287(g) of IIRIRA   
provides in part that the federal government

  may enter into a writt en agreement with a state, or any political subdivi-
sion of a state, pursuant to which an offi  cer or employee of the state or 
subdivision, who is determined . . . to be qualifi ed to perform a function 
of immigration offi  cer in relation to the investigation, apprehension, or 
detention of aliens in the United States (including the transportation of 
such aliens across states lines to a detention center), may carry out such 
function at the expense of the state or political subdivision and to the 
extent consistent with state and local law.   11      

 Th  e agreement made in the MOU grants local law enforcement agencies the 
power to enforce federal immigration law, although local police forces were not 
granted such power previously. Although police and sheriff  departments have 
the authority to implement such a MOU since 1996, it was not until aft er 9/11 
that this provision of IIRIRA 
 was implemented nationally. Th  e Department of 
Justice’s  Offi  ce  of  Legal  Counsel  issued  a  memorandum  to  the  att orney  gen-
eral in 1989 concluding that unauthorized presence in the United States is not 
a  crime   12   —thereby  implying  that  local  authorities  do  not  have  the  authority 
to enforce immigration law. In 2002, Att orney General John Ashcroft  issued a 
new memorandum stating that the 1989 memo was fl awed.   13    According to the 
new memo, states have an “inherent authority” to enforce immigration law. Th  is 

78

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

statement essentially opened the door for local governments to embrace section 
287(g) of IIRIRA 

. 

 On a national level, the implementation of 287(g) was part of the forma-
tion  of  the  homeland  security  state.  Th  is  process  involved  the  integration  of 
the Immigration and Naturalization Service under the newly formed DHS in 
2003. Indeed, the implementation of the 287(g) throughout the United States 
cannot be separated from the goals of the anti-migrant bloc and their eff ort to 
implement the enforcement-through-att rition strategy. Indeed this strategy was 
outlined in Operation Endgame, a ten-year strategic plan that calls for the deep-
ening of interagency cooperation between the DHS-ICE and local law enforce-
ment agencies to implement an enforcement-through-att rition strategy.   14    

 As part of this strategy, the federal government advanced a series of initia-
tives to expand its capacity for enforcement from the traditional zone of the US–
Mexico border into the interior. One of these new forms of interior enforcement 
was made possible by the MOU between the DHS-ICE and municipal govern-
ments to implement the 287(g) program by authorizing police and sheriff  agen-
cies to be trained to enforce federal immigration law. During 2006, the fi rst year 
that the program was implemented in Riverside County, ICE trained eight depu-
ties from the sheriff ’s department and referred 71% of the roughly 196 inmates 
that it screened in an average month for deportation.   15    In the two years follow-
ing the 2006 mega-marches, the 287(g) program was expanded to seventy-one 
local law enforcement agencies in twenty-six states.   16    ICE reports that since the 
program was implemented, it has trained 1,190 offi  cers to enforce immigration 
law and has identifi ed more than 173,000 deportable individuals.   17    

 Th  e MOU was implemented under the premise that there is a natural connec-
tion among crime, migrants, terrorism, and threats to public safety. Ironically, 
however, at the time that local governments and state agencies were signing the 
MOU, crime had been declining nationally. According to a study conducted by 
the Public Policy Institute of California, even in migrant-receiving states such 
as California, immigrants are less likely to commit crimes than US citizens are, 
and cities experiencing an increase in their immigrant populations have seen 
a net drop in crime.   18    Nonetheless, the county governments of Los Angeles, 
Orange,  San  Bernardino,  Riverside,  and  Ventura  have  all  signed  the  MOU. 
Th  e fi ndings made by the Public Policy Institute of California suggest that no 
positive correlation exists between an increase in the immigrant population 
and crime in California cities. Despite the declining crime rate, the Riverside 
County Board of Supervisors approved and justifi ed passing the MOU as an 
ostensibly race-neutral policy that would curtail crime in the county.    

Race, Globalization, and Migration Control

79

      Th  e Local Anti-Migrant Bloc   

 Th  ere was nothing inevitable about the implementation of the MOU in Riverside 
County. If oppositional Latino groups and their allies had possessed the politi-
cal power necessary, they might have, in theory, pressured the county’s Board 
of Supervisors not to participate in the 287(g) program. Local governments do 
not implement policies on their own; rather, policies are passed when a group 
harnesses the power of the state to implement its agenda, prevailing over sub-
ordinate groups that may also be competing for control over the institutions of 
governance. 

 Th  ose  governing  are  not  the  enlightened  statesmen  of  the  polity  whom 
they are assumed to be in classic pluralist theory. Th  ey are individuals who are 
rooted in racialized class relations. In other words, they are governing in a soci-
ety in which race and class greatly aff ect the distribution of resources, rights, 
and privilege. Under such conditions, it is critical for dominant groups to create 
the conditions for the social reproduction of racialized class relations by bring-
ing together diff erent social bases into a constellation of force in both the state 
and in civil society. In the context of Riverside County, this coalition could only 
happen through the formation of a regional or local bloc of interests comprised 
of capital, elected and appointed offi  cials, and civil society–based organizations 
that seek to ensure that Riverside County continue its regional transformation 
from a rural backwater of Southern California to part of the Los Angeles global 
city region and hence a critical nodal point in the global capitalist economy. 

 I conceptualize this regional constellation of forces in Riverside County as a 
local anti-migrant bloc. Indeed, it is a highly heterogeneous and contradictory set 
of actors that includes elected and appointed offi  cials who are linked to the most 
lucrative fractions of capital in the region and a reactionary base of conservative 
whites and a handful of Republican Latinos. Elected offi  cials and state person-
nel who work with the county, such as the Board of Supervisors and the Sheriff  
Department, act as organic intellectuals for the bloc as they seek to win ideologi-
cal consent for the dual system of justice and for the development model they 
have imposed on the region. Th  e language that they use to criminalize Latinos 
in the region is one that resonates with the common sense of supporters among 
a large sector of the working- and middle-class whites who no longer have the 
same standard of living aff orded to them under the Fordist mode of production. 
Th  us,  the  Riverside  County  anti-migrant  bloc  brings  together  corporate  and 
socially conservative Republican interests under a ruling coalition at multiple 
levels of governance, including but not limited to the Riverside County Board of 
Supervisors, city governments, school boards, and a variety of civil society–based 
organizations. It has a corporate faction that actively promotes the interests of 
corporate capital in the county by imposing a neoliberal development model in 

80

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

which the state is supposed to att ract investors by subsidizing their use of water 
and power and their development of roads and by lift ing any social and envi-
ronmental regulations considered barriers to development. However, it is also a 
racial bloc. Since its inception, it has been led by a faction of male Anglo leaders 
who have historically relied on reactionary whites as a base of support and legiti-
macy while politically marginalizing the county’s working-class Latino commu-
nities. For instance, while the county is 46% Latino, the Riverside County Board 
of Supervisors is entirely composed of white men. 

 Th  e anti-migrant bloc is the premier socioeconomic and political force in the 
region, and it operates without major rivals. Despite the region’s demographic 
trends, the bloc will be a feature of governance in Riverside County for some 
time to come, unless progressive forces in the Inland Empire region can build a 
class-based alliance between the region’s diff erent ethnic and racial groups with 
the political capacity to challenge its hegemony. To begin, a recent study by the 
Public Policy Institute of California on the future of the Inland Empire pre-
dicts, “By 2015, whites will account for only 35 percent of adults in the popula-
tion but will make up almost half (48 percent) of registered voters. By contrast, 
Latinos will make up almost half of the adults (48 percent) but only 33 percent 
of the registered voters.”   19    Th  e same report also indicates that Latinos already 
compose the majority of the region’s workforce and that wages and educational 
levels are signifi cantly lower in the region than in the rest of the state.   20    

 While the federal government provided in 2002 the impetus for enforcing 
the program nationally, the Riverside County Board of Supervisors was all too 
ready  to  comply  with  enforcement  on  April  11,  2006,  just  one  day  aft er  the 
National Day of Action for Immigrant Justice and a few weeks aft er the fi rst major 
march in Los Angeles on March 25. Indeed, the board laid down the ideologi-
cal groundwork for implementing the MOU by criminalizing the Latino com-
munities of Riverside County: during the hearing to implement the MOU, they 
constantly associated crime, Mexicans, and threats with the public safety of the 
“good” citizens of Riverside County. Criminalizing Latinos, by using racial pro-
fi ling and specialized draconian police practices that specifi cally target Latino 
communities, deepens the county’s dual system of justice, and it further blurs 
the lines between local and federal police systems. Riverside’s dual system of 
justice, in turn, provides the local anti-migrant bloc with an apparatus to regulate 
the spatial boundaries between its necessary barrios of Latino workers and its 
newly built, luxurious centers of middle-class suburban leisure.   21    Most impor-
tant, however, criminalization allows the bloc in Riverside County to appeal to 
its working- and middle-class white social base while concealing the fact that the 
development model that it has imposed on the region is what is driving Latino 
labor into the county.  

Race, Globalization, and Migration Control

81

    Globalization and Demographic Change in 

Riverside County   

 One must locate the development model in Riverside County in the context of 
neoliberal globalization. Globalization has led to the transformation of regions 
as  far  away  from  each  other  as  northern  Mexico,  El  Salvador,  and  Southern 
California as they become integrated into a transnational model of society and 
economy. Although theoretical explanations of how globalization is uprooting 
communities in regions across North America may seem abstract, these changes 
can be viewed in the concrete transformation of communities across Riverside 
County. 

 Riverside County is one of the largest counties in the United States; it is also 
a county of great inequality. As Figure 3.1 shows, its eastern part includes the 
affl  uent resort cities of Palm Springs, Palm Desert, Indian Wells, La Quinta, and 
Rancho Mirage. Th  ese communities are located next to low-income areas includ-
ing Coachella, Indio, and Cathedral City, which are populated overwhelmingly 
by Mexican and Central American laborers and their families. Th  e western end 
of  the  county  is  home  to  racially  diverse  working-class  communities,  where 
Mexicans and Central Americans live alongside a shrinking population of poor 
and  working-class  whites.  Th  is  division  of  socioeconomic  classes  is  the  case 
in parts of Riverside and Corona and in the formally unincorporated areas of 
Rubidoux, Mira Loma, and Norco. Th  ese working-class communities are sepa-
rated from one another by newly built middle-class suburbs such as Eastvale, 
Indian Hills, and Corona Hills. Th  ese distinct regions are targets of the Board 
of Supervisors’ “redevelopment” zones and its eff orts to regulate migrant fl ows 
in a region that has been marked by racial strife and repression for generations.      
 Th  e  development  of  Riverside  County  refl ects  that  of  the  rest  of  the 
Southwest, which functions as an important region in the world capitalist sys-
tem.   22    Like many communities of the Southwest, the area known as Riverside 
County has been a site of racial confl ict and state repression for over two hun-
dred  years.  Before  colonization,  indigenous  groups  such  as  the  Gabrielino, 
Cahuilla-Luiseno,  and  Serrano  inhabited  what  is  now  prime  real  estate,  from 
coastal Southern California to the Los Angeles and Santa Ana river basins.   23    In 
the late eighteenth century, the Spanish crown set up a mission system with the 
dual goal of Christianizing indigenous people and coercing their labor. Th  e mis-
sion system marked the beginning of a long patt ern of suff ering and injustice 
for nonwhites in what would become Riverside County. Aft er the war of 1848 
and the onslaught of the Gold Rush, Anglo colonial forces launched an off en-
sive with the goal of destroying the local indigenous groups. Southern California 
Indians resisted until they were largely confi ned to reservations located in the 
most  uninhabitable  parts  of  eastern  Riverside  County.  Ironically,  these  areas 

38

San Bernardino

62

 

RIVERSIDE
County Map, California
Los

Angeles

Mira
Loma
Eastvale

Glen Avon

Rubidoux

RIVERSIDE

Norco

Corona

241

Orange

L. Mathews

15

Lake
Elsinore

215
Perris

5

Pacific
Ocean
0

0

15 km

Copyright © 2008 Compare Infobase Limited

   Figure 3.1   Map of Riverside County.   

Moreno
Valley

Morongo
Ind. Res.

Cherry Valley
Banning

White
Water

Beaument
San
Jacinto

Perria
Roe
Lakeview
Hemet
Winchester

Sonoba
Ind. Res.
Valle
Vista

Palm
Springs

Cabazon
Mt. SanMt. San
Mt. San
Jacinto
Jacinto
Jacinto
        S.P
        S.P
        S.P

Agua Caliente
Ind. Res.

Idyllwild

Rancho
Mirage

Mountain
Center

Thomas Mtn.
6.835 ft.

Diamond
Valley
Lake

79

L. Hemel

Ramona
Ind. Res.

Sage
Dripping
Dripping
Dripping
Springs
Springs
Springs

Cahuilla
Indian Res.

Aguanga

Sun
City
Canyon
Lake

Temecula

Pechanga
Ind. Res.

LITT
Desert
Hot Springs

Hidden
Valley
LE SA

N BE
Thousand Palms
Cathedral City
Indio

Palm Desert

La Quinta
San Bernardino
San Bernardino
San Bernardino
Natl. Forest
Natl. Forest
Natl. Forest

Jumbo
Jumbo
Jumbo
Rocks
Rocks

RyanRyan
Ryan
Keys View
R

M

T

S.

N

A

R

D

O 
Cabazon
Indian Res.
Coachella
Thermal
Mecca

Anza

Santa Rosa
Indian Res.

SA

N

Torres Martinez

TA R

Ind. Res.

O

S
A M

L. Skinner

Murrieta

Cleveland
Cleveland
Cleveland

National Forest
National Forest
National Forest

15 mi

T

S

San Diego

Eagle
Mountain

Joshua Tree
Joshua Tree
Joshua Tree
National Park
National Park
National Park
Cottonwood

General
Patton
Museum

Hayfield

Chiriaco
Summit
OROCOPIA MTS.
North Shore

Saltan Sea
Saltan Sea
Saltan Sea
St. Rec. Area
St. Rec. Area
St. Rec. Area

Salton
Sea

Race, Globalization, and Migration Control

83

have become the site of a multibillion-dollar casino and resort industry in the 
twenty-fi rst century. 

 Aft er being colonized and incorporated into the Anglo-American capitalist 
economy, Riverside County became known for its vineyards, citrus orchards, 
large  dairies,  and  rich  agricultural  valleys,  where  lett uce  and  grapes,  among 
other  products,  are  grown.  Although  offi  cial  histories  of  the  area  oft en  cel-
ebrate the orchards and vineyards, such as the Cantu-Galleano Ranch, which 
was  founded  by  Italian  immigrants,  these  histories  oft en  omit  the  fact  that 
regional development was dependent on Mexican labor. From its inception, 
Riverside County has relied on Mexican and indigenous land/labor.  Mexicanos  
composed the majority of the labor force in the vineyards, citrus orchards, and 
dairies throughout most of the twentieth century.   24    Th  is history played out par-
tially because of the arrival of a large base of Mexican workers who were fl eeing 
the Mexican Revolution and who sett led in the communities of Casa Blanca, 
Corona, Eastside Riverside, and in small pockets of the unincorporated ran-
chos in Rubidoux and Mira Loma. 

 During the Fordist era of production (World War II to the late 1970s), the 
rise  of  the  aerospace  industry  brought  three  military  bases  and  companies, 
including Kaiser Steel to the region, and well-paid, unionized Anglo-American 
workers became the majority in Riverside County. In the 1950s, the area saw 
the building of the Rubidoux Drive-In, and boutiques and hotels predominated 
along  Mission  Boulevard,  which  connects  Rubidoux  with  a  bridge  over  the 
Santa Ana River to the city of Riverside. Moreover, aft er the Watt s Rebellion of 
1965, Riverside County, like the rest of the Inland Empire, became a choice des-
tination for whites fl eeing the Los Angeles area. By the 1970s, it was known as a 
hotbed of racism and was home to a large base of the KKK and to outlaw biker 
gangs such as the Hells Angels.   25    During this era, the Mexican population was a 
numerical minority, confi ned to small, isolated barrios. 

 However, as Raymond Rocco reminds us, globalization can lead to the trans-
formation of once-Anglo-majority areas into Latino communities in places like 
southeastern Los Angeles County.   26    While not as rapid or complete as the transi-
tion that occurred in southeast Los Angeles, economic restructuring has led to a 
transformation of Riverside County. Th  e closing of military bases and the decline 
of the aerospace industry meant that the once mostly Anglo working-class com-
munities saw their employment opportunities shrink. Th  is loss of high-paying 
jobs set the material basis for the white fl ight that gradually began in some parts 
of the county in the late 1980s and accelerated in the 1990s, as Mexican, Central 
American,  and  African  American  families  from  the  surrounding  counties 
moved inland in greater numbers. By the 1990s, many whites had moved to the 
newly built southwestern suburbs of Murrieta, Temecula, and Lake Elsinore.   27    
Th  roughout  the  fi rst  decade  of  the  twenty-fi rst  century,  many  whites  left   the 

84

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

county altogether as Latino and African American families, displaced by gen-
trifi cation and in search of aff ordable housing, left  Los Angeles for the Inland 
Empire.   28    In what has become an ironic and perhaps irreversible cycle, by 2010 
the city of Riverside had lost nearly thirty thousand whites, and the only cities 
in the county to gain whites were located in the southeastern suburban cities 
near San Diego County, which have become hotbeds for anti-migrant racism 
and human rights abuses.   29    

 Th  e demographic transformation in Riverside County is a refl ection of the 
demographic changes occurring throughout the Inland Empire. Th  e latest cen-
sus data reveal that Latinos in Riverside County made up 45.5% of the popu-
lation in 2010, whereas in 2000 they composed just 36.2%. Th  e neighboring 
county of San Bernardino has experienced a similar demographic change, with 
Latinos composing 49.2% of the population in 2010 versus 39.2% in 2000.   30    

 Th  e  demographic  transformation  occurred  for  two  interrelated  reasons. 
First, the implementation of a neoliberal economic model in Mexico set the 
conditions for the displacement of millions of workers in the 1990s.   31    In fact, 
in the 1990s the United States would see the dramatic infl ux of post-NAFTA 
migrants from Mexico. Second, NAFTA was accompanied by the rapid restruc-
turing  of  Southern  California’s  Fordist  economy  to  a  post-Fordist  economy 
highly dependent on fl exible labor. In such conditions, transnational corpora-
tions rely heavily on nonunionized, part-time, subcontracted labor and on the 
use of just-in-time delivery systems made possible by the logistics revolution.   32    
Th  e  ascendency  of  neoliberalism  in  Mexico  and  economic  restructuring  in 
the United States are in fact part of the same process involving the reorganiza-
tion of capitalist production around the globe from nation-based systems of 
production and trade to a transnational system of production, trade, fi nance, 
and labor. 

 Riverside County is no exception to what social scientist Raúl Delgado Wise 
calls the dialectic between development and migration.   33    For instance, in the 
aft ermath  of  the  General  Agreement  on  Trade  and  Tariff s  in  1986  and  later 
NAFTA in 1994, the community of Mira Loma, located in the far western tip 
of the county, along with parts of neighboring Ontario, Fontana, and Rancho 
Cucamonga became one of the primary nodal points of the post-Fordist econ-
omy in the United States. Because Mira Loma is no more than two days away 
from nearly 85% of the population in the western United States, it became a 
strategic inland port for the transnational corporations that do business there.   34    
Inland ports are designed to store overfl ow cargo from saturated seaports and to 
serve as forwarding locations for moving cargo into strategic routes. Th  e inland 
port became a central part of North America’s post-NAFTA capitalist infrastruc-
ture. Currently there are several inland ports along the United States’ main com-
mercial highways. 

Race, Globalization, and Migration Control

85

 As a result of the infl ux of capital into the region, the Mira Loma port, which 
has further grown to absorb the overfl ow from the Long Beach port, has the 
dubious privilege of being one the largest inland ports in the United States. Th  e 
formally unincorporated community of Mira Loma, which is just one part of 
the distribution network that cuts through the Inland Empire, is currently home 
to some of the largest warehouses for the most powerful transnational corpora-
tions, including Walmart, Union Pacifi c, General Motors, Hyundai, FedEx, and 
UPS, to name a few.   35    Mira Loma is also home to the largest automobile dis-
tribution center in the world. Research shows that the air pollution created by 
these industries is so bad that if Mira Loma were its own country, it would have 
the  world’s  fourth-worst  air  quality,  rivaled  only  by  that  of  Bangkok,  Manila, 
Mexico  City,  and  New  Delhi.  And  much  like  their  third-world  counterparts, 
the people bearing the brunt of the environmental damage are predominantly 
working-class people of color.   36     

 Th  e transition of Riverside County from a Fordist economy to a post-Fordist 
hub of global capital was made possible by the combination of factors such as 
acces to cheap land and the County Board of Supervisor’s laissez-faire treat-
ment of the logistics industry. Edna Bonacich has writt en that part of the rea-
son for the growth of giant distribution centers in the Inland Empire is that 
regional government allowed major corporations set up shop with litt le to no 
interference. Th  is process contributed to the political and material conditions 
for the demographic transformation of the region. As Latino urban scholars 
have  observed,  one  of  the  notable  characteristics  of  the  fl exible  labor  prac-
tices in Southern California is the highly racialized labor force.   37    Latino labor 
is  an  essential  feature  of  the  system  of  fl exible  labor  practices  in  Riverside 
County. For instance, at least 50% of the thousands of warehouse workers for 
the world’s largest corporations doing business in Mira Loma are migrant and 
second-generation Latinos.   38    

 Latino labor is also essential to the most lucrative industries in the eastern 
part  of  the  county,  where  Mexican  and  Central  American  communities  are 
concentrated  in  agriculture,  construction,  hospitality,  and  service.  In  eastern 
Riverside County, Latinos have long been the majority in cities like Coachella 
and Indio, but the whole region has experienced an overall growth of its Latino 
population over the last two decades that parallels the growth of the casino and 
resort industries. 

 It is precisely at this junction in the world capitalist system that Riverside 
County has become a batt leground for both corporate capital and migration 
control.  Indeed,  this  scene  is  the  landscape  in  which  the  anti-migrant  bloc 
implements public policy to “deal” with the immigrants that it depends on as 
part of its development model. Th  is tumultuous and contradictory landscape 
has put the local anti-migrant bloc of Riverside County in a predicament. Th  ey 

86

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

are  dependent  on  both  reactionary  Anglo  Republican  voters  and  a  domes-
tic fl exible labor force composed of Mexican and Central American workers 
to  att ract  the  industries  that  have  turned  their  rural  backyard  of  vineyards, 
orchards, fi elds, and dairies into a critical nodal point of the global capitalist 
system. Th  is system puts pressure on the anti-migrant bloc in Riverside County 
to come up with ways of balancing its contradictory need to secure a fl exible 
Latino labor force and maintain its hegemony among a political base of reac-
tionary white voters.  

    Th  e Riverside County Board Meeting   

 On April 11, 2006, the Riverside County Board of Supervisors publicly discussed 
and approved agenda item 3.23, a proposal to implement the MOU enforcing 
287(g) in the county. Th  roughout the discussion, the board completely evaded 
the subjects of why Latinos are att racted to the region and the proposed policy’s 
legal and human rights impact. Th  e meeting was a reminder that the ability to 
defi ne the boundaries of public debate is an artifact of power. 

 Th  e  meeting  began  with  a  Christian  prayer,  which,  ironically,  praised 
American  democratic  values  of  freedom  and  liberty  and  pointed  out  the 
authoritarian  and  undemocratic  character  of  other  nations  throughout  the 
world. Aft er the prayer, the meeting proceeded with public comments; there 
were two speakers, one for and the other against the MOU. Th  e board com-
pletely  ignored  the  comments  made  in  opposition  to  the  bill.  Th  ere  was  no 
substantive  debate  among  the  supervisors  about  the  fundamental  problems 
or merits of the MOU. Rather, the deliberation seemed more like a dialogue 
among the Board of Supervisors, the Riverside County Sheriff ’s Department 
(RSD), the Riverside Police Department (RPD), DHS, and the FBI that, in 
eff ect, naturalized the need to implement the MOU. Th  e RSD representative, 
Neil Lingle, went before the board to state, “Th  is request is simply for training 
to ask your board to approve to eventually augment and enhance our ability to 
send these criminal illegal aliens back to their country of origins.”   39    Th  ere was 
no debate as to the nature of the policy—no discussion of whether migrant 
communities were actually criminally engaged, how the policy would impact 
communities, or the fundamental consequences of blurring the lines between 
federal and local law enforcement. 

 Th  e only “issue” brought up by the board concerned the costs of the pro-
gram and reimbursement from the federal government. For instance, Supervisor 
John Tavaglione of the Second District asked the RSD representative to tell him 
the net cost of sustaining the MOU over a one-year period. Aft er the RSD rep-
resentative indicated that the net cost of the program for the county would be 

Race, Globalization, and Migration Control

87

over $5 million per year, for which it would be reimbursed only $1.2 million, 
Supervisor Tavaglione made the following point:

  [Th  e MOU is] a loss for us obviously. And the reason I bring that up 
is because I support this. I wholeheartedly support this. I think it’s the 
right thing to do. Th  is is no diff erent than training any of our deputies 
or police offi  cers in drug recognition, gang recognition. We put them 
to special training to identify certain levels of criminal behavior. Th  is 
is just another level to help us deal with the system much more effi  -
ciently. I am very happy that you brought this forward; I think it’s the 
right thing to do, and I will support this wholeheartedly.   40     

 Supervisor Tavaglione makes clear that he “wholeheartedly” supports the con-
struction of this new apparatus of state violence for racial profi ling as a sound 
and rational public policy option. Moreover, he equates criminal activity, such as 
selling drugs or belonging to a gang, with the status of undocumented workers, 
when in fact the courts have been clear that being in the United States without 
documents is only an administrative violation, not a criminal off ense. We will 
return to this issue later. For now, however, we will evaluate how other members 
of the board pushed for the MOU. 

 Th  e following excerpt from the record reveals Supervisor Stone’s logic in sup-

porting the MOU:

  I believe that we are in this position we are in this country today, not 
because we didn’t have the laws on the books. We did not enforce the 
laws that we have today. . . . In plain English, I fully support to identify 
and to return illegal aliens, especially those that commit crimes, back 
to Mexico. My concern is that we are just extending the revolving door 
back to the border. Th  ey are going to be coming back in. . . . Will [the 
federal government] be proactive in ensuring that we keep these dan-
gerous criminals off  our streets?   41     

 Supervisor Stone describes undocumented workers as “illegal aliens”—the most 
basic and consistent form of criminalizing migrant workers. Second, in what was 
perhaps a Freudian slip that violates the rules of post–civil rights race relations, 
he makes it clear, in “plain English” in fact, that the county board is concerned 
with immigration coming from Mexico and the “revolving door” at the border, 
implying that many migrants are returning aft er being deported and thus per-
petuating the stereotype of lawlessness on the border. 

 Supervisor  Wilson  immediately  sought  to  cover  up  Supervisor  Stone’s 

remarks with the following cumbersome comment:

88

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

  Th  ere is going to be equal opportunity in deportation. Th  at is deportation 
to Mexico, to Canada, deportations to whatever country you came from 
if you commit a serious illegal act in the county of Riverside. And I think 
that will send a deterrent eff ect out to all the communities in Riverside, 
to immigrant communities, to cities, to counties. It’s not something we 
are doing in the streets, it’s something we are doing aft er people are in the 
jails aft er there is a higher probability of conviction, or aft er conviction?.   42     

 Th  e words of Supervisor Wilson refl ect the way that the county board supports 
anti-migrant policies brought to its fl oor without having full knowledge of what 
is at stake. It is clear that Supervisor Wilson did not care to know how the MOU 
would actually be implemented. Th  e fact remains that the sheriff  deputies con-
duct immigration interviews with any “suspected” undocumented person in its 
county jails regardless of whether he or she is actually convicted. Despite not 
being clear on the policy, Supervisor Wilson restated his unequivocal support 
for the MOU in the name of public safety:

  In  addition  to  the  monetary  savings  that’s  a  very 
important 
issue. . . . Beyond that the overriding thing is the general eff ect on public 
safety in the county I think will be enhanced. Th  e word will go out. 
People will think twice about committ ing these off enses that will not 
only land them in jail but actually will cause them to be deported to 
their country of origin, wherever that may be.   43     

 Th  e board never addressed the nature or potential consequences of the type of 
policing model that it wanted to support. On the contrary, a blind willingness to 
continue expanding RSD’s police powers to deport “dangerous criminals” was 
the central theme throughout the discussion of agenda item 3.23. For instance, 
the following statement from RSD representative Neil Lingle summed up what 
the county purported would be the benefi t of the MOU:

  What this program really does for us is that it ensures safer communities. 
Anytime that we have an opportunity to take criminals off  the street, it is 
going to fi t very nicely into our crime prevention strategy in the county. 
It opens up opportunities for federal databases to check the status of 
people that we do not have the ability to access right now. . . . Th  ere are 
seven diff erent databases that the fed[eral] gov[ernment] has to deter-
mine alienage, and we don’t have that right now. . . . Th  e bott om line is 
that it is going to prevent the victimization of innocent people.   44      

Race, Globalization, and Migration Control

89

 Th  roughout  the  board’s  deliberation  on  the  MOU,  the  issue  of  protecting 
the nation and its presumably innocent citizens was consistently brought to the 
fl oor. For example, in the following remarks, Supervisor Stone and Neil Lingle 
go as far as to advocate a preemptive police strategy to go aft er the infamous 
transnational Salvadoran gang, the Mara Salvatrucha. Supervisor Stone states:

  I hope we can get ahead of the ballgame here. I read about the highly 
sophisticated international gang members such as Mara Salvatrucha; 
they are actually coming back and forth, back and forth, almost redou-
bling their strength, knowledge, and organization. Th  at hasn’t reached 
our county yet, but it may. . . . It’s an extremely grave issue that aff ects 
many metro police and sheriff  departments in our county. Do you [the 
RSD] see that as an emerging issue that you have to be concerned about?  

 Neil Lingle, representative of the RSD, responds to Supervisor Stone’s question:

  It  goes  to  the  insightfulness  of  your  board  to  support  our  gang  task 
force.  What  we  are  experiencing  here  is  a  manifestation  of  our  own 
growth. I don’t think it’s a matt er of if, but when these things will come 
to Riverside County. Th  e hope we hold is that we will be able to posi-
tively infl uence our future.   45      

 Th  ese excerpts from the April 11, 2006, meeting of the Riverside County 
Board of Supervisors reveal how local policy makers associate undocumented 
migrants  with  crime,  gangs,  Mexicans,  and  terrorism.  Th  e  board’s  discourse 
doesn’t just make this association—it naturalizes it, thereby making the need for 
draconian police policies appear self-evident. Equally as critical, the criminaliza-
tion of Riverside County’s Latino communities obscures the real causes driving 
Latino migrant labor to the region, and it conceals that the real impact of the 
MOU will be the separation of families. 

 As the county board presented it, the “debate” on the MOU was about the 
program’s cost, and the subjects of the policy were criminals from Mexico and 
Salvadoran gang members. Th  e board’s discussion in eff ect absolved them from 
advocating a development model that depends on fl exible migrant labor. Rather 
than being an anomaly or just a bad policy, the discourse that we fi nd in the halls 
of the Riverside County board is reproduced in multiple sites of state power and 
in hundreds of county boards throughout the country. For now, however, we 
will briefl y explore how the MOU aff ects the Latino communities of Riverside 
County.  

90

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

    Dual System of  Justice   

 Th  e discursive link between crime, migrants, and Latinos sets the ideologi-
cal  conditions  for  implementing  the  MOU  enacting  287(g)  authority  in 
Riverside County. Th  is authority, in turn, provides the institutional and juridi-
cal framework for the consolidation of a dual system of justice in the county. 
Indeed, in Riverside County there is a system of justice for whites that func-
tions like the justice systems in most democratic societies. For the Mexican 
and Central American communities of the Inland Empire, however, there is a 
prosecutorial system made possible by the homeland security state that works 
more like a national security system than a civilian police system in a demo-
cratic society.   46    

 Th  is dual system of justice is perhaps most pronounced at the intersection of 
the immigration and the criminal justice systems. For whites, there is a separa-
tion of federal and local police institutions unless a warrant is issued by a federal 
judge. Latino communities are oft en subject to racial profi ling by city, county, 
and federal authorities that work together on a regular basis. Whites are pre-
sumed innocent until proven guilty in a court of law. Latinos are presumed to be 
undocumented until they prove otherwise. Whites found guilty for committ ing 
a crime are given regular sentences. Latinos convicted of a crime are regularly 
assigned  harsh  sentences.  Moreover,  when  undocumented  Latinos  have  con-
tact with any law enforcement agency in Riverside County, they are likely to be 
deported—even if they have not been convicted of a crime. 

 Indeed the 287(g) agreement in Riverside County is a preconviction agree-
ment, meaning that any contact with law enforcement, regardless of whether a 
crime is committ ed, could result in deportation. According to Emilio Amaya, 
executive director of the San Bernardino Community Service Center, the impact 
of the 287(g) agreement has been devastating:

  Aft er reviewing the data, about 80 percent of the people who are trans-
ferred  to  ICE  under  287(g)  are  people  who  are  stopped  for  traffi  c 
infractions or minor convictions such as DUIs. Th  ese are allegations, 
not even convictions, and they are going to be transferred to ICE, which 
basically means that they are going to be put into deportation proceed-
ings. And that is a big diff erence when compared to other places such 
as [Los Angeles] County, which is post-conviction, meaning that most 
people don’t get [ICE] detainers until they get convicted. In Riverside 
it is regardless of.   47      

 Th  e dual system of justice oft en has severe consequences for the county’s 
Mexican and Central American communities. For instance, Amaya relates what 

Race, Globalization, and Migration Control

91

happened to an undocumented Latina mother from Riverside in March 2010 
when she called the police to report domestic abuse.  

  Even though she was a victim of domestic violence, the family court 
judge in Riverside got upset with her and called the Border Patrol. So 
she was arrested by the Border Patrol at the family court and transferred 
to ICE. We fi led a U visa because she was a victim of a crime, but that 
illustrates the fact that when you have something like 287(g), not just 
police offi  cers but anybody else that deals with immigrants and crimi-
nal justice issues feels empowered to enforce immigration law.   48     

 As pointed out by Amaya, the 287(g) program creates a situation in which law 
enforcement offi  cers, whether the RSD or the RDP, feel empowered to enforce 
immigration  law.  For  instance,  Daniel  Guzmán,  a  community  organizer  and 
member of the Rapid Response Network (a migrant rights group that docu-
ments human rights abuses in the Inland Empire), relates the following fi rsthand 
account of a joint police and Border Patrol operation that took place on Madison 
Avenue in the Riverside neighborhood of Casa Blanca:

  In February of 2009 we got rapid calls, “Hurry, hurry, they are arrest-
ing day laborers. . . . It’s a huge operation.” I immediately see what they 
meant. Two offi  cers running aft er a man with a hood over his head. 
Basically they were going to question and arrest him. Tapping hurry-
ingly on his shoulder the man turns around and they see a black face. 
Th  ey laugh and chuckle, and wave to the man and turn around. Seconds 
later, there were throngs of patrol cars with day laborers in those patrol 
cars. Th  e Riverside police had mounted a huge undertaking to “clean 
up the neighborhood”—that was the phrase that was used. I then saw 
patrol cars backing up the policemen and the bicycle policemen. Th  ey 
were stopping a young man who was simply riding a bicycle on the 
sidewalk, and they themselves were on bicycles! As if he was a drug 
criminal they ran at him and they stopped him. Th  ey demanded iden-
tifi cation. Th  e young man simply puts his bike down. Th  ey surround 
him. Th  ey forced him to sit on the fl oor so they can look at his ID. Th  e 
young man is very calm and gives it to him. Th  ey leave to catch other 
people. Th  ere was lots of videos caught of offi  cers going around asking 
people for their ID simply because they were standing on the sidewalk. 
Standing on the sidewalk, that is not a violation, but for them it was.   49     

 Th  e words of Guzmán illustrate how Latinos are profi led and then subject to a 
dual system of justice in Riverside County. Indeed, when the police offi  cers saw 

92

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

that the man on the bike was African American, they let him go. Had he been 
Mexican or Guatemalan, he would have been subject to a series of questions and 
forced to prove that he was in the United States legally until proven otherwise.   50    
Moreover, no law makes it illegal to stand on a sidewalk. However, Mexican and 
Central American day laborers are de facto suspected of being undocumented, 
and standing on the sidewalk becomes grounds for local and federal police to 
cooperatea and to profi le and interrogate them. Th  e fact that riding a bike or 
standing on the sidewalk could result in such police action for Latinos and not 
whites is a prime example of the dual system of justice that has emerged in local 
communities under the homeland security state. 

 While an operation consisting of arresting day laborers for the simple act of 
looking for work is deplorable enough, the 287(g) agreement created the insidi-
ous climate in which the police felt empowered to hand over those captured in 
the raid to the Border Patrol. According to Guzmán, the Border Patrol was “in 
cahoots” with the RDP. In an interview recounting what had occurred on that 
day, the Riverside chief of police told reporters that the Border Patrol was called 
in to help them “translate.” During the operation that day, roughly thirty people 
were captured, jailed, and deported.   51    Th  is event is not an isolated incident. 

 In the city of Temecula, located in the southeastern tip of Riverside County, 
there  have  been  many  incidents  of  police  abuse  against  Latino  communi-
ties. Temecula is home to an immigration checkpoint along Interstate 15. Th  e 
checkpoint is a regular site of racial profi ling and harsh interrogation that many 
Southern California Latinos—regardless of legal status—dread crossing when 
traveling between the Inland Empire and San Diego County. Beyond the check-
point, local rights groups report that Temecula’s Latino communities face harass-
ment from the Temecula Police Department and RSD deputies, who regularly 
cooperate with ICE and immigration offi  cials. In one case, the police handed 
over the only witness to a homicide to immigration authorities for deportation.   52    
A local migrant rights activist, Estella, relates the details of another incident:

  A young man from Temecula was walking on the street when the police 
stopped him just because of the way he looked—Mexican or Latino 
with dark hair. Th  e cop asked him, what you are doing on the street.? 
Th  e  young  man  answered,  I  am  walking  home.  Th  e  cop  asked  him, 
Where is your house? Th  e young man answered, In those apartments. 
Th  e cop asked, Do you have identifi cation? Yes, said the young man and 
showed him. Th  e police offi  cer said, Th  is is not a United States iden-
tifi cation. Do you have identifi cation? No, he told him. Do you have 
immigration papers? You know you can’t be here, you are illegal! I am 
going to arrest you. Th  is was the Temecula police! He took him all the 

Race, Globalization, and Migration Control

93

way to Murrieta, another city where the immigration is at. And there he 
turned him in to immigration.   53     

 Th  e  incident  reported  by  Estella  is  just  one  documented  case  in  the  city  of 
Temecula. It should be kept in mind that cases that are brought to the att en-
tion of activists represent only a few of many similar occurrences that have taken 
place throughout the county since the MOU was implemented. 

 Th  e MOU is just one component of the dual system of justice. It is neither the 
beginning nor the end of this racialized system of migration control. Rather, it 
represents a deepening of the injustices facing Latino communities in places like 
Riverside County that have a long history of violence against communities of 
color. Latino male youths are but the latest targets of this racialized violence. For 
instance, in 2005 and 2006, Riverside County sheriff  deputies were involved in 
more fatal shootings than their counterparts in Los Angeles County, where the 
population is twice that of Riverside.   54    While 287(g) provides a mechanism for 
novel forms of policing Mexican and Central American migrants, law enforce-
ment in the region has a long history of using violence against communities of 
color. Indeed, police violence against Latinos, blacks, and Native Americans in 
Riverside County has been all too familiar in the 1990s and early twenty-fi rst 
century.  For  a  case  in  point,  in  May  1996,  the  RSD  was  launched  onto  the 
national scene as its deputies chased a van alongside the 60 Freeway in El Monte, 
California. At the end of the chase, two white male sheriff  deputies beat unarmed 
28-year-old Elisa Soltero in broad daylight as television news cameras from heli-
copters above recorded the incident.   55    In 1998, in another high-profi le incident, 
RPD offi  cers fatally shot 19-year-old Tyisha Miller, who was unconscious in a 
car with a gun on her lap. Miller was shot twelve times by police offi  cers who 
claimed she reached for the gun, even though lab reports indicated that the gun 
was never fi red.   56    

 Violent  relations  between  law  enforcement  and  communities  of  color  were 
exacerbated with the ascendency of the war on terror. For instance, shortly aft er 
the formation of DHS in 2003, a series of raids was launched in Riverside and San 
Bernardino counties. Border Patrol agents went into busy supermarkets, stopped 
pedestrians on busy streets, and picked up parents waiting for their children in 
front of Jurupa Valley High School in Mira Loma.   57    

 Th  e raids instilled terror in Mexican communities as children were ripped from 
the arms of their mothers, and hundreds of families were separated in the fi rst wave 
of raids that would be systematically implemented throughout the United States 
in the fi rst decade of the twenty-fi rst century. Such raids were not limited to the 
Jurupa area. Th  ey continued in the Coachella Valley and other parts of Riverside 
County. In one such raid in 2008 that took place in an unincorporated community 

94

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

near Coachella, the Border Patrol detained parents as they picked up their chil-
dren from the school bus.   58    

 Riverside County has also become the site of federally funded antigang units 
that  disproportionally  target  Latino  communities,  with  some  fatal  outcomes. 
For instance, in 2005, the Jurupa Anti-Gang Task Force fatally shot 26-year-old 
Robert Mendoza. Mendoza, who was fl eeing police on a parole violation, was 
shot over forty times as his older brother pleaded with police to allow him to 
coax his brother into surrendering.   59    Police claimed Mendoza had brandished 
a fi rearm, yet family members and witnesses insisted that Mendoza was carry-
ing only his cell phone. In 2007, RSD deputies were involved in the fatal shoot-
ing of three Saboba tribe members in a one-month period.   60    As in the cases of 
the fatal shootings of Miller and Mendoza, the law enforcement agency, in this 
instance the RSD, claimed that its offi  cers felt that their lives were in danger. 
Tribal leaders, however, echo the criticism put forth by the Miller and Mendoza 
families: offi  cers shot fi rst and asked questions later.  

    Resisting the Dual System of Justice   

 In Riverside County, as in other areas of the United States facing programs like 
287(g), activist voices have emerged to challenge these new forms of anti-migrant 
policies and practices. Since its inception, the MOU has met with resistance. For 
instance, in the hall of the Riverside County Board of Supervisors, which was 
fi lled with a crowd of sheriff  deputies and DHS-ICE agents, community orga-
nizer Esther Portillo voiced this powerful critique:

  I work in Riverside, specifi cally in the Mira Loma Glen Avon area. In 
the past what has happened is RSD is not only identifying and racial 
profi ling people that are driving and asking them for their immigration 
papers. . . . Th  ese laws that you are approving would be violating the civil 
rights of people. . . . It hasn’t been the “criminals,” the “gang members” 
[aff ected], it has been the community, it has been the workers that are 
building all these new buildings here in Riverside.   61     

 Th  e  words  of  this  local  activist  went  against  the  grain  of  the  terms  of  the 
debate in several ways. First, she situated her critique from the perspective of 
the communities aff ected rather than law enforcement. Second, she refused 
to  use  any  criminalizing  terms,  such  as  “illegal  alien”  or  “criminals,”  to  talk 
about the communities aff ected. On the contrary, she explicitly challenged the 
notion that those who will be aff ected by the MOU are criminals. Th  ird, she 
affi  rmed that the people aff ected are workers, who have civil rights and who 

Race, Globalization, and Migration Control

95

are part and parcel of the community and labor market. Finally, she explicitly 
challenged the County Board of Supervisors’ and the RSD’s practices of racial 
profi ling. 

 Despite  the  valiant  eff orts  of  this  organizer,  the  reality  is  that  in  2006  the 
resources  available  to  organize  around  immigration  issues  in  Riverside  were 
nonexistent,  thus  there  was  not  enough  community  pressure  at  the  April  6 
meeting to make the board vote against 287(g). Portillo describes how only four 
organizers from the Center for Community Action and Environmental Justice 
were present the day the county voted to implement the MOU.  

  Th  e meeting was jam-packed with the FBI, police, sheriff s—a lot of 
sheriff s.  It  was  standing  room  only.  I  don’t  think  people  understood 
the severity of 287(g) at that point. Some had an idea, but they did 
not foresee what was going to happen in the future. Even with commu-
nity pressure present, the Riverside Board of Supervisors is made up of 
mostly conservative white males.   62     

 Th  e words of Portillo are a testament to the need for Latino migrant activists in 
the Inland Empire to build a more sophisticated organizational infrastructure 
and mobilization strategy. Aft er taking busloads of activists to downtown Los 
Angeles  for  the  mega-marches,  Riverside  County–based  organizations  could 
not mobilize eff ectively against the signing of the MOU that was implemented 
almost a month before the  May 1, 2006, Great American Boycott . 

 It was not until the aft ermath of the 287(g) program that organizers began 
to reactivate coalitions and to create new organizations to fi ght the agreement, 
ICE raids, and other forms of cooperation between the police and Border Patrol. 
Th  e two main coalitions founded to challenge the 287(g) agreement and work 
to defend the rights of migrants were the Justice for Immigrants Coalition of the 
Inland Empire and the Rapid Response Network. Founded in 2008, the Justice 
for  Immigrants  Coalition  is  composed  of  community-based  organizations 
such as the San Bernardino Community Service Center, Libreria del Pueblo, 
the  Pomona  Economic  Development  Center,  the  Day  Laborers’  Council  of 
the Inland Empire, Warehouse Workers United, Laborers International Union 
of North America, and religious organizations such as the Archdiocese of San 
Bernardino.   63    Th  e Rapid Response Network was founded the next year to pro-
vide a quick response to immigration raids and abuses in the Inland Empire. 

 Together these two groups have mobilized against the cooperation between 
local law enforcement agencies and ICE. In February 2009, the social justice 
community  in  Riverside  turned  out  in  large  numbers  to  protest  cooperation 
between police and immigration authorities. Daniel Guzmán vividly recounts, 
“Everybody joined in less than two weeks later. We did a huge march, closing 

96

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

down some of the main streets in downtown Riverside all the way to the Border 
Patrol offi  ce. It was a fi ve-mile walk in the middle of heavy rain. And people did 
not stop. Th  ey just wanted to keep on going, even people with babies—it was 
that important.”   64    

 Mobilizations have provided some important victories for the Mexican and 
Central American migrant communities of Riverside and San Bernardino coun-
ties. In some cases, activists have been able to prevent deportations resulting 
from the cooperation between local law enforcement and federal immigration 
authorities. With respect to the MOU itself, the Justice for Immigrants Coalition 
and the Rapid Response Network have been able to meet with local and fed-
eral law enforcement agencies and get them to abide by the MOU. Th  ey have 
ensured that offi  cers read people their rights and that they implement 287(g) 
within the regulations that are stipulated in the actual MOU. For instance, the 
MOU states that local law enforcement agencies in Riverside County can hold 
people for only forty-eight hours for ICE to pick them up for deportation. Aft er 
the forty-eight hours, the sheriff s are supposed to release the individual, accord-
ing to the agreement. In practice, however, sheriff s were holding individuals for 
up to fi ve days to facilitate their deportation.   65    Th  anks to the work of the coali-
tion and network, this practice has ceased, or at least has been seriously cur-
tailed. In some cases, with the leadership of Emilio Amaya of the San Bernardino 
Community Service Center, they were able to have some people released aft er 
forty-eight hours.   66    

 Th  ere  have  been  other  small-scale  victories.  Amaya  pointed  out  that  in 
some cases, county workers who are not lawyers were advising undocumented 
migrant workers to sign their own deportation orders. To rectify this practice, 
the Justice for Immigrants Coalition has conducted workshops for county work-
ers instructing them to refrain from providing potentially misleading or erro-
neous legal advice. Other small-scale victories have occurred in Temecula; for 
instance Estela states that they have been organizing actions and stopping some 
deportations.   67    

 Despite  the  saliency  of  these  immediate  victories  for  those  facing  depor-
tation,  demanding  that  migrants  be  read  their  rights  or  that  police  authori-
ties  implement  the  MOU  correctly  reinforces  the  state’s  power  to  use  racial 
profi ling and to enact legal violence against Riverside County’s Mexican and 
Central American communities. Th  e Rapid Response Network and the Justice 
for Immigrants Coalition are part of larger network of immigration reformers 
across the country that would like to see the MOU dissolved. However, they are 
up against the power of the state and a politically active civil society that sup-
ports programs like 287(g). Notwithstanding the oppositional currents within 
these coalitions, in the face of this reality, organizers and activists mentioned 
here cannot realistically put a stop to the systematic and daily deportations that 

Race, Globalization, and Migration Control

97

take place every morning from the Robert Presley Detention Center. Nor can 
they  realistically  stop  the  Border  Patrol’s  systematic  and  daily  harassment  of 
Mexicans and Central Americans at immigration checkpoints and throughout 
the county as a part of the so-called roving patrols conducted by immigration 
authorities.  Given  the  asymmetrical  relation  of  force  among  Latino  migrant 
activists, the anti-migrant bloc, and the homeland security state, it is near impos-
sible  for  activists  to  eff ectively  defend  the  rights  of  migrants  throughout  the 
entire county without building up their political power and their internal orga-
nizational capacity. 

 For the Mexican and Central American migrant communities of Riverside 

County, there are no short cuts to fi nding justice. Amaya critically points out:

  Th  e long-term goal is to stop the cooperation between local immigra-
tion enforcement, but we understood that it was going to be very dif-
fi cult to have the politicians do something about it [287(g)]. Most of 
them like it, and most of them see anyone here without documents as a 
criminal regardless. Th  e long-term goal is to stop cooperation with ICE 
in the two counties [Riverside and San Bernardino counties]. It takes a 
lot of political will for the county to stop this practice, but we don’t have 
this at the time. We have to do our work.   68      

 Indeed, there is much work to be done in Riverside County to fi nd a sustain-
able and transformative justice for migrants and their families. Th  e gloomy real-
ity is that the dual system of justice that exists in Riverside County is one that 
exists in many communities throughout the United States where the forces of 
global capital and economic restructuring have created the conditions for local 
right-wing politicians and police agencies to cooperate with the homeland secu-
rity state, with deadly consequences for local communities of color. 

 * 

* 

* 

 Th  e MOU between the Riverside County Board of Supervisors and the DHS 
cannot be viewed in a vacuum. Th  e structural forces that have led to the trans-
formation of Riverside County are the same forces that have led to the demo-
graphic transformation of communities throughout the United States. Th  ese are 
the same structures that help explain the large migrant population in Georgia, 
Nebraska, Kansas, and other states. In these areas powerful transnational corpo-
rations such as Swift  and Company, which own meat processing plants, employ 
tens  of  thousands  of  migrant  workers  and  their  second-generation  off spring, 
while local and federal authorities att empt to repress Latino migrant workers. 
In fact, although Riverside County is in Southern California and now shares 

98

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

many characteristics with nearby Los Angeles County, it also has much in com-
mon with the small rural regions in the midwestern, northeastern, and southern 
United States that are contradictorily dependent on nonunionized migrant labor 
and a mostly white political base.   69    

 Global capitalism has created the conditions in which Latino communities 
are emerging throughout the United States. Yet it is precisely in regions out-
side the main metropolitan centers of political power where the Latino migrant 
movement must be strengthened. A few activists and nonprofi t organizations 
can always resist draconian immigration policies. But resistance in and of itself 
is not the same as launching an eff ective oppositional politics capable of win-
ning sustainable and transformative social justice victories against programs like 
287(g). Latino migrant rights activists do not have the organizational and politi-
cal infrastructure in place to launch an eff ective oppositional politics in Riverside 
County. Until the Latino migrant movement can build the necessary resources 
for securing social justice victories for communities like Riverside County across 
the country, there will be no justice for migrants and their families.        

      4 

 Th  e Geopolitics of the Homeland Security 

State and Deportation in 

El Salvador    

       Th  e people who get deported are treated like the worst criminals that 
there could possibly be in the world.  

  —Mirna Perla, Supreme Court Judge of El Salvador   1      

 Reporters swarmed the press conference in December 2005 held in downtown 
Los Angeles as Alex Sanchez of the organization Homies Unidos stood in front 
of the microphone and did what many immigration reformers in Washington, 
D.C., were too scared to do: he denounced ICE raids perpetrated in the name 
of the war on gangs and war on terror, and he called att ention to the plight of 
deportees  in  Central  America.  Sanchez,  a  former  gang  member  turned  com-
munity organizer and violence prevention worker, along with family members 
of  deportees  and  a  group  of  community  allies,  were  denouncing  Operation 
Community Shield, a campaign headed by DHS-ICE in partnership with local 
law enforcement agencies to ostensibly remove alleged gang members from the 
streets  through  detention  and  deportation.  DHS-ICE  argued  that  such  raids 
were designed to go aft er transnational gangs and claimed that the raids were 
a major success in what was becoming a coordinated eff ort between federal law 
enforcement agencies in the United States and its partner nations in Mexico and 
Central America. 

 I vividly recall Sanchez eloquently explaining to a reporter from the Spanish- 
language media aft er the press conference that while there may have been some 
gang members caught in those raids, the raids were the opening of a Pandora’s 
box  that  would  eventually  be  used  to  detain,  incarcerate,  and  deport  scores 
of deportable Latinos, that is, both undocumented migrants and those with 
some type of noncitizen legal status, such as those with a visa or those with 

99

100

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

Legal Permanent Resident status. Unfortunately, Sanchez was correct. From its 
inception in 2005 through September 2009, 8,575 criminal arrests were made 
under Operation Community Shield. Th  ere were also 10,350 administrative 
deportations carried out under the program.   2    In essence, a signifi cant number 
of people who could not be tried for any crime were deported for being undoc-
umented under a program designed ostensibly to go aft er the most dangerous 
criminals. 

 Operation Community Shield was part of a trend in which the homeland 
security state claimed to be concerned with gang members, drug dealers, and 
human  smugglers  and  ended  up  deporting  thousands  of  people,  who  were 
treated like the collateral damage of US bombs in Iraq. Since then the homeland 
security state has evolved into a more sophisticated and effi  cient deportation 
regime through a variety of programs that have resulted in the expulsion of over 
one million people between 2009 and 2011 alone. Th  e vast majority of these 
people did not have violent criminal records or were deported for pett y crimes, 
even as state authorities claimed to be looking for dangerous criminals. 

 At  the  December  protest,  Homies  Unidos  was  denouncing  policies  that 
anthropologist  Elana  Zilberg  describes  as  part  of  a  neoliberal  security  scape. 
In this scape, neoliberalism and transnational police practices, instituted in the 
name of antiterrorism, represent a continuation of US-sponsored violence in El 
Salvador that dates back to the Cold War.   3    Building upon and departing from 
Zilberg’s succinct analysis of a very complex problem, I argue that governments 
in the United States and El Salvador used the new security paradigm of the global 
war on terror to export US migration-control policies into the Mesoamerican 
region, with torturous and, at times, disproportionate and deadly consequences 
for young, male deportees because of their imputed gang identity. By “imputed 
gang identity,” I am referring to how young Latino men are policed and suspected 
of being in, or affi  liated with, a gang regardless of having actual gang member-
ship or affi  liations. 

 As in other sites of state power discussed in the previous chapters, I illustrate 
how the state does not act on its own as if it were a monolithic and homog-
enous institution but through a bloc of actors that operate at the nexus between 
the state and civil society. Th  ey work to create the ideological conditions for 
the  expansion  of  the  state’s  coercive  powers  to  police  migrants  and  deport-
ees domestically and globally. In this case, one of the civil society actors is the 
Heritage Foundation, a think tank that has historically brought together lead-
ing nativists including the late Samuel Huntington and neoliberal intellectuals 
with policy makers and media agencies to advance a conservative social-political 
agenda domestically and in the foreign policy arena. Like its nativist counter-
parts  FAIR  and  CIS  did  with  respect  to  interior  enforcement  in  the  United 
States, the Heritage Foundation helped to create the hysteria over transnational 

The Geopolitics of the Homeland Security State

101

gangs and to push for the expansion of draconian police practices domestically 
and transnationally. Indeed, this constellation of actors in the US government 
and the Heritage Foundation also pushed for deepening the neoliberal develop-
ment model into the Mesoamerican region, with devastating consequences for 
the human rights of deportees arriving in El Salvador from the United States. 
Th  is imputed transnational gang identity assigned to Latino youth and the trans-
national system of migration control can not be separated from the broader pro-
cess involving changes to the modern state under the conditions of globalization 
and transnationalism. 

 Scholars  have  noted  that  globalization  has  fundamentally  challenged  our 
understanding of the state.   4    While there are many approaches to understand-
ing the state and globalization, I share much in common with the global capital 
school that is oft en identifi ed with the work of scholars William I. Robinson, 
Bob Jessop, and Leslie Sklair.   5    Th  ese scholars contend that the state is neither 
withering away nor becoming entrenched. Rather, they assert that the state is 
undergoing transformations to meet the pressures of globalization in two ways. 
First, the state is yielding many important tasks that were under its exclusive, 
sovereign domain during the Fordist era to multilateral institutions, such as the 
United Nations, Organization of American States, and to the regulatory mech-
anisms created by free trade agreements such as NAFTA and the Dominican 
Republic–Central American Free Trade Agreement (DR-CAFTA). Second, the 
global capital school views the emergence of a novel transnational state appara-
tus emerging from within the nation state. For example, according to Robinson, 
the  transnational  state  should  be  conceived  of  as  “an  emerging  network  that 
comprises transformed and externally integrated national states, together with 
the supranational economic and political forums, and it is one that has not yet 
acquired any centralized institutional form.”   6    Robinson’s conceptualization of 
the  transnational  state  provides  a  powerful  analytical  tool  for  thinking  about 
the emerging social control network between the homeland security state in the 
United States and the government of El Salvador’s war on gangs. 

 In this chapter, I analyze the text and talk of political elites such as US diplo-
mats and military leaders in public government documents and of the Heritage 
Foundation. Studying the discourse of political elites is an important method 
revealing how dominant social groups exercise their hegemony over allied and 
subordinate  groups  in  civil  society,  domestically  and  transnationally.  Indeed, 
to  win  consent  for  building  a  transnational  system  of  migration  control,  the 
US government and its civil society—allies such as the Heritage Foundation—
must gain ideological leadership over a transnational civil society in the United 
States and in El Salvador. In this respect the discourse of US diplomats and think 
tanks are not just empty words but rather part of a steady discursive narrative 
that takes on an ideological function in El Salvador. As Gramsci wrote, based on 

102

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

their prestige, intellectuals infl uence people’s everyday, common-sense thinking 
about politics and society. One cannot underestimate how the words of US dip-
lomats, politicians, and intellectuals are disseminated and used to shape politics 
in El Salvador. 

 From this perspective, US diplomats, embassy staff , and scholars at presti-
gious think tanks take on a role as organic intellectuals in that they condition 
people’s ideological positions on politics and policy to the point that the gang 
problem and criminal deportees become the rationale for the emergent transna-
tional system of migration control. While elites leave traces of their political ide-
ology in the public record of the traditional institutions of power, marginalized 
groups such as deportees in El Salvador do not have ready access to think tanks, 
corporate media outlets, and governmental institutes. Nor do they, as do the 
State Department and the Heritage Foundation, send their “experts” to testify 
before Congress to shape US migration and foreign policy. Th  us to get access to 
what deportees are experiencing in El Salvador, we have to turn to ethnographic 
methods. 

 Between 2002 and 2009, I interviewed deportees, offi  cials from the govern-
ment of El Salvador’s Human Rights Offi  ce, a judge from El Salvador’s Supreme 
Court,  members  of  the  National  Assembly,  nongovernmental  human  rights 
organizations, and individuals connected to the criminal justice/public security 
system in El Salvador. I made my contacts through leaders in the Salvadoran 
community in Los Angeles. 

 Scholars have highlighted that El Salvador is a strategic case for understand-
ing the politics of transnationalism.   7    El Salvador’s society is embedded in a trans-
national model of society, economy, and polity that emerged since the 1980s. 
Th  e transnational model refers to a set of social, economic, and political rela-
tions, the product of nearly thirty years of neoliberal restructuring beginning 
in the 1970s.   8    Th  e transnational economy is composed of previously separate 
national economies, like those of the United States and El Salvador, that are inte-
grated via remitt ances, trade, and labor supplies and locked into place by a series 
of free trade agreements. Th  is transnational economy is sustained on the backs 
of millions of Salvadoran families who are overwhelmingly concentrated in the 
service sector and construction labor markets of the United States.   9       

      Th  e Homeland Security State and the Global 

War on Terror   

 As part of the same restructuring that occurred in the name of the war on ter-
ror, in which the Immigration and Naturalization Service was renamed United 
States  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Service  (USCIS)  and  was  moved  to  the 

The Geopolitics of the Homeland Security State

103

DHS, the United States announced what Nicholas De Genova calls “a planetary 
‘War on Terrorism.’ ”   10    

As part of this process, the Pentagon began to frame its objectives in Latin 
America as part of the global war on terror, which cannot be separated from the 
strategic ambitions of its architects. Former president George W. Bush’s foreign 
policy was devised by a group of advisers, including his brother Jeb Bush, Donald 
Rumsfeld, Elliot Abrams, Dick Cheney, and Paul Wolfowitz, all of whom signed 
on to the statement of principles of the Project for a New American Century, 
a  neoconservative  think  tank  that  sought  to  push  forth  a  “Reaganite”  foreign 
policy for the twenty-fi rst century.   11    In such a vision, the United States would 
be  an  unrivaled  superpower  in  a  unipolar  world  in  which  all  rivals  would  be 
overwhelmed by the grand military power of the United States. When Bush was 
elected in 2000, this neoconservative group, many of whose members were part 
of the Reagan administration’s interventions in Central America in the 1980s, 
got the opportunity to apply their grandiose ideas for creating a new American 
empire as the guiding principles of US foreign policy.   12    

Using  the  new  paradigm  of  the  global  war  on  terror,  Bush  and  the 
neoconservatives sought to work with their allies in Latin America, especially 
in El Salvador, to have them endorse the war on terror. Some countries in South 
America, especially Venezuela, were openly critical of the war on terror from its 
inception. El Salvador, under the leadership of the National Republican Alliance 
(ARENA), the leading far-right political party in El Salvador, was all too ready 
to take advantage of what they viewed as an opportunity to return to the good 
old days of US military aid and political support. Well rooted in the Washington 
consensus, in 2001 the ARENA-controlled government gave up its national cur-
rency, the colón, and replaced it with the dollar. It also signed an agreement 
in 1999 that would allow the United States to build a small military base that 
the US military calls the Forward Operating Location as part of its larger war 
on drugs in Latin America. By 2002, the ARENA government, under the presi-
dency of Francisco Flores, sent El Batallón Cuscatlán to assist the United States 
in its Alliance of the Willing, an array of countries that helped to invade Iraq for 
the second time.   13    Th  e batt alion served from 2003 to 2008 in Iraq. El Salvador 
under the leadership of ARENA was quick to endorse the global war on ter-
ror at a critical time, when the Pentagon used the security paradigm to combat 
what it called transnational threats and to create secure conditions for the fl ow 
of capital in the region. Indeed, military and police aid to El Salvador rose from 
$707,000 in 1996 to $18,646,533 in 2006, at the height of the war on gangs 
under the ARENA government.   14    

 Th  e  United  States  Southern  Military  Command  (SOUTHCOM),  which 
heads all US military operations in Latin America south of Mexico, began to get 
involved in this emergent system of transnational social control. Th  is institution 

104

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

has a history of coordinating US military intervention and support for repres-
sive regimes in Latin America.   15    In particular, SOUTHCOM played a major role 
in working with the armed forces of El Salvador during the 1980s. It organized 
and aided the counterinsurgency model that was used to combat the Farabundo 
Martí Front for National Liberation and that resulted in the death over 80,000 
Salvadorans.   16    SOUTHCOM, formally headquartered in Panama, provided mil-
itary aid and training to the notoriously brutal government of Efraín Ríos Montt  
in Guatemala and to the military juntas in El Salvador, Honduras, Colombia, 
Argentina, Chile, Uruguay, and Brazil.   17    Moreover, SOUTHCOM maintained a 
close relationship with multiple military regimes in El Salvador from the 1960s 
to the end of the Civil War in 1992. 

 Aft er the Cold War, however, SOUTHCOM began to look for a new mission 
besides fi ghting Communism. During this period SOUTHCOM underwent a 
major reorganization. For instance, its headquarters was moved from Panama 
to Miami, and its Area of Responsibility was expanded to include the air and 
seaways between the United States and Mexico, which were formally part of the 
United States Northern Command (Canada, United States, and Mexico). Th  e 
greatest transformation, however, was the redefi nition of its mission. Th  e fi rst 
of the new enemies or threats that SOUTHCOM would identify aft er the Cold 
War were narco-traffi  ckers, which eventually gave rise to the war on drugs. In 
fact, the war on drugs defi ned much of US foreign policy toward Latin America 
between 1989 and 2001, before September 11. 

 Following 9/11, SOUTHCOM and other sectors of the US foreign policy appara-
tus began to speak of “transnational threats.”   18    Speaking before the 109th Congress—
the  same  Congress  that  passed  the  Border  Protection,  Illegal  Immigration,  and 
Anti-Terrorism Act of 2005 (passed in the House of Representatives), the Real 
ID Act of 2005, and the Secure Fence Act of 2006—General Bantz Craddock, the 
head of SOUTHCOM, argued that such threats “are not specifi c to any given coun-
try, but really cut across borders and boundaries, across seaways, across the air—
and in the end, are threats to the United States as well.”   19    General Craddock noted, 
“Th  e stability and prosperity of the SOUTHCOM’s AOR [Area of Responsibility] 
are threatened by transnational terrorism, narco-terrorism, illicit traffi  cking, forgery 
and money laundering, kidnapping, urban gangs, radical movements, natural disas-
ters and mass migration.”   20    Th  e very idea of transnational threats problematically 
lumps migrants alongside terrorism, radical insurgencies, gangs, drug and human 
smugglers, natural disasters, and radical populism as part of the new constellation 
of threats to states found within the transnational model of society and economy 
between the United States and El Salvador. 

 Scholars  have  criticized  the  discursive  link  that  the  United  States  has 
att empted  to  make  between  drugs,  insurgencies,  and  terrorism.   21     However, 
few have noticed how these categories are subtly and critically being linked to 

The Geopolitics of the Homeland Security State

105

migration. Th  e following quote from SOUTHCOM read before Congress illus-
trates how this discursive link is made:

  We will put forth a cohesive and coordinated eff ort, in concert with 
partner nations to counter: transnational terrorism and crime; illegal 
narcotics production; illicit traffi  cking (narcotics, arms and humans); 
and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, their precursors, 
and  delivery  systems . . . when  requested  by  partner  nations,  we  will 
assist in the reconstructing and training of defense and security forces 
to combat transnational threats.  

 As the words of General Craddock suggest, the United States looks for “partner 
nations” in its global war on terror. Such partners should be willing to combat a 
seamless continuum of transnational threats that includes terrorists, criminals, 
drug dealers, and human smugglers as part of the new security scape. Th  e gov-
ernment of El Salvador, under ARENA control in this period, proved to be an 
eager ally and consented to building a transnational system of migration control 
with the assistance of its partner to the north. 

 Beyond General Craddock, Att orney General Alberto Gonzales also helped 
to advance the expansion of the transnational system of migration control in 
El Salvador. For instance, Gonzales speaking at the US Embassy in El Salvador 
about the newly formed transnational Anti-Gang Unit illustrates this point:

  Th  is  initiative  will  enable  the  United  States  and  our  colleagues  in 
Central  America  to  share  information  and  coordinate  law  enforce-
ment  eff orts  as  we  work  in  partnership  to  target  and  dismantle  vio-
lent gangs. . . . I look forward to working with President Saca and other 
Central American leaders to fi ght crime and keep our citizens safe.   22      

 Th  ese seemingly noble eff orts elaborated on by Gonzales to “target and dis-
mantle violent gangs” and “keep citizens safe” solidifi es and expands the transna-
tional system of migration control. In fact, these remarks by Gonzales were made 
at a bilateral meeting in 2007 between the ARENA-controlled government of 
El  Salvador  and  the  US  government  to  sing  a  binational  intelligence-sharing 
agreement.  

    Transnational System of Migration Control   

 Th  e  elite  discourse  of  men  such  as  Att orney  General  Alberto  Gonzales  and 
General  Craddock  does  not  consist  of  empty  words  void  of  meaning  and 

106

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

power. On the contrary, what they have to say, and by virtue of who they are 
when  they  say  it,  advances  the  consolidation  of  an  emergent  transnational 
system of migration control between the United States and El Salvador. For 
instance, in 2005, the United States helped fi nance the creation of a regional 
Rapid Reponse Force composed of Central American and Mexican police and 
military agencies to respond to terrorism and transnational gangs.   23    Th  e FBI 
also created a special binational task force with offi  ces in the United States and 
San Salvador to train regional police and military forces in anti-gang strategies/
tactics and to coordinate transnational law enforcement eff orts. Furthermore, 
the United States built the International Law Enforcement Academy (ILEA) in 
El Salvador, which began training Central American and Mexican police and 
military forces in anti-crime and anti-gang strategies in June 2006.   24    Th  e ILEA 
will eventually train nearly twice as many Latin American police and military 
agents per year than does the School of the Americas—now called the Western 
Hemispheric Institute for Security Cooperation. Th  e curriculum, direction, and 
personnel for the ILEA come from the US State Department and Department 
of Defense and is jointly fi nanced by the United States and El Salvador. Th  e 
authors of curriculum at the ILEA made no reference to the history of training 
military and police personnel in the region at institutions like the School of 
the Americas. While state personnel—whether high-ranking members of the 
military, diplomats, or the former att orney general—take on the function of 
organic intellectuals of the US government’s foreign policy in Central America, 
the transnationalization of US migration control would be impossible without 
the support of civil society–based organizations.  

    Th  e State–Civil Society Nexus   

 Th  e  right-wing  civil  society–based  organization  Heritage  Foundation  is  just 
one of the organizations involved in creating the ideological conditions for the 
development of the transnational system of migration control. Heritage is part 
of a broader network of US think tanks and policy organizations that pushed for 
greater migration control in the United States and for greater police and secu-
rity cooperation between states in North America. (See  chapter 1 for the role of 
anti-migrant think tanks in supporting HR 4437.) Th  e Heritage Foundation was 
closely associated with the Reagan administration during the 1980s, publish-
ing reports and documents that provided ideological ammunition and techni-
cal support to push through Reagan’s neoliberal vision domestically and in the 
international arena. Even more so than groups like FAIR and CIS, which have 
also capitalized on the hysteria of transnational gangs to push their domestic 
migration control agenda, the Heritage Foundation has actively supported the 

The Geopolitics of the Homeland Security State

107

transnationalization  of  the  homeland  security  state  into  Mexico  and  Central 
America. In a report published in March 2005 by the Heritage Foundation, titled 
North American Transnational Youth Gangs, Breaking the Chain of Violence, 
research fellows Stephan Johnson and David B. Muhlhausen argued for greater 
cooperation between local and federal law enforcement agencies to apprehend 
and deport gang members and for greater transnational cooperation among the 
United States, Mexico, and Central America to curb the growth and impacts of 
transnational gangs. 

Unlike most academic articles, which are primarily read by a specialized com-
munity of scholars and graduate students, the studies by the Heritage Foundation 
and  groups  like  CIS  are  used  to  advance  a  conservative  social  agenda  in  the 
upper  echelons  of  state  power.   25     Th  ese  documents  are  usually  published  and 
publicized through press releases and, with the help of communications experts, 
disseminated to the leading national and international media agencies. Many 
policy reports from the Heritage Foundation and CIS are oft en presented before 
Congress in the form of testimony by fellows at each organization. Moreover, 
like  any  other  Washington,  D.C.–based  think  tank,  the  Heritage  Foundation 
depends on relationships with members of Congress and an active network of 
conservative policy and opinion makers. Far from simply producing “objective 
social  science  research,”  these  organizations  are  in  the  business  of  advancing 
research that supports a broader social and political agenda. Th  is agenda can-
not be separated from the particular faction of capital to which the Heritage 
Foundation is linked: sectors of transnational capital that would stand to ben-
efi t from DR-CAFTA, such as Exxon Oil. According to Exxon’s own website, it 
gave the foundation $50,000 in 2010.   26    Moreover, the Heritage Foundation has 
received millions of dollars from the Mellon Scaife Foundation, which has sup-
ported both nativist and neoliberal think tanks such as CIS, FAIR, and others, 
such as the CATO Institute and the American Enterprise Institute. 

 Th  e Heritage Foundation has long supported neoliberal policies domestically 
and abroad. Th  e report, which was strategically released during the congressio-
nal debate over the DR-CAFTA, was partially designed to address concerns over 
crime and the controversial free trade agreement, which passed by only one vote. 
Th  us, while recognizing the seriousness of transnational gangs, which were scaring 
investors in the region, the report called for solutions that would further deepen 
neoliberalism and the transnational model of society and economy between the 
United States and Central America. Th  e report called for solutions that would 
“help to open market economies by supporting foreign projects that foster eco-
nomic reform, property rights, and the growth of new industry.”   27    It urged pol-
icy  makers  to  “help  to  open  market  economies”  and  specifi cally  that  “the  US 
Congress should approve the Dominican Republic–Central America Free Trade 
Agreement  to  help  create  more  job  opportunities  at  home  and  abroad.  Both 

108

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

US diplomacy and any development assistance must support economic reforms 
and bett er governance to provide a foundation for more prosperous societies.”   28    
Ironically, the report’s policy suggestions called for the further expansion of neo-
liberal policies that have caused thousands of Salvadoran families to seek refuge in 
the United States. In addition to supporting free trade agreements, the Heritage 
Foundation called on Congress to adopt policies that would buff er the homeland 
security state to deport migrants in the United States. For instance, the report 
called for the US government to “promote stable neighborhoods through col-
laboration among federal and local law enforcement agencies to minimize char-
acteristics that induce delinquency; reduce illegal immigration through stronger 
border zone controls to fi lter out undocumented migrants more eff ectively and 
through policies that simplify entry and exit for documented legal workers and 
visitors.”   29    Interestingly the report juxtaposes the protection of “neighborhoods” 
through policies that will “reduce illegal immigration” through “stronger border 
zone controls.” Th  e policy report also called for the United States to pursue trans-
national  police  practices  to  deal  with  the  problem  of  transnational  gangs.  For 
instance, the report argued that the United States should “cooperate with partner 
countries by sharing intelligence on gangs, in processing deportees, and by help-
ing them to strengthen their own borders through database sharing and training 
immigration and customs personnel.” 

In essence, the report called for the strengthening of the homeland security 
state within the United States and for a transnationalization of US migration con-
trol under the rationale of the war on gangs. It does this by advocating for the 
expansion of US migration control policies through programs that will result in 
greater cooperation between local and federal police agencies (in practice, this 
report  translates  into  programs  like  287(g)  in  Riverside,  California,  and  fed-
eral programs such as Secure Communities across the country) and for greater 
security  cooperation  among  the  United  States,  Mexico,  and  Central  America. 
In essence, the Heritage Foundation is pushing for an expansion of the home-
land security state domestically and as part of US foreign policy while calling for 
the expansion of neoliberal policies that have led to the mass displacement of 
Salvadoran families with complete disregard for the human rights of deportees 
and young people.  

    Deepening the Neoliberal Model   

 Neoliberalism in El Salvador was born on the back of the country’s civil war. 
During the middle of the civil war, the United States started to support a faction 
of neoliberal elites, many trained at elite US universities, to become the domi-
nant economic and political class of El Salvador.   30    Th  is neoliberal faction came to 

The Geopolitics of the Homeland Security State

109

power in 1989 with the presidential victory of Alfredo Cristiani. Cristiani imme-
diately secured loans from the International Monetary Fund and World Bank. As 
part of his agreement with them, he began a series of privatizations and imple-
mented  “austerity”  measures  by  cutt ing  social  spending  on  education,  health 
care, and government aid to the poor and by removing subsidies on basic foods.   31    
As  in  many  third  world  countries  that  accepted  the  International  Monetary 
Fund/World  Bank/US  government  model,  poverty  and  greater  inequality 
resulted rather than the promised prosperity. For instance, at the beginning of the 
civil war in 1980, 68% of the population qualifi ed as poverty stricken. By 1999, 
the fi gure had jumped to 80%.   32    Th  e United Nations Human Development Index 
(HDI) ranks 175 countries based on an aggregate of social conditions such as 
education, housing, access to health care, mortality rates, and poverty. A country 
ranked higher on the HDI is presumed to have bett er living conditions than a 
country ranked lower. According to the index, El Salvador fell from a ranking of 
112 in 1990 to 72 in 1997.   33    Th  is drop represents a serious decline in the social 
and economic conditions facing the entire population. Th  e neoliberal model fur-
ther skewed wealth distribution. According to the United Nations Development 
Fund, in 1992 the richest 20% of the population received 54.5% of the national 
wealth, whereas the bott om 20% earned 3.2%. Ten years later, in 2002, the richest 
20% earned 58.3% of the national wealth whereas the poorest 20% of the popula-
tion earned 2.4%.   34    Ten years of neoliberal reforms in El Salvador made the rich-
est sectors of society far richer, while the poorest sectors became poorer. Th  is 
social and economic situation brought about by the US-backed ARENA party’s 
neoliberal policies in combination with the country’s demographic profi le made 
gang culture an att ractive option for socially excluded youth—not simply deport-
ees from Los Angeles. 

 Few articles, policy reports, or news reports link these policies with the emer-
gence of gangs. But Salvadoran gangs did not magically appear because deport-
ees from Los Angeles were able to convince youth that being in a gang is “cool,” 
as the State Department, Heritage Foundation, and ARENA government’s poli-
cies could lead one to believe. Rather, gang life became appealing to socially 
excluded youth in a system in which millions of family members have been torn 
apart seeking refuge from the civil war and the deepening social and economic 
crisis facing Salvadoran families aft er the peace accords.  

    Th  e War on Gangs and the Terror of Deportation in 

El Salvador   

 While  deportation  might  symbolically  banish  the  brown  body  from  the 
US body politic, for the majority of young people being deported it was the 

110

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

continuation of a precarious life in which the prospect of being killed, tor-
tured, or arbitrarily arrested by the Salvadoran authorities’ new zero-tolerance 
police model loomed heavily over their daily lives. In June 2003, the same year 
that the DHS was formed, the government of El Salvador, controlled by the 
ARENA party, launched Plan Mano Dura under the leadership of Francisco 
Flores  (1999–2003).  President  Flores’s  Plan  Mano  Dura  imposed  “ la  ley 
anti-mara ”  (anti-gang  law)  that  established  mandatory  minimum  sentences 
for youth convicted of being gang members and made being a gang member 
punishable with three to six years of imprisonment.   35    Th  e law used an elastic 
defi nition of what constitutes a gang member so anyone who “uses tatt oos, 
symbols, or colors, to identify themselves, [and] meets habitually” could be 
arrested for being a gang member. Reforms to the laws made by the Flores 
administration made the mere act of associating with a gang member grounds 
for being convicted under the law. Furthermore, to enforce the law the gov-
ernment  utilized  joint  police  and  military  forces  in  countergang  operations 
in  which  security  forces  rounded  up  youth  in  public  places  such  as  soccer 
fi elds and parks. Joint police and military patrols also conducted checkpoints 
on busy highways and bus routes in which young men were forced to remove 
their shirts to be inspected for tatt oos. 

 Super  Mano  Dura,  implemented  under  the  presidency  of  Antonio  Saca, 
extended  the  fi rst  anti-gang  law.  Unlike  the  fi rst  Mano  Dura,  which  was  a 
six-month  “emergency  plan,”  Super  Mano  Dura  lasted  until  2009,  the  end 
of President Saca’s tenure. Under Saca use of police raids continued in public 
places, similar to those used in the fi rst campaign. Super Mano Dura also uti-
lized mid-dawn raids, much like their DHS-ICE counterparts in Los Angeles, in 
which police commandos storm a home, usually between 4:00 and 6:00  am,  and 
handcuff   and  interrogate  everyone  in  the  household  to  apprehend  suspected 
gang members. Super Mano Dura also stressed “citizen participation.” Yet citizen 
participation translated into two things, volunteer home registration for search 
and seizure operations and a government informant program. In the search and 
seizure operations, state security forces arrive at homes in working-class com-
munities  such  as  Soyapango,  Apopa,  and  Ciudad  Delgado  and  ask  people  to 
“voluntarily” permit them to search homes for suspected gang members, drugs, 
and illegal arms. Th  e stated goal of the measure is to visit as many homes as pos-
sible to create a national registry of homes with gang members, illegal fi rearms, 
and drugs. 

 Th  e ARENA government also depended on anonymous tips from citizens 
to tell them where gang members were staying. Once the government receives 
a tip of the whereabouts of a suspected gang member, the National Civil Police 
(PNC), backed by the military, will conduct a “voluntary” home search. Th  e 
director of the Procurator for the Defense of Human Rights at the time, Beatriz 

The Geopolitics of the Homeland Security State

111

de Carrillo, also denounced the use of secret agents moving within the civilian 
population in the name of the war on gangs.   36    In the summer of 2005, President 
Saca deployed 1,000 additional soldiers to patrol the streets of San Salvador as 
part of his Super Mano Dura policy. Although not offi  cially part of the Super 
Mano Dura, death squads that were common during the civil war reemerged 
with the promise to “cleanse” the nation of gang members.   37     

    Th  e Terror of Deportation   

 Given the conditions that emerged from the war on gangs, it is more likely that 
young male deportees from the United States will face violence and possibly 
torture or death in El Salvador. For instance, in an interview, Supreme Court 
Magistrate Mirna Perla notes, “Any person sent here from over there, will surely 
be killed. Indeed, they will kill him or morally destroy him.”   38    What follows are 
interviews with four deportees, all of whom were legal permanent residents who 
were deported aft er their fi rst contact with the criminal justice system as adults. 
Th  eir experiences highlight the terror of deportation and illustrate the agency 
that these young men used to survive in El Salvador’s post-9/11 security system 
under the Mano Dura. What Judge Mirna Perla decried was confi rmed by Javier 
and Marcos at Metro Centro, a busy mall in San Salvador. Javier was 27 years 
old at the time of the interview, and Marcos was about 22 years old. Th  e former 
had grown up in San Francisco, and the other grew up in Manhatt an and spoke 
English with a thick Manhatt an accent. During the interview Javier related the 
following.  

  I went to the US when I was three years old; I got deported when I was 
27. I spent most of my life over there. I went to elementary school, mid-
dle school; I went to high school, and I worked for KFC. Th  ey deported 
me . . . over a mistake over identity, over who had the dope and who was 
around. Th  ey took my papers, they took me to El Salvador, I came over 
here to the penitentiary, twice to jail over here.   39     

 Guilt  by  association  is  a  characteristic  of  zero-tolerance  police  tactics  in  the 
United States. Under such policies, youth are oft en criminalized by association, 
and prosecutors will charge them with possession with intent to sell even though 
the  person  may  have  never  possessed  the  drugs.  Indeed,  Javier  was  arrested 
because his friend had drugs. Th  is minor conviction put him into deportation 
proceedings  and  resulted  in  him  being  removed  to  El  Salvador.  Shortly  aft er 
arriving in El Salvador, he was one of the 30,000 youth incarcerated under the 
Mano  Dura  legislation  between  2003  and  2006.   40     He  was  released  from  jail 

112

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

because he had no tatt oos and could not be charged under the Mano Dura laws. 
Javier att empted to change his lifestyle, began working in a youth program, and 
got a second job working for a deputy in the National Assembly. I had heard 
about threats to activists who worked with deportees and gang youth, so I asked 
Javier if he had any similar experiences.  

  j: 

 I got shot once and they broke my arm yesterday.   41    [I noticed that he had 
obviously been in a physical confrontation. He had a black eye, bruises, and 
his arm was in a sling.] 

 a:  Yesterday? What happened? 
 j: 

 I was gett ing off  of my car and some police offi  cer told me to stop and to put 
my hands against the car. When they asked me who I was, I told them in my 
wallet you will fi nd my name and everything. . . . All of a sudden they started 
hitt ing me, they whipped me and they hit me with a billy club, and every-
thing broke my arm in three places. My ribs are all bruised up. 
 Has this happened to other activists? 
 I know the guy, he was a good person, they took them from their house, and 
they never came back. Th  ey disappeared. Nobody knows where he is at. In 
 los Estados Unidos  [the United States] or over here in  El Salvador , not even 
the family knows. He just disappeared.  

 a: 
 j: 

 Th  e practice of disappearing individuals that the government of El Salvador 
or society deems undesirable dates back to the country’s civil war, and some 
would argue to the 1930s. During the civil war, it was common for U.S-trained 
death squads and paramilitary forces to take people out of their homes in the 
middle of the night. Most of the time those picked up would never be seen 
again alive. Th  is practice reemerged in the context of the war on gangs, and 
once again the government of El Salvador denies any involvement in extrajudi-
cial violence. Indeed, as many interviewees pointed out, the government oft en 
fails to investigate the killing of young people thought to be gang members or 
deportees. For instance, during interviews with Judge Mirna Perla and with 
members of the National Assembly, I was told that the police rarely investi-
gate homicides or disappearances involving young people with tatt oos. Javier 
confi rmed this.  

  a:
 j:

 Is there an investigation when a deportee is murdered? 
 Th  e police said they were going to investigate, but when they know you were 
working with people who have been deported or that are gang members, 
they don’t do anything. And when a guy over here has tatt oos, ahha, he is a 
 marero  [gang member]. We are not going to lose that much. Just put him in 
a plastic bag and that is about it.   42     

The Geopolitics of the Homeland Security State

113

 Like many deportees, Javier had a complex theory on why the government was 
targeting deportees in  El Salvador  that was rooted in the material reality of the 
post–civil war political economy.  

  a:
 j:

 Why do you think this is going on? 
 Most of the guys from the government have security offi  ces. Th  ey have  ofi ci-
nas de seguridad para proteger digamos gente de mercados y ventas. Entonces, a 
ellos les conviene tener eso  [security fi rms to protect, let’s say, people involved 
in merchandise and sales, so it is convenient for them to have this].  Es un  [it’s 
a] business type of thing. Blame it on the dog [the deportee]. Even though 
he does not have rabies, he is the one that did it!   43     

 Javier was correct about the booming security business in  El Salvador  that fl our-
ished under the former ARENA government. Indeed, Elana Zilberg points out, 
the security industry in  El Salvador  has grown tremendously aft er the signing of 
the peace accords in 1992: “Numbering fewer than 10 in 1992 . . . private com-
panies increased to more than 80 in 1995 and 265 in 2001. Th  e number of pri-
vate security agents more than tripled from 6,000 in 1996 to 18,943 in 2001.”   44    
Deportees such as Javier describe the critical security situation facing Salvadoran 
youth. Javier explained:

  Th  ere is always going to be death squads to deal directly with people 
from the street, just like there was the Black Shadow [death squad] dur-
ing the civil war. But at least that was a war. I mean it was a war. But 
today, aft er the peace accords, what is happening is alarming and worri-
some at the same time. Th  e future of young people, the way things are 
going, no one is going to make it to twenty-fi ve years of age.   45     

 Javier’s words point to the ironic situation facing Salvadoran youth in the aft er-
math of the peace accords. Indeed, the United Nations held up El Salvador 
as  a  democratic  model  with  the  best  civilian  police  system  in  post-confl ict 
society.   46    During the armed confl ict it was common for young people to be 
tortured, killed, or disappeared for being involved with guerrillas. Ironically, 
however, in the aft ermath of the peace accords and since the implementation 
of Mano Dura policies, it is common for young people suspected of being gang 
members to be disappeared again. Given this reality, one can see why young 
people like Javier felt that the ARENA-controlled government is at war with 
them again. 

 I asked Marcos if he had anything to add. He was quiet at fi rst and nodded 
no. I shut off  the recorder. A few seconds later he began to describe how it was 
hard for young people to make it in the United States and in El Salvador. I asked 

114

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

if I could turn on the recorder and he said yes. I proceeded to ask him about his 
background.  

  I was four years old when I went over there. I grew up in Manhatt an in 
Chelsea. I was raised by my mother, grandmother and aunt. At nine-
teen, I caught a case. I did two years and aft er two years I got deported. 
I tried to fi ght my case. It didn’t happen. Th  ey gave me a parole date, 
and when I got to the gate they [DHS-ICE] were already there waiting 
for me. I had a green card—I was a resident too. Th  ey chained me up, 
and I went to the detention center. Th  ey fi ngerprinted me and put me 
on the record.   47     

 Like many deportees facing their fi rst off ence, Marcos pleaded guilty to charges 
and received a short sentence in criminal court. Like many others, he thought 
he was going to get out of jail and go home. To his surprise, he was picked up by 
ICE and deported. In the next vignett e, Marcos described the conditions that he 
faced when he arrived to El Salvador in 2006, the year that El Salvador received 
over $18 million to fi ght the war on gangs, more than it ever had since the end 
of the civil war.  

  I was scared, I was shaky. People were telling me you bett er watch out, 
El Salvador is real dangerous, you don’t talk Spanish—I used to only 
talk English. When I got out the plane, the cops took me to a room 
and investigated me. And then some other guy, he was investigating me. 
What do I expect to do here? Do I plan to sell drugs here, do I have 
an addiction, and they asked if I have tatt oos. Th  ey actually made me 
take off  my shirt. Th  ey had my picture and they took another picture 
to update my face to see if I had any changes . . . I am not even trying 
to do jail over here, son. Th  is is a hard environment to get accustomed 
to. I don’t have any family over here. All my family is over there. I really 
don’t have nobody to fall on. I have to pick myself up.   48     

 Marcos described his fear of being processed by the police, something that all 
deportees go through. He described the intimidating experience of being pro-
cessed,  in  which  the  Salvadoran  authorities  have  a  roster  with  the  names  of 
deportees and the off ences for which they are being deported. Although only 
about one-third of deportees have a criminal record and even fewer are gang 
members, all deportees are subject to interrogation and run a risk of facing arbi-
trary detention, a widespread practice in El Salvador that even the Department 
of State’s annual human rights reports have documented.   49    

The Geopolitics of the Homeland Security State

115

 Chiming in on the discussion between Marcos and me, Javier began to dis-
play signs of frustration and despair over his deportation. It uprooted him from 
his family, which was well established in the San Francisco Bay Area.  

  Most of my family has been going over [to the United States] for over 
a hundred years back. My great grandparents were there, my grandpar-
ents were there, my parents were there. I got family that fought in the 
Vietnam War. My family has been going back and forth, back and forth. 
My grandmother saw that El Salvador was having problems with the 
civil war and she said I am going to take you with me. So she took me 
when I was really young, and I made my life over there. I feel like a fi sh 
without water, a veces desesperado, a veces como con ganas de llorar, y 
a veces con no saber en que diablo que hacer. Yo no tengo familia aquí, 
nada de familia [I feel desperate, sometimes I feel like crying, some-
times I do not know what the hell to do, I do not have family here, no 
family].   50      

 Javier’s words remind us that while deportation symbolically banishes the 
migrant from the body politic of the nation-state, deportation is just the begin-
ning. Th  e stigma of being deported follows the deportee wherever he or she may 
go. Perhaps the only thing more troubling than the dramatic growth in deporta-
tions since the formation of the homeland security state is the tragic fate that 
an  unknown  number  of  deportees  have  met  in  their  countries  of  origin.  An 
unknown number of deportees have been killed or tortured upon returning to 
their place of birth. Th  ose who manage to survive have to live with what schol-
ars David Brotherton and Luis Barrios call the psychological and social stigma 
of  deportation,  a  concept  that  they  use  to  describe  the  sense  of  deprivation 
and anguish felt by deportees in the Dominican Republic but that I have also 
observed with Javier and Marcos.   51    Beyond the issue of social and psychological 
stigma, deportees like Javier and Marcos live with the looming threat of torture 
at the hands of the police and groups that the police cannot control, such as 
death squads (paramilitary groups that act outside of the formal auspices of the 
state) that enact social cleansing policies against young male deportees who are 
imputed to have gang identity. 

 Social  cleansing  and  other  forms  of  repression  facing  deportees  in  El 
Salvador are real, and deportees must take great eff orts to hide their identity as 
deportees because the mere label “deportee” oft en raises suspicion among the 
Salvadoran authorities and many people in civil society. Some deportees who 
are older and truly fl uent in Spanish and do not speak with a US-based Latino 
street language may be harder to detect. For others like Marcos, however, who 

116

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

speak with a thick New York accent and scarcely speak Spanish, detection is a 
fact of life.  

 Do people here recognize that you are from the US? 

  a:
 m: Fast. Th  e way you dress, the way you walk, the way you talk. 
 a: How about when you speak Spanish? 
 m: Ah, that’s faster!   52     

 Marcos’s comment was a reminder that how one speaks Spanish is also a sig-
nifi er of where one is “from” in the transnational model of society and econ-
omy.  In  fact,  it  was  my  Spanish  with  a  Chicano  accent  that  gave  me  up  to  a 
deportee named Carlos whom I met at a conference that I was att ending in San 
Salvador. I was walking through the front door to the parking lot when, aft er a 
brief exchange of words in Spanish, the doorman asked me, “Hey, are you from 
Los?” [a shorthand Chicano term, adopted by Salvadorans, used to refer to Los 
Angeles]. I said that I was from the Inland Empire located just outside of Los 
Angeles. Aft er a few days of light conversation, I asked him if he would grant me 
an interview. He agreed. I asked Carlos about his deportation and living condi-
tions in El Salvador. Carlos went to the United States when he was nine and grew 
up near Vermont and Pico in the Korea town neighborhood of Los Angeles and 
att ended Hollywood High School.  

  a: When did you get deported? 
 c:

 I was deported about four years ago. I spent most of my life in the states. 
Aft er that, I was trying to fi ght the case to stay in the states. Even though they 
knew I was going to get killed [in El Salvador]. But thank God, I haven’t. 
I mean, I am alive [ looks at his hands in disbelief ]. And I got a job. 

 a: Have you had any contact with the police? 
 c:

 Cops used to fuck with me every day. First they stop you, then aft er they 
stop you, they ask you to lift  up your shirt. You could tell them I am not a 
gang member. Th  ey say shut the fuck up. I got beat down once. 

 a: Th  is was the PNC? 
 c:

 Soldiers too! It was in the morning. Th  ey were looking for someone. Th  ey 
asked if I seen something. “Stop right here, we are going to search you.” 
I told them that I did not see anything. Th  e cops started hitt ing me. Th  ey 
were talking about they were going to take me to jail. “Because you should 
not be here. You probably killed someone in the states. We don’t want to see 
you here.” 

 a: Do you fear for your life here? 
 j:

 Hell yeah, every day, dog! I want to go back to the states. I got four years right 
here. I still have to go through six more [there is a ten-year bar on reentry for 
deportees]. I hope I don’t get killed. I have to survive in El Salvador.   53     

The Geopolitics of the Homeland Security State

117

 The narrative shared by Carlos confirms the experience of many deportees 
upon arriving in El Salvador. They arrive in a country that they hardly know 
and are criminalized by the authorities and civil society after being deported 
by  a  country  that  sees  them  as  perpetual  suspects.  Moreover,  any  contact 
with law enforcement, much as in the barrios of the United States, could lead 
to arbitrary arrest and violence. In the case of Carlos, he had the misfortune 
of being questioned and subsequently beat by the Grupo de Tarea Conjunto, 
a  joint  police  and  military  patrol.  These  so-called  temporary  patrols  first 
started in 1998 to temporarily assist the PNC in its police duties, but they 
have  become  more  common  since  the  implementation  of  the  Mano  Dura 
policies. 

 Th  e young men who shared their stories with me were all legal permanent res-
idents and held green cards while living in the United States. Although only one 
of them was a former gang member turned youth activist, they were all treated 
like gang members by the authorities. During my research several deportees told 
me that when the authorities were beating them, either in the streets or in prison, 
they oft en blamed deportees for all of the problems in El Salvador. Much like 
the nativists discussed in earlier chapters who scapegoat migrants in the United 
States, it was common for some of the PNC offi  cers that I interviewed to blame 
deportees for the social ills in El Salvador.   54    

 Most deportees, regardless of age or status as a former gang member or per-
ceived gang member, are subject to the same type of criminalization and harass-
ment by the Salvadoran authorities and disdain from many individuals in civil 
society. For instance, I met Roberto, a man in his early fi ft ies, who had lived in 
the United States for thirty-eight years and left  fi ve children behind. He held 
steady jobs for several years at a time, worked in the merchant marine, in deliver-
ies, and in a glass factory. Like all of the men I interviewed, Roberto was a legal 
permanent resident, a green card holder, who until the date of his fi rst convic-
tion in 2003 had never been convicted of a crime—but he was deported. He 
was diff erent from most of the other deportees who I interviewed because he 
had grown up in El Salvador and did not have a US-based Latino youth culture 
swagger. He also spoke fl uent Spanish, unlike most other deportees with whom 
I came into contact, who oft en spoke Spanglish. Roberto arrived in 2003 before 
the implementation of the Mano Dura and witnessed how crime got worse in 
the aft ermath of the so called anti-crime strategy.  

  r: Well, in reality the government has given the deportee negative propa-
ganda. Because today they want to blame the social problems that the 
country has on other people. When the government can’t make it with 
what it has, then it tries [to] fi gure out how someone could pay for what 
they did. When I got here in 2004 none of this was here, so then crime 
has increased, and the government could not be at the wrong place at 

118

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

the wrong time. So someone has to pay for the broken dishes, and who 
bett er than the deportee?   55      

 Roberto  succinctly  noted  that  crime  went  up  aft er  the  implementation  of 
the Mano Dura policies. Indeed, not only crime but homicides went up aft er 
ARENA’s war on gangs. Rather than att ribute the increase in crime to deport-
ees, he pointed to the poor socioeconomic conditions that currently exist in El 
Salvador. Moreover, he discussed how this dire socioeconomic situation leads to 
criminality, which is then att ributed to deportees. Th  is blame is att ributed with-
out identifying the root causes of this chain of events: neoliberalism, poverty, 
crime, displacement, migration, and deportation. 

 Th  e narratives of the deportees interviewed for this chapter were confi rmed 
in an interview with Mirna Perla a Supreme Court Justice in El Salvador. She 
narrated how deportees are generally treated by the police even when they are 
released from jail.  

  Of course, I mean the police never provide protection. Even in jail if 
they say, Look, I want you [the police] to help me, they are threatening 
me, they are coming aft er me, they are extorting. Because in there they 
extort people; they tell them, if you don’t give me $500 on that day, 
when your family comes, we are going to kill you, or rape you, or we are 
going to do this to you. So people agree right there. And the police are 
not capable of doing anything. Th  ey don’t give these people any type 
of protection. On the contrary, they have them stigmatized, and every 
time there is a crime, they go and get them. Even though they have not 
done anything, they are trying stay out of trouble. When they get out 
of jail, they stay home just because they are scared to go outside of the 
house. But it is there where they are captured and persecuted. So if they 
go and ask for help, obviously it won’t be provided.   56      

 Judge Mirna Perla’s words describe a dire situation facing deportees in which, 
as the Harvard Human Rights Clinic Report put it, deportees have “nowhere 
to hide.”   57    Indeed, none of the deportees with whom I spoke could turn to the 
police for protection. In fact, as Mirna Perla elaborated, most must evade the 
police because the police may try to extort them for money. Moreover, even if 
deportees stay indoors and try to evade police because of fear of persecution, 
the police may enter their homes in the anti-gang sweeps and take them to jail. 
 Th  e conditions described by deportees Javier, Marcos, Carlos, and Roberto 
and  Judge  Mirna  Perla  speak  to  a  human  rights  crisis  facing  deportees  in  El 
Salvador.  Th  e  crisis  facing  deportees  is  not  limited  to  El  Salvador,  as  similar 
conditions face deportees in other parts of Mesoamerica and in the Caribbean 

The Geopolitics of the Homeland Security State

119

more broadly.   58    Th  e bulk of the deportees, and other policy makers who I did 
not quote here, spoke to the conditions that deportees encounter as they are 
banished to live in El Salvador. Th  e ironic thing about the war on gangs/terror in 
El Salvador is that it has resulted in a terrifying situation for deportees. 

 As terrifying as the conditions facing deportees may be, one cannot separate 
the transnationalization of the zero-tolerance police model in El Salvador and 
the policing of deportees from the geopolitical context of the war on terror and 
the homeland security state in the United States. Aft er all, the increase in deport-
ees arriving in El Salvador, the zero-tolerance police model, the military aid, the 
International Law Enforcement Academy, and the social anxiety that this new 
transnational system of policing produces are a direct result of the homeland 
security state’s crackdown on migrants in the United States. 

 * 

* 

* 

 Th  is chapter illuminated the transnational dimension of the homeland security 
state and the human rights consequences it has for deportees. Logically, this 
discussion  suggests  that  any  eff ort  to  secure  justice  for  Latino  families  must 
take into account the current moment in which there is a transnationalization 
of  zero-tolerance  policing  in  the  name  of  anti-terrorism  with  severe  human 
rights consequences for deportees, regardless of the reason for their deporta-
tion. Immigration reformers and oppositional groups within the migrant rights 
movement have diff erent reactions to the plight of deportees. Among the few 
organizations that have att empted to call att ention to the human rights condi-
tions facing deportees as a result of US migration and foreign policies is Homies 
Unidos in Los Angeles. Homies Unidos works closely with individuals fi ghting 
their deportation cases and with families separated by deportation. Th  e orga-
nization led a campaign designed to put a moratorium on deportations and to 
denounce the Mano Dura. Organizers with Homies Unidos provide educational 
workshops about the plight of deportees with religious organizations, universi-
ties, and elected offi  cials. Homies Unidos oft en works with migrants in deten-
tion  to  fi ght  their  deportation  cases.  Th  ey  work  with  lawyers,  detainees,  and 
country conditions experts to prove to the court that a deportee is likely to face 
torture or death in Salvador. Th  ey base their eff orts on the Convention Against 
Torture (CAT), an international human rights agreement ironically advanced by 
the United States in 1984 to help people fl eeing torture and state violence to win 
asylum in the United States. According to the CAT, countries that have signed 
the agreement cannot deport individuals to another country where there is a 
more than likely chance that the person will face torture at the hands of the gov-
ernment or groups the government cannot control. Homies Undidos is rarely 
successful at winning CAT cases for Central American youth facing deportation 

120

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

because of changes in immigration case law and a variety of other factors that 
go beyond the scope of this chapter. Yet organizers with Homies Unidos clearly 
understand that there must be an eff ort to curtail the draconian police tactics 
in the United States and the zero-tolerance police model in El Salvador if there 
is ever going to be justice for deportees and their families in the United States. 
 As a short-term remedy to bring some relief to families facing possible sep-
aration  because  of  deportation,  Homies  Unidos  worked  with  the  New  York 
City–based organization Families for Freedom to support the Child Citizenship 
Protection Act, a bill introduced by Congressman Serrano from the Bronx in 
New York. Th  e bill would have given immigration judges more discretion to 
cancel a deportation in cases in which US citizen children would be adversely 
aff ected by deportation. Had the Child Citizenship Protection Act become law, 
three of the men I interviewed for this chapter, all of whom had children who are 
US citizens, may have received some form of relief from an immigration judge. 
Unfortunately,  the  eff orts  of  Homies  Unidos  and  their  allies  fell  upon  politi-
cians who lacked the political will to support the Child Citizenship Protection 
Act. Th  is failuare is partially because immigration reformers were focusing on 
comprehensive immigration reform (CIR) as the only viable solution. Yet, as we 
will see in the following chapter, CIR, as articulated by immigration reformers, 
would not help men or women with minor criminal off enses who—like all the 
men I interviewed for this chapter—would still be deported even if a CIR bill 
would have passed in Congress. Moreover, such a bill would leave the homeland 
security state and transnational system of migration control intact, despite the 
horrifi c human rights consequences for people on all sides of national borders. 
Even as the political conditions have changed with President Obama’s election 
in 2008 and in 2012, immigration reformers, guided by the good immigrant–
bad immigrant binary, were reluctant to fi ght for the rights of migrants with a 
“criminal record” and even less so to defend the human rights of deportees. In 
this next chapter we will see how these groups in Washington, D.C., and New 
York City struggled to win a CIR bill in Congress under the fi rst term of the 
Obama administration.     

   5 

 Resisting “Passive Revolution”: Th  e 

Migrant Rights Movement in Washington, 

D.C., and New York City    

       I  think  the  consensus  is . . . the  American  people  still  want  to  see  a 
solution [to undocumented immigration] in which we are tightening 
up our borders, or cracking down on employers who are using illegal 
workers in order to drive down wages.  

  —President Obama, June 25, 2009  

  Th  e issues we’re touching on here must be broached by liberals. Th  e 
conservatives simply cannot do it without tainting the whole subject.  
  —John Tanton  

  Instead of mastering reality, they allowed themselves to be absorbed by it.  
  —Antonio Gramsci   

 In 2006, Latino rights activists began using the slogan Hoy marchamos,  mañana 
votamos  (Today we march, tomorrow we vote). Th  e slogan refl ects the coming 
to political consciousness of the new generation of Latinos participating in the 
mega-marches and in the political system more broadly. In the aft ermath of the 
marches, many Latino advocacy organizations sought to capture the moment of 
mass mobilization and heightened politicization of Latino communities to build 
up their electoral power in support of a presidential candidate, Barack Obama, 
who  promised  to  pass  immigration  reform  and  stop  ICE  raids  in  migrant 
communities. 

 Obama’s  promise  energized  Latino  voters  to  come  out  for  the  historic 
2008 election. Indeed, 67% of the ten million Latinos who voted in the elec-
tion supported his candidacy.   1    Aft er Obama was elected president, most sec-
tors  of  the  migrant  rights  movement  were  excited  about  the  possibility  of 

121

122

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

immigration reform. Compared to 2006 and 2007, when the movement was 
up against a Republican president and a Congress heavily infl uenced by the 
anti-migrant bloc and its allies, the moment seemed favorable for change. Th  e 
111th  Congress  began  with  a  Democratic  majority  in  both  the  House  and 
Senate and the fi rst African American president in the history of the United 
States.  Many  Latino  migrant  activists  and  their  allies  in  the  migrant  move-
ment thought the tables had turned as Obama appointed forty-eight Latinos 
to top-level positions with Senate confi rmation. Th  is numbered more than any 
previous administration and earned Obama the praise of many mainstream 
Latino organizations.   2    

 Despite  all  the  hope,  immigration  reform  did  not  occur  during  President 
Obama’s fi rst term. Ironically, it was during this time, when Latinos were most 
integrated into the American political system, with more voters and elected and 
appointed offi  cials than at any time previous in the history of the United States, 
that  the  country  simultaneously  witnessed  a  record  number  of  deportations. 
Th  is chapter is an eff ort to explain this apparent paradox. 

 I argue that the election of Obama created the conditions for a constellation 
of  Washington,  D.C.–based  civil  society  organizations  to  pacify  the  migrant 
movement and channel the popular demands of migrant workers into a vision 
of reform that would in theory bring about some immediate relief in the form of 
temporary status for undocumented workers who qualify, while sacrifi cing the 
demands of the oppositional sector of the movement. By the “pacify,” I don’t 
mean that the movement stood by idly and did nothing. In fact, in this study 
I focus on concrete days of action. But by pacifi cation I am referring to how the 
demands, strategy, and tactics were tamed by forces other than an organic base 
of migrant workers and their organizations in an eff ort to bring about palat-
able reforms. Th  is new constellation of immigration reformers fi nanced by the 
major foundations and select fractions of global capital, and under the political 
leadership of groups close to the Democratic Party, fought for a limited set of 
reforms known as comprehensive immigration reform (CIR). While this vision 
of reform included real short-term benefi ts for a select group of undocumented 
migrants (such as a work permit and, in some cases, a pathway to citizenship), 
it sacrifi ced any radical challenge to the authoritarian nature of the homeland 
security state, the structural causes of migration, or the fundamentally racist 
policing, detention, and deportation of millions of Latinos and other migrants 
from other parts of the third world. Moreover, this vision of reform legitimated 
the emergence of a more effi  cient and robust homeland security state that was 
being built by the Obama administration and resulted in the deportation of 
over  1.5  million  people  under  his  fi rst  term  alone.  His  offi  ce  made  modest 
reform that would benefi t a minority of noncitizens at the expense of millions 
of others. 

Resisting “Passive Revolution”

123

 Th  is assessment is not to say that Latino migrant activists and their allies did 
not make any gains during Obama’s fi rst term. Immigration reformers were able 
to organize large mobilizations in support of their vision of CIR, and opposi-
tional youth were able to pressure the president to use executive power to pass 
Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals. Indeed, Gramsci noted that “the fact 
of hegemony presupposes that account be taken of the interests and the tenden-
cies of the groups over which hegemony is to be exercised.”   3    Th  us the expan-
sion of the homeland security state was accompanied by modest reforms and 
the reinforcement of the good immigrant–bad immigrant binary. A select group 
of migrants benefi ted from the reforms while the vast majority was targeted for a 
mass program of state-sponsored detention and deportation. 

 Th  e period covered in this chapter—marked by Obama’s election and fi rst 
term—can be characterized by what Gramsci described as passive revolution. 
Gramsci used “passive revolution” to describe a political transition that appears 
to be a great transformation and resonates with the aspirations of the popular 
classes but ultimately only restores the hegemony of the ruling classes and the 
institutions of governance—without fundamentally changing society. His ideas 
on passive revolution are related to what he saw as a dual process of revolution-
restoration. State leaders promise reforms and then incorporate moderate forces 
into the dominant ruling bloc that silence potentially counterhegemonic forces. 
Gramsci wrote, for instance, “Th  e absorption of the enemies’ elites means their 
decapitation and annihilation oft en for a very long time.”   4    Stuart Hall, interpret-
ing Gramsci wrote, “Passive revolution, simply put, designates all those strate-
gies designed to put through reforms in order to prevent revolution.”   5    In other 
words,  the  dominant  classes  seek  to  co-opt  sectors  of  social  movements  by 
making moderate reforms without fundamentally transforming the structures 
of society. Th  us the dominant class brings those movements into a game of per-
petual compromise. 

 To illustrate how the migrant rights movement was pacifi ed by the Obama 
administration and its civil society allies, I draw upon interviews with activists, 
organizers, and political operatives and my own observations in Washington, 
D.C., and New York City between January 2008 and July 2011. During this 
period, I interviewed several dozen activists at migrant rights actions, rang-
ing  from  a  civil  disobedience  action  led  by  CASA  de  Maryland  in  January 
2009  to  the  two  largest  migrant  mobilizations  held  in  the  Northeast  dur-
ing  2010:  March  for  America,  a  mass  mobilization  organized  by  Reform 
Immigration for America (RIFA) on March 21 in Washington, D.C and the 
May 1st mobilization in New York City. Most of the activists whom I inter-
viewed  were  working-class  Latinos:  construction  workers,  restaurant  work-
ers, street vendors, day laborers, housewives, domestic workers, and students. 
Th  ey were men and women, migrants and nonmigrants, from Latin American 

124

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

countries such as Mexico, Peru, Colombia, Ecuador, Nicaragua, El Salvador, 
and the Dominican Republic. In addition to interviewing migrants and their 
supporters on the ground during the heat of a mobilization,   6    I also interviewed 
grassroots organizers, executive directors of nonprofi t organizations, and polit-
ical operatives from think tanks and advocacy organizations in Washington, 
D.C.,  and  New  York  City,  including  members  of  RIFA’s  management  team. 
In Washington, D.C., I interviewed top leaders from the Service Employees 
International Union (SEIU) and from national Latino and immigration pol-
icy organizations, including the National Council of La Raza, the Center for 
American  Progress,  and  the  National  Immigration  Forum.  I  draw  on  these 
interviews  to  provide  an  analysis  of  the  period  between  the  mega-marches 
and the end of Obama’s fi rst term. In New York, I interviewed leaders from the 
May 1 Coalition, the New York Immigrant Rights Coalition, Make the Road 
New York, SEIU Local 1199, the Teamsters Local 808, Families for Freedom, 
Bayan  International,  the  New  Sanctuary  Movement,  Jornaleros  Unidos  de 
Woodside, and New Immigrant Community Empowerment.    

      Th  e Mega-Marches, the Global Economic Crisis, 

and RIFA   

 Passive  revolution  is  a  way  of  dealing  with  a  crisis  of  hegemony.  Indeed, 
Gramsci describes it as a “brilliant solution” to a crisis or as “revolution with-
out a revolution.”   7    Gramsci maintained that when a crisis emerged that could 
potentially  threaten  the  hegemony  of  the  dominant  classes,  the  state  would 
implement a strategy for debilitating potentially transformative social move-
ments. Th  e crisis of hegemony could come about for many reasons, including 
“because  the  ruling  class  has  failed  in  some  major  political  undertaking  for 
which it has requested, or forcibly extracted, the consent of the broad masses 
(war, for example).”   8    In response to such a crisis, Gramsci maintained that the 
dominant class may “make sacrifi ces, and expose itself to an uncertain future by 
demagogic promises; but it retains power, reinforces it for the time being, and 
uses it to crush its adversary.”   9    

 Obama was elected in the context of the global economic crisis and a cri-
sis of the broad constellation of forces that constitute the conservative right in 
the United States. Th  e Bush administration and the neoconservative movement 
faced a public that had become opposed to the war in Iraq and Afghanistan. 
Th  is period was also the time of the global economic crisis, or what is known 
in the popular media as the Great Recession of 2008. Moreover, Obama was 
elected two years aft er the 2006 mega-marches, which marked the rapid ascent 
of the migrant rights movement into a powerful and large-scale social force that 

Resisting “Passive Revolution”

125

momentarily was able to challenge the hegemony of the anti-migrant bloc. Th  e 
election of the fi rst African American president at such a moment created the 
appearance of a great transformation in American politics—to the point that it 
reestablished the legitimacy to the American political system in the United States 
and in many areas around the world. Most important, this period marked the 
Latino migrant movement’s transition from a mostly grassroots and activist-led 
social movement to a professionalized movement led by a class of professional 
nonprofi t activists and political operatives. Th  is latt er group relies on electoral 
politics and an “insider game” based on connections with powerful fi gures in the 
administration. 

 As noted by Nativo Lopez, the former director of Hermandad Mexicana and 
leader  in  the  Southern  California  Latino  migrant  movement,  in  an  interview 
conducted  in  2008,  the  slogan  Hoy  marchamos  mañana   votamos   (Today  we 
march, tomorrow we vote) was not a coincidence but rather part of a strategy 
led by labor, the Catholic Church, think tanks, and liberal foundations based 
in Washington, D.C. In retrospect, Lopez was correct.   10    Although this constel-
lation of forces maintained an offi  cial nonpartisan posture, for all intents and 
purposes, they prepared Latino communities to become a base of voters for the 
Democratic Party. Th  is coliation of voters is most clearly illustrated through the 
campaign called Mi Familia Vota (My family votes) and the coalition known as 
Ya Es Hora (Th  e time is now). 

 Th  is campaign was organized by the SEIU along with Univisión, the National 
Association  of  Latino  Elected  and  Appointed  Offi  cials,  and  the  National 
Council of La Raza. Eliseo Medina, secretary-treasurer of the SEIU noted, “Th  e 
goal was . . . to have a national campaign of civic education and say to Latinos that 
your vote matt ers!” Eliseo continued, “We went out on a national citizenship 
campaign and we actually had a goal of one million new citizenship applications 
and we actually wound up with 1.2 million new citizenship applications from 
all over the country.”   11    While the campaign was offi  cially nonpartisan, this new-
found Latino electoral power was in place for the run-up to the historic 2008 
presidential election. Th  is was a time when most Latinos associated Republicans 
with anti-migrant policies.   12    

 Aft er the primary election, many Latino voters were particularly drawn to 
Illinois  senator  Barack  Obama,  who  cautiously  expressed  a  public  solidarity 
with migrants. Speaking before the League of United Latin American Citizens 
in July 2008, candidate Obama promised a more just and humane approach to 
immigration:

  Th  e system is not working when a young person at the top of her class, a 
young person with so much to off er this country, cannot att end a public 
college or university. . . . Th  e system isn’t working when . . . communities 

126

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

are terrorized by ICE immigration raids. . . . When all of that is happen-
ing, the system just isn’t working, and we need to change it!   13     

 With promises to end the raids, to give undocumented students an opportu-
nity to stay in the United States, and to pass immigration reform, most Latinos 
identifi ed  with  Obama.  In  fact,  exit  polls  from  the  polling  group  Latino 
Decisions indicated that 68% of Latinos voted for Obama to become president 
in 2008.   14    

 Once Obama was elected, RIFA was designed to channel local migrant rights 
groups across the country into a centralized campaign structure to push through 
a CIR during Obama’s fi rst term. Th  e campaign was run top-down, with political 
direction coming from Washington, D.C., leading progressive think tanks and 
policy organizations. RIFA was closely associated with the state–civil society 
nexus, especially with the president’s civil society allies, and select fractions of 
global capital in the form of private foundations and direct corporate sponsorship 
of many of its member organizations. From Washington, D.C., RIFA soon estab-
lished its ideological and organizational leadership over Latino migrant activists 
across the country. Some oppositional groups in the migrant rights movement 
tried to resist this eff ort at passive revolution from within the RIFA structure, 
and many more did so from outside it. However, these groups were eventually 
marginalized from the overall political direction of the coalition and the policy 
discussion around reform during Obama’s fi rst term, especially between 2008 
and 2010, when CIR was potentially on the congressional agenda.  

    RIFA and the Pacifi cation of the Migrant 

Rights Movement   

 Launched in June 2009 with the specifi c goal of passing CIR during the 111th 
Congress, RIFA arguably played a bigger role in the fi ght for CIR during the fi rst 
two years of the Obama administration than did any other coalition or campaign. 

    Rationale and Structure   

 Th  e rationale for creating RIFA came out of the experience of national migrant 
advocacy  organizations’  fi ght  for  immigration  reform  during  2006  and  2007. 
RIFA  chair  and  executive  director  of  the  National  Immigration  Forum,  Ali 
Noorani,  explained  that  the  coalition  was  created  because  the  movement 
“needed an integrated strategy that goes fi eld, communications, and then leg-
islation—that’s why it was created, to build that kind of infrastructure and that 
type of coordination.” RIFA drew on lessons from previous national coalitions, 

Resisting “Passive Revolution”

127

such as the Somos America coalition, which was the main coalition during the 
mega-marches and pushed for the Kennedy-McCain bill in 2006 and a similar 
bill in 2007. In such a coalition, membership is based on shared policy prefer-
ences,  not  necessarily  shared  resources,  responsibility,  and  accountability  to 
the rest of the coalition. Noorani related, “RIFA was diff erent because we had 
to raise the resources to hire organizers in key districts or hire organizations in 
key districts across the country. Th  is was a campaign, not a policy coalition.”   15    
Indeed, RIFA was structured from the top-down, with a management team pro-
viding it direction. 

 Th  e RIFA management team brought together diff erent stakeholders in the 
immigration debate—from business, clergy, labor, national civil rights organi-
zations, policy groups, and local migrant rights groups across the country—to 
help coordinate a national strategy. Among those from the business sector was 
the Agricultural Coalition for Immigration Reform. National migrant rights and 
civil rights groups included Americas Voice, the National Immigration Forum, 
and  the  National  Council  of  La  Raza.  Local  migrant  rights  organizations  on 
the management team included  Pineros y Campesinos Unidos del Noroeste  (Pine 
Workers  and  Farmworkers  of  the  Northwest),  CASA  de  Maryland  from  the 
metro Washington, D.C., area, Make the Road New York, CAUSA from Oregon, 
and the Coalition for Humane Immigrant Rights of Los Angeles, among other 
groups. In addition, hundreds of local migrant rights groups across the coun-
try were members, helping coordinate RIFA’s local activities in distinct regions. 
Labor also played a major role in RIFA, with unions such as the United Food and 
Commercial Workers, the AFL-CIO, the SEIU, and the United Farm Workers 
of America also on the management team. A coalition of clergy that included 
groups such as the Leadership Conference for Civil Rights also provided sup-
port within the management team. In addition to the base organizations, there 
were think tanks and policy groups, such as the Center for American Progress 
and the Center for Community Change, that provided political direction, com-
munications strategy, and legislative expertise to the coalition.  

    RIFA’s Strategy and the State–Civil Society Nexus   

 RIFA sought to build a coalition that could amass the political power necessary 
to win enough votes for CIR in the 111th Congress. Ali Noorani stated, “At the 
outset of the campaign we asked people to focus on 279. . . . To win anything, 
you need 218 [votes] in the House, 60 in the Senate, and then you are missing 
the president, that is 279. So when we talked about it that way, people realized 
that they could deliver Xavier Becerra [D-CA], but that we still need 279.”   16    In 
other words, RIFA sought to build the political infrastructure that could move 
not only liberal members of Congress but also congressional voters in swing 

128

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

districts  across  the  country  to  support  CIR.  Th  is  campaign  strategy  stressed 
mobilization, legislation, and communications.   17    Th  e idea behind these three 
components was that one sector of the immigration rights movement, the base 
organizations throughout the United States (what RIFA calls “the fi eld”), would 
mobilize the masses of migrants and their allies to create pressure on Congress 
to adopt legislation. Th  e communications part of the strategy, according to RIFA 
leadership, was designed to create a sense of inevitability around immigration 
reform.   18    RIFA’s legislative strategy was straightforward: garner the votes neces-
sary to pass a bill. But RIFA publicly questioned the enforcement-heavy compo-
nents of the CIR package proposed by congressional Democrats. 

 While all groups played a role in guiding the political direction of RIFA, its 
political  strategy  was  shaped  primarily  by  the  Center  for  American  Progress 
(CAP),  the  Center  for  Community  Change,  and  the  National  Council  of  La 
Raza. Th  ese Washington, D.C.–based institutions, which had close ties with the 
administration, provided direct linkages to the state–civil society nexus, between 
the migrant rights movement and the president. For instance, Janet Murguía, 
who is president and CEO of the National Council of La Raza (2005 to pres-
ent), joined the president’s cabinet, and John Podesta, the chair  of CAP, ran 
Obama’s transition team. CAP was especially infl uential within RIFA. A Time 
magazine article described CAP as a think tank on steroids, noting that Podesta 
was the former chief of staff  of the Clinton administration and that the organi-
zation had an annual budget of over $25 million.   19    Angela Maria Kelley, head 
of immigration policy for CAP, stated, “We are so associated with the Obama 
administration because John [Podesta] ran the transition team for Obama [and 
so] he helped select the cabinet that is there now. CAP has a lot of staff ers at the 
White House. I think like fi ft y people left  to go and work in the White House 
with the administration aft er he [Obama] was elected.”   20    Indeed, CAP was to the 
Obama administration what the Heritage Foundation was to the Reagan admin-
istration: a factory of ideas that provided the intellectual resources to move the 
president’s agenda forward.   21    With groups like CAP helping to design RIFA’s leg-
islative and communications strategy, the management team was fi rmly planted 
in the state–civil society nexus that emerged aft er Obama’s election. 

 Much of RIFA’s strategy depended on “insider” connections with the admin-
istration and the Democratic Party. Indeed, RIFA sought to reproduce a cer-
tain  discourse  on  immigration  reform  that  had  already  been  adopted  by  the 
Democratic Party in 2007, aft er CIR did not pass during the 109th Congress. 
At that time, the Democrats concluded that the only way to pass immigration 
reform was to talk more like Republicans and reproduce the same law-and-order 
arguments.   22    Th  is shift  in the Democratic Party’s strategy was a result of a study 
funded by CAP that concluded that any eff ort to win immigration reform should 
appeal  to  the  sensibilities  of  the  public  that  was  undecided  on  immigration 

Resisting “Passive Revolution”

129

issues. Th  is strategy translated into developing a discourse on immigration pol-
icy that appealed to the common sense of middle-class white Americans—what 
many  Washington,  D.C.,  political  operatives  and  communications  specialists 
call “the middle.” Th  e pollsters and linguists who conducted the study advised 
immigration  advocates  to  start  using  buzzwords  like  “illegal  alien”  instead  of 
“undocumented” and to insist that it is “unacceptable for there to be twelve mil-
lion undocumented people in the United States” and that the undocumented 
must “get right with the law, pay taxes, and learn English—or face deportation.” 
Angela Maria Kelley explained,

  We did polling at CAP. One of the strategic engagements was to con-
vene several pollsters to look at the issue of CIR and to look at the issue 
of the undocumented and to fi nd language that you can use that speaks 
to policy that we support and that wins over the middle. . . . Th  e messag-
ing is if you talk about requiring undocumented immigrants to register, 
to pay taxes, learn English, and go through background checks, then 
you get very, very high support, in the mid to high 80s even, in bright 
red districts. It is tried and true. It does not matt er when you use this 
language, who says it—if you use those words, the public buys it, they 
support that, and they want people to be part of that program. I think 
that most undocumented immigrants would be OK with it.   23     

 Although  this  messaging  strategy  resonated  with  pollsters  and  Washington, 
D.C., political operatives, it did not resonate with Latino migrant activists across 
the country. On the contrary, it created skepticism and undercut unity between 
oppositional forces and immigration reformers within the overall movement. 

 RIFA’s overall political strategy was likewise problematic. It rendered mass 
mobilization in the forms of marches and large protest rallies subordinate to the 
legislative lobbying, and it sought to make mobilization eff orts fi t into a tightly 
managed messaging scheme that reinforced the good immigrant–bad immigrant 
binary. Rather than allow the migrants most aff ected and veterans of the move-
ment to develop their own strategy organically, as occurred during the planning 
meetings for the mega-marches in 2006, RIFA was waiting for the president and 
Congress to get ready to take on immigration reform. But this strategy was prob-
lematic because it rested on the assumption that the president would act on his 
own without an autonomous social movement pushing him to act. If the migrant 
rights  movement  would  have  been  led  by  an  independent  and  autonomous 
movement, it could have pressured the president to act on immigration reform 
sooner and under diff erent terms. But instead, Gustavo Andrade of CASA de 
Maryland noted, “people [in the coalition] were operating under the position 
that the administration was on their side, which is fairly obvious to anybody that 

130

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

they were not. Rahm Emanuel and the administration were actively blocking 
immigration reform from ever seeing the light of day.”   24    Other leaders within 
RIFA at the National Council of La Raza and SEIU argued that they could not 
get the president to act because he had health care and the economy on his leg-
islative agenda. Yet, as one of the few movements in the United States with a 
large, passionate base, the migrant rights movement could have pushed harder 
and sooner on the president without worrying about what was on his agenda. 
Th  is is why social movements all over the world are most oft en ardent defenders 
of their autonomy from state leaders and political parties.  

    Resistance from within RIFA and Civil Disobedience   

 RIFA was a centralized but never a homogeneous coalition. By August 2009, 
it  became  apparent  even  to  members  of  RIFA’s  management  team  that  the 
inside-the-Beltway strategy of waiting for the Democrats and the president was 
not going to work. Some groups within RIFA were pressuring the management 
team to push for a major mobilization that would use the passion of the base 
of migrant workers to create a mass mobilization to compel the president and 
Congress  to  act.  Most  on  the  management  team  resisted  this  idea,  until  one 
of the larger organizations within the coalition broke with the consensus. Th  is 
break put tremendous pressure on RIFA’s leadership. Ali Noorani noted, “We 
had to go through a process of really making sure that the coalition was com-
fortable challenging the president, because not everyone was there necessarily. 
We had assumed that we could have lost the coalition.”   25    CASA de Maryland 
gambled on this chance to jump-start the movement in January 2010. 

 One of the fi rst organizations within the RIFA management team to break 
with the consensus on strategy, CASA de Maryland, spearheaded an action on 
January 26, 2010, just one day before President Obama was to deliver the State 
of the Union address. By denouncing the record number of deportations under 
the Obama administration, the action aimed to escalate the demand for immi-
gration reform and pressure Obama to commit to a timeline on immigration 
reform during the speech. Forces within the broader movement could then, the 
organizers hoped, mobilize around this timeline. 

 At the action, roughly two hundred activists gathered in front of the head-
quarters of DHS to demand that Obama make good on his promise of immi-
gration  reform.  Twenty-three  protesters  then  att empted  a  civil  disobedience 
action that broke with RIFA’s messaging strategy. Th  e group of mostly Latino 
migrant activists that I interviewed at the action explained that they were dis-
appointed with President Obama and the Democrats for whom they voted in 
2008. For instance, Elsa, a waitress who had left  law school in El Salvador to 
make money to send back to her family there, gave the following explanation 

Resisting “Passive Revolution”

131

for her participation in the protest: “ Estoy aquí por muchas razones. La primera 
es que necesitamos que toda nuestra gente sea legalizada! Todos los inmigrantes que 
estamos en este país para poder tener un estatus legal y poder ayudar a tener, a poder 
tener decisiones para contribuir tanto en las leyes de este pais como para ayudar nues-
tra gente de Latinoamérica ” (I am here for many reasons. First, we need all our 
people to get legalized! All of us immigrants that are in this country so we could 
get our legal status and be able to help to have the power to make decision to 
contribute to both the laws in this country and also to help our people in Latin 
America).   26    Elsa’s position that she wanted legalization to be able to help her 
people in Latinoamérica is a common one among many migrants, yet it was not 
represented in RIFA’s communication strategy, which sought to portray migrants 
as Americans in waiting who can’t wait to assimilate into the American main-
stream. Yet this goal is not one of Elsa’s demands. Indeed, as noted by Fernandez 
and Olsen, a signifi cant number of Latino migrants maintain that they are dem-
onstrating not just for liberal citizenship within the United States but also for 
legalization as something that will allow them to exert a transnational citizen-
ship through which they can be political and social actors in the United States 
and for their families in Latin America.   27    

 On  a  similar,  albeit  more  critical,  note,  Tony,  an  Afro-Colombian,  activist 

gave the following explanation for his participation in the action:

   Estoy  aquí  porque  ya  estamos  cansados.  Queremos  que  el  gobierno  de 
Obama  cumpla  sus  promesas  de  campaña.  Necesitamos  una  reforma 
migratoria ahora! Ahora! Somos doce millones o más que estamos traba-
jando, aportando la economía de este país. Por eso le estamos diciendo hoy, 
le estamos diciendo al gobierno nacional que cumpla su promesa de cam-
paña y que estamos aquí en la lucha. Siempre y fuerte.  (I am here because 
we are tired. We want Obama’s government to fulfi ll their campaign 
promises. We need immigration reform now! Now! We are twelve mil-
lion or more who are working, helping the economy of this country. 
Th  at is why we are telling him today, we are telling the national govern-
ment to fulfi ll their campaign promise and we are here in the struggle. 
Always and strong.)   28      

 Antonio’s passionate demand for reform  ahora  (now) and emphasis on the 
eleven to twelve million undocumented workers who contribute to the economy 
refl ects the position of many migrants that they have earned their right to be in 
the United States based on their labor. Th  is common-sense position of many 
migrants was not refl ected in RIFA’s talking points around “paying a fi ne, reg-
istering with the government, and speaking English.”   29    Th  e growing frustration 
that Antonio expressed was refl ected in the words of María, a Mexican migrant 

132

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

and pastor at a Lutheran church in the Washington, D.C., area, who gives the fol-
lowing argument for her participation:

   Estoy envuelta en esto porque estoy dándole voz a mi comunidad latina y a la 
comunidad inmigrante en general que está sufr iendo deportaciones a pesar 
de que es gente que paga impuestos y que ha trabajado. Estoy aquí porque 
tengo el compromiso de ayudar a la comunidad a que tenga una reforma 
migratoria y en ese sentido puede estar trabajando con documentos, pueda 
visitar a su familia, porque eso es lo más cruel que ellos no puedan visitar a 
sus familias.  (I am involved in this because I am giving my Latino com-
munity a voice and a voice to the immigrant community in general that 
is suff ering deportations despite the fact that they pay taxes and have 
worked. I am here today because I have an obligation to help the com-
munity to be able to get immigration reform and in this sense be able to 
work with legal documents, be able to visit their families, because that 
is the cruelest thing, not being able to see your family.)   30     

 María’s position refl ects a righteous indignation felt by many migrants who feel 
they have earned the right to be here through the sweat of their labor and pay-
ment of taxes. Such migrants dislike being separated from their families by unfair 
and unjust US immigration laws. Th  is stance does not conform with the image of 
the passive assimilationist Latino put forth by immigration reformers. 

 Th  is action in Washington, D.C., was held in conjunction with several actions 
throughout the country in which activists sought to escalate the pressure on 
the Obama administration by bringing att ention to the plight of migrants and 
highlighting the need for CIR. In Phoenix, Arizona, for example, people dem-
onstrated against the actions of Sheriff  Joe Arpaio, the fl amboyant head of the 
Maricopa County Sheriff ’s Department who had ties to neo-Nazi groups and 
humiliated  migrants  by  putt ing  them  in  pink  jumpsuits  and  diapers  in  make 
shift  Arizona tent city jails. In Florida, a group of students began a march to 
Washington, D.C., in solidarity with undocumented students. Nonetheless, the 
Washington, D.C., action was particularly important, because it was organized 
in the nation’s capital and spearheaded by Washington, D.C., rights groups with 
a large base of Latino migrant workers. CASA de Maryland sought to use the 
January direct action at the DHS offi  ce as a way to escalate the struggle and build 
the momentum to pressure other members of RIFA and the administration to 
act. Accordingly, they used the action to call for a major mobilization to be held 
on March 21, 2010. Gustavo Torres, the director of CASA de Maryland, ended 
the protest with the following announcement: “ Queremos anunciarles a ustedes 
que estamos preparando una marcha extraordinaria para el mes de marzo. Nos van a 
acompañar de todo el pais. Desde Florida hasta el estado de Washington ” (We want 

Resisting “Passive Revolution”

133

to announce to all of you that we are preparing an extraordinary march in the 
month of March. People will join us from all over the country, from Florida to 
the state of Washington).   31    CASA de Maryland and the rest of RIFA spent the 
next month and a half preparing the March for America mobilization to be held 
on March 21, 2011. Th  is march was supposed to be the catalyst for passing CIR 
in the 111th Congress.  

    Th  e March for America Mobilization   

 Th  e March for America was one of the largest single migrant rights mobilizations 
held aft er the 2006 mega-marches and perhaps the largest during the fi rst two 
years of the Obama administration. It was att ended by more than 250,000 partici-
pants—including workers, students, migrants, and those of the second genera-
tion—who had come to Washington, D.C., from all over the country. Th  e night 
before the protest, I was impressed with the number of buses in the city; a labor and 
migrant rights organizer who helped plan the action told me that more than three 
hundred buses of protesters had arrived in the city. Th  e next morning, members 
of organizations poured in on buses from Chicago, Kansas City, New York City, 
and elsewhere. Javier Valdez of Make the Road New York, which took forty-three 
buses, noted, “It was really inspiring to be part of such a large mobilization. On 
the way down to DC, we did fi ve conference calls [with members of Congress].”   32    
Altogether, other New York City–based groups, including New York Immigrant 
Community Empowerment (NICE), Families for Freedom, Desis Rising Up and 
Moving (DRUM), Jornaleros Unidos de Woodside, and the May 1 Coalition, 
took hundreds of migrants activists to the action. 

 On the day of the march, it was apparent that the protest was going to be 
enormous. Not since the fi rst mega-marcha, held on March 25, 2006, in Los 
Angeles, had I gott en the feeling that I was about to participate in a colossal 
protest. From the bus driving down Fourteenth Street, from Columbia Heights 
to the Capital, I could see thousands of Latino protesters dressed in white and 
heading to the National Mall. It was the fi rst time that I had been to a dem-
onstration at which there were apparently more Central American (Salvadoran, 
Honduran, and Guatemalan) families than Mexicans. Th  is percentage was obvi-
ously not an accident; the majority of those in att endance were from the massive 
Central American community that resides in the metro Washington, D.C., area. 
Gustavo Andrade from CASA de Maryland explained how the massive turnout 
came about: “We mobilized 268 buses. We estimate that at least 75,000 people 
came through the eff orts of a small team of very dedicated people and local lead-
ers from Maryland.”   33    

 Participants  articulated  powerful  explanations  for  why  they  were  demon-
strating.  For  instance,  Alonso,  a  construction  worker  originally  from  Celaya, 

134

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

Guanajuato (Mexico), traveled thirty hours on a bus from Garden City, Kansas, 
to the Washington D.C., action. Alonso explained that he and the group he trav-
eled with came for the following reasons: “ Nosotros estamos aquí porque queremos 
decirle a Obama que aquí estamos y no nos vamos a ir hasta que nos dé una reforma 
migratoria porque él prometió y nos tiene que cumplir ” (We are here because we 
want to tell Obama that we are here and we are not going anywhere until we 
have immigration reform, because he promised and he must keep his promise 
and that we are not going to leave until he gives us immigration reform, because 
he promised us and he has to comply).   34    Alonso’s words conveyed a sense of 
dignity. He spoke as a migrant worker demanding rights promised to him by the 
president. He was not declaring guilt or a willingness to “get right with the law” 
and forgo his culture and language. 

 Alyssa, a middle-aged migrant with a Chicago-based organization, laid out 
her reasons for att ending: “ Soy de Perú y estoy aquí para exigir una reforma, una 
reforma migratoria, porque ya es tiempo de salir de las sombras y exigir los derechos 
que tenemos en este país como cualquier otro ciudadano, porque trabajamos, aporta-
mos y hacemos más grande a este país ” (I am from Peru and I am here to demand 
reform, immigration reform, because it is time to come out of the dark and fi ght 
for our rights that we have in this country like any other citizen, because we 
work, we pay taxes, and we make up a big part of this country).   35    Her demands 
were based on a sense of equality ( como cualquier otro ciudadano ). When I asked 
her if she thought the protest would provide results, she said, “ Pues, yo no estoy 
segura de verdad porque se ha prometido tanto, hace tantos años y no se ha cumplido. 
Pero lo único que yo sé es que si ahora no se cumple, vamos a regresar cuantas veces sea 
necesario hasta que tengamos una legalización ” (Well, I am not really sure, because 
so much has been promised, so many years and nothing has been done. But the 
only thing that I do know is that it is time for these promises to be fulfi lled; 
we are going to return as many times necessary until we have legalization).   36    
Alyssa expressed dignity and a will to keep fi ghting even if the president failed to 
make good on his promise. Th  is sense of determination and the need to wage a 
long-term struggle was also conveyed by an indigenous organizer named Sylvia 
Herrera, who was from Puente, an organization at the epicenter of the migrant 
rights movement in Phoenix, Arizona. She put it:

  With or without immigration reform, what we need to focus on is the 
criminalization  of  our  communities. . . . We  do  not  want  it  to  be  just 
any reform, because what is happening now . . . this country is adopting 
laws that are criminalizing workers, that are criminalizing children. In 
Arizona, laws are being passed basically denying services to US children 
that were born in this country but because their parents do not have 
papers, the state has passed laws that are denying social service, health 

Resisting “Passive Revolution”

135

services to these children and also they’re at the point of adopting a 
law that would make it mandatory for schools to report parents when 
they’re enrolling their children. Th  e right to education is being denied, 
and if this happens in Arizona, it is going to happen in other states, and 
this is what we need to focus on. I know that reform is important, but 
with or without it we cannot continue to have deportations, we cannot 
continue to have separations of families.   37      

 Sylvia’s powerful words remind us that one must struggle to fi nd justice that 
goes beyond fi ghting for legal status or a piece of legislation. Moreover, she rec-
ognized that the migrant rights movement must struggle even for those born in 
the United States but who are racialized and excluded from society. 

 Th  e authoritative words of Alonso, Alyssa, and Sylvia resonated with those of 
others whom I interviewed on the ground throughout the day. Th  ey conveyed 
the sense of collective power and solidarity between Latino migrant workers and 
the second generation, both of whom expressed a sense of righteous indignation 
over immigration policies that separate families and deny them the right to live 
and work in the United States. But the voices of people on the ground contrasted 
drastically with the voices of those on the stage.  

    March 21 on the Stage   

 It seemed as if there were two separate actions going on: the mass turnout 
as expressed in the hundreds of thousands who protested and the rally on 
stage hosted by RIFA. Th  e stage area was protected by a sea of labor orga-
nizers.  Speakers  included  such  Washington,  D.C.,  elites  as  then-president 
of  the  SEIU,  Andy  Stern;  Senator  Charles  Schumer  of  New  York;  Senator 
Bob Menendez of New Jersey; and Obama administration cabinet member 
Cecilia Muñoz, among others. A videotaped address by President Obama was 
screened on the Jumbotrons that surrounded the red-white-and-blue-covered 
stage, which, according to one organizer with the SEIU, cost thousands of 
dollars to set up.   38    It looked like a stage at a typical concert or mainstream 
political convention. 

 Th  e event was carefully choreographed from above to convey the “right” mes-
sage. Labor organizations that were staffi  ng the stage area passed out American 
fl ags and asked protesters holding fl ags from various Latin American countries 
to put them away. Th  e ceremony was opened by a group of all-white students 
from  the  Midwest  holding  American  fl ags  and  singing  the  national  anthem. 
While it is perfectly legitimate and necessary for there to be broad working-class 
solidarity across ethnic and racial groups around questions of migrant rights, 
it is important to note how careful the political messaging was managed at this 

136

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

action. Moreover, it was managed in such a way as to suggest that the very people 
who made up the bulk of the protesters—including Elsa, the Salvadoran wait-
ress living in D.C., and Alonso, the Mexican construction worker who traveled 
from Kansas—had litt le to say. 

 Latino migrants were not the only ones disappointed with the action. Janis 
Rosheuvel of Families for Freedom, a New York City–based organization that 
works  with  a  large  base  of  migrants  from  all  over  the  African  diaspora,  said, 
“Even on the bus coming back home, I remember a lot of our members being 
like,  where  were  the  people  that  were  aff ected  by  these  issues  on  the  stage? 
Where  are  the  black  folks  on  stage?  Th  e  Afro-Caribbean  people,  the  African 
people, where are they? Th  ere was disappointment from folks. We went, but it 
didn’t seem like they were talking about stuff  that are going to aff ect us.”   39    While 
Rosheuvel was correct to point out that the base of Families for Freedom did 
not feel represented, it could also be said that many of the Latino migrant work-
ers who were there did not feel represented with the political messaging at the 
mobilization—albeit for diff erent reasons. 

 Despite  the  disjunction  between  what  the  base  of  migrant  workers 
demanded and what RIFA’s careful communications strategy sought to con-
vey, the March 21 mobilization was still an important milestone in the migrant 
rights movement, thanks in large part to the hundreds of thousands of Central 
American migrants from the Washington, D.C., metro region and their allies 
who came to the protest from throughout the country. It conveyed that the 
base of Latino migrant workers was still demanding legalization. In fact, the 
March 21 mobilization was the largest for immigration reform in Washington, 
D.C., since April 10, 2006.   40    Jaime Contreras, a Salvadoran migrant and dis-
trict chair for SEIU Local 32BJ for the capital area, stated that the March 21 
mobilization  “made  the  community  within  the  D.C.  region  and  from  other 
states that they came from realize that this movement is not fi nished: we still 
have  major  problems  with  immigration  reform—it  helped  wake  up  people 
again.”   41    Jaime made these remarks because aft er 2006 major mobilizations in 
support of immigration reform in Washington, D.C., had become a thing of 
the past. As indicated by the words of Contreras, the March 21 RIFA mobili-
zation illustrated that the migrant rights movement could still fl ex its muscle, 
albeit for a vision of reform that many migrants at the protest would probably 
fi nd problematic.   

    Th  e Democrats and the CIR Bill Th  at Never Was   

 By  the  beginning  of  2010,  even  some  of  the  forces  most  integrated  into  the 
state–civil society nexus within RIFA realized that only a mobilization could 

Resisting “Passive Revolution”

137

help  persuade  Congress  to  act  on  immigration  reform.  Angela  Maria  Kelley 
explained, “We could not get an inside game going; we did not have enough 
juice. . . . We needed outside pressure, just like the marches [in 2006], and we 
needed to show that we had that type of power.”   42    

 The  March  for  America  was  RIFA’s  attempt  to  pressure  the  president 
and leaders in the Senate to commit to CIR but to no avail. The most they 
were able to get was a  Washington Post  op-ed piece just a few days before the 
March 21 protest jointly authored by Senators Charles Schumer and Lindsey 
Graham. Having agreed on a set of principles that would guide an immigra-
tion reform bill, the Democratic senator from New York and the Republican 
senator from South Carolina made their principles public in an article titled 
“The Right Way to Mend Immigration.”   43    The Schumer-Graham principles 
essentially  reinforced  the  status  quo  by  calling  for  an  enforcement-first 
approach to immigration reform that would tighten US control over migrant 
labor.  This  process  would  happen  through  a  biometric  national  ID  card 
and an employment verification system, with an “earned” path to citizen-
ship. RIFA had for all intents and purposes endorsed the Schumer proposal 
before it was even made public. According to Clarrisa Martinez of NCLA,  
her organization and RIFA were “ready to support something along the lines 
of that construct” [the Schumer proposal]. From her perspective and that 
of most immigration reformers “on the merits of policy the debate has been 
won.”   44      

    Th  e Schumer Proposal   

 It  was  not  until  Th  ursday,  April  29,  just  over  one  month  aft er  the  March  21 
mobilization,  that  Senator  Schumer  and  his  Democratic  Party  allies  Senator 
Menendez and Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid released a twenty-six-page 
document outlining their proposal for immigration reform, which they dubbed 
REPAIR (Real Enforcement with Practical Answers for Immigration Reform).   45    
Although not an actual bill, the proposal provided details on the type of immi-
gration reform bill that the Democratic Party leadership and most groups within 
RIFA were willing to embrace. Th  e proposal confi rmed the fears of those who 
thought it would be an enforcement-fi rst approach to immigration reform. Th  e 
fi rst paragraph of the proposal laid out eight benchmarks that would be required 
for a legalization program to be considered:

  Th  ese benchmarks must be met before action can be taken to adjust 
the status of people already in the United States illegally and should 
include the following: (1) increased number of Border Patrol offi  cers; 
(2) increased number of US Immigration and Customs Enforcement 

138

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

(ICE)  agents  to  combat  smuggling  operations;  (3)  increased  num-
ber of ICE worksite enforcement inspectors and increased inspection 
resources;  (4)  increased  number  of  ICE  document  fraud  detection 
offi  cers  and  improved  detection  capability;  (5)  increased  number 
of  personnel  to  conduct  inspections  for  drugs,  contraband,  and  ille-
gal immigrants at America’s ports of entry; (6) improved technology, 
infrastructure, and resources to assist the Border Patrol and ICE in their 
missions; (7) increased resources for prosecution of drug smugglers, 
human traffi  ckers, and unauthorized border crossers; and (8) increased 
immigration  court  resources  to  expedite  the  removal  of  unlawfully 
present individuals.   46     

 Th  e proposal lends unequivocal support for further militarizing the US-Mexico 
border and interior enforcement, with a punitive path for people to adjust their 
immigration status. In fact, most of the twenty-six-page document focuses on 
enforcement-related items and control over labor. It is not until page twenty-
three,  section  ten,  that  a  path  toward  legalization  is  outlined.  Th  is  section 
bears  the  subhead  “MANDATORY  REGISTRA  TION,  ACCEPTANCE  OF 
RESPONSIBILITY,  AND  ADMINISTRA  TION  OF  PUNISHMENT  FOR 
UNAUTHORIZED ALIENS PRESENTLY IN THE UNITED STATES.” As 
this language suggests, the fundamental assumption built into the document is 
that those in this country without documents are criminals who must be pun-
ished for their transgression. 

 Th  e section further outlines the Democrats’ vision for adjustment of status. 
Th  e proposal calls for granting “lawful prospective immigrant” (LPI) status to 
those undocumented workers who pass a rigorous screening process and pro-
vide biographic and biometric data:

  Aft er eight years, individuals who have been granted LPI status will be 
permitt ed to apply for adjustment of status to lawful permanent resi-
dence (LPR), provided that they can demonstrate that they meet cri-
teria related to: (1) basic citizenship skills; (2) English language skills; 
(3) continuous residence in the US; (4) updated terrorism, criminal 
history, and other checks; (5) payment of all federal income taxes, fees, 
and civil penalties; and (6) registration for Selective Service.   47     

 In short, the Schumer, or REPAIR, proposal off ers the same old solutions pro-
posed  by  the  Republican-controlled  House  and  Senate  in  2006.  During  that 
period,  the  country’s  political  leaders  suggested  strengthening  the  homeland 
security state through increased militarization of enforcement in exchange for a 

Resisting “Passive Revolution”

139

punitive form of legalization. Th  e Schumer proposal contained many of the com-
ponents of the enforcement-through-att rition strategy proposed by the nativist 
Right, and actually added elements that not even the nativists had thought up—
biometric IDs and an expanded E-Verify program. 

 RIFA held the position that the Schumer CIR proposal was the best that the 
migrant rights movement could possibly att ain in 2010. For instance, in a RIFA 
press release strategically distributed on April 29, 2010, just aft er the Democrats’ 
CIR  proposal  was  made  public,  RIFA  chair  Ali  Noorani  made  the  following 
statement:  “Th  e  invitation  by  Senate  Democratic  leaders  to  Republicans  to 
come together to negotiate, starting with the framework released today, is a step 
toward  the  federal  government  and  Congressional  leaders  stepping  up  their 
eff orts  to  fulfi ll  their  responsibility  to  fi x  the  broken  immigration  system.”   48    
When I interviewed Noorani about what could have been done diff erently to 
win justice for migrants in 2010, he limited his point to the tactical means, not 
the end goal, of CIR:

  At that moment we were at the peak of our power as a campaign, if you 
will. Th  e mistake we made is that we should have told Schumer, Reid, 
etc.,  you  have  to  drop  a  Democratic  Party  bill  [without  the  support 
of  Republicans]. . . . Th  en  because  what  would  have  happened  is  that 
would have led to us rallying around a bill and pressuring Republicans 
on that bill . . . that was our mistake [not dropping a Democratic Party 
only bill], but that was not a function of the rally, that was a function of 
the legislative strategy. Now I don’t think we could do that again mov-
ing forward, because Congress is never going to be like that again.  

 Rather than question the terms of the Schumer proposal, or of any CIR pack-
age, Noorani and others on the RIFA management team simply questioned 
the  timing  and  tactics  behind  their  legislative  strategy.  RIFA  was  unwilling 
to  push  for  a  genuine,  humane,  and  just  immigration  reform  package  that 
refl ected the desires of the millions of workers for dignity and full legalization. 
Rather, groups like the National Council of La Raza, the National Immigration 
Reform, the Center for American Progress, and other RIFA member organi-
zations never questioned the nature of the CIR; in fact, they kept the move-
ment from demanding anything that would deviate from an ominous CIR bill. 
Angela Maria Kelley remarked: “I don’t think there is some new big, creative 
idea on how to fi x the immigration system. It’s prett y basic. You have to con-
trol people coming in, they have to come in with visas, not smugglers; you 
have to deal with the people who are already here. Enforcement is best done 
at the point of hire, so a verifi cation system is needed, smart technology at the 

140

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

border.”   49    As the words of Angela Maria Kelly suggest, the leadership of RIFA 
was willing to agree to a bill that would result in the deepening of the home-
land security state and a twenty-fi rst-century labor-control system in exchange 
for legalization. 

 While RIFA and its allies found CIR to be a fair compromise, for the opposi-
tional sector of the migrant rights movement, the Schumer proposal was a line 
in the sand that they were not willing to cross.   

    CIR and Fragmenting the Migrant Rights Movement in 

New York City   

 At the time of the March 21 protest, it seemed as if RIFA and the Democratic 
Party  had  pacifi ed  most  of  the  leadership  of  the  migrant  rights  movement. 
Nonetheless,  there  was  a  burgeoning  but  fragmented  oppositional  sector  of 
the migrant rights movement that sought to resist the process of passive revo-
lution. Oppositional elements of the migrant rights movement rejected RIFA’s 
structure, strategy, and vision long before the March for America. One of the 
main groups opposing the Schumer proposal in New York City was the May 1st 
Coalition for Immigrant and Workers Rights. 

 Established during the 2006 mega-marches in New York City, when half a 
million migrants and their allies hit the streets to denounce HR 4437 and to 
demand legalization, the May 1st Coalition is informed by genealogies of strug-
gle that are unique to New York City. Among its key members one can fi nd orga-
nizers and leaders from the Nuyorican movement of the 1960s and 1970s, recent 
New  York  Mexican  migrant  struggles,  the  city’s  Dominican  community,  and 
Central and South American migrants. In addition, and unlike its counterpart 
in Los Angeles (see  chapter 2), the New York May 1st Coalition includes many 
non-Latino  migrant  organizations,  including  Pakistani  and  Filipino  groups, 
African  American  and  African  organizations,  and  rank-and-fi le  labor  leaders. 
Th  e May 1st Coalition thus represents a heterogeneous and multinational Left  
tradition that is specifi c to New York City. Like its counterpart in Los Angeles, 
it is a coalition that is autonomous from the Democratic Party and the political 
machinery of US labor. 

 Th  is  political  autonomy  has  allowed  it  to  articulate  a  position  that  was 
unequivocally opposed to the Schumer proposal and that called for an imme-
diate  moratorium  on  all  enforcement  policies  and  practices  (raids,  deporta-
tions, and border militarization) and for the full and immediate legalization of 
all undocumented workers. Indeed, Melanie Dulfo, a Filipina migrant organizer 
with Bayan USA, which works with May 1st Coalition, articulated, “No mat-
ter how much we do advocacy through parliamentary struggle and expect our 

Resisting “Passive Revolution”

141

representatives to hear our voices and represent us . . . we can never, never, never 
replace the primary struggles, which are out on the streets . . . which is always 
from the people—from what we want . . . what is in mind with what our princi-
ples are . . . that includes legalization for all. . . . Th  at’s not something they’re ever 
going to carry for us.”   50    Melanie’s position was echoed by other Latino migrant 
activists who supported the May 1 mobilization at Union Square in 2010. 

 Teresa Gutiérrez, co-coordinator of the May 1st Coalition, recalled how on 

Labor Day 2009, she approached Senator Schumer at a parade:

  He was walking the line, shaking hands. He is very tall. He seems seven 
feet, I’m sure he wasn’t, but I’m fi ve one. He was working the line and 
everyone was shaking his hand. I had to take the occasion of telling him 
how opposed we were to the Schumer plan and that immigrants have 
earned  legalization  and  that  100%  of  the  undocumented  should  get 
legalization. He got almost violent, he was raging, spit was coming out 
of his mouth, he got so angry, and he told me that immigrant organiza-
tions were for his plan. I said no, not all of the immigrant organizations 
support his plan. He was very aggressive in saying what the Democrats 
always say, that this is the best we could get.   51      

 Teresa was willing to confront Senator Schumer and articulate why she and 
her allies were critical of his bill. Th  e senator likely became irate partially because 
he is not accustomed to activists challenging him. In fact, it was much harder for 
the unions and the established immigration nonprofi ts to challenge the sena-
tor openly because many of these groups were on board with RIFA’s message. 
For instance, when I asked the vice president of SEIU Local 1199, Rhadames 
Rivera, about his position on the Schumer proposal, he responded, “ Para mí, no 
hay propuesta mala, lo que hay son propuestas incompletas ” (For me there are not 
bad proposals, but there are incomplete proposals).   52    Rivera, like others associ-
ated with RIFA in New York City, was too close to the Democrats to criticize the 
Schumer proposal openly. Teresa Gutiérrez related, “Th  ey might not have called 
for the Schumer proposal overtly, but they did not denounce it, and the May 1 
Coalition did.”   53    Given this diff erence over the willingness to push Schumer on 
the details of his proposal, it was almost inevitable that the long-standing ten-
sions between these two coalitions would lead to further diff erences. 

 Th  ese political diff erences between the May 1st Coalition and RIFA affi  liate 
organizations in New York City led to further divisions in the migrant rights 
movement and ultimately to two separate actions for May 1, 2010. Th  e march and 
rally organized by the May 1st Coalition was, at its height, att ended by roughly 
25,000 people. Th  e action started at Union Square and ended at Foley Square in 
downtown Manhatt an later that evening. Unlike at the carefully choreographed 

142

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

RIFA rally in Washington, D.C., on March 21, migrant workers had the larg-
est presence on stage and their voices were heard loud and clear. Th  e program 
featured a broad array of speakers from the grassroots Left  in New York City, 
including Dominican organizations and hip-hop groups from the South Bronx 
and Washington Heights; Ecuadorian and Filipino organizations from Queens; 
Honduran activists; progressive religious leaders; and street vendors; day labor-
ers; youth active in the fi ght for the Dream Act; rebellious labor organizers from 
the Teamsters Local 808, SEIU Local 32BJ, and the Longshoremen Union;   54    
and students and educators. Not a single politician or political operative from 
the Democratic Party spoke at the rally. But perhaps most important, migrants 
spoke out against the Schumer proposal. I recall a lett er writt en by an undocu-
mented indigenous Mexican women from the Bronx-based street vendor orga-
nization Vamos Unidos that explicitly denounced the bill. Th  e lett er, which she 
wrote from her hospital bed, said, “No queremos los papeles si estan manchados de 
sangre!” (We do not want papers if they are stained in blood!) Th  e woman’s lett er 
and the words of many of the popular migrant organizations on the stage articu-
lated a series of positions that came directly from the migrant working class and 
not a carefully choreographed political messaging plan designed to win over the 
middle or to reinforce the good immigrant–bad immigrant binary. 

 Th  ere was a great synergy between what people said on stage and what the 
masses of migrant workers on the ground were saying. Many of the participants 
in the May 1 Union Square rally noted that they were angry over SB 1070 in 
Arizona. For instance, Juan, an Ecuadorian migrant waiter in his early twenties 
who had never participated in a protest while in the United States, gave the fol-
lowing analysis of the Arizona law:

   Eso es la cosa más ridícula . . .   se trata de puro racismo. Racismo, que nos 
quieran  echar  de  acá.  Porque  los  que  están  cazando  son  latinoamerica-
nos?  Porque  no  migrantes  europeos,  italianos,  de  otros  países?  Ellos  no 
están siendo casados, los que están siendo casados son nosotros. Eso es rac-
ismo. . . . Esta es la primera vez que salgo por la ley de Arizona porque es 
una cosa que está muy mal. Ahí no están respetando los derechos huma-
nos y este país se caracteriza por derechos, valores, libertad de expresión, y 
todo?  (Th  at is the most ridiculous thing. It’s about pure racism. Racism 
is the reason they want to get out of here. Why are they hunting Latin 
Americans? Why not European immigrants, Italians, and from other 
countries? Th  ey are not being hunted; we are the ones that are being 
hunted! Th  at is racism. Th  is is the fi rst time that I come out to protest, 
because of the Arizona law, because it is something really wrong. Th  ey 
are not respecting human rights there, and this country is supposed to 
be characterized by rights, values, free expression and all?)   55     

Resisting “Passive Revolution”

143

 Juan was not afraid to denounce policies that he saw as racist and that resulted 
in  what  he  explicitly  described  as  the  hunting  of  Latinos.  Such  an  argument 
gets to a critical point that rarely is discussed in the press releases of immigra-
tion reformers: the diff erential racial treatment that Latinos receive compared 
to European-origin groups. Moreover, this humble Ecuadorian waiter had the 
good sense to make a claim against such racist treatment based on his human 
rights and to call into question the democratic credentials of the government of 
the United States for its treatment of Latinos. 

 Clearly,  Arizona’s  SB  1070  was  not  the  only  factor  leading  people  to  pro-
test. Others noted that they were there to fi ght for their family. For instance, a 
twenty-two-year-old US-born Salvadoran woman from Manhatt an named Zoila 
gave the following explanation for her participation:

  I’m here fi ghting for my father because right now . . . they’re trying to 
send him back to his country. He’s been here twenty-fi ve years now. 
When he fi led last year to get his papers, they took him in right then and 
there so now we’re trying to fi ght for him to stay because if not, then I’m 
going to be the one taking care of the family.   56     

 Zoila was at this rally to demand justice, in this case an end to the suff ering 
for her family. While I never learned the details about Zoila’s father’s case, it is 
important to note that the CIR bill that was being proposed by Senator Schumer 
and that is now being proposed by the president would not put an end to the 
draconian practice of detaining migrants who are trying to fi x their status when 
they visit immigration authorities. Th  us, Zoila, at just twenty-two years of age, 
would still likely face the possibility of having to raise her family in the absence 
of her father. 

 Th  e  migrant  workers  and  their  family  members  who  I  interviewed  at  the 
May 1 rally felt the pain of deportation, and they expressed a righteous indigna-
tion over racial profi ling and draconian police practices like Arizona’s SB 1070. 
Despite  the  variety  of  positions  and  social  locations  of  the  speakers,  they  all 
called for a just and humane immigration reform that went beyond what was 
outlined in the Schumer proposal. A US-born Filipina woman named Sabia gave 
the following explanation for her opposition to the Schumer proposal.  

  I know that one of his main points is trying to make a national identifi ca-
tion system or some sort of biometric and trying to get your fi ngerprint, 
some type of retinal scan. But that is not right, because you don’t have 
to live in such a society where we are policed like that and where they 
must know our identity. We are human, we should be able live freely 
without being harassed by people just to know if we have documents. 

144

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

Just because I have a passport does not mean, should not mean that 
I have more rights than the person that also works here twelve hours a 
day and is undocumented.   57     

 Th  e points made by Sabia refl ect a broader critique laid out by many migrants. 
She rejected the Schumer proposal because it would subject migrant workers 
to a draconian social control system based on the inalienable human rights of 
migrant workers. Th  e positions voiced by migrant workers and their children 
at the Union Square rally should be distinguished from what took place at the 
Foley Square rally. 

 Th  at same morning, forces associated with RIFA also held a demonstration 
in Foley Square. Att ended by roughly 3,000 people, the rally primarily featured 
organizations and leaders closely linked to the Democratic Party leadership and 
the major labor unions in the New York City area. Speakers included Arlene 
Holt Baker, executive vice president of the AFL-CIO, leaders from nearly every 
major union (AFSCME, LIUNA, SEIU 32BJ, and SEIU Local 1199, among 
others), and a host of elected offi  cials, including Congressman Charles Rangel, 
Congresswoman Nydia Velázquez, and City Council Speaker Christine Quinn. 
Th  e  speakers  at  the  RIFA  action  did  not  question  Schumer’s  CIR  proposal 
and  the  Democratic  Party  leadership.  Although  the  action’s  messaging  was 
one that denounced Arizona’s SB 1070 and called on Congress and the presi-
dent to support so-called CIR, the rally’s organizers did not recognize that the 
Democratic Party’s immigration proposal would essentially result in the same 
type of racial profi ling as the Arizona law being institutionalized at the national 
level. Rhadames Rivera, vice president of SEIU Local 1199, one of the most 
powerful unions in New York City and one of the main organizers of the Foley 
Square action, stated, “ No podamos pensar que vamos a lograr una amnistía gen-
eral. Eso no va pasar! ” (We could not think that we are going to reach a general 
amnesty!  Th  at  is  not  going  to  happen!)   58     Rivera  was  essentially  capitulating 
to the Schumer proposal and to the anti-migrant bloc. Rivera was not alone 
in this thinking; most RIFA-affi  liated groups that organized the Foley Square 
action were demanding CIR without questioning the content of the Schumer 
proposal. 

 Other  groups  att ending  the  Foley  Square  rally,  such  as  the  New  York 
Immigrant Coalition and Make the Road New York, held a position similar to 
Rivera’s. For instance, Javier Valdez of Make the Road New York agreed that an 
immigration reform package would have to exclude some migrants and include 
more enforcement: “If legislation is going to be the venue on immigration, then 
we have to understand that there are going to be some things that we negoti-
ate . . . there is going to be good things and bad things. . . . I think he [Schumer] 
was honestly doing the work; he was going to a lot of meetings and trying to 

Resisting “Passive Revolution”

145

persuade conservative Democrats and marginal Republicans to get on board. 
It just shows that he knows how to do legislation.”   59    Valdez explained the sepa-
rate May Day rallies as just a matt er of territorialism between the two coalitions. 
Although groups in New York City are certainly territorial, since 2006 the real 
diff erence between the groups has been political: the question of who is the real 
and legitimate force in the migrant rights movement refl ects the diff erent posi-
tions that these groups hold on immigration reform. Just as there was in Los 
Angeles in 2006, there is an oppositional current that demands the full legaliza-
tion of all twelve million undocumented people in the United States, and there 
is a current of immigration reformers who stand behind CIR and who are willing 
to compromise on who should qualify for such a legalization package. 

 RIFA’s strategy failed at its principal goal of winning CIR during the 111th 
Congress. Th  is failure occurred for a variety of reasons that were out of its con-
trol,  such  as  the  development  of  an  ultra-Right  social  movement  funded  by 
conservative foundations in the United States that pushed the national debate 
on immigration—and just about everything else—to the right. However, the 
principle reason why RIFA’s strategy failed was internal: its management team 
assumed that the president and the Democratic Party would prioritize immigra-
tion to win over the Latino vote before the 2010 midterm election, as conven-
tional political science would predict. Rather than prioritizing immigration, the 
president and his party spent most of their political capital fi ghting legislative 
batt les over health care and energy. Moreover, as Clarissa Martínez De Castro 
of the National Council of La Raza related, “In many ways the biggest friend to 
Democrats when it comes to the Latino electorate, for example, are Republicans. 
And in many ways some Democrats expect that as long as Republicans continue 
to be as bad as they are being, then Democrats do not have to work very hard.”   60    
In  the  meantime,  the  Obama  administration  sought  to  placate  Latinos  with 
high-level appointments, minor changes to immigration policy, and the promise 
of immigration reform. 

 Some of the organizations within the RIFA management team eventually real-
ized that they had been too restrained with the president and that they should have 
intensifi ed the pressure much sooner. Th  is realization, however, came too late, as 
the summer recess began and Congress geared up for the 2010 midterm elections. 
CIR did not pass during the 111th Congress; in fact, a CIR bill was never even 
formally introduced on the Senate fl oor. Not only did RIFA’s strategy fail but also 
the question over what type of immigration reform should be demanded further 
divided the migrant rights movement. Most organizations within RIFA were will-
ing to consent to a CIR legislative package that contained many of the enforce-
ment measures proposed by the nativist faction of the anti-migrant bloc, such as 
the further militarization of the border and programs such as Secure Communities 
and E-Verify, among other draconian policies in exchange for legalization. Th  e 

146

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

compromise on CIR had the eff ect of fragmenting the migrant rights movement 
and alienating many in the leadership from the base of migrant workers. Juan 
Carlos Ruiz, a Mexican priest and migrant activist, noted, “At this point there is no 
intention of working together. I think that organizing on the ground has become 
so politicalized that we have allowed our own interests to come before organizing 
the community people who are in front of organizations.”   61    Further refl ecting on 
the state of aff airs of the migrant rights movement in 2010 and 2012, Ruiz noted, 
“We have become so corrupted by the politics by the state that instead of being 
the voice and demands of our people. . . . we are in debt with the state, with those 
institutions. And as results we have two marches” and a divided movement.  

    Litt le Carrots and Big Sticks: Obama’s 

Immigration Policies   

 Despite divisions among Latino migrant activists, hope turned into despair for 
many Latino migrant families during Obama’s fi rst term in offi  ce. Th  e Democratic 
Party leadership failed to push for an immigration reform bill, and the adminis-
tration sought to implement a program of passive revolution. Indeed, it pacifi ed 
the movement with a series of reforms that could be classifi ed as carrots and 
sticks. Th  e carrots were minor reforms to its enforcement system coupled with 
the promise of a CIR bill, and the sticks were policy changes that resulted in a 
more robust and effi  cient homeland security state apparatus responsible for the 
deportation of more than 1.5 million people. 

    Carrots   

 Th  e Obama administration used its executive power over DHS to make several 
changes to the migration control system. While some of these changes appear 
to make the system more effi  cient and humane to some, the reality is that the 
changes to the migration control apparatus refl ect the broader strategy of passive 
revolution that has played out against Latino migrant activists and their allies. It 
is also alienating the leadership of the movement from the base of migrant work-
ers who face the brunt of state violence. 

 Th  e  administration  has  certainly  made  some  adjustments  that  make  the 
migration control system appear more fair and humane to the casual observer. 
For instance, the Obama administration moved away from aggressive work-site 
raids. Moreover, under the Obama administration, assistant secretary of ICE John 
Morton issued a memo in which ICE would ostensibly deport those migrants 
whom it has dubbed a “high priority” or a threat to public safety or national secu-
rity. According to the memo, the DHS will exercise what it calls prosecutorial dis-
cretion, which gives ICE agents more power to decide how to proceed in what 

Resisting “Passive Revolution”

147

they consider to be low-priority cases. Assistant Secretary Morton also announced 
that ICE would att empt to create a more “civil detention system” which suppos-
edly releases asylum seekers on bail who pass a credible fear interview, provide 
an online prisoner locator system, and look for alternatives to detention, among 
other reforms.   62    Moreover, the Department of Justice under Erik Holder brought 
charges against the Maricopa County Sherriff , Maricopa County, and Sherrif Joe 
Arpaio  for  violating  the  civil  rights  of  Latino  groups.  Th  e  administration  also 
made adjustments to the provisional waiver program, which forgives unlawful 
presence  for  those  who  have  no  criminal  history  or  administrative  violations. 
And in the face of intensifi ed activism from Obama’s strongest critics—undocu-
mented youth and their allies—he announced the implementation of Deferred 
Action for Childhood Arrivals. Finally, Obama gave his symbolic support for a 
series of CIR bills that never made it past both the House  and Senate. 

 Yet these minor reforms to the migration control system and symbolic ges-
tures were accompanied by eff orts to create a more robust and homeland secu-
rity  state.  Indeed,  Obama  continued  the  Bush  administration’s  spending  on 
enforcement, which has climbed steadily from almost $7.5 billion in 2002 to $17 
billion in 2010.   63    Moreover, President Obama expanded the capacity of home-
land security by stepping up what is euphemistically called interior enforcement 
and border enforcement. Th  is enforcement has occurred primarily through two 
 programs that represent a new generation of technology-based social control 
policies: E-verify and Secure Communities.  

    E-Verify   

 Th  e Obama Administration may have abandoned the use of work site raids, but 
it replaced them with electronic raids through E-Verify. E-Verify is the online 
worker identifi cation verifi cation system of the federal government. Th  e program 
works by comparing information from employee work documents to govern-
ment records to check the legal status of workers.   64    Th  e program, which has been 
around as a pilot program since the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant 
Responsibility Act of 1996, became E-verify in 2007 under the Bush adminis-
tration. Th  e Bush administration, however, did not make the program manda-
tory for all federal contractors until aft er 2007, when CIR did not fall through. 
In 2009 the Obama administration continued the practice of requiring E-Verify 
for all federal contractors.   65    In light of this policy reform, the number of employ-
ers participating in the program more than doubled, according to the Migration 
Policy Institute. In fi scal year 2009 there were 157,000 employers enrolled in the 
program, and the government processed more than eight million queries. Th  e 
program increased to thirteen million in FY 2010 and seventeen million queries 
in 2011. As a consequence undocumented workers are being fi red when employ-
ers can not match their information through the E-verify database.   66     

148

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

    287(g) and Secure Communities   

 As part of the administration’s eff orts to expand the capacity of the homeland 
security state, it has begun to replace the 287(g) program, which allows ICE to 
partner with local law enforcement agencies and eff ectively gives local police 
the powers of federal immigration agents. Despite its popularity and growth in 
the aft ermath of the mega-marches, the 287(g) program fell under much scru-
tiny from the Department of Justice and Latino migrant activists and their allies 
who viewed it as a program that uses racial profi ling. In light of this critique 
and other contentious points around the program, DHS began plans to replace 
287(g) with another program called Secure Communities. Th  e DHS claims that 
Secure  Communities  does  not  use  racial  profi ling  to  identify  undocumented 
people because all people arrested, regardless of race or nationality, are subject 
to screening. Still, the vast majority of those deported through the program are 
Latinos, many of whom are taken into custody because of racial profi ling on the 
streets by regular police offi  cers. 

 Secure  Communities  runs  the  fi ngerprints  of  suspects  arrested  by  local 
authorities  through  two  federal  databases,  one  belonging  to  DHS  (IDENT 
checks immigration history) and another belonging to the FBI (IAFIS checks 
criminal  history).   67     Th  ese  two  compatible  databases  are  used  to  determine 
whether a person is in the United States without documents. Th  ese searches 
will most oft en result in an immigration detainer being issued for people who 
are undocumented or are deemed deportable by federal authorities. A detainer 
allows local law enforcement to hold a person for seventy-two hours or until 
immigration authorities can arrive to detain the individual and begin immigra-
tion proceedings. Moreover, the program was originally implemented through 
a Memorandum of Understanding like the ones used to implement the 287(g) 
program in which states could opt out of the program. However, aft er Latino 
migrant activists and their allies in Chicago and New York City began campaigns 
to opt out of the program, the DHS revised the program and made it mandatory 
across the United States and its territories. 

 Th  e  Obama  administration  aggressively  expanded  the  program.  For 
instance, Figure 5.1 illustrates how the program went from being implemented 
in only 77 jurisdictions in July 2009 to 3,074 in July 2012.  Th  e expansion of 
the program is partially responsible for the increase in deportations under the 
Obama administration.  For instance, in 2009 the program accounted for 4% of 
all removals, whereas in 2011 it accounted for 20% of removals.   68    DHS plans to 
expand the program to all 3,181 jurisdictions in the United States and its ter-
ritories by March 2013.   69    Th  e Migration Policy Institute indicated, “Th  e total 
number of fi ngerprints submitt ed through the program increased from 828,119 
in  FY  2009,  to  nearly  3.4  million  in  FY  2010,  to  approximately  6.4  million 

Resisting “Passive Revolution”

149

Jurisdictions deployed

3,074

1,502

481

77

July 2009

July 2010

July 2011

July 2012

3500

3000

2500

2000

1500

1000

500

0

 

   Figure 5.1   Expansion of Secure Communities
 Source : Immigration Policy Center, A Decade of Rising Enforcement (American Immigration 
Countil, Janurary 2013). htt  p://www.immigrationpolicy.org/sites/default/fi  les/docs/
enforcementstatsfactsheet.pdf   

in FY 2011.”   70    Th  is massive interior enforcement apparatus of the homeland 
security state cannot be separated from the unprecedented buildup of border 
enforcement.       

    Border Enforcement   

 As part of its move toward using so-called smart technologies to enforce migra-
tion control eff orts, the Obama administration has also continued to expand 
border  enforcement  using  the  latest  state-of-the-art  technology  and  surveil-
lance equipment. In 2010 the Obama administration deployed 1,500 National 
Guard troops to the border, together with about three hundred new Customs 
and Border Protection agents, through a program called Operation Phalanx. Th  e 
program, which was supposed to be discontinued in 2011, was still in place as 
of December 2013, according to the Migration Policy Institute.   71    Th  e continued 
presence of these troops, who provide logistic, surveillance, and technological 
support, among other types of “support,” is part of a broader border enforcement 
strategy  for  2012–16  implemented  under  the  Obama  administration.  Under 
this program US Customs and Border Protection seeks to develop mobile rapid 
response teams of up to fi ve hundred agents at a time to respond to “terrorism” 
and other emergencies. While the Obama administration has kept funding and 
personnel levels steady compared to the several years of sustained and signifi -
cant growth since Operation Gatekeeper in 1994, it has completed 651 miles 
of the 700-mile border fence approved by Congress in the Secure Fence Act of 
2005.   72    Th  is marks a milestone in the rapid expansion of border enforcement, 

150

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

which at the time of Operation Gatekeeper in the mid-1990s had fourteen miles 
of fencing at the border. 

 * 

* 

* 

 As  noted  by  political  theorists  and  activists  Luis  Fernandez  and  Greg  Olson, 
the “debate” between nativists and immigration reformers who support CIR is 
oft en at odds with the way undocumented people see themselves.   73    Along similar 
lines, I found a disjuncture between the messaging used by RIFA’s communica-
tions strategists and campaign managers and the way that many Latino activists 
on the ground perceive themselves, even at RIFA actions.   74    For instance, not a 
single migrant from Mexico, Central America, the Caribbean, or Philippines who 
I interviewed saw himself or herself as an “illegal person” who must “get right 
with the law, pay taxes, pay a fi ne, and speak English,” as RIFA’s talking points and 
communications strategy seek to convey.   75    Nor did any of the individuals who 
I approached at the protests at RIFA’s own actions or at the actions of the May 1st 
Coalition say that they were there demonstrating for CIR. Almost all of the people 
who I interviewed at these protests and actions, migrant and nonmigrant alike, 
off ered a diff erent message: they all unequivocally were calling for legalization in 
the face of what many of them described as racist policies that target Latinos. 

 But  these  popular  demands  were  never  met  by  the  111th  Congress,  nor 
are they likely ever to be met without a massive autonomous grassroots social 
movement with suffi  cient power to make the demands of migrants a reality. Th  e 
beauty and power of the 2006 mega-marches was that migrant workers had orga-
nizations and venues that were capable of articulating those demands, if momen-
tarily, in the face of the homeland security state that viewed them as passive 
objects. By 2008, however, a new leading ideological force among Latino migrant 
activists and their allies had emerged. Moreover, these immigration reformers 
demonstrated a willingness to concede to a CIR bill that contained most of the 
enforcement-through-att rition measures proposed by the anti-migrant bloc in 
exchange for legalization. Clearly, this concession is not simply a matt er of being 
satisfi ed  with  the  CIR  framework;  there  are  well-intentioned  activists  with  a 
long trajectory of fi ghting for workers and migrant rights who temporarily and 
strategically adopted such a discourse as part of a campaign strategy to win a 
path toward legalization. Nonetheless, the fact they were willing to adopt such a 
discourse and set of policy proposals at a time when the Democratic Party con-
trolled the presidency and Congress is a refl ection of the ideological leadership 
over the immigration debate established by the anti-migrant bloc. Th  ey pushed 
the public discourse so far to the right that even when they were no longer the 
majority in the legislative apparatus of the state, the immigration reformers and 
the Democrats continued to use the same discourse. Indeed, the nativist Right 
spent the last thirty years preparing the moral and intellectual groundwork to 

Resisting “Passive Revolution”

151

reduce the immigration debate to a binary that forced activists to agree to police 
the “bad immigrant” to save the “good immigrant.”

Th  e president, the Democratic Party, and RIFA structured their position on 
immigration reform in such a way that they played directly into this binary oppo-
sition. Th  e logical consequence of adopting the good immigrant–bad immigrant 
binary is agreement that the undocumented are criminals, and thus the natural 
and ostensibly race-neutral solution must be to punish and deport the undocu-
mented for their reputed transgression—not to challenge the underlining struc-
tural reason people migrate. Th  us, rather than providing an opportunity to fi ght 
for the most popular demands that came from the base of migrant workers, the 
election of Obama had a pacifying eff ect. 

 Rather  than  being  a  “revolution”  or  great  transformation,  the  election  of 
President Obama, in classic Gramscian fashion, resulted in the strengthening 
of the very structures that Latino migrant activists and the migrant rights move-
ment were fi ghting. Obama the candidate and later president pacifi ed immigra-
tion reformers by making promises to push through a CIR bill and to curtail 
state  violence  against  Latino  communities.  Immigration  reformers  and  their 
allies across the county sacrifi ced radical challenges to lethal migration control 
policies for the sake of short-term gains and  access to powerful administration 
fi gures. 

 Th  is sacrifi ce resulted in a rather ironic outcome as immigration reformers 
got behind the president and his party’s ominous immigration reform proposal 
while he and his administration did more to expand the repressive capacities of 
the homeland security than any of his Republican predecessors. As a veteran 
Chicano migrant rights activist and lawyer put, “It’s like a Republican plan but 
it’s executed by the Democrats,  güey! ”   76            

   6 

 Beyond Immigration Reform: Th  e Latin 

Americanization of  Latino Politics, 

Authoritarian Statism, and Democracy 

from Below    

       It is impossible to disentangle the migration and labor question today 
without a deep understanding of the nature of contemporary capital-
ism, namely, neoliberal globalization   

 Th  is book was born out of both inspiration and frustration with the gains made 
by Latino migrant activists and the migrant rights movement in the face of the 
homeland security state during the conjuncture of 2001–12. I use the concept 
of the homeland security state to refer to the post-9/11 migration and social 
control regime that emerged under the discourse of the war on terror but that is 
also part of a thirty-year long symbiosis between the prison-industrial complex 
and the war on drugs with immigration control eff orts of the 1980s and 1990s. 
 Aft er  more  than  a  decade  of  struggle  the  movement  has  not  been  able  to 
win justice for people like Bernardo, the father and veteran deported to Mexico 
because of a minor criminal off ense, the several Salvadoran men interviewed for 
 chapter 4, or the millions of others who have been deported in the aft ermath 
of the post-9/11 homeland security state. Clearly, this is not due to a lack of 
eff ort. Even before 9/11, there have been major mobilization eff orts to fi ght for 
migrant rights: actions against Proposition 187 in California; protests against 
similar  bills  in  places  like  Arizona;  and  numerous  actions  against  the  border 
wall in the southwest in the 1990s. Following the post-9/11 crackdown, there 
have been countless actions, including the 2006 mega-marches, which put three 
to fi ve million people on the streets nationwide; the Ya Es Hora and the Ve y 
Vota campaigns in 2007, which produced over one million new Latino citizens 
and voters; the 2010 rally at the National Mall, which brought 250,000 mostly 

152

Beyond Immigration Reform

153

Central American migrants and their allies to demand immigration reform under 
the Obama administration; sit-ins, hunger strikes, teach-ins, and other actions 
against racist ordinances and state proposals; the struggle for driver’s licenses; 
and the student-led struggle for the Dream Act across the country. 

 I asked a simple question at the outset of this book: how is it that aft er this 
entire struggle, Latino migrant activists have not been able to win sustainable 
and transformative social justice victories for migrants and their families beyond 
the conventional policy solutions embedded in most CIR proposals from 2001 
to 2012? I argued that the reason Latino migrant activists and their allies were 
in  such  a  position  was  that,  starting  in  the  1980s,  a  dynamic  and  contradic-
tory constellation of forces that I call the anti-migrant bloc built the political 
and intellectual infrastructure to establish its hegemony over the immigration 
debate. Th  is bloc used its ideological leadership, which I call anti-migrant hege-
mony, to call for the expansion of the state’s police powers at the local, federal, 
and transnational levels of governance. Th  e post-9/11 security context created 
the  conditions  for  an  anti-migrant  bloc  born  out  of  an  alliance  between  the 
nativist Right, state actors, and strategic fractions of capital that benefi t from 
undocumented migrants as a fl exible labor force that is detainable and deport-
able. Together, these contradictory forces have set the ideological boundaries of 
the immigration debate in such a way that many immigration reformers consent 
to, and in some cases defend, many of the components of the homeland secu-
rity state and the enforcement-through-att rition strategy devised by the nativist 
Right in exchange for legalization. As a result of this ideological leadership, the 
anti-migrant bloc has been able to divide and disorganize Latino migrant activ-
ists and their allies. Indeed, until the day of this writing, migrant activists are 
divided over their vision of reform and strategy on how to best proceed. 

 As I have shown in the last fi ve chapters, the key to the anti-migrant bloc’s 
success  has  been  the  criminalization  of  Latinos  at  nearly  every  level  of  the 
state–civil society nexus, from local county boards to Congress to US foreign 
policy institutions and in civil society. Th  e anti-migrant bloc won the ideologi-
cal batt le on immigration reform long before Barack Obama became president 
of the United States and long before Latino organizations and their allies built 
the political machine that brought about the results of the 2012 election and 
renewed eff orts to pass immigration reform in Congress.    

       Th  e 2012   

 Election and Beyond 

   Like all major elections, the 2012 presidential election proved to be an impor-
tant gauge of political att itudes and trends more broadly. A record 11.5 million 
Latinos turned out to vote in this election, according to the Pew Hispanic Center.   1    

154

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

Although Latinos are yet to realize their full electoral power, further analysis of the 
2012 election indicates that Latinos are gaining electoral infl uence and that sup-
port for the anti-migrant bloc—at least in its previous confi guration—is waning.  
 In the 2012 presidential election Republican candidate Mitt  Romney prom-
ised to promote the enforcement-through-att rition strategy pushed by the nativist 
Right. He hired Kris Kobach, mentee of the late Samuel Huntington and author 
of Arizona’s SB 1070, as his immigration adviser. Republicans felt that they could 
galvanize the racial resentment of their base against a group that they portrayed as 
noncitizens who do not and cannot vote. Yet this strategy proved to be a total fail-
ure. Latino organizations through the Ya Es Hora (Th  e Time Is Now) campaign 
and the eff orts of grassroots organizations made good on their promise when they 
said  Hoy marchamos y mañana votamos  (Today we march, tomorrow we vote). 

 Some of the leading Latino political scientists, including Gary Segura and Matt  
Barreto, have called the election a “watershed” moment.   2    Nearly 72% of Latinos 
voted for President Obama. According to the polling group Latino Decisions, 
Latinos were “nationally decisive” in a US presidential election for the fi rst time 
in history. According to Decisions, “Latinos’ net contribution to Obama [was] a 
5.4% margin” when the national popular vote margin for Obama was +2.3%. Th  e 
polling group concluded that, if Latinos had split their votes evenly for both par-
ties, Obama may have lost. From this perspective, Romney could have won with 
35% of the Latino vote.   3    Moreover, the Latino vote played a decisive role in the 
batt leground states of Arizona, Colorado, Nevada, Florida, and Virginia. 

 Indeed, a major reason why Latinos voted for Obama and the Democratic 
Party more broadly is that they associated the Republican candidates with more 
aggressive anti-migrant and, hence, anti-Latino policies. Latino Decisions noted 
that  56%  of  Latino  voters  believed  that  Romney  did  not  care  about  Latinos, 
whereas only 23% of Latinos felt that Obama does not care about Latino issues.   4    
In fact, 66% of Latino voters thought Obama cares about Latino issues, compared 
with only 14% who thought that Romney did.   5    Moreover, 58% of Latino voters 
felt more enthusiastic about voting for Obama aft er he announced his Deferred 
Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) policy, which allowed undocumented 
youth between the ages of fi ft een and thirty, with no felonies or fewer than two 
misdemeanors temporary legal status for two years. Compare this fi gure to 57% 
of Latinos who felt less enthusiastic about Romney’s immigration policies.   6     

 Th  ese political att itudes must been seen as a response to the racist vitriol of 
the anti-migrant bloc over the last decades, which led to the increased politiciza-
tion of Latino communities. According to the Pew Hispanic Research Center, 
from 2008 to 2012 the number of eligible Latino voters grew from 19.5 million 
to 23.3 million.   7    Moreover, the Center for American Progress expects that by 
the 2016 election there will be over four million new eligible Latino voters, an 
increase of 17% over the current number of eligible voters.   8    In addition, the Pew 

Beyond Immigration Reform

155

Hispanic Center reports that, as of 2012, “some 800,000 Latinos turn 18 each 
year; by 2030, this number could grow to 1 million per year, adding a potential 
electorate of more than 16 million new Latino voters to the rolls by 2030.”   9    Th  is 
increase in potential voters could double the Latino electorate by 2030 and turn 
Arizona and Texas into blue states where Democrats will be positioned to win 
the Electoral College and dramatically shift  the outcome of presidential elec-
tions for generations to come. 

 In the aft ermath of the 2012 election some of the most rabid anti-migrant 
forces most closely associated with the nativist Right, including Representative 
Brian Bilbray of San Diego’s 50th Congressional District, who chaired the noto-
rious House Immigration Reform Caucus, are now out of offi  ce thanks in part 
to the Latino vote.   10    In fact, several conservatives who supported the slew of 
anti-migrant legislation introduced in Congress since 2001 have been voted out 
of offi  ce. In Riverside County, California, conservative Republican Mary Bonno 
Mack, who held a fi rm grip over her congressional seat, was defeated by politi-
cal newcomer Democrat Raul Ruiz, an emergency room doctor with humble 
Mexican roots.   11    Th  is change happened, in part, because of the changing demo-
graphics  in  places  like  Riverside  County  and  more  competitive  districts  that 
were redrawn based on the 2006 Census. In light of these demographic changes 
and restructuring of the political system, it is unlikely that the hard-core nativ-
ist Right will continue to maintain the same type of ideological leadership over 
policy and the public discourse on migration control, especially in places with 
rapidly changing demographics. 

 Th  is confl uence of forces set the context for the 2012 presidential race and 
will create a new set of conditions for Latino migrant activists and the broader 
migrant rights movement vis-à-vis the homeland security state in the years to 
come. Stanford political scientist Gary Segura succinctly made this point: 

 Th  e results of the 2012 election have awakened the Republican Party 
to  their  impending  demographic  disaster.  Substantial  growth  in  the 
size and power of the Latino vote—and an overwhelming tilt in that 
vote against their nominee—paints a bleak future for Republican elect-
ability.  Coupled  with  startling  Democratic  vote  share  among  Asian 
Americans (73%), and an ever more resolute and motivated African 
American vote, demography may be destiny for the GOP.   12     

 Segura is pointing to an emerging coalition of color that is strongly identifi ed 
with immigrants and that is skeptical if not adverse to the GOP’s broad agenda 
on a variety of issues. 

 Political  scientists  such  as  Segura  are  not  alone  in  their  optimism  about 
changing political and demographic trends. Noting that by 2040 the majority 

156

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

of Americans will be people of color, sociologist Joe Feagin stated, “We will in 
all likelihood have fewer winning white candidates opposing antidiscrimination 
laws and pressing for laws further restricting Latin American and Asian immigra-
tion as well as more candidates of color.”   13    Segura and Feagin are correct to point 
to an inevitable shift  in politics due to the changing demographics and emerging 
voices in our society, but demography is not always destiny, and if history has 
taught us anything, having large majorities of people of color does not guarantee 
access to social justice, much less a democratic polity.  

    Reconfi guring the Anti-Migrant Bloc: Th  e Latin 

Americanization of Latino Politics in the United States   

 Although recent demographic trends and the infl uence of the Latino vote may 
make it seem like the immigration debate has changed for the bett er, there are no 
guarantees that these changes will lead to sustainable and transformative social 
justice victories for Latino communities. Nor do these changes mean that the 
anti-migrant bloc has been defeated.   14    Rather, the anti-migrant bloc and its hege-
monic leadership over the immigration debate is being reconfi gured. 

 In response to the demographic changes and evolving political att itudes in 
Latino  communities,  I  see  a  reconfi guration  of  the  anti-migrant  bloc  and  of 
politics in the United States in general. I conceptualize this phenomenon as the 
Latin Americanization of Latino politics in the United States to refer to how a 
mostly Euro-descendant and affl  uent Latino elite is att empting to represent the 
interests of nearly 50.5 million Latinos, the vast majority of whom are working 
class and many of whom are descendants of the African and indigenous com-
munities of Latin America, and in some cases of the United States.   15    I developed 
this  concept  as  a  corollary  to  Eduardo  Bonilla  Silva’s  argument  on  the  Latin 
Americanization of race in the United States. He uses this sociological concept 
to discuss how race relations in the United States are changing in such a way 
that some Latinos are able to pass as honorary whites, while large sectors of 
dark-skinned Latinos continue to bear the brunt of racism. 

 Building upon the ideas of Bonilla Silva, I foresee a new generation of main-
stream  Latino  politicians,  alongside  political  operatives  and  media  person-
alities,  emerging  and  taking  on  the  role  of  representing  the  vast  majority  of 
working-class Latinos before the United States political system without chal-
lenging the structural causes of migration and the racial politics that make state 
violence against migrants and people of color all too common. Much like Latin 
American elites who use nationalism to make broad appeals to national unity in 
racially and linguistically diverse societies that are also divided over class, the 
Latino political elite oft en appeal to a sense of  Latinidad  that conceals the racial, 

Beyond Immigration Reform

157

class, sexual, and linguistic discontinuities in Latino communities to become 
brokers between Latinos and the homeland security state. 

 Among Republicans we have a new generation of politicians such as Senators 
Ted Cruz and Marco Rubio who are quickly emerging as a new class of con-
servative Latino politicians across the United States. Th  ese two particular cases 
are emerging as the Latino face of the anti-migrant bloc in what is a transparent 
att empt to recast the image of Republicans as being inclusive and to lend cre-
dence to the claim that anti-migrant policies are colorblind. In fact, just seven 
months aft er the 2012 election, Republicans in the House of Representatives 
have sponsored a bill to defund the DACA program and to increase funding for 
the  DHS’s  detention  and  deportation  programs.  Th  e  main  spokesman  in  the 
Senate against the immigration reform in the 113th Congress was Senator Ted 
Cruz, who proposed poison amendments to remove any pathway toward citi-
zenship in the 2013 Senate immigration bill. Cruz, a Tea Party Republican who 
is to the “right” of even Senator Rubio, has appeared on  Th  e Rush Limbaugh show  
and other conservative talk radio programs to boost opposition to the immigra-
tion bill. Rubio has also called for expanding the “border fence” and threatened 
to revoke his support from the very bill that he helped draft  if certain border 
triggers are not met. Politicians like Cruz and Rubio are not going away; in fact, 
conservative Latinos like them are being groomed across the country. Th  ey will 
become the new face of the anti-migrant bloc for years to come. 

 Republican Senators such as Ted Cruz and Marco Rubio are extreme exam-
ples of this phenomenon. But it would be a theoretical and conceptual mistake 
fraught  with  serious  political  consequences  to  limit  an  analysis  of  the  Latin 
Americanization of Latino politics to Republicans and conservatives. As politi-
cal theorist Kathleen R. Arnold writes, when it comes to immigration politics 
“the separation between Right and Left  is a matt er of degrees, rather than lead-
ing to debate or exposing the complexities of immigration . . . Both Democrats 
and Republicans have backed the border fence, the guest workers program, and 
tighter immigration control.”   16    In fact, she notes that even the much-celebrated 
Hispanic Democratic governor of New Mexico Bill Richardson “declared the 
border area a ‘state of emergency’ and deployed his state’s National Guard before 
President Bush did in May 2006.”   17    In a similar fashion throughout this book, 
I have shown how the anti-migrant bloc has gained ideological leadership over 
groups  that  have  traditionally  been  viewed  as  progressive  and  aligned  with 
migrants. Th  e Latin Americanization of Latino politics in the United States is a 
bipartisan and bilingual racial and class project. 

 Th  e  Latin  Americanization  of  Latino  politics  in  the  United  States  has  its 
manifestations from above and from below. From above, it is made possible by 
the affl  uence and corporate connections of the mostly Euro-descedant Latino 
political elites who do the work of representing the masses of Latino workers 

158

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

before a system that they ultimately seek to preserve. As in Latin America, there 
is also a politics from below. Th  is form of politics come via the proliferation of 
labor organizing among warehouse workers, street vendors, car wash workers, 
guest workers, and other marginalized workers. It also comes in the form of new 
social movements comprised of students, marginalized youth, women, sexual 
minorities, and indigenous people, Afro-Latinos—all of whom have emerged 
to make rights claims from the margins of society. Perhaps nowhere else is the 
diff erences between these two class projects more visible than in the struggle for 
immigration reform. 

      Th  e Gang of Eight Bill (S. 744): Forging a 

Twenty-First-Century System of 

Labor-Migration Control   

 On  June  27,  2013,  the  United  States  Senate  passed  the  Border  Security, 
Economic Opportunity, and Immigration Modernization Act (S. 744). Th  e bill, 
which was originally draft ed by the Gang of Eight, named aft er the eight sena-
tors who have come together to work out an immigration bill, passed with a vote 
of 68 to 32. Most liberal media pundits and immigration reformers celebrated 
the bill as a major step forward for bringing the eleven million undocumented 
people in the United States out of the shadows and toward fi xing our broken 
immigration system. 

 Th  e most celebrated aspect of the bill is that it will grant undocumented peo-
ple who qualify and overcome certain hurdles Registered Provisional Immigrant 
(RPI) status for ten years with an eventual path toward a green card that osten-
sibly makes those who qualify eligible for citizenship aft er waiting another three 
years, if certain security triggers are met. Th  e bill also puts about two million 
undocumented migrants, primarily Dreamers and agricultural workers, on an 
expedited fi ve-year path toward receiving a green card, which, in turn, would 
make them eligible to apply for citizenship. If S. 744 becomes law, it will surely 
provide much-needed temporary relief to undocumented migrants that qualify 
by allowing them to travel, obtain a driver’s license, and to have some type of 
temporary legal status. Th  e bill would make some important changes to deten-
tion  and  immigration  court  practices.  For  instance  it  would  limit  the  use  of 
solitary  confi nement,  it  would  provide  court-appointed  council  to  unaccom-
panied children and people with mental illness, and would allow judges a bit 
more discretion in certain immigration cases, among other concessions. Such 
reforms would provide a degree of relief to detainees and people with immigra-
tion cases. S. 744 may provide temporary relief for a selected group; however, it 
will not provide justice for migrants and their families over the long run. In fact 

Beyond Immigration Reform

159

all of these benefi ts come at a heavy cost for those who att empt to navigate the 
so-called pathway toward citizenship, for those who do not qualify, for the future 
fl ows of migrants, and for the prospects of having a meaningful democracy in the 
United States. 

 To qualify for the RPI status and start the legalization process, undocumented 
people will be required to pay a fi ne, pay back taxes, register with the govern-
ment, and go through a series of background checks. From the commencement, 
a large number of migrants will not qualify for RPI status because of prior con-
victions and because many migrants arrived aft er December 31, 2011, both of 
which would disqualify them from the status. Moreover, as with DACA, there 
will be a large number of migrants who will not qualify because they cannot pro-
duce proper documentation within the brief one-year application fi ling period 
provided to apply for the RPI status. 

 For those undocumented migrants who successfully qualify for RPI status, 
the path toward citizenship is a gauntlet riddled with legal trip wires and require-
ments that will result in only a fraction of the undocumented population ever 
being able to apply for legal permanent residency status and even fewer able to 
apply for citizenship, if ever. In addition, there is a secondary set of fi nes and 
hurdles that must be met aft er six years to renew RPI status. For instance, to 
qualify for a renewed RPI status aft er six years, undocumented migrants will 
have to prove that they have not been unemployed for more than sixty days con-
secutively and that they have a yearly income 25% above the federal poverty line. 
Th  ese same requirements will apply four years later, along with an additional set 
of application fees, as part of the application for legal permanent residency status 
or the green card. Given the nature of the global economic crisis and the fl ex-
ible segment of the labor economy that many undocumented Latino migrants 
occupy, it is highly unlikely that they will be able to navigate the ten-year pro-
cess successfully to qualify for a green card, let alone citizenship. In a candid 
moment, while commenting on the requirements to meet the path for citizen-
ship, Republican Senator Lindsey Graham noted, “Hell, half my family wouldn’t 
qualify.”   18    

 Some immigration reformers maintain that S. 744 is a sweeping and historic 
reform. However, upon inspection, the bill appears to be designed to prevent 
people from successfully navigating the system and to expand the power of the 
homeland security state. Th  e reputable immigration att orney Peter Schey of the 
Center for Human Rights and Constitutional Law noted that S. 744 may cre-
ate a fair and straight forward path toward citizenship for the about two mil-
lion Dreamers and agricultural workers out of the eleven million undocumented 
people in the United States. However, Schey emphasized, “Th  e proposed pro-
gram  for  9  million  undocumented  immigrants  is  so  complex,  costly,  drawn 
out over time, and burdened with obstacles that its implementation will likely 

160

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

legalize no more than half of the remaining 9 million undocumented immigrants 
now living in the US”   19    In addition, those who meet these requirements will be 
in a legal purgatory similar to that of youth who qualify for DACA, and they will 
not be able to apply for a green card for at least ten years or until the border is 
90% “secured.”    20    Moreover, those who obtain RPI status will have to go to the 
proverbial “back of the line” until all those who have applied for a green card 
have been processed. With such ambiguous language, the bill could potentially 
result in certain national groups such as Mexicans being given a temporary work 
permit and indefi nitely waiting for a green card and perhaps citizenship because 
of the extensive backlogs in the system.   21    In short, S. 744 sets up a gauntlet of 
requirements designed to keep undocumented workers in a perpetual tempo-
rary legal status. 

 Th  e Gang of Eight’s S. 744 also calls for unabated political and economic sup-
port for the homeland security state. As originally passed by the Senate Judiciary 
Committ ee,  S.  744  requests  3,500  new  US  Customs  and  Border  Protection 
offi  cers to be hired between 2014 and 2017. Th  e bill also preserves the use of 
National  Guard  troops  to  be  used  to  operate  drones,  install  motion  sensors, 
build fencing, and provide support including checkpoints and other duties in 
border regions at the request of the governor of a border state or the secretary 
of defense. 

 Th  e border-enforcement provisions in S. 744 were problematic to begin with. 
However, as Gerald Lenoir of the Black Alliance for Just Immigration (BAJI) 
noted, S.744 “went from bad to worse” when Republican Senators Bob Corker 
and John Hoeven added the so-called border surge amendments designed to 
win Republican support for S. 744, which were approved on June 27, 2013.   22    
Th  e amended version of the bill will provide a total of $46.3 billion for migration 
control. According to the National Network for Immigrant and Refugee Rights, 
the border surge will provide $30 billion to double the number of Border Patrol 
agents from roughly 20,000 to 40,000 over the next ten years; provide $8 bil-
lion to add 700 miles of fencing along the US-Mexico border; provide $140 mil-
lion  for  Blackhawk  helicopters;  deploy  160  drones  for  border  enforcement; 
and recruit former members of the armed forces to be hired by Department of 
Homeland Security and its agencies.   23    Th  is funding is a monumental amount 
of money to be spent on border security. If the Merida Initiative, a military aid 
package that the United States provided to Mexico in 2008—with disastrous 
human rights consequences—was for $1.9 billion, the proposed border surge 
would be twenty times larger and will likely yield the same results. 

 Th  is border surge comes in the aft ermath of the Secure Fence Act of 2006 
and the Secure Border Initiative, which have resulted in a twenty-fi rst-century 
state-of-the-art border-control strategy with ground sensors, aerial drones, and 
rapid-response teams. Such teams come from US counter-insurgency models 

Beyond Immigration Reform

161

in which special units comprising up to 500 Customs and Border Patrol agents 
can be rapidly deployed into the border to neutralize enemies. As the term  surge , 
which  was  originally  used  by  the  United  States  Armed  forces  to  refer  to  the 
intensifi cation of the war in Iraq, suggests, S. 744 will result in the intensifi cation 
of the war on migrants along the US–Mexico border, which has already resulted 
in the deaths of thousands of migrants in the desert since the 1990s. Like the 
Merida Initiative, the border surge is likely to result in the intensifi cation of state 
violence along both sides of the US–Mexico border while creating the appear-
ance of stability and democracy. Th  e border surge amendment was enough to 
win support for S. 744 among Arizona governor Janet Brewer and Senator John 
McCain, who frankly noted, “We will have the most militarized border since the 
fall of the Berlin Wall.”   24     

 Th  is  border-enforcement  strategy  is  part  of  a  broader  migration-control 
paradigm that will also include expanding the police powers of the homeland 
security state for interior enforcement along with a system of employer verifi ca-
tion. Interior enforcement has already been greatly expanded under the Obama 
administration,  which  has  expanded  the  Secure  Communities  program  from 
about a dozen police jurisdictions to almost every jurisdiction in the country. 

 Th  e amended version of S. 744 that passed in the Senate will also empower the 
DHS to share information with local law enforcement agencies on people who 
have overstayed their visas. Such intelligence sharing will inevitably lead to ICE 
detainers being issued and hence more deportations. Th  is unconditional sup-
port for interior enforcement comes at a time when the House Appropriations 
Committ ee approved a bill that would provide $147 million more than what was 
originally allocated to the DHS in 2014 to keep the 34,000-bed quota in immi-
gration detention centers and to fund deportation programs.   25    

 Th  e expanded capabilities of the homeland security state to police its bor-
ders and the interior of the nation will take place in the context of the greatly 
expanded system of employer verifi cation. As mentioned in the previous chap-
ter,  the  current  employment-verifi cation  program  of  the  federal  government, 
E-Verify, has become mandatory for all federal institutions and private employ-
ers with a contract with the federal government under the Obama administra-
tion. Moreover, many states have implemented the same program in their public 
facilities.  Employment  verifi cation  will  be  expanded  to  include  all  employ-
ers across the nation in fi ve years under S. 744. Finally, the Gang of Eight bill 
contains provisions for the expansion of a guest-worker program and visas for 
high-skilled workers in technology and science, among other critical areas. As 
we will see, the guest-worker program and the expansion of programs such as 
E-verify are the linchpin of current immigration reform proposals. 

 All of these reforms come at a great expense for those who will not qualify 
for the RPI status, for those who fail to navigate the legalization gauntlet, and 

162

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

for future fl ows of migration. Undocumented migrants who do not qualify for 
RPI will be further criminalized and face a more powerful homeland security 
state through programs such as E-verify and Secure Communities, which will 
starve and police them out of the United States. In fact, amendment 31 to S. 744, 
known as the Grassley Amendment, will require the United States Immigration 
and Citizenship Services to create a weekly report on individuals whose infor-
mation did not match the E-verify system, which, in turn, will be handed over to 
ICE. Th  is requirement is likely to result in a witch-hunt against migrants that do 
not qualify for, or have lost, RPI status, people who have overstayed their visas, 
and future undocumented migrants. 

 Th  e Gang of Eight’s S. 744 creates a pipeline to the immigration detention 
system that will benefi t the private detention corporations and the homeland 
security state. It does so by imposing the harshest penalties ever seen for illegal 
entry and illegal reentry. Currently being undocumented is a civil off ense. Under 
S. 744, being undocumented in the United States will be punishable by one year 
in prison and reentry, that is returning aft er being deported or accepting a volun-
tary departure, will be punishable with three years of prison time.   26    Th  e bill also 
creates harsher will create the conditions for the maintenance of an immigration 
detention system to be fi lled with brown and black bodies for years to come long 
aft er S. 744, or similar legislation, becomes law. 

 As of this writing in August 2013, it is too early to predict if some version of 
S. 744 will become law, given Republican eff orts to sink the bill in the House of 
Representatives. Most Democrats are expected to support any bill that includes 
a  pathway  toward  citizenship  and  that  lends  unequivocal  support  for  bor-
der and interior enforcement. Moreover, Democrats need to persuade twenty 
Republicans  to  support  their  legislation  to  reach  the  218  votes  necessary  to 
pass the bill in the House.   27    In fact there is a memo circulating among House 
Democrats with a list of 99 House Republicans with a high concentration of 
Latino and Asian constituents or agriculture and high tech industries in their 
districts.   28    Th  ose on the list are being targeted by Democrats as potential sup-
porters of a House bill. Regardless of the scenario that plays out in the House, 
Congress is bound to consider only reforms without justice similar to S. 744 
unless the so-called bipartisan consensus made possible by anti-migrant hege-
mony is eff ectively challenged. 

 Beyond narrow discussions about House rules, or overly simplistic celebra-
tions about the ascendency of Latino political power, we must begin to see that 
the Gang of Eight’s S. 744, and most CIR bills for that matt er, are destined to 
fail at their ostensible goal even if they become law. Th  ey will fail because they 
will not address the driving force behind mass migration from Latin America 
over  the  last  thirty  years—that  is,  US-backed  neoliberal  globalization,  which 
was  implemented  through  asymmetrical  relations  of  domination  with  Latin 

Beyond Immigration Reform

163

American and Caribbean nations particularly in the 1980s and 1990s. Moreover, 
most proposals are based on the same good immigrant–bad immigrant binary 
that has been used by both the anti-migrant bloc and immigration reformers 
over the last decade. Th  is binary does not allow for proposals that recognize the 
fundamental and inalienable human rights of migrants. One audacious journal-
ist, Meagan Ortiz, pointed out, “Embedded in the [Gang of Eight] principles is 
an emphasis of the economic versus the human worth of people and ensures a 
continuation of immigration policy that will divide the undocumented into the 
‘good and deserving’ and the ‘bad, criminal, and undesirable.’ We have already 
seen what so-called ‘smart enforcement’ has yielded, record number deporta-
tions, even of ‘good’ immigrants.”   29    

 Th  e Gang of Eight’s S. 744 has not led us to a historic civil rights bill, as many 
had hoped and many will be tempted to argue still. Rather, it has resulted in a 
historic compromise between nativists and capitalists, who, only under the pres-
sure of the migrant movement, changing demographics, and the Latino vote, 
may concede to a deal that will include legalization for some undocumented 
people  but  result  in  the  emergence  of  a  twenty-fi rst-century  migration-  and 
labor-control system. 

 Th  is  system  of  labor-migration  control  will  be  unrivaled  by  any  other  in 
US  history,  including  the  Bracero  Program,  or  others  perhaps  in  the  world. 
When one looks at all of the enforcement measures that have been put in place 
at the border and in the interior alongside the employment verifi cation system 
of the homeland security state, there will be litt le room for undocumented work-
ers to come to the United States except as guest workers. Th  is is because E-verify 
and similar programs are a key component in the enforcement-through-att rition 
strategy cooked up by the nativist Right several years ago. It will push undocu-
mented workers either out of the United States because they will not be able 
to fi nd work, or it will push them even deeper into the underground economy. 
Undocumented workers under such conditions will have no choice but to tell 
employers that they are undocumented to work in the most precarious labor 
sectors or face a dreaded no-match lett er. Th  is is nothing new per se. 

 Guest-worker programs have been at the heart of most immigration legisla-
tion since the notorious immigration reform negotiations between presidents 
George W. Bush and Vicente Fox. Indeed, before 9/11, before the Bolivarian 
movement  led by the late Hugo Chávez eff ectively challenged the so-called 
Washington  Consensus  in  Latin  America,  and  before  the  Great  Recession, 
a  guest-worker  program  was  seen  as  a  natural  corollary  to  NAFTA  and 
the  Free  Trade  Area  of  the  Americas.  According  to  labor  historian  Gilbert 
G.  Gonzalez,  there  was  an  “upsurge  of  publicity  as  this  matt er  swelled  in 
the  media,  including  research  institutes.  Th  e  Carnegie  Endowment  for 
International Peace, together with the Autonomous Technological Institute 

164

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

of Mexico, published a policy statement arguing that any ‘comprehensive new 
strategy should match Mexico’s surplus of young workers with the US indus-
try’s  shortage  of  unskilled  labor.’ ”   30     During  this  period  when  the  so-called 
Washington  Consensus  appeared  invincible,  the  United  States  sought  to 
turn Latin America into a giant free trade zone, seal the border, and create a 
guest-worker program. 

 We now know that the post-9/11 climate created conditions in which such 
proposals fell apart. Yet aft er the Great Recession and the crisis of global capital 
more broadly, securing a fl exible temporary labor force, or what Richard Vogal 
called  “transient  servitude,”  is  still  a  necessity  to  the  dominant  classes  in  the 
United States and in Latin America.   31    Such a labor force will allow business to 
break the back of organized labor in the United States and provide an escape 
valve  for  Latin  American  countries,  especially  Mexico,  to  release  social  pres-
sures brought about by economic crisis, endemic violence, and social and politi-
cal polarization, not to mention maintain remitt ance-based economies. In fact, 
S. 744, the Secure Border Initiative, and the desire to invest in “border security” 
through the border surge and other proposals that will inevitably emerge should 
be  viewed  in  the  context  of  the  relations  of  domination  between  the  United 
States and Mexico. Indeed, a major pillar of the 2008 Merida Initiative, or Plan 
Mexico as it is known to many, is to create a “21st century border.” According to 
the Congressional Research Service, some of the main goals of the initiative are 
“securing the cross-border fl ow of goods and people” and “expediting legitimate 
commerce and travel through investments in personnel, technology, and infra-
structure.”   32    Th  e politics of migration control in the United States and so-called 
security in Mexico are two sides of the same transnational project to safeguard 
global capitalism. 

 Th  is scheme for a twenty-fi rst-century system of labor-migration control 
goes beyond “immigration enforcement,” which implies that states are solely 
concerned with controlling who comes into their borders. In fact, states are 
concerned with migration control that regulates the importation of temporary 
workers when it is benefi cial to certain fractions of capital but that can also 
remove such workers when they are unruly (i.e., become politicized) and or 
are no longer needed. Sociologist Robyn M. Rodriguez describes the role of 
guest-worker programs under the conditions of global capitalism in her writ-
ings on the Philippine state’s labor export program. In her view, guest workers 
off er “a kind of institutional ‘fi x’ resolving global capital’s demand for labor 
and neoliberalizing labor-importing states’ demand for temporary migrants 
who will not make claims for membership and will return to their countries 
of origin once their jobs are done.”   33    Almost fi ft y years aft er the end of the 
Bracero Program (1942–64) and sixty years since Operation Wetback in the 
mid-1950s, the United States is forging a new migration control regime that 

Beyond Immigration Reform

165

could simultaneously import temporary fl exible workers and deport those it 
does not need but this time with technologies of a twenty-fi rst-century police 
state built for a global service-based economy. Indeed, those in RPI status 
will become the new braceros of the twenty-fi rst century who have been lured 
into this status with the promise of legality and a pathway to citizenship. 

 Th  is need for a fl exible labor force is a recurring contradiction in the his-
tory  of  the  United  States  since  slavery;  Anglo-American  capital  has  had  an 
unquenchable thirst for a racialized army of rightless workers to provide cheap 
labor when needed, but it has been unwilling to provide them with the same 
legal  and  substantive  rights  as  white Americans.  Many  people  of  color  have 
fi lled this role in the labor economy, albeit under diff erent conditions. But for 
Mexicans in particular, we are always seen as the worker and never the citi-
zen. Th  e last thing that the major political parties, the Gang of Eight, and their 
associated corporate-funded think tanks on the right or the left  seek to do is 
abandon the neoliberal model and asymmetrical relations between the United 
States and Latin America. Rather, they seek to fi x the system by making it more 
effi  cient—not  altering  the  relations  of  domination  between  states  in  North 
America, much less changing the system of racial domination that has charac-
terized politics in the United States since its founding as an Anglo-American 
sett ler colony. 

      Th  e Homeland Security State and Authoritarian Statism   

 Most CIR bills, including the Gang of Eight bill, raise questions around democ-
racy and the relationship between popular movements and the homeland secu-
rity  state.  All  popular  movements,  even  those  that  claim  to  be  autonomous, 
must deal with the state at one point or another. In the case study off ered here, 
Latino migrant activists and the migrant rights movement writ large are making 
demands vis-à-vis the homeland security state. As we saw, the homeland secu-
rity  state  is  neither  a  monolithic,  homogenous,  nor  self-propelling  force,  nor 
is it simply a vehicle to be used by those who run the best campaign and get 
their candidate elected. It is a dynamic integral state with deep roots in a society 
divided over race and class and other forms of diff erence. 

 Th  e homeland security state is also akin to a particular confi guration of the 
modern capitalist state that Nicos Poulantzas described as authoritarian statism. 
In his formulation, authoritarian statism is a system in which states maintain all 
the formal and symbolic institutions of a representative democracy, such as elec-
tions, civil liberties, and constitutional guarantees, while they adopt draconian 
forms of social control that resemble those of a totalitarian regime. Poulantzas 
discusses  aspects  of  authoritarian  statism  that  are  obviously  relevant  to  the 

166

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

politics of migration control, such as the “rise of the administration” and the “rise 
of the mass party.” Th  e former refers to the rise of a powerful bureaucracy that 
gains power and autonomy, oft en in secrecy, from the traditional institutions of 
representative democracy such as parliament or congress. Th  e latt er refers to the 
converging of policy proposals among the dominant parties to those that guar-
antee the reproduction of global capitalism. 

 Poulantzas also noted that authoritarian statism “involves the establishment 
of an entire institutional structure serving to prevent a rise in popular struggles 
and  the  dangers  which  that  holds  for  class  hegemony.”   34     Certainly  one  only 
need see the power of state repression during the May Day march of 2007 in 
Los Angeles or the violent repression and infi ltration of the Occupy Wall Street 
movement  in  New  York  City  in  2011  to  witness  authoritarian  statism  in  full 
eff ect. Indeed, it is now clear that the FBI, DHS, and private security fi rms for 
some of the world’s most powerful banks worked together to disrupt and repress 
leaders of the Occupy movement.   35    It would be a mistake to limit the analysis 
on authoritarian statism to racialized groups or “street radicals” like those in the 
Latino migrant or Occupy Wall Street movements. Rather, we must see this as 
part of broader authoritarian trends developing in the United States including, 
but not limited to, recent revelations of the National Security Agency spying on 
the international community and its massive domestic electronic surveillance 
program of personal phone and Internet records. Th  ese trends are all symptoms 
of a democracy in decay.  

 If we are to understand these distinct lines of resistance and domination, we 
must  understand  the  nature  of  the  global  economic  crisis  for  which  authori-
tarian  statism  is  a  response.  Poulantzas  wrote  that  authoritarian  statism  has 
come to “defi ne a structural characteristic of the present phase, namely the hid-
den but permanent instability of the bourgeoisie’s hegemony in the dominant 
countries.”   36    If this statement was true during the dawn of neoliberalism in the 
mid-1970s, it is profoundly evident today under the advanced stages of global 
capitalism,  class  polarization,  nativism,  and  colorblindness.  Indeed,  we  must 
understand the homeland security state and other confi gurations of state-led 
social and labor control as a response to the organic crisis of global capitalism 
and race relations over the last thirty years. 

 If a characteristic of state authoritarianism is to maintain all the formal consti-
tutional mechanisms of a representative democracy while having the social con-
trol of a totalitarian state, then we must see the Latin Americanization of Latino 
politics in the specifi c context of the United States as a pernicious symptom of 
this project in a multiracial society. Th  us we have a multiracial authoritarian stat-
ism, a situation in which the appearance of racial inclusion and representative 
democracy are maintained through the formal institution of governance—from 

Beyond Immigration Reform

167

minorities in offi  ce to minority police offi  cers—but with the draconian policies 
and practices of a segregated racial totalitarian state. 

 Th  is  uniquely  US  brand  of  colorblindness  and  authoritarian  statism  is  the 
political underbelly of the much-celebrated rise of Latino political power and the 
emerging Latino political elites including Julian Castro, Marco Rubio, Ted Cruz, 
and Bob Menendez, among others. As Michelle Alexander noted in her seminal 
work on mass incarceration, the ideology of colorblindness depends on stories of 
racial exceptionalism like that of Barack Obama.   37    Th  is same need is also the case 
with the homeland security state, mass deportation, and the myth of a post-racial 
society. Th  e state does not work through top-down repression only. It is a per-
petual conduit for organizing the unity of the distinct factions of a society based 
on racialized class relations for the reproduction of that society. Th  us the domi-
nant classes dialectically make room for newcomers whom they can absorb more 
eff ectively vis-à-vis the state as they use the state to disorganize popular move-
ments. Th  ose it cannot co-opt or placate, it represses and marginalizes. Th  us the 
dominant classes vis-à-vis the state give material concessions in the forms of spe-
cial positions within the bureaucracy, high salaries, prestige, and grants (both 
governmental and from the private foundations of capital) to those in certain 
sectors of the Latino political elite who it can accommodate. At the same time 
it gives indictments, court cases, intimidation, mass incarceration, beatings, and 
mass  deportation  to  those  whom  it  cannot  accommodate.  Th  us  we  have  the 
former head of the National Council of La Raza, Cecilia Muñoz, appointed to 
the president’s cabinet and defending the DHS-ICE’s Secure Communities pro-
gram, while community leaders Alex Sanchez, former executive director of the 
Los Angeles–based organization Homies Unidos, and Nativo Lopez, the former 
head of Hermandad Mexicana and key leader during the 2006 mega-marches in 
California, were both imprisoned for a signifi cant period. Meanwhile, migrants 
Bernardo, Elsa, Miguel, Josue, Roberto, and Marcos who I interviewed for this 
book  have  been  deported  or  have  self-deported  variously  to  Mexico  and  El 
Salvador, along with millions of migrants who have been removed since 2001. 

 Th  e homeland security state is a particular confi guration of authoritarian stat-
ism, which is a response to the class and racial polarization brought about by the 
organic crisis of global capitalism and race relations in the United States over the 
last thirty years. We are still dealing with the global capitalist system that leads to 
what Poulantzas described as “real ‘outsiders’. . . namely immigrant workers, the 
unemployed, women and a large proportion of the young and the old. . . whose 
real economic, social and cultural conditions of life not only diverge more and 
more from the legal-political representations of equality, but make increasingly 
fragile their participation in the institutions of political democracy.”   38    In the con-
text of the United States, Latinos and other people of color are disproportionally 
represented among those excluded from society. 

168

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

 Immigration  reform  is  not  enough.  Unless  there  is  a  popular  and  demo-
cratic challenge to authoritarian statism and neoliberalism, the homeland secu-
rity  state  will  be  a  permanent  feature  of  politics  in  the  United  States.  Tanya 
Maria Golash-Boza courageously underscored a similar point when she wrote, 
“Legalization for all is not enough. . . . Even if undocumented migrants in the 
United States were able to legalize today, ten years from now, we would fi nd our-
selves in the same situation with a new population of undocumented migrants. 
Th  is is the unspoken truth that rarely makes its way into the debates over immi-
gration.”   39    Indeed, if there is going to be a solution to the “immigration crisis” 
besides  the  proposed  system  of  state-managed  labor-migration  control  that 
seeks to preserve the neoliberal order and maintain a racialized rightless labor 
force, there must be an eff ective challenge to that very order. 

      Beyond Reform and Elections: Latino Youth and 

Democracy from Below   

 Th  e politics of migration control, as Kathleen Arnold reminds us, “cannot be 
divorced from the status of democracy.”   40    Democracy is conceived here as a sys-
tem in which, at minimum, most people have relatively equal chances to eff ect 
the decisions that aff ect their lives and when people—regardless of legal sta-
tus—can enjoy the right to have rights and protection from arbitrary abuse and 
coercion. Th  e United States cannot claim to be a democracy, nor credibly pro-
mote democracy abroad, when under the homeland security state and the con-
ditions of authoritarian statism it has incarcerated millions of black Americans 
and  deported  four  million  migrants  since  1990.  Th  e  consequences  of  such 
a system are inherently undemocratic, no matt er how many black and Latino 
elites are incorporated into the upper echelons of formal state power. In the face 
of this inherently undemocratic system more broadly, there must be a move-
ment to build Latino political power from below and forge new cross-racial and 
class-based coalitions in civil society if there is going to be a chance to democra-
tize the United States. 

 Th  is statement may seem counterintuitive, for much of the political science 
literature operates under the normative assumption that greater political incor-
poration  under  the  traditional  indicators  will  translate  into  greater  political 
power. However, this formula does not necessarily guarantee a more democratic 
and just future under the conditions of authoritarian statism, in which the con-
ditions of neoliberalism limit the power of elected offi  cials and policy makers to 
create change in areas of governance that aff ect the everyday conditions facing 
Latinos. As Raymond Rocco reminds us, voting is a necessary but insuffi  cient 
activity for guaranteeing the human rights of Latino communities.   41     

Beyond Immigration Reform

169

 Th  e insuffi  ciency of electoral politics does not mean that traditional forms of 
political participation should be discarded; however, it means that those forms 
of political participation will not be enough and that a dual strategy should be 
pursued.  Indeed,  political  parties  and  elected  offi  cials  respond  best  to  orga-
nized bases in Latino communities, which, regardless of their legal status, can 
hold elected offi  cials accountable. However, Poulantzas warns, “unless the State 
is radically transformed by the Left  in power,” the opposition runs the risk of 
reproducing authoritarian statism.   42    Th  erefore there must be an eff ort to build 
political power that contests the power of the homeland security state and that 
pushes for democratic victories from below. 

 During the conjuncture between 2001 and 2012, several batt les have been 
won and lost, but the greatest victories have not come from the corporate board 
rooms in Washington, D.C., but from Latino youth and politically autonomous 
movements that acted from below. In fact, we have seen that those closest to 
the upper echelons of state power have been most willing to compromise and 
those based in the barrios and that are oft en physically and political distant from 
the halls of Congress have taken a more oppositional stance. Th  ese divisions are 
most evident in the reactions to S. 744. On the one hand, Washington, D.C.-
based  leaders  such  as  Frank  Sherry  of  America’s  Voice  issued  a  statement  in 
which he heralded S. 744 as a landmark victory and thanked the Gang of Eight 
senators for their courage in passing a Senate immigration bill that, although 
imperfect, is “consistent with our movement’s principles.”   43    On the other hand, 
oppositional Latino migrant organizations such as Hermandad Mexicana, one 
of the oldest Latino migrant organizations founded by the legendary Mexican 
labor leader Bert Corona, issued the following statement:

  Th  ere is no Faustian bargain for us. S. 744 smells rott en to the core and 
the  most  recent  border  militarization  amendment  and  the  corollary 
House Judiciary Committ ee bills moved us to publicly oppose this leg-
islation.. . . We admonish those “advocates” and union leaders who do 
not recognize the national security character of the proposed legisla-
tion and related amendments under the guise of “comprehensive immi-
gration reform that moves the country closer to a police state with all 
the insidious totalitarian trappings.”   44      

 Such divisions over how to proceed should not be reduced to being a refl ection 
of one group’s pragmatism and another’s idealism. 

 Such idealism, or principled demand for a democratic society, has oft en come 
from young people who have driven the migrant movement forward. Against 
horrible odds, there is reason to be optimistic for a new generation of seasoned 
and  batt le-tested  Latino  youth  leaders  who  have  emerged  from  California  to 

170

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

New York City and from Kansas City to Fort Meyers, Florida, and beyond. It 
was  this  generation  of  leaders  that  produced  the  fi restorm  of  Latino  migrant 
activism unleashed by Dreamer youth, especially in the months before the 2012 
election, that helped create relatively more favorable relations for the migrant 
movement at the end of 2012 and the beginning of 2013. Even more so than the 
youth who took to the streets during the 2006 mega-marches, youth activism 
around the Dream Act was more structured and capable of moving the immigra-
tion debate. Th  is youth activism was chaotic and contradictory, but it could not 
be completely detained by Washington, D.C., insiders and the Democratic Party, 
despite their eff orts to do so. Although a certain faction bought into the same 
good immigrant–bad immigrant binary that many of their counterparts in the 
migrant rights movement helped to perpetuate, Dreamers became a liability for 
the Obama administration. 

 Th  ese youth were able to expose how the president and the Democratic Party 
failed to pass immigration reform and to pass the Dream Act in Congress. Th  e 
Spanish-language media and even immigration reformers began to question the 
president in public about his lack of action on immigration reform. In the face 
of this pressure, the president instituted DACA in an eff ort to win over strategic 
sectors of the Latino vote. Th  is action came at a moment when oppositional sec-
tors of the migrant rights movement sought to denounce the president’s depor-
tation policies in the months before the election. Dreamer youth took over the 
president’s headquarters in the heat of the election, and other Dreamers infi l-
trated Broward Detention Center in Florida to denounce the president’s policies 
of going aft er only “high-priority” immigrants as a farce. 

 On July 22, 2013, nine undocumented Mexican youth who became known 
as  the  Dream  Nine—Claudia  Amaro,  Adriana  Gil  Diaz,  Luis  Leon,  Maria 
Peniche, Ceferino Santiago, Mario Felix, Lulu Martinez, Marco Saavedra and 
Lizbeth Mateo—att empted to enter to the United States without authoriza-
tion from Nogales, Mexico, in an act of civil disobedience. Frustrated with 
the national debate on immigration reform and dressed in graduation robes, 
these valiant youth sought to denounce the Obama administration’s deporta-
tion policies and position themselves in the debate on reform in a way that 
defi es the good immigrant–bad immigrant binary and brings att ention to the 
plight of detainees and deportees. Th  ey were immediately detained and some 
held in solitary confi nement, a practice which has been denounced by human 
rights groups across the United States and the world, for their act of civil dis-
obedience. While immigration reformers have been critical of their civil dis-
obedience, and most silent on the detention of the Dream Nine, the actions 
of these youth have reenergized oppositional sectors of the movement, espe-
cially among the youth to continue to fi ght for reforms with justice while call-
ing att ention to the plight of all migrants and detainees.45

Beyond Immigration Reform

171

Th  ere is an entire generation of young leaders emerging like those that took 
over President Obama’s headquarters and the Dream Nine. A signifi cant por-
tion of these oppositional leaders understand not only the urgency of winning 
immediate victories but they also know that if there is ever going to be a sub-
stantive multiracial and multilingual democracy in the United States, there must 
also be a concerted eff ort to fi ght for the rights of migrants and people of color 
beyond the Gang of Eight bill and any proposal for CIR. Th  is sector of Latino 
migrant activists understands that even if S. 744 or any similar bill passes that 
it may bring temporary relief to some but that there will still be people dying 
at the border, there will still be a massive buildup of prisons (both private and 
state owned) to be fi lled with brown and black bodies, and that there will still be 
human suff ering at the hands of the homeland security state. Beyond eff orts to 
create a kinder and gentler “civil” homeland security state, these young leaders 
are pushing for the demilitarization and democratization of our society. 

 If we are to learn anything from the 2006 mega-marches that defeated HR 
4437 and the movement of undocumented youth, which pressured the Obama 
administration to implement DACA, it is that for a popular sector to gain ideo-
logical leadership within the migrant rights movement and in society at large, 
the people directly aff ected must be in the lead. Moreover, for this leadership to 
be eff ective, it must have a great deal of political and fi nancial autonomy from the 
dominant political parties and corporate forces that fund many of the leading 
advocacy organizations. Th  is autonomy does not mean, in this case, that groups 
try to live “off  the grid” by engaging in dumpster diving and wearing homemade 
clothes, or that they do not make demands to the state and its offi  cials, or that 
allies cannot not play a support role. It means that the leading forces in the move-
ment must be primarily accountable to organized social bases, not foundations 
or political cronies. Only a politically autonomous force can eff ectively lead a 
counterhegemonic movement that challenges the power of the homeland secu-
rity state and fi ghts for a more democratic society. 

 Th  is new approach would require a subtle but important shift  from a movement 
based primarily on professional leadership and dependent on a campaign strategy 
fi nanced by the major foundations, union brass, and Democratic Party political 
operatives at the state–civil society nexus to a movement led by the people most 
aff ected,  fi nanced  through  alternative  funding  and  predicated  on  a  mass-based 
social  movement  strategy.  Th  e  diff erences  between  these  two  approaches  and 
forms of leadership may seem subtle, but they are important. In campaign mode, 
organizers att empt to win justice for migrants in the same way that a union wins a 
contract, or a community group shuts down a polluter, or a party gets a candidate 
elected. Th  is tactic has essentially been the strategy used by groups such as Reform 
Immigration for America to try to win CIR in Congress. A mass-based social move-
ment strategy requires that movement leaders distinguish between a nonviolent 

172

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

civic version of what Gramsci called a war of maneuver and a war of position. In the 
former, one struggles for a direct and immediate victory, via elections or through a 
campaign; in the latt er, groups struggle to build forces in civil society to change the 
relations of force before transforming the state and society at large. 

 Gramsci  argued  that  the  fi ght  against  the  Fascists  needed  to  be  a  war  of 
position. Along similar lines, I suggest that the struggle for the rights of Latino 
migrants but also racial justice and democracy more broadly goes beyond any 
immigration reform bill. Like the African American freedom struggle, which did 
not end with passage of the civil rights acts, state violence against Latino com-
munities and migrants from the global south will not go away with immigra-
tion reform. While the challenges facing the migrant movement require it to be 
capable of winning short-term meaningful victories that improve people’s lives, 
to be sure, it also requires that Latino migrant activists and their allies develop a 
long-term vision and strategy. Th  is strategy requires challenging white suprem-
acy and transforming the social and economic structures rooted in geopolitical 
asymmetries between the United States and Latin America that cause people 
to migrate and that allow society to consent to the production of state violence 
against brown bodies and racial others. 

 Winning a civic war of position, however, is a complicated and diffi  cult task. It 
requires that a new social bloc, perhaps not even a Latino one, emerge to trans-
form US politics. If such a movement congeals, it must be able to counter indi-
vidual laws and state acts of violence against migrants, and it must also be able 
to  dismantle  and  hence  demilitarize specifi c  police  programs  such  as  287(g) 
or programs like Secure Communities. Moreover, it must also be able to win 
moral and intellectual authority on the issue of who belongs in the United States 
and what are the acceptable conventions of belonging. For such a movement to 
be successful, a new generation of leaders and intellectuals must grapple with 
people’s common sense and try to create a new moral, intellectual, and ethical 
reformation in civil society. A new common sense must emerge among Latino 
migrant activists and their allies, those sectors of working-class communities of 
color—especially among those who do not consider themselves activists or who 
may not have ethnic and class consciousness. Otherwise, at best, the migrant 
movement  will  be  led  by  the  Latino  political  elite  and  their  allied  immigra-
tion reformers to fi ght for a CIR bill that will not get to the root of why people 
migrate in the fi rst place (i.e., US-led global capitalism) and that will preserve the 
homeland security state and, more severely, authoritarian statism. 

 Such groups are emerging across the nation. One example of such a forma-
tion is the Migrant Power Alliance (MPA), or Alianza Poder Migrante, a promis-
ing group that has emerged in New York City. Th  is multiethnic and multisector 
coalition comprised of and led by Caribbean, African, Mexican, and Filipino 
migrant,  student,  and  worker  organizations  and  their  unique  genealogies  of 

Beyond Immigration Reform

173

struggle emerged with the goal of building migrant power, the social and politi-
cal capacity of migrants to make rights claims in global civil society. Part of its 
organizational philosophy is that the people directly aff ected by the homeland 
security state should lead their own movement. Also by consciously using the 
word  migrant  versus  immigrant , the group is asserting its right to have rights from 
a diff erent epistemic location as part of a global diaspora of migrants displaced 
by the forces of global capitalism and asymmetric geopolitical relations of domi-
nation between North and South over the last thirty years. 

 In addition, the group’s broad coalition that brings together black migrants 
with Latino and Asian migrants is fusing important genealogies of struggle to cre-
ate a new migrant politics. Black migrants, who may be from any country in the 
Americas, the Caribbean, Africa, and sometimes Europe, are an especially potent 
force in the migrant rights movement because they serve as an important bridge 
between  African  Americans  and  Latinos  (including  Afro-Latinos).  Moreover, 
black migrant organizations, such as BAJI, an organization founded by African 
Americans and black migrants that joined MPA, oft en emphasizes the need for 
rejecting the good immigrant–bad immigrant binary and stresses the relationship 
between the criminal justice system and the migration-control system. Perhaps 
most critically, black migrant organizations such as BAJI have a deep understand-
ing of the history racial domination faced by African Americans that can enrich 
Latino and Asian migrant organizations by exposing the limits of formal citizen-
ship in a society that practices racial policing and other forms of domination. 

 In the fi rst months of the debate around what would become S. 744, immi-
gration reformers provided a mariachi serenade in front of Senator Schumer’s 
offi  ce  thanking  him  for  advancing  what  is  now  a  fl awed  and  problematic 
reform bill. In contrast, a young undocumented Jamaican working with MPA 
called S. 744 “fool’s gold” as the coalition staged protests outside of the offi  ce 
of Senator Schumer demanding an end to all deportations and the criminaliza-
tion of noncitizens, including the thirteen million legal permanent residents liv-
ing in the United States who are still potentially subject to deportation due to 
the 1996 immigration laws. Such demands broke the code of silence that kept 
many immigration reformers applauding the bill and thanking the Republican 
senators for their support. MPA’s call for an end to all deportations and its eff ort 
to build a multiethnic and multisector alliance are examples of fi ghting for the 
rights of migrants beyond immigration reform. 

 For  the  MPA  to  be  eff ective,  many  more  groups  are  needed  like  them 
throughout the country. Most critically, it will require what Gramsci called both 
pessimism of the mind and optimism of the spirit. When it comes to winning 
sustainable and transformative social justice victories for migrants, the struggle 
cannot be judged by its ability to arrive at the 279 votes in Congress needed to 
pass the Gang of Eight bill or any CIR bill. It must also move beyond immigration 

174

R e f o r m   W i t h o u t   J u s t i c e

reform or gett ing more Latinos elected to offi  ce. Indeed, if anything, the fi rst 
four years of the Obama administration exposed the structural limits of multi-
culturalism in a world system dominated by hegemonic states and global capi-
talism. Latino politics, and all politics for that matt er, is about the struggle for 
power, and power is much more than the ability to shape the outcome of an 
election, get a candidate elected, or have a place at the table in a meeting with 
White House staff .    45    Elections, voting, lobbying, and high-power meetings are 
simply a means to an end. Power is much more fl uid and complex; it is the ability 
for groups with competing interests and values to have their needs and demands 
met in a polity shaped by racialized class relations. Power, in the end, determines 
a group’s access to social justice. Th  e ultimate measure of Latino political power 
in the twenty-fi rst century will be to win a sustainable and transformative social 
justice for working-class Latinos, regardless of their legal status. 

 No one can precisely predict the future of the fi ft y-fi ve million Latinos in the 
United States in light of the global economic crisis and authoritarian statism. 
History,  while  shaped  by  macrostructural  forces,  is  always  contested  by  rival 
forces and thus can unfold in any direction. Indeed, Gramsci noted, “the deci-
sive element in every situation is the permanently organized and long prepared 
force which can be put into the fi eld when it is judged that a situation is favorable 
(and it can be favorable only in so far as such a force exists, and is full of fi ght-
ing spirit).”   46    Judging by the 2006 mega-marches and the struggle in defense of 
the undocumented through countless mobilizations, meetings, and actions that 
have taken place over the last two decades, it is clear that there is a fi ghting spirit 
in Latino communities. But just like the spirit needs the body to make concrete 
interventions in the material world, the fi ghting spirit of Latino migrant activists 
must fi nd greater levels of organization and political clarity if they plan on being 
a democratizing force for turning the tide against not just the homeland security 
state but also, more profoundly, authoritarian statism. Regardless of what hap-
pens with immigration reform, there are no easy answers, just struggles to be 
fought.      

       Appendix 

TO WA R D   A   N E O - G R A M S C I A N   A P P R O A C H   TO 
L AT I N O   P O L I T I C S   R E S E A R C H :   T H E O RY   A N D 

M E T H O D S     

   Th  e questions pursued in this book require an alternative to conventional theo-
ries and methodologies used in traditional American political science and its 
subfi eld of Latino politics. I say “methods” because the research questions pur-
sued here cannot be reduced to a single methodology such as a large-n study 
where the researcher relies on a data set based on a survey such as the Latino 
National Survey.   1    

 As even MIT professor Stephen Van Evera, a leading methodologist in tradi-
tional political science, noted, “Methodology classes cover large-n methods (or 
large n and rational choice) as if these were all there is . . . but political science 
should embrace the task of historical explanation among its missions.”   2    He also 
wrote, “Political science fi eld culture has avoided the application of theory to 
solve policy problems and answer historical questions.”   3    Although I occasion-
ally draw on such data to illustrate certain points, I rely on a unique theoretical 
framework, methods, and research design that is problem-oriented on the rela-
tions of force between the homeland security state, the anti-migrant bloc, and 
pro-migrant forces. 

 Th  is historical problem requires theory and methods of political inquiry that 
can  capture  how  power  is  exercised  from  above  and  resisted  from  below.  To 
capture these multiple levels of analysis, I adopt a neo-Gramscian theoretical 
framework and variety of method such as critical discourse analysis and criti-
cal ethnography. First I will discuss my reasons for drawing on neo-Gramscian 
theory, describe my methods that stem from this framework, and fi nally discuss 
how this approach could enrich our understanding of the politics of migration 
control and Latino politics.    

175

176

Appendix

     Neo-Gramscian Th  eory    

 Th  e  argument  advanced  in  this  book  rests  on  a  particular  Gramscian  and 
neo-Gramscian understanding of the state, intellectuals, and relations of force 
in concrete historical conjunctures that was discussed in the introduction, and 
upon which my research design and methods are predicated. 

 Th  e ideas of the twentieth-century political thinker Antonio Gramsci and the 
interpretation of his life works by neo-Gramscian scholars such as Stuart Hall, 
Nicos Poulantzas, and others can be used to illuminate Latino migrant politics in 
particular and Latino politics in general. Moreover, at a time when some schol-
ars have proclaimed that Gramsci’s ideas are no longer useful for understand-
ing contemporary social movements, it is important to raise why I draw upon 
Gramsci and interpretations of his work for understanding the relations of force 
between Latino migrant activism and what I have referred to as the homeland 
security state.   4    

 Neo-Gramscian scholars have used Gramsci’s theoretical insights to under-
stand the struggles between social movements and states in distinct conjunctures 
across the globe.   5    Although they are admitt edly complex, Gramsci’s conceptual 
insights have much to off er those who seek to gain greater clarity on the barriers 
facing Latino migrant activists and the migrant rights movement as they struggle 
for sustainable and transformative justice in the context of the homeland secu-
rity state and global capitalism. 

 Although it is common for North American scholars to refer to Gramsci’s use 
of the concept of hegemony, his writings off er far more complex tools and con-
cepts for the study of conjunctures, including a methodology and philosophy 
of social science in which social, historical, and political research is conducted 
to inform practical social change.   6    In fact, Gramsci wrote, “Th  e most important 
observation to be made about any concrete analysis of the relations of force is 
the following: that such analyses cannot and must not be ends in themselves, but 
acquire signifi cance only if they serve to justify a particular practical activity, an 
initiative of will.”   7    

 Gramsci was a committ ed revolutionary who wanted to understand what went 
wrong with the Italian Left  in a moment similar to the one facing Latino migrant 
activists and the broader migrant rights movement in 2006, when immediately 
aft er the mega-marches the movement seemingly was at the height of its power, 
only to see the expansion of the homeland security state and the deportation 
of millions people thereaft er. Gramsci wanted to understand how the Fascists 
in Italy were able to win consent for their reactionary project under the con-
ditions of liberal democracy,  even among some socialists,  in the aft ermath of the 
Italian factory workers’ movement in the early 1920s, when over 500,000 work-
ers took over factories and the Left  seemed to be in its ascendancy. I recognize 

Appendix

177

that there are important diff erences between Italian Fascism of the 1920s and 
1930s and the fascistic elements of twenty-fi rst-century state practices in the 
United States today, such as the degree of violence employed by both regimes, 
the nature of global capitalism, and the character of contemporary race relations. 
Nonetheless, I use a series of interrelated Gramscian concepts to understand 
why, despite intensifi ed Latino migrant activism between 2001 and 2012, we 
have an ever more powerful and effi  cient homeland security state while receiv-
ing  only  relatively  modest  concessions  and  symbolic  gestures  toward  Latino 
migrant activists and other people of color.  

    Methods 

   Neo-Gramscian  theory,  with  its  focus  on  power  and  resistance,  requires 
methods that capture both these dynamics. To capture how power is exerted 
from above, from state actors and civil society organizations that comprise 
what I have termed the anti-migrant bloc, I employ discourse analysis. Th  ere 
are many forms of discourse analysis. In this case, I adopt a broad method 
known  as  critical  discourse  analysis  for  studying  the  relationship  between 
language and power. Indeed, the leading social scientist who popularized crit-
ical discourse analysis, Teun A. Van Dijik, stated, “Critical discourse analysis 
(CDA) is a type of discourse analytical research that primarily studies the 
way social power abuse, dominance, and inequality are enacted, reproduced, 
and resisted by text and talk in the social and political context.”   8    My approach 
to critical discourse analysis should be distinguished from formal approaches 
to the study of language coming out of contemporary linguistics that oft en 
focus on the structure of language such as the syntax or more quantifi able 
forms of content analysis. Rather, my approach highlights how language is 
deployed and consumed in the state–civil society nexus between micro actors 
and macro social and political structures. I use this method to illustrate how 
elite actors’ discourse, whether writt en or spoken, is circulated in the context 
of the homeland security state and Latino migrant activism. 

 Th  e discourse analysis is primarily of state documents related to migration 
control but also includes the speeches and documents of nativist think tanks 
and intellectuals who lobby to infl uence immigration policy at multiple levels 
of  governance.  Such  methods  are  necessary  when  att empting  to  access  elite 
actors, especially those located within the anti-migrant bloc, because elite actors 
most oft en make their political decisions behind closed doors and because they 
have the power to determine to whom they grant interviews. One advantage of 
studying elite actors in the deliberative institutions of the state is that they leave 
readily available public documents in the form of government press releases, 

178

Appendix

transcripts  of  governmental  proceedings,  printed  speeches,  and  other  docu-
ments that can be found on governmental websites and that are oft en quoted 
in public media outlets. Th  us, throughout this study I apply discourse analysis 
methods to the language of political elites in various sites of state power such as 
Congress, municipal government, foreign policy institutions, and so on. I also 
study the discourse of political elites in think tanks, media, and academic institu-
tions, among other sites of knowledge production. 

 In a situation in which dominant groups are using the state and other insti-
tutions of power to police, detain, and deport subordinate groups, one must use 
alternative methods to reach those who resist this power from below. To get to 
these sources I draw upon critical ethnography rather than drawing upon a tradi-
tional data set. Critical ethnography is a method of study that draws its inspiration 
from critical theory and seeks to contribute to human liberation. Critical ethnog-
raphers recognize that the act of doing research is in itself a political act and att empt 
to identify their own positionality in the research. Soyini D. Madison noted, “Th  e 
critical ethnographer also takes us beneath surface appearances, disrupts the status 
quo, and unsett les both neutrality and taken-for-granted assumptions by bringing 
to light underlying and obscure operations of power and control.”   9    

 Th  is  critical  ethnography  is  based  on  over  sixty  interviews  and  participant 
observation with a range of Latino migrant activists, policy makers, and deport-
ees in the US, El Salvador and Mexico. Th  e interviews were done with activists, 
established community organizers, and labor leaders in Greater Los Angeles and 
New York City and with leading policy makers and advocates who are fi rmly rooted 
in Washington, D.C., immigration policy circles. To supplement these interviews, 
I also draw upon own participant observations drawn from hundreds of hours of 
meetings, protests, marches, and events organized by Latino migrant activists in 
Southern California, New York City, and Washington, D.C., from 2001 to 2012. 

 Researchers are never outside of the politics of the topics that they study. 
I  gained  access  to  the  migrant  leaders  interviewed  for  this  study  based  on 
long-established  relationships  that  I  built  with  Latino  migrant  activists  in 
Southern California starting in the early 1990s, when I fi rst became a participant 
in the Latino migrant movement as a high school student. Moreover, because 
many  of  these  leaders  were  connected  to  national  and  transnational  migrant 
activist networks, I was able to gain further access to these organizations and 
political operatives in Washington, D.C., New York City, Mexico, and El Salvador. 
 During the initial stages of research program I used to use my positionality 
as a Chicano doctoral student at the University of California at Los Angeles to 
study the discourse and actions of the anti-migrant bloc in the United States and 
the Latino migrant movement in Southern California. Starting in the summer of 
2008, as an assistant professor living and teaching in New York City, I began to 
build relationships and gain access to migrant activist networks in my new home. 

Appendix

179

I also drew on my own migration experience from Tijuana, Mexico, as a child 
and  my  relationships  working  with  leading  Latino  migrant  activists  over  the 
years to gain access to the various sectors of the migrant rights movement across 
the country and with deportees and policy makers in El Salvador. As a refl ection 
of the racial, class, and geopolitical asymmetries that penetrate social and politi-
cal research in any social formation, I was not able to gain access to many of the 
dominant sectors of the anti-migrant bloc in the United States, but I was able to 
gain access to many Latino political elites in the United States and in El Salvador. 
 It is also important to clarify that while the majority of people whom I inter-
viewed are Latinos, Latino migrant activism does not occur in a vacuum but 
rather  in  the  context  of  a  multiethnic  and  multisector  global  migrant  rights 
movement. Th  us I also interview Asian, South Asian, African, and West Indian 
migrant activists and their Euro-American allies to understand the conjuncture 
in its complexity. Acknowledging this diversity, however, I focus on Latinos in 
the migrant rights movement because they are the largest and most visible group 
within the movement and because they are disproportionately the targets of vit-
riol and state violence in the United States and in the transnational spaces that 
they traverse in the conjuncture under study.  

    Implications for the Literature   

 Th  e major challenge of writing this book is that the literature on migration con-
trol and Latino politics does not provide us with the theoretical and conceptual 
resources to develop the type of analysis needed to answer the questions pur-
sued herein. While there are several books that cover parts and aspects of the 
themes and issues discussed here, there is no one book that tackles the admit-
tedly large questions that I engage. 

 Most  of  the  available  literature  is  too  narrowly  focused  on  either  aspects 
of  migration  control  or  Latino  political  behavior.  Th  e  body  of  social  science 
research on migration control, while certainly revealing much about the dynam-
ics and evolution of state eff orts to regulate migrants, most oft en assumes that 
Latino communities are passive victims or are otherwise powerless in shaping 
the policies that directly impact their lives.   10    Moreover, this literature is oft en 
focused on just one aspect of migration enforcement. For instance, the works 
of Wayne Cornelius and Joseph Nevins, among others, tend to focus on border 
enforcement.   11    Others such as Monica Varsanyi focus on local and state immi-
gration policy, and Lina Newton focuses on congressional immigration policy.   12    
A  recent  notable  study,  by  sociologist  Tanya  Maria  Golash-Boza,  discusses 
DHS as the twenty-fi rst-century enforcement regime but does not provide a 
theoretical foundation for conceptualizing DHS as part of a more complex and 

180

Appendix

diff erentiated state apparatus. In other words, she limits her analysis to DHS, its 
agencies, and actions and provides scant discussion on the nature of the state or 
on Latino migrant activists’ labor to counter such actions.   13    Scholars of migra-
tion control have produced insightful but atomized studies that focus on aspects 
of the matt er, but few have developed theoretical or empirical work concerned 
with the dialectic between migration control and migrant resistance per se.   14    Yet 
for the millions of people like Bernardo, whose experience was discussed in the 
introduction and conclusion, migration control is infused with state power at 
multiple levels and is resisted almost every step of the way. 

 Th  e  diffi  culty  with  using  the  established  research  on  Latino  politics  to 
answer the questions pursued in this study is almost the reverse of the litera-
ture on migration control. Latino politics research primarily focuses on political 
behavior, such as voting, naturalization, public opinion, and political incorpo-
ration, without taking into account the structural context for such behavior.   15    
Th  is research helps us understand with great precision certain aspects of Latino 
political life in the United States on a micro and individual level to be sure. Yet 
with few exceptions, the fi eld of Latino politics has yet to develop a theory of the 
state, when almost everything that we study, from voter participation, transna-
tionalism, identity formation, migrant activism, and so on takes place within the 
orbit of the state. One important exception to this work is that of Rodney Hero, 
who developed a theory of two-tiered pluralism to illustrate how despite the for-
mal existence and recognition of democracy and equality in the American politi-
cal system, there is only marginal inclusion of Latinos and other racial minorities 
within the polity.   16    Although Hero uses empirical data to eff ectively challenge 
the axiom of liberalism that all people have a relatively equal chance to aff ect 
the political system, he still works within a modifi ed version of pluralism. Th  e 
diffi  culty with the pluralist approach more generally is that it assumes that there 
is a functional separation of powers, a separation of the state and economy, and 
it assumes that the state has a transhistorical character. Yet as political theorist 
Raymond Rocco reminds us, Latino politics is taking place in the context of pro-
found processes of neoliberal restructuring that limit the possibility of choice 
and justice aff orded to Latino communities.   17    

 As  noted  by  Lisa  García  Bedolla,  there  is  a  tension  between  the  study  of 
structure and agency in Latino politics research.   18    Indeed, this brief review of 
the literature on migration control and Latino politics raises the question: how 
do  we  make  sense  of  contemporary  Latino  political  struggles,  which  include 
voting, running for offi  ce, the processes of voter preferences, forging congres-
sional coalitions, and social movements, in the context of the marco-structural 
transformations taking place such as neoliberal globalization, the rise of a trans-
national civil society, and supranational institutions and regional trading blocs 
such  as  the  NAFTA,  the  Dominican  Republic–Central  American  Free  Trade 

Appendix

181

Agreement (DR-CAFTA), and the United States–Colombia Trade Promotion 
Agreement? Th  ese realities require that we develop a theoretical approach to the 
study of migration control and Latino politics more broadly that could account 
for both the micro and macro levels of analysis. 

 Scholars working outside of what is traditionally considered Latino politics 
have recently begun to call for a diff erent approach to understanding the poli-
tics of migration control and migrant activism as part of holistic problem facing 
democracy. One notable and recent example of this comes from political theo-
rist Kathleen R. Arnold, in  American Immigration aft er 1996: Th  e Shift ing Ground 
for Inclusion .   19    In this important book Arnold draws upon the theories of Michel 
Foucault  and  Giorgio  Agamben  to  examine  the  militarization  of  US  immi-
gration policies aft er 1996. She argues that contrary to the idea that states are 
becoming weaker under neoliberal globalization, the United States is reasserting 
its sovereignty over borders and migrant fl ows. Unlike most researchers on the 
topic, she is concerned with the interactions between the eff orts of groups in 
civil society and migration control. She argues that civil society groups on the 
Right such as Minutemen, the Federation for American Immigration Reform, 
and Save our State, although positioning themselves as critical “patriots” who 
are “doing what the government has failed to do,” are supporting what she calls 
prerogative  power,  the  legal  suspension  of  constitutional  and  human  rights 
norms in times of emergency in the name of anti-immigration and antiterrorism. 
Moreover, Arnold argues that demands from the “pro-immigrant” camp oft en 
reduce the undocumented to guest workers. In the fi nal analysis, according to 
Arnold, demands from anti-migrant and pro-migrant groups are “mutually rein-
forcing” notions that migrants are either a threat to national security or a source 
of cheap labor. 

 Two other important books that speak to the issues addressed here are not 
coming  from  political  scientists  but  from  anthropologists,  such  as  Nicholas 
De  Genova  and  Leo  Chavez.  In  the  introduction  to  the  edited  volume   Th  e 
Deportation Regime  (co-authored with Natalie Peutz) and in other writings, De 
Genova correctly argue that any eff ort to understand the politics of migration 
control and migrant rights activism must start with the state. In fact, I expand 
upon his notion of the homeland security state throughout this book. In Th  e 
Latino Th  reat, Leo Chavez argues that there is a dominant narrative that por-
trays Latinos as a threat to the United States that can be found in the media 
and in the medical fi eld, among other sites.   20    Moreover, Chavez writes about the 
spectacle of border enforcement and discusses how the 2006 marches were a 
form of performance politics in which Latinos were demanding full citizenship. 
 In this study, I att empt to build on the strengths of Chavez, De Genova and 
Peutz, and Arnold, while avoiding some of their conceptual pitfalls. Th  e Latino 
Th  reat  focuses  almost  entirely  on  civil  society.  Chavez  does  not  provide  an 

182

Appendix

analysis  of  the  state  in  the  production  of  violence  against  migrants.  Th  us,  he 
gives his concept of “the Latino threat” an agency of its own without provid-
ing a coherent explanation of the forces involved in producing the narrative and 
their relationship to the state. In Th  e Deportation Regime and in other writings, 
De Genova’s work correctly calls for studies of migration control to account for 
the state.   21    Moreover, he elucidates what he calls the securitization of citizenship 
and the emergence of the homeland security state.   22    However, De Genova att ri-
butes agency to the state and to immigration law themselves and does not reveal 
the structures and actors behind state migration control. Arnold, while giving 
one of the most penetrating analyses on this issue to date, homogenizes what she 
calls “pro-immigrant” groups and fails account for oppositional migrant organi-
zations that consciously resist the urge to reduce migrants to bare life in order to 
win short term policy demands. 

 Reform Without Justice takes a diff erent approach and endeavors to theorize 
state migration control in multiple spaces of governance through a neo-Gramscian 
framework. From this perspective, the state can be seen as an integral racial state 
rooted in civil society and shaped by concrete civil-society actors, similar to the 
way that Arnold accounts for nonstate actors. Th  is approach complements De 
Genova’s in that it accounts for the centrality of the state in migration control. 
However, unlike De Genova’s approach, it also accounts for the ways that groups 
in civil society win consent for building the homeland security state not just 
among the general public, but also among immigration reformers. Approaching 
the state from the perspective of Gramsci’s integral state, in which intellectual 
power is central to winning consent for state coercion, will allow us not only to 
decipher the interstices of the homeland security state—its juridical, legislative, 
intellectual, and ideological aspects—but also to name some of the concrete 
actors sustaining and resisting the homeland security state. 

 Th  is book is part of a growing body of research that combines the insights 
from political theory and Latino studies to shed light on contemporary political 
issues for a transdisciplinary audience.   23    Indeed, I join the scholarship of my col-
league Cristina Beltrán, who uses political theory to question the celebration of 
Latino political power and the insightful work of Kathleen R. Arnold.   24    However, 
my work should be distinguished from these authors, for it fuses neo-Gramscian 
theory with critical ethnography and discourse analysis from transdisciplinary 
approaches to anthropology and Latino studies. Th  is allows me to ground my 
theoretical approach to Latino migrant politics and the homeland security state 
right down to meetings, protests, and on the streets where the rights of migrants, 
and democracy are violated and contested in the context of neoliberal globaliza-
tion and post–civil rights racism.     

     N O T E S     

     Introduction   

  1  .   Bernardo (pseudonym), interview, Mexico City, November 8, 2010.   
  2  .   Ibid.   
  3  .   See Nicholas De Genova, “Th  e Production of Culprits: From Deportability to Detainability 
in the Aft ermath of ‘Homeland Security,’ ” Citizenship Studies 11, no. 5 (2007): 421. Also 
see; Roberto Lovato. “One Raid at a Time: How Immigrant Crackdowns Build the National 
Security State” Public Eye Magazine. Spring 2008, Vol 23, No 1.   

  4  .   I use the term migration control instead of immigration enforcement in most cases, because 
the latt er term assumes that the United States is only concerned with who enters the country, 
but as we shall see, recent eff orts to build the homeland security state are just as concerned 
with controlling the fl ow of migrant labor coming into the United States and establishing 
the terms of their stay. However I do use the term immigration enforcement when citing 
other works that use this term. For more on migration control as a form of labor control see, 
Gilbert Gonzalez,  Guest Workers or Colonized Labor: Mexican Labor Migration to the United 
States  (Boulder, CO: Paradigm Publishers, 2004).   

  5  .   For  an  analysis  of  post-1996  immigration  politics  see:  Kathleen  R.  Arnold.  Immigration 
Politics Aft er 1996: Th  e Shifi ng Ground of Political Inclusion (College Park, PA: Pennsylvania 
University Press, 2011).   

  6  .   Press Release “US Spends More on Immigration Enforcement than on FBI, DEA, Secret 
Service & All Other Federal Criminal Law Enforcement Agencies Combined,” Migration 
Policy Institute, January 7, 2013. htt p://www.migrationpolicy.org/news/2013_1_07.php   

  7  .   Ben  Winograd,  “Removals  Remain  the  Starkest  Measure  of  Immigration  Enforcement” 
January  11,  2013.  Immigration  Impact,  Project  of  the  American  Immigration  Council. 
htt p://immigrationimpact.com/2013/01/11/removals-remain-the-starkest-measure-of-
immigration-enforcement/.   

     
     
     

     

     

     

     

     

  8  .   Doris  Meissner  et  al.,  Immigration  Enforcement  in  the  United  States:  Th  e  Rise  of  a 
Formidable Machinery (Washington, D.C.: Migration Policy Institute, January 2013), p. 2 
htt p://www.migrationpolicy.org/pubs/enforcementpillars.pdf.   

  9  .   Ibid.   

     
        10  .   Associated  Press,  “More  Hispanics  Go  to  Federal  Prison,”  USA  Today,  June  4,  2011,  
     htt p://usatoday30.usatoday.com/news/nation/2011-06-04-immigration-hispanic-off ende
rs-federal-prison_n.htm   

        11  .   I  oft en  use  the  word  migrant  versus  immigrant  when  referring  to  Latino  migrants,  the 
migrant movement, and anti-migrant groups and policies. I regularly do this because the 
word immigrant as used in contemporary migration studies was developed on the Western 
European immigrant experience and assumes a unidirectional relationship in which people 
voluntary come to the host country and permanently sett le. I prefer to use the word migrant 

183

184

Notes

in reference to Latino migrants and migrants from the global south because it indicates a 
more circular relationship in which people, like several that I interviewed for this book, plan 
on returning to their host country, or come from families in which people have migrated 
between two distinct nation states for generations. In some cases, as in the case of indigenous 
migrants it could be argued that their history of circular migration within the Americas actu-
ally predates the modern nation state. I do however, use the word immigrant when citing 
others who use this term, or as a generic reference to all people who have (im)migrated to 
the United States.   

        12  .   Irene Bloemraad, Kim Voss, and Taeku Lee “Th  e Protests of 2006: What Were Th  ey, How 
Do We Understand Th  em, Where Do We Go?” in Rallying for Immigrant Rights: Th  e Fight 
for Inclusion in 21st Century America, ed. Irene Bloemraad (Berkeley, CA: University of 
California Press). 3–43.   

        13  .   Adrián Félix, Carmen Gonzalez, and Ricardo Ramírez, “Political Protest, Ethnic Media, and 

Latino Naturalization,” American Behavioral Scientist 52, no. 4 (2008): 618–34.   

        14  .   Under the DACA program, DHS issued a memo in June 2012 stating that it would review the 
cases of undocumented youth who came to the United States before they were 16 years old, 
are under the age of 30, have lived in the United States for fi ve consecutive years, and have 
not committ ed a felony or who have not committ ed a serious misdemeanor.   

        15  .   Iris Marion Young, Justice and the Politics of Diff erence (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 

Press, 1990).   

Machinery. 1.   

        16  .   Th  e  Antonio  Gramsci  Reader:  Selected  Writings,  1916–1935,  ed.  David  Forgacs 

(New York: New York University Press, 2000). P 423   

        17  .   Meissner et al., Immigration Enforcement in the United States: Th  e Rise of a Formidable 

        18  .   Leisy Abrego and Cecilia Menjívar, “Immigrant Latina Mothers as Targets of Legal Violence,” 

International Journal of Sociology of the Family 37, no. 1 (2012): 9–26.   

        19  .   Certainly we could fi nd other anti-migrant discourses besides criminalization, such as the 
following:  immigrants  are  responsible  for  the  declining  economy;  immigrant  women  are 
having too many children; immigrants are responsible for the declining quality of public 
education and for the value of American citizenship, etc. In the public records I consulted in 
this study, however, I found criminalization of Latinos to be the dominant discourse.   

        20  .  Stuart  Hall,  “Th  e  Spectacle  of  the  Other,”  chap.  4  in  Representation:  Cultural 
Representations  and  Signifying  Practices,  ed.  Stuart  Hall  (London:  Sage  Publications, 
1997), 223–290.   

        21  .   Factions refer to political ideological divisions such as libertarians versus traditional conser-
vatives. When I refer to fractions, or fractions of capital, I am referring to groups located in 
a particular segment of the economy, such as private prison corporations, the meat packing 
corporations, agricultural business, etc.   

        22  .   See Samuel P. Huntington, “Th  e Hispanic Challenge,” Foreign Policy, May 1, 2004, htt p://

www.foreignpolicy.com/articles/2004/03/01/the_hispanic_challenge.   

        23  .   Here I am using organic intellectual in a slightly diff erent way than Gramsci. He theorized 
several modes of being an intellectual. For instance, he distinguished between traditional 
intellectuals (professors, lawyers, priests etc.) and non-traditional intellectuals such as work-
ers, or a peasant who learns to produce knowledge with the aide of traditional intellectuals. 
In this book I refer to two types of organic intellectuals those of the homeland security state 
that produce knowledge to advance more authoritarian solutions to regulate migration, and 
to a particular strata of Latino migrant activists and their allies who draw upon their political 
traditions to produce knowledge for the migrant movement.   

        24  .   To understand this about Huntington‘s thesis on Latinos we must revisit his early writing 
in the study, titled “Th  e Crisis of Democracy,” writt en in the early 1970s in the aft ermath 
of the watershed year of 1968. Th  e study funded by the Trilateral Commission, a consor-
tium convened by David Rockefeller brought together some of the most powerful corpo-
rate and governmental leaders to confront common problems. In this report Huntington 
argues that problem with democracy was that “marginal social groups, as in the case of the 
blacks,  are  now  becoming  full  participants  in  society.”  Huntington  in,  Michel  J.  Crozier, 

Notes

185

Samuel P. Huntington, Joji Watanuki. Th  e Crisis of Democracy, Report Submitt ed to the 
Trilateral Commission Report on Governability (New York, NY: New York University Press, 
1973), 94.   

        25  .   Robert G Kaiser and Ira Chinoy, “Scaife: Funding Father of the Right,” Washington Post, 
May  2,  1999.  htt p://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/politics/special/clinton/stories/
scaifemain050299.htm.   

        26  .   Luis Fernandez and Joel Olson, “To Live and Work, Anywhere You Please: Arizona and the 

Struggle for Locomotion,” Contemporary Political Th  eory 10, no. 3 (2011): 412–19.   

        27  .   Th  e  Antonio  Gramsci  Reader:  Selected  Writings,  1916–1935,  ed.  David  Forgacs 

(New York: New York University Press, 2000), 211–12.   

        28  .   National  Council  of  La  Raza  (NCLR),  Corporate  Board  of  Advisors,  Commemorative 

Publication, htt p://www.nclr.org/images/uploads/pages/CBA_Pub_2011.pdf.   

        29  .   Aristride R. Zolberg, A Nation by Design: Immigration Policy in the Fashioning of America 

(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2008).   

        30  .   Th  e Antonio Gramsci Reader, 429.   
        31  .   Roberto  Lovato.  “One  Raid  at  a  Time:  How  Immigrant  Crackdowns  Build  the  National 

        32  .   Bob Jessop, Th  e Capitalist State: Marxist Th  eories and Methods (New York, NY: New York 

Security State”.   

University Press, 1982), 211–213.   

from the South 1, no. 3 (2000): 533–80.   

        33  .   Aníbal Quijano, “Coloniality of Power, Eurocentrisim, and Latin America,” Nepantla: Views 

        34  .   Ibid., 533.   
        35  .   David Th  eo Goldberg, Th  e Racial State (Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing, 2002).   
        36  .   Bonilla-Silva, White Supremacy and Racism, 11.   
        37  .   Cristina  Beltrán,  Th  e  Trouble  with  Unity:  Latino  Politics  and  the  Creation  of  Identity 

(New York: Oxford University Press, 2010).   

        38  .      Luis   Fernandez  and  Joel   Olson  ,  “To Live and Work, Anywhere You Please: Arizona and the 

Struggle for Locomotion.”     

        39  .   Gramsci distinguished between the conjunctural and the organic. Th  e former represent the 
actors, personalities, and players of a “day-to-day character” that defi ne a political moment. 
“Organic phenomena . . . give rise to social-historic criticism, whose subject is wider social 
groupings—beyond  those  people  with  immediate  responsibilities  and  beyond  the  ruling 
personnel.” Indeed Gramsci is talking about “something lasting decades,” such as the chang-
ing mode of capitalist development or racial politics. As Gramsci noted, “when a historic 
period comes to be studied a great distinction becomes clear,” but he also notes that “con-
junctural phenomena too depend on organic movements to be sure”; thus his focus is on 
the nexus between these two levels of analysis, for it is the dialectic between the conjunc-
tural and the organic from which the distinct political actors organize. Th  e Antonio Gramsci 
Reader, 201.   

        40  .   William  I.  Robinson,  A  Th  eory  of  Global  Capitalism:  Production,  Class,  and  State  in  a 

Transnational World (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2004).   

        41  .   United  Nations  Department  of  Economic  and  Social  Aff airs,  Population  Division, 
“Population  Facts,”  no.  2010/6,  Nov.  2010,  htt p://www.un.org/esa/population/publica-
tions/popfacts/popfacts_2010-6.pdf.   

                42  .   Raúl  Delgado-Wise  and  Humberto  Marquez  Covarrubias,  “Th  e  Reshaping  of  Mexican 
Labor Exports under NAFTA: Paradoxes and Challenges,” International Migration Review 
41, no. 3 (2007): 656–79.   

        43  .   Raúl Delgado-Wise, “Forced Migration and US Imperialism,” Critical Sociology 35, no. 6 

(2009): 793–810.   

        44  .   Pew  Hispanic  Center,  “Statistical  Portrait  of  the  Hispanic  Population  in  the  United 
States,” Table 6, Detailed Hispanic Origin 2009, htt p://pewhispanic.org/fi les/factsheets/
hispanics2009/2009%20Hispanic%20Profi le%20Final.pdf.   

        45  .   Marilyn  Espitia,  “Th  e  Other  ‘Other  Hispanics’:  South  American  Latinos  in  the  United 
States,” chap. 6 in Th  e Columbia History of Latinos in the United States since 1960, ed. 
David Gutiérrez (New York: Columbia University Press, 2004).   

186

Notes

        46  .  For  a  discussion  on  post-civil  rights  racism  see  Howard  Winant,  Th  e  New  Politics  of 
Race:  Globalism,  Diff erence,  Justice  (Minneapolis:  University  of  Minnesota  Press, 
2004);  Eduardo  Bonilla-Silva,  White  Supremacy  and  Racism  in  the  Post–Civil 
Rights  Era  (Boulder,  CO:  Lynne  Rienner  Publishers,  2001);  and  Michael  Omi  and 
Howard Winant, Racial Formation in the United States: From the 1960s to the 1990s 
(London: Routledge, 1994).   

        47  .  For  more  on  this  history  see;  Arnoldo  De  León,  Th  ey  Called  Th  em  Greasers:  Anglo 
Att itudes toward Mexicans in Texas. (Austin: University of Texas Press) 1983; Rodolfo 
Acuña,  Occupied  America:  A  History  of  Chicanos.  6th  ed.  (New  York:  Pearson 
Longman, 2000).   

        48  .   Manny  Fernandez,  “Prosecutors  Describe  Hunt  for  Hispanic  Victim,”  New  York  Times, 

March 18, 2010.    

    Chapter 1   

  1  .   US.  Library  of  Congress,  Congressional  Research  Service,  “Immigration  Legislation  and 
Issues  in  the  109th  Congress,”  Andorra  Bruno,  CRS  Report  RL33125  (Washington, 
D.C.:  Offi  ce  of  Congressional  Information  and  Publishing,  updated  November  7,  2006), 
 htt p://fpc.state.gov/documents/organization/76318.pdf .   

  2  .      Jean    Stefancic    and    Richard    Delgado  ,    No  Mercy:  How  Conservative  Th  ink  Tanks  and 
Foundations  Changed  America’s  Social  Agenda    ( Philadelphia :   Temple  University  Press , 
 1996 ) .   

  3  .      Lisa    McGirr  ,    Suburban,  Warriors:  Origins  of  the  New  American  Right    ( Princeton,  NJ : 

 Princeton University Press ,  2002 ) .   

     

     

     

     

     
     

     

     
     

  4  .    Quintin Hoare and Geoff rey Smith, eds.  Selections from the Prison Notebooks of    Antonio  

 Gramsci   ( New York :  International Publishers ,  1971 ),  157  .   

  5  .   Ibid., 6.   
  6  .   “Center  for  Immigration  Studies  Staff   List,”  accessed  January  27,  2013,   htt p://cis.org/

Staff -List .   

  7  .      Mark   Krikorian   and   Steven A.   Camarota  ,   Immigration and Terrorism: What Is to Be Done?   
( Washington, D.C.   :    Center for Immigration Studies , November  2001 ),  htt p://www.cis.org/
sites/cis.org/fi les/articles/2001/back1601.pdf  .   

  8  .   Ibid.   
  9  .   Kathleen  R.  Arnold,   American  Immigration  aft er  1996:  Th  e  Shift ing  Ground  of  Political 

Inclusion  (College Park, PA: Pennselvania State University, 2011), 10.   

        10  .   Gramsci used the concept of “war of position” to explain how groups from either the Right 
or Left  could become hegemonic over a prolonged political struggle. In our case, I am talking 
about a reactionary racial war of position in which the radical right was able to become main-
stream. “War of position” should be distinguished from Gramsci’s concept of “war of maneu-
ver,” in which groups seek to overthrow the state to implement a revolution from above. For 
more on these concepts, see Th  e Antonio Gramsci Reader, 225–30.   

        11  .   See John Tanton, interview by    Otis L.   Graham   Jr. in Graham’s   A Skirmish in a Wider War: An 
Oral  History  of  John  H.  Tanton,  Founder  of  FAIR    ( Ann  Arbor,  MI :   Bentley  Historical 
Library, University of Michigan ,  1992 ) .   

        12  .      Eduardo   Bonilla-Silva  ,   Racism Without Racists: Color-Blind Racism and the Persistence of 
Racial Inequality   ( New York :  Rowman & Litt lefi eld ,  2003 ) ;    Howard   Winant  ,   Th  e World Is a 
Ghett o   ( New York :  Basic Books ,  2001 ) .   

        13  .      Deepa  

 Fernandes  , 

  Targeted:  Homeland  Security  and  the  Business  of  Immigration   

( New York :  Seven Stories Press ,  2007 ) .   
        14  .   Graham, A Skirmish in a Wider War, 32.   
        15  .   SPLC, “John Tanton Is the Mastermind Behind the Organized Anti-Immigration Movement,” 
Intelligence  Report,  no.  106  (Summer  2002),   htt p://www.splcenter.org/get-informed/
intelligence-report/browse-all-issues/2002/summer/the-puppeteer.    

        16  .   Graham, Skirmish in a Wider War, 15.   
        17  .   Ibid., 12.   

Notes

187

        18  .   Th  ese studies blamed so-called “inferior races” but conveniently overlooked the role of US- 
and  Western  European-backed  military  dictatorships  and  colonialism  in  creating  poverty 
and so-called underdevelopment.   

        19  .   “Mexican  Americans  Sterilized  Disproportionately  In  California  Institutions,  Study 
Says”,  Huffi  ngton  Post,  June  5,  2013.  htt p://www.huffi  ngtonpost.com/2013/06/05/
mexican-americans-sterilized_n_3390305.html?view=print&comm_ref=false.   

        20  .   Graham, Skirmish in a Wider War, 37.   
        21  .      Tucker   Carlson  ,  “Th  e Intellectual Roots of Nativism,”   Wall Street Journal , October 2,  1997  .   
        22  .   Ibid.   
        23  .   Ibid.   
        24  .      Peter    Brimelow  ,    Alien  Nation    ( New  York :   Random  House ,   1995 ),   59  ,  quoted  in     Devin  
 Burghart    and    Steven    Gardiner  ,   “Lady  Liberty  No  More:  Th  e  Rise  of  the  New  Nativism”  
(unpublished manuscript,  2011 ) .   

        25  .      Ali   Behdad  ,   Forgetful Nation: On Immigration and Cultural Identity in the United States   

( Durham, NC :  Duke University Press ,  2005 ) .   

        26  .   SPLC, “John Tanton Is the Mastermind.”   
        27  .   Ibid.   
        28  .   Ibid.   
        29  .   Center for Immigration Studies, Board of Directors,  htt p://cis.org/Staff -List.    
        30  .   Center for Immigration Studies, “Immigration and the SPLC” [Video], National Press Club, 

Washington D.C., March 10, 2010  htt ps://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R-DZK3J1Qao    

        31  .      Jerry   Kammer  ,   Immigration and SPLC: How the Southern Poverty Law Center Invented 
a  Smear,  Served  La  Raza,  Manipulate  the  Press,  and  Duped  its  Donors.    ( Washington, 
D.C. :   Center  for  Immigration  Studies ,  March   2010 ) ,   htt p://www.cis.org/articles/2010/
immigration-splc.pdf .   

        32  .   SPLC, “John Tanton Is the Mastermind.” Emphasis in the original.   
        33  .   Burghart and Gardiner, “Lady Liberty No More.” Emphasis in the original.   
        34  .   Bonilla-Silva, Racism Without Racists.   
        35  .   SPLC, “John Tanton Is the Mastermind.”   
        36  .   Graham, A Skirmish in a Wider War.   
        37  .   For the mission statement of the Immigration Reform Law Institute, visit  htt p://irli.org/

        38  .    Southern Poverty Law Center,  “When Mr. Kobach Comes to Town: Nativist Laws and the 
Communities  they  Damage,”   ( Montgomery,  AL ,   Southern  Poverty  Law  Center ,  January 
2011)  
 htt p://cdna.splcenter.org/sites/default/fi les/downloads/publication/Kobach_
Comes_to_Town.pdf.    

        39  .   Amanda  Peterson  Beadle,  “Meet  Mitt   Romney’s  Immigration  Advisors,”   htt p://think-

progress.org/justice/2012/08/01/605121/meet-mitt -romneys-immigration-advisers/.    

        40  .   Burghart and Gardiner, “Lady Liberty No More.”   
        41  .      Jessica M. Vaughan  ,   “Att rition Th  rough Enforcement: A Cost-Eff ective Strategy to Shrink the 
Illegal Population”   ( Washington, D.C. :  Center for Immigration Studies , April  2006 ),  htt p://
www.cis.org/Enforcement-IllegalPopulation  .   

        42  .   Ibid.   
        43  .   Angela Maria Kelley (Vice President for Immigration Policy, Center for American Progress), 

personal interview, Washington, D.C., June 30, 2011.   

        44  .   Burghart and Gardiner, “Lady Liberty No More.”   
        45  .   Robyn Rodriguez, Migrant Workers for Export, xxii.   
        46  .   For more on parochial nationalism, see Genova, “Th  e Production of Culprits.”   
        47  .   Devin Burghart (director of the Building Democracy Initiative), telephone interview, June 

about .   

15, 2011.   

        48  .   Burghart and Gardiner, “Lady Liberty No More.”   
        49  .   Ibid.   
        50  .   Stefancic and Delgado, No Mercy, 46   
        51  .   Ibid.   
        52  .   Th  e Sara Scaife Foundation broke off  from the other foundations and was moved to West 

Palm Beach, Florida.   

188

Notes

        53  .   “Richard Mellon Scaife,” IPS Right Web, updated February 26, 2009,  htt p://www.rightweb.

irc-online.org/profi le/Scaife_Richard_Mellon .   

        54  .   Jessica M.Vaughan, “Att rition through Enforcement”.   
        55  .   SPLC, “John Tanton Is the Mastermind.”   
        56  .   Building  Democracy  Initiative,  “Nativism  in  the  House:  A  Report  on  the  House 
Immigration Reform Caucus” (Chicago: Center for a New Community, 2007),  htt p://www.
buildingdemocracy.org/reports/HIRC.pdf .   

        57  .   Fernandes, Targeted, 225.   
        58  .   Building Democracy Initiative, “Nativism in the House”, 6.   
        59  .   Ibid. 6   
        60  .   Ibid. 6   
        61  .   Examining  the  Need  for  Comprehensive  Immigration  Reform,  Part  II:  Hearing  Before 
the  Committ ee  on  the  Judiciary,  US  Senate,  109th  Cong.  (July  12,  2006)  (statement  of 
Michael  W.  Cutler,  fellow,  Center  for  Immigration  Studies,  Washington,  D.C.),   htt p://
judiciary.senate.gov/hearings/testimony.cfm?id=e655f9e2809e5476862f735da118277a&
wit_id=e655f9e2809e5476862f735da118277a-2-1 .   

        62  .  Comprehensive  Immigration  Reform  II:  Hearing  before  the  Committ ee  on  the 
Judiciary,  US  Senate,  109th  Cong.  (October  18,  2005)  (statement  of  Frank  Sharry, 
executive  director  of 
 htt p://judiciary.sen-
ate.gov/hearings/testimony.cfm?id=e655f9e2809e5476862f735da10b35e4&
wit_id=e655f9e2809e5476862f735da10b35e4-2-1 .   

Immigration  Forum), 

the  National 

        63  .   Ibid.   
        64  .   I do not contend that there were no competing or overlapping discourses used by groups 
in the House. Some Republicans argued that immigrants are a drain on national resources, 
and others made the claim that Mexican migrants were anti-American. Nonetheless, it goes 
beyond the scope of this chapter to categorize and quantify all of the competing discourses.   
        65  .   James  Sensenbrenner  (Republican,  Wisconsin),  “Border  Protection,  Antiterrorism,  and 
Illegal Immigration Control Act of 2005” (House of Representatives, December 15, 2005).   
        66  .   Steve King (Republican, Iowa), “Comparing the Statistics” (House of Representatives, May 

        67  .   Ginny  Brown-Waite  (Republican,  Florida),  “Th  e  Senate  Needs  to  Act  on  Immigration 

Reform” (House of Representatives, March 29, 2006).   

        68  .   John Carter (Republican, Texas), “Th  e Senate Needs to Act on Immigration Reform” (House 

of Representatives, July 12, 2006).   

3, 2006).   

11, 2006).   

        69  .   John  Carter  (Republican,  Texas),  “Illegal  Immigration”  (House  of  Representatives,  July 

        70  .   James  Sensenbrenner  (Republican,  Wisconsin),  “Border  Protection,  Antiterrorism,  and 
Illegal Immigration Control Act of 2005” (House of Representatives, December 15, 2005).   

        71  .   Of course, to the dominant society, most Latinos can appear to be Mexican.   
        72  .   Steve King (Republican, Iowa), “Border Protection, Antiterrorism, and Illegal Immigration 

Control Act of 2005” (House of Representatives, July 11, 2006).   

        73  .   For more on metaphors that compare immigrants to animals, see Ott o Santa Ana, Brown Tide 
Rising: Metaphors of Latinos in Contemporary American Discourse (Austin: University of 
Texas Press, 2002).   

        74  .   Ginny Brown-Waite (Republican, Florida), “Border Protection, Antiterrorism, and Illegal 

Immigration Control Act of 2005” (House of Representatives, July 12, 2006).   

        75  .   “Border Protection, Anti-Terrorism, and Illegal Immigration Control Act of 2005” (House of 

Representatives, December 16, 2005).   

        76  .   Ibid.   
        77  .   Nancy  Pelosi  (California,  Democrat),  “Border  Protection,  Antiterrorism,  and  Illegal 

Immigration Control Act of 2005” (House of Representatives, December 16, 2005).   

        78  .   Sheila  Jackson  Lee  (Texas,  Democrat),  “Border  Protection,  Antiterrorism,  and  Illegal 

Immigration Control Act of 2005” (House of Representatives, December 16, 2005).   

        79  .   Ibid.   
        80  .   Raúl  Grijalva  (Democrat,  Arizona),  “Border  Protection,  Antiterrorism,  and  Illegal 

Immigration Control Act of 2005” (House of Representatives, December 16, 2005).   

Notes

189

        81  .   Charles  Gonzales  (Democrat,  Texas),  “Border  Protection,  Antiterrorism,  and  Illegal 

Immigration Control Act of 2005” (House of Representatives, December 16, 2005).   

        82  .   For more on the lack of leadership among California Latinos in the House of Representatives, 
see  Mindy  Farabee,  “Where  Are  Latino  Elected  Leaders  in  Immigration  Reform  Fight?” 
Eastern  Group  Publications,  March  25,  2006,   htt p://network.nshp.org/profi les/blogs/
latino-leaders-need-to-be .   

        83  .   Th  ese politicians are located in an area stretching from downtown Los Angeles to the San 

Gabriel Valley that has one of the largest Latino voter blocs in the United States.   
        84  .   Paloma Esquivel, “From the Streets to the Polls,” Th  e Nation, August 15, 2006.   
        85  .   Chris Zepeda-Millán, “Dignity’s Revolt: Th  reat, Identity, and Immigrant Mass Mobilization” 

(PhD diss., Cornell University, 2011).    

    Chapter 2   

     
     

     
     
     

     

     

     

  1  .   Field notes, San Bernardino, California, December 3, 2005.   
  2  .   At this protest and others in the Inland Empire, Joseph Turner appeared at protests alongside 
neo-Nazi skinheads and purposely taunted counter-protesters and sought to incite violence. 
Turner, a local anti-migrant activist who harassed day laborers and migrant rights protesters 
throughout Southern California, worked for FAIR but was reportedly let go thirteen months 
aft er  being  hired  in  November  2006.  See  Heidi  Beirich,  “Controversial  Offi  cial  Leaves 
FAIR” (SPLC Hatewatch, January 8, 2008).  htt p://www.splcenter.org/blog/2008/01/08/
controversial-offi  cial-no-longer-at-fair .   

  3  .   For more on the role of the media in the 2006 mobilization, see    Félix  ,  “Political Protest.”     
  4  .      Zepeda-Millán  ,  “Today We March, Tomorrow We Vote.”     
  5  .   One could certainly describe particular aspects of the 2006 mega-marches by taking one of 
the more traditional approaches to social movements, such as resource mobilization theory, 
political opportunities theory, or some of the theories to come out of the new social move-
ment literature. Unlike scholars working from these perspectives, I am not interested under-
standing the mobilization structures used in 2006, how organizers seized the opportunity 
created by HR 4437, or how they used identity for mobilization per se. However, I seek to 
analyze the marches within the analysis of conjunctures between 2001 and 2010 and to theo-
rize the implication of the marches from a Gramscian framework.   

  6  .   While I focus on Latinos, it should be made clear that many other ethnic groups partici-
pated in organizing the marches. Perhaps most profoundly Filipino organizations drew on 
their knowledge and style of organizing for the mega-marches in Greater Los Angeles and 
nationally.   

  7  .   Indigenous Mexicans and other indigenous groups oft en found themselves siding with the 
“Latino” migrant bloc, but as they oft en point out they are not Latinos or Hispanics who 
have ancestral connections to the Iberian Peninsula. Rather as these indigenous migrants 
correctly point out, their ancestors have been on this continent since time memorial.   

  8  .   Caciquismo refers to a style of leadership in which one autocratic individual dominates, as 

opposed to a collective and democratically run leadership structure.   

  9  .   Zepeda-Millán, “Today We March.”   

     
        10  .   Zepeda-Millán, “Today We March,”; Varsanyi,  Taking Local Control .   
        11  .      Jessie    Diaz    and    Javier    Rodriguez  ,  “ Undocumented  in  America. ”    New  Left   Review    47 
(September–October  2007 ),  93–107.   htt p://newleft review.org/II/47/jesse-diaz-javier-rod
riguez-undocumented-in-america. Interview conducted by William Robinson.     

        12  .      Ponce  ,  “Racialization, Resistance, and the Migrant Rights Movement .”    
        13  .   Th  e struggle for the rights of Mexican migrants goes back to the 1920s and to the civil rights 
activism of Mexican and Latino organizations in the 1950s. I provide analysis of these three 
genealogies  because  the  people  who  were  at  the  center  of  the  organizing  leading  to  the 
spring 2006 mobilizations had undisputable roots in these genealogies of struggle. For more 
on these earlier forms of migrant activism, see Ponce, “Racialization, Resistance, and the 
Migrant Rights Movement.”   

        14  .   I realize that Gramsci spoke about the need for a party structure to form organic intellectu-
als during the specifi c moment that he was writing in Italy in the 1920s and 1930s. In our 

190

Notes

twenty-fi rst-century case study, however, there was not a formal or signifi cant party structure 
yet capable of forming organic intellectuals. Th  us I am taking the liberty to write about the 
formation of organic intellectuals as something that could happen inside a party structure to 
be sure but also in a more horizontal constellation of social movements spanning a period, 
as in the case of the Latino genealogies of struggle that led to the formation of the Latino 
social bloc.   

        15  .   Javier Rodríguez and Nativo Lopez had their roots in CASA; Armando Navarro and Carlos 

Montes came from the Brown Berets.   

        16  .   For  more  on  Corona,  see     Mario  T.    García  ,    Memories  of  Chicano  History:  Th  e  Life  and 
Narrative of Bert Corona   ( Berkeley :  University of California Press ,  1994 ) . For more on the 
evolution and eventual decline of CASA, see    Ernesto   Chávez  ,   Mi Raza Primero! (My People 
First!): Nationalism, Identity and Insurgency in the Chicano Movement in Los Angeles, 1966–
1978   ( Berkeley :  University of California Press ,  2002 ).    

        17  .      Laura  

 Pulido  , 

  Black,  Brown,  Yellow,  and  Left :  Radical  Activism 

in  Los  Angeles   

( Berkeley :  University of California Press ,  2006 ).    

        18  .   Ibid.   
        19  .      Nora   Hamilton  and Norma S.  Chinchilla  ,   Seeking Community in a Global City: Guatemalans 

and Salvadorans in Los Angeles   ( Philadelphia :  Temple University Press ,  2001 ).    

        20  .     Susan  Bibler    Coutin  ,   “Cultural  Logics  of  Belonging  and  Movement:  Transnationalism, 
Naturalization, and US Immigration Politics,”  in   Th  e Anthropology of the State: A Reader  , 
ed.    Sharma    Aradhana    and    Akhil    Gupta    ( Malden,  MA :   Blackwell  Publishing ,   2006 ), 
 310–336 .    

        21  .      Lisa  García    Bedolla  ,    Fluid  Borders:  Latino  Power,  Identity,  and  Politics  in  Los  Angeles   

( Berkeley :  University of California Press ,  2005 ).    

        22  .      Carlos   Mora  ,   Latinos in the West: Th  e Student Movement and Academic Labor in Los Angeles   

( New York :  Rowman & Litt lefi eld ,  2007 ).    

        23  .      William  I.    Robinson  ,   “ ‘Aquí  Estamos  y  No  Nos  Vamos!’  Global  Capital  and  Immigrant 

Rights,”    Race and Class    48 , no.  2  ( 2006 ):  77–91 .    

        24  .   See     Armando    Navarro  ,    La  Raza  Unida  Party:  A  Chicano  Challenge  to  the  US  Two-Party 
Dictatorship   ( Philadelphia :  Temple University Press ,  2000 );     Michael C.   Dawson  ,   Behind the 
Mule: Race and Class in Afr ican-American Politics   ( Princeton, NJ :  Princeton University Press , 
 1994 ) ; and    Robert C.   Smith  ,   We Have No Leaders: Afr ican Americans in the Post-Civil Rights 
Era   ( Albany :  State University of New York Press ,  1996 ).    

        25  .   Gloria  Saucedo,  (Executive  Director  Hermandad  Mexicana  Nacional)  interview,  North 

Hollywood, California, February 5, 2008.   

        26  .   Armando Navarro, Th  e Immigration Crisis: Nativism, Armed Vigilantism, and the  Rise of a 

Countervailing Movement . (Boulder: Alta Mira Press, 2009), 321.   

        27  .   Esther  Portillo  (Board  member,  Salvadoran  American  National  Association)  interview, 

Fontana, California, February 1, 2008.   

        28  .   Rosalio Muñoz, (People’s Workers Weekly) interview, Highland Park, California, February 
13,  2008;  Victor  Narro  (Director  of  the  UCLA  Labor  Center),  interview,  Westlake, 
California, February 11, 2008.   

        29  .      Juan    Gómez-Quiñones  ,   “Toward  a  Perspective  on  Chicano  History,”     Aztlán     2 ,  no.   2  

( 1971 ):  1–49 .    

31, 2006.   

        30  .   Claudia  Núñez,  “La  Clave  Está  en  la  Radio,”  La  Presna  (Riverside,  California),  March 

        31  .   Ibid.   
        32  .   “Obispos  y  Empresarios  Apoyan  El  Gran  Paro  Nacional,”  El  Sol:  Voz  Latina  del  Inland 

Empire, April 19, 2006.   

        33  .      Amalia    Pallares  ,  and    Nilda    Flores-Gonzalez  .    Marcha!  Latino  Chicago  and  the  Immigrant 

Rights Movement   ( Chicago :  University of Illinois Press ,  2010 ).    

        34  .   Field notes, Los Angeles, March 25, 2006.   
        35  .   Narro, interview, Westlake, California, February 11, 2008..   
        36  .      Carlos   Muñoz  ,   Youth, Identity, Power: Th  e Chicano Movement   ( New York :  Verso Books ,  2007 ) ; 
   Juan   Gómez-Quiñones  ,   Mexican Students por La Raza: Th  e Chicano Student Movement in 
Southern California 1967–1977   ( Santa Barbara, CA :  Editorial La Causa ,  1978 ).    

        37  .   Narro, interview, Westlake, California, February 11, 2008.   

Notes

191

        38  .      Cynthia H.   Cho   and   Joel   Rubin  ,  “High School Students Extend Immigration Protests into 

Fourth Day,”    Los Angeles Times  , March 27,  2006 .    

        39  .   Robert  Jablon,  “School  Walkouts  Continue  in  California  to  Protest  Immigration  Bill,” 

Associated Press, March 27, 2006.   

        40  .   Field notes, Santa Ana, California, March 27, 2006.   
        41  .   Mario  Martínez  (Field  Organizer,  Hermandad  Mexicana-Latinoamericana),  interview, 

Riverside, California, February 9, 2008.   

        42  .   Jose Ortega, “Mega-Marcha,”  La Opinión  (Los Angeles), March 26, 2006.   
        43  .   Ron Gochez, (Coordinator, Union Del Barrio) interview, Los Angeles, California, June 8, 2008.   
        44  .   Field notes, Santa Ana, California, March 27, 2006.   
        45  .   Angelica Salas, (Executive Director, Coalition for Humane Immigrant Rights of Los Angeles) 

interview, Los Angeles, California, February 21, 2008.   

        46  .   Narro, interview, Westlake, California, February 11, 2008.   
        47  .   Gochez, interview; Juan Jose Gutiérrez, interview, East Los Angeles, California, February 

        48  .   Gochez, interview, Los Angeles, California, June 8, 2008.   
        49  .      Rachel L .  Swarns  ,  “Cardinal Mahoney: Immigrant Groups Plan Campaign to Bring Legal 

Changes,”    New York Times  , April 20,  2006 .    

        50  .      Teresa   Gaouett e   and   Nicole   Watanabe  ,  “Marchers Fill LA’s Streets,”    Los Angeles Times  , May 

        51  .   Gaouett e and Watanabe, “Marchers Fill LA’s Streets.”   
        52  .      David    Streitfeld  ,   “Th  rongs  Show  Th  eir  Potent  Role  in  Economy,”     Los  Angeles  Times  , 

        53  .      Nancy   Cleeland  ,  “Boycott  Turns Panorama City Mall into Ghost Town,”    Los Angeles Times  , 

        54  .   Streitfeld, “Th  rongs Show Potent Role.”   
        55  .      Pallares   and   Flores-González  , eds.,   ¡Marcha!      
        56  .      P. J.   Huff stutt er  ,  “Cities’ Immigrants Spoke One Language Th  is Time,”    Los Angeles Times  , 

21, 2006.   

2,  2006 .    

May 2,  2006 .    

May 2,  2006 .    

May 2,  2006 .    

        57  .   Gillian  Flaccus,  “From  LA  to  NY,  Immigrants  Raise  Peaceful,  But  Boisterous  Voices,” 

 Press-Enterprise  (Riverside, California), May 2, 2006.   

        58  .   “Obispos y Empresarios,” El Sol.   
        59  .   Ibid.   
        60  .   Arturo  Carmona,  (Executive  Director  of  COFEM)  interview,  Los  Angeles,  California, 

January 29, 2008.   

        61  .   Santa Ana,  Brown Tide Rising .   
        62  .   Gaouett e and Watanabe, “Marchers Fill LA’s Streets”; Scott  Gold, “When I See Th  is I See 
Strength,”  Los Angeles Times,  May 2, 2006; Ana Gorman and Marjorie Miller, “Immigrants 
Demonstrate Peaceful Power,”  Los Angeles Times,  May 2, 2006.   

        63  .   Streitfeld, “Th  rongs Show Potent Role.”   
        64  .   “Millions of Immigrants to Take Part in Mass Protest,”  China Daily,  April 29, 2006.  htt p://

english.peopledaily.com.cn/200604/29/eng20060429_262132.html.    

        65  .   Securing America’s Borders Act, S. 2454, 109th Cong. (2006).  Congressional Record  152, 
no. 37 (March 29, 2006): S2511–S2526.  htt p://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CREC-2006-03-
29/html/CREC-2006-03-29-pt1-PgS2511.htm .   
        66  .   Kelley, interview, Washington, D.C., July 1, 2010.   
        67  .   Salas, interview, Los Angeles, California, February 21, 2008.   
        68  .   Ali Noorani (RIFA Chair and Executive Director of the National Immigration Forum), inter-

view, Washington, D.C., June 29, 2011.   

        69  .   Nativo Lopez Interview.   
        70  .   Nativo  Lopez,  (Executive  Director,  Hermandad  Mexicana-Latinoamericana)  interview, 

Ontario, California, February 25, 2008.   

        71  .   Manuel Roman, (Lead organizer, UNITE-HERE Local 11) interview, Chino, CA, February 

11, 2006.   

        72  .   Ibid.   
        73  .   Lopez, interview, Ontario, California, February 25, 2008.   
        74  .    Hoare and Smith, eds., Selections fr om the Prison Notebooks,  12.   

192

Notes

        75  .   Martínez, interview, Riverside, California, February 9, 2008.   
        76  .   Angelica  Rivera,  “Chicago  Grassroots  Resistance  to  Racial  Profi ling,  Deportations,  and 
Empire  Building:  Th  e  Case  of  Elvira  Arellano  y  un  Pueblo  Sin  Fronteras  (One  People 
Without Borders)” (paper presented at the Nuestra América Conference, Kansas University, 
Lawrence, Kansas, February 9, 2008).   

        77  .      Adalijiza Sosa   Riddell  ,  “Chicanas and El Movimiento,”    Aztlán    1 , no.  2  ( 1974 ):  359–370 .    
        78  .   Forgacs, ed.,  Th  e Antonio Gramsci Reader,  97.   
        79  .   Portillo, interview, Fontana, California, February 1, 2008.    

    Chapter 3   

  1  .   Emilio Amaya (Executive Director, San Bernardino Community Service Center), interview, 

San Bernardino, California, March 25, 2011.   

  2  .   Zepeda-Millán, “Today We March.”   
  3  .   Alexandra Delano and Adrián Félix, “From Migrants to New Americans: Latinos and Civic 
Integration  in  the  US”  (paper  presented  at  the  International  Studies  Association  Annual 
Meeting, New Orleans, February 2010), 24.   

  4  .   Varsanyi,  Taking Local Control .   
  5  .   Board  of  Supervisors,  Riverside  County  of  California.  htt p://www.countyofriverside.us/

government/boardofsupervisors.html.   

  6  .   Hans  Johnson,  Deborah  Reed,  and  Jose  Hayes, 
Francisco: Public Policy Institute of California, 2008).   

 Th  e  Inland  Empire  in  2015   (San 

     

     
     

     
     

     

     
     

     

  7  .   Ibid.   
  8  .   For a discussion on Mexican Americans and the citrus industry in Riverside County, see 
José Alamillo,  Making Lemonade Out of Lemons: Mexican American Labor and Leisure in a 
California Town, 1880–1960  (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2006).   

  9  .   Despite this growth of Mexican and Central American communities in the Inland Empire, 
there  is  virtually  no  available  research  on  this  demographic  phenomenon  in  Riverside 
County.  Inland  Southern  California  is  not  exactly  a  new  destination  for  Latino  migrant 
labor, given that the region has largely consisted of Mexican communities since it was part of 
Mexico. Nonetheless, the region has much in common with new destinations for migrants, 
where  the  emerging  Mexican  and  Latino  communities  are  upsett ing  the  demographic 
balance  in  conservative  areas,  whose  local  state  institutions  oft en  respond  with  coercive 
policies.   

        10  .      Sherry    McNary  ,   “Deporting  Inmates:  Program  Aims  to  Save  Money,  Relieve  Crowding 

Doing More Time,”    Press-Enterprise  , January 27,  2007 .    

        11  .   Agenda no. 3.23, Minutes of the Riverside County Board of Supervisors, April 11, 2006, 

Riverside, California.   

        12  .      Aarti   Kohli  and  Deepa   Varma  ,   Borders, Jails, and Jobsites: An Overview of Federal Immigration 
Enforcement  Programs  in  the  United  States    ( Berkeley :   Chief  Justice  Earl  Warren  Institute 
on  Race,  Ethnicity,  and  Diversity,  the  University  of  California  Berkeley  School  of  Law , 
 2001 ),  13 .    

        13  .   Ibid.   
        14  .   Tom Barry, “Th  e Deterrence Strategy of Homeland Security,”  Counter Punch,  June 7–9, 2008. 
htt p://www.counterpunch.org/2008/06/07/the-deterrence-strategy-of-homeland-security/.   

        15  .   McNary, “Deporting Inmates.”   
        16  .   Kohli and Varma,  Borders, Jails, and Jobsites,  13.   
        17  .   Ibid., 14.   
        18  .      Daniel    Mears  ,   “Immigration  and  Crime:  What  Is  the  Correlation?”     Federal  Sentencing 

Reporter    14 , no.  2  ( 2002 ):  284–288 .    

        19  .   Johnson et al.,  Th  e Inland Empire in 2015 .   
        20  .   Ibid.   
        21  .   For  an  excellent  analysis  of  culture  and  the  production  of  luxurious  suburban  spaces  in 
the Inland Empire, see Juan D. De Lara, “Remapping Inland Southern California: Global 
Commodity Distribution, Land Speculation, and Politics in the Inland Empire” (PhD diss., 
University of California Berkeley, 2009).   

Notes

193

        22  .      Mario   Barrera  ,   Race and Class in the Southwest: A Th  eory of Racial Inequality   ( Notre Dame, 

IN :  University of Notre Dame Press ,  1979 ).    

        23  .   For  a  history  of  Southern  California  Indians,  see  Eduardo  D.  Castillo,  “Short  Overview 
of  California  Indian  History”  (California  Native  American  Heritage  Foundation,  1998). 
 htt p://www.nahc.ca.gov/califi ndian.html .   

        24  .   Alamillo,  Making Lemonade .   
        25  .      Mike    Davis  ,    City  of  Quartz:  Excavating  the  Future  of  Los  Angeles    ( New  York :   Verso 

        26  .   Raymond  Rocco,  “Latino  Los  Angeles:  Reframing  Boundaries/Borders  in  Los  Angeles” 

(unpublished manuscript, 2006).   

        27  .      Jeff     Horsemen  ,   “Southwest  Part  of  County  Still  Mostly  White,”     Press-Enterprise  ,  March 

Books,   1990 ).    

14,  2011 .    

16,  2011 .    

        28  .   For  a  discussion  on  gentrifi cation  and  Latino  families  leaving  Los  Angeles  for  the 
Inland  Empire,  see     Steve    Bender  ,    Tierra  y  Libertad:  Land,  Liberty,  and  Latino  Housing   
( New York :  New York University Press ,  2010 ).    

        29  .   Horsemen, “Southwest Part of County Still Mostly White.”   
        30  .      Tiff any    Ray   and   Vanessa    Franco  ,   “Change  in  Inland  Landscape,”     Press-Enterprise  ,  March 

        31  .   Gutiérrez, “Globalization, Labor Migration” (see chap. 1, n. 37).   
        32  .      Robin M.   Law  and  Jennifer R.   Wolch  ,  “Social Reproduction and the City: Restructuring in 
Time and Space,”  in  Th  e Restless Urban Landscape, ed.     Paul     Knox    ( Princeton, NJ :  Princeton 
Hall ,  1993 ),  165–206 .    

        33  .   Delgado-Wise, “Forced Migration” (see chap. 1, n. 39).   
        34  .      Edna   Bonacich  and  Jake B.   Wilson  ,   Gett ing the Goods: Ports, Labor, and the Logistics Revolution   

( Ithaca, NY :  Cornell University Press ,  2008 ). 136    

        35  .   Formally unicorporated Mira Loma became part of the City of Jurupa Valley in 2011.   
        36  .   California Public Interest Research Group,  Citizen’s Agenda  13, no. 3 (1997): 4.   
        37  .      Martin  Valdez    Torres  ,   “Indispensible  Migrants:  Mexican  Workers  and  the  Making  of 
Twentieth-Century Los Angeles,”  in   Latino Los Angeles: Transformations, Communities, and 
Activism  ,  ed.    Enrique  C.    Ochoa    and    Gilda  L.    Ochoa    ( Tucson :   Arizona  University  Press , 
 2005 ),  23–37 .    

        38  .   As geographer Juan de Lara noted in a conversation with the author, the number of Latino 
workers  is  actually  much  higher  when  one  takes  into  account  temporary  workers  in  the 
region.   

        39  .   Agenda no. 3.23, Minutes of the Riverside County Board of Supervisors.   
        40  .   Ibid.   
        41  .   Ibid., emphasis added.   
        42  .   Ibid.   
        43  .   Ibid.   
        44  .   Ibid.   
        45  .   Ibid.   
        46  .   Amaya, interview, San Bernardino, California, March 25, 2011.   
        47  .   Ibid.   
        48  .   Ibid.   
        49  .   Daniel  Guzmán  (Coordinator  of  the  Diocese  of  San  Bernardino  Justice  for  Immigrants 

Campaign), interview, Fontana, California, March 26, 2011.   

        50  .   Th  is  statement  is  not  to  suggest  that  African  Americans  are  exempt  from  racial  profi ling 
and police violence in Riverside County. On the contrary, the African American commu-
nity was subject to profi ling and racial violence in Riverside long before the Tyishia Miller 
case in 1995. However, Latinos are profi led in a diff erent way, one in which their phenotypic 
features and cultural characteristics make them subject to the homeland security state and 
potential targets for deportation.   

        51  .   Guzmán interview, interview, Fontana, California, March 26, 2011.   
        52  .   Ibid.   
        53  .   Estela  (pseudonym;  community  organizer  from  Temecula),  interview,  March  26,  2011. 

Pseudonym used by mutual agreement.   

194

Notes

  Press-Enterprise  , June 25,  2007 .    

April 3,  1996 .    

  New York Times  , May 7,  1999 .    

        54  .      Sonja   Bjelland  ,  “In Deputy-Involved Fatal Shootings, Riverside County Tops LA County,”  

        55  .      Kenneth B.   Noble  ,  “Videotape of Beating by Authorities Jolts Los Angeles,”    New York Times  , 

        56  .      Don   Terry  ,  “California Offi  cers Cleared in Killing of Young Woman, Prompting Protests,”  

        57  .   “Border  Patrol  Remains  Silent  about  Immigration  Raids  Th  is  Summer”  (American  Civil 

Liberties Union, December 15, 2004).  htt p://www.aclu-sc.org/releases/view/100794 .   

        58  .   Guzmán, interview, Fontana, California, March 26, 2011.   
        59  .      Jacquie   Welsh  and  John   Paul  ,  “Offi  cers, Family Diff er over Death,”    Press-Enterprise  , December 

22,  2004 .    

        60  .      Richard  K.  

 Press-Enterprise,  April 22,  2008 .    

 Atley  , 

 “Att orney  General  Says  Deputies’  Names  Should  Be  Disclosed,”  

        61  .   Agenda no. 3.23, Minutes of the Riverside County Board of Supervisors.   
        62  .   Esther Portillo, interview, Brooklyn, New York, March 27, 2011.   
        63  .   Guzmán, interview, Fontana, California, March 26, 2011.   
        64  .   Ibid.   
        65  .   Amaya, interview, San Bernardino, California, March 25, 2011.   
        66  .   Ibid.   
        67  .   Estela interview, March 26, 2011.   
        68  .   Amaya, interview, San Bernardino, California, March 25, 2011.   
        69  .      Víctor   Zúñiga  and  Rubén   Hernández-León  ,   New Destinations: Mexican Immigration in the 

United States   ( New York :  Russell Sage Foundation ,  2006 ).     

    Chapter 4   

     

     
     

     

     

     
     

  1  .   Mirna Perla (Supreme Court Justice, Supreme Court of El Salvador), interview, San Salvador, 
El Salvador, January 14, 2007. “ La gente que viene deportada, la tratan como el peor criminal que 
pueda haber en el mundo .”   

  2  .   Meissner et al.,  Immigration Enforcement,  118.   
  3  .      Elana   Zilberg  ,   Spaces of Detention: Th  e Making of a Transnational Gang Crisis Between Los 

Angeles and San Salvador   ( Durham, NC :  Duke University Press ,  2011 ).    

  4  .   I do not engage the entire debate around the state and globalization in this chapter; scholars 
generally view the relationship between them along two ends of the same pole. At one end 
there is a tendency to view the state as “withering away.” On the other end, the state is viewed 
as retaining its primacy in the international system. For a synopsis of the literature on the state 
in the era of globalization, see Aradhana Sharma and Akhil Gupta, “Introduction: Rethinking 
Th  eories of the State in the Era of Globalization,” in  Th  e Anthropology of the State,  ed. Sharma 
and Gupta, 1–41.   

  5  .   For  a  discussion  on  the  nature  of  the  state  under  capitalist  globalization  see     Bob    Jessop  , 
 “Narrating the Future of the National Economy and National State: Remarks on Remapping 
Regulation and Reinventing Governance,”  in   State/Culture: State Formation aft er the Cultural 
Turn, ed. George Steinmetz   ( Ithaca, NY :  Cornell University Press,   1999 ),  378–406  ; and    Leslie  
 Sklair  ,   Sociology of the Global System   ( Baltimore :  Johns Hopkins University Press ,  2001 ).    

  6  .   Robinson,  A Th  eory of Global Capitalism,  88 (see chap. 1, n. 35).   
  7  .   For  more  on  Salvadoran  transnationalism,  see     Leisy    Abrego  ,   “Rethinking  El  Salvador’s 
Transnational Families,”    NACLA Report on the Americas    42  no.  6  ( 2010 ):  28–32  ;    Cecilia  
 Menjívar  ,   Fragmented Ties: Salvadoran Immigrant Networks in America   ( Berkeley :  University 
of California Press ,  2000 ) ;    Susan   Coutin  , “ Cultural Logics of Belonging and Movement” ; 
  Transnational  Confl icts:  Central  America,  Social  Change,  and 
  William  I.  
Globalization   ( New York :  Verso Books ,  2003 ).    

 Robinson  , 

  8  .   Robinson,  Transnational Confl icts .   
  9  .   Menjívar, Fragmented Ties.   

     
     
        10  .   De Genova, “Th  e Production of Culprits” (see chap. 1, n. 3).   
        11  .   “Statement of Principles” (Project for a New American Century, June 3, 1997).  htt p://www.

newamericancentury.org/statementofprinciples.htm .   

Notes

195

        12  .  For  more  on  Bush-era  neoconservatives,  see     Greg    Grandin  ,    Empire’s  Workshop:  Latin 
America, the United States, and the Rise of the New Imperialism   ( New York :  Macmillan , 
 2007 ).    

        13  .   “El Salvador Withdraws Last Soldiers from Iraq,”  USA Today,  February 7, 2009.   
        14  .   “Military  and  Police  Aid  and  All  Program  Entire  Region,  1996–2012,”  Just  the  Facts, 
accessed  on  February  5,  2013.   htt p://justf.org/Print_All_Grants_Country?country=&
year1=1996&year2=2012&subregion=Entire+Region&funding=All+Programs&x=21
2&y=14 .   

        15  .   see    Leslie   Gil  ,   School of the Americas: Military Training and Political Violence in the Americas   
( Durham,  NC :   Duke  University  Press ,   2004 ) ;  and     Jennifer    Schirmer  ,    Th  e  Guatemalan 
Military  Project:  A  Violence  Called  Democracy    ( Philadelphia :   University  of  Pennsylvania 
Press ,  1998 ).    

        16  .   For more on US military involvement in El Salvador, see    Mario   Lungo Ucles  ,   El Salvador in 
the Eighties: Counterinsurgency and Revolution   ( Philadelphia :  Temple University Press ,  1990 ) ; 
   William   Stanley  ,   Th  e Protection Racket State: Elite Politics, Military Extortion, and Civil War in 
El Salvador   ( Philadelphia :  Temple University Press ,  1996 ) ; and    Tommie Sue   Montgomery  , 
  Revolution  in  El  Salvador:  From  Civil  War  to  Civil  Peace  .  2d  ed.  ( Boulder,  CO :   Westview 
Press ,  1996 ).    

        17  .   For more on national security regimes in Latin America, see    Charles   Call  ,  “War Transitions 
and the New Civilian Security in Latin America,”    Comparative Politics    35 , no. 1 ( 2002 ):  1–20  ; 
   Paul    Zagorski  ,    Democracy  vs.  National  Security:  Civil-Military  Relations  in  Latin  America   
( Boulder,  CO :   Lynne  Rienner ,   1992 ) ;  and     Brian    Loveman   and   Th  omas  M.    Davies,    Jr., 
  Th  e  Politics  of  Anti-Politics:  Th  e  Military  in  Latin  America    ( Wilmington,  DE :   Scholarly 
Resources ,  1997 ).    

        18  .   Tom Barry,  “Mission Creep” in Latin America–US Southern Command’s New Security Strategy  
(International  Research  Center,  America’s  Program,  July  2005).   htt p://nlgmltf.org/pdfs/
Mission_Creep.pdf .   

        19  .    Posture Statement of General Bantz J. Craddock, United States Army Commander US Southern 
Command,  before  the  109th  Congress  Senate  Armed  Services  Committ ee,   US  Southern 
Command,  March  14,  2006.  htt p://www.armed-services.senate.gov/statemnt/2005/
March/Craddock%2003-15-05.pdf.   

        20  .   Ibid.   
        21  .      M.  V.    Bhatia  ,   “Fighting  Words:  Naming  Terrorists,  Bandits,  Rebels,  and  Other  Violent 

Actors,”    Th  ird World Quarterly    26 , no.  1  ( 2005 ):  5–22 .    

        22  .      Alberto    Gonzales  ,   “Prepared  Remarks  of  Att orney  General  at  the  Press  Conference 
Following Bilateral Meetings in El Salvador,”   San Salvador , February 5,  2007 .  htt p://www.
justice.gov/archive/ag/speeches/2007/ag_speech_070205.html .    

        23  .      Manuel   Bermúdez  .  “Central America: Gang Violence and Anti-Gang Death Squads.”   Inter 
Press  Service ,  September  6,   2005 .   htt p://www.ipsnews.net/2005/09/central-america-g
ang-violence-and-anti-gang-death-squads/.     

        24  .      Kathryn    Tarker  ,   “Too  Close  for  Comfort:  El  Salvador  Ratches  Up  US  Ties”   ( Council 
 htt p://www.coha.org/too-close-for-comf

 2005) . 

on  Hemispheric  Aff airs , 
July  19, 
ort-el-salvador-ratchets-up-its-us-ties/ .    

        25  .   For more on conservative think tanks, see Stefancic and Delagado,  No Mercy  (see chap. 1, 

n. 46).   

        26  .   Exxon  Mobil  Corporation,  2010  Contributions  and  Community 

Investments, 
 htt p://exxonmobil.com/Corporate/Files/

accessed 
gcr_contributions_pubpolicy-2010.pdf .   

February 

on 

5, 

2013. 

        27  .      Stephen  

 David  B.  

 Johnson   and 

  North  American  Transnational  Youth 
Gangs:  Breaking  the  Chain  of  Violence    ( Washington,  D.C. :   Heritage  Foundation ,   2005 ). 
 http://www.heritage.org/research/reports/2005/03/north-american-transnational-yo
uth-gangs-breaking-the-chain-of-violence .    

 Muhlhausen  , 

        28  .   Ibid.   
        29  .   Ibid.   
        30  .   For more on neoliberalism and migration among Salvadorans, see    Edur Velasco   Arregui  and 
 Richard   Roman  ,  “Perilous Passage: Central American Migration through Mexico,”  in   Latino 

196

Notes

Los Angeles: Transformations, Communities, and Activism  , ed.   Enrique C.   Ochoa   and   Gilda L.  
 Ochoa   ( Tucson :  University of Arizona Press ,  2005 ),  38–62 .    

        31  .   Robinson,  Transnational Confl icts,  309–310.   
        32  .   Ibid.   
        33  .   Ibid.   
        34  .   Fundación de Estudios para la Aplicación del Derecho and Centro de Estudios Penales de 
El Salvador,  Informe Anual Sobre Justicia Penal Juvenil en El Salvador 2004  (San Salvador, El 
Salvador: Fundación de Estudios para la Aplicación del Derecho, 2005).   

        35  .      Alfonso   Gonzales  ,   Rethinking US Involvement in the War on Gangs in Central America: Th  e 

Case of El Salvador   ( Washington, D.C. :  Institute for Policy Studies ,  2006 ).    

        36  .   “Informe de PDDH confi rma existencia de Escuadrones de la Muerte”  Diario CoLatino  (San 

Salvador), June, 28, 2005.   

        37  .      Manuel    Bermúdez  ,   “Gang  Violence  and  Anti-Gang  Death  Squads,”    Inter  Press  Service , 

September 6,  2005 .  htt p://www.ipsnews.net/news.asp?idnews=30163 .    

        38  .   Mirna Perla, interview. San Salvador January 15, 2007 “ Aquí a cualquier persona que mandan 

de ayá, seguro que lo van a matar. Eso, lo van a matar, o destruir moralmente. ”   
        39  .   Javier (pseudonym), interview, San Salvador, El Salvador, January 14, 2007.   
        40  .   Zilberg,  Spaces of Detention,  11.   
        41  .   Javier, interview, San Salvador, El Salvador, January 14, 2007.   
        42  .   Ibid.   
        43  .   Ibid.   
        44  .   Zilberg,  Spaces of Detention,  46.   
        45  .   Javier, interview, San Salvador, El Salvador, January 14, 2007.   
        46  .   For more on El Salvador’s post-peace accord security system, see    Call  ,  “War Transitions” ; 
and   Mary   Popkin  ,   Peace Without Justice: Obstacles to Building the Rule of Law in El Salvador   
( Philadelphia :  Pennsylvania State University Press ,  2000 ).    

        47  .   Marcos (pseudonym), interview, San Salvador, El Salvador, January 14, 2007.   
        48  .   Ibid.   
        49  .   Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor, US Department of State, Country Report 
on  Human  Rights  Practices  2005—El  Salvador,  March  8,  2006.   htt p://www.state.gov/j/
drl/rls/hrrpt/2005/61727.htm .   

        50  .   Javier, interview, San Salvador, El Salvador, January 14, 2007.   
        51  .      David C.   Brotherton  and  Luis   Barrios  ,   Banished to the Homeland: Dominican Deportees and 

Th  eir Stories of Exile   ( New York :  Columbia University Press ,  2011 ).    

        52  .   Marcos, interview, San Salvador, El Salvador, January 14, 2007.   
        53  .   Carlos (pseudonym), interview, San Salvador, El Salvador, January 13, 2007.   
        54  .   An important exception to this was Dr. Esencio, who was a subcommissioner of the PNC 
and a Farabundo Marti front for National Liberation combatant during the civil war. He 
oft en  spoke  about  neoliberalism  and  social  exclusion  as  the  main  reason  why  gangs  and 
crime had gott en out of control.   

        55  .   Roberto (pseudonym), interview, San Salvador, El Salvador, January 3, 2007. ( Bueno aquí de 
deportados ay realmente . . . que el gobierno le ha dado mucha propaganda negativa. Porque ahora 
si los problemas sociales que el país tiene se lo quieren hacerlo ver a otra gente ósea, . . . cuando el 
gobierno no puede con lo que tiene entonces tratando de hacerla la manera de que alguien page 
por lo que hiso. Cuando yo llegue en el 2003 esto aquí no estaba. Entonces ahora la criminalidad 
ha aumentado, y el gobierno no puede estar en el lugar equivocado y la hora equivocado. Entonces 
alguien tiene que pagar los platos rotos y que mejor que el deportado ).   

        56  .   Perla, interview. ( Por supuesto, ósea ellos nunca les dan protección la policía. Si ellos dicen miren 
yo quiero que me ayuden, me están amenazando, me están persiguiendo, me está extorsionando, me 
están... ni siquiera dentro de la prisión se hace. Por qué ayá extorsionan a la gente, les dicen si no me 
das 500 dólares el día. Cuando venga tu familia, te vamos a matar o te vamos a violar, o te vamos 
hacer esto. A la gente la agreden ahí. Y la policía no es capaz de hacer nada menos hacer algo. Ah 
esta gente normalmente, no les da ningún tipo de protección. Al contrario los tienen estigmatizados 
y cada vez han resuelto algún crimen a ellos los van a traer. Aunque no hayan cometido nada y 
estén tratando de portarse bien. Algunos de ellos incluso cuando salen de la cárcel, se quedan solo en 
la casa con miedo que no salgan. Pero, ahí los capturan o los persiguen. Y si van a pedir una ayuda 
obviamente no se la pueden dar ).   

Notes

197

        57  .      International Human Rights Clinic  ,   Nowhere to Hide: Gang, State, and Clandestine Violence 
in El Salvador   ( Cambridge, MA :  Harvard Law School ,  2007 ).  htt p://www.law.harvard.edu/
programs/hrp/documents/FinalElSalvadorReport%283-6-07%29.pdf .    

        58  .   Brotherton and Barrios,  Banished to the Homeland .    

    Chapter 5   

  1  .      Julia   Preston  ,  “In Big Shift , Latino Vote Was Heavily for Obama,”    New York Times  , November 

  2  .      Erin    Kelly  ,   “Obama’s  1st  Year  Sets  Record  for  Hispanic  Nominations,”     Arizona  Republic  , 
August 31,  2009 .  htt p://www.azcentral.com/arizonarepublic/news/articles/2009/08/31/
20090831hispanics0831.html.     

  3  .   Forgacs, ed.,  Th  e Antonio Gramsci Reader,  423.   
  4  .   Ibid.   
  5  .   Stuart Hall, Hard  Road to Renewal: Th  atcherism and the Crisis of the Left   (New York: Verso, 

     

     

     
     
     

     

6,  2008 .    

1988), 132.   

  6  .   I use pseudonyms for all of the activists that I interviewed at the on ground actions or marches 
in Washington, D.C., and in New York City, unless given permission to use the actual name of 
the interviewee. Interviews were conducted in English and in Spanish. I asked people their 
name, country of origin, and why there were participating. I conducted all of these interviews 
on the street during an action or march, with noise and a heavy police presence in most cases. 
In contrast to the interviews that I conducted with organizers and political operatives associ-
ated with the migrant rights movement were almost always conducted in English and in an 
offi  ce or calm spaces retrospectively refl ecting on the broader movement and the specifi c 
actions such as marches, rallies, or lobby eff orts.   

  7  .   Forgacs, ed.,  Th  e Antonio Gramsci Reader,  250.   
  8  .   Ibid., 218.   
  9  .   Ibid.   

     
     
     
        10  .   Félix  et  al.,  “Political  Protest,  Ethnic  Media,  and  Latino  Naturalization”;  Zepeda-Millán, 

“Today We March.”   

        11  .   Eliseo Medina (Secretary-Treasurer, SEIU), interview, Washington, D.C., June 28, 2011.   
        12  .      Ricardo   Ramírez  and  Olga   Medina  ,   Catalysts and Barriers to Att aining Citizenship: An Analysis 

of Ya Es Hora ¡Ciudadania!   ( Washington, D.C. :  National Council of La Raza ,  2011 ).    

        13  .   “Barack  Obama  at  the  LULAC  Convention,”  YouTube  video,  posted  by  BarackObama.
com, July 8, 2008.  htt p://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fx8-h1WdEbg . From a speech at the 
League of United Latin American Citizens convention on July 8, 2008.   

        14  .      Matt    Barreto  .  “Record Latino Voter Turnout in 2008 Helps Obama Win Key Batt leground 
States,”  
 htt p://www.latinodecisions.com/
blog/2008/11/19/record-latino-voter-turnout-in-2008-helps-obama-win-key-batt legroun
d-states/.     

  Latino  Decisions  ,  November  19,  2008. 

        15  .   Noorani, interview, Washington, D.C., January 29, 2011.   
        16  .   Ibid.   
        17  .   Ibid.   
        18  .   Ibid.   
        19  .   Michael Scherer, “Inside Obama’s Factory of Ideas,”  Time,  November 21, 2008.  htt p://www.

time.com/time/politics/article/0,8599,1861305,00.html#ixzz1V2V2hNIh .   

        20  .   Kelley, interview, Washington, D.C., July 1, 2011.   
        21  .   Scherer, “Inside Obama’s Factory of Ideas.”   
        22  .   Carrie  Budoff   Brown,  “Dems’  Tough  New  Immigration  Pitch,”   Politico,   June  10,  2010. 

 htt p://www.politico.com/news/stories/0610/38342.html .   

        23  .   Kelley, interview, Washington, D.C., June 30, 2011.   
        24  .   Gustavo Andrade (Organizing Director, CASA de Maryland), interview, Washington, D.C., 

June 28, 2011.   

        25  .   Noorani, interview, Washington, D.C., June 29, 2011.   
        26  .   Elsa (pseudonym) interview, Washington, D.C., January 26, 2010.   
        27  .   Fernandez and Olson, “To Live and Work” (see ch. 1, n. 27).   
        28  .   Tony (pseudonym), interview, Washington, D.C., January 27, 2010.   

198

Notes

        29  .   Kelley, interview, Washington, D.C., June 30, 2011.   
        30  .   María (pseudonym), interview, Washington, D.C., January 27, 2010.   
        31  .   Gustavo Torres, (Executive Director, CASA De Maryland), pubic speech, Washington D.C., 

        32  .   Javier  Valdez  (Co-Executive  Director,  Make  the  Road  New  York),  interview,  Brooklyn, 

January 27, 2010.   

New York, June 23, 2010.   

        33  .   Andrade, interview, Washington, D.C., June 28, 2011.   
        34  .   Alonso (pseudonym), interview, Washington, D.C., March 21, 2010.   
        35  .   Alyssa (pseudonym), interview, Washington, D.C., March 21, 2010.   
        36  .   Ibid.   
        37  .   Sylvia Herrera (Organizer, Puente Arizona), interview, Washington, D.C., March 21, 2010.   
        38  .   Jamie Contreras (Capital-Area District Chair, SEIU Local 32BJ), interview, New York City, 

        39  .   Janis Rosheuvel (Executive Director, Families for Freedom), interview, Brooklyn, New York, 

June 8, 2011.   

May 17, 2011.   

        40  .   Contreras, interview, New York City, June 8, 2011.   
        41  .   Ibid.   
        42  .   Kelley, interview, Washington, D.C., June 30, 2011.   
        43  .      Charles   Schumer  and  Lindsey   Graham  ,  “Th  e Right Way to Mend Immigration,”    Washington 

Post  , March 19,  2010 .    

        44  .    Clarrisa Martinez de Castro, (Director of Immigration and National Campaigns, National 

Council of La Raza), interview, Washington, D.C., July 1, 2011.    

        45  .      Perry   Bacon,   Jr.,  “Democrats Unveil Immigration-Reform Proposal,”    Washington Post  , April 

29,  2010 .    
        46  .   Emphasis 

in 

the  original. 

for 
Immigration  Reform  (REPAIR)  Proposal”  (Immigration  Policy  Center,  American 
Immigration  Council,  May  3,  2010). 
 htt p://www.immigrationpolicy.org/just-facts/
real-enforcement-practical-answers-immigration-reform-repair-proposal-summary.    

“Real  Enforcement  with  Practical  Answers 

        47  .   Emphasis in the original, Ibid.   
        48  .   Reform  Immigration  for  America,  “Immigration  Reform  Gathers  Steam  as  Democrats 

Release Comprehensive Outline” (press release), April 29, 2010.   

        49  .   Kelley, interview, Washington, D.C., June 30, 2011.   
        50  .   Melanie Dulfo (BAYAN USA), interview, Manhatt an, June 10, 2011.   
        51  .   Teresa Gutiérrez (Coordinator, May 1 Coalition for Immigrant and Workers Rights), inter-

view, Queens, New York, June 3, 2011.   

        52  .   Rhamades Rivera (Vice President, SEIU Local 1199), interview, New York City, June 24, 2011.   
        53  .   Guitiérrez, interview, Queens, New York, June 3, 2011.   
        54  .   Th  e organizers from these unions supported the May 1 rally at Union Square in direct defi -

ance of the union leadership.   

        55  .   Juan (pseudonym) interview, New York City, May 1, 2010.   
        56  .   Zoila (pseudonym) interview, New York City, May 1, 2010.   
        57  .   Sabia (pseudonym) interview, New York City, May 1, 2010.   
        58  .   Rivera, interview, New York City, June 24, 2011.   
        59  .   Valdez, interview, Brooklyn, New York, June 23, 2010.   
        60  .   Clarissa Martínez De Castro (Director of Immigration and National Campaigns, National 

Council of La Raza), interview, Washington, D.C., July 1, 2011.   

        61  .   Juan  Carlos  Ruiz  (New  Sanctuary  Movement),  interview,  Manhatt an,  New  York,  June 

        62  .   Meissner et al.,  Immigration Enforcement in the United States,  129–130.   
        63  .   Department  of  Homeland  Security,  “Secretary  Napolitano  Announces  Record-Breaking 
Immigration  Enforcement  Statistics  Achieved  Under  the  Obama  Administration”  (press 
release), October 6, 2010.  htt p://www.dhs.gov/ynews/releases/pr_1286389936778.shtm .   
        64  .      Spencer S.   Hsu  ,  “Obama Revives Bush Idea to Catch Illegal Workers,”    Washington Post  , July 

10, 2011.   

9,  2009 .    

        65  .   Meissner et al.,  Immigration Enforcement in the United States,  84.   
        66  .   Ibid.   
        67  .   Ibid., 113.   

Notes

199

1,  2010 .    

        68  .   Ibid., 115.   
        69  .      Shankar   Vedantam  ,  “No Opt-Out for Immigration Enforcement,”    Washington Post,   October 

        70  .   Meissner et al., 116.   
        71  .   Meissner et al., 26.   
        72  .   Meissner et al., 31.   
        73  .   Fernandez and Olson, “To Live and Work” (see chap. 1, n. 27).   
        74  .   RIFA would argue otherwise and point to its polling on support for CIR.   
        75  .   Kelley, interview, Washington, D.C., June 30, 2011.   
        76  .   Th  is term has many meaning in Mexican Spanish, but in this context it has the English equiva-
lent to the word  dude . Manuel (pseudonym), interview, Brooklyn, New York, February 2013    

    Chapter 6   

     

     

     
     
     
     
     
     

     

  1  .   Mark  Hugo  Lopez  and  Ana  Gonzalez-Barrera,  Inside  the  2012  Latino  Electorate. 
(Pew  Hispanic  Center,  June  3,  2008).  htt p://www.pewhispanic.org/fi les/2013/05/
the-latino-electorate_2013-06.pdf.   

  2  .   Matt   Barreto  and  Gary  Segura,  2012  Election  Eve  Poll.  (ImpreMedia/Latino  Decisions, 
November  7,  2012).  htt p://www.latinodecisions.com/fi les/3513/5232/9137/LEE_
PRESENTATION_2012.pdf.   

  3  .   Ibid.   
  4  .   Ibid.   
  5  .   Ibid.   
  6  .   Ibid.   
  7  .   Lopez and Gonzalez-Barrera, Inside the 2012 Latino Electorate.   
  8  .   Oakford  and  Vanessa  Cardenas,  Infographic:  Th  e  Growth  of  the  Latino  Electorate  in 
Key  States  (Center  for  American  Progress,  February  28,  2013).  htt p://www.ameri-
canprogress.org/issues/race/news/2013/02/28/54251/infographic-the-growth-of-
the-latino-electorate-in-key-states-2/.   

  9  .   Paul  Taylor,  Ana  Barrera-Gonzalez,  Jeff ery  Passel,  and  Mark  Hugo  Lopez,  Awakened 
Giant, Hispanic Electorate Is Likely to Double by 2030.(Pew Hispanic Center, November 
14,  2012).   http://www.pewhispanic.org/2012/11/14/an-awakened-giant-the-hispan
ic-electorate-is-likely-to-double-by-2030/ .   

        10  .   Matt  Barreto and Gary Segura, 2012 Election Eve Poll.   
        11  .   “Raul  Ruiz  Defeats  Mary  Bono  Mack  in  Riverside  County  Upset.”   Los  Angeles  Times , 

November 7, 2012.   

2012, 206.   

        12  .   Ibid.   
        13  .   Joe Feagin,  White Party, White Government: Race, Class, and US Politics . London: Routledge, 

        14  .   Pete  Kasperowicz,  “House  Votes  to  Defund  Obama’s  ‘Administrative  Amnesty’  for 
Immigrants.”  Th  e Hill , June, 6, 2013.  htt p://thehill.com/blogs/fl oor-action/house/303869-h
ouse-votes-to-defund-obamas-administrative-amnesty-for-immigrants#ixzz2VbW2cNLd .   
        15  .   Although the racial dimensions to the Latin Americanization of Latino politics are strong, it 
should be noted that this does not mean that Latinos of Afro or indigenous descent cannot 
become honorary parts of this elite. Eduardo Bonilla-Silva and David R. Dietrich, “Th  e Latin 
Americanization of US Race Relations: A New Pigmentocracy.” In  Shades of Diff erence: Why 
Skin  Color  Matt ers ,  edited  by  Evelyn  Nakano  Glenn,  40–60.  Stanford,  CA:  Stanford 
University Press, 2009.   

        16  .   Arnold,  American Immigration Politics aft er 1996 .   
        17  .   Ibid.   
        18  .   Albert R. Hunt, “Republicans to Watch on Immigration,”  New York Times , June 16, 2013. 

 htt p://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/17/us/17iht-lett er17.html?_r=1& .   

        19  .   Peter  Schey,  Analysis  of  Senate  Bill  744’s  Pathway  to  Legalization  and  Citizenship 
(Center  for  Human  and  Constitutional  Rights,  June  2013).   htt p://www.centerforhu-
manrights.org/6-18-13%20CHRCL-Peter%20Schey%20Analysis%20Senate%20Bill%20
Legalization%20Program.pdf .   

200

Notes

        20  .   Elise Foley, “Immigration Reform Framework Includes Citizenship, Drones, and Dreamers,” 
 Huffington  Post ,  January  28,   2013 .  http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/01/28/
immigration-reform-framework_n_2566494.html.    

        21  .   Foley, “Immigration Reform Framework.”   
        22  .   Black Alliance for Just Immigration, “Senate Immigration Bill Goes from Bad to Worse,” June 
28, 2013.  htt p://www.blackalliance.org/senate-immigration-bill-goes-from-bad-to-worse/ .   
        23  .   National  Network  for  Immigrant  and  Refugee  Rights,  “Senate  Nears  Vote  on  Flawed 
Immigration Bill” [press blog], June 26, 2013.  htt p://www.nnirr.org/drupal/senate-nears-v
ote-on-fl awed-immigration-bill .   

        24  .   “McCain: US Will Have ‘Th  e Most Militarized Border Since the Fall of the Berlin Wall,’ ”  RT , 

June 25, 2013.  htt p://rt.com/usa/mccain-border-berlin-wall-226/ .   

        25  .   Detention  Watch  Network,  “House  Appropriations  Committ ee  Approves  $147  Million 
More to Detain Immigrants” [press release], May 23, 2013.  htt p://detentionwatchnetwork.
wordpress.com/2013/05/23/house-appropriations-committ ee-approves-147-million-m
ore-to-detain-immigrants/ .   

        26  .   National  Immigrant  Justice  Center,  Heartland  Alliance  Program,  “Th  e  Good  &  Bad  in 
S.  744:  Border  Security,  Economic  Competitiveness,  and  Immigration  Modernization 
Act  of  2013,” 
 htt p://www.immigrantjustice.org/immigrationreform/s744analysis#.
UdFYsvlgdrt .   

        27  .   Greg  Sargent,  “Can  Immigration  Reform  Pass  in  the  House?  Maybe.”  Washington  Post 
July  8,  2013.   http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/plum-line/wp/2013/07/08/
can-immigration-reform-pass-the-house-maybe/?print=1.    

        28  .   Ibid.   
        29  .   Maegan Ortiz, “Hispanic Caucus Repeats Same Old Immigration Reform Policy,”  Politics365 , 
November  28,  2012.  htt p://politic365.com/2012/11/28/hispanic-caucus-reiterates-s
ame-old-comprehensive-immigration-reform-principles/.   

        30  .   Gonzalez,  Guest Workers or Colonized Labor , 154.   
        31  .   Richard Vogal, “Transient Servitude: Th  e Guest Workers Program For Exploiting Mexican 
and  Central  American  Workers.”   Monthly  Review   25,  no.  8  (2007).  htt p://monthlyre-
view.org/2007/01/01/transient-servitude-the-u-s-guest-worker-program-for-exp
loiting-mexican-and-central-american-workers.   

        32  .   Clare  Ribando  Seelke  and  Kristen  M.  Finklea,  “US–Mexican  Security  Cooperation:  Th  e 
Merida Initiative and Beyond,” Congressional Research Service, June 12, 2013, 22.  htt p://
fpc.state.gov/documents/organization/210921.pdf .   

        33  .   Robyn Magalit Rodriguez,  Migrants for Export :  How the Philippine State Brokers Labor to the 

World  (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2010), xxii   

        34  .   Nicos Poulantzas,  State Power Socialism.  (London: Verso Books) 1978, 211.   
        35  .   Jason  Cherkis  and  Zach  Carter,  “FBI  Surveillance  of  Occupy  Wall  Street  Detailed,”   Hu
ffington  Post ,  January  5,  2013.  http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/01/05/
fb  i-occupy-wall- street_ n_2410783.html.   

        36  .   Poulantzas,  State Power Socialism , 212.   
        37  .   Michelle  Alexander,   Th  e  New  Jim  Crow:  Mass  Incarceration  in  the  Age  of  Colorblindness . 

(New York: New Press, 2010)   

        38  .   Ibid., 215.   
        39  .   Tanya  Maria  Golash-Boza,  I mmigration  Nation:  Raids,  Detentions,  and  Deportations  in 

Post-9/11 America.  (Boulder, CO: Paradigm Publishers, 2012) 169.   

        40  .   Ibid, 141.   
        41  .   Raymond  Rocco,  “Th  e  Structuring  of  Latino  Politics:  Neoliberalism  and  Incorporation,” 

 NACLA Report on the America  43, no. 6 (2010): 40–43.   

        42  .   Poulantzas,  State Power Socialism , 237.    
        43  .   Americas Voice, “Landmark Immigration Bill Passes” [blog], June 27, 2013.  htt p://ameri-

casvoiceonline.org/blog/landmark-immigration-bill-passes-senate-68-32/ .   

        44  .   Hermandad  Mexicana.  “Border  Militarization  Amendment  Prevails  with  Majority 

Democratic Vote: No Faustian Barging for Us” [press release], June 27, 2013.    

      45 .    Michelle Chen, No Papers, No Fear: Th  e ‘Dream 9’ represent a radical strand of the immigra-
tion movement that’s fed up with compromise. August 6, 2013. htt p://inthesetimes.com/

Notes

201

article/15402/no_papers_no_fear_9_activists_push_the_boundaries_of_the_immi-
grant_rights_m/ 

        46  .   Alfonso  Gonzales,  “Power,  Justice,  and  Survival:  Latino  Politics  in  the  21st  Century,” 
 NACLA  Report  on  the  Americas   43,  no.  6  (2010):  13–14.  htt ps://nacla.org/news/
power-justice-and-survival-latino-politics-21st-century.   

        47  .   Forgacs, ed.,  Th  e Antonio Gramsci Reader , 209.    

    Appendix   

  1  .   I do not wish to suggest that data from the Latino National Survey cannot be used to high-
light, sustain, and perhaps even challenge certain aspects of Latino political life. It provides 
an important set of data, but it is limited for understanding the politics of the homeland 
security state and of Latino migrant activism to a certain extent.   

  2  .      Stephen   Van Evera  ,   Guide to Methods for Students of Political Science   ( Ithaca, NY :  Cornell 

  3  .   Ibid.   
  4  .   Richard  J.F.  Day,   Gramsci  is  Dead:  Anarchist  Currents  in  the  Newest  Social  Movements  

     

     

     
     

     

     

     
     

     

University Press ,  1997 ),  4–5 .    

(London: Pluto Press, 2005).   

  5  .   For  discussions  of  Gramsci  and  social  movements,  see  Stuart  Hall  Chas  Critcher,  Tony 
Jeff erson,  and  Brian  Roberts,   Policing  the  Crisis:  Mugging,  Th  e  State  and  Law  and  Order  
(London:  McMillan,  1978);  David  Morton,   Unravelling  Gramsci:  Hegemony  and  Passive 
Revolution  in  the  Global  Political  Economy   (London:  Pluto  Press,  2007);  and  William 
I. Robinson, “Gramsci and Globalization: From Nation-State to Transnational Hegemony,” 
 Critical Review of International Social and Political Philosophy  8, no. 4 (2005): 1–16. For a 
Gramscian analysis of Afro-Brazilian social movements, see Michael G. Hanchard,  Orpheus 
and  Power:  Th  e  “Movimento  Negro”  of  Rio  de  Janeiro  and  São  Paulo,  Brazil,  1945–1988  
(Princeton,  NJ:  Princeton  University  Press,  1994).  For  more  on  the  uses  of  Gramsci 
by  movements  in  Latin  America,  see  Raúl  Burgos,  “Th  e  Gramscian  Intervention  in  the 
Th  eoretical and Political Production of the Latin American Left ,” trans. Carlos Pérez,  Latin 
American Perspectives  29, no. 1 (2002): 9–37.   

  6  .   A wider set of conceptual tools such as “historic bloc,” “integral state,” “organic intellectuals,” 

“common sense,” and “passive revolution” are among his most important contributions.   

  7  .      Forgacs  , ed.,   Th  e Gramsci Reader,    209.     
  8  .      Teun  A.    Van  Dijk  ,   “Critical  Discourse  Analysis,”   in    Th  e  Handbook  of  Discourse  Analysis  , 
ed.   Deborah   Schiff rin  ,   Deborah   Tannen  , and   Heidi E.   Hamilton   ( Malden, MA :  Blackwell 
Publishers ,  2001 ), 352–371. Emphasis in the original.    

  9  .      Soyini D.   Madison  ,   Critical Ethnography, Method, Ethics, and Performance   ( Th  ousand Oaks, 

CA :  SAGE Publications ,  2005 ),  1–16 .    

        10  .      Douglas S.   Massey ,  Jorge   Durand  , and   Nolan   Malone  ,   Beyond Smoke and Mirrors: Mexican 
Immigration in an Era of Economic Integration   ( New York :  Russell Sage Foundation ,  2002 ) ; 
   Wayne    Cornelius  ,   “Death  at  the  Border:  Effi  cacy  and  Unintended  Consequences  of  US 
Immigration Control Policy,”    Population and Development Review    27 , no.  4  ( 2001 ):  661–
685  ;    Timothy   Dunn  ,   Militarization of the US–Mexico Border: Low Intensity Confl ict Doctrine 
Comes  Home    ( Austin :   University  of  Texas  Press ,   1996 ) ;  and     Joseph    Nevins  ,    Operation 
Gatekeeper:  Th  e  Rise  of  the  “Illegal”  Alien  and  the  Making  of  the  US–Mexico  Boundary   
( London :  Routledge ,  2002 ).    

        11  .   Cornelius, “Death at the Border”; and Nevins,  Operation Gatekeeper .   
        12  .   Varsanyi,  Taking Local Control  (see chap. 1, n. 14); also see Lina Newton,  Illegal, Alien, or 
Immigrant: Th  e Politics of Immigration Reform  (New York: New York University Press, 2008).   
        13  .      Tanya  Maria    Golash-Boza,      Immigration  Nation:  Raids,  Detentions,  and  Deportations  in 

Post-9/11 America   ( Boulder, CO :  Paradigm Publishers ,  2012 ).    

        14  .   For an important exception to this see: Arnold,  Immigration Politics aft er 1996 .   
        15  .   For  an  example,  see  Fraga  et  al.,   Making  It  Home ;  and     Rodolfo    Espino  ,    David    Leal  , 
  Latino  Politics:  Identity,  Mobilization,  and  Representation   

 Meier  ,  eds., 

and 
( Charlott esville :  University of Virginia Press ,  2008 ).    

  Kenneth  

202

Notes

        16  .      Rodney  E.  

 Hero  , 

( Philadelphia :  Temple University Press ,  1992 ),  190 .    

  Latinos  and 

the  US  Political  System:  Two-Tiered  Pluralism   

        17  .   Rocco, “Th  e Structuring of Latino Politics.”   
        18  .      Lisa  García    Bedolla  ,    Introduction  to  Latino  Politics  in  the  US    ( Cambridge,  UK :   Polity 

Press ,  2009 ).    

        19  .   Arnold,  American Immigration aft er 1996 .   
        20  .      Leo   Chavez  ,   Th  e Latino Th  reat: Constructing Immigrants, Citizens, and the Nation   ( Stanford, 

CA :  Stanford University Press ,  2008 ).    

        21  .   See    Nicholas   De Genova   and   Nathalie   Peutz  , eds.,   Th  e Deportation Regime: Sovereignty, Space, 
and the Freedom of Movement   ( Durham, NC :  Duke University Press ,  2010 ) ; and    Nicholas  
 De Genova  ,  “Th  e Legal Production of Mexican/Migrant ‘Illegality,’ ”    Latino Studies  , no.  2  
( 2004 ):  160–185 .    

        22  .   Also see De Genova, “Th  e Production of Culprits” (see chap. 1, n. 3).   
        23  .   For  more  on  this  approach,  see     Paul    Apostolidis  ,    Breaks  in  the  Chain:  What  Immigrant 
Workers Can Teach America about Democracy   ( Minneapolis :  University of Minnesota Press , 
 2010 ) ;    Cristina   Beltrán  ,   Th  e Trouble with Unity: Latino Politics and the Creation of Identity   
( New  York :   Oxford  University  Press ,   2010 ) ;     Edwina    Barvosa  ,    Wealth  of  Selves:  Multiple 
Identities,  Mestiza  Consciousness,  and  the  Subject  of  Politics    ( College  Station :   Texas  A&M 
University  Press ,   2008 ) ;  and     Victor  M.    Valle    and    Rodolfo  D.    Torres  ,    Latino  Metropolis   
( Minneapolis :  University of Minnesota Press ,  2000 ).    

        24  .   Beltrán,  Th  e Trouble with Unity .       

     S E L E C T E D   B I B L I O G R A P H Y     

    Abrego ,  Leisy  .  “Rethinking El Salvador’s Transnational Families.”   NACLA Report on the Americas  

  42   no.  6  ( 2010 ):  28–32 . 

   Abrego ,  Leisy  , and   Cecilia   Menjívar  .  “Immigrant Latina Mothers as Targets of Legal Violence.”  

 International Journal of Sociology of the Family    37  , no.  1  ( 2012 ):  9–26 . 

   Acuña ,   Rodolfo  .    Occupied  America:  A  History  of  Chicanos  .  6th  ed.   (New  York :   Pearson 

Longman ,  2000) . 

   Alamillo ,  José  .   Making Lemonade Out of Lemons: Mexican American Labor and Leisure in a 

California Town, 1880–1960   ( Urbana :  University of Illinois Press ,  2006 ). 

   Apostolidis ,   Paul  .    Breaks  in  the  Chain:  What  Immigrant  Workers  Can  Teach  America  About 

Democracy    (Minneapolis :  University of Minnesota Press ,  2010 ). 

   Arregui ,   Edur    Velasco,  and  Richard  Roman.  “Perilous  Passage:  Central  American  Migration 
Th  rough  Mexico.”  In    Latino  Los  Angeles:  Transformations,  Communities,  and  Activism  , 
edited  by    Enrique    Ochoa    and    Gilda  L .   Ochoa  ,   38–62    (Tucson :   University  of  Arizona 
Press ,  2005) . 

   Barrera ,  Mario  .   Race and Class in the Southwest: A Th  eory of Racial Inequality    (Notre Dame, 

IN :  University of Notre Dame Press ,  1979) . 

   Barvosa ,  Edwina  .   Wealth of Selves: Multiple Identities, Mestiza Consciousness, and the Subject of 

Politics    (College Station :  Texas A&M University Press ,  2008) . 

   Behdad ,   Ali  .    Forgetful  Nation:  On  Immigration  and  Cultural  Identity  in  the  United  States   

   Beltrán ,   Cristina  .    Th  e  Trouble  with  Unity:  Latino  Politics  and  the  Creation  of  Identity   

 (Durham, NC :  Duke University Press ,  2005) . 

 (New York :  Oxford University Press ,  2010) . 

   Bender ,   Steve  .    Tierra  y  Libertad:  Land,  Liberty,  and  Latino  Housing     (New  York :   New  York 

University Press ,  2010) . 

   Bhatia ,  M. V  .  “Fighting Words: Naming Terrorists, Bandits, Rebels, and Other Violent Actors.”  

 Th  ird World Quarterly    26  , no.  1  ( 2005 ):  5–22 . 

   Bloemraad ,  Irene  , and   Kim   Voss  .   Rallying for Immigrant Rights: Th  e Fight for Inclusion in 21st 

Century America    (Berkeley :  University of California Press ,  2011) . 

   Bonacich ,  Edna  , and   Jake B .  Wilson  .   Gett ing the Goods: Ports, Labor, and the Logistics Revolution   

 (Ithaca, NY :  Cornell University Press ,  2008) . 

   Bonilla-Silva ,  Eduardo  . “Th  e Latin Americanization of U.S. Race Relations: A New Pigmentocracy.” 
In   Shades of Diff erence: Why Skin Color Matt ers  , edited by   Evelyn Nakano   Glenn  ,  40–60  
 (Stanford, CA :  Stanford University Press ,  2009) . 

.   Racism Without Racists: Color-Blind Racism and the Persistence of Racial Inequality   

 (New York :  Rowman & Litt lefi eld ,  2003) . 

.    White  Supremacy  and  Racism  in  the  Post-Civil  Rights  Era     (Boulder,  CO :   Lynne 

 

 

Rienner ,  2001) . 

203

204

Selected Bibliography

   Brotherton ,  David C  ., and   Luis   Barrios  .   Banished to the Homeland: Dominican Deportees and 

Th  eir Stories of Exile    (New York :  Columbia University Press ,  2011) . 

   Burghart ,   Devin  ,  and    Steven    Gardiner  ,   “Lady  Liberty  No  More:  Th  e  Rise  of  the  New  Nativism.”  

Unpublished manuscript,  2011 . 

   Burgos ,   Raúl  .   “Th  e  Gramscian  Intervention  in  the  Th  eoretical  and  Political  Production  of  the 
Latin  American  Left .”   Translated  by    Carlos    Pérez  .   Latin  American  Perspectives     29  ,  no.   1  
( 2002 ):  9–37 . 

   Call ,  Charles  .  “War Transitions and the New Civilian Security in Latin America.”   Comparative 

Politics    35  , no.  1  ( 2002 ):  1–20 . 

   Chávez ,  Ernesto  .   Mi Raza Primero! (My People First!): Nationalism, Identity, and Insurgency 
in the Chicano Movement in Los Angeles, 1966–1978    (Berkeley :  University of California 
Press ,  2002) . 

   Cornelius ,   Wayne  .   “Death  at  the  Border:  Effi  cacy  and  Unintended  Consequences  of  US 
Immigration Control Policy.”   Population and Development Review    27  , no.  4  ( 2001 ):  661–85 . 
 Susan  Bibler  .  “Cultural  Logics  of  Belonging  and  Movement:  Transnationalism, 
Naturalization, and US Immigration Politics.” In   Th  e Anthropology of the State: A Reader  , 
edited  by 
 Blackwell 
  Sharma  
Publishing ,  2006) . 

 (Malden,  MA : 

 Aradhana    and 

 310–336 . 

   Coutin , 

  Akhil  

 Gupta  , 

.   Nation of Emigrants: Shift ing Boundaries of Citizenship in El Salvador and the United 

 

States    (Ithaca, NY :  Cornell University Press ,  2007) . 

   Davis ,  Angela  .   Are Prisons Obsolete?    (New York :  Seven Stories Press ,  2003) . 
   Davis ,  Mike  .   City of Quartz: Excavating the Future of Los Angeles    (New York :  Verso Books , 

 1990) . 

   Dawson ,  Michael C  .   Behind the Mule: Race and Class in African-American Politics    (Princeton, 

NJ :  Princeton University Press ,  1994) . 

   De Genova ,  Nicholas  .  “Th  e Legal Production of Mexican/Migrant ‘Illegality.’ ”   Latino Studies    2  , 

no.  2  ( 2004 ):  160–85 . 

 

.  “Th  e Production of Culprits: From Deportability to Detainability in the Aft ermath of 

Homeland Security.”   Citizenship Studies    11  , no.  5  ( 2007 ):  421–48 . 

   De Genova ,  Nicholas  , and   Nathalie   Peutz  , eds.   Th  e Deportation Regime: Sovereignty, Space, and 

the Freedom of Movement    (Durham, NC :  Duke University Press ,  2010) . 

   Delano ,   Alexandra  ,  and  Adrián  Félix. “ From  Migrants  to  ‘New  Americans’:  Latinos  and  Civic 
Integration  in  the  US. ”  Paper  presented  at  the  International  Studies  Association  Annual 
Meeting, New Orleans, February  2010 . 

   De  Lara ,   Juan  D  .  “Remapping  Inland  Southern  California:  Global  Commodity  Distribution, 
Land Speculation, and Politics in the Inland Empire.” PhD diss., University of California 
Berkeley,  2009 . 

   Delgado-Wise ,   Raúl  .   “Forced  Migration  and  US  Imperialism:  Th  e  Dialectic  of  Migration  and 

Development.”   Critical Sociology    35  , no.  6  ( 2009 ):  793–810 . 

   Delgado-Wise ,  Raúl  , and   Humberto   Marquez Covarrubias  .  “Th  e Reshaping of Mexican Labor 
Exports  Under  NAFTA:  Paradoxes  and  Challenges.”    International  Migration  Review     41  , 
no.  3  ( 2007 ):  656–79 . 

   Dunn ,  Timothy  .   Militarization of the U.S.–Mexico Border, 1978–1992: Low-Intensity Confl ict 

Doctrine Comes Home    (Austin :  University of Texas Press ,  1996) . 

   Espino ,  Rodolfo  ,   David L .  Leal  , and   Kenneth J .  Meier  , eds.   Latino Politics: Identity, Mobilization, 

and Representation    (Charlott esville :  University of Virginia Press ,  2008) . 

   Espitia ,  Marilyn  . “Th  e Other ‘Other Hispanics’: South American Latinos in the United States.” In 
  Th  e Columbia History of Latinos in the United States since 1960  , edited by   David   Gutiérrez  , 
 257–280   (New York :  Columbia University Press ,  2004) . 

   Feagin , 

 Joe  . 

  White  Party,  White  Government:  Race,  Class,  and  U.S.  Politics   

 (London : 

 Routledge ,  2012) . 

   Félix ,   Adrián  ,    Carmen    Gonzales  ,  and    Ricardo    Ramírez  .   “Political  Protest,  Ethnic  Media,  and 

Latino Naturalization.”   American Behavioral Scientist    52  , no.  4  ( 2008 ):  618–34 . 

   Fernandes ,  Deepa  .   Targeted: Homeland Security and the Business of Immigration    (New York : 

 Seven Stories Press ,  2007) . 

Selected Bibliography

205

   Fernandez ,   Luis  ,  and    Joel    Olson  .   “To  Live  and  Work,  Anywhere  You  Please:  Arizona  and  the 

Struggle for Locomotion.”   Contemporary Political Th  eory    10  , no.  3  ( 2011 ):  412–19 . 

   Fraga ,   Luis  R  .,    John  A .   García  ,    Gary  M .   Segura  ,    Michael    Jones-Correa  ,    Rodney  E .   Hero  ,  and 
  Valerie   Martínez-Ebers  .   Making It Home: Latino Lives in America    (Philadelphia :  Temple 
University Press ,  2010) . 

   Frymer ,  Paul  .   Uneasy Alliances: Race and Party Competition in America    (Princeton, NJ :  Princeton 

University Press ,  1999) . 

   García  Bedolla ,   Lisa  .    Fluid  Borders:  Latino  Power,  Identity,  and  Politics  in  Los  Angeles   

 (Berkeley :  University of California Press ,  2005) . 

.   Introduction to Latino Politics in the U.S.    (Cambridge, UK :  Polity Press ,  2009) . 

 
   García ,   Mario.  T  .    Memories  of  Chicano  History:  Th  e  Life  and  Narrative  of  Bert  Corona   

 (Berkeley :  University of California Press ,  1994) . 

   Gill ,  Leslie  .   School of the Americas: Military Training and Political Violence in the Americas  . 

 (Durham, NC :  Duke University Press ,  2004) . 

   Gilmore ,  Ruthie Wilson  .   Golden Gulag: Prisons, Surplus, Crisis, and Opposition in Globalizing 

California    (Berkeley :  University of California Press ,  2007) . 

   Golash-Boza ,   Tanya  Maria  .    Immigration  Nation:  Raids,  Detentions,  and  Deportations  in 

Post-9/11 America    (Boulder, CO :  Paradigm Publishers ,  2012) . 

   Goldberg ,  David Th  eo  .   Th  e Racial State    (Malden, MA :  Blackwell Publishing ,  2002) . 
   Gómez-Quiñones ,   Juan  .    Mexican  Students  por  La  Raza:  Th  e  Chicano  Student  Movement  in 

Southern California 1967–1977    (Santa Barbara, CA :  Editorial La Causa ,  1978) . 

   Gonzales ,   Alfonso  .   “Th  e  2006  Mega  Marchas  in  Greater  Los  Angeles:  Counter-Hegemonic 

Moment and the Future of El Migrante Struggle.”   Latino Studies    7  , no.  1  ( 2009 ):  30–59 . 

.  “Power, Justice, and Survival: Latino Politics in the 21st Century,”   NACLA Report on the 

Americas    43  , no.  6  ( 2010 ):  13–14 . 

.   Rethinking U.S. Involvement in the War on Gangs in Central America: Th  e Case of El 

Salvador    (Washington, D.C. :  Institute for Policy Studies ,  2006) . 

   Gonzalez ,  Gilbert G  .   Guest Workers or Colonized Labor: Mexican Labor Migration to the United 

States    (Boulder, CO :  Paradigm Publishers ,  2004) . 

   Graham  Jr.,  Otis L  .   A Skirmish in a Wider War: An Oral History of John H. Tanton, Founder of 

FAIR    (Arbor, MI :  Bentley Historical Library, University of Michigan ,  1992) . 

   Gramsci ,  Antonio  .   Th  e Antonio Gramsci Reader: Selected Writings 1916–1935  . Edited by   David  

 Forgacs    (New York :  New York University Press ,  2000) . 

.   Selections from the Prison Notebooks of Antonio Gramsci  . Edited by   Quintin   Hoare   and 

  Geoff rey   Smith    (New York :  International Publishers ,  1971) . 

   Grandin ,  Greg  .   Empire’s Workshop: Latin America, the United States, and the Rise of the New 

Imperialism    (New York :  Macmillan ,  2007) . 

   Gutiérrez ,  David  . “  Globalization ,  Labor   Migration, and the Demographic Revolution: Ethnic 
Mexicans in the Late Twentieth Century.”   Th  e Columbia History of Latinos in the United 
States  Since  1960  ,  edited  by    David    Gutiérrez  ,   1–42    (New  York :   Columbia  University 
Press ,  2004) . 

   Hall ,   Stuart  .  “Th  e  Spectacle  of  the  Other.”  In    Representation:  Cultural  Representations  and 
Signifying Practices  , edited by   Stuart   Hall  ,  223–290   (London :  SAGE Publications ,  1997) . 
   Hall ,  Stuart  ,   Chas   Critcher  , Tony Jeff erson, and Brian Roberts.   Policing the Crisis: Mugging, the 

State, and Law and Order    (London :  McMillan ,  1978) . 

   Hamilton ,  Nora  , and   Norma S .  Chinchilla  .   Seeking Community in a Global City: Guatemalans 

and Salvadorans in Los Angeles    (Philadelphia :  Temple University Press ,  2001) . 

   Hanchard ,  Michael   G.   Orpheus and Power: Th  e “Movimento Negro” of Rio de Janeiro and São 

Paulo, Brazil, 1945–1988    (Princeton, NJ :  Princeton University Press ,  1994) . 

   Hero ,  Rodney E  .   Latinos and the U.S. Political System: Two-Tiered Pluralism    (Philadelphia :  Temple 

 

 

 

University Press ,  1992) . 

and Shuster ,  2004) . 

   Huntington ,  Samuel  .   Who Are We: Challenges to Americas National Identity    (New York :  Simon 

   Jessop ,   Bob  .  “Narrating  the  Future  of  the  National  Economy  and  National  State:  Remarks  on 
Remapping Regulation and Reinventing Governance.” In   State/Culture: State Formation 

Selected Bibliography

206

 

Aft er  the  Cultural  Turn  ,  edited  by    George    Steinmetz  ,   378–406    (Ithaca,  NY :   Cornell 
University Press ,  1999) . 

.   Th  e Capitalist State: Marxist Th  eories and Methods    (New York :  New York University 

Press ,  1982) . 

   Johnson ,  Hans  ,   Deborah   Reed  , and   Jose   Hayes  .   Th  e Inland Empire in 2015    (San Francisco :  Public 

Policy Institute of California ,  2008) . 

   Kohli ,  Aarti  , and   Deepa   Varma  .   Borders, Jails, and Jobsites: An Overview of Federal Immigration 
Enforcement Programs in the United States  .  Berkeley, CA :  Berkeley Law Center for Research 
and  Administration .  htt p://www.law.berkeley.edu/fi les/WI_Enforcement_Paper_fi nal_
web.pdf. 

 Hall, Stuart, Hard Road to Renewal: Th  atcherism and the Crisis of the Left  (New York: Verso, 1988), 132. 
 Earl Warren Institute on Race, Ethnicity, and Diversity at the University of California, Berkeley 

School of Law,  2001 . 

   Law ,  Robin M  ., and   Jennifer R .  Wolch  . “Social Reproduction and the City: Restructuring in Time 
and Space.” In   Th  e Restless Urban Landscape  , edited by   Paul   Knox  .  165–206   (Princeton, 
NJ :  Princeton Hall ,  1993) . 

   Loveman ,  Brian  , and   Th  omas M .  Davies  , Jr.   Th  e Politics of Anti-Politics: Th  e Military in Latin 

America    (Wilmington, DE :  Scholarly Resources ,  1997) . 

   Lusane ,  Clarence  .   Pipeline Dreams: Racism and the War on Drugs    (Boston :  South End Press , 

 1991) . 

CA :  SAGE Publications ,  2005) . 

   Madison ,  Soyini D  .   Critical Ethnography, Method, Ethics, and Performance    (Th  ousand Oaks, 

   Massey ,   Douglas  S  .,    Jorge    Durand  ,  and    Nolan    Malone  .    Beyond  Smoke  and  Mirrors:  Mexican 
Immigration in an Era of Economic Integration    (New York :  Russell Sage Foundation ,  2002) . 
   McGirr ,  Lisa  .   Suburban Warriors: Origins of the New American Right    (Princeton, NJ :  Princeton 

   Mears ,  Daniel  .  “Immigration and Crime: What Is the Correlation?”   Federal Sentencing Reporter    14  , 

University Press ,  2002) . 

no.  2  ( 2002 ):  284–88 . 

   Meissner ,   Doris  ,    Donald  M .   Kerwin  ,    Muzaff ar    Chishti  ,  and    Claire    Bergeron  .    Immigration 
Enforcement  in  the  United  States:  Th  e  Rise  of  a  Formidable  Machinery  .   Washington, 
D.C. :   Migration  Policy  Institute ,  January  2013.  htt p://www.migrationpolicy.org/pubs/
enforcementpillars.pdf. 

   Menjívar , 

 Cecilia  . 

  Fragmented  Ties:  Salvadoran 

Immigrant  Networks 

in  America   

 (Berkeley :  University of California Press ,  2000) . 

   Montgomery ,   Tommie  Sue  .    Revolution  in  El  Salvador:  From  Civil  War  to  Civil  Peace  .   2d  ed. 

   Mora ,  Carlos  .   Latinos in the West: Th  e Student Movement and Academic Labor in Los Angeles   

   Morton ,  David  .   Unravelling Gramsci: Hegemony and Passive Revolution in the Global Political 

(Boulder, CO :  Westview Press ,  1996) . 

 (New York :  Rowman & Litt lefi eld ,  2007) . 

Economy    (London :  Pluto Press ,  2007) . 

   Muñoz ,  Carlos  .   Youth ,  Identity  ,   Power: Th  e Chicano Movement    (New York :  Verso Books ,  2007) . 
   Navarro ,  Armando  .   La Raza Unida Party: A Chicano Challenge to the U.S. Two-Party Dictatorship   

   Nevins ,  Joseph  .   Operation Gatekeeper: Th  e Rise of the “Illegal” Alien and the Making of the U.S.–

 (Philadelphia :  Temple University Press ,  2000) . 

Mexico Boundary    (London :  Routledge ,  2002) . 

 (New York :  New York University Press ,  2008) . 

1990s    (London :  Routledge ,  1994) . 

   Newton , 

 Lina  . 

  Illegal,  Alien,  or 

Immigrant:  Th  e  Politics  of 

Immigration  Reform   

   Omi ,  Michael  , and   Howard   Winant  .   Racial Formation in the United States: From the 1960s to the 

   Pallares ,  Amalia  , and   Nilda   Flores-González  , eds.   ¡Marcha! Latino Chicago and the Immigrant 

Rights Movement    (Urbana :  University of Illinois Press ,  2010) . 

   Ponce ,  Albert  .  “Racialization, Resistance, and the Migrant Rights Movement: A Historical Analysis.”  

 Critical Sociology , in press (prepublished online). doi:10.1177/0896920512465210. 

   Popkin ,   Mary  .    Peace  without  Justice:  Obstacles  to  Building  the  Rule  of  Law  in  El  Salvador   

 (Philadelphia :  Pennsylvania State University Press ,  2000) . 

   Poulantzas ,  Nicos  .   Political Power and Social Classes    (London :  Verso Books ,  1968) . 

Selected Bibliography

207

.   State Power Socialism    (London :  Verso Books ,  1978) . 

 
   Pulido ,  Laura  .   Black, Brown, Yellow, and Left : Radical Activism in Los Angeles    (Berkeley :  University 

   Quijano ,  Aníbal  .  “Coloniality of Power, Eurocentrisim, and Latin America.”   Nepantla: Views fr om 

of California Press ,  2006) . 

the South    1  , no.  3  ( 2000 ):  533–580 . 

   Rivera , 

   Ramírez ,  Ricardo  , and   Olga   Medina  .   Catalyst and Barriers to Att aining Citizenship: An Analysis 

of the Ya Es Hora ¡Ciudadania!    (Washington, D.C. :  National Council of La Raza ,  2011) . 

 Angelica  .  “ Chicago  Grassroots  Resistance  to  Racial  Profi ling,  Deportations,  and 
Empire  Building:  Th  e  Case  of  Elvira  Arellano  y  un  Pueblo  Sin  Fronteras  (One  People 
Without  Borders). ”  Paper  presented  at  Nuestra  América  Conference,  Kansas  University, 
Lawrence,  2006 . 

   Robinson ,  William I  .  “ ‘Aquí Estamos y No Nos Vamos!’: Global Capital and Immigrant Rights.”  

 Race and Class    48  , no.  2  ( 2006 ):  77–91 . 

.   A Th  eory of Global Capitalism: Production, Class, and State in a Transnational World  . 

 (Baltimore :  Johns Hopkins University Press ,  2004) . 

.  “Gramsci and Globalization: From Nation-State to Transnational Hegemony.”   Critical 

Review of International Social and Political Philosophy    8  , no.  4  ( 2005 ):  1–16 . 

. 

  Transnational  Confl icts:  Central  America,  Social  Change,  and  Globalization  . 

 

 

 

 

 (New York :  Verso Books ,  2003) . 

Unpublished manuscript,  2006 . 

   Rocco ,   Raymond  .  “Latino  Los  Angeles:  Reframing  Boundaries/Borders  in  Los  Angeles.” 

.  “Th  e Structuring of Latino Politics: Neoliberalism and Incorporation.”   NACLA Report on 

   Santa Ana ,  Ott o  .   Brown Tide Rising: Metaphors of Latinos in Contemporary American Discourse   

the Americas    43  , no.  6  ( 2010 ):  41–43 . 

 (Austin :  University of Texas Press ,  2002) . 

   Scherer ,  Michael  . “Inside Obama’s Factory of Ideas.” Time, November 21, 2008. htt p://www.time.

com/time/politics/article/0,8599,1861305,00.html#ixzz1V2V2hNIh. 

   Schirmer , 

 Jennifer  . 

  Th  e  Guatemalan  Military  Project:  A  Violence  Called  Democracy   

 (Philadelphia :  University of Pennsylvania Press ,  1998) . 

   Sharma ,  Aradhana  , and   Akhil   Gupta  . “Introduction: Rethinking Th  eories of the State in the Era of 
Globalization.” In   Th  e Anthropology of the State: A Reader  , edited by   Aradhana   Sharma   and 
  Akhil   Gupta  ,  1–41   (Malden, MA :  Blackwell Publishing ,  2006) . 

   Singh ,  Nikhil  .   Black Is a Country: Race and the Unfi nished Struggle for Democracy    (Cambridge, 

MA :  Harvard University Press ,  2004) . 

   Sklair ,  Leslie  .   Sociology of the Global System  .  Baltimore :  Johns Hopkins University Press ,  2001 . 
   Smith ,  Robert Charles  .   We Have No Leaders: African Americans in the Post-Civil Rights Era   

 (Albany :  State University of New York Press ,  1996) . 

   Sosa Riddell ,  Aldajiza  .  “Chicanas and El Movimiento.”   Aztlán    5  , no.  1  ( 1974 ):  27–56 . 
   Stanley ,  William  .   Th  e Protection Racket State: Elite Politics, Military Extortion, and Civil War in 

El Salvador    (Philadelphia :  Temple University Press ,  1996) . 

   Stefancic ,  Jean  , and   Richard   Delgado  .   No Mercy: How Conservative Th  ink Tanks and Foundations 

Changed America’s Social Agenda    (Philadelphia :  Temple University Press ,  1996) . 

   Tarker ,  Kathryn  .   Too Close for Comfort: U.S. Ratches Up Central American Ties  .  Washington, 
D.C. :   Council  on  Hemispheric  Aff airs ,   2005 .  htt p://www.coha.org/too-close-for-comf
ort-el-salvador-ratchets-up-its-us-ties/. 

   Ucles , 

 Mario  Lungo  . 

  El  Salvador 

in  the  Eighties:  Counterinsurgency  and  Revolution   

 (Philadelphia :  Temple University Press ,  1990) . 

 U.S. Bureau of the Census. “Census Shows America’s Diversity.” Press release. March 24, 2011. 

htt p://www.census.gov/newsroom/releases/archives/2010_census/cb11-cn125.html. 

   Valdez Torres ,  Martin  . “Indispensible Migrants: Mexican Workers and the Making of Twentieth 
Century Los Angeles.” In   Latino Los Angeles: Transformations, Communities, and Activism  , 
edited by   Enrique C .  Ochoa   and   Gilda L .  Ochoa  ,  23–37   (Tucson :  University of Arizona 
Press ,  2005) . 

   Valle ,   Victor  M  .,  and    Rodolfo  D .   Torres  .    Latino  Metropolis  .   (Minneapolis :   University  of 

Minnesota Press ,  2000) . 

208

Selected Bibliography

   Van  Evera ,   Stephen  .    Guide  to  Methods  for  Students  of  Political  Science     (Ithaca,  NY :   Cornell 

University Press ,  1997) . 

   Van Dijk ,  Teun A  . “Critical Discourse Analysis.”   Th  e Handbook of Discourse Analysis  , edited 
by    Deborah    Schiff rin  ,    Deborah    Tannen  ,  and    Heidi  E .   Hamilton  ,   352–371    (Malden, 
MA :  Blackwell Publishers ,  2001) . 

   Varsanyi ,  Monica  .   Taking Local Control: Immigration Policy Activism in U.S. Cities and States   

 (Stanford, CA :  Stanford University Press ,  2010) . 

   Winant ,  Howard  .   Th  e World Is a Ghett o    (New York :  Basic Books ,  2001) . 
 

.   Th  e New Politics of Race: Globalism, Diff erence, Justice    (Minneapolis :  University of 

Minnesota Press ,  2004) . 

Press ,  1990) . 

   Young ,  Iris Marion  .   Justice and the Politics of Diff erence    (Princeton, NJ :  Princeton University 

   Zagorski ,   Paul  .    Democracy  vs.  National  Security:  Civil–Military  Relations  in  Latin  America   

 (Boulder, CO :  Lynne Rienner ,  1992) . 

   Voss ,  Kim   and   Irene   Bloemraad  .   Ralllying for Immigrant Rights: Th  e Fight for Inclusion in 21st 

Century America.    Berkeley :  University of California ,  2011 . 

   Zepeda-Millán ,   Chris  .  “Dignity’s  Revolt:  Th  reat,  Identity,  and  Immigrant  Mass  Mobilization.” 

PhD diss., Cornell University,  2011 . 

 

.  “ Today  We  March,  Tomorrow  We  Vote:  Th  e  Eff ects  of  the  2006  Immigrant  Rights 
Protest-Wave. ”  Paper  presented  at  the  American  Political  Science  Association  Annual 
Meeting and Exhibition, Washington, D.C., September 2010. 

   Zilberg ,  Elana  .   Spaces of Detention: Th  e Making of a Transnational Gang Crisis between Los 

Angeles and San Salvador    (Durham, NC :  Duke University Press ,  2011) . 

   Zolberg ,   Aristride  R  .    A  Nation  by  Design:  Immigration  Policy  in  the  Fashioning  of  America   

 (Cambridge, MA :  Harvard University Press ,  2008) . 

   Zúñiga ,   Víctor  ,  and    Rubén    Hernández-León  .    New  Destinations:  Mexican  Immigration  in  the 

United States    (New York :  Russell Sage Foundation ,  2006) .     

I N D E X

Page numbers followed by f or t indicate fi gures or tables, respectively. Numbers followed by “n” indicate 

endnotes.

Abrams, Elliot, 103
Abrego, Leisy, 6
Abuse, domestic, 91
Activism

civil rights, 189n13
Great American Boycott , 63–68
Great Grape Boycott , 64
Los Angeles mega-marchas, 3–4, 18, 48–74, 

124–126, 152

migrant activists, 2–3, 12
violence against Mexican and Latino activists, 

62

walkouts, 61–63, 68
youth activism, 58, 61–63, 109, 170
Act Now to Stop War and End Racism 

(ANSWER), 58

Acuña, Rodolfo, ix
Advocacy, 73
AFL-CIO, 127, 144
African Americans, 193n50
Afro-Latinos, 158, 199n15
AFSCME, 144
Agricultural Coalition for Immigration Reform, 

127

Alabama, 11
Alexander, Michelle, 167
Alianza Poder Migrante, 172–173
Alien Nation (Brimelow), 27
Allegheny Foundation, 33–34
Alliance of the Willing, 103
Almendárez Coello, Renán “El Cucuy,” 59
Alonso, 133–134, 136
Alyssa, 134
Amaya, Emilio, 75, 90–91, 96–97
Amenero, Max, 67
American Apparel, 11
American Bankers Association, 37
American Enterprise Institute, 23, 107
American identity, 30

American Immigration Control Foundation, 

31–32

American Medical Association, 37
America’s Voice, 9, 127, 169
Andrade, Gustavo, 129–130, 133
Anglo-America, 13–14
Anglo American national identity, 8
Ankle bracelets, 10–11
Anti-crime strategy, 117–118
Anti-gang law (“la ley anti-mara”), 110
Anti-Gang Unit, 105
Anti-Latino racism, 25–30
Anti-migrant bloc, 7–9, 32–34, 38, 46, 79–80, 152, 

156–157

Anti-migrant discourse, 184n20
Anti-migrant hegemony, 5–6
Antiterrorism, 2. see also Border Protection, 
Antiterrorism, and Illegal Immigration 
Control Act of 2005

Antonio, 131–132
Archdiocese of San Bernardino, 95–96
Arellano, Elvira, 71
Arellano, Saul, 71
ARENA. see National Republican Alliance
Argentina, 104
Arizona, 11, 23, 152–155

SB 1070, 31–32, 142–143

Arnold, Kathleen R., 157, 168–169, 181–182
Arpaio, Joe, 132–133, 147
Ashcroft , John, 31, 77–78
Authoritarian statism, 165–168
Autonomous Technological Institute of Mexico, 

164

Azteca América, 59

“Bad” immigrants, 7, 22, 150, 163
BAJI. see Black Alliance for Just Immigration
Baker, Arlene Holt, 144
Bank of America, 10

209

210

Index

Barnes, Sherry, 26–27
Barreto, Matt , 154
Batt allon Buscatlan, 103
Bayan International, 124
Becerra, Xavier, 45, 127–128
Beck, Glenn, 8
Behdad, Ali, 28
Beltrán, Cristina, 13, 49, 182
Bernardo (migrant), 1–2, 4, 11, 167–168
Beyond the Minutemen Summit (UCLA Downtown 

Labor Center, December 2005), 56–57

Bilbray, Brian, 36, 155
Black Alliance for Just Immigration (BAJI), 

160–161, 173
Black migrants, 173
Bonacich, Edna, 85
Bonilla-Silva, Eduardo, 13, 17, 156
Border controls

Border Protection, Antiterrorism, and Illegal 

Immigration Control Act of 2005 (HR 
4437), 3–4, 21–47, 67–68, 104, 160–162
Border Security, Economic Opportunity, and 
Immigration Modernization Act (S. 744), 
4, 11, 158–166, 169, 173

Customs and Border Patrol, 149, 161
“North American Transnational Youth Gangs, 
Breaking the Chain of Violence” (Johnson 
and Muhlhausen), 107–108

Secure Fence Act, 21–22, 25, 70, 74, 104, 

149, 161

U.S.-Mexico relations, 9, 32, 51, 72, 78

Border enforcement, 147–149
Border fence, 46, 72, 149, 157, 161
Border Patrol, 10, 91–94, 97
Border Protection, Antiterrorism, and Illegal 
Immigration Control Act of 2005 (HR 
4437), 3–4, 21–47, 67–68, 104, 160–162
Border Security, Economic Opportunity, and 

Immigration Modernization Act (S. 744), 4, 
11, 158–166, 169, 173

Boycott s, 63–68
“Boycott  Turns Panorama City Mall into a Ghost 

Town,” 65

Bracero Program, 165
Brazil, 104
Brimelow, Peter, 27, 30, 46
Brokering, 73
Broward Detention Center (Broward, FL), 170
Brown Berets, 53–54
Brown-Waite, Ginnery, 40, 42
Bush, George W., 39, 64, 74, 103, 163
Bush, Jeb, 103
Buzz words, 129

Caciquismo, 189n8
California. see also specifi c cities

city sanctuaries for migrants, 75–76

Inland Empire, 76, 84, 192n9
Los Angeles mega marches, 3–4, 18, 48–74, 

124–126, 152

migrant policy, 23, 75–76
Mira Loma, 84–85, 85t, 193n35
Proposition 187, ix–x, 31–32, 55, 152
Riverside County, 75–98, 193n50
Santa Ana walkouts, 61–62, 68
State Senate, 67

Cámara de Comercio de Tijuana (Chamber of 

Commerce of Tijuana), 66

Camarota, Steven, 24, 46
Cantu-Galleano Ranch, 83
CAP. see Center for American Progress
Capitalism

global, 98, 164–165, 172
North American, 15–18

Caribbean, 16
Carlos (deportee), 116–119
Carlson, Tucker, 27
Carmona, Arturo, 52, 55
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 

Carter, John, 40–41
Carthage Foundation, 33–34
CASA. see Centro de Acción Social Autónoma
CASA de Maryland, 123–124, 127, 129–130, 

163–164

132–133

Castro, Julian, 167
Catholic Church, 9, 57–58, 69–71, 125
Cato Institute, 23, 34, 34t, 107
CAUSA, 127
CDA. see Critical discourse analysis
Cedillo, Gil, 67
Center for American Progress (CAP), 9, 32, 53, 

124, 127–128, 139

Center for a New Community, 35–36
Center for Community Change, 9, 70, 127–128
Center for Human Rights and Constitutional Law, 

159

Center for Immigration Studies (CIS), 8, 22–25, 

29, 31–32, 34, 34t, 107

Center for Strategic Studies, 23
Central America, 14, 16–18, 55–56, 66. see also 

specifi c countries

Central American Resources Center, 57, 63–64
Centro de Acción Social Autónoma (CASA), 

53–54, 64

Centro Sin Fronteras, 54
Chavez, César, 64, 164
Chavez, Leo, 49, 181–182
Cheney, Richard (Dick), 103
Chicago, IL, 65
Chicano Moratorium Committ ee, 54
Chicano movement, 53–54
Chicanos, 14, 116
Child Citizenship Protection Act, 120

Index

211

Critical ethnography, 178
Cruz, Ted, 157, 167
Customs and Border Patrol, 149, 161
Cutler, Michael, 38

DACA. see Deferred Action for Childhood 

Arrivals

Day laborers (jornaleros), 48
Day Laborers’ Council of the Inland Empire, 95
Death squads, 111, 115
De Carrillo, Beatriz, 110–111
De Castro, Clarissa Martínez, 145
Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA), 

3, 123, 147, 154, 157, 170

De Genova, Nicholas (Nick), 2, 13, 102–103, 

181–182

Deindustrialization, 16
Demilitarization, 168–174
Democracy, 152–174
Democratic Party, 30, 43–44, 46, 55, 63, 67–68, 
70–71, 122, 128–129, 136–137, 142, 170

Demographics, 81–86, 192n9
Demonstrations, 130–131

Chicago, 59
Great American Boycott , 63–68
Great Grape Boycott , 64
Los Angeles mega marches (2006), 3–4, 18, 

48–74, 124–126, 152

March for America, 133–137
May Day (2010), 141–144
National Mall rally (2010), 130–133, 152
U.S. Embassy, Mexico City protests, 1–3
walkouts, 61–63, 68
Watt s Rebellion, 83
youth and student marches, 58, 61, 63–64
Deportations, 88, 92–93, 109–111, 161–162, 

Chile, 104
Christaini, Alfredo, 108–109
Christian Right, 33
CIR. see Comprehensive immigration reform
CIS. see Center for Immigration Studies
Citizenship requirements, 160
City sanctuaries, 75–76
Ciudad Juárez, Mexico, 65–66
Civil disobedience, 130–133
Civil rights activism, 189n13
Civil rights movement, 189n13
Civil rights violations, 114–116, 118–119, 147
Civil society, 21–47, 106–108, 127–130
Clinton, Bill, 1, 77
Coachella, CA, 85, 93–94
Coalition for Humane Immigrant Rights of Los 

Angeles, 52, 57, 63–64, 69, 127

Coca Cola, 10
Coe, Barbara, 30
Colombia, 104
Colonialism, 13, 27–28
Colorado, 154
Colorblindness, 7, 157, 167
Comprehensive immigration reform (CIR), 10, 

120–122, 126–129, 140–150, 171

proposals for, 4, 136–137

Congressional Hispanic Caucus, 9, 43, 45, 70–71
Consejo Coordinador Empresarial de Ciudad Juárez 
(Business Council Coordinator of the City 
of Juarez), 66

Conservatives

Christian Right, 33
nativist Right, 22–25, 27–37, 155, 157–158
neo-conservatives, 103

Contreras, Jaime, 136
Convention Against Torture (CAT), 119–120
Coordinadora Estudiantil de la Raza, 52, 55, 

58–59, 64, 69

Coors, 10
Corker, Bob, 160–161
Cornelius, Wayne, 179
Corona, Bert, 53–54
Corporate sponsors, 11
Costs. see Funding
Council of Mexican Federations, 52, 55, 66
Counterhegemonic moment, 50–51, 59, 66–67, 

73–74

Craddock, Bantz, 104–105
Credit Union Legislative Action Council, 37
Crime, 8f, 196n54
Criminalization, 94–95

of deportees, 117
Ted Kennedy on, 67–68
of Latinos, 6–7, 17–18, 42, 80, 89–91, 184n20
of migrants, 6–7, 40, 162

Criminal justice system, dual, 90–91, 94–97
Critical discourse analysis (CDA), 177

167–168

2000–2010, 2, 3f
Bernardo’s story, 1–2
Carlos’s story, 116–117
country of origin of, 6–7, 7f
criminal removals, 8f
to El Salvador, 99–120
Javier’s story, 111–115
Marcos’s story, 111, 114–115
noncriminal, 8f
Obama administration, 130
Roberto’s story, 117–118
terror of, 111–119

Desis Rising Up and Moving (DRUM), 133
Detention centers, 161
Development, 15–16, 81–82, 84
DHS. see United States Department of Homeland 

Security
Díaz , Jesse, 53
Disappearances, 112
Discourse analysis, 177–178

212

Index

Disobedience, civil, 130–133
Diversity, 29
Dobbs, Lou, 8, 29
Domestic abuse, 91
Domestic globalization, 81–86
Dominican Republic, 14, 115
Dominican Republic–Central American Free 
Trade Agreement (DR-CAFTA), 101, 
107–108, 180–181
Dream Act, 142, 152, 170
Dreamers, 170
Drones, 10
Drugs, 103
Dulfo, Melanie, 140

Economic issues. see also Funding

global crisis, 124–126
Great Recession (2008), 124–125, 164
restructuring, 16, 84
socioeconomics, 81, 109

Ecuadorans, 18
Ehrlich, Paul, 26
Elections, presidential, 121, 153–156
Elsa (migrant), 130–131, 136, 167–168
El Salvador, 102–103

anti-crime strategy, 117–118
as democratic model, 113
deportees, 6–7, 99–120
disappearances, 112
International Law Enforcement Academy 

(ILEA), 106, 119

“la ley anti-mara” (anti-gang law), 110
living conditions, 109
migration from, 17, 54
National Assembly, 112
National Civil Police (PNC), 110–111
neoliberalism, 108–109
Plan Mano Dura, 110
security industry, 113
socioeconomics, 109
solidarity, 66
Super Mano Dura, 110–111
U.S. aid to, 15, 103–104, 119
U.S.-sponsored violence in, 100
war on gangs, 101, 114

Emanuel, Rahm, 130
“Enforcement plus” solution, 47
English, 23, 31
Ethnicity, 29
Ethnography, critical, 178
Eugenicists, 25–30, 33
E-Verify, 51, 139, 145–147, 162
Exxon Oil, 107

FAIR. see Federation for American Immigration 

Reform

Families for Freedom, 120, 124, 133, 136

Farabundo Marti, 104
Farm workers, 71
FBI, 86, 106
Feagin, Joe, 156
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), 166
Federation for American Immigration Reform 

(FAIR), 8, 22–28, 35–36, 107, 181

American Immigration Control Foundation, 

31–32

funding, 33, 34t
Social Contract Press, 31
US English, 31
Voices of Citizens Together, 31–32

FedEx, 85
Feminists, 72–73
Fernandez, Luis, 9, 14, 149
Filipinos, 189n6
Financing. see Funding
Fingerprint checks, 148
Flores, Francisco, 103, 110
Florida, 132–133, 154
Fordist era, 83
Fordist model, 15–16, 79–80
Foreigners, 14–15
Foreign policy, 103
Forward Operating Location, 103
Fox, Vicente, 39, 163
Free trade, 101
Free Trade Area of the Americas, 163
Frente Continental, 52, 54, 64, 69
Frymer, Paul, 55
Funding

of anti-migrant bloc, 33–34, 34t, 107
corporate sponsors, 11
of immigration policy, 8
of nativist Right, 33–35, 37
of political candidates, 36–37

Gang of Eight, 4, 165
Gang of Eight Bill. see Border Security, 

Economic Opportunity, and Immigration 
Modernization Act (S. 744)

Gangs, 89–90, 94, 196n54

“North American Transnational Youth Gangs, 
Breaking the Chain of Violence” (Johnson 
and Muhlhausen), 107–108
war on, 101, 103, 109–111, 114

García Bedolla, Lisa, 180–181
Gender dynamics, 72–73
General Agreement on Tariff s and Trade (GATT  ), 

17, 84

General Motors, 85
“Genetically inferior,” 17
Geopolitics, 99–120
Georgia, 98
Giraldo, Eduardo, 67
Global capitalism, 98, 164–165, 172

Index

213

Global economic crisis, 124–126
Globalization, 15–16, 81–86, 101, 163
Gochez, Ron, 52, 55, 62–63
Golash-Boza, Tanya Maria, 168, 179–180
Gonzales, Alberto, 105
Gonzalez, Charles, 45
Gonzalez, Gilbert G., 163
“Good” immigrants, 7, 22, 150, 163
Graham, Lindsey, 137, 159
Graham, Otis L., Jr., 26–27
Gramsci, Antonio, 5–8, 10–13, 23, 49, 71–74, 

101–102, 121–123, 172, 185n41

neo-Gramscian approach to Latino politics, 

175–182

neo-Gramscian theory, 176–177
war of maneuver, 186n10
war of position, 186n10 

Great American Boycott , 63–68
Great Boycott , 64
Great Recession (2008), 124–125, 164
Green, Gene, 43
Grijalva, Raúl, 45
Group Latino decisions, 126
Growers, 11
Grupo de Tarea Conjunto, 117
Guatemala, 6–7, 54, 66, 77, 104
Guest workers, 71, 163–165
Gutiérrez, Juan José, 52, 55
Gutiérrez, Luis, 45, 69
Gutiérrez, Teresa, 141
Guzmán, Daniel, 91–92, 95

Hall, Stuart, 123, 176
Harding, Garrett , 27, 46
Hegemony, 5–6, 10, 18, 45, 69–70. see also 

Counterhegemonic moment

Hells Angels, 83
Heritage Foundation, 8, 23, 34, 34t, 100–101, 

106–108

Hermandad Mexicana, 52, 55–56, 169–170
Hero, Rodney, 180
Herrera, Sylvia, 134–135
HIRC. see House Immigration Reform Caucus
Hispanic Congressional Caucus, 9, 43, 45, 70–71
“Hispanics,” 8
Historic bloc, 53–55
History, 53–55, 81–84
Hoeven, John, 160–161
Holder, Erik, 147
Home Depot, 48
Homeland Security. see United States Department 

of Homeland Security

Homeland security state, 2, 8, 11–15, 38, 99–120, 

165–168

Home searches, 110–111
Homicides, 112
Homies Unidos, 99–100, 119–120

Homo contraceptivus, 28–29
Homo progentiva, 28
Honduras, 6, 104
Hoover Institute, 23
House Immigration Reform Caucus (HIRC), 

35–37

House Resolution 2712 (HR 2712), 36
House Resolution 4437 (HR 4437). see Border 

Protection, Antiterrorism, and Illegal 
Immigration Control Act of 2005

“Hoy marchamos, mañana votamos” (“Today 

we march, tomorrow we vote”), 121, 125, 
154

Human rights violations, 114–116, 118–119
Huntington, Samuel P., 8, 31, 46, 100, 184n26

IAFIS fi ngerprint checks, 148
ICE. see Immigration and Customs Enforcement
ID cards, 137–138
Idealism, 169
IDENT fi ngerprint checks, 148
Identity, 8, 30
Identity cards, 137–138
IIRIRA 

. see Illegal Immigration Reform and 
Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996

Illegal aliens, 41–46, 87, 129
Illegal immigration

Border Protection, Antiterrorism, and Illegal 

Immigration Control Act of 2005 (HR 
4437), 3–4, 21–47, 67–68, 104, 160–162
Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant 
 ), 2, 

Responsibility Act of 1996 (IIRIRA 
32, 77–78, 93, 95, 108, 147–148, 172
Section 287(g), 32, 77–78, 93, 95, 108, 

147–148, 172

Immigrants, 14–15, 24, 170, 183n12

“bad,” 7, 22, 150, 163
“good,” 7, 22, 150, 163
“lawful prospective immigrant” (LPI) status, 

138

Immigration

as national crisis, 5, 11, 38, 50, 168
as slow motion terrorism, 40

Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), 

72, 93–94, 114, 146, 162

Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) 

(DHS-ICE), 77–78, 86–90, 94–98
Operation Community Shield, 99–100

Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS), 

24, 78, 102–103, 162. see also United States 
Citizenship and Immigration Service 
(USCIS)

“Immigration and Terrorism: What Is to Be 

Done?” (Krikorian and Camarota), 24–25
Immigration law enforcement, 1–2, 77–78, 147, 

165, 183n4

Immigration policy, 8, 146–151, 163, 181

214

Index

Immigration reform, x, 9–11, 74–98, 120–121

Kelley, Angela Maria (Angie), 32, 53, 68, 128–129, 

Border Protection, Antiterrorism, and Illegal 
Immigration Control Act of 2005, 21–47

comprehensive immigration reform (CIR), 4, 
10, 120–122, 126–129, 136–137, 140–150, 
171

Democratic Party on, 43–44
“enforcement plus,” 47
Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant 
 ), 2, 

Responsibility Act of 1996 (IIRIRA 
32, 77–78, 93, 95, 108, 147–148, 172

Immigration Reform and Control Act 
(Simpson-Mazzoli bill), 2, 25–26, 54

“North American Transnational Youth Gangs, 
Breaking the Chain of Violence” (Johnson 
and Muhlhausen), 107–108

as not enough, 168
passive revolution, 121–151
Reform Immigration for America (RIFA), 

123–137, 139–140, 145–146, 171

REPAIR (Real Enforcement with Practical 

Answers for Immigration Reform), 
137–144

“Th  e Right Way to Mend Immigration” 

(Schumer and Graham), 137

Immigration Reform and Control Act (Simpson-

Mazzoli bill), 2, 25–26, 54

Immigration Reform Law Institute (IRLI), 31
Indio, CA, 85
Inland Empire, 76, 84, 192n9
Intellectuals, 8, 22–25, 38, 49–50, 184n25, 190n14
International Law Enforcement Academy (ILEA), 

106, 119

International Migrant’s Alliance, 2–3
International Monetary Fund (IMF), 16
International Socialist Organization, 58
International Workers Day, 64–65

Jackson Lee, Sheila, 44
Janis, 136
Javier (deportee), 111–115, 118–119
Jessop, Bob, 101
Jim Crow racism, 8
Johnson, Stephan, 107–108
Johnson & Johnson, 10
Jornaleros (day laborers), 48
Jornaleros Unidos de Woodside, 124, 133
Josue (migrant), 167–168
Juan, 142
Jurupa Anti-Gang Task Force, 94
Justice, 90–91, 94–97 
Justice for Immigrants Coalition of the Inland 

Empire, 95–97
Justice for Janitors, 57

Kammer, Jerry, 29
Kansas, 97

139

Kennedy, Edward, 67–68
King, Steve, 40, 42
KKK, 83
Kobach, Kris W., 31, 46
Krikorian, Mark, 24

Labor, 83, 85–86, 158–165
Bracero Program, 165
guest workers, 71, 164–165
jornaleros (day laborers), 48
legalization of workers, 67–68
temporary workers, 193n38
transient servitude, 164
undocumented workers, 87–90

Laborers International Union of North America, 

95

Labor movement, 71
Labor protections, 11
Labor unions, 198n54. see also specifi c unions
La Forumla, 59
La Jornada, 66
La Nueva 101.9 FM, 59
LAPD. see Los Angeles Police Department
La Placita Working Group, 56, 58
La Que Buena 105.5 FM, 59
La Raza, 48, 53
La Raza 97.9 FM, 59
La Reforma, 66
La Tierra Es de Todos (Th  e Land Belongs to 

Everyone) Summit (Riverside, March 2005), 
56–57

Latin America, 16. see also specifi c countries
Latin Americanization, 152–174

of Latino politics, 156–157, 199n15
of race relations, 199n15

Latinidad, 156
Latino Decisions, 154–155
Latino Movement USA, 52
Latino National Survey, 201n1
Latino politics, 152–182, 199n15
Latinos

in 111th Congress, 122
as class, 14–15
criminalization of, 6, 17–18, 80, 89–91, 

184n20

demographics of, 77
as foreigners, 12–15
as labor force, 85–86
migrant bloc, 14–15, 189n7
Proposition 187 generation, 55
racialization of, 14–15, 17–18
racial profi ling of, 1–2, 80, 87, 92, 94–95, 

193n50

social bloc, 52–59, 68–73
as threat, 181–182

Index

215

as ‘unmeltable ethnics,’ 29–30

Latino vote, 125, 152–156, 154f
Law enforcement, 77–78, 89, 91–94, 147, 165, 

183n4. see also Deportations

aid to El Salvador, 103
anti-crime strategy, 117–118
anti-gang units, 94
border enforcement, 147–149
colorblindness of, 7, 157, 167
“enforcement plus” solution, 47
interior enforcement, 147
International Law Enforcement Academy 

(ILEA), 106, 119

Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD), 

60, 71

Mano Dura laws, 117
Rapid Reponses Force, 106
Riverside County Sheriff  ‘s Department 

(RSD), 86–89, 92–93

Riverside Police Department (RPD), 86
Santa Ana Police Department, 62
spending on immigration enforcement, 2, 147
Temecula Police Department, 92–93
violence against Mexican and Latino activists, 

62

“Lawful prospective immigrant” (LPI) status, 138
Leadership, 72–73, 189n8
Leadership Conference for Civil Rights, 127
League of United Latin American Citizens, 125
Legalization of workers, 67–68
Legal violence, 6
Legislation. see specifi c acts, laws
Lenoir, Gerald, 160–161
“La ley anti-mara” (anti-gang law), 110
Liberals, 30. see also Neoliberalism
Libreria del Pueblo, 95
Limbaugh, Rush, 8
Lingle, Neil, 86, 89
Litt le Village (Chicago, IL), 72
LIUNA, 144
Local anti-migrant bloc, 79–80
Local governments, 75–76
Longshoremen Union, 142
Lopez, Nativo, 52–54, 63, 70–71, 125, 167, 

190n15

Los Angeles, CA

Great American Boycott , 64–65
mega marches, 3–4, 18, 48–74, 124–126, 152

Los Angeles County Federation of Labor, 71
Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD), 60, 71
Los Angeles Times, 65–67
Lozano, Rudy, 54
LPI. see “Lawful prospective immigrant” status
Lutt on, Wayne, 30

MacArthur Park, 71
Mack, Mary Bonno, 155

Madison, Soyini D, 178
Make the Road New York, 124, 127, 133, 144–145
Malthus, Th  omas Robert, 26
Manhatt an Institute for Policy Research, 8, 23, 

34, 34t

Mano Dura laws, 113, 117, 119

Plan Mano Dura, 110
Super Mano Dura, 110–111

Mara Salvatrucha, 89
March 25 Coalition, 53, 55, 61, 69
Marches. see Demonstrations
March for America, 123–124, 133–137
Marcos (migrant), 111, 114–116, 118–119, 

167–168
María, 131–132
Martínez, Mario, 52, 55, 62
Martínez, Mel, 64
Mass media, 170
Mass mobilization. see also Demonstrations

limits of, 48–74
Los Angeles mega marches (2006), 3–4, 18, 

48–74, 124–126, 152

May 1 Coalition, 124, 133
May 1 Coalition for Immigrant and Workers 

Rights, 140–141

Mayans, 77
May Day

Great American Boycott , 63–68
Los Angeles march (2007), 166
New York City rallies (2010), 141–145, 

198n54

McCaskill, Claire, 46
McKenna, Matt , 46
Meatpacking industry, 11
MEChA. see Movimiento Estudiantil Chicano de 

Aztlán

Medina, Eliseo, 125
Mega marchas (Los Angeles area, 2006), 3–4, 18, 

48–74, 124–126, 152

Meiko/Honda, 85,
Mellon family, 8, 33–34
Mellon Scaife Foundation, 107
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) (DHS-

ICE), 77–78, 86–90, 94–98

Mendoza, Robert, 94
Menendez, Bob, 135, 137–140, 167
Menjivar, Cecilia, 6
Merida Initiative, 161, 164
Mexicali, Mexico, 66
Mexican American Political Association, 52, 71
Mexican American women, 26
“Mexican hunting,” 18
Mexicano/Latino Leadership Summit (Riverside 

Convention Center), 56–57

Mexicanos, 83
“Mexicanos del otro lado” (Mexicans on the other 

side), 65–66

216

Index

Mexicans, 14, 41–46, 83, 89–90, 189n7, 189n13
Mexico

migration from, 16–17, 84
removals to, 6–7
solidarity, 65–66
U.S. aid to, 161
U.S. border relations, 10, 32, 51, 72, 78
U.S. Embassy protests (Mexico City), 1–3
Mi Familia Vota (My family votes) campaign, 

125

Migrant Power Alliance (MPA), 172–173
Migrant rights movement, 2–4, 9, 72, 121–151
Migrant rights organizations, 11. see also specifi c 

organizations by name

Migrants, 98

activists, 2–3, 12
black, 173
city sanctuaries for, 75–76
criminalization of, 6
global, 16
vs immigrants, 183n12
Latino bloc, 14–15, 189n7
refugees, 54–55
services for, 75–76

National Association of Latino Elected and 

Appointed Offi  cials, 125

National Association of Realtors, 37
National Automobile Dealers Association, 37
National Beer Wholesalers Association, 36–37
National Civil Police (PNC) (El Salvador), 

110–111

National Council of La Raza (NCLR), 9–10, 64, 

124–125, 127–128, 139, 145

National Day of Action for Immigrant Justice, 80
National Homebuilders Association, 37
National ID cards, 137–138
National identity, 30
National Immigration Forum, 9, 38, 53, 69, 124, 

127

National Immigration Reform, 139
Nationalism, parochial, 33
National Liberation, 104
National Mall rally (2010), 130–133, 152
National Network for Immigrant and Refugee 

National Republican Alliance (ARENA), 103, 

Rights, 69, 161

105, 109–111

National Restaurant Association, 37
Nativist perspective, 27–28
Nativist Right, 22–25, 27–37, 155, 157–158
Navarro, Armando, 53–57
NCLR. see National Council of La Raza
Nebraska, 97
Neo-conservatives, 103
Neo-Gramscian approach to Latino politics, 

175–182

Neo-Gramscian theory, 176–177
Neoliberal globalization, 163
Neoliberalism, 16, 33, 84, 100, 108–109
Neo-Nazis, 48
Nestles, 85, 85t
Nevada, 154
Nevins, Joseph, 179
New Immigrant Community Empowerment, 

124

67

New Mexico, 157
New Sanctuary Movement, 124
Newton, Lina, 179
New York, 23
New York City, NY, 75–76, 121–151

Foley Square rally, 144–145
Great American Boycott , 65
Union Square rally, 141–144, 198n54

New York City Hispanic Chamber of Commerce, 

New York Immigrant Coalition, 144–145
New York Immigrant Community Empowerment 

(NICE), 133

New York Immigrant Rights Coalition, 124
New York Statewide Coalition of Hispanic 

Chambers of Commerce, 67

Migration, 84. see also Immigration
Migration control, 2, 164–165, 183n4

in Riverside County, 75–98
spending on, 2
system reforms, 146–147
transnational, 105–106

Migration Policy Institute, 6, 147–149
Miguel (migrant), 167–168
Militarization, 181
Military aid, 103, 119, 161
Military patrols, temporary, 117
Miller, Tyisha, 93
Minutemen Project, 25, 31–32, 42, 181
Mira Loma, CA, 84–85, 85t, 193n35 
Montes, Carlos, 53–54
Morton, John, 146
Movimiento Estudiantil Chicano de Aztlán 

(MEChA), 58

MPA. see Migrant Power Alliance
Muhlhausen, David B., 107–108
Multiculturalism, 23
Municipal governments, 75–76
Muñoz, Cecilia, 64, 135, 167
Muñoz, Rosalio, 52, 54, 58
Murguía, Janet, 128
MySpace, 61

NAFTA. see North American Free Trade 

Agreement

Napolitano, Grace, 45
Narcoterrorists, 40–41
Narro, Victor, 52, 58, 60, 63
National Alliance for Human Rights, 56–57

Index

217

Pineros y Campesinos Unidos del Noroeste 

(Pine Workers and Farmworkers of the 
Northwest), 127

Pioneer Fund, 33
Plan Mano Dura, 110
Plan Mexico, 164
Planned Parenthood, 26–27
Podesta, John, 128
Police practices, 80, 92–93

anti-gang strategies/tactics, 106
Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD), 

National Civil Police (PNC) (El Salvador), 

60, 71

110–111

“North American Transnational Youth Gangs, 
Breaking the Chain of Violence” (Johnson 
and Muhlhausen), 107–108

Nicaragua, 66
NICE. see New York Immigrant Community 

Empowerment

9/11 hijackers, 24
No Borders Camp (San Diego, CA), 72
Noorani, Ali, 53, 69, 126–128, 139
North American capitalism, 15–18
North American Free Trade Agreement 

(NAFTA), 16, 84, 101, 164, 180–181

“North American Transnational Youth Gangs, 

Breaking the Chain of Violence” (Johnson 
and Muhlhausen), 107–108

Nuestra Señora de Los Angeles Church, 56, 58, 64
Nuevo Laredo, Mexico, 66
Numbers USA, 24, 32, 34, 34t, 36
Nunez, Peter, 29

Obama, Barack, 120–126, 135, 167
2008 presidential election, 121
2012 presidential election, 153–156
immigration policy, 121–126, 146–151

Obrador, Andés Manuel López, 57
Occupy Wall Street, 166
Olson, Greg, 149
Olson, Joel, 9, 14
Operation Community Shield, 99–100
Operation Endgame, 78
Operation Gatekeeper, 149
Operation Phalanx, 149
Operation Wetback, 165
Opposition, 12
Organic crisis, 66
Organic intellectuals, 8, 22–25, 38, 49–50

formation of, 190n14
types of, 184n25
Organization, 30–33
Organization of American States (OAS), 101
Organized labor, 198n54. see also specifi c unions
Ortiz, Meagan, 163
Overpopulation, 27–28

Pacifi cation, 122, 126–136
Parochial nationalism, 33
Partido Acción Nacional, 65–66
Partido de la Revolución Democrática, 65–66
Partido Revolucionario Institucional, 65–66
Passive revolution, 121–151
Patriot Act, 2
Patriotism, 181
Pederson, Jim, 45–46
Pelosi, Nancy, 43–44
People’s Weekly World, 52
Perla, Mirna, 99, 111–112, 118
Personality confl icts, 72–73
Peutz, Natalie, 181
Phoenix, AZ, 132–133
Piedras Negras, Mexico, 66

Rapid Reponses Force, 106
Riverside Police Department (RPD), 86
Santa Ana Police Department, 62
Temecula Police Department, 92–93
temporary patrols, 117
terrorism, 93–94

Political action committ ees (PACs), 36–37
Politics

geo-politics, 99–120
Latino, 152–182, 199n15
of transnationalism, 102

Pomona Economic Development Center, 95
Ponce, Albert, 53
Popular Assembly of the Peoples of Oaxaca, 57
Th  e Population Bomb, 26
Population control, 26–27
Portillo, Esther, 52, 55, 73–74, 94–95
Post-civil rights racism 17
Post-Fordist economy, 16
Poulantzas, Nicos, 165, 169, 176
Prerogative power, 25
Price Costco, 85, 85t
Private security, 113, 166
Project for the New American Century, 23, 103
Proposition 187 (CA), ix–x, 31–32, 55, 152
Proposition 187 generation, 55
Protestantism, 8
Protests. see also Demonstrations

Great American Boycott , 63–68
Great Grape Boycott , 64
March for America, 133–137
U.S. Embassy, Mexico City, 1–3
Watt s Rebellion, 83

Public Policy Institute of California, 78, 80
Puerto Ricans, 14–15
Purdue Farms, 67

Q’anjob’al Mayans, 77
Quijano, Aníbal, 13–14
Quinn, Christine, 144

218

Index

Race relations, 13–18, 75–98, 199n15
Racial exceptionalism, 167
Racialization of Latinos, 14–15, 17–18, 40
Racial paranoia, 29
Racial profi ling, 1–2, 80, 87, 92–95, 193n50
Racism, 8, 14, 25–30, 33, 83
Radio “W” 690 AM, 59
Raids, 93
Ranch Rescue, 31–32
Rangel, Charles, 144
Rapid Reponses Force, 106
Rapid Response Network, 91–92, 95–97
Raza Graduate Student Association, 53, 58–59, 63
Reaganism, 103
Real ID Act, 21, 25, 104
Red Sunday, 73–74
Reform Immigration for America (RIFA), 

123–137, 139–140, 145–146, 171

Refugees, 54–56
Registered Provisional Immigrant (RPI) status, 

158–159

Reid, Harry, 137–140
“Released,” 10–11
Removals. see Deportations
REPAIR (Real Enforcement with Practical 

Answers for Immigration Reform), 137–144

Republican Party, 22–23, 43, 157
Research methods, 177–182, 197n6
Research theory, 175–182
Revolution, passive, 121–151
Reynosa, Mexico, 66
Richardson, Bill, 157
RIFA. see Reform Immigration for America
“Th  e Right Way to Mend Immigration” (Schumer 

and Graham), 137
Rivera, Isaura, 52, 54–55
Rivera, Rhadames, 141, 144
Riverside County, CA, 76, 82f
anti-migrant bloc, 79–80
Board of Supervisors, 78, 80, 86–90, 97–98
Casa Blanca, 77, 91–92
demographics, 77, 81–86, 155, 192n9
development of, 81–82
globalization of, 81–86
history of, 81–84
Latino population, 77
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) 

(DHS-ICE), 77–78, 86–90, 94–98

migration control, 19, 75–98
racial profi ling, 193n50

Riverside County Sheriff  ‘s Department (RSD), 

86–89, 92–93

Riverside Police Department (RPD), 86
Roberto (migrant), 117–119, 167–168
Robert Presley Detention Center, 97
Robinson, William I., 15–16, 101
Rocco, Raymond, 83, 169, 180

Rodríguez, Javier, 53–55, 190n15
Rodriguez, Robyn M., 165
Roman, Manuel, 52, 71
Roman Catholic Church, 10, 57–58, 69–71, 125
Romero, Gloria, 67
Romney, Mitt , 31, 154–155
Rubidoux Drive-In, 83
Rubio, Marco, 157, 167
Ruiz, Juan Carlos, 145–146
Rumsfeld, Donald, 103

Sabia, 143–144
Saca, Antonio, 110
Salas, Angelica, 52, 63–64, 69
Salvadoran American National Association, 

52–53

95–96

Salvadorans, 77, 99–120
Sambrano, Angela, 54–55, 63–64
San Bernardino Community Service Center, 

San Bernardino County, CA, 84
Sanchez, Alex, 99–100, 167
Sánchez, Ricardo “El Mandril,” 59
San Francisco, CA, 65, 75–76
San José, CA, 65
Santa Ana, CA, 61–62, 68
Santa Ana, Ott o, 42
Santa Ana Police Department, 62
Sarah Scaife Foundation, 33–34, 34t, 188n52
Saucedo, Gloria, 52, 55–56
Savage, Fred, 8
Save Our State, 48, 181
Scaife, Richard Mellon, 8, 33–34
Scaife family, 33–34
Scaife Family Foundation, 33–34
Scaife foundations, 8, 33–34, 34t
Schey, Peter, 159
School of the Americas, 106
Schumer, Charles, 135, 173

REPAIR (Real Enforcement with Practical 

Answers for Immigration Reform) 
proposal, 137–144

“Th  e Right Way to Mend Immigration” 

(Schumer and Graham), 137

Schumer proposal. see REPAIR (Real Enforcement 

with Practical Answers for Immigration 
Reform)

Secure America and Orderly Immigration Act (SB 

2611, Kennedy-McCain bill), 39, 68–71

Secure Border Initiative, 161, 164
Secure Communities, 32, 51, 108, 145–148, 149f, 

162, 167, 172

161

Secure Fence Act, 21–22, 25, 70, 74, 104, 149, 

Security industry, 113, 166
Segura, Gary, 154, 155
SEIU. see Service Employees International Union

57, 70, 124, 127

Local 32BJ, 142, 144
Local 1199, 141, 144

Service sector, 16
Servitude, transient, 164
Sherry, Frank, 38–39, 169
Sklair, Leslie, 101
Smart wall, 10–11
Smith, Robert, 55
Social bloc, Latino, 52–59, 68–73
Social cleansing, 115–116
Social Contract Press, 31
Social movements, 171
Socioeconomics, 81, 109
Solidarity, 14, 65–66
Soltera, Elisa, 93
Somos America, 63, 69
Sotelo, Eddie “El Piolín,” 59
Southern Poverty Legal Center (SPLC), 29
Spanish, 116
“Spics,” 17
SPLC. see Southern Poverty Legal Center
Stanford University, 23
State-civil society nexus, 21–47, 106–108, 

Senate Bill 744 (S 744). see Border Security, 

Economic Opportunity, and Immigration 
Modernization Act

Senate Bill 2611 (SB 2611). see Secure America 
and Orderly Immigration Act (Kennedy-
McCain bill)

Sensenbrenner, James, 40–41
Sensenbrenner bill. see Border Protection, 

Antiterrorism, and Illegal Immigration 
Control Act of 2005 (HR 4437)

Serrano, José, 45, 120
Service Employees International Union (SEIU), 

127–130

State repression, 72
State violence, 15, 87
Statism, authoritarian, 165–168
Stein, Dan, 27
Stereotypes, historical, 17–18
Sterilization, forced, 26
Stern, Andy, 135
Stone, 87, 89
Strategy, 30–33
Student protests. see Youth activism
“Subhuman,” 17
Super Mano Dura, 110–111
Swain, Carol, 29
Swensrud, Sidney, 26
Swift  and Company, 97
Swift  Inc., 67
Syratech, 85, 85t

Tancredo, Tom, 35
Tanton, John, 25–32, 35, 46, 121

Index

219

Tatt oos, 112
Tavaglione, John, 86
Teamsters Local 808, 124, 142
Tea Party, 157
Tecate, Mexico, 66
Telemundo, 59, 63–64
Temecula, CA, 92–93
Temecula Police Department, 92–93
Temporary patrols, 117
Temporary workers, 193n38
Terminology, 29–30, 94–95, 129
Terrorism, 89–90, 149

antiterrorism, 2
of deportation, 109–119
narcoterrorists, 40–41
9/11 hijackers, 24
by police, 93–94
war on terror, 25, 102–105

Texas, 155
Tijuana, Mexico, 66
Time magazine, 128
Tony, 130–131
Torres, Gustavo, 132–133
Torture, 115
Transient servitude, 164
Transnational corporations, 85, 85t, 98
Transnationalism, 16–17, 102, 104–106
Trilateral Commission, 184n26
Turner, Joseph, 189n2
Tyson Food Inc., 67

UFW. see United Farm Workers
Undocumented workers, 87–90, 129, 138, 162
Unemployment, 16
Unión del Barrio, 53
Union Pacifi c, 85
Union Square rally (May 1, 2010), 141–142, 

198n54

United Farm Workers (UFW), 57, 64, 71, 127
United Food and Commercial Workers, 127
United Nations, 101, 113
United Nations Development Fund, 109
United Nations Human Development Index, 109
United Parcel Service Inc., 37
United States

aid to El Salvador, 14, 103, 119
aid to Mexico, 161
border enforcement, 147–149
border relations, 10, 32, 51, 72, 78
Bush administration, 147
109th Congress, 21–22, 35–37, 46
111th Congress, 122, 145–146, 150
deindustrialization of, 16
demographics, 84
deportations, 2, 3f, 130
economic restructuring, 16
foreign policy, 104, 106, 108

220

Index

United States (Cont.)

as homeland security state, 2, 8, 11–15
immigration enforcement, 106, 147
immigration policy, 181
interior enforcement, 147
labor migration from Mexico to, 16
Latino politics in, 156–157
as nation of laws, 41–46
Obama administration, 2, 3f, 121–151
offi  cial language of, 23, 31
parochial nationalism of, 33
2008 presidential election, 121
2012 presidential election, 121, 153–156
Rapid Reponses Force, 106
spending on immigration enforcement, 2, 147
war on terror, 105

United States Citizenship and Immigration Service 

(USCIS), 102–103

Agreement, 180–181

160

United States Customs and Border Protection, 

United States Department of Defense, 106
United States Department of Homeland Security 

(DHS), 2, 10–11, 49, 72, 146, 161, 165, 
179–180

Immigration and Naturalization Service 

(INS), 102–103

Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) 

(DHS-ICE), 77–78, 86–90, 94–98
Operation Community Shield, 99–100
Secure Communities program, 147–148

United States Department of Justice (DoJ), 77–78, 

147

44–47

United States House of Representatives, 39–41, 

Appropriations Committ ee, 161–162
Judiciary Committ ee, 36–39

United States National Guard, 51, 149, 160
United States Senate, 38
United States Southern Military Command 

(SOUTHCOM), 103–105

United States State Department, 106
UNITE HERE Local 11, 52, 57, 71
University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), 52
Univision, 59, 125
‘Unmeltable ethnics,’ 29–30
UPS, 85
Uruguay, 104
USCIS. see United States Citizenship and 

Immigration Service

Valdez, Javier, 133, 144–145
Vamos Unidos, 142
Van Dijk, Teun A., 177
Van Evera, Stephen, 175
Varsanyi, Monica, 179
Vaughn, Jessica, 31, 35, 46

United States–Colombia Trade Promotion 

125

Velázquez, Nydia, 45, 144
Venezuela, 103
Ve y Vota campaigns, 152
Villaraigosa, Antonio, 62–64
Violence, 93–94, 112, 115. see also Police practices

domestic abuse, 91
forced sterilization, 26
legal, 6
against Mexican and Latino activists, 62
state, 15, 87
U.S.-sponsored, 100

Virginia, 154
Vocabulary, 94–95
Vogal, Richard, 164
Voices of Citizens Together, 31–32
Voting

Latino vote, 152–156, 154f
Mi Familia Vota (My family votes) campaign, 

presidential elections, 121, 153–156
Ve y Vota campaigns, 152

Walkouts, 61–63, 68
Walmart, 85, 85t
Warehouse Workers United, 95
War of maneuver, 186n10
War of position, 22–25, 35, 186n10
War on drugs, 103–104
War on gangs, 101, 103, 109–111, 114
War on terror, 25, 102–105
Washington, DC, 121–152
Washington Consensus, 164
Watt s Rebellion, 83
Wealth distribution, 109
Western Hemispheric Center for Security 

Cooperation, 106

“Wetbacks,” 17
White fl ight, 83–84
White supremacists, 14
Winant, Howard, 17
Wise, Raul Delgado, 84
WITAN, 28–30, 35
Witch hunts, 162
Wolfowitz, Paul, 103
Workers. see Labor
World Bank, 16

Ya Es Hora (Th  e time is now) campaign, 125, 152, 

154

Youth activism, 109, 112, 170. see also Gangs

April 15, 2006 protest, 58, 61
Los Angeles mega marches (2006), 61–63

Zepeda-Millán, Chris, 47, 49, 51
Zero Population Growth (ZPG), 26
Zero tolerance, 119
Zilberg, Elana, 100, 113
Zoila, 143

