Universität Osnabrück 
Institut für Anglistik u. Amerikanistik  
Wintersemester 2012/13 
Seminar 
Dozent 
March 15, 2013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

Diasporic Identity in the “Thirdspace”: 
Spatiality in Monica Ali’s Brick Lane 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
XYZ 
1. Fachsemester 
B.A. Anglistik 
E-mail:xyz@uos.de 
123456 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

Table of Contents 

 

1.  Introduction 
2.  Edward Soja’s “Thirdspace” as a New Mode in Postmodern Spatial Thinking 
3.  Spatial Representations and their Role in Monica Ali’s Brick Lane 
4.  Conclusion 
 
5.  Works Cited 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 

2 
3 
6 
10 
12 

1 

 

 
1.  Introduction 

 

She, thought, Would we sit like this in Dhaka? In a room 
like this? And would we sit like this and would it feel just 
the  same  and  would  everything  be  the  same  but  just  in  a 
different place? (Ali 404) 

     

The idea that place plays a significant role in how one defines one’s own identity and, 
equally,  how  that  identity  is  defined  by  others,  has  always  been  foregrounded  in 
postcolonial discourse. In recent years mass movements of bodies across the globe and 
demographic  shifts  out  of  all  proportion  caused  the  emergence  of  new  “hybrid 
identities”  (Iyall  Smith  7)  out  of  “transnational  cultures”  (Hannerz  243).  These 
changes increased the academic interest on spatiality and its impact on the process of 
identity  formation.  However,  until  recently,  postcolonial  discourse  has  considered 
space  in  abstract  theoretical  terms.  As  opposed  to  this,  the  aim  of  my  paper  is  to 
address space within a literary text. Monica Ali’s novel Brick Lane, which portrays the 
process of identity formation of a Bangladeshi woman Nazneen, is characterized by 
the  complex  relationship  of  different  spatial  aspects:  the  heroine  lives  in  London  in 
Tower  Hamlets  torn  by  the  feelings  of  alienation  and  homesickness  and  constantly 
dreaming  of  her  home  village,  but  when  her  husband  decides  to  go  back  to 
Bangladesh, she refuses to leave the estate. The analysis of the role of spatial issues in 
Nazneen’s  diasporic  experience  provides  the  possibility  not  only  to  understand  the 
novel at a deeper level, but also to learn about the impact of space on the immigrant 
identity formation. 

I  will  begin  my  paper  with  presenting  some  critical  views  on  the  concept  of 
space in postcolonial theory in order to create a theoretical framework for my analysis. 
Postcolonial scholars Andrew Teverson and Sara Upstone point out that until recently 
spatial thinking tended to be bicameral: spatiality was either seen as concrete material 
forms to be mapped, analyzed, and explained; or as mental constructs, ideas about and 
representations  of  space  and  its  social  significance  (9).  Characterizing  postmodern 
space,  French  social  theorist  Michel  Foucault  speaks  of  “spatiality  of  another  kind, 
which is the ’external space’, the actually lived and socially produced space.” (Qtd. in 
Soja  13)  Extending  this  idea  and  connecting  it  with  Homi  K.  Bhabha’s  theory  of 
cultural hybridization, postmodern political geographer Edward Soja offers a concept 
of “Thirdspace” as “an-Other way of understanding and acting to change the spatiality 
of  human  life”,  thus  enabling  the  contestation  and  re-negotiation  of  boundaries  and 
cultural  identity.  I  will  explore  Edward  Soja’s  spatial  theory  in  Monica  Ali’s  novel 
 
2 

 

Brick  Lane  and  apply  his  terms  for  different  forms  of  space  (“Firstspace”, 
“Secondspace” and “Thirdspace”) in the analysis of spatiality and its role in Nazneen’s 
diasporic identity formation.  

After having established the theoretical framework of my paper, I will continue 
with the analysis of Brick Lane, applying the method of close reading. I will also use 
critical works of Andrew Teverson and Sara Upstone, Elizabeth Jackson, Irene Pèrez 
Fernández, Sagarika Chattopadhyay and Jaya Shrivastava, which are concerned with 
spatiality  in  postcolonial  fiction.  I  intend  to  study  how  different  aspects  of  space  in 
Monica Ali’s novel constitute Nazneen’s diasporic experience and how they affect the 
process of her identity formation. I argue that the movement of Nazneen’s diasporic 
identity  from  constraint  to  liberation  is  realized  by  re-imaging  different  spaces  and 
extending the spatial boundaries. 

 

Basing  on  this  argument,  I  will  make  a  conclusion  about  the  role  of  different 

spatial aspects in the process of diasporic identity formation.  
 
 
2.  Edward Soja’s “Thirdspace” as a New Mode in Postmodern Spatial Thinking 

 

Over  the  recent  years  discussions  in  literary  and  cultural  studies  have  become 
increasingly  spatial  in  their  orientation.  In  the  introduction  to  his  book  Thirdspace: 
Journeys  to  Los  Angeles  and  other  Real-and-Imagined  Places,  cultural  geographer 
Edward Soja argues that “the spatial dimension of our lives has never been of greater 
practical and political relevance than it is today.” (1) The reasons for this ‘spatial turn’ 
(Soja  47)  are  often  linked  to  globalization  and  a  resulting  shift  in  identity  and 
subjectivity:  “Rather  than  a  fixed,  unified  identity  that  lies  at  the  core  of  modern 
self,…there are grounds for arguing many people, hooked into different locales via the 
interest, consist of multiple, shifting, even contradictory ‘selves’.” (Warf, Arias 6) In 
this context, space and spatiality have become crucial dimensions in understanding of 
identity formation in a contemporary world.   

In  their  interdisciplinary  essay  collection  on  the  crucial  role  of  space  in 
postcolonial  discourse  scholars  Andrew  Teverson  and  Sara  Upstone  point  at  the 
dualism  of  recent  spatial  thinking  (9).  Until  1970s  space  was  conceptualized  as  an 
objective  physical  surface  with  specific  fixed  characteristics  upon  which  social 
identities  and  categories  were  mapped  out.  Space  was  understood  as  the  “neutral 

 

3 

 

container, a blank canvas outside human existence.” (Hubbard, Kitchin 4) Likewise, 
social identities were also taken for granted as fixed and, thus, social relations within 
this  spatial  framework  were  overlooked.  Reacting  against  this  materialism  that 
represents  space  as  “fixed,  dead  and  undialectical,”  (Soja  79)  scholars  developed  a 
metaphorical perspective on spatiality. This approach assumed that “spatial knowledge 
is primarily produced through discursively devised representations of space, through 
the  spatial  workings  of  the  mind.  This  does  not  mean  that  there  is  no  material 
reality…but  rather  than  the  knowledge  of  this  material  reality  is  comprehended 
essentially  through  thought.”  (Soja  79)  Edward  Soja  criticizes  metaphorical  spatial 
understanding  as  “filled  with  illusive  presumptions.”  (64)  Moreover,  this  form  of 
reductionism  overlooks  “actual  social  and  spatial  practices,  the  immediate  material 
world of experience and realization.”(Soja 63) 

In the late 1960s another mode of spatial awareness, the one that extended the 
traditional  spatial  dualism,  began  to  emerge,  in  particular  in  the  writings  of  Michel 
Foucault  and  Henry  Lefebvre.  Both  scholars  came  up  with  “an-Other  term,  a  third 
possibility” (Soja 60) of space apart from mental-material opposition. Foucault called 
this  third  space  heterotopia  and  described  it  as  “the  space  in  which  we  live,  which 
draws us out of ourselves, in which the erosion of our lives, our time and our history 
occurs.” (qtd. in Soja 15) Lefebvre also focuses on the importance of social practice 
and  speaks  about  the  “social  space”,  “space  occupied  by  sensory  phenomena, 
including products of the imagination such as projects and projections, symbols and 
utopias.” (qtd. in Soja 62) The concept of ‘Third space’ also becomes the object of 
interest  in  Homi  K.  Bhabha’s  The  Location  of  Culture.    The  scholar  argues  that 
postcolonial  discourse  does  not  simply  signify  the  East/West,  Self/Other  dichotomy 
but  also  conflates  the  “points  of  conflict  or  crisis”  (Bhabha  82)  of  these  binaries. 
Bhabha  concentrates  on  the  spatiality  of  cultural  hybridization  and  points  at  the 
occurrence  of  “liminal  space”  in  the  interaction  of  dissimilar  cultures.  By  “liminal 
space”  Bhabha  means  the  site  of  conflict,  interaction,  and  mutual  assimilation  that 
every encounter between cultures involves. The resulting cultural hybridity suggests 
spatiality, which marks a continuous flux in the process of identity formation.  

Extending  the  ideas  of  Michel  Foucault  and  Henri  Lefebvre,  and  connecting 
them to Homi K. Bhabha’s concept of cultural hybridization, Edward Soja developed a 
theory  of  “Thirdspace,”  a  special  space  in  which  “everything  comes  together… 
subjectivity and objectivity, the abstract and the concrete, the real and the imagined, 

 

4 

 

the knowable and the unimaginable, the repetitive and the differential, structure and 
agency,  mind  and  body,  consciousness  and  the  unconscious,  the  disciplined  and  the 
transdisciplinary,  everyday  life  and  unending  history.”  (Soja  56-57)  At  the  core  of 
Soja’s  work  is  the  idea  that  to  understand  human  life  spatiality  must  be  recognized 
alongside  historicality  and  sociality  in  a  balanced  “cumulative  trialectics.”  (63) 
Critically revising Lefebvre’s ‘three moments of social space’ described in his work 
The Production of Space, Soja summarizes and extends his spatial theory.   

Edward  Soja’s  spatial  trialectics  is  based  on  redefinition  of  Lefebvre’s  three 
spatialities  –  “perceived”,  “conceived”  and  “lived”  space.  “Perceived  space”  is 
“materialized,  socially  produced,  empirical  space”  (Soja  66)  that  can  be  directly 
comprehended in empirically measurable configurations: in the absolute and relative 
locations of things and activities. These physical, real spaces “surround our bodies in 
households,  buildings,  neighbourhoods,  villages,  cities,  regions,  nations,  states,  the 
world economy, and global geopolitics.” (Soja 75) Soja defines this “directly sensible” 
space as “Firstspace.” (66) Representations of space define a “conceived space” or, as 
Soja  calls  it,  “Secondspace.”  This  form  of  space  is  “entirely  ideational,  made  up  of 
projections  into  the  empirical  world.”  (79)  Secondspace  is  constructed  of  mental 
images of space that individuals carry in their minds. Thus, conceived space becomes 
the interpretative locale for “creative artist and artful architect, visually or literally re-
presenting  the  world  in  the  image  of  their  subjective  imaginaries;  …  the  spatial 
semiologist  reconstructing  Secondspace  as  ‘Symbolic’  space.”  (Soja  80)  Finally, 
“lived  space,”  or  “Thirdspace”  (Soja  67)  is  the  inhabited  space  that  includes  the 
perceived  and  the  conceived  space  and  extends  beyond  their  scope.  With  this 
approach, space is understood as the ongoing result of collaborations and negotiations 
between  physical  realities  and  mental  or  cultural  constructions.  Soja  goes  beyond 
Lefebvre  in  describing  Thirdspace  as  “an-Other”  zone  (57).  According  to  Soja, 
Thirdspace  not  only  unites  the  dualism  between  real  and  imagined,  it  is  “radically 
open to additional otherness, to a continuing expansion of spatial knowledge.” (61) It 
is  “a  space  of  extraordinary  openness,  a  place  of  critical  exchange”  (5).  Since 
Thirdspace  is  constantly  expanding,  it  remains  open  to  the  possibilities  for  social 
change and renegotiations of power, boundaries, and identity.  

Thirdspace  is  an  open  space  that  allows  contradictory  and  seemingly 
incompatible ideas to coexist and be creatively restructured in new ways to produce 
new meaning. This mode of spatial thinking provides a new understanding of identity. 

 

5 

 

In  such  a  space,  human  subjects  brush  against  one  another  and  are  consequently 
changed by that contact. In this way, identity in Thirdspace is fluid and changeable, 
binaries  that  people  use  to  inform  the  self,  including  male/female,  margin/centre, 
white/non-white,  straight/gay,  public/private,  can  be  disrupted  and  creatively 
restructured to give way to alternative understandings of the self (Cf. Hubbard, Kitchin 
383).  Edward  Soja  argues  that  in  this  Thirdspace,  where  real  and  imagined  spaces 
meet, an identity “is re-awakening the contemporary world to the powerfully symbolic 
spaces of representation, to struggles over the right to be different, to a new politics of 
location and a radical spatial subjectivity and praxis.” (61) The scholar continues that 
Thirdspace  identity  constructions  do  justice  to  the  complexity  of  the  self  by  giving 
space for the existence of binaries as well as a third/other choice. These constructions 
reveal a gathering together of the dichotomous elements of a person’s identity and a 
juxtaposing and restructuring of those elements in an attempt to better understand the 
relationships  between  them,  and  how  those  relationships,  as  much  as  the  elements 
themselves, contribute to a person’s sense of self (Soja 65). 

 

3. Spatial Representations and Their Role in Monica Ali’s Brick Lane 
 
Characterizing  spatial  representations  in  Monica  Ali’  s  Brick  Lane,  Irene  Pèrez 
Fernández  points  at  the  fluid  nature  of  space  and  identity  in  the  novel:  “space  and 
identities  are  malleable  categories  that  are  presented  as  in  constant  process  of 
re/vision,  re/definition  and  change.”  (149)  The  narrative  evolves  around  Nazneen,  a 
Bangladeshi woman who migrates to London after an arranged marriage and settles in 
Brick Lane, an area in Tower Hamlets populated by Bangladeshi immigrants. Being 
placed  into  multicultural  space,  Nazneen’s  homogeneous  identity  is  questioned 
throughout. The heroine renegotiates her identity by re-imagining different spaces she 
belongs to.   

Brick Lane begins in Nazneen’s home village in Bangladesh. This opening of the 
novel  signifies  the  space  that  becomes  a  reference  point  in  heroine’s  diasporic 
experience. The reader finds out the story of Nazneen’s birth represented as a fable on 
the power of fate. Her mother refused any intervention from midwives and medical 
professionals  and  placed  her  child’s  destiny  entirely  in  the  hands  of  Allah.  The 
protagonist was constantly reminded of this story and taught to live without complaint, 
“to be still in her heart and mind, to accept the grace of god, to treat life with the same 
indifference with which it would treat her.” (Ali 4) This fatalism becomes the part of 

 

6 

 

Nazneen’s cultural and religious identity: “What could not be changed must be borne. 
And since nothing could be changed, everything had to be borne. This principle ruled 
her  life.”  (ebd.  6)  The  narrative  constantly  returns  to  this  principle  in  Nazneen’s 
married life: 

It was her place to sit and wait…For her, there was nothing else to be done. Nothing else that 
God wanted her to do…No more eating in the middle of the night. No more dreaming of ice, 
and blades, and spangles. No more missed prayers. No more gossip. No more disrespect to my 
husband. (ebd. 103) 
 

Although  Nazneen’s  physical  space  in  her  home  village  is  not  limited,  her  mental 
world,  or  Secondspace,  is  constricted  by  psychological  boundaries  characterized  by 
Elizabeth  Jackson  as  “insidiously  boundaries  which  often  lie  within  the  female 
psyche.” (57)  

Psychological  boundaries  which  Nazneen  adopts  from  her  Bangladeshi 
background remain the part of her identity in a new physical space in London. Her 
current Firstspace becomes limited to her husband’s apartment and the estate where 
“everyone  [live]  in  their  boxes,  counting  their  possessions.”  (Ali  16)  The  narrator 
concentrates in minute detail on the intricacies of the everyday life of the protagonist 
and  elaborates  physical  attributes  of  the  domestic  interior.  The  use  of  internal 
focalization  in  depicting  Nazneen’s  reactions  to  her  experiences  and  environment 
underlines  claustrophobic  loneliness  and  deep  unhappiness  of  the  protagonist.  Thus, 
she  calls  her  current  physical  space  “large  box  with  the  furniture”  (ebd.  16)  and 
dreams that “she was locked inside the wardrobe and hammered and hammered but 
nobody  heard.”  (ebd.)    Describing  Nazneen’s  surroundings,  the  narrator  constantly 
compares her Firstspace with prison: “She looked and she saw that she was trapped 
inside this body, inside this room, inside this flat, inside this concrete slab of entombed 
humanity. They had nothing to do with her.” (Ali 74) Irene Pèrez Fernández argues 
that  the  feelings  of  spatial  dislocation,  loneliness  and  imprisonment  in  Nazneen’s 
diasporic experience evoke the need to negotiate a different sense of identity (155). 
Since  the  connection  between  the  self  and  the  space  is  broken  by  relocation,  the 
heroine restores her identity by mentally recreating her lost Firstspace. Thus, during 
the first years of her life in London Nazneen constantly dreams about her home village 
in Bangladesh and compares it with her new physical environment:  

You can spread your soul over a paddy field, you can whisper to a mango tree, you can feel the 
earth beneath your toes and know that this is the place, the place where it begins and ends. But 
what can you tell to a pile of bricks? The bricks will not be moved.” (Ali 66) 
Chattopadhyay and Schrivastava argue that associating herself with the safety of 
her  home,  Nazneen  “resists  adherence  to  an  image  provided  from  outside.”  (117) 

 

7 

 

Being  mentally  bound  to  her  Firstspace  of  her  home  village,  Nazneen’s  diasporic 
identity remains in the state of mute acceptance and resists the image of independent 
liberated woman, provided by her new physical space in London. Nazneen separates 
her  Firstspace,  London,  as  alien  space  where  she  was  reluctantly  placed,  and  her 
metaphorical  Secondspace,  her  home  village  in  Bangladesh  where  she  felt  safe  and 
secure. Irene Pèrez Fernández claims that as long as metaphorical and real spaces do 
not come together, as long as Nazneen keeps identifying herself with her imaginary 
‘home’,  her  identity  will  remain  in  the  state  of  marginality:  “Identity  and  its 
performance  character  become  an  issue  once  the  idea  of  belonging  to  a  place  …  is 
broken:  ‘the  thought  of  ‘having  an  identity’  will  not  occur  to  people  as  long  as 
‘belonging’  remains  their  fate.”  (158)  The  idea  that  Nazneen  considers  her  identity 
bound to a certain physical space is confirmed in the text passage when Chanu quotes 
the strophes from the song Corner of a famous American kirtan singer Jai Uttal. The 
last lines of the song “O Baul of the road, O Baul, my heart, What keeps you tied To 
the corner of the room?” (Ali 392) evoke the protagonist’s mental response: “Nazneen 
thought, We are all tied to our corners of the room. This thought stayed at her breast 
like  a  sucking  baby  for  the  rest  of  the  day.”  (392)  The  use  of  italics  as  well  as 
metaphorical description of the thought as a sucking baby underline the significance of 
the idea of belonging to a place in Nazneen’s sense of identity. 

As  Nazneen  gradually  adapts  to  her  life  in  London  and  integrates  into  the 
community, she emotionally moves away from her imagined home: “The village was 
leaving  her.  Sometimes  a  picture  would  come.  Vivid;  so  strong  she  could  smell  it. 
More often, she tried to see and could not.” (176) When her emotional connection with 
the place of belonging breaks, her identity shifts to a new state. Nazneen opens herself 
to  the  new  outside  experience  that  extends  her  Secondspace:  she  enters  an  intimate 
relationship with Karim, a young second generation Bangladeshi immigrant. His ideas 
about the state of Muslims all over the world rouse in Nazneen a sense of community 
beyond  Towers  Hamlet.  “She  learned  about  her  Muslim  brothers  and  sisters…She 
discovered  Bosnia.”  (259)  Chattopadhyay  and  Schrivastava  claim  that  Nazneen’s 
relationship with Karim “initiates a stepping out of the traditional confines of thought 
and practice… [and] realigns her association with her home in a new way.” (117) In 
the act of giving her body to Karim, Nazneen exposes an intensely private site to an 
outside influence. The scholars understand this penetration of Karim into the heroine’s 
private space as “negating activity” (Chattopadhyay, Schrivastava 118) that establishes 

 

8 

 

a bridge between her real Firstspace and her imagined Secondspace. Nazneen chooses 
to inhabit the relocated home and allows her identity to dwell in it. This re-imagining 
and expanding of the site of home leads to renegotiation of diasporic identity of the 
protagonist: “The initial fright of the experience transforms into a dynamism that leads 
her  to  negotiate  between  the  many  sites  of  associations  and  subjectivities.” 
(Chattopadhyay, Schrivastava 118) 

Nazneen is unable to locate herself in the suddenly expanded site of home, which 
is now dispersed between herself and Karim, the children, Chanu, her sister Hasina, 
her home village, and Tower Hamlets. This binary opposition between two different 
spaces  as  well  as  complexity  of  the  problem  of  belonging  to  one  of  them  puts  the 
heroine’s  sense  of  identity  into  question.  However,  this  situation  gives  her  the 
possibility  of  choice,  which,  to  my  mind,  contributes  to  celebration  of  her  liberated 
identity.  She  realizes  that  the  meaning  that  she  asserted  to  different  spaces  was 
artificially constructed. She decides against marrying Karim and tells him, “I wasn’t 
me, and you weren’t you… we made each other up.” (498) However, she does not go 
back to her old identity and remain a subdued obedient wife. Nazneen stays back in 
the Tower Hamlets while Chanu goes back to Bangladesh.  

By reconceptualising her spatial boundaries Nazneen discovers a new image of 
self that gives her the third option for defining her identity. She decides that she will 
no more be controlled by fate, she will take her own decisions: “I will decide what to 
do; I will say what happens to me. I will be the one.” (301) She will remain in London, 
she will work and look after herself and her two daughters. Nazneen constructs her 
own  Thirdspace  that  allows  her  being  different  and  decide  independently  how  to 
modify  her  social  spaces.  The  last  chapter  of  the  novel  depicts  the  protagonist’s 
independent  life  in  Brick  Lane.  She  remains  faithful  to  Bangladeshi  traditions  and 
culture, she wears sari and keeps contact with her husband in Dhaka. At the same time 
Nazneen’s identity is open for new experiences offered by the Western culture: 

A new song came on the radio… A woman’s voice, half singing, half screeching. You know you 
make me wanna shout…She waved her arms, threw back her head, and danced around the table. 
Shout! She sang along, filling her lungs from the bottom, letting it all go loose, feeling her hair 
shake  out  down  her  neck…She  swooped  down  and  tucked  her  sari  up  into  the  band  of  her 
underskirt. Shout! (Ali 537) 
 

The  culmination  of  the  novel  is  Nazneen’s  arrival  at  her  independent  identity 
destination,  which  is  demonstrated  in  the  text  passage  where  the  protagonist  finally 
goes  to  the  skating  rink,  a  place  that  became  Nazneen’s  symbol  of  freedom.  The 
narrative establishes the link between her identity and this metaphorical space: “To get 

 

9 

 

on ice physically – it hardly seemed to matter. In her mind she was already there.” (Ali 
541) This example shows how real and imagined spaces come together constructing 
the Thirdspace that the heroine occupies at the end of the novel. Chattopadhyay and 
Schrivastava  point  out  that  “This  is  a  new  space  with  its  shares  of  struggles  and 
uncertainties, but Nazneen commands this space and in that articulates a new home, a 
new sense of belonging.” (118)  

 

Conclusion 
 
Globalization and the resulting shift in understanding of identity increased academic 
interest  on  spatiality  and  its  impact  on  the  process  of  identity  formation.  Recent 
theories  on  space,  which  concentrated  either  on  its  material  or  on  its  metaphorical 
forms,  failed  in  providing  conceptual  tools  for  explaining  the  complex  notion  of 
postcolonial  identity.  This  dualism  was  broken  down  in  Edward  Soja’s  model  of 
spatial trialectics that acknowledged the existence of another form of space apart from 
the  material  Firstspace  and  the  mental  images  of  the  world  represented  in  the 
Secondspace. Soja’s Thirdspace is a social space that arises out of negotiation between 
physical realities and mental images. In this open fluid space human subjects contact 
and shape each other by this contact. As a result, identity is malleable and changeable. 
An identity in the Thirdspace is not restricted to either/or binaries, it is more complex 
and always open for otherness.  
 
Postcolonial  fiction  explores  the  complex  relationship  between  space  and 
identity.  Monica  Ali’s  novel  Brick  Lane  depicts  how  diasporic  experience  can  be 
shaped by re-imagining and expanding different spaces. Edwad Soja’s spatial theory 
gives the opportunity to describe and better understand this process.  
Brick  Lane  uses  the  concepts  of  space  and  location  to  mark  the  transitions  of 
 
character and identity of the Bangladeshi immigrant Nazneen. The reference point in 
Nazneen’s  diasporic  experience  is  her  home  village  in  Bangladesh,  a  space  that 
provides  her  with  sense  of  identity  during  her  dislocation.  The  connotation  of  her 
home is cultural and religious legacy that sets psychological limits to her Secondspace. 
These limits characterize the protagonist’s identity during the first years of her married 
life in London, as she constantly mentally recreates her lost Firstspace and the sense of 
identity  associated  with  it.  By  doing  that  Nazneen  tries  to  cope  with  feelings  of 
loneliness and alienation that she experiences in her limited physical space in London. 

 

10 

 

This  emotional  connection  with  home,  however,  prevents  Nazneen’s  identity  from 
development and complicates the process of her adaptation to the new multicultural 
environment.  Only  when  she  re-imagines  and  expands  the  site  of  home  by  opening 
herself  to  the  outside  experience,  her  Secondspace  becomes  more  complex  and 
contradictory  and  shifts  her  identity  in  a  new  state.  By  transgressing  her  spatial 
boundaries,  Nazneen  effectively  renegotiates  them  and  constitutes  her  Thirdspace, 
where her home is simultaneously Bangladesh and London, where she is devoted to 
her family and culture, and at the same time open to other experiences. By articulating 
a new sense of home her identity moves from constraint to liberation, Nazneen is free 
to choose her place of belonging and decide what meaning she ascribes to it. So she 
stays in London when her husband goes back to Dhaka, and says Karim, her lover, that 
she will not marry him.  
Monica  Ali’s  novel  Brick  Lane  demonstrates  the  dynamic  and  fluid  nature  of 
 
space  that  is  constantly  being  negotiated  and  inscribed  with  variable  meanings. 
Negotiating,  regulating  and  extending  different  spaces,  diasporic  identity  constantly 
produces and reproduces itself anew and thus occupies the Thirdspace.  
 
 
 

 

 

11 

 

Works cited 
 
Ali, Monica. Brick Lane. New York: Scribner, 2003. Print. 
Bhabha, Homi K. The Location of Culture. London: Routledge, 1994. Print. 
Chattopadhyay, Sagarika, Shrivastava, Jaya. “Transitional Identities and the Unhomed 
Space in Monica Ali’s Brick Lane and Tishani Doshi’s The Pleasure Seekers”. 
Asiatic 6.1 (2012): 113-125. JSTOR. Web. 25 March 2013. 

Hannerz,  Ulf.  “Cosmopolitans  and  Locals  in  World  Culture”.  Theory,  Culture  & 

Society 7 (1990): 237-251. Web. 17 March 2013. http://tcs.sagepub.com 

Hubbard, Phil, Kitchin, Rob. Key Thinkers on Space and Place. ed. London: SAGE, 

2011. Print.  

Jackson, Elizabeth. “Gender and Space in Postcolonial Fiction: South Asian Novelists 
Re-imagining  Women’s  Spatial  Boundaries”.  Postcolonial  Spaces:  Politics  of 
Space  in  Contemporary  Culture.  Ed.  Andrew  Teverson  and  Sara  Upstone. 
London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2011. Print. 

Pèrez  Fernández,  Irene.  “Representing  Third  Spaces,  Fluid  Identities  and  Contested 
Spaces  in  Contemporary  British  Literature”.  Atlantis  31.2  (2009):  143-160. 
Project MUSE. Web. 17 March 2013.  

Soja, Edward W. Thirdspace: Journeys to Los Angeles and other Real-and-Imagined 

Places. Oxford: Blackwell, 1996. Print. 

Upstone, Sara. “’Same Old, Same Old’: Zadie Smith’s White Teeth and Monica Ali’s 
Brick  Lane”.  Journal  of  Postcolonial  Writing  43.3  (2007):  336-349.  Project 
MUSE. Web. 13 March 2013. 

Teverson,  Andrew,  Upstone,  Sara,  ed.  Postcolonial  Spaces:  Politics  of  Space  in 

Contemporary Culture. London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2011. Print. 

Warf, Barney, Arias, Santa, ed. The Spatial Turn: Interdisciplinary Perspectives. New 

York: Routledge, 2009. Print. 

 

12 

