 
 
 
 
  

  
Questions: 

APPENDIX 

Migrant Organizations 

1.  Read the example of the Association of the Yazidis. What is your first impression on the 

work of the association? How is their offer composed? Who does it address?  

2.  How  is  the  organisation  incorporated  into  the  social  structure  of  the  city?  How  is  it 
interconnected  with  other  actors,  organisations?  Is  the  association  supported  or 
promoted through any means by other actors? 

3.  Can the Forum be seen as an important agent in negotiating the production of the city ? 

In which way? How does the Forum contribute to it? 

 
 
The Association of the Yazidi  ( Forum ) – Oldenburg 
  
The Association of the Yazidi in Oldenburg was founded in 1993. Its aim is to maintain and to 
transmit  religious  and  cultural  habits  as  well  as  values  and  traditions  of  the  Yazidi  form  of 
society  (social  system)  among  the  diaspora.  The  character  of  the  Yazidi  lifestyle,  in  both 
ideological  and  traditional  way/sense,  is  to  be  maintained  considering  the  conditions  of  the 
enlightened modern society in Western Europe. The Yazidi shall be given a chance to continue 
and increase their culture in a peaceful way. The association does community service to bring 
together  people  who  left  their  home  and  builds  bridges  between  the  German  society  and 
migrants of Kurdish origin. The association also provides support in different life situations and 
problem areas, working in different fields.  
  
Working fields (as described by the association): 
 
Social work 
The  Yazidi  in  Germany  are facing  a  society  with  different  values,  norms and  habits.  They  are 
exposed  to  continuous  culture-related  conflicts  and  therefore  tend  to  be  more  susceptible  to 
psychosomatic disorders. Due to these psycho-social difficulties, a minority-specific treatment is 
required. The association of the Yazidi in Oldenburg has the necessary cultural background and 
understanding for this. 
 
Intercultural meetings 
Many people talk about integration and actually refer to assimilation. A lot of people talk about a 
multicultural society within the frame of their own definition of the concept  of culture and don’t 
ask the affected people what they think about it. We (the Yazidi Association) think: multicultural 
society means the cohabitation of different cultures. Thus, the Forum is in favor of a multicultural 

society  and  sees  the  promoting  of  intercultural  meetings  as  an  important  duty  of  its  own  - 
supporting  meetings  especially  between  the  Yazidi  and  Germans.  Because  only  the  cultures 
that  are  lived,  can  exchange  ideas.  This  exchange  is  important  for  the  harmonization  and 
revitalization of the society, but is also important because the cultural exchange helps to break 
down  prejudices  and  thus  combat  a  cause  of  xenophobia.  In  this  regard,  the  association 
organizes  intercultural  encounters,  participates  through  numerous  contributions  in  the  cultural 
life  of  Oldenburg  and  is,  in  cooperation  with  other  social  and  urban  organizations,  active  in 
promoting equality and the coexistence of foreigners and Germans marked by mutual tolerance.   
 
Youth (welfare) work 
A  high  priority  represents  the  support  and  counselling  of  the  Yazidi  youth.  Many  Yazidi 
adolescents feel left alone with their problems. They find themselves in a tense atmosphere of 
two  cultures  and  have  identity  problems. These  are  problems  that  do  not  occur  among  native 
adolescents.With its work in this field, the cultural forum makes an important contribution to the 
youth work in Oldenburg. Thus, the inclusion of young people will be encouraged and important 
social values such as tolerance and humanity will be taught. The cultural forum is a recognized 
provider of private youth services and is a member of the Stadtjugendring*.  
 
*Many  youth  associations  joined  together  and  formed  the  umbrella  organisation  named 
Stadtjugendring (“circle of youth of the city”). Their common goal is to support and promote the 
young generation of Oldenburg. The incorporated association forms a strong community and it 
also serves as a representation towards politics and administration. In addition, it operates the 
House of Youth as a joint institution, working on projects, providing services and always striving 
to improve the youth work in Oldenburg. 
     
Women (welfare) work 
For the special protection of the interests of women, the association named a representative of 
the women-workgroup. The special problems of migrant women (eg. lack of integration) should 
be repealed by minority-specific care.  
 
Refugee social work 
The refugees lose their social environment they had in their homeland, and the development of 
new social contacts  in Germany proves to be very difficult. The Forum counsels refugees and 
provides support and orientation in dealing with authorities and other institutions.  
 
Voluntary work for the elderly 
The german proverb “an ancient tree can not be planted elsewhere” is valid for the older Yazidi 
generation.  The  change  from  a  traditional  society  to  an  industrial  environment  creates, 
especially for this group, major mental and physical conflicts. Since this group is largely cut off 
from the labor process, the integration takes place only with great difficulty. Though it was easy 
to  establish  contacts  with  like-minded  in  the  home  village,  this  proves  to  be  a  problem  in 
Germany  because  of  greater  distances.  Thus,  to  avoid  loneliness,  it  is  very  important  to 
organize meeting places for the older generation. 
 

 
 
Cultural and religious work 
The  cultural  and  religious  work  of  the  Forum  covers  also  the  formation  of  music-  and  folklore 
groups,  the  holding  of  church  services  and  the  organization  of  holidays.  After  years  of 
oppression in the homeland, this work contributes greatly to the self-esteem and thus facilitates 
the integration of the Yazidi. 
 
PROJECT KING 2.0 (Kompetent Integration Gestalten - Shaping of competent integration) 
The goal of the forerunner KING project, which was held in collaboration with the Diakonisches 
Werk of the evangelical lutheran church (Social Service), was to strengthen the structures and 
potentials  of  the  association  of  the  Yazidi.  This  should  result  in  a  gain  in  skills,  help  and 
volunteer  work  opportunities.  The  Diakonisches  Werk  provided  an  impetus  for  intercultural 
awareness and opened their own services and facilities for this tandem partnership. As a result, 
the association is more noticed by the public; this gave rise to several requests to give lectures 
to Yazidism and promoting integration and group visits in the house of the association. Different 
time-limited projects were and will be carried out with new partners. The cooperation with other 
migrant  organizations  in  Oldenburg  was  improved  by  the  forming the  working group  "dialogue 
between migrant organizations". Also, the Association is now an active member in many urban 
bodies  (eg.  Stadtjugendring,  Youth  Services  Committee,  Prevention  Committee,  Rehabilitation 
Advisory Committee). 
After  the  first  project  has  been  very  positive,  the  Yazidi  Forum  has  been  granted  another 
support  from  the  Federal  Office  for  Migration  and  Refugees.  Thus,  the  association  builds  the 
new project based on the forerunner. This project focuses mainly on women and girls. The aim 
is to strengthen them in their positions and using their existing potentials. This is made possible 
through various courses, seminars and tours. The cross-cultural awareness and inter-religious 
dialogue are also in the foreground and take place through trainings etc.. 
 
  
Regarding the integration work, the Forum is very pleased with the cooperation and support of 
the city of Oldenburg. The mayor assigned the issue of integration a high priority. He supports 
migrant  organizations  and  is  open  to  discussions  and  solutions.  Through  the  establishment of 
the  Integration  Office  of  the  City,  it  is  able  to  strengthen  the  issue  of  integration  in  social  and 
political  discussions  to  take  the  interests  and  concerns  of  migrants  better  into  account  and  to 
establish  a  continuous  dialogue  between  the  relevant  actors  in  integration  work  in  the  city  of 
Oldenburg. 
 
 
 
 

 
Questions: 

Science 

1.  Which  role  does  (“scientific”)  knowledge  play 

in  constructing  a  spatial 

understanding of the “identity” of Roma people? 

2.  How  is  this  knowledge  reflected  in  the  urban  reproduction  of  Roma  places? 

(Consider “glocalization”) 

3.  In which way is (self-) representation/ agency of importance in these examples? 

 
Scientific Construction of Roma people and their “character attributes” 
  
Picker,  Giovanni  &  Roccheggiani,  Gabriele  2014.  Abnormalising  minorities.  The  state  and 
expert knowledge addressing the Roma in Italy. Identities 21(2), 185–201. 
  
“1960s–1990s. Lacio Drom and the Gypsy Studies Centre 
While keeping and reinforcing the idea of re-education of „Gypsies‟, the expert knowledge that 
emerged  in  the  mid-1960s  fundamentally  transformed  the  understanding  of  nomadism  from  a 
bio-psychological  and  psycho-moral  abnormality  into  a  psychosocial  and  „cultural‟  obstacle  to 
the progressive evolution of 
„Gypsies‟.  The  most  important  and  authoritative  forum  for  the  production  of  this  expert 
knowledge  was  the  journal  Lacio  Drom.  Bimonthly  Journal  of  Gypsy  Studies  [Lacio  Drom. 
Rivista bimestrale di studi zingari]. The journal was published from 1965 to 1999 by the Gypsy 
Studies Centre [Centro Studi 
Zingari]  (hereafter  GSC),  and  directed  by  the  Pedagogy  Institute  of  Padua  University  in 
cooperation with the charity Nomads Work. It was not only the main intellectual context in which 
the  elaboration  of  expert  theories  on  Gypsies  circulated,  but  as  well  a  think  tank  providing 
consultancy  to  policymakers.  The  director  of  the  journal,  Mirella  Karpati,  who  worked  in  the 
Institute of Pedagogy at the University of Padua, was also the director of the GSC and a long-
term partner to Nomads Work. 
[…] 
In  practical  policy  terms,  this  meant  that  the  solution  of  „the  Gypsy  problem‟,  i.e.  ultimately 
nomadism, was psycho-pedagogic and would require re-educative measures. The most suitable 
instruments to achieve this goal were equipped halting sites, and in 1970, the Turin section of 
Nomad  Work  lobbied  the  Ministry  of  the  Interior  to  institute  measures  towards  constructing 
these halting sites that would allow „Gypsy children‟ to receive proper schooling services.10 
This  re-educative  model  that  was  progressively  gaining  institutional  recognition  within  the 
Ministry  of  Interior  circulars  (1973,  1982,  1985)  was  inspired  by  Mirella  Karpati.  Through  her 
field-based sociological work and pedagogical activity in Trentino Alto Adige with the local Sinti 
community, Karpati outlined what she conceived as the social, cultural and psychological-moral 
features of the „nomad people‟ (Karpati 1962), updating the pre-1945 label of the Gypsy-nomad 
„re-educable  deviant‟  with  contemporary  psychological  and  sociological  studies.  She 
categorised  Italian  Gypsies  as  people  living  in  a  condition  of  sociocultural  and  psychological-
moral  decadence,  due  both  to  their  „nomad  culture‟  which  was  unfit  to  the  Western  industrial 
society, and their contact with the deviant underclass. […] 

Karpati  claimed  „their  wandering  has  taken  roots  in  their  hearts  to  such  an  extent  that  it  has 
become one of their specific connotations. Roma and Sinti people are not „Gypsy‟ because they 
travel;  rather,  they  travel  because  they  are  „Gypsy‟‟  (Karpati  1962,  p.  141).  Therefore,  the 
priority  for  achieving  social  inclusion  was  to  erase  nomadism,  because  this  „nomadic 
psychological condition‟ was considered the main obstacle to adaptation,  i.e. the root cause of 
the  „lower  level  of  sociability‟  causing  anti-social  behaviour.  In  order  to  accomplish  that, 
according  to  Karpati,  it  was  „necessary,  first,  to  modify  the  Gypsy‟s  psychology  [la  psicologia 
dello zingaro]; second, to provide him/her with a new cultural upgrading and a new capacity to 
work,  and finally,  to  create  an  environment which  would  be  in favour  of the  Gypsy‟s  inclusion‟ 
(Karpati 1962, p. 143). 
[…] 
This view became ultimately coupled with the issue of cultural heritage and „ethnic character‟. In 
a 1969 article, Karpati argued that „Ethnicity is a historical cultural phenomenon and to define it, 
its socio-psychological facet is essential [. . .] It is possible to define an ethnotype, which (. . .) is 
a sort of mathematic resultant [. . .]‟ (Karpati 1969, pp. 7–8). The pedagogist enlisted nine main 
characteristics  of  Gypsy  adults  that  at  times  may  have  taken  extreme,  almost  pathological 
forms:  internal  and  external  instability;  the  intensity  with  which  they  live  in  the  present; 
exaggerated individualism; lack of discipline; impulsive and violent reactivity; lack of moderation; 
emotional suggestibility; thriftless and interest for satisfying immediate needs‟ (Karpati  1969, p. 
8). 
[…] 
This peculiar type of abnormalisation in fact envisaged the need for a more sophisticated policy 
device,  such  as  „equipped  halting  sites‟.  It  is  therefore  not  surprising  that  from  1984  to  1993, 
before  voting  upon  the  drafts  of  the  laws  for  Roma,  regional  authorities  consulted  volunteers 
and „experts‟ working at the 
GSC and Nomads Work who advocated firmly for including „camps‟ and „equipped areas‟ in the 
laws as urban devices to help „nomads‟ grow and emancipate themselves (see Picker 2011, p. 
611).” (P. 9-11) 
  
  
Roma and the urban field 
  
 “The head of the Nomad Patrols described their activities in the Yugoslav Romani camp: 
  
We keep track of  everything happening in the authorised camps and in non-authorised slums. 
Our  everyday  activity  aims  to  check  if  there  are  non-authorised  persons  in  those  sites.  We 
usually  search  cars,  and  potential  criminal  activities.  Our  priority  is  prevention,  because  this 
means being able to intervene beforehand. In this way, we do not allow crimes to be committed, 
or at least we make crimes less likely to be committed. We prioritize an in-depth knowledge of 
that world. All policemen working in the slums are professionals who know personally those who 
live in the slums, they call them by name and they chat regularly. There is a reciprocal respect 
with those nomads.” (P.5) 
  
Struggling for self-representation 

Sigona, Nando 2005. Locating „The Gypsy Problem‟. The Roma in Italy: Stereotyping, Labelling 
and „Nomad Camps‟. Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies 31(4), 741–756. 
  
 “Several  motivations  drove  me  to  change  my  life:  first,  the  fact  of  being  „nomad‟,  that  is  from 
Rom  to  become  „nomad‟,  to  become  „zingaro‟  with  many  prejudices,  mainly  negative.  I  never 
thought  of  myself  as  a  nomad  in  my  home  country,  I  didn‟t  think  of  me  as  a  „zingaro‟:  dirty, 
tattered, thief. That is why I decided to be actively involved for Romani rights here in Italy. I want 
to show to Italians that no „zingaro‟ would call another Rom: „zingaro‟ (BH, Macedonian Rom).” 
(P.745) 
  
  
  
 
  
A nomad regime? 

 
P.750: 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 
Work on the following questions: 
 

 

MEDIA 

1.  How is migration/are migrants presented in the excerpts?  
2.  How is migration interlinked with space? 
3.  Are there constructions of “immigrant neighborhoods”? Which (spatial) attributions are 

 

made on “immigrant neighborhoods”?   

4.  Think about how the media as an actor in an urban field influences the  

perception 

and development of urban space.  

 

 
Snapshots of Paris: From Tourist Heaven to Immigrant Hell (Spiegel Online, November 11th  
2005) 
When most people think of the City of Lights, it's romantic scenes on the Left Bank that come to 
mind. But it doesn't take long to find a totally different Paris. You just have to know where to 
look. 
[...]Paris – the city of good food and high art – is also a powder-keg of immigrant tension that 
has been exploding into violence night after night for two weeks. […] The France visited by 
tourists remains largely untouched by the stone throwing, the arson attacks, the running battles 
between immigrant youth and French police. The violence, in any case, is abating – largely due 
to the curfews imposed on affected neighborhoods across the country. […] The heart of Paris, 
though – even at the height of the unrest - remained more Kir Royal than Molotov cocktail. 
[…] up to the gleaming white Basilique du Sacre Coeur at the top of Montmartre. The sweeping 
stairs leading up to the basilica are, during the summer, a favorite meeting spot for young 
travelers. Guitar music and singing last well into the night following the fantastic sunsets that 
many come here to watch. Yet for all the frivolity on top of the hill, most don't realize that the 
bottom is a different story – and the site of one of the city's invisible rifts. On the one side of 
Barbes Boulevard, which runs along the eastern flank of Montmartre, are tourist hotspots and 
upper-middle class plushness. On the other is one of the poorest neighborhoods of Paris. 
The area is known as La Goutte d’Or and in addition to being poor, it is also incredibly diverse. 
Immigrants from the African colonies were the first to arrive – the initial wave hitting immediately 
following World War II. They have since been joined by Indians, Pakistanis, Haitians and 
Chinese. 
Those living on the rich side of the boulevard rarely venture into the narrow, dirty streets of La 
Goutte d'Or. Many of the buildings here are shabby and rundown, plaster cracked and 
crumbling. During the day, black market vendors sell watches and mobile phones on the streets. 
At night, they make way for the drug pushers and crack addicts. […] 
 
 

Little Senegal in the Big Apple: Harlem's West African heart (CNN, Febuary 19th, 2013) 
Harlem, New York (CNN) – At the heart of West Harlem, West Africa is buzzing. 
Nestled inside one of the world's most diverse cities, over the years the thriving neighborhood of 
Harlem has become the hub of New York's African American community. 
At the start of the 20th century, throngs of African Americans migrated from the southern United 
States into the big city, lured by the jobs and opportunities of urban life. 
But in the last 30 years or so, another group of people decided to call Harlem home. Scores of 
immigrants from several francophone West African countries moved to the borough to start a 

new life. At the center of it all, a vibrant Senegalese community has created a new home away 
from home, adding their culture, fashion and tastes to Harlem's diverse mix. 
Known as Little Senegal, or Le Petit Senegal, the strip of blocks around West 116th Street is 
packed with inviting restaurants and colorful shops, powerful reminders of life back in the 
homeland. 
"We're the ones who built Harlem," says El Hadji Fey, vice president of the Senegalese 
Association of America."When we got here, all the stores you see over here, it was absolutely 
nothing. We bought a lot of stores here, a lot of Senegalese businesses right here. 
"We were scared in the beginning -- you know how Harlem was 20, 30 years ago. We're the 
ones who really made Harlem grow up. That's why a lot of people call here Little Senegal 
because we started making the community grow, we started making people grow." 
Along this stretch of blocks, the taste of Senegal is everywhere -- from the tantalizing scents of 
fish and rice stews emanating from the traditional restaurants dotting the neighborhood, through 
to the lively Malcolm Shabazz Market, where stall vendors hawk their wares, to the numerous 
Senegalese-named clothes and haircare shops.[...] 
 
 

France‟s troubled suburbs 

Forgotten in the banlieues (The Economist, Febuary 23rd 2013) 

Young, diverse and unemployed 
WHEN the director of a job centre organised a visit to the Louvre for unemployed youngsters, 
she knew it would be a rare event. Sevran is one of France’s poorest places, north-east of the 
Paris périphérique. The jobless rate is 18%, and over 40% among the young. Yet the director 
was taken aback by how exceptional the visit proved. Of the 40 locals who made the 32km (20-
mile) trip, 15 had never left Sevran, and 35 had never seen a museum. 
Sevran is one of France’s 717 “sensitive urban zones”, most of them in the banlieues. In such 
places unemployment is over twice the national rate. More than half the residents are of foreign 
origin, chiefly Algerian, Moroccan and sub-Saharan African. Three-quarters live in subsidised 
housing; 36% are below the poverty line, three times the national average. […] 
For all the schemes and money, the banlieues are a world apart. From 2008 to 2011 the gap 
widened between unemployment rates in “sensitive urban zones” and in surrounding areas. 
Schools have a high turnover of often-inexperienced teachers, gaining merit by doing time in the 
banlieues. Job centres are understaffed. The unemployed say their postcode stigmatises them. 
Drug dealers compete with careers advisers to recruit teenagers. “Here, drug trafficking has 
always helped circulate money,” says Stéphane Gatignon, Sevran’s Green mayor. “It’s how 
people scrape by, despite the crisis.” […] 
The sense of isolation in a place like Sevran is social as much as physical. Too many teenagers 
grow up with little connection to the world of work. Manuel Valls, the interior minister, who cut 
his teeth as mayor of the multicultural banlieue of Evry, talks of de facto “apartheid” in France. 
Over 70 different nationalities, and many faiths, crowd into Sevran; new migrants from Africa’s 
poorest corners are joined by more recent arrivals from Spain and Italy. Even today in France, 
according to new research by Yann Algan and colleagues at Sciences-Po university, somebody 
called Mohamed, Ali or Kamel is four times more likely to be unemployed than somebody 
named Philippe or Alain. 
Sevran’s disconnection is rich in paradox. The town has good railway links, yet Paris feels a 
world away. At the dimly lit Sevran-Beaudottes station, where the halal butcher and Rotisserie 

Couscous trade beneath advertising for Vita Malt African bottled drinks, fast trains tear through, 
carrying travellers from the airport direct to Paris. “We have to wait for the slow trains that stop 
at the stations in-between,” says a woman from Sevran who commutes to the airport for work 
each day. “There’s too much theft here, and they want to keep the tourists away.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                       
 

 

 

Administration 

 
Fanke,  Thomas/Löhr,  Rolf-Peter:  Neighbourhood  Management  -  A  Key  Instrument  in 
Integrative Urban District Development.  
The  Federal-  State  Program:  Districts With  A  Special  development Needs  -  The  Socially 
Integrative City”. 
 

1.  Which are the basic principles of the program? What fields and measures should be 

used during the implementation of the program? 

 
2.  What are the criteria for the implementation of the program? Which images are 

being produced about the inhabitants of the districts? 

 
3.  Who are the important contributors to the program “Social City” to foster a socially 

inclusive city? 

 
Without  intervention  by  the  welfare  state,  the  downward  spiral  of  some  “districts  with  special 
development  needs”  is  assured.  The  processes  taking  place  in  these  areas  reinforce 
themselves continuously unless interrupted and reversed by the concerted efforts of politicians, 
local  authorities,  residents,  industry,  and  other  local  players.  An  integrated  district  policy 
approach is therefore needed that takes account of the area as a social space and encourages 
the  development  and  stabilization  of  the resources  that  are  usually  still  available  there.  In this 
connection,  however,  a  growing  discrepancy  has  become  apparent  between  socio-economic 
problems and constructional-technical solutions, and the prevailing sectorial approaches taken 
by  specialized  departments  and  authorities  no  longer  offer  effective  solutions.  For  this  reason 
and  because  cities  cannot  alone  meet  the  challenges  posed  by  the  critical  developments  in 
many neighborhoods, the federal/ Länder program “Districts With Special Development Needs – 
The Socially Integrative City” was launched in July 1999 to develop an integrated approach to 
the complex problems (Becker/Löhr 2000). 
The  main  criterion  for  inclusion  in  the  Social  City  program  is  the  presence  of  special 
developmental  need:  the  chosen  district  is  supposed  to  be  in  such  a  bad  condition  that 
intervention  is  urgent  and  indispensable.  looking  at  the  specifics  of  this  special  lack  of 
development,  it  is  worth  noticing  that  two  main  indicators  are  high  unemployment  rate  an 
extreme dependence of the residents on welfare. Other criteria included: 
- Urban shrinkage: drops in population, resulting in high vacant property rates. 
- Lack of social integration resulting in social conflicts. 
- Lack  of  positive  outlook  among  residents,  including  feelings  of  hopelessness  and  a  lack  of 
prospects of a better life. 
- A negative image of the district among its residents and external audiences. 
The  program  is  based  on  a  range  of  experience  in  various  states  and  on  the  preparatory 
conceptual work by the Working Group of the Ministers and Senators of the States Responsible 
for  Building,  Housing  and  Settlement  (ARGEBAU).  It  also  draws  on  experience  in  other 

European  countries  and  on  the  results  of  the  European  Union  URBAN  initiative.  The  core 
elements can be sketched as follows (Franke/Löhr/Sander 2000). 
-  The  program  is  to  complement  traditional  urban  development  assistance  and  dovetail  it  with 
other policy areas relevant to urban development in a new, integrated approach. 
- The aim is to concentrate investment and non-investment measures from various programs of 
the EU, the federal and Länder governments. 
- The concept calls for ongoing, area-specific, and integrated urban-development action in the 
sense of a holistic improvement strategy. 
- Residents, business and industry, clubs and associations, and other local players are to take 
on responsibility in developing and implementing local programs. 
-  Implementation  of  the  program  is  to  be  accompanied  operationally  by  experts  from  the 
German Institute of Urban Affairs. 
The  overriding  aim  of  the  program  is  to  counter  the  generation  or  consolidation  of 
disadvantagement  and  to  promote  the  preventive  improvement  of  local  living  conditions. 
Integrated,  cooperative,  and  activating  strategies  are  needed  (Becker/Löhr  2000).  After  the 
launch  of  the  program  in  1999,  all  16  federal  states  participated,  with  a  total  of  161 
neighborhoods in 157 cities. In 2000 the number of neighborhoods rose to 209 in 189 cities. A 
great deal of thought is being spent by the federal and Länder governments on how to stabilize 
the program, which, like traditional urban development assistance programs, has to be prepared 
each year. 
The “Socially Integrative City” program should be seen in the context of an overriding issue: the 
need  to  redefine  the  relationship  between  government  and  society.  In  Germany,  as  in  other 
European  countries,  the  call  for  integrative,  socially-oriented  urban  development  policy  is 
associated with the demand for reform in political and administrative structures. In other areas 
of  public  responsibility,  too,  the  problems  to  be  dealt  with  can  no  longer  be  solved  with  the 
traditional  concepts  and  practices  of  governmental  action  and  the  discharge  of  duties.  Efforts 
are therefore being made to redefine the relationship between government as a whole and so-
ciety, and to redistribute functions not only between the various levels of the federal system in 
Germany but also between government and the citizenry (Franke/Löhr/Sander 2000). 
The  State  and  administration  need  to  redefine  their  functions  and  their  responsibilities  under 
changed  societal  and  economic  conditions.  For  this  purpose,  the  federal  government  adopted 
the program “Modern State – Modern Administration” in December 1999, which propagated 
the  “activating  State”.  The  aim  is  to  establish  a  new  balance  between,  on  the  one  hand, 
governmental duties and, on the other, private initiative and social commitment. This new model 
is based on four, closely linked and interdependent principles, which concern all structural and 
functional levels of the federal system in Germany (Franke/Löhr/Sander 2000). 
-  In  redistributing  competencies  between  government  and  society,  government  wishes  to 
propose more than dispose. The self-regulatory resources of society are to be encour-aged and 
the necessary scope provided. This is to be achieved by setting common goals, by cooperation 
between governmental, quasi-governmental, and non-governmental entities, and by delegating 
governmental decision-making competence and thus power. 
- An essential precondition is greater orientation towards the citizenry. Government and citizens 
are equal partners in acting for the common good. This means that government decisions have 
to  be  as  transparent  and  comprehensible  as  possible,  and  that  citizens  must  be  given  the 

means  and  opportunity  to  make  decisions  on  their  own  responsibility,  especially  at  the  local 
level. And this requires devolved decision making powers. 
- The redistribution of competencies and greater orientation towards the citizenry means greater 
governmental  diversity.  Not  all  the  functions  of  the  State  and  the  municipality  need  uniform 
methods  and  rules.  Cooperative  structures  between  federal,  Land,  and  local  government 
become  more  important.  Personal  initiative  can  be  strengthened  by  reducing  federal 
prescription, and greater and more appropriate scope for making decisions is provided. 
- If these three principles are to take effect, more efficient administrative structures are needed 
at all levels of governmental and local action. 
The “Social Integrative City” program combines new perspectives on the role of government in 
social and local government policy and in urban development and renewal policy with an appeal 
to  all  concerned  to  be  open  to  new  ideas  and  ways  of  thinking  in  coping  with  new  patterns of 
action and behavior. Implementing the program therefore makes heavy demands on integrated 
and efficient administrative action. A great deal has to be dealt with at the same time: citizens 
have  to  be  involved  and  empowered  in  decision-making  on  planning  and  implementation, 
numerous,  very  different  players  have  to  be  coordinated,  development  processes  have  to  be 
mobilized and controlled, new cooperative structures across policy areas need to be generated, 
and specifically neighborhood  policy integrated into citywide development policy. Finally, more 
efficient administrative structures need to be measured against success criteria like the creation 
of  viable  districts  with  good  prospects  for  the  future.  Central  elements  of  the  program  are 
therefore  the  concentration  of  resources  and  cooperation,  participation  and  decision-making 
competencies  for  the  citizenry,  business  and  industry,  and  the  creation  of  appropriate 
management and organizational structures. 

