606

the journal of philosophy

EXPLANATORY GAMES*

A philosophical theory of explanation must solve many prob-

lems. It must provide a descriptive account of the explana-
tory activity of scientists in the different domains of science.
It must show how this activity differs from the provision of common-
sensical explanations permanently offered in everyday life by ordinary
people and how the explanatory practices evolve over time in dif-
ferent social arenas. It must also account for the fact that explana-
tory activities very often, if not always, take place under conditions
of a cognitive division of labor in which different participants in
the explanatory enterprise undertake different tasks and assume
different roles. In a nutshell, a philosophical theory of explanation
must be able to provide an adequate descriptive account of the dif-
ferent facets of the explanatory activity, a task which is much harder
than it prima facie appears.

Such a theory must also provide standards for judging the quality of
the outcomes of the explanatory activity. Some explanations are better
in certain respects than others, and a set of norms is necessary for pro-
viding judgments of their quality. Some explanations provided in every-
day life and in science can be more accurate, simpler, or closer to truth
than alternatives that are on offer. They might be able to provide a
better understanding of the subject matter that they are supposed to
deal with, and they might be much easier to use when one wants to
intervene in the world on the basis of them. In short, normative rules
for adjudicating among the explanations offered in different social
contexts are needed and must be worked out and debated critically.

These diverse aims that a philosophical theory of explanation must
accomplish are of both a descriptive and a normative nature. Stated dif-
ferently, a philosophical theory of explanation is to provide solutions

* I would like to thank Hans Albert, Theodore Arabatzis, Martin Carrier, Volker
Gadenne, Jens Harbecke, Carl-David Mildenberger, Stathis Psillos, and two anony-
mous reviewers for many helpful comments on earlier versions of this article. Talks
based upon this paper were presented at the 14th International Congress of Logic,
Methodology and Philosophy of Science in July 2011 in Nancy, at the University of
Bielefeld in November 2011, at the University of Athens in March 2012, at the Tech-
nical University of Munich in June 2012, at the 86th Joint Session of the Aristotelian
Society and the Mind Association in Stirling in July 2012, at the 8th Congress of the
Gesellschaft für Analytische Philosophie (GAP) in Constance in September 2012, at the
1st Congress of the Gesellschaft für Wissenschaftsphilosophie (GWP) in Hanover in
March 2013, and at the 23rd World Congress of Philosophy in Athens in August 2013.
I thank all participants of the above events for their comments and suggestions.

0022-362X/13/1011/606–632

ã 2013 The Journal of Philosophy, Inc.

explanatory games

607

to a series of problems, both descriptive and normative, using not only
philosophical resources but also whatever resources are available from
other disciplines. The aim of this essay is to establish the claim that
this can be best done if one theorizes in terms of explanatory games
rather than focusing on the explication of the concept of explanation.

i. the wrong question: what is an explanation?

Though most of the thoughts and arguments that gained currency
in the theory of explanation of the twentieth century can be found
one way or another in the works of some past philosopher, from
Aristotle to John Stuart Mill, the great advancements in logic and
the explosion in the technical sophistication of the philosophers of
the twentieth century have led to a more systematic treatment of
scientific explanation, giving birth to a whole subdiscipline in the
philosophy of science that deals with this issue.1 Since the classic con-
tribution of Hempel and Oppenheim,2 the modern theory of expla-
nation has largely come to reflect the virtues and vices of the analytic
tradition: precise formulations and carefully exposed arguments on
the one hand, but also a passionate insistence on logical aspects at
the cost of more substantial aspects on the other. The primary ques-
tion that the philosophical theory of explanation has tried to answer
has been what does an explanation consist in? As an answer to this ques-
tion, Hempel famously maintained that to explain a singular event
is to show how this event can be expected to happen if one takes into
account the laws that govern its occurrence together with its initial
conditions. One set of reactions to this so-called “received view” of
scientific explanation3 has centered around the provision of counter-
examples to Hempel’s model, ranging from shadows explaining the
height of poles4 to magicians hexing salt5 and much more. The more

1 For a competent and precise review starting with Aristotle and including the
main models of explanation prevailing in the present discussion, see Stathis Psillos,
“Past and Contemporary Perspectives on Explanation,” in Theo Kuipers, ed., General
Philosophy of Science: Focal Issues (Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2007), pp. 97–174.

2 See Carl G. Hempel and Paul Oppenheim, “Studies in the Logic of Explanation,”
Philosophy of Science, xv, 2 (April 1948): 135–75, reprinted in Hempel, Aspects of Scientific
Explanation, and Other Essays in the Philosophy of Science (New York: Free Press, 1965).

3 See Wesley C. Salmon, Four Decades of Scientific Explanation (Minneapolis: Minnesota

UP, 1989) p. 8, who coined this term.

4 In the literature the vertical flagpole example is usually referred to, but in his
seminal paper Bromberger refers to the height of a telephone post to which a taut
wire is connected—exemplifying, of course, the same point. See Sylvain Bromberger,
“Why-Questions,” in Robert Colodny, ed., Mind and Cosmos (Pittsburgh: University
Press, 1966), pp. 87–111, at p. 105.

5 See Henry E. Kyburg, Jr., “Salmon’s Paper,” Philosophy of Science, xxxii, 2 (April 1965):
147–51; and Salmon, “Statistical Explanation,” in Colodny, ed., The Nature and Function

608

the journal of philosophy

constructive critics of Hempel have offered alternative models of
explanation showing how they could better account for the cases
in which Hempel’s model failed. Just to name the most influential
ones: the causal-mechanistic model, which claims that an explanation
consists in the identification of mechanisms understood as entities
and activities organized such that they are productive of regular
changes from start to termination conditions;6 the unification model,
which claims that explanations are deductive arguments that pro-
vide understanding by fitting the particular facts and events within
a general theoretical framework;7 the pragmatic account of explana-
tion, which claims that explanation is not a relationship like that
of description, that is, a relationship between theory and fact, but
rather a three-term relationship, namely between theory, fact, and
context;8 the manipulationist account of explanation, which claims,
relying on invariant generalizations rather than covering laws, that
an explanation primarily answers a “what-if-things-had-been-different-
question,” that is, that an explanation primarily enables us to see
what sort of difference it would have made for the explanandum
if the factors cited in the explanans had been different in various
possible ways;9 and the kairetic model, which claims that explanation

of Scientific Theories (Pittsburgh: University Press, 1970), pp. 173–231, reprinted in
Salmon, Statistical Explanation and Statistical Relevance (Pittsburgh: University Press,
1971), pp. 29–87.

6 This is the definition of “mechanism” from the influential paper by Peter Machamer,
Lindley Darden, and Carl F. Craver, “Thinking about Mechanisms,” Philosophy of Science,
lxvii, 1 (March 2000): 1–25, at p. 3. The causal/mechanical model of scientific explana-
tion has been mainly developed by Wesley Salmon. See especially Salmon, Scientific
Explanation and the Causal Structure of the World (Princeton: University Press, 1984);
and Salmon, Causality and Explanation (New York: Oxford, 1998). For specific applica-
tions of the mechanistic approach, see for example Craver, Explaining the Brain:
Mechanisms and the Mosaic Unity of Neuroscience (New York: Oxford, 2007); William
Bechtel, Mental Mechanisms: Philosophical Perspectives on Cognitive Neuroscience (New York:
Routledge, 2008); Jon Elster, Explaining Social Behavior: More Nuts and Bolts for the Social
Sciences (New York: Cambridge, 2007); and Pierre Demeulenaere, ed., Analytical Sociology
and Social Mechanisms (New York: Cambridge, 2011).

7 See Michael Friedman, “Explanation and Scientific Understanding,” this journal,
lxxi, 1 ( Jan. 17, 1974): 5–19; Philip Kitcher, “Explanatory Unification,” Philosophy of
Science, xlviii, 4 (December 1981): 507–31; and Kitcher, “Explanatory Unification and
the Causal Structure of the World,” in Kitcher and Salmon, eds., Scientific Explanation,
Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science XIII (Minneapolis: Minnesota UP, 1989),
pp. 410–505.

8 See Bas C. van Fraassen, The Scientific Image (New York: Oxford, 1980); and Peter

Achinstein, The Nature of Explanation (New York: Oxford, 1983).

9 See James Woodward, “Explanation and Invariance in the Special Sciences,” The
British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, li, 2 ( June 2000): 197–254; and Woodward,
Making Things Happen: A Theory of Causal Explanation (New York: Oxford, 2003).

explanatory games

609

is a matter of finding, by way of using a kairetic criterion, which of
the causal influences on a phenomenon are relevant to its occur-
rence, demanding more specifically that the explanation is not miss-
ing parts and that every aspect of the causal story represented by
the explanatory model makes a difference to the causal production
of the explanandum.10

All these models of explanation—even though their designers
intended them to be alternatives to Hempel’s model—remain in
the same research tradition of producing unitary models in order
to capture what is supposedly the main aim of (theoretical) science,
explanation. If not explicitly then at least implicitly, the main philo-
sophical project of the philosophers working in this tradition consists
in offering an explication of the concept of explanation, or stated
more neutrally, in answering the question, what is an explanation?
The development of the precise meaning of the concept of scien-
tific explanation occupies center stage in all those approaches.
Nobody can oppose—and nor do I—the famous dictum of John
Stuart Mill that “[t]he word explanation occurs so continually and
holds so important a place in philosophy, that a little time spent
in fixing the meaning of it will be profitably employed.”11 However,
this cannot be but a mission of peripheral importance to a philo-
sophical theory of explanation for the simple reason that the outcome
of this endeavor can only be a more precise concept of explanation—
to be used in the discourse about the solution of the descriptive and
normative problems of scientific explanatory activity making up the
core of the philosophical enterprise.12

But even if one disagrees about the nature of the philosophical
enterprise that a philosophical theory of explanation should launch

10 See Michael Strevens, Depth: An Account of Scientific Explanation (Cambridge:

Harvard, 2008).

11 See John Stuart Mill, A System of Logic Ratiocinative and Inductive, vol. VII of
The Collected Works of John Stuart Mill, ed. J. M. Robson and R. F. McRae (London:
Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1974), p. 464.

12 Surprisingly, the only text that endorses this view is Noretta Koertge, “Explanation
and Its Problems,” British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, xliii, 1 (March 1992): 85–98,
at p. 86:

What strikes me as unsatisfactory about the current philosophical discussion of
explanation is not its failure to match our intuitions about flagpole shadows or
mayors with paresis. Rather it is the paucity of explicit theories of explanation—the
absence of systematic philosophical generalizations in which the competing explica-
tions or models of explanation play a central role. I suggest that we reverse the order
of investigation. We should begin by asking what problems a good theory about scien-
tific explanation might reasonably be expected to solve. Only then can we begin to
sketch such a theory.…I believe it is only by focusing on the philosophical problem-
situation that we can transcend the forty years of explication of explanation…

610

the journal of philosophy

and follow, a cursory glance at the prevailing scientific practices
shows that the unitary models of explanation on offer have only a
limited range of application. It is simply a matter of fact, thus, that
their resources cannot capture anything but the explanatory activi-
ties of some areas of (theoretical) science. The claim that each of
them raises, that is, that it is supposed to accommodate all and every
scientific activity, is not tenable. I will briefly focus on the case of
the social sciences, providing three examples in a very general form
that are intended to show that the unitary models of explanation
have at best limited application.

ii. a brief outlook on the social sciences

The social sciences constitute a very disparate domain of sci-
ence replete with debates and all kinds of controversies, and
this is not the place to review them. I will select three fields to
exemplify my argument. Since the three most influential models
of explanation are the causal-mechanistic model, the unification
model, and the manipulationist model, I will show that only
one of those three models is suited to each case that I will dis-
cuss. My aim is to show not only that one philosophical model
of explanation fits the respective case but also that the other two
do not.

II.1. Neoclassical Microeconomic Theory. The most theoretically devel-
oped field of the social sciences is probably neoclassical micro-
economics: it avails of a well-developed mathematical formulation,
has a great range of applications, and is indeed the only piece of
social scientific knowledge that is offered in a standardized way in
every single economics textbook. Since Alfred Marshall13 gave a sys-
tematic and thorough shape to the ideas provided by the marginal
revolution of the 1870s,14 neoclassical economic theory, based on the
theoretical construction of utility maximization, has provided a sys-
tematic account of the interplay between supply and demand on
product and factor markets. Neoclassical microeconomics offers
a global theoretical framework for both a partial analysis of a single
market and a total analysis of all markets in an economy, using the
maximization hypothesis and focusing on the properties of eco-
nomic equilibrium. The neoclassical toolbox has also been applied

13 See Alfred Marshall, Principles of Economics (London: Macmillan and Co., 1890).
14 See the pioneering works of Carl Menger, Grundsätze der Volkswirtschaftslehre
(Vienna: Wilhelm Braumüller, 1871); William Stanley Jevons, The Theory of Politi-
cal Economy (New York: Macmillan and Co., 1871); and Léon Walras, Éléments
d’ Économie Politique Pure, ou Théorie de la Richesse Sociale (Lausanne: L. Corbaz et
Cie, 1874).

explanatory games

611

to phenomena other than markets, as for example to politics,15 law,16
crime, and family.17

The explanatory practices of neoclassical economists are definitely
better captured by the unification model of scientific explanation:
a few generations of neoclassical economists have worked in the
direction of subsuming a great range of economic and other social
phenomena under a unique descriptive and explanatory scheme.18
Indeed, one of the great merits of the neoclassical theory consists
precisely in its unifying power, that is, its ability to subsume a great
range of social phenomena under a unique descriptive and explana-
tory scheme. Thus Kitcher’s main message seems to fit precisely to
neoclassical economic theory:

Science advances our understanding of nature by showing us how to
derive descriptions of many phenomena, using the same patterns of
derivation over and over again, and, in demonstrating this, it teaches
us how to reduce the number of types of facts we have to accept as
ultimate (or brute).19

More specifically, the general argument pattern that lies at the heart
of the neoclassical enterprise is one of maximization under con-
straints. There is a long series of specific argument patterns: the utility
maximization of consumers, the profit maximization of firms, the vote
maximization of politicians in democratic politics, and so on. More
and more specific argument patterns can be embedded into the
larger argument pattern of maximization under constraints, however,
and thus provide explanations by means of unification. It is obvious
that the unification model of explanation is clearly the appropriate
model to accommodate these sets of practices.

The alternative models cannot adequately capture these practices.
Let us start with the causal-mechanistic model of explanation. This

15 See the seminal monographs by Anthony Downes, An Economic Theory of Democracy
(New York: Harper, 1957); James M. Buchanan and Gordon Tullock, The Calculus of
Consent: Logical Foundations of Constitutional Democracy (Ann Arbor: Michigan UP, 1962);
and Mancur Olson, The Logic of Collective Action: Public Goods and the Theory of Groups
(Cambridge: Harvard, 1965). For an overview of Public Choice as in principle a neo-
classical economic theory of politics, see Dennis C. Mueller, Public Choice III (New York:
Cambridge, 2003).

16 See for example Richard Posner, Economic Analysis of Law, 8th ed. (New York:

Aspen, 2010).

17 See for example Gary Becker, The Economic Approach to Human Behavior (Chicago:
University Press, 1976); and Becker and Posner, Uncommon Sense: Economic Insights, from
Marriage to Terrorism (Chicago: University Press, 2009).

18 For specific historical examples, see Uskali Mäki, “Explanatory Unification: Double

and Doubtful,” Philosophy of the Social Sciences, xxxi, 4 (December 2001): 488–506.

19 Kitcher, “Explanatory Unification and the Causal Structure of the World,” p. 432.

612

the journal of philosophy

requires the identification of mechanisms which will ultimately pro-
vide explanatory information. In the words of Salmon, it is the
“underlying causal mechanisms…which hold the key to our under-
standing of the world.”20 This is because “causal processes, causal
interactions, and causal laws provide the mechanisms by which the
world works; to understand why certain things happen, we need to
see how they are produced by these mechanisms.”21 However, micro-
economics textbooks never pay any attention to “causal processes,
causal interactions, and causal laws,” and there is indeed absolutely
no causal talk included in the analysis of any type of market, be it
the competitive market, a monopoly, or an oligopoly. The endeavor
is to determine precisely the equilibrium price and quantity without
paying any attention to causal interactions. The causal-mechanistic
model is clearly not the fitting model here.

The same is true for the manipulationist model of Woodward.
Indeed, a notorious criticism of the mainstream neoclassical theory
is that it operates at a level of abstraction that makes it extremely
difficult to test the theory empirically. The well-worked out deductive
arguments employed to analyze market behavior are not amenable
to an analysis of the manipulationist approach. The equations that
make up neoclassical economic theory are not offered as invariant
generalizations that continue to hold under some range of interven-
tions. In fact, contrary to the model of Woodward, it is required that
they be invariant under all possible changes and interventions. The
decision calculi that are offered in neoclassical economic theory
can definitely not be accommodated by the manipulationist model,
which focuses on formulating the necessary and sufficient condi-
tions for a generalization in order that it be descriptive of a causal
relationship, that is, that it be invariant under some appropriate set
of interventions. The decision calculi of neoclassical economic theory
are clearly argument patterns that can be accommodated only by the
unification model of explanation.

II.2. Social Mechanisms in Sociology. In sociology and political science,
on the other hand, a great bulk of the work of practicing scientists
concerns the identification of social mechanisms and the description
of their working properties. Take the well-observed phenomenon in
the liberal democracies of the Western world that the expansion of
educational opportunity neither increases social mobility nor reduces
social inequality. Raymond Boudon has provided a widely accepted

20 Salmon, Scientific Explanation and the Causal Structure of the World, p. 260.
21 Ibid., p. 132.

explanatory games

613

explanation of the puzzle that although education does provide
opportunity for individuals to improve their social position, this
does not translate into change in the social structure.22 In every
educational system, at some point in the curriculum, the individual
has to make some choices about staying or not staying in school.
These decisions are always taking place within a certain social con-
text and give rise to a specific educational performance. Boudon dis-
tinguishes between primary and secondary effects of social origin.
The primary effect directly influences the educational performance
of the children as a joint result of class-specific primary socialization
processes such as the potential of parents to actively support their
child in school, the general cultural differences, and so on. In the
words of Boudon: “The lower the social status, the poorer the cul-
tural background—hence the lower the school achievement.”23

The other mechanism, called the secondary effect, focuses on how
families from different social backgrounds estimate the costs and
benefits of higher education tracks. The prospects of success of
children from working class families in higher education tracks are
estimated to be rather low by their parents since the parents are
mostly not familiar with this type of school themselves. A major
interest of the parents themselves, which influences decisively their
decision making, is status maintenance; that is, they want to ensure
that their current status is maintained. A consequence of this is that
their children receive sufficient praise and acceptance in their family
environment even if they do not necessarily aim at the highest
academic achievement. Parents in families with a higher social
background, on the other hand, are motivated to provide their
own children with the best possible education in order to make
sure that their intergenerational status level remains relatively
stable. This mechanism gives rise to parents of unequal social
status producing children, through a family socialization process, that
make unequal use of educational opportunities. The differentially
educated children—even in partly meritocratic societies such as
those in the modern Western world—often just replicate the social
statuses of their parents.

In a nutshell, even though education does provide opportunity
for individuals to improve their social position, this does not trans-
late into change in the social structure. Rates of social mobility have
not increased over time, although the set of educational opportunities

22 See Raymond Boudon, Education, Opportunity and Social Inequality: Changing Pros-

pects in Western Society (New York: Wiley, 1974).

23 Ibid., p. 29.

614

the journal of philosophy

has increased, and it is not the case that societies with more expan-
sive educational systems have higher mobility rates.

Other things being equal…educational growth…has the effect of
increasing rather than decreasing social and economic inequality, even
in the case of an educational system that becomes more equalitarian.24

The causal-mechanistic model of explanation seems to best capture
this and similar cases of explanatory practice prevalent in sociology,
political science, psychology, and the other social sciences. The
scientific endeavor of the practicing scientists consists in uncovering
mechanisms in the social world, and it certainly offers a “local”
rather than “global” understanding. In the present example, Boudon’s
explanation does not apply to societies outside the Western liberal
democracies and does not aspire to provide insights into the causal
structure of the educational systems of, say, developing countries or
those of the Middle Ages.

It is clearly not the case that one looks for global theoretical
frameworks and attempts to fit the particular instances under them.
There is no formalized argument pattern provided in the concrete
example of Boudon, nor is there any attempt to embed a specific
argument pattern into a more general one. The philosophical model
of explanation as unification is not fitting in this case or in similar
cases in the social sciences.

Nor is the manipulationist model. The central notion of inter-
vention is not employed by Boudon. His explanation is not based
on regression equations, nor is any type of counterfactual reasoning
involved. The same is true for a series of other mechanistic explana-
tions provided by practicing social scientists—the manipulationist
model cannot accommodate them.

II.3. Econometrics. Finally, let us briefly look at a purely empirical
part of social science research, econometrics. The attempt here is
to estimate regression equation models which specify a functional
relationship between dependent and independent variables, taking
into consideration that the relationship contains a random element,
the “measurement error.” Regression equations take the form:

Y 5 B1X1 1 B2X2 1 …… 1 BnXn 1 U

X1, X2, …, Xn are the independent variables; B1, B2, …, Bn are the
coefficients; Y is the dependent variable; and U the error term (which
makes the model a stochastic one).

24 Ibid., p. 187.

explanatory games

615

The manipulationist model of explanation best accounts for this
set of practices in the social sciences. Woodward’s theory offers what
he calls a “natural causal interpretation of regression equations”:

[A regression equation] may be understood as claiming that each of
X1 … Xn are direct causes of Y….These causal relationships are under-
stood as holding for each individual in the population of interest, in
the sense that for each such individual [the regression equation] char-
acterizes the response of the value of Y possessed by that individual
to some range of interventions that change the values of X1 … Xn
for that individual. On this interpretation, the error term U also has
a causal interpretation: it represents the combined influence of all
the other causes of Y besides X1 … Xn that are not explicitly repre-
sented in [the regression equation].25

In those cases where the explanatory activity consists in establishing
the truth of quantitative relationships in specific populations and
under specific conditions, the manipulationist model of explanation
is clearly the most appropriate. It is characteristic of the nature of
the philosophical enterprise that, even if Woodward’s account seems
to be tailored to much of the applied work in the social sciences, it still
stands in the long tradition of unitary models aiming at explicating
the meaning of the concept of explanation.

I distinguish this interpretive issue from issues about the conditions
under which one can reliably estimate the coefficients in [a regression
equation]. The latter issues are epistemological: they have to do not
with what [a regression equation] means but with when and how one can
determine the values of the coefficients in [a regression equation].26

The unification model clearly cannot capture the econometric prac-
tices. There are no argument patterns to be embedded in more
general argument patterns, and there is a clear commitment to
causal relationships that involve counterfactual reasoning—both
aspects that are intentionally left out of the unification model.

Though the generalizations that are offered in econometrics invoke
causal talk and causal inference, they never identify a causal mechanism
proper. These generalizations constitute a sort of causal knowledge,
which although not possessing the dignity of laws, do depict invari-
ances which offer satisfactory explanatory information. Regression
equations and structural models do not specify mechanisms and
cannot, thus, be adequately captured by the causal-mechanistic
model either.

25 Woodward, Making Things Happen, p. 321.
26 Ibid., my emphasis.

616

the journal of philosophy

These three examples show that the unitary models of explanation
cannot account for all and every explanatory activity in the social
sciences. They are, if at all, only partially relevant as means of descrip-
tion and/or normative standards, at least in the social sciences,
though a similar case can be made for other parts of science as well.27
What does this teach us then?

iii. explanatory pluralism

The lesson that one can draw from this brief overview is that each
of the three main models currently on offer, the unificationist, the
mechanistic, and the manipulationist, can accommodate some of the
existing scientific practices in different social scientific domains.
Though they are well-worked out models of scientific explanation
and they can definitely be applied successfully in different and dis-
tinct domains of (social) scientific knowledge, their main claim—tied
to their design as unitary models of scientific explanation—cannot
be upheld: none of them can successfully claim the monopoly as
the one and correct account of scientific explanation. In different
domains of science different kinds of scientific practices prevail, so
trying to establish a monolithic philosophical theory of explanation
that is supposedly good for everything cannot be an acceptable
strategy. In a nutshell, the goal of a philosophical account of expla-
nation should not be to capture the explanatory relation, but rather
to capture the many ways in which explanations are provided in the
different domains of science.

The position that seems obvious and which I wish to adopt is
that of an explanatory pluralism, which allows for different ideal
types of explanation, that is, different exemplary accounts, intended
to provide a classification of different types of explanatory activities
in diverse domains of science. Before elucidating the position of
explanatory pluralism further in a more positive way, let me state
clearly what this position does not amount to. First, explanatory
pluralism is different than the explanatory ecumenism that Jackson
and Pettit endorse insofar as it is independent of any type of com-
mitment to causality.28 What they call “causal fundamentalism,”
that is, the position that every explanation must provide information

27 Salmon, Causality and Explanation, chapter 4, made a similar point about the
physical sciences, suggesting that causal models were better suited to explanations
of individual events, unification models to high theory. For a discussion see Henk W.
de Regt, “Wesley Salmon’s Complementarity Thesis: Causalism and Unificationism
Reconciled?,” International Studies in the Philosophy of Science, xx, 2 (2006): 129–47.
28 See Frank Jackson and Philip Pettit, “In Defense of Explanatory Ecumenism,”

Economics and Philosophy, viii, 1 (April 1992): 1–21.

explanatory games

617

on the causal history of what is to be explained, need not be an
ingredient of explanatory pluralism. Quite to the contrary, Lewis’s
dictum that “to explain an event is to provide some information
about its causal history,”29 which Jackson and Pettit endorse, need
not be followed: a genuinely pluralistic position can and should
make as few commitments as possible to causality (and other meta-
physical issues). Causal fundamentalism is an unnecessary restriction
imposed on the process of producing successful explanations in
science. Second, explanatory pluralism need not hinge on positions
and discussions of reductionism. In the few cases in which such
a position is defended in the literature, be it in the philosophy
of psychology,30 the philosophy of biology,31 or the philosophy of the
social sciences,32 it has always been done in the context of the dispute
between reductionists and anti-reductionists. However, the passion
for viewing scientific phenomena through the lenses of reductionism
is a relic of logical positivism and of the epoch of the explanatory
monarchy of physics (which designated all other sciences as “special”)
rather than of the explanatory liberal democracy of our times. Going
deeper on this issue would lead us astray; it suffices to note that
one can be an explanatory pluralist without adopting a specific stance
toward the issue of reduction.

Stating explanatory pluralism in a positive way is, of course, much
harder and must avoid two dangers: first, of serving a merely apologetic
function by providing ex-post legitimization of any and/or all explanatory
scientific practices; and second of sliding into an anarchic position that
christens as acceptable any explanation offered in scientific discourse
by entirely giving up the authority of any kind of scientific rationality.
I propose that these two dangers can be evaded if one theorizes in terms
of explanatory games. Let us proceed with the elaboration of this claim.

iv. the explanatory enterprise

Explanatory activity is part of the scientific activity undertaken by
imperfect biological organisms with a limited cognitive capacity in

29 David Lewis, “Causal Explanation,” in Philosophical Papers, Volume II (New York:

Oxford, 1986), p. 217.

30 See for example Robert McCauley and Bechtel, “Explanatory Pluralism and
Heuristic Identity Theory,” Theory and Psychology, xi, 6 (December 2001): 736–60;
McCauley, “Time Is of the Essence: Explanatory Pluralism and Accommodating Theo-
ries about Long-Term Processes,” Philosophical Psychology, xxii, 5 (2009): 611–35.

31 See for example Kim Sterelny, “Explanatory Pluralism in Evolutionary Biology,”

Biology and Philosophy, xi, 2 (April 1996): 193–214.

32 See for example Caterina Marchionni, “Explanatory Pluralism and Comple-
mentarity: From Autonomy to Integration,” Philosophy of the Social Sciences, xxxviii,
3 (September 2008): 314–33.

618

the journal of philosophy

interaction with artifacts in a specific social context. The explanatory
enterprise is a social process, and it consists of the attempt of the
participants in this process to provide answers to puzzles and solu-
tions to theoretical problems. The explanatory enterprise is embed-
ded in certain practices employed by the participants and unfolds
according to normative standards that have emerged in a long evolu-
tionary process of trial and error. There is a history to the explana-
tory enterprise, a history that includes the more and less successful
attempts of answering specific why-questions, the development of
more and less accurate means of representation devised to answer
such questions, and the permanent change of institutional constraints
under which the participants engage in their activities. The explana-
tory enterprise has a prehistory rooted in the attempt of our remote
ancestors to understand what was going on in their immediate physi-
cal and social environment and a history reflected in the progressive
exposure of explanations to a critical attitude and testing. Mythical
explanations of rain caused by a frustrated Zeus sitting on the top of
Olympus throwing thunder at the mortals have given place to scien-
tific explanations of natural phenomena tested in different experi-
mental settings with the aid of highly sophisticated techniques. The
explanatory enterprise emerges as a human phenomenon—therefore
permanently unfinished, and it should be understood as a project
in which humanity has been engaged for most of its history.33

At every moment of time there is a stock of explanations available
in a society proposed by ordinary people “in the wild” or by spe-
cialists organized formally or semi-formally within specific organiza-
tional structures such as churches, universities, and so on. This
explanatory reservoir is distributed among diverse individuals and
groups in the society under conditions of a cognitive division of
labor. The terms of provision, control, and dissemination of explana-
tions in this collective explanatory enterprise are regulated by the
different rules that the participants have come to adopt over time.
These rules incorporate the normative standards that guide the pro-
cesses of discovery and justification of explanations as well as
the modes of their communication, dissemination, and adoption.
They constitute the rules of the explanatory game that the participants
are playing.

Explanations emerge in the process of playing the game. How the
game is played depends on the rules of the game. Obviously, different

33 For a similar argument in the realm of ethics, see Kitcher, The Ethical Project

(Cambridge: Harvard, 2011), p. 2.

explanatory games

619

people play different explanatory games, which give rise to different
outcomes. The distinction between rules and actions within rules is
constitutive of the analysis of the explanatory enterprise in terms of
games. The players of a respective game, be they ordinary people,
scientists, or religious preachers, are constrained at any moment of
time by a series of rules concerning their explanatory activities. The
rules of the game divide the, in principle, innumerable possibilities
for providing explanations into those that can be undertaken and
those that cannot. The rules of the game define the means that
the players can use to represent the phenomena that they want to
explain as well as the class of explanatory strategies that the players
are allowed to undertake. They structure the interaction between
the players and shape the way that the explanatory game is played
over time.

This view conceptualizes the explanatory enterprise as a set of
explanatory games and highlights explanatory activity as fundamen-
tally social. In the case of science, for example, there is a cognitive
division of labor: some provide the big intuitions; others build the
bridges to existing theoretical structures, providing the unification
of phenomena; others elaborate on the means of representation;
and still others work out the empirical testing and applications to
different ranges of phenomena. Explanations are the outcome of
the complex processes of social interaction among individuals pur-
suing different aims and undertaking different tasks. Even in those
cases where explanations deemed to be very successful seem to be
prima facie due to the labors of a single scientist, it is never the case
that she masters all the practices and has invented all means of rep-
resentation and has designed all the techniques necessary for the pro-
vision of them. In other words, it is literally never the case that all
parameters of the explanatory process are controlled by one indi-
vidual and all the ingredients of a successful explanation can be
offered by a single scientist.

v. the explanatory process

A conceptualization of activities in terms of explanatory games goes
hand in hand with a focus on explanation as a process rather than
as an outcome. The task is to highlight the complex process of explanation
rather than to pose the issue as if explanation were a static situation.
During an evolutionary process of trial and error, explanatory activi-
ties are undertaken according to the prevailing rules of the game,
and a permanent flow of explanations is produced, tested, and
retained or discarded. Novelty is a permanent feature of this process
since new ways of representing the phenomena constantly emerge,

620

the journal of philosophy

new ways of testing are being constantly designed, and new means of
criticism are constantly invented. The traditional view of explanation
in its many facets has failed to see this point and has instead under-
taken scholastic efforts to analyze the outcomes of this process, high-
lighting mainly the logical aspects of what was supposed to be “the
explanatory relation.” There has been silence about a whole range
of issues pertaining to the processes of the construction of (success-
ful and less successful) explanations and to the diverse factors that
play a role in their rise and demise—quite a natural attitude since
the philosophical project has been concerned with the explication
of the concept of explanation rather than with the analysis of the
process of explanatory activity. More fatally still, the hidden consen-
sus has been that there is a single outcome, “the explanation” to be
described, rather than a range of explanations produced in a con-
stant process; and it has been thought that there is a single ideal,
“the successful explanation” that is to be normatively appraised,
rather than a great range of normative rules that structure the pro-
cess, which are to be criticized and refined.

To use a metaphor, the traditional view of explanation has focused
on what comes out of the pipe instead of the flow in it; and it has
offered the analysis of the drain that comes out of the flow as if it
were analogous to the pressure of the influx at the beginning of the
pipe. Between the two ends, however, lies an elastic and changeable
reservoir, whose magnitude depends on a series of circumstances.
Analogously, in the case of ordinary explanations the analysis should
focus on the flow of the river in the valley rather than on how the
landscape around the mouth of the river is shaped by the water
ending in it. One can grasp the explanatory process if one concep-
tualizes it as a continuous flow or river, which produces unceasingly,
at its terminus, the final products emerging in multiple transforma-
tive processes after the initial insertion of inputs. At every moment of
time many such streams flow, or, even more, complexly branched
river systems emerge next to each other, each a bit more advanced
than the next. The final products of all those streams appear in
more or less distant points in time.

The flow of explanations is channeled by the rules that govern the
explanatory activity. Depending on the rules, only certain classes of
activities can be undertaken; consequently a whole range of explana-
tions that are possible in principle are never produced and never
considered. The rules of the game are whatever constrains the flow
and gives it a shape; there can be natural or artificial impediments
that channel the flow in different ways, little stones and branches
which push the flow in a certain direction or big artificial dams

explanatory games

621

which interrupt it violently and force the water to collect in artificial
lakes. The rules of the game influence decisively the explanatory
process and shape the possible final outcomes.

Explanatory activities take place in historical time. The history
develops according to basic rules that set the trajectory for develop-
ment and that the participants learn in their socialization process.
The historicity of explanations is embedded in the rules of the
explanatory game: in the case of scientific explanations, this occurs
in processes whereby apprentices learn the ways to play the game
from veterans in the respective scientific community.34 The historicity
of the explanatory enterprise refers to nothing more than the learn-
ing history of the individual members of the respective group regard-
ing which explanatory strategies are permissible and which are not.
And the best way to analyze the slogan “history matters” is to analyze
the rules that govern the respective explanatory games. How should
such an analysis proceed, and what can it accomplish?

vi. the rules of the explanatory games:

an abstract characterization

The analysis of the rules of an explanatory game can be both of a
descriptive and a normative nature. I will tackle the descriptive task
in this and the next section before taking up the normative task in
the following two sections.

A description of the rules of a game includes the way that the
rules have emerged over time, but also their precise content. It is
straightforward that there are different types of explanatory games,
and the means for classifying them refer to the similarity of the rules
that govern the explanatory activities of the respective participants.
There are religious explanatory games, mythical explanatory games,
scientific explanatory games, and so on. Describing the different
kinds of games requires the exposition of the special rules that
characterize them and an account of how they differ among them.
I will not undertake this task here but will devote my attention
instead to the harder task of providing an abstract characterization
of an explanatory game.

Such a characterization can be given from both a static and a
dynamic view. From a static perspective one can mainly distinguish
among three kinds of rules:

1. Constitutive rules. There is a basic set of rules that constitute
an explanatory game as a game. They include three categories of

34 See Kitcher, The Advancement of Science: Science without Legend, Objectivity without

Illusions (New York: Oxford, 1993), p. 58ff.

622

the journal of philosophy

rules: (a) Rules determining what counts as an explanandum. Aristotle
famously regarded motion as an explanandum, and he provided causes
as an explanans. Newton did not regard motion as an explanandum.
Motion was taken to be what it was, the explanandum being the
change of motion. Aristotle and Newton played a different kind of
explanatory game. (b) Rules determining what must be taken as given.
Every game takes place within a context of background knowledge
that remains unquestioned and is taken as given. There is a bedrock
of unquestioned facts, beliefs, and practices which are left out of
the game, implicitly or explicitly. When August Cournot explained
the pricing behavior of a monopolist he took as given that the earth
is round, that all human beings can breathe, and that the cooking
of a pie requires a system that produces heat. (c) Rules determining
the metaphysical presuppositions. No explanatory game can take place
in a metaphysical vacuum. The metaphysical assumptions act as
constraints on the generation of the other rules and belong therefore
to the constitutive rules. The structure of the game is predicated on
prior assumptions concerning the way the world is and by what means
it is explainable in principle. These rules can be implicit or explicit
and they can vary from stone-age metaphysics to highly refined meta-
physical assumptions.

2. Rules of representation. Because of the hospitality the people of
Attica showed Demeter when she was searching for Persephone,
the Olympian goddess first gave agriculture to the human race. This
mythical explanation of the emergence of agriculture is not only
represented by means of an oral story (later also documented in
written form) using metaphorical language, but also with the aid
of some visual representations like a fifth-century BCE red-figure
Attic stamnos, showing Triptolemos teaching agriculture, the gift
of Demeter.35 In contemporary scientific explanatory games, repre-
sentation occurs by means of artifacts, both concrete, like graphs,
scale models, computer monitor displays, and so on, and abstract,
like mathematical models.36 Which rules of representation guide
the explanatory activities is fundamentally important for the quality
of explanations generated during the game.

3. Rules of inference. In every explanatory game a set of inferen-
tial strategies are used which aim at whatever is regarded as the
explanandum. Inferences act on the representations provided and

35 See Matthew Clark, Exploring Greek Myth (Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2012),

36 See van Fraassen, Scientific Representation: Paradoxes of Perspective (New York:

p. 7ff.

Oxford, 2008).

explanatory games

623

they can be of very different sorts. In religious explanatory games,
for example, inferences are frequently made from experiences of
revelation to phenomena easily observable without sophisticated
means of scientific representation. In scientific explanatory games,
laws or law-like statements, along with rules that respect some formal
logical requirements, are the basic rules of inference. Such rules can
be very specific and very diverse, ranging from recipes to formulate
predictions to instructions about how to construct arguments.

From a dynamic perspective the most important is the set of rules

of development:

4. Rules of scope. These are rules of specification; that is, they give
instructions about the scope of phenomena to which the explanatory
game should be applied. The scope of the explanatory game that
evolutionary theorists were engaged in originally included plants
and animals. The scope was then extended to include human cul-
ture. It has been extended and specified further to include even
routines employed by firms in market competition and much more.
The rules of scope are responsible for one main property of games,
which I would like to call nestedness. They give instructions on how
to dock one explanatory game into another and so provide nested
games. The easier the fit between the rules of scope of different
explanatory games, the higher the degree of their nestedness and
the greater the potential of interlocking different explanatory games.
For example, the rules of scope of the explanatory game of bio-
logical evolution and the rules of scope of the explanatory game
of growth economics have turned out to be congruent, so that the
economics of evolutionary change by Nelson and Winter has
emerged as an explanatory game, nested in the two other games.37
So, it is easier to get into a game if nestability is given. You need not
learn (a lot of) new rules in order to get into it. (Nestability is, thus, in a
sense the analogue of depth in the reductionist accounts of explanation.)
In a nutshell the rules of scope comprise the instructions about
where to apply the explanatory practices of the game and how to
apply the game to new phenomena—they are, thus, of a dynamic
nature by virtue of extending or contracting the phenomena on
which the specific explanatory practices of the game are to be applied.

vii. a (very short) case study

In order to exemplify further this rather abstract characterization of
a game, I will discuss very shortly an explanatory game in the history

37 See Richard R. Nelson and Sidney G. Winter, An Evolutionary Theory of Economic

Change (Cambridge: Harvard, 1982).

624

the journal of philosophy

of economic analysis which concerns the value of commodities. I will
start with the explanatory game that classical political economists
of the eighteenth century were playing and will then show how this
game was transformed into the one that marginalist economists came
to play at the end of the nineteenth century.

1. The constitutive rules of the explanatory game consisted first (a)
in what counted as an explanandum. Adam Smith, David Ricardo,
J. S. Mill, and the other classical economists regarded exchange
value as the explanandum.38 Further (b) the explanatory game took
place within a context of background knowledge, both natural
scientific and common sense knowledge, which remained unques-
tioned. This bedrock of unquestioned facts and beliefs was left
out of the explanatory game in an implicit manner. Finally, (c) the
main rule regulating the metaphysical presuppositions was that the
social world is in principle knowable, that it exemplifies an order
commensurate to the order of nature and that it is governed by laws
which are discoverable. 2. In order to explain the value of commodi-
ties, the classical economists used natural language and numerical
examples as the sole means of representation. The rules of represen-
tation that structured their explanatory game were, thus, very basic.
3. The rules of inference used to explain the exchange value of com-
modities were the rules of logic prevailing at that time, along with
a series of law-like statements. The most important one is included
in the title of Chapter I, Section I, of David Ricardo’s Principles: “The
value of a commodity, or the quantity of any other commodity for
which it will exchange, depends on the relative quantity of labour
which is necessary for its production, and not on the greater or less
compensation which is paid for that labour.”39 4. The scope of the
explanatory game is the “commercial society.” An additional rule
of scope is explicitly mentioned by Ricardo: “In speaking then of
commodities, of their exchangeable value, and of the laws which
regulate their relative prices, we mean always such commodities only
as can be increased in quantity by the exertion of human industry,
and on the production of which competition operates without restraint.”40
Under competitive conditions the “whole annual produce of labour
of every country, taken complexly, must resolve itself into the same

38 See Adam Smith, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations,
ed. Edwin Cannan (1776; repr., Chicago: University Press, 1976), Book I, chapter IV,
p. 32f.

39 See David Ricardo, On the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation, ed. Piero

Sraffa (1817; repr., Cambridge, UK: University Press, 1951), p. 11.

40 Ibid., p. 12, my emphasis.

explanatory games

625

three parts, and be parcelled out among different inhabitants of the
country, either as the wages of their labour, the profits of their stock,
or the rent of their land.”41 The explanatory game of the value of
commodities is nested, thus, into the explanatory game of the value
of factors of production and this is made possible by the rules of scope.
The explanatory game played by classical economists for approxi-
mately one century was structured by the sets of rules that I have
indicated. Within these rules their explanatory activities unfolded
and there was a specific cognitive division of labor. It was Adam
Smith who provided the big intuitions, David Ricardo who speci-
fied more rigorously the rules of inference, and John Stuart Mill
who extended the scope of applications of the theory. The explana-
tions that were generated while these and other less memorable clas-
sical economists were playing the game were the outcome of the
complex processes of social interaction between individuals pursuing
different theoretical and practical aims. A flow of explanations of the
value of commodities was produced and criticized mainly on theo-
retical terms since in this case no direct experimental evidence has
been produced. It has primarily been these theoretical criticisms that
have gradually led to the change in the rules of inference; and it was
the introduction of mathematical models that gradually led to a new
set of rules of representation. The scope of the analysis has also been
extended to include monopolies and (later) oligopolistic competition.
In this specific explanatory game the change has concerned all kinds
of rules: the rules of inference, the rules of representation, and the
rules of scope. The change was initiated by the marginalists. These
economists, Walras, Jevons, and Menger being the most influential
ones among others, were still playing the same game since the consti-
tutive rules had not changed: the explanandum remained the value
of commodities, the metaphysical assumptions remained largely the
same, and a great part of what was taken for granted by the classical
economists was also taken for granted by the marginalists.

The rules of inference started changing when economists confronted
a series of difficulties in explaining prices because of the lack of a
theory of demand. The concept of substitution at the margin pro-
vided a more satisfactory explanation of prices of products and fac-
tors of production. The marginal economists introduced a new
rule of inference, the maximization principle, so that distribution
became nothing more than the outcome of the application of
a more general principle. So, the marginalists achieved greater

41 Smith, op. cit., Book I, chapter VI, p. 58f.

626

the journal of philosophy

generality and unification by explaining both factor and product
prices with the help of a single principle. This maximization prin-
ciple also facilitated the introduction of new rules of representation:
mathematical calculus, more specifically maximization under con-
straints. The application of this formal means of representation
made the explanations more precise, simpler, and offered a unifica-
tion of diverse economic phenomena. The scope of the explanatory
game was also extended to include the explanation of prices under
monopolistic conditions. The classical economists did address the
case of monopoly prices but in a very unsystematic way, since their
main rule of inference—that is, that value depends on the amount
of labor—could only work under competitive conditions.

This change of the rules of the game came about as the outcome
of a process in which the explanatory activities of those economists
still employing the initial sets of rules were criticized by an ever
growing number of economists who were promulgating the advan-
tages of the new rules. Those advantages were mainly conceived
in terms of increased consistency of the rules, increased accuracy,
and simplicity. The unification provided by the extension of the
scope of the explanatory game counted as an additional benefit.
The successful propagation of the new rules by a few innovators
called more and more imitators to the scene, and so widespread adop-
tion of the new rules of the explanatory game took place in a gradual
learning process. Whether this change of rules had a revolutionary
character or a more gradual one is an issue that I will leave undis-
cussed here. It is only important to stress that under the new set
of rules, new kinds of explanatory activities started generating novel
explanations of market prices of commodities at different levels.

viii. criteria of appraisal of the rules:

a procedural conception

From a normative point of view, the focus on rules is equally impor-
tant. The normative discourse about explanations has centered
around the goodness of the outcomes rather than the goodness of
the rules. The traditional philosophical account of explanation
adopts a static stance when trying to develop normative standards
by which to judge the outcomes of explanatory activity. Philosophers
of science engage in the business of developing unitary models
of what “the successful explanation” is supposed to accomplish.
The development of the notion of an “ideal explanatory text,”42

42 See Peter Railton, “Probability, Explanation, and Information,” Synthese, xlviii,

2 (August 1981): 233–56, at p. 240ff.

explanatory games

627

for example, is a characteristic attempt to offer an eternal standard
for judging the quality of explanations (even if meant to serve only
as a regulative ideal). The provision of a general model able to serve
as a reference that applies to all times and conditions suggests itself
if one focuses on explanations as outcomes.

However, the opposing procedural conception is based squarely
in the rejection of any claim that the explanations that are good
are “out there” waiting to be discovered by scientists or anybody else.
The rules of the explanatory game are quite literally made up or
created in some participatory process of discussion, criticism, and
persuasion. Good explanations are those that have emerged because
good rules have been followed, and working out the criteria of their
goodness is not a once-and-for-all matter, but rather a continuous
enterprise, taking place with the participation of different kinds of
experts or other participants in the explanatory game. The expert
in the philosophy of science occupies no specific métier that allows
the privilege of making claims to define what is best for others. The
elucidation of this participatory process is the fundamentally natu-
ralistic element of the approach.

The moral is that it is not possible to provide a general model able
to serve as a reference for a successful explanation, which applies at
all times and under all conditions. Rather, the concrete specification
of the prescriptive rules that govern the explanatory activity must
proceed from a critical analysis of the prevailing situation, and it
must get by without an atemporal abstract ideal. In other words,
the explanatory process is channeled by rules which are themselves
changing. This refers to all kinds of rules, including the rules of logic
(which are especially important in the context of scientific explana-
tions), since logic, like every other discipline, develops over time.43

The virtues and vices of the rules of an explanatory game can be
themselves analyzed, debated, and criticized. This criticism takes
place at a first level with respect to specific criteria of appraisal that
emerge in the process of the evolutionary change of the rules. These
criteria of appraisal encapsulate the diverse values that those who
undertake the explanatory activities hold. These can be epistemic
values, like accuracy, simplicity, consistency, fruitfulness, and so on,
or non-epistemic values like honesty, integrity, piety, beauty, and so
on. There is, naturally, value-pluralism. At a first level, the critical
appraisal of the rules of the explanatory games takes place with

43 The refinement of the logical aspects of scientific explanation with the aid of
first-order predicate logic is, thus, naturally, only one stage of a long evolutionary
process rather than the final word on the matter.

628

the journal of philosophy

reference to these diverse values by participants and non-participants
in the game alike. The means of the critical appraisal can, of course,
differ. Some explanatory games are characterized by a great dog-
matism and the critical appraisal of the rules takes place by violent
means—this is often the case with religious explanatory games. The
means of critical appraisal used for judging the quality of the rules
of modern scientific explanatory games are non-violent—this has
become so common that it is regarded as self-evident.

ix. explanatory methodology as technology

This prompts the question whether there is some kind of external
criterion or justification process that can be used in order to judge
the superiority of the different values that are involved in the critical
appraisal of the rules of different explanatory games. It should be
clear that the quest for an ultimate justification of values and rules
is a manifestation of the vain quest for certainty originating in the
idea of a positive, sufficient justification. This general philosophical
idea, operative both in epistemology and philosophy of science as
well as in ethics and political philosophy, mandates the quest for
an adequate foundation, a sufficient justification, for all convictions
and principles. The demand for a justification of everything leads to
a situation with three alternatives, all of which unacceptable: the
Münchhausen Trilemma, named such because of an analogy existing
between this problem and one which that baron once had to solve.44
It involves three options: one has the choice between an infinite
regress, a logical circle, or a dogmatic suspension of the process at a
particular point. The traditional philosophical theory of explanation
typically suspends dogmatically the argumentation at some point in
favor of the ultimate “given” that the respective philosopher favors.
The dogmatism and the Münchhausen Trilemma can be avoided
by substituting the principle of critical examination for the principle
of sufficient justification. In accord with this principle, a discussion
of the problems of epistemology, philosophy of science, or ethics
need not refer back to ultimate reasons in order to be convincing
or “rational.” Instead, problems that arise in the sphere of cognition
or in the sphere of praxis are to be discussed and solved in light of
the already existing solutions. Solutions to new types of problems of
any sort require creativity and imagination and are not worked
out in a social and mental vacuum. The application of the principle
of critical examination means that solutions are to be creatively

44 See Hans Albert, Treatise on Critical Reason (Princeton: University Press, 1985),

p. 16ff.

explanatory games

629

discovered, they are to be weighted in reference to certain values
and standards, and, on this basis, the preferred solutions to prob-
lems are to be decided upon. Solutions are not judged to be good
or rational by virtue of being based on certain knowledge or ulti-
mate values. Instead, our solutions in all areas of cognition and
action are fallible, but they can be improved by critical discussion.
The idea of the immanent rationality or goodness of certain
models of explanation is a dogma. In contrast, the critical discussion
of the rules of the explanatory games aiming at their modification
and revision on the basis of a weighting of the various feasible alter-
natives with regard to different criteria and values is a way of escaping
dogmatism, without sliding into any kind of anarchic position of
“anything goes.” This middle-ground position between dogmatism
and extreme relativism consists of three essential ingredients: plu-
ralism, fallibilism, and revisionism. Let me specify very briefly these
three ingredients.

A pluralistic account acknowledges positively the existence of
many values, epistemic and non-epistemic alike. Pluralism is fun-
damentally different than relativism since pluralism does not involve
a renunciation of judgment and commitment as relativism does.45 A
pluralist engages with what she disagrees with, poses critical argu-
ments, and proposes alternatives—an attitude very far from the rela-
tivistic “whatever.” Besides, relativism does not necessarily imply
pluralism: the requirement to treat equally all alternatives that do
exist does not entail the requirement to have many alternatives.
If all agree on one alternative and there is no active search for other
alternatives, relativism has nothing to oppose to monism.46

Fallibilism is the position that all our knowledge, activities, principles,
positions, and rules are prone to error. In all areas of cognition and
action human beings constantly make mistakes, but they are able to
learn from them. A fallibilist treats all problem solutions as hypo-
thetical: she provisionally accepts them instead of searching for a
final justification for them. The fallibilistic attitude can be applied to
all areas of human activity: science, politics, and even religion. (The
existence of God can be treated as a hypothetical postulate to be criti-
cally discussed, for example.) What concerns us more here, criteria
and values can all be accepted as hypotheses amenable to criticism.

Revisionism is the position that all our beliefs and problem
solutions, fallible themselves, are amenable to revision—and possibly

45 See Hasok Chang, Is Water H2O? Evidence, Realism and Pluralism (New York: Springer,

2012), p. 261.

46 Ibid.

630

the journal of philosophy

to a progressive one. Revisionism is a corollary of the proce-
dural view adopted here—any static ideal would not be compatible
with it.

This middle-ground position views explanatory methodology as a
technological discipline. A technology operates, as is well known, with
hypothetical rather than categorical imperatives. Having accepted
that the quest for certainty is vain and that the attempts to provide
final justifications of our values are futile, the main endeavor consists
in accepting provisionally a series of values and normative criteria that
have emerged and then inquiring into how the different rules help to
attain them. To judge the performance of different sets of rules of
explanatory games, it is only necessary to hypothetically presuppose
certain performative criteria and then to investigate the degree to
which the explanatory activities guided by these rules can fulfill these
criteria. Truth or verisimilitude could be such a criterion, for exam-
ple, and a critical discussion of the rules of an explanatory game can
take place with respect to whether the explanations of a phenome-
non on offer at a certain point of time are true or close to the truth.
If truth is not accepted as a criterion or epistemic value, however,
then the quality of explanations can be judged according to other
criteria, such as, for example, beauty.

Favoring explanatory methodology as a technological discipline
does not force us to ostracize the domain of values to a dogmatic
or relativistic heaven. Values are not to be viewed as impervious to
critical discussion as the positivistic dogma demanded for decades.
Nor are they ostracized to an indifferent relativistic universe. Values
as normative principles of highest generality can be themselves criti-
cally debated. The outcomes of such discussions are, however, always
of a provisional character, the results of human endeavor themselves,
amenable to further debate and criticism. An Archimedean point of
departure does not exist in this case; nor does it in any other case.
There can just be moments or longer periods of consensus about
what are supposed to be the highest virtues of the rules of the
game, crystallizing the fallible outcomes of the ongoing discussion.
There is, to put it differently, no ultimate justification of the rules,
but a provisional consensus, if at all, about the most general norma-
tive standpoints and the highest principles, a consensus amenable
to revisions.

But the technological character of explanatory methodology that
I would like to stress here is not dependent on the outcome of the
ongoing discussion about values. Explanatory methodology can be
conceptualized as a rational heuristic: the different sets of rules are
appraised with respect to the different values, which are accepted

explanatory games

631

only hypothetically. And it is possible, of course, to evaluate different
kinds of rules with respect to different values. The rules of inference
of a certain explanatory game, for example, can be evaluated with
respect to truth, but also with respect to beauty. One can have a
set of rules of inference that satisfy aesthetic criteria (say highly
complex mathematical calculi) but fail to give a true account of
the phenomena to be explained. The hypothetical imperatives
employed are of the type: if one wants to attain a true explanation
of the phenomenon A, then one should employ rules of inference
that provide valid information about the structure of the respective
part of reality. The critical debate will concern whether this has
been attained or not, and this is a problem that requires creativity
and ingenuity on the part of the participants, who can be experts in
a specific field and philosophers of science alike.

All we avail of as participants in this discussion is the possibility
of framing informed judgments about these issues and defend-
ing them with arguments. A holy grail to help us find the perfect
explanation does not exist. Our fallible judgments are all that
we have, and at some point we have to make choices about the
rules we prefer—not necessarily rejecting the rest (there can be
also a second and a third prize, not only a first prize). And it is
important to stress that there is no algorithm relieving us from
the necessity to make the choices. Controversies cannot be substi-
tuted by calculations—we still have to form judgments and decide
which calculations to adopt.

x. conclusion

One way to defend explanatory pluralism is, thus, to view the
myriads of explanatory activities undertaken by scientists and
ordinary people in terms of explanatory games. In social
life
and in different domains of science different explanatory games
are played, and the philosophical project consists in describing and
normatively appraising the rules that constitute these games. This
project is fundamentally liberal, in the sense that participants and
non-participants in the game alike engage in the critical discussion
and revision of the rules, or to put it in other terms, the project is
fundamentally naturalistic—philosophers and scientists equally take
part in it.

The explanatory enterprise being a process that is developing,
all we can do is to point to the constraints of this process, the rules
of the game, but we can never work out the necessary and suffi-
cient conditions of what should be called an “explanation.” What
is an explanation? is a question that cannot be answered by a single

632

the journal of philosophy

philosophical account of explanation, but it is up to the various
explanatory games to come to terms with this. The traditional theory
suggests that we explain if and only if we use a theory of a cer-
tain sort (for example, mechanistic, unificationist, manipulationist).
According to my suggestion we explain if and only if we use a theory
insofar as this theory is embedded in a certain explanatory game,
where the “explanatory” is defined as a network of certain rule-
guided practices.

c. mantzavinos

University of Athens

