CHILD DEVELOPMENT PERSPECTIVES

Autonomy and Relatedness Revisited: Cultural

Manifestations of Universal Human Needs

Heidi Keller

University of Osnabrueck

ABSTRACT—Autonomy and relatedness are considered basic
human needs that manifest differently in different cultural
environments in response to contextual demands. This arti-
cle conceptualizes 3 types of cultural environments—proto-
typical Western, urban, middle-class families; prototypical
rural, subsistence-based farming families; and a hybrid
milieu of urban middle-class families from non-Western
environments—and proposes that autonomy and related-
ness have different meanings in each type. In contexts in
which individuals have a high degree of formal education
(Western and non-Western middle-class families), there is
an emphasis on inner states and mental representations.
Western middle-class families focus on separate individuals;
non-Western middle-class families focus on the family as a
social unit. In contexts in which individuals have a low
degree of formal education, there is a primary emphasis on
social responsibilities. Different socialization strategies
support adaptive frameworks in each of the 3 types of con-
texts: individual psychological autonomy in Western mid-
dle-class families, communal psychological autonomy in
non-Western middle-class families, and action autonomy in
subsistence-based farming families. All conceptions of
autonomy and relatedness can be considered as universal
competencies, yet they are differently emphasized in differ-
ent cultural milieus due to differing contextual demands.

KEYWORDS—cultural milieus;
psychological
responsibility.

autonomy;

action

socialization strategies;
social

autonomy;

Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to
Heidi Keller, Department of Culture and Development, Institute of
Psychology, University of Osnabru¨ck, Artilleriestr. 34, 49076
Osnabru¨ck, Germany; e-mail: heidi.keller@uni-osnabrueck.de.

ª 2011 The Author
Child Development Perspectives ª 2011 The Society for Research in Child Development
DOI: 10.1111/j.1750-8606.2011.00208.x

The need for autonomy and the need for relatedness can be con-
sidered as part of panhuman psychology. For healthy develop-
ment and well-being, individuals need communion as well as
agency (Bakan, 1966), love and belongingness as well as self-
actualization (Maslow, 1968), and closeness and interdepen-
dence with others as well as control over one’s own life (Ryan &
Deci, 2000). Humans acquire conceptions of autonomy and
relatedness during ontogenetic development through participa-
tion in everyday situations and routines. Yet the cultural mes-
sages that are embodied in everyday situations and routines
differ substantially across environmental contexts (Cowley,
Moodley, & Fiori-Cowley, 2004; Csordas, 1999; Keller, 2007;
Ochs & Izquierdo, 2009). Therefore, as a consequence of these
ontogenetic processes, individuals’ conceptions of autonomy and
relatedness will necessarily vary between different environments.
Over the past few decades, researchers have proposed various
conceptualizations of the relation between autonomy and related-
ness, ranging from the bipolar, unidimensional deﬁnition of indi-
vidualism⁄ collectivism (Hofstede, 2001; Triandis, 1995) to the
coexistence of independent dimensions (Deci & Ryan, 1991;
Kag˘itcibas¸ i, 1996; Kitayama & Uchida, 2005; Kuhl & Keller,
2008; Raeff, 2010). The premise of the bipolar, unidimensional
model of individualism⁄ collectivism is that autonomy and relat-
edness are mutually dependent constructs on the same contin-
uum. Individuals’ levels of autonomy and relatedness depend,
therefore, on the position that they occupy on the continuum: A
position closer to the autonomy pole excludes the existence of
relatedness to a large degree, and vice versa. Arising from multi-
ple criticisms of this conceptualization (e.g., Kag˘itcibas¸ i, 2007;
Killen & Wainryb, 2000; Oyserman, Coon, & Kemmelmeier,
2002; Raeff, 2010) are claims that autonomy and relatedness
coexist and need to coexist because they are both universal
human needs that are part of any human action and situation.
Kag˘itcibas¸ i (2007), for example, argues that individuals can be
autonomous as well as relational at the same time. Similar pro-
posals include the conceptions of interdependent agency (Yeh,
Bedford, & Yang, 2009), conjoint agency (Markus & Kitayama,

Volume 6, Number 1, 2012, Pages 12–18

2003), communal mastery (Hobfoll, Schroder, Wells, & Malek,
2002), and relationally autonomous reasons (Gore & Cross,
2006). Other authors exemplify the point of view that autonomy
and relatedness are both involved in everyday actions and situa-
tions across cultures. All these approaches have in common the
idea that autonomy⁄ agency mainly emphasizes the separate indi-
vidual with desires, intensions, and wishes (i.e., the inner world
of individuals) and the control of individual options and choices
(e.g., Savani, Markus, & Conner, 2008) and that relatedness cov-
ers the need for closeness with others and any actions and inten-
tions directed toward others. In this article, I argue that different
conceptions of autonomy and relatedness, as well as of their
interrelations, are needed, because contextual demands differ
substantially.

Different strands of science, such as neuroscience, evolution-
ary theory, and cognitive and socioemotional developmental psy-
chology, have demonstrated that infancy is a formative phase
during lifespan development
(Keller, 2007). Conceptions of
autonomy and relatedness during the early life period are scarce,
however. It is for this reason that I will focus on infancy and
early childhood in my discussion of these conceptions. Before
examining the different aspects of autonomy and relatedness and
their interplay in more detail, I will present an overview of cul-
tural environments and their differences.

DIFFERENT ENVIRONMENTS—DIFFERENT CULTURAL

MILIEUS

On the basis of both evolutionary psychology and psychocultural
research (Keller, 2008; LeVine, 1977; Whiting, 1980), I deﬁne
environments as contexts combining particular sociodemographic
characteristics that set the stage for the development of different
psychologies. In line with others, I consider individuals’ level of
formal education to be central in shaping reproductive histories
and related cultural values and practices (Greenﬁeld, 2009; Kel-
ler, 2007; LeVine, Miller, Richman, & LeVine, 1996). Higher
degrees of formal education are associated with a trend toward
smaller, nuclear households and having children later in life.
Lower degrees of formal education are associated with extended
households and having children earlier in life. Similarities in the
level of formal education, together with age at the birth of the ﬁrst
child, number of children, and household size prove to form simi-
lar cultural milieus with sets of beliefs, attitudes, norms, and val-
ues across different countries and geographical areas (Greenﬁeld,
2011; Keller, Borke, Lamm, Lohaus, & Yovsi, 2011).1

Research has identiﬁed three different types of environmental
contexts (without claiming to capture all of the environmental
variation on the planet): Two are prototypical contexts and the
third is a context combining various elements of the other two
(Keller, 2007). One prototypical context
is represented by

1It is important to stress that I refer here to formal education in particular insti-

tutions. I do not address education as part of everyday practices.

Autonomy and Relatedness

13

agrarian, subsistence-based environments, which are associated
with low levels of formal education, early onset of reproduction,
high numbers of children, and large multigenerational house-
holds. Another prototypical context is represented by Western
urban, postindustrialized, information-based environments with
high levels of formal education, later onset of reproduction, small
numbers of offspring, and nuclear-family households (Keller,
2008). There are multiple possible hybrid combinations of these
two prototypical contexts. One group of combinations is repre-
sented by middle-class families in non-Western societies who
have high levels of formal education (comparable to the Western
urban prototype) but who live in larger family units (comparable
to agrarian prototype). The number of children in these families
may vary but is usually more than 1–2 children in Western mid-
dle-class families and less than 5-plus children in non-Western
rural families (Keller, 2007). There are many other environmen-
tal contexts with different living arrangements.

It is important to stress that the two prototypical contexts are
not antithetical opposites on one dimension, as researchers often
mistakenly assume with reference to individualism⁄ collectivism.
Speciﬁcally, 5–7 years of formal education cannot be regarded
as the opposite of 15–17 years of formal education; one child
cannot be regarded as the opposite of ﬁve children; and becom-
ing a parent during one’s late teens cannot be regarded as oppo-
site of becoming a parent during one’s mid-30s. Instead, the two
prototypical contexts simply represent two very different socio-
cultural environments with substantially different views concern-
ing autonomy and relatedness. The cultural milieus in which
individuals and families live differ in systematic ways although
still allowing for interindividual variability within contexts, as
well as differences between contexts assigned to the same cul-
tural milieu. Nevertheless, there are pervasive characteristics
that differentiate between various environments and their respec-
tive cultural milieus.

DIFFERENT FACETS OF AUTONOMY AND

RELATEDNESS

As I brieﬂy outlined above, autonomy, deﬁned as the control and
realization of intentions, wishes, preferences, and mental states,
can be viewed from an individual perspective or from a
social⁄ communal perspective. Mind-mindedness (Meins et al.,
2003) and mentalization (Fonagy, Gergely, Jurist, & Target,
2002), deﬁned as accurate reading, understanding, and appropri-
ate commenting on inner states in parent–child interactions, are
thought to play a major role for acquiring this conception of
autonomy. The individual perspective focuses on the individual’s
self-expression and self-enhancement. A child who is socialized
toward individual autonomy is encouraged from early on to make
his or her own choices and to fulﬁll his or her own aspirations.
The self-conscious and self-contained child is the cultural ideal
of Western, middle-class families. The communal perspective, in
contrast, prioritizes the social unit (i.e., the family). A child who

Child Development Perspectives, Volume 6, Number 1, 2012, Pages 12–18

14 Heidi Keller

is socialized toward communal autonomy does not make a dis-
tinction between his or her own aspirations and the expectations
of the family. The modest child with a communal sense of self is
the cultural ideal of non-Western, middle-class families. This
communal perspective, however, is not imposed (heteronomous
in the Piagetian sense; Piaget, 1951) nor is it an unhealthy adop-
tion of others’ wishes and intents (inﬁltration, e.g., Deci & Ryan,
2008); rather, it is the expression of a communal identity (Kitay-
ama & Uchida, 2005).

The focus on mental states implies reﬂective monitoring of
actions. Verbal elaborativeness is necessary in order to express
and negotiate mental states. These conceptions can best be
described as psychological autonomy with a focus on the inner
world. In line with the literature on individual and communal
agency, I differentiate between individual psychological auton-
omy (when the individual is primarily in control) and communal
psychological autonomy (when the individual’s actions and
choices are primarily merged with the values of the social sys-
tem, mainly the family; Keller & Otto, 2011). Note, however, that
individuals can be in control of actions and situations without
reference to their inner state of mind concerning themselves or
others. For example, fetching wood, selling cookies, and caring
for smaller siblings in a traditional village family requires indi-
vidual decisions and responsibilities, yet these activities may be
performed without negotiations of one’s own and others’ inten-
tions and wishes (Rabinovich, 2008). Anthropologists have
described other such states of mind, like the opacity of mind of
the Kaluli, a group of rainforest dwellers in Papua New Guinea
who assert that they do not know what others think or feel
(Schieffelin, 1986). Similarly, in his observations of the lives of
the Amazonian Piraha Indians, Everett (2009) describes a princi-
ple of immediacy of experience that excludes reference to expe-
riences beyond the here and now. Nevertheless, it cannot be
denied that the Kaluli or the Piraha exert agency and autonomy
in their lives.

I propose to capture this mode of autonomy with the term
action autonomy. Action autonomy can be deﬁned as an individ-
ual’s capacity to act in a responsible and self-controlled way with
respect to fulﬁlling responsibilities and obligations. This capacity
comprises the planning and the performance of an action (Heck-
hausen & Heckhausen, 2006), which is under the control of the
individual.

Action autonomy can, of course, also be in the service of
psychological autonomy. Action autonomy is a central develop-
mental task during toddlerhood, and all children eventually
acquire it. Yet the domains in which action autonomy can be
expressed (e.g., stacking building blocks on one’s own or
handling a sharp knife; see also Everett, 2009) and the
responsibilities regarding the actions assigned to the child
(playing with toys in appropriate areas or contributing to family
maintenance) may vary substantially across different environ-
ments. Therefore, action autonomy can be executed with and
without psychological autonomy.

Relatedness is usually discussed in the literature in terms of two
different modes of social relations: closeness and separateness. The
implied differentiation between closeness and separateness may
lead to the incorrect assumption that separate individuals have
neither want nor need of relationships when, in fact, individuals
cannot exist without relationships. Rather, the mode and structure
of relationships may differ. Kitayama, Duffy, and Uchida (2007)
characterize the separateness mode in terms of instrumental social
relations, in which individuals regulate their social relations with
respect to their desires, goals, needs, and plans and act in accor-
dance with the relevant attributes of the self. Kitayama, Markus,
Matsumoto, and Norasakkunkit (1997) characterize the closeness
mode in terms of communal social relations, in which individuals
need to be aware of external contingencies like expectations, needs,
and wishes of others, as well as of nonsocial aspects of social situa-
tions. Social relations are thus based on responsibilities toward
social roles and expectations. Individual psychological autonomy
necessitates the mode of separateness. Communal psychological
autonomy necessitates the mode of closeness.

This distinction does not, however, take into account the qual-
ity that relatedness can embody, especially with respect to the
dimension of psychological intimacy. If, as I have argued, action
autonomy may be executed without psychological autonomy,
social relations can also be expected to be less integrated into
one’ s own and others’ inner worlds and to rely more on unques-
tioned social obligations and duties. I will, therefore, differentiate
between separate relatedness and relatedness in terms of social
responsibilities that may or may not be based on psychological
intimacy. Separate relatedness is considered to be the functional
mode of relatedness in Western, middle-class families. Social
responsibility together with psychological intimacy is considered
to be the functional mode of relatedness in non-Western, mid-
dle-class families. Social responsibility without psychological
intimacy as a requirement is considered to be the functional
mode of relatedness in rural, subsistence-based families.

These different conceptions of autonomy and relatedness can
be universally expected to be part of humans’ repertoires. It is
also probable, however, that these conceptions are valued and
emphasized to different degrees in the three types of cultural
environments discussed above. In the sections that follow, I will
discuss the cultural milieus that frame socialization strategies
used by families in these different contexts, highlighting different
facets of autonomy and relatedness. It is important to note that
I will characterize central
tendencies that do not exclude
individual and interindividual variation.

SUBSISTENCE-BASED FARMING FAMILIES

The life of farmers in subsistence-based economies requires
unconditional and unquestioned cooperation. Every member of
the family system must fulﬁll duties and roles within an age and
gender hierarchy. For this reason, socialization strategies empha-
size relatedness in terms of social responsibilities as well as early

Child Development Perspectives, Volume 6, Number 1, 2012, Pages 12–18

action autonomy. Thus, all family members are able to contribute
to the functioning of the family by carrying out tasks that are
appropriate for their developmental competencies.

(e.g.,

verbal

communication patterns

Children in these economies are primed toward unconditional
social responsibility with symbiotic relationships through exten-
sive body contact (e.g., Cameroonian Nso farmers: Keller, 2003;
Nsamenang, 1992; the Beng people: Gottlieb, 2004; Ngandu:
Hewlett, Lamb, Shannon, Leyendecker, & Scho¨lmerich, 1998).
For example, infants are breast-fed before they express negative
emotionality in order to blur the distinction between self and
others (Rothbaum, Pott, Azuma, Miyake, & Weisz, 2000), and
co-occurring
vocal
exchanges) are synchronous and overlapping rather than dia-
chronic or sequential (e.g., Indians: Gratier, 2003; the Nso: Keller,
Otto, Lamm, Yovsi, & Ka¨rtner, 2008). Verbal and motor behaviors
are coordinated into (joint) protosongs (rhythmically co-occurring
communication) that form social actions rather than protoconver-
sations (turn-taking conversations) that form individual actions
(Cowley et al., 2004; Demuth, 2008). This socialization strategy
has been demonstrated to support children’s compliance to social
rules (Keller, Ka¨rtner, Borke, Yovsi, & Kleis, 2005; Keller et al.,
2004). Caregivers mirror what the child is doing and refer to outer
appearance and visible behaviors without reference to the inner
world (Demuth, 2008). The verbal environment is rather skeletal
and repetitive, with ample use of statements and orders (Demuth,
2008; Schro¨der et al., 2011).

In order to make children supportive family members from
early on, families place special emphasis on accelerating their
physical development so that they achieve motor independence
at a young age (e.g., the Beng: Gottlieb, 2004; the Nso: Keller,
Yovsi, & Vo¨lker, 2002). Consequently, from an early age (about
3–4 years), children help with household chores like cleaning
the house, fetching water and wood, helping with the family busi-
ness (e.g., selling farm and kitchen products), and babysitting
younger siblings or relatives (for a summary, see Lancy, 2008).
The mode of autonomy that is needed to comply with these
expectations is action autonomy. Children are expected to be
helpers who can act in self-determined and self-responsible ways
with a focus on the functioning and well-being of the social unit.
The enactment of social responsibilities does not require
exploration and realization of the inner world. Communication is
based on the here-and-now reality of everyday life. The cultural
milieu of subsistence-based farmers can thus be characterized as
embodying social responsibility with action autonomy. Social
responsibility is the primary concern; the mode of autonomy that
is emphasized and supported in these communities is clearly in
the service of social responsibilities.

WESTERN, POSTMODERN, URBAN FAMILIES

In a Western, urban metropolis, self-expression and competition
are absolutely necessary for becoming a competent and success-
ful member and are encouraged in a family system in which

Autonomy and Relatedness

15

parents and children have the right to voice their opinions and
to negotiate their points of view in order to optimize individual
interests and desires. Within this system, these families adopt
socialization strategies that emphasize the psychological auton-
omy of the child from early on. Infants are treated as quasi-
equal partners whose wishes, preferences, and intentions are
responded to and respected by sensitive caregiving, mainly from
the mother (Ainsworth, Blehar, Waters, & Wall, 1978). Mothers
and fathers (albeit to a lesser degree) spend ‘‘quality time’’ with
their infants using exclusive dyadic attention. The preferred
modes of interaction are face-to-face contact, object stimulation,
and extensive conversations that mirror and explain the inner
world to the infant (e.g., intention: ‘‘What do you want?’’; emo-
tion: ‘‘Do you like this?’’; and cognition: ‘‘You know so much!’’;
Keller, Demuth, & Yovsi, 2008; Keller & Otto, 2009).

Contingent responsiveness to infants’ communicative signals
(mainly visual and vocal) allow them to develop expectations
and predictions about the world and experience themselves as
causal agents and, as such, separate selves (Ka¨rtner, Keller, &
Yovsi, 2010; Keller, Lohaus, Vo¨lker, Cappenberg, & Chasiotis,
1999). Individual psychological autonomy is the developmental
organizer in a relational network that emphasizes separate relat-
edness. The developmental consequence of this socialization
strategy is the emergence of an early separate identity (Keller,
2007).

Parents, in line with health-care and education professionals,
believe that each infant has his or her own developmental pace,
and therefore, motor stimulation is considered as inappropriate
and even dangerous. Nevertheless, efforts are often made to
advance the development of infants’ minds and cognitive sys-
tems with books, toys, and games. Indeed, in recent years, the
popularizing of now-questioned research on enhancing infants’
cognitive growth led to a boom in early training programs, with
such self-proclaimed mind-builders as Little Einstein, Mozart
for Babies, and Creativity with Picasso. The cultural milieu of
Western, middle-class families can thus be characterized as
embodying primarily individual psychological autonomy. Rela-
tionships are based on free communicative choices between
separate individuals who regulate their own desires, goals,
needs, and plans. Thus, action autonomy, as well as separate
relatedness, is clearly in the service of individual psychological
autonomy.

NON-WESTERN, URBAN, MIDDLE-CLASS FAMILIES

Non-Western, urban, middle-class families often have their cul-
tural roots in traditional village contexts similar to that of the
subsistence-based farming families described above. They them-
selves, their parents, or their grandparents migrated from the
village to the city. They have high levels of formal education
received from Western or Western-oriented school systems and
universities. Formal education can be regarded as the engine
of change, in that it increases the availability of economic

Child Development Perspectives, Volume 6, Number 1, 2012, Pages 12–18

16 Heidi Keller

opportunities and new lifestyles. As a consequence, knowledge
becomes detached from the generational repositories (parents
and grandparents) within the extended-family context. In fact,
Greenﬁeld (2004) argues that formal schooling undermines the
family as an educational institution. Knowledge becomes the
possession of the individual and is independent of family hierar-
chies (Greenﬁeld, 1996).

The most prevalent consequence of

formal education on
socialization strategies is the increase in verbal exchanges as
language becomes more important in daily practices (LeVine
et al., 1996). Interactions generally become more distal, with
decreases in body contact and increases in face-to-face episodes
and object play, though these changes occur to a lesser extent
than in Western families. In this context, psychological auton-
omy is nourished, but not necessarily at the expense of social
responsibilities within the family. Parents still try to instill in
their children conformity with family values, respect for the
elderly, self-control, and maintenance of parental authority
(Chaudhary, 2004; Kag˘itcibas¸ i, 2007). Urban, educated families
from non-Western backgrounds do not, however, form prototypi-
cal cultural contexts like those of the non-Western farming fami-
lies and Western, urban, middle-class families, largely because
the combination of individual and communal dimensions may
take different forms within this hybrid context.

Infants and children participate in daily family activities that
instantiate communal psychological autonomy with elaborate
and mind-minded conversations and interactions focusing on
communal themes and interests. Individual psychological auton-
omy may also be supported in non-Western, urban, middle-class
families, however. At the same time, these families value rela-
tional responsibilities embodying hierarchy, conformity, and
respect in the family system. The developmental consequences
of this socialization strategy are that children achieve social com-
petencies earlier than do Western, middle-class children. The
cultural milieu of non-Western, middle-class families can thus
be characterized as embodying primarily communal psychologi-
cal autonomy with psychologically enacted social responsibili-
ties. It
is still unclear from the existing literature whether
communal psychological autonomy is in the service of social
responsibilities with respect to the family system or whether the
network of family responsibilities informs communal psychologi-
cal autonomy.

CONCLUSION

In line with some of the existing literature, I have argued that
autonomy and relatedness are basic human needs that are also
represented as cultural values. I have proposed conceptions of
autonomy and relatedness in terms of the functional affordances
in different environments. Basically, psychological autonomy as
the psychological control over intentions, wishes, and actions is
differentiated from action autonomy as the responsibility to per-
form actions in a self-reliable way. Psychological autonomy as

well as action autonomy can be in the service of the self or a
social unit. Similarly, relatedness can be based on psychological
bonds between separated individuals (separate relatedness) or on
social responsibilities within a social unit. Both modes can be
synthesized with psychological intimacy.

The prevalent modes of autonomy and relatedness are differ-
ently enacted in different sociodemographic contexts. I have pro-
posed three types of environmental contexts: two prototypical
contexts (Western urban, middle-class families and rural, subsis-
tence-based farming families) and one hybrid context (urban,
middle-class families from non-Western societies). High degrees
of formal education support a mind-minded, reﬂective way of life
with an emphasis on inner states and mental representations of
actions and situations. Western, middle-class families focus on
separate individuals, and non-Western middle-class families
focus on the communal perspective (i.e., the family as a social
unit), but both family types have the same underlying orientation
with respect to the role of the mental organization of psychologi-
cal autonomy. Low degrees of formal education support the pres-
ence and the necessity of action as an individual responsibility
in terms of action autonomy, which is ingrained in communal
responsibility for the survival and functioning of the family or
household. Previous studies have demonstrated that the timing,
sequence, and content of developmental milestones differ across
these three environments (for a summary, see Keller, 2007).

Current approaches that stress the coexistence of autonomy and
relatedness (e.g., Deci & Ryan, 1991; Kag˘itcibas¸ i, 2005; Killen &
Wainryb, 2000; Nucci, Saxe, & Turiel, 2000) often lack speciﬁca-
tion of the structure and form of this coexistence. I propose that
the conceptualization of autonomy and relatedness as adaptations
to the demands of particular living contexts shapes the coexis-
tence in particular ways and helps to overcome explicit and impli-
cit dichotomies. Unlike Kag˘itcibas¸ i
(2007), who proposes a
dimension of interpersonal distance, I do not believe that sepa-
rateness is the opposite of relatedness. Instead of a continuum,
there may be different modes that can vary independently along
different dimensions, including closeness and separateness.

Similarly, I do not conceive of autonomy as the opposite of
heteronomy along the continuum of agency (e.g., Kag˘itcibas¸ i,
2007). Most deﬁnitions of autonomy or autonomous motivation
stress the subjective experience of one’s own actions as self-
chosen and arising from one’s own experience of the world.
Heteronomy (Kag˘itcibas¸ i, 2007), or controlled motivation (Gagne´
& Deci, 2005), is the experience of being subject to the will and
intentions of others and acting with a sense of pressure. There is
ample cross-cultural evidence, however, that control is experi-
enced differently in different cultural environments (Chao,
1994). My proposal goes beyond the coexistence of autonomy
and relatedness and speciﬁes a synthesis that can be identiﬁed
in particular developmental patterns (see also Luciano, 2009).
training in West-African villages accelerates
Early motor
children’s motor development and leads
to early motor
independence. This early motor independence allows for early

Child Development Perspectives, Volume 6, Number 1, 2012, Pages 12–18

action autonomy in order to fulﬁll relational obligations and
duties. The cognitive training and elaborate conversations of
Western, middle-class families support an early separateness,
with a focus on inner experiences in preparation for a competi-
tive urban lifestyle.

A point that needs emphasizing is that it is not countries or
societies that represent contexts for the development of autonomy
and relatedness but sociodemographically based cultural mili-
eus. In this article, I have characterized modal patterns, but I
have not discussed interindividual or intraindividual variability.
I also have not discussed subjective states of mind; for example,
an individual with a separate psychological relational conception
may place greater emphasis and personal importance on rela-
tionships in his or her life than would an individual with a rela-
tional conception of social responsibilities.

It is important to stress that all conceptions of autonomy and
relatedness are adaptations to particular contextual demands.
However, contexts are not static blueprints; they change in both
predictable and unpredictable ways over time. Indeed, cultural
milieus need to change in order to be adaptive (see also Green-
ﬁeld, 2009). In this article, I have presented proﬁles that facili-
tate the study of variability and change within and between
contexts and milieus in the future. It is also important to stress
that there is not one conception that is better than another, nor is
there one conception that is more developed and advanced than
another. All conceptions have their own disadvantages and pos-
sible maladaptive variants. Much more research is needed in
order to clarify the modes of autonomy and relatedness in differ-
ent cultural environments.

REFERENCES

Ainsworth, M. D. S., Blehar, M. C., Waters, E., & Wall, S. (1978).
the strange

Patterns of attachment: A psychological study of
situation. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Bakan, D.

(1966). The duality of human existence: Isolation and

communication in Western man. Chicago: Rand McNally.

Chao, R. (1994). Beyond parental control and authoritarian parenting
style: Understanding Chinese parenting through the cultural notion
of training. Child Development, 65, 1111–1119.

Chaudhary, N. (2004). Listening to culture: Constructing reality from

everyday day talk. New Delhi, India: Sage.

Cowley, S. J., Moodley, S., & Fiori-Cowley, A. (2004). Grounding signs
of culture: Primary intersubjectivity in social semiosis. Mind,
Culture, and Activity, 11, 109–132.

Csordas, T. J. (1999). Embodiment and cultural phenomenology. In G.
Weiss & H. Haber (Eds.), Perspectives on embodiment (pp. 143–
162). New York: Routledge.

Deci, E., & Ryan, R. (1991). A motivational approach to self: Integration
in personality. In R. Dienstbier (Ed.), Nebraska Symposium on
Motivation: Vol. 38. Perspectives on motivation (pp. 237–288).
Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.

Deci, E., & Ryan, R.

psychological well-being
Psychology, 49, 14–23.

(2008). Facilitating optimal motivation and
domains. Canadian

across

life’s

Autonomy and Relatedness

17

Demuth, C. (2008). Talking to infants: How culture is instantiated in
early mother–infant interactions. The case of Cameroonian farming
Nso and North German middle-class families. Unpublished doctoral
dissertation, University of Osnabru¨ck, Germany.

Everett, D. (2009). Don’t sleep, there are snakes: Life and language in the

Amazonian jungle. New York: Vintage Books.

Fonagy, P., Gergely, G., Jurist, E., & Target, M.

(2002). Affect
regulation, mentalization and the development of the self. New York:
Other Press.

Gagne´, M., & Deci, E. L. (2005). Self-determination theory and work

motivation. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 26, 331–362.

Gore, J. S., & Cross, S. E. (2006). Pursuing goals for us: Relationally
in long-term goal pursuit. Journal of

autonomous
Personality and Social Psychology, 90, 848–861.

reasons

Gottlieb, A. (2004). The afterlife is where we come from. Chicago:

Chicago University Press.

Gratier, M.

(2003). Expressive timing and interactional synchrony
similarities, cultural
experience. Cognitive

between mothers and infants: Cultural
differences,
Development, 18, 511–531.

immigration

and

the

Greenﬁeld, P. M. (1996). Culture as process: Empirical methods for
cultural psychology. In J. W. Berry, Y. H. Poortinga, & J. Pandey
(Eds.), Handbook of cross-cultural psychology (2nd ed., Vol. 1,
pp. 301–346). Boston: Allyn & Bacon.

Greenﬁeld, P. M.

(2004). Weaving generations

together: Evolving

creativity in the Maya of Chiapas. Santa Fe, NM: Sar Press.

Greenﬁeld, P. M. (2009). Linking social change and developmental
change: Shifting pathways of human development. Developmental
Psychology, 45, 401–418.

Greenﬁeld, P. M.

(2011). Commentary on: Developing patterns of
parenting in two cultural communities. International Journal of
Behavioral Development, 35, 240–241.

Heckhausen, J., & Heckhausen, H. (Eds.). (2006). Motivation und
Handeln [Motivation and action]. Heidelberg, Germany: Springer
Medizin.

Hewlett, B. S., Lamb, M. E., Shannon, D., Leyendecker, B., &
Scho¨lmerich, A. (1998). Culture and early infancy among central
African foragers and farmers. Developmental Psychology, 34, 653–
661.

Hobfoll, S. E., Schroder, K. E. E., Wells, M., & Malek, M. (2002).
Communal versus individualistic construction of sense of mastery
in facing life challenges. Journal of Social & Clinical Psychology,
21, 362–399.
Hofstede, G. H.

(2001). Culture’s consequences: Comparing values,
behaviors, institutions, and organizations across nations. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.

Kag˘itcibas¸ i, C. (1996). The autonomous-relational self: A new synthesis.

European Psychologist, 1, 180–186.

Kag˘itcibas¸ i, C. (2005). Autonomy and relatedness in cultural context:
Implications for self and family. Journal of Cross-Cultural
Psychology, 36, 403–422.

Kag˘itcibas¸ i, C. (2007). Family, self, and human development across
(2nd ed.). Mahwah, NJ:

countries: Theory and applications
Erlbaum.

Ka¨rtner, J., Keller, H., & Yovsi, R. D. (2010). Mother–infant interaction
during the ﬁrst three months: The emergence of culture-speciﬁc
contingency patterns. Child Development, 81, 540–554.

Keller, H. (2003). Socialization for competence: Cultural models of

infancy. Human Development, 46, 288–311.

Child Development Perspectives, Volume 6, Number 1, 2012, Pages 12–18

18 Heidi Keller

Keller, H. (2007). Cultures of infancy. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Keller, H.

(2008). Culture and biology. Social and Personality

infancy: Variables in the human experience (pp. 15–27). New York:
Academic Press.

Psychology Compass, 2, 668–681.

Keller, H., Borke, J., Lamm, B., Lohaus, A., & Yovsi, R. D. (2011).
Developing patterns of parenting in two cultural communities.
International Journal of Behavioral Development, 35, 233–245.

Keller, H., Demuth, C., & Yovsi, R. D. (2008). The multi-voicedness of
independence and interdependence: The case of Cameroonian Nso.
Culture and Psychology, 14, 115–144.

Keller, H., Ka¨rtner, J., Borke, J., Yovsi, R. D., & Kleis, A. (2005).
Parenting styles and the development of the categorial self. A
longitudinal study on mirror self recognition in Cameroonian Nso
farming and German families. International Journal of Behavioral
Development, 29, 496–504.

Keller, H., Lohaus, A., Vo¨lker, S., Cappenberg, M., & Chasiotis, A.
(1999). Temporal contingency as an independent component of
parenting behavior. Child Development, 70, 474–485.

Keller, H., & Otto, H. (2009). The cultural socialization of emotion
regulation during infancy. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology,
40, 996–1011.

Keller, H., & Otto, H. (2011). Different faces of autonomy. In X. Chen &
K. H. Rubin (Eds.), Socioemotional development in cultural context
(pp. 164–185). New York: Guilford.

Keller, H., Otto, H., Lamm, B., Yovsi, R. D., & Ka¨rtner, J. (2008). The
timing of verbal ⁄ vocal communications between mothers and their
infants: A longitudinal cross-cultural comparison. Infant Behavior
& Development, 31, 217–226.

Keller, H., Yovsi, R. D., Borke, J., Ka¨rtner, J., Jensen, H., &
Papaligoura, Z.
(2004). Developmental consequences of early
parenting experiences: Self regulation and self recognition in three
cultural communities. Child Development, 75, 1745–1760.

Keller, H., Yovsi, R. D., & Vo¨lker, S. (2002). The role of motor
stimulation in parental ethnotheories: The case of Cameroonian
Nso and German women. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 33,
398–414.

Killen, M., & Wainryb, C. (2000). Independence and interdependence
in diverse cultural contexts. In S. Harkness, C. Raeff, & C. M.
Super (Eds.), Variability in the social construction of the child. New
Directions in Child and Adolescent Development (Vol. 87, pp. 5–22).
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Kitayama, S., Duffy, S., & Uchida, Y. (2007). Self as cultural mode of
being. In S. Kitayama & D. Cohen (Eds.), Handbook of cultural
psychology (pp. 136–174). New York: Guilford.

Kitayama, S., Markus, H. R., Matsumoto, H., & Norasakkunkit, V. (1997).
Individual and collective processes in the construction of the self:
Self-enhancement in the United States and self-criticism in Japan.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 72, 1245–1267.

(2005).

Kitayama, S., & Uchida, Y.

Interdependent agency: An
alternative system for action. In R. Sorrentino, D. Cohen, J. M.
Ison, & M. P. Zanna (Eds.), Culture and social behaviour: The
Ontario Symposium (Vol. 10, pp. 165–198). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Kuhl, J., & Keller, H. (2008). Affect-regulation, self-development and
pareting: A functional-design
cross-cultural
differences. In R. Sorrentino & S. Yamaguchi (Eds.), The handbook
of motivation and cognition across cultures (pp. 19–47). New York:
Elsevier.

approach

to

LeVine, R. A., Miller, P. M., Richman, A. L., & LeVine, S. (1996).
Education and mother–infant interaction: A Mexican case study. In
S. Harkness & C. M. Super (Eds.), Parents’ cultural belief systems
(pp. 254–288). New York: Guilford.

Luciano, M.

(2009). Commentary: Autonomy

and relatedness
reconsidered: Learning from the Inuit. Culture and Psychology, 15,
451–462.

Markus, H. R., & Kitayama, S. (2003). Culture, self, and the reality of

the social. Psychological Inquiry, 14, 277–283.

Maslow, A. (1968). Toward a psychology of being (2nd ed.). New York:

Van Nostrand Reinhold.

Meins, E., Fernyhough, C., Wainwright, R., Clark-Carter, D., Das Gupta,
M., Fradley, E., et al. (2003). Pathways to understanding mind:
Construct validity and predictive validity to maternal mind-
mindedness. Child Development, 74, 1194–1211.

Nsamenang, A. B. (1992). Human development in cultural context: A

Third World perspective. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.

Nucci, L., Saxe, G., & Turiel, E.

(2000). Culture,

thought and

development. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

Ochs, E., & Izquierdo, C. (2009). Responsibility in childhood: Three

developmental trajectories. Ethos, 37, 391–413.

Oyserman, D., Coon, H. M., & Kemmelmeier, M. (2002). Rethinking
individualism and collectivism: Evaluation of theoretical assump-
tions and meta-analyses. Psychological Bulletin, 128(1), 3–72.

Piaget, J. (1951). The origin of intelligence in children. New York:

International Universities Press.

Rabinovich, E. P. (2008). Commentary: How far is Brazil from Africa?

Culture and Psychology, 14, 145–152.

Raeff, C.

(2010). Independence and interdependence in children’s
developmental experiences. Child Development Perspectives, 4, 31–
36.

Rothbaum, F., Pott, M., Azuma, H., Miyake, K., & Weisz, J. (2000). The
development of close relationships in Japan and the United States:
Paths of symbiotic harmony and generative tension. Child
Development, 71, 1121–1142.

Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2000). Self-determination theory and the
facilitation of intrinsic motivation, social development, and well-
being. American Psychologist, 55, 68–78.

Savani, K., Markus, H. R., & Conner, A. L. (2008). Let your preference
be your guide? Preferences and choices are more tightly linked to
North Americans than for Indians. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 95, 861–876.

Schieffelin, B. B. (1986). Teasing and shaming in Kaluli children’s
interactions. In B. B. Schieffelin & E. Ochs (Eds.), Language
socialization across cultures (pp. 165–181). New York: University of
Cambridge Press.

Schro¨der, L., Keller, H., To˜ugu, P., Tulviste, T., Lenk, M., Schwarzer, S.,
et al. (2011). Cultural expressions of preschoolers’ emerging self:
Narrative and iconic representations. Journal of Cognitive
Education and Psychology, 10, 7–95.

Triandis, H. C. (1995). Individualism and collectivism. Boulder, CO:

Westview.

Whiting, B. B. (1980). Culture and social behavior: A model for the

development of social behavior. Ethos, 8, 95–116.

Lancy, D. F. (2008). The anthropology of childhood. Cherubs, chattel,

changelings. New York: Cambrigde University Press.

LeVine, R. A. (1977). Child rearing as cultural adaptation. In P. H.
Leiderman, S. R. Tulkin, & A. Rosenfeld (Eds.), Culture and

Yeh, K.-H., Bedford, O. B., & Yang, Y.-J. (2009). A cross-cultural
comparison of
the coexistence and domain superiority of
individuating and relating autonomy. International Journal of
Psychology, 44, 213–221.

Child Development Perspectives, Volume 6, Number 1, 2012, Pages 12–18

