Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México
 
The Justification of Equality
Author(s): Thomas Nagel
Source: Crítica: Revista Hispanoamericana de Filosofía, Vol. 10, No. 28 (Apr., 1978), pp. 3-31
Published by: Instituto de Investigaciones Filosóficas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de
México
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/40104073
Accessed: 12-05-2016 06:11 UTC
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

http://about.jstor.org/terms

 

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted

digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about

JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Instituto de Investigaciones Filosóficas are
collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Crítica: Revista Hispanoamericana de
Filosofía

This content downloaded from 131.173.41.233 on Thu, 12 May 2016 06:11:40 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 THE JUSTIFICATION OF EQUALITY*

 THOMAS NAGEL
 Princeton University

 I

 It is difficult to argue for the intrinsic social value of equa-
 lity without begging the question. Equality can be defended
 up to a point in terms of other values like utility and liberty.
 But some of the most difficult questions are posed when it
 conflicts with these.

 Contemporary political debate recognizes four types of

 equality: political, legal, social, and economic. The first three
 cannot be defined in formal terms. Political equality is not
 guaranteed by granting each adult one vote and the right
 to hold public office. Legal equality is not guaranteed by
 granting everyone the right to a jury trial, the right to bring
 suit for injuries, and the right to counsel. Social equality is
 not produced by the abolition of titles and official barriers
 to class mobility. Great substantive inequalities in political
 power, legal protection, social esteem and self-respect are
 compatible with these formal conditions. It is a common-
 place that real equality of every kind is sensitive to economic
 factors. While formal institutions may guarantee a minimum
 social status to everyone, big differences in wealth and in-
 come will produce big distinctions above that - distinctions
 that may be inherited as well.

 So the question of economic equality cannot be detached
 from the others, and this complicates die issue, because the
 value of the other types of equality may be of a very diffe-

 * The 1977 Tanner Lecture at Standford University, published by permission

 of the Tanner Lecture Trust.

 3

This content downloaded from 131.173.41.233 on Thu, 12 May 2016 06:11:40 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 rent kind. To put it somewhat paradoxically, their value may
 not be strictly egalitarian. It may depend on certain rights,
 like the right to fair treatment by the law, that must be im-
 partially protected, and that cannot be protected without a
 measure of substantive equality. Rights are in an extended
 sense egalitarian, because everyone is supposed to have them;
 but this is not a matter of distributive justice. The equal pro-
 tection of individual rights is usually thought to be a value
 independent of utility and of equality in the distribution of
 advantages. Later I shall comment on the relation among
 these values, but for now let us assume their distinctness. This
 means that the defense of economic equality on the ground
 that it is needed to protect political, legal, and social equality
 may not be a defense of equality per se - equality in the
 possession of benefits in general. Yet the latter is a further
 moral idea of great importance. Its validity would provide an
 independent reason to favor economic equality as a good in
 its own right. If, per impossibile, large economic inequalities
 did not threaten political, legal, and social equality, they
 would be much less objectionable. But there might still be
 something wrong with them.

 In addition to the arguments that depend on its relation to
 other types of equality, there is at least one non-egalitarian,
 instrumental argument for economic equality itself, on
 grounds of utility. The principle of diminishing marginal
 utility states that for many goods, a particular further incre-
 ment has less value to someone who already possesses a sig-
 nificant amount of the good than to someone who has less.1
 So if the total quantity of such a good and the number of
 recipients remains constant, an equal distribution of it will
 always have greater total utility than a less equal one.

 This must be balanced against certain costs. First, attempts

 to reduce inequality may also reduce the total quantity of
 goods available, by affecting incentives to work and invest.
 For example, a progressive income tax and diminishing mar-

 1 This is obviously not true of things in which interest varies greatly, like

 recordings of bird songs, or horror comic books.

 4

This content downloaded from 131.173.41.233 on Thu, 12 May 2016 06:11:40 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 ginal utility make it more expensive to purchase the labor
 of those whose services are most in demand. Beyond a cer-
 tain point, the pursuit of equality may sacrifice overall uti-
 lity, or even the welfare of everyone in the society.

 Secondly, the promotion of equality may requiere objec-
 tionable means. To achieve even moderate equality it is ne-
 cessary to restrict economic liberty, including the freedom
 to make bequests. Greater equality may be attainable only
 by more general coercive techniques, including ultimately
 the assignment of work by public administration instead of
 private contracts. Some of these costs may be unacceptable
 not only on utilitarian grounds but because they violate indi-
 vidual rights. Opponents of the goal of equality may argue
 that if an unequal distribution of benefits results from the
 free interactions and agreements of persons none of whom
 violate one another's rights, then the results are not objec-
 tionable, provided they do not include extreme hardship for
 the worst off.

 II

 So there is much to be said about the instrumental value and
 disvalue of equality; the question of its intrinsic value does
 not arise in isolation. Yet the answer to that question deter-
 mines what instrumental costs are acceptable. If equality is
 in itself good, producing it may be worth a certain amount
 of inefficiency and loss of liberty.

 There are two types of argument for the intrinsic value of

 equality, communitarian and individualistic. According to the
 communitarian argument, equality is good for a society taken
 as a whole. It is a condition of the right kind of relations
 among its members, and of the formation in them of healthy
 fraternal attitudes, desires, and sympathies. This view ana-
 lyzes the value of equality in terms of a social and individual
 ideal. The individualistic view, on the other hand, defends
 equality as a correct distributive principle - the correct way
 to meet the conflicting needs and interests of distinct people,

 5

This content downloaded from 131.173.41.233 on Thu, 12 May 2016 06:11:40 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 whatever those interests may be, more or less. It does not
 assume the desirability of any particular kinds of desires, or
 any particular kinds of interpersonal relations. Rather it fa-
 vors equality in the distribution of human goods, whatever
 these may be whether or not they necessarily include goods
 of community and fraternity.

 Though the communitarian argument is very influential,
 I am going to explore only the individualistic one, because
 that is the type of argument that I think is more likely to
 succeed. It would provide a moral basis for the kind of liberal
 equalitarianism that seems to me plausible. I don't have such
 an argument. This essay is a discussion of the form such an
 argument would have to take, what its starting points should
 be, and what it must overcome.

 A preference for equality is at best one component in a
 theory of social choice, or choice involving numbers of peo-
 ple. Its defense does not require the rejection of other values
 with which it may come into conflict. However, it is excluded
 by theories of social choice which make certain other values
 dominant. Egalitarianism may once have been opposed to aris-
 tocratic theories, but now it is opposed in theoretical debate
 by the adherents of two non-aristocratic values: utility and
 individual rights. I am going to examine the dispute in order
 to see how equality might be shown to have a value that can
 resist these to some extent, without replacing them.

 Though I am interested in the most general foundation for
 such a principle, I shall begin by discussing a more special-
 ized egalitarian view, the position of John Rawls.2 It applies
 specifically to the design of the basic social institutions, ra-
 ther than to distributive choices, and perhaps it cannot be
 extended to other cases. But is the most developed liberal
 egalitarian view in the field, and much debate about equality
 focuses on it. So I will initially pose the opposition between
 equality, utility, and rights in terms of his position. Later I

 12 John Rawls, A Theory of Justice (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
 Press, 1971). Some of my comments are developed in "Rawls on Justice,"
 Phil. Review 82 (1973), 220-233.

 6

This content downloaded from 131.173.41.233 on Thu, 12 May 2016 06:11:40 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 shall explain how my own egalitarian view differs from his.

 Rawls' theory assigns more importance to equal protec-

 tion of political and personal liberties than to equality in the
 distribution of other benefits. Nevertheless it is strongly egali-
 tarian in this respect also. His principle of distribution for
 general goods, once equality in the basic liberties is secure,
 is that inequalities are justified only if they benefit the worst-
 off group in the society (by yielding higher productivity and
 employment, for example).

 This so-called Difference Principle is used not to deter-
 mine allocation directly, but only for the assessment of econ-
 omic and social institutions, which in turn influence the allo-
 cation of goods. While it is counted a good thing for anyone
 to be made better off, the value of improving the situation
 of those who are worse off takes priority over the value of
 improving the situation of those who are better off. This is
 largely independent of the relative quantities of improvement
 involved, and also of the relative numbers of persons. So
 given a choice between making a thousand poor people some-
 what better off and making two thousand middle class
 people considerably better off, the first choice would be pre-
 ferred. It should be added that people's welfare for these
 purposes is assessed in terms of overall life prospects, not
 just prosperity at the moment.

 This is a very strong egalitarian principle, though it is not
 the most radical we can imagine. It is constructed by adding
 to the general value of improvement a condition of priority
 to the worst off. A more egalitarian position would hold that
 some inequalities are bad even if they benefit the worst off,
 so that a situation in which everyone is worse off may be
 preferable if the inequalities are reduced enough. So long as
 the argument remains individualistic such a position could
 seem attractive only for reasons stemming from the connec-
 tion between economic and social equality.8

 3 The argument would be that improvements in the well-being of the lowest
 class as a result of material productivity spurred by wage differentials are
 only apparent: damage to their self-respect outweighs the material gains. And

 7

This content downloaded from 131.173.41.233 on Thu, 12 May 2016 06:11:40 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 Later I shall discuss Rawls' arguments for the view, and
 offer some additional ones, but first let me say something
 about the two positions to which it is naturally opposed, and
 against which it has to be defended. They are positions that
 do not accord intrinsic value to equality but admit other va-
 lues whose pursuit or protection may requiere the acceptance
 of considerable inequality. Those values, as I have said, are
 utility and individual rights.

 From a utilitarian point of view, it doesn't make sense to
 forego greater benefits for the sake of lesser or benefits to
 more people for the sake of fewer just because the benefits
 to the worst off will be greater. It is better to have more of
 what is good and less of what is bad, no matter how they are
 distributed.

 According to a theory of individual rights, it is wrong to
 interfere with people's liberty to keep or bequeath what they
 can earn merely in order to prevent the development of ine-
 qualities in distribution. It may be acceptable to limit indi-
 vidual liberty to prevent grave evils, but inequality is not
 one of those. Inequalities are not wrong if they do not result
 from wrongs of one person against another. They must be
 accepted if the only way to prevent them is to abridge indi-
 vidual rights to the kind of free action that violates no one
 else's rights.

 Both types of theory point out the costs of pursuing dis-

 tributive equality, and deny that it has independent value
 that outweighs these costs. Morey specifically, the pursuit of
 equality is held to require the illegitimate sacrifice of the
 rights or interests of some individuals to the less important
 interests of others. These two theories are also radically op-
 posed to one another. Together with egalitarianism they form
 a trio of fundamentally different views about how to settle
 conflicts among the interests of different people.

 even inequalities that genuinely benefit the worst off may destroy non-distribu-
 tive values like community or fraternity. See Christopher Ake, "Justice as
 Equality," P E PA 5 (1975), 69-89, esp. 76-77.

 8

This content downloaded from 131.173.41.233 on Thu, 12 May 2016 06:11:40 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 What is the nature of the dispute between them? The units
 about which the problem arises are individual persons, indi-
 vidual human lives. Each of them has a claim to considera-
 tion. In some sense the distinctness of these claims it at the
 heart of the issue. The question is whether (a) the worst off
 have a prior claim, or (b) the enforcement of that claim
 would ignore the greater claims of others not among the
 worst off, who would benefit significantly more if a less egali-
 tarian policy were adopted instead, or (c) it would infringe
 the claims of other persons to liberty and the protection of
 their rights.

 Now this looks like a dispute about the value of equality.
 But it can also be viewed as a dispute about how people
 should be treated equally, not about whether they should be.
 The three views share an assumption of moral equality be-
 tween persons, but differ in their interpretations of it. They
 agree that the moral claims of all persons are, at a sufficient-
 ly abstract level, the same, but disagree over what these are.4
 The defender of rights locates them in the freedom to do

 certain things without direct interference by others. The uti-
 litarian locates them in the requirement that each person's
 interests be fully counted as a component in the calculation
 of utility used to decide which states of affairs are best and
 which acts or policies are right. The egalitarian finds them
 in an equal claim to actual or possible advantages. The issue
 remains acute even though most social theories do not fall
 squarely into one of these categories, but give primacy to
 one interpretation of moral equality and secondary status
 to the others.

 All three interpretations of moral equality attempt to give
 * This way of looking at the problem was suggested to me by a proposal of

 Rawls (personal communication, Jan. 31, 1976) :

 Suppose we distinguish between the equal treatment of persons and their
 (equal) right to be treated as equals. (Here persons are moral persons.)
 The latter is more basic: Suppose the Original Position represents the
 latter re moral persons when they agree on principles and suppose they
 would agree on some form of equal treatment. What more is needed?

 9

This content downloaded from 131.173.41.233 on Thu, 12 May 2016 06:11:40 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 equal weight, in essential respects, to each person's point of
 view. This might even be described as the mark of an en-
 lightened ethic, though some theories that do not share it still
 qualify as ethical. If the opposition of views about distribu-
 tive equality can be regarded as a disagreement about the
 proper interpretation of this basic requirement of moral
 equality, that provides a common reference against which the
 opposing positions may be measured. It should be possible
 to compare the quality of their justifications, instead of
 simply registering their mutual incompatibility.

 What it means to give equal weight to each person's point
 of view depends on what is morally essential to that point of
 view, what it is in each of us that must be given equal weight.
 It also depends on how the weights are combined. And these
 two aspects of the answer are interdependent. Let us consider
 each of the positions from this point of view.

 IV

 The moral equality of utilitarianism is a kind of majority
 rule: each person's interests count once, but some may be
 outweighed by others. It is not realy a majority of persons
 that determines the result, but a majority of interests suitably
 weighted for intensity. Persons are equal in the sense that each
 of them is given a Vote' weighted in proportion to the mag-
 nitude of his interests. Although this means that the interests
 of a minority can sometimes outweigh the interests of a ma-
 jority, the basic idea is majoritarian because each individual
 is accorded the same (variable) weight and the outcome is
 determined by the largest total.

 In the simplest version, all of a person's interests or pre-
 ferences are counted, and given a relative weight depending
 on their weight for him. But various modifications have been
 suggested. One doubt voiced about utilitarianism is that it
 counts positively the satisfaction of evil desires (sadistic or
 bigoted ones, for example). Mill employed a distinction be-
 tween higher and lower pleasures, and gave priority to the

 10

This content downloaded from 131.173.41.233 on Thu, 12 May 2016 06:11:40 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 former. (Could there be a corresponding distinction for
 pains?) Recently, Thomas Scanlon has argued that any dis-
 tributive principle, utilitarian or egalitarian, must use some
 objective standard of interest, need, or urgency distinct from
 mere subjective preference to avoid unacceptable consequen-
 ces. Even if the aim is to maximize the total of some quantity
 of benefit over all persons, it is necessary to pick a single
 measure of that quantity that applies fairly to everyone, and
 pure preference is not a good measure. "The fact that some-
 one would be willing to forego a decent diet in order to
 build a monument to his god does not mean that his claim
 on others for aid in his project has the same strength as a
 claim for aid in obtaining enough to eat (even assuming that
 the sacrifices required of others would be the same)."6

 Even if a standard of objectivity is introduced, the range
 of morally relevant interests can still be quite broad, and it
 will vary from person to person. The individual as moral
 claimant continues to be more or less the whole person. On
 the other hand, anyone's claim can in principle be com-
 pletely outvoted by the claims of others. In the final outcome
 a given individual's claims may be met hardly at all, though
 they have been counted in the majoritarian calculation used
 to arrive at that outcome.

 Utilitarianism takes a generous view of individual moral
 claims and combines them aggregatively. It applies the result-
 ing values to the assesment of overall results or states of
 affairs, and derives the assessment of actions from this as a
 secondary result. One is to do what will tend to promote the
 results that appear best from a point of view that combines
 all individual interests. The moral equality of utilitarianism
 consists in letting each person's interests contribute in the
 same way to determining what in sum would be best overall.

 V

 Rights are very different, both in structure and in content.

 e T. M. Scanlon, "Preference and Urgency," /. Phil. 72 (1975), 659-660.

 11

This content downloaded from 131.173.41.233 on Thu, 12 May 2016 06:11:40 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 They are not majoritarian or in any other way aggregative,
 and they do not provide an assessment of overall results. In-
 stead, they determine the acceptability of actions directly. The
 moral equality of persons under this conception is their equal
 claim against each other not to be interfered with in specified
 ways. Each person must be treated equally in certain defi-
 nite respects be each other person.

 In a sense, these claims are not combined it all. They must
 be respected individually. What anyone may do is restricted
 to what will not violate the rights of anyone else. Since the
 designated aspect of each person's point of view sets this
 limit by itself, the condition is a kind of unanimity require-
 ment.

 Rights may be absolute, or it may be permissible to over-
 ride them when a significant threshold is reached in the
 level of harm that can be prevented by doing so. But however
 they are defined, they must be respected in every case where
 they apply. They give every person a limited veto over how
 others may treat him.

 This kind of unanimity condition is possible only for rights

 that limit what one person may do to another. There cannot
 in this sense be rights to have certain things - a right to medi-
 cal care, or to a decent standard of living, or even a right to
 life. The language of rights is sometimes used in this way,
 to indicate the special importance of certain human goods.
 But to preserve distinctions I shall use it only for claims that
 place a condition of unanimous acceptability on action. There
 can be no literal right to life in that sense, because there
 are situations in which any possible course of action will lead
 to the death of someone or other; and if everyone had a
 right to stay alive, nothing would be permissible in those
 situations.6

 6 I have suggested elsewhere that there may be circumstances in "which
 nothing is permissible - true moral dilemmas in which every possible course of
 action is wrong. But these arise only from the clash of distinct moral prin-
 ciples and not from the application of one principle. See "War and Mass-
 acre", Philosophy & Public Affairs (1972), 123-144.

 12

This content downloaded from 131.173.41.233 on Thu, 12 May 2016 06:11:40 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 Rights of the kind I am considering escape this problem
 because they are agent-centered. A right not to be killed, for
 example, is not a right that everyone do what is required to
 insure that you are not killed. It is merely a right not to be
 killed, and it is correlated with other people's duty not to
 kill you.

 Such an ethic does not enjoin that violations of rights be
 minimized. That would be to count them merely as particu-
 larly grave evils in the assessment of outcomes. Instead,
 rights limit action directly: each person is forbidden to vio-
 late directly the rights of others even if he could reduce the
 overall number of violations of rights indirectly by violating
 a few himself. It is hard to account for such agent-centered
 restrictions. One thing to say about them by way of interpre-
 tation is that they represent a higher degree of moral invio-
 lability than principles requiring us to do whatever will mini-
 mize the violation of rights. For if that were the principle,
 then violation of the right would not always be wrong. The
 moral claim of a right not to be murdered even to prevent
 several other murders is stronger than the claim which merely
 counts murder as a great evil, for the former prohibits mur-
 ders that the latter would permit. That is true even though
 the latter might enable one to prevent more murders than the
 former. But this does not go very far toward explaining agent-
 centered rights. A serious account would have to consider not
 only the protected interests but the relation between the agent
 and the person he is constrained not to treat in certain ways,
 even to achieve very desirable ends. The concern with what
 one is doing to whom, as opposed to the concern with what
 happens, is an important primary source of ethics that is
 poorly understood.

 Having noted that rights yield an assessment in the first
 instance of actions rather than of outcomes, we can see that
 they also define individual moral claims more narrowly than
 does utilitarianism, and combine them differently. The utili-
 tarian constructs an impersonal point of view in which those
 of all individuals are combined to give judments of utility,

 13

This content downloaded from 131.173.41.233 on Thu, 12 May 2016 06:11:40 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 which in turn are to guide everyone's actions. For a defender
 of rights, the respects in which each person is inviolable pres-
 ent a direct and independent limit to what any other person
 may do to him. There is no single combination of viewpoints
 which yields a common goal for everyone, but each of us
 must limit our actions to a range that is not unacceptable to
 anyone else in certain respects. Typically, the range of what
 may be done because it violates no rights is rather large.

 For this reason the morality of rights tends to be a limited,
 even a minimal morality. It leaves a great deal of human
 life ungoverned by moral restrictions or requirements. That is
 why, if unsupplemented, it leads naturaly to political theories
 of limited government, and in the extreme, to the libertarian
 theory of the minimal state. The justification of broad govern-
 ment action to promote all aspects of the general welfare
 requires a much richer set of moral requirements.7

 This type of limited morality also has the consequence
 that the numbers of people on either side of an issue do not
 count. In a perfectly unanimous morality the only number
 that counts is one. If moral acceptability is acceptability in
 a certain respect from each person's point of view, then even
 if in other respects one course of action is clearly more accep-
 table to most but not all of the people involved, no further
 moral requirement follows.8

 7 The issue over the extent of morality is one of the deepest in ethical

 theory. Many have felt in an objection to utilitarianism that it makes ethics
 swallow up everything, leaving only one optimal choice, or a small set of
 equally optimal alternatives, permissible for any person at any time. Those
 who offer this objection differ over the size and shape of the range of choices
 that should be left to individual inclination after the ethical boundaries have
 been drawn.

 * John Taurek has recently defended essentially this position in his paper,
 "Should the Numbers Count?" {Philosophy & Public Affairs, Vol. 6, No. 4
 [Summer, 1977], 293-316.) He holds that given a choice between saving one
 life and saving five others, one is not required to save the five: one may save
 either the one or the five. I believe that he holds this because there is at
 least one point of view from which saving the five is not the better choice.
 Taurek does believe that some moral requirements derive from special rights
 and obligations, but in cases like this, where there are fundamental conflicts
 of interest, it is impossible to define a condition of universal acceptability,
 and the choice is therefore not governed by any moral requirement.

 14

This content downloaded from 131.173.41.233 on Thu, 12 May 2016 06:11:40 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 The moral equality of rights, then, consists in assigning to

 each person the same domain of interests with respect to
 which he may not be directly interfered with by anyone else.

 VI

 Oddly enough, egalitarianism is based on a more obscure
 conception of moral equality than either of the less egalita-
 rian theories. It employs a much richer version of each per-
 son's point of view than does a theory of rights: in that re-
 spect it is closer to utilitarianism. It also resembles utilita-
 rianism formally, in being applied first to the assessment of
 outcomes rather than of actions. But it does not combine all
 points of view by a majoritarian method. Instead, it estab-
 lishes an order of priority among needs and gives prefer-
 ence to the most urgent, regardless of numbers. In that re-
 spect it is closer to rights theory.

 What conception of moral equality is at work here, i.e.

 what equal moral claim is being granted to everyone and how
 are these claims combined? Each individual's claim has a
 complex form: it includes more or less all his needs and
 interests, but in an order of relative urgency or importance.
 This determines both which of them are to be satisfied first
 and whether they are to be satisfied before or after the inter-
 est of others. Something close to unanimity is being invoked.
 An arrangement must be acceptable first from the point of
 view of everyone's most basic claims, then from the point
 of view of everyone's next most basic claims, etc. By contrast
 with a rights theory, the individual claims are not limited
 to specific restrictions on how one may be treated. They con-
 cern whatever may happen to a person, and in appropriate
 order of priority they include much more than protection
 from the most basic misfortunes. This means that the order
 of priority will not settle all conflicts, since there can be con-
 flicts of interest even at the most basic level, and therefore
 unanimity cannot be achieved. Instead, one must be content
 to get as close to it as possible.

 15

This content downloaded from 131.173.41.233 on Thu, 12 May 2016 06:11:40 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 One problem in the development of this idea is the defi-
 nition of the order of priority: whether a single, objective
 standard of urgency should be used in construing the claims
 of each person, or whether his interests should be ranked at
 his own estimation of their relative importance. In addition
 to the question of objectivity, there is a question of scale.
 Because moral equality is equality between persons, the indi-
 vidual interests to be ranked cannot be momentary prefer-
 ences, desires, and experiences. They must be aspects of the
 individual's life taken as a whole: health, nourishment, free-
 dom, work, education, selfrespect, affection, pleasure. The
 determination of egalitarian social policy requires some
 choice among them, and the results will be very different
 depending on whether material advantages or individual lib-
 erty and self-realization are given priority.

 But let me leave these questions aside. The essential fea-
 ture of an egalitarian priority system is that it counts im-
 provements to the welfare of the worse off as more urgent
 than improvements to the welfare of the better off. These other
 questions must be answered to decide who is worse off and
 who is better off, and how much, but what makes a system
 egalitarian is the priority it gives to the claims of those whose
 overall life prospects put them at the bottom, irrespective of
 numbers or of overall utility. Each individual with a more
 urgent claim has priority, in the simplest version of such a
 view, over each individual with a less urgent claim. The mo-
 ral equality of egalitarianism consists in taking into account
 the interests of each person, subject to the same system of
 priorities of urgency, in determining what would be best over-
 all.

 VII

 It is obvious that the three conceptions of moral equality
 with which we are dealing are extremely different. They de-
 fine each person's equal moral claim differently, and they
 derive practical conclusions from sets of such claims in differ-
 ent ways. They seem to be radically opposed to one another,

 16

This content downloaded from 131.173.41.233 on Thu, 12 May 2016 06:11:40 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 and it is very difficult to see how one might decide among
 them.

 My own view is that we do not have to. A plausible social
 morality will show the influence of them all. This will cer-
 tainly not be conceded by utilitarians or believers in the
 dominance of rights. But to defend liberal egalitarianism it is
 not necessary to show that moral equality cannot be inter-
 preted in the ways that yield rights or utilitarianism. One has
 only to show that an egalitarian interpretation is also accep-
 table. The result then depends on how these disparate values
 combine.

 Though my own view is somewhat different from that of
 Rawls, I shall begin by considering his arguments, in order
 to explain why another account seems to me necessary. He
 gives two kinds of argument for his position. One is intuitive
 and belongs to the domain of ordinary moral reasoning. The
 other is theoretical and depends on the construction by which
 Rawls works out his version of the social contract and which
 he calls the Original Position. I shall begin with two promin-
 ent examples of the first kind of argument and then go on
 to a brief consideration of the theoretical construction.

 One point Rawls makes repeatedly is that the natural and
 social contingencies that influence welfare - talent, early en-
 vironment, class background - are not themselves deserved.
 So differences in benefit that derive from them are morally
 arbitrary.9 They can be justified only if the alternative would
 leave the least fortunate even worse off. In that case everyone
 benefits from the inequialities, so the extra benefit to some is
 justified as a means to this. A less egalitarian principle of
 distribution, whether it is based on rights or on utility, allows
 social and natural contingencies to produce inequalities jus-
 tified neither because everyone benefits nor because those
 who get more deserve more.

 The other point is directed specifically against utilitarian-
 ism. Rawls maintains that utilitarianism applies to problems

 • Rawls, pp. 74, 104.

 17

This content downloaded from 131.173.41.233 on Thu, 12 May 2016 06:11:40 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 of social choice - problems in which the interests of many
 individuals are involved - a method of decision appropriate
 for one individual.10 A single person may accept certain
 disadvantages in exchange for greater benefits. But no such
 compensation is possible when one person suffers the dis-
 advantages and another gets the benefits.

 So far as I can see, neither of these arguments is decisive.
 The first assumes that inequalities need justification, that
 there is a presumption against permitting them. Only that
 would imply that undeserved inequalities are morally arbi-
 trary in an invidious sense, unless otherwise justified. If they
 were arbitrary only in the sense that there were no reasons
 for or against them, they would require no justification, and
 the aim of avoiding them could provide no reason to infringe
 on anyone's rights. In any case the utilitarian has a justifi-
 cation to offer for the inequalities that his system permits:
 that the sum of advantages is greater than it would be without
 the inequality. But even if an inequality were acceptable only
 if it benefited everyone, that would not have to imply any-
 thing as strong as the Difference Principle. More than one
 deviation from equality may benefit everyone to some extent,
 and it would requiere a specific egalitarian assumption to
 prefer the one that was most favorable to the worst off.

 The second argument relies on a diagnosis of utilitarianism

 that has recently been challenged by Derek Parfit.11 But even
 if the diagnosis is correct, it does not supply an argument
 for equality, for it does not say why this method of summa-
 tion is not acceptable for the experiences of many individuals.
 It certainly cannot be justified simply by extension from the
 individual case, but it has enough prima facie appeal to re-
 quire displacement by some better alternative. It merely says
 that more of what is good is better than less, and less of

 *« Rawls, pp. 27, 187.
 ^ Later belves and Moral Principles in A. Montehore, ed., fhilosophy
 & Personal Relations (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1973). Parfit suggests
 that utilitarianism could express the dissolution of temporally extended in-
 dividuals into experiential sequences rather than the conflation of separate
 individuals into a mass person.

 18

This content downloaded from 131.173.41.233 on Thu, 12 May 2016 06:11:40 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 what is bad is better than more. Someone might accept this
 conclusion without having reached it by extending the prin-
 ciple of individual choice to the social case. There is no par-
 ticular reason to think that the principle will be either the
 same or different in the two cases.

 In utilitarianism intrapersonal compensation has no spe-
 cial significance. It acquires significance only against the
 background of a refusal in general to accept the unrestricted
 summation of goods and evils a background to which it pro-
 vides the exception. This background must be independently
 justified. By itself, the possibility of intrapersonal compen-
 sation neither supports nor undermines egalitarian theories.
 It implies only that if an egalitarian theory is accepted, it
 should apply only across lives rather than within them. It
 is a reason for taking individual human lives, rather than
 individual experiences, as the units over which any distribu-
 tive principle should operate. But it could serve this function
 for anti-egalitarian as well as for egalitarian views. This is
 the reverse of Rawls' argument: no special distributive prin-
 ciple should be applied within human lives because that would
 be to extend to the individual the principle of choice appro-
 priate for society. Provided that condition is met, intraper-
 sonal compensation is neutral among distributive principles.
 Next let me consider briefly Rawls' contractarian argu-
 ment. Though he stresses that his theory is about the mora-
 lity of social institutions, its general ideas about equality can
 I think be applied more widely. The Original Position, his
 version of the social contract, is a constructed unanimity con-
 dition which attributes to each person a schematic point of
 view that abstracts from differences between people, but
 allows for the main categories of human interest. The indivi-
 dual is expected to choose principles for the assessment of
 social institutions on the assumption that he may be anyone,
 but without assuming that he has an equal chance of being
 anyone, or that his chance of being in a certain situation is
 proportional to the number of people in that situation.

 The resulting choice brings out the priorities that are gen-

 19

This content downloaded from 131.173.41.233 on Thu, 12 May 2016 06:11:40 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 erally shared, and combines interests ranked by these prio-
 rities without regard to the numbers of people involved. The
 principles unanimously chosen on the basis of such priorities
 grant to each person the same claim to have his most urgent
 needs satisfied prior to the less urgent needs of anyone else.
 Priority is given to individuals who, taking their lives as a
 whole, have more urgent needs, rather than to the needs that
 more individuals have.

 There has been much controversy over whether the rational
 choice under the conditions of uncertainty and ignorance that
 prevail in the Original Position would be what Rawls says it
 is, or even wheteher any choice could be rational under those
 conditions. But there is another question that is prior. Why
 does what it would be rational to agree to under those condi-
 tions determine what is right?

 Let us focus this question more specifically on the features
 of the Original Position that are responsible for the egalita-
 rian result. There are two of them. One is that the choice
 must be unanimous, and therefore everyone must be deprived
 of all information about his conception of the good or his
 position in society. The other is that the parties are not al-
 lowed to choose as if they had an equal chance of being any-
 one in the society, because in the absence of any information
 about probabilities it is not, according to Rawls, rational to
 assign some arbitrarily, using the Principle of Insufficient
 Reason. The Original Position is constructed by subtracting
 information without adding artificial substitutes. This results
 directly in the maxim in strategy of choice, which leads to
 principles that favor the worst off in general and impose
 even more stringent equality in the basic liberties.

 Suppose Rawls is right about what it would be rational to
 choose under those conditions. We must then ask why a
 unanimous choice under conditions of ignorance, without an
 assumption that one has an equal chance of being anyone in
 the society, correctly expresses the constraints of morality.
 Other constructions also have a claim to counting all persons
 as moral equals. What makes these conditions of unanimity

 20

This content downloaded from 131.173.41.233 on Thu, 12 May 2016 06:11:40 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 under ignorance the rights ones? They insure that numbers
 do not count12 and urgency does, but that is the issue. A more
 fundamental type of argument is needed to settle it.

 VIII

 The main question is whether a kind of unanimity should
 enter into the combination of different points of view when
 evaluative judgments are being made about outcomes. This
 is an issue between egalitarian and utilitarian theories, both
 of which concern themselves with outcomes. Rights theories
 are opposed to both, because although they use a kind of
 unanimity condition, it is a condition on the acceptability of
 actions rather than of outcomes. In defending an interpreta-
 tion of moral equality in terms of unanimity applied in the
 assessment of outcomes, I am therefore denying that either
 utilitarianism or rights theories, or both, represent the whole
 truth about ethics.

 As I have said, acceptance of egalitarian values need not
 imply total exclusion of the others. Egalitarians may allow
 utility independent weight, and liberal egalitarians standardly
 acknowledge the importance of certain rights, wich limit the
 means that may be used in pursuing equality and other ends.12
 I believe that rights exist and that this agent-centered aspect
 of morality is very important. The recognition of individual
 rights is a way of accepting a requirement of unanimous
 acceptability when weighing the claims of others in respect
 to what one may do. But a theory based exclusively on rights
 leaves out too much that is morally relevant, even if the in-
 terests it includes are among the most basic. A moral view

 32 Since the Difference Principle is applied not to individuals but to so-
 cial classes, conflicts of interest within the worst off or any other groups are
 absorbed in a set of average expectations. This means that the numbers count
 in a sense within a social class, in determining which policy benefits it most
 on avefage. But numbers do not count in determining priority among classes
 in the urgency of their claims. That is why the problems of this conception
 of social justice are similar to those of a more individually tailored egalita-
 rian ism.

 13 Such a view is defended by Ronald Dworkin in Taking Rights Seriously

 (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1977).

 21

This content downloaded from 131.173.41.233 on Thu, 12 May 2016 06:11:40 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 that gives no weight to the value of overall outcomes cannot
 be correct.

 So let me return to the issue of unanimity in the assessment
 of outcomes. The essence of such a criterion is to try in a
 moral assessment to include each person's point of view sep-
 arately, so as to achieve a result which is in a significant
 sense acceptable to each person involved or affected. Where
 there is conflict of interests, no result can be completely
 acceptable to everyone. But it is possible to assess each result
 from each point of view to try to find the one that is least
 unacceptable to the person to whom it is most unacceptable.
 This means that any other alternative will be more unaccept-
 able to someone than this alternative is to anyone. The pre-
 ferred alternative is in that sense the least unacceptable, con-
 sidered from each person's point of view separately. A rad-
 ically egalitarian policy of giving absolute priority to the
 worst off, regardless of numbers, would result from always
 choosing the least unacceptable alternative, in this sense.

 This ideal of individual acceptability is in fundamental
 opposition to the aggregative ideal, which constructs a special
 moral point of view by combining those of individuals into
 a single conglomerate viewpoint distinct from all of them.
 That is done in utilitarianism by adding them up. Both the
 separate and the conglomerate methods count everyone fully
 and equally. The difference between them is that the second
 moves beyond individual points of view to something more
 comprehensive than any of them, though based on them.
 The first stays closer to the points of view of the individuals
 considered.

 It is this ideal of acceptability to each individual that
 underlies the appeal of equality. We can see how it operates
 even in a case involving small numbers. Suppose I have two
 children, one of which is normal and quite happy, and the
 other of which suffers from a painful handicap. Call them
 respectively the first child and the second child. I am about
 to change jobs. Suppose I must decide between moving to
 an expensive city where the second child can receive special

 22

This content downloaded from 131.173.41.233 on Thu, 12 May 2016 06:11:40 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 medical treatment and schooling, but where the family's
 standard of living will be lower and the neighborhood will
 be unpleasant and dangerous for the first child - or else mov-
 ing to a pleasant semi-rural suburb where the first child,
 who has a special interest in sports and nature, can have a
 free and agreeable life. This is a difficult choice on any view.
 To make it a test for the value of equality, I want to suppose
 that the case has the following feature: the gain to the first
 child of moving to the suburb is substantially greater than
 the gain to the second child of moving to the city. After all,
 the second child will also suffer from the family's reduced
 standard of living and the disagreeable environment. And
 the educational and therapeutic benefits will not make him
 happy but only less miserable. For the first child, on the
 other hand, the choice is between a happy life and a dis-
 agreeable one. Let me add as a feature of the case that there
 is no way to compensate either child significantly for its loss
 if the choice favoring the other child is made. The family's
 resources are stretched, and neither child has anything else
 to give up that could be converted into something of signifi-
 cant value to the other.

 If one chose to move to the city, it would be an egalitarian
 decision. It is more urgent to benefit the second child, even
 though the benefit we can give him is less than the benefit
 we can give the first child. This urgency is not necessarily
 decisive. It may be outweighed by other considerations, for
 equality is not the only value. But it is a factor, and it de-
 pends on the worse off position of the second child. An im-
 provement in his situation is more important than an equal
 or somewhat greater improvement in the situation of the first
 child.

 Suppose a third child is added to the situation, another
 happy, healthy one, and I am faced with the same choice in
 allocation of indivisible goods. The greater urgency of ben-
 efiting the second child remains. I believe that this factor is
 essentially unchanged by the addition of the third child. It

 23

This content downloaded from 131.173.41.233 on Thu, 12 May 2016 06:11:40 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 remains just as much more urgent to benefit the second child
 in this case as it was when there were only two children.14
 The main point about a measure of urgency is that it is
 done by pairwise comparison of the situations of individuals.
 The simplest method would be to count any improvement in
 situation of someone worse off as more urgent than any im-
 provement in the situation of someone better off; but this is
 not especially plausible. It is more reasonable to accord
 greater urgency to large improvements somewhat higher in
 the scale than to very small improvements lower down. Such
 a modified principle could still be described as selecting the
 alternative that was least unacceptable from each point of
 view. This method can be extended to problems of social
 choice involving large numbers of people. So long as numbers
 do not count it remains a type of unanimity criterion, defined
 by a suitable measure of urgency. The problem of justifying
 equality then becomes the problem of justifying the pursuit
 of results that are acceptable to each person involved.

 Before turning to a discussion of this problem, let me say
 why I think that even if it were solved, it would not provide
 the foundation for a correct egalitarian theory. It seems to
 me that no plausible theory can avoid the relevance of num-
 bers completely. There may be some disparities of urgency
 so great that the priorities persist whatever numbers are in-
 volved. But if the choice is between preventing severe hard-
 ship for some who are very poor and deprived, and preven-
 ting less severe but still substantial hardship for those who
 are better off but still struggling for subsistence, then it is
 very difficult for me to believe that the numbers do not count,
 and that priority of urgency goes to the worse off however

 ** Note that these thoughts do not depend on any idea of personal identity
 over time, though they can employ such an idea. All that is needed to evoke
 them is a distinction between persons at a time. The impulse to distributive
 equality arises so long as we can distinguish between two experiences being
 had by two persons and their being had by one person. The criteria of per-
 sonal identity over time merely determine the size of the units over which a
 distributive principle operates. That, briefly, is what I think is wrong with
 Parfit's account of the relation between distributive justice and personal
 identity.

 24

This content downloaded from 131.173.41.233 on Thu, 12 May 2016 06:11:40 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 many more there are of the better off. It might be suggested
 that this is a case where equality is outweighed by utility.
 But if egalitarian urgency is itself sensitive to numbers in
 this way, it does not seem that any form of unanimity cri-
 terion could explain the foundation of the view. Nor does
 any alternative foundation suggest itself.

 IX

 For a view of the more uncompromising type, similar in
 structure to that of Rawls, we need an explanation of why
 individual pairwise comparison to find the individually least
 unacceptable alternative is a good way to adjudicate among
 competing interests. What would it take to justify this method
 of combining individual claims? I think the only way to
 answer this question is to ask another: what is the source of
 morality? How do the interests of others secure a hold on us
 in moral reasoning, and does this imply a way in which they
 must be considered in combination?

 I have a view about the source of other-regarding moral
 reasons that suggests an answer to this question. The view is
 not very different from the one I defended in The Possibili-
 ty of Altruism™ and I will only sketch it here. I believe that
 the general form of moral reasoning is to put yourself in
 other people's shoes. This leads to acceptance of an imper-
 sonal concern for them corresponding to the impersonal con-
 cern for yourself that is needed to avoid a radical incongruity
 between your attitudes from the personal and impersonal
 standpoints, i.e. from inside and outside your life. Some
 considerable disparity remains, because the personal concerns
 remain in relation to yourself and your life: they are not to
 be replaced or absorbed by the impersonal ones that corre-
 spond to them.16 (One is also typically concerned in a per-
 sonal way for the interests of certain others to whom one is
 close.) But we derive moral reasons by forming in addition

 m Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1970.
 ** In this respect my present view differs from the one in the book.

 25

This content downloaded from 131.173.41.233 on Thu, 12 May 2016 06:11:40 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 a parallel impersonal concern corresponding to the interests
 of all other individuals. It will be as strong or as weak, as
 comprehensive or as restricted, as the impersonal concern
 we are constrained by the pressures of congruency to feel
 about ourselves. In a sense, the requirement is that you love
 your neighbor as yourself: but only as much as you love
 yourself when you look at yourself from outside, with fair
 detachment.

 The process applies separately to each individual and
 yields a set of concerns corresponding to the individual lives.
 There may be disparities between a person's objective in-
 terests and his own subjectively perceived interests or wishes,
 but apart from this, his claims enter the impersonal domain
 of reasons unchanged, as those of an individual. They do
 not come detached from him and go into a big hopper
 with all the others. The impersonal concern of ethics is an
 impersonal concern for oneself and all others as individuals.
 It derives from the necessary generalization of an imper-
 sonal concern for one's own life and interests, and the gener-
 alization preserves the individualistic form of the original.
 For this reason the impersonal concern that results is frag-

 mented: it includes a separate concern for each person, and
 it is realized by looking at the world from each person's point
 of view separately and individually, rather than by looking
 at the world from a single comprehensive point of view.

 This, it seems to me, makes pairwise comparison the na-
 tural way to deal with conflicting claims. The may be cases
 where the policy chosen as a result will seek to maximize
 satisfaction rather than equalizing it, but this will only be
 where all individuals have an equal chance of benefitting, or
 at least not a conspicuously unequal chance.17 At the most
 basic level, the way to choose from many separate viewpoints
 simultaneously is to maintain them intact and give priority
 to the most urgent individual claims.

 17 I leave aside the question when the equality of chances can be counted
 as real enough to supersede the inequality of actual outcomes. Perhaps that
 applies only to certain kinds of outcomes, and certain ways of determining
 chances.

 26

This content downloaded from 131.173.41.233 on Thu, 12 May 2016 06:11:40 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 As I have said, equality is only one value and this is only
 one method of choice. We can understand a radically egali-
 tarian system just as we can understand a radical system of
 rights, but I assume neither is correct. Utility is a legitimate
 value, and the majoritarian or conglomerate viewpoint on
 which it depends is an allowable way of considering the con-
 flicting interests of numbers of different people at once. Still,
 the explanation of egalitarian values in terms of separate
 assessment from each point of view is a step toward under-
 standing; and if it does not imply that these values are absol-
 ute, that is not necessarily a drawback.

 27

This content downloaded from 131.173.41.233 on Thu, 12 May 2016 06:11:40 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 RESUMEN

 El autor comienza observando la existencia de cuatro tipos de igual-
 dad, a saber, la politica, la social, la legal y la economica. Luego
 apunta que la igualdad economica es necesaria para proteger a los
 otros tres tipos de igualdad. Sin embargo, la defensa de la igualdad
 economica puede no ser la defensa de la igualdad per se9 y esta ul-
 tima es la que constituye una idea moral basica.

 Menciona dos argumentos en favor de la igualdad economica: uno
 de tipo utilitario y otro que tambien puede ser deontologico. El pri-
 mero sefiala que la consecucion de la igualdad economica puede re-
 sultar inaceptable porque viola ciertos derechos individuales.

 Hay dos tipos de argumentos en favor del valor intrinseco de la
 igualdad, a saber, el comunitario (la igualdad es buena para la
 sociedad considerada como un todo) y el individualista (la igualdad
 es un principio distributivo para resolver conflictos entre individuos
 diferentes entre si).

 El autor escoge el punto de vista liberal de J. Rawls porque este

 ha intentado una justification individualista del mismo. En esta
 forma, aunque oponiendose a Rawls, el autor elucida la conception
 moral que subyace a la teoria de aquel.

 Rawls usa un principio igualitario segun el cual la igualdad en la
 distribution de las libertades politicas y personales es mas impor-
 tante que la igualdad de los otros beneficios. Sin embargo, la des-
 igualdad solo se justifica cuando beneficia a los menos favorecidos
 en la escala social.

 Rawls ofrece dos tipos de argumentos, uno intuitivo y otro teo-

 rico. Ambos van dirigidos a eliminar la position utilitarista. El autor
 considera primero el argumento intuitivo, que consta de tres pun-
 tos: I9) No es razonable aceptar un prospecto de vida mas bajo
 para favorecer a otros. 29) Las contingencias naturales y sociales
 que influyen el bienestar de las gentes, no son justas. 39 El utilita-
 rismo aplica el metodo de la decision individual a los problemas so-
 ciales.

 Del primero dice el autor que, para ser valido como objecion a
 la compensation interpersonal que propone el utilitarista, necesita
 una premisa segun la cual es peor sacrificar a los que estan abajo

 28

This content downloaded from 131.173.41.233 on Thu, 12 May 2016 06:11:40 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 que a los que estan arriba en la escala social. Pero esta es la con-
 clusion que se busca probar.

 El segundo punto asume demasiado porque presupone que las des-
 igualdades tienen que justificarse. Aun si las desigualdades no bene-
 fician a todos bien puede ser que los beneficien en alguna medida.
 Del tercero dice que la generalization del caso de un individuo

 al caso general no esta justificada en si misma, pero tiene en prin-
 cipio un atractivo cuya elimination exige el proponer una mejor
 alternativa.

 Sin embargo, el autor piensa que el ultimo punto es interesante
 porque lo que esta en cuestion son los individuos. La cuestion es,
 entonces, si (a) los que estan en peor posicion tienen un derecho
 primario como quiere el liberalismo igualitario, o si (b) preferir a
 los que estan en la peor posicion danaria los derechos de otras per-
 sonas en su libertad y en la protection de sus otros derechos, como
 quiere la teoria liberal de los derechos fundamentales o garantias del
 individuo; o si finalmente (c) esa preferencia ignoraria los derechos
 de otros, que no estan entre los peor situados y que se beneficiarian
 mucho mas si se adoptara una politica menos igualitaria como quie-
 re el utilitarismo.

 El autor cualifica que aun cuando esta parece una discusion acer-
 ca del valor de la igualdad, se trata en realidad de una disputa
 acerca de como deberia tratarse a la gente en forma igual. Es decir,
 los tres puntos de vista asumen la igualdad moral entre las personas
 pero difieren en su interpretation de esa igualdad. Si bien todos
 intentan dar igual importancia al punto de vista de cada persona,
 esto depende de dos cosas: lo que es moralmente esencial para ese
 punto de vista y como debe combinarse lo que es importante para
 cada una de las personas.

 El utilitarismo es objetable porque, aun cuando parte de las de-

 mandas de los individuos, una vez que estas se calculan desde el
 punto de vista mayoritario resulta dificil que cada uno obtenga sa-
 tisfaction.

 La teoria liberal de los derechos resulta demasiado rigida e im-
 pide tomar medidas que prevendrian males mayores. A diferencia
 de la teoria utilitarista, que introduce un punto de vista impersonal
 que decide cual es el camino a seguir, la teoria de los derechos no
 permite un punto de vista unico que resulte de la combination de
 los puntos de vista individuals. Empero, en la medida en que de-
 fiende un minimo de derechos como inviolables, deja una gran parte

 29

This content downloaded from 131.173.41.233 on Thu, 12 May 2016 06:11:40 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 de la vida humana lib re de restricciones y conduce en forma natu-
 ral hasta las teorias liberates del estado policia. Por otra parte, esta
 moralidad excluye un buen numero de elecciones por la manera en
 que logra la unanimidad.

 El igualitarismo liberal es menos igualitario y usa una nocion

 mas viva del punto de vista personal al establecer un orden de prio-
 ridad de las necesidades, dando preferencia a las mas urgentes. La
 prioridad incluye la vida de la persona y el intento de evitar los
 peores prospectos para ella misma y para sus allegados. La dificul-
 tad consiste en el criterio de la urgencia: o bien se construye un
 criterio objetivo o se lo construye subjetivamente y entonces difiere
 de persona a persona. Luego quedan otras dificultades, como la de
 que intereses son mas urgentes y si se antepone la igualdad material
 a la espiritual o no.

 Los detalles de una posicion igualitaria - concluye el autor -
 dependen de varios factores, pero queda una cuestion que por sim-
 ple resulta la mas dificil: si los intereses de las diferentes personas
 deben combinarse por mayoria o mediante una forma de unanimi-
 dad.

 Esta ultima es la posicion de Rawls. Aun suponiendo que tuviera
 lugar una eleccion bajo las condiciones que Rawls especifica y que
 esa eleccion fuese rational, quedaria por determinar si lo que esa
 eleccion decide es lo correcto. ^Expresaria esa eleccion las restriccio-
 nes de la moralidad? ^Seria verdad que los numeros no cuentan y
 que lo que importa es la urgencia?

 Dos cuestiones resultan cruciales: la primera, si la igualdad mo-
 ral debe interpretarse en terminos de unanimidad o de mayoria; la
 segunda atane a la comprehensividad de la moralidad y la objetivi-
 dad de la clasificacion en orden de procedencia de los intereses mo-
 ralmente relevantes.

 Las respuestas a la primera consisten, o bien en tratar de incluir

 cada punto de vista y encontrar solucionea aceptables para cada
 uno, o bien en encontrar un nuevo punto de vista combinando los
 puntos de vista individuales. El autor propone un metodo que con-
 siste en escoger la alternativa menos inaceptable considerando cada
 punto de vista. Esto no implica que siempre se deba ayudar al peor
 ubicado en la escala social. Este metodo logra una solution que toma
 en cuenta a todos sin dejar de discriminar los puntos de vista indi-
 viduales.

 Respecto a la segunda cuestion, se incluye un criterio bastante

 30

This content downloaded from 131.173.41.233 on Thu, 12 May 2016 06:11:40 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 objetivo de aceptabilidad o inaceptabilidad que puede eliminar las
 medidas subjetivas y limitar lo que se espera que cada individuo
 sacrifique en beneficio de los demas. El criterio de urgencia deter-
 minara esos factores.

 <?C6mo justificar ese metodo? El autor piensa que responder esa
 pregunta presupone responder estas otras: <;Cual es la fuente de
 la moralidad? <;C6mo influyen los intereses de los demas en el razo-
 namiento moral? ^Implica esto una manera segun la cual esos in-
 tereses deben considerarse en combination?

 La respuesta del autor es que la forma general del razonamiento
 moral incluye el acto de ponerse en la position de las otras personas
 y aceptar una preocupacion impersonal por ellos, que corresponda a
 la preocupacion impersonal que uno mismo debe aceptar respecto
 de si para evitar una incongruencia entre las actitudes hacia si y
 hacia los demas. La idea es amar al projimo como a si mismo pero
 no mas de lo que uno se ama a si mismo cuando se contempla desde
 fuera.

 La preocupacion impersonal que asi resulta, es fragmentada por-
 que incluye una preocupacion para cada persona y se realiza al
 mirar al mundo desde cada punto de vista, separada e individual-
 mente. Asi ubicados se mantienen intactos los puntos de vista y se
 da prioridad al mas urgente. Todos los intereses con alguna objeti-
 vidad tienen que encontrar un lugar aun si se tiene que conceder
 un lugar especial a alguno(s).

 (Resumen de E. VUlanueva)

 31

This content downloaded from 131.173.41.233 on Thu, 12 May 2016 06:11:40 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

