Language evolution and linguistic norms 

Nikola Kompa (University of Osnabrueck) 

19/10/14 – working draft 

Words  are  cheap  token,  so  why  would 
anyone believe them? 

Derek Bickerton 

Introduction 

The paper is an exercise in speculative anthropology. And here is the question that I should like 
to see answered: How might language have possibly evolved and which norms, if any, might have 
played a role in shaping it?  

For  present  purposes,  language  may  be  best  characterized  by  what  it  enables  us  to  do,  by  the 
function  it  serves.  Yet  language  answers  many  purposes.  Most  obviously,  it  is  a  means  of 
communication. Communication, in turn, serves different purposes. A large amount of what we 
say  each  day  is  aptly  characterized  as  small-talk  or  gossip.  Language  is,  as  John  Locke  already 
remarked “the great Instrument and common Tye of Society.“ (Locke E III.I.1) Yet language is 
as perfect a means of inclusion as of exclusion. It helps to demarcate the bounds of one’s group; 
those who speak my language (or my dialect) are those who belong to my group.  

But then, occasionally, we communicate in order to convey and share information; we say how 
thinks are–or at least how they look like from where we stand. Language allows us to describe the 
world; to acquire, store and pass information. It is a means to classify, to structure the manifold 
of appearances; by noticing similarities, we sort like things alike. We divide men into friend and 
foe, books into those worth reading and those not worth the while, our colleagues into potential 
partners for cooperation and others. Because these similarities and differences are important to 
us,  we  have  words  to  mark  them.  And  language  is  highly  productive;  it  allows  us  to  utter  and 
understand sentences that no one has ever uttered before (cf. Tallermann & Gibson 2012b). We 
are at liberty to think and express ideas and thoughts that haven’t been thought before and to 
invent  phrases  (metaphors,  for  example)  that  haven’t  been  used  before.  Moreover,  ideas  and 
thoughts can be conjured up at will. They are not simply impressed on us by the environment 
and bound to a particular situation; they are at our disposal (cf. Trabant 2008: 32). Most animal 
communication systems, on the other hand, comprise a rather restricted and mostly invariant set 
of signals that are meaningful in particular situations only and mostly bound to the here and now. 
Human beings, on the other hand are able to talk about future and past events, about possible or 
impossible events, etc. Language makes modal reasoning possible. We can describe other ways 

 

1 

the  world  might  be;  we  can  make  plans,  tell  stories,  and  write  fiction.  And  we  can  tell  lies. 
Language is commonly used to manipulate people, to bring them to do or think particular things. 
By  means  of  language,  “we  can  shape  events  in  each  other’s  brain  with  exquisite  precision“. 
(Pinker 1994: 1) (In the next section, most of these features will be discussed in slightly more 
detail.) 

What  kinds  of  norms  (or  normativity)  might  language  bring  into  play,  then?  To  a  first 
approximation, norms are rules governing behavior. Except from phonetic, morphological and 
syntactic rules that will not concern us here, there seem to be semantic norms, telling us how to 
apply  the  terms  of  our  language.  And  there  seem  to  be  pragmatic  norms,  regulating 
communicative interaction. Yet there are, arguably, also language-related social and moral norms.  

In the first and second part of the paper, I will speculate a bit about how language might have 
evolved  and  explore  differences  between  human  language  and  non-human  communication 
systems. One of the differences that I will elaborate on is the difference between (natural) signs, 
signals and symbols. I will claim that a certain level of communicative complexity is required for 
anything like linguistic normativity to enter the picture. The third and final part of the paper will 
be devoted to the question of what kinds of norms might have played a role in the evolution of 
symbolic language; the problem of honest communication will be addressed.  

1. Language evolution 

All animals communicate to some extent and in some sense. Some are even able to understand 
members of other species; some species learn to understand alarm calls of another species, for 
example (Zuberbühler 2012: 74); and certain domesticated animals also learn to understand ‘calls’ 
of another species. Yet all those animal communications systems are interestingly different from 
human  language.  The  gap  might  even  seem  unbridgeable.  What  could  be  possible  non-human 
primate  precursors  to  language?  We  seem  to  face  a  continuity  problem:  language  has  to  have 
evolved;  but  what  could  it  possible  have  evolved  from?  Yet  as  Derek  Bickerton  put  it: 
„Uniqueness isn’t the issue. Unlikeness is the issue.“ (2009:21) Language may be unique; but what 
is much harder to explain is why it is so unlike any other communication system. And suppose 
that  there  had  been  a  protolanguage;  it  would  have  consisted,  presumably,  of  a  handful  of 
(proto)words at the beginning. What could its selective advantage possibly have been? By way of 
reply one might deny that the communications system that eventually turned into language was 
adaptive at every stage. Saltationists even claim that language came about by a single (or a few) 
mutation(s)  (see  Tallermann  &  Gibson  2012b:  21).  But  then,  suppose  you  were  the  lucky  one 
with the mutation, thereby becoming linguistically much more skillful than all the others. How 

 

2 

would  that  help  when  there  is  no  one  around  to  understand  you  (cf.  Burling  2012:  410)? 
Consequently,  it  is  reasonable  to  assume  that  “the  main  difference  must  and  does  exist  in  the 
realm of behavior and cognition.” (Kappeler, Silk, Burkart, and van Schaik 2010). 

But then, again, why did we get language while no other species acquired anything like it? They all 
seem  to  be  content  with  the  communications  systems  that  they  have.  Derek  Bickerton  has  a 
ready  answer:  “...  if  humans  got  language,  they  can  only  have  got  it  because  they  had  some 
pressing need for it.“ (Bickerton 2009:25) The others just didn’t need language (ibid: 24). More 
specifically, Bickerton’s point is that language–or rather protolanguage–allowed our ancestors to 
construct  and  inhabit  a  new  niche.  Of  course,  our  ancestors  constructed  several  niches,  „a 
terrestrial omnivore niche, a low-end scavenging niche, a high-end scavenging niche, a hunting-
and-gathering niche, a herding niche, and an agricultural niche. You could ad an urban-industrial 
niche...“ (Bickerton 2009:109). Yet it is the high-end scavenging niche–in which our ancestors no 
longer  cracked  bones  to  extract  marrow  but  turned  to  exploiting  the  carcasses  of  large 
herbivores–that lead to the development of a protolanguage; or so Bickerton claims.1 Truth be 
told, Bickerton admits that the “story to be told may be proven by future research not to have 
been  completely  accurate  –  it  goes  a  little  beyond  what  the  known  facts  support.“  (Bickerton 
2009:145) Here is a slightly hollywoodesque version of how it might have begun: 

Imagine that we’re together, you and I, in this small group, eight of us, drawing breath in the 
scant shade cast by a thorny tree. Apart from a small rabbit-sized creature, a few lizards, and a 
handful or two of withered figs that we squabbled over, we haven’t eaten today and it’s getting 
on  for  noon.  As  we  sit,  briefly,  we  scan  the  rolling  patterns  the  wind  makes  in  the  tawny 
grasses,  and  the  white-on-white  sky  where  motionless  streaks  of  cirrus  fail  to  impede  the 
burning sun, watching for any sign that there might be food out there.  

Suddenly one of us lets out a shout and stands erect, pointing. There to the west, not too far 
away, a circling vulture has come into view, followed by another, then a third. We beginn to 
jabber excitingly, pointing not only toward the sky but to one another, and gesturing. Then we 
begin to move. (...)    

There,  in  a  patch  of  marshy  ground,  lies  the  corpse  of  a  huge  deinotherium,  a  prehistoric 
elephant. Its hide is intact still, but other scavengers have arrived already–lionlike or tigerlike 

                                             
1 When did all this happen? “The most plausibel hypothesis is that the group ancestral to erectus splitt of from habilis (...) by going 
from  the  catchment  strategy  based  on  extracting  bone  marrow  to  a  territorial  strategy  based  on  exploiting  carcasses  of  large 
herbivores.“  (Bickerton  2009:  151)  So  the  advent  of  (proto)language  would  date  back  almost  two  million  years.  It  might  have 
taken  a  while  until  something  like  language  as  we  know  it  emerged.  Yet  Stephen  Levionson  and  Dan  Dediu,  e.g.,  claim  that 
“humans  half  a  million  years  ago  probably  had  languages  structurally  very  similar  to  those  on  the  planet  today.“  (Dediu  & 
Levinson 2014: 184)  

 

3 

creatures,  some  larger  than  those  of  modern  times.  A  pack  of  big  protohyenas  prowls  the 
perimeter of the scene. The vultures drift in the wind, tightening their circles. One or two of 
them  land,  taking  off  quickly  as  a  saber-tooth  lunges  at  them.  One  lands  near  us,  stares 
curiously at us with limpid and strangely innocent blue eyes.  

We look at one another. We break and run, you one way, I another. Nobody tells us which 
way to go. If one goes one way, the other goes a different way. There’s nothing so few of us 
can do in the present situation. We need numbers, as many as we can get. And we need them 
now. (Bickerton 2009: 158) 

Only  by  recruiting  as  many  group  members  as  possible  we  have  a  chance  of  fighting  back 
competitors.  As  Bickerton  emphasizes,  the  niche  our  ancestors  constructed  was  one  in  which 
cooperation  would  pay.  Competition  was  fierce;  and  none  of  us  could  exploit  the  carcass  for 
himself. We would all benefit from cooperation. But once we got home in search of recruits, how 
could we bring them to join us? Yet how do we gather numbers without language?  

It looks like the only way you could get them to go with you would be by telling them what 
you have found (...). All you can do is imitate whatever species the dead animal belongs to, 
imitate  the  sounds  it  makes  or  the  way  it  moves,  or  mime  some  prominent  feature  of  its 
anatomy. (Bickerton 2009: 159/160)  

Recruitment is the key to language evolution, according to Bickerton (cf. Bickerton 2009: 132). 
And the first ‘linguistic’ signs would have been iconic (they somehow resembled what they stood 
for).  Nonetheless,  they  already  exhibited  a  feature  that  many  take  to  be  a  defining  feature  of 
linguistic symbols. Symbols show displacement: they can be used in order to talk about objects 
and events not immediately present to the senses (ibid. 50).2 

Yet those recruitment signals weren’t words yet; there were not yet fully symbolic (cf. Bickerton 
2009: 218). They were still used only for recruitment, bound to that particular type of context and 
meaningful in that context only. They were still  

coupled with occurrence; even though displacement had been achieved, you couldn’t yet talk 
about the large dead herbivore you found last month, or suggest strategies for finding more in 
the future. You couldn’t talk about such things until you had words of some kind showing 
that you were talking about the future or the past. (Bickerton 2009:216) 

Moreover, other non-human signalling systems exhibit displacement and carry information, too. 
Similar pressures seem to generate similar results. The selective pressure that we yielded to was 
                                             
2 Charles Hockett and Stuart Altmann take displacement (“We can talk about things that are remote in time, space, or both from 
the site of the communicative transcation.”) to be one of the ‘design features’ of language. (Hockett & Altmann 1968: 63)  

 

4 

“the  need  to  transmit  information  about  food  sources  outside  the  sensory  range  of  message 
recipients.“ (Bickerton 2009: 131) Yet bees and ants have similar needs; they also have to recruit 
conspecifics in order to exploit food sources; so they developed a communication system that 
also  carries  information  about  objects  and  events  not  physically  present.  They  don’t  employ 
symbols, though. How, then, did signals turn into symbols? For one thing, they had to be used 
more flexibly:  

But  as  suggested  earlier,  a  gradually  increasing  number  of  uses  in  an  increasing  variety  of 
contexts would progressively bleach the signal of its scavenging-specific associations, slowly 
(this  could  have  taken  countless  millennia)  converting  it  from  a  context-bound  signal  to 
context-free symbolic word. (Bickerton 2014: 99) 

We can imagine our ancestors beginning to use a particular sound, one that was first employed in 
order to ‘inform’ other group member about a dead mammoth a few miles away say, in different 
kinds of circumstances. Youngsters may use it in play, others in re-telling the story of how they 
found the mammoth; some may employ it when they come across mammoth footprints; some in 
trying to get others to join them in looking out for mammoths, etc. (Bickerton 2009: 218-219). 
Chris  Knight  and  Jerome  Lewis  point  out  that  hunter-gatherers  across  Africa  to  this  day  are 
prone  to  use  in  story–telling  “the  characteristic  sounds  of  an  encounter–the  animal  calls, 
thrashing of branches, departures and arrivals in preference to verbal descriptions of key events.“ 
(Knight & Lewis 2014: 302) As they emphasize, for that to work, those listening to the story have 
to be able to tell the difference between the real event and its re-enactment by those telling the 
story; they have to realize that it is make-believe.  

According  to  Bickerton,  words  and  the  neuronal  representations  of  the  gestures  or  sounds 
required  to  produce  a  particular  word  came  first.  Words  “are  simply  permanent  anchors  that 
most concepts have“ (Bickerton 2009:208). The word “leopard“, for example, binds together all 
mentally available ‘information’ about leopards. All the information provided by the concept can 
be triggered by an utterance of the word; and words can be voluntarily produced. As a result, the 
concept can be conjured up at will, too. That marks the difference between what he calls online- 
and offline thinking: 3  

                                             
3 Concepts are not to be equated with (representations of) categories, though: „Categories sort things into classes but can only be 
evoked by physical evidence that members of those classes are present. Concepts sort thing into classes but can in addition be 
evoked by other concepts even in the absence of members of any of the classes concerned. Hence they become available for 
offline thinking.“ (Bickerton 2014: 210) 
 

 

5 

Online  thinking  occurs  when  an  individual  is  involved  in  some  specific  activity,  and  that 
activity  is  the  focus  of  thought.  (...)  Offline  thinking  occurs  when  the  topic  of  thought  has 
nothing  to  do  with  the  thinker’s  current  behavior  (...).  To  perform  offline  thinking  both 
voluntary  retrieval  and  neural  linkage  are  essential.  Any  concept  has  to  be  continuously 
accessible  and  immediately  retrievable  if  any  offline  thinking  is  to  be  done.  But  nothing  is 
gained by retrieving individual concepts in isolation from one another. It is essential to be able 
to link potentially any concept with any other concept (...). (Bickerton 2014: 79-80) 

So at some time in history, our ancestors began to combine, link and entertain concepts as they 
saw fit; they began to solve complex tasks that required that they kept a concept in mind for a 
while; they acquired the capacity to think about mammoths whenever they felt like it and not just 
when one happened to be present; etc. And they all lived happily ever after.... 

Bickerton’s story is, admittedly, very sketchy; it is highly unlikely that is gets many of the details 
right; it is probably incorrect in many important respects, too; it may even be wholly fictitious. 
But at least it is a story. Moreover, any story about the origin of language has to be conjectural–
given  the  epistemic  situation  we  are  in.  For  all  that,  it  highlights  a  couple  of  points  worth 
discussing; or so it seems to me.  

In  a  nutshell,  the  idea  is  that  signs  began  to  show  displacement  as  they  were  used  to  inform 
others  about  things  and  events  not  immediately  present.  That  required  a  certain  level  of 
cooperation that secured that our ancestors all benefitted from sharing information. Those signs 
were  iconic  at  first.  Yet  then  our  ancestors  began  to  use  them  in  a  variety  of  contexts  and  to 
different purposes; the signs became divorced from the situation in which they had emerged and 
gave way to modality-free concepts. Those concepts could be linked; they could be conjured up 
at will and be used to mentally roam through space and time.   

Firstly, I take the idea of the (at least partly) iconic origin of linguistic symbols to be promising. It 
seems to be the account best suited to explain how something like semantic (or mental) content 
came into being; how symbols acquired meaning, that is. Secondly, the idea that language evolved 
in  a  cooperative  context  in  order  to  inform  or,  more  broadly,  in  order  to  bring  people  to  do 
things, strikes me as rather plausible. Moreover, people were brought to do things not because 
they simply causally reacted to the signals so produced but due to the fact that they were given 
„information“  about  things  or  events  in  the  world  (–they  were  given  ‘reasons’,  that  is).  Again, 
that  account  seems  to  best  explain  why  we  were  willing  to  take  the  other  one  as  trying  to 
communicate something in the first place (–more on this below.)  

Other  accounts  fail  on  both  scores.  Those  claiming  that  speech  did  evolve  as  a  means  of 
grooming-at-a distance (cf. Dunbar 2012: 344) have a hard time explaining how semantic content 

 

6 

could have emerged. Gossip may be a mechanism for generating reputation (Fitch 2010: 418) and 
the  quest  for  reputation  may  help  to  explain  why  our  ancestors  began  to  give  information  for 
free.  Yet  while  gossiping  is  no  doubt  a  prominent  function  of  language,  it  already  requires  a 
rather extensive vocabulary and enough to gossip about (Bickerton 2009: 28). Others defend the 
idea of a musical or prosodic protolanguage (e.g. Mithen 2005).4 It might have emerged, as it did 
in  songbirds,  in  order  to  attract  mates  and  as  a  result  of  sexual  selection;  it  might  also  have 
emerged  as  an  early  form  of  motherese  (Falk  2004,  2012).  In  each  case,  only  half  of  the 
population  was  engaged  in  the  activity  of  ‘inventing’  a  language.  Also,  it  fails  to  explain  how 
syntax or semantics could have emerged. Gestural origin theories, on the other hand, don’t face 
these problems. (And it seems not implausible that our ancestors’ first communicative attempts 
were, at least, multi-modal.) But, as Tecumseh Fitch points out:  

The most powerful flaw is the failure of gestural origin theories to convincingly explain the 
transition  to  spoken  language–as  some  gesture  advocates  concur  (e.g.  Hewes,  1973).  Many 
commentators have independently concluded that accepting modern sign as a fully adequate 
modality for linguistic communication makes it difficult to explain the virtually total transition, 
in modern humans, to spoken language (...). (Fitch 2010: 465)  

2. Signs, signals, and symbols 

Before we turn to the question of what kinds of norms might have emerged as language evolved, 
we  ought  to  better  understand  at  which  level  of  communicative  complexity–the  level  of  signs, 
signals, or symbols–they might have emerged. It is more or less agreed upon that 

[s]ensitivity to signals is as basic a property of life as the ability to reproduce. All organisms 
are  able  to  detect  signals  indexing  the  presence  of  conditions  hospitable  to  survival  and 
reproduction. The more complex the organism, the greater the range of signals to which it is 
sensitive, and the more complex its behavior both in response to, and in the active search for, 
life-relevant signals. (Sinha 2014: 41) 

Also,  is  common  to  distinguish  between  animal  signals  and  linguistic  symbols.  But  it  may  be 
useful  to  draw  a  further  distinction  between  natural  signs  and  non-natural  signs. 5  More 
specifically, I suggest that we distinguish between natural signs, signals and symbols (–symbols 
are clear cases of non-natural signs; signals may be in between; for the distinction between natural 
                                             
4 Charles Darwin wrote in The Descent of Man that “some early progenitor of man, probably used his voice largely, as does one of 
the gibbon-apes at the present day, in producing true musical cadences, that is in singing; we may conclude from a widely-spread 
analogy that this power would have been expecially exerted during the courtship of the sexes (...)” (Darwin 1871/2013: 44) 
5 St. Augustin already distinguished, in De doctrina Christiana II 1,2-2,3 between signa data and signa naturalia. In more recent times 
the distinction has been popularized by Paul Grice (Grice 1957). 

 

7 

signs and signals cf. also Maynard Smith & Harper 2003: 3-6). A natural sign reliably indicates a 
particular state of the world. According to Fred Dretske, natural signs are  

events and conditions that derive their indicative powers, not (as in the case of symbols), from 
us,  from  our  use  of  them  to  indicate,  but  from  the  way  they  are  objectively  related  to  the 
conditions they signify. (Dretske 1988: 54)  

Facial expressions, for example, may be natural signs. A particular expression on your face may 
indicate  that  you  are  angry;  or  that  you  are  frightened,  etc.  Those  signs  have  natural  meaning; 
they mean that you are angry, or frightened. But it is not that someone has given them a meaning; 
or that you mean something by looking the way you do (cf. Grice 1957: 213-214). Still, a natural 
sign can be ‘interpreted’ by those who know about the underlying causal connection. As Robbins 
Burling points out:  

It  may  confer  no  advantage  to  be  able  to  share  precious  information  with  others,  but  it  is 
always advantageous to understand. Any animal should be helped by understanding the noises 
and  gestures  of  others,  even  when  those  noises  and  gestures  were  never  intended  to  be 
communicative. (Burling 2012: 411) 

Yet note that interpretation here means, basically: drawing the right kind of inference. That in 
turn, may require only that one react appropriately. I can infer that you are angry by seeing the 
expression  of  your  face;  that  I  am  drawing  the  inference  is  made  manifest  by  my  reacting 
appropriately. Natural signs need not have evolved in order to be interpreted. Still, being able to 
interpret them may prove to be advantageous.  

Next,  there  are  signals.  John  Maynard  Smith  and  David  Harper  define  a  signal  as  “any  act  or 
structure which alters the behavior of other organisms, which evolved because of that effect, and 
which is effective because the receiver’s response has also evolved.“ (Maynard Smith & Harper 
2003: 3; cf. also Power 2014: 47). Other than natural signs, signals may, to some extent at least, 
be  deliberately  produced;  and  they  may  have  evolved  exactly  because  they  are  amenable  to 
interpretation. How do signs turn into signals, then? Some birds, herring gulls for example, adopt 
an  upright  threat  posture  (vividly  described,  e.g.,  in  Tinbergen  1952)  that  is  basically  the  same 
posture they would adopt in circumstances in which they actually attacked their opponent. What 
once was a sign first was turned into a signal, it seems. Similarly, “when a dog is about to attack, 
for example, it bares its teeth in preparation for biting. Bared teeth have become a display that 
signals aggression in many mammals.“ (Rogers and Kaplan 1998: 17) Yet dogs might have been 
in the habit of retracting their lips in preparation for a bite just because they wanted to make sure 
that they did not bite their own lips. Still, those who were able to interpret the retracted lip as a 

 

8 

preparation for biting–those who saw what was coming, that is–had a better chance of escaping. 
The dog, in turn, might begin to snarl at others simply as a means of threatening them:  

Even a dog that had no intention of biting might frighten off an enemy by pulling back his lip 
and, in that way, avoid any need to make a much more dangerous direct attack. Only at that 
point  did  the  curled  lip  become  a  deliberate  signal.  It  had  already  become  communicative 
when it was first understood. (Burling 2012: 412) 

Not surprisingly, there is a huge debate about the extent to which animal signals are learned; the 
extent to which they can be flexibly and deliberately produced in order to affect others; etc.  

With a few exceptions, all modern mammals have a relatively small repertoire of call types (...). 
Mammals  can  control  whether  they  vocalize  or  remain  silent  and  make  some  limited 
modification in the acoustic features of their calls, but for the most part vocal production is 
highly constrained (for a review see Hammerschmidt and Fischer 2008). (Seyfarth & Cheney 
2012: 60) 

A  well  rehearsed  point  in  the  literature  by  now  is  that  vervet  monkeys  give  alarm  calls  to 
leopards, eagles and snakes that differ acoustically, thereby eliciting different responses (Cheney 
& Seyfarth 1990). Nonetheless, these calls need not be produced intentionally. A species whose 
members  are  prone  to  produce  alarm  calls  may  have  better  chances  of  survival  than  a  species 
whose members fail for produce alarm calls (cf. Fischer 2012: 242). And indeed, these calls seem 
to  be  innate,  as  cross-fostered  monkey  infants,  i.e.  monkey  infants  raised  by  foster  parents  of 
another species, don’t seem to adjust the way they use those calls if their foster parents use them 
differently (cf. Seyfarth & Cheney 2012: 61).  

This  has  lead  some  people  to  think  that  primate  vocalizations  disqualify  as  precursors  to 
language,  exactly  because  primates  seem  to  have  very  limited  control  over  their  vocalizations. 
Primate  manual  gestures,  on  the  other  hand,  seem  to  be  used  much  more  flexibly  and  can  be 
intentionally produced. They make a more promising candidate for language’s primate precursor–
or so it has been claimed.6 Yet as Klaus Zuberbühler and his colleagues emphasize, the traditional 
picture of primate vocalization may need revising:  

As producers they modify vocal behaviour in response to different audiences (e.g., Clay and 
Zuberbühler 2012, Slocombe and Zuberbühler 2007), may sometimes modify signal meaning 
by using call combinations assembled in context-dependent ways (e.g. Clay and Zuberbühler 

                                             
6 Michael  Corballis,  e.g.,  claims:  “One  argument  for  the  priority  of  the  manual  system  is  that  language  is  intentional,  and  the 
primate vocal system, unlike the manual system, is poorly adapted for intentional production.“ (Corballis 2012: 383). Simone Pika 
points out that apes use a multifaceted gestural repertoire in recipient-specific ways (Pika 2014; cf. also De Waal & Pollick 2012).  
 

 

9 

2009) and may sometimes even vocalize intentionally to inform naive recipients (Crockford et 
al. 2012). (Clay & Zuberbühler 2014: 156) 

So call production may be subject to audience effects; the epistemic situation of the recipient may 
be taken into account. Captive orang-utans, for example, modify their signals if they haven’t been 
fully understood (cf. Zuberbühler 2012: 72-72). Also, how to respond to alarm calls has to be 
learned:  

Infant vervet monkeys, for example, respond to playback of leopard, eagle, and snake alarm 
calls by running to their mothers or showing some other, often inappropriate reaction. They 
require  several  months’  experience  before  they  respond  to  the  different  alarm  calls  in  an 
appropriate, adult-like manner (Cheney and Seyfarth 1990). (Seyfarth & Cheney 2012: 62) 

In  sum:  There  seems  to  be  a  range  of  signals  that  differ  in  the  extent  to  which  they  (or  their 
responses) have to be learned, the extent to which they can be deliberately and flexibly produced, 
the extent to which they are subject to audience effects, etc. Moreover, signals (other than natural 
signs)  seem  to  have  evolved  because  they  are  amenable  to  ‘interpretation’.  They  evolved  as  a 
menas of influencing the behavior of others. Still, while both signs and signals carry information, 
they need not be used in order to intentionally convey the information they carry. For all that, 
they can both be interpreted; that is, they can serve as premises for certain inferences. But, again, 
interpretation  or  inference  seems  to  require  only  that  the  appropriate  kind  of  reaction  results. 
Nonetheless, there is room for deception on the producer’s side, at least to the extent that the 
signal is deliberately produced in order to influence the behavior of others. Is that to be described 
as the violation of a norm? Only if there also were an established way of using those signals and a 
practice of punishing deviant behavior, it seems…  

Symbols, it is said, are not meant to directly influence behavior but rather to influence the state of 
mind  of  a  conspecific:  “language  is  designed  instead  to  alter  what  is  inside  a  listener’s  mind, 
operating in that sense in a virtual world.” (Power 2014: 50) Moreover, they show displacement; 
they can be used to talk about things and events not present.  

Communication by one animal to another about some state of the world is triadic, involving 
three entities, the sender, the receiver, and the world-state described. Communication between 
animals starts more simply, with dyadic communication involving no reference to the world, 
but only involving the sender and the receiver of the message. In every human language, there 
are  few  conventional  expressions  of  this  purely  dyadic  nature.  The  only  meaning  theses 

 

10 

expressions have is their illocutionary force, with no reference to any event or situation. The 
best example is the greeting Hello. (Hurford 2012: 377)7  

But then, it is a controversial point whether alarm calls, for example, are referential, too. Are they 
referring  to  eagles,  or  leopards?  Or  do  they  rather  ‘say’  something  like:  “Up  in  the  trees!“  or 
“Take cover!“?  

The earliest words (...) would have to be used alone, apart from other words, so they could 
have had no syntactic properties. (Burling 2012: 410)  

The earliest uses of the mammoth-sign, for example, may have been attempts at communicating 
something (whatever exactly that might have been) about mammoths. And they may well have 
been multi-modal–employing whatever means had been available (gestures, sounds, pantomime, 
etc.). Yet to ask whether they were referential or predicative expressions, or used in the indicative 
or  imperative  mood  is,  arguably,  not  a  sensible  question.  Also,  to  assume  that  the  ‘speaker’ 
already had a very clearly contoured communicative intention but was only lacking the linguistic 
means to convey it is to simply push the problem one level up.8 Where did the intention’s specific 
and precise content come from? In any case, once the mammoth-sign turned into a symbol by 
being divorced from particular situations, by being linked to a concept that, in turn, is linked to 
other concepts and pieces of encyclopedic knowledge, and by being made combinable with other 
concepts, it became available as a means of offline thinking.9  

Lets us take stock, then. Natural Signs and signals carry information. But while signals may have 
evolved because they do so, signs did not. Both signs and signals can be interpreted in that they 
can  serve  as  premises  in  inferences.  Signals  may  be  innate  or  learned,  be  more  or  less  flexibly 
used, more or less deliberately produced and recipient-specific. They can show displacement by 
providing information about things and events not immediately present. Yet they are still bound 
to  a  particular  context  of  use  and  not  yet  abstracted  from  the  situations  in  which  they  have 
emerged. They cannot be conjured up at will (without external clues), combined or even created 
at  will.  These  are  features  of  symbols  only.  But  one  of  the  most  interesting  differences  is  that 
symbols have to be interpreted in a different way than signs or signals. That is where normativity 

                                             
7 „The evolutionary move from merely dyadic communication, involving only the sender and the recipient, to triadic signalling, 
where messages are also about some other object or event in the world, is facilitated by the capacity for joint attention.“ (Hurford 
2011: 484) 
8 Did language evolve primarily as a means of (conceptual) thought or of communication? The answer has  to be that both had to 
co-evolve; hand in hand, so to speak.  
9 That  may  help  explain  why  there  is  no  innate  vocabulary  (but  see  Carey  2009,  who  claims  that  there  are  innate  conceptual 
representations).  
 

 

11 

comes into play. And that is why they can be used to inform others about all kinds of things. But 
then, did we really ‘invent’ language primarily in order to honestly inform other people?  

3. Linguistic Norms and the Paradox of Honest Communication 

Why would we do that? “If information has any value, it is in the interest of no one to give it for 
free. And if information has no value, why are there ears ready to listen to it?“ (Desalles 2014: 
284). A related problem is that that words are notoriously easy to produce and so ought to enjoy 
low credibility; how could they acquire anything like a stable meaning in the first place? Given 
that signals are cheap, no one would attend to them; it would not even be possible to use them in 
order to inform. How could honest communication, and with it symbols that carry information 
in  a  non-natural  way,  possibly  have  evolved?  Oughtn’t  one  to  expect  dishonest  signals  to 
abound?   

It is interesting in this context that dishonest signals are relatively rare, at least in intra-species 
animal communication. (Clay & Zuberbühler 2014: 143)  

Clay and Zuberbühler offer two explanations: The first is that, as Zahavi’s handicap principle has 
it, “receivers will only attend to signals that are physically difficult to produce and hard to fake 
(...)“.  (Clay  and  Zuberbühler  2014:  143).  According  to  Zahavi’s  principle:  “characters  which 
develop through mate preference confer handicaps on the selected individuals in their survival.“ 
(Zahavi  1975:  205).  Consequently,  we  ought  to  distinguish  between  natural  signs  that  reliably 
indicate  a  certain  state  of  the  world  by  being  causally  connected  to  that  state  and  handicaps 
“which are signals whose reliability depends on the fact that they are costly to make.“ (Maynard 
Smith & Harper 2003: 1) Yet if Amotz Zahavi is right, then there simply are no (or only very 
few) cheap signals–at least not among those that play a role in sexual selection.  

The second explanation draws on the idea that animals would avoid dishonest signalling in order 
not to lose reputation (cf. Clay and Zuberbühler 2014:143). A similar idea is promoted by Jean-
Louise Desalles, who claims that giving honest information may be a valuable strategy after all as 
you thereby advertise that you make a good friend. And friends are the best life insurance that 
one can get (cf. Desalles 2014: 291). 

As  I  will  suggest,  conversational  moves,  far  from  being  cooperative  offers,  are  more  like 
competitive advertising. (Desalles 2014: 286)10  

                                             
10 According to Desalles, there are two main types of verbal activities: conversational narratives and argumntative discourse (cf. Desalles 
2014: 286). And „individuals demonstrate their ability to generate unexpectedness and emotion through narratives; and they show 
off  their  ability  to  deal  with  logical  inconsistency  through  discussion.“  (Desalles  2014:  289)  Moreover,  the  ability  to  detect 
unexpected events or to detect inconsistencies in the testimony of others are both valuable in a friend, according to Desalles. 

 

12 

Others, like Bickerton, claim that honest communication (or the lack of dishonest signalling) is 
best  explained  on  the  assumption  that  signaller  and  receiver  share  a  common  interest  and  are 
engaged in a cooperative enterprise (cf. also, e.g., Maynard Smith and Harper 2003: 29 & 37). On 
that account, a certain level of cooperation would have been a prerequisite for the evolution of 
language. Lying or faking simply wouldn’t pay in the circumstances depicted by Bickerton. Given 
that we both benefit from sharing information and that we have a common interest here, there 
would be no gain in lying–so far. Moreover, the signaller could immediately be proven wrong and 
lose  social  standing  (–a  point  also  highlighted  in  Desalles’  approach.)  Michael  Tomasello  also 
emphasizes the role of mutualism in the evolution of language:  

Our proposal is that cooperative communication was adaptive initially because it arose in the 
context  of  mutualistic  collaborative  activities  in  which  individuals  helping  others  were 
simultaneously helping themselves. (Tomasello 2008: 170; cf. also Tomasello 2009 & Zlatev 
2014)  

But note that regarding signs and signals that are not deliberately produced in order to inform the 
question  of  dishonesty  (and  of  normativity)  doesn’t  even  arise.  Natural  signs  are  causally 
connected to what they are signs for; there is not even room for misrepresentation.11 In the case 
of signals, error may be possible. But the problem of honest communication arises only when we 
turn to signals that can be produced with the intention to inform.  

Let’s  go  back  to  Bickerton’s  mammoth-scenario.  Although  “mammoth“  need  not  have  been 
among the first words that our ancestors came up with, words somehow relating to food, prey 
and predators are promising candidates when it comes to the question of what the first words of 
our species could possibly have been. As Charles Darwin already pointed out,   

it does not appear altogether incredible, that some unusually wise ape-like animal should have 
thought of imitating the growl of a beast of prey, so as to indicate to his fellow monkeys the 
nature  of  the  expected  danger.  And  this  would  have  been  a  first  step  in  the  formation  of 
language. (Darwin 1871/2013: 45) 

So suppose that you try to recruit me; you want me to help you exploit the delicious carcass of a 
mammoth a few miles away. You try a couple of things–gestures, sounds, and pantomime. You 
imitate the appearance, the movements of and the noises made by the mammoth, for example. In 
order  to  understand  your  behavior  at  all,  I  have  to  understand  that  what  you  are  doing  is  an 
attempt  at  communicating  in  the  first  place–what  Thomas  Scott-Philipps  calls  ‘signalling 

                                             
11 According to Dretske, for example, indicating (other than representing) is 100% reliable: “As I am using these words, there can 
be no misindication, only misrepresentation.” (Dretske 1988: 56) 

 

13 

signalhood’ (e.g. in Scott Phillips et. al. 2009; cf. also Hurford 2012: 379). I have, in other words, 
to understand that you are not dancing, nor moving and howling just for the fun of it. I have to 
understand that the sounds and gestures are directed at me and that they are about something 
else. You are trying to bring me to do something; but not by dragging me along but by using a 
sign that is about something. Slightly anachronistically, we may say that you are trying to give me 
a reason to join you.  

The sign used need not be iconic; as long as I can get enough other clues as to what it might be 
about iconicity seems dispensable. Yet if it is not iconic, I have to understand not only that you 
are trying to communicate by means of a non-natural sign but also what its non-natural meaning 
might possibly be. Therefore, iconicity helps as it provides one more clue as to the what. Iconic 
signs  can  be  interpreted–to  some  extent  at  least–‘naturally’.  I  still  have  to  realize  that  you  are 
trying to communicate, though:  

Iconic gestures rely on common ground in the same way (as does pointing, NK), but a bit less so 
because  more  information  is  potentially  in  the  gesture  itself.  And  so  I  may  gesture  to  my 
novice partner iconically how she is to dig out the dirt I want her to dig out, even if she has 
never done this before in this context (though she still needs to see my gesture as communicative 
and as relevant to our current activity). (Tomasello 2008: 203; my emphasis)    

So even if I understand that you are trying to communicate and even if the sign used is iconic, 
there would still be alternative interpretations. To narrow down the range of interpretation, the 
sign ought to convey something relevant–otherwise I would be at a loss (and without any motive) 
as  to  how  to  interpret  it.  Yet  it  has  to  be  of  relevance  to  both  of  us  in  order  for  it  to  be 
interpretable. If it were of relevance to me only why would you bother to tell me? If it were of 
relevance  to  you  only  why  would  I  bother  to  listen.  (That  would  presuppose  genuine  altruism 
already). Moreover, as Tomassello point out, joint relevance will be generated by joint activities 
and  joint  purposes  (cf.  Tomasello  2008,  2009).  Consequently,  in  order  to  understand  your 
behavior I have to interpret it in light of our shared purposes or interests. I can understand what 
you  are  doing  only  by  understanding  what  you  are  doing  it  for  of  why  you  are  doing  it.  If 
successful, I will thereby have grasped your communicative intention, even if it may not be very 
specific  yet.  (Yet,  again,  I  will  let  you  ‘read  my  mind’  only  if  we  are  in  a  non-competitive, 
cooperative context, cf. Knight & Power 2012.)  

In  a  nutshell:  In  order  to  make  your  behavior  interpretable  at  all,  I  have  to  expect  that  it  is 
something relevant that you are trying to communicate and, more specifically, that it is relevant to 
the  fulfillment  of  a  common  interest  of  purpose  of  ours.  An  utterance  that  cannot  yet  exploit 
conventional  means  is  interpretable  only  on  the  assumption  that  something  relevant  has  been 

 

14 

uttered. Consequently, there will be a mutual expectation of relevance each time we understand 
the other one as trying to communicate something (cf. Sperber & Wilson  21995; Grice 1967).12 
Without cooperation in the form of joint activities that serve a common purposes, non-natural 
signs (symbols) are not interpretable. As Tomasello puts it:  

Human  infants  from  as  early  as  14  month  of  age  (…) communicate  cooperatively–to  share 
interest  in  things  and  inform  others  of  things–and  they  construct  and  participate  in  joint 
atttentional frames, which give cooperative gestures their meaning. Without a foundation in 
cooperative  communication  of  this  type,  human  language  is  not  even  thinkable  (…) 
(Tomasello & Moll 2010: 342) 

Mutual  expectations,  it  seems,  have  normative  import.  Yet  one  might  wonder  whether  the 
expectation  of  relevance  and  cooperation  is  still  necessary  (or  fulfilled)  once  non-natural  signs 
have acquired a stable (non-natural, i.e. conventional) meaning (–I will come back to that below). 
But then, without cooperation symbols could not acquire anything like a situation-independent, 
stable meaning in the first place.  

The situation in front of us can be described, following David Lewis, as a coordination problem. 
Suppose,  to  take  an  example  of  Lewis’,  we  want  to  meet  tomorrow  at  noon.  There  are,  let  us 
further suppose, three places were we could meet. We both don’t care where we meet, as long as 
we  meet.  This  is  a  coordination  problem  as  is  meets  the  following  two  criteria.  Our  (relevant) 
interests coincide; and there will be more than just one coordination equilibrium.13  

An equilibrium, we recall, is a combination in which no one would have been better off had 
he alone acted otherwise. Let me define a coordination equilibrium as a combination in which no 
one  would  have  been  better  off  had  any  agent  alone  acted  otherwise,  either  himself  of 
someone else. (Lewis 1969/2002:14) 

How do we solve coordination problems? Explicit agreement is the most obvious way to go; if 
that is not an option, we can try for a coordination equilibrium that is somehow salient (cf. ibid: 
35). Moreover, precedent is a special case of salience. Suppose we had been confronted with a 
coordination problem and had reached a coordination equilibrium in the past. Now we encounter 

                                             
12 According to Neo-Griceans like Deidre Wilson and Dan Sperber, “[e]very act of ostensive communication communicates a 
presumption of its own optimal relevance.“ (Sperber & Wilson 21995: 15) Ostensive communication consists “of making manifest 
to  an  audinece  one´s  intention  to  make  manifest  a  basic  layer  of  information.“  (Ibid.  54)  And  a  stimulus  is  optimally  relevant 
when is is worth the addresses’ while to process it and it is the most relevant one available to the communicator. 
13 A coordination probleme must have more than one coordination equilibrium–otherwise rationality alone will secure that we can 
reach the equilibrium (cf. Lewis 1996/2002: Chap. I.2).  
 

 

15 

an analogous problem. We may try to solve it analogously; and so again and again, each time we 
encounter that type of problem. A noticeable regularity will emerge.  

Since  our  present  problem  is  suitably  analogous  to  the  precedents,  we  can  reach  a 
coordination  equilibrium  by  all  conforming  to  this  same  regularity.  Each  of  us  wants  to 
conform to it if the others do; he has a conditional preference for conformity. (Lewis 1969/2002: 
39)  

Let us assume, for example, that eventually you managed to get me to join you in exploiting the 
said carcass. There might have been other means you could have used. But given that you were 
successful this time, you may well use the same means again next time, the same sound-gesture 
combination, for example; and I might do so as well.  

Each new action in conformity to the regularity adds to our experience of general conformity. 
Our experience of general conformity in the past leads us, by force of precedent, to expect a 
like conformity in the future. And our expectation of future conformity is a reason to go on 
conforming (...). (Ibid.: 41)  

A convention is born.14 (And once a particular iconic gesture or sound is robustly associated with 
a particular meaning, the iconicity may well get lost; cf. Harnad 2012: 391).15 According to Lewis, 
conventions are a type of norm in that they are “regularities to which we believe one ought to 
conform.“ (Lewis 1969/2002: 97) This is so because for any particular conventional regularity R, 
I have reason to think that most members of my population P will conform to R and expect me 
to do so as well; and I myself prefer that if that is so, then I conform, too. Consequently, “I have 
reason  to  believe  that  my  conforming  would  answer  to  my  own  preferences  (...)  and  to  the 
preferences of most other members of P.“ (Ibid.: 98) That line of reasoning, in turn, gives me 
(and any other member of P) a reason why I ought to conform.  

But don’t norms require that there be sanctions, too? Moreover, isn’t it the case that conformity 
in  the  linguistic  case  is  in  each  member’s  own  interest;  so  they  can  be  expected  to  conform 
anyway. Yet note that norm-violations are possible nonetheless, due to ignorance, irrationality or 

                                             
14 Here is a definition (that is still subject to certain qualifications): “A regularity R in the behavior of members of a population P 
when they are agents in a recurrent situation S is a convention if and only if it is true that, and it is common knowledge in P that, in 
any instance of S among members of P,  
1. everyone conforms to R; 
2. everyone expects everyone else to conform to R;  
3. everyone prefers to conform to R on condition that the others do, since S is a coordination problem and uniform conformity 
to R is a coordination equilibrium in S.“ (Lewis 1969/2002: 58)  
15 As Michael Corballis points out, “(m)odern sign languages retain a strong mimetic, or iconic, component.“ (Corballis 2012: 384) 
 

 

16 

simply by mistake. Still, only moderate sanctions (if at all) seem to be imposed on those violating 
the norms. How is that to be explained? Lewis contrasts conventions with social contracts. Both 
are usually not brought about by explicit agreement; rather, they are sort of thought experiments 
used to rationalize certain phenomena. But according to Lewis, there is an important difference 
between  the  two:  In  the  case  of  a  convention,  the  agent  will  prefer  general  conformity  to 
conformity  by  all  but  himself.  In  the  case  of  a  social  contract,  the  agent  will  prefer  general 
conformity to a certain state of general nonconformity (the state of nature, so to speak) (cf. Lewis 
1969/2002: 88-96). This has an interesting consequence. Given that the agent prefers to conform 
to  R  on  condition  that  all  (or  most)  of  the  others  do,  one  ought  to  expect  there  to  be  no 
semantic freeriders. Anyone would contravene R to his own disadvantage; as long as the others 
conform, that is. That would also explain why there will be, at best, moderate sanctions; people 
only inadvertently or accidentally contravene those norms. Moral norms, on the other hand, seem 
to  be  more  like  social  contracts  in  that  respect.  They  effectively  exclude  cases  of  general  non-
conformity but fail to exclude cases of freeriding. Yet if I use a word with a different meaning 
than  that  conventionally  assign  to  it,  communication  may  not  succeed.  I  run  the  risk  of  being 
misunderstood. Consequently, these semantic norms seem to be a type to prudential norms. (So 
to say that there are semantic norms is not to say that they are irreducibly semantic; cf. Röska-
Hardy & Glock, this volume?).  

But he who tells lies–isn’t he semantically free-riding? Doesn’t he violate semantic norms? No, he 
does  not.  A  liar  intends  to  use  the  terms  in  accordance  with  their  conventional  meaning.  He 
means to say exactly what he says. He wants to be interpreted accordingly. It is just that he does 
not believe what he says (–I am focusing on typical cases of lying here). What kind of norm could 
he be violating then–a norm of truthfulness? Some claim that it is a norm of assertion that one 
ought  to  assert  only  what  one  knows  (cf.,  e.g.,  Williamson  2000).  It  may  be  classified  as  a 
pragmatic norm (see below). Yet it may also qualify as a moral norm. Yet it is not a semantic 
norm (note that we are not talking about a “truthfulness-in-L” as defined by Lewis 1969/2002: 
177-19). To briefly sum up: There has to be a mutual expectation of relevance in order for signs 
to acquire non-natural meaning in the first place. And certain prudential norms are required in 
order for non-natural signs to acquire a stable meaning. Also, there may be pragmatic (and/or 
moral) norm of truthfulness.  

What,  exactly,  are  pragmatic  norms,  then?  Pragmatic  norms  are  supposed  to  regulate 
communicative interaction. As Nick Enfield and Jack Sidnell point out,  

 

17 

many social actions that are carried out through use of language come in pairs, for example 
requests  and  granting  (or  rejection),  invitation  and  acceptance  (or  refusal),  complaints  and 
excuse (or denial), and so on. (Enfield & Sidnell 2014: 99) 

There are often initiating and responsive utterances, as they put it. Consequently, communication 
itself is–often–a joint activity; a cooperative action. Not surprisingly, children learn to use words 
such as „hi“ and „by“ as part of a ritual (Lamm 2014: 269). Other words, too, are often learned 
as part of a question-answer ritual that “involves turn-taking, the rituals of dialogue, the linguistic 
pragmatics of questioning, the mechanics of questions and answers (...).“ (Lamm 2013: 271) Also, 
a  speaker  has  to  understand  the  „normative  context  of  discourse“  that  determines  the 
illocutionary  force  of  direct  or  indirect  speech  acts,  whether  an  utterance  is  a  promise,  or  a 
request, or a warning, etc. (cf. Lamm 2014: 268). These norms may be called pragmatic in that 
they regulate communicative activities. But in the end, they may be reducible to social norms 
(Enfield, this volume?). 

Other  pragmatic  norms  help  to  secure  communicative  success  by  guiding  interpretation.  More 
specifically, they provide clues for figuring out what might have been meant over and above that 
which has been explicitly said. What is said is closely connected to the conventional meaning of 
the  words’  used  (cf.  Grice  1967:  25).  Pragmatic  norms  or  rules,  such  as  the  Gricean  maxims, 
provide  clues  for  what  is  implicitly  communicated.  Roughly,  we  expect  our  interlocutors  to 
comply with the following four maxims:  

Don’t say more than is required at the present stage of the conversation, and don’t say less.  

Don’t say anything that you lack adequate evidence for or even take to be false. (That seems 
to be a version of the norm of truthfulness.) 

Be relevant.  

Be perspicuous and brief (cf. Grice 1967: 26-27).  

At  the  dawn  of  language,  the  first  two  maxims  and  the  last  one–other  than  the  third  maxim– 
could hardly have played a role. Given that we couldn’t even produce grammatically well-formed 
sentences and that our vocabulary was rather limited, being too prolific wasn’t really the problem. 
For similar reasons, neither truth nor perspicuitas was much of an issue. I venture the guess that we 
were lucky if we managed to get something across. But one might think that once language was 
on its way, the maxims became superfluous anyway; now that we have conventional means to 
communicate.  

Yet  the  Gricean  maxims  are  meant  to  guide  implicit  communication–as  opposed  to  explicit 
communication to exploit conventional means. (That is why the maxim of relevance was useful 

 

18 

in  modeling  how  language  might  have  evolved;  at  the  beginning  communication  was  fully 
implicit,  simply  because  explicit,  i.e.  conventional,  means  weren’t  in  place  yet.)  Given  that  the 
semantic  content  of  most  utterances  underdetermines  what  the  speaker  meant  to  get  across, 
implicit communication is an important issue. Speakers commonly mean more than what the say. 
Suppose you overhear someone say: “She is ready.“ What is she ready for, you might wonder? 
The speaker has violated the second maxim–at least at the level of what is said. Yet you might 
reason  as  follows:  ‘What  she  said  is  not  informative  enough.  I  take  it  that  she  tries  to  convey 
something  informative.  What  could  she  have  meant  over  and  above  that  which  she  had  said?’ 
You thereby perform an inference to the best interpretation.  

Speakers  and  hearers  exploit  those  maxims  in  communication.  And,  again,  there  is  a  mutual 
expectation of compliance with (something like) those maxims. Moreover, one ought to comply 
with  those  maxims  if  one  wants  to  be  understood.  And  communication  aims  at  being 
understood,  it  seems.  Consequently,  these  pragmatic  maxims  seem  to  be  a  type  of  prudential 
norm,  too.  Yet  it  is  important  to  bear  the  following  in  mind.  Firstly,  pragmatic  norms  govern 
implicit  communication  only.  As  soon  as  we  avail  ourselves  of  conventional  communicative 
means,  we  are  no  longer  bound  by  these  norms  (–or  to  a  lesser  extent).  Secondly,  to  say  that 
there are pragmatic norms of relevance, informativeness or truthfulness is not deny that speakers 
use linguistic means in order to pursue all kinds of ignoble purposes; and they may have all kinds 
of ignoble intentions. Yet their implicit communicative intentions will be fulfilled only by being 
recognized  (cf.  Kemmerling  2001).  And  they  will  be  recognized  only  to  the  extent  that  they 
comply with those norms.  

Summing up 

We  are  now  in  a  position  to  solve  the  problem  of  explaining  how  honest  communication  by 
means  of  symbols  (non-natural  signs)  could  have  possibly  evolved.  At  the  beginning,  symbols 
(non-natural  signs)  were  interpretable  with  recourse  to  joint  interests  and  purposes  only.  That 
required that speaker and hearer cooperate. And cooperation is also required if non-natural signs 
are  to  acquire  anything  like  a  conventional  meaning.  Linguistic  conventions  are  a  type  of 
prudential norms. Moreover, communicative interaction is governed by pragmatic norms. Some 
of  them  may  be  reducible  to  social  norms.  Others  govern  implicit  communication  (–and  they 
may roughly look like the Gricean maxims). Those norms, too, are aptly characterized as a type 
of prudential norm. But then, as soon as symbols have acquired a stable meaning, things change. 
Explicit  communication,  i.e.  communication  by  conventional  linguistic  means,  allows  one  to 
exploit the conventional meaning of linguistic symbols in order to pursue all kinds of noble or 
less noble purposes. (Moral norms to the rescue!)  
 
19 

References 

Bickerton, Derek 2009: Adam’s Tongue: How Humans Made Language, How Language Made Humans. New York: Hill and Wang.   

Bickerton, Derek 2014: More than Nature Needs: Language, Mind, and Evolution. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.  

Burling, Robbins 2012: Words Came First: Adaptations for Word-Learning. In: Tallermann, M. & Gibson, K. R (eds.) 2012a, 406-
416. 

Carey, Susan 2009: The Origin of Concepts. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Cheney, Dorothy L. & Seyfarth, Robert M 1990: How monkeys see the world: Inside the mind of another species. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press. 

Clay, Zanna & Zuberbühler, Klaus 2009: Food-associated Calling Sequences in Bonobos. Animal Behaviour 77:1387-1396. 

Clay,  Zanna  &  Zuberbühler,  Klaus  2012:  Communication  during  Sex  among  Female  Bonobos:  Effects  of  Dominance, 
Solicitation and Audience. Scientific Reports 2: 291. 

Clay, Zanna & Zuberbühler, Klaus 2014: Vocal communication and social awareness in chimpanzees and bonobos.  In: Dor, D.; 
Knight, C. & Lewis, J. (eds.) 2014: 141-156.  

Corballis, Michael C. 2012: The Origins of Language in Manual Gestures. In: Tallermann, M. & Gibson, K. R (eds.) 2012a, 382-
386. 

Crockford, C; Wittig, R.M.; Mundry, R & Zuberbühler, K 2012: Wild Chimpanzees Inform Ignorant Group Members of Danger. 
Current Biology 22: 142-146.   

Darwin, Charles 1871/2013: The Descent of Man. Ware: Worldsworth Editions.  

De Waal, Frans B. M. & Pollick, Amy S. 2012: Gesture as the most flexible Modality of Primate Communication. In: Tallermann, 
M. & Gibson, K. R (eds.) 2012a, 82-89. 

Dediu, Dan & Levinson, Stephen C. : The time frame of the emergence of modern language and its implications. In: Dor, D.; 
Knight, C. & Lewis, J. (eds.) 2014: 184-195. 

Desalles, Jean-Louis 2014: Why talk? In: Dor, D.; Knight, C. & Lewis, J. (eds.) 2014: 284-296. 

Dor, Daniel, Knight, Chris & Lewis, Jerome (eds.) 2014: The Social Origins of Language. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Dretske, Fred 1988: Explaining Behavior: Reasons in a World of Causes. Cambridge Mass.: The MIT Press (a Bradford Book).  

Dunbar, Robin I. M. 2012: Gossip and the Social Origins of Language. In: Tallermann, M. & Gibson, K. R (eds.) 2012a, 341-345. 

Enfield,  Nick  J.  &  Sidnell,  Jack  2014:  Language  presupposes  and  enchronic  infrastructure  for  social  interaction.  In:  Dor,  D.; 
Knight, C. & Lewis, J. (eds.) 2014: 92-104. 

Falk, Dean 2004: Prelinguistic Evolution in early Hominins. Whence motherese? Behavioral and Brain sciences 27: 491-503. 

Falk, Dean 2012: The Role of Hominin Mothers and Infants in prelinguistic evolution. In: M. Tallerman & K. R. Gibson (eds.) 
2012a: 318-321.  

Fischer, Julia 2012: Affengesellschaft. Berlin: Suhrkamp.  

Fitch, Tecumseh W. 2010: The Evolution of Language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.  

Grice, Paul H. 1948/1957: Meaning. In: Grice, P. 1989, 213-223. 

 

Grice, Paul H. 1967: Logic and Conversation. In: Grice, P. 1989, 22-40. 

 

Grice, Paul H. 1989: Studies in the way of words. Cambridge Mass.: Harvard University Press.  

 

20 

Hammerschmidt, Kurt & Fischer, Julia 2008: Constraints on primate call production. In K. Oller & U. Griebel (eds.) 2008: The 
evolution of communicative creativity: From fixed signals to contextual flexibility. Cambridge Mass.: The MIT Press: 93-119.  

Harnad, Steven 2012: From sensorimotor Categories and Pantomime to Grounded Symbols and Propositions. In: Tallermann, M. 
& Gibson, K. R (eds.) 2012a, 387-392. 

Hewes, Gordon W. 1973: Primate communication and the gestural origin of language. Current Anthropology 14: 5-24. 

Hockett,  Charles  F.  &  Altmann,  Stuart  A  (1968):  A  Note  on  Design  Features.  In  Thomas  A  Sebeok  (ed.)  1968:  Animal 
Communication. Techniques of study and results of Research. Bloomington: Indiana University Press: 61-72.  

Hurford, James 2011: Linguistics from an Evolutionary point of View. In Ruth Kempson, Tim Fernando and Nicholas Asher 
(eds.): Philosophy of Linguistics, Volume 14 of the  Handbook of the Philosophy of Science General editors: Dov M. Gabbay, 
Paul Thagard and John Woods. Elsevier: 473-498. 

Hurford, James R. 2012: The Origins of Meaning. In: Tallermann, M. & Gibson, K. R (eds.) 2012a, 370-381. 

Kappeler, Peter M., Silk, Joan S.; Burkart, Judith; van Schaik, Carel 2010: primate Behavior and Human Universals: Exploring the 
Gap. In: Kappeler, P.M. & Silk, J. S (eds.) 2010: Mind the Gap: Tracing the Origins of Human Universals. Berlin/Heidelberg: Springer, 
3-15.  

Kemmerling, Andreas 2001: Gricy actions. In: Cosenza, G. (ed.): Paul Grice’s Heritage. Turnhout: Prepols Publ.: 73-99.  

Knight, Chris & Lewis, Jerome 2014: Vocal deception, laughter, and the linguistic significance of reverse dominance. In: Dor, D.; 
Knight, C. & Lewis, J. (eds.) 2014: 297-314. 

Knight,  Chris  &  Power,  Camilla  2012:  Social  Conditions  for  the  Evolutionary  Emergence  of  Language.  In:  Tallermann,  M.  & 
Gibson, K. R (eds.) 2012a, 346-349.  

Lamm, Ehud 2014: Forever united: the co-evolution of language and normativity. In: Dor, D.; Knight, C. & Lewis, J. (eds.) 2014: 
267-283. 

Lewis,  David  1969:  Convention.  Cambridge  Mass.:  Harvard  University  Press.  Reissued  2002  by  Blackwell  Publishers  (Oxford). 
Quotations are to the 2002 edition.  

Locke,  John:  An  Essay  Concerning  Human  Understanding.  Edited  with  an  introduction  by  Peter  H.  Nidditch.  Oxford:  Clarendon 
Press, 1975. 

Maynard Smith, John & Harper, David 2003: Animal Signals. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Mithen, Steven 2005: The Singing Neanderthals: The origins of music, language, mind, and body. London: Weidenfeld & Nicholson.  

Pika, Simone 2014: Chimpanzee grooming gestures and sounds. In: Dor, D.; Knight, C. & Lewis, J. (eds.) 2014: 129-140. 

Pinker, Steven 1994: The Language Instinct: How the Mind Creates Language. New York: Harper Perennial.  

Power, Camilla 2014: Signal evolution and the social brain. In: Dor, D.; Knight, C. & Lewis, J. (eds.) 2014: 47-55. 

Rogers, Lesley J & Kaplan, Gisela 1998: Songs, Roars, & Rituals. Communication in Birds, Mammals and other species. Cambridge Mass.; 
Harvard University Press.  

Scott-Phillips,  Thomas  C.,  Kirby,  Simon  &  Ritchie,  Graham  R.  S.  (2009).  Signalling  signalhood  and  the  emergence  of 
communication. Cognition 113(2), 226-233. 

Seyfarth,  Robert  M.  &  Cheney,  Dorothy  L.  2012:  Primate  social  cognition  as  a  Precursor  to  Language.  In:  Tallermann,  M.  & 
Gibson, K. R (eds.) 2012a, 59-70.   

Sinha, Chris 2014: Niche construction and semiosis: biocultural and social dynamics. In: Dor, D.; Knight, C. & Lewis, J. (eds.) 
2014: 31-46.  

 

21 

Slocombe,  K.  E.  &  Zuberbühler,  Klaus  2007:  Chimpanzees  Modify  Recruitment  Screams  as  a  Function  of  Audience 
Composition. Proceedings of the national Academy of Sciences USA 104(43): 17228-17233. 

Sperber, Dan & Wilson, Deidre 21995: Relevance. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.  

Tallermann, Maggie & Gibson, Kathleen R. 2012a: The Oxford Handbook of Language Evolution. Oxford: Oxford University Press.  

Tallermann, Maggie and Gibson, Kathleen R. 2014b: Introduction: The Evolution of Language. In Tallermann, M & Gibson, K. 
R. 2012a: 1-45.  

Tinbergen,  Niko  1952:  Derived  activities:  Their  causation,  biological  significance,  origin  and  emancipation  during  evolution. 
Quaterly Review of Biology 27:1-32. 

Tomasello, Michael 2008: Origins of Human Communication. Cambridge Mass.: The MIT Press.  

Tomasello, Michael 2009: Why We Cooperate. Cambridge Mass.: The MIT Press (a Boston Review Book).  

Tmasello, Michael & Moll, Henrike 2010: The Gap is Social: Human Shared Intentionality and Culture. In: Kappeler, P.M. & Silk, 
J. S (eds.) 2010: Mind the Gap: Tracing the Origins of Human Universals. Berlin/Heidelberg: Springer, 331-349.  

Trabant, Jürgen 2008: Was ist Sprache. München: C.H.Beck.  

Williamson, T., 2000, Knowledge and its Limits, Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Zahavi, A. 1975: Mate selection – selection for a handicap. Journal of Theoretical Biology 53:205-214.  

Zlatev,  Jordan  2014:  The  co-evolution  of  human  intersubjectivity,  morality,  and  language.  In:  Dor,  D.;  Knight,  C.  &  Lewis,  J. 
(eds.) 2014: 249-266. 

Zuberbühler, Klaus 2012: Cooperative Breeding and the Evolution of Vocal Flexibility. In: Tallermann, M. & Gibson, K. R (eds.) 
2012a, 71-81.  

 

 

22 

