Psychology Research and Behavior Management

Open Access Full Text Article

Dovepress

open access to scientiﬁc and medical research

R E V I E W

Behavioral treatments for children and adults  
who stutter: a review

Michael Blomgren
Department of Communication 
Sciences and Disorders, University 
of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA

Correspondence: Michael Blomgren 
Department of Communication 
Sciences and Disorders, University 
of Utah, 390 S. 1530 E., Rm 1210, 
Salt Lake City, UT 84112-0252, USA 
Email michael.blomgren@health.utah.edu

Abstract: This  paper  provides  a  brief  overview  of  stuttering  followed  by  a  synopsis  of 
current approaches to treat stuttering in children and adults. Treatment is discussed in terms 
of multifactorial, operant, speech restructuring, and anxiolytic approaches. Multifactorial and 
operant  treatments  are  designed  for  young  children  who  stutter.  Both  of  these  approaches 
involve parent training and differ primarily in their focus on reducing demands on the child 
(multifactorial) or in their use of response contingent stimulation (operant conditioning). Speech 
restructuring and anxiolytic approaches are used with adults who stutter. Speech restructuring 
approaches focus on the mechanics of speech production, and anxiolytic treatments tend to 
focus on the symptoms and social and vocational challenges of stuttering. The evidence base for 
these different approaches is outlined. Response contingent therapy (for children) and speech 
restructuring therapy (for adults) have the most robust empirical evidence base. Multifactorial 
treatments for children and stuttering management approaches for adults are popular but are based 
on theoretical models of stuttering; the evidence base is not robust and tends to be inferred from 
work in areas such as cognitive behavior therapy and desensitization. Comprehensive, or holistic, 
approaches to treating stuttering are also discussed. Comprehensive approaches for treating 
stuttering in adults address both improved speech ﬂuency and stuttering management.
Keywords:  stuttering,  treatment,  stuttering  management,  speech  restructuring,  cognitive 
restructuring

Introduction
Stuttering is a developmental speech disorder in which the forward ﬂow of speech 
is  interrupted  by  repetitions  of  sounds,  words,  and/or  the  prolongation  of  sounds. 
Developmental stuttering appears during the preschool years, typically between the ages 
of 2 and 4. Stuttering can be quite variable, especially in childhood. It is not uncommon 
for stuttering to appear and disappear in cycles during the preschool years. Stuttering 
in children and adults may also vary depending on the speaking context. Stuttering is 
also more pronounced when an individual is rushed or in a stressful speaking situation. 
In fact, one of the few invariant aspects of stuttering is that it is highly variable.

The reported incidence numbers for stuttering vary, but stuttering is most common 
in young children (approximately 5%). Approximately 0.5% to 1% of adults stutter.1 
These  numbers  indicate  that  most  children  (about  75%)  recover  from  stuttering 
naturally, although obviously not all do. Currently, no foolproof indicators exist to 
determine if an individual child will naturally stop stuttering or not; however, gender 
and family history of natural recovery appear to be predictors of natural recovery. 
Girls are more likely to stop stuttering than boys and children with a family history 

submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress 
http://dx.doi.org./10.2147/PRBM.S31450

Psychology Research and Behavior Management 2013:6 9–19
© 2013 Blomgren, publisher and licensee Dove Medical Press Ltd. This is an Open Access article  
which permits unrestricted noncommercial use, provided the original work is properly cited.

9

Blomgren

Dovepress

of natural recovery from stuttering are more likely to stop 
stuttering.2

On  the  surface,  stuttering  is  a  disorder  of  speech 
production. It is not a language disorder or a communication 
disorder secondary to other emotional or mental conditions. 
Speciﬁcally, surface elements of stuttering include the speech 
motor  behaviors  of  repeated  articulatory  movements  (eg, 
t-t-t-talk) and/or ﬁxed articulatory postures (eg, mmmine).3 
These  two  broad  categories  account  for  the  majority  of 
stuttering  moments. These  stuttering  moments  may  also 
be accompanied by muscle tension and signs of struggle to 
speak. Other nonverbal gestures include behaviors such as 
facial grimaces, eye blinking, and loss of eye contact. These 
nonverbal gestures are reactive responses at the moment of 
stuttering and are not considered “core” stuttering behavior. 
Verbal  interjections  (eg,  “uh,”  “like,”  “um,”  etc)  and 
circumlocutions are also common secondary behaviors.

The surface features of stuttering are those most readily 
visible to an observer. However, stuttering is more than its 
surface manifestations. Stuttering is also a multidimensional 
disorder.4,5 Aspects of stuttering that exist “below the surface” 
include private and affective aspects of stuttering.6 It should 
be obvious that people who stutter do not enjoy stuttering. 
Therefore,  stuttering  speakers  often  develop  numerous 
avoidance  strategies. These  strategies  include  avoiding 
problematic words, avoiding stressful speaking situations, 
or avoiding talking with people where a history of excessive 
stuttering exists. Examples of particularly stressful speaking 
situations  include  talking  on  the  telephone,  introducing 
themselves or others, or talking with authority ﬁgures. For 
many  who  stutter,  avoidance  behaviors  can  be  the  most 
handicapping  aspect  of  the  disorder. Avoidance  behaviors 
may lead to reduced social and occupational participation. 
Over time, avoidance behaviors may also lead to negative 
affective  functioning  such  as  feelings  of  loss  of  control, 
decreased mood, and increased anxiety.7

Stuttering impacts many facets of daily life. Most people 
project their identities, their knowledge, and their thoughts 
and  beliefs  through  verbal  communication. When  verbal 
communication is a challenge, the ability to present oneself 
as  a  “whole”  person  also  becomes  difﬁcult.  Many  people 
who stutter feel frustration, anger, embarrassment, self-doubt, 
and sometimes even shame related to their stuttering. School 
age children in particular may feel anger and embarrassment 
when called upon in class to read aloud or provide answers 
to  questions. Adults  who  rely  on  clear  and  effective 
communication in their jobs often ﬁnd their stuttering becomes 
an impediment to attaining their vocational potential.8

In addition to the observable communication challenges, 
for some, stuttering may also lead to social anxiety or social 
phobia.7 Social phobia involves an extreme and debilitating 
fear of humiliation, embarrassment, and negative evaluation 
by  others.  Stuttering,  combined  with  the  effects  of  social 
phobia, may lead to problems in maximizing one’s potential 
in social, interpersonal, and professional relationships.

The exact cause of stuttering is unknown; however, it is 
widely accepted that stuttering is primarily due to a problem 
with the neural functioning that underlies speech production. 
In that respect, stuttering is a physical disorder and is not 
considered a mental disorder per se. Stuttering is not caused 
by  nervousness,  stress,  or  parenting  styles.9  Numerous 
neuroimaging studies have reported different brain activation 
patterns between stuttering and non-stuttering speakers.10,11 
Many  of  these  differences  are  identiﬁed  during  silent,  or 
inner, speech tasks indicating that differences may exist in 
the linguistic or motor planning stages of speech production. 
There may also be timing issues in speech and language areas 
of the brain that result in stuttering.12 About 60%–70% of 
stuttering speakers also have relatives who stutter, indicating 
that there is a heritability link. However, the exact form of 
genetic transmission is unclear. While stuttering is primarily 
a neurophysiological problem, complex interactions between 
speech motor, cognitive, social, and emotional needs likely 
mediate the disorder.

Speech-language pathologists (SLPs) are the appropriate 
providers of stuttering treatment. SLPs (also known as speech 
therapists)  receive  extensive  training  in  the  identiﬁcation 
and  remediation  of  communication  disorders,  including 
stuttering. Many countries require SLPs be licensed and/or 
certiﬁed by national accrediting bodies. Stuttering assessment 
includes interviewing patients to assess their levels of speech 
difﬁculty and ascertain their levels of concern. The SLP then 
administers a series of formal and informal tests to determine 
the severity of the disorder. Treatment begins with identifying 
treatment options for the client and working collaboratively 
to develop the best individualized treatment plan.

There are currently two basic approaches to treatment 
for both children and adults who stutter. The methods for 
children and adults are understandably different, but for both 
age groups there exists a historical dichotomy in approaches. 
For children, the dichotomy involves indirect versus direct 
treatment;  that  is  whether  the  emphasis  of  treatment  is 
manipulating  environmental  factors  (indirect)  or  whether 
the emphasis is working exclusively on the speech of the 
child (direct). For adults, the differences exist primarily in 
the relative emphasis placed on changing either core speech 

10

submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress 

Psychology Research and Behavior Management 2013:6

Dovepress

Behavioral treatments for children and adults who stutter

behavior  or  treating  knowledge,  acceptance,  stress,  and 
anxiolytic issues secondary to the core stuttering disorder.

The purpose of the remainder of this article is to provide 
examples  of  modern  treatments  for  stuttering  in  children 
and  adults. There  are  numerous  specific  treatments  for 
stuttering,  and  it  would  be  impossible  to  review  them 
all  in  a  review  article  such  as  this.  Interested  readers  are 
encouraged  to  consult  a  variety  of  excellent  textbooks 
for  in-depth  reviews  of  treatment  approaches.1,13–17  In  this 
paper, a small number of exemplary treatment approaches 
will  be  described.  Within  each  of  the  age  groups,  two 
broad  treatment  categories  will  be  discussed:  those  that 
focus primarily on the core speech disorder and those that 
focus on the symptomatic or environmental aspects of the 
disorder.  Examples  of  speech-centric  approaches  include 
the Lidcombe Treatment Approach for children and speech 
restructuring treatments for adults. Examples of symptomatic 
approaches include multifactorial treatments for children and 
stuttering management for adults.

Treatments for children
Treatments  for  children  who  stutter  have  historically  been 
less structured than many approaches for adults. One reason 
may be that, for many decades, there was a “hands off the 
child” attitude toward stuttering treatment and children.14 This 
situation was prevalent in the United States from the 1940s 
through the 1970s. The belief was that directly addressing 
stuttering in a child could make the situation worse. To some 
extent this belief is still held by many SLPs. However, studies 
motivated by operant conditioning indicated the opposite to 
be true: stuttering can be reduced by calling attention to it.18
During  the  past  20–30  years,  the  focus  from  indirect 
treatments (working solely with the caregivers) has yielded 
to more direct treatments (having the child be the focus of the 
intervention). Parental involvement does, however, continue 
to  be  an  essential  component  of  nearly  all  treatments  for 
young children.

Multifactorial treatment
Multifactorial  treatments  for  stuttering  are  based  on  the 
notion  that  multiple  factors  may  trigger  and  maintain 
stuttering in preschool children.9,19 The classic example of 
a multifactorial approach to treating stuttering in preschool 
children  is  the  Demands  and  Capacities  model.20–22 This 
model  posits  that  stuttering  occurs  when  the  speaking 
demands  placed  on  a  child  outweigh  the  child’s  current 
capacity for ﬂuent speech. Speciﬁcally, stuttering will occur 
when  demands  for  ﬂuency  exceed  the  child’s  cognitive, 

linguistic, motor, or emotional abilities for ﬂuent speech. The 
speaking demands may be internal, such as those arising from 
rapidly developing language (typically between the ages of 
2 and 5), or through constitutional characteristics of the child, 
such as perfectionism, high sensitivity, or other speech and 
language difﬁculties. External demands may include stress in 
the family, unrealistically high demands placed on the child 
by parents, fast talking parents, etc.

Numerous  multifactorial-treatment  programs  exist 
for  preschool  or  young  school-aged  children.  Examples 
include the Family Focused Treatment Program23 offered at 
the Stuttering Center of West Pennsylvania (USA), Parent 
Child Interaction (PCI) therapy,24–26 which originated at the 
Michael Palin Centre in London England, and the Parent–
Child Groups Program27–29 at Vanderbilt University. These 
approaches are primarily parent- or family-based treatments 
and are based on the Demands and Capacities Model. The 
above  mentioned  treatment  programs  are  founded  on  the 
view  that  the  demands  for  ﬂuency  may  be  modiﬁed,  and 
when  the  demands  decrease  more  ﬂuent  speech  should 
follow.

While many examples of multifactorial treatments exist, 
the Yaruss’  Family  Focused Therapy  approach  is  outlined 
below  due  to  its  relatively  straightforward  programmatic 
structure. The primary goals of the Family Focused Therapy 
approach are “(a) to help parents learn about stuttering [...] and 
(b) to help parents implement communication modiﬁcations 
in their interactions with their child that may facilitate the 
child’s development of ﬂuent speech, healthy communication 
attitudes, and effective communication skills”.23 The parents 
are always present during therapy. In fact, the emphasis is on 
training the parents rather than the child. The parent-child 
training sessions usually consist of six to eight 45-minute 
appointment times, with meetings typically scheduled once 
per week.

The parent-child training is divided into three sections: 
(a) education and counseling, (b) communication modiﬁcation 
training,  and  (c)  review  and  reassessment.  Education 
and  counseling  prepare  the  parents  to  participate  in  their 
child’s treatment. Parents learn about the basics of effective 
communication and the basics of stuttering. Counseling helps 
parents reduce their anxiety and concerns about their child’s 
stuttering,  and  teaches  parents  to  respond  to  their  child’s 
stuttering in a supportive and understanding manner. As part 
of this ﬁrst component, parents complete a stressor inventory 
that helps identify potential personality characteristics of the 
child that may affect the child’s communication and speech 
ﬂuency,  as  well  as  environmental  factors  that  may  affect 

Psychology Research and Behavior Management 2013:6

submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress 

11

Blomgren

Dovepress

the child’s communication and speech ﬂuency. The parents 
complete a home charting exercise. Parents observe at least 
ﬁve situations in which their child engages in conversation. 
They make note of with whom the child is talking, how much 
stuttering is present, what type of stuttering is present, how 
aware the child seems about their stuttering, and what the 
reactions  are  of  the  listener. These  observations  are  then 
discussed at a subsequent appointment.

The  second  phase  of  the  treatment,  communication 
modification  training,  involves  teaching  parents  to  use 
strategies intended to facilitate ﬂuent speech production in 
their child. The strategies include minimizing time pressure, 
use  of  “easy,  relaxed  speech,”  reducing  communication 
demands by modifying parents’ questioning style, reﬂecting/
rephrasing the child’s speech to provide an accurate model, 
and providing a reassuring communicative environment.

In the ﬁnal review and reassessment sessions, the SLP 
may  meet  with  other  family  members  or  caregivers  such 
as  babysitters  and  preschool  teachers. Warning  signs  that 
stuttering may be returning are presented.

Evidence  of  efﬁcacy  for  multifactorial  approaches  is 
limited, but preliminary studies show stuttering reduction, 
improved  parent  awareness  of  their  child’s  stuttering,  and 
improved  capacity  to  address  the  stuttering  openly.23,24,30 
Multifactorial treatments have many positive aspects. The 
positive attributes include the high degree of individualiza-
tion for each child, the fact that this type of treatment can be 
started with very young children, and that parents discover 
that there are factors within their control and factors out-
side their control. Factors within a parent’s control include 
responding  appropriately  to  stuttering,  decreasing  rate  of 
speech, and fostering a supportive communicative environ-
ment. Factors outside a parent’s control include factors like 
genetic predisposition and temperament.19

Operant conditioning  
and the Lidcombe Program
The Lidcombe Program was designed for children aged ﬁve 
and younger. It is a parent implemented behavioral treatment 
developed by clinicians and researchers at the University of 
Sydney, Australia. The program is named after the Sydney 
suburb  of  Lidcombe  where  the  program  originated. The 
primary  component  of  the  Lidcombe  Program  involves 
teaching parents to use verbal contingencies for unambiguous 
stuttering during conversations. A secondary component is the 
measurement of stuttering by both parents and the SLPs.

The  Lidcombe  Program  is  based  on  studies  in  the 
1970s that showed stuttering in preschool children could 

be  reduced  by  verbal  contingencies.18,31  In  this  respect, 
principles  of  operant  conditioning  form  the  bases  for 
the  Lidcombe  Program.32  The  Lidcombe  Program  is 
one  of  the  most  documented  treatments  for  stuttering. 
Numerous  outcome  and  efﬁcacy  trials  indicate  that  the 
program results in decreased stuttering.33–35 A randomized 
controlled trial36 reported a signiﬁcant difference between 
a Lidcombe Program treatment group (25 children) and 
a non-treatment control group (25 children) at 9 months 
after randomization. The average frequency of stuttering 
was 1.5% for the treatment group and 3.9% for the non-
treatment  group. The  study  supported  the  importance 
of  early  intervention  for  stuttering  using  the  Lidcombe 
Program.

The Lidcombe Program is divided into two phases. Stage 
one is the main component of treatment and involves daily 
measurement of stuttering and parent training to apply verbal 
contingencies  to  stutter-free  and  stuttered  speech.  Stage 
two  is  a  longer  term  follow-up  stage.  In  recognition  that 
stuttering is a relapse prone disorder, stage two is designed 
to prevent relapse. In stage two, the time between clinic visits 
increases and parents are more reliant on their own skills and 
knowledge to detect possible relapse.

In the beginning of stage one, parents identify moments 
of  stuttering.  Different  types  of  stuttering  (ie,  repeated 
movements and ﬁxed postures) and differences in stuttering 
severity  are  discussed.  Parents  are  instructed  to  rate  the 
severity of their child’s stuttering daily and bring the graph 
sheet to each weekly clinic visit. The rating scale is easy to 
use. The scale is one to ten, where one reﬂects no stuttering, 
two reﬂects very mild stuttering, and ten reﬂects extremely 
severe stuttering. The numbers between two and ten are not 
deﬁned. The score is a global severity rating assigned for 
the whole day. Therefore, parents are encouraged to score 
their child’s stuttering severity in the evening. The scale has 
been shown to be easily completed by parents, is not time 
consuming, and parents can be reliable with minimal training. 
The child’s compliance is also not required, which can be a 
signiﬁcant advantage when working with young preschool-
aged  children. The  daily  severity  score  is  considered  an 
essential component of the treatment as it guides the need 
for other intervention.

The  primary  treatment  component  involves  parents 
applying  verbal  contingencies  for  stutter-free  speech  and 
unambiguous stuttering. Verbal contingencies for stutter-free 
speech may include praise (eg, “good talking!” “nice smooth 
talking!”)  and/or  acknowledgment  of  stutter-free  speech 
(eg, “that was smooth”). Acknowledgement is delivered in 

12

submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress 

Psychology Research and Behavior Management 2013:6

Dovepress

Behavioral treatments for children and adults who stutter

a neutral tone of voice and can be used in conjunction with 
praise. Acknowledgment may be useful for children who are 
sensitive to praise and to make sure praise is not overdone. 
Parents may also request self-evaluation from the child (ie, 
“did you say that smoothly?” “Did you hear any bumps?”). 
Requests  for  self-evaluation  are  only  used  for  stutter-free 
speech. The expected answer for self-evaluation requests is 
always an afﬁrmation that the child’s speech was, in fact, 
free of stuttering moments. The majority of all contingencies 
should be for stutter-free speech.

Contingencies for unambiguous stuttering may also be 
given. Only unambiguous stuttering is addressed so as not 
to instill confusion in the child. Acknowledging stuttering 
should  be  used  with  caution.  It  should  not  be  used  if  the 
contingency appears to be stressful to the child. The ratio of 
positive to negative contingencies should be minimally 5:1. 
Acknowledgment of stuttering should always be given in a 
neutral tone, and may take the form of “I heard a bump,” 
“That was a bump,” or “That wasn’t smooth.” Parents may 
also  request  self-correction  for  unambiguous  stuttered 
speech.  For  example,  “Can  you  say  that  again?” Again, 
this strategy should only be used if the child is not reacting 
negatively.

The  use  of  verbal  contingencies  for  stutter-free  and 
stuttered speech begins in structured conversations. The ﬁrst 
conversations containing contingencies should be carefully 
structured so that the child is likely to be mostly stutter-free. 
The treatment progresses to parents using contingencies in 
unstructured  daily  conversations  once  the  parent  is  adept 
at providing the contingencies in structured conversations. 
Children move to stage two when parents have reported one 
week of severity ratings of one (no stuttering) or two (very 
mild stuttering).

Combined approaches
The two treatments for preschool children outlined above 
differ in their focus on reducing demands on the child (the 
multifactorial approach) or in the use of response contingent 
stimulation  (the  Lidcombe  Program). The  multifactorial 
model  focuses  on  modifying  interpersonal  stressors  and 
simplifying  the  communication  style  between  child  and 
caregiver. In contrast, the Lidcombe Program focuses nearly 
exclusively on the principles of operant conditioning. There 
is  much  debate  about  the  superiority  of  each  approach.37 
However, one similarity, or acknowledgement, is that parents 
play  a  vital  role  in  helping  their  children  overcome  their 
stuttering. Both approaches rely on families that are willing 
and  able  to  participate.19 This  prerequisite  may  make  it 

difﬁcult or impossible to use these approaches when family 
support is lacking or absent.

Currently the Lidcombe Program is the only treatment 
supported  by  Phase  I  to  Phase  III  clinical  trials. The 
multifactorial approaches have some preliminary evidence 
of success, but more research is clearly needed. What has 
perhaps been lost in the many discussions about the merits 
and pitfalls of each approach is that the two approaches may 
be  used  synergistically. While  no  studies  have  assessed  a 
combined approach, it is likely that many SLPs are already 
doing this. These approaches are not necessarily dichotomous. 
The multifactorial model may provide a structured starting 
point in helping parents understand stuttering. Knowledge 
about  stuttering  can  maximize  a  healthy  and  appropriate 
communication environment between parent and child. If the 
child does not respond to mostly indirect environmental and 
communicative manipulations then a more direct approach 
would be dictated.

Treatments for adults
There  is  also  much  disagreement  regarding  the  essential 
components  of  stuttering  treatment  for  adults.38–42 While 
many different treatment approaches exist to treat stuttering 
in adults, most of the approaches can be separated into two 
groups. The  groups  include  those  approaches  dedicated 
primarily to (1) cognitive/anxiolytic issues, or (2) dedicated 
primarily  to  increasing  speech  fluency. These  groups 
are  referred  to  as  “stuttering  management”  and  “speech 
restructuring,” respectively.43

Stuttering management
Stuttering management therapies started in the 1930s with 
the work of Lee Travis and Bryng Bryngelson.44 This early 
treatment  required  attitude  change  and  social  adjustment 
to  help  the  person  who  stuttered  to  deal  with  the  social 
and  vocational  ramiﬁcations  of  stuttering.  One  treatment 
technique that has remained a central feature of stuttering 
management therapies is that of “voluntary stuttering.” This 
procedure originated from the Negative Practice techniques 
introduced by Knight Dunlap.45 Later, stuttering management 
therapies evolved with the work of Bloodstein,46 Johnson,47 
Sheehan,21,48 Van Riper,49 and Williams.50 Since most of these 
therapies originated at The University of Iowa, they are also 
referred to as the “Iowa Approach.”51

Stuttering management therapy focuses on desensitization 
to stuttering (eg, through voluntary stuttering) and includes 
stuttering  modification  techniques  designed  to  reduce 
muscular  tension  associated  with  stuttering  moments. 

Psychology Research and Behavior Management 2013:6

submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress 

13

Blomgren

Dovepress

Like most desensitization therapies, stuttering management 
therapy has its origin in the cognitive learning literature.52–54 
The  main  goals  of  stuttering  management  therapy  are  to 
develop  acceptance  of  stuttering,  reduce  fear  and  anxiety 
associated  with  stuttering,  and  to  teach  the  person  who 
stutters to stutter with decreased effort.55

Over time, most adults and adolescents who stutter develop 
a set of adverse reactions to their stuttering. To address this 
problem, stuttering management therapy may also involve 
basic elements of cognitive behavior therapy (CBT). CBT 
is used with individuals experiencing debilitating levels of 
social anxiety related to stuttering and speaking. It has been 
reported that approximately 50% of adults who stutter may 
have signiﬁcantly high levels of social anxiety.56,57 The goal 
of CBT is to reduce social avoidance and anxiety.58,59

The basic premise of CBT is that emotional reactions and 
behavior are inﬂuenced by cognitions. A person’s thoughts, 
opinions, and interpretations about themselves inﬂuence their 
emotional  state. A  process  of  cognitive  restructuring  can 
promote improved self-control and improved self-concept. 
Improved control can likewise lead to decreased feelings of 
self-deprecation and emotions of shame and fear related to 
stuttering.

The  core  component  of  CBT  for  people  who  stutter 
is  challenging  unhelpful  beliefs  about  possible  negative 
evaluations by others. Speciﬁcally, CBT used in stuttering 
treatment can lead to reduced anxiety and social avoidance.60 
CBT therapy comprises a series of sessions where negative 
thoughts  related  to  stuttering  and  social  interaction  are 
systematically modiﬁed. The ﬁrst step is for the client and 
therapist to develop an understanding of the problem. Patterns 
of unhelpful thoughts are identiﬁed. Clients then re-evaluate 
their negative thoughts that they have related to their speech 
and their stuttering. In the context of stuttering, evaluating 
negative  thoughts  may  be  accomplished  through  multiple 
means:  (1)  individual  counseling  involving  “reframing” 
negative  thoughts  and  emotions,  (2)  group  problem-
solving  discussions  related  to  anxiety  management,  and 
(3)  systematic  desensitization  of  stuttering  fears  by  using 
disclosure and pseudo-stuttering.

A  long  standing  problem  with  stuttering  management 
approaches  is  that  treatment-effectiveness  research  is 
lacking.55  Blomgren  et  al38  recently  evaluated  the  clinical 
effectiveness of a three week intensive stuttering management 
program. The study indicated that the approach did not treat 
stuttered speech per se, but rather the acceptance, avoidance, 
stigmatic,  and  anxiolytic  symptoms  of  the  disorder. Two 
all-encompassing  conclusions  were  proposed. The  first 

was that stuttering frequency does not appear to decrease 
automatically with reductions in self-reported anxiety. The 
second was that, even in the absence of decreases in stuttering 
frequency, it is possible to treat anxiety and avoidance related 
to stuttering.

Speech restructuring approaches
Speech restructuring refers to speech therapy where a client 
is  taught  to  use  a  new  speech  pattern. These  approaches 
are  also  called  “ﬂuency  shaping”  or  “prolonged  speech” 
treatments.  Slowed  or  prolonged  speech  is  typically  the 
primary component of any new speech pattern. The person 
who stutters is also taught to make speech motor movements 
with  less  articulatory  pressure  and  to  initiate  vocal  fold 
vibration in a gradual and controlled manner. The premise 
is that stuttering speakers habitually use speech production 
strategies that are outside their speech motor control abilities. 
The goal of speech restructuring is to promote a new speech 
production pattern that is conducive to ﬂuent speech.

Some speech restructuring approaches focus exclusively 
on speech rate reduction. These approaches use prolonged 
speech  as  the  sole  or  primary  technique.61–64 The  speciﬁc 
prolonged speech techniques are also referred to as “stretched 
syllables,”  “controlled  rate,”  “slow  speech,”  or  “smooth 
speech” techniques. Other speech restructuring approaches 
combine  prolonged  speech  with  other  ﬂuency  enhancing 
techniques.65–68

Speech  restructuring  therapy  is  an  evidence-based 
approach to helping people who stutter improve their control 
over their speaking mechanism. A relatively wide range of 
published studies indicate that speech restructuring therapy 
does reduce stuttering frequency.44,69–72 However, most “pure” 
speech  restructuring  approaches  do  not  address  negative 
feelings, unhelpful attitudes, or anxiety related to stuttering. 
Furthermore, while speech restructuring therapies can result 
in quite dramatic decreases in in-clinic stuttering frequency, 
maintaining constant control in everyday speaking situations 
can be very difﬁcult. Stuttering is also susceptible to relapse, 
so  teaching  stuttering  management  skills  to  deal  with  the 
stuttering when it occurs is prudent.

Comprehensive approaches
As indicated above, proponents of stuttering management 
and speech restructuring approaches have long been at odds. 
For multiple decades, each theoretical camp held antithetical 
viewpoints. At  times  the  interaction  between  the  camps 
was nothing less than hostile. More recently, there has been 
an attempt to combine stuttering management and speech 

14

submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress 

Psychology Research and Behavior Management 2013:6

Dovepress

Behavioral treatments for children and adults who stutter

restructuring  approaches.  In  North America,  examples 
include  well-known  intensive  stuttering  programs  such  as 
the Comprehensive Stuttering Program at the University of 
Alberta,66,73 the Intensive Treatment Program at the American 
Institute  of  Stuttering,74  and  the  Fluency  Plus  Program.67 
While  these  programs  are  primarily  based  in  the  speech 
restructuring approaches, all have recently added stuttering 
management components.

A  comprehensive  approach  to  stuttering  treatment 
includes dealing with both the surface elements of stuttering 
as well as the deeper attributes of stuttering such as anxiety, 
fear of stuttering, approach-avoidance issues, self-conﬁdence 
issues,  and  self-perception  issues.6 This  multidimensional 
approach  follows  the  mandate  of  the  World  Health 
Organization  (WHO,  Geneva,  Switzerland). The  WHO 
advocates  a  multidimensional  paradigm  of  human  health 
conditions,  which  includes  the  concepts  of  “impairment,” 
“activity  limitation,”  and  “participation  restrictions.” The 
WHO model has been implemented as a model for evaluating 
both  surface  stuttering  and  the  adverse  consequences  of 
stuttering.75–78  In  this  vein,  stuttering  treatments  should 
only  be  considered  successful  if  they  reduce  stuttering 
frequency (impairment level) and also reduce “participation 
restrictions or activity limitations.”

Stuttering  treatment  is  usually  most  effective  when 
implemented in an intensive manner.68 The rationale is similar 
to the immersion principle in second language learning; that 
is,  new  skills  as  complicated  as  learning  a  new  language 
(or  a  new  speaking  pattern)  are  best  accomplished  in  an 
intensive, or immersive, manner.

The  University  of  Utah  Intensive  Stuttering  Clinic 
(UUISC)  is  one  example  of  a  comprehensive  approach 
to  treating  stuttering. The  UUISC  is  based  on  the  speech 
restructuring techniques developed by Webster,68,72 Boberg 
and Kully,66 and Kroll79 as well as stuttering management and 
cognitive-behavioral/desensitization approaches inﬂuenced 
by Van Riper49 and Breitenfeldt and Lorenz.80 The UUISC is 
based on the perspective that stuttering is a multidimensional 
disorder that demands a multidimensional approach to treat. 
At its core, stuttering is a disorder of speech motor control. 
However, the disorder is more than the stuttering moments; 
the broader experience of stuttering involves a lifetime of 
dealing with anxiety and avoidance caused by the stuttering. 
Therefore, the UUISC targets both improved speech ﬂuency 
and stuttering management.

The  UUISC  is  an  annual  clinic  and  approximately 
80  clients  have  participated  in  the  treatment  since  2003. 
Normally,  six  to  ten  clients  participate  in  each  clinic. 

The  clinic  involves  approximately  60  hours  of  treatment. 
Clients are seen from 9 am to 4 pm on weekdays for 2 weeks. 
Treatment  encompasses  a  combination  of  individual  and 
group sessions. A detailed therapy manual is available,65 and 
signiﬁcant treatment outcomes have been presented.65,81

The goals for the clinic are for clients to:

(cid:118) Learn new speaking skills that facilitate ﬂuent speech
(cid:118) Reduce the number and severity of stuttering moments
(cid:118) Foster  a  proactive  attitude  toward  improving  speech 

production

(cid:118) Foster a good understanding and healthy acceptance of 

stuttering

(cid:118) Manage  stress  and  anxiety  related  to  stuttering  and 

speaking

(cid:118) Practice learned techniques in real-life situations
(cid:118)

Increase self-conﬁdence related to speaking.
A series of speech restructuring strategies are utilized. 
These techniques are based on those used in the Stuttering 
Treatment Center at the Hollins Communications Research 
Institute  in  Roanoke Virginia,68,72  and  at  the  Institute  of 
Stuttering Treatment  and  Research  at  the  University  of 
Alberta.66 There are three core ﬂuency facilitating techniques 
utilized in the UUISC: (1) the stretched syllable target, (2) the 
gentle phonatory onset target, and (3) the reduced articulatory 
pressure  target. There  are  four  supplemental  techniques: 
(1) the full breath target, (2) the smooth articulatory change 
target,  (3)  the  continuous  phonation  target,  and  (4)  the 
full  articulatory  movement  target. These  techniques  are 
considered  “supplemental”  because  not  every  stuttering 
speaker is asked to use these techniques. For most clients, 
the three core targets of the UUISC are adequate to promote 
controlled  speech  fluency.  One  or  more  supplemental 
techniques may be prescribed if they are considered helpful 
for facilitating ﬂuent speech for an individual speaker.

The primary goal of the stretched syllable target is to stretch 
the duration of each and every spoken syllable. This “slow 
motion” speech allows an individual to notice and alter their 
speech  sound  production. The  stretched  syllable  technique 
results  in  reduced  force  and  abruptness  of  articulatory 
movements. During stuttered speech, syllable durations are 
often shorter than normal and pauses are longer than normal.68 
The prolongation of syllables results in increased control over 
the articulatory movements of speech.

Prolonged  speech  has  been  found  to  be  the  most 
efﬁcacious ﬂuency facilitating technique82 and is the primary 
ﬂuency technique in nearly all speech restructuring therapies. 
Speech rate may be decreased by lengthening the duration 
of  syllables  or  by  pausing  longer  between  utterances. 

Psychology Research and Behavior Management 2013:6

submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress 

15

Blomgren

Dovepress

An utterance is all the words one speaks on a single breath. 
Decreasing  speech  rate  is  best  achieved  by  stretching  the 
duration  of  syllables,  not  necessarily  by  inserting  longer 
pauses between utterances. Initially, speech is produced at 
a very slow rate. In the UUISC each syllable is prolonged 
for two seconds. After ﬂuent speech has been established 
at  2-second  stretch,  syllable  durations  are  systematically 
shortened to 1 second, 0.5 seconds, and ﬁnally to “controlled 
normal rate.” Controlled normal rate is the rate that a person 
who stutters can speak with little or no stuttering. The ﬁnal 
rate varies for each client.

The  gentle  vocal  onset  technique  provides  a  strategy 
for stuttering speakers to initiate vocal fold vibration in a 
controlled,  precise,  and  relaxed  manner. The  gentle  onset 
technique  is  used  on  words  that  begin  with  vowels  and 
voiced consonants. This technique can be very helpful since 
many  people  who  stutter  make  some  speech  sounds  with 
hard vocal onsets. They initiate voicing with too much force 
and muscular rigidity. This high level of tension results in a 
greater propensity for a stuttering moment to occur. The third 
and ﬁnal core technique is reduced articulatory pressure. This 
technique targets the tongue and lips primarily. The technique 
provides a way for speakers to reduce articulatory pressure 
and smoothly transition from speech sound to the next in 
running speech.

Five  stuttering  management  techniques  are  applied 
throughout  the  clinic.  Stuttering  management  techniques 
are used to (1) decrease the likelihood of a severe stuttering 
moment from occurring in the ﬁrst place, and (2) to lessen 
the severity of stuttering moments when they do occur. In 
this  respect,  some  stuttering  management  techniques  are 
proactive and others are reactive.65

The  proactive  techniques  include  (1)  maintaining  eye 
contact, (2) openly disclosing one stutters, and (3) pseudo-
stuttering.  Using  appropriate  eye  contact,  disclosing  or 
advertising  that  one  stutters,  and  pseudo-stuttering  are 
proactive because these techniques allow the individual to 
minimize the impact of stuttering early in a conversation. 
Reactive techniques include (1) purposefully terminating a 
stuttering moment, and (2) cancelling a stuttered word by 
repeating  it  ﬂuently.  Purposefully  terminating  a  stuttering 
moment and cancelling a stuttered word are reactive because 
the  speaker  uses  the  techniques  to  react  to  a  moment  of 
stuttering after it has already begun. Cancelling a stuttered 
word  essentially  allows  the  individual  to  restabilize  their 
speech once stuttering has begun.

Maintaining appropriate eye contact during a conversation 
is  a  good  communication  skill  for  everybody  and  is  very 

important for people who stutter. Maintaining eye contact 
is  especially  important  during  moments  of  stuttering. 
Maintaining eye contact lets a conversational partner know 
that (1) the speaker is in control of the conversation, (2) that 
the speaker is not embarrassed by any stuttering that may be 
present, and (3) that the speaker values the communication 
that is taking place.80,83

Finally, disclosure of one’s stuttering is also an essential 
stuttering  management  technique.84,85  Many  people  who 
stutter  spend  much  effort  attempting  to  hide  the  fact  that 
they stutter. People who stutter try to hide their stuttering for 
numerous reasons. These include fear of embarrassment, fear 
of social punishment, poor acceptance of their disorder, or 
perhaps simple habit after years of avoiding problem sounds, 
words, or speaking contexts. Breitenfeldt and Lorenz80 list 
three approaches to disclosing one’s stuttering: (1) the direct 
route in which one simply states that they stutter – either at 
the very beginning of a conversation or immediately after 
the ﬁrst stuttering moment, (2) by using humor – following 
a moment of stuttering one can make a joke about it to help 
put  a  conversational  partner  at  ease,  and  (3)  the  pseudo-
stuttering  (fake  stuttering)  approach  in  which  the  speaker 
stutters on purpose. In order for a pseudo-stutter not to turn 
into  an  uncontrolled  stutter,  it  is  important  the  stutter  be 
produced in a slow, controlled, and deliberate manner. Pseudo 
stuttering has two main beneﬁts: (1) it serves as an obvious 
way to advertise stuttering early in a conversation and (2) 
pseudo-stuttering can beneﬁt people who stutter by helping 
them  become  desensitized  to  their  stuttering. The  idea  is 
based on the notion that what a person can do deliberately 
should not be feared.

Summary
The purpose of this article was to provide examples of modern 
behavioral treatments for stuttering in children and adults. 
A  small  number  of  representative  treatment  approaches 
were  described.  It  would  have  been  impossible  to  review 
all available treatments for stuttering in a single article so, 
regrettably, a number of approaches are absent. My apologies 
to  my  many  esteemed  colleagues whose  approaches were 
omitted or mentioned only in passing.

Treatment  for  children  who  stutter  has  historically 
ﬂuctuated between direct therapies and indirect therapies. 
Direct  therapies  focus  directly  on  the  child.  Indirect 
therapies  focus  on  the  parents  of  the  stuttering  child. 
Current  therapies  for  children  are  distinguished  primarily 
by the multifactorial treatments and the response contingent 
therapies.  Multifactorial  treatments  work  on  altering 

16

submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress 

Psychology Research and Behavior Management 2013:6

Dovepress

Behavioral treatments for children and adults who stutter

parent-child interactions, mediating interpersonal stressors, 
and  generally  providing  a  supportive  communicative 
environment.  Response  contingent  therapies,  such  as  the 
Lidcombe  Program,  focus  on  providing  consequences  for 
stutter free and stuttered speech. Nearly all current approaches 
to treating stuttering in children involve parental training. 
Regardless of the treatment approach, however, the high rate 
of  spontaneous  recovery  in  children  provides  a  statistical 
challenge for determining treatment effectiveness.

For adults, stuttering therapy has traditionally focused on 
either (1) teaching new ways to manage and deal with the 
stuttering or (2) teaching new ways of speaking that facilitate 
ﬂuent speech. These two approaches (stuttering management 
and  speech  restructuring,  respectively)  are  increasingly 
used in concert to help people who stutter to deal with the 
core stuttering behavior as well as the affective, anxiolytic, 
emotional, and cognitive aspects of the disorder. In all cases, 
the  stuttering  speaker  is  challenged  to  cease  previously 
unhelpful  behaviors  and  substitute  new  productive  ones. 
Ultimately, therapy must be tailored to the individual needs of 
the clients. There is currently no cure for stuttering in adults, 
so  all  therapy  techniques  are,  in  essence,  compensatory. 
The nature of compensatory techniques is that they must be 
used continuously to maintain improvement. Therefore, it is 
imperative that any stuttering treatment incorporates a long-
term strategy of teaching clients to be their own clinicians and 
also offering opportunities for long-term therapeutic follow-up.
While  this  article  focused  on  treatments  for  younger 
children and adults, treatment for school-age children ought 
not to be completely overlooked. It should not be a surprise 
that treatments for this age group often include combinations 
of the techniques discussed for younger children and those 
for  adults. The  main  modiﬁcation  in  transitioning  from  a 
preschool child to a school-aged child is the new emphasis on 
speech production strategies, such as prolonged speech. As a 
child gains metalinguistic awareness, it becomes increasingly 
easier to teach ﬂuency facilitating techniques that require 
conscious control over speech motor mechanisms. Also, as a 
child matures, the need to address the anxiolytic, acceptance, 
and self-esteem issues generally becomes more pronounced. 
While  the  ultimate  goal  for  preschool  children  is  to  stop 
stuttering, the goal for school-aged children and adults is 
not, or should not, be complete ﬂuency. Successful treatment 
outcomes may be deﬁned by modest decreases in stuttering 
frequency,  shorter  stuttering  moments,  decreased  struggle 
to speak, decreased avoidance behavior, decreased anxiety 
associated with speaking, and improved social, educational, 
and occupational engagement.

While  the  emphasis  of  this  article  was  on  behavioral 
techniques,  nonbehavioral  treatment  approaches  also  exist. 
For  instance,  pharmacological  treatments  are  emerging,86 
delayed auditory feedback (ie, the SpeechEasy device [Janus 
Development Group, Inc, Greenville, NC, USA]) has a long 
history in stuttering therapy,87 and even the effects of acupuncture 
have been examined (albeit with entirely negative results).88 
While none of these approaches has proven to provide long term 
amelioration of stuttering, future behavioral treatments may 
well include pharmacological adjuvants and may increasingly 
incorporate a variety of emerging technologies such as portable 
biofeedback devices and web-facilitated treatment options.

Disclosure
The author reports no conﬂicts of interest in this work.

References
  1.  Bloodstein O, Ratner NB. A Handbook on Stuttering, 6th ed. Clifton 

Park, NY: Thomson Delmar Learning; 2008.

  2.  Yairi E, Ambrose NG, Paden EP, Throneburg RN. Predictive factors of 
persistence and recovery: pathways of childhood stuttering. J Commun 
Disord. 1996;29(1):51–77.

  3.  Teesson  K,  Packman A,  Onslow  M. The  Lidcombe  Behavioral 
Data  Language  of  stuttering.  J  Speech  Lang  Hear  Res.  2003;46(4): 
1009–1015.

  4.  Bennett EM. Working with People Who Stutter: A Lifespan Approach. 

Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson/Merrill/Prentice Hall; 2006.

  5.  Smith A,  Kelly  E.  Stuttering:  a  dynamic,  multifactorial  model.  In: 
Curlee RF, Siegel GM, editors. Nature and Treatment of Stuttering: 
New Directions, 2nd ed. Boston: Allyn and Bacon; 1997:204–217.

  6.  Blomgren M. Stuttering treatment outcomes measurement: Asssessing 
above  and  below  the  surface.  Perspect  Fluen  Fluen  Disord.  2007; 
17(3):19–23.

  7.  Blumgart E, Tran Y, Craig A. Social anxiety disorder in adults who 

stutter. Depress Anxiety. 2010;27(7):687–692.

  8.  Gabel  RM,  Hughes  S,  Daniels  D.  Effects  of  stuttering  severity  and 
therapy  involvement  on  role  entrapment  of  people  who  stutter. 
J Commun Disord. 2008;41(2):146–158.

  9.  Packman A, Attanasio JS. Theoretical Issues in Stuttering. Hove, East 

Sussex; New York: Psychology Press; 2004.

 10.  Blomgren M, Nagarajan SS, Lee JN, Li T, Alvord L. Preliminary results 
of a functional MRI study of brain activation patterns in stuttering and 
nonstuttering speakers during a lexical access task. J Fluency Disord. 
2003;28(4):337–355; quiz 355–336.

 11.  Ingham RJ. Neuroimaging in Communication Sciences and Disorders. 

San Diego, CA: Plural Pub; 2008.

 12.  Salmelin R, Schnitzler A, Schmitz F, Freund HJ. Single word reading 
in developmental stutterers and ﬂuent speakers. Brain. 2000;123(Pt 6): 
1184–1202.

 13.  Bennett  E.  Working  with  People Who  Stutter:  A  Lifespan Approach. 

Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson/Merrill/Prentice Hall; 2006.

 14.  Yairi E, Seery CH. Stuttering: Foundations and Clinical Applications. 

Boston: Pearson; 2011.

 15.  Jel(cid:254)i(cid:252)  Jakši (cid:252)  S,  Onslow  M.  The  Science  and  Practice  of  Stuttering 

Treatment: A Symposium. West Sussex, UK: Wiley-Blackwell; 2012.

 16.  Bothe AK. Evidence-Based Treatment of Stuttering: Empirical Bases 

and Clinical Applications. Mahwah, NJ: L. Erlbaum; 2004.

 17.  Guitar  B,  McCauley  RJ.  Treatment  of  Stuttering:  Established And 
Emerging Approaches, 1st ed. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & 
Wilkins; 2010.

Psychology Research and Behavior Management 2013:6

submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress 

17

Blomgren

Dovepress

 18.  Martin  RR,  Kuhl  P,  Haroldson  S. An  experimental  treatment  with 
two  preschool  stuttering  children.  J  Speech  Hear  Res.  1972;15(4): 
743–752.

 19.  Lasan  M.  Multifactorial  treatment  for  preschool  children.  In:  Jelcic 
Jaksic S, Onslow M, editors. The Science and Practice of Stuttering 
Treatment: A  Symposium.  West  Sussex,  UK:  Wiley-Blackwell; 
2012:171–181.

 20.  Andrews G, Craig A, Feyer AM, Hoddinott S, Howie P, Neilson M. 
Stuttering:  a  review  of  research  ﬁndings  and  theories  circa  1982. 
J Speech Hear Disord. 1983;48(3):226–246.

 40.  Blomgren  M,  Roy  N,  Callister T,  Merrill  R. Assessing  stuttering 
treatment without assissing stuttering? A response to Reitzes and Snyder. 
J Speech Lang Hear Res. 2006;49:1423–1426.

 41.  Reitzes  P,  Snyder  G.  Response  to  “Intensive  stuttering  modiﬁcation 
therapy:  a  multidimensional  assessment  of  treatment  outcomes,”  by 
Blomgren, Roy, Callister, and Merrill (2005). J Speech Lang Hear Res. 
2006;49(6):1420–1422; author reply 1423–1426.

 42.  Ryan BP. Response to Blomgren, Roy, Callister, and Merrill (2005). 
J  Speech  Lang  Hear  Res.  2006;49(6):1412–1414;  author  reply 
1415–1419.

 21.  Sheehan JG. Stuttering; Research and Therapy. New York: Harper and 

 43.  Blomgren M. Stuttering treatment for adults: an update on contemporary 

Row; 1970.

approaches. Semin Speech Lang. 2010;31(4):272–282.

 22.  Starkweather  CW.  Fluency  and  Stuttering.  Englewood  Cliffs,  NJ: 

 44.  Ingham  RJ.  Stuttering  and  Behavior Therapy:  Current  Status  and 

Prentice-Hall; 1987.

 23.  Yaruss JS, Coleman C, Hammer D. Treating preschool children who 
stutter:  description  and  preliminary  evaluation  of  a  family-focused 
treatment  approach.  Lang  Speech  Hear  Serv  Sch.  2006;37(2): 
118–136.

 24.  Millard SK, Nicholas A, Cook FM. Is parent-child interaction therapy 
effective  in  reducing  stuttering?  J  Speech  Lang  Hear  Res.  2008; 
51(3):636–650.

 25.  Millard SK, Edwards S, Cook FM. Parent-child interaction therapy: 

Adding to the evidence. Int J Speech Lang Pa. 2009;11(1):61–76.

 26.  Rustin L, Botterill W, Kelman E. Assessment and Therapy for Young 
Dysﬂuent  Children:  Family  Interaction.  San  Diego:  Singular  Pub. 
Group; 1996.

 27.  Conture EG. Stuttering: Its Nature, Diagnosis, and Treatment. Boston, 

MA: Allyn and Bacon; 2001.

 28.  Conture E, Melnick K. Parent-child group approach to stuttering in 
preschool and school-age children. In: Onslow M, Packman A, editors. 
Early Stuttering: A Handbook of Intervention Strategies. San Diego: 
Singular; 1999:17–51.

 29.  Richels  C,  Conture  E. An  indirect  treatment  approach  for  early 
intervention for childhood stuttering. In: Conture E, Curlee R, editors. 
Stuttering and Related Disorder, 3rd ed. New York: Thieme; 2007.

 30.  Franken MC, Kielstra-Van der Schalk CJ, Boelens H. Experimental 
treatment of early stuttering: a preliminary study. J Fluency Disord. 
2005;30(3):189–199.

 31.  Reed  C,  Godden  A.  An  experimental  treatment  using  verbal 
punishment with two preschool stutterers. J Fluency Disord. 1977;2: 
225–233.

 32.  Harrison E, Onslow M. The Lidcombe Program for preschool children 
who stutter. In: Guitar B, McCauley R, editors. Treatment of Stuttering: 
Established and Emerging Interventions. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott 
Williams & Wilkins; 2009:118–140.

 33.  Onslow M, Costa L, Rue S. Direct early intervention with stuttering: 
some  preliminary  data.  J  Speech  Hear  Disord.  1990;55(3): 
405–416.

 34.  Onslow M, Andrews C, Lincoln M. A control/experimental trial of an 
operant treatment for early stuttering. J Speech Hear Res. 1994;37(6): 
1244–1259.

 35.  Jones M, Onslow M, Harrison E, Packman A. Treating stuttering in 
young children: Predicting treatment time in the lidcombe program. 
J Speech Lang Hear R. 2000;43(6):1440–1450.

 36.  Jones M, Onslow M, Packman A, et al. Randomised controlled trial of 
the Lidcombe programme of early stuttering intervention. BMJ. 2005; 
331(7518):659–661.

 37.  Onslow  M, Yaruss  JS.  Differing  perspectives  on  what  to  do  with  a 
stuttering  preschooler  and  why.  Am  J  Speech  Lang  Pathol.  2007; 
16(1):65–68.

 38.  Blomgren M, Roy N, Callister T, Merrill RM. Intensive stuttering modi-
ﬁcation therapy: a multidimensional assessment of treatment outcomes. 
J Speech Lang Hear Res. 2005;48(3):509–523.

 39.  Blomgren  M,  Roy  N,  Callister T,  Merrill  R. Treatment  outcomes 
research: A  response  to  Ryan.  J  Speech  Lang  Hear  Res.  2006;49: 
1415–1419.

Experimental Foundations. San Diego: College-Hill Press; 1984.

 45.  Dunlap  K.  Habits:  Their  Making  and  Unmaking.  New York: 

Liveright; 1932.

 46.  Bloodstein  O.  Stuttering  as  tension  and  fragmentation.  In: 
Eisenson  J,  editor.  Stuttering:  A  Symposium.  New York:  Harper; 
1975:1–96.

 47.  Johnson W. Stuttering. In: Moeller WJD, editor. Speech-Handicapped 

School Children. New York: Harper and Row; 1967:229–329.

 48.  Sheehan J. Current issues on stuttering and recovery. In: Gregory HH, 
editor.  Controversies About  Stuttering Therapy.  Baltimore,  MD: 
 University Park Press; 1979:175–208.

 49.  Van  Riper  C.  The Treatment  of  Stuttering.  Englewood  Cliffs,  NJ: 

Prentice-Hall; 1973.

 50.  Williams  DE.  Stuttering  therapy  for  children.  In: Travis  LE,  editor. 
Handbook of Speech Pathology and Audiology. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice-Hall; 1971:1073–1093.

 51.  Zebrowski  PM, Arenas  RM. The  “Iowa Way”  revisited.  J  Fluency 

Disord. 2011;36(3):144–157.

 52.  Bandura A. Self-efﬁcacy: toward a unifying theory of behavioral change. 

Psychol Rev. 1977;84(2):191–215.

 53.  Bandura A.  Social  Foundations  of Thought  and Action.  Englewood 

Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall; 1986.

 54.  Wolpe  J.  Psychotherapy  by  Reciprocal  Inhibition.  Stanford,  CA: 

Stanford University Press; 1958.

 55.  Blomgren  M.  Review  of  the  Successful  Stuttering  Management 
Program.  In:  Jel(cid:254)i(cid:252)  Jakši (cid:252)  S,  Onslow  M,  editors.  The  Science  and 
Practice of Stuttering Treatment: A Symposium. Chichester, UK: John 
Wiley & Sons, Ltd; 2012:99–113.

 56.  Kraaimaat  FW, Vanryckeghem  M, Van  Dam-Baggen  R.  Stuttering 
and  social  anxiety.  J  Fluency  Disord.  2002;27(4):319–330; 
quiz 330–311.

 57.  Menzies  RG,  O’Brian  S,  Onslow  M,  Packman  A,  St  Clare  T, 
Block  S. An  experimental  clinical  trial  of  a  cognitive-behavior 
therapy  package  for  chronic  stuttering.  J  Speech  Lang  Hear  Res. 
2008;51(6):1451–1464.

 58.  Craig AR, Tran Y. Fear of speaking: Chronic anxiety and stuttering. 

Advances in Psychiatric Treatment. 2006;12:63–68.

 59.  Menzies RG, Onslow M, Packman A, O’Brian S. Cognitive behavior 
therapy  for  adults  who  stutter:  a  tutorial  for  speech-language 
pathologists. J Fluency Disord. 2009;34(3):187–200.

 60.  Rowley D. Cognitive behaviour therapy. In: Jel(cid:254)i(cid:252) Jakši(cid:252) S, Onslow M, 
editors. The Science and Practice of Stuttering Treatment: A Symposium. 
Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd; 2012:183–193.

 61.  Howie PM, Tanner S, Andrews G. Short- and long-term outcome in an 
intensive treatment program for adult stutterers. J Speech Hear Disord. 
1981;46(1):104–109.

 62.  Ingham  RJ.  Operant  methodology  in  stuttering  therapy.  In: 
Eisenson J, editor. Stuttering: A Scond Symposium. New York: Harper 
and Row; 1975.

 63.  O’Brian  S,  Packman A,  Onslow  M. The  Camperdown  Program.  In: 
Guitar B, McCauley R, editors. Treatment of Stuttering: Established 
and Emerging Interventions. Philadelphia: Wolters Kluwer/Lippencott 
Williams & Wilkins; 2010:256–276.

18

submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress 

Psychology Research and Behavior Management 2013:6

Dovepress

Behavioral treatments for children and adults who stutter

 64.  Ryan BP. Programmed Therapy for Stuttering in Children and Adults. 

 77.  Yaruss  JS.  Evaluating  treatment  outcomes  for  adults  who  stutter. 

Springﬁeld, IL: Thomas; 1974.

 65.  Blomgren M. University of Utah Instensive Stuttering Clinic Therapy 

Manual. Acton, MA: Copley Custon Textbooks; 2009.

 66.  Boberg  E,  Kully  D.  Comprehensive  Stuttering  Program:  Clinical 

Manual. San Diego: College-Hill Press; 1985.

 67.  Kroll R, Scott-Sulsky L. The Fluency Plus Program: An integration of 
ﬂuency shaping and cognitive restructuring procedures for adolescents 
and adults who stutter. In: Guitar B, McCauley R, editors. Treatment 
of Stuttering: Established and Emerging Interventions. Philadelphia: 
Wolters Kluwer/Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2010:277–311.

 68.  Webster  RL.  Precision  Fluency  Shaping  Program:  Speech 
Reconstruction for Stutterers. Roanoke, VA: Communications Devel-
opment Corporation; 1982.

 69.  O’Brian S, Onslow M, Cream A, Packman A. The Camperdown Program: 
outcomes of a new prolonged-speech treatment model. J Speech Lang 
Hear Res. 2003;46(4):933–946.

 70.  O’Brian  S,  Packman A,  Onslow  M. Telehealth  delivery  of  the 
Camperdown Program for adults who stutter: a phase I trial. J Speech 
Lang Hear Res. 2008;51(1):184–195.

 71.  Goldiamond I. Stuttering and ﬂuency as manipulatable operant response 
classes.  In:  Krasner  L,  Ullmann  LP,  editors.  Research  in  Behavior 
Modiﬁcation. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston; 1965.

 72.  Webster  RL.  Evolution  of  a  target-based  behavioral  therapy  for 
stuttering. In: Shames GH, Rubin H, editors. Stuttering Then and Now. 
Columbus, OH: Merrill Publishing; 1986:397–414.

 73.  Kully D, Langevin M, Lomheim H. Intensive treatment of stuttering in 
adolescents and adults. In: Conture EG, Curlee RF, editors. Stuttering 
and  Related  Disorders  of  Fluency,  3rd  ed.  New York: Thieme; 
2007:213–232.

 74.  Montgomery  CS. The  treatment  of  stuttering:  From  the  hub  to  the 
spoke. In: Bernstein Ratner N, Tetnowski JA, editors. Current Issues 
in Stuttering Research and Practice. Mahway, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum; 
2006:159–204.

 75.  No authors listed. Guidelines for practice in stuttering treatment. Special 
Interest Division on Fluency and Fluency Disorders American Speech-
Language-Hearing Association.  ASHA  Suppl.  1995;37(3  Suppl  14): 
26–35.

 76.  Finn  P,  Howard  R,  Kubala  R.  Unassisted  recovery  from  stuttering: 
self-perceptions  of  current  speech  behavior,  attitudes,  and  feelings. 
J Fluency Disord. 2005;30(4):281–305.

J Commun Disord. 2001;34(1–2):163–182.

 78.  Yaruss JS, Quesal RW. Stuttering and the International Classiﬁcation 
of Functioning, Disability, and Health: an update. J Commun Disord. 
2004;37(1):35–52.

 79.  Kroll R. Manual of Fluency Maintenance: Guide for Ongoing Practice. 

2nd edition. Toronto: Clarke Institute; 1991.

 80.  Breitenfeldt  DH,  Lorenz  DR.  Successful  Stuttering  Management 
Program (SSMP): For Adolescent and Adult Stutterers, 2nd ed. Cheney, 
WA: Eastern Washington University Press; 1999.

 81.  Blomgren M, Whitchurch M, Metzger E. The University of Utah Inten-
sive Stuttering Clinic: Treatment Outcomes. Presented at: 6th World 
Congress on Fluency Disorders; August 5–8; 2009; Rio de Janeiro, 
Brazil.

 82.  Andrews G, Guitar B, Howie P. Meta-analysis of the effects of stuttering 

treatment. J Speech Hear Disord. 1980;45(3):287–307.

 83.  Webster WG, Poulos M. Facilitating Fluency: Transfer Strategies for 
Adult  Stuttering Treatment  Programs. Tucson, AZ:  Communication 
Skill Builders; 1989.

 84.  Lee K, Manning W. Listener responses according to stuttering self-
acknowledgement  and  modification.  J  Fluency  Disord.  2010;35: 
110–122.

 85.  Healey  EC,  Gabel  RM,  Daniels  DE,  Kawai  N. The  effects  of  self-
disclosure and non self-disclosure of stuttering on listeners’ perceptions 
of a person who stutters. J Fluency Disord. 2007;32(1):51–69.

 86.  Maguire  G,  Franklin  D, Vatakis  NG,  et  al.  Exploratory  randomized 
clinical study of pagoclone in persistent developmental stuttering: the 
EXamining Pagoclone for peRsistent dEvelopmental Stuttering Study. 
J Clin Psychopharmacol. 2010;30(1):48–56.

 87.  Ramig  PR,  Ellis  JB,  Pollard  R. Application  of  the  SpeechEasy  to 
stuttering  treatment:  Introduction,  background,  and  preliminary 
observations. In: Guitar B, McCauley R, editors. Treatment of Stuttering: 
Established and Emerging Interventions. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott 
Williams & Wilkins; 2010:312–328.

 88.  Craig AR, Kearns M. Results of a traditional acupuncture intervention 

for stuttering. J Speech Hear Res. 1995;38(3):572–578.

Psychology Research and Behavior Management
Publish your work in this journal
Psychology Research and Behavior Management is an international, peer-
reviewed, open access journal focusing on the science of psychology and 
its application in behavior management to develop improved outcomes 
in the clinical, educational, sports and business arenas. Speciﬁc topics 
covered include: Neuroscience, memory & decision making; Behavior 
Submit your manuscript here: http://www.dovepress.com/psychology-research-and-behavior-management-journal

modiﬁcation & management; Clinical applications; Business & sports 
performance management; Social and developmental studies; Animal 
studies. The manuscript management system is completely online and 
includes a quick and fair peer-review system. Visit http://www.dovepress.
com/testimonials.php to read real quotes from published authors.

Dovepress

Psychology Research and Behavior Management 2013:6

submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress 

19

