R E V I E W S

MULTIDRUG RESISTANCE IN
CANCER: ROLE OF ATP-DEPENDENT
TRANSPORTERS

Michael M. Gottesman, Tito Fojo and Susan E. Bates

Chemotherapeutics are the most effective treatment for metastatic tumours. However, the ability
of cancer cells to become simultaneously resistant to different drugs — a trait known as
multidrug resistance — remains a significant impediment to successful chemotherapy.  Three
decades of multidrug-resistance research have identified a myriad of ways in which cancer cells
can elude chemotherapy, and it has become apparent that resistance exists against every
effective drug, even our newest agents. Therefore, the ability to predict and circumvent drug
resistance is likely to improve chemotherapy.

Patients who have cancer that does not respond to local
excision or radiation (about 50% of total cancer cases),
and patients with haematological malignancies, are
treated with chemotherapy, immunotherapy and bio-
logical-response modifiers. But why can some patients
be cured by these approaches and others respond tran-
siently or incompletely? Host and tumour genetic
alterations, epigenetic changes and tumour environ-
ment all seem to contribute to the complex story of
cancer drug resistance1.

Cellular mechanisms of multidrug resistance
There are two general classes of resistance to anti-
cancer drugs: those that impair delivery of anticancer
drugs to tumour cells, and those that arise in the can-
cer cell itself due to genetic and epigenetic alterations
that affect drug sensitivity. Impaired drug delivery can
result from poor absorption of orally administered
drugs, increased drug metabolism or increased excre-
tion, resulting in lower levels of drug in the blood and
reduced diffusion of drugs from the blood into the
tumour mass2,3. Recent studies have emphasized the
importance of the tumour vasculature and an appro-
priate pressure gradient for adequate drug delivery to
the tumour4. In addition, some cancer cells that are
sensitive to chemotherapy as monolayer cells in cul-
ture  become  resistant  when  transplanted  into 

animal models5. This indicates that environmental
factors, such as the extracellular matrix or tumour
geometry, might  be  involved  in  drug  resistance.
Cancer cells grown in culture as three-dimensional
spheroids, mimicking their in vivo geometry, have also
been shown to become resistant to cancer drugs2,5,6.
Much remains to be learned about this type of drug 
resistance and its role in clinical oncology.

Cellular mechanisms of drug resistance have been
intensively studied, as experimental models can be easily
generated by in vitro selection with cytotoxic agents.
Cancer cells in culture can become resistant to a single
drug, or a class of drugs with a similar mechanism of
action, by altering the drug’s cellular target or by increas-
ing repair of drug-induced damage, frequently to DNA.
After selection for resistance to a single drug, cells might
also show cross-resistance to other structurally and
mechanistically unrelated drugs — a phenomenon that
is known as MULTIDRUG RESISTANCE. This might explain why
treatment regimens that combine multiple agents with
different targets are not more effective.

As illustrated in FIG. 1, different types of cellular 
multidrug resistance have been described. Resistance to
natural-product hydrophobic drugs — sometimes
known as classical multidrug resistance — generally
results from expression of ATP-dependent efflux pumps
with broad drug specificity. These pumps belong to a

Laboratory of Cell Biology
and Cancer Therapeutics
Branch, The Center for
Cancer Research, Building
37, Room 1A09, National
Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892,
USA. Correspondence 
to M.M.G.
e-mail:
mgottesman@nih.gov
DOI: 10.1038/nrc706

48 | JANUARY 2002 | VOLUME 2  

www.nature.com/reviews/cancer

©  2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

Summary 

• Multidrug resistance of cancer cells is a potentially surmountable obstacle to effective
chemotherapy of cancer.
• ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters, including MDR1 (ABCB1), MRP1 (ABCC1)
and ABCG2, can confer multidrug resistance to cancer cells in vitro.
• MRP2 (ABCC2), MRP3 (ABCC3), MRP4 (ABCC4), MRP5 (ABCC5), ABCA2 and
BSEP (ABCB11) are capable of transporting drugs; future studies are needed to
determine a role in drug resistance.
• ABC transporters such as MDR1 and MRP1 are expressed in many human cancers,
including leukaemias and some solid tumours; in some studies, expression of these
transporters has been shown to correlate with response to therapy and survival.
• Inhibitors of ABC transporters such as MDR1/P-glycoprotein have been tested in  

clinical trials with a suggestion of benefit, especially in acute myelogenous leukaemia.

• Interpretation of clinical trials using inhibitors of MDR1/P-glycoprotein has been
confounded by their effects on the pharmacokinetics of anticancer drugs.
• Development of inhibitors of ABC transporters should focus on potency and
specificity to minimize unexpected pharmacokinetic effects.
• Efficacy should be confirmed using surrogate assays.
• Normal tissues might be protected from toxicity by gene transfer of drug-resistance 

genes.

• Prevention of ABC transporter induction in cancer cells might help to avert 

drug resistance.

family of ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters that
share sequence and structural homology. So far, 48
human ABC genes have been identified and divided
into seven distinct subfamilies (ABCA–ABCG) on the
basis of their sequence homology and domain organi-
zation7. Resistance results because increased drug
efflux lowers intracellular drug concentrations. Drugs
that are affected by classical multidrug resistance include
the VINCA ALKALOIDS (vinblastine and vincristine), the
ANTHRACYCLINES (doxorubicin and daunorubicin), the
RNA transcription inhibitor actinomycin-D and the
microtubule-stabilizing drug paclitaxel8.

Resistance can also be mediated by reduced drug
uptake. Water-soluble drugs that ‘piggyback’ on trans-
porters and carriers that are used to bring nutrients into
the cell, or agents that enter by means of endocytosis,
might fail to accumulate without evidence of increased
efflux. Examples include the antifolate methotrexate,
nucleotide analogues, such as 5-fluorouracil and 
8-azaguanine, and cisplatin9,10.

Multidrug resistance can also result from activa-
tion of coordinately regulated detoxifying systems,
such as DNA repair and the CYTOCHROME P450 mixed-
function oxidases. Indeed, coordinate induction of the
multidrug  transporter  P-glycoprotein  (PGP)  and
cytochrome P450 3A has been observed11. This type of
multidrug resistance can be induced after exposure to
any  drug. Recent  evidence  indicates  that  certain
orphan nuclear receptors, such as SXR, might be
involved  in  mediating  this  global  response  to 
environmental stress12.

Finally, resistance can result from defective apoptotic
pathways. This might occur as a result of malignant
transformation; for example, in cancers with mutant or

MULTIDRUG RESISTANCE
Simultaneous resistance to
several structurally unrelated
drugs that do not have a
common mechanism of action.

VINCA ALKALOIDS
A family of natural-product
anticancer drugs, extracted from
the periwinkle family, that
depolymerize microtubules.
Examples include vincristine
and vinblastine.

ANTHRACYCLINES
Semi-synthetic anticancer
derivatives of anthraquinone
that intercalate into DNA and
inhibit DNA topoisomerase II.
Examples include daunorubicin
and doxorubicin.

CYTOCHROME P450
A group of enzymes that are
located on the endoplasmic
reticulum, and are involved in
drug metabolism and
detoxification. They are
primarily expressed in the liver
and small intestine.

MULTIFACTORIAL MULTIDRUG
RESISTANCE
Multidrug resistance caused by
several different mechanisms of
resistance that operate
simultaneously.

R E V I E W S

non-functional p53 (REF. 158). Alternatively, cells might
acquire changes in apoptotic pathways during exposure
to chemotherapy, such as alteration of ceramide levels13
or  changes  in  cell-cycle  machinery, which  activate
checkpoints and prevent initiation of apoptosis.

An important principle in multidrug resistance is
that cancer cells are genetically heterogeneous. Although
the process that results in uncontrolled cell growth in
cancer favours clonal expansion, tumour cells that are
exposed to chemotherapeutic agents will be selected for
their ability to survive and grow in the presence of cyto-
toxic drugs. These cancer cells are likely to be genetically
heterogeneous because of the mutator phenotype. So, in
any  population  of cancer  cells  that  is  exposed  to
chemotherapy, more than one mechanism of multidrug
resistance can be present. This phenomenon has been
called MULTIFACTORIAL MULTIDRUG RESISTANCE.

ATP-dependent transporters
Selection of cancer cells in culture with natural-prod-
uct anticancer drugs, such as paclitaxel, doxorubicin,
or vinblastine, frequently results in multidrug resis-
tance that is due to expression of the ABC transporter
PGP, the product of the ABCB1 (or MDR1) gene14,15.
PGP is a broad-spectrum multidrug efflux pump that
has 12 transmembrane regions and two ATP-binding
sites16 (FIG. 2). The  transmembrane  regions  bind
hydrophobic drug substrates that are either neutral or
positively charged, and are probably presented to the
transporter directly from the lipid bilayer8. Two ATP
hydrolysis events, which do not occur simultaneously,
are needed to transport one drug molecule17. Binding

Increased efflux
(ATP-dependent
efflux pumps)

Decreased influx

Activation of 
detoxifying systems
(cytochrome P450)

Activation of DNA repair

*

*

Blocked 
apoptosis
(e.g. decreased 
ceramide levels)

Figure 1 | Cellular factors that cause drug resistance.
Cancer cells become resistant to anticancer drugs by several
mechanisms. One way is to pump drugs out of cells by
increasing the activity of efflux pumps, such as ATP-dependent
transporters. Alternatively, resistance can occur as a result of
reduced drug influx — a mechanism reported for agents that
‘piggyback’ on intracellular carriers or enter the cell by means
of endocytosis. In cases in which drug accumulation is
unchanged, activation of detoxifying proteins, such as
cytochrome P450 mixed-function oxidases, can promote drug
resistance. Cells can also activate mechanisms that repair
drug-induced DNA damage. Finally, disruptions in apoptotic
signalling pathways (e.g. p53 or ceramide) allow cells to
become resistant to drug-induced cell death.

NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER

VOLUME 2 | JANUARY 2002 | 4 9

©  2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

R E V I E W S

Structure
a

N

b

N

c

Examples

MDR1 (ABCB1)
MRP4 (ABCC4)
MRP5 (ABCC5)
MRP7 (ABCC1)
BSEP/SPGP (ABCB11)

MRP1 (ABCC1)
MRP2 (ABCC2)
MRP3 (ABCC3)
MRP6 (ABCC6)

MXR/BCRP/ABC-P
(ABCG2)

C

C

C

ATP

ATP

ATP

ATP

N

ATP

Figure 2 | Structures of ABC transporters known to confer drug resistance. The structures of
three categories of ABC transporter. a | ABC transporters such as multidrug resistance MDR1 and
multidrug-resistance-associated protein 4 MRP4 have 12 transmembrane domains and two ATP-
binding sites. b | The structures of MRP1, 2, 3 and 6 are similar in that they possess two ATP-
binding regions. They also contain an additional domain that is composed of five transmembrane
segments at the amino-terminal end, giving them a total of 17 transmembrane domains. c | The
‘half-transporter’ ABCG2 contains six transmembrane domains and one ATP-binding region — in
this case, on the amino-terminal side (N) of the transmembrane domain. In other ‘half-transporters’,
such as the transporter associated with antigen processing (TAP), the ATP-binding cassette is found
on the carboxy-terminal (C ) side of the transmembrane domain. Half-transporters are thought to
homodimerize or heterodimerize to function.

of substrate to the transmembrane regions stimulates
the ATPase activity of PGP, causing a conformational
change that releases substrate to either the outer
leaflet of the membrane (from which it can diffuse
into  the  medium)  or  the  extracellular  space18.
Hydrolysis at the second ATP site seems to be required
to ‘re-set’ the transporter so that it can bind substrate
again, completing one catalytic cycle19.

PGP efficiently removes cytotoxic drugs and many
commonly used pharmaceuticals from the lipid bilayer.
Its broad substrate specificity presumably reflects a large,
polymorphous drug-binding domain or domains within
the transmembrane segments. Because PGP binds many
different hydrophobic compounds, it has been easy to
find potent PGP inhibitors. Two inhibitors that are used
in the laboratory and in clinical trials that attempted to
reverse drug resistance are the calcium channel blocker
verapamil and the immunosuppressant cyclosporin A.

As not all multidrug-resistant cells express PGP, a
search for other efflux pumps was initiated, leading to
the discovery of the multidrug-resistance-associated 
protein 1 (MRP1, or ABCC1)20. MRP1 is similar to PGP
in  structure, with  the  exception  of an  amino-
terminal  extension  that  contains  five-membrane-
spanning domains attached to a PGP-like core (FIG. 2).
MRP1  recognizes  neutral  and  anionic  hydrophobic 
natural products, and transports glutathione and other
conjugates of these drugs, or, in some cases — such as for
vincristine  — 
unconjugated
glutathione21–23. The discovery of MRP1 stimulated a
genomic search for homologues, leading to the discovery
of eight additional members of the ABCC subfamily of

co-transports 

FLIPPASE
A transport system that moves
substrates from one leaflet of the
membrane bilayer to the other
leaflet.

transporters, of which six have been studied in some
detail24. Like MRP1, some of these MRPs have the five-
transmembrane amino-terminal extension (ABCC2,
ABCC3  and  ABCC6, also  named  MRP2, 3, and  6),
whereas others do not. Many MRP family members
transport drugs in model systems and therefore have
the potential to confer drug resistance24.

Some anticancer drugs, such as mitoxantrone, are
poor substrates for MDR1 and MRP1. Selection for
mitoxantrone resistance results in multidrug-resistant
cells that produce a more distant member of the ABC
transporter family, ABCG2 — also known as MXR
(mitoxantrone-resistance gene), BCRP (breast cancer
resistance protein) or ABC-P (ABC transporter in 
placenta)25–27. This  transporter  is  thought  to  be  a
homodimer of two half-transporters, each containing
an ATP-binding domain at the amino-terminal end of
the molecule and six transmembrane segments (FIG. 2).
The first two original ABCG2 genes that were cloned
from resistant cells encoded proteins with either a thre-
onine or glycine substituted for arginine at amino acid
482, giving them much broader substrate specificity,
including the ability to transport doxorubicin28,29. This
finding, together with many well-documented muta-
tions  in  PGP, shows  that  even  single  amino-acid 
substitutions can change substrate specificity8.

Other ABC family members have been associated
with drug resistance. For example, the bile salt export
protein (BSEP, also known as ABCB11), first reported as
the ‘sister of PGP’ (SPGP), is expressed at high levels in
liver cells, and in transfection experiments it confers low-
level resistance to paclitaxel30. MDR3 (sometimes called
MDR2), a phosphatidylcholine FLIPPASE that is closely
related to PGP, normally transports phospholipids into
bile, but can transport paclitaxel and vinblastine, albeit
inefficiently unless it is mutated31–33. Finally, ABCA2 is
overexpressed  in  estramustine-resistant  cells7,34,35.
Estramustine is a nitrogen mustard derivative of oestra-
diol, so ABCA2 — which is expressed intracellularly in
endosomal/lysosomal vesicles — might participate in
steroid transport.

Although the lung resistance protein (LRP) is not
an ABC transporter, it is frequently included in discus-
sions of drug resistance, as it is expressed at high levels
in drug-resistant cell lines and some tumours36. LRP is
a major vault protein found in the cytoplasm and on
the nuclear membrane. Vaults are large ribonucleo-
protein particles that are present in all eukaryotic cells.
Their shape is reminiscent of the nucleopore central
plug, and the major vault proteins account for 70% of
their mass. Although their role in normal physiology is
not yet established, vaults might confer drug resistance
by redistributing drugs away from intracellular targets.

ABC transporters in normal cells
Although many ABC transporters have been identified
as drug-resistance proteins, they are all expressed in
normal tissues33,37–48 (TABLE 1). Consistent with their
wide distribution, it is becoming clear that in addition
to  exogenously  administered  drugs, ABC  proteins 
transport numerous endogenous substrates.

50 |  JANUARY 2002 | VOLUME 2

www.nature.com/reviews/cancer

©  2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

Table 1 | Tissue localization and possible functions of ABC transporters 
Common Name  Systematic name

Tissue 

Non-chemotherapy Chemotherapy 
substrates

PGP/MDR1

ABCB1

Intestine,
liver, kidney,
placenta,
blood–brain
barrier

Neutral and cationic
organic compounds,
many commonly 
used drugs

R E V I E W S

Defects in 
human disease

References

None known;
altered sensitivity
to drugs

8

Progressive familial  31,33,66,67
intrahepatic 
cholestasis
None known 

20–24

Dubin–Johnson
syndrome

24,60–63

None known

37,38

substrates
(known and suspected)
Doxorubicin, daunorubicin,
vincristine, vinblastine,
actinomycin-D, paclitaxel,
docetaxel, etoposide, 
teniposide, bisantrene,  
homoharringtonine (STI-571)
Paclitaxel, vinblastine

Phosphatidylcholine,
some hydrophobic
drugs
Glutathione and other Doxorubicin, epirubicin,
conjugates, organic
anions, leukotriene C4 methotrexate
Similar to MRP1, non- Methotrexate, etoposide,
bile salt organic anions doxorubicin, cisplatin,

etoposide, vincristine,

vincristine, mitoxantrone
Etoposide, teniposide,
Glucuronate and 
glutathione conjugates, methotrexate, cisplatin,
bile acids
vincristine, doxorubicin

ABCB4

Liver

ABCC1

All tissues

ABCC2

ABCC3

ABCC5

Liver, kidney,
intestine

Pancreas,
kidney, 
intestine,
liver, adrenal
glands
Prostate,
testis, ovary,
intestine,
pancreas, 
lung
Most tissues

MDR2

MRP1

MRP2, 
cMOAT

MRP3

MRP5

MRP6

MXR, 
BCRP,
ABC-P
BSEP, 
SPGP

ABCA2

MRP4

ABCC4

Nucleotide analogues, Methotrexate, thiopurines
organic anions

None known

39,40

ABCC6

Liver, kidney

Nucleotide analogues, 6-Mercaptopurine
cyclic nucleotides,
organic anions
Anionic cyclic 
pentapeptide

6-Thioguanine

Unknown

ABCG2

ABCB11

ABCA2

Placenta,
intestine,
breast, liver
Liver

Prazosin

Bile salts

Doxorubicin, daunorubicin,
mitoxantrone, topotecan,
SN-38
Paclitaxel

Brain,
monocytes

Steroid derivatives,
lipids

Estramustine

None known 

41,42

Pseudoxanthoma
elasticum (substrate
unknown)
None known

43–46,58

25–29,54

Progressive familial
intrahepatic 
cholestasis
Intracellular steroid 
transport

30,47,48,
64,65

7,34,35

ABC transporters have an important role in regu-
lating central nervous system permeability. The brain
is protected against blood-borne toxins by the blood–
brain barrier (BBB), and the blood–cerebrospinal-fluid
(CSF) barrier. The BBB is formed by the endothelial
cells of capillaries, with PGP located on the luminal
surface, preventing  the  penetration  of cytotoxins
across the endothelium49,50. MRP proteins such as
MRP1 are localized to the basolateral membrane of the
choroid plexus, where they serve to pump the meta-
bolic waste products of CSF into the blood51. ABC
transporters also seem to protect testicular tissue and
the developing fetus in a similar manner. In the testis,
as in the brain, PGP transports toxins into the capillary
lumen. MRP1, on the other hand, is localized on the
basolateral surface of Sertoli cells, protecting sperm
within the testicular tubules. In the placenta, PGP is
localized on the apical syncytiotrophoblast surface,
where it can protect the fetus from toxic cationic
xenobiotics52. MRP family members and the half-

transporter ABCG2 are also localized in placenta53,54.
MRP1 and other isoforms might be involved in pro-
tecting fetal blood from toxic organic anions and
excreting glutathione/glucuronide metabolites into the
maternal circulation55.

Whereas ABC transporters are expressed in the
brain, testis and placenta to protect these ‘sanctuaries’
from cytotoxins, the liver, gastrointestinal tract and
kidney use them to excrete toxins, protecting the
entire organism. PGP is localized in the apical mem-
branes of hepatocytes, where it transports toxins into
bile56. In humans, MRP3 is localized to the basolateral
surface of hepatocytes, where it transports organic
anions from liver back into the bloodstream57. A simi-
lar role might exist for MRP6, which has been found
to be expressed at high levels by liver cells58. MRP2
(cMOAT) is also localized on the apical surface of
hepatocytes, where it transports BILIRUBIN-glucuronide
and other organic anions into bile59. Mutations that
disrupt MRP2 function cause bilirubin accumulation

BILIRUBIN
A breakdown product of
haemoglobin that is processed
by the liver, where it is
conjugated to glucuronic acid
and excreted in the bile.
Accumulation of bilirubin in the
blood and tissues can lead to
jaundice and neurological
damage.

NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER

VOLUME 2 | JANUARY 2002 | 5 1

©  2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

R E V I E W S

CANALICULAR MEMBRANES
Surface of the hepatocyte that
faces the biliary canaliculus,
through which bile is excreted.

and jaundice in rats60,61 and in patients with Dubin–
Johnson syndrome62,63. Mutations in BSEP are associ-
ated with progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis
type-2, which is characterized by reduced secretion of
bile salts and hepatic failure64,65. Finally, MDR2 func-
tions as a phosphatidylcholine trans-locase, which
reduces the toxicity of bile salts66. Loss of MDR2 func-
tion  results  in  progressive  familial  intrahepatic
cholestasis type-3 (REFS 31, 67).

In the gastrointestinal tract, PGP is localized in apical
membranes of mucosal cells, where it extrudes toxins,
forming a first line of defence. Increased tissue concen-
trations of PGP substrates in Mdr1a/Mdr1b-knockout
mice indicate that PGP might have a significant role in
determining oral drug bioavailability. Studies have
shown increased tissue absorption of putative PGP sub-
strates  following  oral  administration  when  a  PGP
inhibitor is administered concurrently68–70. Additionally,
PGP actively secretes intravenously administered drugs
into the gastrointestinal tract71. In contrast to PGP,
MRP1  is  located  in  the  basolateral  membrane  of
mucosal cells, and therefore transports substrates into
the interstitium and the bloodstream, rather than across
the apical surface into the intestinal lumen72. Consistent
with the absence of expression on the apical surface,
Mrp1-null mice have not been found to have alterations
in drug pharmacokinetics73. MRP2, on the other hand,
localizes to the CANALICULAR MEMBRANE of hepatocytes and
the apical surface of epithelial cells, and has a primary
role in the excretion of bilirubin-glucuronide. Studies
confirmed that MRP2 was capable of mediating drug
efflux, and a recent study showed increased bioavailabil-
ity of a food-derived carcinogen — 2-amino-1-methyl-
6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b] pyridine — in Mrp2-null rats74.
This  indicates  that  MRP2, like  PGP, might  also 
regulate drug bioavailability.

ABC transporters in human cancers
Although it seems likely that cancer cells use several dif-
ferent types of ABC transporter to gain drug resistance,
most clinical studies have focused on PGP. Early studies
showed that PGP was highly expressed in colon, kidney,
adrenocortical and hepatocellular cancers75,76. Initially,
there was hope that increases in PGP expression alone
could explain cancer drug resistance. However, the fail-
ure of these cancers to respond to drugs that are not PGP
substrates indicated that other factors are involved, and
attention turned to cancers that acquire resistance fol-
lowing chemotherapy. In seeking to define the role of
PGP in drug resistance, researchers have assumed that
PGP expression is highest in tumours that are dependent
on expression for survival, that expression impairs
response to chemotherapy, and that expression levels
increase as tumours become drug resistant. On the basis
of these assumptions, clinical trials aimed at increasing
chemotherapy sensitivity in drug-resistant tumours,
through inhibition of PGP, have been implemented.

So, does PGP expression confer drug resistance in
human cancer? Most studies that correlate PGP expres-
sion  with  clinical  outcome  have  been  small,
retrospective, single-institution studies with insufficient

power to draw reliable conclusions77. One problem
with designing a study that provides statistically valid
results is that methods for detecting PGP expression are
imperfect. This is primarily due to the lack of specificity
of many commonly used anti-PGP antibodies. To com-
plicate matters, researchers also use different methods
to quantify expression, to control for tumour hetero-
geneity, and to account for the presence of normal tissue
in tumour biopsies78. Despite efforts to bring uniformity
to PGP quantification, it is still difficult to discern valid
from invalid data.

Expression of MRP1 has also been analysed in clini-
cal samples. Antibodies against MRP1 seem to be more
specific than those that recognize PGP79, and MRP1 is
highly expressed in leukaemias, oesophageal carcinoma
and non-small-cell lung cancers 80. Conclusions about
expression levels of other ABC transporters in human
tissue await more extensive analysis.

Leukaemia. The most uniform associations between
MDR1/PGP expression and drug resistance have been
reported in acute myelogenous leukaemia (AML). PGP
expression has been reported in leukaemic cells from
about one-third of patients with AML at the time of
diagnosis, and more than 50% of patients at relapse;
higher  levels  occur  in  certain  subtypes, including 
secondary leukaemias81–83. PGP expression is correlated
with a reduced complete remission rate, and a higher
incidence of refractory disease — a surprising finding,
as treatment regimens include not only the PGP sub-
strate daunorubicin, but also AraC, which is not a PGP
substrate81,84–86. Recent studies report that PGP expres-
sion is associated with a poorer prognosis, although the
magnitude of the effects on response and survival is
probably not as great as initially thought. These clinical
results are supported by ex vivo studies of leukaemic
cells, which have shown that PGP expression reduces
the intracellular accumulation of daunorubicin86,87. In
addition, administration of a PGP inhibitor increases
daunorubicin accumulation in leukaemic cells88.

MRP1 and LRP expression have also been evalu-
ated in leukaemia. Increased MRP1 expression has
been  reported  in  chronic  lymphocytic and  pro-
lymphocytic leukaemia cells89. Expression levels are
less frequently elevated in AML cells (10–34%)81,85,90,
and these studies lead to different conclusions about
whether MRP1 confers a poor prognosis. So far, the
largest trial in untreated patients found no correlation
between MRP1 or LRP expression and prognosis, but
observed a correlation between PGP expression and
prognosis81. Finally, low expression levels of BCRP/
MXR  have  been  observed  in  AML  cells91. Taken
together, the clinical data support a role for PGP in
drug  resistance  in  AML  patients, and  for  MRP1
expression in chronic lymphocytic and prolympho-
cytic leukaemias. Additional studies are needed to
confirm and extend these findings.

Breast  cancer. Detection  of transporters  in  solid
tumour samples has been more difficult. A 1997 meta-
analysis of 31 reports from 1989–1996 found that 41%

52 |  JANUARY 2002 | VOLUME 2

www.nature.com/reviews/cancer

©  2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

of breast tumours expressed PGP92. PGP expression
increased  after  therapy  and  was  associated  with  a
greater likelihood of treatment failure. However, there
was considerable interstudy variability — a finding that
has  persisted  in  the  reports  since  1996  (REFS
93,96,97,159–161), preventing a solid conclusion about the
role of PGP in breast cancer. Recent imaging studies
using  99mTc (technetium)-sestamibi (Cardiolite), a
transport substrate recognized by PGP, indicate that its
activity is increased in breast carcinomas93–95.

Whether the MRP1 expression levels associated with
breast cancer are enough to confer drug resistance is
not yet resolved96,97. As MRP1 is expressed ubiquitously,
it is not surprising that using reverse transcriptase poly-
merase chain reaction (RT—PCR), MRP1 mRNA can
be detected in all breast cancer samples at levels compa-
rable to that in normal tissues. One immunohisto-
chemical analysis of a series of resected invasive pri-
mary breast carcinomas reported a correlation between
relapse-free survival and MRP1 expression98.

Other solid tumours. Variability in expression is also a
problem for other solid tumours. In ovarian cancer
samples, 16–47% were found to express PGP, as mea-
sured by immunohistochemistry162–164. Critical analysis
of these data reveals that PGP is expressed by only about
20% of ovarian cancers when samples were taken at
diagnosis. This makes it difficult to demonstrate a corre-
lation between expression and outcomes, such as dis-
ease-free survival, particularly given the importance of
cisplatin in therapy.

In lung cancer samples, MDR1 mRNA expression
was reported to be increased in 15–50% of tumours99–101.
The incidence of MRP1 expression is much higher
(about 80%) in small-cell lung cancer (SCLC) samples.
MRP1 expression was detected in 100% of non-small-
cell lung cancers (NSCLC), with higher levels noted in
30% of the samples — this might not be surprising,
given its ubiquitous expression in normal lung tis-
sue101,102. Immunohistochemical studies confirmed the
predominantly plasma-membrane localization pattern
of MRP1 (REF. 103). Given the low levels of MDR1 expres-
sion and the nearly ubiquitous expression of MRP1, lung
cancer should be an excellent model in which to evaluate
the role of MRP1-specific inhibitors.

Sarcomas represent another malignancy in which
PGP expression seems to be important for drug resis-
tance. Immunohistochemical studies of both soft-tissue
sarcomas and osteosarcomas revealed a strong associa-
tion between PGP expression, relapse-free survival and
overall survival104,105. Other methodologies, however,
have been used to substantiate and refute these find-
ings, and there has been no consensus regarding the
effect of PGP on survival in sarcomas106–110.

Reversal of drug resistance in cancer
Since  the  early  1980s, many  agents  have  been 
investigated for their ability to reverse PGP-mediated 
multidrug resistance in cancer patients. Examples
include verapamil, the phenothiazines, quinidine,
quinacrine, quinine, amiodarone, several neuroleptics,

R E V I E W S

tamoxifen, progesterone, cyclosporin A, dexverapamil,
dexniguldipine, GF-902128, PSC-833 and VX-710.
Agents already in use for other indications, but discov-
ered to also inhibit PGP, were tested in the first clinical
trials. Early speculation was replaced by reality as these
agents were found to be weak inhibitors that were toxic
at high doses111. In subsequent trials — most notably
those  with  cyclosporin  A  and  dexverapamil  —  it
became clear that surrogate markers would be needed
to evaluate efficacy. It has also become clear that a
number  of complications  arise  in  treating  cancer
patients with these types of drug. Excellent reviews 
cataloguing completed trials are available111–115.

Toxicity. The potential for bone-marrow and neurologi-
cal  toxicity  were  of concern  when  trials  with  PGP
inhibitors were launched. Previous studies had shown
that PGP was expressed and ‘active’ in haematopoietic
stem cells116, and the discovery that PGP functioned at
the BBB led to concern that inhibitors might damage the
central nervous system. In support of this, the concentra-
tion of PGP substrates were increased in the central ner-
vous systems of Mdr1a- and Mdr1b-null mice49. Clinical
findings  did  not, however, validate  these  concerns.
Although MYELOSUPPRESSION has been observed in patients
treated with PGP inhibitors, it is more likely to be caused
by a pharmacokinetic interaction than by toxicity to stem
cells.Very little toxicity to the central nervous system has
been reported in patients treated with PGP inhibitors —
even with known neurotoxic compounds, such as the
TAXANES or vinca alkaloids117. CEREBELLAR ATAXIA has been
described in patients treated with PSC-833, tamoxifen or
dexniguldipine administered alone115. It is unclear, how-
ever, if this ataxia occurs by inhibition of PGP at the
blood–brain barrier.

A large number of trials have been conducted in
patients with AML. Compared with historial controls,
non-randomized trials showed an improved response
in patients with relapsed or refractory AML, older
patients with AML, and patients with MYELODYSPLASTIC
SYNDROME who developed AML118–122. In one study, qui-
nine treatment increased the complete response rate
and disease-free survival in patients with PGP-positive
leukaemic cells, but not in those with PGP-negative
cells122. In addition, a large prospective randomized
study of AML patients reported an increase in relapse-
free  and  overall  survival  for  patients  receiving
cyclosporin A123. Similar observations were made in
patients with other PGP-expressing malignancies124,125.

Pharmacokinetic interactions. Interpretation of clini-
cal trials involving inhibitors of MDR1/PGP has been
confounded by their effects on the pharmacokinetics
of anticancer drugs. Because PGP inhibitors increase
serum levels of anticancer drugs112,113, researchers
reduced  the  doses  of anticancer  drugs  given  to
patients. The hope was that these dose reductions
would result in similar drug concentrations. However,
two studies administering paclitaxel in combination
with PSC-833 found that a significant fraction of
patients were undertreated177,126. Further evidence for

MYELOSUPPRESSION
Temporary inhibition of bone-
marrow production, caused by
chemotherapy-mediated
cytotoxicity to blood-cell
precursors.

TAXANES
A family of natural-product and
semi-synthetic agents, including
paclitaxel, which was originally
isolated from the bark of the yew
tree. Their mechanism of action
includes stabilization of
microtubules and inhibition of
mitosis.

CEREBELLAR ATAXIA
Difficulty in walking caused by
impaired cerebellar function.

MYELODYSPLASTIC SYNDROME
A disorder of haematopoietic
cells that often leads to acute
leukaemia.

NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER

VOLUME 2 | JANUARY 2002 | 5 3

©  2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

R E V I E W S

Box 1 | New P-glycoprotein inhibitors under development 

XR-9576, an anthranilic-acid-based drug, is a potent inhibitor of P-glycoprotein without
apparent pharmacokinetic interaction. In clinical studies, a single intravenous dose
completely inhibits rhodamine efflux from CD56+ circulating cells for up to 72 hours,
consistent with the observation that it is not a substrate for P-glycoprotein-mediated
transport; and so might be expected to have a longer duration of action153.

R-101933 is a benzazepine derivative being developed as an oral P-glycoprotein

inhibitor. In vitro studies have shown that the main metabolic pathway is not dependent
on the cytochrome P450 CYP3A4, whereas clinical studies have found no effect on
docetaxel pharmacokinetics.

LY-335979 is a potent inhibitor that contains a cyclopropyldibenzosuberane moiety.

Although the affinity of P-glycoprotein for LY-335979 is high, as with XR-9576,
LY-335979 does not seem to be a substrate for P-glycoprotein. Clinical studies indicate
that LY-335979 lacks significant pharmacokinetic interaction with plasma levels of
doxorubicin, etoposide or paclitaxel154,155.

OC-1440935 is a substituted diarylimidazole that was generated using combinatorial
chemistry and high-throughput cell-based screening. Similar to the other, newer agents,
it is highly potent, and does not seem to be a P-glycoprotein substrate. Pre-clinical
studies indicate that it is orally bioavailable, lacks a pharmacokinetic interaction with
plasma paclitaxel and does not inhibit CYP3A4.

GF-120918, an acridinecarboxamide derivative, fully reverses P-glycoprotein-

mediated resistance at concentrations as low as 30 nM156 with a half-maximal inhibition
at 50 nM157, and has a minor effect on pharmacokinetics, except at very high modulator
and doxorubicin levels, albeit with a more pronounced effect on doxorubicinol
pharmacokinetics133. It can also block the half-transporter BCRP/MXR/ABCP, making it
attractive as an inhibitor of more than one transporter157.

Drug resistance reversal: surrogate assays
To fully evaluate the in vivo efficacy of PGP inhibitors,
surrogate assays have been developed that measure the
extent of PGP inhibition. In the simplest assay, serum
can  be  obtained  from  patients  receiving  a  PGP
inhibitor and assayed for its ability to either reverse
multidrug resistance or increase drug accumulation in
a PGP-overexpressing cell line136,137.

Alternatively, CD56+ CELLS can be taken from patients
undergoing therapy with a PGP inhibitor, and assayed
for  efflux  of the  PGP  substrate, rhodamine-123 
(FIG. 3)138,139. CD56+ cells express high levels of PGP

a

120

Pre

s
t
n
u
o
c
 
l
l

e
C

0

0

b

120

2 hrs

200

400

600

800

1000

Rhodamine fluorescence

underdosing can also be inferred from other trials83,119,127.
If these are representative of most studies, and there is
no reason to believe otherwise, it indicates that a sig-
nificant fraction of patients have been underdosed. In
a disease such as AML, this would have adverse con-
sequences. Furthermore, another fraction of patients
were probably overdosed, increasing the morbidity
and  mortality  in  those  individuals  receiving  the 
PGP inhibitor.

The pharmacokinetic complications associated with
PGP inhibitors might be due to the fact that they
inhibit other proteins involved in drug metabolism,
such as cytochrome P450. Or, for example, PSC-833
and cyclosporin A inhibit BSEP and reduce the secre-
tion of bile salts, so they might reduce bile flow and
slow hepatic excretion of chemotherapeutic agents128.
Pharmacokinetic interactions seem to be most pro-
nounced  in  patients  treated  with  PSC-833  and
cyclosporin A117,118,126,129,130, although they have been
reported in patients treated with verapamil, dexvera-
pamil, nifedipine and VX- 710 (REFS 112,131,132,165). The
effect varies depending on the anticancer drug used in
conjunction with the inhibitor, or even whether the
parent drug or a metabolite is administered115,132–135.

After nearly 15 years and dozens of studies111,113–115,
there is no definitive answer to the question: can a
PGP inhibitor effectively reverse drug resistance in
humans? The pharmacokinetic interactions observed
with these agents have made it difficult to interpret
efficacy. PGP inhibitors with fewer pharmacokinetic
interactions are being developed, and surrogates are
being used to determine the optimal dose of PGP
inhibitor needed (BOX 1).

s
t
n
u
o
c
 
l
l

e
C

0

0

200

400

600

800

1000

Rhodamine fluorescence

c

120

24 hrs

s
t
n
u
o
c
 
l
l

e
C

0

0

200

400

600

800

1000

Rhodamine fluorescence

Figure 3 | A surrogate assay for PGP inhibition. This assay
uses flow cytometry to test the ability of human CD56+ cells —
which express high levels of the efflux pump P-glycoprotein
(PGP) — to retain the PGP substrate rhodamine after exposure
to the efflux pump inhibitor PSC-833. The number of cells is
indicated on the y axis, and intracellular rhodamine fluorescence
intensity is indicated on the x axis. a | Cells that were never
incubated in rhodamine have very low levels of fluorescence
(blue line). When cells taken from a patient who has not yet been
treated with PSC-833 are incubated in rhodamine, and then
allowed a 30-min period of efflux in rhodamine-free medium,
they begin to lose fluorescence (yellow line). When the same
cells are loaded with rhodamine and also treated with the PGP
inhibitor PSC-833, they are highly fluorescent after 30 mins in
rhodamine-free medium (red line). b, c | Cells taken from the
same patient have high levels of intracellular fluorescence (red
line) 2 and 24 hours after initiation of a continous intravenous
infusion of PSC-833.

CD56+ CELLS
A subset of circulating
lymphocytes, known as natural
killer cells, that express the CD56
antigen. They are used to test
drug effectiveness in clinical
studies because they express
high levels of MDR1/P-
glycoprotein.

54 |  JANUARY 2002 | VOLUME 2

www.nature.com/reviews/cancer

©  2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

a

b

Figure 4 | 99mTc-sestamibi imaging to monitor PGP
activity. Imaging analysis of the P-glycoprotein (PGP)
substrate 99mTc-sestamibi after administration to a patient with
adrenocortical cancer. Images were taken a | before and 
b | after the patient was given a single dose of the PGP
inhibitor XR-9576 (Tariquidar). a | 99mTc-sestamibi accumulates
in the gastrointestinal tract (red arrow), after excretion from the
liver (orange arrow). The 99mTc-sestamibi in the bladder (blue
arrow) has been excreted by the kidneys. The liver is seen as a
faint image, and no lung lesions are seen. b | After XR-9576
treatment, 99mTc-sestamibi accumulates in lung metastases,
which appear as small labelled nodules in both lungs (white
arrows). 99mTc-sestamibi also accumulates in the liver (orange
arrow) as a consequence of PGP inhibition. The amount of
effluxed 99mTc-sestamibi observed in the gastrointestinal tract
(red arrow) and bladder (blue arrow) is markedly diminished
compared with the left panel. The intense signal in the middle
of the abdomen represents 99mTc-sestamibi accumulation in
retroperitoneal lymph nodes. Images obtained 48 hours after
the single dose show continued 99mTc-sestamibi retention in
the liver (not shown). 

and actively efflux rhodamine. This efflux is elimi-
nated following administration of a PGP inhibitor.
Neither  of these  assays, however, can  be  used  to 
quantify accumulation of the chemotherapeutic agent
in tumours.

Finally, 99mTc-sestamibi, a PGP substrate used in car-
diac function imaging, can also be used to directly image
PGP activity in both normal and tumour tissue (FIG. 4).
Enhanced hepatic accumulation of 99mTc-sestamibi is
now considered a surrogate marker for effective PGP
inhibition140–142. Several  studies  show  a  correlation
between 99mTc-sestamibi efflux from tumours and PGP
expression  in  cancer  patients93–95. Furthermore,
increased 99mTc-sestamibi accumulation in tumours has
been observed following administration of PSC-833
and VX-710 (REFS 141,142). Similar results have been
obtained  with  the  newer  PGP  antagonist  XR-9576
(Tariquida) (FIG. 4; BOX 1). However, it is important to
remember that 99mTc-sestamibi is a substrate for MRP as
well as for PGP143,144.

R E V I E W S

Future prospects 
Detailed knowledge about the causes of drug resistance
might make it possible, in the future, to predict the
response of a human cancer to chemotherapy. Once all
the main causes of drug resistance have been catalogued
and molecular probes have been defined, it should be
possible to determine their expression in individual can-
cer cells, obtained by either microdissection or from
pathological sections. Even specific mechanisms of resis-
tance expressed in a subpopulation of cells might be
ascertained in this way. By enhancing detection capabili-
ties, the likelihood of predicting the sensitivity or resis-
tance of a cancer might be improved. DNA microarray
analysis will improve our ability to determine which
drug-resistance and drug-metabolizing genes are upreg-
ulated in different tumours, and these results can then
be correlated with clinical responses to specific types of
chemotherapy.

The primary goal of clinical trials has been to reverse
existing drug resistance. A trial approach that has not
been thoroughly examined is one that aims to prevent
the emergence of drug resistance. In the laboratory,
selection of resistant cells usually begins with low drug
concentrations, which are then gradually advanced.
Using  high  concentrations  at  the  outset  markedly
reduces the number of resistant clones that are isolated.
Because drug transporters effectively reduce drug expo-
sure, they can facilitate development of drug resistance
without themselves conferring high levels of resistance.
So, a potentially effective strategy to prevent the emer-
gence of drug resistance is to increase the intracellular
concentration of chemotherapeutic agents by adminis-
tering a transport inhibitor at the beginning of treat-
ment. Several in vitro models support such a strategy.
For example, in single-step selections, co-administration
of an inhibitor has been shown to reduce the rate of
mutations that cause doxorubicin resistance to a tenth of
the rate in the absence of an inhibitor, while suppressing
the emergence of PGP-expressing resistant cells145.

It must be emphasized, however, that in a trial
design that aims to prevent the emergence of drug
resistance, significant differences in patient response
rates might not be observed. Instead, only differences in
the rate of relapse and time to progression would be
anticipated. The latter would occur because a preven-
tion strategy does not target most of the cells in a
tumour, but only a small subpopulation, and hence
does not significantly alter the initial cell kill. Such an
outcome  has  been  reported  in  a  study  in  which
cyclosporin A was added to daunorubicin and Ara-C in
the initial treatment of patients with AML123. Although
this combination regimen had no impact on the
complete remission rate, the overall survival and the 
disease-free survival were improved.

Clinical evidence indicates that PGP expression can
be induced by drug exposure. In one study in which
biopsies were obtained surgically at the beginning and
end of a lung perfusion with doxorubicin, PGP levels
increased 3–15-fold, showing that tumours adjust
rapidly to anticancer drugs146. Similar observations
have  been  made  in  patients  receiving  the  histone

NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER

VOLUME 2 | JANUARY 2002 | 5 5

©  2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

R E V I E W S

deacetylase inhibitor FR-901228, an experimental anti-
cancer agent known to be an excellent PGP substrate147.
Administration of FR-901228 results in rapid induc-
tion of PGP expression in malignant cells from patients
with T-cell lymphoma (S.E.B., unpublished observa-
tions). These studies indicate that strategies to block
upregulation of PGP might also be useful in the clinic.

Finally, although it is common for cancer cells to
become multidrug resistant, normal human tissues
remain sensitive to the toxic effects of chemotherapy.
This indicates that multidrug-resistance genes might be
used to protect normal tissues against the cytotoxic
effects of anticancer drugs. In mice, transfer of genes
that encode Mdr1 (REF. 148) and methotrexate-resistance
proteins149 protects bone marrow from the toxic effects
of anticancer drugs such as paclitaxel and methotrex-
ate. Several clinical trials have been undertaken in 
cancer patients who are undergoing autologous bone-
marrow transplants to assay the ability of bone-marrow

cells that transgenically express MDR1 to survive after
chemotherapy150. However, the  finding  that  mice
expressing Mdr1 from a retroviral vector developed
myelodysplasia151 indicates  that  more  needs  to  be
known about the effects of drug-resistance genes on
normal haematopoietic function before this approach
can be undertaken routinely in cancer patients.

Nearly  three  decades  after  the  description  of
active outward transport of daunorubicin in drug-
resistant tumour cells152, the study of multidrug
resistance is still work in progress. Many questions
must be answered about the mechanisms by which
cancer cells elude chemotherapy, and known mecha-
nisms of multidrug resistance must undergo further
analysis in clinical trials. One conclusion is certain
— the mutability and heterogeneity of cancer cells
will always provide them with ways to overcome
resistance, no matter how new or important the
anticancer drug.

1.  Gorre, M. E. et al. Clinical resistance to STI-571 cancer

therapy caused by BCR–ABL gene mutation or
amplification. Science 293, 876–880 (2001).

confers resistance to colchicine, doxorubicin, and vinblastine.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 84, 3004–3008 (1987).

J-107088, topoisomerase I inhibitors with an indolocarbazole
structure. Cancer Res. 61, 2827–2832 (2001).

16. Chen, C.J. et al. Internal duplication and homology with

30.  Childs, S., Yeh, R. L., Hui, D. & Ling, V. Taxol resistance

2.  Pluen, A. et al. Role of tumor–host interactions in
interstitial diffusion of macromolecules: cranial vs.
subcutaneous tumors. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 98,
4628–4633 (2001).
Jain, R. K. Delivery of molecular and cellular medicine to
solid tumors. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 46, 149–168 (2001).
Jain, R. K. Normalizing tumor vasculature with anti-
angiogenic therapy: a new paradigm for combination
therapy. Nature Med. 7, 987–989 (2001).

4. 

3. 

5.  Green, S. K., Frankel, A. & Kerbel, R. S. Adhesion-

dependent multicellular drug resistance. Anticancer Drug
Des. 14, 153–168 (1999).

6.  Durand, R. E. & Olive, P. L. Resistance of tumor cells to

chemo- and radiotherapy modulated by the three-
dimensional architecture of solid tumors and spheroids.
Methods Cell Biol. 64, 211–233 (2001).

7.  Dean, M., Rzhetsky, A. & Alliknets, R. The human ATP-
binding cassette (ABC) transporter superfamily.Genome
Res. 11, 1156–1166 (2001).
Most recent update of the ABC transporter family,
emphasizing genetic disorders that result from
disruption of ABC genes.  

8.  Ambudkar, S. V. et al. Biochemical, cellular, and

pharmacological aspects of the multidrug transporter. 
Annu. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol. 39, 361–398 (1999).

9.  Shen, D. W., Goldenberg, S., Pastan, I. & Gottesman, M.

M. Decreased accumulation of [14C]carboplatin in
human cisplatin-resistant cells results from reduced
energy-dependent uptake. J. Cell Physiol. 183,
108–116 (2000).

bacterial transport proteins in Mdr-1 (P-glycoprotein) 
gene from multidrug-resistant human cells. Cell 47, 371–380
(1986).
Description of the sequence of the MDR1
(P-glycoprotein) cDNA and its homology to two
bacterial transporters, thereby defining the first
members of the ABC transporter family.

17.  Senior, A. E. & Bhagat, S. P-glycoprotein shows strong
catalytic cooperativity between the two nucleotide sites.
Biochemistry 37, 831–836 (1998).

18.  Ramachandra, M. et al. Human P-glycoprotein exhibits

reduced affinity for substrates during a catalytic transition
state. Biochemistry 37, 5010–5019 (1998).

19.  Sauna, Z. E. & Ambudkar, S. V. Evidence for a requirement

for ATP hydrolysis at two distinct steps during a single
turnover of the catalytic cycle of human P-glycoprotein.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 97, 2515–2520 (2000).

20.  Cole, S.P.C. et al. Overexpression of a transporter gene in a

multidrug-resistant human lung cancer cell line. Science
258, 1650–1654 (1993).

21.  Loe, D. W., Deeley, R. G. & Cole, S. P. Characterization of

vincristine transport by the M(r) 190,000 multidrug
resistance protein (MRP): evidence for cotransport with
reduced glutathione. Cancer Res. 58, 5130–5136 (1998).

22. Jedlitschky, G. et al. Transport of glutathione,

glucuronate, and sulfate conjugates by the MRP gene-
encoded conjugate export pump. Cancer Res. 56,
988–994 (1996).
Observations that led to the conclusion that MRP was
a broad-specificity organic anion transporter.

10.  Shen, D., Pastan, I. & Gottesman, M. M. Cross-resistance to

23.  Muller, M. et al. Overexpression of the gene encoding the

methotrexate and metals in human cisplatin-resistant cell
lines results from a pleiotropic defect in accumulation of
these compounds associated with reduced plasma
membrane binding proteins. Cancer Res. 58, 268–275
(1998).

11.  Schuetz, E. G., Beck, W. T. & Schuetz, J. D. Modulators

and substrates of P-glycoprotein and cytochrome
P4503A coordinately up-regulate these proteins in human
colon carcinoma cells. Mol. Pharmacol. 49, 311–318
(1996).

12.  Synold, T. W., Dussault, I. & Forman, B. M. The orphan

nuclear receptor SXR coordinately regulates drug
metabolism and efflux. Nature Med. 7, 584–590 (2001).
This paper provides direct evidence for coordination
of drug-detoxifying systems through activation of a
single transcription factor, SXR.

13.  Liu, Y. Y., Han, T. Y., Giuliano, A. E. & Cabot, M. C. Ceramide

glycosylation potentiates cellular multidrug resistance.
FASEB J. 15, 719–730 (2001).

14.  Juliano, R.L. & Ling, V. A surface glycoprotein modulating
drug permeability in Chinese hamster ovary cell mutants.
Biochim. Biophys. Acta 455, 152–162 (1976).

15.  Ueda, K., Cardarelli, C., Gottesman, M. M. & Pastan, I.

Expression of a full-length cDNA for the human MDR1 gene

multidrug resistance-associated protein results in increased
ATP-dependent glutathione S-conjugate transport. Proc.
Natl Acad. Sci. USA 91, 13033–13037 (1994).

24.  Borst, P., Evers, R., Kool, M. & Wijnholds, J. A family of drug
transporters: the multidrug resistance-associated proteins.
J. Natl Cancer Inst. 92, 1295–1302 (2000).

25.  Miyake, K. et al. Molecular cloning of cDNAs which are

highly overexpressed in mitoxantrone-resistant cells:
demonstration of homology to ABC transport genes.
Cancer Res. 59, 8–13 (1999).

26.  Doyle, L. A. et al. A multidrug resistance transporter from
human MCF-7 breast cancer cells. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci.
USA 95, 15665–15670 (1998).

27.  Allikmets, R., Schriml, L. M., Hutchinson, A., Romano-
Spica, V. & Dean, M. A human placenta-specific ATP-
binding cassette gene (ABCP) on chromosome 4q22 that is
involved in multidrug resistance. Cancer Res. 58,
5337–5339 (1998).

28.  Honjo, Y. et al. Acquired mutations in the MXR/BCRP/ABCP

gene alter substrate specificity in MXR/BCRP/ABCP-
overexpressing cells. Cancer Res. (in the press).

29.  Komatani, H. et al. Identification of breast cancer resistant

mediated by transfection of the liver-specific sister gene of
P-glycoprotein. Cancer Res. 58, 4160–4167 (1998).

31.  Smit, J. J. et al. Homozygous disruption of the murine Mdr2

P-glycoprotein gene leads to a complete absence of
phospholipid from bile and to liver disease. Cell 75, 451–462
(1993).

32.  Zhou, Y., Gottesman, M. M. & Pastan, I. Studies of human

MDR1–MDR2 chimeras demonstrate the functional
exchangeability of a major transmembrane segment of the
multidrug transporter and phosphatidylcholine flippase. Mol.
Cell Biol. 19, 1450–1459 (1999).

33.  Borst, P., Zelcer, N. & van Helvoort, A. ABC transporters in

lipid transport. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1486, 128–144 (2000).
34.  Laing, N. M. et al. Amplification of the ATP-binding cassette 2

transporter gene is functionally linked with enhanced efflux
of estramustine in ovarian carcinoma cells. Cancer Res. 58,
1332–1337 (1998).

35.  Vulevic, B. et al. Cloning and characterization of human

adenosine 5′-triphosphate-binding cassette, sub-family A,
transporter 2 (ABCA2). Cancer Res. 61, 3339–3347 (2001).
36.  Scheffer, G. L., Schroeijers, A. B., Izquierdo, M. A., Wiemer,
E. A. & Scheper, R. J. Lung resistance-related protein/major
vault protein and vaults in multidrug-resistant cancer. Curr.
Opin. Oncol. 12, 550–556 (2000).

37.  Kool, M. et al. MRP3, an organic anion transporter able to
transport anti-cancer drugs. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 96,
6914–6919 (1999).

38.  Belinsky, M. G. & Kruh, G. D. MOAT-E (ARA) is a full-length

MRP/cMOAT subfamily transporter expressed in kidney and
liver. Br. J. Cancer 80, 1342–1349 (1999).

39.  Chen, Z. S., Lee, K. & Kruh, G. D. Transport of cyclic

nucleotides and estradiol 17-β-D-glucuronide by
multidrug resistance protein 4: resistance to 
6-mercaptopurine and 6–thioguanine. J. Biol. Chem. 276,
33747–33754 (2001).

40.  Schuetz, J. D. et al. MRP4: a previously unidentified factor in
resistance to nucleoside-based antiviral drugs. Nature Med.
5, 1048–1051 (1999).

41.  Wijnholds, J. et al. Multidrug-resistance protein 5 is a

multispecific organic anion transporter able to transport
nucleotide analogs. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 97,
7476–7481 (2000).

42.  Jedlitschky, G., Burchell, B. & Keppler, D. The multidrug

resistance protein 5 functions as an ATP-dependent export
pump for cyclic nucleotides. J. Biol. Chem. 275,
30069–30074 (2000).

43.  Struk, B. et al. Mutations of the gene encoding the
transmembrane transporter protein ABC-C6 cause
pseudoxanthoma elasticum. J. Mol. Med. 78, 282–286
(2000).

44.  Bergen, A. A. et al. Mutations in ABCC6 cause

pseudoxanthoma elasticum. Nature Genet. 25, 228–231
(2000).

protein/mitoxantrone resistance/placenta-specific, ATP-
binding cassette transporter as a transporter of NB-506 and

45.  Ringpfeil, F., Lebwohl, M. G., Christiano, A. M. & Uitto, J.

Pseudoxanthoma elasticum: mutations in the MRP6 gene

56 |  JANUARY 2002 | VOLUME 2

www.nature.com/reviews/cancer

©  2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

encoding a transmembrane ATP-binding cassette (ABC)
transporter. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 97, 6001–6006
(2000).

nonprogressive but persistent intrahepatic cholestasis. Proc.
Natl Acad. Sci. USA 98, 2011–2016 (2001).

66.  Ruetz, S. & Gros, P. Phosphatidylcholine translocase: a

46.  Le Saux, O. et al. Mutations in a gene encoding an ABC
transporter cause pseudoxanthoma elasticum. Nature
Genet. 25, 223–227 (2000).

47.  Gerloff, T. et al. The sister of P-glycoprotein represents the
canalicular bile salt export pump of mammalian liver. J. Biol.
Chem. 273, 10046–10050 (1998).

48.  Lecureur, V. et al. Cloning and expression of murine sister of

P-glycoprotein reveals a more discriminating transporter
than MDR1/P-glycoprotein. Mol. Pharmacol. 57, 24–35
(2000).

49. Schinkel, A. H., Wagenaar, E., Mol, C. A. & van Deemter, L.
P-glycoprotein in the blood–brain barrier of mice influences
the brain penetration and pharmacological activity of many
drugs. J. Clin. Invest. 97, 2517–2524 (1996).
Follow-up study to the landmark observation that
disruption of the PGPs failed to evoke a disease
phenotype, but did render mice extraordinarily
sensitive to ivermectin. This implicated a role for PGP
in the blood–brain barrier.

50.  Xie, R., Hammarlund-Udenaes, M., de Boer, A. G. & de

Lange, E. C. The role of P-glycoprotein in blood–brain
barrier transport of morphine: transcortical microdialysis
studies in Mdr1a (–/–) and Mdr1a (+/+) mice. Br. J. Pharmacol.
128, 563–568 (1999).

51.  Rao, V. V. et al. Choroid plexus epithelial expression of

MDR1 P glycoprotein and multidrug resistance-associated
protein contribute to the blood-cerebrospinal-fluid drug-
permeability barrier. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 96,
3900–3905 (1999).
Description of MRP and PGP localization in the
epithelium of choroid plexus, and prediction of
distinctive roles in the blood–cerebrospinal-fluid
barrier.

52.  Cordon-Cardo, C. et al. Expression of the multidrug

resistance gene product (P-glycoprotein) in human normal
and tumor tissues. J. Histochem. Cytochem. 38,
1277–1287 (1990).

53.  Jonker, J. W. et al. Role of breast cancer resistance protein

in the bioavailability and fetal penetration of topotecan. 
J. Natl Cancer Inst. 92, 1651–1656 (2000).

54.  Maliepaard, M. et al. Subcellular localization and

distribution of the breast cancer resistance protein
transporter in normal human tissues. Cancer Res. 61,
3458–3464 (2001).

physiological role for the Mdr2 gene. Cell 77, 1071–1081
(1994).
First physiological role for an MDR gene is
convincingly described. 

67.  de Vree, J. M. et al. Mutations in the MDR3 gene cause
progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis. Proc. Natl
Acad. Sci. USA 95, 282–287 (1998).

68.  Mayer, U. et al. Full blockage of intestinal P-glycoprotein and
extensive inhibition of blood–brain barrier P-glycoprotein by
oral treatment of mice with PSC-833. J. Clin. Invest. 100,
2430–2436 (1997).

69.  Greiner, B. et al. The role of intestinal P-glycoprotein in the

interaction of digoxin and rifampin. J. Clin. Invest. 104,
147–153 (1999).

70.  Lown, K. S. et al. Role of intestinal P-glycoprotein (Mdr1) in

interpatient variation in the oral bioavailability of cyclosporine.
Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 62, 248–260 (1997).

71.  Sparreboom, A. et al. Limited oral bioavailability and active

epithelial excretion of paclitaxel (Taxol) caused by 
P-glycoprotein in the intestine. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA
94, 2031–2035 (1997).

72.  Evers, R. et al. Basolateral localization and export activity of

the human multidrug resistance-associated protein in
polarized pig kidney cells. J. Clin. Invest. 97, 1211–1218
(1996).

73.  Wijnholds, J. et al. Increased sensitivity to anticancer drugs
and decreased inflammatory response in mice lacking the
multidrug resistance-associated protein. Nature Med. 3,
1275–1279 (1997).

74.  Dietrich, C. G., de Waart, D. R., Ottenhoff, R., Schoots, I. G.
& Elferink, R. P. Increased bioavailability of the food-derived
carcinogen 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]
pyridine in Mrp2-deficient rats. Mol. Pharmacol. 59,
974–980 (2001).

75.  Fojo, A.T. et al. Expression of a multidrug resistance gene in
human tumors and tissues. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 84,
265–269 (1987).

76.  Goldstein, L. J. et al. Expression of a multidrug resistance
gene in human cancers. J. Natl Cancer Inst. 81, 116–124
(1989).

77.  van den Heuvel-Eibrink, M. M., Sonneveld, P. & Pieters, R.

The prognostic significance of membrane transport-
associated multidrug resistance (MDR) proteins in leukemia.
Int. J. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 38, 94–110 (2000).

55.  St-Pierre, M. V. et al. Expression of members of the

78.  Beck, W.T. et al. Methods to detect P-glycoprotein-associated

multidrug resistance protein family in human term placenta.
Am. J. Physiol. 279, R1495–R1503 (2000).

56.  Schinkel, A. H. et al. Normal viability and altered

pharmacokinetics in mice lacking Mdr1-type (drug-
transporting) P-glycoproteins. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 94,
4028–4033 (1997).
Clear demonstration that PGP affects the tissue
distribution and retention of drugs other than
anticancer agents.

57.  Scheffer, G. L. et al. Specific detection of multidrug

resistance proteins MRP1, MRP2, MRP3, MRP5, and
MDR3 P-glycoprotein with a panel of monoclonal
antibodies. Cancer Res. 60, 5269–5277 (2000).

58.  Kool, M., van der Linden, M., de Haas, M., Baas, F. & Borst, P.

Expression of human MRP6, a homologue of the multidrug
resistance protein gene MRP1, in tissues and cancer cells.
Cancer Res. 59, 175–182 (1999).

59.  Konig, J., Nies, A. T., Cui, Y., Leier, I. & Keppler, D.

Conjugate export pumps of the multidrug resistance protein
(MRP) family: localization, substrate specificity, and MRP2-
mediated drug resistance. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1461,
377–394 (1999).

60.  Paulusma, C. C. et al. Congenital jaundice in rats with a

61. 

mutation in a multidrug resistance-associated protein gene.
Science 271, 1126–1128 (1996).
Ito, K. et al. Molecular cloning of canalicular multispecific
organic anion transporter defective in EHBR. Am. J. Physiol.
272, G16–G22 (1997).

62.  Kartenbeck, J., Leuschner, U., Mayer, R. & Keppler, D.
Absence of the canalicular isoform of the MRP gene-
encoded conjugate export pump from the hepatocytes in
Dubin–Johnson syndrome. Hepatology 23, 1061–1066
(1996).

63.  Paulusma, C. C. et al. A mutation in the human canalicular

multispecific organic anion transporter gene causes the
Dubin–Johnson syndrome. Hepatology 25, 1539–1542
(1997).

64.  Strautnieks, S. S. et al. A gene encoding a liver-specific ABC

transporter is mutated in progressive familial intrahepatic
cholestasis. Nature Genet. 20, 233–238 (1998).
65.  Wang, R. et al. Targeted inactivation of sister of 

P-glycoprotein gene (Spgp) in mice results in

multidrug resistance in patients’ tumors: consensus
recommendations. Cancer Res. 56, 3010–3020 (1996).

79.  Hipfner, D. R. et al. Epitope mapping of monoclonal

antibodies specific for the 190-kDa multidrug resistance
protein (MRP). Br. J. Cancer 78, 1134–1140 (1998).

80.  Nooter, K. et al. Expression of the multidrug resistance-
associated protein (MRP) gene in human cancers. Clin.
Cancer Res. 1, 1301–1310 (1995).

81. Leith, C. P. et al. Frequency and clinical significance of the

expression of the multidrug resistance proteins MDR1/
P-glycoprotein, MRP1, and LRP in acute myeloid leukemia:
a Southwest Oncology Group Study. Blood 94, 1086–1099
(1999).
Assay of leukaemic cells obtained from 351 patients
with acute myelogenous leukaemia, and confirmation
that PGP expression and function correlate with a
decreased complete remission rate and an increased
rate of resistant disease.

82.  Han, K. et al. Expression of functional markers in acute

nonlymphoblastic leukemia. Acta Haematol. 104, 174–180
(2000).

83.  Dorr, R. et al. Phase I/II study of the P-glycoprotein

modulator PSC 833 in patients with acute myeloid leukemia.
J. Clin. Oncol. 19, 1589–1599 (2001).

84.  van der Kolk, D. M. et al. P-glycoprotein and multidrug

resistance protein activities in relation to treatment outcome
in acute myeloid leukemia. Clin. Cancer Res. 6, 3205–3214
(2000).

85.  Legrand, O., Simonin, G., Beauchamp-Nicoud, A., Zittoun, R.

& Marie, J. P. Simultaneous activity of MRP1 and PGP is
correlated with in vitro resistance to daunorubicin and with 
in vivo resistance in adult acute myeloid leukemia. Blood 94,
1046–1056 (1999).

86.  Michieli, M. et al. P-glycoprotein, lung resistance-related

protein and multidrug resistance associated protein in 
de novo acute non-lymphocytic leukaemias: biological 
and clinical implications. Br. J. Haematol. 104, 328–335
(1999).

87.  Broxterman, H. J. et al. Do P-glycoprotein and major vault

protein (MVP/LRP) expression correlate with in vitro
daunorubicin resistance in acute myeloid leukemia?
Leukemia 13, 258–265 (1999).

R E V I E W S

88.  Tidefelt, U. et al. P-glycoprotein inhibitor valspodar 

(PSC-833) increases the intracellular concentrations of
daunorubicin in vivo in patients with P-glycoprotein-positive
acute myeloid leukemia. J. Clin. Oncol. 18, 1837–1844
(2000).

89.  Burger, H. et al. Expression of the multidrug resistance-

associated protein (MRP) in acute and chronic leukemias.
Leukemia 8, 990–997 (1994).

90.  Filipits, M. et al. Multidrug resistance-associated protein in
acute myeloid leukemia: no impact on treatment outcome.
Clin. Cancer Res. 3, 1419–1425 (1997).

91.  Ross, D. D., Karp, J. E., Chen, T. T. & Doyle, L. A.

Expression of breast cancer resistance protein in blast cells
from patients with acute leukemia. Blood 96, 365–368
(2000).

92. Trock, B. J., Leonessa, F. & Clarke, R. Multidrug resistance

in breast cancer: a meta-analysis of MDR1/GP170
expression and its possible functional significance. 
J. Natl Cancer Inst. 89, 917–931 (1997).
Meta-analysis showing PGP expression in
approximately 40% of breast cancer samples, and a
correlation with decreased treatment response.

93. Vecchio, S. D. et al. In vivo detection of multidrug-resistant

(MDR1) phenotype by 99m sestamibi scan in untreated breast
cancer patients. Eur. J. Nucl. Med. 24, 150–159 (1997).
Study showing an inverse correlation between MRK-
16 binding to breast cancer samples and 99mTc-
sestamibi retention in breast cancers.

94.  Sun, S. S. et al. Expression of mediated P-glycoprotein

multidrug resistance related to Tc-99m MIBI
scintimammography results. Cancer Lett. 153, 95–100 (2000).

95.  Kao, C. H. et al. P-glycoprotein and multidrug resistance-
related protein expressions in relation to technetium-99m
methoxyisobutylisonitrile scintimammography findings.
Cancer Res. 61, 1412–1414 (2001).

96.  Dexter, D. W. et al. Quantitative reverse transcriptase-

polymerase chain reaction measured expression of MDR1
and MRP in primary breast carcinoma. Clin. Cancer Res. 4,
1533–1542 (1998).

97.  Filipits, M. et al. MRP and MDR1 gene expression in 

primary breast carcinomas. Clin. Cancer Res. 2, 1231–1237
(1996).

98.  Nooter, K. et al. The prognostic significance of expression of
the multidrug resistance-associated protein (MRP) in primary
breast cancer. Br. J. Cancer 76, 486–493 (1997).

99.  Oka, M. et al. The clinical role of MDR1 gene expression in
human lung cancer. Anticancer Res. 17, 721–724 (1997).

100. Savaraj, N. et al. Multidrug-resistant gene expression in
small-cell lung cancer. Am. J. Clin. Oncol. 20, 398–403
(1997).

101. Young, L. C. et al. Expression of multidrug resistance

protein-related genes in lung cancer: correlation with drug
response. Clin. Cancer Res. 5 , 673–680 (1999).

102. Nooter, K. et al. Expression of the multidrug resistance-
associated protein (MRP) gene in primary non-small-cell
lung cancer. Ann. Oncol. 7, 75–81 (1996).

103. Wright, S. R. et al. Immunohistochemical detection of
multidrug resistance protein in human lung cancer and
normal lung. Clin. Cancer Res. 4, 2279–2289 (1998).
104. Chan, H. S. L., Thorner, P. S., Haddad, G. & Ling, V.
Immunohistochemical detection of P-glycoprotein:
prognostic correlation in soft tissue sarcoma of childhood. 
J. Clin. Oncol. 50, 2818–2822 (1990).

105. Chan, H. S., Grogan, T. M., Haddad, G., DeBoer, G. & Ling, V.

P-glycoprotein expression: critical determinant in the
response to osteosarcoma chemotherapy. J. Natl Cancer
Inst. 89, 1706–1715 (1997).

106. Perri, T. et al. Effect of P-glycoprotein expression on

outcome in the Ewing family of tumors. Pediatr. Hematol.
Oncol. 18, 325–334 (2001).

107. Baldini, N. et al. Expression of P-glycoprotein in high-grade

osteosarcomas in relation to clinical outcome. N. Engl. J.
Med. 333, 1380–1385 (1995).

108. Coley, H. M. et al. Incidence of P-glycoprotein

overexpression and multidrug resistance (MDR) reversal in
adult soft tissue sarcoma. Eur. J. Cancer 36, 881–888
(2000).

109. Wunder, J. S. et al. MDR1 gene expression and outcome in

osteosarcoma: a prospective, multicenter study. J. Clin.
Oncol. 18, 2685–2694 (2000).

110. Kuttesch, J. F. et al. P-glycoprotein expression at diagnosis

may not be a primary mechanism of therapeutic failure in
childhood rhabdomyosarcoma. J. Clin. Oncol. 14, 886–900
(1996).

111. Ferry, D. R., Traunecker, H. & Kerr, D. J. Clinical trials of 

P-glycoprotein reversal in solid tumours. Eur. J. Cancer 32A,
1070–1081 (1996).

112. Kerr, D. J. et al. The effect of verapamil on the

pharmacokinetics of adriamycin. Cancer Chemother.
Pharmacol. 18, 239–242 (1986).

NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER

VOLUME 2 | JANUARY 2002 | 5 7

©  2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

R E V I E W S

113. Fisher, G. A. & Sikic, B. I. Clinical studies with modulators of

133. Sparreboom, A. et al. Clinical pharmacokinetics of

152. Dano, K. Active outward transport of daunomycin in

multidrug resistance. Hematol. Oncol. Clin. N. Am. 9,
363–382 (1995).

114. Bradshaw, D. M. & Arceci, R. J. Clinical relevance of

transmembrane drug efflux as a mechanism of multidrug
resistance. J. Clin. Oncol. 16, 3674–3690 
(1998).

115. Fisher, G. A., Lum, B. L., Hausdorff, J. & Sikic, B. I.

Pharmacological considerations in the modulation of
multidrug resistance. Eur. J. Cancer 32A, 1082–1088
(1996).

doxorubicin in combination with GF120918, a potent
inhibitor of MDR1 P-glycoprotein. Anticancer Drugs 10,
719–728 (1999).

134. Advani, R. et al. A phase I trial of doxorubicin, paclitaxel, and
valspodar (PSC- 833), a modulator of multidrug resistance.
Clin. Cancer Res. 7, 1221–1229 (2001).

135. Kang, M. H. et al. The P-glycoprotein antagonist PSC- 833

increases the plasma concentrations of 
6α-hydroxypaclitaxel, a major metabolite of paclitaxel. 
Clin. Cancer Res. 7, 1610–1617 (2001).

116. Chaudhary, P. M. & Roninson, I. B. Expression and activity of

136. Solary, E. et al. Sufficient levels of quinine in the serum

P-glycoprotein, a multidrug efflux pump, in human
hematopoietic stem cells. Cell 66, 85–94 (1991).
Early paper that highlights the role of P-glycoprotein
in normal cells. 

117. Chico, I. et al. Phase I study of infusional paclitaxel in

combination with the P-glycoprotein antagonist PSC- 833.
J. Clin. Oncol. 19, 832–842 (2001).

118. Advani, R. et al. Treatment of refractory and relapsed acute

myelogenous leukemia with combination chemotherapy
plus the multidrug resistance modulator PSC-833
(Valspodar). Blood 93, 787–795 (1999).

119. Kornblau, S. M. et al. Phase I study of mitoxantrone plus
etoposide with multidrug blockade by SDZ PSC-833 in
relapsed or refractory acute myelogenous leukemia. J. Clin.
Oncol. 15, 1796–1802 (1997).

120. List, A. F. et al. Phase I/II trial of cyclosporine as a

chemotherapy-resistance modifier in acute leukemia. J. Clin.
Oncol. 11, 1652–1660 (1993).

121. Lee, E. J. et al. Parallel phase I studies of daunorubicin
given with cytarabine and etoposide with or without the
multidrug resistance modulator PSC-833 in previously
untreated patients 60 years of age or older with acute
myeloid leukemia: results of cancer and leukemia group
B study 9420. J. Clin. Oncol. 17, 2831–2839 
(1999).

122. Solary, E. et al. Combination of quinine as a potential

reversing agent with mitoxantrone and cytarabine for the
treatment of acute leukemias: a randomized multicenter
study. Blood 88, 1198–1205 (1996).

123. List, A. F. et al. Benefit of cyclosporine (CsA) modulation

of drug resistance in patients with poor-risk acute
myeloid leukemia: a Southwest Oncology Group (SWOG)
Study. Blood 98, 3212–3220 (2001).
These long-term results indicate a survival advantage
of treatment of acute myelogenous leukaemia with
daunomycin in combination with the PGP antagonist
cyclosporin A. 

124. Sonneveld, P. et al. Modulation of multidrug-resistant

multiple myeloma by cyclosporin. Lancet 340, 255–259
(1992).

125. Millward, M. J. et al. Oral verapamil with chemotherapy for
advanced non-small cell lung cancer: a randomised study.
Br. J. Cancer 67, 1031–1035 (1993).

126. Fracasso, P. M. et al. Phase I study of paclitaxel in

combination with a multidrug resistance modulator, 
PSC-833 (Valspodar), in refractory malignancies. J. Clin.
Oncol. 18, 1124 (2000).

127. Fracasso, P. M. et al. Phase II study of paclitaxel and

valspodar (PSC-833) in refractory ovarian carcinoma: a
gynecologic oncology group study. J. Clin. Oncol. 19,
2975–2982 (2001).

128. Bohme, M., Buchler, M., Muller, M. & Keppler, D. Differential
inhibition by cyclosporins of primary-active ATP-dependent
transporters in the hepatocyte canalicular membrane. FEBS
Lett. 333, 193–196 (1993).

129. Lum, B. L. et al. Alteration of etoposide pharmacokinetics

and pharmacodynamics by cyclosporine in a phase I trial to
modulate multidrug resistance. J. Clin. Oncol. 10,
1635–1642 (1992).

130. Bartlett, N. L. et al. Phase I trial of doxorubicin with

cyclosporine as a modulator of multidrug resistance. J. Clin.
Oncol. 12, 835–842 (1994).

circumvent the multidrug resistance of the human leukemic
cell line K562/ADM. Cancer 68, 1714–1719 (1991).

137. Minami, H. et al. Phase I study of intravenous PSC-833 and
doxorubicin: reversal of multidrug resistance. Jpn. J. Cancer
Res. 92, 220–230 (2001).

138. Robey, R. et al. Efflux of rhodamine from CD56+ cells as a
surrogate marker for reversal of P-glycoprotein-mediated
drug efflux by PSC-833. Blood 93, 306–314 (1999).

139. Witherspoon, S. M. et al. Flow cytometric assay of

modulation of P-glycoprotein function in whole blood by the
multidrug resistance inhibitor GG918. Clin. Cancer Res. 2,
7–12 (1996).

140. Luker, G.D., Facasso, P.M., Dobkin, J. & Piwnica-Worms, D.

Modulation of the multidrug resistance P-glycoprotein:
detection with technetium-99m-sestamibi in vivo. J. Nucl.
Med. 38, 369–372 (1997).
Promising study showing the ability of PSC-833 to
increase liver retention of 99mTc-sestamibi as a
surrogate for PGP inhibition.

141. Chen, C. C. et al. Detection of in vivo P-glycoprotein

inhibition by PSC-833 using Tc-99m sestamibi. Clin. Cancer
Res. 4, 545–552 (1997).

142. Peck, R. A. et al. Phase I and pharmacokinetic study of the

novel MDR1 and MRP1 inhibitor biricodar administered
alone and in combination with doxorubicin. J. Clin. Oncol.
19, 3130–3141 (2001).

143. Hendrikse, N. H. et al. 99mTc-sestamibi is a substrate for 
P-glycoprotein and the multidrug resistance-associated
protein. Br. J. Cancer 77, 353–358 (1998).

144. Chen, W. S. et al. Effects of MDR1 and MDR3 P-

glycoproteins, MRP1, and BCRP/MXR/ABCP on the
transport of (99m)Tc-tetrofosmin. Biochem. Pharmacol. 60,
413–426 (2000).

145. Beketic-Oreskovic, L., Duran, G. E., Chen, G., Dumontet, C.

& Sikic, B. I. Decreased mutation rate for cellular resistance
to doxorubicin and suppression of Mdr1 gene activation by
the cyclosporin PSC-833. J. Natl Cancer Inst. 87,
1593–1602 (1995).
Cells exposed to doxorubicin in the presence of 
PSC-833 develop resistance less frequently,
supporting an argument for early intervention with
PGP inhibitors.

146. Abolhoda, A. et al. Rapid activation of MDR1 gene

expression in human metastatic sarcoma after in vivo
exposure to doxorubicin. Clin. Cancer Res. 5, 3352–3356
(1999).

147. Lee, J. S. et al. Rhodamine efflux patterns predict 
P-glycoprotein substrates in the National Cancer 
Institute Drug Screen. Mol. Pharmacol. 46, 627–638 
(1994).

148. Sorrentino, B. P. et al. Selection of drug-resistant bone

marrow cells in vivo after retroviral transfer of human MDR1.
Science 257, 99–103 (1992).
First use of MDR1 in a gene therapy setting,
providing a means to increase dose intensity by
protecting bone-marrow cells from chemotherapy
toxicity.

149. Flasshove, M. et al. Ex vivo expansion and selection of

human CD34+ peripheral blood progenitor cells after
introduction of a mutated dihydrofolate reductase cDNA
via retroviral gene transfer. Blood 85, 566–574 
(1995).

131. Rowinsky, E. K. et al. Phase I and pharmacokinetic study of

150. Moscow, J. A. et al. Engraftment of MDR1 and NeoR gene-

paclitaxel in combination with biricodar, a novel agent that
reverses multidrug resistance conferred by overexpression
of both MDR1 and MRP. J. Clin. Oncol. 16, 2964–2976
(1998).

132. Wilson, W. H. et al. Phase I and pharmacokinetic study of

the multidrug resistance modulator dexverapamil with
EPOCH chemotherapy. J. Clin. Oncol. 13, 1985–1994
(1995).

transduced hematopoietic cells after breast cancer
chemotherapy. Blood 94, 52–61 (1999).

151. Bunting, K. D., Galipeau, J., Topham, D., Benaim, E. &

Sorrentino, B. P. Transduction of murine bone marrow cells
with an MDR1 vector enables ex vivo stem cell expansion,
but these expanded grafts cause a myeloproliferative
syndrome in transplanted mice. Blood 92, 2269–2279
(1998).

resistant Ehrlich ascites tumor cells. Biochim. Biophys. Acta
323, 466–483 (1973).

153. Abraham, J. et al. A phase I study of the novel 

P-glycoprotein (PGP) antagonist, XR9576 in combination
with vinorelbine. Proc. Am. Soc. Clin. Oncol. 20, 287 (2001).

154. Dantzig, A. H. et al. Reversal of P-glycoprotein-mediated

multidrug resistance by a potent
cyclopropyldibenzosuberane modulator, LY335979. 
Cancer Res. 56, 4171–4179 (1996).

155. Starling, J. J. et al. Pharmacological characterization of

LY335979: a potent cyclopropyldibenzosuberane
modulator of P-glycoprotein. Adv. Enzyme Regul. 37,
335–347 (1997).

156. Hyafil, F., Vergely, C., Du Vignaud, P. & Grand-Perret, T. 

In vitro and in vivo reversal of multidrug resistance by
GF120918, an acridonecarboxamide derivative. Cancer
Res. 53, 4595–4602 (1993).

157. de Bruin, M., Miyake, K., Litman, T., Robey, R. & Bates, S. E.
Reversal of resistance by GF120918 in cell lines expressing
the ABC half-transporter, MXR. Cancer Lett. 146, 117–126
(1999).

158. Lowe, S. W., Ruley, H. E., Jacks, T. & Housman, D. E.

p53-dependent apoptosis modulates the cytotoxicity of
anticancer agents. Cell 74, 957–967 (1993).

159. Schneider, J. et al. Expression of LRP and MDR1 in locally
advanced breast cancer preditcs axillary node invasion at
the time of rescue mastectomy after induction
chemotherapy. Breast Cancer Res. 3, 183–191 (2001).

160. Tolcher, A. W. et al. Phase I crossover study of paclitaxel with

r-verapamil in patients with metastatic breast cancer. 
J. Clin. Oncol. 14, 1173–1184 (1996).

161. Mechetner, E. et al. Levels of multidrug resistance (MDR1)

P-glycoprotein expression by human breast cancer
correclate with in vitro resistance to taxol and doxorubicin.
Clin. Cancer Res. 4, 389–398 (1998).

162. Izquierdo, M. A. et al. Drug resistance-associated marker

LRP for prediction of response to chemotherapy and
prognoses in advanced ovarian carcinoma. J. Natl Cancer
Inst. 87, 1230–1237 (1995).

163. Schneider, J., Jimenez, E., Marenbach, K., Marx, D. &

Meden, H. Co-expression of the MDR1 gene and HSP27 in
human ovarian cancer. Anticancer Res. 18, 2967–2971
(1998).

164. Baekelandt, M. M., Holm, R., Nesland, J. M., Troupe, C. G.

& Kristensen, G. B. P-glycoprotein expression is a marker
for chemotherapy resistance and prognosis in advanced
ovarian cancer. Anticancer Res. 20, 1061–1067 (2000).
165. Fedeli, L. et al. Pharmacokinetics of vincristine in cancer
patients treated with nifedipine. Cancer 64, 1805–1811
(1989).

Online links

DATABASES
The following terms in this article are linked online to:
CancerNet: http://cancernet.nci.nih.gov/
acute myelogenous leukaemia | adrenocortical cancer | breast
tumours | chronic lymphocytic leukaemia | colon cancer |
hepatocellular cancer | kidney cancer | non-small-cell lung
cancers | oesophageal carcinoma | osteosarcomas | soft-tissue
sarcomas
LocusLink: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/
ABCA2 | ABCB1 | ABCG2 | BSEP | cytochrome P450 | Mdr1a |
Mdr1b | MDR3 | Mrp1 | MRP1 | Mrp2 | MRP2 | MRP3 | MRP6 |
p53 | SXR
Medscape DrugInfo:
http://promini.medscape.com/drugdb/search.asp
amiodarone | cisplatin | cyclosporin A | daunorubicin | docetaxel |
doxorubicin | etoposide | 5-fluorouracil | methotrexate |
mitoxantrone | nifedipine | paclitaxel | progesterone | quinidine |
quinine | tamoxifen | verapamil | vinblastine | vincristine
OMIM: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Omim/
Dubin–Johnson syndrome | progressive familial intrahepatic
cholestasis type-3

FURTHER INFORMATION
Breast Cancer Drug Resistance Database:
http://www.lecb.ncifcrf.gov/breastDB/
The Center for Adaptation Genetics and Drug Resistance:
http://www.healthsci.tufts.edu/labs/Sblevy/home.html
Access to this interactive links box is free online.

58 |  JANUARY 2002 | VOLUME 2

www.nature.com/reviews/cancer

©  2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

