The Global Politics of Sport 

Sport presents one of the most advanced cases of ‘globalisation’, arguably because there 
are fewer cultural and political obstacles to the development of trade and international 
power in sport than there are in other fields. Thus there has been a change in the nature of 
the  politics  of  sport  since  the  end  of  the  Cold  War;  the  subject  must  be  rewritten  to 
acknowledge a twenty-first-century world in which international sporting organisations 
and transnational corporations have become far more important than states. 

The Global Politics of Sport presents a range of essays examining the emerging global 

political issues in twenty-first-century sport including: 
• The role and power of organisations such as FIFA and IOC 
• The influence of US exceptionalism 
• The construction of global sports heroes 
• Tensions developing within traditionally ‘alternative’ sports in a global commercial 

culture. 

The Global Politics of Sport presents new and fresh exploration of different conceptions 
of sport as a purely commercial activity and as an activity as embodying ‘higher’ social 
and ethical values. It is a sequel to The Politics of Sport and The Global Politics of Sport, 
which were previously the leading works in the field. 

Lincoln Allison was the founding Director of the Warwick Centre for Study of Sport 
in Society. He is currently Visiting Professor in the politics of sport at the University of 
Brighton and will be Emeritus Reader in politics at the University of Warwick. 

Sport in the Global Society 

General Editor: J.A.Mangan 

The interest in sports studies around the world is growing and will continue to do so. This 
unique  series  combines  aspects  of  the  expanding  study  of  sport  in  the  global  society, 
providing  comprehensiveness  and  comparison  under  one  editorial  umbrella.  It  is 
particularly  timely,  with  studies  in  the  cultural,  economic,  ethnographic,  geographical, 
political,  social,  anthropological,  sociological  and  aesthetic  elements  of  sport 
proliferating in institutions of higher education. 

Eric  Hobsbawm  once  called  sport  one  of  the  most  significant  practices  of  the  late 
nineteenth century. Its significance was even more marked in the late twentieth century 
and will continue to grow in importance into the new millennium as the world develops 
into a ‘global village’ sharing the English language, technology and sport. 

Other Titles in the Series 

British Football and Social Exclusion 

Edited by Stephen Wagg 

Football, Europe and the Press 

Liz Crolley and David Hand 

The Future of Football 

Challenges for the Twenty-First Century 

Edited by Jon Garland, Dominic Malcoim and Michael Rowe 

Football Culture 

Local Contests, Global Visions 

Edited by Gerry P.T.Finn and Richard Giulianotti 

France and the 1998 World Cup 

The National Impact of a World Sporting Event 

Edited by Hugh Dauncey and Geoff Hare 

The First Black Footballer 

Arthur Wharton 1865–1930: An Absence of Memory 

Phil Vasili 

International Football and International Politics, 1900–1939 

Scoring for Britain 

Peter J.Beck 

Women, Sport and Society in Modern China 

Holding Up More than Half the Sky 

Dong Jinxia 

Sport in Latin American Society 

Past and Present 

Edited by J.A.Mangan and Lamartine P.DaCosta 

Sport in Australasian Society 

Past and Present 

Edited by J.A.Mangan and John Nauright 

Sporting Nationalisms 

Identity, Ethnicity, Immigration and Assimilation 

Edited by Mike Cronin and David Mayall 

The Commercialization of Sport 

Edited by Trevor Slack 

Shaping the Superman 

Fascist Body as Political Icon: Aryan Fascism 

Edited by J.A.Mangan 

Fascist Body as Political Icon: Global Fascism 

Superman Supreme 

Edited by J.A.Mangan 

Making the Rugby World 
Race, Gender, Commerce 

Edited by Timothy J.L.Chandler and John Nauright 

Rugby’s Great Split 

Class, Culture and the Origins of Rugby 

League Football 

Tony Collins 

The Race Game 

Sport and Politics in South Africa 

Douglas Booth 

Cricket and England 

A Cultural and Social History of the Inter-war Years 

Jack Williams 

 

The Games Ethic and Imperialism 
Aspects of the Diffusion of an Ideal 

J.A.Mangan 

The Global Politics of Sport 

The role of global institutions in sport 

Edited by  

Lincoln Allison 

 

LONDON AND NEW YORK 

First published 2005 by Routledge  2 Park Square, Milton Park,  Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN 
Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada  by Taylor & Francis Inc  270 Madison Ave, 

New York, NY 10016 

Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group 

This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2005. 

 “To purchase your own copy of this or any of Taylor & Francis or Routledge’s collection of 

thousands of eBooks please go to http://www.ebookstore.tandf.co.uk/.” 

© 2005 Edited by Lincoln Allison 

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or  reproduced or utilised in any form or 

by any electronic,  mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter  invented, including 

photocopying and recording, or in any  information storage or retrieval system, without permission 

in  writing from the publishers. 

Every effort has been made to ensure that the advice and information in  this book is true and 
accurate at the time of going to press. However,  neither the publisher nor the authors can accept 
any legal responsibility or  liability for any errors or omissions that may be made. In the case of 
drug  administration, any medical procedure or the use of technical equipment  mentioned within 

this book, you are strongly advised to consult the  manufacturer’s guidelines. 

British Library Cataloging in Publication Data  A catalogue record for this book is available from 

the British Library 

Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data  A catalog record has been requested for this 

book 

ISBN 0-203-00546-5 Master e-book ISBN 

Format)  

ISBN 0-415-34601-0 (hbk) 
ISBN 0-415-34602-9 (pbk) 

Contents 

  

   Notes on contributors 
   Preface 
   Series editor’s foreword 

LINCOLN ALLISON 

ALAN TOMLINSON 

JOHN SUGDEN AND ALAN TOMLINSON 

LINCOLN ALLISON AND TERRY MONNINGTON 

1   Sport and globalisation 
2   Sport, prestige and international relations 
3   Not for the good of the game 
4   Olympic survivals 
5   Alternative models for the regulation of global sport 
6   Sport and the nation in the global era 
7   The curious role of the USA in world sport 
8   Local heroes and global stars 
9   Selling out? The commercialisation and globalisation of lifestyle Sport 
10   Afterword: more questions than answers 

KEN FOSTER 

ALAN BAIRNER 

LINCOLN ALLISON 

PAUL GILCHRIST 

BELINDA WHEATON 

LINCOLN ALLISON 

  

 

   Notes 
   Index 

  viii 
   x 
   xi 

   1 
   5 
   24 
   42 
   57 
   79 
   91 
  107 
  127 
  147 

  149 
  171 

Contributors 

Lincoln Allison is (Emeritus) Reader in Politics at the University of Warwick and 

Visiting Professor in the Politics in Sport at the University of Brighton. From 1993 to 
2002 he was Director of the Warwick Centre for the Study of Sport in Society. He has 
been editor of a number of books on sport and is author of Amateurism in Sport. His 
other published academic work is mainly in the fields of political theory and the 
politics of the environment. He remains an active cricketer and tennis player. 

Alan Bairner is Reader in the Sociology of Sport at the University of Loughborough, 

having previously been Professor in Sports Studies at the University of Ulster. He has 
written extensively on Irish sport (often in collaboration with John Sugden) and is 
most recently the author of Sport, Nationalism and Globalization. He remains a 
supporter of Dunfermline Athletic Football Club. 

Ken Foster is now semi-retired and living in the North York Moors National Park. He 

was a full-time member of the School of Law at the University of Warwick until 2002, 
where he continues to teach a course on sport and the law. He has published 
extensively on sports law and his recent publications include, ‘Is There a Global 
Sports Law?’ in Entertainment Law (2003). He continues to support Middlesbrough 
Football Club and now has more time to follow his horse-racing interests. 

Paul Gilchrist is a research assistant at the University of Brighton where he is working 

towards a doctorate on the ideas of heroes and heroines in sport. He previously 
completed a BA in Politics and an MA in Sport, Politics and Society at the University 
of Warwick where he was captain of the university darts team. 

Terry Monnington is Director of Physical Education at the University of Warwick. 

Most of his career has been as a teacher of physical education and he has published 
widely in the fields of British and African sport. He previously played Rugby Union 
for Moseley, whom he captained, and for the North Midlands. He coaches rugby and 
volleyball. 

John Sugden is Professor of the Sociology of Sport at the University of Brighton. He is 
the author of Boxing and Society and has also written extensively on Irish sport (often 
in collaboration with Alan Bairner). With Alan Tomlinson he coauthored FIFA and 
the Contest for World Football and co-edited Power Games. He has coached the 
Northern Ireland Universities and Brighton University football teams and continues to 
play the game even in his mature years. 

Alan Tomlinson is Professor of Leisure Studies at the University of Brighton. From 
2000 to 2003 he was editor of the International Review for the Sociology of Sport. 
Apart from his collaborations with John Sugden (see above) his books include 
Consumption, Identity and Style and The Games Up. He continues to play tennis and 
to support Burnley Football Club. 

Belinda Wheaton is Senior Research Fellow in Leisure Studies at the University of 

Brighton. She is principally interested in the politics of popular culture, especially of 
‘lifestyle’ sports. She is the editor of Understanding Lifestyle Sport and has 
contributed to a wide variety of journals and magazines in the field. She is herself a 
surfer, windsurfer and snowboarder. 

Preface 

This volume is a successor to The Politics of Sport (1986) and The Changing Politics of 
Sport (1993). The pace of change requires an entirely new body of work and the range of 
the subject prohibits a singly authored volume. 

I would like to thank the University of Warwick and particularly the Department of 
Politics and International Studies for the support they have offered in the production of 
this volume and especially for financial assistance in bringing the contributors together to 
discuss  the  issues  and  themes  raised  by  the  book.  I  would  also  like  to  thank  my  son 
Michael for his help with the editorial task and my wife Ann for her support, particularly 
in bringing the contributors together. 

Lincoln Allison 
Leamington Spa 

Series editor’s foreword 

According to Richard Vinen, ‘…all social history and sociology and social anthropology 
is  political  in  that  all  history  is  about  power’,1  while  according  to  Robert  W.Stern, 
‘…change  is  the  condition  of  everything  that  lives  (and)  the  condition  of  social 
continuity’.2 The Global Politics of Sport bears witness to the prescience of both remarks. 
‘While everyone else was changing, so were we. We were changing too’!3 The Global 
Politics of Sport is the third volume of a trilogy on the politics of sport and reflects the 
editor’s  latest  change  of  approach  in  response  to  changes  in  the  relationship  between 
sport and politics. Mutant moments characterise all change. Of course, continuity in this 
relationship continues as the present furore over Mugabe, morality, politics and cricket 
demonstrates. Change and continuity in history go hand in hand. 

In  the  changes  that  characterise  modern  sport,  globalisation  is  a  ‘leading  player’. 
Consequently it receives due prominence in The Global Politics of Sport and the term is 
adapted to circumstance rather than circumstance adapted to it. The quality of analysis is 
thus enhanced. 

The ‘Great Universal Churches’ of the IOC and FIFA, as The Global Politics of Sport 
makes very clear, now exert a powerful doctrinal, liturgical and ‘theocratic’ influence—
with their propensity for architectonic control—over countless millions. FIFA has indeed 
created a borderless international community. The English Premier League illustrates this 
perhaps  too  well.  In  one  weekend  of  April  2004  ‘foreign  legionnaires’  outnumbered 
‘native footsoldiers’ heavily. Only 65 of the 220 who started in the games were qualified 
to play for England. The top 5 teams had a mere 14 English players!4 

Arguably The Global Politics of Sport leaves the best till last in the question it poses: 
is global sport moving into an era of a post-Westphalian or even a neo-Medieval system 
of  international  politics  far  more  autonomous  of  state  systems  than  in  the  twentieth 
century?  This  question  stimulates  others.  Does  this  shift,  if  true,  have  future  dramatic 
consequences  for  the  use  and  abuse  of  power?  What  have  the  IOC  and  the  European 
Union  in  common,  in  addition  to  canonical  texts,  centralisation,  corruption  and 
unaccountability?  In  fact,  are  such  organisations  linked,  not  divorced  (as  The  Global 
Politics  of  Sports  suggests)  in  their  use  of  power?  Do  Blatter  and  Chirac  share  the 
dystopic  ‘papal  qualities  of  haughtiness,  self-righteousness  and  pretension’?5  Do  the 
politicians of power-bloc politics and sports politics systematically construct distancing 
mechanisms  from  accountability?  Is  it  time  therefore  for  ‘un  certain  tour  d’esprit’ 
involving atomistic resistance in the global politics of sport? 
Academic analysts of sport can only watch and wonder. 
It is all a long way from the ideals if not the practice of Corinthianism, ‘fair play’ and 

amateurism.6 

The great attraction of The Global Politics of Sport is that its questions raise questions. 
J.A.Mangan  
Series Editor  
Sport in the Global Society 

 

1 

Sport and globalisation 

The issues 
Lincoln Allison 

What  follows  is  a  second  sequel  to  The  Politics  of  Sport  in  1986  and  The  Changing 
Politics of Sport in 1993.1 The ‘Politics of Sport’ in its 1986 sense can now be seen as the 
‘Old Politics of Sport’, its assumption being of a ‘Westphalian’ system in which states 
were the dominant actors in international politics. To discuss the politics of sport required 
describing the policies of communist and African states in using sport to achieve greater 
recognition  and  legitimacy,  the  use  of  sport  in  contests  over  the  relationship  between 
nationality and statehood and the consequences of state policies—primarily apartheid in 
South  Africa—which  challenged  assumptions  about  the  ‘autonomy’  of  sport  and  its 
irrelevance to politics. If there is a single word with which to label the era, it is ‘boycott’, 
in  reference  to  the  numerous  and  escalating  attempts  by  states  to  withdraw  their 
competitors from international sporting contests in pursuit of broader diplomatic goals. 

One  paradox  of  the  weakening  of  the  primacy  of  the  state  is  that  in  many  cases  in 
Western  states  government  is  considerably  more  involved  in  the  domestic  politics  of 
sport  now  than  it  was  twenty  years  ago.  Certainly  in  the  United  Kingdom  (as  Terry 
Monnington and I argue later) government is involved in programmes to achieve sporting 
success and acquire major championships to a degree that was almost inconceivable in 
the  1980s.  It  is  difficult  to  conceive  of  the  events  of  1980,  when  Mrs  Thatcher’s 
government attempted to boycott the Moscow Olympics but the vast majority of British 
sports federations ignored the boycott, taking part. In Africa, we shall argue, there was a 
heyday  of  successful  intervention  lasting  from  the  1960s  to  the  1980s  during  which 
governments  were  able  to  achieve  goals  of  international  prestige  and  internal  unity 
through sport. This capacity has now diminished considerably, partly because of general 
economic failure, but also because the competitors themselves have been spirited away 
beyond  the  control  of  domestic  politicians  in  the  direction  of  American  campuses  and 
European football clubs, though in some countries, such as South Africa and Ethiopia, 
there is still clearly a ‘sports dividend’. 

The broad truth is that within the international system states are much less important 
than they were. In sport, they generally (and to a remarkable degree) compete with each 
other  within  agendas  set  by  transnational  corporations  and  global  non-governmental 
organisations. Imagine—if it is not already the case—that you are concerned about some 
aspect of the future of sport. It might be the shape and survival of test match cricket or 
the development of surfing or the survival of small town football clubs or the use of drugs 
in track and field athletics: all of these are matters which concern the contributors to this 
volume.  Almost  entirely,  at  the  time  of  writing,  your  concerns  would  not  lead  you  to 
monitor the activities of governments, but they would lead you to want to know more 
about  what  was  going  on  at  Newscorp,  at  the  Federation  Internationale  de  Football 

The Global Politics of sport     2

Association,  at  the  International  Olympic  Committee  and  at  the  World  Anti-Doping 
Agency,  among  others.  This  stands  in  sharp  contrast  to  the  situation  in  environmental 
politics  or  human  rights  where  states  remain  much  more  important  and  international 
organisations much less powerful. 

The  pace  of  change  has  been  remarkable.  A  good  proportion  of  the  policies  and 
contests  which  defined  the  politics  of  sport  in  1986  had  disappeared  by  the  time  The 
Changing  Politics  of  Sport  was  published  in  1993,  replaced  by  a  situation  of  much 
greater fluidity with a much less ‘Westphalian’ shape. There was talk of a ‘new world 
order’,  but  it  seems  more  realistic  to  describe  it  as  the  collapse  of  an  existing  order 
without  the  emergence  of  anything  very  clear  to  replace  it.  Everywhere—inside  and 
outside the academic world—the concept of ‘globalisation’ was invoked. I will not here 
define  ‘globalisation’;  different,  though  broadly  similar  definitions  will  be  invoked  by 
individual contributors in this volume. But there are two points which must be stressed 
about the importance and unavoidability of the concept. 

First,  the  use  of  the  concept  of  globalisation  is  ‘self-fulfilling’—to  use  Robert 
Merton’s term—which, in a sense, means self-realising. People assume and perceive a 
‘global’  reality  where  once  they  assumed  a  ‘Westphalian’  state  system,  though  it  is 
important  to  note  that  ‘globalisation’,  like  ‘charisma’,  ‘elite’  and  others  and  unlike 
‘Westphalian’  is  a  term  now  well-imbedded  in  a  variety  of  ordinary  languages. 
Demonstrators on the streets now conceive what they oppose in terms of globalisation 
where previously they might have conceived it in terms of free trade or imperialism or 
thought of it at all only in terms of a lower level of generality and abstraction. Second, we 
would expect a priori that globalisation in sport would be relatively well developed and 
the evidence suggests that it is. The aspirations of sport, from the start and as represented 
in the constitutions of such bodies as FIFA and the IOC, are parallel to those of a ‘great 
universal church’. But the hostility to sport within national and globally regional cultures 
is markedly less than to the proselytising of a real church and the opposition both to the 
general  idea  of  modern  sport  and  to  specific  sports  has  declined  markedly  in  the  past 
century. It is much less subject to cultural defensiveness than are institutions concerned 
with  language  and  the  arts.  ‘Borderlessness’  is  easier  in  sport,  particularly  since  the 
collapse of communism. In the labour market ‘professional’ footballers can cross borders 
with none of the limitations—not even language—that limit their contemporaries in the 
older  professions.  There  exists  a  global  system  of  cores  and  peripheries  in  which,  for 
example, leading Irish, African and Scandinavian footballers rarely play in their countries 
of origin. In the capital market, the governor of Siberia can become the owner of Chelsea 
Football Club. In the image market it becomes possible to choose between three different 
live cricket matches on television while living in the United States, a society which has 
an historic disdain for cricket, while the England footballer David Beckham acquires fans 
in East Asia on a different scale from the followings for players in previous generations. 
In  the  political  dimension  it  is  normal  to  conceive  of  globalisation  in  terms  of  the 
development of ‘systems of governance’ and the emergence of effective ‘regimes’. Here 
again the broad judgement must be that the major sporting bodies operate at a level of 
coherent global power unknown to aspirants in fields such as the environment and human 
rights. Compare, for example, the way in which the People’s Republic of China treats 
representatives of the International Olympic Committee with its treatment of international 
non-governmental organisations in the other fields mentioned! For whatever reasons—

Sport and globalisation     3

and those reasons will be discussed in this volume—it is clear that states find it much 
easier to ‘pool’ sovereignty in the regulation of sport than they do in other fields. 

Generically, three types of issue arise out of the globalisation of sport, though it would 
be  only  proper  to  acknowledge  that  they  could  be  classified  in  alternative ways. First, 
there are issues of regime development. Parallel to the theory that in the development of 
states a gangster-like central power is a necessary stage before the rule of law, is the idea 
that a raw global power is bound to develop before mature regulation is possible. The 
issue is whether global power can be turned into a mature regime capable, for example, 
of dealing successfully with problems like doping and of aspiring to spread the benefits 
of the regime to a global public. The context is one in which the personnel and practice of 
international  organisations  often  look  more  Robber  Baron  than  Civil  Service.  The 
chapters by John Sugden and Alan Tomlinson on FIFA and by the latter on the Olympics 
are  concerned  with  these  generic  issues.  As  a  sports  lawyer,  Ken  Foster  offers  an 
important  perspective  on  these  issues  by  contrasting  American  perspectives  on  the 
regulation  of  sport  with  those  in  Europe.  American  law  (predictably?)  conceives 
professional sport as a primarily commercial activity, though it has to accept some odd 
implications of that assumption. European approaches to the regulation of sport, after a 
brief flirtation in the mid-1990s with the idea that the regulation of such matters as the 
regulation  of  the  labour  market  in  football  should  be  the same as in other commercial 
activities, has reverted to the more typical European idea that sport, including football, 
should  be  handled  primarily  as  a  ‘social’  or  ‘cultural’  activity,  albeit  one  with  a 
commercial  dimension.  To  some  degree  these  alternative  models  are  competing  for 
hegemony  at  the  global  level.  In  general,  the  prognostications  for  the  development  of 
global sporting regimes in this book offer a mixed picture, though not without a good 
deal of pessimism. 

A second sort of issue concerns the relationship between emerging global institutions 
and  existing  institutions,  including  states,  but  also  including  nationalist  parties  and 
movements  and  national  sports’  associations.  The  chapter  by  Terry  Monnington  and 
myself  falls  under  this  heading,  as  does  Alan  Bairner’s  analysis  of  the  relationship 
between globalisation and nationalism. To some degree—to borrow a favourite academic 
analogy—the story here is of a dog that doesn’t bark: there are surprisingly few conflicts 
between the institutions of sporting globalisation and other movements and authorities. 
But this is a situation which may change. 

Finally,  to  borrow  a  German  term  with  no  precise English equivalent, there are the 
issues of ‘Kulturkampf’, cultural political struggles arising out of the tendencies to create 
a global culture, the contests over them and the opposition to them. Belinda Wheaton’s 
analysis of ‘lifestyle’ sports like surfing is an account of sub-cultures which are often in 
opposition  to  the  idea  of  globalisation  and  to  the  defining  ideas  of  modern  sport,  but 
which are also themselves global and subject to global commercial pressures. There is a 
political  contest for the ‘soul’ of surfing and also for many other sports which offer a 
‘lifestyle’ and a specialised relationship with natural phenomena. Paul Gilchrist’s essay, 
by contrast, investigates the idea of the hero, till now mainly conceived in a national and 
even nationalist context. My own chapter on the ‘curious’ position of American sport in 
the global context presents what is in some ways and from some angles the inversion of 
the idea of ‘coca-colonisation’ and Eurodisney as the ‘cultural Chernobyl’, in which we 
find  American  cultural  conservatives  berating  the  challenge  of  ‘soccer’.  Though  at  a 

The Global Politics of sport     4

deeper level, I argue, in fairly close resemblance to Ken Foster’s account of a challenge 
from an American model of regulation, American ways are setting a radical agenda for 
global sport. 

These issues will be at the heart of the politics of sport for the foreseeable future and 

perhaps for the twenty-first century. They make it a fascinating subject. 

Sport, prestige and international relations  

2 

Lincoln Allison and Terry Monnington 

In  an  essay  written  in  the  mid-1980s,  Trevor  Taylor  concluded  that,  ‘…international 
relations  scholars  show  little  sign  of  seriously  considering  the  place  of  sport  in  global 
human affairs’ and prescribed that ‘…international relations should take more account of 
sport…’.1  We  might  have  expected  some  change  in  the  period  since  then,  not  least 
because the academic study of sport has established itself in such fields as politics and 
law  and  has  made  further  advances  in  sociology  and  social  history.  The  ‘myth  of 
autonomy’, which suggested that sport should and did have little effect on other human 
activities, has been largely undermined; indeed we would argue that in some cases there 
has been an overreaction against it. Modern sport is increasingly and perhaps essentially 
international  and  has  had  an  international  dimension  almost  from  the  outset.  It  has 
developed highly autonomous international organisations, most notably the International 
Olympic Committee and FIFA, the international (association) football federation. Sport is 
unusually  free  from  constraints  on  the  development  of  global  markets  in  images  and 
labour. Sport is an important part of the images of nations and states and of the process of 
socialisation of young people into global society: Lothar Matthaus, Michael Schumacher 
and Bernhard Langer have been more importantly formative of young people’s images of 
Germany in the last generation than have Fichte, Hegel and Bismarck. 

Yet the sporting dimension of international relations still often plays almost no part in 
education  in  the  subject.  We  might  expect  to  find  no  mention  of  sport  in  a  collection 
called  Classics  of  International  Relations2  but  it  does  seem  strange  to  find  it  entirely 
absent  from  recent  monographs,  textbooks  like  Michael  Nicholson’s  International 
Relations3 and William Nester’s International Relations.4 An honourable exception might 
be  Joshua  Goldstein’s  International  Relations,  which  manages  two  references  to 
international  sporting  organisation  in  over  six  hundred  pages.5  It  is  not  as  if  sporting 
relations  are  part  of  some  new  study  of  ‘globalisation’,  of  international  organisations 
separate from the state and a global ‘civil society’ which fits oddly with the traditional 
study of relations between states. They are, but it is also the case that states have used 
sport in a variety of ways in their foreign relations. As a preliminary categorisation we 
can note that states have used sport in two principal ways: to sell themselves and enhance 
their image and to penalise international behaviour of which they disapprove. Even at this 
preliminary stage it must be remarked that each of these categories divides further into 
two.  The  ‘image  enhancement’  effect  can  be  a  question  of  success  or  merely  of 
acceptance. A Soviet academic account of Soviet sports policy insisted that ‘each new 
victory  is  a  victory  for  the  Soviet  form  of  society  and  the  socialist  sports  system.  It 
provides irrefutable proof of the superiority of socialist culture over the decaying culture 
of the capitalist states’.6 In this case the success of the policy was entirely dependent on 
success on the field of play; we shall be suggesting some doubts about the efficiency of 

The Global Politics of sport     6

this form of policy and even whether it was what it purported to be as a policy. But many 
states  have  looked  to  sport  merely  to  symbolise  their  acceptance  in  the  international 
community. In the strict diplomatic sense this has been an issue most notably in divided 
countries  such  as  Korea,  China,  Germany  and  Ireland.  It  must  be  remembered  that  in 
1969  only  thirteen  states  recognised  East  Germany  and  in  the  Olympics  of  2000 
Taiwanese  atbletes  paraded  under  the  banner  of  ‘Chinese  Republic—Taipei’,  an 
appellation  which  might  be  thought  to  suggest  that  Taiwan  was  ultimately  a  ‘special 
region’ of China, like Hong Kong. But even some established nations whose existence is 
not in doubt look to sport to express their status. It has been widely argued that China’s 
enthusiasm  for  the  Olympics  is  principally  motivated  by  a  desire  to  secure  and 
demonstrate its acceptance as a mature state in the international system.7 This desire must 
be seen in the context of China’s fragile self-image as an ancient culture whose proper 
status is not fully acknowledged by the established (Western) powers.8 

The politics of international sport has been more overtly coercive where states have 
instituted sporting boycotts as sanctions against the behaviour of other states of which 
they  disapprove.  The  largest  of  these  have  been  the  US-led  boycott  of  the  Moscow 
Olympics  in  1980,  the  Communist  reciprocation  four  years  later  and  the  series  of 
boycotts primarily by African and Commonwealth countries of the South African regime 
in the quarter century before it collapsed. Of these, the South African boycott was easily 
the most important and is generally attributed with a direct effect in bringing down the 
apartheid regime.9 It included a number of secondary boycotts of countries which had 
allowed  sporting  contacts  with  South  Africa,  of  which  the  most  prominent  was  New 
Zealand. But there have been other, lesser boycotts and until it was overthrown in 2001–
02  a  variety  of  global  sporting  organisations  were  boycotting  the  taliban  regime  in 
Afghanistan. 

It has often been remarked that sporting boycotts appealed to governments as strategic 
low-cost alternatives to other political methods. Trade sanctions against South Africa by 
Britain,  for  example,  would  have  imposed  high  costs  on  some  British  workers  and 
capitalists, whereas sporting contacts with South Africa proved largely substitutable. This 
remark  applies  also  to  the  secondary  and  weaker  sense  in  which  governments  seek  to 
apply sanctions through sport, by their influence on the allocation of games. For example, 
a  British  parliamentary  committee  in  2000  recommended  that  the  British  government 
oppose the allocation of the Olympic Games in Beijing in 2008.10 The rationale was that 
the Chinese economy was becoming too important for a serious trade embargo and that 
the  ‘New’  Labour  government’s  stated  aspiration  to  pursue  a  ‘moral’  foreign  policy 
would  have  to  be  pursued  by  other  means  in  the  case  of  a  state  which  had  become 
(especially in relation to its policy in Tibet) one of the major violators of Western human 
rights doctrines. 

In short, sport seems to claim some attention even according to a traditional definition 
of international relations. That it should be so thoroughly ignored does seem to require 
further explanation and the most obvious hypothesis is that it does not have to fit into the 
established  paradigms  and  debates  of  the  discipline.  These  have  been  couched  to  a 
considerable  degree  as  a  contest  between  ‘realists’  and  ‘idealists’  with  (of  course)  a 
number of interpretations and revisions of each approach. A ‘classic’ version of realism, 
as put by Hans Morgentahu in 1960 has it that: 

Sport, prestige and international relations     7

International Politics, like all politics, is a struggle for power. Whatever 
the ultimate aims of international politics, power is always the immediate 
aim… When we speak of power, we mean man’s control over the minds 
and actions of other men.11 

Correspondingly,  idealism  suggests  that  there  is  at  least  a  dimension  of  international 
relations which consists of genuine attempts to create or maintain an international order 
based on shared values. The degree to which idealism or realism is the assumption of a 
foreign policy can be a political issue in itself. In the late 1870s and early 1880s the clear 
difference between Benjamin Disraeli as Conservative leader and his Liberal opponent 
W.E.Gladstone on foreign policy was that Disraeli thought that British policy should be 
based unequivocally on British interests whereas Gladstone thought it should be based on 
the aspiration to a universal, Christian morality of international affairs. Turkey appeared 
as a natural ally of the United Kingdom from a Disraelian perspective, but as a morally 
errant despotism in Gladstone’s eyes. There are shades of this dispute in the differences 
of  emphasis  (at  least)  between  Democrats  and  Republicans  since  the  end  of  the  Cold 
War. 

In order to demonstrate how the realist-idealist dichotomy might unduly marginalise 
sport, it is useful to consider an example. There was a vigorous contest, resolved in 1993, 
as  to  which  city  should  hold  the  ‘millennial’  Olympic  Games  in  the  year  2000.  The 
endgame involved Sydney and Beijing with Sydney being awarded the games despite the 
clear  commitment  of  the  President  of  the  International  Olympic  Committee,  Juan 
Samaranch, to the Chinese cause. The whole issue presented an interesting reversal of 
fortunes for the Olympic movement insofar as the games held less than a decade earlier, 
in 1984, which were ultimately held in Los Angeles, had at one time been threatened by 
cancellation because of the unwillingness of any suitable city to hold them. The decision 
was influenced by both China’s suppression of democracy, especially the brutal response 
to a student demonstration in Tiananmen Square in 1989, and its reputation as a haven for 
sports coaches who used drugs. The result of the decision was particularly offensive to 
the Chinese: here, after all, was a country which is small in population and peripheral in 
world politics being awarded its second games (the first being Melbourne in 1956) before 
the world’s most populous country bad even hosted the games once. 

What did Australia get out of hosting the games? Sydney 2000 was considered a great 
success: the atmosphere and organisation were adjudged by the great majority of those 
who could make the comparison to be clearly superior to those in Atlanta in 1996. This 
image was enhanced by the success of the Paralympics in Sydney shortly afterwards and 
the  comparison  between  the  genuine  enthusiasm  for  this  event  in  Australia  with  the 
tokenism  and  lack  of  interest  in  Atlanta  again  went  Australia’s  way.  A  sense  of  what 
Australians thought they had gained from Sydney 2000 can be judged form the comments 
of  Peter  Fitzsimmons,  Australian  sportswriter  and  former  rugby  international,  on  the 
aftermath of the games. 

And did I mention already that Sydney has never seen the like, never done 
it better, never been so exuberant and I mean never? Never mind that the 
Olympic  flame  has  been  doused—the  city  remains  agog  with  how  well 
everything  went,  the  reception  it  seems  to  have  received  from  an 

The Global Politics of sport     8

international audience and the simply staggering brilliance with which we 
pulled the whole thing off!…don’t think this is just me raving on. One of 
the  most  influential  sports  writers  in  the  world,  Rick  Reilly  of  Sports 
Illustrated, devoted an entire column last week to mounting the argument 
that Sydney should keep the games for perpetuity; that it ‘was the most 
beautiful city in the world’ and made ‘Paris look like Lubbock, Texas’. 
He  also  raved  about  the  hospitality,  how  efficiently  everything  worked, 
the sheer Aussie panache and everything else Down-Under delicious he 
could think of.12 

Even allowing for a certain (self-confessed) over-writing, we must surely concede that 
the games allowed the ‘happy country’ to be seen as it wanted to be seen by the rest of 
the  world  and  that  the  vast  majority  of  Australians  would  share  some  of  Peter 
Fitzsimmons’ pleasure and enhanced self-esteem as a result of them. The success would 
also  prove  beneficial  in  terms  of  tourism  and  investment  (though  the  figures  remain 
highly  contested)  and  at  least  marginally  in  terms  of  the  status  and  opportunities  for 
individual Australians. Getting the Olympics and holding them successfully was good for 
Australian individuals, Australian society and the Australian nation and the benefits in 
these  terms  clearly  outweighed  the  damage  done  by  Australia’s  immediately  previous 
appearance on the world stage as a society with something of an identity problem, deeply 
divided on the fundamental question of monarchy or republic. 

At the same time it would be absurd to assess these benefits primarily in terms of the 
enhanced power to the Australian state in its important relations with Indonesia and the 
United States, just as it would be risible to think that China’s achievement of third place 
in the medals table at the games in any way strengthened the hand of the Chinese state in 
its negotiations with the World Trade Organisation. We must surely allow that there can 
be  benefits  in  status  or  prestige  which  are  distinct  from  power.  If  the  distinction  is 
allowed it would also follow that in the absence of ‘great games’ like imperialism and the 
Cold  War,  the  importance  of  prestige  would  increase  at  the  expense  of  power.  A  less 
state-oriented international society might contain many states and regions whose interest 
lay primarily in their brand image rather than in any sense of ‘power’ or ‘control’ they 
might seek to exercise over the rest of the world. A Welsh person, whose country lies 
within the United Kingdom and the European Union (as well as being part of the state-
like  England  and  Wales)  can  coherently  and  patriotically  welcome  enhanced  Welsh 
prestige  as  a  result  of  the  success  in  the  rugby  field  or  in  the  Commonwealth  Games 
while  being  entirely  opposed  even  to  the  existence  of  Wales  as  a  player  on  the 
international stage. 

There  are  at  least  two  ways  in  which  a  defence  can  be  mounted  for  the  sort  of 

‘realism’ put forward by Morgenthau. He allows 

First,  not  every  action  that  a  nation  performs  with  respect  to  another 
nation is of a political nature. Second, not all nations are at all times to the 
same extent involved in international politics…,13 

In this light, realism is not so much false as arbitrary, misleading and increasingly trivial, 
suggesting an analogy with the traditional ethical thesis that all human beings are selfish. 

Sport, prestige and international relations     9

It is apparent that ‘politics’ in this sense is narrower than it might usefully be and that 
non-politics  is  becoming  more  and  more  important.  The  other  possible  salvation  is  to 
insist that any benefits can be construed as ‘power’ (since the latter includes the general 
category  of  ‘influence-over  minds’):14  if  people  like  or  respect  Australia,  then  that 
country  has  power  over  them.  In  this  case  the  theory  is  simply  tautologous  and 
uninteresting,  incapable, inter  alia,  of  allowing  for  shifts  in  the  nature  of international 
politics. 

Let us assume, therefore, that prestige can exist separately from power and that states 
and other agents can seek it on behalf of nations and civil societies. Sport is a natural 
source of prestige. A number of questions follow: what kind of prestige can be achieved? 
Which  means  are  most  effective?  How  does  international  prestige  relate  to  the  other, 
domestic, objectives which sports policy may have? It is to these questions that we now 
turn. 

An ‘age of goodwill’ and an ‘age of prestige’ 

Before  1939,  governments  regarded  the  role  of  sport  in  international  relations,  if  they 
regarded  it  at  all,  as  being  primarily  a  source  of  goodwill.  To  different  degrees  they 
accepted the orthodox accounts of sport’s own spokesman, such as Pierre de Coubertin, 
that sporting encounters naturally engendered friendship and goodwill between nations. 
Peter  Beck’s  account  of  relations  between  the  Foreign  Office  and  the  Football 
Association  suggests  that  the  former  saw  poten-tial  in  the  latter  as  low-level,  populist 
ambassadors  for  the  country.15  A  notorious  image  remains  of  the  footballer-as-
ambassador: it is of the England team raising their arms in Nazi salute in Berlin in 1938 
before the game against Germany. At the same time, it was obvious that sport did not 
always engender goodwill as the Colonial Offtce and even the Cabinet found when they 
had to pick up some of the pieces of the ‘Bodyline’ controversy in 1933, a major problem 
in Anglo-Australian relations which arose out of tactics on the cricket field. 

It may be that the Foreign Office saw sport as only a minor and low cost opportunity 
to  foster  an  atmosphere  conducive  to  diplomacy.  But  there  were  those  who  put  much 
more faith in sport. Phillip Noel-Baker, for example, saw sport as the principal means of 
developing international understanding and furthering the cause of peace. In a long life he 
was twice an Olympic silver medallist, a member of the British Olympic Committee and 
the International Olympic committee, a Labour M.P. and a campaigner, inter alia, for the 
League of Nations and the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament.16 He brushed aside the 
bitter Anglo-American rivalries which had been part of his own Olympic experience as 
creations of the press, insisting that the atmosphere ‘…at the Olympic Games has now 
become one of friendship between the teams, one of personal acquaintance among the 
runners. Everyone who was in Antwerp will readily accept that view: and everyone who 
has seen the Games from the beginning will know that every year it becomes increasingly 
true’.17  It  was  the  kind  of  naïve  optimism  about  sport  and  peace,  which  Noel-Baker 
represented, which was George Orwell’s target in his essay The Sporting Spirit. Orwell’s 
comments  are  widely  quoted  (especially  the  description  of  international  sport  as  ‘war 
minus  the  shooting’)  and  frequently  misunderstood,  but  they  do  include  the  bald 
assertions  that  ‘sport is an unfailing cause of ill-will’18 and that ‘international sporting 

The Global Politics of sport     10

contests invariably lead to orgies of hatred.’19 They are the natural response of the natural 
polemicist  to  the  kind  of  pious  optimism  expressed  by  the  likes  of  Noel-Baker  and 
espoused from time to time by the Foreign Office. 

But for all the intensity of rivalries in international sport before 1939 there is very little 
evidence of governments seeking prestige by winning sporting contests. The world’s first 
minister  of  sport  was  Jean  Borotra,  appointed  by  Marshall  Petain  under  the  Vichy 
government in 1940. The appointment undoubtedly arose out of a concern with French 
decadence and (lack of) virility, but it was in a context in which international competition 
was  scarcely  possible.20  It  is  only  with  the  Soviet  Union’s  change  of  heart  about 
international  sport  at  the  end  of  the  Second  World  War  that  we  have  a  significant 
example  of  a  government  devoting  resources  to  achieving  prestige  through  victory  in 
competition. Of course, such a policy would have been extremely difficult to conceive in 
the  context  of  major  sporting  nations  before  1939.  Sport  was  considered  to  be  an 
‘autonomous’ activity, part of a civil society independent of both the market and the state. 
In order to have a sports policy the British government, say, would have had to either 
break a fundamental rule of statecraft by putting on the political agenda something which 
it could not control and to have introduced a new form of state intervention which the 
(elite) sporting norms of the time would have declared distasteful. 

To  a  greater  or  lesser  extent  most  governments  have  imitated  the  Soviet  Union  in 
trying  to  increase  national  sporting  success.  Paradoxically,  the  British  government 
imitated it more thoroughly in the 1990s, after the demise of the Soviet Union itself, than 
it  did  before.  During  this  period  the  Major  government  shifted  sports  policy  towards 
‘excellence’ and allocated some of the vast sums made available by the introduction of a 
National Lottery in 1994 to the financial support of elite competitors in non-commercial 
sports.21 But in the thirty years after 1945 most governments developed programmes of 
support  of  sporting  achievement  complete  with  ministers,  funding  and  appropriate 
agencies. One could argue that this might well have happened even if there had been no 
USSR  to  serve  as  model,  exemplar  and  competitor.  Compared  with  previous  and 
subsequent  periods  this  was  a  time  of  etatisme  when  people  looked  to  states  to  solve 
almost  every  kind  of  problem.  The  rapidly  growing  technologies  of  air  travel  and 
television  created,  respectively,  many  more  opportunities  for  international  competition 
and a much higher profile for such competition. In many cases popular and press pressure 
would have been on government to create programmes for sporting success. In the British 
case those pressures arose in the period 1948–53, during which the English cricket team 
were soundly beaten by Australia (in 1948) and the football team was beaten by the USA 
in their first venture into the World Cup in 1950 and lost their unbeaten home record to 
Hungary 3–6 in 1953. 

It is important to note that though there was a shift in government attitude towards 
sport from a belief in its value for establishing international goodwill to a concern for 
prestige  through  success,  the  rhetoric  and  the  practices  of  goodwill  continued.  The 
expression ‘ping-pong diplomacy’, after all, refers to the Nixon government’s overtures 
to the People’s Republic of China in the early 1970s and involved the choice of the sport 
at which the USA was least likely to win. The Foreign Office continued to look to the FA 
to  provide  teams  to  visit  targeted  countries,  though  as  the  pressures  of  international 
competition increased this was less and less likely to be a full England team and more 
likely  to  be  an  ‘FA  XI’  or  an  individual  club  side:  at  the  time  of  writing  the  Foreign 

Sport, prestige and international relations     11

Office is negotiating with at least one Premiership side to play in a country with whom 
relations have been fraught. The Soviet Union itself, away from the competitive glare of 
the  Olympics,  sent  teams  and  coaches  abroad,  particularly  to  Africa,  in  a  spirit  of 
goodwill,  sometimes  even  with  instructions  to  lose.  The  rhetoric  of  goodwill,  perhaps 
even an abstract faith in goodwill, survived Orwell’s scepticism intact. Jaoa Havelange, 
President  of  FIFA  from  1974  to  1998,  who  presided  over an era of rapidly increasing 
competitiveness and commercialism in world football, was nevertheless able to assert, on 
the occasion of the organisation’s ninetieth birthday in 1994, ‘whenever people can find 
an  outlet  for  communication  and—especially—play,  you  will  always  find  peace  and 
harmony’.22 Even so, it is clear that from 1945, despite the survival of these practices and 
this kind of faith, the new and predominant drive of governments’ interest in sport was a 
concern for prestige which could only be attained through success. 

A  political  analysis  of  Soviet  sports  policy  is  bound  to  suggest  considerable  doubt 
about whether the official justification for it was the real drive behind it. It was overtly an 
expression of a Marxist philosophy about the development of mind and body (a kind of 
Russian  version  of  the  nineteenth-century  English  public  school  idea  of  mens  sana  in 
corpore sano). The drive to win international competitions (and the Soviet Union headed 
the medals table in all but one of the Olympic Games in which it competed) was thus a 
kind  of  ‘hearts  and  minds’  campaign  to  convince  people  outside  its  boundaries  of  the 
virtues  of  the  Soviet  ‘way  of  life’.  The  other  dimension  of  the  policy  was  that  it 
functioned  (like  the  space  programme)  as  a  mighty  demonstration  of  the  power  and 
success of the ‘Soviet Motherland’ within its own borders, especially in the fourteen non-
Russian constituent republics which Russians called the ‘near-abroad’. 

This  emphasis  fits  much  better  with  what  it  is  now  orthodox  to  believe  about  the 
Soviet  Union.  The  party  leadership  did  not,  for  example,  harbour  aspirations  to  world 
domination  but  were  primarily  concerned  with  maintaining  full  control  over their own 
territory  and  existing  sphere  of  influence.  The  idea  of  a  popular  sporting  way  of  life 
involving  exercise  and  athletics  decayed  rapidly  as  the  Union  stagnated  leaving  the 
country with a population which was less healthy and less active in sport than in almost 
any Western country while the elite programme remained successful to the end. 

There is a danger of a fallacy of a collective will in generalising about the reasons or 
motives  behind  a  policy.  A  wide  range  of  actors  and  institutions  were  involved  in  the 
policy  over  a  period  of  nearly  half  a  century.  Many  of  them  may  have  believed  the 
official  ideology,  and  it  can  only  be  a  broad,  intuitive  judgement  that  the  reality  was 
about national identification rather than about Marxist-Leninist philosophy. However, we 
can make slightly firmer statements about the success and the failures of the policy. It 
clearly did not enhance Soviet international prestige in anything like a proportion to the 
statistical Olympic success. On the other hand, Georgians have told us that though they 
regret it now, the sight of three Soviet athletes, complete with flag and anthem, standing 
triumphantly on the Olympic podium did make them feel more proud to be associated 
with the ‘Soviet Motherland’.23 It is very important to note, in this context, that though 
the Soviet Union allowed a variety of international cultural representation to take place at 
the level of the individual republics (such as the world tours of the Georgian State Dance 
Troupe),  and  even  had  four  members  of  the  United  Nations,  it  was  insisted  that 
international sporting representation was at the ‘Motherland’ level. 

The Global Politics of sport     12

The hypothesis about Soviet history is that, despite its overt rationale, sports policy is 
to be understood primarily as something designed for internal consumption. An extension 
of this hypothesis would be to suggest that all modern governments see the benefits of 
sports policy primarily in domestic terms. It is not at all convincing to suggest that the 
successes of New Zealand Rugby Union teams or Brazilian football teams in any way 
strengthen the hands of the respective states in international relations. But it does seem 
convincingly  demonstrated  that  those  successes  enhance  the  general  image  of  those 
societies abroad and contribute to a sense of national self-esteem, a ‘feelgood factor’ at 
home. Governments’ interest is surely in fostering that self-esteem and being seen to be 
associated with or to contribute to that success. It is therefore to be understood primarily 
in terms of its domestic pay-off, though in many Western countries it has been a response 
to pressures from the electorate whereas in the Soviet Union it was an elite initiative. We 
now propose to explore these themes by examining the development of policy in Britain 
and in Africa. 

From public school to public interest: the evolution of British concern 

for prestige 

The  long  established  traditions  in  British  sport  of  pluralism  and  voluntarism  created  a 
barrier to state intervention in sport, which in the second half of the twentieth century 
came to be seen as a justification of the need for intervention. The numerous governing 
bodies  of  sport  in  Britain  jealously  guarded  their  autonomy  and  maintained  the 
assumption  that  the  state  should  not  venture  out  on  to  the  playing  fields  of  sport.  For 
much of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries successive British governments were also 
largely  indifferent  to  the  needs  of  sport  and  to  its  potential  social  and  political  value. 
Action in this sector was only deemed appropriate when crises relating to public health or 
public  order  warranted  legislative  action.  In  these  contexts  sport  and  leisure  were  to 
benefit  occasionally  as  a  consequence  of  their  presumed  instrumental  value.  The 
provision  of  open  space  in  public  parks,  the  eventual  location  for  sports  pitches,  was 
justified on the basis of the need for public access to fresh air in towns which had become 
grossly overcrowded and polluted by industrial effluent. 

Such attitudes to state involvement in sport were to guide government action well into 
the  twentieth  century.  Demands  for  government  support  for  sport  were  voiced,  on 
occasion, to facilitate an improvement in the physical fitness of the working classes in 
preparation  for  work  or  war.  In  the  late  nineteenth  century,  defeat  in  sport  of  our 
supposedly  national  teams  engendered  only  limited  serious  national  concern.  Even  the 
defeat of the England cricket team by the Australians in 1882 that prompted the famous 
obituary notice in the Sporting Times only had significance for the dedicated cricketing 
community.  However,  with  the  restoration  of  the  Olympic  Games,  the  concern  of  the 
nation was aroused and more particularly our status in the world community was thought 
to be compromised if our athletes proved to be unsuccessful. The comments of the author 
F.A.M.Webster, following the failures at the Stockholm Games in 1912, were considered 
to reflect the view of many British people. He referred to ‘…a feeling of shame that we 
should  fall  so  low  as  to  be  beaten  by  the  even  lesser  European  nations,  who  for 
generations past have been our pupils in all sporting pastimes’.24 A further comment of 

Sport, prestige and international relations     13

Webster’s  apropos  the  1912  games,  reinforced  his  views  on  the  damage  to  Britain’s 
prestige that defeat on the international sporting stage could now bring: ‘For remember 
we are a nation holding vaster possessions overseas than any other country ever has held, 
and once let us lose dominion and we sink to the level of the least European peoples’.25 

Webster was one of a number of individuals who expressed concern and frustration 
about British sporting performances, but for the most part, the attitude of the government 
and politicians was characterised by indifference. There were, inevitably, however, a few 
individual  politicians  who  supported  the  view  that  sporting  success  could  deliver 
credibility and prestige to a nation. In 1927, 1929 and 1931 the Air Ministry successfully 
supported  the  entry  of  British  seaplanes  in  the  Schneider  Trophy  Air  Race.  These 
successes  produced  an  ‘immediate  fillip  to  British  prestige  and  a  long-term  benefit  to 
aircraft design and even victory in the Battle of Britain’.26 

National concern over sporting failure was further expressed following the failure of 
the British team at the Helsinki Games in 1952 when our gold medal tally was one. The 
failure and the other high profile defeats in the period leading up to 1952 in international 
sport prompted a group of physical educationalists at the University of Birmingham to 
publish their report entitled Britain in the World of Sport. The argument was that British 
sporting  failure  could  only  be  reversed  through  some  form  of  state  intervention  and 
financial  support.  Such  a  move  was  heresy  to  the  traditionalists  in  British  sport,  but 
support  for  the  principle  of  intervention  grew  steadily.  Even  the  highly  influential 
Wolfenden  Report,  commissioned  by  the  Central  Council  of  Physical  Recreation  and 
published  in  1960,  which  in  many  respects  provided  the  ‘blue-print’  for  future  British 
sports’ development, was dismissive of certain forms of direct government involvement 
in sport.27 The Report even questioned the real value of success in international sport and 
we can note the irony that a body which is acknowledged to have played an important 
historical role in the development of British government interest in the prestige value of 
sport should have expressed such clear scepticism about such value: 

To  talk,  as  some  do,  as  if  sport  could  be  properly  used  as  a  major 
instrument  of  international  diplomacy,  or  as  if  a  nation’s  authority  and 
influence in world affairs at large are to be measured by its successes and 
failures in the Olympic Games, seem to us to reveal a serious lack of a 
sense of proportion.28 

Despite  the  concern  of  many  of  the  Wolfenden  Committee,  they  were  well  aware that 
certain  governments  abroad  were  already  more  than  willing  to  exploit  international 
sporting success: 

There  are  many  more  nations  taking  part  (in  sport);  increased  and 
improved  means  of  communication  enable  a  much  wider  public  to  be 
emotionally  involved  in  the  result;  in countries  with  a  highly integrated 
political  structure,  sport  and  its  prestige  values  can  be  consciously 
exploited.  We  may  deplore this feature of international competition; we 
cannot ignore it.29 

The Global Politics of sport     14

Nevertheless,  the  re-dected  Conservative  government  in  1959  did  make  some 
concessions to international sport during its term of office, including offering a modest 
grant of £20,000 towards the 1964 Olympics appeal fund. But Mr Denis Howell, later 
Minister  for  Sport  in  the  1964  Labour  government,  berated  the  government  for 
underrating  ‘…the  importance  attached  to  international  prestige  gained  at  the  Olympic 
meetings’.30 Of particular note was his suggestion that this prestige was important to the 
British public; he overtly acknowledged the value of international sporting success for 
domestic consumption. The 1964 Olympics was a success for British athletes and there 
followed a vigorous press campaign to force government to offer essential support. Mr 
Christopher Brasher of the Observer commented about the athletes that ‘…the money can 
only come from the government, and a cheer went up from most of the team when the 
news came through that Labour had won the Election’.31 

When the Labour government entered office in ’64 there was initial disappointment 
with  the  level  of  public  funding  in  support  of  sport,  including  a  real  fall  in  public 
expenditure on sports facilities. But, through the efforts of the new Minister for Sport, 
Denis Howell, there was an increase in financial support for international sport, which 
generated much favourable comment towards the government. It was inevitable that the 
Soviet  Union’s  use  of  sport  as  propaganda  was  seen  to  be  paying  substantial  political 
dividends  both  at  home  and  abroad.  Politicians  around  the  world  could  not  fail  to  be 
impressed.  The  victory  of  the  English  football  team  at  Wembley  stadium  in  1966 
provided further evidence to the government of the value of international sporting success 
and was seen to ‘…provide one euphoric moment when austerity measures announced on 
the twentieth of July could be forgotten in a haze of national pride’.32 

In 1968 Goodhart and Chattaway offered a prophetic comment when they suggested 

that 

Under the stimulus of popular concern, governments are certain to spend 
more  heavily  upon  the  development  of  successful  sports  teams,  and  to 
intervene  in  these  affairs  more  regularly.  In  Western  democracies, 
governments  may  have  been  slower  to  look  at  sport  in  this  light,  but 
attitudes are changing with the growing belief that a country’s prestige is 
involved on the sports field.33 

State intervention in sport, once legitimised in the 1960s, was rationalised primarily to 
reinforce  state  hegemony  in  a  period  where  the  working  class,  especially  the  young 
working class, were deemed to be a threat to social order; policy favoured access to more 
sport  and  range  of  leisure  opportunities.  Public  funding  of  new  sports  facilities  was 
primarily  through  the  locally  determined  actions  of  local  governments.  The  advisory 
Sports Council, established in 1965 and chaired by Denis Howell, provided advice and 
encouragement for sports development for masses. Elite sport was not as yet prioritised 
by this body or government as no real political agenda for sport was identified nor was 
their recognition of the value of potential of sport in the generation of national prestige. 
The situation was to change, however, from 1975 when the incoming Labour government 
decided to accord elite sport equal priority with the solving of social problems through 
sport.  ‘Success  in  international  competition  has  an  important  part  to  play  in  national 
morale’.34  To  this  end,  government  financial  aid  for  elite  sport  rose  significantly, 

Sport, prestige and international relations     15

supported  by  a  ‘Centres  of  Excellence’  policy,  which  was  overtly  designed  to  foster 
national morale and prestige. By the 1980s, the government was increasingly usurping 
the de jure independent role of the Executive Sports Council, created by Royal Charter in 
1971, as it increasingly prescribed an agenda for British sport. On occasions Margaret 
Thatcher marginalised the Minister for Sport, as issues relating to sport were perceived to 
be  too  serious  to  be  handled  by  a  junior  minister.  Likewise,  the  advice  of  the  Sports 
Council  was  also  regularly  ignored  or  not  sought  by  the  Prime  Minister.  She  was 
motivated,  not  by  any  love  of  sport,  quite  the  contrary,  but  by  the  perception  that 
international  status  and  prestige  were  at  stake,  particularly  in  the  issues  raised  by  the 
Moscow Olympics.35 

Thus,  despite  Thatcher’s  indifference  to  sport,  it  was  indisputably  on  the  political 
agenda, guided by a corporate plan identified by the government’s own Sports Council; it 
was often considered too important to be left to the sports administrators alone. Sport for 
All was to be the responsibility of the local authorities, while alleviating social unrest in 
the inner cities and the promotion of elite sport were to be the main focus of attention of 
central  government,  with  policy  initiatives  implemented  through  the  Sports  Council. 
However,  as  these  latter  issues  were  perceived  by  government  to  be  increasingly 
important, the supposedly independent Sports Council was required to mirror the values 
of  sport  that  the  government  articulated.  The  Council  was  also  required  to  initiate 
programmes in support of these values. More and more the Sports Council was becoming 
‘…the Government’s executive arm for developing and promoting sport’.36 

The election of John Major as leader of the Conservative party in 1990 heralded an 
increased profile of sport on the government’s agenda. Publication of the government’s 
sports policy document, Sport: Raising the Game, focused much of its attention on the 
creation  of  an  infrastructure  to  support  elite  sport.  The  expressed  view  of  Major,  that 
reflected an importance that he attached to sport, which was widely accepted as sincere, 
saw sport as 

…a  binding  force  between  generations  and  across  borders.  But,  by  a 
miraculous  paradox,  it  is  at  the  same  time  one  of  the  defining 
characteristics of nationhood and of local pride.37 

His support for construction of a state-finded institute of sport confirmed the significance 
he  attached  to  international  sporting  success.  The  establishment  of  the  Department  of 
National  Heritage,  with  a  minister  of cabinet rank, and sport being identified as a key 
area of responsibility in this Department, further raised the profile of sport. Creation of 
the National Lottery in 1994–5 and its clear predilection to support elite performers and 
the construction of national facilities reinforced the status afforded top-level sport in the 
priorities of the government. 

Conservative  party  publicists  were  constantly  eager  to  exploit  Major’s  professed 
commitment  to  sport  by  encouraging  identification  with  the  efforts  of  senior  sports 
administrators to attract prestigious sporting events to this country. Most notable was his 
close identification with the bid to host the 2000 Olympic Games in Manchester. In July 
1996, John Major wrote an article in the Daily Telegraph commenting on the three weeks 
of Euro ’96. His conclusion was that ‘…football brought the country together in a way 
only sport can. The performance of the side lifted the spirits of the nation’.38 The actions 

The Global Politics of sport     16

of  the  Sports  Council  and  those  of  the  remaining  home  nations  continued  to  support 
government strategy ever more closely. The eventual division of the Sports Council in 
1995  into  the  English  Sports  Council  (now  referred  to  as  Sport  England)  and  the  UK 
Sports Council (now UK Sport) reflected the need for a separate organisation, the latter to 
direct elite sport, the element so crucial to government in the creation of national prestige 
through  sport.39  A  change  in  government  in  1997  has  not  derailed  movement  towards 
ever-greater government involvement and control of British sport. Tony Blair does not 
share  Major’s  passion  for  sport,  but  there  is  no  evidence  of  a  downgrading  of  sport’s 
importance on the political agenda of government. 

During  the  latter  half  of  the  twentieth  century,  British  sport  has  experienced  a 
significant,  but  not  total,  metamorphosis.  Much  of  this  experience  has  been  led  by 
government as increasingly, as the Birmingham University report prophesised, ‘he who 
pays the piper calls the tune’. Government investment in support of sport in Britain has 
not come without strings. Political agendas for sport in Britain, set by governments, have 
emerged  and  evolved,  not  always  in  a  coherent  and  carefully  considered  manner.  The 
politicisation  process  has  been  gradual  but  relentless  and  the  consequences  dramatic. 
British  sports’  administration,  with  its  multitude  of  governing  bodies,  remains 
superficially intact. But for the majority, state-funding support has brought a significant 
degree of dependency to a corporate plan led by Sport England but ultimately prescribed 
by  government.  Even  the  relatively  affluent  and  seemingly  independent  government 
bodies have been subjected to increased government influence and direction. 

The machinery of government that has emerged to support British sport has brought 
many  benefits.  But  the  superficially  hidden  political  agendas  that  are  increasingly 
directing sport to facilitate social policy implementation and to generate prestige can be 
challenge.  Indications  are  that  very  substantial  additional  funding  is  likely  to  be  made 
available to sport through a number of major government departments and ministries in 
pursuance  of  educational,  public  health  and  crime  prevention  agendas.  Under  such 
circumstances, many of the traditional values and requirements of sport could be lost.  

Sport as a last resort: the rise and fall of the African dividend from 

sport 

Sport  was  widely  accepted  as  one  of  the  few  locations  for  super  power  competition 
during the Cold War years, even if the rhetoric was directed more for consumption of the 
media  than  believed  by  political  leaders  and  their  policy  advisors.  Many  Third  World 
leaders, however, embraced sporting success even more earnestly, not least because they 
had far less opportunity or power to effect political change. Sub-Saharan Africa provides 
many  examples  of  national  leaders  exploiting  sport  and  international  sports  stars  for 
political gain. The weak and precarious nature of many political regimes in this part of 
the world following independence meant internal stability and future economic prospects 
were  almost  invariably  at  crisis  point.  Post-independence  euphoria  soon  passed  and 
existing linguistic, ethnic and tribal divisions that had been evident for generations were 
to  cause  much  tension  and  concern.  The  fight  for  independence  had  often  suppressed 
these divisions, but in most cases they now re-emerged. 

Sport, prestige and international relations     17

Economic exploitation of the African possessions by the colonial powers had left the 
countries with only limited industrial capacity through which to develop new economies. 
Self-interest  among  tribal  groups  seriously  hampered  all  aspects  of  development. 
Economic  prosperity  and  political  stability required  unity  and  common goals, but they 
were  rarely  in  evidence.  The  reality  was  invariably  political  insecurity  and  economic 
stagnation that owed much to the colonial inheritance. The world recession of the 1970s 
and early 1980s compounded already serious situations. African economies took a serious 
downturn  as  demand  for  exports  declined  and  costs  of  imports  escalated.  Natural 
disasters,  including  severe  drought  and  famine,  crippled  already  faltering  economies. 
Social unrest and disaffection were fuelled by a failure to improve the economic fortunes 
of the African peasantry. Unemployment was endemic, while real wages failed to keep 
pace with inflation and what prosperity was accruing to many independent nations was 
being  enjoyed  by  an  increasingly  isolated  elite.  Essential  foreign  aid  was  only 
exacerbating the economic problems, as the African nations had now to service massive 
foreign  debts.  Revolution  and  military  coups  were  regular  consequences  of  public 
frustration.  Successive  governments  across  Sub-Saharan  Africa  flirted  with  every 
conceivable political ideology.40 The progress made by Asian economies from the 1970s 
and by many of the economies of South America from the 1980s has generally eluded 
African  countries.41  In  desperation,  many  African  leaders  have  turned  to  sport  for  a 
lifeline to provide some credibility for their failing regimes. 

To secure authority over sport and the necessary power to permit its use as a political 
tool,  many  African  governments  established  Western  systems  of  sport  and  physical 
education, but often with stricter government control and direction. By the mid-1960s the 
majority of African nations had established government sport offices, either as separate 
ministries  of  sport,  or  as  sections  of  existing  ministries.  Direct  control  was  invariably 
vested in a sports council or commission with extensive powers, including organising and 
financing sport on a national level. In particular, the objective was often to dictate sports’ 
policy,  an  essential  objective  when  considering  the  use  of  sporting  boycotts  in  the 
international  arena.  The  political  role  of  African  sport,  in  particular  its  potential  in 
legitimising both individual regimes and nation-states, as well as its perceived value as a 
cohesive  influence  on  domestic  politics,  is  not  solely  the  prerogative  of  athletics, 
although during the early years of independence this particular sport caught the attention 
of the world media. 

The breakthrough for African athletes came at the Olympic Games in Rome in 1960 
when Abebe Bikila of Ethiopia won the Marathon, followed home by a Moroccan. There 
followed  throughout  the  1960s  and  1970s  a  succession  of  preeminent  African  athletes 
who became household names across the world, following their victories at major athletic 
meetings,  including  the  Olympic  and  Commonwealth  Games.  Kenya  proved  to  be  the 
most prolific producer of middle and long distance track stars, with Kip Keino perhaps 
the  most  famous.42  Their  arrival  on  the  athletics  scene  was  to  herald  an  East  African 
domination  of  distance  running  that  has  been  challenged,  but  rarely  surpassed.  A 
definitive explanation for their success is probably impossible, but certainly the athletes 
had  the  incentive  of  fame  and  material  benefits  were  lavished  on  them.  Keino,  in 
particular,  was  lauded  by  politicians,  including  the  head  of  state,  Jomo  Kenyatta,  and 
regaled with the most prestigious honours. President Kenyatta was sufftciently astute to 
appreciate  that  this  popular  sporting  hero  could  become  a  focal  point  for  the  diverse 

The Global Politics of sport     18

peoples  of  Kenya,  generating  a  feeling  of  nationhood  among  a  society  that  had  long 
suffered from often intense tribal and consequential political divisions. Keino’s victories, 
along  with  those  of  other  Kenyan  athletes,  could  also  be  construed  as  victories  for  an 
emerging and perhaps internationally significant new member of the world community. 
Prestige that could be exploited domestically and internationally could come cheaply, but 
with  apparently  significant  rewards.  The  sporting  infrastructure  that  supported  these 
athletic  victories  was  truly  basic.  A  visit  by  the  author  to  Kenya  in  the  mid-1990s 
confirmed this reality. St Patrick’s Boys’ School and the nearby Singore Girls’ School in 
the Rift Valley, near the small town of Iten, have produced many of the country’s and the 
world’s  finest  athletes.  But  the  facilities  for  sport  available  at  the school are poor; the 
girls’ school relies on a cow pasture to prepare its athletes to compete on the world stage. 
The  boys’  school  has  a  worn-out  grass  volleyball  court  and  a  dangerously  slippery 
tarmacadam tennis court. The athletes train on the nearby track in Iten. 

The  list  of  African  political  leaders  who  have  endeavoured  to  follow  the  lead  of 
Kenyatta,  from  the  1960s  through  to  the  1990s,  in  identifying  with  and  exploiting 
sporting  success  for  political  gain  has  proved  extensive.  The  heads  of  state  in  Ghana, 
Libya, Zambia, Cameroon and Morocco are among many whose political ambitions were 
in part vested in identification with prestigious sporting contests, successful teams and 
sports’ heroes. 

Football,  however,  is  the  most  popular  participant  and  spectator  sport  in  Africa, 
regularly attracting crowds of over one hundred thousand. The mass euphoria the game 
generates  was  confirmed  in  April  1993  as  a  consequence  of  the  death  of  thirty  of 
Zambia’s national squad and associated officials in an air crash near the Gabonese capital 
as the party were travelling to Senegal for a World Cup qualifying match. One hundred 
and fifty thousand mourners joined the funeral cortege at the six-hour burial ceremony, 
outside the National Independence Stadium in Lusaka. 

This sport has, in consequence, been credited with similar political functions to those 
of athletes. Kwame Nkruma, the first President of Ghana, had a vision of a new Africa 
that  had  thrown  off  the  shackles  of  colonialism  and  the  associated  exploitation  and 
subjugation. He saw the continent’s future as a united states of Africa in which sport had 
a role in enhancing the dignity and pride of its peoples and a vital role in moulding and 
mobilising the youth of a nation. President Mobutu of Zaire also recognised early on the 
potential of sporting success for the benefit of political leaders in their search for personal 
and national prestige. The success of Zaire’s national football team in 1974 in qualifying 
for the finals of the World Cup represented a first for Black African football. Mobutu 
endorsed  a  trend,  to  be  mirrored  subsequently  by  many  African  leaders,  of  rewarding 
successful  sportsmen  with  lavish  gifts  and  national  honours.  The  status  afforded  the 
footballers  in  1974  was  considered  to  be  vindication  of  his  Africanisation  policy  and 
systematic  removal  of  symbols  of  Belgian  colonisation  and  suppression  of  African 
traditions. 

The  success  on  the  world  stage  of  African  football  has  been  limited  and  few 
commentators of the game would be willing to suggest that there is much chance of an 
African  nation  winning  the  World  Cup  in  the  future.  Nevertheless,  moderate  African 
success  in  this  tournament  has  been  an  excuse  for  national  celebrations  and  the 
appearance of national leaders to emerge from the shadows to bathe in reflected glory. 

Sport, prestige and international relations     19

Despite  the  reservations  felt,  but  rarely  expressed,  African  sport  clearly  had  some 
considerable  success  during  the  early  post  independence  years.  The  success  was 
extensively used by political leaders to further their own political ambitions as well as the 
wider objectives of developing national integration or nationhood, national identity and 
international recognition. Success in international sport is highly visible and is perceived 
to offer quick returns for relatively minimal financial investment if, as was the case, elite 
sport is the priority. 

Unfortunately,  however,  the  potential  role  of  sport  in  fostering  prestige  for  African 
political leaders and providing other political benefits has not always been long lasting. 
The  concentration  on  developing  an  elite  nucleus  of  athletes  in  an  often  very  narrow 
range of events has brought success and gained a high profile for both the athletes and 
their  country  of  origin.  But  international  recognition  in  this  form  is  invariably  a 
temporary testimony to the strength of a nation. The success of the great Kenyan athletes 
of the late 1960s and early 1970s certainly brought their nation a high profile that was 
fully exploited by her political leaders. Yet subsequent international boycotts through the 
1970s and early 1980s along with the luring away to the USA of many of the outstanding 
Kenyan  athletes  on  university  scholarships  certainly  contributed  to  the  loss  of  Kenyan 
status both in sport as well as in the broader realms of international diplomacy.43 There is 
now  a  discernable  trend  for  African  leaders  to  be  more  careful  about  associating  with 
specific sporting contests to further their political ambitions. 

There are several possible explanations for this development. The important context is 
that  Africa  over  the  last  two  decades  of  the  twentieth  century  was  the  disastrous 
exception in global economic history with an estimated negative growth of around 15 per 
cent, while many Asian economies were doubling and trebling in size. Inevitably sports 
investment  suffered.  But  it  is  also  true  that  the  continued  violence  associated  with 
domestic as well as international sport has often discredited the name of sport and those 
associated with it. Success in sport, by its very nature, cannot be guaranteed even with the 
support of science, both legal and illegal. For politicians to identify too closely with sport 
can have regrettable and sometimes serious consequences. For politicians it can result in 
embarrassment, bring identification with failure, evidence of a lack of leadership skills 
and, at worst, gross incompetence. A visit to Zimbabwe in 1995 for the Sixth All Africa 
Games confirmed the inherent danger of politicians identifying too closely with sports 
stars and sporting spectacles. 

The occasion was the opening ceremony of the Games in the new National Stadium of 
Harare, a stadium funded by the Chinese in recognition of their support for the country’s 
Marxist  leader,  President  Mugabe.  The  games  had  been  established  as  a  pan-African 
event  and  was  regarded  by  many  as  one  more  means  by  which  modern  Africa  could 
express  its  modern  ancestry  and  celebrate  the  individuality  of  its  multifarious  cultural 
traditions,  but  also  its  unity.  The  history  of  the All Africa Games has been beset with 
problems, most notably as a consequence of mismanagement and political exploitation. 
But in 1995 it was planned to be different. 

President  Mugabe  was  eager  to  impress  his  guests  with  the  capacity  of  the 
Zimbabwean people to organise a showpiece Games. His guests included many African 
and  international  leaders  and  senior  representatives  of  the  International  Olympic 
Committee and other supra-national governing bodies of sport. Unfortunately, there were 
not many other spectators in the stadium. The time of the opening ceremony had been 

The Global Politics of sport     20

changed without notice and public transport to the stadium had been commandeered for 
the athletes. The mass of the population of Harare could not reach the stadium, even if 
they could have afforded the entrance charge. The start was delayed by half an hour as 
the torch was caught up in the traffic of Harare. When it did arrive, it had to be constantly 
re-lit  on  its  lap of honour. Disaster followed disaster, culminating in the failure of the 
public address system, thus precluding our listening to the swearing of the Games’ oath, 
the welcome of the President and the playing of the National Anthem. 

For  President  Mugabe  an  opportunity  to  enhance  his  personal  reputation  as  one  of 
Africa’s  senior  politicians  was  lost  through  the  incompetence  of  the  Games’ 
administrators. The opening ceremony was a political embarrassment, a lost opportunity 
to paper over some of the cracks that were already in evidence in the country’s economy 
and  political  system.  The  strength  of  the  South  African  team  and  their  outstanding 
successes  at  the  Games  further  undermined  the  value  to  Mugabe  of  the  Games  as  a 
political stage. 

Yet  despite  these  risks,  during  the  second  half  of  the  twentieth  century,  politicians 
were often eager to identify with sport. But towards the end of the twentieth century sport 
was  changing  its  nature  and  becoming  much  more  overtly  commercial  and  globalised. 
Political attitudes towards sport were also changing as politicians became more astute and 
less willing to risk reputations and status on activity that they were increasingly unable to 
control because of the uncertainty of the outcomes of sporting contests. 

As globalisation proceeds, organisations like the International Olympics Committee, 
FIFA  and  IAAF  are  able  to  wield  power and influence superior to many Third World 
countries and they have the budgets to match. They are major players in the creation of a 
global  sporting  culture,  with  their  own  identifiable  political  economies.  They  are  in 
reality  emerging  and  increasingly  significant  players  in  the  global  economy  alongside 
governments,  multi-national  corporations  and  other  interest  groups  that  have  similarly 
become  active  across  the  globe,  endeavouring  to  spread  their  influence  and  flex  their 
economic muscle.44 

In the context of sport, as the controlling bodies become more powerful, presidents of 
these organisations, along with the management agents of the athletes, have increasingly 
taken elite sport out of control of the politicians, governments and even the competitors 
themselves. The ability of governments to control these international sporting bodies and 
competitors diminishes as they vie with one another to attract sporting spectacles to their 
country. The political and economic power and influence of many African and other third 
world nations are usually significantly inferior to those of the large international sporting 
bodies. The success of the major sporting extravagances such as the Olympic Games is 
regarded by many as attributable to the IOC and its president rather than the host city, 
more a celebration of the supra-national governing body of sport than a nation-state and 
its political leaders. The hosting of such events is becoming increasingly a mere dream of 
most countries rather than a realisable ambition. The cost is well beyond the means of 
most  national  budgets.  For  those  nations  that  continue  to  dream  of  hosting  a  major 
national international sporting tournament, the inevitable need to turn to external funding 
agencies  to  support  a  project  will  once  more,  for  many,  re-kindle  images  of  neo-
colonialism and economic dependency. 

The athletes themselves were once the ambassadors of their nations, but they too are 
often  commodities  in  the  sporting  global  economies.  Many  are  extremely  wealthy, 

Sport, prestige and international relations     21

international  personalities,  even  away  from  the  context  of  sport.  But  they  are, 
nonetheless, subjected to market forces that require them to respond to the needs of the 
market place. This invariably means competing in events around the world and for many, 
particularly in athletics, it means basing themselves in Europe. Many African athletes and 
footballers are no longer based in their home countries where they should be available as 
role  models  for  future  generations  of  sports  men  and  women.  They  are  certainly  less 
available  to  their  political  leaders  to  be  used  to  further  political  objectives  or personal 
goals.  Interference  by  senior  politicians  and  presidents  of  African  nations  in  team 
selection,  particularly  the  national  football  team,  has  been  in  the  past,  a  common 
occurrence. The Cameroonian football team experienced such interference at the World 
Cup in 1990 and 1994. By the year 2000 such interference only brought embarrassment 
and ridicule. In February 2000, following the apparent failure of the team from the Ivory 
Coast, the President incarcerated the team in a military camp near the capital. He seized 
their  mobile  phones  and  lambasted  them  for  their  poor  performance.  Somewhat 
frightened,  the  majority  of  the  team  was  desperate  to  be  released,  have  their  phones 
returned and be able to return home to their clubs far away in Europe. Their priorities lay 
elsewhere.  In  the  context  of  Africa,  particularly  in  Sub-Saharan  Africa,  the  success  of 
elite  sports  men  and  women  and  national  teams  has  thus  become  a  potentially  less 
valuable and valued tool in the political armoury of leaders of many of the countries of 
the region. 

The great promise of the early years of independence has for many African countries 
evaporated  as  natural  disasters,  economic  mismanagement,  corruption  and  poor 
leadership  have  crippled  their  economies  and  political  systems.  The  world  media  has 
regularly chronicled the demise of many of these nations. The United Nations and the 
World Bank have produced vast quantities of statistics to confirm the faltering nature of 
their economies and the plight of the people. The message included in a report of the IOC 
in 1986 has now even more poignancy than ever. It was, essentially, ‘Do we have the 
right to offer sport for all when we do not have bread for all and work for all? Do we 
have  the  right  to  play  and  dance  and  to  take  seriously  the  measuring  of  our  physical 
strength and the exercise of our physical skills so long as penury and illiteracy exist?’ 

From  a  political  perspective,  investment  in  sport and physical education at the elite 
level or for the masses is also not likely to engender much support when the social and 
economic  infrastructure  of  society  is  being  subjected  to  the  level  of  pressure  which  is 
now evident across the continent. Sport can only bring temporary respite and transient 
pleasure for a beleaguered society. Sporting success and the associated prestige for all 
concerned,  including  the  political  ‘hangers  on’  cannot  hide  the  consequences  of  a 
collapsing, corrupt economy. The 1970s slogan that ‘there can be no normal sport in an 
abnormal society’ has become increasingly relevant to Sub-Saharan Africa because of its 
failure to develop. Sport is simply not a priority for people fighting to survive. Education 
and employment inevitably and rightly rank higher. From a political perspective, sporting 
victory is increasingly less valuable in a failing society. In extremis, sporting victory can 
mock the condition of the majority. Thus, politicians are less eager to step out into the 
sporting arena, and if they dare, they present an increasingly less credible image. In short, 
though  there  was  a  period  following  independence  when  African  politicians  could 
develop and identify with sporting success in the interest of national unity and morale and 
in furtherance of their own careers, the potential for doing so has declined. Power has 

The Global Politics of sport     22

moved from states to international organisations and the African athletes and footballers 
themselves have moved from Africa to Europe and America. 

Conclusion: the nature of the sporting dividend 

It  is  an  ironic  epithet  for  the  Soviet  Union  that  its  level  of  commitment  to  producing 
sporting champions is one of the few policies which has been widely imitated and has 
outlived the Soviet state. In many countries throughout the world there now exist full-
time sportsmen and sportswomen whose activities are not funded by paying spectators. 
They  are  neither  amateurs  or  professionals  in  the  old,  contending  sense,  but  state 
apparatchiki  who  exist  to  bring  prestige  to  their  nations  and  governments.  They  are 
products  of  a  sporting  etatisme  which  expects  a  ‘medal  return’  for  its  investment,  the 
political  benefits  of  which  are  clearly  located  in  domestic  politics  rather  than  in 
international relations. Indeed, in countries like the United Kingdom, where some 40 per 
cent of lottery money at the time of writing is diverted to elite athletes and France, where 
four sports have been ‘cherry picked’ as the most efficient investment targets, there are 
specific  attempts  to  assess  investment  against  medal  probabilities.45  The  practice  was 
much  reinforced  in  the  UK  by  the  ‘dividend’  of  eleven  gold  medals  at  the  Sydney 
Olympics and there is every indication that future governments will continue investment. 
Of course, the Soviet Union cannot be given the unquestioned causal credit for these 
practices.  Assuming  the  counter-factual  hypothetical  that  it  remained  aloof  from 
‘bourgeois’ sporting competition after 1945, we can easily imagine that the development 
of television, the increase in international competition and nationalist pressure displaced 
by national media on to sport would have led to governments treating sport very much as 
they  have  actually  done  so.  It  would  only  take  one  government  to  successfully  reap  a 
dividend from an investment in champions and surely many others would have followed 
suit. Few governments showed much concern for sporting prestige in the first half of the 
twentieth  century  (though  both  Nazis  and  Fascists  showed  some  leaning  in  that 
direction). On the whole, they considered the matter either trivial, none of government’s 
business, or both, but in the second half of the twentieth century they developed an active 
concern  for  prestige  achieved  through  sporting  success.  This  was  complicated  by  an 
intermittent concern to host major sporting events which sometimes complemented and 
sometimes contradicted the desire to produce champions. 

Of course, the political games which involve commitment to success in the real games 
must tend to be zero-sum. If all states intervene and invest to produce success none is any 
better off than if none did, except insofar as politicians claim credit that they would not 
have been able to claim otherwise and except, also, that different populations may weight 
the  value  of  sports  very  differently  so  that  a  wider  variety  of  countries  may  see 
themselves as leading sporting nations than would be possible with a single weighting. 
But to some degree sporting investment must now be ‘factored in’ to many states as a 
routine need to be seen to be committed to sporting success and in the hope of a relatively 
small  dividend  by  way  of  a  ‘feelgood’  factor.  Nobody  could  now  have  the  kind  of 
expectations of the political dividend from sport which drove many of the communist and 
African  countries  to  invest  in  producing  champions  the  third  quarter  of  the  twentieth 
century.  Nevertheless,  investment  is  almost  certainly  rising,  perhaps  confirming  ‘neo-

Sport, prestige and international relations     23

liberal’ fears about the difficulty of actually rolling back levels of state intervention and 
confirming the belief that states have innate tendencies to intervene in new fields when 
they are thwarted in old ones. 

3 

Not for the good of the game 

Crisis and credibility in the governance of world 

football 

John Sugden and Alan Tomlinson 

When I became President there was hardly twenty dollars 
in  the  cash  box  and  now  it  gives  me  great  personal 
satisfaction to know that things have moved on from there. 
I will leave with the cash box substantially filled with four 
billion.1 

In  this  chapter  we  consider  the  central  question  of  the  global  governance  of  sport  by 
looking at the role played by FIFA (Fédération Internationale de Football Association). 
Our  main  concerns  are  classic  issues  for  political  science  and  sociology  and  are  to  do 
with representation, responsibility, accountability, agency-structure and, above all, power 
and its abuse. 

One of the defining features of the twentieth century was the acceleration in the range 
and extent of international government organisations (IGOs) and their non-governmental 
equivalents  (INGOs).  In  1909  there  were  only  37  IGOs  and  176  INGOs  (including 
FIFA), while by 1996 it was calculated that there were 260 IGOs and a staggering 5,472 
INGOs. In part, the growth in the number and reach of IGOs has been a response to the 
dramatic expansion of INGO activity. Whether they be charitable organisations such as 
OXFAM,  political  lobbyists  such  as  CND,  or  global  organisations  of  criminals  and 
terrorists,  national  governments  have  collaborated,  through  bodies  such  as  the  United 
Nations  and  its  satellites,  or  the  European  Union,  to  monitor  and  exert  a  degree  of 
influence  over  INGO’s  activities.2  Hitherto,  sport  in  general  and  football  in  particular, 
have been exceptional to this rule. 

Drawing  upon  Archer’s  classification  of  types  of  international  organisations,3  the 
central thesis of our argument is that since its foundation in 1904, FIFA has transformed 
itself  from  an  INGO  (International  Non-Government  Organisation)  into  a  BINGO 
(Business  International  Non-Government  Organisation)  and  that,  contrary  to  FIFA’s 
motto, this is not ‘for the good of the game’. As Morozov states, the aims and activities of 
an international organisation must be in keeping with the universally accepted principles 
of international law embodied in the charter of the United Nations and must not have a 
commercial  character  or  pursue  profit-making  aims.4  The  governing  body  of  world 
football  grew  throughout  the  twentieth  century,  from  the  initiative  of  seven  European 
national  football  associations  in  1904,  to  represent  more  than  200  at  the  turn  of  the 
twentieth and twenty-first century. As it has grown, in violation of Morozov’s principles, 
FIFA’s reason for existence has been increasingly profit-driven, particularly in the final 

Not for the good of the game     25

the 

quarter  of 
the 
professionalisation and commercialisation of modern sport, and of sport’s emergence at 
the heart of the worldwide cultural industries. 

twentieth  century.  It  has  become  a 

leading  example  of 

Sport  was  conducive  to  economic  and  commercial  exploitation  in  the  context  of 
international trade: in Miller et al.’s words, ‘the high point of trade for imperial Europe 
was also its high point for setting in place the global governance of sport’.5 Football as an 
international  cultural  phenomenon,  alongside  de  Coubertin’s  initiative  of  the  Olympic 
celebration of international competition, was a remarkably resilient and sustained case of 
the supra-national growth of the administration and governance of a cultural practice. The 
history  of  bodies  such  as  FIFA  tracks  the  increasing  interdependence  of  the  political 
(sports associations speaking for national interests, often with international aspirations) 
with the economic (cultural industries such as the international media forming more and 
more extensive partnerships with sports bodies and their corporate sponsors). As Miller et 
al. put it: ‘What began as a cultural exchange based on empire has turned into one based 
on capital’ (p.10). 

We are not, however, minded to continue our scrutiny of these issues in an abstract or 
metaphorical  sense  by,  for  instance,  prefacing  our  thoughts  with  a  dissertation  on 
globalisation,  (post)  modernity  and  related  theories  of  international  organisation  and 
social change. To some extent we have already done this elsewhere.6 Instead, we want to 
show what happens inside an INGO when the pursuit of profit overwhelms an ethic of 
service. To achieve this we present a summary of the findings of a detailed, embodied 
and empirical investigation into power and corruption at the heart of the FIFA family—as 
those who inhabit the inner sanctum of football’s global governing body choose to refer 
to themselves.7 

The crisis in world football 

‘Crisis,  what  crisis?’  Joseph  ‘Sepp’  Blatter,  president  of  FIFA,  might  have  said  to  the 
world as he surveyed the aftermath of World Cup 2002, ‘the people’s game has never 
been  healthier’.  The  men’s  World  Cup  in  Japan  and  Korea,  Asia’s  first,  was  a  great 
success: the high-tech stadiums bulged, the media coverage was massive and the blue-
chip  sponsors  beamed.  The  women’s  World  Cup  had  higher  profile  than  ever  before, 
particularly revered in China, the USA, Germany and Norway. On one level, then, world 
football  was  in  rude  health,  booming,  central  to  the  initiatives  and  profiles  of  the 
international  media  industries.  But  on  closer  scrutiny,  football  was  in  crisis.  Live 
attendances  in  national  leagues  were  volatile  and,  mostly,  falling,  as  were  television 
audiences worldwide. Television and sponsorship monies provide a fragile basis for mid-
or  long-term  planning.  Media  outlets  over-expose  the  product  and  artificially  inflate 
company accounts, allowing absurdly high sums of money to be paid for the transfer of 
individual players, and to individuals for their playing contracts.8 

Behind his smiling, sardonic countenance, as Blatter surveyed his empire in 2002, the 
Swiss knew that as a global business football was on the verge of bankruptcy, and with it 
FIFA. Just beneath the surface things were beginning to unravel. In the months running 
up to the 2002 World Cup FIFA was in trouble like never before, and in the spotlight of 
the world media. The crisis was precipitated by the collapse of trust in the inner circles of 

The Global Politics of sport     26

FIFA House, and the challenge that was mounted by the European association UEFA, 
and some of its allies, to the unbridled and scarcely accountable power of the incumbent 
president, Blatter. 

Crisis One: FIFA’s finances 

Ever since his controversial election to the FIFA Presidency in Paris in 1998 there had 
been  a  strong  whiff  of  corruption  about  Blatter’s  regime.  FIFA  family  wars  had  been 
intensifying  since  the  collapse  of  marketing  partner  ISL  (International  Sports  and 
Leisure) in the spring of 2001. Veterans of FIFA’s executive committee also agreed that 
Blatter wasn’t the cleverest of diplomats. He had fall-outs with the Asian confederation. 
He  lacked  the  Havelange  style,  the  gait,  the  presence,  the  ‘oomph’,  the  gravitas,  the 
charisma.  Things  began  to  come  to  a  head  when  ISL,  FIFA’s  long-term  partner,  went 
bankrupt.  We  talked  to  numerous  ISL  people  in  Lausanne  as  the  company  collapsed 
around  them.  All  denied  responsibility,  shuffling  away  from  discussion  and  pointing 
towards the culpability of the long-term bosses. Dick Pound, marketing maestro at the 
International  Olympic  Committee  (IOC)  over  the  years,  and  about  to  contest 
unsuccessfully the IOC presidency, said that FIFA lacked business credibility. The IOC 
had already severed its links with ISL: ‘We got out of our ISL relationship’ a few years 
ago: ‘they were way offside the core business’. 

FIFA could hardly do this whether it wanted to or not. ISL had been long known as 
the black-box bolstering FIFA finances. Blatter himself was of the same generation as 
ISL top bosses, all inspired by the vision and style of the late Horst Dassler of Adidas, 
whose brainchild ISL was. Some had left to form their own outfits. ISL graduate Jürgen 
Lenz headed up TEAM, the company behind the Champions League and UEFA’s own 
preferred  marketing  agency.  At  the  time  of  the  ISL  collapse,  the  normally  loquacious 
Lenz couldn’t ‘talk to you in good conscience’, choosing ‘to abstain from comment’. 

ISL’s parent company ISMM had been ordered to start bankruptcy proceedings, by a 
Swiss court, in Aril 2001. Vivendi-Universal, a Paris-based media group, turned down an 
invitation for a take-over rescue. ISMM collapsed the following month, and arguments 
raged  within  FIFA  concerning  the  financial implications of the collapse, as ISL losses 
were put by the Swiss courts at a monumental US$1.25 billion. Certainly monies went 
astray. Revenues due from broadcasters in Brazil were diverted to a secret bank account. 
Sponsorsip  revenues  of  up  to  US$200  million  were  reported  to  have  gone  missing.  A 
hundred  million  US  dollars  of  television  money  owed  to  FIFA  was  said  to  be  hidden 
away in a bank account in Lichtenstein. 

The  scale  of  the  ISL-based  losses  was  at  the  heart  of  the  debates  within  the  FIFA 
committees  and  factions.  Blatter  was  claiming  that  the  ISL  collapse  had  cost  FIFA  a 
‘mere’  US$30–32  million,  but  as  Agence-France  Presse  reported  at  the  beginning  of 
2002,  ‘independent  marketing  experts  suggested  an  extra  zero  could  be  added  to  that 
figure’.  Later,  a  disillusioned  FIFA  general  secretary  Michel  Zen-Ruffinen’s  estimate 
would be US$116 million. 

Whatever  the  precise  figure,  FIFA  needed  to  take  out  a  US$420  million 
‘resecuritisation’ bond from Credit Suisse First Boston, to get its finances back on track. 
FIFA’s  business  credibility  looked  to  be  at  an  all-time  low  when  ISL’s  ‘partner’ 
KirchMedia itself went bankrupt in April 2002, though its creditors and FIFA agreed a 

Not for the good of the game     27

deal to transfer the World Cup TV rights into a separate company, KirchSport. Blatter’s 
‘Venetian  night  of  love’  in  his  ‘sweet-heart  deal’  with  ISL  over  the  years—as  a  BBC 
Newsnight interview phrased it—had plunged FIFA into its most serious financial crisis 
ever.  It  had  certainly  been  avoidable.  Even  FIFA’s  prodigal  son  Guido  Tognoni 
recognised this: 

FIFA  made  with  ISL  a  three-term  commitment.  Nobody  was  really 
challenging  ISL  in  those  days.  Everybody  knew  that  the  links  between 
ISL and FIFA are so strong that there was no chance and the links brought 
their status strong and there was no chance for another one, so you can 
make  your  own  thoughts  on  that.  ISL  was  the  leading  company  in  the 
world.  They  did  a  good  job…Where  I  put  the  question  mark  on  is  the 
procedure. I think that everybody should have the same chance to bid for 
rights, and this is questionable that this is the case. 

But Blatter hadn’t got where he was without loyal deals. He had always been close to his 
old mentor Horst Dassler. Tognoni reminds us that ‘Blatter was partly paid by Adidas in 
the early days because FIFA did not have money’. Blatter says that he only had his office 
in the Adidas building, this was while FIFA was building a new one. It would, of course, 
have  been  possible  to  hire  an  office  rather  than  have  the  general  secretary  of  FIFA 
operating  from  the  premises  of  a  sports  equipment  company.  ISL  had  been  Dassler’s 
brain-child,  and  the  long-established  conduit  for  the  less  accountable  FIFA-related 
monies. Blatter’s loyalty was misplaced in the case of the over-stretched ISL, his faith in 
his Family not justified on this occasion. 

On the initial collapse of ISL European football powers were incensed. After the 2001 
Champions League final in Milan, UEFA officials announced that Blatter must explain. If 
he  couldn’t  ‘provide  an  explanation…he’d have  to  step  down’. Blatter knew that only 
months later the FIFA congress in Buenos Aires would be a critical moment, vital for his 
survival if not credibility, The big European powers of UEFA had people in the wings, 
ready to challenge the shaky-looking Blatter in a presidential election in Seoul in 2002. 
Dr Chung, of Korea, President of the AFC (Asian Football Confederation) and a Director 
of the industrial giant, Hyundai, was one of these. His countryman ‘Mickey’ Kim had 
failed  to  win  the  IOC  presidency,  and  this  cleared  the  way  for  Chung  to  put  himself 
forward,  if  called,  for  the  top  job  in  football.  If  not  Chung  there  was  the  charismatic 
Cameroonian, Issa Hayatou, recently handed an IOC membership. 

In Buenos Aires Blatter faced a vote of (no) confidence and UEFA president, Lennart 
Johansson, tabled a list of questions at the FIFA Congress in Rio de Janeiro.9 It would be 
too distracting for the purposes of this overview to go into detail on all aspects of this list 
of charges. Suffice to say had a similar list of questions and allegations been laid at the 
door of the CEO of any other major global corporation, his chances of survival would 
have been extremely slim and even prison might have loomed. 

Instead, Blatter performed an astonishing escape act, deflecting the questions in one of 
his  classically  stage-managed  forums.  He  got  delegates  from  Jamaica,  and  other  small 
countries, to speak out and remind the big Europowers (England, France, Germany) of 
FIFA’s crucial constitutional fact—one vote one country. The big powers might win the 
football and be First World leading nations, but they had no more power in FIFA than the 

The Global Politics of sport     28

tiniest  member.  Blatter  moved  quickly  to  call  a  vote  of  confidence.  FIFA’s  general 
secretary Michel Zen-Ruffinen flapped, reminding him that there’d been no roll-call, no 
proper procedure. Brushing aside his top administrator, Blatter got his vote of confidence 
on  a  show  of  hands  that  made  militant  trade  unionism  voting  tactics  look  like  pure 
democracy. The Europeans were outmanoevred in classic FIFA fashion, a turning point 
for  Blatter  in  his  fight  for  survival.  ‘Pure  Blatter,  brilliant’,  conceded  Franz  ‘Kaiser’ 
Beckenbauer. 

He might have lacked the presidential gravitas of Havelange, but Blatter was crafty. 
Chuck  Blazer,  General  Secretary  of  the  Caribbean,  North  and  Central  American 
Confederation (CONCACAF) has said that ‘his predecessor was a better politician’. But 
the street-fighting skills of a lifetime in the business saw him through. UEFA retreated, 
licking its wounds. But as the scale of the financial crisis at FIFA escalated, and Blatter’s 
leadership  style  became  increasingly  despotic,  a  challenge  to  Blatter’s  presidency  was 
planned. 

Questions over Blatter’s salary had been another recurrent issue. One insider claimed 
that  he  was  on  a  six-year  deal  worth  24  million  dollars,  a  deal  projected  beyond  the 
period of his four-year presidency. The head of the finance committee, Argentinean Julio 
Grondona, can be held responsible for this contract. The executive committee was never 
consulted on this. Chung took this up with Jack Warner, deputy chairman of the finance 
committee,  in  January  2002.  This  is  a  man  who  is  born  and  bred  to  rule, scion of the 
Hyundai chaebol. He didn’t mince his words: 

I  would  like  to  emphasize  that  the  management  of  FIFA’s  finance  is 
flawed and the lack of transparency is at the root of current speculations. 
It  is  of  critical  importance  that  we  provide  a  clear  and  transparent 
investigation of FIFA’s financial situation so that we could restore FIFA’s 
honor and image in the world. 

This is strong stuff indeed, and from a heavyweight global businessman. Chung focused 
on three points in particular: the inadequacy of audit company KPMG’s review report on 
finances after the ISL collapse; the financial strategy, termed a ‘securitisation scheme’, a 
‘sort of loan arranged against the collateral of future revenues’; and ‘the story I heard 
about  the  President’s  salary  is…that  it  is  more  than  20  million  dollars  over  6  years, 
instead of 4 years’. 

Chung’s  letter  was  one  of  numerous  communications  faxing  and  flying  their  way 
across  FIFA’s  corridors  of  power  between  November  2001  and  March  2002.  Blatter 
wrote  in  early  November  to  national  associations,  confederations  and  the  executive 
committee, assuring them that the ISL losses would not exceed 51 million Swiss francs, 
and attaching a report of the auditors, KPMG. The review report of KPMG, on an interim 
balance  sheet,  was  at  pains  to  point  out  that  a  review  is  not  an  audit.  It  is  hardly 
reassuring. Though ‘nothing has come to our attention that causes us to believe that the 
accompanying interim balance sheet does not comply with Swiss law and FIFA’s articles 
of  incorporation’,  the  ISL  question  was  not  settled:  ‘the  overall  implications  of  ISL’s 
bankruptcy for FIFA may only be assessed once bankruptcy proceedings are completed’. 
The  auditors  also  drew  attention to FIFA’s recognition of revenue and expenses ‘on a 
cash basis’, including 299 million Swiss francs of ‘future income recorded in 2000 from 

Not for the good of the game     29

existing marketing contracts (excluding TV-rights) for the 2002 and 2006 World Cups’. 
The balance sheet was conventionally well-balanced–465,157,894 Swiss francs of assets; 
and exactly the same figure for the equity and liabilities. It balanced, but only with the 
help  of  the  24-hour  cash  placements  clawed  back  from  what  was  not  yet  earned.  In 
December, thirteen (all the European, all the African, and Korean Chung) members of the 
executive  wrote  to  express  their  overall  dissatisfaction  at  the  review  report,  and  posed 
questions on the ISL losses, lost income from cancelled events, FIFA’s relationship with 
Brazilian  broker  company  Traffic  (partly  owned  by  Havelange  and  his  son-in-law 
Ricardo  Texeira),  commercial  contracts  held  by  members  of  the  executive  committee, 
and the increasing profile of unaccountable presidential advisers. 

‘I am determined to continue to lead FIFA with policies of utmost transparency and 
open  communication,’  countered  Blatter  within  days.  Lennart  Johansson,  UEFA 
president, responded immediately on the financial question, the inner administration and 
conflicts  of  interest  of  committee  members:  ‘Why  do  you  oppose  the  setting  up  of  an 
internal investigation group? What are you afraid of? We will come back.’ On Christmas 
Eve, Jack Warner from Trinidad and Tobago wrote to Blatter to condemn the ‘posturing 
and histrionics of some members’, and their threat to Blatter’s principles of ‘solidarity 
and  fraternity’.  Warner  looked  back  and  forward:  ‘…brokering  and  confederational 
politics  take  precedence  over  genuine  discussion  and  debate  and…the  elections  of  ‘98 
have  never  been  over  and  are  being  fought  in  the  FIFA  Executive  Committee.  It  will 
never be won at the level of the Congress’. Warner was reassuring Blatter that in any vote 
among the full FIFA membership, his loyalty base was intact. 

Argentinean Julio Gondona, chair of the finance committee, joined the fray in January, 
to apologise for the late circulation of key papers, and to spout some FIFA rhetoric on 
restoring ‘a sense of security to the entire FIFA family’. FIFA’s Scottish vice president, 
David  Will,  responded,  scathing  about  the  two-page  auditor’s  review  when  he’d 
anticipated a 200–300 word document, and not letting go of the key issue of the riskiness 
of  drawing  upon  future  anticipated  income  ‘to  cover  current  costs  without  the  direct 
permission of the Congress’. At the end of January the thirteen members reasserted their 
demands  for  the  setting  up  of  an  investigation  committee.  Blatter  conceded,  following 
Will, proposing ‘an ad hoc internal audit committee’, and an extraordinary meeting of the 
executive committee in March, dedicated to financial matters. 

The national associations heard from Blatter at the end of January, interested to learn 
that after the ISL collapse, ‘I personally took charge of FIFA’s financial situation…and 
FIFA is in a position to keep up the benefits due to the national associations, competition 
organisers  and  commercial  partners  without  any  reductions  whatsoever’.  He  also  told 
them that the recalcitrant thirteen were acting out of line with FIFA statutes. This was too 
much  for  Chung,  Johansson  and  Hayatou,  who  felt  the  need  to  also  write  to  all  the 
national associations, explaining their dissatisfaction with the ‘drip by drip confirmation 
in writing of what we suspected already last year in June’, that the ISL fall-out may be 
500 million Swiss francs, ten times that claimed by Blatter. The three vice-presidents also 
wanted  to  know  why  ISL’s  bankruptcy  administrator  was  not  being  pursued  with 
reasonable  claims,  and  why  Blatter  had  not  even  referred  to  ongoing  negotiations.  In 
early  February  Blatter  wrote  to  the  executive  committee,  calling  the  reproaches  in  the 
letter ‘erroneous, some of the accusations caluminous… I can accept none of this’. 

The Global Politics of sport     30

Crisis Two: out of Africa 

At the same time that Blatter was fighting his critics about FIFA’s balance sheet and his 
own  finances,  his  presidency  was  re-engulfed  in  accusations  about  bribery  and  vote 
fixing at his 1998 election. There had been strong rumours circulating that money from 
the oil-rich Gulf had been used to secure the votes of a significant number of African 
delegates at the Paris Congress.10 In revelations first made to the Daily Mail, Farah Addo, 
a CAF vice president, seemed to offer the first concrete proof of this when he claimed 
that he had been offered a bribe by Mohamed Bin Hammam of Qatar to vote for Blatter 
on the eve of the election. Addo has claimed that 18 of Blatter’s votes came from African 
delegates persuaded to break ranks, helped along by bundles of cash dispensed in Paris’s 
Le Meridien hotel on the eve of the election. If those votes had gone to Johansson, he’d 
have  been  ahead  of  Blatter  by  five  votes  in  that  first  poll.  In  response  Bin  Hammam 
wrote to CAF’s president, Issa Hayatou and in doing so, as the following excerpt reveals, 
lifted the FIFA family wars onto a new global scale:11 

Let me make a confession if we are going to start hitting under the belt, 
Mr. Addo has personally come to me in Zurich and claimed that you are 
in his pocket and you will do whatever he wants. He told me that he wants 
me to run for AFC Presidency and he wants me to support you to become 
FIFA President while he would take over CAF Presidency. He went on to 
say  that  imagine  with  three  Muslims  leading  the  global  football 
confederations (FIFA) and two largest confederations (CAF & AFC) what 
power we will have in hand. This shows you what kind of sick illusion 
and racism is in the head of this man. President, I told him ‘Islam has got 
nothing to do with this and for me as far as Blatter is a candidate I will 
always be with him, only if he steps down I can think of an alternative and 
Issa is my favourite. 

[Our italics] 

An  astonishing  range  of  issues  is  raised  by  this  item  of  correspondence:  threats  of 
revenge, world conspiracy theory, dictatorial government, personal sacrifice, the denial of 
corruption. By now the FIFA family was looking like a worn-out warring shambles of 
cabals and feuding factions. However, Addo was a relatively marginal figure in FIFA’s 
corridors of power, a man not taken very seriously, even in his own African continent. 
But when the FIFA general secretary himself turned whistle-blower, many thought that 
Blatter’s days may indeed be numbered. 

Crisis Three: Zen-Ruffinen’s dossier 

Michel Zen-Ruffinen had been groomed by Blatter as his successor as general secretary. 
He  had  arrived  in  FIFA  House,  keen  and  ambitious,  from  a  back’  ground  in  law,  and 
experience  as  an  international  standard  football  referee.  He  came  from  Blatter’s  own 
region, the Valleé in Switzerland. Guido Tognoni, back in the FIFA fold until sacked as a 
consequence of the publication of our book Badfellas, talked to us after he’d been sacked 
in  the  New  Year  1995  as  FIFA’s  media  and  marketing  guru.  When  he  spoke  of  Zen-
Ruffinen he spoke with bitter resentment: ‘He came to FIFA and after three days he says 

Not for the good of the game     31

that he wants to become general secretary, that is his aim, he is crazy. We were a bunch 
of people who were working together, we thought he is kinky’. Kinky or not, his rise was 
close to meteoric. Blatter told Tognoni ‘…“we need better organisation in FIFA House. 
FIFA House has also to work when I am not in”. I replied “well, what happened during 
the last ten years? You were frequently away and the house didn’t crash down, it worked 
fine”.  Then  happened  something  very  strange.  All  of  a  sudden,  without  consulting 
anybody before, Blatter said that they had a new “organisational chart”.’ This brought 
Michel Zen-Ruffinen in as deputy general secretary. 

Tognoni  didn’t  mince  words:  ‘I  was  shocked,  everybody  was  shocked  in  the 
management,  everybody  was  shocked  that  Blatter  took  such  a  measure,  taking  the 
youngest  one,  the  least  experienced  one  and  a  lightweight,  promoting  him  to  deputy 
general secretary. I said to Blatter “can he give me orders?” and he said “yes” then I said 
“this I have problems to accept because he is not competent enough to give me orders, he 
has not the experience”…I said “this creates a problem for me if this young chap has the 
competence to give me advice”’.  

When  Blatter  became  FIFA  president  in  1998  it  seemed  only  natural  that  Zen-
Ruffinen should succeed him as general secretary. But it did not take long for things to 
turn sour. In the four years of Blatter’s presidency, the ambitious Zen-Ruffinen had been 
cut  out  of  the  loop  of  power,  and  could  no  longer  stay  silent  on  the  manner  in  which 
Blatter  was  running  FIFA.  Blatter  supporter  Chuck  Blazer,  CONCACAF  general 
secretary, claims that ‘Blatter’s administration is much more transparent’ than that of his 
predecessor. ‘More meetings; more information; distribution of committee chairmanships 
and  positions,  including  his  opponents.  Financial  information  much  more  ample  and 
available.’ Zen-Ruffinen’s view from the heart of the FIFA administration was a million 
miles away from Blazer’s glowing testimonial. 

At  the  FIFA  executive  committee  of  3  May  2002,  just  weeks  before  the  upcoming 
presidential  election,  Zen-Ruffinen  broke  his  silence  on  what  he  called  Various 
turbulences’. Here is the rationale for this intervention, in the words of the former referee 
turned whistleblower himself: 

FIFA is flawed by general mismanagement, disfunctions in the structures 
and financial irregularities. I therefore decided to stand up for the good of 
the  game;  it  has  been  too  long,  that  I  was  loyal  to  the  President.  Many 
FIFA representatives from places all over the world encouraged me with 
their  full  support  to  clarify  matters  in  regard  of  the  various  harmful 
occurrences taking place in and outside of the headquarters of FIFA. They 
felt embarrassed to be seen as ‘FIFA family members’ after all the recent 
news which damage the image of our organisation. 

In  his  explosive  document,  Zen-Ruffinen  asserts  that  Blatter  took  over  both  the 
administration and management of FIFA, against the statutes, working with a few select 
people in his inner group, the F-Crew, and ‘manipulating the whole network through the 
material  and  administrative  power  he  gained  to  the  benefit  of  third  persons  and  his 
personal  interests.  FIFA  today  is  run  like  a  dictatorship.  FIFA  is  not  a  decent  and 
structured organisation anymore. It has been reduced to the Blatter organisation’. Zen-
Ruffinen describes a bloated family at FIFA House, 150 staff now rather than 50, plus 80 

The Global Politics of sport     32

refugees from the ISL debacle, now located in FIFA Marketing AG. ‘FIFA is in a bad 
shape  today.  FIFA  is  disorganised,  the  staff  is  dissatisfied,  frustrated  and  the  FIFA 
administration is governed by the President and a handful of people of his choice. The 
finances only seem to be in order. In fact, FIFA today lives from income of the future’. 

The  style  of  working  of  the  F-Crew  (the  Führensgruppe,  the  leadership  group),  the 
inner-circle of four of Blatter’s ‘closest collaborators’—Champagne, Linsi, Siegler and 
Schallhart—was  described  to  Johansson  in  Buenos  Aires  in  June  2001  as  ‘merely  an 
internal consultation body’. In reality F-Crew went way beyond such an advisory role, 
and  began  to  deal  with  staff  appointments,  budget  decisions  and  the  like.  The  general 
secretary  himself  was  nominally  part  of  this  grouping,  but  routinely  found  himself 
‘systematically circumvented’.  

Zen-Ruffinen’s  document  describes  wide-ranging  forms  of  maladministration, 
personal  self-aggrandisement,  conflicts  of  interest,  financial  irregularities  and  alleged 
cases of outright bribery and cronyism. The spiralling mess of the FIFA finances is plain 
to  see.  Zen-Ruffinen  rubbished  the  president’s  public  claim  that  FIFA  had  the  highest 
ratings for its procedures, from established financial bodies: ‘For 1998 and earlier, the 
years  for  which  the  President  was  responsible  as  General  Secretary,  no  information  is 
available anymore, even though documents must be stored for 10 years due to the law. 
Neither  the  former  auditors  of  FIFA  nor  FIFA  itself  do  have  such  information.’  Zen-
Ruffinen’s summary of 1999, the first year for which he as the new general secretary had 
responsibility,  shows  the  deep-rootedness  of  the  escalating  crisis.  The  strategy  of 
borrowing  against  future  income—what  Chung  called  ‘rather  like  the  situation  of  a 
patient who extends his life by emergency aid’—was already in place: 

At the end of 1999, the liabilities exceeded the assets of FIFA, i.e. FIFA 
was overindebted in the amount of CHF 67.8 million. The situation could 
be improved since CHF 144 million were accounted as income out of TV-
rights  in  the  year  2000.  However,  what  must  be  disclosed  is  that  the 
balance sheet never appears to reflect a true and certain situation. Already 
in 1998 CHF 65 million were booked as income into the year 1998 out of 
TV rights regarding the World Cup 2002 to be recognised as income only 
for  the  period  1999–2002.  The  auditors  (KPMG)  have  clearly  criticised 
the respective accounting policy. 

(Zen-Ruffinen) 

This  borrowing  against  future  assets—the  ‘securitisation  concept’—was  used  with 
increasing desperation by FIFA, especially after the 2001 collapse of ISL. Regardless of 
this,  the  disillusioned  general  secretary  goes  on,  Blatter,  acting  alone,  could  casually 
commit 250 million Swiss francs to the local organising committee for the 2006 World 
Cup in Germany, commit 12 million Swiss francs to McKinsey & Company and conduct 
numerous otber dubious financial deals with individuals and outside bodies, with little or 
no  internal  accountability  back  in  the  general  secretary’s  office  or  to  the  executive 
committee.  Zen-Ruffinen’s  remarkable  paper  raised  the  stakes  in  the FIFA in-fighting, 
and  provided  the  basis  for  what  the  following  week  was  submitted  to  the  Swiss 
prosecutor. 

Not for the good of the game     33

It looked as if this could be Blatter’s toughest ride yet. The venom flying around the 
factions  of  the  executive  committee,  and  the  stunning  testimony  of  Zen-Ruffinen, 
culminated in the lodging of a criminal complaint by eleven members of the executive 
committee, on 10 May, just a couple of weeks before the Seoul Congress at which the 
presidential  election  would  be  contested.  It  was  delivered  by  hand  to  the  Public 
Prosecutor’s  Office  in  Zurich, ‘filed on behalf of individual members of the executive 
committee,  writing  from  their  residential  bases:  Lennart  Johansson,  Stockholm;  David 
Will, Brechin, Angus, Scotland; Antonio Mattarese, Rome; Issa Hayatou, Cairo; Mong 
Joon Chung, Seoul; Michael D’Hooghe, Bruges; Per Ravn Omdal, Eiksmarka, Norway; 
Amadou  Diakité,  Mali;  Slim  Aloulu,  Tunisia;  Ismael  Bhanjee,  Botswana;  and  Senes 
Erzik, Istanbul. This was the amassed forces of Africa and Europe pushing the FIFA wars 
to unprecedented levels of intensity. 

The  complaint  concerned  ‘Suspicion  of  Breach  of  Trust’  and  ‘Dishonest 
Management’,  as  the  charges  are  termed  in  the  Swiss  Criminal  Code,  which  the 
complainants’ attorney argued to be applicable as Blatter’s activities were on behalf of 
FIFA, and the city of Zurich ‘the centre of his professional activity as FIFA President’.12 
This petition logs an extraordinary list of charges: vote-buying across the old Soviet 
satellites  of  East  Europe,  all  of  the  Americas,  particular  parts  of  Africa;  nobbling 
witnesses,  shredding  evidence;  favouring  insider  contractors;  stage-managing  activities 
for personal aggrandizement; ignoring the board (the executive committee). 

As the family at war uncharacteristically bared its feuds to the outside world, Blatter 
stuck to his guns. He knew where the grateful support would come from, and where the 
loyal  votes  lay.  He  had  been  planning  for  this  for  four  years,  and  the  key  was  his 
international  schedule  around  the  Goal  development  projects,  a  ‘tailor-made  aid 
programme’, as Blatter himself put it: ‘all about giving a chance: giving a chance to FIFA 
to  channel  the  fruits  of  football’s  success  back  to  the  grass-roots  of  the  game,  and  by 
giving those grass-roots a chance to taste some of that success’. Not a bad chance for 
Blatter, too, to remind the minnows of world football where their bread was buttered and 
they could certainly be relied upon to turn up at the Seoul Hilton and show their respects 
to the president. 

Crisis Four: the Seoul Congress 

‘I  am  not  a  crook’,  said  US  President  Richard  Nixon,  one  grey  November  day  in 
Washington in 1973. ‘I am not a bad man’, said Joseph ‘Sepp’ Blatter on stage in the 
convention  centre  of  the  Hotel  Seoul  Hilton,  South  Korea,  the  Wednesday  before  the 
weekend kick-off of World Cup 2002. In Seoul on this sweltering May day in 2002, the 
FIFA  president  sought  to  stem  the  tide  of  his  own  Watergate,  with  documents 
disappearing from the files at FIFA House, and integrity and credibility draining daily 
from the veins of the world governing body. ‘Many, many thanks. You cannot imagine 
what it means to me having been during months accused by a certain press saying what a 
bad man I am’. ‘I am not a bad man’, he’d also stated at a press conference a little earlier: 
‘Look into my eyes’. 

Blatter had just been re-elected as president of the governing body of world football. 
There’d never been a FIFA Congress quite like this one. It had come close in 1998, when 
Blatter won the presidency against European (UEFA) football boss Lennart Johansson. 

The Global Politics of sport     34

This  time  round  Blatter  faced  a  challenge  from  the  boss  of  the  African  football 
confederation, Issa Hayatou, of Cameroon. The world media were hungry for this, and 
Blatter was splattered across the headlines of most of the world press, on news rather than 
sports  pages:  all  asking  whether  he  could  survive  the  serious  allegations  over  his 
stewardship  of  FIFA.  ‘For  the  Good  of  the  Game’,  FIFA’s  slogan, was looking like a 
laughing stock as Blatter reeled in the face of accusations of administrative malpractice, 
financial mismanagement and outright organisational deception and fraud. The English 
press, the Daily Mail in particular, went beyond a reliance on media releases and mere 
speculation,  and  relentlessly  attacked  the  FIFA  president  and  his  network  of  cronies, 
crooks and charlatans who had made personal gains from their lofty positions. Much of 
the attention focused upon the question of whether Blatter was even fit to stand for re-
election  for  the  FIFA  presidency.  The  media  revelled  in  the  dramatic  atmosphere  of 
charge and counter-charge as the FIFA edifice looked more and more shaky. 

Havelange—the fittest 85 year old one might ever encounter—was in Seoul, observing 
the legacy of his presidency. The Big Man of the FIFA family, Havelange reminded his 
flock  that  the  presidency  demanded  strong  qualities.  Hedging  his  bets,  he  didn’t  grant 
Blatter his total blessing as he gave his still-presidential nod, rather than taking the stage. 
His former protégé had made a mess of too many aspects of the family business, and was 
certainly incurring the wrath of his former mentor. But Havelange was still pretty sure 
that the smooth Swiss charmer would have done the business on the campaign trail. 

Chuck  Blazer  was  likewise  smugly  sure  that  Blatter  would  glide  to  a  second  term. 
We’d  asked  him,  the  weekend  before  the  congress,  whether  his  confederation  could 
continue to deliver a bloc vote of its members on any issue, especially the presidential 
election. He confirmed the delivery of 35 votes for Blatter: ‘It can continue to deliver 
block  votes  where  a  common  interest  is  concerned.  This  is  certainly  the  case  in  the 
Presidency and there are other issues as well, but this is one of the few which is voted on 
by  the  membership  in  full’.  Blazer’s  boss,  confederation  president  Jack  Warner  from 
Trinidad and Tobago, was looking confident and cocky as ever, despite press revelations 
of his dubious business privileges in FIFA deals in the Caribbean region. 

Peter Velappan was there too, one of the men who’d turned against Sir Stanley Rous 
in 1974, casting his Malaysian vote in favour of the promises from Havelange. Velappan 
was now general secretary of the Asian confederation, 45 votes less easy to manipulate as 
a bloc. The FIFA executive committee member Dr Mong Joon Chung, from Korea, was 
one of the outspoken critics of Blatter’s style and practices. But the man from the Gulf, 
Mohamed Bin Hammam Al-Abdulla of Qatar, was a key Blatter supporter. This was the 
same man alleged by Somalian Farah Addo to have offered the bribes for votes in Paris in 
1998.  Bin Hammam also facilitated Blatter on the camaign trail, with the provision of 
private jets to help him along in his busy schedule. 

European  associations  were  split  down  the  middle,  some  big  football  powers, 
including England, supporting Hayatou, but many, including France, Germany and Spain, 
still hand-in-hand with Blatter. It was recognised, though only whispered, in the corridors 
of power of European football, that Hayatou was never in the running. Numerous football 
associations were for Blatter not just because of past favours and the spiders’ webs of 
patronage and dependency. They were also adamant that no African—for this, read black 
man,  and  the  myriad  of  alternatives  to  that  term  floated  in  some  nations  of  Europe, 
particularly  the  newer  nations  in  the  east  of  the  continent—could  be  contemplated  as 

Not for the good of the game     35

FIFA  president.  And  it  wasn’t  just  at  the  heart  of  Europe  where  such  prejudice  was 
simmering.  Delegates  from  South  America,  Asia,  Arab  Africa and the Gulf would not 
want a black African at the head of the FIFA family. 

South  America,  Brazilian  Havelange’s  original  power  base,  was  all  the  way  behind 
Blatter.  Julio  Grondona  from  Argentina,  chair  of  FIFA’s  comio-looking  finance 
committee,  was  a  long-term  survivor  of  FIFA  politics.  Johansson  had  found  South 
America a fruitless campaign trail in 1998. It was to be no different for Issa Hayatou this 
time  round.  Little  Oceania  was  now  well  represented  in  the  hall,  a  dozen  member 
associations in a confederation only granted full confederational status in 1996. Adrian 
Wickham, for instance, from the Solomon Islands wouldn’t waste much time listening to 
Issa Hayatou’s case. He’d recently got on the FIFA executive committee, and a nice lump 
of  cash  from  FIFA—US$668,000—had  just  renovated  and  upgraded  the  Solomon’s 
national stadium in Honiara. He liked Blatter’s Goal initiative to help small footballing 
nations  like  his  own.  He  wasn’t  about  to  waste  all  this  good  work  and  back  calls  for 
reform and accountability and the like. 

The day before the congress, at an extraordinary congress at which Blatter planned to 
answer his critics, he’d looked vulnerable. The then English Football Association chief 
executive Adam Crozier called the Blatter performance an ‘absolute disgrace from start 
to  finish.  There  was  no  attempt  at  transparency  in  two  hours  of  manipulation’.  No 
opponents of Blatter were allowed to address the congress. Delegates from Blatter client 
countries  such  as  Iran,  Libya  and  Jamaica  spoke  fulsomely  of  Blatter’s  leadership, 
insulted  UEFA  president  Johansson,  attacked  David  Will  and  praised  the  president’s 
financial  acumen.  The  Libyan  delegate,  Muammer  Al-Qadhafi  Assadi,  son  of  the 
dictator, was jeered as he tried to discredit African-based critics of Blatter. Scot David 
Will, FIFA vice-president, and chair of an internal audit committee set up to probe FIFA 
finances, was prevented from speaking, and confirmed that ‘only one side of the financial 
information was given. Blatter just refused to let me speak and I’m very angry’. Korean 
Dr Chung was permitted to speak only in the form of a welcoming address on behalf of 
his home, host country, but did say that ‘only one person is responsible for the division of 
FIFA’. Blatter was unapologetic, but defensive: ‘I am not ashamed of what I have done. I 
don’t  always  act  according  to  procedures  that  are  normally  accepted,  but  I  have  done 
nothing against the Statutes of FIFA’. ‘No peace in our time here’, muttered one seasoned 
international journalist as the votes were cast. 

But the dapper Blatter never quite lost his confident step. He knew that there was little 
chance of him losing the election. What surprised the parvenus to the FIFA scene was the 
margin of Blatter’s victory. There were 197 national asso ciations present in the hall and 
entitled to vote, and 195 valid votes cast. A two-thirds majority (130) was needed for an 
outright  first-round  victory.  Blatter  got  139,  Hayatou  a  mere  56.  The  Cameroonian’s 
supporters estimated that only 19 votes had come from the membership of his African 
confederation. Blatter more than doubled his 1998 winning margin, despite the charges of 
corruption and the extraordinary spectacle of the FIFA family feuds in headlines across 
the world. Media people in the hall gasped in shock at this. 

Of course, for most of the vote-holders the election had little or nothing to do with 
principles of integrity and the FIFA delegates in the congress hall were less surprised at 
the outcome than some gullible media outsiders. They represented football’s worldwide 
family, the more than 200 national football associations from FIFA’s six confederations. 

The Global Politics of sport     36

In the year leading up to the election, Asia had 45 member associations; Africa had 52; 
South  America  had  10;  the  Central,  North  American  and  Caribbean  confederation  35. 
Oceania (Australia, New Zealand and the South Pacific islands) had 11 full members; and 
the  powerful  European  body,  UEFA,  51.  The  bosses  of  the  confederations  were  the 
powerbrokers  of  the  FIFA  family,  seeking  to  mobilise  bloc  votes  of  their  member 
associations. The presidents and their general secretaries and the men from the national 
associations themselves knew that Blatter was the master manipulator of FIFA’s pseudo-
democratic  structure.  In  the  FIFA  congress,  the  delegate  from  the  Cook  Islands 
(population  17,000)  has  as  much  power  and  influence  as  the  delegate  from  Germany, 
Brazil or the USA. Blatter had worked this system for over twenty years, first as general 
secretary, then for four years as president. In Seoul he demonstrated his mastery of the 
FIFA power game. 

Vengeance 

In  The  Prince,  Machiavelli  wrote  that  ‘men  should  either  be  treated  generously  or 
destroyed’ and ‘it is much safer for a prince to be feared than loved’. In the weeks after 
his re-election Blatter, in the style of Machiavelli, moved swiftly to consolidate his power 
base. Clearly, Blatter bad no intention of being bullied or, in his eyes, betrayed, by either 
his executive or his administration ever again. According to Tognoni, Blatter’s problems 
with the executive were already well on the way to being solved. ‘Blatter’s stubborn at 
times’,  explained  Tognioni.  He  had  not  exercised  the  authoritative  and  charismatic 
control of an Havelange over the executive. But at the last executive elections he tipped 
the balance in his favour by getting rid of Per Omdal (Norway) and Antonio Matarrese 
(Italy),  two  UEFA  loyalists,  and  getting  French  football  legend  Michel  Platini,  his 
running mate from 1998, German Vorfelder, and Spain’s Angel Llona on board—‘all his 
supporters’, Tognoni confirmed. After his election victory the long knives were wielded 
as  Blatter  cleaned  out  his  administration.  The  press  release  announcing  the  start  of 
Blatter’s purge was chillingly terse: 

Zurich 10 July 2002—FIFA has yesterday and today parted company with 
seven  employees.  The  decision  to  terminate  or  not  extend  these 
employees’  contracts  comes  as  part  of  FIFA’s  restructuring  process. 
President Joseph S. Blatter will present a proposal concerning the future 
structure of world football’s governing body to the Executive Committee 
at its next meeting on 23/24 September 2002. 

First head on the chopping block was that of Michel Zen-Ruffinen. ‘If you have in your 
own house a traitor, this is bad’, Blatter blurted to Jennie James of Time magazine, in the 
Glasgow  Hilton  on  Champions  League  night:  ‘Have  you  ever  heard  of  Brutus?’  he 
continued, comparing Zen-Ruffinen to Shakespeare’s assassin. This time it was Caesar 
who would wield the knife. ‘Zen-Ruffinen is bad, not naïve and he’s just not very smart’ 
was the way Tognoni summed up the outgoing general secretary. ‘Grondona got it right 
when he said, “I wouldn’t put him in charge of a troop of boy scouts let alone FIFA. Now 
I feel I must apologise to the scouts!”’. As we’ve seen, Zen-Ruffinen had been the rising 

Not for the good of the game     37

star  in  FIFA  House  when  Tognoni  was  being  shown  the  door  and  be  still  harboured 
resentment that the young Swiss lawyer and former referee had occupied the seat that he 
coveted for himself. ‘I left FIFA seven and a half years ago because of Zen-Ruffinen’s 
gross incompetence. No matter what he tells you, Zen-Ruffinen’s charges against Blatter 
are a pack of lies and that is why they have been withdrawn from the Swiss courts’. 

Loyal F-Crew members and other cronies were quickly moved into key management 
positions.  Fellow  German-Swiss  Urs  Linsi  replaced  Zen-Ruffinen  as  boss  of  the 
administration, and Blatter’s former personal communications advisor, Markus Siegler, 
of  Germany,  made  himself  comfortable  in  the  Director  of  Communications  office, 
occupied  across  two  successful  World  Cup  cycles  by  the  urbane  Englishman,  Keith 
Cooper.  Then  he  turned  his  attention  to  FIFA’s  influential  committees as fierce critics 
like David Will and Farrah Addo lost their positions of responsibility. 

Next to go, for the second time was, Guido Tognoni, wrongly accused by Blatter of 
‘collaboration’ with two English journalists in the production of a book that was critical 
of FIFA. The two so-called journalists are the authors of this chapter. We had talked to 
Tognoni on a number of occasions. Most of the information used in the book (and in this 
chapter) came from an interview with him in 1996, a time when he was outside of the 
FIFA family. This falls some way short of collaboration. Nevertheless, a confident and 
vengeful Blatter was taking no chances and Guido had to go. 

With  a  tame  executive  and  a  loyal,  Germanic  praetorian-guard  around  him  Blatter 
became  increasingly  despotic  and  invulnerable.  He  is,  nevertheless,  pledged  to  stand 
down  in  2006  on  the  eve  of  the  World  Cup  Finals  in  Germany.  History  suggests  that 
things may turn out otherwise. Either way, with the Kaiser, Franz Beckenbauer, waiting 
in the wings, there would be smiles on the faces of officials of the Deutscher Fussball-
Bund  in  Frankfurt.  One  can  only  wonder  at  what,  back  in  Brazil,  Havelange  the 
Godfather  must  have  thought  of  the  Swiss-German  cabal  at  the  heart  of  his  beloved 
FIFA.  He  may  have  mused  that  Blatter  had  learned  well  from  his  own  Machiavellian 
leadership style.  

The future for FIFA 

If  things  continue  as  they  are—FIFA  run  by  Blatter  and  his  acolytes—what  does  the 
future  hold?  In  the  final  chapter  of  Great  Balls  of  Fire  we  indulged  ourselves  by 
projecting  what  the  future  held  for  international  football  if  it  was  allowed  to  continue 
along the course chosen for it by FIFA and its ‘partners’.13 In this vision we drew the 
logical conclusion that the commodification of the peoples’ game would become total as 
national  teams  were  replaced  by  teams  representing  trans-national  companies—Team 
Nike, Team Adidas, Team Coca Cola, Team MasterCard etc—and the World Cup Finals 
would  be  played  out  annually  between  these  teams  in  a  permanent  and  purpose-built 
arena-cum-resort called Fifaland, in Las Vegas, Nevada. The rules would be changed to 
make the games more spectacular. The world’s best players would be contracted to the 
companies, and certain performance-enhancing drugs would be permitted allowing them 
to extend their careers. Players like Ronaldo, Figo, Beckham, and Giggs would join an 
ensemble of ageing and aged rock stars and crooners permanently engaged in Vegas for 
the perpetual entertainment of an affluent global market and clientele. 

The Global Politics of sport     38

Dream,  nightmare,  or  vision  of  the  future?  In  a  classic  case  of  life  resembling  art, 
shortly  after  we  first  penned  this  fiction,  this  dark  fantasy  came  a  small  step  closer  to 
reality, thanks to Chuck Blazer when, in 1999 he sat next to Kirk Hendrix, president of 
Las  Vegas  events,  who  announced  that  the  North  and  Central  American  soccer  club 
championships would be held in the casino capital of the world. ‘Our intent is to make 
this  a  success  and  bring  it  back  on  an  annual  basis,’  Hendrix  said.  ‘We  would  like  to 
develop  Las  Vegas  as  a  soccer  destination.  We  think  Las  Vegas  and  the  soccer 
community can be great partners’. 

While Fifaland Las Vegas as described above may itself never happen, the wholesale 
transformation of football is more likely to come to pass. It is inevitable if the people—
that is, all of us—passively accept that there is no choice but to allow the game to be 
driven by the bullish and ultimately self-destructive logic of big business. We cannot turn 
back the clock but we can still have a say in the shape of things to come. Either through 
incompetence, greed or vainglorious notions of pre-destiny, an earlier breed of football 
administrators—the league of gentlemen, the blazer and slacks brigade—forfeited their 
right to rule world football a long time ago. As former boss of the English FA (Football 
Association) Graham Kelly put it to us, ‘The FIFA executive committee know they are 
part of a massively discredited regime, which, had it been in charge of a local Sunday 
league, would long ago have been subjected to the most rigorous inquiry and its officials 
banned from holding office indefinitely’. Should this come to pass, there is however a 
danger  that  their  places  will  be  filled  by  slick-suited  chief  executives  or  high  flying 
commissioners, with scant regard for football’s traditional culture. Jim Boyce, president 
of Northern Ireland’s football governing body, asked, in the lobby of the Glasgow Hilton 
the  night  that  Real  Mardrid  triumphed  over  Bayer  Laverkusen,  ‘Who  will  clean  up 
FIFA?’ Before this question can be addressed, however, we need to understand what kind 
of reforms are necessary. 

Conclusion: what is to be done? 

After reviewing the state of the global governance of sport in general, Sunder Katwala, 
concludes that, ‘it is difficult to find anything in the world quite so badly governed as 
international sport.’ He goes on to say: 

Reform  of  international  sporting  governance  is  not  inevitable  but  it  is 
possible. Sporting governance is in a state of extreme disequilibrium—the 
tensions  between  the  global  revolution  and  unmodernised  governance 
must eventually bring change of one sort of another. But change is likely 
to come from an uncertain combination of different forces—change from 
within, pressure from outside and change through collapse and crisis. 

In 1998 and 2002 FIFA had a clear opportunity to ‘change from within’ and recover its 
position as the guardian of the world game. But, as the 1998 and 2002 FIFA presidential 
elections  illustrated,  turkeys  do  not  routinely  vote  for  Christmas.  However,  the 
democratising of FIFA may yet come about ‘through collapse and crisis’. The bankruptcy 
of  ISL  in  2001  and  the  implication  of  senior  FIFA  officials,  including  the  president 

Not for the good of the game     39

himself,  in  this  debacle,  shook  the  organisation’s  foundations  and  renewed  calls  for 
democratic reform. Of potentially more significance than the alleged corrupt practices of 
individuals within or close to FIFA is the organisation’s financial crisis. There is clear 
evidence  that  media  and  marketing  interest  in  football,  at  least  at  the  world  level,  has 
peaked or even gone into decline. Without the huge financial surplus that accrues to FIFA 
from such arrangements it is unlikely to be able operate on the same lavish scale in the 
future.  Without  the  ‘cash  box’  brim  full  and  overflowing,  the  deals  and  alliances  that 
have  maintained  FIFA  as  a  fiefdom  and  kept  the  likes  of  Havelange  and  his  protégé, 
Blatter,  in  power  for  nearly  three  decades,  will  no  longer  have  this  most  important 
resource. If this comes to pass then calls for democratic reform, both from within and 
without, may become irresistible. 

Hitherto,  because  of  sport’s  mythical  status  as  a  politics-free  zone,  FIFA  (like  the 
IOC) has proven itself to be relatively impervious to pressure from the outside for reform. 
Up  until  now,  the  formal  political  presence  of  government  in  world  football  has  been 
limited,  usually,  to  token  and  largely  ceremonial  functions.  Royalty,  presidents,  and 
prime ministers attending opening ceremonies of World Cup matches or the same people 
hosting  lavish  dinners  for  ‘Fifacrats’  and  their  retinues  are  among  the  roles  routinely 
adopted by government representatives within the network. Interaction between national 
governments and FIFA tends to become more pronounced only when world football is 
perceived  to  have  a  bearing  on  the  national  interest.  Typically  this  occurs  around  the 
bidding for and hosting of major international tournaments, parti-cularly the World Cup 
finals.  Mega-events  in  sports  are  staged  for  corporate  profit,  personal  aggrandisement, 
and for state-driven national pride. 

Otherwise,  FIFA’s  engagement  with  state  politicians  usually  only  happens  when  it 
seeks to help one or more of its member associations prevent political interference into its 
affairs by its national government. Herein lies a clue that helps us to understand why up 
until  now  FIFA  has  operated  largely  beyond  the  reach  of  any  international  and 
democratically accountable legal framework. FIFA, like the IOC, was established by a 
class of people who thought themselves to be selfless, well-meaning, and right thinking 
gentlemen,  who  believed  in the separation of sport from politics as a sacred principle. 
According to this view, politics and politicians could only violate sports integrity. People 
like Frenchman Jules Rimet, Belgian Rudolf Seeldrayers and Englishmen Arthur Drewry 
and Sir Stanley Rous felt duty bound to protect football from the overt interference of 
politicians,  and  the  organisation  that  they  helped  to  mould  has  continued  to  operate 
according  to  the  same  principles.  This  is  a  position  that  has,  for  the  most  part,  been 
respected by mature democratic governments who rarely, if ever, meddle in the affairs of 
sports’ governing bodies. 

Of course, such a stance was naively self-serving from the outset, and is even more so 
now. It is a confidence trick that has been made easier to carry off because of the façade 
of democracy under which FIFA operates. As we have seen, when it comes to making 
major  decisions,  such  as  electing  a  new  president,  every  member  association  has  one 
equal vote. Thus, when it comes to the equity of representation, FIFA seems to occupy 
the moral high ground. However, often, those who cast votes are not themselves elected 
and neither are they accountable to any broader constituency. Furthermore, because FIFA 
elections operate a secret ballot, they can and have been rigged to ensure that those who 
are best suited to serve the business interests of big business are elected and re-elected. In 

The Global Politics of sport     40

this way, without any genuine democratic accountability, self-styled sporting aristocrats 
and autocrats secretly have manipulated and exploited global sport for their own financial 
and vainglorious purposes. 

As Cable puts it, ‘A culture of secrecy or perceived arrogance by international civil 
servants  and  policy  elites  can  be  seriously  counterproductive.  Opaqueness and secrecy 
are enemies of an open international system’. A big part of the problem is that neither 
INGOs nor BINGOs are subject to the same framework of international law as IGOs.13 
They have constitutions, members’ voting rights, auditing procedures and so forth, but 
generally,  accountability  is  an  in-house  affair.  Cable  observes  that  ‘these  [INGOs  and 
BINGOs] may well create elaborately democratic structures of consumer and producer 
interests  and  provide  for  cooperation  between  regulators,  but  a  necessary  political 
dimension is often missing’.14 

We  would  not  by  any  means  want  national  governments  to  run  football.  But  at  a 
domestic level democratically elected governments, should, through a legally constituted 
and independent agency, exercise a guiding, and if necessary, a restraining influence over 
the game. If, in many societies of varying political cultures, other important and formerly 
nationalised  utilities  such  as  gas,  water,  electricity  and  the  railways  have  to  be 
accountable  to  government  watchdogs,  then  the  same  should  apply  to  something  as 
important to the national psyche as football. 

At a regional level a similar arrangement could be worked out between, for instance, 
UEFA and the European Commission/Parliament, itself (in part at least) a democratically 
elected and representative body. At the least, such an arrangement would force these two 
bodies to come together and work out a sensible legal framework for the development 
and continued vitality of football in Europe, one through which the EC protected football 
from  the  business  predators  rather  than  helping  them  to  feast  at  the  top  table.  Similar 
arrangements  could  be  worked  out  between  football  federations  and  regional  IGOs  in 
other parts of the world. 

Finally,  FIFA  itself  must  be  brought  within  the  embrace  of  an  accountable 
international  organisation  such  as  the  United  Nations,  perhaps  under  the  wing  of  this 
organisation’s cultural framework, UNESCO.15 Under such an arrangement, FIFA’s off-
shore  financial  status  would  have  to  end.  All  of  its  important  decisions  would  be 
scrutinised by officials, themselves accountable to a broader electorate and within a wider 
legal framework. 

What  football  needs  at  every  level  is  transparently  representative  and  responsible 
government.  For  this  to  happen  the  administration  of  football  has  to  be  rooted  in 
accountable  institutions  and  subject  to  the  rule  of  law.  We  are  not  suggesting  that 
politicians  should  run  national  or  world  football.  A  restructured and more accountable 
FIFA would continue to exercise authority over all member associations. But here it is 
important  to  distinguish  between  political  control  and  political  accountability.  Control 
suggests uncontested domination whereas accountability alludes to representation based 
on  transparency  and  the  capacity  for  reform.  In  this  regard,  while  FIFA  is  right  to 
continue to protect its member associations from the political interference of those who 
would  seek  to  control  football,  it  is  wrong  to  continue  to  protect  itself  from  outside 
scrutiny and accountability. 

‘Why  does  this  matter’,  media  commentators  have  routinely  asked  us.  It  matters 
because supra-national organisations can gain for themselves unbridled power. Studying 

Not for the good of the game     41

the practices and values of long-term survivors at the heart of FIFA’s flawed system is 
important because the perpetuation of a system based upon cynical rhetoric and deeply 
ingrained hypocrisy can only in the long term undermine the more idealistic potential of 
sport  and  any  claims  that  sport  has  a  positive  role  to  play  as  a  form  of  trans-national 
global  culture.  Susan  Strange  has  written  of  unavoidable  ignorance,  insignificant 
ignorance and ‘the area of significant ignorance’.16 ‘The business of government’, and 
‘what  rulers  and  authorities  need  to  know  is  a  relative  matter’,  she  states.  But  ‘good 
modern governments’ need to know more and more. She argues that with a ‘disordered 
monetary  system’,  more  things  ‘now  lie…inside  the  area  of  significant  ignorance  for 
national governments’. As politicians of the highest rank from some of the major national 
powers  in  the  world  continue  to  pamper  members  of  sport’s  governmental  bodies  and 
elites,  seeking  the  favours of bodies such as FIFA and the IOC, yet know little of (or 
refuse to look clearly at) the nature of future organisational partners, lack of knowledge 
of the politics of international sports organisations constitutes an acute case of significant 
ignorance.  Strange  wrote  passionately  of  the  need  to  combat  the  ‘sorry  state  of  the 
international financial system’, not by trying to ‘turn the clock back’ or ‘trying to muddle 
through’.  Only  radical  reforms  would  suffice  to  deal  with  the  extent  of  the  global 
financial crisis, with the ‘mad money’ at the heart of ‘casino capitalism’. Strange is right. 
Reforms  remain  tokenistic  if  generated  from  within.  A  political  analysis  of  the 
organisation and governance of world sport is an essential premise for debates about the 
reforms that are necessary so that INGOs such as FIFA can really be seen to be working 
for the good of the game, rather than in the interests of those who have seen in FIFA, and 
other  such  organisations,  an  irresistible  opportunity  to  benefit  from  a  particularly 
lucrative BINGO.  

4 

Olympic survivals  

The Olympic Games as a global phenomenon  

Alan Tomlinson 

In this chapter I do three things. First, I review some commentaries on globalisation and 
culture,  and  globalisation  and  sport.  Second,  I  offer  some  selective  reflections  on  the 
history  of  the  Olympic  Games,  casting  an  analytical,  period’  ising  eye  over  the  24 
(Summer) Games, warning against the analysis of the Olympics on the basis of a sort of 
boxed-off self-referencing history of the sport event itself. Third, I review projections and 
claims made for the Sydney 2000 Olympic Games, and then discuss why and how the 
Olympics continues to be such a prominent player in the global politics of sport. 

In the first half of 2003 some of the world’s major cities—London, Madrid, Moscow, 
New  York,  Paris—and  other  bopefuls  such  as  Havana,  Istanbul,  Rio  de  Janeiro  and 
Leipzig, lined themselves up for the competition to win the hosting of the 2012 Summer 
Olympic  Games.  In  Prague,  in  June  of  the  same  year,  over  100  delegates  from  the 
bidding cities of Vancouver, Salzburg and Pyeongchang accompanied their teams’ last-
ditch  presentations,  hoping  to  sway  the  remaining  floating  votes  among  the  100  or  so 
IOC  (International  Olympic  Committee)  members  whose  whims  and  fancies  would 
determine  the  decision  as  to  where  to  place  the  2010  Winter  Games.1  Top  politicians, 
including prime ministers from Canada, Austria and South Korea lent their names to the 
bids, assuming obvious benefits should their city be successful. Such benefits, economic 
and/or symbolic, are notoriously difficult to identify in any precise fashion, and it is as 
much  the  ideological  cant  of  the  Olympic  phenomenon  that  sustains  its  profile  in  the 
modern  international  world  as  any  clear  or  tangible  gains.  This  was  reiterated  in  the 
rhetoric  and  style  of  the  three  presentations  in  Prague,  where  glitzy  contemporary 
populism was mixed with pseudo-philosophical babble in tributes to the enduring values 
of Olympism. The eventual winner Vancouver went first, entitling its presentation ‘The 
Sea to Sky Games’, and lead man John Furlong talked of the Olympics as ‘a powerful 
platform  for  building  a  better  world  through  sport’.  He  recalled  the  words  of  the 
immigrations  officer  who’d  greeted  him  on  arriving  in  Canada  from  Ireland  30  years 
before: ‘Welcome to Canada. Make us better’. ‘To give is the Canadian way’, he added, 
telling  the  IOC  that  The  Olympic  Winter  Games  will  make  us  all  better’.  Hockey 
superstar Wayne Gretzky talked of the fulfilment of his sporting dreams, which included 
four Stanley Cup victories, then added that ‘there’s no greater honour than the Olympics 
because  there’s  no  greater  movement  than  the  Olympics’,  and  stated  Team  Canada’s 
belief in the possibility of a world living in peace through sport. Other Winter Olympians 
recalled their starts in sport. Catronia Le May Doan, speed-skating gold medal winner at 
Nagano  and  Salt  Lake  City,  emphasised  the  limitlessness  of  the  bid’s  vision  of  ‘an 
Olympic  dream  of  forever’.  This  would  include  50,000  event  tickets  in  an  Olympic 

Olympic survivals     43

access programme for children who could not otherwise afford to attend any events, and 
an  international  youth  camp  populated  by  two  children  invited  from  every  national 
Olympic  committee.  Furlong  reappeared  and  pledged  that  if  the  decision  went 
Vancouver’s way, if the voters ‘felt our passion’, then we ‘Would distinguish ourselves 
in the cause of sport and humanity… Our dream, like your dream, is a dream of forever’. 
Salzburg was next, appealing to its small-town charm and its reputation for music and 
culture. Mozart, born in the town, dominated the soundtrack of the video clips, and the 
presentation  was  compered  by  Annely Peebo, a blonde opera singer with a potentially 
winning smile, who was soon to warble the title line of the bid, ‘The Sound of (Winter) 
Sport’. The Austrian prime minister, Wolfgang Schussel, referred to the success story of 
the  Olympics,  stated  an  intention  to  get  over  100  nations  to  participate  in  2010,  and 
praised sport’s capacity to cultivate ‘competition instead of confrontation’, and to speak 
for peace. The head of Salzburg’s music festival also emphasised the peace-stimulating 
dimension  of  cultural  exchanges  and  intercultural  understanding,  beaming  out  her 
message that ‘sport and art are like sun and moon’, they are both ‘the source of our well 
being’. 

Pyeongchang’s  presentation  was  headed  up  by  IOC  member  Dr  Un  Yong  Kim, 
veteran  sport  campaigner  for  and  boss  of  taekwondo,  and  chair  of  the  association  of 
international federations. Kim and the bid committee’s chairman offered full government 
support  for  the  extensive  construction  programmes  that  would  be  essential,  support 
confirmed  soon  after  by  prime  minister  Kun  Goh.  Further  presenters  emphasised  the 
projected venue’s nickname, Peace City, and the universality of winter sports. The bid 
talked up the theme of a Games for all based upon fundamental principles of peace and 
humanity. Much was also made of the potential of the Games to further the process of the 
uniting of the two Koreas. Across all the bids ran a theme of dreams come true, grafted 
on to a commitment to peace and a form of humanitarianism in which Olympism could 
show the way forward beyond some of the most pressing problems of the age. 

At every such presentation, ceremony and vote, it is clear that the appeal is never to 
simple economic benefits, or infrastructural upgrading, or national sentiment. Something 
else  is  claimed  for  the  Olympics,  something  transceiv  dental  in  relation  to  the  grubby 
materialism of everyday life. A strange, spiritual sense comes to pervade the proceedings. 
At such moments, criticising the Olympics is akin to laughing out loud in church.  

Global culture, global sport: the Olympic Games as a global cultural 

event 

Sociologists  and  social  historians  of  sport  have  long  recognised  the  centrality  of  the 
Olympics in any historical narrative of the rise and spread of international sport. Miller et 
al. observe how as forms of televison-based popular culture, events such as the Olympics 
provide ‘a crucial site where populations are targeted by different forms of governmental 
and  commercial  knowledge/power’.2  They  ask  us  to  attempt  to  imagine  such  an  event 
stripped of all the familiar cultural and political symbols that have become so familiar to 
worldwide audiences: 

The Global Politics of sport     44

No comprehensive media coverage, no national flags flying, no playing of 
national  anthems, no politicians involved in the ceremonies, no military 
displays, no tables comparing national standings, and athletes competing 
in whatever clothing they desired instead of national uniforms.3  

It is of course difficult to achieve this act of the imagination. A deeply entrenched and 
historically  claimed  symbolism  of  co-existing  national  rivalries,  perpetuated  alongside 
the commercially branded later cases of the corporatised Games, is one of the assumed 
dimensions of the mega-events of contemporary global culture. Maurice Roche locates 
this merging of the commercial and the political on the level of global consumer culture: 

Mega-events have had, and continue to have, an important role to play in 
the  development  of  this  global  consumer  culture  through  their  long-
established  promotion  of  what  I  refer  to…as  ‘touristic  consumerism’. 
They  also  contribute  to  understandings  and  experiences  of  ‘one  world’ 
through their capacity to carry universalistic meanings and ideals. These 
include  those  associated  with  the benefits of peaceful cultural exchange 
between  nations,  ethnic  and 
ideological  communities  (expos  and 
Olympics),  scientific  and  technological  ‘progress’  (expos),  human 
‘progress’  and  the  value  of  personal  and  national  achievement  and 
recognition through rule-governed competition.4  

Mega-events such as the Olympics are, for Roche, quintessential phenomena of global 
modernity, ‘intrinsically complex processes’ which combine the interests of political and 
economic elites and professionals from the increasingly supranational cultural industries. 
These  interlocking  elites  operate  on  a  number  of  levels,  Roche  goes  on:  ‘within  and 
between urban, national and international levels…ing together in a medium-term time-
horizon both to produce the events and to manage their effects’.5 

The  Olympics  are,  of  course,  more  than  mere  reflections  of  social  processes  and 
trends.  They  are  formative  as  well  as  formed,  pointing  the  way  towards  new  cultural 
formations and as such important indices of change and cultural trans-formation. Maguire 
identifies the last quarter of the nineteenth century as a major phase in ‘the international 
spread  of  sport,  the  establishment  of  international  sports  organizations,  the  growth  of 
competition  between  national  teams,  the  worldwide  acceptance  of  rules  governing 
specific sport forms and the establishment of global competitions such as the Olympic 
Games’.6  In  this  list,  it  is  the  Olympics  and  the  very  grandeur  of  the  scale  of  the 
conception  of  de  Coubertin  (the  Renovateur),  that  constitutes  a  project  of  seriously 
globalising proportion and potential, ridden with contradictions rooted in de Coubertin’s 
aristocratic,  imperialist,  patriarchal  roots,  but  nevertheless  premised  on  a  vision  of  an 
increasingly  networked,  compressed  and  orchestrated  global  culture.  As  Maguire  also 
notes, the Olympic Games continue to provide a stage on which can be played out some 
of the recurring tensions of global politics. The West ‘still has hegemonic control in the 
global sport figuration’ but for non-Westerners a ‘main source of potential dispute may 
well be the Olympic Games’.7 Miller et al. note the strong opposition of the Third World 
to  the  ‘undemocratic  ways’  of  the  IOC’s  international  Court  of  Arbitration  for  Sport.8 
And the Games have provided, case after case through their history, an opportunity for 

Olympic survivals     45

the  expression  of  national  identity.  Bairner  has  reaffirmed  how,  on  the  level  of  the 
national,  different  statements  can  be  made  to  a  world  audience,  in  the  context  of  the 
Olympics, about what it is to be American or Canadian.9 

in 

The Olympics operate therefore as a focus for the articulation of serious national and 
global  political  dynamics,  and  as  a  giant  billboard  for  the  elite  crop  of  multi-national 
corporations  that  are  the  preferred  sponsorship  partners  of  the  International  Olympic 
Committee.  These  political  and  economic  dimensions  are  interconnected  and  serve the 
interests  of  what  Miller  et  al.  (2001)  call  the  New  International  Division  of  Cultural 
Labour,  which  operates  in  the  context  of  ‘five  simultaneous,  uneven,  interconnected 
processes  which  characterize 
sport:  Globalization, 
Governmentalization,  Americanization,  Televisualization, 
and  Commodification 
(GGATaC)’.10 Listing all these processes may be a disservice to crisp English prose, but 
it  is  an  important  reminder  that  the  economic,  the  political  and  the  cultural  are  not 
separate dimensions of phenomena such as the Olympics. Studying the global reach of 
events such as this requires an analytical approach sensitive to the ways in which these 
dimensions intermesh. 

the  present  moment 

Recognition of the profile of the Olympic Games is well established in the scholarly 
circles of the historical and social scientific analysis of sport. The Games are not, though, 
always seen to be of great significance in more general approaches. In his analysis of the 
transnational capitalist class, one of Sklair’s main propositions is that ‘the globalization 
of  the  capitalist  system  reproduces  itself  through  the  profit-driven  culture-ideology  of 
consumerism’.11 He makes no mention of the IOC, and the Olympic Games is mentioned 
only in footnotes, in terms of some of its policy developments around green issues and 
the environment,12 and as an example of the increase in sport sponsorship of international 
sporting  events.13  Sklair’s  analysis  is  on  the  macrolevel  of  the  workings  and  reach  of 
transnational  companies  and  capital,  which  he  sees  as  powerfully  entrenched  in  their 
positions:  ‘No  social  movement  appears  even  remotely  likely  to  overthrow  the  three 
fundamental institutional supports of global capitalism that have been identified, namely 
the TNCs, the transnational capitalist class, and the culture-ideology of consumerism’.14 
The Olympics is in some senses, from this scale of macro perspective, just one example 
of the operationalisation of the practices and ideologies of global capital and the trans-
national companies that dominate the centres of international capital. It is not surprising 
therefore that they are not acknowledged to be any more or less interesting or important 
than any other such exemplar. More surprising is the total absence of any discussion of 
the Olympic Games or international sports-media events in the work of John Tomlinson. 
Tomlinson’s major themes are connectivity in a world characterised by ‘a particular and 
exaggerated  sense  of  proximity’,  aided  by  a  form  of  ‘high-profile  globalizing 
technology’, all with the potential to ‘change the nature of localities’.15 Central concerns 
in  his  book  are  deterritorialisation,  hybridisation,  mediated  communication  and  its 
consequences 
the  question,  or  possibility,  of 
cosmopolitanism. Those of us working consistently on sport would find it hard to ignore 
the Olympics as a major example through which to explore such themes, and associated 
themes, derived from Anthony Giddens, of time-space distanciation and its implications 
for people’s experience of place. Tomlinson cites shopping malls as examples of what 
Giddens has called the ‘phantasmagoric’ nature of modern places. Olympic villages and 

for  cultural  experience,  and 

The Global Politics of sport     46

stadia, Olympic parks and sites could equally usefully be viewed as illuminating cases of 
such places. 

Generally, although Olympic scholarship has generated extremely valuable histories, 
contemporary  studies  and  critical  interventions—far  too  vast  a  range  of  sources  to  be 
meaningfully listed here—a challenge remains. This is the straightforward challenge of 
re-locating  critical  analyses of the Olympic phenomenon within the context of debates 
concerning the nature of international cultural politics, the operation of the interests of 
trans-national companies and international capital, and the nature of international sport’s 
relation to global consumer culture and international markets. Any such challenge should 
reconsider the balance of forces that have combined to make the Games, and the so called 
Movement of which the Games are an embodiment, an international phenomenon of such 
profile, impact and longevity. 

The Olympic Games 1896–2008 

The  simple  facts  of  the  growth  of  the  Olympic  Games  are  widely  established,  in  an 
expanding  line-up  of  events,  participants,  media  personnel,  media  coverage  and 
worldwide spectators and television viewers. But the story of the survival and eventual 
expansion into everyday global consciousness of the Games was not an even one. Early 
Games after the inaugural success in Athens in 1896 were linked to expos.16 In Paris in 
1900 and in St Louis in 1904 events with few spectators were peripheral aspects of great 
trade  shows,  celebrations  of  expand-ing  international  markets.  As  high-profile  cultural 
events they were insignificant flops. London in 1908 recaptured some of the revivalist 
momentum  of  the  de  Coubertin  project.  The  British  Olympic  Association  had  been 
created  in  1905,  allocated  a  seat  on  the  IOC,  and  with  its  well-established  athletics 
organisation  in  the  form  of  the  Amateur  Athletics  Association  it  could  respond  to  a 
desperate IOC, looking for a replacement host city in 1906 when Rome had withdrawn 
just  two  years  before  the  event.  The  Franco-British  Exhibition  of  1908  became  the 
saviour of the Olympic idea. Though by the final day 90,000 turned out to witness the 
marathon race, spurred on by a media picking up on British-American athletic rivalries, 
the event was again a marginal appendage. It is interesting to look closely at some of the 
surviving documentation of the time.17 

The programme for the 1908 Olympic Games featured no Olympic logos or signs, and 
had no mention of the Olympics at all on the cover, which featured a high-jumper clad in 
classic white athletic kit, in an insert inside a kind of pseudo-classical door or arch-way: 
the  programme  is  headlined  The  Great  Stadium,  Shepherd’s  Bush,  London—Franco-
British Exhibition 1908 6d’. The Olympic Games and the ‘4th International Olympiad’ 
are not billed until page 2, after a first page advertisement for Robinson’s ‘Patent’ Barley 
Water:  in  the  ad,  a  polo-player  is  served  by  a  man-in-waiting,  and  horses  are  held  by 
others looking on: ‘For any violent exercise, “Barley Water” is the best Thirst-Quencher 
when properly made’ from R’s Patent Barley. The IOC and the BOA committee line-ups 
feature  on  the  third  and  fourth  pages.  The  athletic  contests  scarcely  feature  in  the 
programme. The event was seized upon by a range of advertisers, with advertisements for 
a range of products: a Pear’s Soap baby on the back cover, McVitie’s digestives, healing 
balm called Zam-Buk, a raincoat, Bryant and May and Swan Vestas matches, Gamage’s 

Olympic survivals     47

equipment,  Piggott  and  Ward  retailers,  ‘Read’s  Olympian  Oils—The  Marvellous  Pain 
Reliever and Muscle Strengthener’ at a shilling and 2/6, available from 90 Victoria Street 
SW, golf balls, embrocine medication (‘An antiseptic and disinfectant spirit’ that ‘makes 
old people feel young’); and Schweppes Dry Ginger Ale and Lemonade & Soda Water. 
Already,  we  see  associations  between  athletic  competition  and  self-improvement 
consumer products. The financial potential of the Olympics was very much untapped in 
London’s first Olympics, but the commercial dimension and potential of the event was 
clearly recognised. 

Alongside  this  commercial  dimension,  in  the  promotional  literature  of  the  British 
Olympic Committee, an idealised rhetoric of Olympism claimed that the Ancient Games 
‘formed  a  bond  between  widely  scattered  members  of  the  Greek  race;  they  fostered 
throughout the Greek world a sense of kinship and a consciousness of common ideals 
which  not  even  war  was  able  to  obscure’,  and  that  the  revival  of  the  Olympics  could 
foster an adaptation of fruitful past ‘principles of bringing together the chosen athletes of 
all nations in the strength of their youth and in the prime of their manhood to learn in the 
chivalrous and friendly rivalry of athletic contests that mutual respect and esteem, which 
are the only sure basis of International concord’. On this basis, the BOC desired ‘that the 
celebration should be worthy of the Motherland of International Sport’. The 1908 London 
Games confirmed the fragile cultural and economic basis of the Olympics, and provided 
some basis for the consolidation of the project in Stockholm in 1912. The Games after the 
1914–18  Great  War  (Antwerp  1920,  Paris  1924,  Amsterdam  1928)  remained  on  a 
relatively  modest  scale,  though  the  US  presence  was  becoming  increasingly  dominant, 
and included powerful statements of athletic prowess by women athletes. In Amsterdam 
in 1928, G.Van Rossem, secretary general of the Netherlands Olympic Committee and 
compiler of the official report of the Games,18 could write proudly that the press needs 
were catered for by setting up a Press Section. The Press Stand could seat 600. ‘In front 
of  many  of  the  seats  there  were  small  folding  tables  on  which  a  typewriter  could  be 
placed or notes made’ (p.247). The account of the provision of the media facility conveys 
the  modest  scale  of  the  event,  yet  also  the  excitement  of  applying  the  new 
communications technology to the international sporting event: 

[Next to the] post and telegraph office a room was fitted out in which the 
journalists could prepare urgent reports and telegrams. The writing tables 
being partitioned off so that each journalist could work without interfering 
with  the  others…offices  were  fitted  out  at  the  Heerengracht  and  in  De 
Groote  Club,  where  all  communiques  could  be  found,  where  the 
journalists could work, where they could obtain all the information they 
desired, and where, thanks to the management of the club, they could take 
their  meals  …  Further,  there  were  5  telephone  booths  installed  in  the 
office  at  the  Heerengracht.  This  measure  was  not  necessary  in  the 
Kalverstraat office owing to its being in the close vicinity of the General 
Post office, where ample provision was made.  

The  national  Olympic  Committee  was  not  averse  to  a  little  self-publicity  either,  and 
‘occasionally  propagative  articles  on  Holland  in  general  and  Amsterdam  in  particular 
with suitable photos were sent out for publication, and in this connexion much assistance 

The Global Politics of sport     48

was  afforded  by  the  “Society  for  making  Holland  better  known  abroad”  and  by  the 
‘Dutch Touring Club’. 

The Committee also took a stance on a case of competing media interests, at a time 
when  the  written  press  was  still  for  many  the  first  source  of  contact  with  news  and 
information, and in this case the outcome of sporting encounters: 

At the request of the Association Internationale de la Presse Sportive, the 
Committee gave up the idea of broadcasting results of the events, as the 
Association pointed out that this would be hardly fair to journalists whose 
papers had gone to much expense and trouble to send representatives to 
the Games. If the foreign papers had not done this, there would not have 
been  the  propaganda  made  for  the  Games  in  particular  and  Holland  in 
general, which there was undeniably, due to personal visits.  

The  official  report  catalogued  the  scale  of  communications  activity.  A  total  of  14,480 
telegrams  were  sent  from  the  Press  Bureau  in  the  Stadium.  Athletics  (1,166)  and  the 
Marathon (1,058) days generated most telegrams in the second period. Football (441) and 
hockey were the busiest days of the first period. You can sense the excitement at how 
these Olympics began to experiment with people’s expectations of time and space: 

The  excitement  which  prevailed  in  connexion  with  the  results  of  the 
contests and the extraordinary energy evinced by the journalists in their 
efforts  to  report  to  their  papers  as  quickly  as  possible  caused  a  sort  of 
sporting rivalry among the telegraphists at Amsterdam. It was due to this 
fact  that  messages  regarding  the  match  Uruguay-Argentine  were  cabled 
from  Amsterdam  via  New  York  to  Buenos  Aires  in  about  40  seconds. 
This  incident  was  unique  in  the  annals  of  the  telegraph  service  and 
therefore deserves special mention.  

Three  hundred  and  seventeen  journalists  were  present  during  the  first  period  of  the 
Games. In the second period this increased to 1928 and 616 respectively. At times there 
was pressure on space. Smaller press stands at some venues limited the number of these 
journalists admitted. Only 261 could cover fencing, 138 wrestling and weight-lifting, and 
196  swimming.  Amsterdam  1928  marked  the  beginning  of  a  transformation,  with 
international  communications  demonstrating 
the 
internationalism of the event itself, and the national interests of the host and participating 
nations. 

the  potential 

If the first eight Summer Olympics Games were relatively low profile, politically and 
commercially,  the  Games  of  the  1930s  were  more  overtly  political  and  expressive  of 
national  interests.  In  this  sense,  the  Games  from  1932  to  1984  can  be  seen  as  more 
explicitly political projects, in the 1920s and 1930s matched by the Soviet experiments in 
the use of sport for display and propaganda. It was in 1928, the year of the Amsterdam 
Olympics and a year in which Joseph Stalin was manoevering his way to power, that ‘the 
USSR  produced  its  own  large-scale  international  Olympic-type  multi-sport  event  in 
Moscow, the first “Spartakiad”, a combination of sport event and mass festival’.19 The 
second Spartakiad was held in Moscow in 1932. For the next twelve Olympic Games—

to 

speak 

for 

Olympic survivals     49

Los Angeles, 1932; Berlin 1936; London, 1948; Helsinki, 1952; Melbourne, 1956; Rome, 
1960; Tokyo, 1964; Mexico, 1968; Munich, 1972; Montreal, 1976; Moscow, 1980; and 
Los  Angeles,  1984—the  political  stakes  became  higher  and  higher.  This  included  the 
exploitation of the 1936 Games in the cause of fascism and Nazism, and after the Second 
World War the use of the Games to fuel Cold War rivalries, once the Soviet Union was 
permitted  into  the  party.  The  Olympics  also  offered  nations  the  possibility  of 
rehabilitation into the world community (Italy, Japan and Germany). Across this phase of 
the  Olympic  story,  the  explicit  political  motivation  of  intensely  national  interests 
catapulted  the  Games  on  to  a  new  level,  once  the  survival  had  been  achieved  in  the 
London 1948 Games. The Games represented the wider sport cultures of the nations that 
participated in them. In 1929 Mussolini sought to win the 1936 Games for Rome, and at 
Berlin in 1936 failed again in a bid to stage the 1940 Games. But this hardly stopped the 
fascist sport project established by Mussolini. His regime celebrated high-profile Italian 
victories in Europe’s first football World Cup Finals in 1934 and 1938, but the general 
sports project was operative across a range of levels. 

In  a  1933  booklet  on  the  ‘International  University  Games’,20  we  have  access  to  a 
discourse on the young sporting body that combines the claimed idealism of international 
brother- and sisterhood with the fascist project of Il Duce, Benito Mussolini. The rhetoric 
and  hyperbole  of  the  booklet  repays  close  scrutiny.  On  its  front  cover  it  features  a 
downhill skier, on its back cover a rower (in very modernist, sharp and angular imagery, 
canoe in the water looking like the spout of 1970s supersonic aircraft Concorde). Inside 
the booklet, the photograph on the title page is of an obelisk of Mussolini, and the Italian 
national flag. The opening photograph in the booklet proper is of the Mussolini Stadium. 
The  text  of  the  booklet  begins  with  a  paeon  to  Romantic  writers,  then  asserts  that 
‘there are many new things in Italy and one more important than the rest, Italy is today 
the youngest country in Europe, with young people aged 20 or under making up 43% of 
the population’. It reports the ‘wonderful progress made by Italy in this field of human 
activity’,  sport—its  profile  in  the  1932  LA  Olympic  Games,  Grand  Prizes  in  other 
countries  in  motor-cars,  horse  shows,  football  matches,  swimming,  fencing—‘it  is  the 
result of ten years of the Fascist Regime which places in the front rank the health and the 
physical  improvement  of  the  Italian  race…the  spirit  of  the  Italian  masses  has  been 
physically changed…and successful efforts made to give a sporting education to young 
men which will strengthen their muscles today and mould their character in the future’. 

French writer D.Chappert is quoted, writing in a leading Paris newspaper, telling his 
country’s  and  Europe’s  liberals  that  they  shouldn’t  be  afraid  to  recognise  and  admire 
Italy’s  sports  development,  for  sport  there  has  become  as  important  as  anti-TB 
campaigns, draining marshlands, building hospitals, roads and schools: ‘it is animated by 
the same spirit that inspired the unearthing of the glorious remains of ancient Rome and 
the development of aviation; sport has today become the real means of national education 
and stadia, sporting fields and swimming pools are being everywhere and democratically 
placed at the disposal of Italian youth’. Chappert’s hymn to youth becomes an apologia 
for the fascist project: 

Those  entrusted  with  the  direction  of  this  great  movement  justly  place 
university students in the front rank of the great mass of the young men 
they  are  training,  almost  as  if  they  represented  the  real  youth  of  the 

The Global Politics of sport     50

country. Youth, is in fact the title of a hymn that has become national, and 
it is considered as the inexhaustible source of new energies and therefore 
placed at the head of this renewed country.  

The Duce perfectly realizes that he can fully rely on this group of keen 
and intelligent young men fanatical for the greatness of their country, its 
glory and its mission in the world. 

It  may  be  a  case  of  collective  enthusiasm,  a  Latin  exaggeration  or  a 
Mediterranean  microbe…but  all  the  same  it  implies  a  great  material 
organization and a practical and moral work of preparation.  

Youth’s foremost place in national life in fascist Italy in the 1920s and 1930s led to the 
organisation  of  elite  groups  within  the  academy:  Fascist  University  Groups  (FUGs), 
‘initiated in 1920, side by side with the Fascist squads of action’. The latter were later 
incorprated into the National Party and then into the Regime, and the FUGs retained their 
university  base,  soon  reaching  55,000  in  number  and  acquiring  ‘the  character,  both  as 
regards culture and sport, of the most complete National Union in Europe’. FUGs were 
promoted in their ‘sporting education’, lectures, travel, cruises, international exchanges 
and  reunions—‘Italian  University  students  have  acquired  the  conscience  and  pride  of 
their status and they are now united in a mass of disciplined energies, from which the 
State and the Party have already selected with successful results, men of inexhaustible 
loyalty to fill positions of trust’. 

Youth were also inculcated into the Yearly Littoriali Sporting Competition, first held 
in  Bologna  in  ‘the  X  year  of  the  Fascist  Regime’.  These  were  designed  to  create  and 
reaffirm the sporting masses, and to award prizes according to numbers and discipline 
and  not  just  first  places,  and  cultivate  ‘sporting  spirit  as  a  whole’,  reinforcing  too  the 
achievements of the first ten years of the Fascist Regime, during which 58 stadia and 493 
sporting fields were built, and 3,500 sporting associations organised. It was the second 
time that Italy was preparing for these International University Games, after successfully 
staging them in 1928. For the 1933 event, the construction of the largest stadium in the 
country  was  planned  for  Turin.  In  Rome,  the Forum of Mussolini was constructed for 
athletic  exercises,  staged  in  front  of  20,000  spectators,  ‘surrounded  with  large  marble 
figures of athletes in repose each one representing a branch of sport. This harmonious 
construction recalls Graeco-Roman buildings of a similar character and its situation on 
the green hills of Monte Mario, is bound, even during sporting exercises…inspiring them 
with the higher ideals of physical and spiritual beauty as was the case in past epochs’. 
These Games, held in Turin from 1–10 September 1933, were an encomium to the fascist 
project. All the youthful idealism in the world could not undermine the prime political 
project. Italy, the booklet concluded, was sure that the Games would generate ‘that serene 
and sincere spirit of comradeship and that spiritual and sporting brotherhood which unite 
the youth of the entire world in a real and great “internationale”’. 

Arriving  from  anywhere  else  in  the  world  that  autumn  in  1933,  you  might  have 
swallowed  the  rhetoric  of  the  Italian  state  and  authorities,  have  understandably  seen 
yourself as a representative of a noble internationalist ideal. But from the acceptance of 
the  invitation  onwards,  and  certainly  from the moment you entered the Turin stadium, 
your sporting idealism was appropriated—‘arrogated’, as I have often called this process 
with  reference  to  the  Olympic  ideal21  Your  sporting  body  would  be  speaking  for  the 

Olympic survivals     51

apologists of the Italian political project. Even winning would not change this. For all of 
Jesse Owens’s gold medals and dignity in 1936, it made no difference whatsoever to the 
momentum  of  the  Nazi  project.  In  such  cultural  moments  and  spaces  the  body  is  an 
instrument of the ideology on the basis of which the sporting practice has been planned 
and  produced.  The  Olympics  inscribe  wider  cultural  projects  and  ideologies.  All  the 
Olympic hyperbole in the world does not alter this. In the explicitly nationalist second 
phase in the history of the Olympic Games, they prospered primarily on the basis of their 
usefulness as a vehicle for the articulation of political meanings and national rivalries. 
But as the Olympic project veered from crisis to crisis in the crisis-ridden ‘M’ years from 
1968  to  1980,  rocked  by  political  protest  (Mexico  City,  1968),  terrorist  incursions 
(Munich, 1972), unprecedented losses (Montreal, 1976) and major boycotts (Montreal, 
1976, and Moscow, 1980), it was its combined commercial potential and political use as 
shown in the 1984 Games that secured its future as a mega-event of the televisual age. It 
was fitting that the Games marking the transformative point of these phases in Olympic 
history were both staged in Los Angeles. 

Reporting US$225 million profits, based on restoration of facilities as much as new 
provision, celebrating the values of the free Western world after boycotting Moscow in 
1980,  and  producing  opening  and  closing  ceremonies  based  on  sheer  Hollywood 
razzmatazz, the LA Games marked a point of transformation in the cultural staging and 
underpinning  political  economy  of  world  sport.  It  was  the  first  Games  held  under  the 
presidency  of  Juan  Antonio  Samaranch,  and  launched  the  Games  into  a  new  phase  of 
development hand-in-hand with television companies willing to pay unheard-of sums to 
cover  the  events,  and  economic  partners  paying  huge  sums  for  their  exclusive 
sponsorship status and rights in the TOP (the Olympic programme) scheme.22 From that 
point  on,  the  Games  were  guaranteed  a  future  as  one  of  the  most  high-profile  global 
commodities. The Seoul Games (1988) carried on the political mission of host cities, but 
the cultural-commercial-economic rebalancing of interests was best encapsulated in the 
cases  of  Barcelona  (1992)  and  Sydney  (2000),  sandwiched  by  the  attempt  of  Atlanta 
(1996) to reconfigure the worldwide audience’s perception of US geography. The Games 
of  this  third  phase  were  immersed  in  a  developmental  cultural  logic  of  economic 
regeneration  and  global  self-promotion  of  cities  and  states,  justified  widely  and 
recurrently on the basis of some amorphous spiritual value of benefit to all of humankind. 
This logic continues to fuel the scramble to win the right to host the Games, with four of 
the world’s top cities—London, Madrid, Paris and New York—lining up in 2003 to do 
battle to win the 2012 Games. 

G’day: Sydney 2000 

Sydney was desperate to secure the 2000 Summer Olympics, to claim the first Games of 
the new millennium. It was clear in its bidding documentation as to its motives.23 The 
main features of Sydney’s bid as outlined in the Candidature File were: 
1 The concentration of fourteen sports in Homebush, plus press centre and village: 
‘Sydney Olympic park was to be the largest concentration of venues in Olympic 
history’. 

The Global Politics of sport     52

2 Many sports in Sydney Harbour Zone, yachting on the Harbour, six sports in Darling 

Harbour area: ‘the fifth largest Olympic precinct in history’. 

3 All athletes in the one Olympic village in the park ‘for the first time in Olympic 

history’. 

4 All venues within 30 minutes of Olympic Park. 
5 Focus on needs of athletes in all aspects of planning. 
6 ‘…to overcome fears about distance, transport costs to Sydney for all athletes and 
officials would be met by the Sydney Organising Committee, in addition to free 
accommodation and meals in the Olympic Village’. 

7 ‘…the freight costs of canoes and kayaks, rowing shells, yachts and all horses would be 

met by the Sydney Organising Committee’. 

8 Sydney ‘a low security risk with no known threats to the safety of the Olympic Family’. 
9 ‘…a four-year arts festival program with a particular focus on Australia’s indigenous 

and multicultural heritage’. 

10 ‘…the sheer physical beauty, the warmth of its people and the temperate climate of 

Sydney were also highlighted as providing a perfect location for the Olympic Games’.  
And Sydney’s bid ‘broke new ground in promising the most “environmentally friendly” 
Olympic  Games  in  history’  developing  guidelines  later  adopted  by  the  IOC  as  the 
standard  for  Summer  Olympic  environmental  policies.  Crucially,  the  bid  committee 
devised a sophisticated and comprehensive programme of lobbying IOC members. IOC 
members made visits to Sydney to be ‘briefed on the plans and to inspect progress’, and 
65  IOC  members  visited  Sydney  at  the  invitation  of  the  bid  committee,  not  counting 
delegates to the GAISF (the gathering of international sports federations) conference in 
the city in October 1991. 

And the lobbying certainly paid dividends. On 23 September 1993, five bidding cities 
made  final  presentations  of  30  minutes  each  with  15  minutes  for  questions.  Berlin, 
Sydney,  and  Manchester  started  in  the  Monte  Carlo  line-up.  Features  of  Sydney’s 
presentation  included:  Olympic  film  footage;  the  score  to  Waltzing  Matilda;  Kevin 
Gosper, the IOC vice-president and Australian Olympic Committee member, speaking on 
the Olympics and Australia’s unbroken attendance record and showing the commitment 
of  the  country  in  this  third  consecutive Australian bid. John Fahey, New South Wales 
president,  ‘committed  the  NSW  government  to  financially  guarantee  the  Games’,  and 
carefully  illustrated  the  solid,  modern  infrastructure  already  in  place  in  Sydney,  and 
stated concern for the environment. John Coates of the Australian Olympic Committee 
stressed  ‘The  Athletes’  Games’,  emphasising  in  particular  the  great  ‘centre  stage’  of 
harbour sites, the centrality of the Park, and the scope of the Olympic Village. Kieren 
Perkins, Barcelona 1500m freestyle gold medallist, spoke on freedom, safety, comfort for 
athletes and ‘a clean, healthy environment’. The fifth speaker was an 11-year-old Sydney 
schoolgirl, Tanya Blencowe: ‘Sydney is a friendly city where it doesn’t matter where you 
come  from.  We  are  all  Australians  together.  We  eat  together,  learn  together  and  play 
sport together. And that’s what the Olympic Games really mean to me. It’s bringing the 
young  people  of  the  world  together  to  celebrate  sport  and  friendship’.  Prime  Minister 
Paul Keating made three main points: he lauded the Australian love of sport, freedom and 
democracy,  claimed  Australia  as  a  representative  of  the  Asia-Pacific  region  and 
reaffirmed  the  city  as  an  ideal  venue  for  a  safe  games.  ‘Annita  Keating  followed  her 
husband to the microphone. Dutch-born Mrs Keating spoke as a representative of the 25 

Olympic survivals     53

per cent of all Australians born overseas, and of the 140 cultures found in Sydney, which 
she described as a “welcoming community” with a spirit of “friendliness and fun”. She 
repeated the final sentence of her speech in both French and Italian, a gesture to which 
the audience reacted warmly’. The last speaker was the leader of the bidding team, Rod 
McGeoch,  who  reiterated  the  key  messages,  cited  the  Olympic  ideals  and  charter,  and 
closed with a suitably oleaginous appeal: ‘Mr. President, on behalf of our entire team, on 
behalf of all Australians, and on behalf of all the peoples of Oceania, we humbly submit 
the Sydney 2000 bid’.  

IOC voting proceeded thus: 

City 

Sydney 
Beijing 
Manchester
Berlin 
Istanbul 

Round 

Round 

Round 

Round 

1 

2 

3 

4 

45
43
–
–
–

30
32
11
9
7

30 
37 
13 
9 
– 

37
40
11
–
–

The Australian bid came from behind, helped by bribery and late vote switches, to win in 
the  last  round.  No-one  knows  the  real  cost  of  winning  this  bid  and  staging  the  event. 
Rome might have pulled out of the 1906 Games with just two years to go, but now if you 
win the right to stage a modern Olympics you simply have to make it happen. Just weeks 
before the Games, organisers were requesting and getting hundreds of millions of dollars 
from the New South Wales Government. 

Sydney  2000  was  the  bumper  Summer  Olympics.  It  welcomed  more  than  11,000 
athletes, several thousand officials and coaches, and as the 16 days whizzed by estimates 
of the number of mediafolk in town reached 21,000, although official estimates had been 
initially put at around 15,000. Athens 2004 plans to cater for 18,000 media. The Main 
Press Centre at the Olympic Park was vast, and the International Broadcast Centre was 
dominated  by  US  broadcaster  NBC,  which  had  paid  US$705  million  dollars  for  the 
rights, and mobilised a workforce of more than 2,000. More athletes, more sports, more 
professionals remains the apparently inexorable trend. 

The  International  Olympic  Committee  claims  that  the  vast  majority  of  the  world’s 
population able to access a television will have watched the action and that the opening 
ceremony was watched by several billion—though such claims are beyond corroboration, 
and more reputable estimates by independent researchers have put the figure at rather less 
than  half  the  one  trumpeted  by  the  IOC.  But  it  is  beyond  dispute  that  the  summer 
Olympic  Games  does  claim  one  of  the  biggest  television  audiences  of  all  time. 
Australians,  and  Sydneysiders  especially,  responded  to  the  Games  with  passion  and  a 
determination to shout for and support their own competing hopefuls, and then in the 24-
hour pubs of Pyrmont and the like to party through till dawn. Australian Gold was won 
by the scantily clad blonde women beach volleyballers at Bondi Beach, by the muscular 
concrete-pillar  necked  water  polo  girls  in  the  Aquatic  Centre,  as  well  as  by  the  beach 
bums of the swimming squads and the fated and feted bridge to Aboriginal/Australian 
reconciliation,  400-metre  gold  medallist  and  lighter  of  the  Olympic  flame,  Cathy 
Freeman. 

The Global Politics of sport     54

When the big hopes were competing, the venues were a sell out and the great live sites 
of  Sydney—Circular  Quay,  Martin  Place  in  the  Central  Business  District,  Tumbalong 
Park at Darling Harbour, Pyrmont Park, The Domain atop the Royal Botanical Gardens, 
Belmore Park at Central Station—were throbbing with nationalist enthusiasm. The home 
crowds were raucously supportive of their Australian hopes, and always ready with a jeer 
and a boo for the athletes from the UK and the US. If there was no serious Australian 
competitor in an event, the crowd cheered any compatriot it could locate. At the boxing, 
this gave a moment of celebrity to a number of Australian referees. 

It was nevertheless enthralling seeing a nation of 20 million people chasing the USA 
and China in the medal table, and celebrating this by waving or being draped in a national 
flag dominated by the flag of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. 
The victorious side of the Olympics for the host nation quickly became a metaphor for 
both  the  reconciliation  embodied  in  the  dignified  presence  of  Cathy  Freeman,  and  the 
success  of  the  new  Australia  of  multi-cultural  mix.  The  silver  medal  in  the  first-ever 
Olympic women’s pole vault was won by a blonde beauty from Adelaide, with the most 
New-Australian  of  names,  Tatiana  Grigorieva.  Many  of  the  Australian  women  were 
blonde, leggy and en route to, if not already packaged up in, modelling contracts. Tatania 
had already got the ‘glam shots’ of herself, in far less than her pole-vaulting outfit, ready 
for the world press. 

The  organisers  of  the  Games,  the  much  maligned  SOCOG  (Sydney  Organizing 
Committee for the Olympic Games) could claim an Olympic record in ticket sales, far 
above  the  sales  figures  for  Atlanta  1996.  But  there  weren’t  many  sell  outs  for  the 
women’s soccer semis, or the softball preliminaries, or the Graeco-Roman wrestling, or 
the handball. In the bloated Olympic schedule you can always get to see something, be a 
part of the event. You won’t get into the best hotels in town, even if you’re a regular. 
Writer and expatriate Australian Clive James could not get in his usual hotel as the main 
hotels  in  Sydney  were  completely  taken  over  by  the  IOC  and  its  Olympic  ‘family’. 
Sydney  2000  has  been  widely  hailed  as  a  model  event,  the  ‘best  Games  ever’  in  the 
words  of  the  outgoing  Olympic  president  Samaranch.  What  can  we  glean  from  this 
picture of the Sydney bid and event, to account for the place of the Olympic Games in the 
global politics of sport? It is to this question that I turn in the concluding comments to 
this chapter. 

Concluding comments 

To understand in any adequate fashion the social and cultural significance of the Olympic 
Games it is necessary to conduct the analysis on a number of levels: the historical, the 
national/local, the international/global, the economic, the political and the cultural. In the 
three  main  phases  of  the  Olympic  Games  a  grand  sociopolitical project with a modest 
economic profile (1896–1928) was succeeded by a markedly political intensification of 
the event at the heart of international political dynamics (1932–1984). In the third phase 
(1984  onwards)  the  Olympic  Games  have  been  fuelled  by  the  global  reach  of  capital, 
which has held hands with the pseudo-universalist idealist hyperbole of an Olympism as 
it has sought to penetrate new international markets and reimage cities and regions in the 
international economy of a global culture. 

Olympic survivals     55

Close consideration of the effects of Olympic Games upon the host city and the nation 
remains curiously inconsistent. But Seoul and Atlanta have hardly emerged as tourist hot-
spots. Sydney has projected figures for increased tourism, but they seem more dubious 
two  years  on,  as  people  realise  that  the  long-haul  flights  to  Sydney  from  the  lucrative 
tourist  markets  of  North  America  and  Western  Europe  are  not  so  irresistible  after  all, 
despite  the  scenes  from  Sydney’s  super  September  in  2000.  Barcelona  remains  the 
serious contender to explain in any rational way the continuing attraction of staging the 
Olympics. Sustained studies have demonstrated the swing from business towards tourism 
in  statistical  profiles  of  visitors.  High-spending  US  and  Japanese  tourists  fill  the 
expensive rooms of top Barcelona hotels. Catalonian nationalists still celebrate the profile 
achieved by the 1992 event for their region of Spain, and for their wider political cause 
and ambitions. The Olympic Village is walkable from the squares and Ramblas of the 
city centre, contiguous to the Olympic Port. Here, nightclubs attract young hedonists and 
vose cinema screenings attract the international English-language movie fan. The beach 
and harbour-side base of the Olympic facilities is a base for thousands of promenaders, 
flaneurs of all types, ages and nationalities on sunny weekends. The Olympic Stadium 
atop the majestic Montjuic Park stages rock concerts and regular Spanish football league 
matches. Barcelona knows it was worth it. Other cities convince themselves that it was, 
as they seek to reposition themselves in the global marketplace.  

Understanding  the  significance  of  the  Olympic  Games  in  the  global  culture  of 
advanced modernity is not so much about what is on the agenda of Olympic competition 
and  activity  programmes.  It  is  more  about  the  global  profiling  of  places  and  the 
worldwide expansion of consumer markets. The Olympic Games, with all its ceremonial 
and ritual and tradition, its deference to youth and internationalism, its preservation of the 
pristine purity of the Olympic Stadium, continues to be significant in the contemporary 
world because of its unique blend of the all-embracingly international, the passion for the 
celebration  of  national  and/or regional identity, and the regular celebration of a global 
consumerism that attracts the sponsors to keep queuing up to be associated with the five 
rings  of  the  Olympic  logo  so  jealously  and  greedily  guarded  by  the  beneficiaries, 
luminaries and lawyers of the International Olympic Committee and its bogus ‘Family’. 

The irrational motives that drive those still spellbound by the Olympic Games and its 
promises are based in the fascinating hold that the Olympics still has on the contemporary 
imagination, and are stimulated by the image that the Olympic Games can still convey of 
a world in which the most passionate national interests can be mobilised within a tolerant 
and  inter-cultural  internationalism.  It  is  undeniable  too  that  those  feelings—manifestly 
exhibited in the avenues and passages of Barcelona, in the streets and places/squares of 
Sydney—are  genuine  and  deeply  felt.  The  Olympic  Games  may  be  in  some  senses 
absurd,  cases  of  magnificent  trivia  in  the  light-entertainment  schedules  of  a  mediated 
global culture. But they continue to provide a focus for the articulation of both a sense of 
national  identity,  and  an  international  cosmopolitanism  rooted  in  consumerism. 
Peculiarly, persisting across all the phases of the history of the Games is the rhetoric of 
spirituality, the claim that the Games fulfil some important expressive function over and 
above the politics and economics of the day. They have survived and in some undeniable 
sense  prospered  despite  the  shifting  agenda  of  the  event  itself,  and  the  many  ways  in 
which  sport  has  changed.  They  have  also  been  exposed  as  amoral  or  corrupt, 
unaccountable  in  ways  widely  typical  of International Non-Government Organisations, 

The Global Politics of sport     56

but claiming to put the guilty house in order and get back on the ethical track, expelling a 
few bribe-takers and establishing an agenda for reform. At the level of sport practice and 
performance itself, the Olympics has represented as many lows as highs in terms of moral 
aspirations;  and,  as  many  world  sports  organisations  would  claim,  and  championships 
would demonstrate, the Olympics is not a consistent pinnacle of technical achievement. 
Yet  despite  three  such  persistent  critiques,24  they  have  survived  and  expanded.  The 
rhetorical  idealism  of  the  Olympic  movement,  ideal  and  the  like  have  certainly  been 
arrogated to good effect by hosts of the Games, for uses internal to the needs of a city, 
region or nation and for purposes of wider international self-promotion. But the global 
religiosity at the core of the De Coubertin vision is consistently re-peddled, institutionally 
and individually. We see this in early messianic tributes to Olympism, in individual lives 
forged  by  a  commitment  to  its  ideals,  and  in  the  worldwide  thinking  of  contemporary 
figures.  The  first  programme  for  the  1932  Los  Angeles  Olympic  Games  featured  an 
article by the president of the University of California.25 For him, the religious elements 
of the ancient Greek Olympics provided a parallel to the Games’ modern mission: ‘May 
they  promote  the  love  of  play,  the  reciprocity  of  good  will,  and  the  solvent  of  good 
sportsmanship  in  which  shall  be  washed  away  the  immemorial  feuds  of  mankind  that 
now obscure the goal that is nevertheless so surely there and so completely attainable, the 
goal  of  “Peace  on  earth,  goodwill  toward  men”.’  As  on  2  July  2003  the  three  cities 
slugged it out for the IOC vote for 2010, the contemporaneous exhibition in the Olympic 
Museum featured Ella Maillart, a pioneer of sporting Swiss womanhood.26 Born in 1903, 
the  ill-health  of  her  childhood  was  reversed  by  a  strength  developed  through  sport, 
particularly  the  outdoor  activities  of  sailing  and  ski-ing.  But  the  sports  were  not  only 
sources of physical wellbeing. They represented a spiritual journey, an essential aspect of 
her  search  ‘for  her  inner  being,  which  she  discovered  in  an  ashram  in  Southern  India 
when  the  Second  World  War  had  just  broken  out  in  Europe’.  For  Maillart,  all  her 
physical efforts on the mountain and the seas were a ‘search for foreign skies’, part of a 
quest  integrating  the  physical  and  the  spiritual.  At  an  IOC  education  event  during  the 
Sydney Olympics, focused upon a review of the Olympic truce and a consideration of its 
potential  for  contemporary  initiatives  and  interventions,  the  president  of  the  United 
Nations, Kofi Annan, addressed the meeting on video. He praised the Olympics for the 
way it provided a sight of men and women of all types, a collection of human diversity 
and  inclusiveness.  Sport, he said, shares with world affairs more generally ‘the shared 
goal of a culture of peace’.  

Making sense of the Olympics is no straightforward task. Much depends on where you 
look,  and  I  have  argued  elsewhere  that  the  Olympic  experience  can  be  seen  as 
comparable to the theme park or the Disney experience.27 But the Olympic phenomenon 
remains  underpinned  by  an  enduring  rhetoric  of  universalist  spiritual  idealism,  and  a 
persisting  hold  on  the  worldwide  imagination.  Combining  this  so  successfully  with  an 
integrated powerful pull of the political, the cultural and the economic—as consolidated 
in the transformative phase after Los Angeles 1984—the Olympic Games are likely to 
retain their extraordinarily prominent profile in the global cultural consciousness.  

Alternative models for the regulation of 

5 

global sport  

Ken Foster 

Historically,  sport  has  been  governed  by  management  structures  that  were  hierarchical 
and authoritarian. Their ideology, and often their legal form, was that of a private club. 
The commercialisation, and the later commodification, of sport put pressure on this legal 
form.  Private  clubs  began  to  exercise  significant  economic  power  over  sport.  National 
associations of sport, which grew up to manage their sports, exercised monopoly control. 
International  sporting  bodies,  as  federations  of  national  associations,  in  turn  organised 
global  sport.  Increasingly  there  have  been legal challenges to the abuse of this private 
power by those who consider themselves damaged by it. The autonomy that allowed self-
regulation by sporting bodies has weakened in the face of legal intervention. The need for 
due process in decision making and the need to prevent abuses of dominant power within 
the sport were two important consequences of this legal intervention. 

Sporting  bodies  have  reacted  to  this  juridification  of  their  governance  by  trying  to 
create a zone of private justice that protects some of these legal values, a’rule of law’ in 
sport,  but  through  a  system  of  private  arbitration.  This  strategy  has  been  energetically 
pursued,  especially  at  the  international  level,  and  particularly  through  the  IOC’s 
encouragement  of  the  Court  of  Arbitration  for  Sport.  Additionally  the  nature  and 
functions  of  international  sporting  federations  as  global  organisations  has  made  legal 
regulation of their activities by national courts difficult. 

This  dual  difficulty  of  regulation,  private  arbitration  in  sport  and  the  inadequate 
national  legal  supervision  of  international  sporting  federations,  has  led  to  other 
approaches. The basis of legal intervention however is partly dependent upon the nature 
of  sporting  organisation  and  upon  regulators’  perceptions  of  the  values  of  sport.  One 
approach is to treat sport as a predominately commercial activity and to apply a market 
model to its regulation. This for example has been the dominant approach in the USA. 
However,  regional  regulation  by  the  European  Union  suggests  another  approach.  This 
treats sport as a cultural commodity with unique social elements and can be described as 
a  European  model  of  sport.  It  preserves  the  traditional  autonomy  of  governing  bodies 
over purely sporting issues. It encourages an organisational separation of commercial and 
regulatory functions within sporting federations. Its regulation of commer-cial activities 
is modified because of the ‘specific cultural’ values of sport, such as national leagues, the 
need for a redistribution of income, and support for local identity. 

Overall, the traditional structures of governance in sport have been altered by the dual 

processes of commodification and globalisation. 

The Global Politics of sport     58

Commodification 

Sport has always had some market relations between promoters, spectators, players and 
clubs. Players became professionals. Spectators paid to watch the event. Promoters of the 
sporting event gained revenue and hoped that the event made a profit. In this sense, sport 
has been commercialised for a long time. 

Commercialised  sport  saw  little  legal  regulation.  When  the  law  deals  with  internal 
market relations, it intervenes little. English law is reluctant to upset ‘free’ contracts even 
when they are one-sided. Players were tied to their club and had good reasons, like many 
workers, not to sue their employers. The legal form of football clubs was not designed for 
investment and profit. 

Commercialised  sport  has  become  commodified  in  the  past  two  decades,  especially 
with  the  arrival  of  specialised  sports  television  channels  who  have  paid  much  greater 
sums for broadcasting rights than previously. Sporting events are now sold to other than 
their immediate consumer; they become a commodity. Sport is sold to television or used 
to sell other commodities. The commodity form creates an external relation with other 
capitalists.  Commercial  enterprises  now  sponsor  events,  teams  and  individual  players. 
Corporate  hospitality  at  major  sporting  events  is  big  business.  Football  clubs  have 
become  public  limited  companies  and  are  run  for  profit  rather  than  sporting  success. 
Business  to  business  relationships  are  more  typical  of  commodification  and  the  more 
equal power of two businesses in itself makes litigation more likely. 

Thus commercialised sport has internal market relations and values, but it is still a use-
value, consumed for its own sporting worth. Law rarely intervenes in this realm where 
sport is produced. Commodified sport is an exchange-value that allows for the creation of 
surplus value in its external market relations. Law controls these external relations more 
readily in the realm of circulation. The commodification of sport has produced greater 
wealth,  especially  the  most popular sports such as football and motor racing. This has 
caused a crisis in the structure of governance as a battle over these new revenues ensued. 
Two  contrasting  patterns  of  governance  have  emerged.  Historically  international 
sporting federations developed to manage international competitions and to regulate their 
sport globally. Take FIFA as an example, for football is the most popular sport and FIFA 
has  202  members.  From its foundation in 1904, FIFA was intended to be an umbrella 
organisation  for  international  football.  It  has  representatives  from  every  national 
association of clubs. It is a federation. The scope of its jurisdiction is universal. Anyone 
in the world playing competitive football is ultimately under FIFA’s rule, via their club, 
their league, and their national association. Its statutes are designed to harmonise playing 
con-ditions  in  each  country.  They  also  provide  for  mutual  recognition  of  each 
association’s  authority.  This  means  for  example  that  a  player  suspended  by  one 
association is suspended by all and cannot play anywhere in the world. FIFA’s statutes 
also  rule  on  issues  concerning  players;  for  example  a  player  cannot  play  under  the 
jurisdiction of more than one national association and the sporting nationality of players 
is  also  determined  by  FIFA’s  rules.  The  sporting  monopoly  that  international  sporting 
federations control is an important cultural value. Most fans want one champion and rival 
organisations confuse the sporting quest to establish the best. So FIFA and its regional 
confederations are the sole promoters of international football and the sole accreditors of 
a  single  national  league.  Players,  on  pain  of  universal  expulsion,  are  forbidden  from 

Alternative models for the regulation of global sport     59

playing  in  games  organised  by  outside  promoters  for  commercial  gain.  FIFA  is  self-
financed. It is not funded by governments and it claims to be free of political interference. 
It operates as a private institution within international civil society. 

The  traditional  governing  bodies  have  struggled  to  retain  control  over  these  new 
revenues created by the commodification of sport. By using their monopoly powers to 
license  competitions  and  promote  sport,  they  have  tried  to  restrain  rival  promoters  of 
events. Out of the revenues raised by the sport, the governing bodies have kept a share for 
the  general  good  of  the  game.  The  competitors  have  not  been  allowed  to  take  all  the 
profit. This is best achieved by a hierarchical and authoritarian model of governance. The 
elite  within  the  sport  can  be  coerced  because  the  governing  body  is  globally  the 
monopoly controller of the sport. 

An alternative model emerges when the elite performers try to retain all the revenues 
that  they  produce.  To  gain  this  financial  control,  they  are  prepared  to  breakaway  and 
create  a  new  organisation.  This  has  a  different  form  of  governance  to  that  of  the 
governing bodies. The commercial imperative that usually drives breakaway organisation 
in  sport  leads  to  a  more  corporate  form  of  governance.  When  the  Premier  League  in 
England gained its independence from the Football League in 1992, it became a company 
with twenty equal shares. This is a legal form more suited to a joint commercial venture 
and very different from the existing management structure. 

Globalisation 

The process of globalisation has also contributed to the crisis of governance, especially at 
the  level  of  international  sporting  federations.  With  more  international  sporting 
competition, so the power and influence of the international governing bodies of sport 
have  grown.  The  globalisation  of  sport  has  moved  the  focus  of  legal  regulation 
increasingly towards international sports federations. 

Globalisation is an imprecise and contested concept. Following Scholte,1 it is possible 

to identify several strands in sport. 
1 Internationalisation: there are more international sporting competitions. There are also 

more nations. In team sports, the post-war expansion in the number of nation-states 
has meant that there are far more nations able to compete in global events. There has 
been more global movement and migration of sportspeople. Players of sport, at least at 
the elite level, have become global vagabonds, performing as often as not outside their 
home country on a global circuit. International sports tourism is now also big business. 
Many fans now follow sporting teams abroad or travel to international tournaments, 
such as the Olympic Games. 

2 Liberalisation: the removal of cross border restrictions on trade is less important in 

sport but cases such as Bosman2 have allowed greater movement of players and fewer 
nationality quotas in team sports. 

3 Universalisation of sport: this is a process of harmonisation and homogeneity. There are 

fewer sports that can dominate globally. To transcend local and cultural differences 
that are seen as barriers to global acceptance, the variety of sports that are capable of 
being marketed globally diminishes. A global sport, like football and basketball, needs 
to be simple in its structure and thus readily understood by those who have never 

The Global Politics of sport     60

played the game. There is global broadcasting of major sporting events. The television 
audiences for the Olympic Games and football’s World Cup are huge. Some national 
sports leagues are marketed and seen worldwide. English Premier football and 
basketball’s NBA league from the USA are two leading examples. These globally-
seen sports swamp local sports, which are culturally diminished by not being globally 
broadcast. 

4 Globalisation is often described as Westernisation or Americanisation. However this 
conflates and simplifies a complex process. Arguably there are three elements here. 
First, there is the rationalisation of games into sport as part of the process of 
modernity. Written rules are adopted. Leagues are organised so that the best team can 
be rationally identified. Scientific methods of training, timing and judging are 
introduced. Second, there is imperialism, as the Westernisation of third world sport. 
The pressures of globalisation and homogeneity have led to an exclusion of the ‘third 
world’ from the global sporting arena. Developing countries are excluded because 
they have fewer facilities, poorer training and their best atbletes are poached to the 
‘first world’. Sports have altered their technical requirements to the detriment of 
poorer countries. Sports like motor racing require massive technical capital that 
excludes them. Hockey introduced artificial pitches, which are expensive and 
disadvantage developing nations. This shifted the balance of power in world hockey 
towards developed countries, such as Australia and Germany, and away from 
countries such as Pakistan and India. Third, there is Americanisation. It is sometimes 
assumed that, because globalisation creates global homogeneity, in late capitalism this 
means the predominance of American values. However, the dominant forces in global 
sports have historically been European and, to a lesser extent, South American. North 
American sport, especially in professional team sports, has developed a very different 
model. In sport, globalisation does not necessarily mean the cultural dominance of 
Americanisation.  

5De-territorialisation: Globalisation alters the spatiality of social dimensions. As Giddens 

describes, ‘it diminishes the space-time dimension’. We have global broadcasting of 
sport and global fans. These fans are also consumers and are arguably more likely to 
‘shop around’ the global sports market for a cultural and sporting identity. As 
Giulianotti says The next generation of rootless football fans may come to practise 
placeless forms of …fandom that are promoted through the spectacular television 
coverage of the top teams.’3 De-territorialisation has weakened local identity in sport. 
As Giulianotti argues, ‘globalisation brings with it a disembedding of local social and 
political ties between club and community.’4 Even national sides are made up more of 
global mercenaries and less of local conscripts, as the ties of national identity weaken. 
In international sport, nationality has been manipulated for commercial gain. ‘Shirts of 
convenience’ are chosen by players who may have multiple sporting nationalities 
because of their ancestry.  

This  final  conceptual  strand  of  de-territorialisation  is  central  to  the  problems  of  legal 
regulation.  Building  on  Houliban’s  work,5  it  can  be  argued  that  there  is  a  difference 
between internationalised sport and globalised sport. In internationalised sport, the ‘the 
nation is the defining unit’.6 Sports teams are defined by their nationality. International 
competition,  as  in  football,  is  between  national  teams.  In  Olympic  sports,  athletes 
represent countries with a fixed number of competitors in each event. Globalised sport by 

Alternative models for the regulation of global sport     61

contrast  has  rootless  teams  with  multi-national  or  nationally  ambiguous  teams.  These 
rootless, de-territorialised sports are often typified by their identification with commercial 
sponsors. Formula One racing teams are defined by their manufacturers, such as Ferrari. 
Professional cycling teams are named after their sponsor, such as Telecom. Racehorses 
are often named after companies. 

Two  models  of  regulation  flow  from  this  difference.  One  is  based  on  the  national, 
regional  and  international  regulation  of  international  sporting  federations. They can be 
challenged  legally  through  doctrines  that  recognise  their  monopoly  control  over  an 
important  economic  activity,  and  because  they  exercise  a  public  function.  They  are 
subject to regulatory oversight, at least in their overtly commercial functions. They have 
‘no privilege arising solely from their status as global sports organisations.’7 

The second model of regulation is one of ‘contested self-regulation’ by a commercial 
promoter of globalised sport. Usually operating outside, or free from, any international 
sporting federation in the sport, they have no direct regulatory functions within the sport 
but are a profit-making organisation of elite sport. Commercial promoters, or elite teams 
organising  a  closed  league,  usually  adopt  a  commercial  legal  form.  This  leaves  them 
vulnerable to regulation as if they were any other capitalist venture. 

The challenge within most sports is that they have inherited the first pattern but that 
the process of commodification and globalisation are moving towards the second pattern. 
Internationalised  sport  suits  the  traditional  model  of  inter-national  sporting  federations 
because it respects national-based patterns of sport and its governance. Globalised sport 
suits a commercial, self-regulatory pattern. 

This simple dichotomy however needs to be used with caution. As sport has become 
more globalised, so the need for international codification has increased. The rules of a 
global  sport  need  to  be  universal  and  applied  everywhere.  This  global  codification  is 
supplied by international sporting federations. They create a hierarchy of rules and insist 
that  national  associations,  on  pain  of  expulsion,  follow  and  enforce  the  global  rules. 
Increasingly national associations of sport have their rule books written at international 
level.  The  international  harmonisation  of  rules  has  delocalised  sport  and  moved  it 
towards  a  single  global  regulatory  framework  and  governance.  The  IOC  is  a  supreme 
example of global regulation of sport. It acts as a global legislator, trying to embrace all 
sports.  This  is  especially  true  of  drugs  policy,  where  it  has  tried  to  impose  the  same 
regulations with the same definition of prohibited substances and the same penalties on 
all  sports.8  So  international  sporting  federations  are  harmonising  and  becoming  more 
homogenous because of globalisation. Nevertheless, their claims for self-regulation are 
conceptually different from those of the commercial promoters of globalised sport and 
need to be distinguished for the purpose of legal analysis. 

Regulating international sporting federations? 

The regulation and legal control of international sporting federations is thus a key issue in 
the global economy of sport. There are two main types of regulation that for differing 
reasons have proved ineffective in the control of international sporting federations. First, 
the traditional pattern of self-regulation of sport is incapable of resolving conflicts that 
arise  from  increasing  commodification  and  globalisation  of  sport.  This  has  led  to 

The Global Politics of sport     62

increasing  legal  intervention.  Second,  legal  regulation  by  states  or  by  national  legal 
systems  is  poor.  States  are  unwill’  ing  or  incapable  of  challenging  the  power  of 
international sporting federations. By failing to control international sporting federations 
effectively,  national  legal  systems  have  hastened  the  trend  towards  alternative 
approaches.  There  are  several  reasons  why  national  legal  systems  cannot  effectively 
regulate international sporting federations. 

Challenging private governance 

The existing patterns of global governance of sport have proved incapable of resisting the 
pressures  of  commercial  interests.  Governing  bodies  have  embraced  commercialism, 
professionalism and sponsorship. The interests of other stakeholders in sport have been 
ignored  or  marginalised.  In  part,  this  is  because  the  traditional  model  of  governance 
within international sporting federations has been that of the private club, with autonomy 
to  manage  its  own  affairs  without  legal  challenge  or  supervision.  This  autonomy  has 
discouraged  transparency  and  accountability  in  managing  sport,  and  failed  to  deter 
arbitrary or irrational decision making. 

Private clubs and private contracts 

The  approaches  of  national  courts  have  been  an  important  element  in  this  failure  to 
regulate  international  sporting  federations.  They  have  viewed  international  sporting 
federations  as  if  they  were  private  clubs  and  therefore  outside  detailed  legal  scrutiny. 
Sporting  federations  are  treated  as  voluntary  bodies,  which  people  are  free  to  join  as 
members  and  to  associate  freely  with  others.  They  are  not  publicly  accountable  and 
cannot  be  held  to  the  same  legal  standards  of  fairness  in  their  governance  that  would 
apply  to  publicly  funded  organisations.  English  courts  decided  in  1993  that  a  sporting 
federation could not be made legally accountable for their decisions by the public law 
route of judicial review because they lacked the status and functions of public bodies.9 
The US courts have consistently held that sporting federations are not state actors thereby 
freeing  them  from  an  obligation  to  operate  within  constitutional  guidelines,  especially 
those of due process and equal protection.10 Linked to this notion of the private club, is 
the idea that the rules of sporting federations are private contracts.11 National courts will 
accept the validity of contract provisions excluding their jurisdiction. Provisions in the 
rule books of international sporting federations that their decisions are ‘final and binding’ 
have been accepted by the English courts as binding on the athlete.12 

A  second  method  of  avoiding  legal  scrutiny  is  for  sporting  federations  to  make  it 
compulsory  in  their  rules  that  disputes  go  only  to  private  arbitration.  This  arbitration 
panel will usually be an ‘independent’ appeals body set up by the international sporting 
federation  or  increasingly  the  Court  of  Arbitration  for  Sport.  Here  the  genuine 
independence of the arbitrating body as well as the compulsory nature of the arbitration 
clause are the legal issues. 

A third way of avoiding legal scrutiny is by exclusion clauses. Athletes are now asked 
to sign agreements not to take legal action against international sporting federations as a 
precondition of taking part in international competitions.13 Such waivers have been used 
at the last four Olympic Games. 

Alternative models for the regulation of global sport     63

Private justice 

The intent of all these legal tactics is to create a zone of private justice within the sporting 
field  of  regulation  that  excludes  judicial  supervision  or  intervention  with  the  decision-
making process of international sporting federations. It denies athletes access to national 
courts  and  leaves  them  dependent  on  the  arbitrary  justice  of  the  international  sporting 
federations themselves. Athletes can claim redress only from an arbitration panel created 
and  appointed  by  the  international  sporting  federation  itself  or  at  best  the  Court  of 
Arbitration for Sport, created by the IOC.  

Arbitration  is  used  as  an  alternative  to  litigation  precisely  because  it  is  outside  the 
scrutiny of national courts. The Court of Arbitration for Sport14 was created in 1983 by 
the  IOC  as  an  independent  authority  to  conduct  arbitration  in  international  sports 
disputes. It offered the usual advantages of arbitration. It was a specialised agency with a 
speedy and inexpensive procedure. A decisive change occurred in 1993. An arbitration 
award of the Court of Arbitration for Sport was challenged by an athlete. He appealed to 
the Swiss Federal Tribunal arguing that Court of Arbitration for Sport was not impartial 
and  independent.  The  Federal  Tribunal  recognised  the  independence  of  the  Court  of 
Arbitration for Sport and thus effectively gave it a legal seal of approval.15 Nevertheless it 
was  critical  of  the  numerous  links  between  the  Court  of  Arbitration  for  Sport  and  the 
IOC. The IOC had financed the Court of Arbitration for Sport; it could alter the statutes 
of  the  Court  of  Arbitration  for  Sport  and  the  IOC  president  could  appoint  half  the 
arbitrators. 

Responding to this judicial criticism, the IOC reformed the organisation and structure 
of the Court of Arbitration for Sport, which aimed to give it greater independence. Under 
a new Code, the powers of appointment and administration were removed from the IOC 
and given to a new body, the International Council for Arbitration for Sport. There are 
now 150 arbitrators. Parties to an arbitration each choose their arbitrator and then these 
two choose a third to complete the panel. 

These changes have led to a considerable expansion of the Court of Arbitration for 
Sport’s role. Before 1994, it was used by a minority of international sporting federations 
and  its jurisdiction was not imposed on athletes by federations. Since its reform many 
more  international  sporting  federations  have  amended  their  regulations  to  make 
arbitration  compulsory.  There  is increasing pressure from the IOC on the international 
sporting federations to standardise their procedures and to use the Court of Arbitration for 
Sport  as  the  final  court  of  appeal,  especially  in  doping  cases.  It  established  ad  hoc 
divisions to settle disputes rapidly during the Olympic Games, beginning in Atlanta in 
1996. The law applied by the Court of Arbitration for Sport in appeals against a sports 
federation is that chosen by the parties or, in the absence of such choice, by the law of the 
country in which the federation is domiciled.16 As many international sporting federations 
are domiciled in Switzerland, this will in practice often be Swiss law. 

The Court of Arbitration for Sport is a system of exclusive private justice. There is no 
right  of  appeal  to  the  courts,  at  least  not  to  the  Swiss  courts  who  have  recognised  its 
independence  and  impartiality.  For  an  athlete  appealing  against  decisions  of  an 
international sporting federation based in Switzerland there is no further recourse. It is 
assumed  that  other  national  courts  would  also  recognise  the  awards  of  the  Court  of 
Arbitration for Sport because it is a genuinely independent arbitration.17 The IOC sees the 
system  as  part  of  its  policy  of  harmonisation  of  rules  and  procedures  within  the 

The Global Politics of sport     64

international regulatory regime of sport. The consistent application and interpretation of 
these  harmonised  rules  of  international  sporting  federations  by  a  single  institution  are 
seen  as  a  considerable  advance  towards  a  global  set  of  sporting  principles.  From  the 
IOC’s perspective, the Court of Arbitration for Sport is presented as an impartial external 
body that is a better alternative than international sporting federations settling disputes 
themselves, even by way of independent appeals procedures. For its supporters the Court 
of Arbitration for Sport represents the injection of the rule of law into the disciplinary 
procedures to which athletes are subject. Reeb argues that ‘centralising the resolution of 
sports  disputes  within  the  Court  of  Arbitration  for  Sport  should  encourage  the 
harmonization of certain major legal principles that are still applied haphazardly by the 
top sports bodies, such as the right to a fair hearing’.18 This analysis suggests that the 
Court of Arbitration for Sport’s jurisprudential function is to bring international sporting 
federations into a standardised application of the rule of law. As such it is an important 
and  active  agent  of  juridification,  forcing  rules  to  be  more  legalistic  and  to  be  more 
formally applied. Nevertheless, the acceptance by national courts that this is a system of 
impartial and independent arbitration removes such issues from their scrutiny. 

Lex sportiva 

A  more  wide-ranging  argument  is  that  the  emerging  jurisprudence  of  the  Court  of 
Arbitration for Sport is creating an independent set of legal principles applicable to the 
resolution  of  disputes  with,  and  within,  international  sporting  federations.  This 
jurisprudence  has  been  termed  lex  sportiva19  deliberately  invoking  the  concept  of  lex 
mercatoria,  which  refers  to  a  set  of  legal  principles  used  to  20  govern  international 
commercial arbitrations. 

This  argument  claims  that  as  an  international  institution,  an  international  sporting 
federation can by their rules and regulations create customary international law and this 
will  therefore  be  recognised  as  binding  by  national  courts  and  so  be  outside  their 
jurisdiction.  The  lex  sportiva  is  a  stateless  legal  order  that  governs  the  activities  of 
international  sporting  federations.  It  is  a  private  contractual  order  that  uses  binding 
arbitration to settle its disputes. And as such, it is respected by national courts. 

National regulation 

These three elements—private clubs, private arbitration and respect for a lex sportiva—
combine to remove sporting disputes from the regulation of national legal systems. The 
inadequacy  of  national  regulation  over  international  sporting  federations  stems  partly 
from  this  concept  of  unsupervised  autonomy  for  private  institutions.  But  it  is  also 
inadequate because national courts generally have difficulties in taking jurisdiction over 
global organisations. There are three principal reasons for this second type of inadequacy. 
First,  there  is  an  argument  that  international  sporting  federations  are  international 
organisations and as such they have a ‘diplomatic’ immunity from national courts. The 
status  of  the  IOC  as  an  international  body,  and  therefore  outside  the  jurisdiction  of 
national courts, was implied by the US courts in litigation arising out of the decision by 
the United States Olympic Committee not to send a team to the 1980 Moscow Games as 

Alternative models for the regulation of global sport     65

a protest against the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. In refusing to intervene the Court 
said that: 

Congress was necessarily aware that a National Olympic Committee is a 
creation and a creature of the International Olympic Committee, to whose 
rules it must conform. The NOC gets its power and its authority from the 
IOC, the sole proprietor and owner of the Olympic Games.21  

The  clear  implication  was  that  the  IOC  was  an  immune  organisation  and  that  that 
immunity extended to the national committees. 

There  has  been  further  debate  as  to  whether  the  IOC  has  a  legal  status  as  an 
international non-governmental organisation. The classic definition of international legal 
personality has been the capacity to enter into legal obligations at the international level 
with other international persons such as nation states. The IOC undoubtedly satisfies this 
criterion. In addition, the Swiss Federal Council has granted the IOC, which is domiciled 
in Switzerland, a special legal status that recognises it as an international institution. 

Second, there is an argument that global organisations, especially INGOs, are outside 
the  jurisdiction  of  national  courts  because  of  their  international  functions  and  the 
character of their governance. For example, the US courts refused to interfere with the 
programme  of  the  1984  Los  Angeles  Olympic  Games,  when  a  complaint  of  sex 
discrimination was filed, declaring that: 

…a  court  should  be  wary  of  a  state  statute  to  alter  the  content  of  the 
Olympic Games. The Olympic Games are organized and conducted under 
the  terms  of  an  international  agreement—the  Olympic  Charter.  We  are 
extremely hesitant to undertake the application of one state’s statutes to 
alter an event that is staged with competitors from the entire world under 
the terms of that agreement.22  

Third,  a  further  difficulty  with  making  international  sporting  federations  accountable 
before national courts is the issue of jurisdiction. This raises the question of what is the 
proper  forum  for  a  case  involving  international  sporting  federations.  An  example 
occurred in the case of Lewis v Bruno23 where a dispute between two British boxers was 
held not to be triable by the English courts because it involved the interpretation of the 
rules of the WBA, who were legally domiciled in the USA. The increasing globalisation 
of sport will make such cases more likely and increase the likelihood of ‘forum shopping’ 
whereby international sporting federations locate themselves in legally friendly countries.  
This interlocking legal framework makes it difficult to regulate international sporting 
federations. They are effectively outside the control of national legal systems, which treat 
them as immune and unaccountable, either because they are global in scope, or immune 
as international organisations. However, there is one form of legal intervention that has 
had  some  effect  in  controlling  the  activities  and  governance  of  international  sporting 
federations and that is regional regulation. 

The Global Politics of sport     66

Regional regulation and a European model of sport 

The alternative to globalised self-regulation or inadequate national regulation that has the 
most  potential  for  resistance  to  commercialisation  and  globalisation  is  regional 
regulation.  Such  regulation  can  directly  help  to  preserve  national  identity  in  sport  and 
resist the commercial pressures that globalise sport. The best example of such regional 
regulation of sport is the European Union. 

The European Union had a short period that lasted from the Bosman judgment24 in 
1995 to the Amsterdam treaty in 1997 where it looked as if a purely commercial model 
would  be  applied  to  sport.  Legal  regulation,  especially  through  the  enforcement  of 
European competition law, would treat sport like any other business and not recognise 
any unique character to professional sport. Part of the move away from a pure free market 
model  was  signalled  by  the  publication  of  the  policy  document  in  1998  entitled  the 
European model of sport.25 This argued that the European regulators should try to protect 
sporting and cultural values. By implication it contrasted an American model of sport that 
was more commercial and subject to a different style of regulation. 

American team sports have historically been organised as single economic enterprises 
in which the success of the league as a whole is the prime purpose. The league is owned 
by capitalists who then franchise teams to compete in the league. Entrepreneurs buy these 
franchises and construct a team to compete in the league by buying in all the necessary 
factors of production, such as a stadium, management and players. The promoters of the 
league aim to maximise profits in an overtly economic enterprise. Revenues within the 
league are distributed relatively equally amongst the teams in the league to try and ensure 
sporting balance. 

It thus differs markedly from the European model, which is said to have a distinctive 
pattern  of  organisation  and  governance.  This  pattern  protects  the  specific  and  unique 
cultural  values  of  European  sport.  These  are  non-commercial  values  that  a  regulatory 
framework should protect by exempting some sporting matters from its scope. 

The  key  features  of  the  European  model  and  the  principal  differences  from  the 

American model can be represented in the following table:  

European model of sport vs American model of 
sport 
    

European 
(socio-
cultural) 
Sporting 
competition 
Open pyramid. 
Promotion and 
relegation 
Vertical 
solidarity; sport 
for all 

American 
(commercial)

Profit 

Closed league; 
ring-fenced 

Profit 
maximisation; 
promote elite 

1 Organisational 

motive 
2 League 
structure 

3 Governing 
body’s role 

Alternative models for the regulation of global sport     67

4 Cultural 
identity 

5 International 
competitions 

6 Structure of 
governance 

stars as 
celebrities 
Transnational 
or global 
leagues; 
footloose 
franchises 

Non-existent or 
minimal 

League or 
commissioner 

National 
leagues; local 
teams. 
Opposition to 
relocation of 
teams & 
transnational 
leagues. 
Important for 
national 
identity 
Single 
representative 
federal body 

These key differences can be expanded: 

The organisation of sport is not governed directly by commercial motives 

but by sporting motives 

The European model of sport is a model of organic growth in which enthusiasts combine 
to  compete  against  each  other.  The  values  are  sporting  and  social;  any  profit  made  is 
treated  as  incidental  not  central.  In  professional  football,  for  example,  there  were 
historically  limits  on  taking  profits  out  of  football  clubs,  so  making  them  unattractive 
investment  opportunities.  The  legal  form  of  most  sports  clubs  in  Britain  is  that  of  an 
unincorporated association, effectively a private members’ club. This is essentially a non-
profit making form. The primary purpose of a sports league or competition is to find the 
best.  Commercialism  is  a  necessary  evil,  in  some  sports  still  resisted,  and  which 
governing  bodies  believe  should  always  be  secondary  to  sporting  values.  Many 
professional  football  teams  run  at  a  loss  and  would  be  closed  on  ordinary  business 
principles. As economic enterprises they are frequently worthless apart from their major 
asset, their ground. They nevertheless continue to function, dreaming of sporting success. 
The  American  model  is  an  outcome  of  commodity  production  of  sport  where 
commercial  values  predominate.  Sport  is  sold  as  a  commodity,  especially  to television 
broadcasters.  They  are  the  primary  consumer  with  massive  bargaining  power.  Rule 
changes  are  made  to  accommodate  television.  Franchises  relocate  to  capture  new  and 
larger  fan  and  viewer  bases.  Failing  franchises,  which  do  not  contribute  to  the  greater 
economic  good  through  gate  and  other  receipts,  are  ruthlessly  pruned  or  moved  to 
economically greener pastures. Whole leagues in the past have failed economically and 
become redundant. The overall model and ideology is that sport is the same as any other 
business venture.  

The Global Politics of sport     68

The structure of leagues is open 

The  European  sports  league  has  an  open,  not  closed,  structure.  There  is  a  pyramid 
structure through which teams can advance on sporting performance alone. Teams rise 
and  fall  through  linked  leagues  by  promotion  and  relegation.  The  rich  club  can  be 
relegated; the poor team promoted. 

This fear of sporting and economic decline is absent from closed sports leagues, such 
as those that are normal in North American sports. Such leagues are a closed shop with 
entry controlled by the incumbents. There is a fixed number of teams in the league with 
no relegation. New teams cannot break into the closed shop unless the league decides that 
its  overall  economic  health  will  be  improved  by  expansion  franchises.  The  economic 
risks of sporting failure are reduced and this makes capital investment in a team franchise 
more attractive. 

Sports federations promote vertical solidarity 

The governing bodies take part of the commercial revenues generated by the sport and 
use it for the overall good of the sport. Vertical solidarity refers to the techniques that are 
used by a single governing body in the sport taking a share of the sport’s total receipts 
and  using  them  to  support  the  grassroots  of  the  game.  Redistribution  can  help  youth 
development, wider participation and coaching. The elite, money-making clubs in effect 
subsidise  the  lower  reaches  of  the  game.  Vertical  solidarity  depends  on  the  exclusive 
jurisdiction of a single governing body that has the jurisdiction and authority to reflect 
this form of ‘taxation’. This is why European regulators and policy makers have been so 
opposed to the threat of a breakaway independent league of the top European football 
clubs, fearing that the sport overall will be impoverished. 

There is no vertical solidarity in American sports. The professional leagues do little to 
support the game other than to support their own farm teams that can be exploited for 
gain.  Elite  performers  are  exploited  for  personal  and  collective  monetary  gain.  The 
business of sport is seen as much as about entertainment as about sporting excellence. 

The preservation of national leagues is culturally important 

The preservation of national leagues is culturally important so that teams and their fans 
retain  a  sense  of  identity. Local teams are supported by vertical solidarity so that fans 
retain  a  sense  of  local  identity.  As  a  consequence  transnational  leagues  are  opposed, 
especially the emergence of pan-European leagues. 

There is little sense of local identity in the American model. In sports where the team 
can  disappear  overnight  and  move  to  a  new  location,  the  league’s  identification  of  its 
supporters is one of commercial customers rather than fans. The business can and will be 
moved whenever commercial considerations dictate, more like a supermarket chain than 
a sports team.  

Alternative models for the regulation of global sport     69

National team competition is important 

The international sports federations share the European sporting ideology, which is where 
the overwhelming majority of them had their historical roots. They organise international 
competitions  to  establish  the  sporting  best.  They  usually  follow  redistribution  policies 
similar  to  those  of  national  federations,  trying  to  develop  their  sport  globally  and 
supporting  the  poorer  nations.  There  is  little  international  competition  in  American 
sports. Baseball has its parochial ‘World Series’; football has its genuinely ‘World Cup’. 

Sport is governed by a single governing body 

Another  major  and  crucial  difference  between  the  American  and  European  models  of 
sport is the structure of governance. European sports leagues are usually part of a wider 
structure of regulation and governance within the sport. National governing bodies are 
the constitutional regulators of the sport, both amateur and professional. They approve 
and license the sports leagues. Independent sports leagues outside the structure of unitary 
governance are absent or short-lived because a separate independent league is seen as a 
threat to be eliminated. 

The closed league of American sports leagues is an independent capitalist venture. The 
sports  league  governs  itself;  it  is  independent,  autonomous  and  exclusive.  The 
governance of the league is not in the hands of a national federation for the sport but in a 
separate commercial structure. The league is governed as if it is a single economic entity 
with a board of owners of the various brands. This is a model of governance much closer 
to a commercial board of directors. It regulates itself by agreement among the partners, 
although they often cede executive power in non-financial matters to a powerful single 
Commissioner. The professional league is not part of a wider constitutional framework of 
governance. It is not normally affiliated to an international sports federation.26 

This ideal type of the European sports model has limitations. In most team sports, the 
open  pyramid  structure  does  not  extend  throughout  the  sport  but  is  restricted  to  the 
professional levels of the sport. The dream of taking the village cricket team to the apex 
of  the  game  is  not  available.  The  professional  league  in  cricket,  the  County 
Championship, is a closed league. The same teams compete every season and there have 
been only two new counties admitted in the last hundred years. Even sports that have a 
relatively  open  structure,  such  as  football,  have  narrow  entrance  points  to  the  higher 
professional  levels.  Only  one  team  per  season  has  been  promoted  from  the  semi-
professional Conference to the higher reaches of the fully professional Football League, 
though the number was increased to two in 2003.27 The fear of economic decline amongst 
the professional clubs means that the trapdoor down into the Conference is still narrow. 

Other  sports  have  moved  to  an  American  model  to  a  much  greater  degree.  Rugby 
League,  for  example,  has  created  a  ‘Super  League’  with  strict  entry  criteria.  These 
include  economic  criteria  such  as  the  potential  gate  revenues.  The  sport  has  tried  to 
enforce  rationalisation  and  merge  economically  weaker  clubs.  It  has  granted  new 
franchises in towns without any history of rugby league in an attempt to make the sport 
attractive  outside  its  narrow  geographical  limits.  The  European  sports  model  is  not 
empirically universal nor is it immune from the forces of economic rationalisation and 

The Global Politics of sport     70

commodification. The closed league is developing in many sports and the historical links 
to the grassroots of the game are being severed. 

American regulation 

The American approach to the legal regulation of sport has been markedly different to 
that  of  Europe.  American  professional  sports  have  been  regulated  by  the  anti-trust 
authorities starting from the position that they are commercial enterprises. For this reason 
it is instructive to look briefly at the approach of the American regulators for it represents 
the best example of regulation in a free market context, in which there has been little or 
no recognition that sport has a cultural or social dimension. It will then be contrasted with 
the developing model of regional regulation within the European Union. 
The three major issues that have been litigated under anti-trust law are: 

1 free agency for players 
2 breakaway leagues 
3 franchise relocation.  

1. Free agency 

Historically, disputes about players moving were the earliest preoccupation of sports law 
in the USA. Players were restrained from freely changing clubs, partly to control wages 
but also to counter rival leagues who wanted to poach players for themselves. The most 
notorious restraint was baseball’s reserve clause. All players had a clause inserted in their 
original contract that gave the club an option to renew their contract each season. At the 
end of the season each team listed players that it wished to retain (reserve) and claimed 
exclusive rights over them. Other teams in the league agreed to respect these reserve lists 
and  not  induce  the  player  to  move.  The  player’s  club  could  then  exercise  its  option 
knowing that the player had no bargaining power; he could not threaten to leave. Players 
were effectively bound to a single club until the club chose to release them. 

The ‘reserve clause’ was upheld by the Supreme Court in 1922 when it decided the 
anti-trust  laws  did  not  apply  to  baseball.28  When  other  professional  sports  expanded 
rapidly  in  the  1950s,  partly  because  of  money  from  television  broadcasting,  they  also 
used similar contractual devices. These were challenged and in 1957 the Supreme Court 
held that, unlike baseball, professional football was covered by the anti-trust laws.29 Later 
decisions extended this judgment to other sports and baseball’s exemption was declared 
to be an anomaly.30 Even this exemption came under judicial attack in the 1990s when 
courts tried to limit it to the narrow issue of the reserve clause and so allow anti-trust 
laws to apply to other questions such as franchise relocation within baseball.31 

Once the preliminary issue that anti-trust law applied to most professional sport was 
decided,  there  was  a  campaign  on  free  agency  for  players.  Anti-trust  law  was  used  to 
protect the interests of the players. In a series of cases the courts asserted a Bosman-type 
principle of free agency for players.32 Whilst not achieving full freedom of movement for 
players,  these  decisions  have  modified  some  of  the  worst  excesses  of  labour  practices 
within American sport. The draft system in American football, where new professional 

Alternative models for the regulation of global sport     71

players are effectively assigned to one club, has been regularly challenged and has been 
slowly modified under this judicial onslaught. 

2. Monopolies and rival leagues 

The professional sport leagues now have a monopoly. There is only one league in each 
sport.  But  historically  they  faced  competition.  Organised  baseball  faced  many  rival 
leagues in its early days. The American League and the National League agreed to form, 
in  effect,  a  single  structure  in  1903.  Other  leagues  were  ‘defeated’  by  their  long-term 
inability to get players. The Federal League was the last major competitor and it folded in 
1915.33 The Supreme Court’s approval of the reserve clause in 1922 undoubtedly made 
future challenges from other leagues difftcult. The pattern of new leagues emerging to 
rival the existing league left a legacy in American sports. Raw competition in the free 
market was to be the solution to organising sport effectively. 

Other sports have had similar histories.34 In ice hockey, the National Hockey League 
had  a  rival,  the  World  Hockey  Association, which survived for six years in the 1970s 
before  four  of  its  teams  were  absorbed  into  the  NHL.  The  National  Basketball 
Association formed in 1949 but faced the American Basketball Association from 1967 to 
1976  until  an  agreement  between  the  two  leagues  brought  teams  into  the  NBA.  In 
professional football the NFL merged with the AFL in 1966 with all the eight teams of 
the rival AFL joining the NFL. 

The commercial model of sport that emerges from this pattern is one of takeovers and 
mergers with a gradual tendency towards monopoly with only one league surviving. Not 
surprisingly,  the  application  of  anti-trust  legislation,  which  was  designed  to  prevent 
monopoly, was now, apart from baseball, assumed. When the NFL and AFL merged in 
1966, Congress felt it necessary to grant an immunity from anti-trust legislation to the 
merger.35 

The  tactics  used  to  defeat  rival  leagues  have  been  considered  in  several  leading 
cases.36  The  jurisprudence  emerging  from  these  cases  shows  a  balance  being  stuck 
between the illegality of anti-competitive behaviour towards rival leagues and the legality 
of maintaining single sports league as the preferred form of organisation.  

3. The relocation of sporting franchises 

Getting the best commercial opportunities goes to the heart of the closed league system of 
American  sport.  By  controlling  the  number  of  franchises,  the  leagues  can  control  the 
entry of new teams. By controlling the location of existing franchises, the leagues can 
control which cities have a sports team. All sports leagues require a unanimous vote of 
owners  to  approve  a  relocation.  Legal  challenges  abounded  in  the  1980s  as  the  major 
sports leagues spread their geographical wings. There was a broad move of franchises 
from the rust belt of the north-eastern United Sates to the sun belt of the Southwest and 
the Old South. However, the most legally high-profile case concerned the proposed move 
of the Raiders football franchise from Oakland to Los Angeles, which was blocked by the 
league,  the  NFL,  but  allowed  by  the  courts.37  The  key legal question—was the league 
abusing its dominant market position?—depended on what constituted the market. The 
NFL unsuccessfully tried to argue that they were competing in a broad market; either the 

The Global Politics of sport     72

entertainment market or the market for watching sport generally. The courts held that the 
market  was  a  narrow  one—specifically  for  NFL  football.  With  such  a  narrow  market 
definition, the NFL were obviously a monopoly. They then were unable to show that the 
blocked  relocation  was  reasonable.  Three  principal  reasons  emerge from the litigation. 
One, that there was no obvious need for the league to control the allocation of franchises 
in order to produce a successful product in terms of the league’s overall economic well-
being. Two, that there were no express and objective criteria, such as population size or 
regional balance of teams, for the decision to block the transfer. Three, that the decision 
was not clearly an objective business judgment but was tainted by personal animosity. 
The consequence of this period of litigation over relocation of franchises was that judicial 
scrutiny  of  decisions  overrode  internal  league  governance  but  the  sports  leagues  were 
also driven to adopt and follow objective criteria in future decisions over franchises. 

4. Exceptions 

The sporting leagues have however been saved from the full logical consequences of a 
commercial model by two legal doctrines that limit the impact of a commercial model. 

First, during the 1980s, the courts allowed sports leagues to use the ‘labor exemption’. 
This  doctrine  was  inserted  into  the  anti-trust  legislation  to  ensure  that  collective 
bargaining between trade unions and employers was not treated legally as a price-fixing 
cartel. The labour exemption provided that if there was genuine collective bargaining in 
the industry then the anti-trust legislation was inapplicable. Players’ unions now regularly 
bargain with the leagues on a wide range of issues as well as salaries. They successfully 
argue  that  these  aspects  of  collective  regulation  are  outside  the  scope  of  the  antitrust 
legislation  and  so  many  issues  of  sports  regulation,  especially  free  agency,  have  now 
been removed from judicial scrutiny.  

Second,  a  legal  doctrine  known  as  the  single  entity  theory  has  been  success’  fully 
argued. Under this doctrine, a sports league is treated as a single legal entity, akin to a 
joint venture between the clubs, rather then a collection of individual legal entities. By 
virtue of being treated as a single entity, a sports league is thereby not combining, which 
is of course at the heart of the anti-trust legislation, to the detriment of the public interest. 
The most recent application of this doctrine has been to soccer. In the landmark case of 
Fraser v MSL38 the courts have allowed US soccer to keep a system in which players are 
centrally  contracted  to  the  league  and  then  allocated  to  a  franchise.  The  complex 
reasoning in this case suggests at least that new leagues in minor sports, as professional 
soccer is in the USA, may gain some protection. 

The  history  of  anti-trust  regulation  thus  suggests  that  sport  leagues  cannot  avoid 
judicial scrutiny given their commercial ideology and structures of governance, but that if 
players’  rights  are  respected,  rational  decision-making  is  employed,  unions  are 
collectively  bargained  with,  and  fledging  leagues  protected  then  the  full  rigour  of 
competition law can be modified. 

Alternative models for the regulation of global sport     73

European regulation 

History 

Following the landmark case of Bosman in 1995,39 there was a massive increase in the 
number  of  complaints  about  UEFA’s  activities  by  those  who  were  subject  to  its 
jurisdiction,  especially  clubs  and  players,  and  by  those  who  had  commercial  relations 
with UEFA, especially broadcasters. For a time it appeared that the Commission might 
take  an  extreme  position  and  say  that  all  decisions  made  by  UEFA,  and  indeed  other 
governing  bodies  of  sport,  were  in  principle  subject  to  challenge  under  European 
competition law. If football was just a business, and UEFA was its monopoly supplier in 
Europe, then the anti-Competitive rules of the Treaty applied without modification. The 
spectre of continual involvement and intervention by the European Court of Justice and 
the  European  Commission  into  the  affairs  and  internal  governance  of  UEFA  was  thus 
raised. 

This extreme position, that everything UEFA does is legally challengable, was soon 
seen to be untenable. After its brief flirtation with the undiluted free market model40 and 
treating football as if it was like any other business, the Commission began to search for 
another position. The Amsterdam Treaty in 1997 had a Declaration on Sport annexed. 
This spoke of ‘the social significance of sport’. In a protocol it was declared that: 

The Conference emphasises the social significance of sport, in particular 
its role in forging identity and bringing people together. The Conference 
therefore  calls  on  the  bodies  of  the  European  Union  to  listen  to  sports 
associations when important questions affecting sport are at issue. In this 
connection,  special  consideration  should  be  given  to  the  particular 
characteristics of amateur sport.41  

This was the first recognition by the European Union of the unique features of sport. It 
was  followed  in  1998  by  the  Commission’s  paper  on  the  European  model  of  sport, 
discussed above. This argued that sport has a social and cultural role and is not solely 
about money. This paper was followed in 1999 by the Helsinki Report on sport.42 This 
stressed  the  values  upheld  by  existing  goveriving  bodies  of  sport  such  as  UEFA.  The 
Report concluded by calling for a new partnership between the sporting federations, the 
member states and the European Commission, which would require that the Commission 
as the principal regulatory organ should ‘take account of the specific characteristics of 
sport’. An informal council of European Ministers of Sport in Lisbon in May 2000 issued 
a Declaration on the ‘Social Dimension of Sport’. This concluded, in idiomatic English: 

Being a precious factor of the development of a ‘feeling of belonging’ as 
an  expression  of  social  cohesion  and  warrant  of  community  life  and 
solidarity,  and  also  being  an  element  of  socialisation  of  groups  and 
individuals  that  cannot  be  ignored,  contributing  to  the  strengthening  of 
civic  society,  sport  …wishes  therefore  to  be  respected  in  its  specific 

The Global Politics of sport     74

aspects  within  the  space  of  the  European  Union,  and  to  that  end  the 
specific aspects of sport, namely its social function, should be taken into 
consideration in the implementation of community policies.43  

This was followed by the Nice Declaration on sport in December 2000. This was entitled 
‘a declaration on the specific characteristics of sport and its social function in Europe’. It 
proclaimed: 

Even  though  not  having  any  direct  powers  in  this  area,  the  Community 
must, in its action under the various Treaty provisions, take account of the 
social, educational and cultural functions inherent in sport and making it 
special, in order that the code of ethics and the solidarity essential to the 
preservation  of  its  social  role  may  be  respected  and  nurtured.  The 
European  Council  hopes  in  particular  that  the  cohesion  and  ties  of 
solidarity  binding  the  practice  of  sports  at  every  level,  fair  competition 
and  both  the  moral  and  material  interests  and  the  physical  integrity  of 
those  involved  in  the  practice  of  sport,  especially  minors,  may  be 
preserved.44  

This new approach, recognising the specificity of sport, has two principal elements. The 
first element distinguishes between the sporting and social functions of sport, which will 
be immune from regulation, and the commercial activities of sporting federations. The 
conceptual  basis  of  this  distinction  distinguishes  different  functions  for  sporting 
federations such as UEFA. For example if UEFA are regulating the rules of the game, 
then  this  will  be  seen  as  a  purely  sporting  function  and  the  Commission  will  not 
intervene.  If  UEFA  are  selling  exclusive  broadcasting  rights  to  football  matches  as  a 
collective  package,  then  they  are  clearly  functioning  commercially  and  there  is  no 
apparent justification for this function to be exempt from European law. 

The  second  strand  addresses  the  social  and  cultural  character  of  sport.  It  now 
encompasses  many  strands,  some  vague  and  aspirational,  such  as  ‘strengthening  civic 
society’.  Key  policies  however  include  ‘identity’  by  preserving  national  leagues  and 
international competitions and encouraging the redistribution of income within sport, as 
‘ties of solidarity binding the practice of sports at every level’. The policy agenda, driven 
by  the  politicians,  has  a  simple  underlying  message  opposing  the  commodification  of 
football: save small local clubs; prevent a breakaway European Superleague. 

The Commission’s current approach 

Collective marketing of broadcasting rights 

The collective selling of broadcasting rights to sporting events by the governing body is a 
key  factor  in  promoting  solidarity  within  the  sport.  Unless  the  govern’  ing  body  can 
control these valuable commodities, they will be unable to generate sufficient revenue to 
act  as  trustees  for a redistributive mechanism. Collective marketing and selling is thus 
one  area  where  the  European  regulators  have  been  prepared  to  accept  a  sporting 

Alternative models for the regulation of global sport     75

justification to modify a free market approach. Legally, the rights to sports events belong 
to the home club. At least this is the case if the home club is the owner of its ground. For 
what  is  being  granted  to  a  broadcaster  is  a  contractual  exclusive  licence  to  enter  the 
ground  where  the  game  is  being  played.  The  club  will  also  promise  exclusivity  by 
denying access to any rival broadcaster. However sports leagues typically will only allow 
participation  in  their  competition  if  each  club  assigns  their  rights  to  the  league.  This 
central pool of rights is then offered for sale as a single package by the league, usually on 
an exclusive basis, to competing broadcasters. 

Central marketing is objectionable to a free market approach for several reasons. It is 
claimed that it distorts competition amongst broadcasters. Sport, especially football, is a 
key driver in developing television markets. It is a ‘must-have’ item that is indispensable 
for getting viewers to pay for coverage. By pooling all the fixtures into a single package, 
only  the  large  and  richer  media  groups  can  afford  to  bid  for  them.  Smaller  and  new 
entrants to the broadcasting market, and poorer terrestrial broadcasters, are excluded. 

It is also claimed that exclusive deals bar other entrepreneurs access to the rights for 
different media. If these were sold separately, other companies could develop new sports 
services  through  mobile  phones  and  the  internet.  Collective  marketing  is  also  said  to 
prejudice  the  consumer.  Such  deals  limit  the  total  number  of  games  broadcast  and  so 
deny viewers a free choice of games to watch. The sporting authorities defend collective 
marketing  because  it  allows  financial  redistribution  in  the  sport.  Individual  clubs  are 
unable to sell their games at a market price; if they could, the popular teams would get 
richer, and the less popular poorer. In sport, the rich tend to win. So collective marketing, 
it is claimed, equalises the financial strength of the clubs by foreclosing individual clubs 
from selling their games. 

UEFA have always claimed the right to sell and market the broadcasting rights of the 
competitions that it promotes, especially those of the Champions’ League. The top clubs 
have complained that collective marketing is an abuse of UEFA’s dominant position. The 
clubs have no alternative but to agree to forfeit their rights despite the economic loss that 
they suffer. Broadcasters also claimed that they suffered because they were unable to buy 
single games from clubs but could only buy a collective package from UEFA. 

In June 2002 UEFA and the European Commission reached a compromise agreement 
on the matter that gave UEFA most of the spoils.45 The Commission allowed UEFA to 
continue  to  sell,  as  a  collective  package,  the  live  and  delayed  television  rights  to 
Champions’  League  games.  Some  other  media  rights,  such  as  internet  rights,  will 
however be jointly exploited by the clubs and UEFA. The Commission appears to have 
allowed this anti-competitive practice of taking the clubs’ commercial rights away from 
them  to  continue  because  of  the  redistribution  of  the  broadcasting  income  that  UEFA 
proposed  to  implement.  UEFA  claimed  that  the  new  agreement  showed  that  it  was 
possible  to  reconcile  the  specific  characteristics  and  nature  of  football  within  the 
framework  of  European  law.  It  is  a  notable  departure  from  normal  commercial 
considerations and is an important recognition that the redistribution of income by UEFA 
is a key social purpose that needs to be legally exempt. 

The Commission has also shown an interest in the collective marketing arrangements 
that have been entered into by national football leagues. The deals struck by the English 
Premier  League  and  BSkyB  have  been  under  scrutiny,  especially  in  relation  to  the 
exclusive element of these deals.46 The current proposal by the Premier League for the 

The Global Politics of sport     76

upcoming bidding round is to offer three different packages of games. This clearly results 
from discussions with the European Commission and is designed to avoid the charge of 
selling an exclusive package. 

Separation of regulation and promotion functions 

The boundary between the Commission’s regulation and sport’s self-regulation has been 
redrawn by the Commission’s approach to the governance of motor sports by FIA. The 
Commission laid down an important principle that a governing body of sport needs to 
separate its regulation of the sport from its commercial activities in promoting events and 
in  maximising  their  commercial  value;  a  governing  body  must  not  use  its  regulatory 
functions improperly to exclude its commercial rivals from the sport.47 

FIA had used its monopoly position in running international motor sport to prevent 
rival promoters setting up rival events through various methods. They refused to license 
rival  promoters,  competitors  and  events.  They  banned  drivers  who  competed  in  rival 
events. They insisted that circuit owners grant them exclusive use of their tracks, thereby 
preventing  any  other  promoter  from  using  these  circuits.  They concluded broadcasting 
agreements that penalised the broadcasters if they showed rival events. 

After a long period of negotiation, the Commission secured modified regulations from 
FIA.  They  insisted  on  a  complete  separation  of  the  regulatory  function  of  FIA,  as  the 
governing body of the sport, and its commercial function of exploiting the broadcasting 
rights  to  all  motor  sports  events  under  its  jurisdiction.  The  separation  is  designed  to 
prevent conflicts of interest. The Commission also limited the extent to which FIA, as the 
regulator of the sport, can take measures to prevent rival promoters of events competing 
with  FIA’s  events.  The  Commission  wanted  to  separate  the  function  of  the  FIA  in 
promoting events (and thereby gaining commercial benefit) from that of licensing events 
as  part  of  its  regulatory  function.  The  role  of  a  governing  body,  according  to  the 
Commission, is to act fairly and create a level playing field so that all promoters of events 
are treated equally fairly. 

The  Commission  here,  unlike  its  approach  to  UEFA’s  governance  of  football,  is 
clearly using a commercial model. FIA is seen as the current monopoly supplier of motor 
sports  internationally.  Rivals  who  wish  to  enter  this  sport  and  promote  alternative 
competitions  need  drivers,  circuits  and  broadcasting  income  among  other things, to be 
commercially competitive. Each of these necessary components was controlled by FIA 
and they used their monopoly position to block rivals. Drivers were blacklisted, circuits 
were tied up exclusively, and broadcasters penalised if they traded with rivals. None of 
these tactics were acceptable to the Commission. 

The different approach by the Commission can be explained because motor sport is a 
globalised,  rather  than  an  internationalised,  sport.  It  had  a  commercial  structure  of 
management  and  offered  no  cultural  or  social  justification  of  its  anti-competitive 
behaviour. As such it was subject to normal commercial criteria in its regulation. This 
example may be unusual in that there was an excessive intermingling of the regulatory 
and  commercial functions within the governing structures of international motor sport. 
However,  it  indicates  that  regional  regulation  can  be  effective  and  that  the  fear  that 
globalised sport can escape all regulation and be immune from legal intervention may be 
exaggerated. 

Alternative models for the regulation of global sport     77

Self-regulation on sporting issues 

The general approach by the European regulators to the governance of sport has been to 
allow an area of self-regulation to sporting authorities. The Commission has declared its 
policy  publicly.  Commissioner  Monti  in  a  speech  in  2001  outlined  the  Commission’s 
approach said: 

The  Commission  is  not,  in  general,  concerned  with  genuine  ‘sporting 
rules’. Rules, without which a sport could not exist, (that is rules inherent 
to  a  sport,  or  necessary  for  its  organisation,  or  for  the  organisation  of 
competitions) should not, in principle be subject to the application of EU 
competi-tion rules. Sporting rules applied in an objective, transparent and 
non-discriminatory manner do not constitute restrictions of competition.48  

This is a clear statement, although the three final conditions, objective, transparent and 
non-discriminatory  manner,  need  to  be  noted.  This  policy  follows  partly  from  two 
important cases before the European Court of Justice in 2000. In Lehtonen49 the Belgian 
basketball association had rules forbidding transfers after a deadline late in the season. A 
Finnish player who signed after the deadline complained that the rule restricted his free 
movement,  following  the  Bosman  ruling.  The  Court  held  that  as  long  as  there  was  no 
discrimination between EU citizens such a rule was not unlawful as it had a clear sporting 
objective,  to  prevent  clubs  buying  in  new  players  for  the  end  of  season  play-offs.  In 
Deliege50  a 
international 
competitions, where there was a limited quota of places for each nation. Again the Court 
found that the rules did not hinder her economic freedom and that sporting associations 
were free to set selection criteria as long as they were not arbitrary and were objectively 
justified.  These  two  decisions  gave  sporting  asso  ciations  a  degree  of  autonomy  but 
arguably  left  the  court  with  a  residual  supervision.  The  Court  clearly  rejected  the 
argument that sporting bodies had a total immunity even over ‘the rules of the game’ but 
they had to satisfy basic legal safeguards such as non-discrimination and rational criteria 
for decisions.51 

judoka  challenged  her  non-selection  for  Belgium 

in 

Conclusion 

The governance of sport by international sporting federations is in principle not beyond 
the  regulatory  scope  of  states,  either  through  national  legal  systems  or  through 
international  law. But the nature of international sporting federations makes regulation 
through national legal systems difficult. Attempts to use a zone of private arbitration by 
international sporting federations may only allow self-regulation to reappear. Therefore, 
frameworks of wider scope are needed to control their activities. 

Regional  regulation  is  suggested  as  the  alternative.  Because  European  sport  has 
specific  features,  especially  the  protection  of  open  leagues  and  the  issue  of  national 
identity,  regional  regulation  can  help  to  support  internationalised  sport  against  the 
encroachment of globalised sport. 

If the process of globalisation continues, what are the likely changes to the regulation 
of sport? The political economy of sport is now ruled by global capital. This will hasten 

The Global Politics of sport     78

the Americanisation of sport and lead to the development of a single model of globalised 
sport.  The  present  system  of  governance,  as  represented  to  a  large  extent  by  the 
traditional  governing  bodies,  will  be  dismantled  in  favour  of  elite  sports  managing 
themselves, especially in the key area of profit maximisation. Even the minimum level of 
regulation represented by the European Union’s approach will be resented by capital and 
it will strive to recreate unregulated, autonomous structures. Law and regulation needs to 
rise  to  this  challenge  by  subjecting  globalised  sport,  and  its  commercial  forms  of 
governance, to the full legal consequences of its commercial logic. The attitude of the 
competition regulatory bodies is decisive here. The approach of European regulation has 
tried to protect what it defines as the specificity of European sport. This embraces the 
cultural values of internationalised sport and not those of globalised commercial sport. 
Globalised sport, with a purely commercial model, needs to be legally subjected to the 
full  force  of  competition  law.  The  approach  of  the  anti-trust  authorities  in  the  USA  is 
instructive here for they have dealt longer with self-managed, closed sports leagues. The 
approach of the European Commission to motor sport is encouraging; regional regulation 
can be effective, if only because the most commodified sports are played, watched and 
financed in Europe. Where cultural values and the protection of national identity in sport 
are  key  issues,  European  regulation  has  tried  to  give  those  values  special  protection. 
Whether this protection of non-commodified values especially can resist the rising tide of 
globalised sport remains to be seen. A breakaway transnational European football league 
may yet be the key test.  

Sport and the nation in the global era  

6 

Alan Bairner 

It  has  frequently  been  argued  that  the  various  processes  that  have  come  to  be  known 
collectively as globalisation pose a major threat to nations and to identities created and 
supported by the concept of the nation. The argument is perfectly straightforward even 
though it is commonly expressed in far from accessible language. Put simply, economic, 
political,  cultural  and  ideological  trends,  supported  by  a  pervasive  and  all-powerful 
global  media  industry,  must  inevitably  destroy  the  distinctiveness  upon  which  nations, 
nationalism and national identities depend for their very existence. For some this means 
the triumph, at least temporarily, of what Tom Nairn describes as ‘the dissemination of a 
secular  faith,  the  new  monotheism  of  cure-all  Free  Trade,  or  marketolatry’.1  For  other 
commentators,  globalisation  understood  in  this  way  will  culminate  in  something  even 
more specific, namely the universal acceptance of a peculiarly American way of doing 
things—ironic given that part of the argument aims to prove that all nations are doomed. 
Others  are  more  precise  on  this  point  and  suggest  that  all  nation-states  and  national 
cultures are in danger of being subsumed within a new global order accompanied by its 
own homo geneous culture. Indeed, John Urry has challenged the very notion that what 
has emerged has been a struggle between the national and the global with the latter being 
characterised as a new region. This ‘territorial trap’, as Urry calls it, ignores the fact that 
global  systems  are  by  their  very  nature  entropic  and  challenge  the  very  notion  of  the 
bounded region.2 

Specifically in relation to sport, Miller et al. argue that the global exchange of sporting 
bodies  ‘has  made  it  increasingly  difficult  for  the  nation-state  to  be  represented  by 
conventional  corporeal  symbols,  as 
the  spread  of  schooling,  commodification, 
scientization,  medicalization,  and  surveillance  as  part  of  the  NICL  [New  International 
Division of Cultural Labor] has reorganized sporting bodies’.3 Maguire et al. argue that 
‘modern sport is bound up in a global network of interdependency chains that are marked 
by uneven power relations’.4 The consequence is a set of global power networks within 
which  ‘the  practice  and  consumption  of  elite  modern  sport  can  best  be  understood’.5 
‘Given  this  growth  in  the  multiplicity  of  linkages  and  networks  that  transcend  nation-
states’,  they  continue,  ‘it  is  not  surprising  that  we  may  be  at  the  earliest  stages  of  the 
development of a transnational or global culture, of which sport is a part’.6  

Elsewhere, however, Maguire presents a subtler and altogether more seductive version 
of the globalisation thesis to argue that the concept describes a process in which there is 
considerable  exchange  of  cultural  values  and  modes  of  expression.7  According  to  this 
interpretation, the nation as we have known it may well be about to disappear but it will 
do  so  not  because  of  the  triumph  of  a  single  and  unidirectional  tendency—e.g. 
Americanisation—but  rather  because  all  national  cultures  borrow  and  will  continue  to 
borrow  from  each  other.  For  Maguire,  the  result  is  a  world  that  is  characterised  by 

The Global Politics of sport     80

‘diminishing  contrasts’  but  ‘increasing  varieties’.  The  point  remains,  however,  that 
distinctive national identities, it would appear, will still disappear. 

There is, of course, another approach that argues simply that the demise of the nation 
and the concomitant triumph of a global order have both been greatly exaggerated. As 
Anthony  D.Smith  points  out,  ‘in  the  era  of  globalization  and  transcendence,  we  find 
ourselves  caught  in  a  maelstrom  of  conflicts  over  political  identities  and  ethnic 
fragmentation’.8  Indeed,  it  can  be  claimed  that  the  forces  associated  with  the  idea  of 
globalisation  have  actually  created  political  and  cultural  space  in  which  historically 
submerged nations and nationalities have been reawakened and infused with new vitality. 
According  to  Smith,  ‘only  by  grasping  the  power  of  nationalism  and  the  continuing 
appeal of national identity through their rootedness in pre-modern ethnic symbolism and 
modes  of  organization  is  there  some  chance  of understanding the resurgence of ethnic 
nationalism at a time when “objective” conditions might appear to render it obsolete’.9 
Developing arguments that I have already expressed elsewhere,10 it is this latter approach 
that dominates the following examination of the links between sport and the nation in the 
modern world. Furthermore, the chapter questions the extent to which the resilience of 
the  nation  actually  runs  counter  to  “objective”  conditions.  Particular  attention  will  be 
given  in  this  regard  to  Irish  sport  and  specifically  to  the  role  of  the  Gaelic  Athletic 
Association  (GAA)  in  the  global  era.  The  chapter  begins,  however,  with  a  few  more 
general comments on globalisation, specifically in relation to sport. 

Sport, nationalism and globalisation 

Links between sport, nationalism and globalisation tend to confirm the validity of claims 
that  global  processes  are  best  understood  as  multidirectional  flows.  For  example,  it  is 
undeniable  that  American  influences  had  a  major  part  to  play  in  the  fact  that  baseball 
became  such  a  popular  sport  in  Japan.  In  addition,  ‘lifestyle’  or  so-called  ‘alternative’ 
sports,  whilst  resistant  to  traditional  ways  of  playing  and  organising  sport,  are  also 
characterised, as Belinda Wheaton reveals elsewhere in this collection, by transnational 
networks.  Even  where  there  is  evidence  of  national  or  even  continental  resistance  to 
global forces—for example, the general refusal of Europeans to exhibit any real appetite 
for  either  American  football  or  baseball—the  point  must  still  be  made  that  cultural 
pressures  work  in  mysterious  ways.  Thus,  Europeans  continue  to  play  and  watch 
association  football  in  preference  to  American  sports  but  they  do  so  in  ways  that  are 
increasingly  influenced  by  the  American  (or  perhaps  that  should  simply  read  the 
consumer capitalist) way of packaging sport. Critics of this approach have argued that I 
failed to take into account the power of both capital and of the media when arriving at 
what are somewhat benign conclusions. The criticisms are fair to the extent that I could 
certainly have said more about consumer capitalism and the media in relation to sport. 
Thus, Scherer is correct when he writes, ‘while Bairner briefly mentions the power and 
flexibility of capital and transnational corporations, many theorists might wish for a more 
detailed consideration of the impact of the global economy on increasingly dismantled 
contemporary  natioi-states’.11  Equally  reasonable  is  Scherer’s  assertion  that  ‘some 
scholars  might  wish  for  a  more  exhaustive  overview  of  the  media’s  role  in  producing 
imagined national identities and national heroes’.12 It is true, for example, that Miller et 

Sport and the nation in the golden era     81

al.  have  considerably  more  to  say  about  such  elements  in  the  globalisation  process  as 
commodification, the role of the media and labour migration.13 However, they do so, one 
might argue, at the expense of examining the ways in which individuals relate in practice 
to  the  collision  of  the  global  and  the  national.  But,  in  any  event,  I  do  not  propose  to 
remedy my own sins of omission in this particular chapter. Instead, I intend to go even 
further and argue that, whilst global trends have clearly affected the relationship between 
sport and the nation, they have done so in such ways as to underline the extent to which 
ideas about nations and nationhood are at least as central to political discourse today as 
they have ever been. In addition, in the hope of pre-empting possible criticisms that this 
chapter  again  fails  to  take  capital  seriously,  I  shall  argue  that  this  analysis  can  be 
supported with reference to political economy. The resilience of the nation is not so much 
a victory of emotion over economic necessity but, in part at least, a rational response to 
the latter. 

My  feeling  about  some  of  the  more  extreme  versions  of  the  globalisation  thesis  is 
similar to thoughts I have frequently entertained about the more elitist assumptions both 
of  orthodox  Marxism  and  of  postmodern  cultural  theory.  According  to  both  forms  of 
social  analysis,  the  individual  is  revealed  as  a  largely  passive  recipient  of  false  ideas 
courtesy of whatever opiate the ruling class has on offer at any given time. Gramscian 
influences  did  much  to  turn  Marxist  thinking  in  more  constructive  directions  that 
indicated that hegemonic ideas could be contested although one could easily be forgiven 
for  harbouring  thoughts  that  in  this  respect  the  pessimism  of  Gramsci’s  intelligence  is 
altogether more persuasive than the optimism of his will. In relation to the study of sport, 
I am mindful here of Stephen Jones’s work on the British working class and its capacity 
to articulate resistance through sport. According to Jones, ‘it is clearly wrong to depict 
the working class as impotent consumers, having little or no say in the form and content 
of the leisure product’.14 Central to this chapter is the contention that even in the face of 
unfavourable global odds something similar can be said today about nations, nationalities 
and nationalisms. The relationship between sport and the nation is not inevitably doomed 
with helpless individuals looking on as local, regional and national cultures are sacrificed 
on  the  altar  of  global  capitalism.  Furthermore,  attempts  to  maintain  the  relationship 
between  sport  and  the  nation  should  not  be  dismissed  as  essentially  reactionary 
confrontations with the inevitable in a last ditch stand on behalf of the emotional and the 
irrational. It may be precisely the impact of global capitalism that obliges people to act 
rationally and self-consciously in order to maintain the links between sport and nations. 

Definitions 

I shall begin by describing briefly how I intend to use certain concepts in this chapter. 
Prior  to  discussing  the  relationship  between  sport  and  nationalism  in  Ireland,  Mike 
Cronin offers a useful introduction to the different ways in which nationalism itself has 
been interpreted—by theorists whom he classifies as primordialists, modernists, statists 
and  political  mythologists.15  Their  various  interpretations  have  a  bearing  on  the 
discussion that follows. But it should be noted at the outset that seldom if ever can any 
category relating to the nation be regarded as self-contained. Nor should one imagine that 
rival  interpretations  are  mutually  exclusive. As a consequence, and in order to be in a 

The Global Politics of sport     82

stronger position to fully understand how the nation/sport dialectic operates, it is essential 
to go beyond Cronin and to comment on a number of basic concepts that are connected to 
nationalism but often in quite complex ways. The words themselves are all well known 
and  are  frequently  used  in  relation  to  the  social  significance  of  sport.  It  is  important, 
however, that we are clear about their precise meanings if we are to use them in such a 
way  as  to  understand  how  sport  reflects  and  simultaneously  provides  insights  into  the 
struggles between nations and global forces. 

The first essential point is to distinguish the nation from the nation-state. As Allison 
comments, ‘“Nation” and the concepts derived from it are among the most shifting and 
elusive in the entire study of society, not least because they arouse such emotion’.16 Yet 
perhaps  this  no  longer  matters.  Writing  about  the  need  for  the  study  of  sport  to  take 
globalisation into account, Rowe and Lawrence write, ‘it is increasingly difficult for an 
adequate sociology or history of sport to take the nation state as its main ground or point 
of  reference’.17  That  may  well  be  so  but  what  does  this  tell  us  about  the  status  of  the 
nation as opposed to the nation-state in such analysis? One need go no further than the 
United  Kingdom  in  order  to  clarify  what  initially  might  seem  to  be  a  purely  semantic 
point. 

As  Nairn  observes,  ‘“Britain”  is  of  course  by  definition  a  nationless  identity’.18 
Nowhere is this demonstrated more publicly than in the world of international sport. With 
a single Olympics squad, four ‘national’ soccer teams and three ‘national’ rugby teams 
together with Northern Ireland’s part share in the Irish team, the UK’s sporting landscape 
is  testimony  to  the  complex  relationship  between  nations  and  nation-states.  When  we 
refer to the prestige that nations can derive from sport it is important to think in terms not 
only of internationally recognised states but also of submerged nations (Scotland, Ireland, 
Wales, Québec, Catalonia and so on) for which sport has commonly been one of the most 
effective vehicles for cultural resistance. Above all, sport provides athletes and fans with 
opportunities  to  celebrate  a  national  identity  that  is  different  from  and,  in  some  cases, 
opposed  to,  their  ascribed  nationality.  The  two  need  not  be  mutually  exclusive.  It  is 
possible to support both British teams and Scottish ones or to represent Wales and also 
the United Kingdom. It can be argued though that national identity is what takes priority 
in  the  minds  of  sports  fans.  Nationality,  on  the  other  hand,  is  what  matters to athletes 
since  this  guarantees  the  right  to  compete  on  behalf  of  a  nation.  It  is  worth  noting, 
however, that nationality rules have become increasingly flexible in sport as a response to 
labour migration. 

The  desire,  particularly  on  the  part  of  fans,  to  express  their  national  identity  in  the 
realm of sport is clearly linked to nationalism in the broadest sense or, at the very least, to 
patriotism. Former member of parliament Jim Sillars dismissed the attitude of his fellow 
Scots towards national sporting representatives as ‘ninety-minute patriotism’19 and it is 
common to use sports fandom to illustrate what Billig meant by ‘banal nationalism’20 and 
Urry  has  located  under  the  heading  ‘brand  nationalism’.21  One  could  also  add  a 
distinction  between  ‘shallow’  and  ‘deep’  nationalism  in  this  respect.  As  this  chapter 
argues, Irish support for national representatives in global sporting activities is in most 
cases  patriotic  and,  by  implication,  relatively  politically  shallow.  The  relationship 
between Gaelic games and Irish nationalism is on the other hand much more profound. In 
general, however, attempts to distinguish the passions aroused by international sport from 
‘real’ nationalism miss the point. It is undeniable that expressions of solidarity for players 

Sport and the nation in the golden era     83

and teams that represent one’s nation are closely linked to cultural nationalism. Whether 
or not they are also bound up with political nationalism is a different question, the answer 
to which necessarily varies from one individual to the next. For many people, even ones 
whose  national  identity  is  associated  with  a  submerged  nation,  cultural  nationalism  is 
enough. They may well feel that they could not become any more Scottish or Welsh or 
Catalan than they already are with the formation of a nation-state that would correspond 
to their sense of national identity. For others though, cultural nationalism is nothing more 
than the emotional embellishment of a strongly held political ideology that will settle for 
nothing  less  than  national  sovereignty.  How  this  is  to  be  achieved  as  well  as  the 
constitutional character of the end product will be influenced to a considerable degree by 
the interplay between two other nationalisms that require some comment. 

Ethnic  nationalism  and  civic  nationalism  are  often  taken  to  be  polar  opposites, 
whereas in practice they may overlap and feed upon each other to a considerable extent. 
In  essence,  the  former  places  most  emphasis  of  the  biological  lineage  of  those  who 
constitute a nation whilst the latter is concerned to include everyone who lives within the 
nation’s  boundaries.  They  are  seldom  mutually  exclusive  but  understanding  them  as 
distinct  entities  at  this  point  is  useful  for  the  discussion  that  follows.  With  these 
definitions  in  mind,  it  is  now  possible  to  take  the  discussion  a  stage  further.  The 
discussion  proceeds  by  saying  something  about  the  traditional  importance  of  the 
relationship between sport and the nation, particularly with reference to the concept of 
‘national sports’, before going on to consider why and how this relationship can continue 
to flourish despite the challenge of globalisation. 

Sport and nations 

According  to  Allison,  ‘whether  we  are  talking  about  nationalism  or  patriotism  or  the 
development and expression of national identity…it is clear that a national dimension is 
an  important  part  of  sport’.22  For  Miller  et  al.,  ‘the  sporting  body  bears  triumphant 
national mythologies in a double way, extending the body to encompass the nation and 
compressing it to obscure the social divisions that threaten national unity’.23 These claims 
can be amply supported by evidence drawn from a wide variety of countries and an array 
of  different  sporting  contexts.  For  most  sportsmen  and  women,  even  in  an  era  when 
money is a major incentive for sporting success, representing the nation still matters. Of 
course, it is not inconceivable that they might represent more than one nation with neither 
ethnic  origins  nor  even  well  established  civic  connections  being  necessary  for  a  move 
from one to another. Mike Ticher refers to ‘an increasing number of international players, 
across a whole range of sports, whose apparently “obvious” nationality conflicts with the 
country  they  represent’.24  For  the  overwhelming  majority  of  athletes  engaged  in 
international  sport  though  the  matter  is  still  relatively  clear  cut.  For  fans,  things  are 
arguably even simpler. Following one’s ‘proxy warriors’25 into international competition 
is  one  of  the  easiest  and  most  passionate  ways  of  underlining  one’s  sense  of  national 
identity,  one’s  nationality  or  both  in  the  modern  era.  Needless  to  say,  not  everyone 
wishes to celebrate their national affiliation in this way, in most instances for the simple 
reason that they are not interested in sport, the nation or the relationship between the two. 
But  just  as  for  most  active  participants,  for  the  majority  of  sports  fans  the  choice  is 

The Global Politics of sport     84

relatively  straightforward.  This  is  not  to  deny  of  course  that  in  certain  circumstances 
athletes and fans alike may well understand their nations in different ways. Furthermore, 
it is not only sporting individuals who demonstrate the contested character of most, if not 
all, nations. Sports themselves also do so to the extent that they become ‘national’ in the 
popular imagination for a variety of reasons. 

I  wrote  in  Sport,  Nationalism  and  Globalization  that  ‘national  sports  take  different 
forms  and,  in  so  doing,  they  provide  us  with  interesting  insights  into  the  character  of 
particular nations’.26 I would like to develop that argument here and in addition suggest 
that  the  concept  of  the  ‘national’  sport  not  only  provides  insights  into  the  relationship 
between the various terms listed above that are associated with the nation but also helps 
us  to  understand  how  it  is  that  nations  resist  globalisation  even  in  a  global  era.  Some 
‘national’ sports are peculiar to specific nations. Their ‘national’ status is protected by 
their  exclusivity—echoes  here,  it  would  seem,  of  ethnic  nationalism.  One  thinks  of 
Gaelic  games  in  Ireland  (of  which,  more  later)  and  shinty  or  curling  in  Scotland. One 
might also consider under this heading the claims of ice hockey and lacrosse in Canada or 
bullfighting in Spain. The same is true of traditional games that are played in Sweden and 
elsewhere in the Nordic area. Although they are played by declining numbers of people 
and are spatially restricted to specific areas, they say things about the region which no 
amount of fanatical support for global games is able to do. These activities need not be 
exclusive to particular countries. However, they are in some sense linked to the essence 
of the nations in question even though their actual origins, like those of Gaelic games and 
shinty,  are  pre-national  or  at  least  prior  to  the  emergence  of  nation-states.  One  might 
think  of  these  various  activities  as  ‘tourist  board’  national  sports.  Certainly  they  have 
acquired  a  certain  ring-fenced  cultural  status  which  is  not  enjoyed  by  other  sports,  no 
matter how popular in terms of participation rates and attendance figures. They advertise 
‘the nation’ even though it may well be the case that they have demonstrably failed to 
capture the interest of all of the people who constitute the civic nation and/or the nation-
state. 

It should be noted, of course, that those activities that are most likely to be ring-fenced 
because of their specific cultural resonance do not always find favour with members of 
particular  nations’  cosmopolitan  elites  who  may  well  believe  that  the  nation  is  better 
represented  by  sports  that  are  both  modern  and  transnational.  As  Carrie  B.  Douglass 
notes,  ‘for  many  Spaniards  and  Hispanists  …bullfights  are  a  minor,  unimportant 
nineteenth century survival, part of an arcane world view associated with General Franco 
and his supporters’.27 Certainly the corrida de toros, the classic form of the bullfight, is 
not  universally  popular  throughout  Spain  nor  does  it  even  take  place  at  all  in  some 
Spanish regions. There are, however, alternative taurine festivals in most of those places 
and that is good enough for the advertising companies which ensure that the bull and the 
matador  are  used  to  sell  a  huge  variety  of  Spanish  products  together  with  holidays  to 
Spain. Hurling fulfils a similar function in Ireland although the sport itself comes a poor 
second to Gaelic football if popularity is measured in terms of the numbers of people who 
actually play and watch. Canadian ice hockey, on the other hand, might appear to offer 
conflicting evidence. Beloved by the marketing men and women, it is also hugely popular 
and  additionally  offers  Canadians  the  opportunity  to  engage  relatively  successfully  in 
international  competition.  But  we  should,  at  the  very  least,  recognise  that  not  all 
Canadians  think  fondly  of  hockey  and  that  in  any  event,  come  the  summer  months, 

Sport and the nation in the golden era     85

baseball—the  national  pastime  of  the  United  States—takes  over.  The  other  ‘national’ 
sports already mentioned face even stiffer competition. 

According to Phil Ball, ‘Spanish football is in a sense so wonderful that the country 
needs  little  else  these  days  to  sustain  it’.28  The  comment  is  surely  intentionally 
hyperbolic. But it does serve to put the status of bullfighting into perspective. Football is 
almost unarguably the ‘national sport’ of Spain. Yet, as Ball himself reveals in his study 
of club rivalry in Spanish football, at least as much as taurine activities, the game helps us 
to appreciate the extent to which Spain is at best a divided nation and, at worst, not a 
nation at all— merely a nation-state. Similarly in Scotland whilst curling and shinty may 
look right on an advertising hoarding alongside a glass of malt, a smattering of tartan and 
a  West  Highland  terrier  thrown  in  for  good  measure,  few  Scots  play  or  watch  these 
activities.  As  in  Spain  the  true  ‘national’  sport  is  football.  Yet  it  does  not  necessarily 
unite the nation. Like ice hockey in Canada, football is heartily disliked by many Scots. 
The national team unites the country rather more effectively than la sekcción in Spain. 
However, in Scotland as in Spain, football is also a major source of division—between 
cities,  between  regions  and,  most  damagingly  of  all,  between  followers  of  Celtic  and 
Rangers  whose  national  identity  has  constantly  been  shaped by other factors rooted in 
their own perso nal biographies as well as in the theological history of the Scottish nation. 
In Ireland, whilst hurling may well be the sport of choice in the eyes of Bord Fáilte or 
the  executives  responsible  for  selling  a  variety  of  Irish  products,  including  stout  and 
whiskey, the sport’s popularity varies considerably from one county, and even one parish, 
to  another.  Gaelic  football  is  more  uniform  in  terms  of  the  support  that  it  receives 
throughout the thirty-two counties. Yet there are isolated pockets where it loses out to 
hurling.  Furthermore,  the  right  of  any  Gaelic  game  to  be  assigned  ‘national  status’  is 
considerably weakened not only because some Irish nationalists opt for other sports, such 
as rugby union and soccer, but also because the overwhelming majority of the Protestant 
community in the north of Ireland have resolutely turned their backs on the whole Gaelic 
games  tradition.  It  might  seem  easy  to  dismiss  this  difficulty  by  simply  taking  these 
people at their word and accepting that since they do not consider themselves to be truly 
Irish, their sporting preferences need have no impact on what does or does not constitute 
an Irish national sport. But this would be to ignore the basic precepts of Irish republican 
ideology that has consistently sought to embrace not only Catholics but Protestants and 
Dissenters as well. 

Games  such  as  rugby  union  and  soccer  have  some  claim  on  the  right  to  be  called 
‘national’ in the Irish context. Despite their British origins, they are played throughout 
the  island.  Moreover,  although  rugby  tends  to  be  played  by  Protestants  rather  than 
Catholics in Northern Ireland, both football codes enjoy considerable support from both 
traditions  on  the  island  as  a  whole.  They  offer  Irish  sportsmen  the  opportunity  to 
represent the nation at international level. Indeed, rugby, unlike soccer, allows northern 
unionists the chance to acknowledge their sporting Irishness whilst retaining a political 
allegiance to the union of the United Kingdom and Northern Ireland. It should be noted, 
however,  that  regardless  of  any  claims  that  either  sport  may  have  to  be  recognised  as 
‘national’,  neither  has  escaped  the  influence  of  globalisation.  The  two  Irish  ‘national’ 
soccer teams have both fielded players whose ethnic ‘right’ to belong has been relatively 
weak. The same thing has happened in rugby union, which in recent years has witnessed 
a  flood  of  antipodean  coaches  and  players,  some  of  whom  have  qualified  to  play  for 

The Global Politics of sport     86

Ireland despite having accents that conjure up images of Dunedin or Durban, not Dublin 
or Dungannon. 

Gaelic games have been less affected by the movement of people that is commonly 
linked to globalisation except in the sense that Irish migrants have taken their traditional 
activities to other parts of the world, most notably north America. This is not to deny that 
changes  taking  place  beyond  the  shores  of  Ireland  have  had  an  impact  on  the  Gaelic 
Athletic Association (GAA). I would argue, however, that the factors that have been most 
influential are best understood in terms of modernisation and capitalism as opposed to the 
more specific category of globalisation. Gaelic games, I shall argue, have been relatively 
unscathed  by  the  latter.  As  a  result,  the  GAA  offers  rich  insights  into  the  processes 
whereby the nation has been able to resist the global in sport as in much else. 

Sport and the nation: the case of the Gaelic Athletic Association 

As regards the relationship between sport and the nation, the GAA has arguably received 
more academic attention than any other sporting organisation.29 It has performed a central 
role in the reproduction of a particular form of Irish national identity since its formation 
in Thurles, Co. Tipperary, in 1884 to the present day, when images of hurlers promote a 
vision of Ireland, both real and imagined, whilst simultaneously advertising beer. Today, 
according  to  Humphries,  ‘three-quarters  of  a  million  Irish  people  are  members  of  the 
GAA, but that figure represents only a fraction of the Irish people who are touched by the 
games of football and hurling in their regular daily lives’.30 For Humphries, ‘the GAA is 
more than a sports’ organization, it is a national trust, an entity which we feel we hold in 
common  ownership’.31  In  similar  lofty  tones,  Healey  claims  that  ‘the  Association  has 
become a national movement, a driving force behind the people, a giant parental figure to 
the youth of the country’.32 In broadly cultural terms, therefore, there is no disputing the 
significance of the GAA’s historic and ongoing influence. 

The GAA’s influence vis à vis the construction of Irish national identity was relatively 
straightforward  in  the  years  immediately  after  its  formation  with  debates  between 
physical  force  nationalists  and  constitutionalists  being  the  only  major  area  of  discord. 
However, its role in relation to national identity was thereafter considerably affected by 
the fact that Ireland itself became an example of failed nation-state building, resulting in 
Gaelic games, organised on a 32-county basis, being played from 1921 in two separate 
political jurisdictions. In addition, most relevant in the context of this chapter, the Gaelic 
games movement has been increasingly affected by socioeconomic trends in Ireland and 
also in the wider global economy. The impact on the GAA of socioeconomic change is 
by  no  means  new.  Industrialisation  and  urbanisation,  which  were  accompanied  by  the 
growth of soccer as a major sport for both players and spectators, has been gnawing away 
at  the  rural  roots  of  the  Association  virtually  since  its  inception.  However,  it  can  be 
argued that the pace of change experienced during the past two decades has been greater 
than anything known previously and the global and postmodern impulses which are the 
result  inevitably  demand  new  articulations  of  Irishness  which,  in  the opinion of some, 
may have only limited space for Gaelic games and the construction of Irishness which is 
felt to be associated with them. 

Sport and the nation in the golden era     87

Yet  the  general  influence  of  the  GAA  on  Irish  life  remains  undeniable.  Today,  the 
Association  has  a  membership  of  around  800,000  with  2,700  clubs  fielding 
approximately  20,000  teams.  Although  it  is  stronger  in  some  parts  of  Ireland  than  in 
others, its influence is felt throughout the 32 counties. For many players in particular, the 
identity which the GAA forges is essentially a sporting one relatively free from political 
connotations.  Thus  in  the  1999  edition  of  the  Irish  Sports  Almanac,  writing  about  the 
challenges which currently face the GAA, Liam Horan fails to comment on any of the 
issues discussed in this chapter, concentrating instead on the use of modern technology to 
help  match  officials  deal  with  disciplinary  matters.33  Gaelic  games  have  problems, 
according  to  this  analysis,  but  they  occur  on  the  field  of  play  and  not  at  the  level  of 
intellectual  discourse  on  nationality.  At  least  as  significant,  however,  is  the  GAA’s 
symbolic role in the construction of the Irish landscape. Gaelic pitches evoke a sense of 
Irishness  even  for  those  who  do  not  see  them  regularly  as  they  go  about  their  daily 
business. Thus, they are very much part of Ireland’s ‘imagined community’.34 It should 
be added that Gaelic grounds are by no means unique in this respect. For example, in 
Northern Ireland, certain soccer grounds are important symbolic spaces that contribute to 
the  construction  of  unionist  and  loyalist  identities  as  well  as  Irish  nationalist  ones.35 
Established in an effort to democratise access to leisure activities in Ireland and to resist 
the process whereby a British cultural hegemony was being consolidated in sport as in 
other spheres of activity, the GAA quickly laid down roots particularly in the rural areas 
of  nineteenth-century  Ireland.36  From  the  outset  it  embraced  representatives  of  all 
branches  of  Irish  nationalism,  including  the  Catholic  church  which  has  consistently 
played an important part in the reproduction of Irish national identity even though this 
role has been greatly diminished in recent times. Despite the involvement of Protestant, 
and  even  unionist,  members  in  its  formation,  in  a  relatively  short  space  of  time,  the 
Association  came  to  be  regarded  as  providing  sporting  space for certain types of Irish 
people,  mainly  men  and  certainly  Catholic  and/or  politically  nationalist.  This 
development was assisted in no small degree by a series of bans (1885, 1887, and 1905) 
which sought to prevent GAA members from playing or watching ‘foreign’ games, tried 
to ensure that GAA facilities would not be used for such games and barred members of 
the  British  security  forces  from  GAA  membership.  The  foreign  games  rules  were 
removed in 1971 but Rule 21 which prevented members of the British armed forces, as 
well as the Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC), from joining the GAA remained in force 
until November 2001, despite increasingly strenuous efforts by leading figures within the 
Association  to  have  it  rescinded.  In  addition  to  having  to  deal  with  competition  from 
other sporting activities, together with wrestling with the quasi-political question of how 
to react to the crown forces, the GAA has been obliged increasingly to react to general 
changes in the way in which sport is organised globally in the direction of sponsorship, 
professionalism and, most recently, the labour organisation of players. In its responses to 
all of these issues the Association has revealed particular ways of representing Irishness 
whilst  continuing  to  provoke  hostile  responses  from  those  who  believe  that  its 
representation of the nation is outmoded and inappropriate for the new, pluralist society 
which  the  GAA’s  critics  believe  is  emerging.37  As  a  result,  one  might  be  inclined  to 
believe that its self-proclaimed role as the repository if Ireland’s sporting soul, whatever 
its earlier credibility, is now impossible to justify. 

The Global Politics of sport     88

Writing  in  1994,  Barrie  Houlihan  noted  that  ‘while  Gaelic  sports  continue  to  be 
popular,  the  last  10  years  have  witnessed  a  rapid  increase  in  the  popularity  of  soccer, 
helped  by  strong  performances  by  the  Irish  team  in  the  1990  and  1994  World  Cup 
competitions’.38 Whilst acknowledging ‘the capacity of the nationalist Irish community to 
maintain a degree of autonomy within the global sports culture’, Houlihan argued that 
‘while the symbolism of Gaelic sport is still acknowledged as a powerful demonstration 
of  the  particularity  of  the  Irish  nation,  soccer  is  now  able  to  fulfill  a  similar  function 
before a global audience’.39 There is of course a large degree of truth in this statement. 
However, it would be wrong to suppose either that the GAA’s role is purely symbolic or 
that its contribution to the promotion of a distinctive Irish identity has been diminished 
over time. The GAA is arguably as strong today as at any time in its history. Moreover, it 
can be argued that this strength is derived not so much from its symbolic representation 
of an older Ireland but rather from its capacity to respond to an Ireland that is changing, 
due  in  large  part  to  global  economic  pressures.  It  might  even  be  argued  that  the 
nationalism which associates itself with and is supported by the GAA is deeper than that 
which other sports inspire. 

Conclusion 

For the most part, political economy has tended to be invoked in support of relatively 
hard-line readings of globalisation that talk in terms of cultural homo genisation and/or 
Americanisation. The figurational approach is more insightful in this respect because it 
takes  into  account  the  importance  of  reciprocal  actions  and  unplanned  consequences 
leading to a rather more complex if not quite entropic universe. Attempts to emphasise 
the capacity of the nation to resist global change appear to be more closely linked to the 
tradition of philosophical idealism. What is celebrated is the power of a largely irrational 
idea  to  confront  brute  economic  facts.  This  is  misleading.  In  reality,  it  is  absolutely 
essential to adopt a perspective that gives primacy to socioeconomic factors if one is to 
understand fully the reasons for the resilience of nations and nationalism in the global 
era. 

Marxists  have  found  the  nation  and  nationalism  notoriously  difficult  propositions. 
Many  have  tended  to  view  nationalist  ideology,  not  unlike  a  passion  for  sport,  as  a 
product  of  false  consciousness,  except  in  circumstances where it was felt that national 
liberation  might  serve  the  cause  of  social  and  economic  emancipation.  In  general 
nationalism has been regarded by the left as being at best antithetical to class politics and 
at worst downright reactionary. Modernisation theory, on the other hand, has tended to 
recognise  the  progressive  impulse  that  lay  behind  the  emergence  of  nationalism  as  a 
political  force.  But  the  approach  is  essentially  historicist  and  denies  all  claims  that 
nationalism has premodern roots and or that it can act progressively in a wide range of 
different historical conjunctures. The way is open, therefore, to the philosophical idealists 
who present the idea of the nation as something that has a perennial appeal. In political 
terms,  this  approach  is  most  likely  to  find  favour  with  reactionary  nationalists—those 
who  constantly  look  backwards  with  great  nostalgia  to  a  world  of  blood  sacrifice  and 
ethnic purity. 

Sport and the nation in the golden era     89

It would be easy to categorise the contemporary role of the GAA as a product of the 
idealism  of  nostalgia,  now  using  ‘idealism’  in  a  slightly  different  way.40  As  a  result, 
Gaelic games in the contemporary era are understood to be nothing more than reactionary 
strategies whereby disaffected people seek solace in outmoded forms of physical activity. 
It is undeniable that the GAA is an instinctively traditional organisation. Its popularity is 
still  most  apparent  in  rural  areas  and  its  subcultures  can  from  time  to  time  prompt 
thoughts of rural idiocy in the minds of even the most passionately Irish cosmopolitan 
urban dweller. It should be noted though that nostalgia has an honourable place in the 
construction  of  radical  ideals.41  In  any  case  there  is  an  alternative  form  of  political 
idealism,  which  applies  with  at  least  equal  force  to  the  GAA—that  is,  idealism  of  the 
imagination.  As  the  late  Bob  Berki  observed,  ‘imagination  is  the  dominant  feature  of 
radical thought in the sense that the radical thinker’s major premise in all his arguments 
directed  against  existing  arrangements  is  an  “alternative”’.42  For  Berki,  ‘imagination 
means that the proposed desirable alternative is essentially, significantly new’.43 On the 
face of it, it would seem ridiculous to regard the GAA as linked to a project that is in any 
sense ‘new’. That, however, is to ignore the fact that the association is operating today in 
a context that is radically different from the one out of which it first emerged. As a result, 
simply doing the same things as it has always done and doing these things well allows the 
GAA to be seen as offering something not only different but new—new, that is, in terms 
of  the  changes  that  have  accompanied  the  onset  of  the  global  era.  It  may  well  have 
reinvented itself as a mode of resistance not only to cultural imperialism, its first avowed 
aim, but also to all of the homogenising tendencies that accompany late capitalism. It is a 
paean  to  community  life  and  to  the  worth  of  the  real  as  opposed  to  the  hyperreal. 
Resistance  has  not  been  totally  effective  as  the  packaging  of  Gaelic  games  reveals. 
Concerns must also continue to be expressed in relation to the ethnic exclusivity of the 
GAA.  Nevertheless,  and  contrary  to  most  academic  analysis,  I  would  argue  that  it  is 
possible to defend the association as a progressive force once the true enemy of liberation 
has been correctly identified. 

Irish  nationalists  themselves  would  claim  that  nationalism  in  Ireland  has  generally 
been  inspired  by  a  set  of  progressive  political  values  even  though,  on  occasion,  these 
have been corrupted by certain organisations and individuals. Certainly, despite what its 
critics would say, at no stage in its history has the GAA as a whole acted in an absolutely 
reactionary manner. Indeed, today perhaps more so than at any point in its development, 
the  association  is  now  able  to  say  that  it  has  not  only  sought  to  remove  traces  of 
reactionary and exclusive nationalism but it has also come to offer, in sporting terms at 
least,  one  of  the  more  enlightened  models  of  how  people  can  respond  to  global 
economics and the accompanying drift towards cultural homogeneity. Was this intended? 
The answer is surely ‘no’, if we are thinking purely in terms of conscious decisions made 
by people within the GAA to challenge the homogenising tendencies that operate under 
late capitalism. The outcome was planned, however, to the extent that there has always 
been a widespread conscious desire within the association to keep Gaelic games alive in a 
rapidly  changing  world  whilst  simultaneously  embracing  change  whenever  that  has 
seemed advantageous to the promotion of Gaelic sport. 

There is no doubt that many Irish people identify with national sporting heroes. They 
celebrate their triumphs and share their sorrow in defeat. To that extent, all of the sports 
that  Irish  people  play,  no  matter  how  global  in  their  appeal,  provide  avenues  for 

The Global Politics of sport     90

expressions of national sentiment in the face of homogenising forces. Only Gaelic games, 
however,  provide  us  with  a  window  through  which  we  can  examine  particular 
representations of Irishness at the beginning of the twenty-first century. This is because 
Gaelic  games  are  linked  more  profoundly  to  Irish  identity  than  those  other  sports,  no 
matter how many Irish people play them and at what level. This is not to suggest that 
only  Gaelic  games  are  played  by  the  ‘real’  Irish.  It  is  to  argue,  however,  that  the 
relationship between the people and the sporting activities, in this instance, is less likely 
to be mediated by external forces. As a result, it is easier to discuss the link between sport 
and  the  nation  free  from  the complexities that aspects of globalisation create for other 
sports. Much has changed over the years in the world of Gaelic games. It can be argued, 
however,  that  the  experiences  of  players  and  fans  alike  suggest  a  large  degree  of 
resistance  to  global forces. Moreover, to understand more fully the place of sport in a 
global age, it is important that such experiences are not ignored. 

Indeed,  I  wish  to  conclude  with  a  rallying  cry  to  those  who  seek  to  develop  our 
understanding of the relationship between the global and the national in relation to sport. 
There has been an abundance of theory in the area. There has also been any amount of 
studies of transnational organisations, including those that are charged with running sport 
and  those  that  seek  to  profit  from  sport  if  such  a  distinction  can  be  said  to  exist  in 
practice. Arguably, what we need most of all now are studies of how individual men and 
women are affected by and respond to the global-national nexus. Sport labour migration 
studies are exceptional in this respect.44 But they tend to focus on elite performers. But 
how is the hurler in Thurles, Co. Tipperary, influenced by globalisation on a day-to-day 
basis? What does the club footballer in Hilltown, Co Down, make of global complexity? 
For that matter, what does the rugby player in Dunfermline, the football fan in Burnley 
and the aficionado of the corrida in Seville make of it all? The answer in each case is that 
these people are certainly not influenced by the global era to such a degree that they are 
likely  in  the  near  future  to  abandon  totally  their  sporting  attachment  to  the  local,  the 
parochial and the national. It is ironic, given its commitment to traditionalism, that the 
GAA emerges from this chapter as a progressive force. On the other hand, there could 
well be a salutary and an emancipatory lesson to be learned from what might otherwise 
be too easily dismissed as a contradiction in terms.  

The curious role of the USA in world sport  

7 

Lincoln Allison 

Any  assessment  of  the  relation  between  ‘Americanisation’  and  ‘Globalisation’  must 
revisit  the  problem  faced  by  Alexis  De  Tocqueville  when  he  wrote  Democracy  in 
America. De Tocqueville was ultimately more interested in ‘democracy’ than in America. 
He saw democracy as the destination of a set of tendencies which had been evident, in 
Western Europe at least, since the twelfth century and America as the place where these 
tendencies  met  with  the  least  resistance.1  Very  broadly,  these  tendencies  were  a 
movement towards greater political and social equality plus a movement towards greater 
commercial  freedom,  the  two  tendencies  being  in  inevitable  and  permanent  tension.  A 
particular  aspect  of  that  tension  which  naturally  intrigued  De  Tocqueville  was  the 
survival and even revival of the ‘aristocratic’ principle, more often discussed by a later 
generation of writers under the heading ‘elitism’. 

‘Modernity’,  as  we  might  call  it,  and  Americanism  are  thus  intertwined.  Some 
phenomena must be seen as democracy-in-America: they are best (or only) studied in the 
United States, but much of their interest lies in the probability that England or France will 
eventually  demonstrate  similar  phenomena.  But  there  are  also  peculiar  features  of  the 
United states, arising out of local conditions. For example, the constant tension between 
constitutionalism and populism is one which all democracies will face in some form or 
another, but the particular problems which arise out of the existence of Indian tribes and 
slave states are rooted only in the soil of the United States. 

At the heart of this chapter is the distinction between two kinds of Americanism and 
Americanisation and the complex inter-twining between them. The intention is to update 
De Tocqueville’s framework and to apply it to sport. Even at a preliminary glance we can 
distinguish sporting versions of the two kinds of Americanism. For example, the power 
of television in sport is something which a Tocquevillian observer in the US of the 1950s 
and  1960s  might  have  seen  as  a  guide  to  all  our  futures,  despite  what  now  seem 
extraordinary degrees of resistance to it in other countries where the television industry 
remained dominated by the state. In contrast, there is no reason to suppose that the very 
particular  and  important  role  played  by  universities  and  colleges  in  American  sport  is 
going to spread elsewhere.  

The two-way exceptionalism 

We  must  begin  with  the  near-universal  perception  of  an  American  exceptionalism.  As 
Eric Hobsbawm remarked, considering the twentieth century as a whole, in the ‘field of 
popular  culture  the  world  was  American  or  it  was  provincial’  except  in  the  unique 

The Global Politics of sport     92

instance  of  sport.  What  made  sport  so  exceptional  was  the  triumph  of  Association 
Football as the world’s game, ‘a simple and elegant game…the child of Britain’s global 
presence’.2 Markovits and Hellerman suggest that in ‘soccer’, ‘Crudely put, America did 
not  matter’.3  Soccer,  like  socialism,  provides  an example  of  American  exceptionalism: 
both are institutions which developed a major presence almost everywhere, but not in the 
USA. 

Seen in this light the world of sport offers an ironic reversal of the generally dominant 
flow  of  cultural  power.  Because  of  soccer  it  is  the  USA  which  seems  insular  and 
provincial in world sport. A strong flavour of this reversal is offered at the beginning and 
end of Offside. In the preface, Markovits describes returning from Frankfurt to Boston 
during  the  1986  World  Cup  Finals  to  face  an  almost  posturing  lack  of  interest  in  the 
event.4  In  the  second  appendix  of  the  book  the  authors  survey  the  reactions  of  the 
American press to the 1994 finals, held in the USA. As Ann Killion wrote in the San Jose 
Mercury News, ‘We won’t be allowed to simply enjoy the event… Too bad it comes with 
so many strings attached’.5 Those strings include a supposed liberal agenda that America 
should give more credence to the world’s game and non-liberal national reaction against 
that.  This  often  showed  itself  in  expressions  of  scorn  against  soccer  by  those  who 
purported to have tried to watch matches, often emphasising the lack of athleticism and 
the absence of goals. Writers also stressed the record of hooliganism in the major centres 
of the game, rather gratuitously since this was not a problem during the championships. 
As Jake Vest put it in the Orlando Sentinel, This may be the world’s most-beloved game, 
but the world has always been over-rated’.6 A further element in the often vitriolic debate 
was a resentment that Americans were being expected to take an interest in soccer when 
the World Cup visitors were for the most part unashamedly uninterested in the sports of 
the  host  nation.  In  many  respects,  the  kind  of  cultural  conservatism  stimulated  in  the 
‘antis’ of this knockabout debate was the precise inverse of what many people in the rest 
of  the  world  feel  about  America.  In  return  for  what  Jean-Jacques  Servan-Schreiber 
described  in  the  1950s  as  ‘cocacolanisation’  the  1994  World  Cup  was  seen  as  an 
attempted soccerisation of the USA. 

However, it would be quite wrong to be carried away by the brute fact of the absence 
of soccer as a real Major League American sport or by the passion of some reaction to 
that fact. The apparent antithesis between America and the rest of the world has to be 
modified by an acknowledgement of several complexities. One is that there are doubts 
and  ambiguities  about  calling  things  ‘American’.  Another  is  that  in  some  respects  the 
sporting relationship between the US and the rest of the world does mirror the normal 
economic  structure  of  power.  In  Lancashire,  arguably  the  geographical  cradle  of 
working-class professional sport, the county cricket team in its one-day manifestation is 
now called ‘Lancashire Lightning’ while the most famous Rugby League club is ‘Wigan 
Warriors’ who play their traditionally winter game in the summer, ironically to create a 
global season in a sport which is played in fewer than a handful of countries. The name 
changes may be a trivial stylistic influence (though this is open to debate), but the season 
change in Rugby League is one of the major breeches of tradition in a British sport. All of 
these changes can be attributed to a form of Americanisation mediated through Australia. 
The  arguments  for  them  normally  posit  one  of  the  two  countries,  if  not  both,  as  the 
example to follow in acknowledging the ‘need’ for sport to develop consumer-friendly, 
television-oriented forms in order to survive and prosper in an increasingly commercial 

The curious role of the USA in world sport     93

society. Thus we can trace the ‘Lightning’ and the ‘Warriors’ as well as more significant 
changes to the fall of Singapore in 1942 and the consequent reorientation of Australia’s 
world-view towards a dominant USA. 

It is also the case that if we broaden the concept of sport to that of leisure and conceive 
it as an industry then the relationship between Americanisation and globalisation seems 
more normal. The sports-goods industry is dominated by firms with power bases in the 
USA. Hollywood presents sports films such as ‘Field of Dreams’, ‘Bad News Bears’ and 
‘The Mighty Ducks’ in an idiom the world can understand even if it is not the world’s 
favourite  idiom.  A  Martian  who  had  access  to  cinema  but  to  no  other  means  of 
communication would come to the conclusion that American sport was also world sport. 
The  new  global  systems  of  communication  abound  with  anti-globalisation  messages, 
most  of  them  from  young  and  Asian  origins,  which  see  their  cultures  threatened  by  a 
global-American package which includes fast food and rock music as well as basketball 
and baseball. 

But  I  will  be  insisting  throughout  this  essay  that  we  must  not  equate America with 
Major  League.  Even  in  soccer  the  US  looks  a  much  more  ‘normal’  society  below  the 
professional level, with its nineteen-million participants and domination of the women’s 
game.  Also  we  must  question  the  extent  to  which  the  ‘American’  sports  culture  is 
actually  American  as  opposed  to  being  a  conduit  for  essentially  British  ideas  and 
institutions. The US imported the idea of the organised game from England. Two of its 
major  sports,  baseball  and  football,  are  clearly  English  in  origin  while  ice  hockey  is 
Canadian. Only basketball is truly American in origin. Important minor sports, especially 
golf, tennis and track and field athletics, are also British in origin and to a greater extent 
than in the major sports have continued to imitate British practice. Of course, one should 
not  attribute  too  much  significance  to  mere  origin;  the  perception  of  origin  is  usually 
more important. The continued success of soccer is not seen in the twentieth century as 
an ‘Anglicisation’ because the game is seen as a global phenomenon, shaped by global 
forces. Almost equally, cricket and Rugby Union have been internalised in South Asia 
and the Southern Hemisphere and their re-shaping owes as much to distinctive cultural 
traits in those countries as to their English origins. A New Zealand rugby fan or an Indian 
cricket fan is not likely to emphasise the ‘Englishness’ of their sport whereas they may 
well put greater emphasis on the American qualities of basketball simply because the US 
is identified as a source of cultural power. 

Thus, the analysis of the relations between globalisation and Americanisation in sport 
involves  almost  every  kind  of  conceptual  difficulty.  We  are  talking  about  influence, 
always a matter of conjecture and vagueness; to make matters worse it is a question of 
cultural influence. In any case, there are at least three senses of ‘American’ sources of 
influence. There are those which are American in the sense that the US experiences the 
consequences of some kinds of general tendency earlier than other societies. There are 
those which the US has taken from elsewhere (most often from Britain) and transmitted 
to itself and to other parts of the world with degrees of change which may vary from the 
essential  to  the  superficial.  And  there  are those which are peculiar to the US itself. In 
order to understand and evaluate ‘Americanisation’ in world sport it is thus necessary to 
analyse what is distinctive in American sport, the sense in which it is distinctive and from 
what it is distinctive. 

The Global Politics of sport     94

The peculiarities and distinctiveness of American sport 

In this section I intend to distinguish five important aspects of sport in the United States 
which, in different ways and according to variable comparisons, make it different from 
sport  elsewhere.  In  doing  so  I  will  be  invoking  a  wide  variety  of  sources,  but  an 
especially useful source has been the work of those historians who have sought to explain 
the  failure  of  association  football  and  cricket  to  assume  the  kind  of  role  in  American 
society that they did elsewhere and were often expected to in the US. 

Commercialism 

By  commercialism  I  mean  a  tendency  for  social  arrangements  to  run  according  to 
principles of free markets and fair exchange combined with a belief in the propriety of 
those  arrangements.  In  this  sense  much  of  the  political  history  of  sport  consists  of 
attempts to protect it from commercial forces thought likely to debase and corrupt it. I 
have argued elsewhere that the key episode in the history of British sport (also key, to 
varying  degrees,  in  the  Empire  and  an  extended  sphere  of  influence)  was  ‘the 
establishment  of  an  amateur  hegemony’  between  1863  and  1895,  particularly  the 
establishment of a set of ruling bodies ranging (in time) from the Football Association to 
the International Olympic Committee which were committed to the extreme mitigation of 
commercial forces.7 

Of course, we would expect a greater degree of commercialism from the US. Writers 
from  De  Tocqueville  to  Antonio  Gramsci  have  observed  that  the  distinctive feature of 
American  society  is  the  absence  of  obstacles  to  the  development  of  commercialism. 
Gramsci’s  account  of  ‘Fordism’  is  of  a  political  culture  which  uniquely  accepts  and 
admires  a  kind  of  capitalist  brutality.8  But  a  simple  account  of  American  sport  as 
capitalist sport would be quite wrong. American elites absorbed and even exaggerated the 
British  view  of  sport.  Games  were  to  be  played  to  foster  Christian  decency  and 
republican virtue, chiefly masculine virtue, not to make money. From John Mahaffy to 
Grantland  Rice  to  Avery  Brundage  some  of  the  strongest  protestations  of  amateur 
principles are from American writers. I shall argue that these values are still present in 
American sport and embedded in many of its important institutions. But the crucial factor 
is that in the US space was left for the development of a purely commercial conception of 
sport.  British  and  American  sport  developed  along  lines  which  were  similar  in  many 
respects  in  the  1860s  and  1870s;  their  paths  diverged  when  baseball  was  allowed  to 
develop freely as a set of competing (and often chaotic) commercial enterprises whereas 
national  authorities  were  established  in  Britain  to  prohibit,  exclude  or  limit  the 
commercial principle.9 Markovits and Hellerman are quite right to emphasise that one of 
the two most important differences between the US and other countries in sport is the 
absence of bodies like the Football Association and the Marylebone Cricket Club which 
had effective power to license and control clubs and competitions (the other being the 
lack  of  international  competition  in  the  principal  sports).  It  was  only  baseball  which 
developed  in  this  space;  until  the  television  age  professional  football  and  basketball 
remained almost as marginalised in American society as Rugby League was in England. 
But the uninhibited development of baseball as the paradigm and exemplar of a Major 
League  sport  was  immensely  important  and  quite  different  from  what  happened 

The curious role of the USA in world sport     95

elsewhere, as is illustrated by the fact that in 1930 the earnings of Babe Ruth, the most 
famous baseball player of the day, were more than twenty times those of Dixie Dean, the 
most notable English soccer player. 

If the political space allowed for the development of baseball as a commercial sport in 
the  1880s  was  crucial  to  the  nature  of American sport, the continued existence of this 
space in the television age of the 1950s allowed the development of the Major League 
concept on a different scale. In retrospect, one of the most astonishing episodes in the 
history of sport is the absolute refusal of sporting authorities in most countries, including 
Britain,  France  and  Australia,  to  exploit  the  potential  of  television  as  it  became  the 
dominant means of communication. English football all but banned the live televising of 
games;  Australian  cricket  refused  to  sell  to  the  highest  bidder;  nowhere  were  existing 
arrangements  allowed  to  change  substantially  to  suit  the  new  medium.  But  in  the  US, 
television  and  Major  League  were  allowed  to  grow symbiotically in the 1950s. At the 
beginning of the decade there were only 42 Major League franchises; by the end there 
were  101.  By  comparison,  there  were  exactly  the  same  number  of  ‘first  class’  cricket 
counties and Football League clubs in England at the end of the decade as there were at 
the beginning. In 1950, it was estimated that less than 10 per cent of the population of the 
US  in  1950  had  ever  seen  major  league  sport.  By  1960,  more  than  90  per cent of the 
population had some acquaintance with one or other of the Major League sports through 
the  medium  of  television.  The  three  major  sports  (or  four  if  you  include  the  more 
regionally  limited  case  of  ice  hockey)  developed  in  a  network  of  intense  capitalist 
competition between television networks, rival sports and rival leagues. 

The  development  of  Major  League  sport  was  unique  in  the  world.  The  established 
civil authorities did not allow such a development in the countries in which sport was 
already  established  while  in  the  Communist  and  post-colonial  regions  sport  was 
controlled by the state for a variety of purposes, normally connected with nation-building 
and modernisation. The legacy of this control has lasted into the twenty-first century.10 
Major League sport is thus the unique paradigm for those who wish to commercialise and 
‘modernise’  sport  elsewhere.  It  is  the  principal  dynamic  of  ‘Americanisation’  and  a 
multiple  source  of  debate  about  the  reform  of  more  traditional  systems.  However,  the 
temptation  to  equate  America  with  Major  League  in  sport  must  be  resisted.  Much  of 
American  sport,  including  the  vast  majority  of  sports,  lies  outside  the  Major  League 
ambit  and  it  is  as  American  to  be  concerned  about  the  greed,  unscrupulousness  and 
vulgarity of Major League sport as it is to follow it. James Michener’s famous essay on 
what is good and bad about American sport carries considerable resonance more than a 
quarter of a century on and the kind of arguments he invoked are still discussed a great 
deal more enthusiastically than are party politics.11 

‘Razzmatazz’ 

The word ‘razzmatazz’ came into being in the context of American popular music in the 
first half of the twentieth century, but it has come to be more generally used by outside 
observers of the US to denote a certain style of presentation, especially in sport. Bands, 
pom-pom  girls,  cheerleaders,  wild  celebration,  the  exploitation  of  every  available 
commercial  opportunity:  these  are  the  essence  of  ‘American  razzmatazz’,  frequently 
loathed  by  cultural  conservatives  but  admired  by  modernisers in the rest of the world. 

The Global Politics of sport     96

Sometimes the worlds of English and American sport can seem like cultural opposites. In 
England we still expect a ‘breathless hush’, to use Sir Henry Newbolt’s phrase, to dignify 
certain sporting moments like the last man going in to bat in the last over or the kicking 
of a vital penalty goal in a rugby match. Even in English soccer in the early twenty-first 
century  crowds  will  diligently  observe  one-minute  silences  for  recently  deceased 
dignitaries  or  former  players  though  they  do  not  accord  the  same  respect  to  a  visiting 
penalty-taker  as  do  rugby  crowds.  Meanwhile,  in  the  US  Major  Leagues,  the  big 
moments are marked by the organ playing, the scoreboard flashing and the dancing girls 
dancing.  American  sport  seems  unequivocal  about  its  status  as  ‘entertainment’  while 
British sport sells itself as a combination of pageant, tradition and expression of identity. 
It is possible, though, to find both styles within the same sport: the All-England tennis 
championships  at  Wimbledon  are  a  pure  case  of  the  ‘Old  English’  style,  but  the 
presentation  of  British  home  ties  in  the  Davis  Cup  is  copied  directly  from  the  (US) 
National Basketball Association and incorporates lasers and heavy rock music.  

It is clear that these cultural differences have very deep roots. When cricket was at its 
peak in the US, in the 1850s, yet was beginning to attract some nationalist opprobrium, 
the game as played by Englishmen was often derided for its solemnity. For example, in 
1859  Mortimer  Neal  Thompson,  a  popular  humorist,  described  cricket  as  ‘a  solemn 
ceremony  periodically  performed  by  deluded  Englishmen  who  think  they  are  having 
fun.’12 Even then it was customary to remark that batsmen raised in the US were much 
more  aggressive  than  was  either  orthodox  or  wise.  The  counter-factual  hypothetical 
suggested  by  Melville’s  research  on  ante-bellum  cricket  is  that  if  Americans  had  been 
able to evolve and control their own form of the game it would have been modernised, 
shortened  and  Americanised  and  might  well  have  come  to  occupy  the  space  actually 
taken up by an intensified form of rounders. 

Thompson’s comment will ring true to most people who have played amateur sport in 
an  Anglo-American  context  in  the  twentieth  century.  It  is  reminiscent  of  American 
Rhodes Scholars in Oxford rugby games embarrassing English public schoolboys by yee-
hawing when the latter have scored a try. Or the sole American who has found his way 
into a village or college cricket team who whoops when an opposition wicket falls as the 
English  captain  apologises  to  the  batsman,  ‘Bad  luck,  batsman.  Sorry  about that.’ The 
differences of culture—or ‘national character’ as the Victorians would have put it—are 
long-lasting  and  profound,  though  ultimately  inexplicable  given  the  range  of  factors 
involved. 

The transfer of sporting cultures to the mass media represented and magnified existing 
differences.  Lord  Reith’s  BBC  discouraged  a  personality  cult  of  commentators  as  it 
discouraged the camera crew for dwelling on the crowd for fear of encouraging ‘showing 
off. The objective was to present sport with dignity and avoiding changing what you were 
showing.  Television  was  a  poor  person’s  poor  alternative  to  real  attendance.  Roone 
Arledge’s  ABC  took  almost  exactly  the  opposite  approach,  changing  times  to  suit  TV 
rather than live audiences, positively encouraging showing off by both crowd and players 
and creating the commentator as a star, beginning with Howard Cosell Only in the 1990s 
did Arledge’s assumptions about the televising of sport become the norm in Britain. 

The curious role of the USA in world sport     97

A Calvinist theology of winners and losers 

Vince  Lombardi,  the  coach  of  the  Green  Bay  Packers  who  dominated  the  early 
Superbowls in the 1960s, famously said that ‘Winning isn’t the main thing—it’s the only 
thing’.  Paul  Gardner  transferred  a  business  slogan  to  sport  with  his  book  Nice  Guys 
Finish Last.13 It is something of a cliché to say that American sport, particularly football, 
serves as a metaphor for capitalist life: both can be seen as a kind of Darwinist jungle in 
which you discover whether you are a winner or a loser. Or do you have the free will to 
decide? The ambiguity is parallel to that in Calvinist theology in which membership of 
the  divine  elite  (the  ancient  past  participle  of  the  verb  ‘to  choose’  in  French)  is  both 
predestined and meritorious. The most obvious symptom of the American obsession with 
winning  is  the  unmarketability  of  the  drawn  contest.  ‘Ties’  occur  in  only  very  rare 
circumstances in Major League sport whereas they are a substantial minority of results in 
both cricket and football in England. 

But to accept the picture of Major League sport as a brutal struggle to find winners is 
to  accept  its  sales  hype  rather  than  its  realities.  Because  of  the  exclusivity  of  Major 
League  sport  and  the  institution  of  the  draft  the  strength  of  teams  is  fairly  even  so 
everybody  experiences  victory  and  defeat on a fairly regular basis. Because the Major 
Leagues have organised themselves on sustainably commercial lines those involved are 
shielded from many of the harsher consequences of failure as they exist in British sport. 
There is no relegation to a lower league and under an arrangement specifically permitted 
by the Sports Broadcasting Act of 1961 TV rights are pooled. By British standards clubs 
have essentially sound finances and most are effectively subsidised by local government. 
All  in  all  Major  League  sport  is  more  like  a  cosy  cartel  than  a  ruthless  capitalist 
competition.  As  Art  Modell,  the  owner  of  the  Cleveland  Browns  said  of  the  National 
Football League owners in 1978, ‘We’re twenty-eight republicans who vote socialist’.14 
Not for the Major League competitor is the prospect of defeat which may mean not just 
relegation,  but  even  the  demise  of  the  club.  Nor  do  they  have  to  face  the  extreme 
pressures  of  representative  international  competition  where  you  may  have  to  take  a 
penalty on which your nation’s hopes rest. 

Yet mythology is also, of course, a social reality. The myth of a society of winners and 
losers with Major League football in particular as its sporting metaphor is an important 
element  of  American  culture  which is constantly transmitted abroad through films and 
television. 

Athleticism and superlativism 

The generic term for those who play sports and games in England is ‘sportsman/ woman’. 
In the US it is ‘athlete’, a term which in England refers only to ‘track and field’ athletes. 
It could be argued that this is a trivial difference in usage, but I do not think so. Whereas 
‘sportsman’  suggests  activities  defined  by  sporting  values  such  as  fairness,  judgement 
and  dedication,  ‘athlete’  suggests  primarily  a  commitment  to  extreme  physical 
achievement. And, indeed, if you suggest to a group of American football fans that their 
game is boring, over-specialised and lacking in the kinds of skill you need to play soccer 
or cricket (an experiment I have tried on several occasions), the reaction is normally to 

The Global Politics of sport     98

point to hard athletic facts which other sports cannot rival such as the existence of 300-
pound players who can run the 100 metres in under eleven seconds. Major League sells 
itself as a place of superlatives, even—in the cases of football and basketball—as a kind 
of  freak  show.  It  justifies  itself  as  the  real  location  of  the  values  of  ‘Citius,  Altius, 
Fortius’. As a spectator you are prepared to pay its prices because you are seeing the very 
best. In this respect its claims contrast quite sharply with those of domestic competitions 
in other countries whose appeal is much more based on partisanship and tradition and 
which  do  not  portray  themselves  as  the  supreme  level  of  competition  because  that 
accolade belongs to the international level of the sport. 

However, it is clear that insofar as athleticism and superlativism distinguish the culture 
of American sport from the sporting cultures of other societies, they do so to different 
degrees. The contrast with Britain would be a much sharper one than the contrast with 
Germany,  for  example,  where  athleticism  and  superlativism  have  been  admired  much 
more than they have in Britain. It is interesting to note that the perception of American 
athleticism has marked Anglo-American rivalry throughout the history of modern sport. 
In the early modern Olympics the American press was keen to point out that although 
their team did not always win the most medals they did win the more athletic events and 
they  even  published  alternative  medal  tables  which  left  out  the  more  sedentary  events 
which the British tended to win.15 

The relationship between sport and education 

The idea that what we now call sport (or sports) should be an essential part of a system of 
education, aiding the development of community and individual character as well as the 
health  of  children  and  young  people  is  one  which  was  imported  in  its  entirety  from 
Britain to the US. But it is an idea which took on wholly new forms and a life of its own 
on American soil. Nothing else in the world is comparable with the American system of 
college and university sport and relatively little is comparable with high school sport in 
the US. There are more than four and a half thousand institutions of higher education, the 
vast  majority  of  which  run  sports  teams  and  the  majority  of  which  offer  sports 
scholarships. According to the National Collegiate Athletic Association more than 90 per 
cent of the paying audience for live sport in the US is for college sport and more than 99 
per cent of athletes who perform in front of a paying audience are college athletes. Even 
on television the audience for the sum total of college sport is roughly equal to that for 
Major League.16 The college system, just as much as Major League, is a typically and 
uniquely American institution. In the grandest of American universities, such as Stanford 
in California, the quality of facilities is such that an Olympic Games could be relocated 
there  without  further  investment;  World  Cup  soccer  and  professional  football’s 
Superbowl have already been held at Stanford. 

Perhaps the most convincing way of demonstrating the rootedness of college sport in 
American life is by showing how it overcame considerable opposition to become what it 
is today. It is generally accepted that the early development of college sport, before the 
Civil War, was student-led and British-inspired. Even after 1865 most college authorities 
were either indifferent or hostile to organised games, regarding them as an unscholarly 
diversion. The vestiges and legacy of this hostility have lasted throughout the history of 
college sport. Matters came to a head in the early twentieth century with the death of at 

The curious role of the USA in world sport     99

least twelve college footballers in 1902; in the subsequent discussions and investigations 
college  football  was  described  in  an  extreme  case  as  a  ‘boy-killing,  education-
prostituting, so-called sport’ and it was ‘touch and go’ whether it would be banned. In 
1905 the (Teddy) Roosevelt Commission recommended rule changes in football and in 
1906 the Inter-Collegiate Athletic Administration (which developed into the NCAA) was 
established. College sport had begun to develop the vast culture and organisation which it 
now has. The opposition was never entirely eradicated: the ‘Ivy League’ of prestigious 
Eastern colleges opted out of the system, formally establishing a separate conference in 
1956.  In  1939,  the  University  of  Chicago  opted  out  of  formal  sporting  competition 
altogether. It is plausible to suggest that nothing like modern college sport might have 
evolved if the USA had remained as thirteen states (or even the twenty-four of the De 
Tocqueville period). It was in provincial America, in the Mid-West and the backwoods of 
the South that college sport took on new dimensions. States needed universities not only 
as channels for individual aspirations but also as a focus for local pride. Universities, in 
turn, became the torch-bearers for reason and progress in deeply provincial communities. 
College sport became a way of attracting the general support of the community to the 
university.  It  thus  shares  an  historic  origin  in  certain  respects  with  the  institution  of 
tenure. One of its achievements, in my view, is that the inhabitants of Ohio regard Ohio 
State  University  as  ‘their’  institution  to  a  degree  which  is  inconceivable  in  the 
relationship,  for  example,  between  the  University  of  Warwick  and  the  people  of 
Warwickshire. 

The college system remains the object of much cynicism and criticism. Arguably it is 
a system of pseudo-professional sport foisted on to higher education and its effects are to 
distort admissions, to undermine academic life and to exploit athletes. It may not be the 
direct ‘boy-killer’ it was a century ago, but NCAA figures show that well over half of 
Afro-American  scholarship  athletes neither graduate nor proceed to Major League and 
many of those are almost literally cast on to the streets having tasted the glories of large 
crowds, TV coverage and fan adulation. The system can simultaneously be accused of 
combining  some  of  the  worst  excesses  of  professional  sport  with  the  exploitation  of 
amateurs.  Most  European  observers  are  likely  to  perceive  it  as  a  form  of  pseudo 
professionalism, being aware of the draft system which feeds college players into Major 
League and of the status of college golf, for example, as a kind of ‘junior pro’ tour. 

All  of  this  is  true,  but  a  more  balanced  picture  must  acknowledge  a  wide  range  of 
contributions made by college sport to American life. The NCAA alone has more than 
1250 institutional members and runs championships in eighteen principal sports. Many 
institutions,  including  most  of  the  smaller  and  older  colleges,  are  not  members  of  the 
NCAA  but  are  involved  in  sport  to  some  degree.  Many  sports  (including  rugby  and 
cricket)  are  not  governed  by  the  NCAA.  College  sport  remains  the  heartland  of  the 
American  sports  fan.  Geographically  its  tentacles  extend  to  places  hundreds  of  miles 
beyond the remit of Major League. Historically it has a permanence and sense of tradition 
precisely  because  its  activities  are  dominated  by  sporting  and  communal  values  rather 
than  by  commerce.  As  they  say  in  Indiana,  ‘The  Colts  (the  Indianapolis  football  team 
which  moved  from  Baltimore)  may  come  and  go,  but  Purdue  versus  Notre  Dame  will 
always  be  the  Big  Match’.  Howard  Nixon  argues  that  sport  is  very  much  part  of  the 
‘American  Dream’,  but  it  is  college  sport  which  best  fits  that  role,  allowing  the  local 

The Global Politics of sport     100

hero,  the  all-rounder,  to  progress  from  sporting  victory  to  business  and  communal 
success.17 

In  certain  respects  the  American  system  of  college  sport  is  the  focus  for  sporting 
values and cultures in the way that professional sport is in England. It is also a system at 
least nominally founded on the ideals of amateurism and sportsmanship. The NCAA is an 
overtly  amateur  organisation  (with  a  17-page  definition  of  amateur  status  in  its 
regulations).18 Its ideals are of the ‘student-athlete’ and of sport as an ‘avocation’. It runs 
a system of awards for all-rounders who succeed in the classroom and on the field. Much 
of the appeal of college sport lies not in the superlative, but in the dogged support of the 
local. It is as much about romance as about the grinding out of excellence: the ‘March 
Madness’  basketball  tournament  allows  for  one-off  acts  of  giant-killing  which  are 
anathema  to  Major  League  and  more  like  the  appeal  of  the  FA  Cup.  The  stout 
businessman who once played a whole five minutes as a substitute defensive end in front 
of  90,000  people  and  the  TV  cameras  regards  the  experience  as  part  of  his  success, 
whereas a five-minute career in professional sport would be a frustrating failure. 

College sport is not usually given credence for its values; much of the debate about it 
concentrates on its spectacular excesses and failings, notwithstanding that these occur in 
a handful of sports and a minority of colleges. But it has remained amateur not only in the 
aspiration that all competitors be genuine ‘student-athletes’, but also, for example, in the 
strict confining of competition to undergraduates and to a maximum of four years and in 
the  prohibition  of  financial  incentives  for  sporting  success.  In  some  respects,  like  the 
abolition of athletic residential buildings, the hyphenated aspiration has been intensified. 
Above  all,  college  sport  remains  the  locus  for  debate  about  sporting  values  and  ideals 
which are still in place in contrast to the drug-, strike- and crime-ridden milieu of Major 
League. Newspapers all over the US run stories and features on the issues of college sport 
such as whether the equality of women has gone too far or whether anything can be done 
to revive the ‘Walk-in’ (the athlete who has no sports scholarship but wants to try out for 
a  team  place).  These  two  issues  are  linked  because  it  is  the  requirement  to  give  equal 
facilities  to  female  competitors  under  Title  IX  which  restricts  the  space  for  additional 
squad  members  in  the  principal  male  sports.  The  assumption  of  these  debates  is  that 
college sport still has a soul, culturally speaking, even if it is in constant danger of losing 
or selling that soul. 

The ideas of globalisation and Americanisation 

I have so far avoided discussing the contemporary conceptual debate about globalisation, 
largely  because  there  is  so  much  of  it.  Globalisation  in  its  most  general  sense  is  the 
breaking  down  of  boundaries  so  that  the  world  tends  to  become  a  single  system  of 
society.  One  might  imagine  this  happening  on  a  planet  which  consisted  of  a  set  of 
roughly equal states which acted primarily as independent units but also in some respects 
as a system (a ‘Westphalian’ system as it is often called in international relations). As 
barriers broke down, as trade and migration increased and as regulatory bodies developed 
which covered the whole planet, we might witness an even and consensual globalisation. 
This  would  be  a  complicated  and  multi-dimensional  process:  trade,  capital  flows, 
institutional  governance  and  culture  might  tend to  move  in  the  same  direction  as  each 

The curious role of the USA in world sport     101

other, but they might also rest or move independently or even inversely. Migration might 
be at a high level, for example, because of the strength of the Westphalian system and the 
consequent  failure  of  economic  opportunities  and  political  rights  to  cross  frontiers. 
Reactions to the growth of international trade may include attempts to protect and ‘ring-
fence’ totemic cultural goods. 

The  issue  becomes  yet  more  complex  on  our  real  planet  where  the  differences  in 
power between states and the organisations based in them are enormous and where there 
has been since 1989 a sole superpower. Theories of the integration of the globe began the 
twentieth century as theories of imperialism developed by such writers as Hobhouse, Roy 
and Lenin. In the second half of the twentieth century some core ideas had been absorbed 
into the neostructuralist theories of the United Nations Commission for Latin America, 
but also dependency theories and world systems theories which portrayed integration as a 
relationship  between  a  ‘core’  (which  gains  and  controls)  and  a  ‘periphery’  which 
becomes increasingly dependant. These are a range of theories which greatly complicate 
the  ideas  of  transfer  and  integration,  turning  them  into  accounts  of  power  and 
imposition.19 

It is at least possible that power and influence could exist as counter-flows, that Rome 
could absorb much from Greece, so to speak. But such influence tends to go unnoticed or 
not  to  be  categorised  as  globalisation,  certainly  not  in  the  adverse  sense  in  which 
globalisation and Americanisation are often equated. Thus a room full of French children 
eating  hamburgers  and  wearing  baseball  caps  (backwards)  is  easily  theorised  as 
globalisation whereas a room full of mid-Western businessmen eating warm salad with 
lardons  or  deep  fried  camembert  is  merely  sophistication,  possibly  globalisation,  but 
certainly  not  Gallicisation.  Although  French  influence  in  the  US  may  be  great  and 
increasing (in some respects, and despite overtly anti-French prejudice) it is not normally 
understood as the consequence of a power structure, but of free choice. Jose Bove and his 
followers attack McDonald’s in France, but nobody is counterattacking the Frenchified 
restaurants of middle America. Yet it is also possible that free choices to mutual benefit 
may  also  occur  in  the  context  of  cultural  transfers  from  a  powerful  to  a  less  powerful 
state. 

All of which is intended as further notes of conceptual caution and as a framework for 
the concluding consideration of the extent of Americanisation in world sport. This will be 
done by considering three dimensions of the problem: first, by an overview of the main 
headings under which globalisation is considered and how they work in sport, second by 
assessing the main features of American sport in terms of their achievement and potential 
for transfer to the rest of the world and finally by asking the question of whether and in 
what  respects  a  particular  kind  of  cultural  conservative  might  be  concerned  about 
American influence in sport. 

The dimensions of globalisation 

There  are  aspects  of  sports  which  make  the  US  look  like  the  ‘core’  of  world  sport  in 
relation to a dependent periphery. In many kinds of sports goods the system of production 
is  dominated  by  American  capital  even  when  the  labour  and  the  market  are 
predominantly  elsewhere.20  In  films,  the  world  watches  American  sports  film,  but  not 

The Global Politics of sport     102

vice  versa.  Arguably,  basketball  has  an  NBA  core  in  relation  to  which  the  rest  of  the 
world is a periphery, aspiring to the standards and products of the American institution. A 
similar  situation  exists  in  (ice)  hockey  where  Canadians  often  feel  they  have  been 
peripheralised by a National Hockey League centred on the US.21 But in some cases this 
is reversed: in the mighty case of soccer England feels like the core (along with Spain and 
Italy) with players from all other countries, including the US, aspiring to the prestigious 
European leagues and spectators throughout the globe (including an American minority 
cult)  wanting  to  watch  English  games.  There  has  been  some  cultural  penetration  by 
American sports in European markets: baseball peaked in the 1940s (and established a 
permanent place in Italian sport) and football peaked in the 1980s, but this process has 
been  dwarfed  by  the  American  importation  of  soccer  and  rugby  as  alternative 
participatory sports. US interests are not disproportionately represented in the relatively 
powerful  systems  of  global  sports  governance  though  that  representation  has  certainly 
increased  in  the  Olympic  movement  since  the  success  of  Peter  Ueberroth  in 
commercialising  the  games  in  his  organisation  of  the  Los  Angeles  games  of  1984.  In 
short, it is difficult to portray the US as exercising the kind of dominance in globalisation 
that it does in economic organisation. 

Exporting the peculiarities of American sport 

I have argued that the college system is the heart of American sport. It remains deeply 
rooted in American life and with some influence on individuals in the rest of the world 
through  foreign  scholarships,  but  it  remains  essentially  a  national  phenomenon:  its 
sartorial styles export easily enough, but its essence does not. A rare and minor example 
of imitation was in the news in 2002 when Team Bath, a soccer team of subsidised sports 
studies  students  based  on  Bath  University  became  the  first  university  team  since  the 
nineteenth century to reach the first round proper of the FA Cup where they lost 2–4 to 
Mansfield Town. The team had been established by a previous American vice-chancellor. 
However,  it  was  widely  commented  that,  whereas  in  a  top  American  college  football 
game you will see future stars of the professional game, Team Bath consisted of failed 
and ex-professionals. Soccer is still a game in which players are expected to start early, 
remain dedicated and skip university: Markovits and Hellerman show that of 132 players 
in the top six squads in the 1998 World Cup only two had been to university.22 A great 
deal  of  soccer  may  be  played  in  the  American  college  system,  but  it  has  very  little 
bearing on the global game. 

An assessment of the culturally penetrative capacities of American athleticism must be 
more  equivocal,  not  least  because  some  other  cultures—notably  Slavic  and  Germanic 
cultures—also tend to value the purely athletic more than does British culture. There is 
also  a  difference  between  admiring  the  remarkable  abilities  of  individual  athletes  like 
Muhammed  Ali  and  Michael  Jordan  and  wanting  to  absorb  a  more  pure  form  of 
athleticism into one’s own sporting culture. However, since the peak of the popularity of 
American sports in the late 1980s we can identify a number of factors which have led to a 
revival of soccer and a decline of interest in athleticism (including a drastic decline in the 
popularity  of  track  and  field  atbletics).  Drugs  are  certainly  part  of  the  problem  and  a 
widespread public cynicism about their use puts more of a premium on games of craft 

The curious role of the USA in world sport     103

and  judgement.  Race  is also an issue with an equally widespread perception (however 
misconceived or badly theorised) that outstanding athletes tend to be of African origin. 
Thus,  although  it  is  a  complex  issue,  there  are  undoubtedly  considerable  and  growing 
obstacles  to  European  admiration  for  the American totem of the 300-pound 11-second 
man. 

Equally, since I have already dismissed the cult of the ‘winner’ as a kind of ‘Sunday 
truth’  (as  Bertrand  Russell  would  have  put  it)  it  is  unlikely  to  have  much  culturally 
penetrative  capacity.  But  one  aspect  of  that  cult  is  possibly  more  influential:  the 
abhorrence  of  the  draw  as  ‘like  kissing  your  sister’.23  Draws  have  traditionally  been  a 
common and accepted part of both soccer and cricket while American sports fans have 
(uniquely) found them entirely unsatisfactory: they were part of the case against cricket 
even  in  the  1850s.  It  is  true  that  as  one-day  cricket  (and  limited-over  cricket  at  the 
amateur level) have become a larger proportion of the game draws are much less frequent 
and that in soccer many forms of cup game now incorporate arrangements to produce a 
winner  at  the  first  attempt  (or  the  second  in  the  case  of  the  FA  Cup).  Whether  these 
changes  can  be  attributed  directly  to  American  influence  as  opposed  to  acceptance  of 
other forces of change is impossible to tell. 

Which  brings  us  to  the  aspect  of  Americanisation  which  must  be  considered  most 
seriously.  Major  League  has  set  an  agenda for  world  sport  in  two  distinguishable,  but 
overlapping ways. First, there is its style which has often been so appealing to people in 
more  traditional  (or,  arguably,  backward)  societies.  In  the  1980s,  especially,  when 
English  soccer  had  an  image  of  hooliganism  and  semi-dereliction  many  of  its 
administrators  and  commentators  looked  to  the  bright  orderliness of Major League for 
their salvation. The dancing girls, the ‘family’ atmosphere, the purpose-built, all-seater 
stadia  were  seen  as  the  only  alternative  if  the  game  was  to  revive.  Indeed,  ‘Premier 
League’ does ape Major League in many of its essentials (including ticket prices and the 
removal  of  standing  terraces)  though  in  few  of  its  stylistic  details:  cheerleaders  are 
extremely rare and the cult of the pie has kept popcorn at bay. If Major League has set the 
agenda, though, it has met with vigorous debate rather than a nem. con. vote. There is a 
vast body of fan-writing which condemns these changes, normally on the grounds that the 
Major League atmosphere is bland and anodyne.24 Premiership grounds remain contested 
territories in this respect as in others. 

But more important than the style of Major League is its logic. American professional 
sport has established structures for a sustainable commercial sport. Elsewhere, sport has 
either  resisted  commercial  forces  and/or  they  have  been  unleashed  on  top  of  existing 
sporting  institutions  which  are  neither  truly  commercially  viable  nor  do  they  have  the 
means of adaptation. At the time of writing, for example, at least 90 per cent of English 
football  clubs  are  insolvent  in  at  least  some  sense.  There  is  a  far  more  urgent  need to 
learn  from  Major  League  than  mere  admiration  for  a  more  commercial  style.  Real 
commercial logic applied to team sports in the early twenty-first century means very few 
clubs,  operating  at  the  highest  possible  level  and  oriented  towards  a  televised  market, 
preferably internationally. As far as the big money is concerned the rest of sport consists 
of  support  services.  Another  implication,  outside  the  USA,  is  that  international 
competition becomes increasingly important at the expense of domestic competition. 

Consider  two  examples  of  arguments  generated  by  Major  League  logic.  The  first 
concerns  the  issue  of  relegation  in  English  Rugby  Union  which  has  been  riven  with 

The Global Politics of sport     104

disputes  over  fundamentals  ever  since  it  allowed  payment  to  players  in  1996.  The 
question at issue is over whether the top level of the game (also called the Premiership) 
should be ‘ring-fenced’. Protection of top status has been vehemently advocated by Rob 
Andrew,  Director  of  Rugby  at  the  Newcastle  club  and  formerly  one  of  England’s  top 
players.  The  argument  has  been  put  very  clearly  by  Nigel  Wray,  the  owner  of  the 
Saracens club, who compares living with the prospect of relegation to trying to manage a 
property with only a twelve-month lease. ‘Promotion and relegation are the reasons why 
95%  of  football  clubs  are  financially  shot  to  pieces…(they)  are  alien  concepts  in 
Australia and America and, if we’re honest, they’re rather better at sport than we are… 
Relegation leads to chaos. It leads to a lack of financial planning…’25 

The vast majority of people (according to an email poll conducted by John Inverdale) 
were opposed to this view. As Maurice Lindsay, chairman of the Orrell club, put it, all 
clubs  must  be  part  of  a  pyramid  in  which  you  can  rise  as  high  or  fall  as  low  as  your 
playing merit dictates: ‘Because sport is all about having a dream’.26 Pyramid systems 
now exist in football, cricket, rugby and hockey. In cricket, the ‘first class’ level is ring-
fenced, but promotion and relegation between two divisions were introduced in the year 
2000. Ironically, pyramid systems are fairly new in English sport, largely a product of the 
1980s. The sports authorities approved them because they were meritocratic and more in 
tune  with  modern  sentiment  than  the  supposed  ‘old  boy  networks’  they  replaced.  Yet 
Wray’s argument that they are incompatible with a genuinely business approach to sport 
is surely valid. As is Lindsay’s argument that the Major League concept is incompatible 
with traditional English ideas about sporting organisation. One should perhaps add that 
for  all  the  validity  of  Wray’s  argument  it  does  not  acknowledge  that  in  the  American 
model the league is a firm and the clubs are franchises, which is a very different structure 
from the norm in English sport where the club itself is a firm. 

The parallel argument in football is that the traditional system of 92 professional clubs 
is  not  commercially  viable.  Peter  Kenyon,  Chief  Executive  of  Manchester  United,  has 
said ‘I don’t think you can have four divisions of professional football any longer’. In 
reply  Gordon  Taylor,  the  Chief  Executive  of  the  Professional  Footballers  Association, 
cites our national pride in having the largest number of clubs of any country in the world 
and  adds  ‘football’s  part  in  the  social  fabric  is  even  more  important—it  brings 
communities together on a regular basis’. Once again it is much easier to find supporters 
of  Taylor  than  of  Kenyon,  but  it  is  clear  that  in  football  as  well  the  logic  of  a  truly 
commercial sport is incompatible with English tradition.27 

Although the reformers of English sport often do look directly to America for their 
examples, they more often look to Australia, which in many respects mediates between 
the  two.  Much  of  the  reason  for  this  is  that  we  have  to  play  Australia,  especially  at 
cricket, and usually come off worse. As Michael Parkinson, a leading sports journalist 
and  a  strident  moderniser,  puts  it,  The  basic  difference  between  the  way  we  and  the 
Australians run cricket is that we still hanker for the past. We debate the merits of one-
day cricket, coloured clothing, floodlights, covered wickets, technology and the county 
system. We are suspicious of change. Australians embrace it… Consequently, while they 
have prospered, we have atrophied’.28 

We  can  speculate  as  to  the  reasons  that  tradition  has  proved  so  much  less  of  an 
obstacle to modernisation and commercialisation in Australia than it has in Britain. The 
country  has  a  self-image  of  newness  rather  than  oldness;  its  club  structure  is  much 

The curious role of the USA in world sport     105

smaller  and  less  embedded;  its  media  empires  have  been  particularly  dynamic  and 
aggressive; it has been more positively oriented towards America. Whatever the reasons, 
the  consequences  have  been  a  dynamic  for  change  in  Australia,  which  often  apes 
American  practice  either  intentionally  or  subconsciously.  There  is  a  ‘World  Series’  in 
Australian  cricket,  the  score  boards  offer  amusing  animation  (such  as  a  weeping, 
waddling  duck  to  represent  a  player  who  is  dismissed  without  scoring)  and  media 
presentation is much more American BC than BBC. 

The test of cultural conservatism 

In the 1980s there was, allegedly, something that amounted to a ‘moral panic’ in Europe 
about the prevalence of American programmes on prime time television.29 The European 
Commission went so far as to single out the saga Dallas as the focus of its concerns. I 
confess  to  having  been  a  fan  of  Dallas  (to  the  extent  of  possessing  books  about  the 
making of the programme). I appreciate the theoretical argument, later put by the French 
Government during World Trade Organisation negotiations, that the American product is 
expensively made, but that the marginal costs of its distribution are low so that it can in 
effect be ‘dumped’, crowd out the local products and thus undermine national cultures. 
However, I could not bring myself to regard Dallas as a threat to English identity. 

In  general,  though,  I  would  admit  to  a  cultural  conservatism  which  is  incompatible 
with pure market liberalism. There are aspects of our culture which may be undermined 
by  economic  change  and  which  we  may  seek  to  protect  politically,  I  am  here  using 
‘culture’  in  Scitovsky’s  sense  of  goods  which  do  not  just  give  us  ‘pleasure’,  but 
contribute to our senses of meaning and identity.30 These goods in my case would include 
aspects of the English countryside, pubs and theatre for example. It is typical of cultural 
conservatism in this sense that we are not content to enjoy such totemic goods, but seek 
to ‘list’ and preserve them ‘for future generations’ and that the failure to do so would 
undermine and even destroy present pleasure. 

Some of these goods are sporting: the extent of English professional football, both in 
general and as a supporter of a particular club and the network of seven thousand clubs 
and a quarter of a million players in English amateur cricket. Some of the sporting goods 
are even less definable: the spirit of English amateur cricket, the atmosphere of major 
sporting events like Cheltenham and Wimbledon. Are they ‘under threat’? It is a difficult 
question to answer: as with many evaluations of change it is hard to pick a path between 
arch-conservatism,  which  sees  all  change  as  destruction,  and  Panglossianism  which 
refuses to acknowledge that change can ever be truly destructive of good. What are the 
sources  of  change  which  might  be  seen  as  destructive?  One  is  an  increasing 
commercialism which subjects more activities to market criteria than was previously the 
case. Another is the social dimension of commercialisation, meaning that people spend a 
higher proportion of their time on specific acts of production and consumption, leaving 
less time for the voluntary and amateur aspects which lie in between. In what senses can 
these  changes  be  called  Americanisation?  They  certainly  involve  the  rest  of  the  world 
becoming more like America, but one cannot attribute any intention to Americanise, nor 
can  one  prove  an  answer  to  the  question  of  whether  they  would  have  occurred  if  the 

The Global Politics of sport     106

United States did not exist. We are back to De Tocqueville’s problem of the relationship 
between ‘democracy’ and ‘America’. 

In  its  sporting  dimension,  as  in  several  others,  the  US  is  both  exceptional  and 
influential. By offering a model of commercial sport, America sets the agenda for change. 
It  would  be  wrong  to  blame  America  because  its  influence  is  neither  intentional  nor 
malicious.  But  it  is  not  illogical  to  resent  Americanisation  in  this  sense,  because  its 
influence is hostile to many of the sporting values and institutions which have been held 
dear elsewhere.  

8 

Local heroes and global stars  

Paul Gilchrist 

On 9th January 2002 the American golfer Tiger Woods entered New Zealand’s capital, 
Wellington, as a guest at a gala charity dinner. His presence in the country was owing to 
the latest tournament on the global circuit, the New Zealand Open at Paraparaumu. The 
preparations for his visit mirrored those of the arrival of a Head of State. Bomb squads, 
accompanied  dogs,  scoured  the  surrounding  area  for  explosive  devices  and  possible 
traces of terrorist activity. Police helicopters circled overhead. Fences had been erected 
around the landing site and Special Forces covered the perimeter by manning strategic 
rooftop positions. However, Woods flew into Queens Wharf amidst controversy. Waiting 
to greet him was an assembled mass of protesters who had decided to target the golfer as 
the centrepiece to their anti-globalisation demonstration. They were protesting about poor 
working  conditions  for  workers  in  South  East  Asian  ‘sweatshops’.  The  cause  of  their 
protest  was  unjust  pay  differentials  between  Woods,  who  had  signed  a  five-year 
endorsement contract with Nike worth US$100 million (roughly US$130,000 a day) for 
wearing  a  Nike  baseball  cap,  while  workers  received  a  US$2  a  day  pittance.  The 
demonstration was a lively affair, led by chants of ‘Nike, Nike take a Hike!’ and began 
with a street theatre in which child workers were wheeled out in front of an assembled 
panel  of  corporate  fat  cats  and  auctioned  off.  The  irony  being  that  ‘Mr.  Nike’  bid  the 
lowest price and wheeled off his new workers to the factory. Tiger, who confronted the 
protesters  at  one  point,  simply  remained  mute,  beamed  his  brilliant  white  smile  and 
looked slightly bemused by the whole affair.1 

This chapter attempts to understand the sport star’s response to political and ethical 
questions  in  light  of  tensions  between community  and  individualism,  performance  and 
representation, which are at the heart of the idea of the sporting hero. Its premise is to 
argue  that  globalisation  has  agitated  these  tensions.  To  members  of  the  sporting  elite 
globalisation promises a ‘borderless world’ of an unrestricted cosmopolitan nature, where 
money, fame and trophies can be won in far off places.2 Yet, to communities who register 
an  emotional  commitment  to  their  sporting  heroes  globalisation  appears  as  a  threat,  if 
those opportunities are carried to an extreme. There exists the danger of nomadism. Here 
the exercise of asocial individualism by the sporting hero results in a transgression of the 
relationship  between  hero  and  society,  which  releases  mal-evolent  political  pressures. 
Our understanding of globalisation and the sporting hero therefore entails examining the 
location of sporting heroes within late capitalism, as corporeal representatives of broader 
collectives (most commonly the nation), and also as part of the global economy of sport. 
This understanding will be made easier if we draw a conceptual distinction between the 
sporting hero and the sport star. This task will be dealt with in the following sections and 
throughout.  As  a  rejoinder  and  partial  disclaimer  I  have  not  sought  to  focus  explicitly 
upon  the  gender  dynamics  of  this  distinction  and  the  problems  and  opportunities  the 

The Global Politics of sport     108

globalisation of sport brings to this dynamic. Such a topic, I believe, is worthy of more 
attention than this chapter can provide.3 

The idea of the sporting hero 

In the mid-nineteenth century we witnessed how the industrial revolution paved the way 
for profound technological and social change. One of its impacts was to transform local 
geography,  at  one  point  causing  Wordsworth  in  1844  to  castigate  the  arrival  of  the 
railway  by  the  banks  of  Lake  Windermere,  and  protest,  ‘Is  there  no  nook  of  English 
ground secure from rash assault?’4 In contrast, the writer Henry Thoreau could be seen to 
reject the parochialism and pre-modern sentimentality of Wordsworth, and embrace the 
imminent possibilities borne from change. He expressed, sitting by the banks of Walden 
Pond, that he felt, 

…refreshed  and  expanded  when  the  freight  train  rattles  past  me,  and  I 
smell the stores which go dispensing their odours all the way from Long 
Wharf to Lake Champlain, reminding me of foreign parts…and the extent 
of the globe. I feel more like a citizen of the world.5  

The above views express two instances where individuals have come to terms with the 
broadening  of  their  horizons  from  the  local  to  the  global.  They  are  also  indicative  of 
alternate readings of the same process, in this case the coming of the railway into sedate 
countryside. Globalisation therefore is not just about benign and liberating possibilities 
accorded  to  us  by  a  more  cosmopolitan  social  environment,  but  about  the  conflict  of 
values, interests and ideas, the very stuff of politics, which renders our experiences of 
global flows heterogeneous.6 

When consideration is given to the sporting hero a similar ambivalence arises, which 
produces a complex reading of globalisation. However, in order to excavate the nature of 
this ambivalence, some conceptual clarification is needed. I stipulate that the idea of the 
sporting hero is a totemic construction, it carries a totemic logic. In order to unpack this 
claim,  one  needs  to  grasp  the  nettle  of  the  essence  of  the  concept  of  totemism.  This 
concept has a lineage within anthropological and early sociological studies of primitive 
cultures and was used to denote a relationship between a kinship group toward a sacred 
and representative object of that group.7 The relationship carried acute social significance 
and was one of mutual beneficence, where, as J.G.Frazer wrote, ‘…the totem protects the 
man,  and  the  man  shows  his  respect  for  the  totem  in  various  ways’.8  There  are  three 
important  sets  of  interrelated  ideas  underpinning  the  concept.  First,  the  totem,  the 
material  object  accorded  with  at  times  a  superstitious  and  mysterious  reverence, 
expresses  and  idealises  social  divisions  existent  between  classes  of  people  in  society. 
These  divisions  are  subjectively  understood  and  felt  by  members  of  the  group.  The 
classic example drawn from anthropological studies is of a group that identifies with an 
animal, a plant or a force of nature (e.g. the wind or rain) who construct a totem to reflect 
the distinctiveness of their group identity. Second, this relationship is part of a religious 
or quasi-religious and social system. The bonds of association between members of the 
group and individuals toward the totem are ones of mutual respect, often bathed in an 

Local heros and global stars     109

idea  of  tradition  or  ancestry  that  is  expressed,  at  certain  junctures,  through  public  and 
ritual ceremony. Third, these relationships carry moral and political implications, alerting 
members to the presence of threats to the collective’s way of life and its identity. I would 
concur with Wundt, however, in stating that these features are of shifting significance, 
where  ‘some  of  the  meanings  may  recede,  so  that  totems…frequently  become  a 
nomenclature  of  tribal  divisions,  while  at  other  times  the  idea  of  ancestry,  or  perhaps 
also, the cult of significance, predominates.’9 

The  point  about  conceiving  the  idea  of  the  sporting  hero  as  totemic  is  that  we 
understand and recognise more fully the uniqueness of the social group; the importance 
of a representative to legitimating and expressing a collective’s identity and way of life; 
the public and ritual nature of the celebration of achievement within a system of shared 
understandings; and also the potential threats posed to the group. The presence of other 
totems or heroes of sport who hold an allegiance to a rival community, for instance. A 
‘totemic’  view,  therefore,  writes  Allison,  incorporates  ‘the  wholesomeness  of  Arcadia, 
edged  by  the  threat  of  the  wild  wood,  linked  to  ourselves  by  the  particular  ties  which 
make  it  our  tribal  totem’.10  In  this  instance the sporting hero exemplifies the purity of 
achievement in a distinct cultural location, a representative of what is publicly valued by 
the community—hence the granting of hero-status rather than other forms of accolade. 
They  figuratively  represent  a  range  of  virtues  and  excellences  which  only  hold  public 
value for a specific group of people.11 

This view is more explicitly recognisable when we consider postcolonial societies and 
disenfranchised  communities.  Sport  offers  a  range  of  cultural  forms  in  which  their 
community can be given a history, be it embodied and imagined.12 As CLR James made 
clear  in  Beyond  a  Boundary,  the  subaltern  struggle  has  been  intimately  related  to  the 
search  for  sporting  heroes,  a  cultural  form  to  be  imbued  with  a  distinct  meaning  and 
value.13  This  is  amplified  by  intransigence  of  other  forms  of  expression  and  reform, 
especially  at  an  institutional  level,  where  the  political  power  of  the  community 
evaporates. In the case of the West Indies the success of Constantine and the Three Ws’ 
sent  a  signal  to  the  world  of  a  vigorous  and  ambitious  set  of  islands  that  no  longer 
tolerated the yoke of colonial rule. They had found the cultural form in which to signal 
their arrival to the rest of the world and to forge a new history more resonant with their 
subjectivity. A more recent example is that of the heroics of the athlete Cathy Freeman at 
the Sydney Olympics who claimed victory in the 400 metres under the weight of national 
and international expectation. Her performance symbolised a politics of recognition and 
reconciliation of the continent’s native and immigrant communities: her Aboriginal kin 
could  now  have  their  own  flesh  and  blood  totem.  This  idea  of  the  sporting  hero  may 
sound  rather  emotional  and  dramatic  but  it  is  drawn  from  precedent  thought  on  the 
subject.  In  the  sporting  literature,  the  conceptualisation  is  to  be  found  mainly  in 
sociohistorical  accounts.  Holt  and  Mangan  write,  sporting  heroes  ‘reflect  [society’s] 
values,  aspirations  and  ambitions…,’14  where  ‘Each  nation…interprets  its  sporting 
achievement according to its own intellectual traditions’.15 

Sporting heroism, therefore, is not a universal category of intelligibility. It is certainly 
unclear,  for  example,  whether  the  reception  of  Sir  Henry  Newbolt’s  poem  ‘Vitai 
Lampada’ would be translatable to other contexts. As an ode to self-Sacrificial forms of 
manhood  which  fundamentally  requires  strength  of  character  (bravery,  courage,  ‘guts’ 
and  ‘bottle’)  in  the  service  of  imperial  ambition,  it  intuitively  appears  at  odds  to 

The Global Politics of sport     110

Germanic or American forms of physical culture, which, in the main, stress physicality 
and excessive bodily performance.16 The view of ‘Englishness’ has often traded upon a 
cultural  stereotype  where  qualities  of  character  imbue  the  social  construction  of  its 
sporting heroes. There is some truth to this. The English tend to express a strong cultural 
preference for the ‘underdog’ or the ‘little man’, who is able to overcome conditions and 
competitors to emerge as a champion. Yet, to a degree the interplay of culturally defined 
narratives surrounding heroism and masculinity is paradoxical. We can admire virtues of 
hardness and the extremes of muscular performance, yet, we yearn for the underdog to 
triumph. A classic example taken from British sporting history would be of bespectacled 
insurance  clerk  Don  Thompson,  who  having  collapsed  in  the  heat  of  the  Melbourne 
Olympics,  prepared  for  the  Rome  Olympics  by  creating  a  steamroom  effect  in  his 
bathroom (using kettles and heaters) and walking up and down the bathmat. He managed 
to capture the gold medal in the 50km walk, despite differences in resources when we 
consider his American and Soviet counterparts. 

Global sport lends itself to this particularist model of national and cultural identity in 
two  ways.  First,  it  is  organised  to  accommodate  a  meeting  of  national  communities, 
represented by sporting elites who symbolise traditions, values, roles and virtues of their 
respective homelands. In a benign sense the meeting of communities in the arena is also 
an  interpretive  space  where  we  discover  unique  forms  of  life,  embodied  by  and 
possessing social ideals and a rich tapestry of tradition, which carry depth and meaning. 
Second,  the  sporting  hero  adds  himself  to  the  sum  total  of  the  expression  of  the 
community as a cultural object, along with language, dress, architecture, customs, song 
and law. Sport and sporting heroes, therefore, are essential in terms of representing an 
image of the nation to the rest of the world and, internally, play a part in the socialisation 
of the young and the formation of a culturally specific subjectivity.  

The idea of the sport star 

Sporting contests are important on a global scale because they are typical of dramas of 
valuation  that  structure  equivalence,  by  offering  the  material  upon  which  cultural 
differences  can  be  shared,  even  though  doubts  can  be  cast  on  the  extent  to  which 
difference is understood or even tolerated. The totemic construction of sporting heroism 
sensitises us to difference, as champions are forwarded into the arena of sport to deploy 
the body in motion (often accompanied by mental cunning and qualities of character) in 
order  to  bring  the  prize  of  the  contest  back  to  their  homeland,  to  the  adulation  of  the 
community.  This  idea  rests  upon  an  intimate  connection  between  the  work  of  the 
individual, in displaying heroic (typically masculine) qualities, such as strength, courage, 
tenacity, endurance and the ability to sweat and toil, on behalf of a larger constituency. 
There is also a sense in which the narrative of difference, of nation and community within 
modern sport is submerged. 

The  spectacle  of  modern  globalised  sport  demands  that  athletes  perform  in  heroic 
style,  with  the  heroic  act  as  a  secondary  consideration.17  Heroism,  according  to  the 
conceptualisation above, tends to be more local in nature, rooted within performance that 
requires ‘heroic qualities’ for their completion. This broad and necessarily open-ended 
conceptualisation  applies  equally  to  officers who police inner-city streets, fire-fighters, 

Local heros and global stars     111

and fishermen who trawl the seas in bad weather. Such activities, along with sport, carry 
a narrative of risk and achievement which is conducive to the construction of an heroic 
status. The spectacle of the sporting event or mega-event (World Cups, heavyweight title 
bouts, the Olympics) requires no such phenomenon for their success. Heroism is largely 
replaced  in  significance  with  stardom,  which  brings  to  the  fore  different  qualities  of 
meaning and association. The idea that heroes are local in reach, socially and culturally 
specific  and  hence  only  carry  meaning  for  some  people  is  partly  methodological.  My 
childhood  heroes,  the  darts  player  Eric  Bristow  and  cricketer  Ian  Botham,  although 
having won renown through captivating feats of sporting prowess, could hardly be said to 
be heroes common to other Englishmen, or Englishwomen, or even to those based within 
my sociocultural location. Processes of adulation and celebration of heroic achievement, 
although  mediated  through  channels  and  discourses  that  draw  others  to  bestow  and 
acknowledge  a  similar  feeling  of  attachment,  remain  fundamentally  perso  nal.  On  the 
other  hand,  in  today’s  media  saturated  public  culture  sport  stars  are  unavoidable,  they 
permeate  our  experiences  of  the  everyday:  from  bar-room  discussions  of  Beckham’s 
latest  hairstyle  to  the  image  of  Tiger  Woods  beaming  his  ivory  smile  from  roadside 
billboards to the melodramatic histrionics of Gazza having a night out on the town and to 
the tabloid-induced daydreams of Kournikova’s buttocks. 

Sport  stars  bewitch;  their  spectre  haunts popular culture. But the plethora of ghosts 
invoked  by  discussing  modern  commercialised  sport  do  not  owe  their  presence  to  the 
process and construction of heroism, in the sense as outlined above. Rather, a different 
process  of  the  creation  of  fame  and  renown  occurs,  one  based  upon  the  power  of  the 
media  and  the  interests  of  corporations  within  late  capitalist  society.  The  often  quoted 
work of Daniel Boorstin, The Image: A Guide to Pseudo Events in America, made the 
claim that the concept of the true hero, the individual who serves as a role model and 
exhibits  moral  leadership,  is  being  replaced  by  the  concept  of  transient  celebrity.  A 
celebrity  is  a  person  well  known  for  being  well  known,  a  creation  and  puppet  of  the 
media. The element of performance, merit and achievement rooted within a display of 
individual talent has disappeared from the construction of fame.18 The sadistic, but highly 
popular,  panopticon  of  the  television  show  Big  Brother  takes  this  distinction  to  its 
extreme and a host of British sport stars at the end of their careers have sought to use 
such vehicles in order to remain within public culture. (The boxer Nigel Benn, cricketer 
Phil Tuffnell and footballer John Fashanu on I’m a Celebrity… Get Me Out of Here!’ and 
boxer Chris Eubank on Celebrity Big Brother). Their appearances within this television 
genre  highlights  the  extent  to  which  the  cult  of  celebrity  pervades  the  popular 
imagination  and  it  appears  that  the  seemingly  unlimited  supply  of  ‘stars’  is  equally 
matched by audience demand.19 

The idea that sport stars have a bewitching and magical presence underpins a variety 
of  associated  concepts.  Glamour,  for  instance,  a  word  often  used  in  conjunction  with 
discussions  of  stardom  and  celebrity,  until  the  early  twentieth  century,  was  associated 
with the occult. It denoted an attractiveness, allure and charm which centred around an 
object or a body—an attractiveness too powerful to be real. Sport excites the boundaries 
between  what  is  traditionally  conceived  as  the  empirical  (real)  and  the  transcendental 
(ideal)  realms.  Sport,  which  allows  the  dialectic  between  the  real  and  the  ideal  to  be 
played  out  routinely  provide  the  conditions  for  heroic  achievement.  This  dialectic  is 
expressed  in  classical  sociological  thinking.  For  Durkheimian,  sport  has  a  religious 

The Global Politics of sport     112

character;  it  contains  a  distinction  between  a  sacred  world  in  opposition  to  a  profane 
realm,  men  are  elevated  to  a  sacred  level  through  forms  of  collective  action  that 
symbolically represents the community.20 The real is counterpoised to the transcendental. 
In  a  similar  vein,  Max  Weber  makes  the  distinction  explicit  in  his  work  on  the 
charismatic hero, as a man who possesses ‘a certain quality of an individual personality 
by  virtue  of  which  he  is  set  apart  from  ordinary  men  and  treated  as  endowed  with 
supernatural,  superhuman,  or  at  least  specifically  exceptional  qualities’.21  This  idea  is 
applicable and arguably congruent with our understanding of what constitutes a sporting 
hero. Both the sporting hero and the sport star carry a ‘sorcerous mystique’, though they 
diverge on the modes through which this mystique is conveyed. 

Stars  are  iconic.  Indeed  the  common  media  parlance  used  to  denote  the  social  and 
cultural  importance  of  sporting  personalities  is  ‘icon’,  often  coupled  with  the  prefix 
‘media’.  The  term  carries  meaning  which  is  not  too  distant  from  the  religious 
manifestation of its usage, where an icon is a symbol, often a pictorial representation, of 
something  that  no  one  has  ever  seen.  An  icon  stands  as  a  sign  for  something  that  is 
exclusive  and  a  wonder  to  behold.  Hence,  it  can  be  deployed  to  regale  the  ‘godlike’ 
achievements  of  figures  from  the  world  of  competitive  sport,  or  activities  that  carry  a 
sporting aspect. The achievements of Edmund Hillary and Tenzing Norgay in being the 
first humans to successfully ascend (and return from) the world’s highest mountain can 
be  considered  iconic.  In  the  same  vein  it  can  also  be  used  to  denote  the  shadow  that 
records, achievements, and triumphs cast in the popular imagination—as a symbol of the 
adventurous and progressive spirit of mankind. The term ‘iconic’ therefore also manages 
to  blend  the  empirical  and  transcendental.  Everest,  like  individual  or  collective  heroic 
achievement, can be given a sensuous and visible presence, recordable through pictorial 
representations  and  other  forms  of  media  technology,  which  now  saturate  our  image 
culture,  but  is  also  invested  with  a  spiritual,  invisible  meaning  that  is  difficult  to 
comprehend. 

Furthermore,  the  notion  of  icon  carries  advantages  in  explicating  the  globally 
mediated, visual and public world of sport and sporting personalities. To repeat a now 
over-worn  banality,  the  images  of  sport  stars  play  a  part  in  our  everyday  cultural 
experience.  However,  one  should  add  the  rider  that  such  experience  is  increasingly 
loaded  with  a  plethora  of  commodity  signs,  indicative  of  the  extent  to  which  the 
‘projection’  of  the  presence  of  social  actors  is  increasingly  intertwined  with  economic 
activity, embedded in consumption.22 One can go so far as to state, uncontroversially, that 
the  primary  mode  of  everyday  attachment  to  sport  stars,  particularly  by  youth 
subcultures, is consumerist. Packaged as commodities, sport stars prostitute themselves, 
selling  their  bodily  space  and  privacy  in  order  to  hawk  around,  like  highly  mobile 
clotheshorses, the latest products, brands and merchandise of their corporate paymasters. 
Increased market presence is rewarded with wages that often outstrip those gained solely 
by sporting performance; our relationship is to be seen in terms of the rate at which we 
buy  into  their  products,  and  hence  the  global  cultural  presence,  of  sport  stars.  For  the 
corporate  and  media  interests  of  the  sports  industry,  attachments  to  sporting  heroes 
through the nation is just one possible avenue in its marketing strategy. 

The broader implication, put by Jameson, is that the market and the media are now 
symbiotic, the ‘products sold on the market become the very content of the media image’, 
hence it may no longer be possible to forge a distinction between ‘consumer culture’ and 

Local heros and global stars     113

‘media culture’.23 The characteristic demanded of the sport star is to possess personality, 
for they are part of a multi-media, multimarket sales campaign. The campaign’s primary 
purpose is to earn revenues and decrease production costs and it achieves this through 
translating  fictive  hermeneutic  codes  of  sport  into  ‘saleable’  narratives  (‘the  virtuous 
hero’, ‘the dastardly villain’, ‘the role model’, ‘the clown’, and ‘the beautiful heroine’). 
Perhaps the best sociological conception of the sport star is provided by Mauss’ notion of 
‘persona’. The star is a compound character, with a corporeal public presence, where the 
persona is a ‘a mask, a tragic mask, a ritual mask’.24 The commercial imperatives of the 
sports  industry  requires  athletes  to  be  performers,  able  to  don  masks  and  fashion  an 
individual style, to provide a ‘new take’ on endlessly repeated acts. Sport stars need to be 
entertainers,  they  need  ‘to  possess  the  actor’s  skills  of  presenting  a  colourful  self,  to 
maintain  allure,  fascination,  and  mystery’,  as  Featherstone  writes.25  Their  lives  are 
theatrical.  Stars  are  required  to  display  control  over  and  recognise  the  significance  of 
their  gestures,  actions,  movements  and  behaviours.  The  photo  opportunity  is  their 
currency. And within this frame symbolic management and the positioning of the body is 
all  important.  One  event  from  2003  captures  this  brilliantly:  the  meeting  of  England 
football  captain  David  Beckham  with  the  former  President  of  South  Africa,  Nelson 
Mandela. This publicity event was designed to promote South Africa’s bid for the 2010 
FIFA World Cup; yet, it captured an important difference between the hero and the star. 
Peter Conrad playfully wrote of this stately affair that ‘The martyr of conscience met the 
fashion victim, the grizzled statue shook hands with the gilded totem pole, the man with 
the scars chatted to the man with tattoos’.26 For Mandela, his quiet endurance through 
years  of  imprisonment  for  a  cause  in  which  he  resolutely  and  unwaveringly  believed 
mark him with heroic qualities and provide him with a sacred mystique. Beckham, on the 
other  hand,  although  redeemed  through  his  set-piece  accuracy  on  the  field  of  play,  is 
actively aware that his magic or media presence is dependent upon his beauty, artifice 
and style. 

To  conclude  this  section,  I  contend  that  the  crux  of  the  distinction  between  the 
sporting  hero  and  sport  star  is  provided  by  literary  theory,  in  the  difference  between 
classical and neoclassical dramatic forms. Whereas the classical protagonist’s heroism is 
assured simply by appearing on stage, by the displaying of heroic virtues or enacting of 
bodily feats, the neoclassical protagonist is conscious that his heroism must be mediated 
from a periphery.27 The distinction is captured perfectly by Shakespeare in Coriolanus. 
The irony of the story concerns the intransigence of the hero to acknowledge the need for 
his  deeds  to  be  recounted  to  the  masses.  Coriolanus  and  his  Volscian  counterpart 
Aufidius ably enact this tension between performance and representation. In the play, the 
latter cedes a cynical acceptance that ‘our virtues/Lie in th’interpretation of the time’.28 
While the former rejects Rome’s offer of money and the rituals of Consulship (sealing the 
path to his tragedy) by telling the gathered patricians and crowd that honour is ‘a quality 
of action/not the actions effects’. Coriolanus fancied that it is possible to stand ‘As if a 
man were author of himself/And knew no other kin’.29 (These thoughts certainly seem 
anachronistic when we consider the importance of sports management groups, like the 
late Mark McCormack’s IMG, in the management of image.) 

The Global Politics of sport     114

The sport star and global political economy 

The  growth  of  the  media  and  the  process  of  commodification  underpin  and  infuse 
globalisation and have served to strengthen the reliance upon mediation, and hence the 
power of cultural intermediaries. Its effect has been to marginalise the need to produce 
heroics, where individuals aspire to a purity of physical performance in the service of a 
community.  To  gain  entry  to  the  public  stage  members  of  the  sporting  elite  now  only 
need to carry concern for image, glamour, fashion and style. Depth has been replaced by 
depthlessness.30  This  situation  has  been  predicated  upon  a  growth  in  the  range  of 
institutional mechanisms through which we receive representations of heroic effort. Such 
supply-side features include technological invention and innovation which has given us 
the  radio,  television,  film,  the  Internet,  print  media  and  the  photo  graph.  We  are 
bombarded with a range of information and images about the sporting and non-sporting 
lives  of  heroes  and  stars.  Their  lives  are  seen  as  newsworthy,  and  hence,  as  news  is 
circulated  through  discussion,  forms  part  of  our  everyday  lives.  The  media  is  also 
cannibalistic. It feeds off itself, through speculation, rumour and gossip, so that we also 
witness  a  secondary  circulation  of  stories.  The  content  of  the  public  spbere  is  now  so 
saturated with the lives, loves, tears and tantrums of ‘personalities’ that we commit a non 
sequitur to say that we live in a ‘celebrity culture’.31 This process has grown so intense, 
argues  Whannel,  that  its  effect  is  like  a  Vortex’—sucking  in  various  media,  where  it 
becomes  impossible,  for  a  time,  not  to  pass  comment  upon  a  ‘seismic’  event  (like 
September 11, Princess Diana’s death or David Beckham’s marriage).32 

The  commercialised  nature  of  modern  sport  also  bears  a  requirement  to  produce 
heroes  in  order  to  be  economically  viable.  It  has  been  written  in  The  Economist,  for 
instance,  that  ‘the  most  important  [aspect]  is  personality:  a  sport  will  attract  neither 
crowds  not  TV  cameras  unless  it  can  first  offer  heroes.’33  As  the  profit  motive  is 
transferred on to cultural forms, the range of artistic products turned into a ‘species of 
commodity…marketable  and  interchangeable  like  an  industrial  product’,  increases.34 
Sport  almost  predestines  this  process.  It  provides  the  institutional  and  hermeneutic 
criteria  for  sporting  heroes  to  emerge.  The  nature  of  contest  will  fashion  winners  and 
losers, records will be broken, sublime pieces of skill will punctuate the routine match; 
heroes and villains will emerge. Sporting heroes therefore offer themselves as products of 
the  ‘culture  industry’,  to  be  fashioned  into  sport  stars.  Their  presence  is  ceaselessly 
repeated  while  at  the  same  time  their  form  is  individuated,  offering  novelty  and 
originality,  through  fashion,  glamour  and  other  marks  of  distinction,  to  be  mass 
consumed. 

The  modern  sport  star,  therefore,  is  to  be  understood  as  both  cultural  product (as a 
brand  to  be  sold)  and  process  (part  of  the  chain  of  advertising  and  brand  or  product 
endorsement)  that  underpins  the  regime  of  capital  accumulation  within  late  capitalist 
economy. They are deeply implicated in global political economy. The broadcasting of 
major  world  sporting  events,  which  includes  the  Olympics,  World  Championship 
athletics and the FIFA World Cup, has been estimated to have been received by nearly 
200  countries  by  the  early  1990s.35  Sport  has  developed  to  be  ‘everywhere…all 
encompassing  and  instantaneous…right  there  beside  you  from  cradle  to  grave’,  in  the 

Local heros and global stars     115

words of Nike’s Chief Executive, Phil Knight.36 This makes for incredible commercial 
opportunity, which has been exploited by major worldwide companies, as they seek to 
sell their wares and expose their brands to dormant, emerging and developed markets. 

Through  these  links  sport  stars  are  able  to  combine  their  popular  cultural  presence 
with lucrative economic contracts. Of course, to suggest the association of the sporting 
hero with commercial advertising is a novel feature would be wrong. In the 1950s Denis 
Compton was the original ‘Brylcreem Boy’. His popular cultural appeal, which linked 
sport with beauty and glamour preceded David Beckham by over half a century. Both on-
field performance and his natural good looks were part of his appeal for post-war Britain. 
While, thirty years prior to Compton the archetypal amateur hero, English cricketer CB 
Fry, regularly featured on advertisements for Plasmon Cocoa, Craven Tobacco, Marsuma 
Cigars, Perrier Water and Sanatogen tablets.37 The synergy between commerce and sport 
is also witnessed in tennis heroes from the 1930s, Fred Perry and René Lacoste, who, 
respectively, launched the world’s first lines of sports leisure wear. 

However, the association between sporting heroes and products were managed locally, 
and  intended  for  a  native  audience.  It  was  an  introspective  affair.  Theorists  of 
globalisation are keen to stress that the novelty arises from the intensity of the (unequal) 
exchange  of  ideas,  technologies,  images,  capital,  people  and  commodities  between 
nation-states.38 The demise of the Soviet system, which led to the end of the Cold War, 
marked the genesis of a new world order in which states signed up to Neoliberalism, no 
longer refusing to bend the knee to liberal democracy and the market-based economy.39 
The  picture  we  gain  of  the  international  terrain  is  now  one  hued  with  the  affairs  of 
transnational corporations (TNCs), supported by an international regime of organisations 
and  agreements  (WTO,  IMF,  G7,  World  Bank  and  GATT)40  in  the  search  for  new 
markets, cheap labour and, ultimately, increased profitability. 

The  image  of  sport  stars  therefore  plays  a  significant  part  in  the  desire  of 
predominantly Western companies to gain a market share in local economies. Prior to the 
FIFA World Cup 2002, for example, a marketing campaign was launched which linked 
the  image  of  David  Beckham  with  the  ‘high  performance’  associated  with  British 
Petroleum’s Castrol engine lubricant. In one advertising campaign Beckham’s body was 
fashioned into a well-oiled, slick and burnished motorcycle. Transnational corporations 
like  BP,  Nike,  Reebok  and  Adidas  attempt  to  foster  emotional  ties  between  stars  and 
products,  which  justify  the  huge  sums  paid  out  in  finding  and  retaining  celebrity 
endorsers. This is not only done by harnessing global sport stars such as Beckham, Jordan 
and Woods, but also through local heroes.41 The intention is to foster a good company 
image  and  a  pre-eminence  of  brand  and  product  awareness  at  the  expense  of  other 
competitors. In Beckham’s case the marketing of Castrol motor oil traded upon the ability 
to  transfer  meaning  from  the  star  to  the  product  (for  example,  strength,  reliability  and 
invincibility), which creates a positive commercial image. 

On the other hand, there is a potential for commercial interests to lose out when stars 
under-perform at global sporting events. Before the FIFA World Cup 2002 Roy Keane 
signed a £500,000 nine-month endorsement with PepsiCo’s 7Up soft drink, the highest 
paid  amount  in  the  company’s  Irish  marketing  strategy.  However,  by  the  time  the 
advertisements were launched Keane was able to view them in his native country after his 
mysterious sending home following a row with the manager, Mick McCarthy, before the 
Republic of Ireland’s team had even kicked a ball. Similarly, Thierry Henry was signed 

The Global Politics of sport     116

by  French  car  manufacturer  Renault to promote its Clio hatchback. Yet, in the second 
match  Henry  found  himself  on  the  receiving  end  of  a  red  card.  Subsequently  the 
defending champions exited the tournament in the first round after a series of lacklustre 
performances  in  which  they  failed  to  score  a  single  goal!42 There is a real danger and 
susceptibility, then, of associations between ‘trusted’ brands and fallible humans. 

Closely  interconnected  to  the  intimate  relationship  of  star  and  brand  are  the  legal 
issues pertaining to personal endorsement contracts, the holding of official sponsorship 
rights  for  tournaments  and  the  intellectual  property  rights  of  players.  There  has  been 
increasing  and  widespread  concern  among  sport  stars  over  ‘ambush  marketing’,  the 
commercial exploitation of their image by other companies and businesses. The issue is 
now  so  pertinent  that  in  2003  the  young  17-year-old  Everton  and  England  football 
prodigy, Wayne Rooney, publicly expressed his unease as a pub opposite Goodison Park 
changed its name to Rooney’s without his permission.43 In the world of cricket this issue 
has been particularly notable. A sponsorship row over the use of players’ images came to 
a head in the lead up to the ICC Champions Trophy in Sri Lanka in 2002 and the ICC 
Cricket World Cup in South Africa 2003. The International Cricket Council (ICC), the 
game’s ruling body, expressed fears prior to the tournaments to the official sponsors and 
to  the  Murdoch-owned  Global  Cricket  Corporation  (GCC),  who  held  the  exclusive 
television  and  marketing  rights,  that  it  would  not  be  able  to  honour  the  contracts  as 
players sought to protect their personal endorsement rights. Players, such as Ganguly and 
Tendulkar  of  India,  claimed  that  the  contract  contravened  legal  rights,  liberties  and 
entitlements and acted as an unfair restraint of trade. Furthermore, the GCC was quick to 
remind the ICC that its contract contained a clause stating that the countries must send 
their  best  players  to  the  tournament.  A  furore  emerged  between  some  of  the  leading 
players, such as Sachin Tendulkar, and the ICC over his being asked to sign contracts 
forbidding any personal endorsements which might conflict with World Cup sponsors. 
The sponsorship row lead to a stand-off. It was eventually settled through a negotiated 
settlement  between  the  players  and  the  ICC.  In  response  for  players  requesting  to 
personal sponsors not to air commercials featuring them during the tournament and for 17 
days afterwards, the ICC agreed to place funds accrued from the World Cup into trust 
rather  than  pay  any  moneys  to  the  constituent  boards.  This  funding  arrangement  was 
deemed  appropriate  in  order  to  protect  the  ICC  from  legal  action  for  claims  of 
compensation  by  companies  aggrieved  over  the inability to exploit the images of their 
stars at the most profitable sporting moment.44 The resolution, however, was inadequate, 
piecemeal  and  ad  hoc.  It  failed  to  permanently  settle  conflicts  between  sport  stars, 
international ruling bodies and individual transnational corporations as they all jostle to 
find  the  most  profitable  relationship  from  the  game.45  However,  it  did  have  a  further 
implication. In order to protect their right to profit from the use of their names, images 
and  signatures  the  world’s  leading  players  have  unionised,  under  the  Federation  of 
International Cricketers Association. It remains to be seen what pressure this body can 
exert in the melee. As these examples reveal, stars are part and parcel of the economics of 
the media-sport production complex; mechanisms of control, management and regulation 
over their images are intensely bound with the economic drive for profitability. 

Local heros and global stars     117

Consumption, image and resistance 

It  should  be  clear,  therefore,  that  the  location  of  the  sport  star  as  part  of  the  global 
political economy of sport is different to the relationship between the sporting hero and 
his native community. Stardom brings distance and dislocation between the community 
and  its  heroes.  Without  hesitation  we  can  endorse  Rojek’s  sentiments  that  the  ‘mass-
media constitute the prime channel of contact’ between audiences and stars.46 The social 
effect  of  mass-mediated  culture  is  arguably  universal.  A  capitalist  division  of  labour 
exists;  on  the  one  hand,  a  global  class  of  specialists  inhabits  the  mediascapes, 
ethnoscapes  and  ideoscapes  of  transnational  cosmopolitan  culture  and,  on  the  other, 
exists a public whose primary role is cultural-consumer.47 The audience is distanced from 
participating in culture, towards treating culture as a consumer good. Sport stars exist as 
commodities: objects to be viewed, bought, played with and then discarded when a newer 
and brighter model comes along. In a subtle way, we are all in the same boat. We have 
the freedom to express our difference, but only with the codes and objects the industry 
provides.48 

However,  as  the  opening  paragraph  to  this  chapter  highlighted,  the  global  political 
economy of sport generates immense wealth, yet, it also raises questions about the type of 
society  that  generates  it:  its  values,  commitments  and  ethics.  While  the  media  has  the 
power  to  shape  the  image  of  the  sport  star  and  of  TNCs  it  cannot  control  how  we 
cognitively receive and interpret that image. Growth and technological innovation in the 
mediating  sphere  has  also  facilitated  the  circulation  of  ethical  questions  regarding  the 
practices of global actors. New media outlets and forums, such as the Internet, have the 
potential to be a free realm of deliberation, close to Habermas’ conception of a ‘public 
sphere’. A space where citizens can ‘deal with matters of general interest without being 
subject to coercion; thus with the guarantee that they may assemble and unite freely, and 
express  and  publicise  their  opinions  freely’.49  Coalitions  of  mutual  interest  can  be 
brought together to exchange ideas and information relatively unencumbered. New social 
movements have harnessed it as a site of dissent and resistance. It has played a prominent 
part in the recent anti-globalisation protests that have surrounded the meetings of global 
political, economic and bureaucratic elites. It has also helped not only to document forms 
of  political  participation  (as  a  register  of  social  history)  but  also  operates  as  an  arena 
where inspiration for new types of radical agency is provided,50 and a radical political 
subjectivity is cultivated. 

Globalisation, therefore, does not wholly concern the affairs of states and markets and 
the actions of the transnational capitalist class (as its representa-tive elite);51 it involves 
spurious  and  diverse  actors  from  civil  society  who  contest,  dissent  and  actively  resist 
perplexing features of neoliberal global restructuring. ‘Globalisation-from-above’ is met 
by ‘globalisation-from-below’.52 What is significant about this resistance is that it can be 
diverse in its form, often advocates public and tribalistic forms of protest, that it tends to 
be grounded locally but almost always has a transnational dimension, and that it tries to 
combine knowledge with politics. Citizens across many societies now increasingly dare 
to ‘think for themselves’, quite according to Kant’s motto of the Enlightenment: sapere 
aude!—Dare  to  Know!53  The  result  is  the  creation  of  a  technologically  empowered 

The Global Politics of sport     118

deliberative  public  culture,  where  citizens  are  informed  by  propaganda  and  counter-
propaganda.54  Its  effect,  argues  Urry,  can  be  seen  in  a  media  culture  which  places 
individuals  and  social  institutions  under  the  spotlight,  open  to  a  process  of  ritualistic 
‘shaming’.55  Information  is  used  to  render  the  reputations  of  states  and  TNCs 
untrustworthy.  The  most  notorious  British  case  in  recent  years  being  the  attempted 
disposal of the Brent Spar oil platform by Shell UK which was sanctioned, after intense 
lobbying, by the British government. Arguably, this positions sport and the actions of our 
sporting heroes in a new light. The image of a boxer connecting with an opponent for a 
knockout blow, of the winger making it to the corner flag, or the beauty of a well-placed 
cover drive appear more stable and pure forms of meaning and interpretation.56 We are 
able to trust our eyes in most cases. 

However, as the sporting hero is distilled into its commodity form a good reputation 
becomes a prized asset. Sport stars become brands; they are subject to a heightened level 
of  trust  between  consumers  and  the product. There is a prerequisite to put on a ‘good 
show’  and  endorse  products  that  can  offer  quality.  A  degree  of  dependency  is  placed 
upon this commercial relationship which makes sport stars more susceptible to negative 
media images if they are to retain good market presence. This relationship can work both 
ways. As seen above, companies can suffer when ‘heroics’ are not delivered. Likewise, 
the reputations of sport stars can suffer when their corporate masters undergo ‘shaming’. 
Michael  Jordan’s  sporting  career,  for  instance,  was  dogged  by  negative  accusations 
made  against  the  Nike  sportswear  he  endorsed.  One  of  the  consequences  of  his 
association with Nike was to amplify the social importance of owning a Jordan-endorsed 
commodity, particularly among urban youth cultures. In the late 1980s it was reported 
that a number of American teenagers had been killed for their ‘Air Jordan’ shoes. This 
caused one judge to exclaim ‘It’s bad when we create an image of luxury about athletic 
gear that it forces people to kill over it!’57 (This certainly seems to register a negative 
verdict against commodity fetishism and its management through media, advertising and 
marketing).  Jordan’s  response  was  to  tell  reporters  he’d  ‘rather  eliminate  the  product’ 
than  be  associated  with  crime  and  gangsters.58  This  did  not  stop  the  endorsements 
continuing however, and in 1990 Nike launched its US$60 million ‘Just do It’ campaign, 
using Jordan’s image. A second issue arose in the mid-1990s as Nike’s entry into foreign 
labour  markets  brought  human  rights  issues  and  the  treatment  of  workers  on  to  the 
political  agenda.  It  was  claimed  that  the  major  sportswear  manufacturers  (Adidas, 
Reebok and Nike) exploited Indonesian workers by paying young girls 15 cents an hour 
for  an  eleven-hour  day.  In  the  West  the  shoes  regularly  sold  for  US$70  and  upwards, 
while  LaFeber  writes  that,  ‘Jordan’s  $20m  endorsement  fee  was  higher  than  the 
combined  yearly  payrolls  of  the  Indonesian  plants  that  made  the  shoes’.59  Jordan’s 
response in this case, like that of Woods, was to remain quiet. Both Jordan and Woods, to 
protect  their  media  reputations,  neatly  manoeuvred  into  self-titled  ‘apolitical’  or  ‘non-
political’ positions. It is in these cases, where media and corporate interests conflict with 
the need to take an ethical and/or political position that we find the greatest expression of 
the  persistence  of  the ‘myth of autonomy’—the idea that sport and politics should not 
mix.60 

For some commentators this situation is troubling: bell hooks, for example, mourns 
Jordan’s acquiescence to protecting his media image and his inability to deliver a radical 

Local heros and global stars     119

form of politics. This, she writes, is endemic of black male capitulation to neo-colonial 
white supremacist patriarchal social structures. 

Appropriated by market forces, the subversive potential of the Black male 
body is countered. This has been especially the case for Black male bodies 
whose radical agency is often diffused by a process of commodification 
that strips those bodies of dignity.61  

Following  a  similar  line  of  inquiry  Jennifer  Hargreaves  explores  the  underlying 
imperatives  of  the  sports  industry.  For  her,  these  forces  have  constructed  a  masculine 
notion of competitive sport, which, in its quest for further commercial penetration and 
high-figure TV audiences, creates a need to produce beautiful honed bodies capable of 
performing an aggressive, muscular high-octane spectacle. Its effect for elite female sport 
performers is cultural masculinisation, where sporting heroines, she writes, are ‘modern-
day…manufactured clones of each other’. We should not expect these figures to serve as 
good role models, or the result as a step forward for the feminist movement. Heroines of 
sport,  she  contends  emerge  from  the  everyday,  routine  endeavours  of  women  who 
struggle daily against social structures which challenge their efforts. We should not be 
seduced  by  a  system  operating  according  to  underlying  economic  necessities  which 
‘consistently  induces  them  to  abuse  their  bodies,  tempts  them  to  use  unsporting  and 
damaging  performance—enhancing  agents,  and  produces 
them  as  sexualised 
commodities’62 for consumption by a global audience. 

These  responses  share  common  threads,  which  typifies  the  current  approach  to 
theorising  and  excavating  the  nature  of  the  sport  star  in  society.  They  forward  an 
explanation which sees the sport star as complicit in global capitalism. Kellner’s reading 
of Michael Jordan is typical.63 He regards the ubiquitous basketball player and corporate 
American  interests  as  symbiotic.  Jordan  is  the  embodiment  of  the  values  of  American 
capitalism—materialist  acquisition,  conspicuous  consumption,  excessive  greed  and 
ruthless  competitiveness.  His  public  presence  is  apolitical  in  order  to  maintain  his 
reputation  and  so  as  to  not  alienate  potential  consumers  from  the  range  of  associated 
products bearing his image. The tone of opposition against this feature often laments a 
failed  chance  for  perhaps  the  highest  profile  individual  in  the  world  to  connect  with 
collective struggle. As Toure writes, ‘Couldn’t the world’s greatest endorser have sold us 
something besides shoes?’64 

Loyalty and location 

At one level the explanation that sport stars seek to retain a good media image because 
their  image  is  their  currency  is  appealing.  This  thesis  can  be  substantiated  when  we 
consider the development of a global sport mass media that possesses a highly controlled 
and detailed management of its product (sport stars) as the spectacle of sport is sold to 
audiences far and wide.65 However, there is a deeper set of questions that oblige us to 
work at a level of abstraction in order to understand the normative nature of the idea of 
the sporting hero, the affront that globalisation makes toward it and the political reactions 
it creates. 

The Global Politics of sport     120

The acquiescence of sport stars to take a stand on political or ethical issues, I contend, 
relates to the moral demands made upon them by other communities they inhabit. The 
above section highlighted the need to locate sport stars firmly within the operation of a 
global  political  economy,  in  the  service  of  capitalism  and  the  affairs  of  transnational 
corporations. If we consider the members of these institutions and organisations then it is 
possible to place sport stars within what Sklair terms the transnational capitalist class. 
This is a collection of global elites who work to sustain the dominance of capitalism as a 
social system, which includes a ‘still-evolving’ class of global actors, divided into four 
factions:  TNC  executives,  globalising  bureaucrats,  globalising  politicians  and 
professionals, and consumerist elites.66 I believe it is pertinent to envisage sport stars as, 
at the least, enmeshed in the affairs of this elite, and where most developed, as part of the 
transnational capitalist class. When we consider the slippage between Michael Jordan’s 
sporting  role  as  a  visible  endorser  of  Nike  and  his  current  business  role  as  head  of  a 
division of the Nike Corporation this relationship becomes clear. 

The  globalisation of sport therefore renders a complex, more ambiguous, picture of 
place, loyalty and allegiance for the sport star, arguably because they are now implicated 
in  distinct  ‘communities’  beyond  the  nation-state.  We  can  include  here:  territorial 
communities (city, region, nation, supranation), non-territorial communities (profession, 
family, religion) and transnational communities (sport, corporations). The problem for 
the sport star is one of relativism, requiring an ability to manage and reconcile conflicting 
claims  made  upon  them.  This  idea  provokes  us  into  recognising  the  sport  star  as  a 
complex  social  self  who  is  defined,  according  to  Friedman,  by  ‘various  and  variant 
identity constituents’.67 This is captured well in the following poem, John Manifold’s The 
Recruit. 

Pried from the circle where his family ends,  
Man on his own, no hero of old tales,    
Discovers when the pose of lone wolf fails  
Loneliness and, miraculously, friends,  
Finds how his comradeship with one depends  
On being both from London, say, or Wales,  
How with the next a common job prevails,  
Sport with a third, and so the list extends. 

Nation and region, class and craft and syndicate 
Are only some: all attributes connect 
Their own with this kind, call him to vindicate 

A common honour; and his self-respect  
Starts from the moment when his senses indicate 
‘I’ as the point where circles intersect.68 

Local heros and global stars     121

Although Manifold is writing about his experiences as a wartime soldier it is relatively 
easy to refer its message to the sport star. The poem illustrates the intersection of several 
circles  of  social,  political  and  moral  concern  that  informs  the  identity  of  the  heroic 
individual. Yet, its overall tone and direction reminds us of the importance of loyalty and 
honour  grounded  within  patriotic  nationalism  as  a  means  to  the  intelligibility  of  his 
actions. These tensions are inherent in the globalisation of sport stars. On the one hand, 
media-corporate  interests  require  stars  to  be  mobile,  transportable  and  translatable  to 
other contexts, to respond fluidly to cosmopolitan opportunities that arise as new markets 
are sought. While, on the other hand, the star must manage their sense of self through 
forms of allegiance that are less transnational in their scope. This understanding of the 
sport star comes close to what Giardina calls the ‘Global Hingis’ paradigm, where the 
star  has  a  flexible  citizenship  ‘grounded  within  particular  structures  of  meaning  about 
family,  gender,  nationality,  class  mobility,  and  social  power  which  vary  from  place  to 
place’.69 

The idea of the sport star promotes an idea that members of the sporting elite can be 
‘citizens of nowhere’, where loyalties are ephemeral, transient and temporary. In terms of 
migration patterns sport offers unprecedented freedoms of movement to its stars. Ageing 
former England footballer Paul Gascoigne (‘Gazza’), for instance, signed, in 2003, for 
second division side Gansu Tianma, in the Western reaches of China. Patterns of global 
migration,  as  Bauman  reminds  us,  are  polarised  between  those  privileged  classes  who 
hold the right passport, have the right profession and affluence to exploit the situation. 
Others,  predominantly  from  the  global  South,  face  displacement  through  warfare  or 
hunger, seek to escape persecution and destitution, to find better lives for themselves, but 
confront  a  living  reality  of  nation-states  hidden  behind  barbed  wire,  watchtowers  and 
machine guns.70 A ‘borderless world’ for all people is therefore a fallacy but it appears 
the reality for sport stars.71 

Nevertheless,  the  idea  of  flexible  citizenship  contained  in  the  ‘Global  Hingis’ 
paradigm  is  also  a  reminder  that  without  the  psychosocial  sustenance  groups  provide 
individuals will inevitably experience an alienation of the soul. The nineteenth-century 
German writer Herder noticed this same point. He disavowed the cosmopolitanism of the 
Enlightenment project and embraced plural diversity and innate cultural distinction. The 
fundamental thing about humans, according to Herder, is that they belong to groups. The 
marriage of the individual to the collective, through the sense of a common political and 
cultural identity is the foundation of a healthy political society.72 Sport, perhaps more so 
than  other  cultural  forms  (e.g.  music,  theatre,  radio,  film  and  art),  is  more  apt  at 
expressing such diversity on a global scale. A cosmopolitan and homogenised cultural, 
political and economic order can be disavowed and rejected through the persistence of 
real  and  felt  attachments  of  the  individual  to  community—its  traditions,  history  and 
heroic legacy. In this sense the local provides an affront to the global. 

The forms in which we express such diversity may be undergoing pressures so that 
now it is common to talk of ‘diminishing contrasts’ and ‘increasing varieties’,73 but the 
idea of innate and embodied cultural distinctions remains powerful nonetheless. I think 
its power can be demonstrated when we consider our sensitivity to threats against cultural 
traditions. Threats of change and of ‘the Other’ motivated by a view of globalisation as a 
homogenising or universalising force. Of the former, sport, by virtue of its centrality to 
popular  culture  and  hence  to  notions  of  what  constitutes  the  public  realm,  offers  a 

The Global Politics of sport     122

powerful and visible platform to legitimate or deligitimate processes of change. As stated 
earlier, in the West Indian experience cricket offered the means by which a history of the 
peoples  of  the  islands  could  be  created,  it  provided  a  social  space  in  which  to 
conceptualise  the  birth  of  a  postcolonial  national  identity.  Yet  the  feeling  gained  from 
reading  James’  work  is  one  of  a  post-facto  and  teleological  mythologising  of  the 
Caribbean’s cricketing characters, told from an author at the forefront of a political and 
social movement for independence. What is most telling is how James communicates the 
story  of  heroes  who  lived  up  to  the  social  and  political  expectations  to  succeed  in the 
international arena, and hence to legitimate at one level, the West Indies’ maturation from 
the colonial yoke (Constantine, Worral, Weekes, Sobers and Gibbs). While the story of 
Wilton St Hill is told as a fallen-hero who failed to carry the burden of expectation of the 
West  Indian  peoples,  by  losing  against  the  English.74  These  figures,  however,  remain 
largely passive within this drama; they were to demonstrate their political commitment 
through their sporting prowess. 

In contrast, there have been examples of sport stars who have been willing to actively 
confront processes of political change. The victory of the French football team in 1998 
legitimised the notion that France could be imagined as a multicultural or hybrid nation, 
where the triumvirate of revolutionary appeals to liberté, fraternité and egalite could be 
extended to all its citizens.75 The president, Jacques Chirac, exclaimed on the eve of their 
success, ‘This is a France that wins and is, for once, united in victory’. However, four 
years  later  the  momentum  gained  by  the  team’s  World  Cup  victory  and  subsequent 
European Championship success in 2000, was potentially unhinged. Jean-Marie Le Pen, 
the  leader  of  the  far  right  National  Front,  attracted  considerable  support  for  his 
candidature  for  presidency  in  spring  2002.  His  campaign  centred  on  a  radical  agenda 
which  charged  France’s  political  elite  with  propagating  moves  toward  political  and 
economic liberalism at the cost of the distinctiveness of the (racially homogenous) French 
character.  Staple  issues  of  the  National  Front,  concerns  over  immigrant  workers, 
unemployment  and  law  and  order,  remained  prominent  throughout  the  campaign.  The 
central  question  he  posed  was  how  could  governments  wedded  to  free-market 
globalisation  reduce  its  corrosive  impact  on  the  social  fabric  of  personal  and  local 
identity?  This  was  an  emotional  appeal  formed  by  suspicions  of  an  integrationist 
European  agenda  motivated  by  the  interests  of  big-business  toward  economic 
liberalisation. Le Pen’s campaign found an accord with those who became disempowered 
or  feared  disempowerment,  typically  small  businessmen,  the  metropolitan  unskilled 
working  classes  and  suburban  youth.  Nevertheless,  it  was  an  appeal  wrapped  up  in  a 
political  rhetoric  of  racism;  counterpoising  the  sanctity  of  France’s  rural  and  white 
identity against a political, cultural and economic malaise caused by the presence of (non-
white) immigrant communities.76 

Into  this  context  stepped  the  French  football  team  who  had  won  the  World  Cup  in 
1998 whilst composed of eight non-indigenous players. Among them Zinedine Zidane, 
born  in  Marseille  of  Algerian  parents,  Lillian  Thuram,  from  the  West  Indian island of 
Guadeloupe,  Patrick  Viera,  who  is  Senegalese,  and  Marcel  Desailly,  who  was  born  in 
Ghana. The team, upon Le Pen’s success in gaining enough support to enter the second 
round  of  the  French  presidential  election,  used  their  high  media  profile in conjunction 
with the build-up to the 2002 tournament to warn the public of the dangers they faced if 
Le  Pen  were  to  become  President.  Robert  Pires  laid  down  an  ultimatum:  Le  Pen  as 

Local heros and global stars     123

President  or  France’s  presence  in  South  Korea  and  Japan.  He  stated,  ‘It’d  be  an 
impossibility to play [in the Far East]. We play for France because we’re French, but the 
team’s roots are from everywhere so if France is governed by the extreme right it makes 
it  an impossibility to play for your country’.77 Likewise, Zidane warned, ‘People must 
vote, but above all they must think of the consequences that could arise if they vote for a 
party which does not correspond to French values’.78 The implication being that French 
values  are  to  be  understood  as  cosmopolitan  and  multicultural  values,  rather  than  the 
isolationist and racist values harbored by the National Front.79 

This ultimatum, which was not carried through owing to Jacques Chirac’s reelection, 
raises  some  important  questions.  First,  it  highlights  the  position  of  public  status  and 
responsibility that sporting heroes are required to live by. As this episode illustrates, the 
question of ‘who speaks for the nation?’ was paramount. A collective of international, 
globe-trotting  footballers,  with  the  ability  to  speak  from  various  indigenous  and  non-
indigenous subject-positions, were deemed to be an appropriate assemblage to comment 
upon  the  concerns  generated  by  the  rise  of  the  far  right.  They  were  regarded  as 
representative of modern French values, located arguably in the most visible public arena, 
and  hence  were  called  upon  to  speak  on  behalf  of  similar  communities  whose  social 
locations  leaves  their  sentiments  inaudible.  They  were  called  upon  to  speak  because 
France  and  the  world  would  listen.80  Second,  despite  being  multimillionaires  with 
lucrative commercial contracts, these French sporting heroes intervened, using a global 
sporting  event  to  send  signals  through  the  media  of  their  opposition  to  Le  Pen, which 
confirmed the authenticity of their own (multi) cultural political identity. The question is 
whether  the  cultural  and  political  implications  of  such  an intervention are independent 
from  their  public  moral  position?  One  could  posit  the  case  that  the  practices  they 
participate in provide a strong foundation for moral patriotism. On one level loyalty to a 
political  community  is  a  virtue  born  from  deep-seated  (and  totemistic)  bonds  of 
attachment.81 However, if we hold onto the idea that the sport star is a complex social self 
with different loyalties to be balanced then one can posit that the survival of the French 
nation-state,  in  its  current  form,  is  a  logical  necessity  of  their  position  owing  to  the 
national organisation of sporting competition at the global level. Moral concern with the 
state of the nation is coterminous with the interests of the stars, whose trade is built on 
this edifice. The issue is one of realpolitik. 

Melnick and Jackson’s recent work on young audiences and ‘reference idol selection’ 
in New Zealand is a prime example of the second threat, of the ‘Other’.82 They trace the 
psychosocial effects of globalisation-as-Americanisation in terms of young individuals’ 
attachments  to  sporting  heroes.  The  survey  research  conducted  as  part  of  this  study 
instructed adolescents to consider whether they identified with a public sporting hero in 
any sense and to name the most important individual in their lives at any one moment. 
The results were interpreted in terms of cultural penetration of American cultural forms 
through  the  ‘media-sport  production  complex’.83  Individuals  who  asso  ciated  with 
American sporting icons, such as Michael Jordan, were set against others whose primary 
identification was with indigenous heroes or heroines. The outcomes of the study found 
that  ‘Kiwis  [accounted]  for  approximately  one-third  of  the  heroes/heroines  named’, 
causing Melnick and Jackson to conclude, ‘…the choosing of local, popular athletes may 
represent, however indirectly, a form of cultural resistance against American hegemonic 
sporting practice by New Zealand youth’.84 

The Global Politics of sport     124

The significance of this research is its subtext. It trades upon a distinction between an 
‘authentic’  postcolonial  national  identity,  where  national  sporting  heroes  inform 
individual subjectivity, and laments ‘inauthentic’ attachments to American icons, taken to 
be  indicative  of  New  Zealand’s  growing  dependency  upon  American  popular  culture. 
Implicit in this approach is the totemic logic of sporting heroism discussed earlier, which 
may  explain  for  the  amplifcation  of  the  threat  posed  to  local  cultures  by  the  influx  of 
foreign (predominantly American) stars and associated cultural products. But there is a 
weakness inherent in such thinking. Despite an admirable intention to reveal a complex 
interplay  between  the  global  and  the  local  in  terms  of  popular  culture,  Melnick  and 
Jackson reduce our understanding of globalisation to the spread of cultural objects. This 
line  of  thinking  is  common  to  a  burgeoning  literature  dealing  with  how  communities 
absorb,  subvert  and  adapt  cultural  objects  and  invest  them  with  a  new  meaning  more 
resonant  with  local  social,  political  and  economic  conditions.  Recontextualisation  of 
American sporting heroes is given as evidence of resistance to globalisation.85 

However,  there  is  a  greater  threat  posed  by  globalisation,  which  brings  into  sharp 
relief the relationship between the global and the local, the community and its heroes: the 
danger of nomadism. In order to detail this threat the idea of heroic endeavour needs to be 
unpacked.  There  is  a  sense  that  sporting  heroes  ‘act  out’  liberal  individualism.86  Their 
autonomy  is  predicated  upon  an  ability  to  abstract  themselves  from  relationships.  The 
primary  attachment  is  the  quest  for  goals,  records,  accomplishments  and  glory,  which 
requires ‘heroic’ virtues of strength, bravery, fortitude, courage and discipline. However, 
the  abstraction  of  the  heroic  individual  from  the  community  carries  a  danger  of 
unrestricted  social  authority,  which  contains  the  possibility  of  socially  undesirable 
consequences.  To  return  to  Shakespeare,  this  is  arguably  the  moral  of  the  story  of 
Coriolanus.87  The  more  the  hero  identifies  himself  with  communal  ideals,  virtues  and 
tradition, the more he or she begins to speak as a representative of these elements, the 
more  distant  they  grow  from  society.  The  process  of  embodiment  acts  as  a  separating 
motif  and  a  source  of  ambiguity.  On  the  one  hand,  we  affirm  the  idea  of  what  is  of 
communal  importance.  We  declare  that  sporting  success  and  heroic  achievements  are 
valuable. On the other hand, the individual is distanced from society, the idea becomes 
mobile and portable, nomadic and anonymous. There exists the inherent possibility that 
the sporting hero could, as Barker states, ‘walk away with the national idea, indifferent to 
those  who  feel  they  have  the  most  affective  and  original  claim  on  it’88.  Autonomy  is 
exercised  and  realised,  the  sporting  hero  becomes  a  nomad,  displaying  skills  and 
excellences for another community. On the surface, therefore, this demonstrates the limits 
of conceiving of the community in human form. 

The controversy surrounding the America’s Cup in 2003 is one example of the danger 
of nomadism. Yachting’s most prestigious prize saw the entry (and victory) of landlocked 
Switzerland,  under  the  financial  muscle  of  37-year-old  billionaire  Ernesto  Bertarelli. 
Bertarelli composed the Swiss ‘Alinghi’ team of world-class yachtsmen and women who 
had  competed  for  other  nations.  It  included  former  America’s  Cup  winners  Russell 
Coutts and Brad Butterworth from Team New Zealand, who were lured away by multi-
million  dollar  contracts.  Coutts  and  Butterworth,  who  had  been  part  of  the  champion 
teams of 1995 and 2002, were instantly turned from national heroes to anti-heroes. ‘Black 
Heart’,  a  fanatical  supporters  group  of  the  New  Zealand  team,  launched  a  campaign 
against  them  with  the  slogan  ‘Country  Before  Money’.  The  new  crew  of  Team  New 

Local heros and global stars     125

Zealand decided to emblazon their yacht with the new motto, ‘Loyalty’, so as to show 
their  disgust.  The  rescinding  of  the  relationship  between  heroic  individual  and  their 
constituent or native community therefore carries distinct political pressures. The scale of 
the  threats  over  Coutts’  and  Butterworth’s  defections  apparently  led  to  a  similar 
deployment of New Zealand police resources in order to protect the Swiss team and route 
out potential terrorist activity against the defectors.89  

The globalisation of sport burdens the modern sport star to comprehend and to take 
account of questions of wealth and status, migration and identity, honour and ambition, 
history  and  remembrance,  fame  and  fortune.  But  to  rescind  the  relationship  with  the 
constituent  community  is  clearly  troublesome.  In  a  way,  the  response  of  Jordan  and 
Woods to questions of politics and ethics, of where their loyalties lie may be the most 
appropriate for this day and age. Why upset the apple cart and the riches it provides? All 
you need to do is just smile and wave. Sports historian Richard Holt is correct when he 
writes that the new ‘celebrity heroes’ pursue money, fame and fortune with such verve 
that the old categories of ‘amateur hero’ and ‘professional hero’ now seems redundant.90 
One  implication  of  the  presence  of  stardom  and  celebrity  is  that  our  previous 
conceptualisations  of  sport  may  need  to  be  reworked.  The  communitarian  political 
philosopher Alasdair MacIntyre conceives sport as a culturally valued social practice that 
upholds a rich and unique form of life, embodied by and possessing social ideals and a 
rich tapestry of tradition. Sport is more than a set of rules to be followed in order to attain 
a set of goals, its norms, standards of conduct and virtues help to form its broader ethos 
and appeal.91 It would be interesting to see, through further research, whether this notion 
of sport is either one that is recognisable to the sport star, or desirable for elite sporting 
athletes  when  the  stakes  are  so  high  given  the  power  of  cultural  intermediaries  in 
according status and wealth. A further implication is whether this notion of sport holds a 
normative appeal in the fight against crass instrumentalism and the atrophy of community 
and tradition, virtue and heroics.92 

Conclusion 

Fundamentally,  the  globalisation  of  sport  agitates  differences  between  the  ‘heroic’ 
community,  in  its  culturally  particular  and  spatially  defined  sense,  and  the  sporting 
community, which is now transnational in scope. It is hoped that this brief analysis has 
made us more aware of the individual and often moral choices that sport stars have to 
make  in  negotiating  a  path  between  these  communities.  Often  this  is  handled 
successfully. Nomadism does not appear as a threat and the potential to exercise asocial 
individualism  is  reined  in.  In  normative  terms,  the  commercialised,  transnational  and 
‘depthless’ world of modern sport encourages the ability for selfish individual behaviour 
that in turn undermines the existence of strong and healthy communities which provide 
depth  and  meaning.  The  task  at  hand,  therefore,  is  to  rectify  the  moral  failings  of 
excessive individualism and to counteract its corrosive effects on social relations. This 
demand  is  not  new  to  our  thinking.  It  resonates  from  the  concern  with  the  erosion  of 
traditional  community  structures  as  the  result  of  socioeconomic  change.  Tonnies 
provided  us  with  an  early  statement  of  this  sentiment  when  he  wrote,  ‘the  domestic 
Gemeinschaft  or  home  life  with  its  immeasurable  influence  upon  the  human  soul  has 

The Global Politics of sport     126

been  felt  by  everyone  who  ever  shared  it…’93  The  normative  structure  underlying  the 
totemic  notion  of  the  sporting  hero  requires  an  individual  capable  of  recognising  his 
social  origins,  of  valuing  the  bonds  and  attachments  without  which  they  would  never 
have  entered  the  public  realm.  Media  and  corporate  interests  may  have  dislocated  and 
distracted  elite  sportspeople  from  understanding  the  primacy  of  these  allegiances.  As 
stated  earlier,  a  concern  for  image  has  replaced  concern  for  performance  on  behalf  of 
community. Yet, there is a sense in which the experience of performance on behalf of a 
community is emotive and lasting (think of Terry Butcher’s bloodied head, Denise Lewis 
limping to victory at Sydney, Denis Compton’s cricketing feats despite the removal of his 
knee). It would be a sad indictment of our society to think that our grandchildren, fading 
away  on  their  deathbeds,  on  drawing  their  terminal  breath,  could  only  remember  the 
products and not the presence, magic and wonder associated with sporting heroes.  

9 

Selling out?  

The commercialisation and globalisation of lifestyle 

sport  

Belinda Wheaton 

Introduction: the ‘alternative sportscape’1 

There is now a body of academic literature examining the ‘phenomena’ of what has been 
variously termed ‘extreme’, ‘alternative,’ ‘lifestyle’, ‘whiz,’ ‘panic,’ ‘action’ and ‘new’ 
sports.2  Such  labels  encompass  a  wide  range  of  participatory  and  made-for-television 
sporting activities, including residual cultural forms such as climbing and snowshoeing 
and emergent activities such as wake boarding and BASE jumping.3 While commentators 
have  differed  in  nomenclature,  many  are  agreed  in  seeing  such  activities  as  having 
presented an altenative and potential challenge to traditional ways of ‘seeing’, ‘doing’ 
and  understanding  sport.4  In  this  chapter  I  will  introduce  readers  to  the  alternative 
sportscape, focusing on the type of activity termed lifestyle sports. I discuss firstly what 
these  activities  are,  and  their  significance  in  contemporary  sporting  culture.  I  then 
examine what is arguably one of the main themes in their development, their increasingly 
global reach and concurrent commercialisation, particularly cooption by international and 
transnational corporations. 

Lifestyle sports 

Lifestyle  sports  are  a  specific  type  of  alternative  sport,  including  both  established 
activities  like  surfing  and  skateboarding  through  to  newly  emergent  sports  like  kite 
surfing.5  While  each  lifestyle  sport  has  its  own  history,  identities  and  development 
patterns, there are nevertheless commonalities in their ethos, ideologies and increasingly 
the  national  and  transnational  consumer  industries  that  produce  the  commodities  that 
underpin their cultures. Historically, as Bourdieu has observed, many of these lifestyle 
sports originated in North America in the late 1960s, and were then imported to Europe 
by American entrepreneurs.6 With their roots in the counter-cultural social movements of 
the  1960s  and  1970s  many  have  characteristics  that  are  different  to  the  traditional 
‘dominant’  institutionalised,  Western  ‘achievement’  sport  cultures.7  Unlike  some 
alternative and extreme sports, lifestyle sports are fundamentally about participation, not 
spectating, either in live or mediated settings. Participants show high commitment in time 
and/or  money  and  a  style  of  life  that  develops  around  the  activity.  They  have  a 
hedonistic,  individualistic  ideology  that  promotes  commitment,  but  often  denounce 
regulation  and  institutionalisation,  and  are  often  critical  of,  or  ambivalent  towards, 

The Global Politics of sport     128

commercialism  and  formal  ‘man-on-man’  style  competition.  The  body  is  used  in  non-
aggressive ways, mostly without bodily contact, yet they embrace and fetishise notions of 
risk and danger. The locations in which these sports are practised are often new or re-
appropriated  (urban  and/or  rural)  spaces,  without  fixed  or  delineated  boundaries. 
Theorists have represented the emergence of these sporting activities, and the subcultures 
and  lifestyles  that  develop  around them, as a new phase in the development of sports, 
characterised by some as ‘postmodern’.8 It is certainly undeniable that the emergence of 
these  sports  and  their  associated  lifestyles  is  related  to  wider  issues  around  changing 
contemporary Western society. In these sports we can see some of the central issues and 
paradoxes of advanced capitalist or late-modern societies, such as the expression of self-
identity  as  increasingly  ‘mobile,  multiple,  personal,  self-reflexive,  and  subject  to 
exchange  and  innovation’,9  and  the  ‘individualisation  and  privatisation  of  the  act  of 
consumption,  even  in  seemingly  public  spheres’.10  In  the  emergence  and  evolution  of 
lifestyle sport activities what is being sold to the consumer is not merely a sport or leisure 
activity but a complete style of life, one which is saturated with signs and images that 
emphasises many of the aspirations of postmodern consumer culture. 

In  the  twenty-first  century  lifestyle  sports  are  attracting  an  ever-increasing  body  of 
followers and participants, from increasingly diverse global geographical settings. Take 
the urban sport of skateboarding; it has been claimed that the growth in skateboarding 
over  the  past  ten  years  in  the  USA  (based  on  sales),  now  outpaces  participation  in 
traditional sports like baseball.11 Rinehart claims the ‘alternative sport phenomenon’ is 
‘world  wide,’  citing  the  popularity  of  ESPN’s  X-Games.  In  1997  the  event  attracted 
competitors from over 20 different countries, over 240,000 spectators (in 1998), and was 
beamed  via  ESPN’s  different  sport  channels  to  198  countries  in  21  languages.12 
Participants of lifestyle sport range from the ‘poseurs’ buying into a desirable lifestyle to 
‘weekend  warriors’,  the  occasional  participants  who  often  participate  in  a  range  of 
different alternative and traditional sports, through to ‘hard core’ committed practitioners 
who  are  fully  familiarised  in  the  lifestyle,  argot,  fashion  and  technical  skill  of  their 
activity,  and  spend  considerable  time,  energy  and  often  money  doing  it.  While  some 
lifestyle  sports  such  as  snowboarding  and  windsurfing  attract  significant  numbers  of 
active female participants, the majority are youthful13 white males, from affluent Western 
industrialised nations. 

Selling out? 

Yet the landscape of alternative sport is increasingly characterised by the presence of a 
range of global commercial images and interests. As Kusz reminds us, extreme sport was 
initially ‘decried’ by both sports fans and pundits, seeing them as ‘made-for-TV pseudo-
sports created solely to peddle products to the much coveted teen male demographic’.14 
The  media  and  consumer  industries seem to have appropriated alternative sport to sell 
everything from deodorant to Pepsi: 

In  the  world  of  extreme  sport  sponsorship,  pierced  and  tattooed  skaters 
and skysurfers mix quite amicably with buttoned-down corporations such 
as AT&T and Toyota.[…] For all of the counter-culture cachet associated 

Selling out?     129

with ESPN’s X Games and NBC’s Gravity Games, the truth is that the 15 
events were co-opted from the start.  

Lifestyle  sport  stars  like  Tony  Hawk  (skater)  and  Kelly  Slater  (surfer)  are  individuals 
who,  like  other  global  sport  celebrities  transcend  their  subcultures,  and  ‘occupy  and 
inform national and transnational space’.16 Commentators have therefore seen alternative 
and  especially  mediated  forms  of  extreme  sport  as  a  ‘co-pted’  sporting  movement 
increasingly  associated  with  the  global  expansion  and  reproduction  of  consumer 
capitalism,17  and  controlled  by  multinational  and  transnational  corporations  and  media 
organisations.18 

Yet while commercialisation has been a central thread in research, the influence and 
impact  of  global  commercial  culture  on  ‘local’  (or  ‘translocal’)  cultures,  has  received 
little  attention.  Despite  a  number  of  empirical  studies  of  lifestyle  sports  in  different 
national  and  regional  settings,  none  of  these  studies  have systematically  explored  how 
these ‘local’ sporting practices are informed by, and respond to, the diverse processes of 
globalization.19 In this chapter I will therefore sketch out some of the main influences that 
need to be considered in examining the global-local nexus in lifestyle sports. In outlining 
this  agenda,  my  discussion  will  highlight  the  influences  of  the  media,  tourism  and 
migration,  the  impact  of  global  commodities  in  the  production  and  consumption  of 
equipment  and  sub-cultural  style,  and  how  lifestyle  sports  inform  debates  about  the 
enduring connection between sport and national identity in the context of the proclaimed 
‘Brave new world of transnational culture’.20 My discussion then turns to examining the 
commercialisation process, exploring some of the ways commodities are given meanings 
and re-worked in ‘local’ subcultural settings, illustrating how global consumer capitalism 
penetrates these lifestyle sports in increasingly complex and contradictory ways. 

Lifestyles  sports,  however,  encompass  a  range  of  different  and  by  no  means 
homogeneous  activities,  with  their  own  histories  and  global  development  patterns. 
Despite evident commonalities, there is not universality in the experiences, or politics of 
identity  in  these  sports.  Therefore,  the  illustrations  I  draw  on  are  either  from  my  own 
empirical research on the cultures of windsurfing and surfing, conducted across different 
locales  including  around  the  UK  coast,  Hawaii,  and  Australia,  or  other  lifestyle  sports 
such as skateboarding, where there is empirical research and popular literature referring 
to a range of ‘local’ settings allowing me to draw out commonalities, as well as pointing 
to significant differences.21 

In the first part of this discussion I consider what these globalisation processes are, 

examining their influence in the context of the diffusion of surfing culture.  

The globalisation of lifestyle sport 

Globalisation  according  to  Robertson  refers  to  an  increased  compression of the world, 
and  particularly  our  intensification  of  consciousness  of  it  made  possible  by  escalating 
global  connections.22  Globalisation  processes,  however,  are  not  just  economic  in 
character,  but  are  concerned  with  issues  of  cultural  meaning;  ‘While  the  values  and 
meaning attached to place remain significant, we are increasingly involved in networks 
which extend far beyond our immediate physical location.’23 Increasingly prominent in 

The Global Politics of sport     130

these  global  cultural  flows  are  the  increased  meeting  and  mixing  of  cultures  and 
identities, and the central part played by the media and communications technologies in 
the  acceleration  of  this  process.  Robertson’s  term  glocalization  helps  to  articulate  this 
global  production  of  the  local  and  the  localisation  of  the  global,  the  coexistence  of 
cultural homogenisation and hetrogenisation tendencies.24 These processes have received 
an abundance of critical attention, so my intention here is not to attempt any review or 
overview, not least because as Allison points out, ‘globalisation’ is a term that is ‘fraught 
with  ambiguities’,25  but  to  higblight  issues  pertinent  to  examining  the  articulation  and 
impact of global cultural forces within alternative sport cultures in their ‘local’ and trans-
local contexts. 

Global  flows,  as  Maguire,  and  other  commentators  have  illustrated,  are  a  profound 
feature  of  late  twentieth-century  sport,  including  the  migration  of  elite  talent,  the 
movement  of  technology  and  the  manufacturing  of  clothing  and  equipment.26  In 
discussing the impact of these flows and processes on modern sport Maguire concludes 
that,  ‘Sports  development  has  been  and  continues  to  be  contoured  by  the  interlocking 
process  of  diminishing  contrasts  and  increasing  varieties’.27  He  suggests  that  the 
emergence,  diffusion  and 
increasing  popularity  of  alternative  sports  (he  cites 
snowboarding, hang-gliding and windsurfing) is evidence of this increased heterogeneity 
in  the  range  and  diversity  of  sport  cultures  in  world  sports,  a  ‘creolization  of  sport 
cultures’ characteristic of the latest phase of ‘global sportization’.28 

Appadurai  provides  an  insightful  analysis  of  these  dynamics,  suggesting  that 
globalisation encompasses multidirectional processes, which provide both sameness and 
difference;  ‘The  new  global  economy  has  to  be  seen  as  a  complex,  overlapping, 
disjunctive  order’.29  He  offers  a  framework  for  exploring  this  complexity,  the 
‘disjunctures  between  economy,  culture  and  politics’,  by  examining  the  relationship 
among  the  ‘five  different  dimensions  of  global  cultural  flows’,  dimensions  he  terms 
‘ethnoscapes, mediascapes, technoscapes, financescapes and ideoscapes’.30 Ethnoscapes 
involves  the  ‘shifting  landscapes  of  people’31  around  the  world  including  tourists, 
immigrants, refugees, guest workers and other moving groups; technoscapes refers to the 
flow of technology, and finanscapes to the transfer patterns of global capital Appadurai 
argues that the global relationship between these three scapes is: 

deeply  disjunctive  and  profoundly  unpredictable  because  each  of  these 
landscapes is subject to its own constrains and incentives, […] at the same 
time  as  each  acts  as  a  constraint  and  a  parameter  for  movement  in  the 
others.32  

Supplementing these three scapes are mediascapes and ideoscapes. Ideoscapes refers to 
images  that  are  invested  with  political  and  ideological  meaning,  and  mediascapes 
encompasses  both  mass  media  images,  and  the  process  of  image  production  and 
dissemination.  These  scapes  are  the  ‘building  blocks’  of  what  he  calls—extending 
Anderson’s  idea  of  imagined  communities—imagined  worlds.33  As  Carrington  and 
Wilson suggest, ‘the crux of Appadurai’s framework is the assumption that the various 
disjunctures, or interactions that occur between global cultural flows—as they relate to 
the various scapes—provide the analyst with crucial information about the complex ways 
that local cultures relate to global forces’.34 

Selling out?     131

A  brief  examination  of  the  diffusion  of  modern  surfing will illustrate the impact of 
these  different  global  flows,  particularly  ethnoscapes  and  mediascapes,  in  extending 
‘surfing around the world’.35 I examine surfing because both its form, and cultural values, 
have  had  an  impact  on  the  development  and  ethos  of  many  other  lifestyle  sports. 
Snowboarding, skateboarding, windsurfing and kitesurfing, for example, all have roots 
in, and are all still strongly influenced by, the surfing activity and culture. 

A’travelling culture’: the global diffusion of surfing 

In popular consciousness the USA, and specifically California, is attributed with the birth 
of  surfing  culture;36  however  it  is  worth  noting  that  surfing  has  a  much  longer,  and 
fascinating  history  as  a  pre-Colonial  body  culture  playing  a  pivotal  role  in  Polynesian 
(mens’ and interestingly also womens’) cultural life.37 Eighteenth-and nineteenth-century 
colonisation  by  Europeans  and  Americans  was  to  constrain  the  activity;  puritanical 
American missionaries thought that surfing was immoral and evil, so it was banned.38 In 
the  early  twentieth  century  it  was  revived,  predominantly  by  non-indigenous  ‘Haole’ 
(white) Hawaiian settlers.39 

In  California  in  the  1940  and  50s,  the  political  and  socio-economic  circumstances 
allowed ‘modern’ surfing, and surf culture, to flourish.40 At that time, travel, particularly 
in  the  form  of  tourism,  played  a  key  part  in  its  diffusion.  Following  Appadurai’s 
discussion  of  ethnoscapes,  I  use  the  term  ‘travel’  in  an  expansive  way  to  include 
experiences such as tourism, immigration and migrancy.41 Nevertheless, as Urry points 
out, in global culture ‘corporeal travel has taken on an immense dimension comprising 
the  largest  ever  movement  of  people  across  national  borders’.42  Booth  observes  that 
cheaper  airfares  from  the  1940s  allowed  Californians  to  travel  to  the  surfing  Mecca, 
Hawaii.43 However, surfers in Australia—the other main location at that time—remained 
quite isolated, largely because the heavy Malibu surfboard made travel difficult, but also 
because the anti-hedonistic values of the Australian Lifesaving Club environment served 
to constrain regular surfing.44 Competition also played a part in the migration process; the 
first international surfboard riding competition was held in 1954 in Makaha, Hawaii,45 
and despite playing an ambiguous role in surf culture, has continued to play a significant 
role in its global spread. (Later in the chapter I discuss the ambiguous and changing role 
of competitive surfing.) 

As Appadurai’s discussion of mediascapes and ideoscapes embraces, the growth and 
changing  roles  of  the  media  industries,  particular  the  emergence  of  global  electronic 
culture,  is  seen  as  one  of  the  main  forms  of  cultural  exchange  in  the  context  of 
globalisation. Booth outlines the various influences of the media on surfing in the 1950s 
and 60s. Initially the Hollywood genre of beach movies such as Gidget reproduced the 
idyllic  fantasy  lifestyles  of  California  surfers’  on  the  back  of  which  Californian  surf 
culture  rapidly  diffused  around  other  parts  of  the  Pacific  Rim.46  Yet  whilst  these 
mainstream  films  were  shunned  by  the  surfing  community,  specialist  surf  films  also 
emerged, and quickly became important products, often consumed in communal settings, 
‘explaining  surfing  and  surfers  to  themselves’.47  The  first  subcultural  magazines  also 
emerged  in  the  early  1960s;  for  example  Surfing  World  was  launched  in  Australia, 
initially as a vehicle to promote surf films.48 Travel soon became synonymous with the 

The Global Politics of sport     132

surfing lifestyle, epitomised by Bruce Brown’s classic film The Endless Summer (1964), 
often referred to as ‘the surfing film’49 which followed the adventures (or ‘surfari’) of 
two Californian surfers around the world dedicating their life to the hedonistic voyage in 
search of the perfect wave. 

Because  of  the  surfer’s  aspiration  to  travel,  tourism,  in  conjunction  with  specialist 
films  and  magazines,50  was  the  primary  way  in  which  surfing  cultural  values  were 
diffused  and  assimilated,  particularly  across  national  boundaries.  By  the  early  1960s 
California  surf  culture  had  spread  to  Australasia,  and  locales  in  Europe  including  the 
UK.51 Due to the unregulated nature of surfboard riding, and the subsequent dearth of 
organisations  or  clubs  compared  to  ‘achievement  sport’  culture,  these  informal 
interactions have continued to play an important role in the diffusion of surfing, and in 
producing homogeneity in information and cultural characteristics in the surf culture, and 
related beach cultures such as windsurfing. ‘Surf safaris’, competitions, car-boot sales, 
and trade shows all fostered links between different groups and communities I studied. 
Yet simultaneously the local cultures have become increasingly influenced and defined 
by  their  diverse  and  transient  membership;  for  example  through  Australian  and  South 
African lifeguards working in Cornwall, and Cornish surfers running surfing centres in 
the  Caribbean.  Surfers  are  what  Urry  calls  ‘diasporic  travellers’;  unlike  conventional 
tourism  based  upon  clear  distinctions  between  ‘home’  and  ‘away’,  s/he  has  ‘no  clear 
temporal boundaries as one activity tends to flow into the next’.52 

Furthermore,  as  Appadurai  suggests,  the  media  and  migration  work  together;  [The] 
‘mobile  and  unforeseen  relationship  between  mass  mediated  events  and  migrationary 
audiences  defines  the  core  of  the  link  between  globalization  and  the  modern’.53  The 
subcultural media, particularly magazines and videos, has become central to the meaning 
and experience of lifestyle sport, and has facilitated the creation of trans-local subcultural 
networks  and  communities  that  extend  beyond  geographically  defined  places.  Such 
mediascapes  present  new  possibilities  offering  scripts  for  ‘imagined  lives’,54  depicting 
travel  as  an  integral  part  of  the  surf  and  windsurfing  lifestyles,  fuelling  participants’ 
fantasies of surfari and ‘escape’. As one of the windsurfers I interviewed explained: 

I used to look at these pictures of Mike Waltz and Mark Angulo, sailing in 
these  waves  in  Hawaii,  and  it  just  looked  gorgeous,  and  I  just  used  to 
dream about going to Maui [Jason].  

Another interviewee claimed he often bumped into the same people on his windsurfing 
holidays, regardless of how far afield he travelled. 

Maguire suggests that the practitioners of alternative sport activities more widely are 
the type of migrants he classifies as ‘nomadic cosmopolitans’, those who use their sport 
career to journey.55 Cosmopolitanism, according to Urry is the intellectual and aesthetic 
cultural  disposition  toward  openness  to  peoples,  places  and  experiences  from  different 
cultures.56  More  broadly,  it  considers  how  globalisation  processes  have  lead  to  new 
‘global-others’ that are beyond national boundaries.57 Cosmopolitanism suggests a post-
national  imaginary,  that  transcends  these  traditional  social  identities.  Surfers  and 
windsurfers  seem  to  display  this  cosmopolitan  ‘disposition’,  expressed  through  their 
aspiration to travel, willingness to connect to other cultures (however superficially—see 
on),  and  perhaps  most  conspicuously  through  their  sense  of  ‘ethical  globalism’  as 

Selling out?     133

expressed around environmentalism practices and discourses. For example, an editorial in 
Surfer  magazine  calls  on  surfers, proclaiming [they] ‘have it in their power to make a 
change—environmentally and socially’.58 I revisit environmentalism and its relationship 
to cosmopolitanism later in this chapter. 

Yet the impact of Californian surf culture’s values on different locales was mediated 
by  the  local  culture’s  different  historical  and  sociopolitical  conditions.  For  example, 
Booth’s  historical  analysis  points  to  the  ways  that  existing  differences  in  surfing  style 
between the main settings of Australia, California and Hawaii affected the different ways 
in  which  surf  culture  was  embraced,  given  ‘local’  meanings,  and  subsequently 
institutionalised.59  Australian  surfing  culture  developed  differently  to  that  in  the  USA, 
largely due to the pre-existence of the surf lifesaving clubs with their own anti-hedonistic 
ideologies, and moralistic attitudes towards ‘public displays of the body’.60 In contrast, in 
Hawaii  surfing  had  developed  without  such  ‘moral  constraints’.61  These  cultural 
differences are pertinent to understanding continuing differing attitudes to surfing ‘style’ 
and formal competition. In Australia, surfing today has become a highly institutionalised 
activity  that  has  the  status  of  a  ‘mainstream’  sport.  The  Australian  derived  aggressive 
surfing  ethos  of  ‘dominating  the  wave’  (which  has  achieved  a  hegemonic  position  in 
professional competitive surfing), is based on an aggressive masculinist ethos inherited 
from  the  surf  life  saving  movement.62  Whereas  in  Hawaii,  many  Hawaiians  still  treat 
surfing as part of their cultural heritage—more of a lifestyle than a sport—emphasising 
‘being  at  one’  with  waves  and  nature,  not  aggressive  competition.63  These  local 
differences  remind  us  that  globalisation  is  not  a  linear  or  uniform  process  of  cultural 
homogenisation, but involves more ‘disjunctive flows’ that are overlapping, complex and 
uncertain, their impact more disjoined and contradictory.64 

The global village of surfing: but global for whom? 

Today, surfing, like most lifestyle sport subcultures, extends beyond nationstates and is 
popular  among  participants  in  many  industrialised  nations.  Yet  it  is  important  to 
recognise that while globalization processes have intensified the spread of these sporting 
cultures from the economic centre to periphery areas, this has not necessarily led to these 
activities being made available to, or adopted by local indigenous communities. Although 
surfing is practised in many less-developed countries, such as South America, Africa, and 
the  Pacific  Islands,  the  main  participants  are  travellers,  rather  than  indigenous 
communities.65 Likewise, surfing and windsurfing is increasingly popular in South Africa 
and parts of the Caribbean, however, local ‘black’ surfers remain a minority. In areas like 
Indonesia, ‘locals’ who do participate tend to service the ‘tourists’ working in bars, retail 
and the wider tourism industries. Contrary to surf video narratives that claim surfers and 
indigenous island communities have a ‘bond’, a ‘shared understanding’ of the importance 
of the ocean, it is clear that the surfers do not share the indigenous community’s material 
conditions, nor styles of life.66 Contrary to these romanticised and essentialised images of 
the ‘global village of surfing’, the practitioners of these activities remain in the main part, 
the privileged and specifically Western white males. Moreover, as I explore later in the 
chapter,  it  is  not  just  material  conditions  that  function  to  exclude  many  non-Western 
white  men.  The  values  of  meritocracy  in  skill  and  commitment  underpinning  surfing, 

The Global Politics of sport     134

windsurfing, and many other lifestyle sporting activities serves to exclude individuals—
and particularly women—who tend to be less committed (in time, energy and money), 
less  confident,  and  less  able  to  reach  the  male  defined  values  of  physical  sporting 
prowess and risk. 

In  the  next  section  I  return  to  exploring  the  relationship  between  local  and  global 

cultures, discussing the relationship between local and national cultures and identities. 

The meaning of the ‘local’: the (in)significance of national identity 

One  central  issue  that  has  concerned  globalisation  theorists  is  the  effect  globalisation 
processes have on nation-states, particularly the extent to which ‘the nation’ remains an 
important source of identity and demarcation. While announcements of the ‘obsolescence 
of  nation  states’67  are  clearly  premature,  commentators  have  highlighted  the  increased 
tensions around national identity, identifying forces that simultaneously undermine, de-
stabilise  and  re-establish  the  significance  of  national  units.68  In  the  sporting  context,  a 
plethora  of  research  has  demonstrated  sport’s  continued  importance  as  a  central  site 
where  issues  of  nation,  and  the  politics  of  national  identity,  are  established  and 
contested.69 Most recently, research has turned to examining the role that transnational 
corporate forces have come to play in reconstituting the relationship between sport and 
nation in ‘re-imagining’ national cultures,70 particularly the position of sport within these 
‘reconstructed national cultures of global industry.’71 As Maguire, outlines, ‘the role sport 
plays in identity politics has grown more complex’.72 

Of course minority sports, by their very nature, are less likely to be important contexts 
for the expression of national identity. Nevertheless, unlike more traditional, institutional 
sports, (the conspicuous exception being Formula One), lifestyle sport communities and 
identities  are  not  bound  to  particular  nation-states,  nor  have  they  become  important 
signifiers of national or regional identities.73 For instance, in the professional World Cup 
competitions in surfing and windsurfing—the pinnacle of their sporting competition—on 
the  winner’s  rostrum,  instead  of  being  draped  in  symbols  of  nationalism  like  flags, 
anthems, and nationalistic team emblems, participants’ bodies (and boards) are adorned 
with signifiers of corporations, particularly the companies that sponsor them. Although 
competitors  do  represent  their  countries  of  origin,  in  windsurfing  signified  by  the 
particular letter used in their sail number (like yachting each letter denotes their country 
of  ‘origin’),  their  allegiances  and  ‘training  teams’  tend  to  be  based  around  equipment 
manufacturers,  or  friendship  groups,  not  nations.  In  windsurfing  such  nationalistic 
identifications  become  increasingly  meaningless  when  one  considers  that  a  large 
percentage  of  the  world  elite  windsurfers  live,  or  strive  to  live,  in  the  Mecca  of  the 
Hawaiian island Maui, or a few other centres such as the Canary Islands.74 In Maui I met 
young men from Europe (France, Germany, Spain, Scandinavia, UK), Australasia, Brazil, 
Argentina  and  the  Caribbean  either  residing  on  Maui’s  north  shore,  or  spending  large 
periods  of  time  on  the  island.  A  similar  picture  emerges  trawling  the  pages  of 
windsurfing  magazines.  Travel  articles,  which  are  a  central  theme  in  these  magazines, 
often  narrate  the  adventures  of  the  young  male  professional  windsurfers  on  global 
adventures  to  find  un-crowded  windsurfing  and  surfing  venues.  As  illustrated  above, 
participants  are  often  depicted  as  ‘nomadic  cosmopolitans’,75  global  citizens  without 

Selling out?     135

national  ties  or  roots,  displaying  the  postnational  imaginary’,  Appadurai  describes  in 
transnational groups.76 Their status and identity in this ‘imagined’ subcultural community 
are  based  on  their  windsurfing  prowess,  risk  taking  and  being  the  most  committed 
hedonists.77 As Clifford suggest, perhaps models of culture based around place and locale 
need to be replaced by metaphors evoking travel.78 

These examples illustrate that national identity is not a central factor in determining or 
performing  the  self  or  cultural  identity  of  these  elite  windsurfers.  While  individual 
participants have multiple and shifting subjectivities based on gender, ethnicity age, as 
well  as  local,  regional  and  national  identifications,  often  the  most  important  ‘I/we-
identities’79 of the windsurfer is their subcultural affiliation; that they are ‘a windsurfer’. 
As I have argued in depth elsewhere, for the committed windsurfer for whom windsurfing 
is  an  all-absorbing  style  of  life,  rather  than  the  ‘weekend  warrior’  or  occasional 
participants  (who  tend  to  consume  such  lifestyle  sports  as  postmodern  ‘flaneurs’),  the 
adoption of a subcultural identity is a way of asserting a distinctive and exclusive cultural 
identity and a sense of community.80 In a society where traditional forms of identity have 
become increasingly fractured and unstable, it is argued that collective identity—such as 
national identification—can become decentred, resulting in the prominence of different 
types  of  identities,  such  as  around  these  sporting  lifestyles.81  As  analyses  of 
cosmopolitanism  have  suggested,  globalisation  processes  may  offer  some  groups  of 
consumers new post-national forms of global citizenship and identity.82 

To  summarise,  this  discussion  highlights  that  in  windsurfing,  surfing,  and  probably 
other  lifestyle  sports,  although  national  identity  is  demarked  at  the  highest  levels,  for 
most  performers,  it  is  a  less  important  cultural  identity  than  those  based  around  the 
increasingly trans-national subcultural communities. Nevertheless, this is not to suggest 
that lifestyle sport participants do not a have a sense of place or attachment to the local,83 
but that the ‘other’ is not identities based other nation-states. I’ll briefly exemplify this 
point; that issues around the meaning of space and locality are central to understanding 
the relationships between- and within- alternative sport and (self-other) identities. 

Contesting the ‘local’: ‘them’ and ‘us’ 

Discussing the significance of ‘the local’ in theories of globalisation, Bennett observes 
that  commentators  often  use  ‘local’  to  denote  the  national  rather  than  international 
context,  and/or  to  mean  specific  urban  or  rural  settings.84  These  approaches  tend  to 
conceptualise the local as an unchallenged fixed space, ignoring that the local is a ‘highly 
contested  category’.85  Underlying  the  social  use  of  space  are  ‘competing  sensibilities’, 
such  as  how  ‘different  social  groups  appropriate  and  mark  out  social  spaces  within  a 
particular place’.86 Borden writes about insider/outsider statuses—or the division between 
‘them’ and ‘us’—in skateboarding, demonstrating the ‘territorialization of skate parks’ in 
which ‘locals’ claim a skate park as their own.87 Another case in point is the way ‘the 
waves’ are given meanings as subcultural spaces and policed by their users. In Hawaii, 
my  research  showed  how  this  ‘local’  subcultural  space  was  claimed  and  policed  by 
groups of surfers and windsurfers, both overtly such as cases of surfers territorialism or 
‘localism’, and more subtlety, for example in the exclusion of female and physically less 
able  windsurfers  and  surfers  via  a  culture  of  meritocracy.  Underlying  these  exclusion 

The Global Politics of sport     136

processes  are  power  relations.  Examining  this  hierarchy  of  subcultural  space  reveals  a 
complex  micro  politics  of  gender  (both  between  and  within  each  gender),  ethnicity, 
national identities, and other insider/outsider statuses. 

Another  example  of  the  significance  and  meaning  given  to  ‘local’  space—and  of 
trans-local  communities—is  evident  in  participants  and  subcultural  media  attitudes  to 
ocean pollution. Despite being a global discourse, environmentalism tends to be played 
out  in  local  contexts,  in  this  case  around  particular  beaches  and  beach  communities. 
Furthermore,  as  Urry  suggest  many  claims  about  ‘saving  the  environment’  appear  to 
depend on some notion of the cosmopolitan.88 The subcultural media, and environmental 
groups  like  Surfers  Against  Sewage  (SAS)  use  self—other  identifications  which  pit 
‘them’,  in  this  case  the  politicians,  governments,  corporate  interests—against  ‘us’,  a 
trans-local ‘imagined community’ of surfers and other water sport users based around a 
particular space, ‘our’ beaches. SAS literature in the subcultural media claims; ‘together 
we can make our ocean safe’, ‘stop polluting our beaches’. This environmental concern 
of  surfers  is  also  directed  at  the  surfing  industry  itself  in  a  critique  of  contemporary 
global  capitalism  more  broadly.  In  a  letter  in  Surfer  magazine,  the  author  condemns 
Quicksilver,  for  putting  commercial  incentives  above  environmental  and  humanitarian 
ones.  The  incident  highlighted  by  the  reader,  is  of  Quicksilver’s  alliance  with  the 
Indonesian government, in sponsor’ ing one of the professional surfing competition held 
in  Indonesia,  causing  ‘socially  irresponsible’  ‘environmental  degradation’  at  the  coral 
reefs.89 As Mort argues, ‘shopping as the quintessential expression of consumer choice 
now carriers social anxieties over eco-politics’.90 

In the remainder of the chapter I turn to discussing the influence of global capitalism, 
exploring its complex and contradictory influence on lifestyle sports cultures, particularly 
in the ways identities are constructed, and commodities are consumed in these local, lived 
contexts. I examine the commodities, media and consumer industries that surround these 
sports,  and  their  lifestyles,  drawing  on  some  specific  case-studies  to  illustrate  these 
processes,  such  as  ‘anti  style’  attitudes  in  beach  cultures,  and  attitudes  to  increased 
institutionalisation in a range of lifestyle sports. 

Commodity production and consumption 

Stratton  calls  surfing  a  ‘commodity-orientated  subculture’  arguing  it  supports  ‘two 
fundamentals of American capitalism, consumerism and individualism’.91 The expansion 
of global consumer capitalism is particularly evident in the commodities linked to these 
activities, such as equipment and clothing. In response to this growing market of lifestyle 
sports  is  an  ever-burgeoning  industry  around  the  manufacture  and  distribution  of 
specialised  equipment  and  related  accessories.  Wetsuits,  sunglasses,  T-shirts,  sandals, 
boards,  jewellery,  watches  and  surf  wax  entice  the  consumer,  and  have  increasingly 
become part of mainstream fashion. Importers or distributors of the multinationals like 
Quicksilver and Oakley exist in many countries, helping to produce standardised products 
and promotional materials. An example of this market’s ability to diversify and grow is 
reflected in the speed in which ‘surf style’ for women expanded during the mid’ 1990s, 
the catalyst being the success of the ladies’ board shorts (surfing shorts for women). Then 
there  is  the  sizable  media  industry  also  centrally  involved  in  promoting  the  sporting 

Selling out?     137

equipment and lifestyle. The travel industries also play an increasingly influential role, 
selling ‘extreme’ and high-thrill sporting action to committed practitioners and adventure 
seeking neophyte travellers alike.92  

There are synergies between different lifestyle sports industries and medias. Many of 
these companies make equipment for several lifestyle sports, albeit under different brand 
names. Clothing companies like Quicksilver and O’Neil sell to a range of lifestyle sport 
markets including surfing, windsurfing, snowboarding and emergent activities like kite-
surfing.  The  production  of  kite  and  windsurf  sails  take  place  in  the  same  factories, 
wetsuits are produced for a whole range of water sports; some snowboards and windsurf 
boards  are  manufactured  by  the  same  corporation.  This  pattern  is  mirrored  in  the 
magazine  industry,  with  several  magazines  often  being  produced  in  the  same  design 
house. For example, Arcwind in the UK has editorial teams working on windsurfing, kite-
surfing and in-line skating magazines. 

However, as I have suggested, the global flows of commodities, medias and images, 
do not have a simple homogenising influence on the subculture. As Appadurai argues, 
‘often  the  homogenization  argument  subspeciates  into  either  an  argument  about 
Americanization  or  an  argument  about  commoditization,  and  very  often  the  two 
arguments are closely linked’.93 Many popular and some academic discourses see sports 
like  surfing  in  this  way,  that  is,  as  individualistic,  narcissistic,  materialistic  co-opted 
consumption  practices.  Yet  researchers  focusing  on  the  lived  experience  of  these 
activities, often adopting ethnographic approaches, have illustrated that lifestyle sporting 
cultures  are  also  spaces  in  which  different  and  potentially  more  transformatory 
relationships  and  identities  have  developed  between  the  individual  and  the  objects  of 
consumption, between other (gendered) individuals, and the geographical environment. 

The  following  discussion  will  use  some  examples  to  exemplify  that  alongside  the 
process  of  commodification,  lifestyle  sports  are  at  the  same  time  a  potential  source  of 
cultural  transformation.  In  the  first  instance,  I  discuss  the  influence  of  the  media, 
highlighting the importance of local, micro medias. 

The subcultural media 

Maguire suggests that the global ‘media-sport complex can be explained with reference 
to the homogenization/Westernisation/Americanization strand of globalization debate’.94 
He  highlights  that  ownership  and  control  of  global  sport  media  rests  with  a  few 
transnational corporations and media organisations such as NBC and Eurosport.95 Recent 
ownership  trends  towards  synergy  in  the  telecommunications  industries,  such  as  the 
growth of the Murdoch empire in the early 1990s, have further fuelled fears about the 
Americanisation  of  popular  culture,  including  sport.  Yet,  as  I’ll  illustrate,  despite  the 
influence of American media models in lifestyle sport, they are not all-pervasive; their 
control is not complete, nor is it uncontested.96 

ESPN’s  X-Games  (formerly  called  the eXtreme games) is the spiritual home of the 
‘extreme sport’ concept.97 Rinehart claims that ESPN (owned by the Disney Corporation) 
maintains a dominant market share, and plays a major role in shaping what the extreme 
sports will ‘consist of, constitute, and become’ for the ‘[virtual] world’:98  

The Global Politics of sport     138

the  omnipresence  of  ESPN,  and  the  very  dominance  of  the  electronic 
media,  provides  a  cultural  dominance  over  the  mere  presentations  of 
extreme, alternative sports in the electronic sportscape.’99 

Yet  despite  ESPN’s  dominance  in  the  televisualization  of  alternative  sport,100  and  its 
increasingly  global  reach,  its  influence  outside  the  USA  seems  to  be  more  limited.  In 
Britain for example, the X-Games have tended to be broadcast on subscription satellite 
sport  channels,  usually  at  off-peaks  times.  Furthermore,  these  trans-global  media 
networks have yet to have a sustained impact on the subcultural medias consumed by the 
participants, rather than audiences, of these sporting activities. Even in the USA, skaters 
(in  California)  interviewed  by  Beal  and  Wilson  were  often  indifferent  to  media mega-
events such as the X-Games and the Olympics, a theme I return to later in the chapter.101 
It  is  the  specialist  subcultural  media,  including  magazines,  videos,  fanzines,  and 
increasingly  internet  resources,  that  are  of  central  importance  to  those  within  lifestyle 
sport cultures.102 As Wheaton and Beal explore drawing on the youth subcultural work of 
Sarah  Thornton,  there  is  an  important  differentiation  between  mass  media  (television, 
newspapers, etc) and specialist media.103 For the subulturalists the mass media are seen as 
a ‘colonizing co-opting’ force, whereas the specialist niche media plays a central role in 
the  creation  and  evolution  of  these  cultures,  in  disseminating  information  about  their 
activities to their members, and the creation and circulation of the symbols and meanings 
of  subcultural  capital  and  notions  of  ‘authenticity’.  Booth  suggests  these  subcultural 
media  ‘communicated  cultural  and  technical  trends  and  styles  to  devotees  around  the 
world’.104 Stranger also confirms the importance of subcultural print and electronic image 
of surfing in the surfing lifestyle and aesthetic in Australia.105 The surfers in his survey 
bought  an  average  of  9.27  magazines/year  and  watched  over  10  different  videos  an 
‘indeterminate’  number  of  times.106  Lifestyle  sport  practitioners  from  many  different 
activities consume their respective subcultural videos in a similar way. They watch them 
repeatedly,  often  in  ‘social’  group  settings,  and  replay  fragments  to  deconstruct  the 
manoeuvres and techniques performed by the elite performers. 

Furthermore,  contrary  to  trans-national  media  ownership  trends,  the  ownership  and 
production  patterns  of  the  specialist  magazines  tend  to  be  local  and  more  piecemeal. 
Magazines  are  predominantly  produced  nationally,  in  the  main  by  small  publishers. 
Booth likewise notes that technological developments such as the camcorder have made 
surf videos very easy and cheap to produce. So despite the background influence of the 
multinational, (for example Surfboard, and clothing companies have adopted videos as a 
cheap and easy way to advertise their products via their featured sponsored riders107), he 
suggests  they  remain  in  the  domain  of  the  small  producers;  their  production  is 
‘distinctively post-Fordist’.108 Nevertheless, as noted earlier, these magazines and videos 
have much wider circulation and audiences which serve in the exchange of ideas such as 
the latest techniques, insider information and gossip. Windsurf magazine, for example, a 
British produced publication is sold as far afield as Australia. Windsurfing, surfing and 
skating videos produced by equipment manufacturers, tend to use the English language, 
and  are  distributed  worldwide.  As  already  noted,  the  main  players  in  the  windsurfing 
equipment  industry  have  importers  and  distributors  in  many  countries,  producing 
standardised  products  and  promotional  materials.  Nevertheless,  despite  fears  about  the 
rampant commodification and Americanisation of lifestyle sports, as the next section will 

Selling out?     139

illustrate,  the  commodities  that  flow  from  this  sport-media  complex  are  not  always 
uncritically  accepted  by  ‘local’  cultures;  moreover  that,  ‘local’  consumer  industries 
challenge the control held by international and transnational corporations. 

The commodification of style and ‘attitude’ 

Lifestyle sport cultures are based around newly created commodities such as boards and 
decks.  However  as  I’ll  examine,  the  relationship  between  these  commodities  and  the 
active participants is not one based simply on their exchange value or functionality. As 
Hebdige explains: 

As the consumption economy has developed, the value of commodities is 
seen  to  derive  less  from  the  laws  of  economic  exchange  governing  the 
market or from the ability of products to satisfy primary needs as from the 
way 
they  function  culturally  as  signs  within  coded  systems  of 
exchange.109  

Participants use these commodities to express particular subcultural values including an 
anti-materialistic attitude,110 and to establish social position or status in relation to otber 
consumers. 

Wheaton  and  Beal  illustrate  that  knowledge  about  the  equipment  brands  was  an 
important component of subcultural capital for skaters in California and windsurfers in 
the UK, and a way to demonstrate identity and ‘insider’ status.111 In their ‘readings’ of 
magazine’s  advertising,  windsurfers  showed  how  they  used  the  adverts  to  construct 
narratives of ‘self that demonstrated their own ‘subcultural history’ based around the use 
of  equipment.  Yet  windsurfers  were  hostile  to  conspicuous  consumption  of  the  ‘kit’. 
Visibly displaying skill, risk and commitment to the sport was much more important than 
conspicuously displaying ‘appropriate’ brand names.112 They described equipment as a 
‘necessary evil’ focusing on the aesthetic feeling of the product, an experience that was 
hard(er) to commodify.113 

Skaters’  and  windsurfers’  evaluation  of  brands,  and  the  corporations  that  underlie 
them,  was  also  based  on  the  companies’  commitment  and  understanding of their sport 
and  lifestyle.114  Wheaton  and  Beal  discuss  skaters  and  wind-surfers,  ‘“doing  it” 
Fetishism’,  demonstrating  how  they  rejected  commodities  not  considered  to  be 
‘authentic’.  For  skaters,  brands  had  authentic  status,  primarily  through  demonstrating 
their  long-standing  commitment  to  skateboarding  and  especially  to  the  culture’s ‘core’ 
attitudes;  displaying  those  values  marks  a  company  as  insiders  and,  so  ‘legitimate’. 
Similarly,  windsurfers  were  sceptical  of  brands  that  could  not  demonstrate  long-term 
(‘real’) commitment to windsurfing or surfing, or were targeting newcomers/beginners. 
Although  many  surf  brands  have  become  international  or  transnational  corporations, 
participants favoured surfing brands that had a ‘hard core’ image, which came principally 
from ‘involvement and understanding of the sport and its lifestyle’. Companies of course 
are aware of this process, and explicitly try to portray this attitude, using sponsorship as a 
way  to  get  ‘core’  participants’  insights  on  their  products.115  This  knowledge  is  then 

The Global Politics of sport     140

feedback to develop themes for their products and videos that generate brand loyalty,116 
just one of the ways the ‘attitude’ or value system in these sports has been commodified. 
A brief examination of participant’s attitudes to surf style illustrates these dynamics in 

the commoditisation of surf style. 

‘Anti-style’ in the windsurfing and surfing culture 

When conducting ethnographic research on windsurfing my field notes often noted the 
homogeneity  in  visual  appearance  of  the  young  male  windsurfer.  At  beaches  from  the 
Caribbean to the Canary Islands, the participants wore the same style of board shorts, T-
shirts, thongs, and sunglasses of the same shape and brand.117 As one of my interviewees 
put it: ‘there’s like a uniform’. Windsurfing and surfing shops I visited around the world 
sold many of the same brands.118 This uniformity in experience points to the ways these 
global flows in commodities (and images), Appadurai’s mediascapes, have had a homo 
genising influence on subcultural style. 

Yet  although  clothing  and  fashion  is  an  essential  part  of  surf  culture,  windsurfers 
didn’t  want  to  be  seen  to  be ‘buying into’ an image and coined term such as ‘fashion 
surfers’ ‘to describe those individuals who tried to display their subcultural identification 
solely  via  surf  style  (or  by  conspicuously  displaying—rather  than  using—their 
equipment).119  As  one  windsurfer  put  it,  ‘I  object  to  wearing  heavily  branded 
clothing.[…]  You  don’t  like  to  think  you  are  being  influenced  by  the  trade,  or 
advertising, or the image’.120 Furthermore, well-travelled interviewees suggested that that 
‘brand’ display was much more prevalent in the UK and Europe, than other places around 
the  world,  referencing  particularly  Australia  and  Hawaii.  Alex  claimed  the  non-
Europeans were ‘less into labels…Even in Hawaii, they wear 3 year old bits of clothing; 
no one is walking around wearing flashy new gear’. My own observations suggested that 
underlying  this  claim  was  a  degree  of  romanticisation  of  the  ‘anti-fashion’  ethos, 
nevertheless, it also points to a complex picture in which subcultural style has different 
expressions and meanings in various ‘local’ subcultural settings. 

Moreover, there is another aspect to windsurfers’ ‘style denial’. During the late 1980s 
and  early  1990s  in  the  UK  ‘beach  wear’  and  particularly  surf  style,  exploded  into 
mainstream  men’s  fashion.121  As  surf  style  became  incorporated  into  ‘main  stream’ 
fashion, the distinctiveness and exclusivity of the windsurfers’ and surfers’ subcultural 
style decreased, which seemingly contributed to style becoming a less important aspect of 
subcultural identification. As a British male surfer in his 40s put it: 

In the olden days you could wear surf clothes just to show you’re a surfer. 
Nowadays  everyone  wears  them…  I’d  avoid  the  big  brands  now.  It  no 
longer means anything to me to have surf clothing on, because everyone 
wears them.122  

Denying  the  existence  of  style  was  a  form  of  (verbal)  ‘symbolic’  resistance  to  the 
commercialisation process resulting in surf style’s incorporation into mainstream fashion. 
Stedman  likewise  asks  on  what  basis  do  ‘real  surfers’  express  their  collective  identity 
when  anyone  can  buy  a  surf  T-shirt?123  She  suggests  that  rather  than  commercialism 

Selling out?     141

threatening to undermine the surfing culture in Australia, subcultural identity is displayed 
in different ways. So, similarly to my claims about windsurfers’ display of commitment, 
she  suggests  that  surfers’  ‘attitude’  is  their  way  of  demonstrating  their  collective 
identity.124  The  meaning  and  uniqueness  of  the  subcultural  identification  of  the 
committed  windsurfer  (in  the  UK)  and  surfer  (in  both  Australia  and  the  UK)  was  not 
based  on  the  consumption  of  these  commodities,  but  around  their  ‘attitude’,  and  their 
sporting prowess—or ability to do the activities. An interesting dimension of this process 
that  I  will  come  on  to  consider  is  the  gender  politics,  specifically  how  an  aggressive 
sexism became part of this re-created ‘alternative’ attitude.125 

This  case  study  of  surf  style  is  also  informing  in  illustrating  that  the  influence  of 
global  commodity  culture  is  neither  fixed  nor  unchallenged;  furthermore,  that  at  the 
economic  level,  regional  and  national  industries  challenge  the  stronghold  of  the 
international  and  transnational  corporations.  As  noted  in  my  discussion  of  subcultural 
style, transnational and international companies like Quicksilver are important players in 
the industry, their sphere of influence via sponsorship, the production of sports videos 
and other subcultural resources is key. In many countries lifestyle sport magazines rely 
on  such  advertisers  from  within  their  sports  to  sustain  the  magazines;  (for  example, 
windsurfing  magazines  in  the  UK  are  largely  dependent  on  the  manufacturers  of 
windsurfing  equipment).  Yet  alongside  these  corporations  are  regionally  based  cottage 
industries that coexist, and in some cases dominate, the production of material goods and 
services. Booth likewise recognises the enduring prevalence of small, flexible ‘artisans’ 
in  the  production  of  equipment,  accessories,  films  and  magazines  in  Australia.126  The 
picture  is  clearly  complex,  and  an area that requires detailed research; however, I will 
offer  some  insights  based  on  differences  between  the  British  windsurfing  and  British 
surfing cultures. 

In  the  British  surf  culture  there  is  a  strong  history  of  local  small  scale  production, 
particularly  in  the  West  Country,  manufacturing  merchandise  from  surfboards  to 
wetsuits. Some of these, like Gul wetsuits have expanded sufficiently to impact the global 
market,  but  they  exist  alongside  other  local  brands,  selling  largely  to  the  UK  market. 
Custom-made  surfboards  remain  the  preferred  ‘autbentic’  product,  each  one  is 
individually  crafted  (the  craftsman  is  termed  the  ‘shaper’),  often  with  personalised 
characteristics  and  artwork.  Surfers  who  were  members  of 
the  Cornish-based 
organisation  Surfers  Against  Sewage  (SAS)  admitted  that  one  reason  they  joined  the 
organisation was to be able to buy SAS clothing range, its ‘anti capitalist’ stance gave it a 
‘cool’  factor.  However  in  the  British  windsurfing  culture,  although  a  similar  local 
industry  grew  up  in  the  1980s,  (including  in  the  West  County)  in  the  late  1990s 
‘production’ boards made by the international companies (often using cheap labour in the 
Far East) have dominated the market. In my research on the consumption of brands,127 
contrary  to  in  the  surf  culture  there  was  little  evidence  of  windsurfers  unanimously 
favouring ‘home grown’ clothing or equipment brands. 

The  central  substantive  point  in  this  analysis  of  the  commoditisation  of  style  and 
equipment,  and  worth  emphasising,  is  these  lifestyle  sport  cultures’  complex,  at  times 
contradictory  and  shifting,  relationship  to  the  seemingly  colonising  co-opting  force  of 
global  consumer  culture.  Despite  the  ‘resilient  belief  that  ‘grassroots’  or  ‘authentic’ 
culture  resists  and  struggles  with  a  ‘colonising  massmediated  corporate  world’,128  the 
media  and  consumer  industries’  roles  are  more  complex,  contradictory  and  fluid  than 

The Global Politics of sport     142

simply  incorporation  and  co-option;  these  subculturalists  are  not  simply  Victims’  of 
commercialism, but shape and ‘re-shape’ the images and meanings circulated in and by 
global  consumer  culture.129  Whereas  the  commodity  production  process  has  received 
considerable  attention,  the  institutionalisation  process,  especially  as  expressed  through 
attitudes  to  competition  provides  another  interesting  aspect  in  understanding  the 
commercialisation of these activities. 

Institutionalisation and professionalisation 

The  historical  development  patterns  of  lifestyle  sports  in  many  ways  mirror  the 
‘sportization phases’ suggested by Maguire in his discussion of the globalisation of more 
traditional ‘achievement sports’.130 Lifestyle sports are increasingly global in influence, 
international  sporting  rules  and  organisations  have  been  established,  and—in  some 
cases—competition between ‘national teams’ has evolved and grown. Yet in the majority 
of  these  lifestyle  sports,  clubs  and  organisations  tend  to  exist  only  where  needed  for 
access  to  facilities  or  spaces;  for  most,  participation  strives  to  be  unregulated  and 
individualistic.  Attitudes  to  participating  in  organised  competition  tend  to  stress 
‘intrinsic’ factors such as challenging the self or the environment, and even among elite 
participants’ attitudes to formal man-on-man’ (sic) competitions remain ambivalent. As 
noted  earlier,  whereas  in  achievement  sport  global  sporting  competitions  such  as  the 
Olympics  Games  is  considered  the  pinnacle  of  sporting  achievement,  in  most  lifestyle 
sports,  practitioners  have  been  wary  of  their  incorporation  in  such  institutionalised 
competitions, seeing it as a form of ‘selling out’ their alternative values and ideologies. 
As  one  snowboarder  put  it  at  the  time  of  snowboarding’s  inclusion  in  the  Olympics: 
‘Success  is  measured  in  exhilaration  not  medals  or  money…  How  can  you  have  a 
competition  to  measure  who  has  had  the  most  fun?’131  When  Olympic  champion 
snowboarder  Ross  Rebagliati  was  tem-porarily  stripped  of  his  medal  for  allegedly 
smoking marijuana, he was embraced by sections of the snowboarding subculture as a 
image.132 
champion 
Nonetheless, professional snowboarding competition has thrived—both in the Olympics 
and in media-made forms such as Border-X.133 

snowboarding’s 

‘alternative’ 

for  publicly 

re-establishing 

Similar  contradictions  exist  in  the  increased  professionalisation  and  concomitant 
attitudes  to  competition  in  surfing,  windsurfing  and  skating.  Beal  outlined  how  in  the 
mid-1990s,  skaters  who  embraced  competition  and  sponsorship  were  called  ‘rats’.134 
Since  that  time  competition  has  become  much  more  widespread,  particularly  via  the 
popularity of skating as part of ESPN’s X-Games. As Rinehart argues, ‘ESPN, while not 
defining  what  skating  is,  has  come  to  represent  for  a  majority  of  world-viewers  how 
skating can become a ‘competition,’ and how skaters themselves can be encapsulated’.135 
Beal’s recent research with skaters in North America also reveals changing attitudes to 
commercialisation,  demonstrating  that  skaters  are  less  critical  of  sponsorship  and 
professionalism, seeing the benefits they bring to the skating community. Nevertheless, 
they continue to resist changes that will lead to increased regulation or a change in the 
ethos  of  skating,  such  as  a  creative/artistic  sensibility,  self-expression  and  an 
individualistic  attitude.136  Skaters  continue  to  stress  the  importance  of  an  ‘intrinsic 
motivation’—that is motivations should be oriented to the act of skating, a commitment 

Selling out?     143

to ‘the actual process’ and not solely for money, or ‘looking cooP. Skating—like other 
lifestyle sports—has diversified into different cultural forms such as the more aggressive, 
macho unregulated street-skating. Beal concludes that skaters are not uniformly against 
the commercial process, but show concerns about how their activity is portrayed and the 
resultant  impact  that  may  have;  ‘the  skaters’  assessment  of  commercialization  is 
represented by some ambiguity and contradiction’.137 

Booth  has  written  at  length  about  tensions  and  conflicts  in  the  history  of 
professionalisation and codification of modern surfing.138 Initially, in the 1960s the ‘Soul 
surfing’ movement (‘riding the waves for the good of one’s soul’)139 explicitly rejected 
materialism  and  competition,  extolling  ‘creativity  and  self-expression  within  a 
cooperative  environment’.140  Soul  surfers  interpreted  their  activity  as  an  escape  from 
bourgeois  society,  co-joining  surfing  with  the  counterculture.  Surfing  star  Nat  Young 
claimed he was ‘supporting the revolution’.141 Both Farmer and Pearson have argued that 
‘there is a competitive taboo in the surfing culture—competition against other individuals 
is  not  valued’.142  However,  surfing  has  increasingly  embraced  capitalist  culture  via 
professionalisation,  and  today,  international  professional  surfing  competitions  are  a 
central part of surf culture, run under the auspices of the ASP. An interesting dimension 
of  this  process  is  the  ways  in  which  the  attempts—initially  in  the  1960s—to  impose 
‘universal’ international rules caused conflict between the then main ‘regional’ settings of 
California, Australia and Hawaii. Each wanted to preserve the authenticity of its different 
surfing ‘style’, underpinning which were divergent philosophies about ‘mankind’s (sic) 
relationship  with  nature’.143  As  noted  earlier  these  styles  reflected  differing  cultural 
values and masculine identities. The Hawaiians tended to ‘dance with the waves’ whereas 
the Australians had developed a more aggressive and materialistic attitude and sporting 
masculinity. In this example then the global flow leading toward increased materialism 
and  instutionalisation  initially  came  from  Australia  not  America,  but  nevertheless 
Westernisation has dominated. 

Windsurfing  has  appropriated  the  ethos  of  soul  surfing  to  describe  the  type  of 
windsurfing (usually wave sailing) that pitted an individual against the envinonment, not 
other people. Windsurfer’s idealised and constructed image of the ‘soul’ windsurfer as at 
one with ‘nature’, unfettered by materialism, was a reaction against both competition and 
commercialism.  As  the  editorial  for  a  British  windsurfing  magazine  issue  in  the  late 
1990s  entitled  Soul  Issue  and  devoted  almost  entirely  to  travel,  claimed,  ‘Our  mission 
was to rediscover the spirit of windsurfing, rebuild the foundations […] man,[sic] board 
and rig at one with the wind and the waves’.144 Nevertheless, despite this ambivalence to 
traditional regulated competitions, windsurfing has simultaneously embraced competition 
in  any,  and  every,  form  it  can  to  bring  money  to  the  struggling  lifestyle  of  the 
professional windsurfer. It is hard to imagine a less ‘authentic’ event than the made-for-
TV spectacular of indoor windsurfing. These ‘competitions’, run under the auspices of 
the  PWA  (World  Professional  Windsurfing  Association),  involve giant fans propelling 
windsurfers in slalom races and spectacular aerial antics off a ramp, accompanied by loud 
music  and  a  laser  show.  The  prize  money  matched  that  of  the  ‘real’  windsurfing 
competitions held in dangerous surf. 

The Global Politics of sport     144

Commodification of bodies: the politics of gender 

One conspicuous trend in contemporary consumer culture is the way bodies have been 
increasingly  and  unashamedly  displayed,  commodified  and  sexualised,  particularly 
through  their  association  with  sport  and  exercise.145  Lifestyle  sports  have  not  been 
immune  from  these  processes.  In  films,  advertising  and  television  representations  of 
beach cultures from Baywatch to Pepsi Max, female bodies are displayed in sexualised 
and commodified ways. 

Kusz’s detailed analysis of mainstream press discourses of Extreme sports, points to 
the ways mainstream magazine articles at the end of the 1990s have celebrated Extreme 
sports as the ‘symbol of a new American zeitgeist’ understood as the revival of traditional 
and specifically American values such as ‘individualism, self-reliance, risk taking, and 
progress’.146  Kusz  examines  how  these  discourses  give  a  masculinised  and  patriotic 
representation  of  Extreme  sports  that  re-articulates  and  naturalises  the  link  between 
whiteness and America that he suggests ‘can be read as a symptom and imagined solution 
to America’s perceived crisis of white masculinity’.147 

Likewise, lifestyle sport’s subcultural media tend to commoditise women’s bodies and 
experiences. The body is the site in which differences of gender, sexuality, race, ethnicity 
and class are constituted and made visible. Rinehart illustrates the misogynist imagery in 
skating magazines,148 asserting that almost all of the images of women were sexualised, 
only very rarely depicting women skating.149 Stedman’s analysis of the surfing media in 
Australia demonstrates how the othering of female bodies and identities has shifted over 
the past 30 years. She charts how male surfers’ broad acceptance of women before the 
1980s  changed  to  an  aggressively  toxic  hyper-masculinity  as  surfers  attempted  to 
reestablish  a  deviant  attitude.150  In  the  late  1990s  women’s  surfing  participation  saw 
considerable growth, which is only starting to be reflected by a broader acceptance in the 
subcultural media. 

However, it tends to be the magazines and videos that target the younger, particularly 
‘teen’  male,  consumers  that  so  explicitly  sexualise,  objectify  and  commodify  women. 
Windsurfing  magazines,  for  example,  have  a  more  varied  male  readership  in  terms  of 
both  class  and  age  than  skating  magazines,  and  altbough  they  predominantly  depict 
young  male  performers,  representations  of  women  include  both  ‘beach  babe’  imagery 
that commodify the female body and photos representing women as active, competent, 
advanced embodied performers. Furthermore, researchers that have explored how these 
images  are  consumed,  suggest  that  readers  simultaneously  constructed,  and  contested 
women,  and  non-white  participants,  as  the  ‘inauthentic’  subject  or  ‘Other’.151  For 
example, while acknowledging that images of women in bikinis will always be open to 
sexualised readings, windsurfers’ read images that pretended the subject was ‘doing it’ as 
‘inauthentic’.  As  Booth  outlines,  the  ‘contradictions,  ambiguities  and  paradoxes’ 
associated with the growth of women’s surfing are most conspicuous in the pages of the 
new  magazines  for  female  surfers,152  magazines  like  Wahine  and  Surfer  Girl  where 
adverts  featuring  skinny  models  promoting  makeup  sit  alongside  ‘real’  muscular  wet-
suited women surfing monster waves. 

Selling out?     145

Similarly,  the  expression  of  masculine  and  feminine  identities  in  lifestyle  sporting 
cultures is often more diverse and ambivalent than the mediated products might suggest. 
Gendered power relations have been examined in a range of different lifestyle sporting 
contexts  (e.g.  skateboarding,  windsurfing,  snowboarding,  ultimate  Frisbee  and 
climbing),153 examining how gender (and in some studies class and ‘racial’) identities are 
related to processes of inclusion and exclusion. It is argued that such sporting cultures 
represent  both  a  reinscription  of  traditional  identities—especially  in  relation  to 
compulsory  heterosexuality—as  well  as  the  potential  for  more  progressive  sporting 
identities.  For  example,  my  own  ethnographic  research  in  the  windsurfing  culture 
identified  that  the  prevalent  lived  masculine  subjectivity—‘ambivalent  masculinity’—
was less exclusive of women and ‘other men’ than many institutionalised sport cultures, 
or  (middle-class)  work  cultures.154  ‘Laddishness’,  particularly  as  played  out  through 
competitiveness over status, and masculine identification based on the subordination and 
commodification of women as passive, sexual objects, was largely confined to younger, 
elite men. Participants of both genders emphasised the supportiveness and camaraderie 
among men and women in the culture.155 Nevertheless, in many lifestyle sports attitudes 
to  gender  are  reflective  of  dominant  attitudes  to  gender  and  sexuality.  As  Rinehart 
suggests, while oppositional options are available, groups such as skaters have opted for 
much more conventional, traditional gender relations.156  

Conclusion 

In  this  chapter  I  have  highlighted  the  impact  of  global  commodity  culture  on  lifestyle 
sport cultures, and their practices and identities, highlighting the global flows in images 
and medias, technologies, commodities, and people. I have suggested that the articulation 
of identity in some lifestyle sports, particularly in the expression of self and community 
based  around  trans-local  subcultural  affiliations  and  spaces,  reiterate  claims  that  the 
relationship between sport and national identity is increasingly complex and needs further 
investigation, particularly the position different types of sports, such as alternative sport, 
play  ‘within  the  reconstructed  national  cultures  of  global  industry’.157  Furthermore, 
analysis of these post-national identities and imaginary might fruitfully draw on notions 
of cosmopolitism to examine participant’s cosmopolitan disposition, their ability to live 
simultaneously in both the global and the local, and whether their acceptance of cultural 
diversity embraces difference and transcends national identities. 

The ‘alternative sportscape’158 as Rinehart terms it, is becoming increasingly diverse 
and  globally  widespread.  This  diversity  is  particularly  evident  in  the  ever-expanding 
media-made  events  that  range  from  sports  with  new  twists,  amalgams  of  previously 
known  sports,  to  completely  new  activities.  Furthermore,  it  isn’t  just  the  marketing 
departments of media corporations who are taking the initiative; ex-performers such as 
skateboarder Tony Hawk, have shown they too can be successful entrepreneurs in this 
making  of  the  media  sportscape.  Tony  Hawk’s  latest  venture  is  the  ‘Boom  Boom 
Huckjam’ a live festival of extreme sport and music, in which he is director, sponsor and 
performer.159 The latest financial twist to the media metamorphism of alternative sport is 
in its appropriation by the lucrative video game market which has propelled sportsmen 
like Tony Hawk into wealthy ‘global mega-stars’.160 Yet I have contended that it is those 

The Global Politics of sport     146

activities  that  transcend  the  mediascape  and  become  popular  among  participants  that 
endure  beyond  being  short-lived  fads.  Lifestyle  sports  are  fundamentally  about 
participation  and  performance—the  doing  of  the  activity.  As  Borden  suggests, 
skateboarding is a sport which produces space, time and self, which for its practitioners 
‘involves nothing less than a complete and alternative way of life’.161 

Undeniably, in a global culture increasingly dominated by the exchange of commodity 
signs, which include mediated objects, practices and personalities, a central consequence 
is profitability for a variety of national, international and transnational organisations.162 
As  Maguire  points  out  ‘there  is  a  political  economy  at  work  in  the  production  and 
consumption of global sport/leisure products that can lead to a relative ascendancy of a 
narrow selection of capitalist and Western sport cultures’.163 Yet the case studies have 
also  demonstrated  a  variety  of  complex  and  competing  cultural  flows,  not  just 
Americanisation. As I have exemplified, alongside the evident commodification and co-
option of lifestyle sport, is its ability—like many youth cultures—to adapt and change, to 
remain a potential source of cultural transformation. Recent sociological research that has 
moved  towards  a  more  sophisticated  understanding  of  the  complex  dynamics  between 
subculture, the mass media, and global commercial culture, is better able to explore these 
dynamics.  In  outlining  an  agenda  for  empirically  exploring  the  impact  of  these  global 
cultural forces on alternative sports, I have signalled that analysis needs to move beyond 
cross-cultural comparisons, to exploring the impact of global flows (such as mapped out 
by Appadurai’s scapes) on, between and within local subcultures, and their medias and 
industries.164 Furthermore, the gendered, ethnic and class-based nature of these processes 
needs  continued  attention.  Yet  as  Appadurai  suggests,  ‘A  framework  for  relating  the 
global,  the  national  and  the  local,  in  this  as  in  other  sporting  contexts,  has  yet  to 
emerge’.165  

Afterword: more questions than answers  

10 

Lincoln Allison 

We often claim, in academic social studies, that our aspiration is more to put the right 
questions and to clarify those questions than it is to provide definitive answers. Rarely, 
since the more rigorous forms of positivism have lost their appeal, do we claim to be able 
to predict the future. If we synthesise these two observations we are left with the task of 
suggesting what the key questions about the future are and on what the answers might 
depend.  This  task  can  coexist  with  a  great  deal  of  enthusiasm  for  future  debate  and 
investigation.  In  short,  there  are  a  lot  of  interesting  questions  which  arise  from  the 
previous chapters when taken together. 

Have  International  Non-Governmental  Organisations  (INGOs)  really  preempted  the 
power and influence of states and of a range of inter-governmental organisations? Are 
sporting INGOs (SINGOs) and business INGOs (BINGOs) really particularly strong? Is 
it  right  to  talk  of  the  development  of  ‘post’  Westphalian’  and  even  ‘neo-Mediaeval’ 
systems of international power which are far more autonomous of the state system than 
was  anything  in  the  twentieth  century.  Is  sport  a  particularly  advanced  form  of  this 
development?  In  which  case  Juan  Samaranch,  Rupert  Murdoch  et  al.  in  the  Olympic 
Stadium  in  Sydney  in  2000  might  be  a  visual  symbol  for  international  power  in  the 
twentieth century as Churchill, Roosevelt and Stalin sitting on a bench in Yalta in 1945 
was for the twentieth. 

If  so,  how  worried  should  we  be  about  the  nature  of  power  in  international 
organisations?  In  the  nineteenth  century  liberals  like  John  Stuart  Mill  and  Lord  Acton 
were  also  to  different  degrees  nationalists  because  they  perceived  international 
organisations  like  the  Roman  Catholic  Church  and  the  Austro-Hungarian  Empire  as 
necessarily lacking many of the political virtues which might be developed in the nation-
state.  They  were  less  accountable  than  states  and  less  legitimate  because  the  nature  of 
national identity was such that a Ruritanian would always find it easier to obey a fellow 
Ruritanian  than  he  would  a  foreigner.  They  tended  towards  a  ‘lowest  common 
denominator’, absorbing, for example, the normative approach to corruption of the most 
corrupt. This is echoed in twenty-first century debates about business ethics in the global 
context  where  ‘rotten  apple’  theory  necessarily  applies  insofar  as  it  very  difficult  to 
compete uncorruptly in the matter of tendering if your competitors and the other party to 
a possible contract are both corrupt. 

Acton’s fears as a liberal catholic culminated in the declaration of papal infallibility in 
the Vatican Council rigged by Pius IX in July 1870. The means and the outcome were 
equally disturbing. Why that is particularly relevant is because the accounts given here of 
the  politics  of  FIFA  and  the  IOC  seem  broadly  similar  to  the  Catholic  politics  which 
disturbed Acton. The messianic figures of Brundage, Samaranch, Havelange and Blatter 
even seem to have papal qualities of haughtiness, self-righteousness and pretension which 

The Global Politics of sport     148

are knocked out of everyday, elected, state politicians. Unlike Pius IX they do not seek to 
have themselves declared infallible on matters of doctrine, but the impression given by 
both Jaou Havelange and Juan Samaranch is that they thought their judgements on what 
was  best  for  football  and  for  sport  were  essentially  irrefutable.  Like  Pius  XI  they 
defended themselves by saying that what they stood for was something higher, grander 
and more universal than mere national politicians. 

The world’s press have made life easy for the SINGO emperors, subjecting them to 
much less of the ‘critical spirit’ and to much less direct scrutiny than they do national 
politicians.  This  probably  goes  much  deeper  than  mere  media  practice:  the  failure  of 
accountability is at least partly because most people still think in national terms and have 
much less interest in scrutinising or pillorying international figures, even allowing them 
their positions as ciphers for higher ideals. The question remains: will this continue? Or 
will there be the sort of challenge from the state which so far has been wholly absent 
from  the  agenda?  The  answers  may  depend  on  the  development  of  nationalism.  Sport 
offers an arena for an intense, shallow nationalist competition over the kind of prestige 
which can come from success or from the acquisition of major events. But this kind of 
nationalism is symbiotic with SINGO power. Could there be the development of deeper 
nationalist voices which see SINGO power and homogenisation as the enemies of local 
sporting culture. A Nordic revolt against the IOC’s impact on cross-country skiing? Or an 
English revolt against FIFA’s effects on the FA Cup or the 92-club football league? And 
could  these  voices  be  heard  at  the  state  level,  leading  governments  to  try  to  recapture 
control of sport in the name of democracy? 

In any case, the forces of ‘globalisation’ do not offer a single coherent challenge, but a 
fragmented  contest  between  different  visions  of  sport.  The  BINGOs  offer  sport  as  the 
commercial  opportunity  of  the  future,  an  entertainment  industry  of  almost  unlimited 
potential.  But  the  SINGOs  talk  of  it  as  a  mission,  a  ‘social’,  ‘cultural’,  even  quasi-
religious entity which must be governed as such. In many ways they are dependent on 
each  other’s  logic,  but  the  difference  is  mirrored  by  a  completely  different  set  of 
assumptions about the regulation of sport in Europe and the United States. And a final 
question  that  emerges  about  global  regulation  simply  concerns  whether  it  will  be 
effective,  given  the  money  to  be  made,  in  dealing  with  the  problems  of  doping  and 
gambling and the force of the ‘lowest common denominator’ argument.  

There is a great deal to play for, so to speak, for the sports’ scholar and a great deal to 
argue about. Much of it goes to the heart of the meaning and value of sport and much of it 
will be of concern too to the sports’ fan.  

Notes 

1 Richard Vinen, A History in Fragments: Europe in the Twentieth Century (London: Little, 

Series editor’s foreword 

2 Robert W.Stern, Changing India: Bourgeois Revolution on the Subcontinent (Cambridge: 

Brown and Company, 2000, p.7). 

CUP, 2003), Second Edition, p.1. 

3 Ibid., quoted in the Acknowledgement. 
4 Ian Phillip, letter to The Daily Tekgraph, Wednesday, 28 April 2004, Sport, p.54. 
5 See Chapter 10, ‘Afterword: More questions than Answers’, in Lincoln Allison (ed.), The 

Global Politics of Sport (London: Routledge, 2004). 

6 See Lincoln Allison, Amateurism in Sport: An Analysis and a Defence (London: Frank Cass, 

2000). 

1 

2 

Sport and globalisation: the issues 

1 Lincoln Allison (ed.), The Politics of Sport (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1986); 

Lincoln Allison (ed.), The Changing Politics of Sport (Manchester: Manchester University 
Press, 1993). 

Sport, prestige and international relations 

1 Trevor Taylor, ‘Sport and International Relations’ in Lincoln Allison (ed.), The Politics of 

Sport (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1986, p.45). 

2 John A.Vasquez (ed.), Classics of International Relations (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-

3 Michael Nicholson, International Relations, A Concise Introduction (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 

Hall, 1990). 

1998). 

p.40. 

4 William Nester, International Relations, Geopolitical and Geoeconomic Conflict and Co-

operation (New York: HarperCollins, 1995). 

5 Joshua S.Goldstein, International Relations (New York: HarperCollins, 1996). 
6 Koton and Yadowich quoted in Trevor Taylor, ‘Sport and International Relations’, op. cit. 

7 See, for example, Hugh Carnegy, ‘Hugely Important Symbol of Acceptance’, China 

Supplement, Financial Times, 13th November 2000, p.VII. 

8 See, for example, Nayan Chanda and Kari Huus, ‘The New Nationalism’, Far Eastern 

Economic Review, 9th November 1995, pp.21–28 and Yinhong Shi ‘Why Against China?’, 
Beijing Review, 21 October 1996, p.11. We are grateful to Shaun Breslin for information on 
the background to the Chinese Olympic Bid.  

Notes     150

9 See Adrian Guelke, ‘Sport and the End of Apartheid’, in Lincoln Allison (ed.), The Changing 

Politics of Sport (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1993, pp.151–70). 

10 See House of Commons Foreign Affairs Select Committee Session 1999–2000 Tenth Report, 
‘UK Relations with the People’s Republic of China’. The Chinese response was available on 
http://www.chinese-embassy.org.uk/ I am very grateful to my colleague Shaun Breslin for 
information on this issue. 

11 Hans J.Morgenthau, Politics Among Nations: the Struggle for Power and Peace (New York: 

12 Peter Fitzsimmons, ‘Warm Glow After Flame Dies’, Daily Telegraph, 3rd October 2000, 

13 Hans J.Morgenthau, Politics Among Nations, op. cit., p.27. 
14 Ibid., p.31. 
15 Peter I.Beck, Scoring for Britain, International Football and International Politics (London: 

Knopf, 1960, p.27). 

p.42. 

Frank Cass, 1999). 

16 See Philip Noel-Baker, Man of Sport, Man of Peace, Collected Speeches and Essays of 

Philip Noel-Baker, Olympic Statesman 1889–1992, compiled by Don Anthony (London: 
Sports Editions, 1991). 

17 Ibid., p.37. 
18 George Orwell, ‘The Sporting Spirit’, in The Penguin Essays of George Orwell, 

Harmondsworth, Penguin 1994, p.321. Originally in Tribune, 14th December 1945. 

19 Ibid., p.322. 
20 For the context see Richard Holt, Sport and Society in Modern France (Basingstoke: 

Macmillan, 1981). 

21 For a straightforward account of the escalation of government support to sport see Richard 
Holt and Tony Mason, Sport in Britain 1945–2000 (Oxford: Blackwell, 2000, pp.146–67). 

22 Quoted in John Sugden and Alan Tomlinson, FIFA and the Contest for World Football 

(Cambridge: Polity, 1999, p.7). 

23 In interviews with Lincoln Allison in 1999 as part of his research for Amateurism in Sport, 

an Analysis and Defence (London: Frank Cass, 2001). 

24 Members of the Staff of the Physical Education Department of the University of 

Birmingham, Britain in the World of Sport (London: The Physical Education Association of 
GB and NI, 1956, p.9). 

25 Ibid., p.10 
26 Ibid., p.12. 
27 The report of the Wolfenden Committee, Sport and the Community (London: The Central 

Council of Physical Recreation, 1960). 

28 Ibid., p.72. 
29 Ibid., p.78. 
30 Philip Goodhart and Christopher Chataway, War Without Weapons (London: W.H.Allen, 

1968, p.89). 
31 Ibid., p.90. 
32 Ibid., p.100. 
33 Ibid., p.157. 
34 Department of the Environment, Sport and Recreation (London: HMSO, 1975, p.18, para. 

62). 

35 See Terry Monnington, ‘Politicians and Sport: Uses and Abuses’, in Lincoln Allison (ed.) 
The Changing Politics of Sport (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1993, pp.125–
50). 

36 As suggested in an open letter from the then Minister for Sport, Colin Moynihan, to the 

Director of the Sports Council, John Smith, Department for the Environment, 19th 
November 1997. 

37 Sport: Raising the Game (London: Department of National Heritage, 1995, p.2).  

Notes     151

p.1. 

38 John Major, ‘Three Weeks That Lifted a Nation’, Electronic Tekgraph, 417, 1st July 1996, 

39 For a more detailed description of the role and function of these bodies see the offtcial 

website of Sport England, http://www.sportengland.org.uk/ 

40 See Terry Monnington, ‘The Politics of Black African Sport’, in Lincoln Allison (ed.) The 

Politics of Sport (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1986, pp.149–73). 

41 See UN Development Programme, UN Human Development Report 2000 (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2000) and World Bank, World Development Report 1999/ 2000 (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1999). 

42 See D.Prokop (ed.), The African Running Revolution, Mountain View, Calif., World 

Publications, 1975. 

43 See Terry Monnington, ‘Crisis Management in Black African Sport’, in Clyde Binfield and 

John Stevenson (eds.), Sport, Culture and Politics (Sheffield: Sheffteld Academic Press, 
1993, pp.113–28). 

44 See Joseph Maguire, Global Sport, Cambridge, Polity Press, 1999. 
45 We are grateful to John Roberts, West Midlands Director of Sport England, for clarifying 

this point. The crucial decision for releasing money on the current scale for potential 
medallists was the relaxation in 1997 of the ruling that lottery monies must be devoted to 
capital projects. 

3 

Not for the good of the game 

1 The outgoing president of FIFA, João Havelange, boasts of his financial achievements while 
still at the helm in 1998. Quoted in J.Sugden and A.Tomlinson, FIFA and the Contest For 
World Football. Who Rules the Peoples’ Game? (Cambridge: Polity Press, 1998). 
2 For a detailed discussion of the rise of IGOs and INGOs see D.Held et al., Global 

Transformations—Politics, Economics and Culture (Cambridge: Polity Press, 1999), section 
1, from which these figures on the growth of such organisations have been drawn. 
3 C.Archer, International Organisations, second edition (London: Routledge, 1992). 
4 G.Morozov (1997) ‘The Socialist Conception’, International Social Science Journal 29 

5 T.Miller, G.Lawrence, J.McKay and D.Rowe, Globalization and Sport—Playing the World 

no.1:28–45. 

(London: Sage, 2000), p.10. 

6 A.Tomlinson, ‘Going Global: The FIFA Story’, in Off the Ball: The Football World Cup, eds. 

A.Tomlinson and G.Whannel (London: Pluto Press, 1986); A.Tomlinson, ‘FIFA and the 
World Cup—The Expanding FIFA Family’, in Hosts and Champions—Soccer Cultures, 
National Identities and the USA World Cup (Aldershot: Ashgate Publishing, 1994); J.Sugden 
and A.Tomlinson, FIFA and the Contest; J.Sugden and A.Tomlinson, Great Balls of Fire—
How Big Money is Hijacking World Football (Edinburgh: Mainstream Publishing, 1999); J. 
Sugden and A.Tomlinson, Badfellas—FIFA Family at War (Edinburgh: Mainstream 
Publishing, 2003); J.Sugden, ‘Network Football’, in Power Games—A Critical Sociology of 
Sport, eds. J.Sugden and A.Tomlinson (London: Routledge, 2002). 

7 A more extensive account of this can be found in Sugden and Tomlinson, Badfellas: FIFA 

Family at War. Much of the empirical material in this chapter is drawn from chapters 1 and 
14 of that book. 

8 For a detailed discussion of this in a British setting see T.Bower, Broken Dreams. Vanity, 

Greed and the Souring of British Football (London: Simon and Schuster, 2003).  

9 FIFA congress, Buenos Aires, 2001, Agenda Item A.1+2 
10 See Sugden and Tomlinson, Great Balls of Fire, Chapter 10. 

Notes     152

11 The full text of this letter, pp.4, is in the possession of the authors. 
12 Petition to the Swiss court available from the authors. 
13 Sugden and Tomlinson, op. cit. 1999. 
14 V.Cable, Globalisation and Global Governance (Chatham House Papers: London, The 

Royal Institute of International Affairs, 1999). The quotations are from pp.102 and 103–4. 

15 Obviously, these are ideal solutions with huge practical problems. For instance, when it 

comes to corruption, the UN and the EU have their own problems. 

16 Susan Strange, Casino Capitalism (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1997). The 

quotations are from pp.121 and 189. See too her Mad Money (Manchester: Manchester 
University Press, 199?). 

4 

Olympic survivals: the Olympic Games as a global phenomenon 

1 This account of the 2010 bids is based upon my notes on the presentations, relayed live from 
Prague to the Auditorium of the Olympic Museum, Lausanne, Switzerland, throughout July 
2nd 2003. 

2 T.Miller, G.Lawrence, G.McKay and D.Rowe, Globalization and Sport: Playing the World 

3 Ibid. 
4 M.Roche, Mega-events and Modernity: Olympics and expos in the growth of global culture 

(London: Sage, 2001, p.2). 

(Routledge, 2000, p.26). 

5 Ibid p. 233. 
6 J.Maguire, Global Sport: Identities, societies, civilizations (Cambridge: Polity, 1999, p.88). 
7 Ibid., p. 92. 
8 Miller et al., op. cit., p.12. 
9 A.Bairner, Sport, Nationalism and Globalization—European and North American 

perspectives (Albany: State University of New York Press, 2001). 

10 Miller et al., op. cit., p.40. 
11 L.Sklair, The Transnational Capitalist Class (Oxford: Blackwell, 2001, p.6). 
12 Ibid., p.251. 
13 Ibid., p.110. 
14 Ibid., p.296. 
15 J.Tomlinson, Globalization and Culture (Cambridge: Polity, 1999, p.9). 
16 See Roche, op. cit. 
17 These quotations are taken from the John Johnson Collection of Ephemera at the Bodleian 

Library in Oxford. 

18 The following quotations are taken from G.Ran Rossem (Ed.), The Ninth Olympiad, Being 
the Official Report of the Olympic Games of 1928 Celebrated at Amsterdam, issued by the 
Netherlands Olympic Committee. Translated by Sydney W.Fleming, J.H.De Bussy 
(Amsterdam). 

19 Roche, op. cit., p.105. 
20 Printed by ENIT, 1933, not paginated. Also available in the John Johnson collection. 
21 A.Tomlinson, The Game’s Up: Essays in the Cultural Analysis of Sport, Leisure and 

Popular Culture (Aldershot: Ashgate, 1999). 

22 See A.Tomlinson, “The Making of the Global Sports Economy: ISL, Adidas and the rise of 

the corporate player in world sport” in D.Andrews and M.Silk (eds.) Corporate Nationalisms 
(Oxford: Berg, 2004). 

23 The following details draw on the Official Report of the Games which I consulted at the 

Olympic Museum in Lausanne.  

Notes     153

24 Thanks to Lincoln Allison for drawing out the distinction between these dimensions in 

response to an earlier draft. 

25 This is in a copy of the programme which I consulted in the Olympic Museum in Lausanne. 
26 This exhibition was entitled, ‘Ella Maillart 1903–1997: Sportswoman; on the Roads of the 

27 A.Tomlinson, ‘The Disneyfication of the Olympics? Freak-Shows of the Body’, in J.Bale 

and M.K.Christensen (eds), Post-Olympism? Questioning Sport in the Twenty-First Century 
(Oxford: Berg, 2004, pp. 147–63). 

East’. 

5 

Alternative models for the regulation of global sport 

1 Scholte, J.A., Globalisation: a critical introduction (Basingstoke: Palgrave, 2000). 
2 Union Royale Belge des Sociétés de Football Association v Bosman (case C415/93) [1996] 

3 Giulianotti, R., Football: a Sociology of the Global Game (Cambridge: Polity Press, 1999, 

All ER (EC) 97. 

p.95). 

4 Ibid. p.35. 
5 especially Houlihan, B., Sport and Globalisation in Houlihan, B (ed.) Sport and Society: a 

student introduction (London: Sage, 2003). 

6 Ibid. p.351. 
7 Ibid. p.355. 
8 This can also apply to boxing where the harmonisation of safety standards has been advanced 
so that a boxer declared unfit to box in one jurisdiction cannot shop around until he can find 
somewhere that will allow him to fight. 

9 R v Disciplinary Committee of the Jockey Club ex p Aga Khan [1993] 2 All E R 853 (CA). 
Most commentators consider this case to be wrongly decided. See Beloff, M. & Kerr, T., 
Why Aga Khan is Wrong [1996] JR 30 and Pannick, D., Judicial Review of Sports Bodies 
[1997] JR 150 but it remains the legal position. 

10 The Supreme Court held in 1987 that the United States Olympic Committee was not a state 
actor so that legal action to protect its name did not constitute government action and thus 
the provisions of the Constitution did not apply. San Francisco Arts & Athletics Inc. v 
USOC, 483 U.S.522 (1987). 

11 Korda v ITF (unreported, Times, 4 February 1999). However, in Modahl v British Athletic 
Federation [No.2] (Court of Appeal, 12 October 2001) it was questioned whether an athlete 
automatically has a legal relationship with their national association. 

12 Wilander & Novacek v. Tobin & Jude [1997] 2 Lloyd’s Rep 293. 
13 The entry form for the Sydney Olympics contained this clause; ‘In the interest of a speedy 

and expert resolution of all dispute arising in connection with Olympic Games, I hereby 
surrender any right I may have to commence proceedings in a court in relation to any such 
dispute or file any appeal, review or recourse to any state court or other judicial authority 
from any arbital award, decision or ruling issued by the CAS in particular’. (From 
Sportzaken Journal, 2000/3, p.14). 

14 For descriptions of the work of Court of Arbitration for Sport, see Morris, P. & Spink, P., 

Court of Arbitration for Sport in Stewart, W.J. (ed.) Sport and the Law—The Scots 
Perspective (Edinburgh: T & T Clark, 2000, pp.61–76). Beloff, M.Kerr, T. & Demetriou, M, 
Sports Law, (Hart: Oxford, 1999, especially pp.217–20, & 256–63). 

15 Judgment 15 March 1993. [Recueil Officiel des Arrets du Tribunal federal 119 II 271]. 

Extracted in Reeb, M, Digest of CAS Awards 1986–1998 Staempfli Editions, Bern, 1998, 
pp.561–75. 

Notes     154

16 Code of Sports-Related Arbitration, Article R58. 
17 This is the position under english law by virtue of the Aribtration Acts.  
18 Reeb, M., Digest of CAS. Awards 1986–1998, Stampfli Editions, Bern, 1998, p.xxxi. 
19 On this issue, see Foster, K., Is there a Global Sports Law?, 2003, Entertainment Law, Vol. 

2, No.1, pp.1–18. 

20 See H-J.Mertens, Lex Mercatoria: A Self-Applying System in G.Teubner, Legal Pluralism in 

the World Society in G.Teubner, (ed.) Global Law Without a State, 1997, Andover, 
Dartmouth. 

21 Defrantz v USOC, 492 F.Supp 1181 (1980). 
22 Martin v IOC, 740 F.2d 670 (9th Cir. 1984). 
23 Lewis v World Boxing Council & Bruno, unreported, 3 November 1995. 
24 See note 2. 
25 The European Model of Sport (DG X, Brussels, 1998); for comments on it, see Hoehn, T. & 

Szymanski, S., The Americanization of European Football: Economic Policy, April 1999, 
p.205–40. and Weatherill, S., Resisting the pressures of Americanization: the influence of 
the European Community on the ‘European Sport Model’ in Greenfield, S. & Osborn, G. 
(eds.) Sport and the law (London: Cass, 2000). 

26 One of the reasons why the US basketball team surprising failed to win the world 

championships despite being selected from NBA players is that the IABA plays to different 
rules from the NBA. 

27 This changed for the 2002–3 season when two clubs were promoted from the Conference. 
28 Federal Baseball Club of Baltimore v National League of Professional Baseball Clubs 259 

U.S. 200 (1922). 

29 Radovich v National Football League 352 U.S. 445 (1957). 
30 Ice hockey in Denver Rockets v All-Pro Management 325 F. Supp 1049 (C.D.Cal. 1971) and 

basketball in Robertson v NBA 389 F. Supp 867 (S.D.N.Y. 1975). 
31 Piazza v Major League Baseball 831 F. Supp. 420 (E.D.Pa. 1993). 
32 Starting with Flood v Kuhn 407 U.S. 258 (1972). 
33 On this early history see Seymour, H., Baseball—The Early Years (New York: Oxford 

University Press, 1960). 

34 A useful website on defunct American sports leagues is 

www.geocities.com/Colosseum/Arena/6922. 
35 Football Merger Act of 1996 (USC s.1293). 
36 The two most interesing cases are Philadelpia World Hockey Club v Philadelpia Hockey 

Club, 351 F.Supp 462 (1972) and USFL v NFL, 842 F.2d 1335 (1988). 

37 The litigation was a ten round judicial contest but the clearest discussion of the legal issues is 
the Ninth circuit appeal, Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum v NFL (Raiders I) 726 F.2d 1381 
(1984). 

38 Fraser v Major League Soccer, 7 F.Supp. 2d 73 (D.Mass. 1998). On appeal 97 F.Supp 2d 130 

(2000). There is an extensive American literature on this case. The best articles are Maco, 
M., Rules Restricting Player Movement under FIFA: Do They Violate US Antitrust Law?, 
1999, 18, New York Law School Journal of International and Comparative Law 407 and 
Mathias, E., Big League Perestroika? The Implications of Fraser v Major League Soccer, 
1999, 148, University of Pennsylvania Law Review 203. 

39 See note 2. 
40 On the different models of regulating sport, see Foster, K. ‘How Can Sport be Regulated?’, 
in Steve Greenfield & Guy Osborn (eds.), Law and Sport in Contemporary Society (London: 
Frank Cass, 2000, pp.267–82). 

41 Annex 29. 
42 For a summary of the Helsinki Report, see Weatherall, S. in (2000) 25 European Law 

Review 270. 

43 Available at http://www.europa.eu.int/. 

Notes     155

44 Ibid. 
45 Case COMP/C.2/37.328: selling of media rights to the UEFA Champions’ League on an 

exclusive basis. (2002/C196/03). Official Journal 17/08/02. See also IP/02/ 806. 

46 IP/02/1951. 
47 Cases COMP/35.163: COMP/36.638; COMP/36.776. GTR/FIA & others. Official Journal 

13/06/01. 

48 Speech by Mario Monti, European Commissioner for Competition: ‘Competition and 

Sport—the Rules of the Game. Given at Europe’s first conference on the Governance of 
Sport. Brussels, 26 & 27 February 2001. Available at http://www.supporters-direct.com/. 

49 Lehtonen & Castors Canada Dry Namur-Braine v FRBSB (Belgian Basketball Federation); 

case C-176/96. (2000) ECR I-2549; [2001] All ER (EC) 97. 

50 Deliege v Liege Francophone de Judo; cases C-51/96 & C-191/97. (2000) ECR I-2681; 

[2000] All ER (D) 519. 

51 For a more detailed discussion of these two cases, see Foster, K. ‘Can Sport be Regulated by 

Europe?: An Analysis of the Alternative Methods’, in Andrew Caiger & Simon Gardner 
(eds.), Professional Sport in the EU: Regulation and Re-Regulation (The Hague: TMC Asser 
Press, 2000, pp.43–64). 

6 

Sport and the nation in the global era 

1 Tom Nairn, Pariah. Misfortunes of the British Kingdom (London: Verso, 2002, p.147). 
2 John Urry, Global Complexity (Cambridge: Polity Press, 2003, p.43). 
3 Toby Miller, Geoffrey Lawrence, Jim McKay and David Rowe, Globalization and Sport 

(London: Sage, 2001, p.59). 

4 Joseph Maguire, Grant Jarvie, Louise Mansfield and Joe Bradley, Sport Worlds. A 

Sociological Perspective, Human Kinetics (Illinois: Champaign, 2002, p.4). 

5 Ibid. 
6 Ibid., p.7. 
7 Joseph Maguire, ‘Sport, Identity Politics, and Globalization: Diminishing Contrasts and 

Increasing Varieties’, Sociology of Sport Journal, 11 (4), December, 1994, pp.389–427. See 
also Joseph Maguire, Global Sport. Identities, Societies, Civilizations (Cambridge: Polity 
Press, 1999). 

8 Anthony D.Smith, Nations and Nationalism in a Global Era (Cambridge: Polity Press, p.2). 
9 Ibid., p.7. 
10 Alan Bairner, Sport, Nationalism, and Globalization: European and North American 

Perspectives, (Albany, New York: State University of New York Press, 2001). 

11 Jay Scherer, ‘Review of Alan Bairner, Sport, Nationalism, and Globalization’, in Sport 

History Review, 33 (1), May, 2002, pp.78–79. 

12 Ibid., p.79. 
13 Miller et al., Globalization and Sport. 
14 Stephen G.Jones, Workers at Play. A Social and Economic History of Leisure, 1918–1939, 
(London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1986, p.6). See also Stephen G.Jones, Sport, Politics, 
and the Working Class: Organised Labour and Sport in Inter-War Britain (Manchester: 
Manchester University Press, 1988). 

15 See Mike Cronin, Sport and Nationalism in Ireland. Gaelic Games, Soccer and Irish Identity 

since 1884 (Dublin: Four Courts Press, 1999, pp.24–27). 

16 Lincoln Allison, ‘Sport and Nationalism’, in Jay Coakley and Eric Dunning (eds), Handbook 

of Sports Studies (London: Sage, 2000, pp.344–5, p.349). 

Notes     156

17 David Rowe and Geoffrey Lawrence, ‘Beyond National Sport: Sociology, History and 

Postmodernity’, Sporting Traditions, 12 (2), 1996, 3–16, p.5. 

18 Nairn, Pariah, p.141.  
19 See Grant Jarvie and Graham Walker, ‘Ninety Minute Patriots? Scottish Sport in the Making 
of the Nation’, in Grant Jarvie and Graham Walker (eds), Scottish Sport in the Making of the 
Nation. Ninety-Minute Patriots (Leicester: Leicester University Press, 1994, pp.1–8). 

20 Michael Billig, Banal Nationalism, (London: Sage, 1995). 
21 Urry, Global Complexity, p.107. 
22 Allison, ‘Sport and Nationalism’, p.345. 
23 Miller et al., Sport and Globalization, p. 31. 
24 Mike Ticher, ‘Notional Englishmen, Black Irishmen and Multicultural Australians: 

Ambiguities in National Sporting Identity’, Sporting Traditions, 11 (1), November, 1994, 
pp.75–91, p.75. 

25 See John Hoberman, Sport and Political Ideology (London: Heinemann, 1984). 
26 Bairner, Sport, Nationalism, and Globalization, p.167. 
27 Carrie B.Douglass, Bulls, Bullfighting, and Spanish Identities (Tucson, Arizona: University 

28 Phil Ball, Morbo. The Story of Spanish Football (London: When Saturday Comes Books, 

of Arizona Press, 1997, p.3). 

2001, p.14). 

29 See amongst others W.F.Mandle, The Gaelic Athletic Association and Irish Nationalist 

Politics, 1884–1924 (London: Gill and Macmillan, 1987); Cronin, Sport and Nationalism in 
Ireland; Alan Bairner, ‘Civic and Ethnic Nationalism in the Celtic Vision of Irish Sport’, in 
Grant Jarvie (ed.), Sport in the Making of Celtic Cultures (London: Leicester University 
Press, 1999, 12–25); de Búrca, The GAA. A History (second edition) (Dublin: Gill and 
Macmillan, 1999); Marcus de Búrca, ‘The Gaelic Athletic Association and Organized Sport 
in Ireland’, in Jarvie (ed.), Sport in the Making of Celtic Cultures, pp.100–111; Paul Rouse, 
‘The Politics and Culture of Sport in Ireland: A History of the GAA Ban on Foreign Games 
1884–1971. Part One: 1884–1921’, International Journal for the History of Sport, 10 (3), 
1993, pp.333–60. On the unfolding relationship between sport and politics in Northern 
Ireland, see John Sugden and Alan Bairner, ‘Northern Ireland. Sport in a Divided Society’, 
in Lincoln Allison (ed.), The Politics of Sport (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 
1986, pp.90–117); John Sugden and Alan Bairner, ‘National identity, community relations 
and the sporting life in Northern Ireland’, in Lincoln Allison (ed.), The changing politics of 
sport (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1993, pp.171–206); John Sugden and Alan 
Baimer, Sport, Sectarianism and Society in a Divided Ireland (Leicester: Leicester 
University Press, 1993); Alan Bairner, ‘Sport, Politics and Society in Northern Ireland. 
Changing Times, New Developments’, Studies, 90 (359), Autumn, 2001, pp.283–90; Alan 
Bairner, ‘Sport, Sectarianism and Society in a Divided Ireland Revisited’, in John Sugden 
and Alan Tomlinson (eds), Power Games. A Critical Sociology of Sport (London: Routledge, 
pp. 181–95). 

30 Tom Humphries, Green Fields. Gaelic Sport in Ireland (London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 

1996, p.3). 

p.151). 

31 Ibid. 
32 Paul Healey, Gaelic Games and the Gaelic Athletic Association (Cork: Mercier Press, 1998, 

33 Liam Horan, ‘The challenges facing the GAA’, The Irish Sports Almanac 1999 (Inishowen, 

Co. Donegal: Artcam Ireland, 1998, pp. 117–18). 

34 Benedict Anderson, Imagined Communities. Reflections on the Origin and Spread of 

Nationalism (London: Verso, 1983). 

35 Alan Bairner and Peter Shirlow, ‘Loyalism, Linfield and the Territorial Politics of Soccer 

fandom in Northern Ireland’, Space and Polity, 2 (2), November, 1998, pp.163–77. 

Notes     157

36 See de Búrca, The GAA. A History and Mandle, The Gaelic Athletic Association and Irish 

Nationalist Politics. 

37 See Cronin, Sport and Nationalism in Ireland.  
38 Barrie Houlihan, ‘Homogenization, Americanization and Creolization of Sport: Varieties of 
Globalization’, Sociology of Sport Journal, 11 (4), December, 1994, pp.356–75, p.369. The 
relatively successful 2002 World Cup campaign can now be added to that list. 

39 Ibid. See also Cronin, Sport and Nationalism in Ireland. 
40 See R.N.Berki, On Political Realism (London: Dent, 1981, pp.192–227). 
41 See R.N.Berki, Socialism (London: Dent, 1975). Berki’s description of early English 

socialism could be applied with almost equal force (and a few minor alterations) to the 
ideology of Michael Cusack and other founders of the GAA. Berki could detect ‘in the long-
standing preoccupation with dreams of a resurrected “rural England”, the almost childlike 
longing after the land, as testified to in countless socialist pamphlets, literary pieces, as well 
as the activities of early co-operative colonies, the surviving echo of peasants who had been 
mercilessly chased away from the common land’ (p.51). 

42 Berki, On Political Realism, p.230. 
43 Ibid., p.231. 
44 See for example Maguire, Global Sport. See also Jonathan Magee and John Sugden, ‘“The 

world at their feet”. Professional Football and International Labor Migration’, Journal of 
Sport and Social Issues, 26 (4), November, 2002, pp.421–37 and Pierre Lanfranchi and 
Matthew Taylor, Moving with the ball: the migration of professional footballers (Oxford: 
Berg, 2001). 

7 

The curious role of the USA in world sport 

1 Alexis De Tocqueville, Democracy in America, translated, edited and with an ‘Introduction’ 
by Harvey C.Mansfield and Delba Winthrop. University of Chicago Press, 2000, pp.3–15. 
The first volume of the original French edition was published in 1835, the second in 1840. 

2 Eric Hobsbawm, The Age of Extremes: a History of the Twentieth Century, 1914–91 

3 Andrei S.Markovits and Steven Hellerman, Offside: Soccer and American Exceptionalism 

(Pantheon Books, 1994, p.198). 

(Princeton University Press, 2001, p.5). 

4 Ibid., pp.vii–ix. 
5 Ibid., p.283. 
6 Ibid., pp.287–8. 
7 Principally in Lincoln Allison, Amateurism in Sport: an Analysis and a Defence (Frank Cass, 

2001). 

8 One example of a Gramscian perspective on American sport is to be found in George H.Sage, 
Power and Ideology in American Sport, A Critical Perspective (Champaign, Illinois: Human 
Kinetics Books, 1990). 

9 This account of baseball is principally informed by John P.Rossi, The National Game: 

Baseball and American Culture (Chicago: Ivan R.Dee, 2000). 

10 In November 2002, for example, when I was interviewing Irakli Medzmariashvili, the 

Minister of Sport in the Republic of Georgia, it became clear that he was assuming that the 
vast majority of funding for sport in the United Kingdom came from the state. 

11 James Michener, Michener on Sport, Secker and Warburg, 1976, pp.3–17. 
12 From a column syndicated in several newspapers. Quoted in Tom Melville, The Tented 

Field: a History of Cricket in America (Bowling Green State University Popular Press, 1998, 
p.39). 

Notes     158

13 Paul Gardner, Nice Guys Finish Last: Sport and American Life, Allen Lane, 1974. The 

phrase is by no means original, even as a book title: see Robert Kyle, Nice Guys Finish Last 
(New York: Dell, 1955).  

14 This quotation, in slightly different forms, has been attributed to several NFL owners. This 

seems to be marginally the most authoritative claimant. 

15 One account of Anglo-American sporting tensions during that period is Brian Dobbs, 

Edwardians at Play, Sport 1890–1914 (Pelham, 1973, pp.149–64). 

16 http://www.ncaa.org/. Some of the claims made for college sport are taken from my 

interviews with NCAA officials quoted in Allison, op.cit., pp.123–8. 

17 Howard L.Nixon, Sport and the American Dream (New York: Leisure Press, 1984). 
18 1999–2000 NCAA Division I Manual, Article 12. 
19 The starting point of the contemporary debate is often taken to be Raul Prebisch, The 

Economic Development of Latin America and its Principal Problems (New York: United 
Nations, 1950). For an overview of this body of writing as it relates to sport see Grant Jarvie 
and Joseph Maguire, Sport and Leisure in Social Thought (Routledge, 1994, pp.230–63). 

20 The manufacturer ‘Nike’ is a particular focus of debate about its global role. See, for 

example, the Oxfam Community Aid Abroad site at http://www.caa.org/. 

21 See Bruce Kidd, ‘Sport, Dependency and the Canadian State’, in M.Hart and S. Birrell (eds), 

Sport in the Sociocultural Process (Iowa: Brown, 1981, pp.707–21). 

22 Markovits and Hellerman, op.cit., p.32. 
23 I first quoted this phrase in Lincoln Allison, ‘The Soccer Boom in America’, New Society, 
Vol. 35, No. 700, March 11, 1976, p.545 attributing it to a book by Leonard Schecter, The 
Jocks, which I note is not in the Library of Congress catalogue. 

24 For a good example see Colin Ward, Steaming In: A Journal of a Football Fan, Simon and 

Schuster, 1989, but also a vast range of fanzines and websites such as 
http://surf.to/londonclarets 

25 John Inverdale, ‘Gloves are off in relegation debate’, Daily Tekgraph, Thursday 12 

December 2002, p.S6. 

26 Ibid. There is a nice historic irony to the identity of the speaker. Most of Maurice Lindsay’s 

career has been spent in the administration of Rugby League and of the Wigan club in 
particular, in the one British sport which existed outside the ‘amateur hegemony’. 

27 Sam Wallace,‘“I don’t think you can have four divisions of professional football any more”’ 

Daily Tekgraph, Friday December 6 2002, p.S1. 

28 Michael Parkinson, ‘A Month in View: November!’, Daily Tekgraph, Thursday 3 December 

29 The phrase is from R.Collins ‘Wall to Wall Dallas? The US-UK trade in televison’ Screen, 

30 A major thesis of Tibor Scitivsky, The Joyless Economy (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 

no. 27 vols 3–4, 1986, p.67. 

2002, p.S5. 

1976). 

8 

Local heroes and global stars 

1 Based on a report by Tom Wheeler: ‘Tiger Woods targeted in Nike protest’ 

http://csf.colorado.edu/forums/pvfs/2002i/msg00069.html Accessed 27 January 2003. (Some 
artistic licence may have been used.) 

2 This corresponds to the general notion of cosmopolitanism in Ong’s thesis of ‘flexible 

citizenship. See Ong, A. Flexible Citizenship: The Cultural Politics of Transnationality 
(Durham: Duke University Press, 1999). 

Notes     159

3 Although this appears to be a standard academic disclaimer I remain sympathetic and 

supportive of the concerns of feminism and gender politics more generally. The gender 
dynamics of heroism are covered more extensively in my MA dissertation, from which a 
number of thoughts in this chapter are drawn. See Gilchrist, P. The Idea of the Sporting Hero 
(University of Warwick: unpublished MA dissertation, 2002). 

4 Cited in Allison, L. Ecology and Utility (Leicester: Leicester University Press, 1991, p.33). 
5 Thoreau, H. Walden or Life in the Woods (London: Chapman and Hall, 1927 [1854], p.103). 
6 Appadurai, A. ‘Disjuncture and difference in the global cultural economy’ in Theory, Culture 

and Society (Volume 7, 1990), pp.295–310. 

7 Frazer, J.G. The Golden Bough: A Study in Magic and Religion (London: Macmillan, 1963). 
Boas, F. ‘The Origin of Totemism’, American Anthorpologist (Volume 18, 1916), pp. 319–
26. Durkheim, E. The Elementary Forms of Religious Life (London: Allen & Unwin, 
1912/1971). 

8 Frazer, J.G. cited in Freud, S. Totem and Taboo (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1960, 

p.103). 

9 Wundt cited in ibid., p.106. 
10 Allison, L. Ecology and Utility, p.149. 
11 The precise nature of the group of people or community referred to throughout is a source of 
contention. The sports hero has and does serve as a ‘symbol or emblem, linking the style of 
the performance with a sense of a wider community—a class, a city, a region, an ethnic 
group or religious denomination, a nation and, most strikingly, perhaps even an empire’. 
Holt, R. and Mangan, J. Prologue: European Heroes: Myth, Identity, Sport, International 
Journal of the History of Sport (Volume 13, Number 1, 1996), p.10. 

12 Appadurai, A. Modernity at Large: Cultural Dimensions of Globalisation (Minneapolis: 

University of Minnesota Press, 1996, chapter 5). 

13 James, C.L.R. Beyond a Boundary (London: Serpents Tail, 1994). 
14 Holt, R. and Mangan, J. ‘Prologue’, p.5. 
15 Ibid., p.8. 
16 This generalisation is posited by Allison, L. Amateurism in Sport (London: Frank Cass, 

17 Inglis, F. ‘The State of Play: Capital, Sport and Happiness’ in Allison, L (ed.) Taking Sport 

Seriously (Aacher: Meyer & Meyer, 1998, pp. 155–72). 

18 Boorstin, D. The Image: A Guide to Pseudo-Events in America (New York: Random House, 

2001, pp.149–50). 

1992, p.61). 

19 Voting for the contestants in the second series of ‘Big Brother’ in the UK in 2001, for 

instance, outstripped the combined votes for the Conservative Party at the General Election 
of that year. 

20 Durkheim, E. The Elementary Forms of Religious Life, p.381. See also Jarvie, G. and 

Maguire, J. Sport and Leisure in Social Thought (London: Routledge, 1994, chapter 1). 
21 Weber, M. Charisma and Institution Building (London: Unwin Hyman, 1963, p.xviii). 
22 See Andrews, D.L., Carrington, B., Jackson, S.J. and Mazur, Z. ‘Jordanscapes: a preliminary 

analysis of the global popular’, Sociology of Sport Journal, Volume 13, Number 4, pp.428–
57. 

23 Jameson, F. Postmodernism, or, the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism (Durham: North 

Carolina, Duke University Press, 1991, p.275). 

24 Mauss, M. ‘A category of the human mind: the notion of person; the notion of self’, 

Carrithers, M, Collins, S., and Lukes, S. (eds) The Category of the Person (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1985, p.19). 

25 Featherstone, M. ‘The Heroic Life and Everyday Life’, Theory, Culture and Society (Volume 

26 Conrad, P. ‘Blend it like Beckham’, The Observer, Review Section, Sunday 25 May, 2003, 

9, Number 1, 1992, p.177). 

p.1. 

Notes     160

27 See Gans, E. Originary Thinking (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1993, p.151). 
28 Shakespeare, W. Coriolanus, Lee Bliss (ed.) (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000, 

p.54 (4.7.49–50)).  

29 Ibid, p.252 (5.3.35–6). 
30 Jameson, F ‘Postmodernism, or The Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism’, New Left Review 

(Number 146, July–August 1984), p.58, p.60. 

31 Rojek, C. Celebrity (London: Reaktion Books, 2001). 
32 Whannell, G. Media Sport Stars: Masculinities and Moralities (London: Routledge, 2002, 

33 The Economist, ‘The World of Sport Survey’, June 6 1998, p.7. 
34 Adorno, T.W. and Horkheimer, M. Dialectic of Enlightenment (New York: Herder and 

chapter 15). 

Herder, 1972, p.158). 

Company, 2002, p.67). 

35 European TV Sports Databook (London: Kagan World Media, 1995, p.4). 
36 LaFeber, W. Michael Jordan and the New Global Capitalism (New York: W.W Norton and 

37 See Wilton, Iain. CB Fry: King of Sport (London: Metro, 2002, pp.208–9). 
38 Appadurai, A. Modernity At Large, Chapter 2. 
39 Fukuyama, F. The End of History and the Last Man (London: Hamish Hamilton, 1992). 
40 Held, D. et al. Global Transformations: Politics, Economics and Culture (Cambridge: Polity 

Press, 1999, p.3). 

41 Van Hoecke, J., Van Hoecke, W., De Knop, P. and Taks, M. ‘The Contribution of “Local 

Heroes” in the Athlete Endorsement Mix’, The Cyber Journal of Sport Marketing. Available 
at http://www.cjsm.com/vol4/hoecke43.htm Accessed on 25 November 2002. 

42 Tomkins, R. ‘Advertisers lose out on sporting chance’, Financial Times, 21 June 2002, p.21. 
43 ‘Pub name “may damage Rooney”’ BBC News website: 

http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/england/2834073.stm Accessed March 9 2003. 

44 Kelso, P ‘Money worries that haunt world cup’, The Guardian, January 28 2003. Hopps, D. 

‘Players unite to take on ICC’, The Guardian, September 21 2002. 

45 There are fears that the Rugby World Cup in Australia 2003 could be beset by similar 

problems. 

46 Rojek, C. Celebrity, p.46. 
47 See Fiske, J. Reading the Popular (London: Unwin Hyman, 1989). 
48 Law et al. discuss the nature of global media integration and point out that the codes and 

objects in which to express our differences may be severely limited as media output becomes 
homogenised. See Law, A., Harvey, J. and Kemp, S. ‘The Global Sport Mass Media 
Oligopoly’, International Review for the Sociology of Sport, Volume 37, 3–4 (2002), 
pp.279–302. 

49 Habermas, J. ‘The Public Sphere’ Chapter 14 in Mukerji, C. and Schudson, M. (eds) 

Rethinking Popular Culture: Contemporary Perspectives in Cultural Studies, (Berkeley: 
University of Los Angeles Press, 1991, p.398). 

50 Savigny, H. ‘Public Opinion, Political Communication and the Internet’, Politics (Volume 

22, Number 1, 2002), pp.1–8. 

51 Sklair, L. The Transnational Capitalist Class (Oxford: Blackwell, 2001). 
52 Falk, R. ‘Resisting “Globalisation-from-above” through “Globalisation-from-below”’ New 

Political Economy, Volume 2, Number 1, 1997, p.20. 

53 Kant, I. ‘An Answer to the Question “What is Enlightenment?” Reiss, H. (ed.) Kant: 

Political Writings, Second Edition (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991, p.54). 
This literal translation is ‘Dare to be wise’. 

54 Some scepticism, however, should be retained as to the uses of new technology to 

reinvigorate political participation. See Hand, M. and Sandywell, B. ‘E-topia as Cosmopolis 
or Citadel: On the democratising and de-democratising logics of the Internet, or, toward a 

Notes     161

critique of the new technological fetishism’, Theory, Culture & Society, Volume 19, (1–2), 
2002, pp.197–225. 

55 Urry, J. Globalisation and Citizenship (draft) 

http://www.comp.lancaster.ac.uk/sociology/soc009ju.html. Accessed February 13 2003. 

56 Ibid. 
57 Cited in La Feber, W. Michael Jordan and the New Global Capitalism, p.91. 
58 Ibid., p.92. 
59 Ibid. p.107. 
60 Allison, L. ‘Sport and Politics’ Chapter 1 in Allison, L. (ed.) The Politics of Sport 

(Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1986, p.17). 

61 Hooks, B. Cited in See Andrews, D.L et al, ‘Jordanscapes: a preliminary analysis of the 

global popular’, Sociology of Sport Journal, p.452. 

62 Hargreaves, J. Heroines of Sport: The Politics of Difference and Identity, (London: 

Routledge, 2000, p.4). 

63 Kellner, D ‘The Sport Spectacle, Michael Jordan, and Nike: Unholy Alliance?’ Chapter 3 in 

Andrews, D.L. (ed.) Michael Jordan, Inc: Corporate Sport, Media Culture, and Late 
Modern America (Albany: State University Press of New York, 2001). 

64 Cited in ibid. p.59. 
65 Law, A., Harvey, J., and Kemp, S. The Global Sport Mass Media Oligopoly. 
66 Sklair, Leslie ‘Social movements for global capitalism: the transnational capitalist class in 
action’, Review of International Political Economy (Volume 4, Number 3, Autumn 1997), 
pp.521. 

67 Friedman, M. ‘The Social Self and the Partiality Debates’ in Card, C. (ed.) Feminist Ethics 

(Lawrence: Kansas, University of Kansas Press, 1991, p.171), emphasis in the original. 

68 Manifold, J. ‘The Recruit’ in Gardner, B. (ed.) The Terrible Rain: The War Poets 1939–45 

(London: Magnum Books, 1966, p.31). 

69 Giardina M.D. ‘Global Hingis: Flexible Citizenship and the transnational celebrity’ Chapter 

12 in Andrews, D.L. and Jackson., S.J (eds) Sport Stars: The Cultural Politics of Sporting 
Celebrity (London: Routledge, 2001, pp.205–6). 

70 Bauman, Z. Globalization: The Human Consequences (New York: Columbia University 

73 Maguire, J. Global Sport: Identities, Societies, Civilizations (Oxford: Polity Press, 1999). 
74 James, C.L.R. Beyond a Boundary. 
75 Lichfield, J ‘France unites in football victory’ The Independent, July 10th 1998, p.14. 

Lichfield, J. ‘For once united’, The Independent, July 12 1998, p.4. Lichfield, J. ‘This is the 
France we want to see: valiant, stubborn and multi-racial’, The Independent, July 14 1998, 
p.3. 

76 Davies, P. The National Front in France (London: Routledge, 1999). Mayer, N. ‘The French 

National Front’, in Betz, H-G. and Immerfall, S. (eds) The New Politics of the Right: Neo-
Populist Parties and Movements in Established Democracies (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 
1998, pp.11–25). Webster, P. ‘Le Pen: Populist who rose from ashes’, The Guardian, April 
22, 2002. 

77 Pires, R. Cited in Tallentire, M. ‘Le Pen in, France out says Pires’, The Guardian, Friday 

May 3 2002, p.30. 

78 Ibid. 
79 As a flippant aside, the joke of the day was ‘What is the difference between the French 

football team and Jean-Marie Le Pen?’ ‘Le Pen reached the second round’. 

71 Ohmae, K. Borderless World: Power and Strategy in the Interlinked Economy (London: 

72 See Barnard, F.M. (ed) Herder on Social and Political Culture (Cambridge: Cambridge 

Press, 1998). 

HarperCollins, 1989). 

University Press, 1969, p.7). 

Notes     162

80 Spivak, G.C. ‘Can the subaltern speak?’ in Marxism and the Interpretation of Culture, 

C.Nelson and L.Grossberg (eds) (Urbana, Illinois: University of Illinois Press, 1988, pp.217–
313). 

81 MacIntyre, A. ‘Is Patriotism a Virtue?’ in Beiner, R. (ed.) Theorising Citizenship (Albany, 

New York: State University of New York Press, 1995, pp.209–28).  

82 Melnick, Merrill J. and Jackson, Steven J. ‘Globalization American-Style and Reference Idol 

Selection’, International Review for the Sociology of Sport, 37 (3–4) (2002, pp.429–48). 

83 Maguire, J. Global Sport: Identities, Societies, Civilizations. 
84 Melnick, M.J. and Jackson, S.J. Op Cit. p.443. 
85 See Carrington, B., Andrews, D.L., Jackson, S.J. and Mazur, Z. ‘The Global Jordanscape’ in 
Andrews, D.L. (ed.) Michael Jordan, Inc. (New York: State University of New York, 2001, 
Chapter 7). 

86 Caust, L. ‘Community, Autonomy and Justice: The Gender Politics of Identity and 
Relationship’, History of European Ideas (Volume 17, Number 5, 1993, pp.643–4). 

87 See Barker, F. ‘Nationalism, nomadism and belonging in Europe: Coriolanus’, Chapter 9 in 
Joughin, J.J. (ed.) Shakespeare and National Culture (Manchester: Manchester University 
Press, 1997, pp.233–65). 

88 Ibid. p.252. 
89 Bob Fisher, Amelia Hill and David Fickling ‘Uproar as America’s Cup slips towards 

“traitors”’ The Observer, 23 February 2003, p.25. ‘Alinghi skipper hails cup win’. 
http://news.bbc.co.uk/go/pr/fr/-/sportl/hi/other_sports/sailing/2812427 Accessed March 5 
2003. 

90 Holt, R. ‘Champions, Heroes and Celebrities: Sporting Greatness and the British Public’ in 

Huntington-Whiteley, J. (ed.) The British Book of Sporting Heroes (London: National 
Portrait Gallery Publications, 1998, pp. 12–25). 

91 MacIntyre, A. After Virtue, Second Edition (London: Duckworth, 1985, pp.187–91). 
92 Such a fight, I believe has been conceptually and theoretically prepared by MacIntyre, A. op. 

cit. Allison, L. Amateurism in Sport, Morgan, W. Leftist Theories of Sport (Chicago: 
University of Illinois Press, 1994). 

93 Tonnies, F. Community and Association (Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1955, pp.37–9). 

9 

Selling out? 

1 This term is from R.Rinehart, ‘

 Arriving Sport: Alternatives to formal sport’, in 

Handbook of sport studies, eds. J.Coakley and E.Dunning (London: Sage, 2000, p.507). 

2 For a good over view of alternative sport and extreme sport, and the various terms, see Ibid. 
and R.Rinehart, ‘Inside of the outside: Pecking orders within alternative sport as ESPN’s 
1995 “The eXtreme Games”’, Journal of sport and social issues 22, no. 4 (1998), 398–414. 

3 I am referring here to Raymond William’s categorisation. R.Williams, Marxism and 

Literature (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1977). See also Rinehart, ‘Inside of the 
outside: Pecking orders with in alternative sport as ESPN’s 1995 “The eXtreme Games”’. 
4 See N.Midol and G.Broyer, ‘Towards an anthropological analysis of new sport cultures: The 
case of whiz sports in France’, Sociology of Sport Journal 12 (1995, 204–212; R.Rinehart, 
Players All: Performances in contemporary sport (Bloomington & Indianapolis: Indiana 
University Press, 1998); B.Wheaton, ‘Just Do it: Consumption, commitment and identity in 
the windsurfing subculture’, Sociology of Sport Journal 17, no. 3 (2000): 254–74. Rinehart, 
‘

 Arriving Sport: Alternatives to formal sport’. 

Notes     163

5 I use the term lifestyle sport as this is a term that initially emerged during my ethnographic 
research, seems to be one participants identify with and that for me best encapsulated these 
cultures. For a fuller discussion of this term and others such as alternative, extreme, new, 
postmodern etc. see B.Wheaton, ed., Understanding Lifestyle sports: consumption, identity 
and difference (London: Routledge, 2004).  

6 Bourdieu calls these activities new sports, and terms these entrepreneurs the ‘new’ and ‘petite 
bourgeoisie’. P.Bourdieu, Distinction: A social critique of the judgement of taste (London & 
NY: Routledge & Kegan Paul Ltd, 1984, p.220). 

7 Bale, for example, suggests such activities present a challenge to the ‘western sport model’, 
and Maguire notes they challenge the ‘achievement sport’ ideology. J.Bale, Landscapes of 
modem sport (Leicester: Leicester University Press, 1994). J.Maguire, Global Sport: 
Identities, Societies, civilizations (Cambridge: Polity Press, 1999). See also Midol and 
Broyer, ‘Towards an anthropological analysis of new sport cultures: The case of whiz sports 
in France’, Rinehart, ‘Arriving Sport: Alternatives to formal sport’. Wheaton, ‘Just Do it: 
Consumption, commitment and identity in the wind-surfing subculture’. 

8 The idea of lifestyle sport as postmodern sport is discussed in Wheaton, ed., Understanding 

Lifestyle sports: consumption, identity and difference. However, see also L.Allison, 
Amateurism in sport: An analysis and a defence (London: Frank Cass, 2001, p.43, 44), and 
Rinehart, ‘Arriving Sport: Alternatives to formal sport’. 

9 D.Kellner, ‘Popular culture and the construction of postmodern identities,’ in Modernity and 

Identity, ed. J.Friedman (Oxford: UK and Cambridge, USA: Blackwell, 1992, p.141). 

10 D.Philips and A.Tomlinson, ‘Come on Down? Popular Media Culture in Post-War Britain’, 

in Homeward Bound—Leisure, popular culture and consumer capitalism, ed. S.Wagg 
(Routledge, 1992). 

11 See B.Beal and C.Wilson, ‘“Chicks dig scars”: Commercialisation and the transformations of 

skate boarders’ identities’, in Understanding Lifestyle sports: consumption, identity and 
difference, ed. B.Wheaton, 2004. Likewise according to professional skateboarder Andy 
Mac, there are 12-million skaters in the United States, which is more than play baseball. 
Cited in ‘Skateboarding…seeking respectability’, in The Sports Factor (Radio National 
(Australia), 2003). 

12 Rinehart, ‘Arriving Sport: Alternatives to formal sport’, p.505. 
13 While image of these sports tend to be dominated by those of teenage males, in many 

activities participants include men in their 30s, 40s and 50s. For a discussion of this 
youthfulness (and the wider context of the aging Gen-X) see I.Borden, Skateboarding, space 
and the city: Architecture and the body (Oxford: Berg, 2001). 

14 K.Kusz, ‘“Extreme America”: The Cultural Politics of Extreme Sports in 1990s America’, in 

Understanding Lifestyle sports: consumption, identity and difference, ed. B. Wheaton 
(forthcoming). 

15 J.Ostrowski, ‘Corporate America cozies up to the tattooed extreme world’, Street & Smith’s 

SportsBuisness Journal, Sept 18–24 2000. p.24. 

16 D.Andrews and C.Cole, ‘On issue: the nation reconsidered’, Journal of sport and social 

17 See Rinehart, ‘Inside of the outside: Pecking orders with in alternative sport as ESPN’s 1995 

 Arriving Sport: Alternatives to formal 

issues 26, no. 2, May (2002):123–4. 

“The eXtreme Games”’; Rinehart, ‘
sport’. 

18 The term transnational corporations, and the idea of transnational practices come from 

L.Sklair, The transnational capitalist class (Oxford: Blackwell, 2001). 

19 Robinson also highlights the need for an examination of globalisation processes in new 

sports. See V.Robinson, ‘Men, masculinities and rock climbing’, in Everyday culture 
working paper (The Open University, 2002, p.3–19). 

Notes     164

20 J.Clifford, Routes travel and translation in the late twentieth century (London: Harvard 

University Press, 1997, p.9). 

21 Key academic sources on surfing I’ve used include J.Fiske, ‘Reading the Beach’, in Reading 

the Popular (Unwin Hyman, 1989); R.Farmer, ‘Surfing: motivations, values and culture’, 
Journal of Sports Behaviour 15, no. 3 (1992):241–257; D.Booth, ‘Surfing 60s: A case study 
in the history of pleasure and discipline’, Australian Historical Studies 103 (1994):262–79; 
D.Booth, ‘Ambiguities in Pleasure and dis-cipline: The development of Competative 
surfing’, Journal of Sport History 22, no. 3 (1995):189–206; L.Stedman, ‘From Gidget to 
Gonad Man: Surfers, feminists and postmodernisation’, Australian and New Zealand 
Journal of Sociology 33, no. 1 (1997): 75–90; M.Stranger, ‘The aesthetics of risk: A study of 
surfing’, International Review for the Sociology of Sport 34, no. 3 (1999): 265–76; J.Abell, 
‘Values in a sporting subculture: An analysis of the issues of competitiveness and aggression 
in surfing’, (MA in politics, sport and society, University of Warwick, 2001); D.Booth, 
Australian beach cultures: The history of sun, sand and surf (London: Frank Cass 
Publishers, 2001); M.Henderson, ‘A Shifting line up: men, women and Tracks surfing 
magazine’, Continuum: Journal of media and Cultural Studies 15, no. 3 (2001):319–32. 

22 R.Robertson, Globalization: Social theory and global culture (London: Sage, 1992). 
23 C.Barker, Cultural Studies: Theory and Practice (London: Sage, 2000, p.113). 
24 Robertson, Globalization: Social theory and global culture. 
25 Allison, Amateurism in sport: An analysis and a defence. p.44. 
26 Maguire, Global Sport: Identities, Societies, civilizations. 
27 J.Maguire, ‘Sport and globalization’, in Handbook of sport studies, ed. E.Dunning (London: 

Sage, 2000, p.367). 

28 Maguire, Global Sport: Identities, Societies, civilizations. p.87, p.2.11. In a similar vein, Bale 
suggest such adventure experiences activities are part of a green wave that—along with other 
alternative body cultures—present a challenge to, and critique of, the ‘western sport model’. 
Bale, Landscapes of modern sport. 

29 A.Appadurai, Modernity at Large: Cultural dimensions of globalization (Minneapolis: 

University of Minnesota Press, 1996, p.32). 

30 Ibid. p.33. 
31 Ibid. p.35. 
32 Ibid. p.35. 
33 Ibid. p.33. 
34 B.Carrington and B.Wilson, ‘Global Clubcultures: Cultural flows and late modern dance 

music culture’, in Young People in Risk Society: The restructuring of youth identities in late 
modernity, ed. M.Cieslik and G.Pollock (Aldershot: Arena, 2002). 

35 D.Booth, ‘Surfing films and videos: adolescent fun, alternative lifestyle, adventure industry’, 

Journal of sport history 23, no. 3 (1996): 313–27. p.319. 

36 See Booth, Australian beach cultures: The history of sun, sand and surf. p.91. 
37 There are many interesting dimensions to surfing in its ‘residual’ cultural form possibly 

dating back to 2000 BC. For a description see B.Finney and J.Houston, Surfing: a history of 
the ancient Hawaiian sport (San Francisco: Pomegranate Artbooks, 1996). See also 
A.Gabbard, Girl in the curl: a century of women in surfing (Seattle: Seal Press). For a 
discussion of the significance of pre-colonial, colonial and post colonial body cultures see 
J.Bale and M.Cronin, ‘Introduction: Sport and postcolonialism’, in Sport and 
postcolonialism, ed. M.Cronin (Oxford: Berg, 2003). 

38 D.Booth, ‘Surfing: The cultural and technological determinants of a dance’, Culture, Sport, 
Society 2, no. 1 (1999):36–55. p.44. See also Finney and Houston, Surfing: a history of the 
ancient Hawaiian sport. 

39 Finney and Houston, Surfing: a history of the ancient Hawaiian sport. 
40 See Booth, Australian beach cultures: The history of sun, sand and surf. p.91. 

Notes     165

41 Appadurai, Modernity at Large: Cultural dimensions of globalization. See also Clifford, 

Routes travel and translation in the late twentieth century. 

42 J.Urry, Globalizing the tourists gaze, www.comp.lancs.ac.uk/sociology/soc056ju.html 
(Department of Sociology, Lancaster University, 2002, accessed February 12 2003). 

43 Booth, Australian beach cultures: The history of sun, sand and surf. p.91. 
44 Ibid. 
45 Booth, ‘Surfing: The cultural and technological determinants of a dance’, p.47. 
46 Booth, Australian beach cultures: The history of sun, sand and surf. p.91, 93. 
47 See Ibid. p.94.  
48 See Ibid. p.97. 
49 See Booth, ‘Surfing films and videos: adolescent fun, alternative lifestyle, adventure 

industry’, As Booth notes Endless Summer (and Endless Summer 2) is an interesting case in 
illustrating the commercial potential of surf films both within and outside of the surf culture. 

50 See Booth, Australian beach cultures: The history of sun, sand and surf. p.95. 
51 See Finney and Houston, Surfing: a history of the ancient Hawaiian sport; Abell, ‘Values in 

a sporting sub-culture: An analysis of the issues of competitiveness and aggression in 
surfing’. 

52 Urry, Globalizing the tourists gaze (accessed). 
53 Appadurai, Modernity at Large: Cultural dimensions of globalization. p.4 
54 Ibid. p.36. 
55 Maguire, Global Sport: Identities, Societies, civilizations. p.105. 
56 J.Urry, The Global media and cosmopolitanism, 

www.comp.lancs.ac.uk/sociology/soc056ju.html(Department of Sociology, Lancaster 
University, 2000, accessed February 12 2003). He argues that there are dangers with 
suggesting that ‘cosmopolitanism’ is a ‘specific cultural type’ distinguishable from locals, 
tourists, migrants and so on, so sets out a ‘model of cosmopolitanism’ listing key 
predispositions and practices. 

57 Ibid (accessed). 
58 Surfer, February 1996 p.34. See for example, the environmental movements based around 
surfing such as the SAS, Surfers Against Sewage (UK), and Surfers Alliance (US). These 
discourses around environmentalism—and their effectiveness—are discussed in B.Wheaton, 
Privatised consumption and Eco movements in ‘Surfers against sewage’ (Paper presented at 
Leisure Studies Association conference, Gloucester, 1999). 

59 Booth, ‘Surfing films and videos: adolescent fun, alternative lifestyle, adventure industry’, 

p.319. See also Booth, Australian beach cultures: The history of sun, sand and surf. 

60 Booth, ‘Surfing: The cultural and technological determinants of a dance’, p.45. 
61 Ibid. 
62 See Booth, ‘Ambiguities in Pleasure and discipline: The development of Competative 

surfing’. 

63 Ibid. 
64 See Appadurai, Modernity at Large: Cultural dimensions of globalization. Robertson, 

Globalization: Social theory and global culture. 

65 Although Finney and Houston, Surfing. a history of the ancient Hawaiian sport explore the 

existence of pre colonial surfing forms in many counties. For example, Maoris in New 
Zealand enjoyed body surfing, as did indigenous people of coastal Africa. Finney and 
Houston, Surfing: a history of the ancient Hawaiian sport. 

66 Despite these contradictions these attitudes point to the surfer as cosmopolitans. 
67 Clifford, Routes travel and translation in the late twentieth century. p.9. 
68 See for example; Ibid; J.Urry, Global complexity (Cambridge: Polity, 2003). 
69 For a discussion of this literature see Alan Bairner this volume. 

Notes     166

70 M.Silk and D.Andrews, ‘Beyond a boundary? sport, transnational advertising and the 

reimagining of national culture’, Journal of sport and social issues 25, no. 2, May (2001): 
180–201. 

71 D.Andrews and C.Cole, ‘On issue: the nation reconsidered’, Ibid. 26 (2002): 123–124. p.123. 
72 Maguire, Global Sport: Identities, Societies, civilizations. p.176. 
73 Although surfing’s role in the complex identity politics of in Hawaii is a striking exception 

that requires further investigation—see on. 

74 In surfing, competitors from the USA are differentiated into USA or Haw—the latter 

indicating that they are Hawaiians.  

75 Maguire, Global Sport: Identities, Societies, civilizations p.105. 
76 Appadurai, Modernity at Large: Cultural dimensions of globalization p.177. 
77 For a discussion of these values in the windsurfing culture see Wheaton, ‘Just Do it: 

Consumption, commitment and identity in the windsurfing subculture’. 

78 Clifford, Routes travel and translation in the late twentieth century. 
79 Maguire, Global Sport: Identities, Societies, civilizations p.186, citing Elias, 1996 p.153. 
80 Wheaton, ‘Just Do it: Consumption, commitment and identity in the windsurfing subculture’. 
81 S.Lash, Sociology of Postmoderism, 1st ed. (London & NY: Routledge, 1990, p.37). 
82 Urry, The Global media and cosmopolitanism (accessed). 
83 Maguire calls these types of sport migrants with no attachment to place ‘mercenaries’ 

Maguire, Global Sport: Identities, Societies, civilizations. p.105. 

84 A.Bennett, Popular music and youth culture: Music, identity and place (Basingstoke: 

Macmillan press itd., 2000, p.53). 

85 Ibid. p.53 
86 Ibid. p.53. 
87 Borden, Skateboarding, space and the city: Architecture and the body. 
88 Urry, The Global media and cosmopolitanism. 
89 Surfer, Feb., 1996; p.20. 
90 F.Mort, ‘The politics of consumption’, in New Times: The changing Face of politics in the 

1990’s, ed. M.Jacques (London: Lawrence & Wishart, 1989, p.170). 

91 J.Stratton, ‘On the Impossibility of Subcultural Origins’, in The Subcultures reader, ed. 

K.Gelder (London & NY: Routledge, 1997, pp.183–4). 

92 C.Palmer, ‘Death, danger and the selling of risk in alternative sports’, in Understanding 

Lifestyle sports: consumption, identity and difference, ed. B.Wheaton, 2004. 
93 Appadurai, Modernity at Large: Cultural dimensions of globalization. p.32. 
94 Maguire, Global Sport: Identities, Societies, civilizations. p.145. 
95 Ibid. p.150. 
96 Ibid. p.148, 210. 
97 See K.Kusz, ‘Extreme sports, white masculinity and the white male backlash politics in late 
1990s America’, in North Amercian Sociology of Sport Association (Cleveland: 1999); Kusz, 
‘Extreme America: The Cultural Politics of Extreme Sports in 1990s America’. 

98 Rinehart, ‘
99 Ibid. p.507. 
100 T.Miller and others, Globalization and sport: playing the world (London: Sage, 2001, 

 Arriving Sport: Alternatives to formal sport’. p.507. 

101 Beal and Wilson, ‘“Chicks dig scars”: Commercialisation and the transformations of skate 

p.65). 

boarders’ identities’. 

102 See B.Wheaton and B.Beal, ‘“Keeping it real”: Subcultural media and the discourses of 
authenticity in alternative sport’, International Review for the Sociology of Sport, vol.38, 
No.2, pp. 155–76: S.Thornton, Club cultures: Music, media and subcultural capital 
(Cambridge: Polity Press, 1995). 

Notes     167

103 Wheaton and Beal, ‘“Keeping it real”: Subcultural media and the discourses of authenticity 

in alternative sport’. 

104 Booth, ‘Surfing films and videos: adolescent fun, alternative lifestyle, adventure industry’, 

p.322. 

p.321. 

105 Stranger, ‘The aesthetics of risk: A study of surfing’. See also Margaret Henderson, ‘A 

Shifting Line-Up: men, women and Tracks surfing magazine’, Continuum: Journal of Media 
and Cultural Studies, Vol.15, No. 3, 2001, pp.319–32. 

106 Ibid., p.273.  
107 Booth, ‘Surfing filrns and videos: adolescent fun, alternative lifestyle, adventure industry’, 

108 Ibid., p.324. 
109 D.Hebdige, ‘After the Masses’, in New Times: The changing Face of politics in the 1990’s, 

ed. M.Jacques (London: Lawrence & Wishart, 1989, p.81). 

110 Wheaton and Beal, ‘“Keeping it real”: Subcultural media and the discourses of authenticity 

111 Ibid. 
112 Wheaton, ‘Just Do it: Consumption, commitment and identity in the windsurfing 

in alternative sport’. 

subculture’. 

in alternative sport’. 

113 Wheaton and Beal, ‘“Keeping it real”: Subcultural media and the discourses of authenticity 

114 Ibid. 
115 Ibid. 
116 Ibid. 
117 I claim that this apparent lack of heterogeneity or ‘individuality’ was not because I could 
not ‘read’ or appreciate the subtleties in subcultural style; my interviewees concurred that 
there was a recognisable subcultural style, which newcomers soon became quite competent 
at ‘reading.’ 

118 Although European, Australian and North American collections of the same brand are often 

119 Wheaton, ‘Just Do it: Consumption, commitment and identity in the windsurfing 

different. 

subculture’. 

120 Interviewee quoted in B.Wheaton, ‘Consumption, lifestyle and gendered identities in post-

modern sports: the case of windsurfing’ (PhD, University of Brighton, 1997). 

121 As part of a wider differentiation and fragmentation of the male fashion market. See 
S.Nixon, Hard Looks: Masculinities, Spectatorship and Contemporary Consumption 
(London: UCL Press, 1996). 

122 Interviewee quoted in Abell, ‘Values in a sporting sub-culture: An analysis of the issues of 
competitiveness and aggression in surfing’. Mike Doyle’s description of the evolution and 
development of surf wear industry from a California-based cottage industry in the early 
1960s, illustrates a similar process of commercialisation, incorporation and resistance. 
M.Doyle, Morning glass: The adventures of a legendary waterman (Three Rivers, CA: 
Manzantia Press, 1993). Yet where the historical and cultural context of the UK in the 1990s 
differs is that it was not just particular brands, but the whole ‘image’ that was becoming 
incorporated into the mainstream. With this prevalence of advertisements in men’s 
magazines and the clothing available in the high street—even in male order catalogues—surf 
style rather than individual brands became a ‘style’, available to anyone with the financial 
resources to ‘buy into’ it. Doyle, Morning glass: The adventures of a legendary waterman. 

123 Stedman, ‘From Gidget to Gonad Man: Surfers, feminists and postmodernisation’, p.80. 
124 Ibid. 
125 Ibid. 
126 Booth, ‘Surfing films and videos: adolescent fun, alternative lifestyle, adventure industry’, 

p.323. 

Notes     168

127 Wheaton and Beal, ‘“Keeping it real”: Subcultural media and the discourses of authenticity 

in alternative sport’. 

128 Thornton, Club cultures: Music, media and subcultural capital. p.116. 
129 T.Skelton and G.Valentine, ‘Cool places: An introduction to youth and youth cultures’, in 
Cool Places: Geographies of youth cultures, ed. D.Chambers (London: Routledge, 1998).  

130 What Maguire following Elias calls achievement sports. See Maguire, Global Sport: 

Identities, Societies, civilizations. 

131 Snow boarder, interviewed on Ski Sunday, BBC television 5 Jan 1997. 
132 His medal was later re-instated. Snowboarding’s inclusion in the Olympics has caused 

much debate, and this incident needs to be seen in the context of a wider fracture in 
snowboarding culture at that time and its belief that the FIS (international ski federation) was 
trying to appropriate snowboarding for its own commercially driven ends. 

133 See also Rinehart, ‘
134 B.Beal, ‘Disqualifying the Official: An exploration of Social Resistance Through the 

 Arriving Sport: Alternatives to formal sport’. 

Subculture of Skateboarding’, Sociology of Sport Journal 12, no. 3 (1995): 252–67. 

135 R.Rinehart, ‘Book review of Iain Borden, Skateboarding, space and the city: Architecture 

and the body’, International Review for Sociology of Sport 38, no. 2 (2003): 261–6. 

136 Beal and Wilson, ‘“Chicks dig scars”: Commercialisation and the transformations of skate 
boarders’ identities’. See also Borden, Skateboarding, space and the city: Architecture and 
the body. These authors outline skater’s claims about resistance to corporate takeover. 

137 Beal and Wilson, ‘“Chicks dig scars”: Commercialisation and the transformations of skate 

boarders’ identities’. 

138 Booth, ‘Ambiguities in Pleasure and discipline: The development of Competative surfing’, 

Booth, Australian beach cultures: The history of sun, sand and surf. p.112. 
139 Booth, Australian beach cultures: The history of sun, sand and surf. p.113. 
140 Ibid. p.113. 
141 Ibid. p.113. 
142 Farmer, ‘Surfing: motivations, values and culture’. 
143 Booth, Australian beach cultures: The history of sun, sand and surf. p.101. 
144 Kasprowicz, M. Opening editorial, the Soul Issue, Windsurf Magazine, May 1997, p.6. 
145 See M.Featherstone, ‘The body in consumer culture’, Theory Culture and Society 1, no. 2 

(1982):18–33. 

146 Kusz, ‘“Extreme America”: The Cultural Politics of Extreme Sports in 1990s America.’ 
147 K.Kusz, ‘“I want to be a minority”: The politics of youthful masculinities in sport and 

popular culture in 1990’s America’, Journal of Sport and Social Issues 25 (2001): 390–416; 
Kusz, ‘“Extreme America”: The Cultural Politics of Extreme Sports in 1990s America.’ 
148 R.Rinehart, ‘Babes on boards: Women as co-opted sports models’, in North Amercian 

Sociology of Sport Association (Cleveland: 1999). 

149 Ibid. 
150 L.Stedman, ‘From Gidget to Gonad Man: Surfers, feminists and postmodernisation, 

Australian and New Zealand Journal of Sociology, vol.33, No.1, pp.75–90. 

151 Wheaton and Beal, ‘“Keeping it real”: Subcultural media and the discourses of authenticity 

in alternative sport’. 

152 Booth, Australian beach cultures: The history of sun, sand and surf. 
153 Wheaton, ‘Just Do it: Consumption, commitment and identity in the windsurfing 

subculture’, Beal, ‘Disqualifying the Official: An exploration of Social Resistance Through 
the Subculture of Skateboarding’, A.Thornton, ‘Ultimate Masculinities: An ethnography of 
power and social difference in sport’, (PhD, Ontario Institute for Studies in Education of the 
University of Ontario, 1998); K.Anderson, ‘Snowboarding: the construction of gender in an 
emerging sport’, Journal of Sport and Social Issues 23, no. 1 (1999):55–79; Borden, 
Skateboarding, space and the city: Architecture and the body.  

Notes     169

154 B.Wheaton, ‘“New Lads?” Masculinities and the New Sport participant’, Men and 

Masculinities 2, no. 4 (2000):436–58. 

155 Ibid. 
156 Rinehart, ‘Book review of Iain Borden, Skateboarding, space and the city: Architecture and 

the body’. 

157 Andrews and Cole, ‘On issue: the nation reconsidered’, p.123. 
158 Rinehart, ‘
159 T.Layden, ‘What Is This 34-Year-Old Man Doing On A Skateboard? Making Millions’, 

 Arriving Sport: Alternatives to formal sport’. p.507. 

Sports Illustrated, 10 June 2002. 

160 See M.Borden, X.-Treme Profits: The economy stinks. Tech’s a mess. Not exactly fun and 

games out there—unless, like Activision, you’re making videogames. [InfoTrac Web: 
Expanded Academic ASAP] (Fortune, 4 March 2002, accessed 2002). 

161 Borden, Skateboarding, space and the city: Architecture and the body. p.1. 
162 M.McDonald and D.Andrews, ‘Michael Jordan: corporate sport and postmodern 

celebrityhood’, in Sport stars: the cultural politics of sporting celebrity, ed. S.Jackson 
(London: Routledge, 2001, p.20–21). 

163 Maguire, Global Sport: Identities, Societies, civilizations. p.93. 
164 See Carrington and Wilson, ‘Global Clubcultures: Cultural flows and late modern dance 

music culture’. 

165 Appadurai, Modernity at Large: Cultural dimensions of globalization. p.188. 

 

Index 

 

Addo, Farah 32 
Advertising campaigns 127 
Afghanistan: 

Soviet invasion 72; 
taliban regime 6 

Africa:  

champions 25; 
dividend from sport 18–23 

African delegates 32–3 
Age of goodwill 9 
Age of prestige 9 
Ali, Muhammed 114 
All-England Tennis Championships 106 
Allison, Lincoln: 90, 120; 

The Changing Politics of Sport 1–2; 
The Politics of Sport 1 

Alternative sport 140, 142, 160; 

emergence, diffusion and increasing popularity of 143; 
global commercial images and interests 141 

Amateur Athletics Association 51 
American Basketball Association 78 
American League 78 
American model of sport 74 
American sport: 

exporting 113–16; 
peculiarities and distinctiveness of 104–11; 
regulation of 77–80, 
see also United States 
American sporting heroes: 

recontextualisation of 137 

American sports leagues 76 
Americanisation 66, 101, 151; 
and globalisation 111–13; 
of lifestyle sports 153 

Americanism and modernity 101 
America’s Cup 2003 137 
Amsterdam Olympics 53 
Anderson 144 
Andrew, Rob 115 
Angulo, Mark 146 
Anti-globalisation 118 
Anti-trust legislation 79–80 
Apartheid regime 6  

Index     172

Appadurai, A. 143, 145, 148, 161 
Arbitration: 

as alternative to litigation 70; 
concept of lex mercatoria 71 

Archer, C. 26 
Arledge, Roone 107 
Association Internationale de la Presse Sportive 52 
Athlete: 

use of term 108 
Athleticism 108–9 
Australia 8, 11, 105, 116, 157–9 
Australian Lifesaving Club 144 

Bairner, Alan 3; 

Sport, Nationalism and Globalisation 92 

 

Ball, Phil 93 
Barcelona Olympics 56, 60 
BASE jumping 140 
Baseball 76–8, 103, 105 
Basketball 103–4, 111, 113 
Battle of Britain 14 
Bauman, Z. 133 
BBC 107 
Beal, B. 152–3, 157 
Beck, Peter 9 
Beckenbauer, Franz ‘Kaiser’ 30 
Beckham, David 3, 125, 127 
Berki, Bob 98 
Bertarelli, Ernesto 137 
Bikila, Abebe 19 
Billig, Michael 91 
BINGO 26, 43, 45, 162–3 
Black African footbail 19–20 
Black male bodies: 

subversive potential of 131 

Blair, Tony 17 
Blatter, Joseph ‘Sepp’ xi, 27–34, 36–40 
Blazer, Chuck 30, 34, 37, 41 
Bodies: 

commodification of 158–9 

Bodyline controversy 10 
‘Boom Boom Huckjam’ 160 
Boorstin, Daniel: 

The Image: 
A Guide to Pseudo Events in America 123 

Booth, D. 157 
Borden, M. 160 
Border-X 157 
Borderlessness in sport 2 
Borotra, Jean 10 
Bosman judgment 73 

Index     173

Boxing 72 
Boyce, Jim 41 
Boycotts 6 
Brands: 

evaluation of 153 

Brazilian football teams 12 
Britain in the world of Sport 14 
British concern for prestige 13–17 
British Olympic Association 51 
British Olympic Committee 10, 51 
Broadcasting agreements 84 
Broadcasting rights: 

collective marketing of 82–3 

Brown, Bruce: 

The Endless Summer 145 

Brundage, Avery 105 
BSkyB 83  
Bullfighting 93 
Business INGO see BINGO 
Butterworth, Brad 137 

 

California 157–8 
Calvinist theology of winners and losers 107–8 
Cameroonian football team 23 
Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament (CND) 10, 26 
Capitalist sport 105 
Carrington, B. 144 
Celebrity culture 126 
Central Council of Physical Recreation 14 
Central marketing 82 
Champions’ League 28–9, 83 
Chappert, D. 54 
Chattaway, Christopher 15 
Chelsea Football Club 3 
China 3, 6–9, 11 
Chirac, Jacques xi, 134–5 
Christian decency 105 
Christian morality of international affairs 7 
Chung, Mong Joon 37 
Civic nationalism 91 
Civil Service 3 
Classics of International Relations 5 
Clifford, J. 148 
Closed leagues 76 
Coates, John 58 
Coca-colonisation 4 
Cold War 7, 18, 53, 127 
Collective bargaining 79 
Collective marketing 82; 

broadcasting rights 82–3 

College football 109–10 

Index     174

College sport 101, 109–11, 113 
Commercial exploitation 27, 106 
Commercial motives vs. sporting motives 74 
Commercial promoters 67–8 
Commercialisation 116–17 
Commercialised sport: 
commodified 64–5; 
legal regulation 64 

Commercialism 68, 104–6 
Commodification 64–5, 125; 

of bodies 158–9; 
of style and attitude 153–4 

Commoditisation 151 
Commodity production and consumption 150–1 
Commonwealth Games 9, 19 
Competitions 158 
Compton, Denis 127 
Conrad, Peter 125 
Contested self-regulation 67 
Corporate hospitality 64 
Corporate interests 139 
Corrida de toros 93 
Corruption 28 
Cosell, Howard 107 
Cosmopolitanism 146 
County Championship 76 
Court of Arbitration for Sport 63, 69–71 
Coutts, Russell 137 
Crédit Suisse First Boston 29 
Cricket 11, 13, 76, 103, 105, 107, 114, 116–17, 128, 134 
Cronin, Mike 90 
Crozier, Adam 38 
Cultural Chernobyl 4 
Cultural conservatism 116–17 
Cultural differences 106–7 
Cultural influence 104 
Cultural nationalism 91 
Cultural power 102, 104 
Culture and globalisation 46 
Cycling 67 

 

Dallas 116–17 
Dassler, Horst 28 
Davis Cup 106 
Dean, Dixie 105 
Declaration on Sport 80 
de Coubertin, Pierre 9, 27, 49, 61 
De Groote Club 52 
Deliege vs. Liege Francophone de Judo 85 
Democracy in America 101 
Department of National Heritage 17 

Index     175

 

 

Deterritorialisation 67 
De Tocqueville, Alexis 101, 104, 117 
Developing nations 66 
Disraeli, Benjamin 7 
Doan, Catronia Le May 47 
Douglass, Carrie B. 93 
Draws 114 
Drewry, Arthur 43 
Drugs policy 68 
Durkheim, E. 123 

Economic dependency 22 
Economic exploitation 18, 27 
Economic prosperity 18 
Education and sport 109–11 
Elite performers 65 
Elite sport 16, 23 
Elite teams 67 
Elitism 101 
English Sports Council 17 
Entertainment status 106 
Environmental groups 150 
ESPN X-Games 141–2, 151–2, 157 
Ethnic nationalism 91 
Ethnoscapes 143–4 
Eurodisney 4 
European Championship 134 
European Commission 80, 83, 116 
European competition law 80 
European Court of Justice 80, 85 
European model of sport 73–7 
European regulation 80–5 
European sports league: 

structure 75 

European Union 9, 26, 73, 80–1 
Eurosport 151 
Exceptionalism: 

two-way 102–4 

Executive Sports Council 16 
Extreme sport 141, 158; 

sponsorship 142 

FA Cup 11, 163 
Fahey, John 57 
Farmer, R. 157 
Fascism 53, 55 
Fascist University Groups (FUGs) 55 
Fast food 103 
F-Crew 34, 40 
Featherstone, M. 125 
Federal League 78 

Index     176

Federation Internationale de Football Association see FIFA 
Federation of International Cricketers Association 128–30 
Fetishism 153 
FIA 83–4 
FIFA 2–3, 5, 22, 26–45, 64–5; 

bankruptcy 28; 
business credibility 28–9; 
financial crisis 28–32; 
future 41–2; 
Seoul congress 36–9; 
slogan 37 

Financescapes 143–4 
Fitzsimmons, Peter 8 
Football 11, 19, 20, 64, 80, 83, 93–4, 102–3, 105, 114–15, 117; 

crisis in 27–39; 
world governance 26–45 

Football Association 9, 104–5 
Football League 65, 76, 105 
Foreign Office 9–11 
Formula One racing 67 
Foster, Ken 3–4 
France: 

as multicultural or hybrid nation 134–6; 
‘cherry picked’ sports 24; 
in international sport 10 

Franchises: 

relocation of 79 
Fraser vs. MSL 80 
Frazer, J.G. 119–20 
Free agency for players 77–8 
Free Trade 87 
Freeman, Cathy 59, 121 
Fry, C.B. 127 
Furlong, John 46 

 

Gaelic Athletic Association (GAA) 88, 95–100 
Gaelic games 92–4, 98–9 
Gardner, Paul: 

Nice Guys Finish Last 107 

Gascoigne, Paul 133 
Gender politics 158–9 
Giddens, Anthony 50, 67 
Gilchrist, Paul 4 
Giulianotti, R. 67 
Gladstone, W.E. 7 
Global capitalism 150 
Global civil society 5 
Global Cricket Corporation (GCC) 128 
Global economy 143 
‘Global Hingis’ paradigm 133 
Global institutions and existing institutions 3 

Globalisation-from-above and globalisation-from-below 130 
Globalisation, Governmentalisation, Americanisation, Televisualisation and Commodification 
(GGATaC) 49 
Glocalisation: 

Index     177

 

Global migration 133 
Global political economy and sport star 125–9 
Global sport 121 
Global stars see Sport stars 
Globalisation: 

and Americanisation 111–13; 
and culture 46; 
and governance 65–8; 
and nationalism 4; 
and sport 1–4, 46; 
concept of 2; 
dimensions of 113; 
significance of ‘the local’ in 149–50; 
strands of 65–6; 
tensions caused by 118 

use of term 143 
Goldstein, Joshua 5 
Golf 118 
Gondona, Julio 31 
Goodhart, Philip 15 
Governance and globalisation 65–8 
Government indifference 13 
Government involvement 1, 17 
Government support 13 
Gramsci, Antonio 104 
Gramscian influences 89 
Green Bay Packers 107 
Gretzky, Wayne 46 
Grigorieva, Tatiana 59 
Gul wetsuits 155 

Hargreaves, Jennifer 131 
Havelange, Jaoa 11, 37–8, 40 
Hawaii 157–8 
Hawk, Tony 142, 160 
Hayatou, Issa 36 
Hebdige, D. 153 
Hellerman, Steven 102, 105, 114 
Helsinki Olympics 14 
Helsinki Report 81 
Hendrix, Kirk 41 
Henry, Thierry 128 
Herder, 134 
Hillary, Edmund 124 
Hockey 66, 78, 113 
Hollywood 103 
Holt, Richard 121, 138 

Index     178

 

Hooks, Bell 131 
Hooliganism 114 
Houlihan, Barrie 67, 97 
Howell, Denis 15–16 
Human rights doctrines 7 

IAAF 22 
ICC Cricket World Cup 128 
Ice hockey 78, 93–4, 103, 106 
Icon: 

notion of 124–5 

Idealism 7 
Identity politics 148 
Ideoscapes 143–5 
Image enhancement effect 6 
Imperialism 66 
Inter-Collegiate Athletic Administration 110 
International behaviour 6 
International governmental organisations (IGOs) 26, 43–4 
International non-governmental organisations (INGOs) 26, 43, 45, 61, 72, 162 
International Olympic Committee (IOC) 2–3, 5, 10, 22–3, 28, 45–6, 49, 51, 57–60, 62–3, 68–72, 
104 
International politics 7 
International relations 5–25; 

definition of 7 

International sporting federations: 

regulation 68–73 

International system 1–2 
International University Games 54–5 
Internationalisation of sport 65–6 
Ireland 96, 98, 127–8 
Irish republican ideology 94 
Irish Sports Almanac 96 
ISL (International Sports and Leisure) 28–9 
ISMM 28 
Ivy League 110 

Jackson, S.J. 136 
James, Clive 60 
James, C.L.R.: 

Beyond a Boundary 120 

Jameson, F. 124 
Johansson, Lennart 31, 36 
Jones, Stephen 89 
Jordan, Michael 114, 130–1, 136, 138 

Kant, I. 130 
Keane, Roy 127 
Keating, Annita 58 
Keating, Paul 58 
Keino, Kip 19 

 

 

Index     179

 

 

Kelly, Graham 41 
Kenya 19, 20 
Kenyatta, President 19 
Kenyon, Peter 116 
Killion, Ann 102 
KirchMedia 29 
KirchSport 29 
Knight, Phil 126 
KPMG 31 
Kulturkampf 4 
Kusz, K. 141, 158 

Labour exemption 79 
Lacoste, Ren, 127 
Lancashire Lightning 103 
Langer, Bernhard 5 
League of Nations 10 
Legal intervention 63 
Lehtonen & Castors Canada Dry Namur-Braine vs. PRBSR 85 
Lenz, Jurgen 28 
Le Pen, Jean-Marie 134–6 
Lewis vs. Bruno 72 
Lex mercatoria: 
concept of 71 

Liberal democracy 127 
Liberalisation 66 
Lifestyle sport stars 142 
Lifestyle sports 4; 

Americanisation 153; 
cultures 153; 
empirical studies 142; 
global-local nexus 142; 
globalisation 143–4; 
institutionalisation 156–8; 
masculine and feminine identities 159; 
overview 140–1; 
participation and performance 160; 
professionalisation 156–8 

Lindsay, Maurice 115 
Local heroes 118–39 
Lombardi, Vince 107 
London Olympics 51–2 
Los Angeles Olympics 54, 62, 72, 113 

McCarthy, Mick 127 
McGeoch, Rod 58 
MacIntyre, Alasdair 138 
McKinsey & Company 35 
Magazines 152, 159 
Maguire, Joseph 49, 88, 143, 146, 148, 160 
Mahaffy, John 105 

The Recruit 132–3 

Marijuana 157 
Market and media: 
symbiosis of 124 

Market-based economy 127 
Market forces 131 
Market liberalism 117 
Marketolatry 87 
Markovits, Andrei S.: 

Offside 102, 105, 114 

Marxism 12, 89, 97 
Marxist-Leninist philosophy 12 
Marylebone Cricket Club 105 
Masculine identities 157–8 
Mass media 152 
Matthaus, Lothar 5 
Media: 

and market symbiosis 124; 
growth of 125; 
interests 139; 
outlets 27 

Mediascapes 143–5 
Melbourne Olympics 121 
Melnick, M.J. 136 
Merton, Robert 2 
Michener, James 106 
Miller, T. et al 27, 49, 87, 89, 92 
Minority sports 148 
Mobutu, President 20 
Modell, Art 108 
Modernisation 116; 

Maillart, Ella 62 
Major, John 16 
Major League 103, 105–6,108–11, 114–16 
Mandela, Nelson 125 
Mangan, J. 121 
Manifold, John: 

theory 98 

Modernity: 

and Americanism 101 

Mohamed Bin Hammam Al-Abdulla 37 
Monnington, Terry 3 
Monopolies 78 
Morgenthau, Hans J. 7, 9 
Morozov, G. 26 
Moscow Olympics 1, 6, 16, 72 
Motor sports 83 
Muammer Al-Qadhafi Assadi 38 
Mugabe, President 21–2 
Mythology 108 

Index     180

 

Index     181

Nairn, Tom 87, 90 
Nation: 

definition 90 

Nation state: 

definition 90; 
obsolescence of 147 

National Basketball Association 78 
National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) 109–11 
National cultures: 

NICL (New International Division of Cultural Labor) 87 

re-imagining 148 

National football leagues 83 
National Front 134–5 
National Hockey League 78, 113 
National identity 88, 91; 

(in)significance of 147–9 

National League 78 
National leagues: 

preservation of 75 

National legal supervision 63 
National Lottery 11, 17 
National Olympic Committee (NOC) 72 
National regulation 71–3 
National sports 92–3 
National status 92–5 
National team competition 76 
National units: 

significance of 147 

Nationalism 88–91, 97–8; 

and globalisation 4; 
power of 88 
Nationality 91 
Nations and nationalism 87–100 
Nazi salute 10 
Nazism 53 
NBC 151 
NBC Gravity Games 142 
Neo-colonialism 22 
Neoliberalism 127 
Nester, William: 

International Relations 5 

Rugby Union teams 12; 
threat of the ‘Other’ 136; 
see also Team New Zealand 

Newbolt, Sir Henry 106, 121 
Newscorp 2 
NFL 78–9 
Nice Declaration 81 
Nicholson, Michael: 

International Relations 5 

New International Division of Cultural Labour 49 
New Zealand 6; 

Index     182

Nike Corporation 130, 132 
Nixon, Howard 111 
Nixon, Richard 36 
Nkruma, Kwame 20 
Noel-Baker, Phillip 10 
Nomadism 137–8 
Non-governmental organisations 2–3 
Norgay, Tenzing 124 
Northern Ireland 94 

Oakley 150 
Offside 102 
Ohio State University 110 
Olympic Charter 72 
Olympic Games 6–8, 10, 12–14, 46, 50–6; 

Amsterdam 1928 53; 
as global phenomenon 46–62; 
Barcelona 1992 56, 60; 
Helsinki 1952 14; 
London 1908 51–2; 
Los Angeles 1932 54; 
Los Angeles 1984 62, 72, 113; 
Melbourne 1956 121; 
Moscow 1980 1, 6, 16, 72; 
profile of 49; 
Rome 1960 19, 121; 
Seoul 1988 56; 
significance in global culture 61; 
Stockholm 1912 13; 
Sydney 2000 24, 56–60, 121, 
see also British Olympic Committee; 
International Olympic Committee (IOC); 
National Olympic Committee (NOC); 
United States Olympic Committee; 
Winter Olympics 
Olympic Museum 62 
Olympic Village 60 
Olympic Winter Games 46 
O’Neil 151 
Orwell, George: 

The Sporting Spirit 10 

Other: 

threat of 136 

OXFAM 26 

Paralympics 8 
Parkinson, Michael 116 
Patriotism 91 
Pearson 157 
Peebo, Annely 47 
People’s Republic of China 3, 6–9, 11 

 

 

Index     183

Perry, Fred 127 
Petain, Marshall 10 
Physical education 18 
Ping-pong diplomacy 11 
Political agenda 11 
Political nationalism 91 
Politics of international sport 6 
Pope Pius XI 163 
Pound, Dick 28 
Premier League 65, 83, 114 
Prestige: 

and sport 5–25; 
British concern for 13–17 

Private arbitration 63, 71 
Private clubs 69, 71 
Private contracts 69 
Private governance 68–9 
Private justice 69–71 
Professionalism 68 
Promotion functions 83–4 
Pseudo-sports 141 
Public funding 15 
PWA (World Professional Windsurfing Association) 158 
Pyeongchang 47 
Pyramid systems 115 

 

 

Quicksilver 150–1, 155 

Racehorses 67 
Rationalisation 66 
‘Razzmatazz’ 106–7 
Rebagliati, Ross 156 
Reeb, M. 71 
Regime development 3 
Regional regulation 73–7 
Regulation: 

American sport 77–80; 
commercialised sport 64; 
European 80–5; 
global sport, alternative models 63–86; 
international sporting federations 68–73; 
national 71–3; 
regional 73–7; 
self-regulation 67 

Republic of Ireland see Ireland 
Republican virtue 105 
Rice, Grantland 105 
Rimet, Jules 43 
Rinehart, R. 141, 151, 157–60 
Rival leagues 78 
Robber Baron 3 

Index     184

 

Robertson, R. 143 
Roche, Maurice 48 
Rock music 103 
Rojek, C. 128 
Rome Olympics 19, 121 
Rooney, Wayne 128 
Roosevelt Commission 110 
Rous, Sir Stanley 37, 43 
Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC) 96 
Rugby 94 
Rugby League 76–7, 103, 105 
Rugby Union 103, 115 
Ruth, Babe 105 

St Patrick’s Boys’ School 19 
Salzburg 47 
Samaranch, Juan 7 
Schere, Jay 89 
Schneider Trophy Air Race 14 
Scholte, J.A. 65 
Schumacher, Michael 5 
Schussel, Wolfgang 47 
Scotland 92–4 
Second World War 53, 62 
Securitisation concept 35 
Seeldrayers, Rudolf 43 
Seismic events 126 
Self-regulation 83–5 
Seoul Olympics 56 
Sexualised commodities 131 
Single entity theory 80 
SINGO 163 
Singore Girls’ School 19 
Sixth All Africa Games 21 
Skateboarding 142; 

growth in 141 
Sklair, L. 49, 132 
Slater, Kelly 142 
Smith, Anthony D. 88 
Snowboarding 151, 156–7 
Soccer see Football 
South Africa 6 
Soviet Union 10–12, 24; 

invasion of Afghanistan 72; 
sports policy 6 

Spain 93 
Sponsorship 27, 68; 

extreme sport 142; 
revenues 28 

Sport: 

and education 109–11; 

Index     185

and globalisation 1–4; 
as last resort 18–23; 
future of 2 

Sport England 17 
Sport heroines 131 
Sport: 

Raising the Game 16 

Sport stars 118–39; 

and global political economy 125–9; 
and processes of political change 134; 
as ‘citizens of nowhere’ 133; 
as cultural product and process 126; 
as entertainers 124–5; 
as part of global political economy of sport 128; 
concept of 122–5; 
iconic 123–4; 
image of 127–32; 
loyalty and location 132–8; 
political or ethical issues 132; 
prostitution of 124; 
questions burdening 138; 
reputation of 130; 
response to political and ethical questions 118–39, 
see also sporting heroes 

Sporting disputes 71 
Sporting dividend: 
nature of 24–5 

Sporting elites 121, 125 
Sporting goods 117 
Sporting heroes: 

ambivalence concerning 119; 
and native community 128; 
and products 127; 
as species of commodity 126; 
as totemic construction 119–20; 
concept of 119–21; 
globalisation as threat 118; 
location of 119, 
see also sport stars 

Sporting motives vs. commercial motives 74 
Sporting success 23 
Sporting Times 13 
Sports Council 15–17 
Sports culture 103 
Sports dividend 1 
Sports film 113 
Sports-goods industry 103 
Sportsman/woman: 
use of term 108 

Stanley Cup 46 
State-funded institute of sport 16 
State intervention in sport 15 

Index     186

Stedman 159 
Stern, Robert W. x 
Stockholm Olympics 13 
Stratton, J. 150 
Subcultural media 150–3 
Sub-Saharan Africa 18, 23 
Sugden, John 3 
Super League 76–7 
Superbowl 109 
Superlativism 108–9 
Surfer Girl 159 
Surfers Against Sewage (SAS) 150, 156 
Surfing 142, 149, 152; 

anti-style 154–6; 
culture 145–6; 
global diffusion 144–7; 
global village of 147; 
media 159 

Surfing World 145 
Swiss Criminal Code 36 
Swiss Federal Council 72 
Swiss Federal Tribunal 70 
Sydney Olympics 24, 56–60, 121 
Sydney Organizing Committee for the Olympic Games (SOCOG) 59 

 

Taiwan 6 
Taylor, Gordon 116 
Taylor, Trevor 5 
TEAM 28 
Team Bath 113–14 
Team New Zealand 137 
Technoscapes 143–4 
Television 24, 27, 29, 64, 101, 105–7, 111, 131 
Tendulkar, Sachin 128 
Tennis 106 
Thatcher, Margaret 1, 16 
Third World 18, 22, 49 
Thompson, Don 121 
Thompson, Mortimer Neal 107 
Thoreau, Henry 119 
Tognoni, Guido 29, 33, 40 
Tomlinson, Alan 3 
Tomlinson, John 50 
Totemic logic of sporting hero 119–20 
Totemism: 

concept of 119–20 

Toure 132 
Transnational capitalist class 132 
Transnational corporate forces 148 
Transnational corporations (TNCs) 127–8, 130 
Transnational culture 142 

Index     187

 

Transnational media ownership 152 
Turkey 7 

Ueberroth, Peter 113 
UEFA 28, 80–1, 83 
UK Sports Council (now UK Sport) 17 
UNESCO 44 
United Kingdom: 

lottery investment 24 
United Nations 23, 26, 44 
United Nations Commission for Latin America 112 
United States: 

role in world sport 101–17, 
see also American sport 

United States Olympic Committee 72 
Universalisation of sport 66 
Universities in American sport 101, 109 
Urry, John 87, 91, 144 

 

 

Van Rossem, G. 52 
Vatican Council 163 
Velappan, Peter 37 
Vertical solidarity 75 
Vest, Jake 102 
Vichy government 10 
Videos 153, 159–60 
Vinen, Richard x 
Vivendi-Universal 28 

Wahine 159 
Wake boarding 140 
Waltz, Mike 146 
Warner, Jack 31 
WBA 72 
Weber, Max 123 
Webster, F.A.M. 13–14 
West Indies 120, 134 
Westernisation 66, 158 
Westphalian system 2, 112 
Wheaton, Belinda 4, 88, 153 
Wigan Warriors 103 
Will, David 32, 38 
Wilson, B. 144 
Wilson, C. 152 
Windsurf 152 
Windsurfing 142, 148–9, 151, 158; 

anti-style 154–6; 
magazines 159 
Winners and losers: 

calvinist theology of 107–8 

Winter Olympics 46 

Index     188

Wolfenden Report 14 
Women see Gender 
Women’s World Cup 27 
Woods, Tiger 118, 131, 138 
World Anti-Doping Agency 2 
World Bank 23 
World Cup 11, 20, 23, 27–8, 35, 42–3, 97, 102, 109, 114, 125, 127, 134, 148 
World Hockey Association 78 
World Trade Organisation 9, 117 
Wray, Nigel 115 

Yachting 137 
Yearly Littoriali Sporting Competition 55 
Young, Nat 157 

Zen-Ruffinen, Michel 29, 33–6, 40  
 

 

 

