ANRV389-CB25-26

ARI

4 September 2009

21:46

Listeria monocytogenes
Membrane Trafﬁcking and
Lifestyle: The Exception
or the Rule?
Javier Pizarro-Cerd´a1-3 and Pascale Cossart1-3

1Unit´e des Interactions Bact´eries-Cellules, Institut Pasteur, Paris F75015, France
2INSERM, U604, Paris F75015, France
3INRA, USC2020, Paris F75015, France; email: javier.pizarro-cerda@pasteur.fr,
pascale.cossart@pasteur.fr

Key Words
endocytosis, autophagy, membrane microdomains, cytoskeleton,
caveolae, clathrin

Abstract
Listeria monocytogenes is an intracellular bacterial pathogen that pro-
motes its internalization within nonprofessional phagocytes by interact-
ing with speciﬁc host cell receptors. L. monocytogenes resides transiently
in a membrane-bound compartment before escaping into the host cell
cytosol where bacterial proliferation takes place. Actin-based motil-
ity then promotes cell-to-cell pathogen spread. Extensive studies on
cytoskeleton rearrangements, membrane trafﬁcking, and other events
have established this microorganism as an archetype of cellular func-
tion subversion for intracellular parasitism. Here we discuss the most
signiﬁcant membrane trafﬁcking pathways hijacked by L. monocytogenes
during the host cell infection process and compare them to those of
other intracellular pathogens, in particular Shigella ﬂexneri, Salmonella
enterica, and Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

649

Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2009. 25:649–70

First published online as a Review in Advance on
August 12, 2009

The Annual Review of Cell and Developmental
Biology is online at cellbio.annualreviews.org

This article’s doi:
10.1146/annurev.cellbio.042308.113331
Copyright c(cid:2) 2009 by Annual Reviews.
All rights reserved

1081-0706/09/1110-0649$20.00

Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2009.25:649-670. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitatsbibliothek Osnabruck on 11/13/10. For personal use only.ANRV389-CB25-26

ARI

4 September 2009

21:46

Contents
INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 650
ENTRY INTO TARGET CELLS . . . . 650

Subversion of Host Cell Receptors

for Pathogen Internalization . . . . . 650

Lipid Rafts and Membrane

Organization at Pathogen
Entry Sites . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 655

Clathrin and Caveolin: New Players

and New Links with the
Cytoskeleton . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 657

LIFE IN AND ESCAPE FROM

THE VACUOLE. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 659
Maturation of the Vacuole . . . . . . . . . . 659
Listeriolysin O and Vacuolar

Escape . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 659

INTRACYTOSOLIC SURVIVAL

AND AUTOPHAGY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 661
CELL-TO-CELL SPREAD . . . . . . . . . . 663
CONCLUSIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 664

INTRODUCTION
Invasin of Yersinia pseudotuberculosis was the ﬁrst
reported bacterial gene product involved in the
invasion of host eukaryotic target cells (Isberg
et al. 1987), which opened the door to a new
ﬁeld that emerged at the boundaries of classical
cell biology and microbiology: cellular micro-
biology. During the same period, the hemolysin
gene of Listeria monocytogenes was characterized
and became not only the ﬁrst L. monocytogenes
virulence factor to have its gene characterized
but also the ﬁrst bacterial gene product for
which a function critical to bacterial survival
within host cells was attributed (Mengaud et al.
1987). Since then, the molecular adaptations
of L. monocytogenes to the eukaryotic host cell
environment have been studied extensively
(Figure 1), leading to the identiﬁcation of a
broad range of new bacterial virulence factors
that, similar to the Arp2/3-dependent actin-
polymerizing ActA product or the InlB invasion
protein, have paved the road toward profound
discoveries in the areas of cell and developmen-
tal biology. Many other bacterial pathogens

Pizarro-Cerd´a· Cossart

650

have evolved fascinating adaptations to interact
with and hijack host cell functions, and in the
following sections we compare their molecular
strategies with those of L. monocytogenes with
the goal of drawing common themes in mem-
brane trafﬁcking subversion and intracellular
lifestyle.

ENTRY INTO TARGET CELLS

Subversion of Host Cell Receptors
for Pathogen Internalization
With the analysis of
the L. monocytogenes
genome, it was highlighted that this pathogen
possesses an important arsenal of surface pro-
teins that modulate bacterial interactions with
the environment, in particular with host eu-
karyotic cells (Bierne & Cossart 2007). Among
these bacterial surface molecules, the inter-
nalin family is characterized by the presence
of amino-terminal leucine-rich repeat modules
implicated in protein-protein interactions. Two
members of this family are critical for the inter-
nalization of L. monocytogenes within nonprofes-
sional phagocytic cells through interaction with
cell-speciﬁc receptors (Bierne et al. 2007).

The prototype internalin (also known as
InlA) is a cell wall covalently anchored protein,
which binds the cellular adhesion molecule E-
cadherin and induces bacterial entry into polar-
ized human epithelial cells (Gaillard et al. 1991,
Mengaud et al. 1996) (Figure 2). E-cadherin
is normally involved in homophilic interac-
tions for the establishment and maintenance
of cell-to-cell contacts in epithelial tissues, and
L. monocytogenes exploits the E-cadherin local-
ization at the intestinal barrier to invade en-
terocytes during the initial stages of host col-
onization (Lecuit et al. 2001). E-cadherin is
also involved in the bacterial invasion of the
syncitio-trophoblast layer at later placental in-
fection stages (Disson et al. 2008). Through
studies in human epithelial cell lines, it has
been shown that, during host cell invasion,
L. monocytogenes hijacks the molecular machin-
ery associated with the cytoplasmic tail of
E-cadherin. β- and α-catenins, which are

Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2009.25:649-670. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitatsbibliothek Osnabruck on 11/13/10. For personal use only.ANRV389-CB25-26

ARI

4 September 2009

21:46

Entry: InlA & InlB

Listeria

Double-membrane
vacuole lysis:
LLO, PlcA, PlcB

Vacuole lysis: LLO

Intracellular movement and
cell-to-cell spread: ActA

Figure 1
Model of the Listeria monocytogenes intracellular life cycle. Interaction of the bacterial surface proteins InlA
and/or InlB with speciﬁc cellular receptors at the plasma membrane of host cells induces the internalization
of L. monocytogenes in a vacuole that is subsequently lysed by the pore-forming activity of the cholesterol-
dependent cytolysin lysteriolysin O (LLO). Once in the host cell cytoplasm, L. monocytogenes proliferates and
moves via the polymerization of host actin (stippled regions) triggered by the bacterial surface protein ActA.
Bacteria that reach the host plasma membrane induce the formation of membrane protrusions that invade
neighboring cells, and L. monocytogenes will be located in a double-membrane vacuole that is lysed by the
activity of LLO and two bacterial phospholipases, PlcA and PlcB. Redrawn with permission from the The
Journal of Cell Biology (Tilney & Portnoy 1989).

required to establish a functional link between
E-cadherin and the actin cytoskeleton in
adherens junctions (Imamura et al. 1999),
are recruited by L. monocytogenes
to entry
sites and are required for actin remodel-
ing during bacterial
invasion (Lecuit et al.
2000). The Arp2/3 complex and its acti-
vator cortactin, which direct actin assembly
in nascent cellular adhesive contacts in a
Rac-dependent manner (Helwani et al. 2004,
Kovacs et al. 2002), are also implicated during
L. monocytogenes internalization (Sousa et al.
2007). Study of the InlA/E-cadherin invasion
pathway allowed the identiﬁcation of a novel

guanosine-activating protein for RhoA and
Cdc42 named ARHGAP10 that is involved
in the recruitment of α-catenin to the
L. monocytogenes internalization site and neces-
sary for α-catenin recruitment to cell-cell junc-
tions (Sousa et al. 2005). The unconventional
myosin VIIa and its ligand vezatin are also func-
tionally involved in the formation of adherens
junctions and in the entry of L. monocytogenes in
epithelial cells (Sousa et al. 2004).

The other major internalin-like molecule
involved in entry is InlB, a bacterial effec-
tor loosely bound to the L. monocytogenes
lipoteichoic acid, which can be released

www.annualreviews.org • Listeria monocytogenes Membrane Trafﬁcking and Lifestyle

651

Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2009.25:649-670. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitatsbibliothek Osnabruck on 11/13/10. For personal use only.ANRV389-CB25-26

ARI

4 September 2009

21:46

Listeria

InlA

E–cadherin

Caveolin-1

Lipid raft

Src

Hakai

P

Ub

Clathrin

Cell membrane

Vezatin

β-catenin

α-catenin

Arf6

ARHGAP10

MyoVIIA

Rac

Cortactin

Src

P
Cortactin

Arp2

Arp3

Actin

Figure 2
Entry of Listeria monocytogenes in host polarized cells via the InlA invasion pathway. In polarized epithelial
cells, the bacterial protein InlA interacts with its receptor E-cadherin located in lipid rafts to promote
cellular invasion. Caveolin-1, associated with lipid rafts, is involved in the Src-dependent phosphorylation of
E-cadherin. This phosphorylation triggers the ubiquitination of E-cadherin by the ubiquitin ligase Hakai
and the recruitment of a clathrin coat. β-catenin interacts directly with the cytoplasmic tail of E-cadherin to
promote recruitment of α-catenin, which in turn interacts with actin and with other effectors including the
Rho/Cdc42 guanosine activating protein ARHGAP10 and the small GTPase Arf6. Myosin VIIA provides
the tracking force along actin ﬁlaments to promote bacterial internalization while its ligand vezatin mediates
attachment to the membrane. Src is also involved in the phosphorylation of cortactin that promotes Arp2/3
complex activation and actin polymerization. Rac is implicated in this signaling cascade at a still-unknown
position.

cell molecules

from the cell wall and interacts with three
host
to produce success-
ful bacterial entry: Its C-terminal domain
binds extracellular matrix glycosaminoglycans
( Jonquieres et al. 2001) and the receptor
for the globular part of
the complement

Pizarro-Cerd´a· Cossart

652

molecule C1q (gC1q-R) (Braun et al. 2000),
whereas its N-terminal leucine-rich repeats ac-
tivate the hepatocyte growth factor receptor
Met, a member of the receptor tyrosine ki-
nase family (Shen et al. 2000) (Figure 3).
Stimulation of Met with InlB mimics the

Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2009.25:649-670. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitatsbibliothek Osnabruck on 11/13/10. For personal use only.ANRV389-CB25-26

ARI

4 September 2009

21:46

Listeria

InlB

GAGs

Lipid raft

gC1q-R

PIP3

Sept2

Rac/Cdc42

Wave/N–Wasp

P

CrkII

Gab1
P

PI3K

Arp2

Arp3

Actin

Met

Ub

Cbl
P

Shc
P

PIP

Clathrin

PI4K

Figure 3
Entry of Listeria monocytogenes in host epithelial cells via the InlB invasion pathway. In a wide variety of
epithelial cells, the interaction between InlB and its main signaling receptor Met leads to bacterial
internalization. InlB interacts not only via its N-terminal domain with Met, but also through its C-terminal
domain with extracellular glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) and with the gC1q-R. Activation of the tyrosine
receptor kinase Met leads to its autophosphorylation and recruitment/phosphorylation of several protein
adaptors including CrkII, Gab1, Shc, and Cbl, which in turn are involved in the recruitment of the type I PI
3-kinase (PI3K). Cbl is also a ubiquitin ligase required for Met ubiquitination and promoting clathrin
recruitment and receptor internalization via endocytosis. The type I PI 3-kinase produces PI(3,4,5)P3, and
redistribution of this phosphoinositide within lipid rafts is involved in the activation of Rac (through
recruitment of an as-yet-unidentiﬁed effector), which activates Wave and Arp2/3 for actin polymerization.
Sept2, a new cellular effector required for InlB-mediated entry downstream of Met, is depicted (purple oval
next to the plasma membrane) as well as the type II PI4Kα (red oval associated to the plasma membrane)
involved in the production of PIP in a PI 3-kinase-independent signaling pathway.

physiological stimulation of the receptor with
its natural ligand, the hepatocyte growth fac-
tor: Met dimerizes, autophosphorylates, and
triggers the recruitment/phosphorylation of
several protein adaptors
including Gab-1,
Cbl, Shc, and CrkII (Dokainish et al. 2007,
Ireton et al. 1999). These adaptors are in-
volved in the recruitment to the bacterial entry
site of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase type
I (PI 3-kinase) (Ireton et al. 1996), which is

implicated in the activation of Rac-1 and the or-
chestration of a complex signaling cascade that
leads not only to actin polymerization via the
Arp2/3 complex, WASP-related proteins, and
Ena/VASP (Bierne et al. 2005) but also actin
depolymerization via LIM kinase and coﬁlin
(Bierne et al. 2001). Recent research examining
the InlB/Met signaling pathway has revealed
the role of novel molecular partners includ-
ing two type II phosphatidylinositol 4-kinases

www.annualreviews.org • Listeria monocytogenes Membrane Trafﬁcking and Lifestyle

653

Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2009.25:649-670. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitatsbibliothek Osnabruck on 11/13/10. For personal use only.ANRV389-CB25-26

ARI

4 September 2009

21:46

Phase

DAPI

Septin 11

Actin

Merge

Figure 4
Septin 11 recruitment at the Listeria monocytogenes entry site in JEG-3 cells. The cytoskeletal protein septin 11 is recruited by
L. monocytogenes during the very early stages of cellular infection, as revealed by immunoﬂuorescence in cells infected for 5 minutes with
a wild-type L. monocytogenes strain EGD expressing InlB covalently attached to the bacterial cell wall and labeled with DAPI (blue) to
show bacterial DNA, anti-SEPT11 antibodies (red ), and anti-actin antibodies ( green). Septin 11 forms characteristic rings around the
body of the internalized L. monocytogenes. Adapted from Mostowy et al. (2009).

implicated in a cascade independent of the PI
3-kinase pathway (Pizarro-Cerd´a et al. 2007).
Novel cytoskeletal proteins of the septin fam-
ily also modulate L. monocytogenes entry via the
InlB-dependent pathway (Mostowy et al. 2009)
(Figure 4).

Subversion of surface cellular adhesion/
attachment receptors for invasion has been re-
ported for other bacterial pathogens. Invasin,
an invasion protein of Yersinia enterocolitica and
Y. pseudotuberculosis (Isberg et al. 1987), pro-
motes bacterial entry by binding members of
the integrin family of extracellular matrix bind-
ing receptors (Isberg & Leong 1990). Similar
to the interaction between L. monocytogenes and
E-cadherin, Y. pseudotuberculosis takes advantage
of the molecular machinery associated to the
cytoplasmic tail of β1 integrins to orchestrate
actin rearrangements required for bacterial en-
try: The kinases FAK and Src as well as the
small GTPases Rac1 and Arf6 are subverted
from their normal integrin-mediated signaling
to favor actin polymerization via the Arp2/3
complex that induces pathogen internalization
(Alrutz et al. 2001, Wong & Isberg 2003). It
is important to note that Y. pseudotuberculosis

Pizarro-Cerd´a· Cossart

654

proliferates in the host as an extracellular
pathogen and that cellular invasion is relevant
during the early phases of host infection only
(Bliska & Casadevall 2009). Probably as a strat-
egy for persistence in host tissues, several other
extracellular pathogens that bind extracellular
matrix proteins access the intracellular space by
stimulating the integrin-signaling pathway. For
example, the Staphylococcus aureus ﬁbronectin-
binding adhesin A binds ﬁbronectin to engage
α5β1 integrin and induces endothelial cell inva-
sion in a FAK-, tensin-, cortactin-, and Arp2/3-
dependent manner (Agerer et al. 2005, Massey
et al. 2001). In a similar way, Streptococcus pneu-
moniae binds vitronectin to promote entry in
endothelial and epithelial cells via αVβ3 inte-
grin engagement, integrin-linked kinase activa-
tion, and PI 3-kinase recruitment (Bergmann
et al. 2009).

Uropathogenic Escherichia coli (UPEC), a
bacterium responsible for human urinary in-
fections, is another extracellular pathogen that
can invade host cells facultatively to establish
a bacterial reservoir involved in recurrent uri-
nary infections (Anderson et al. 2003). The
UPEC adhesin FimH binds extracellular matrix

Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2009.25:649-670. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitatsbibliothek Osnabruck on 11/13/10. For personal use only.ANRV389-CB25-26

ARI

4 September 2009

21:46

components such as laminin (Kukkonen et al.
1993); however, functional interaction between
FimH and the monomannose moiety of the
tetraspanin molecule uroplakin 1a leads to in-
vasion of human bladder epithelial cells (Zhou
et al. 2001). Bacterial entry requires the ac-
tivation of small GTPases Cdc42 and Rac1,
phosphorylation of FAK, PI 3-kinase recruit-
ment, and actin binding by α-actinin/vinculin
(Martinez & Hultgren 2002, Martinez et al.
2000). The obligate intracellular pathogen
Rickettsia conorii, responsible for Mediterranean
spotted fever, also invades host cells in a
receptor-dependent manner: R. conorii takes
advantage of its outer membrane protein B
(rOmpB) to interact with the Ku70 subunit of
the DNA-dependent protein kinase to invade
host epithelial cells (Chan et al. 2009, Martinez
et al. 2005). Among the intracellular molecules
engaged by the rOmpB/Ku70 interaction are
the protein adaptor Cbl, the kinase Src, Cdc42,
PI 3-kinase, cortactin, and the Arp2/3 complex
(Martinez & Cossart 2004).

Molecular mimicry and subversion of nor-
mal signaling cascades involved in the physi-
ological function of surface receptors such as
tyrosine receptor kinases, cadherins, or inte-
grins are thus a common feature of intracellular
bacterial pathogens, which exploit these signal-
ing pathways to reorganize the cortical actin
cytoskeleton and to produce membrane rear-
rangements required for bacterial engulfment.
It is important to mention that the dynamics
of actin ﬁlaments can be modulated by other
cytoskeletal proteins including microtubules
(Rodriguez et al. 2003), and disruption of
microtubules inhibits the entry of several
pathogens
including L. monocytogenes and
Campylobacter jejuni (Biswas et al. 2003, Kuhn
1998). In these cases, however, the speciﬁc
molecular pathways involved in the potential
actin-microtubules cross talks have not been
explored. Very recent work on UPEC shows
that histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6), which
deacetylates α-tubulin, can modify microtubule
stability and affect kinesin-1 recruitment while
inhibiting UPEC entry into bladder cells. This
ﬁnding led Dhakal & Mulvey (2009) to propose

that HDAC6 can modulate directional trafﬁck-
ing of kinesin-1 and associated cargos such as
WAVE2, highlighting a molecular pathway that
could link actin and microtubules during bacte-
rial entry. As mentioned above, septins, a fam-
ily of small GTPases that have the property to
form nonpolarized ﬁlaments, which associate
to actin and microtubules and are increasingly
recognized as new elements of the cytoskele-
ton (Tooley et al. 2009), modulate the entry of
L. monocytogenes in host cells (Mostowy et al.
2009) (Figure 4). These results should open
new avenues through which to study the inter-
action of different cytoskeletal elements during
bacterial invasion.

Lipid Rafts and Membrane
Organization at Pathogen Entry Sites
Cellular receptors are located in membranes,
and the physical environment of
speciﬁc
membrane domains affects the behavior of the
receptors subverted by pathogens for entry
into cells. Lipid rafts are specialized mem-
brane microdomains enriched in cholesterol
and sphingolipids (Simons & Ikonen 1997).
Protein-lipid and protein-protein interactions
participate in the formation of these dynamic
structures, which serve as platforms to cluster
signaling molecules that participate in a wide
variety of processes including phagocytosis, cell
migration, and immune responses (Lasserre
et al. 2008). In many cases, their presence is
required for bacterial entry into host cells.

The invasion of target cells by L. mono-
cytogenes requires the integrity of membrane
microdomains (Seveau et al. 2004). Lipid raft
markers such as glycosylphosphatidylinositol
(GPI)-linked proteins, myristoylated and
palmitoylated peptides, and the ganglioside
GM1 are detected by immunoﬂuorescence
at bacterial entry sites (Seveau et al. 2004).
Cholesterol depletion using the water-soluble
cyclic oligosaccharide methyl-β-cyclo-dextrin
(MβCD) reversibly inhibits L. monocytogenes
entry in mouse ﬁbroblasts expressing the
human E-cadherin or in green monkey Vero
kidney epithelial cells expressing a functional

www.annualreviews.org • Listeria monocytogenes Membrane Trafﬁcking and Lifestyle

655

Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2009.25:649-670. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitatsbibliothek Osnabruck on 11/13/10. For personal use only.ANRV389-CB25-26

ARI

4 September 2009

21:46

Met receptor (Seveau et al. 2004). The pres-
ence of E-cadherin in lipid rafts is necessary
for its initial clustering and interaction with
InlA to promote bacterial entry (Seveau et al.
2004). In contrast, the initial interaction of
InlB with Met does not require membrane
cholesterol, but downstream signaling that
leads to actin polymerization is cholesterol
and lipid microdomain dependent
(Seveau
et al. 2004). PI 3-kinase activation downstream
of Met is not affected by cholesterol deple-
tion using MβCD, but activation of Rac1
downstream of PI 3-kinase is inhibited in
cholesterol-depleted cells, which suggests that
the spatial distribution of 3(cid:2)-phosphoinositides
produced by the PI 3-kinase within membrane
microdomains is critical for Rac1 activation
and consequently for actin polymerization at
L. monocytogenes entry sites (Seveau et al. 2007).
Lipid rafts are required for the entry of many
other pathogens within target cells. As men-
tioned above, FimH mediates UPEC internal-
ization in human bladder cells by interacting
with uroplakin 1a (Zhou et al. 2001). This re-
ceptor is associated with lipid rafts, and choles-
terol depletion inhibits bacterial entry in host
cells (Duncan et al. 2004). FimH is also in-
volved in the entry of UPEC in macrophages
and mast cells, and the fate of UPEC in these
cells depends on whether bacteria interact with
the GPI-anchored protein CD48 present in
lipid rafts via FimH or whether bacteria are op-
sonized: In the ﬁrst case, bacteria replicate in
compartments that do not fuse with lysosomes;
in the second case, opsonized bacteria are ef-
ﬁciently internalized but are degraded in lyso-
somes (Baorto et al. 1997, Shin et al. 2000).

Shigella ﬂexneri and Salmonella enterica, the
agents of bacterial dysentery and systemic ty-
phoid fever, respectively, are enteropathogens
that invade target cells by injecting bacterial
effectors into their host cell cytosol through a
macromolecular syringe-like apparatus known
as the type 3 secretion system (T3SS) (Blocker
et al. 2001, Kubori et al. 1998). At the S. ﬂexneri
entry site, GPI-anchored/lipid raft-associated
proteins distinctly accumulate around the
bacteria during epithelial cell invasion (Lafont

Pizarro-Cerd´a· Cossart

et al. 2002). Initial binding of the S. ﬂexneri
T3SS effector IpaB to the cellular transmem-
brane protein CD44 takes place in detergent-
resistant microdomains and is cholesterol
dependent (Lafont et al. 2002). It has been pro-
posed that rafts activate the S. ﬂexneri T3SS
to functionally translocate effectors into target
cells (van der Goot et al. 2004). For S. enterica,
its T3SS effector SipB, which is homologous
to S. ﬂexneri IpaB, binds cholesterol with high
afﬁnity prior to effector delivery and cellular
invasion (Hayward et al. 2005).

Other bacterial species exploit lipid rafts
during infection: Mycobacterium tuberculosis, the
agent of human tuberculosis, survives within
macrophages if entry takes place in choles-
terol microdomains that allow the recruitment
of coronin-1, a coat protein that may par-
ticipate in the inhibition of lysosomal fusion
with M. tuberculosis-containing compartments
(Ferrari et al. 1999, Gatﬁeld & Pieters 2000).
The disruption of lipid rafts also inhibits cel-
lular invasion by R. conorii (Martinez et al.
2005), Brucella abortus (Watarai et al. 2002),
Campylobacter jejuni (Wooldridge et al. 1996),
and some strains of Chlamydia (Stuart et al.
2003), among others. Also interesting is the
fact that the internalization of many bacterial
toxins from extracellular pathogens, including
VacA from Helicobacter pylori, cholera toxin from
Vibrio cholerae, and anthrax toxin from Bacil-
lus anthracis, takes place via lipid raft-mediated
endocytosis (Gupta et al. 2008, Saslowsky &
Lencer 2008, Abrami et al. 2003).

The studies discussed above indicate overall
that the organization of the plasma membrane
in specialized microdomains is critical for the
efﬁcient orchestration of signaling during bac-
terial invasion processes. However, the speciﬁc
structure of these specialized microdomains is
far from completely understood, and emphasis
on the role of cholesterol in the organization of
these microdomains may have underscored the
importance of other mechanisms of lateral seg-
regation for membrane constituents—for ex-
ample, the underlying skeleton, as proposed
in the fence-picket model (Kusumi & Suzuki
2005), or the tetraspan web, which depends

656

Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2009.25:649-670. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitatsbibliothek Osnabruck on 11/13/10. For personal use only.ANRV389-CB25-26

ARI

4 September 2009

21:46

on the ability of tetraspanins to interact with
various other surface proteins to form a net-
work of molecular interactions clearly distinct
from lipid raft microdomains (Espenel et al.
2008). The next challenge is to identify pre-
cisely the speciﬁcities of these different mem-
brane microdomains in order to understand
their unique functional contributions to the sig-
naling cascades subverted by intracellular bac-
terial pathogens.

Clathrin and Caveolin: New Players
and New Links with the Cytoskeleton
Endocytosis is the internalization of macro-
molecules
in cells, and several endocytic
routes have been described; the main and
best-characterized ones are clathrin- and
caveolin-dependent mechanisms (Conner &
Schmid 2003). Caveolin-1 is a protein that
binds cholesterol, inserts as a loop into the
inner leaﬂet of the plasma membrane, and
self-associates to form coats on the surface of
membrane invaginations, i.e., caveolae (Glen-
ney & Soppet 1992). Because caveolin-1 binds
cholesterol, the functions of caveolae and lipid
rafts are often associated (Head et al. 2006,
Pelkmans et al. 2005). Clathrin-mediated en-
docytosis requires the recruitment to endocytic
sites of speciﬁc assembly proteins that recognize
the cargo to be internalized in some cases and
direct the targeting and assembly of clathrin
coats to these internalization sites (Semerdjieva
et al. 2008). The GTPase dynamin is involved
in the ﬁssion of vesicles from the plasma mem-
brane both in clathrin- and caveolin-dependent
processes (Yao et al. 2005, Rappoport et al.
2008).

Analysis of the signaling cascade triggered
by the InlB/Met interaction led to the demon-
stration that clathrin is required for cellular
invasion by L. monocytogenes (Veiga & Cossart
2005, Veiga et al. 2007) (Figure 3). Indeed,
the adaptor protein Cbl recruited by Met to
the bacterial entry site is a ubiquitin ligase
that is involved in the monoubiquitination of
Met to induce its endocytosis (Petrelli et al.
2002). Met is also monoubiquitinated by Cbl

upon cellular stimulation by InlB, and short
interfering RNA (siRNA) depletion of several
components of the endocytic machinery, in-
cluding dynamin, clathrin, and the clathrin-
interacting protein eps15, blocks the entry of
L. monocytogenes in target cells (Veiga & Cossart
2005). Clathrin, dynamin, and auxillin (this lat-
ter protein is required for clathrin-coated vesi-
cles disassembly) are detected by confocal mi-
croscopy at the L. monocytogenes invasion foci,
and real-time imaging analysis of the infection
process indicates that the dynamics of clathrin
recruitment at bacterial invasion sites differ
from the behavior observed during the forma-
tion of classical clathrin-coated pits and vesicles
during endocytosis of smaller cargo (Veiga et al.
2007). Interestingly, depletion of clathrin or dy-
namin by siRNA inhibits actin polymerization,
suggesting that the recruitment of the clathrin-
endocytic machinery precedes the actin re-
arrangements required for InlB-mediated en-
try (Veiga et al. 2007).

These results challenge the prevailing
dogma establishing that the upper-limit size of
clathrin-coated vesicles is 150 nm (Cheng et al.
2007), implying that larger particles cannot
be internalized through a clathrin-dependent
mechanism. It is interesting to note, however,
that large clathrin assemblies have been de-
tected surrounding the base of nascent phago-
somes containing opsonized beads (Aggeler &
Werb 1982). Clathrin had also been previously
observed in human epithelial cells by trans-
mission electron microscopy at the entry sites
of Chlamydia trachomatis (Wyrick et al. 1989)
and E. coli expressing the adhesins AfaE/AfaD
( Jouve et al. 1997), and use of the drug mono-
dansylcadaverin, which acts as an inhibitor
of the transglutaminase that participates in
clathrin-dependent endocytosis, suggested that
S. aureus also requires clathrin for the invasion
of cultured osteoblasts (Ellington et al. 1999).
The involvement of the endocytic machin-
ery in bacterial entry is, in fact, a widespread
mechanism, and the recruitment of clathrin and
dynamin also occurs for the Listeria innocua
InlA/E-cadherin-dependent invasion pathway,
for other zippering bacteria that
include

www.annualreviews.org • Listeria monocytogenes Membrane Trafﬁcking and Lifestyle

657

Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2009.25:649-670. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitatsbibliothek Osnabruck on 11/13/10. For personal use only.ANRV389-CB25-26

ARI

4 September 2009

21:46

S. aureus coated with ﬁbronectin and E. coli
expressing the invasin protein of Y. pseu-
dotuberculosis, and for latex beads of 1 or
5 μm coated with epidermal growth factor
or ﬁbronectin, which suggests a speciﬁcity
of the endocytic-machinery requirement for
receptor-dependent entry (Veiga et al. 2007).
In agreement with this hypothesis, the entry of
pathogens that do not use a classical receptor-
mediated entry mechanism, but use a T3SS-
mediated entry as does S. ﬂexneri or S. enter-
ica, does not require clathrin (Green & Brown
2006, Veiga et al. 2007). In addition, the FimH-
dependent internalization of UPEC in bladder
cells requires clathrin (Eto et al. 2008) and, in-
terestingly, a noninvading pathogen such as en-
teropathogenic E. coli (EPEC), which attaches
to the extracellular surface and induces mem-
brane reorganization and pedestal formation
through the infection of T3SS effectors, re-
cruits clathrin at its attachment site (Veiga et al.
2007). However, how clathrin is assembled at
the EPEC attachment site or during the entry
of zippering bacteria is still unknown.

Studies of the trophoblastic cell line JEG-3
expressing the
InlA receptor E-cadherin
showed that clathrin depletion impaired, but
did not completely block, the entry of the
bacteria L. innocua (InlA), suggesting that other
cellular internalization pathways should play a
role in the InlA invasion pathway (Veiga et al.
2007). In accordance with this hypothesis, it
has been recently shown that caveolin-1 is also
required for L. innocua (InlA) entry in JEG-3
cells (Bonazzi et al. 2008) (Figure 2). Indeed,
caveolin-1 is recruited to the L. innocua (InlA)
entry sites with dynamics that reﬂect those of E-
cadherin recruitment, and caveolin-1 depletion
by siRNA prevents E-cadherin clustering at
bacterial entry sites and bacterial entry (Bonazzi
et al. 2008). Interestingly, caveolin-1 recruit-
ment occurs upstream of the tyrosine phospho-
rylation of E-cadherin by the kinase Src, and
this posttranslation modiﬁcation of E-cadherin
is required for the recruitment of the ubiquitin-
ligase Hakai, which is necessary for the ubiqui-
tination and clathrin-mediated internalization
of E-cadherin (Bonazzi et al. 2008). Overall,

Pizarro-Cerd´a· Cossart

these results demonstrate that caveolin-1
recruitment precedes clathrin recruitment.

Dependence on Cbl, clathrin, and caveolin-
2 (but not caveolin-1) has been demonstrated
recently for the entry of E. coli expressing the
rOmpB protein of R. conorii in HeLa cells (Chan
et al. 2009). However, the hierarchy of recruit-
ment of clathrin and caveolin-2 following cel-
lular stimulation with rOmpB as well as the
structural differences that caveolin-2 confers to
the bacterial invasion site in comparison with
caveolin-1 are not known. It is important also
to note that Pseudomonas aeruginosa colocal-
izes with caveolin-1 and caveolin-2 during the
invasion of type I pneumocytes. In addition,
siRNA-mediated depletion of both caveolins
leads to a diminution in bacterial entry. How-
ever, the selective depletion of caveolin-2 has
an identical susceptibility to P. aeruginosa infec-
tion as the combined caveolin-1 and caveolin-2
knock-down, and only tyrosine phosphoryla-
tion of caveolin-2 is critical for P. aeruginosa in-
vasion, which suggests a more important role
for caveolin-2 in this process (Zaas et al. 2005).
As mentioned above, caveolin-1 binds
cholesterol and hence associates with lipid rafts.
During UPEC entry in the bladder epithe-
lium, caveolin-1 is detected at bacterial en-
try lipidic microdomains, and the reduction of
caveolin-1 expression by siRNA inhibits bacte-
rial invasion (Duncan et al. 2004). Lipid raft-
associated caveolae and caveolin-1 act as entry
ports for Porphyromonas gingivalis in oral epithe-
lial cells (Sukumaran et al. 2002) for Group A
Streptococcus into epithelial and endothelial cells
(Rohde et al. 2003), and they are required
for the transcytosis of meningitis-inducing
E. coli K1 in brain microvascular endothelial
cells (Sukumaran et al. 2002).

In summary, the traditional machinery asso-
ciated with endocytosis appears critical for the
internalization of larger particles such as in-
vading bacteria. The molecular pathways that
link endocytosis and actin polymerization have
been difﬁcult to establish, but recent work from
several laboratories has identiﬁed connections
between these different pathways (Galletta &
Cooper 2009, Kaksonen et al. 2006). The study

658

Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2009.25:649-670. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitatsbibliothek Osnabruck on 11/13/10. For personal use only.ANRV389-CB25-26

ARI

4 September 2009

21:46

of bacterial internalization will probably help
us further understand how these connections
take place (Veiga et al. 2007). Clathrin clearly
assembles in a nonclassical way at sites of bac-
terial entry, and solving the structure of these
assemblies, as well as deﬁning the cross talk be-
tween caveolin and clathrin, will be an exciting
task for the near future.

LIFE IN AND ESCAPE FROM
THE VACUOLE

Maturation of the Vacuole
After the invasion of target cells, L. monocy-
togenes is transiently trapped in a membrane-
bound compartment before it destroys the
vacuolar membrane to escape in the host
cell cytoplasm. L. monocytogenes was proposed
to modify the vacuole maturation through
modulation of the activity of the small GTPase
Rab5a
al. 2008)
(Figure 5). Rab5a (but not Rab5c) overexpres-
sion increases the degradation of a hly mutant
L. monocytogenes, which cannot escape from

(Alvarez-Dominguez

et

the phagocytic vacuole (Alvarez-Dominguez
& Stahl 1999). In macrophages infected with
wild-type L. monocytogenes, Rab5a facilitates
the translocation of the small Rho GTPase
Rac to the bacterial-containing compartment,
which in turn activates the NADPH oxidase
at the vacuolar membrane for bacterial killing
(Prada-Delgado et al. 2001). However, L.
inhibits the exchange activity
monocytogenes
of Rab5a from an inactive GDP- to an active
GTP-bound form by expressing a 40-kDa
protein (Lmo 2459)
that ADP-ribosylates
Rab5a in its inactive form (Alvarez-Dominguez
et al. 2008, Prada-Delgado et al. 2005). How
this enzyme is translocated across the vacuolar
membrane to interact with Rab5a is currently
unknown.

Listeriolysin O and Vacuolar Escape
Lysis of the L. monocytogenes internalization
compartment is mediated via the expression
and activity of listeriolysin O (LLO), which
is one of the major L. monocytogenes virulence
factors (Cossart et al. 1989, Kathariou et al.

a

Vacuole

b

Listeria

Lmo2459

Lmo2459

Rab5a

GDP

Rab5a

GTP

O–

NADPH
oxidase

Rac

Listeria

H+

H+

LLO

GILT

Vacuole

PI-PLC

PC-PLC

Ca+2

H+

Pore

Ca+2

LAMP1

c

Vacuole

Listeria

Listeria

Figure 5
Listeria monocytogenes residency in its internalization vacuole and escape to the host cytoplasm. After internalization in target cells,
L. monocytogenes resides in a membrane-bound compartment before lysing the vacuole membrane to escape to the cytosol. (a) Activation
of the small GTPase Rab5a is important for the Rac-dependent recruitment of the NADPH oxidase to the phagosomal membrane to
favor bacterial killing. L. monocytogenes counterbalances this signaling cascade by producing a 40-kDa protein Lmo 2459, which is
transported through the vacuole membrane (by an unidentiﬁed translocation step) and ADP-ribosylates/blocks Rab5a in an inactive
GDP-bound form. (b) The host γ-interferon-inducible lysosomal thiol reductase (GILT) reduces the bacterial-produced listeriolysin
O (LLO) and favors its oligomerization into an LLO pore, which is implicated in the reduction of vacuolar Ca2+ levels (inhibiting the
recruitment of the lysosomal protein LAMP1). PI- and PC-PLC cooperate with LLO in the disruption of the vacuolar membrane.
Acidiﬁcation (H+) of the vacuole is important for LLO activity and PC-PLC maturation by a bacterial metalloprotease (not shown).
(c) Disruption of the vacuolar membrane leads to bacterial translocation to the host cytoplasm and escape from phagosomal killing.

www.annualreviews.org • Listeria monocytogenes Membrane Trafﬁcking and Lifestyle

659

Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2009.25:649-670. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitatsbibliothek Osnabruck on 11/13/10. For personal use only.ANRV389-CB25-26

ARI

4 September 2009

21:46

1987). LLO belongs
to the large family
of cholesterol-dependent cytolysins including
perfringolysin O from Clostridium perfringens
and streptolysin O (SLO) from Streptococcus
pyogenes, and monomers of these toxins bind
to cholesterol-containing membranes in which
they oligomerize to form 20–30-nm-diameter
pores (Bhakdi et al. 1985, Sekiya et al. 1993).
Despite several decades of research, LLO’s pre-
cise mechanism of action on membranes and
the molecular events that lead to membrane
perforation are still elusive. The initial hypoth-
esis that cholesterol is the cellular receptor
for LLO, and therefore primarily required for
toxin binding to target membranes, was refuted
by the observation that LLO monomers that
are preincubated with cholesterol can still
efﬁciently bind membranes and oligomerize
but are unable to form pores ( Jacobs et al.
1998). Work performed with perfringolysin O
and SLO suggests that cholesterol is critical for
the prepore-to-pore transition (Giddings et al.
2003). Acidiﬁcation of the L. monocytogenes-
containing vacuole is required for membrane
permeabilization (Beauregard et al. 1997), in
agreement with the observation that LLO
presents a higher hemolytic potential at acidic
pH (Geoffroy et al. 1987) (Figure 5). However,
acidiﬁcation may be required for synthesis,
release, or activation of other bacterial or host
factors involved in phagosomal escape. Rup-
ture of the phagosomal membrane is enhanced
by a bacterial phosphatidylinositol-speciﬁc
and a broad-range phospholipase C (PI- and
PC-PLC, respectively) (Smith et al. 1995),
and activation/release of the proPC-PLC to
mature PC-PLC by a L. monocytogenes-encoded
metalloprotease is precisely dependent on
acidic pH (Marquis & Hager 2000). LLO
also requires maturation through reduction
of disulﬁde bonds, and full induction of the
LLO lytic activity in vivo requires its reduction
by the γ-interferon-inducible lysosomal thiol
reductase (GILT), an enzyme that is delivered
from lysosomes to maturing compartments of
the endocytic/phagocytic pathway in antigen-
presenting cells: L. monocytogenes replication in
GILT-negative macrophages is impaired owing

Pizarro-Cerd´a· Cossart

to delayed escape from the vacuole (Singh et al.
2008) (Figure 5).

What are the effects of LLO insertion on the
L. monocytogenes-containing vacuole? LLO in-
duces small-membrane perforations, which al-
low Ca2+ leakage from vacuoles shortly after
infection and lead to an increase in the vac-
uolar pH and inhibition of vacuolar matura-
tion, as measured by the delayed acquisition
of the lysosomal-associated membrane pro-
tein 1 (LAMP1) in wild-type L. monocytogenes-
containing compartments compared with those
of LLO-negative mutants (Henry et al. 2006,
Shaughnessy et al. 2006). Ca2+ favors en-
dosomal fusion with lysosomes (Pryor et al.
2000), and calcium release could account for
the LLO-mediated alteration of vacuolar mat-
uration (Shaughnessy et al. 2006). In addition,
LLO is inefﬁcient in lysis of late-stage vacuoles
that are positive for LAMP1 (Shaughnessy et al.
2006). Overall, these observations indicate that
LLO favors the inhibition of vacuolar mat-
uration and fusion with lysosomes in order
to protect L. monocytogenes from the destruc-
tive effects of mature lysosomal enzymes. LLO
may also make pores to mediate the transloca-
tion of PI- and PC-PLC to the cytosol, where
they could access their substrate phospholipids
present in the cytosolic leaﬂet for the bacteria-
containing vacuole, thereby favoring vacuo-
lar escape (Sibelius et al. 1996, Wadsworth &
Goldﬁne 2002). This potential mechanism of
translocation is reminiscent of that reported for
the SLO of S. pyogenes and may be similar to
the T3SS in gram-positive bacteria (Madden
et al. 2001). More recently, it has been pro-
posed that bacterial vacuolar lysis that is depen-
dent on LLO (and not on PI- and PC-PLC)
leads to a host cell innate response that trig-
gers the control of L. monocytogenes intracellular
growth by autophagy (Py et al. 2007) (see next
section).

Several other pathogens escape from their
internalization compartments to replicate in
the host cytoplasm, but the molecular events
leading to vacuolar escape are poorly under-
stood. In the case of the Rickettsia species, phos-
pholipase A2 (PLA2) activity was reported for

660

Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2009.25:649-670. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitatsbibliothek Osnabruck on 11/13/10. For personal use only.ANRV389-CB25-26

ARI

4 September 2009

21:46

Rickettsia prowazekii, and PLA2 was proposed
to be involved in phagosomal escape (Ojcius
et al. 1995). However, completion of the R.
prowazekii and R. conorii genomes indicates
that no such gene could be identiﬁed, but
a gene that codes for a phospholipase D,
which is expressed and detected in rickettsial
lysates, could account for the previously de-
scribed PLA2 activity (Renesto et al. 2003).
Whether this enzyme plays a role in bacterial
escape from the vacuole remains to be demon-
strated. A similar situation has been reported for
R. typhi because a hemolysin has been cloned
and characterized in this pathogen (Radulovic
et al. 1999), but its possible role in vivo has not
been demonstrated.

Vacuolar escape of S. ﬂexneri remains an
elusive issue. In J774 murine macrophages,
IpaB mutants remained trapped in a phagocytic
vacuole, suggesting that IpaB plays a role in vac-
uolar lysis (High et al. 1992). Subsequent com-
parative studies of the S. ﬂexneri IpaC protein
and its S. enterica homolog SipC showed that
S. enterica SipC mutants expressing IpaC were
found in the cytoplasm of host cells, which sug-
gests a role for IpaC in S. ﬂexneri escape from
the vacuole (Osiecki et al. 2001). Subsequently,
mutation of the leucine-rich repeat protein
IpaH7.8 was shown to slow down S. ﬂexneri cyto-
plasmic localization, implicating this protein in
the facilitation of vacuolar escape (Fernandez-
Prada et al. 2000).

Recently, escape of M.

tuberculosis and
M. leprae from their phagosome to the host
cytoplasm of myeloid cells has been described
and proposed to depend on the type 7 secretion
system ESX-1 (van der Wel et al. 2007); how-
ever, these observations remain controversial
in the ﬁeld. M. marinum, a pathogen responsi-
ble for tuberculosis in ﬁsh and also in humans,
uses the ESX-1 system to secrete the protein
ESAT-6, which has been directly implicated in
the formation of vacuolar pore and bacterial
escape from phagocytic vacuoles (Smith et al.
2008). Additionally, invasive S. pyogenes may
be able to escape phagosomes through SLO-
induced membrane perforation and cytoplas-
mic bacteria may be destroyed by innate defense

mechanisms (Nakagawa et al. 2004) (see next
section), but the functional relevance of vacuo-
lar escape for Group A Streptococcus has not been
discussed.

Work concerning bacterial escape from vac-
uoles has focused on the assumption that main-
tenance of the vacuolar membrane is dependent
only on the activity of bacterial proteins or tox-
ins that damage the vacuole physical integrity.
It is important to mention that in the case of
S. enterica, an intracellular pathogen that nor-
mally proliferates in a membrane-bound com-
partment, deletion of the protein SifA leads
to bacterial localization in the host cell cyto-
plasm (Beuzon et al. 2000), which indicates
that bacteria can also actively participate in the
maintenance of the vacuolar membrane. A sim-
ilar situation is probably true in the case of
Legionella pneumophila (Isberg 2009), highlight-
ing that bacterial interactions with host cell
molecular pathways are also implicated in a
complex balance between vacuolar membrane
maintenance and disruption.

INTRACYTOSOLIC SURVIVAL
AND AUTOPHAGY
Autophagy is an important cellular process
involved in the degradation of cellular compo-
nents in the cytoplasm, which allows protein
turnover in starving cells or the removal of mal-
formed or superﬂuous subcellular components
by sequestration in a double-membrane com-
partment termed the autophagosome, which
may be derived from the rough endoplasmic
reticulum (rER)
(Klionsky 2007). Analysis
of rER markers coupled with morphological
analyses permitted the initial characterization
of this pathway, and several bacterial species
including Brucella abortus and Legionella pneu-
mophila have been shown to interact with
autophagosomes
successful
intracellular replication niche within host cells
(Pizarro-Cerd´a et al. 1998). Only recently
has
the molecular machinery involved in
autophagosome biogenesis been partially un-
raveled, and it has been demonstrated that this
process can be used by the cell as an innate

to establish a

www.annualreviews.org • Listeria monocytogenes Membrane Trafﬁcking and Lifestyle

661

Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2009.25:649-670. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitatsbibliothek Osnabruck on 11/13/10. For personal use only.ANRV389-CB25-26

ARI

4 September 2009

21:46

Listeria

Pore

Listeria

LLO

a

b

Actin

Profilin

Listeria

Arp2/3

VASP

ActA

PI-PLC

PC-PLC

Autophagosome

ΔActA
LAMP1

ER-derived

vesicles

Listeria

ΔActA

LC3

Figure 6
Autophagy as a host innate defense mechanism against Listeria monocytogenes. Bacterial localization in the
host cytosol triggers the formation of autophagosomes to control bacterial proliferation. (a) The bacterial
surface protein ActA brings vasodilator-stimulated phosphoprotein (VASP) and, indirectly, proﬁlin to the
bacterial tail, which induces the recruitment of actin monomers that are polymerized by the Arp2/3 complex
into actin comet tails. This actin-based motility system allows L. monocytogenes to move in the host cytoplasm
and to escape capture by autophagic vacuoles. (b) A ActA L. monocytogenes mutant actively producing LLO
will be trapped by LC3/LAMP1-positive autophagosomes originally derived from the endoplasmic
reticulum, thus inducing bacterial killing. Besides ActA expression, the secretion of phospholipases PI-PLC
and PC-PLC seems important for wild-type bacteria to escape from autophagy.

mechanism to control intracellular pathogen
survival.

After vacuolar escape, the L. monocytogenes
surface protein ActA promotes cellular actin
polymerization and bacterial movement
in
the host cell cytoplasm (Kocks et al. 1992)
(Figure 6). In macrophages infected with a
L. monocytogenes ActA mutant, chloram-
phenicol
treatment was found to lead to
bacterial sequestration of previously cytoplas-
mic bacteria into double-membrane organelles
that resembled autophagosomes, which were
decorated initially with the rER marker protein
disulﬁde isomerase and subsequently with the
lysosomal LAMP1 marker. This prompted
Rich et al. (2003) to propose that the autophagic
pathway could be used as a host defense mech-
anism against invading pathogens. Yuan and
collaborators (Py et al. 2007) observed that
autophagy limits the L. monocytogenes intra-
cellular growth during the early time points
after cellular invasion and vacuolar escape:
Permeabilization of the vacuole by LLO (but
not by phospholipases) triggers the bacterial
sequestering in autophagosomes labeled by the

Pizarro-Cerd´a· Cossart

662

microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3
(LC3) autophagic degradation compartments
(Py et al. 2007). ActA was proposed as the main
bacterial factor required for autophagosome
escape during the ﬁrst 3 hours after infec-
tion, but other virulence factors seem to be
important to evade autophagy at later time
points (Birmingham et al. 2007). In Drosophila,
recognition of the L. monocytogenes peptidogly-
can by the peptidoglycan-recognition protein
(PGRP)-LE is crucial for the induction of
autophagy and the prevention of bacterial in-
tracellular growth (Yano et al. 2008). In SCID
mice, LLO function has been highlighted
again as required for the formation of spacious
L. monocytogenes-containing phagosomes of
autophagic origin (Birmingham et al. 2008).

After the establishment of a functional
link between autophagy and control of
intracellular proliferation
L. monocytogenes
(Rich et al. 2003), other reports documented
the role of autophagy as an innate host defense
mechanism against bacterial pathogens such as
M. tuberculosis (Gutierrez et al. 2004). After
internalization in macrophages, M. tuberculosis

Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2009.25:649-670. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitatsbibliothek Osnabruck on 11/13/10. For personal use only.ANRV389-CB25-26

ARI

4 September 2009

21:46

remains associated with a membrane-bound
compartment and blocks the maturation of
this compartment at an early phagosomal
stage (Sturgill-Koszycki et al. 1994, Via et al.
1997). Autophagy stimulation by starvation or
rapamycin treatment leads to M. tuberculosis
phagosome
colocalization with the LC3
autophagosomal marker and inhibition of
mycobacterial intracellular survival (Gutierrez
et al. 2004). The murine immunity-related p47
guanosine triphosphatase Irgm1 and its human
ortholog IRGM trigger autophagy to eliminate
intracellular mycobacteria (Singh et al. 2006).
And ubiquitin-derived peptides with bacteri-
cidal activity against mycobacteria accumulate
in autophagolysosomes and enhance bacterial
killing (Alonso et al. 2007).

Autophagy has been demonstrated as
a defense mechanism against S. pyogenes: In
mouse embryonic autophagy-deﬁcient Atg5−/−
ﬁbroblasts, bacteria that escape from vacuoles
via an SLO-dependent mechanism are able
to multiply and be released from infected
cells (Nakagawa et al. 2004). The intercellular
spread A (IcsA) protein of S. ﬂexneri, required
for the actin-based motility of this bacterium
in the cytosol of host cells, is targeted by Atg5,
thereby triggering autophagocytosis and bac-
terial killing. However, the T3SS effector IcsB
blocks the IcsA/Atg5 interaction by directly in-
teracting with Atg5 and, in this way, S. ﬂexneri is
able to escape autopaghy (Ogawa et al. 2005). In
the case of S. enterica, some bacteria-containing
vacuoles that have been damaged by the activity
of the T3SS, SPI-1 (normally required only
for cellular invasion and not for intracellular
survival), are targeted by autophagosomes and
control potential bacterial replication in the
host cell cytoplasm (Birmingham et al. 2006).
Cytoplasmic and membrane-bound intra-
cellular pathogens are thus targeted by au-
tophagy for destruction. The deciphering of the
molecular events that trigger this new innate
immune response will reveal whether a single
pathway is always activated or whether diversity
also exists in the formation of autophagosomes
and different signaling cascades are activated in
each case.

CELL-TO-CELL SPREAD
As mentioned above, L. monocytogenes moves in
the host cell cytosol using an actin-based motil-
ity process. In nonconﬂuent cells, bacteria that
reach the cellular plasma membrane induce the
formation of long membrane protrusions that
extend with bacteria at their tips but, surpris-
ingly, never lyse or break. Actin-based motility
is sufﬁcient to promote protrusion formation,
as revealed by an E. coli strain expressing invasin
from Y. pseudotuberculosis for cellular invasion,
LLO from L. monocytogenes to facilitate vacuo-
lar escape, and IcsA of S. ﬂexneri to produce
actin polymerization (Monack & Theriot
2001).
In conﬂuent monolayers, bacterial
protrusions penetrate in neighboring cells and
lead to the formation of a double-membrane
compartment
from which L. monocytogenes
escapes to initiate a new infection cycle. The
term paracytophagy has been proposed to
describe a normal cellular mechanism that
allows epithelial cell engulfment of membrane
fragments from neighboring cells, which is
exploited in part by L. monocytogenes to form
productive protrusions (Robbins et al. 1999).
The inhibition of interaction between actin and
members of the ezrin/radixin/moesin family
results in the formation of short and collapsed
protrusions, suggesting that ezrin, in particular,
is critical for cell-to-cell spread (Pust et al.
2005). A recent study suggested that PI- and
PC-PLC are required for the lysis of the inner
membrane of the double-membrane vacuole
formed after protrusion formation in secondary
cells and that LLO lyses the outer membrane
of
(Alberti-Segui et al.
2007).

this compartment

Few studies have been performed to address
the cell-to-cell spread issue in other bacterial
pathogens. In the case of S. ﬂexneri, E-cadherin
expression seems to be required for a productive
protrusion formation (Sansonetti et al. 1994).
Clearly, cell-to-cell spread is a complex phe-
nomenon that requires inventive cell manipu-
lation techniques to be fully addressed, but it
is worth investigating given its key role during
infection.

www.annualreviews.org • Listeria monocytogenes Membrane Trafﬁcking and Lifestyle

663

Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2009.25:649-670. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitatsbibliothek Osnabruck on 11/13/10. For personal use only.ANRV389-CB25-26

ARI

4 September 2009

21:46

CONCLUSIONS
Survival and replication of bacterial pathogens
within mammalian cells rely on a variety of
molecular strategies. In this review, we describe
in detail the membrane trafﬁcking pathways
hijacked by Listeria and highlight that other
bacteria, although using different effectors, can

target the same pathways to subvert cellular
functions and to hamper deleterious host re-
sponses. Knowledge of the speciﬁc cells or tis-
sues in which these events occur in vivo will be
critical for a full understanding of the infection
process and poses a real challenge for future
research.

DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The authors are not aware of any biases that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this
review.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We apologize to colleagues whose work could not be included in this review owing to space
limitations. Work in P.C.’s group received support from the Pasteur Institute, INSERM, INRA,
and ANR. P.C. is also an international scholar from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute.

LITERATURE CITED
Abrami L, Liu S, Cosson P, Leppla SH, Van Der Goot FG. 2003. Anthrax toxin triggers endocytosis of its

receptor via a lipid raft-mediated clathrin-dependent process. J. Cell Biol. 160:321–28

Agerer F, Lux S, Michel A, Rohde M, Ohlsen K, Hauck CR. 2005. Cellular invasion by Staphylococcus aureus
reveals a functional link between focal adhesion kinase and cortactin in integrin-mediated internalisation.
J. Cell Sci. 118:2189–200

Aggeler J, Werb Z. 1982. Initial events during phagocytosis by macrophages viewed from outside and inside

the cell: membrane-particle interactions and clathrin. J. Cell Biol. 94:613–23

Alberti-Segui C, Goeden KR, Higgins DE. 2007. Differential function of Listeria monocytogenes listeriolysin

O and phospholipases C in vacuolar dissolution following cell-to-cell spread. Cell Microbiol. 9:179–95

Alonso S, Pethe K, Russell DG, Purdy GE. 2007. Lysosomal killing of Mycobacterium mediated by ubiquitin-

derived peptides is enhanced by autophagy. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 104:6031–36

Alrutz MA, Srivastava A, Wong KW, D’Souza-Schorey C, Tang M, et al. 2001. Efﬁcient uptake of Yersinia
pseudotuberculosis via integrin receptors involves a Rac1-Arp 2/3 pathway that bypasses N-WASP function.
Mol. Microbiol. 42:689–703

Alvarez-Dominguez C, Madrazo-Toca F, Fernandez-Prieto L, Vandekerckhove J, Pareja E, et al. 2008.

Characterization of a Listeria monocytogenes protein interfering with Rab5a. Trafﬁc 9:325–37

Alvarez-Dominguez C, Stahl PD. 1999. Increased expression of Rab5a correlates directly with accelerated

maturation of Listeria monocytogenes phagosomes. J. Biol. Chem. 274:11459–62

Anderson GG, Palermo JJ, Schilling JD, Roth R, Heuser J, Hultgren SJ. 2003. Intracellular bacterial bioﬁlm-

like pods in urinary tract infections. Science 301:105–7

Baorto DM, Gao Z, Malaviya R, Dustin ML, Van Der Merwe A, et al. 1997. Survival of FimH-expressing

enterobacteria in macrophages relies on glycolipid trafﬁc. Nature 389:636–39

Beauregard KE, Lee KD, Collier RJ, Swanson JA. 1997. pH-dependent perforation of macrophage phago-

somes by listeriolysin O from Listeria monocytogenes. J. Exp. Med. 186:1159–63

Bergmann S, Lang A, Rohde M, Agarwal V, Rennemeier C, et al. 2009. Integrin-linked kinase is required for

vitronectin-mediated internalization of Streptococcus pneumoniae by host cells. J. Cell Sci. 122:256–67

Beuzon CR, Meresse S, Unsworth KE, Ruiz-Albert J, Garvis S, et al. 2000. Salmonella maintains the integrity

of its intracellular vacuole through the action of SifA. EMBO J. 19:3235–49

Bhakdi S, Tranum-Jensen J, Sziegoleit A. 1985. Mechanism of membrane damage by streptolysin-O. Infect.

Immun. 47:52–60

Pizarro-Cerd´a· Cossart

664

Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2009.25:649-670. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitatsbibliothek Osnabruck on 11/13/10. For personal use only.ANRV389-CB25-26

ARI

4 September 2009

21:46

Bierne H, Cossart P. 2007. Listeria monocytogenes surface proteins: from genome predictions to function.

Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 71:377–97

Bierne H, Gouin E, Roux P, Caroni P, Yin HL, Cossart P. 2001. A role for coﬁlin and LIM kinase in Listeria-

induced phagocytosis. J. Cell Biol. 155:101–12

Bierne H, Miki H, Innocenti M, Scita G, Gertler FB, et al. 2005. WASP-related proteins, Abi1 and Ena/VASP,

are required for Listeria invasion induced by the Met receptor. J. Cell Sci. 118:1537–47

Bierne H, Sabet C, Personnic N, Cossart P. 2007. Internalins: a complex family of leucine-rich repeat-

containing proteins in Listeria monocytogenes. Microbes Infect. 9:1156–66

Birmingham CL, Canadien V, Gouin E, Troy EB, Yoshimori T, et al. 2007. Listeria monocytogenes evades killing

by autophagy during colonization of host cells. Autophagy 3:442–51

Birmingham CL, Canadien V, Kaniuk NA, Steinberg BE, Higgins DE, Brumell JH. 2008. Listeriolysin O

allows Listeria monocytogenes replication in macrophage vacuoles. Nature 451:350–54

Birmingham CL, Smith AC, Bakowski MA, Yoshimori T, Brumell JH. 2006. Autophagy controls Salmonella

infection in response to damage to the Salmonella-containing vacuole. J. Biol. Chem. 281:11374–83

Biswas D, Itoh K, Sasakawa C. 2003. Role of microﬁlaments and microtubules in the invasion of INT-407

cells by Campylobacter jejuni. Microbiol. Immunol. 47:469–73

Bliska JB, Casadevall A. 2009. Intracellular pathogenic bacteria and fungi—a case of convergent evolution?

Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 7:165–71

Blocker A, Jouihri N, Larquet E, Gounon P, Ebel F, et al. 2001. Structure and composition of the Shigella

ﬂexneri “needle complex”, a part of its type III secreton. Mol. Microbiol. 39:652–63

Bonazzi M, Veiga E, Pizarro-Cerd´a J, Cossart P. 2008. Successive post-translational modiﬁcations of
E-cadherin are required for InlA-mediated internalization of Listeria monocytogenes. Cell Microbiol.
10:2208–22

Braun L, Ghebrehiwet B, Cossart P. 2000. gC1q-R/p32, a C1q-binding protein, is a receptor for the InlB

invasion protein of Listeria monocytogenes. EMBO J. 19:1458–66

Chan YG, Cardwell MM, Hermanas TM, Uchiyama T, Martinez JJ. 2009. Rickettsial outer-membrane
protein B (rOmpB) mediates bacterial invasion through Ku70 in an actin, c-Cbl, clathrin and caveolin
2-dependent manner. Cell Microbiol. 11:629-44

Cheng Y, Boll W, Kirchhausen T, Harrison SC, Walz T. 2007. Cryo-electron tomography of clathrin-coated

vesicles: structural implications for coat assembly. J. Mol. Biol. 365:892–99

Conner SD, Schmid SL. 2003. Regulated portals of entry into the cell. Nature 422:37–44
Cossart P, Vicente MF, Mengaud J, Baquero F, Perez-Diaz JC, Berche P. 1989. Listeriolysin O is essential
for virulence of Listeria monocytogenes: direct evidence obtained by gene complementation. Infect. Immun.
57:3629–36

Dhakal BK, Mulvey MA. 2009. Uropathogenic Escherichia coli invades host cells via an HDAC6-modulated

microtubule-dependent pathway. J. Biol. Chem. 284:446–54

Disson O, Grayo S, Huillet E, Nikitas G, Langa-Vives F, et al. 2008. Conjugated action of two species-speciﬁc

invasion proteins for fetoplacental listeriosis. Nature 455:1114–18

Dokainish H, Gavicherla B, Shen Y, Ireton K. 2007. The carboxyl-terminal SH3 domain of the mammalian
adaptor CrkII promotes internalization of Listeria monocytogenes through activation of host phosphoinosi-
tide 3-kinase. Cell Microbiol. 9:2497–516

Duncan MJ, Li G, Shin JS, Carson JL, Abraham SN. 2004. Bacterial penetration of bladder epithelium through

lipid rafts. J. Biol. Chem. 279:18944–51

Ellington JK, Reilly SS, Ramp WK, Smeltzer MS, Kellam JF, Hudson MC. 1999. Mechanisms of Staphylococcus

aureus invasion of cultured osteoblasts. Microb. Pathog. 26:317–23

Espenel C, Margeat E, Dosset P, Arduise C, Le Grimellec C, et al. 2008. Single-molecule analysis of CD9
dynamics and partitioning reveals multiple modes of interaction in the tetraspanin web. J. Cell Biol.
182:765–76

Eto DS, Gordon HB, Dhakal BK, Jones TA, Mulvey MA. 2008. Clathrin, AP-2, and the NPXY-binding subset
of alternate endocytic adaptors facilitate FimH-mediated bacterial invasion of host cells. Cell Microbiol.
10:2553–67

www.annualreviews.org • Listeria monocytogenes Membrane Trafﬁcking and Lifestyle

665

Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2009.25:649-670. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitatsbibliothek Osnabruck on 11/13/10. For personal use only.ANRV389-CB25-26

ARI

4 September 2009

21:46

Fernandez-Prada CM, Hoover DL, Tall BD, Hartman AB, Kopelowitz J, Venkatesan MM. 2000. Shigella
ﬂexneri IpaH7.8 facilitates escape of virulent bacteria from the endocytic vacuoles of mouse and human
macrophages. Infect. Immun. 68:3608–19

Ferrari G, Langen H, Naito M, Pieters J. 1999. A coat protein on phagosomes involved in the intracellular

survival of Mycobacteria. Cell 97:435–47

Gaillard JL, Berche P, Frehel C, Gouin E, Cossart P. 1991. Entry of L. monocytogenes into cells is mediated by

internalin, a repeat protein reminiscent of surface antigens from gram-positive cocci. Cell 65:1127–41

Galletta BJ, Cooper JA. 2009. Actin and endocytosis: mechanisms and phylogeny. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 21:

20–27

Gatﬁeld J, Pieters J. 2000. Essential role for cholesterol in entry of Mycobacteria into macrophages. Science

288:1647–50

Geoffroy C, Gaillard JL, Alouf JE, Berche P. 1987. Puriﬁcation, characterization, and toxicity of the sulfhydryl-

activated hemolysin listeriolysin O from Listeria monocytogenes. Infect. Immun. 55:1641–46

Giddings KS, Johnson AE, Tweten RK. 2003. Redeﬁning cholesterol’s role in the mechanism of the

cholesterol-dependent cytolysins. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100:11315–20

Glenney JR Jr, Soppet D. 1992. Sequence and expression of caveolin, a protein component of caveolae plasma
membrane domains phosphorylated on tyrosine in Rous sarcoma virus-transformed ﬁbroblasts. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 89:10517–21

Green BT, Brown DR. 2006. Differential effects of clathrin and actin inhibitors on internalization of Escherichia

coli and Salmonella choleraesuis in porcine jejunal Peyer’s patches. Vet. Microbiol. 113:117–22

Gupta VR, Patel HK, Kostolansky SS, Ballivian RA, Eichberg J, Blanke SR. 2008. Sphingomyelin functions

as a novel receptor for Helicobacter pylori VacA. PLoS Pathog. 4:e1000073

Gutierrez MG, Master SS, Singh SB, Taylor GA, Colombo MI, Deretic V. 2004. Autophagy is a defense
mechanism inhibiting BCG and Mycobacterium tuberculosis survival in infected macrophages. Cell 119:753–
66

Hayward RD, Cain RJ, McGhie EJ, Phillips N, Garner MJ, Koronakis V. 2005. Cholesterol binding
by the bacterial type III translocon is essential for virulence effector delivery into mammalian cells.
Mol. Microbiol. 56:590–603

Head BP, Patel HH, Roth DM, Murray F, Swaney JS, et al. 2006. Microtubules and actin microﬁlaments regu-
late lipid raft/caveolae localization of adenylyl cyclase signaling components. J. Biol. Chem. 281:26391–99
Helwani FM, Kovacs EM, Paterson AD, Verma S, Ali RG, et al. 2004. Cortactin is necessary for E-cadherin-

mediated contact formation and actin reorganization. J. Cell Biol. 164:899–910

Henry R, Shaughnessy L, Loessner MJ, Alberti-Segui C, Higgins DE, Swanson JA. 2006. Cytolysin-dependent
delay of vacuole maturation in macrophages infected with Listeria monocytogenes. Cell Microbiol. 8:107–19
High N, Mounier J, Prevost MC, Sansonetti PJ. 1992. IpaB of Shigella ﬂexneri causes entry into epithelial cells

and escape from the phagocytic vacuole. EMBO J. 11:1991–99

Imamura Y, Itoh M, Maeno Y, Tsukita S, Nagafuchi A. 1999. Functional domains of alpha-catenin required

for the strong state of cadherin-based cell adhesion. J. Cell Biol. 144:1311–22

Ireton K, Payrastre B, Chap H, Ogawa W, Sakaue H, et al. 1996. A role for phosphoinositide 3-kinase in

bacterial invasion. Science 274:780–82

Ireton K, Payrastre B, Cossart P. 1999. The Listeria monocytogenes protein InlB is an agonist of mammalian

phosphoinositide 3-kinase. J. Biol. Chem. 274:17025–32

Isberg RR, Leong JM. 1990. Multiple beta 1 chain integrins are receptors for invasin, a protein that promotes

bacterial penetration into mammalian cells. Cell 60:861–71

Isberg RR, O’Connor TJ, Heidtman M. 2009. The Legionella pneumophila replication vacuole: making a cosy

niche inside host cells. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 7:12–24

Isberg RR, Voorhis DL, Falkow S. 1987. Identiﬁcation of invasin: a protein that allows enteric bacteria to

penetrate cultured mammalian cells. Cell 50:769–78

Jacobs T, Darji A, Frahm N, Rohde M, Wehland J, et al. 1998. Listeriolysin O: cholesterol inhibits cytolysis

but not binding to cellular membranes. Mol. Microbiol. 28:1081–89

Jonquieres R, Pizarro-Cerda J, Cossart P. 2001. Synergy between the N- and C-terminal domains of InlB for

efﬁcient invasion of non-phagocytic cells by Listeria monocytogenes. Mol. Microbiol. 42:955–65

Pizarro-Cerd´a· Cossart

666

Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2009.25:649-670. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitatsbibliothek Osnabruck on 11/13/10. For personal use only.ANRV389-CB25-26

ARI

4 September 2009

21:46

Jouve M, Garcia MI, Courcoux P, Labigne A, Gounon P, Le Bouguenec C. 1997. Adhesion to and invasion
of HeLa cells by pathogenic Escherichia coli carrying the afa-3 gene cluster are mediated by the AfaE and
AfaD proteins, respectively. Infect. Immun. 65:4082–89

Kaksonen M, Toret CP, Drubin DG. 2006. Harnessing actin dynamics for clathrin-mediated endocytosis.

Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 7:404–14

Kathariou S, Metz P, Hof H, Goebel W. 1987. Tn916-induced mutations in the hemolysin determinant

affecting virulence of Listeria monocytogenes. J. Bacteriol. 169:1291–97

Klionsky DJ. 2007. Autophagy: from phenomenology to molecular understanding in less than a decade.

Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 8:931–97

Kocks C, Gouin E, Tabouret M, Berche P, Ohayon H, Cossart P. 1992. L. monocytogenes-induced actin assembly

requires the actA gene product, a surface protein. Cell 68:521–31

Kovacs EM, Ali RG, McCormack AJ, Yap AS. 2002. E-cadherin homophilic ligation directly signals through

Rac and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase to regulate adhesive contacts. J. Biol. Chem. 277:6708–18

Kubori T, Matsushima Y, Nakamura D, Uralil J, Lara-Tejero M, et al. 1998. Supramolecular structure of the

Salmonella typhimurium type III protein secretion system. Science 280:602–5

Kuhn M. 1998. The microtubule depolymerizing drugs nocodazole and colchicine inhibit the uptake of Listeria

monocytogenes by P388D1 macrophages. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 160:87–90

Kukkonen M, Raunio T, Virkola R, Lahteenmaki K, Makela PH, et al. 1993. Basement membrane carbohydrate
as a target for bacterial adhesion: binding of type I ﬁmbriae of Salmonella enterica and Escherichia coli to
laminin. Mol. Microbiol. 7:229–37

Kusumi A, Suzuki K. 2005. Toward understanding the dynamics of membrane-raft-based molecular interac-

tions. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1746:234–51

Lafont F, Tran Van Nhieu G, Hanada K, Sansonetti P, Van Der Goot FG. 2002. Initial steps of Shigella infection

depend on the cholesterol/sphingolipid raft-mediated CD44-IpaB interaction. EMBO J. 21:4449–57

Lasserre R, Guo XJ, Conchonaud F, Hamon Y, Hawchar O, et al. 2008. Raft nanodomains contribute to

Akt/PKB plasma membrane recruitment and activation. Nat. Chem. Biol. 4:538–47

Lecuit M, Hurme R, Pizarro-Cerd´a J, Ohayon H, Geiger B, Cossart P. 2000. A role for alpha-and beta-

catenins in bacterial uptake. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97:10008–13

Lecuit M, Vandormael-Pournin S, Lefort J, Huerre M, Gounon P, et al. 2001. A transgenic model for listeriosis:

role of internalin in crossing the intestinal barrier. Science 292:1722–25

Madden JC, Ruiz N, Caparon M. 2001. Cytolysin-mediated translocation (CMT): a functional equivalent of

type III secretion in gram-positive bacteria. Cell 104:143–52

Marquis H, Hager EJ. 2000. pH-regulated activation and release of a bacteria-associated phospholipase C

during intracellular infection by Listeria monocytogenes. Mol. Microbiol. 35:289–98

Martinez JJ, Cossart P. 2004. Early signaling events involved in the entry of Rickettsia conorii into mammalian

cells. J. Cell Sci. 117:5097–106

Martinez JJ, Hultgren SJ. 2002. Requirement of Rho-family GTPases in the invasion of Type 1-piliated

uropathogenic Escherichia coli. Cell Microbiol. 4:19–28

Martinez JJ, Mulvey MA, Schilling JD, Pinkner JS, Hultgren SJ. 2000. Type 1 pilus-mediated bacterial invasion

of bladder epithelial cells. EMBO J. 19:2803–12

Martinez JJ, Seveau S, Veiga E, Matsuyama S, Cossart P. 2005. Ku70, a component of DNA-dependent protein

kinase, is a mammalian receptor for Rickettsia conorii. Cell 123:1013–23

Massey RC, Kantzanou MN, Fowler T, Day NP, Schoﬁeld K, et al. 2001. Fibronectin-binding protein A of
Staphylococcus aureus has multiple, substituting, binding regions that mediate adherence to ﬁbronectin and
invasion of endothelial cells. Cell Microbiol. 3:839–51

Mengaud J, Chenevert J, Geoffroy C, Gaillard JL, Cossart P. 1987. Identiﬁcation of the structural gene en-
coding the SH-activated hemolysin of Listeria monocytogenes: listeriolysin O is homologous to streptolysin
O and pneumolysin. Infect. Immun. 55:3225–27

Mengaud J, Ohayon H, Gounon P, Mege RM, Cossart P. 1996. E-cadherin is the receptor for internalin, a

surface protein required for entry of L. monocytogenes into epithelial cells. Cell 84:923–32

Monack DM, Theriot JA. 2001. Actin-based motility is sufﬁcient for bacterial membrane protrusion formation

and host cell uptake. Cell Microbiol. 3:633–47

www.annualreviews.org • Listeria monocytogenes Membrane Trafﬁcking and Lifestyle

667

Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2009.25:649-670. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitatsbibliothek Osnabruck on 11/13/10. For personal use only.ANRV389-CB25-26

ARI

4 September 2009

21:46

Mostowy S, Nam Tham T, Danckaert A, Guadagnini S, Boisson-Dupuis S, et al. 2009. Septins regulate

bacterial entry into host cells. PLoS ONE 4:e4196

Nakagawa I, Amano A, Mizushima N, Yamamoto A, Yamaguchi H, et al. 2004. Autophagy defends cells against

invading Group A Streptococcus. Science 306:1037–40

Ogawa M, Yoshimori T, Suzuki T, Sagara H, Mizushima N, Sasakawa C. 2005. Escape of intracellular Shigella

from autophagy. Science 307:727–31

Ojcius DM, Thibon M, Mounier C, Dautry-Varsat A. 1995. pH and calcium dependence of hemolysis due to

Rickettsia prowazekii: comparison with phospholipase activity. Infect. Immun. 63:3069–72

Osiecki JC, Barker J, Picking WL, Serﬁs AB, Berring E, et al. 2001. IpaC from Shigella and SipC from
Salmonella possess similar biochemical properties but are functionally distinct. Mol. Microbiol. 42:469–81
Pelkmans L, Fava E, Grabner H, Hannus M, Habermann B, et al. 2005. Genome-wide analysis of human

kinases in clathrin- and caveolae/raft-mediated endocytosis. Nature 436:78–86

Petrelli A, Gilestro GF, Lanzardo S, Comoglio PM, Migone N, Giordano S. 2002. The endophilin-CIN85-

Cbl complex mediates ligand-dependent downregulation of c-Met. Nature 416:187–90

Pizarro-Cerd´a J, Meresse S, Parton RG, Van Der Goot G, Sola-Landa A, et al. 1998. Brucella abortus transits
through the autophagic pathway and replicates in the endoplasmic reticulum of nonprofessional phago-
cytes. Infect. Immun. 66:5711–24

Pizarro-Cerd´a J, Payrastre B, Wang YJ, Veiga E, Yin HL, Cossart P. 2007. Type II phosphatidylinositol

4-kinases promote Listeria monocytogenes entry into target cells. Cell Microbiol. 9:2381–90

Prada-Delgado A, Carrasco-Marin E, Bokoch GM, Alvarez-Dominguez C. 2001. Interferon-gamma listerici-
dal action is mediated by novel Rab5a functions at the phagosomal environment. J. Biol. Chem. 276:19059–
65

Inhibition of Rab5a exchange activity is a key step for Listeria monocytogenes survival. Trafﬁc 6:252–65

Prada-Delgado A, Carrasco-Marin E, Pena-Macarro C, Del Cerro-Vadillo E, Fresno-Escudero M, et al. 2005.
Pryor PR, Mullock BM, Bright NA, Gray SR, Luzio JP. 2000. The role of intraorganellar Ca2+ in late
endosome-lysosome heterotypic fusion and in the reformation of lysosomes from hybrid organelles.
J. Cell Biol. 149:1053–62

Pust S, Morrison H, Wehland J, Sechi AS, Herrlich P. 2005. Listeria monocytogenes exploits ERM protein

functions to efﬁciently spread from cell to cell. EMBO J. 24:1287–300

Py BF, Lipinski MM, Yuan J. 2007. Autophagy limits Listeria monocytogenes intracellular growth in the early

phase of primary infection. Autophagy 3:117–25

Radulovic S, Troyer JM, Beier MS, Lau AO, Azad AF. 1999. Identiﬁcation and molecular analysis of the gene

encoding Rickettsia typhi hemolysin. Infect. Immun. 67:6104–8

Rappoport JZ, Heyman KP, Kemal S, Simon SM. 2008. Dynamics of dynamin during clathrin mediated

endocytosis in PC12 cells. PLoS ONE 3:e2416

Renesto P, Dehoux P, Gouin E, Touqui L, Cossart P, Raoult D. 2003. Identiﬁcation and characterization of

a phospholipase D-superfamily gene in Rickettsiae. J. Infect. Dis. 188:1276–83

Rich KA, Burkett C, Webster P. 2003. Cytoplasmic bacteria can be targets for autophagy. Cell Microbiol.

5:455–68

Robbins JR, Barth AI, Marquis H, de Hostos EL, Nelson WJ, Theriot JA. 1999. Listeria monocytogenes exploits

normal host cell processes to spread from cell to cell. J. Cell Biol. 146:1333–50

Rodriguez OC, Schaefer AW, Mandato CA, Forscher P, Bement WM, Waterman-Storer CM. 2003. Con-

served microtubule-actin interactions in cell movement and morphogenesis. Nat. Cell Biol. 5:599–609

Rohde M, Muller E, Chhatwal GS, Talay SR. 2003. Host cell caveolae act as an entry-port for Group A

Streptococci. Cell Microbiol. 5:323–42

Sansonetti PJ, Mounier J, Prevost MC, Mege RM. 1994. Cadherin expression is required for the spread of

Shigella ﬂexneri between epithelial cells. Cell 76:829–39

Saslowsky DE, Lencer WI. 2008. Conversion of apical plasma membrane sphingomyelin to ceramide atten-

uates the intoxication of host cells by cholera toxin. Cell Microbiol. 10:67–80

Sekiya K, Satoh R, Danbara H, Futaesaku Y. 1993. A ring-shaped structure with a crown formed by streptolysin

O on the erythrocyte membrane. J. Bacteriol. 175:5953–61

Semerdjieva S, Shortt B, Maxwell E, Singh S, Fonarev P, et al. 2008. Coordinated regulation of AP2 uncoating

from clathrin-coated vesicles by rab5 and hRME-6. J. Cell Biol. 183:499–511

Pizarro-Cerd´a· Cossart

668

Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2009.25:649-670. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitatsbibliothek Osnabruck on 11/13/10. For personal use only.ANRV389-CB25-26

ARI

4 September 2009

21:46

Seveau S, Bierne H, Giroux S, Prevost MC, Cossart P. 2004. Role of lipid rafts in E-cadherin– and HGF-

R/Met–mediated entry of Listeria monocytogenes into host cells. J. Cell Biol. 166:743–53

Seveau S, Tham TN, Payrastre B, Hoppe AD, Swanson JA, Cossart P. 2007. A FRET analysis to unravel the
role of cholesterol in Rac1 and PI 3-kinase activation in the InlB/Met signalling pathway. Cell Microbiol.
9:790–803

Shaughnessy LM, Hoppe AD, Christensen KA, Swanson JA. 2006. Membrane perforations inhibit lysosome

fusion by altering pH and calcium in Listeria monocytogenes vacuoles. Cell Microbiol. 8:781–92

Shen Y, Naujokas M, Park M, Ireton K. 2000. InIB-dependent internalization of Listeria is mediated by the

Met receptor tyrosine kinase. Cell 103:501–10

Shin JS, Gao Z, Abraham SN. 2000. Involvement of cellular caveolae in bacterial entry into mast cells. Science

289:785–88

Sibelius U, Chakraborty T, Krogel B, Wolf J, Rose F, et al. 1996. The listerial exotoxins listeriolysin
and phosphatidylinositol-speciﬁc phospholipase C synergize to elicit endothelial cell phosphoinositide
metabolism. J. Immunol. 157:4055–60

Simons K, Ikonen E. 1997. Functional rafts in cell membranes. Nature 387:569–72
Singh R, Jamieson A, Cresswell P. 2008. GILT is a critical host factor for Listeria monocytogenes infection.

Nature 455:1244–47

Singh SB, Davis AS, Taylor GA, Deretic V. 2006. Human IRGM induces autophagy to eliminate intracellular

Mycobacteria. Science 313:1438–41

Smith GA, Marquis H, Jones S, Johnston NC, Portnoy DA, Goldﬁne H. 1995. The two distinct phospholipases
C of Listeria monocytogenes have overlapping roles in escape from a vacuole and cell-to-cell spread. Infect.
Immun. 63:4231–37

Smith J, Manoranjan J, Pan M, Bohsali A, Xu J, et al. 2008. Evidence for pore formation in host cell membranes
by ESX-1-secreted ESAT-6 and its role in Mycobacterium marinum escape from the vacuole. Infect. Immun.
76:5478–87

Sousa S, Cabanes D, Archambaud C, Colland F, Lemichez E, et al. 2005. ARHGAP10 is necessary for alpha-

catenin recruitment at adherens junctions and for Listeria invasion. Nat. Cell Biol. 7:954–60

Sousa S, Cabanes D, Bougneres L, Lecuit M, Sansonetti P, et al. 2007. Src, cortactin and Arp2/3 complex are

required for E-cadherin-mediated internalization of Listeria into cells. Cell Microbiol. 9:2629–43

Sousa S, Cabanes D, El-Amraoui A, Petit C, Lecuit M, Cossart P. 2004. Unconventional myosin VIIa and

vezatin, two proteins crucial for Listeria entry into epithelial cells. J. Cell Sci. 117:2121–30

Stuart ES, Webley WC, Norkin LC. 2003. Lipid rafts, caveolae, caveolin-1, and entry by Chlamydiae into host

cells. Exp. Cell Res. 287:67–78

Sturgill-Koszycki S, Schlesinger PH, Chakraborty P, Haddix PL, Collins HL, et al. 1994. Lack of acidiﬁcation
in Mycobacterium phagosomes produced by exclusion of the vesicular proton-ATPase. Science 263:678–81
Sukumaran SK, Quon MJ, Prasadarao NV. 2002. Escherichia coli K1 internalization via caveolae requires
caveolin-1 and protein kinase C-alpha interaction in human brain microvascular endothelial cells. J. Biol.
Chem. 277:50716–24

Tilney LG, Portnoy DA. 1989. Actin ﬁlaments and the growth, movement, and spread of the intracellular

bacterial parasite, Listeria monocytogenes. J. Cell Biol. 109:1597–608

Tooley AJ, Gilden J, Jacobelli J, Beemiller P, Trimble WS, et al. 2009. Amoeboid T lymphocytes require the

septin cytoskeleton for cortical integrity and persistent motility. Nat. Cell Biol. 11:17–26

Van Der Goot FG, Tran van Nhieu G, Allaoui A, Sansonetti P, Lafont F. 2004. Rafts can trigger contact-

mediated secretion of bacterial effectors via a lipid-based mechanism. J. Biol. Chem. 279:47792–98

Van Der Wel N, Hava D, Houben D, Fluitsma D, van Zon M, et al. 2007. M. tuberculosis and M. leprae

translocate from the phagolysosome to the cytosol in myeloid cells. Cell 129:1287–98

Veiga E, Cossart P. 2005. Listeria hijacks the clathrin-dependent endocytic machinery to invade mammalian

cells. Nat. Cell Biol. 7:894–900

Veiga E, Guttman JA, Bonazzi M, Boucrot E, Toledo-Arana A, et al. 2007. Invasive and adherent bacterial

pathogens co-opt host clathrin for infection. Cell Host. Microbe 2:340–51

Via LE, Deretic D, Ulmer RJ, Hibler NS, Huber LA, Deretic V. 1997. Arrest of mycobacterial phagosome
maturation is caused by a block in vesicle fusion between stages controlled by rab5 and rab7. J. Biol. Chem.
272:13326–31

www.annualreviews.org • Listeria monocytogenes Membrane Trafﬁcking and Lifestyle

669

Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2009.25:649-670. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitatsbibliothek Osnabruck on 11/13/10. For personal use only.ANRV389-CB25-26

ARI

4 September 2009

21:46

Wadsworth SJ, Goldﬁne H. 2002. Mobilization of protein kinase C in macrophages induced by Listeria

monocytogenes affects its internalization and escape from the phagosome. Infect. Immun. 70:4650–60

Watarai M, Makino S, Michikawa M, Yanagisawa K, Murakami S, Shirahata T. 2002. Macrophage plasma

membrane cholesterol contributes to Brucella abortus infection of mice. Infect. Immun. 70:4818–25

Wong KW, Isberg RR. 2003. Arf6 and phosphoinositol-4-phosphate-5-kinase activities permit bypass of the

Rac1 requirement for beta1 integrin-mediated bacterial uptake. J. Exp. Med. 198:603–14

Wooldridge KG, Williams PH, Ketley JM. 1996. Host signal transduction and endocytosis of Campylobacter

jejuni. Microb. Pathog. 21:299–305

Wyrick PB, Choong J, Davis CH, Knight ST, Royal MO, et al. 1989. Entry of genital Chlamydia trachomatis

into polarized human epithelial cells. Infect. Immun. 57:2378–89

Yano T, Mita S, Ohmori H, Oshima Y, Fujimoto Y, et al. 2008. Autophagic control of Listeria through

intracellular innate immune recognition in Drosophila. Nat. Immunol. 9:908–16

Yao Q, Chen J, Cao H, Orth JD, McCaffery JM, et al. 2005. Caveolin-1 interacts directly with dynamin-2.

J. Mol. Biol. 348:491–501

Zaas DW, Duncan MJ, Li G, Wright JR, Abraham SN. 2005. Pseudomonas invasion of type I pneumocytes is

dependent on the expression and phosphorylation of caveolin-2. J. Biol. Chem. 280:4864–72

Zhou G, Mo WJ, Sebbel P, Min G, Neubert TA, et al. 2001. Uroplakin Ia is the urothelial receptor for

uropathogenic Escherichia coli: evidence from in vitro FimH binding. J. Cell Sci. 114:4095–103

Pizarro-Cerd´a· Cossart

670

Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2009.25:649-670. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitatsbibliothek Osnabruck on 11/13/10. For personal use only.AR389-FM

ARI

14 September 2009

14:58

Contents

Chromosome Odds and Ends

Joseph G. Gall

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p 1

Small RNAs and Their Roles in Plant Development

Xuemei Chen p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

From Progenitors to Differentiated Cells in the Vertebrate Retina

Michalis Agathocleous and William A. Harris

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Mechanisms of Lipid Transport Involved in Organelle Biogenesis

in Plant Cells
Christoph Benning p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Innovations in Teaching Undergraduate Biology

and Why We Need Them
William B. Wood p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p21

p45

p71

p93

Annual Review
of Cell and
Developmental
Biology

Volume 25, 2009

Membrane Trafﬁc within the Golgi Apparatus

Benjamin S. Glick and Akihiko Nakano p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Molecular Circuitry of Endocytosis at Nerve Terminals

Jeremy Dittman and Timothy A. Ryan p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Many Paths to Synaptic Speciﬁcity

Joshua R. Sanes and Masahito Yamagata p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Mechanisms of Growth and Homeostasis in the Drosophila Wing

Ricardo M. Neto-Silva, Brent S. Wells, and Laura A. Johnston p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Vertebrate Endoderm Development and Organ Formation

Aaron M. Zorn and James M. Wells p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Signaling in Adult Neurogenesis

Hoonkyo Suh, Wei Deng, and Fred H. Gage p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Vernalization: Winter and the Timing of Flowering in Plants

Dong-Hwan Kim, Mark R. Doyle, Sibum Sung, and Richard M. Amasino p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Quantitative Time-Lapse Fluorescence Microscopy in Single Cells

Dale Muzzey and Alexander van Oudenaarden p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Mechanisms Shaping the Membranes of Cellular Organelles

Yoko Shibata, Junjie Hu, Michael M. Kozlov, and Tom A. Rapoport p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

The Biogenesis and Function of PIWI Proteins and piRNAs: Progress

and Prospect
Travis Thomson and Haifan Lin p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p 113

p 133

p 161

p 197

p 221

p 253

p 277

p 301

p 329

p 355

vii

Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2009.25:649-670. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitatsbibliothek Osnabruck on 11/13/10. For personal use only.AR389-FM

ARI

14 September 2009

14:58

Mechanisms of Stem Cell Self-Renewal

Shenghui He, Daisuke Nakada, and Sean J. Morrison p

Collective Cell Migration

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Pernille Rørth p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Hox Genes and Segmentation of the Hindbrain and Axial Skeleton

Tara Alexander, Christof Nolte, and Robb Krumlauf p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Gonad Morphogenesis in Vertebrates: Divergent Means to a

Convergent End
Tony DeFalco and Blanche Capel

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

From Mouse Egg to Mouse Embryo: Polarities, Axes, and Tissues

Martin H. Johnson p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Conﬂicting Views on the Membrane Fusion Machinery and the Fusion

Pore
Jakob B. Sørensen p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Coordination of Lipid Metabolism in Membrane Biogenesis

Axel Nohturfft and Shao Chong Zhang p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Navigating ECM Barriers at the Invasive Front: The Cancer

Cell–Stroma Interface
R. Grant Rowe and Stephen J. Weiss p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

The Molecular Basis of Organ Formation: Insights from the

C. elegans Foregut
Susan E. Mango p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Genetic Control of Bone Formation

Gerard Karsenty, Henry M. Kronenberg, and Carmine Settembre p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Listeria monocytogenes Membrane Trafﬁcking and Lifestyle:

The Exception or the Rule?
Javier Pizarro-Cerd´a and Pascale Cossart p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Asymmetric Cell Divisions and Asymmetric Cell Fates

Shahragim Tajbakhsh, Pierre Rocheteau, and Isabelle Le Roux p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Indexes

Cumulative Index of Contributing Authors, Volumes 21–25 p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Cumulative Index of Chapter Titles, Volumes 21–25 p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Errata

p 377

p 407

p 431

p 457

p 483

p 513

p 539

p 567

p 597

p 629

p 649

p 671

p 701

p 704

An online log of corrections to Annual Review of Cell and Developmental Biology articles
may be found at http://cellbio.annualreviews.org/errata.shtml

viii

Contents

Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2009.25:649-670. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby WIB6113 - Universitatsbibliothek Osnabruck on 11/13/10. For personal use only.