An unconventional
but essential marriage:
pro-poor tourism
and the mainstream industry

Pro-poor tourism has had a signiﬁcant impact on the ‘tourism and development’ 
agenda, but is unlikely to become hegemonic. Its impact on broader development 
debates, the mainstream tourism industry, and the public has been more limited. 
(cid:127)ere is an emerging conceptual framework, methodology and empirical evidence base 
to support the original claims of pro-poor tourism (PPT), that it can be pro-poor and 
can be made more so, that any type of tourism can be pro-poor, and that there are 
signiﬁcant beneﬁts for both the development sector and mainstream tourism industry 
of stronger links between the two.

By Jonathan Mitchell, Overseas Development Institute

T ourist  markets  offer  opportunities  for 

poverty  reduction.  While  most  popu-
lar  tourist  destinations  are  in  affluent 
countries,  these  opportunities  are  evident 
in  the  large  and  increasing  tourism  flows  to 
the  developing  world.  In  2008,  40%  of  in-
ternational  tourist  trips  were  to  developing 
countries  (World  Bank,  2010).  In  Figure  1, 
the  large  scale  of  tourism  in  countries  like 
Mexico,  Thailand  and  Malaysia  compared 
with  the  powerhouses  of  the  world  economy, 
like the United States, Japan and Germany, is 
clear. The emerging role of China, as a devel-
oping country tourist destination and an eco-
nomic giant, is striking.

Developing  country  tourism  is  not  the  preserve 
of  middle-income  countries.  Some  of  the  lowest 

Figure 1: Tourist-eye view of the world

income  countries,  such  as  Ethiopia,  !e  Gambia 
and Tanzania, have small tourist ﬂows by interna-
tional standards yet depend on international tour-
ism for a quarter to a third of their exports (World 
Bank, 2010). Mounting empirical evidence shows 
that  tourism  can  transfer  signiﬁcant  beneﬁts  to 
local economies and communities around tourist 
destinations,  making  a  case  for  identifying  tour-
ism as a mechanism for poverty reduction in some 
low-income countries.

Despite the potential for tourism to reduce pov-
erty,  the  impact  of  pro-poor  tourism  on  the  de-
velopment agenda is still weak. !ough impacts 
vary,  evidence  shows  the  eﬀect  of  tourism  on 
the lives of the poor. It is important for develop-
ment agencies and private operators to consider 
the beneﬁts of closer links between pro-poor and 
mainstream tourism. ...

SHOULD TOURISM 
BE PROMOTED 
IN DEVELOPING 
COUNTRIES?

Jonathan Mitchell 
is an economist and 
leads several of the 
research programs 
of the Overseas 
Development 
Institute (ODI), a 
think tank located 
in London that 
provides public 
policymakers with 
information and 
advice on poverty 
reduction. The 
author takes a 
speciﬁc interest 
in the impacts 
tourism has on 
poor households 
in developing 
countries. In 
this article, the 
author counters 
preconceived 
ideas by defending 
mainstream tourism, 
notably as a lever 
for poverty reduction.

Jonathan Mitchell 

Overseas 
Development Institute

Jonathan Mitchell is a local 
and regional economic 
development specialist with 
long-term experience in Sub-
Saharan Africa and increasing 
exposure in South-East Asia. 
His focus is value-chain 
development, local economic 
development, economic 
and ﬁnancial analyses, and 
tourism and agriculture. 
He has worked for a range 
of multilateral and bilateral 
donor organisations and 
currently heads the Protected 
Livelihoods and Agricultural 
Growth Programme at the 
London-based development 
policy ‘think tank’, the 
Overseas Development 
Institute.

The area of each country is proportional to the number of international tourist arrivals. 
Source: Worldmapper, 2006

ISSUE 7 - SEPTEMBER 2010 - SHOULD TOURISM BE PROMOTED IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES? 3

1 ODI, the International 
Institute for Environment 
and Development and the 
International Centre for 
Responsible Tourism. 
2 PPT is tourism that results 
in increased net beneﬁts for 
poor people. PPT is not a 
speciﬁc product or niche sector 
but an approach to tourism 
development and management. 
3 On this subject, see Denis 
Sireyjol’s article in this 
issue of Private Sector and 
Development.
4 Community-based projects 
involve communities fully 
owning and operating tourism 
facilities to generate collective 
income.
5 TUI Travel is a good example 
of this trend. In 2007 the UK-
based First Choice merged with 
German group TUI to create 
one of Europe’s leading travel 
ﬁrms and tour operators with 
a market capitalisation of GBP 
2.1 billion.

An unconventional but essential marriage:
pro-poor tourism and the mainstream industry
By Jonathan Mitchell, Overseas Development Institute

... PPT and the development agenda 
A  small  group  of  researchers1  around  the  time  of 
the  Millennium  Development  Summit  coined  the 
term ‘pro-poor tourism’ (PPT).2 PPT was based on 
three assertions: tourism can be pro-poor, it can be 
made more pro-poor, and any type of tourism can 
be pro-poor. 

!ese simple assertions were a revelation a decade 
ago.  At  the  time,  the  development  sector  tended 
to see tourism as a private sector activity that had 
little  relationship  with  poverty  reduction,  while 
the  commercial  tourist  sector  saw  poverty  reduc-
tion at destinations as the responsibility of others. 
Ultimately,  PPT  aimed  at  putting  tourism  on  the 
development agenda and development on the tour-
ism agenda. Has this worked? 

In  some  senses,  PPT  has  been  successful.  An  as-
sessment  would  include  its  impact  on  the  donor 
community.  Several  multilateral  donors  (notably 
the  World  Bank,  IFC,  Asian  Development  Bank 
and  UN),  some  bilateral  ones  (GTZ,  USAID  and 
NZAID), and a number of NGOs have provided sig-
niﬁcant support for PPT projects over recent years. 
One of the more successful examples has been the 
partnership between the private sector and NGOs 
in !e Gambia through its International Centre for 
Responsible  Tourism.  !is  initiative  linked  low-
income  communities  with  tourism,  and  improved 
the  pro-poor  impact  of  tourism  in  one  of  Africa’s 
smallest,  and  poorest,  destinations  (Mitchell  and 
Faal, 2008)

Some  key  mainstream  commercial  tourist  opera-
tors have recognised their responsibility for desti-
nation  impacts  and  are  seeking  to  enhance  these. 
!e  emergence  of  sustainability  initiatives  at  the 
major European tourism fairs is evidence of this; for 
example, the Federation of Tour Operators (FTO) – 
umbrella organisation for the largest tour operators 
in the UK – encourages suppliers to respect mini-
mum wage legislation (FTO, 2006), to create corpo-
rate  social  responsibility  and  sustainable  develop-
ment  structures  in  mainstream  corporations,  and 
to establish sustainability accreditation and award 
systems for suppliers (Mitchell and Ashley, 2010). 

However, there is still a great deal to do before there 
is consensus among the development, commercial, 
public and research domains concerning PPT. In the 
development sector, some agencies remain scepti-
cal about including tourism projects in their port-
folios for a variety of reasons.3 Among the enthusi-

astic supporters of tourism projects, like NGOs and 
external donors, many are still seeking an ‘alterna-
tive’ to mainstream tourism. Developing countries 
are  littered  with  well-intentioned  community-
based  tourism  and  eco-tourism  projects4  which, 
with notable exceptions, are delivering limited ben-
eﬁts to few people. Developed in isolation from pri-
vate sector and commercial distribution channels, 
they lack the client volumes needed for commercial 
sustainability, and generally fail soon after the sup-
ply of concessionary funding dries up (Dixey, 2005; 
Harrison and Schipani, 2007). !e view that main-
stream  tourism  should  have  a  prominent  place  in 
poverty  reduction  programmes  for  low-income 
countries with a competitive tourist sector is prob-
ably not even held by the majority in the develop-
ment sector – let alone a consensus view. 

Mainstream  tourism  has  been  timid  in  adopting 
PPT principles, and its embracing of social and en-
vironmental sustainability has been late and piece-
meal.  With  the  majority  of  European  mainstream 
customers being unwilling to pay for more pro-poor 
holidays  (Schwartz  and  Font,  2009),  mainstream 
operators  have  understandably  taken  destination 
impacts  into  account.  An  important  driver  for 
change  has  been  the  ﬂurry  of  recent  mergers  and 
acquisitions  that  has  resulted  in  some  organisa-
tions becoming listed on Western stock exchanges.5 
Several outbound tour operators and hotel chains 
have  a  market  capitalisation  of  EUR  2-4  billion, 
subjecting  them  to  onerous  review  and  reporting 
responsibilities.  Corporate  management  is  aware 
of the impact of negative stories emerging from de-
veloping country destinations. In this context, PPT 
initiatives can play a strategic role in reducing repu-
tational risk. As tourist companies work in complex 
environments, they appreciate that positive socio-
economic beneﬁts can increase their ‘social license 
to operate’. 

In  the  research  community  too,  PPT  does  not 
play a predominant role. While there have been 
many academic articles and several special edi-
tions  of  tourism  journals  focusing  on  PPT,  re-
searchers  concerned  with  the  destination  im-
pacts of tourism operate in contested territory. 
In addition to PPT, many use alternative terms 
–  such  as  ‘responsible’,  ‘inclusive’  and  ‘sustain-
able’  tourism.  In  the  view  of  the  author  there 
is  no  harm,  and  probably  merit,  in  research-
ers  with  similar  principles  and  goals  operating 
under different labels. Some researchers still be-
lieve – despite the mounting evidence - that ...

ISSUE 7 - SEPTEMBER 2010 - SHOULD TOURISM BE PROMOTED IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES? 4

An unconventional but essential marriage:
pro-poor tourism and the mainstream industry
By Jonathan Mitchell, Overseas Development Institute

...  the  destination  impacts  of  international 
tourism  are  almost  always  negative.  However, 
tourism researchers generally have not yet fully 
encompassed  mainstream  development  eco-
nomics,  the  tourist  industry  and  the  general 
public. 

Is there evidence for the impact of tourism
on the poor?
Since the birth of PPT, the Overseas Development 
Institute (ODI) has been developing a conceptual 
framework  (Figure  2),  research  methods  and  an 
empirical  evidence  base  to  assess  the  perform-
ance of various tourist destinations against PPT 
criteria. Figure 2 shows that there are many ways 
in  which  the  tourist  sector  could  transfer  ben-
eﬁts (and consequences) to local communities in 
and around tourist destinations.

ODI developed an action research method that 
‘follows the tourist dollar’ through the tourist 
value chain and associated supply chains. In es-
sence,  ODI  examines  the  total  expenditure  of 
tourists to understand ‘pro poor income’ – the 
wages  and  profits  earned  from  tourist  spend-
ing  by  resource-poor  households.  Diagnosing 
value  chains  yields  rich  comparative  findings, 
and  ODI  has  found  that  these  provide  robust 
empirical support for the three assertions that 
formed the basis of PPT a decade ago.

Figure 2: Linkages between tourism
and local economies

Tourist sector

Non-poor
households

Poor households
inside destination

Poor households

outside destination

Non-tourist

sector

Source: Mitchell and Ashley, 2010 

Direct effects

Dynamic effects

Inter-sectoral linkages

Induced effects

Indirect effects

Figure 3: Share of destination tourist spend reaching the poor

Destination: type of tourism

Northern Tanzania: mountain climbing

Ethiopia: cultural outside Addis

Luang Prabang, Laos: cultural

Central Vietnam: business tourism

South Africa: game viewing

Northern Tanzania: safari

Cape Verde: beach package

Namibia: protected areas

Ethiopia: business in Adids

The Gambia: beach package

Ghana: business in Accra

Cambodia: cultural

0% 5% 10% 15% 20% 25% 30%
Pro-poor income (PPI) as % of destination spending

Source: Mitchell and Ashley, 2010 

On the first assertion of PPT, that tourism can 
be  pro-poor,  there  are  destinations  where  for 
every USD 4 spent by a tourist, USD 1 reaches 
the poor (Figure 3). This is an impressive con-
version of trade volumes to pro-poor benefits. 
In  these  ‘best  practice’  examples,  where  one-
quarter of the tourist destination turnover ac-
crues to poor people, the impact is the result of 
strong linkages. 

However, just because tourism can benefit local 
communities,  it  does  not  always  do  so.  Figure 
3  illustrates  examples  –  Cambodia  and  busi-
ness  tourism  in  Accra  in  Ghana  –  where  less 
than one-tenth of tourist in-country spending 
reaches  the  poor.  In  these  instances,  the  lack 
of an enabling environment results in the ben-
efits of tourism being captured by the elite.

On  the  second  assertion  of  PPT,  there  is  scope 
to  increase  the  beneﬁt  ﬂow  to  the  poor  what-
ever  the  current  level  of  pro-poor  performance 
of  a  destination.  An  important  aspect  of  the 
ODI’s approach is to make practical suggestions 
for how to increase the pro-poor impact of tour-
ism  on  local  communities.  Wherever  ODI  has 
worked,  across  Africa,  Asia  and  Latin  America, 
recommendations  have  been  made.  !ese  have 
been prioritised in terms of speed of implemen-
tation,  resources  required  and  scale  of  the  pro-
poor impact. ...

ISSUE 7 - SEPTEMBER 2010 - SHOULD TOURISM BE PROMOTED IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES? 5

An unconventional but essential marriage:
pro-poor tourism and the mainstream industry
By Jonathan Mitchell, Overseas Development Institute

...  Sometimes  the  recommendations 
involve 
changes  to  the  regulatory  and  enabling  environ-
ment or the operating practices of individual tour 
operators  and  hoteliers.  When  proposing  change 
for  the  private  sector,  the  goal  has  been  imple-
mentable  pro-poor  interventions  that  result  in 
higher commercial and social returns.

On the third assertion of PPT, old prejudices about 
the  impacts  of  certain  kinds  of  tourist  products 
are  often  not  supported  by  evidence.  Cultural 
tourism,  for  example,  is  positive  for  local  com-
munities  in  Laos  but  not  in  Cambodia.  So  there 
is little empirical basis for suggesting mainstream 
tourism  is  inherently  bad  for  development  and 
that  community-based  ecotourism/cultural  tour-
ism is ubiquitously good for development.

ODI’s  approach  has  its  weaknesses:  its  focus  on 
economic  impacts  for  the  poor  does  not  account 
for social and environmental impacts. Deﬁnitions 
of  poverty  are  always  slippery,  and  dynamic  im-
pacts  and  macro  contributions  to  poverty  reduc-
tion need further analysis. However, ODI now has 
a  conceptual  framework  and  a  research  method 
that has been ‘battle tested’ in about a dozen des-
tinations in developing countries. It also has an ac-
cumulating evidence base that suggests that many 
assumptions about the impact of tourism on local 
communities  are  questionable.  In  fact,  there  is 
now a plausible case for advocating stronger link-
ages between mainstream tourism and PPT.

Tourism beneﬁts of embracing PPT
ODI’s analysis suggests that it is very important 
for mainstream tourism to develop and maintain 
tourism  poverty  linkages.  From  a  development 
perspective,  the  quest  for  an  ‘alternative’  tour-
ism  that  beneﬁts  local  communities  by  exclud-
ing  mainstream  tourist  operators  has  largely 
failed.  Small-scale  tourist  interventions  are  un-
able  to  reduce  poverty  at  the  scale  required  by 
the Millennium Development Goals. Large-scale 
poverty  reduction  implies  working  with  large-
scale tourist activity. Improvements made by de-
velopment agencies and governments to the ena-
bling  environment  for  tourism  are  more  likely 
to be eﬀective if the private sector is involved in 
identifying problems and articulating solutions.

From a tourist company perspective, PPT can re-
sult in rapidly improved proﬁtability. Expanding 
the  tourist  sector  while  spreading  the  beneﬁts 
of  tourist  spending  throughout  the  destination 
economy  is  also  the  most  eﬀective  mechanism 
for increasing the scale of beneﬁt ﬂows to the re-
source poor. !is results in a conﬂuence of inter-
est between the tourist industry and the popula-
tion living around the destination.

ODI’s evidence also suggests that tourism’s posi-
tive  impacts  go  unnoticed  because  the  industry 
does not understand its own impacts. As a result 
of a lack of information, tourism is failing to cap-
italise on the good news story that tourism may 
already  be  beneﬁting  destinations.  Where  tour-
ism is not pro-poor, improving performance can 
only be achieved with an awareness of the prob-
lems and solutions. In the medium term, PPT can 
improve  monitoring  of  business  impacts  on  de-
velopment, reduce reputational risk and increase 
social licenses to operate in developing countries. 
In the longer-term, when most mainstream tour-
ists  start  to  demand  enhanced  socio-economic 
performance in developing country destinations, 
the companies that have anticipated this change 
in demand will reap signiﬁcant early mover com-

mercial advantages.•

REFERENCES
Dixey, L., 2005. Inventory and Analysis of Community 
Based Tourism in Zambia, USAID Production, Finance and 
Technology (PROFIT) Programme, Lusaka, Zambia. 
FTO, 2006. Supplier sustainability handbook,
FTO, London.
Harrison, D., Schipani, S., 2007. Lao tourism and poverty 
alleviation: community-based tourism and the private sector, 
Current Issues in Tourism 10,(2-3), 194-230.
Mitchell, J., Ashley C., 2010.
Tourism and Poverty Reduction: Pathways to Prosperity, 
Earthscan, London.
Mitchell, J., Faal, J., 2008. !e Gambian tourism value chain 
and prospects for pro-poor tourism, ODI, working paper 289.
Schwartz, K., Font, X., 2009. Sustainable supply chain 
management: outbound tour operator practices? 
International Centre for Responsible Tourism, occasional 
paper 15.
World Bank, 2010. World Development Indicators, database. 
Worldmapper, 2006. Tourist Destinations.  

ISSUE 7 - SEPTEMBER 2010 - SHOULD TOURISM BE PROMOTED IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES? 6

