ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 26 May 2016
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00329

Retrieval Interference in
Syntactic Processing: The Case
of Reﬂexive Binding in English

Umesh Patil 1, 2*, Shravan Vasishth 1 and Richard L. Lewis 3

1 Department of Linguistics, University of Potsdam, Potsdam, Germany, 2 Computational Linguistics, Institute of Cognitive
Science, University of Osnabrück, Osnabrück, Germany, 3 Department of Psychology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI,

USA

It has been proposed that in online sentence comprehension the dependency between a
reﬂexive pronoun such as himself/herself and its antecedent is resolved using exclusively
syntactic constraints. Under this strictly syntactic search account, Principle A of the
binding theory—which requires that the antecedent c-command the reﬂexive within
the same clause that the reﬂexive occurs in—constrains the parser’s search for an
antecedent. The parser thus ignores candidate antecedents that might match agreement
features of the reﬂexive (e.g., gender) but are ineligible as potential antecedents because
they are in structurally illicit positions. An alternative possibility accords no special
status to structural constraints: in addition to using Principle A, the parser also uses
non-structural cues such as gender to access the antecedent. According to cue-based
retrieval theories of memory (e.g., Lewis and Vasishth, 2005), the use of non-structural
cues should result in increased retrieval times and occasional errors when candidates
partially match the cues, even if the candidates are in structurally illicit positions. In this
paper, we ﬁrst show how the retrieval processes that underlie the reﬂexive binding are
naturally realized in the Lewis and Vasishth (2005) model. We present the predictions of
the model under the assumption that both structural and non-structural cues are used
during retrieval, and provide a critical analysis of previous empirical studies that failed
to ﬁnd evidence for the use of non-structural cues, suggesting that these failures may
be Type II errors. We use this analysis and the results of further modeling to motivate
a new empirical design that we use in an eye tracking study. The results of this study
conﬁrm the key predictions of the model concerning the use of non-structural cues,
and are inconsistent with the strictly syntactic search account. These results present
a challenge for theories advocating the infallibility of the human parser in the case of
reﬂexive resolution, and provide support for the inclusion of agreement features such as
gender in the set of retrieval cues.

Keywords: sentence processing, anaphor resolution, memory retrieval, interference, computational modeling, eye
tracking

1. INTRODUCTION

Sentence comprehension involves, among other things, recovering hierarchical structure from
an input string of words (e.g., Frazier, 1979). Such recovery requires the online application of
grammatical constraints that delimit the possible relationships between various elements of the
sentence. For example, to understand a sentence like (1), the pronoun himself has to be resolved

Edited by:

Colin Phillips,

University of Maryland, College Park,

USA

Reviewed by:

Dan Parker,

College of William & Mary, USA

Jeffrey Thomas Runner,

University of Rochester, USA

*Correspondence:

Umesh Patil

umesh.patil@gmail.com

Specialty section:

This article was submitted to

Language Sciences,

a section of the journal

Frontiers in Psychology

Received: 05 September 2015

Accepted: 22 February 2016

Published: 26 May 2016

Citation:

Patil U, Vasishth S and Lewis RL

(2016) Retrieval Interference in

Syntactic Processing: The Case

of Reﬂexive Binding in English.

Front. Psychol. 7:329.

doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00329

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

1

May 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 329

Patil et al.

Retrieval Interference in Reﬂexive Binding

to a referent of an earlier noun surgeon; the reﬂexive cannot be
associated with Jonathan due to Principle A of the binding theory
(Chomsky, 1981)1.

(1)

The surgeon who treated Jonathan had pricked himself.

Establishing a relationship between two non-adjacent elements in
a sentence requires maintaining some memory of the immediate
past. The question we are concerned with here is: what role do
grammatical and non-grammatical constraints play in the access
to the immediate past? The binding of English reﬂexive pronouns
is a particularly informative case, because the conﬁgurational
and agreement constraints are relatively clear, and the structure
admits manipulations of distance and distracting candidate
antecedents (Sturt, 2003).

One proposal for how structural constraints are implicated in
dependency resolution is motivated by the experiments reported
in Nicol and Swinney (1989), Sturt (2003), and Xiang et al. (2009).
Using diﬀerent experimental methodologies, these studies found
that a grammatically incorrect antecedent [e.g., Jonathan in (1)]
does not interfere in the process of binding a reﬂexive pronoun by
a grammatically correct antecedent [e.g., surgeon in (1)], at least
in the early stages of processing a reﬂexive.

Nicol and Swinney (1989) presented evidence from a
series of experiments that employed the cross modal lexical
priming paradigm. Participants listened to sentences similar
to those shown in (2) and responded to visually presented
probe words that was presented immediately following the
reﬂexive himself. The probe word was either semantically
related or unrelated to one of the three previously occurring
nouns in the sentence (boxer, skier, or doctor). Participants
judged whether the probe word was a word or non-word.
A signiﬁcant priming eﬀect was observed when probe words
were related to grammatically accessible as antecedents [e.g.,
doctor in (2)], but not when they were related to grammatically
inaccessible antecedents [e.g., boxer and skier in (2)]. Nicol
and Swinney (1989) concluded that no priming was observed
for words related to grammatically inaccessible antecedents
because they had not been considered during co-reference
resolution.

(2)

The boxer told the skier that the doctor for the team
would blame himself for the recent injury.

Sturt (2003) reported eye tracking studies using materials such as
(3). He found that ﬁrst ﬁxation duration and ﬁrst pass reading
time on the region containing the reﬂexive were longer when
the gender of the reﬂexive did not match the stereotypical
gender of the grammatically accessible antecedent than when
it matched (e.g., herself and surgeon vs. himself and surgeon).
Early reading times were not aﬀected by gender match between

1Principle A speciﬁes a structural constraint on the interpretation of reﬂexives
in English: a reﬂexive must be bound by an antecedent in the local domain (the
current clause). An antecedent X can bind a reﬂexive Y, if X and Y are coindexed,
and X c-commands Y. The term c-command deﬁnes a hierarchical relationship
between two constituents in a syntax tree. A constituent c-commands its sister
constituent and every constituent below the sister constituent in the syntax tree.
In (1), the reﬂexive himself is bound by surgeon; the noun Jonathan cannot bind
the reﬂexive because it does not c-command it.

the reﬂexive and the grammatically inaccessible antecedent
(Jonathan or Jennifer). Second pass reading time at the reﬂexives
showed an interaction for gender match between the reﬂexive
and the two antecedents suggesting that in later interpretation
stages (but, crucially, not in earlier processing stages)2 the
inaccessible antecedent is part of the candidates being considered
as antecedents. There was also an eﬀect of the inaccessible
antecedent in second pass reading time in the pre-ﬁnal region,
but this eﬀect was observed only when the accessible antecedent
matched the gender of the reﬂexive. However, these late eﬀects
of the inaccessible antecedent were not observed in the second
experiment [with design as in (4)], but he pointed out that the
absence of any eﬀect of the inaccessible antecedent in Experiment
2 could have been due to the fact that the inaccessible antecedent
did not c-command the reﬂexive and it was also not as prominent
as in Experiment 1.

To gain further insight into this late-stage interpretation of
the sentences, Sturt (2003) also ran a follow-up study, where
a sentence-by-sentence self-paced reading task was followed
by a question that directly probed for the antecedent of the
reﬂexive. This study showed a signiﬁcant interference eﬀect, with
more ungrammatical interpretations when the grammatically
inaccessible antecedent matched the gender of the reﬂexive;
the eﬀect was bigger when the accessible antecedent did not
match the gender of the reﬂexive. Sturt (2003) concluded that
grammatical constraints are applied very early in processing,
but interference from the grammatically inaccessible antecedent
occurs during later processes that are related to recovery
strategies, rather than during processes related to the initial
interpretation of the reﬂexive.

(3)

(4)

the City
{Jonathan/Jennifer} was pretty worried at
Hospital. {He/She} remembered that the surgeon had
pricked {himself/herself} with a used syringe needle.
There should be an investigation soon.

the City
{Jonathan/Jennifer} was pretty worried at
Hospital. The surgeon who treated {Jonathan/Jennifer}
had pricked {himself/herself} with a used syringe needle.
There should be an investigation soon.

Dillon et al. (2013) reported two eye tracking studies with English
reﬂexives using material with syntactic structure similar to
Experiment 2 in Sturt (2003). They also did not ﬁnd any eﬀect of
the inaccessible antecedent, but reported eﬀects of the accessible
antecedent. Xiang et al. (2009) reported similar results in an ERP
study, where they found that a P600 is elicited by a reﬂexive
that mismatches the stereotypical gender of the grammatically
accessible antecedent, and is not attenuated by the presence of
a matching antecedent in a grammatically inaccessible position.
Based on results from these studies, Phillips et al. (2011)

suggests that:

“. . . argument
from
structurally inaccessible antecedents because antecedents are

to interference

reﬂexives are

immune

2In this paper, we follow the literature (see e.g., Sturt, 2003) in assuming that so-
called early and late measures in eye tracking data map onto processes that occur
(respectively) in early and late stages of parsing.

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

2

May 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 329

Patil et al.

Retrieval Interference in Reﬂexive Binding

retrieved using only structural cues. In eﬀect, we are suggesting
that the person, gender, and number features of reﬂexives like
himself, herself, and themselves play no role in the search for
antecedents . . . ”

in (1),

An alternative possibility accords no special status to the
structural constraints:
in addition to using Principle A, the
parser also uses non-structural cues such as gender to access
the antecedent. For example,
it is possible that the
parser considers a relation between Jonathan and himself, due
to a gender-feature match, and perhaps also due to the relative
proximity of Jonathan compared to surgeon. Under at least one
cue-based retrieval theory (Lewis and Vasishth, 2005; Lewis et al.,
2006), this should result in interference from grammatically
inaccessible antecedent while resolving the reﬂexive-antecedent
dependency3. Some evidence for this account comes from studies
reported in Badecker and Straub (2002), Choy and Thompson
(2010), and Cunnings and Felser (2013) among others.

Badecker and Straub (2002) reported an interference eﬀect
from gender-matched distractors
in a self-paced reading
experiment using sentences as in (5). They found that reading
times two words beyond a reﬂexive were slowed by the presence
of a gender matching NP in a grammatically inaccessible position.

(5)

{Jane/John} thought
opportunity to solve the problem.

that Bill owed himself another

More evidence for early retrieval interference in reﬂexive binding
comes from the study reported in Cunnings and Felser (2013). In
two eye tracking studies they tested how application of Principle
A varies between low and high working memory span readers. In
the ﬁrst study they found a late eﬀect of inaccessible antecedent,
emerging only at regions following the reﬂexive region. However,
in the second study where the inaccessible antecedent was closer
in the surface string to the reﬂexive, the eﬀect of inaccessible
antecedent was observed in an early eye movement measure,
namely ﬁrst ﬁxation duration, at the reﬂexive itself, although this
eﬀect was limited to low span readers. Consequently, Cunnings
and Felser (2013) conclude that “lower span participants were
more likely to consider both potential antecedents of the reﬂexive
early on during processing, before converging on the structurally
accessible antecedent later on.”

the eﬀect of

Further evidence for

interference from
grammatically inaccessible antecedent comes from an eye
tracking study in a visual world paradigm reported by Choy and
Thompson (Thompson and Choy, 2009; Choy and Thompson,
2010). Although this study was targeted at aphasics’ processing
deﬁcits with binding constructions,
for present purposes
we consider data only from unimpaired participants. Choy
and Thompson (2010) recorded eye movements while the

3We will follow the literature in referring to the correct antecedent as stipulated
by Principle A as the grammatically accessible antecedent and the antecedent that
is incorrect following Principle A as the grammatically inaccessible antecedent.
Occasionally, we abbreviate these terms to accessible and inaccessible antecedents.
It is important to keep in mind that under the model we advocate in this paper, the
grammatically inaccessible antecedent is in fact “accessible” for memory retrieval;
a more appropriate term would have been “incorrect antecedent,” since this does
not presuppose that the non-c-commanding antecedent is inaccessible.

participants listened to a story as in (6), with the critical sentence
containing a pronoun or a reﬂexive (e.g., him or himself ).
The visual stimuli consisted of pictures of two persons, one of
which was grammatically accessible and the other inaccessible
(e.g., soldier and farmer); a human-referring distractor; and
an inanimate-referring noun mentioned in the story (e.g.,
glasses). The data for the reﬂexive condition from unimpaired
participants showed an increase in the proportion of ﬁxations
to the inaccessible antecedent in the reﬂexive and post-reﬂexive
regions compared to the pre-reﬂexive region. Although the
proportion of ﬁxations to the accessible antecedent was higher
than the ﬁxations to the inaccessible antecedent
in most
of the regions, the increase in ﬁxations to the inaccessible
antecedent
the reﬂexive indicates that
participants considered the inaccessible antecedent as the
potential antecedent of the reﬂexive, albeit less often than the
accessible antecedent.

from the onset of

(6)

Some soldiers and farmers were in a house. The soldier
told the farmer with glasses to shave {himself/him} in the
bathroom. And he did.

In summary, the eﬀect of interference from a grammatically
inaccessible antecedent is sometimes observed in early processing
and sometimes in late processing, and in some studies the eﬀect
is completely absent.

In the remainder of this paper, we ﬁrst apply an existing
computational model of cue-based parsing (Lewis and Vasishth,
2005) to an empirical paradigm well established for testing
the processing of reﬂexives in English. The model generates
qualitative predictions and demonstrates that these predictions
are robust against substantial variation in the quantitative
parameters. We then use the theoretical perspective provided
by the model to formulate conjectures for why some of the
existing empirical work may have failed to detect evidence
for the use of non-structural cues. Based on this analysis we
advance a new experimental design which is intended to be more
sensitive, and demonstrate that for many of the predictions the
modiﬁed design yields larger eﬀects in modeling simulations.
We next present an eye tracking study based on the modiﬁed
design, yielding several results that conﬁrm the early use of
non-structural cues in a manner consistent with the model. The
paper concludes with discussion of the implication of these new
results for some current theoretical approaches to dependency
resolution.

2. MODELING REFLEXIVE BINDING IN THE
CUE-BASED RETRIEVAL FRAMEWORK

cue-based retrieval

architecture provides

The
a natural
characterization of the retrieval steps triggered in the process
of reﬂexive resolution. We begin by presenting a model of
Experiment 1 and its follow-up in Sturt (2003), which will
provide insight into the predicted eﬀects and their robustness
against parametric variation, and provide motivation for the
modiﬁed design used in the eye tracking study reported here.

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

3

May 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 329

Patil et al.

Retrieval Interference in Reﬂexive Binding

The emphasis of the model described here is not on parsing the
entire sentence, but on detailed modeling of the retrieval process
carried out at the reﬂexive.

Experiment 1 in Sturt (2003) included an eye tracking
experiment in which participants were required to read short
texts consisting of three sentences. An example is given in (7),
showing the four experimental conditions. A named referent
(Jonathan or Jennifer) is introduced in the ﬁrst sentence, and
this referent is subsequently referred to using a pronoun (he
or she) in the second sentence. The second sentence also
introduces a second referent the surgeon, and includes a reﬂexive
anaphor (himself or herself ). The ﬁrst named referent is not a
grammatically accessible antecedent for the reﬂexive in terms
of binding theory, while the second referent (the surgeon) is a
grammatically accessible antecedent. Accessible and inaccessible
antecedents either matched or did not match the gender of
the reﬂexive. Note that even when the accessible antecedent
doesn’t match the gender of the reﬂexive, the sentences are still
grammatical because a surgeon is only stereotypically masculine
and hence a licit antecedent of herself.

In match-interference and match conditions

[(a) and
(b) in (7)]
the accessible antecedent matches the gender
requirement of
the reﬂexive, and in mismatch-interference
and mismatch conditions [(c) and (d) in (7)] it does not.
Furthermore, in match-interference and mismatch-interference
conditions the inaccessible antecedent matches the gender of the
reﬂexive. Henceforth, we will refer to match-interference and
match conditions simply as match conditions, and mismatch-
interference and mismatch conditions as mismatch conditions,
reﬂecting the fact that the accessible antecedent matches the
gender of the reﬂexive for one pair and does not for the other.
We will refer to match-interference and mismatch-interference
conditions as the interference conditions because the gender
of the inaccessible antecedent matches that of the reﬂexive—
potentially causing interference.

(7)

Sentence 1: {Jonathan/Jennifer} was pretty worried at the
City Hospital.

Sentence 2:

a. Accessible-match/inaccessible-match

(Match-

interference)
He remembered that
himself with a used syringe needle.

the surgeon had pricked

b. Accessible-match/inaccessible-mismatch (Match)

She remembered that
himself with a used syringe needle.

the surgeon had pricked

c. Accessible-mismatch/inaccessible-match

(Mismatch-

interference)
She remembered that
herself with a used syringe needle.

the surgeon had pricked

d. Accessible-mismatch/inaccessible-mismatch

(Mismatch)
He remembered that
herself with a used syringe needle.

the surgeon had pricked

Sentence 3: There should be an investigation soon.

This eye tracking study showed an early eﬀect of the accessible
antecedent (Figure 1). First ﬁxation duration and ﬁrst pass
reading time were faster in the match conditions compared
to the mismatch conditions. But no eﬀect of the inaccessible
antecedent was found in the early measures. The eﬀect of
inaccessible antecedent was found only in later measures—
second pass reading time was shorter in match-interference
condition compared to the match condition.

As mentioned above, Sturt (2003) also conducted a follow-
up study to ﬁnd out the participants’ ﬁnal interpretation of the
reﬂexive. This was a sentence-by-sentence self-paced reading
with the same sentences as in (7) but, instead of sentence 3, there
was a question that explicitly probed for the antecedent of the
reﬂexive [e.g., a question like Who had been pricked with a used
needle? with possible answers, for example, for condition (a) as
Jonathan or surgeon]. The follow-up study showed a main eﬀect
of accessible antecedent, inaccessible antecedent and also an
interaction between these two factors (see (Figure 1). When the
accessible antecedent did not match the gender of the reﬂexive,
participants made a higher proportion of errors in selecting the
correct antecedent. In addition, when the inaccessible antecedent
matched the gender of the reﬂexive participants made more
errors than when it did not. Moreover, the increase in error due
to gender match with the inaccessible antecedent was larger when
the accessible antecedent did not match the gender, resulting in
the interaction between the two factors.

Thus, there are four major ﬁndings in Sturt’s Experiment 1
and his follow-up study. First, gender mismatch with the default
gender of the accessible antecedent resulted in lower question-
response accuracies. Second, gender match with the inaccessible
antecedent resulted in lower question-response accuracies. Third,
early reading time measures (ﬁrst ﬁxation duration and ﬁrst
pass reading time) increased when the gender speciﬁcation
of the accessible antecedent mismatched that of the reﬂexive.
Fourth, second pass reading time (re-reading time) was shorter
when the gender of the inaccessible antecedent matched the
gender of the reﬂexive (this occurred in the case where the
accessible antecedent matched the reﬂexive in gender, i.e., in
match conditions).

Interestingly, the ﬁrst three of the four eﬀects can be explained
by simply assuming that the search for an antecedent includes a
gender feature. Therefore, we begin our modeling by assuming
that both grammatical knowledge about antecedent and gender
matching is used when resolving antecedents in English. For
simplicity, we model the grammatical constraint by assuming
that the antecedent should be a noun and should be the
subject of the clause containing the reﬂexive, albeit under some
diﬀerent implementation of this grammatical constraint, the
predictions may turn out diﬀerently4. This choice of retrieval
cues is motivated by the conjecture that including agreement
features in general may be an adaptive feature of the parser,
although attempting to establish this is not the purpose of the
work reported here. As a result the set of retrieval cues for the

4There are more sophisticated ways to encode the c-command constraint but
these implementation details are orthogonal to the present discussion. See Alcocer
and Phillips (2012) which compares some alternatives of implementing the c-
command constraint.

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

4

May 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 329

Patil et al.

Retrieval Interference in Reﬂexive Binding

FIGURE 1 | The effects in Sturt (2003) Experiment 1: (A) proportions of ungrammatical interpretations of reﬂexives in the follow-up study; (B) ﬁrst
ﬁxation durations in the eye tracking study. The error bars in the plot for ﬁrst ﬁxation duration show 95% conﬁdence intervals.

TABLE 1 | The match of retrieval cues with the accessible and inaccessible
antecedents for the four conditions in Sturt’s experiments (cat=category).

Conditions

Accessible

Inaccessible

a (match-interference)

Gender, cat, role, clause

Gender, cat, role

b (match)

Gender, cat, role, clause

Cat, role

c (mismatch-interference)

Cat, role, clause

Gender, cat, role

d (mismatch)

Cat, role, clause

Cat, role

reﬂexives himself and herself are {gender = masculine/feminine,
category = noun, role = subject, clause = current-clause},
diﬀering only in the value of the gender feature. See Table l for
the list of cues matched by the two antecedents across the four
conditions in Sturt’s experiments.

The accessible antecedent matches all four cues in conditions
(a) and (b) (the “match” conditions), but only three cues in
conditions (c) and (d) (the “mismatch” conditions), since the
stereotypical gender of surgeon is masculine, which does not
match the gender retrieval cue at herself (gender = feminine).
The inaccessible antecedent matches three cues (gender, category,
role) out of a total of four cues in conditions (a) and (c), and
in conditions (b) and (d) it matches two cues (category, role).
As a result, interference for retrieving the antecedent will be
higher in conditions (a) and (c) (the “interference” conditions)
as compared to conditions (b) and (d). Note that the alternative
possibility, as suggested by Phillips and colleagues, is that gender
plays no role in retrieval; in that case, the cues for the match (a vs.
b) and mismatch conditions (c vs. d) would be identical, leading
to no interference.

The cue-based retrieval model predicts that similarity-
based interference (SBI) arises at the moment of retrieval.
SBI in reﬂexive binding is manifested in terms of delay in
retrieval of the correct antecedent or an error in retrieving
the correct antecedent. The delay in retrieval of the correct
antecedent is a result of the fan assumption (see Equation
3 in Appendix A of Supplementary Material) that reduces
the strength of association between a cue and a target as a
function of the number of items associated with that cue.
Reduced strength of association means reduced activation boost,
which produces higher latencies. On the other hand,
the

error in retrieval of the correct antecedent is a combined
result of activation fan and partial match. Reduction in
activation boost of the accessible antecedent due to activation
spreading, and partial matching between retrieval cues (the
second summation component in Equation 1 in Appendix A
of Supplementary Material) and any inaccessible antecedents
can lead (probabilistically as a function of activation noise) to
higher activation of the inaccessible antecedents. As a result, the
probability of retrieving the inaccessible antecedent increases.
The greater the partial match with inaccessible antecedents,
the higher the percentage of errors in retrieving the accessible
antecedent.

We model retrieval in sentence 2 from (7); this is the crucial
sentence for generating predictions about the reﬂexive binding
process. The predictions of the model are generated by running
1000 simulations for each condition. All model parameters are
set to the values that have been used in the previous models
from Lewis and Vasishth (2005), Vasishth and Lewis (2006), and
Vasishth et al. (2008). A list of all the parameter values that we use
is given in Table A1 in Appendix A of Supplementary Material.

The predicted retrieval error percentages accurately capture
the pattern found in the Sturt (2003) follow-up study: There is
a main eﬀect of accessible antecedent, inaccessible antecedent,
and an interaction between these two factors, exactly as in
Sturt’s follow-up study’s response accuracies. First, when the
accessible antecedent does not match the gender of the reﬂexive
the model makes a higher number of errors in retrieving the
correct antecedent (the mismatch eﬀect in response accuracy).
Second, when the inaccessible antecedent matches the gender of
the reﬂexive the model makes more errors than when it does not
(the interference eﬀect in response accuracy). Third, the increase
in error due to gender match with the inaccessible antecedent is
greater in the mismatch conditions.

The retrieval

times predicted by the model (shown in
Figure 2) show a main eﬀect of matching in the accessible
antecedent: When the accessible antecedent does not match
the gender of the reﬂexive, the retrieval times are higher than
when it does. The model also predicts a match × interference
interaction—retrieval
times are predicted to be higher in
the match-interference condition (198 ms) than in the match
condition (194 ms); however, retrieval times are predicted to be

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

5

May 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 329

Patil et al.

Retrieval Interference in Reﬂexive Binding

FIGURE 2 | The twofold predictions of the cue-based retrieval model for Experiment 1 in Sturt (2003), based on the parameter values listed in Table A1
in Supplementary Material. (A) Proportions of retrievals of the inaccessible antecedent; (B) retrieval times at the reﬂexive. The error bars in the plot for retrieval time
show 95% conﬁdence intervals

lower in the mismatch-interference condition (274 ms) compared
to the mismatch condition (295 ms).

In order to compare the predictions to the data, we use
the following terminology: the mismatch eﬀect is the diﬀerence
between the match conditions and the mismatch conditions;
the interference eﬀect is the eﬀect between the two interference
conditions and the other two conditions; the match-interference
eﬀect is the eﬀect of interference in the two match conditions; and
the mismatch-interference eﬀect is the eﬀect of interference in the
two mismatch conditions.

The predicted ungrammatical retrievals accurately model
the ungrammatical
interpretations observed in the Sturt
(2003) follow-up study. However, the predicted retrieval times
accurately capture only the mismatch eﬀect observed in the ﬁrst
ﬁxation duration (FFD) in the eye tracking study. The interaction
predicted between the mismatch eﬀect and interference eﬀect is
not observed in the data. Thus, the model accurately captures the
question-response accuracy data, but only partly characterizes
the ﬁrst ﬁxation duration data.

The divergent patterns between the model’s retrieval times
and the ﬁrst ﬁxation durations in Sturt’s study come from
the diﬀerences in the patterns seen in the predicted match-
interference eﬀect and the mismatch-interference eﬀect. The
predicted match-interference eﬀect is a consequence of spreading
of activation of the gender cue which is matched by both
the accessible and inaccessible antecedent. As described earlier,
activation spreading reduces the strength of association between
the cue and the target, causing longer retrieval latencies in the
match-interference condition than the match condition. On the
other hand, the mismatch-interference eﬀect is a consequence
of partial match between the cues and inaccessible antecedent:
the inaccessible antecedent matches the gender cue which is
not matched by the accessible antecedent (see Table 1), leading
to higher probability of retrieving the inaccessible antecedent.
This can be seen in the predicted retrieval error percentages in
Figure 2. Moreover, in the mismatch-interference condition the
inaccessible antecedent receives more activation from retrieval
cues than in the mismatch condition as it matches more retrieval
cues in the mismatch-interference condition. A substantially
higher number of
incorrect retrievals occur due to higher

activation from the retrieval cues, and the retrieval times in
the mismatch-interference condition are faster than the retrieval
times in the mismatch condition, contrary to the ﬁndings in
Sturt’s study (see Figure 1 vs. Figure 2). We return to this issue
in the Section 3.6.

To summarize, the model predicts the following eﬀects for

retrieval errors (RE) and retrieval times (RT) at the reﬂexive:

E1. Mismatch eﬀect (RE): the retrieval errors for the two
mismatch conditions are higher than those for the two
match conditions.

E2.

Interference eﬀect (RE): the retrieval errors for the match-
interference and mismatch-interference conditions are
higher than those for the other two conditions.

E3. Mismatch eﬀect (RT): the retrieval times for the two
mismatch conditions are longer than those for the two
match conditions.

E4. Match-interference eﬀect (RT): the retrieval times for the
match-interference condition are longer than the match
condition.

E5. Mismatch-interference eﬀect (RT): the retrieval times for
the mismatch-interference condition are shorter than the
mismatch condition.

In Sturt’s experiment, only the eﬀects E1, E2 and E3 were
observed. The interference eﬀects E4 and E5 were missing in the
early measures (ﬁrst ﬁxation duration and ﬁrst pass reading time)
of the eye tracking studies.

the RE translates

Here we assume that

to incorrect
interpretation of the reﬂexive and RT translates to reading time
in the experiment. We also make a simpliﬁed assumption about
the lexical representation of nouns with stereotypical gender—
as far as the gender feature is concerned, the representation of
a stereotypically masculine or feminine noun (e.g., “soldier” or
“nurse”) is the same as that of an unambiguously masculine
or feminine noun (e.g., “John” or “Jane”). It has been shown
that the gender violation eﬀects are stronger for deﬁnitionally
masculine or feminine nouns than for stereotypically masculine
or feminine nouns (Osterhout et al., 1997). This means that

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

6

May 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 329

Patil et al.

Retrieval Interference in Reﬂexive Binding

our simpliﬁed assumption may lead to inﬂated predictions of
various eﬀects than what might be observed in an experiment.
Finding out the precise diﬀerence in the representation of
these two types of nouns is an important research question,
this paper. We
but we think it
also assume that
is retrieved,
is
considered to be the correct antecedent of the reﬂexive in the
ﬁnal representation irrespective of its gender match with the
reﬂexive; i.e., there is no reanalysis of the reﬂexive-antecedent
dependency.

lies outside the scope of
the ﬁrst antecedent
that

for a range of values of

2.1. Parametric Variability in the Model
We did not estimate any parameter values for the current model.
All existing parameters were set to the values that have been
used in previous published versions of the cue-based retrieval
model. It is possible, however, that the predictions of the model
are valid only for the speciﬁc parameter values that we used
here; this could be the reason behind the lack of eﬀects E4
and E5 in the data—these eﬀects might emerge only for a
particular combination of parameter values. Conversely, the
correct predictions of eﬀects E1, E2, and E3 might depend
on the speciﬁc values used by the model. To gain a better
understanding of the range of possible predictions of the model,
we ran the model
three crucial
ACT-R parameters: noise, maximum associative strength and
maximum diﬀerence. The noise parameter controls the amount of
instantaneous activation noise added to each chunk at retrieval;
maximum associative strength is the constant “S” in Equation
3 in Supplementary Material; and the maximum diﬀerence
parameter controls the penalty due to a mismatch between a
retrieval cue and a feature value of a chunk. For each of these
parameters, the range of values over which the predictions are
generated is given in Table 2. The predictions are generated
by running 1000 simulations for each combination of values
of the three parameters. The total number of combinations
of the three parameter values are 1287 (see Table 2). The
predictions of eﬀects E1–E5 across these sets of parameter
values are plotted in Figure 3. Each eﬀect is plotted against the
parameter along which it varies the most. Eﬀects E1 and E2
are inﬂuenced the most by noise, E3 and E5 are inﬂuenced
the most by the maximum diﬀerence parameter, and E4 is
inﬂuenced the most by the maximum associative strength
parameter. Each point in the plots represents a mean over all
values of the other two parameters. In short, Figure 3 illustrates
how the size of each eﬀect varies across diﬀerent parameter
values.

The eﬀect E1 varies from 0 to 23.9%, the eﬀect E2 varies
from 0 to 17.15%, the eﬀect E3 varies from −1.55 to 228.4 ms,

TABLE 2 | The range of parameter values used for testing the parametric
variability of the cue-based retrieval models.

Parameter

Noise

Maximum associative strength

Maximum difference

Range of values

0.05–0.4, in steps of 0.05

1–4, in steps of 0.25

−1 to 0, in steps of 0.1

the eﬀect E4 varies from −6.53 to 17.34 ms and the eﬀect E5
varies from from −36.01 to 3.21 ms. The eﬀects E1 and E2
are zero when the instantaneous activation noise is zero, which
essentially means that the model does not make any mistake
in retrieving the accessible antecedent when there is no noise
added to the activations of chunks. But, in general, a non-zero
value for noise parameter is necessary for modeling memory
errors and response time distribution. Overall, although all
eﬀects show variation across diﬀerent parameter combinations,
they all remain mainly non-zero and have the same numerical
sign as the predicted eﬀects with the predeﬁned parameter
values. These results show that the model’s predictions for E1–
E3 are not crucially dependent on the ﬁxed parameter values
we used.

FIGURE 3 | The predictions of effects E1–E5 for Experiment 1 from
Sturt (2003) across a range of parameter values. Each effect is plotted
against the parameter that affects it the most.

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

7

May 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 329

Patil et al.

Retrieval Interference in Reﬂexive Binding

2.2. An Alternative Explanation for the
Absence of Interference Effects (E4 and
E5) in Sturt (2003)
Although the lack of an interference eﬀect in Sturt (2003)
Experiment 1 could imply that non-structural cues like gender
are not used in retrieval, Sturt noticed that the absence of an eﬀect
could be due to the non-local linear position of the interferer
(inaccessible antecedent) with respect to the reﬂexive [see (7)
above]. The accessible antecedent was introduced later in the
string than the inaccessible antecedent, and was therefore closer
to the reﬂexive. In his Experiment 2, Sturt (2003) modiﬁed this
design by using stimuli as in (8), where the linear positions of the
binding accessible and inaccessible antecedents are reversed with
relation to Experiment 1, while their accessibility with respect to
the binding theory is kept constant. However, this experiment
also did not show any interference eﬀect.

(8)

the City
{Jonathan/Jennifer} was pretty worried at
Hospital. The surgeon who treated {Jonathan/Jennifer}
had pricked {himself/herself} with a used syringe needle.
There should be an investigation soon.

In addition to surface-string locality, we consider now another
possibility for the apparent lack of interference: the degree of
overlap between potential distractors and retrieval cues. We
hypothesized above that reﬂexive binding uses grammatical
category (noun, verb etc.), grammatical role (subject, object
etc.) and gender as the retrieval cues to retrieve the correct
antecedent. In the cue-based retrieval model, the overlap of
these cues with grammatically inaccessible antecedents leads
to an interference eﬀect in both retrieval latency and retrieval
errors. This formulation in the model leads to the following
alternative explanation for the lack of interference eﬀect in Sturt’s
Experiment 2: the interfering antecedent was the object of the
relative clause [see (7) above], and hence did not match the
grammatical role cue for retrieval at the reﬂexive. In fact, Van
Dyke and McElree (2011) have recently proposed that although
distractors with matching semantic cues exert interference, cues
like grammatical role are weighted heavily in the retrieval
process. They found that the interference eﬀect due to the
semantic match was present only when the distractors matched
the grammatical cues as well. These results can also explain the
lack of interference eﬀect in Sturt’s Experiment 2.

In terms of activations of memory elements, the probability
of retrieving an incorrect element is higher if it has a higher
activation value at the time of retrieval. The activation value of
a memory element is directly dependent on its creation time,
retrieval history, and its match with the retrieval cues—the more
recently an element is created or retrieved, and the higher feature
overlap it has with the retrieval cues, the better chances it has
of being retrieved. Consequently, in Sturt’s Experiment 1 the
interferer has less chance of getting retrieved due to its less
recent creation time with respect to the accessible antecedent,
and in Experiment 2 the interferer has less chance of getting
retrieved because its overlap with the retrieval cues is lower
in comparison to the overlap of the accessible antecedent with
the retrieval cues. In other words, in Sturt’s experiments the

inaccessible antecedents may not be strong enough interferers
to detect their eﬀect on the retrieval process. If this reasoning
is correct, then the eﬀect, or rather the lack of an interference
eﬀect, might be a false negative (a type II error). Concluding
that an absence of an interference eﬀect is evidence that no
interference occurs has important consequences to the theory of
retrieval processes in sentence comprehension. No interference
in processing argument reﬂexives implies that the retrieval
mechanism for reﬂexive binding is diﬀerent from other retrieval
mechanisms in sentence processing, e.g., subject-verb agreement,
and agreement attraction. On the other hand, ﬁnding an
interference eﬀect simpliﬁes the theory of retrieval processes
considerably, since no exemption is granted to antecedent-
reﬂexive resolution processes.

2.3. A Modiﬁed Design
In order to increase the strength of the interference eﬀect, we
can use an object relative clause [see (9)] where the inaccessible
antecedent has the subject role in the clause. It is also closer
to the reﬂexive in terms of linear distance. Under the cue-
based retrieval account, the inaccessible antecedent would be
more likely to interfere in the retrieval process than in the two
experimental designs in Sturt (2003)—but under the structurally-
constrained approach, this manipulation should not matter to
the reﬂexive binding process. In fact, Xiang et al. (2009) used
this design in their ERP study, but they did not have the crucial
match condition. Cunnings and Felser (2013) also used this
design to test the interaction of reﬂexive processing and memory
capacity. They do ﬁnd eﬀect of inaccessible antecedent, but they
did not evaluate their ﬁndings in terms any speciﬁc memory
retrieval mechanism. See Section 4 for more details. Note that
our design also uses the manipulation of stereotypical gender of
the accessible antecedent, as in Sturt (2003), but all sentences are
grammatical despite the gender mismatch between the reﬂexive
and the stereotypical gender of the accessible antecedent.

(9)

a.

Accessible-match/inaccessible-match
interference)
The tough soldier that Fred treated in the military
hospital introduced himself to all the nurses.

(match-

b. Accessible-match/inaccessible-mismatch (match)

c.

The tough soldier that Katie treated in the military
hospital introduced himself to all the nurses.
Accessible-mismatch/inaccessible-match (mismatch-
interference)
The tough soldier that Katie treated in the military
hospital introduced herself to all the nurses.
d. Accessible-mismatch/inaccessible-mismatch

(mismatch)
The tough soldier that Fred treated in the military
hospital introduced herself to all the nurses.

We implemented a cue-based retrieval model for the modiﬁed
design described in (9) as well as for Experiment 2 in Sturt
(2003). The goal of this modeling is to compare the predictions of
the cue-based retrieval theory for the ﬁve eﬀects (E1–E5) across
three designs—Experiment 1 (including the follow-up study; we

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

8

May 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 329

Patil et al.

Retrieval Interference in Reﬂexive Binding

count the eye tracking study and the follow-up study as one
experiment, following Sturt), Experiment 2 from Sturt (2003),
and the modiﬁed design. The modeling assumptions are the same
as in the model described above.

Figure 4 compares the predictions for eﬀects E1–E5 across the
three experimental designs. The predictions are generated for the
range of parameter values listed in Table 2. The pattern of eﬀects
E1–E5 for Experiment 2 and the modiﬁed design are similar to
that for Experiment 1. Across a range of parameter values, the
predictions for eﬀects E1, E2, and E5 are clearly stronger (higher
numerical value) for the modiﬁed design than for Experiment 1
and 2 in Sturt (2003). Although the predictions for eﬀect E3 are
almost identical for the modiﬁed design and Experiment 2, they
are nevertheless stronger than for Experiment 1. In contrast, the
predictions for eﬀect E4 are not distinguishable across the three

designs. To gain better insight into the predictions for E4, we
compared eﬀect E4 across variations of the other two parameters
(noise and maximum diﬀerence); see Figure 5. For the maximum
diﬀerence parameter, eﬀect E4 is stronger in the modiﬁed design
and Experiment 2 than in Experiment 1 when the diﬀerence
penalty is high (more negative), and it is weaker when the
maximum diﬀerence penalty is low. For the noise parameter,
eﬀect E4 is stronger in the modiﬁed design and Experiment 2
than in Experiment 1 when the noise is low, and it is weaker when
the noise is high. These patterns show that the predicted strength
of eﬀect E4 is dependent on the speciﬁc value or a range of values
that are selected for these parameters. The noise parameter is
a frequently modiﬁed parameter across various models (Wong
et al., 2010), which is suggestive of uncertainty regarding its value
across diverse cognitive tasks (cf. the decay parameter, which is
usually kept ﬁxed). The best way to estimate or, at least, restrict
the noise parameter’s value would be to empirically validate
predictions of various models. In contrast to noise, the maximum
diﬀerence penalty parameter is seldom modiﬁed, and is set to its
default value of −1. For the default value of this parameter, the
model clearly predicts a stronger E4 eﬀect for the modiﬁed design
and Experiment 2.

In sum,

the predictions

for the modiﬁed design and
Experiment 2 show stronger eﬀects than Experiment 1 across a
range of parameter values. For the most part—and as expected—
the eﬀects for the modiﬁed design are much stronger than the
other two designs. Next, we report an eye tracking study that
we ran with the modiﬁed design (9). The goal of this study is to
evaluate the predictions of our model that diverge from Sturt’s
ﬁndings (speciﬁcally, eﬀects E4 and E5), as well as to replicate the
eﬀects E1–E3 that Sturt (2003) found.

3. EYE TRACKING EXPERIMENT

3.1. Participants
Forty English native speakers residing in Berlin, Germany
participated in the eye tracking study. Data from one participant
was excluded due to less than 40% accuracy on the sentence
comprehension questions on all trials including experimental

FIGURE 4 | The predictions of effects E1–E5 for three experimental
designs across a range of parameter values.

FIGURE 5 | The variations in effect E4 (match-interference (RT)) across
noise and maximum difference parameters for three experimental
designs.

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

9

May 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 329

Patil et al.

Retrieval Interference in Reﬂexive Binding

and ﬁller trials. The remaining 39 participants included 20
female participants and had a mean age of 29.5 years. The 39
native English speakers consisted of 14 British, 13 American, 8
Australian, 3 Canadian, and 1 New Zealander. All participants
had normal or corrected-to-normal vision and were paid 10
Euros for their participation. The experiment had a duration of
approximately 45 min, including set-up time. This study was
carried out in accordance with the Helsinki declaration with
written informed consent from all participants.

started reading in the left-most character position and helped
the experimenter ensure the accuracy of calibration). Participants
were instructed to read the sentence at a normal pace and to move
their gaze to a dot at the bottom right of the screen after ﬁnishing
the sentence. This triggered the presentation of a comprehension
question in two-thirds of the trials, and in the rest it triggered the
presentation of the next trial. The comprehension questions were
included in order to ensure that the participants attended to the
content of the sentences.

3.2. Design and Materials
Twenty-four stimuli were selected from the Xiang et al. (2009)
study and constructed as per (9) by adding an extra match
condition (see Appendix B in Supplementary Material for the
list of stimuli). Of these 24 stimuli, 12 used stereotypically male
nouns and 12 used stereotypical female nouns for the binding-
accessible antecedent. There were 4 lists that comprised diﬀerent
item-condition combinations according to a Latin Square. Each
list contained 54 ﬁller sentences. Two-third of the target items
and all ﬁllers contained a comprehension question, and these
were equally distributed across yes and no answers. In all, each
participant answered 70 comprehension questions.

3.3. Procedure
Participants were seated 60 cm from an NEC Multisync 2080UX
screen color monitor with 1600 × 1200 pixel resolution. They
were asked to sit comfortably in front of an EyeLink 1000 eye
tracker (SR Research) running at 500 Hz sampling rate (0.01◦
tracking resolution, and < 0.5◦ gaze position accuracy). Though
the viewing was binocular, only the participant’s right eye was
tracked. The distance between the camera and the eye was 50 cm.
Participants were asked to position their head in a frame
that stabilized their forehead and chin. They were asked to
avoid large head movements throughout the experiment and to
avoid blinking while reading the sentences. A 7-button Microsoft
Sidewinder game pad was used to record button responses. The
presentation of the materials and the recording of responses was
controlled by two separate PCs, one running internally developed
software (this is called EyeScript, and was originally developed
in Richard Lewis’ lab by Mason Smith, and later in Shravan
Vasishth’s lab by Felix Engelmann, Titus von der Malsburg, and
Tobias Günther; the software is open source and available at
https://github.com/tmalsburg/EyeScript) and the other running
SR Research’s proprietary software.

Each participant was randomly assigned one of four diﬀerent
stimulus lists. The list was randomized for every subject. At
the start of the experiment, a standard calibration procedure
was performed which involved participants looking at a grid of
13 ﬁxation targets in random succession, in order to validate
their gazes. Calibration and validation were repeated if the
experimenter noticed that measurement accuracy was poor, and
if participants took a break during the experiment.

Each trial consisted of the following steps: First, a ﬁxation
target in the same position as the ﬁrst character of the text
display was presented; two 200 ms ﬁxations followed by one
400 ms ﬁxation on this target triggered the presentation of the
sentences (this procedure ensured that the participants always

3.4. Data Analysis
All data processing and analyses were carried out in GNU-
R (R Development Core Team, 2009). Fixations were detected
using the algorithm described by Engbert and Kliegl (2003);
an open source R package, saccades, developed by Titus von
der Malsburg was used to carry out this step (the package
is available at https://github.com/tmalsburg/saccades). Fixation
and regression-based measures were extracted using another
open source R package, em2, developed by Pavel Logaˇcev
(the package is available at: https://cran.r-project.org/src/contrib/
Archive/em2/). All ﬁxations 30 pixels above and below the
sentence were included in the sentence. Fixations in the blank
spaces between words were also counted; ﬁxations in the ﬁrst half
of the space were included in the ﬁxations on the preceding word
and ﬁxations in the second half were included in the ﬁxations on
the following word. All other ﬁxations outside these regions were
excluded.

Eﬀects of accessible antecedent gender match (henceforth,
match) and inaccessible antecedent gender match (interference)
with the gender of the reﬂexive were evaluated across various eye
movement measures. Data analysis was carried out using linear
mixed models (Bates and Sarkar, 2007; Gelman and Hill, 2007).
Linear mixed models were ﬁt for the following eye movement
measures at the reﬂexive. First Fixation Duration (FFD), the time
spent during the ﬁrst ﬁxation during the ﬁrst pass; First Pass
Reading time (FPRT), the sum of all ﬁxations during the ﬁrst pass;
Re-reading Time (RRT), the sum of all ﬁxations in a region that
occurred after ﬁrst pass; Total Reading Time (TRT), the sum of
all ﬁxations in a region, First Pass Regression Probability (FPRP),
the probability of regressing from a region after ﬁxating in that
region during ﬁrst pass; and Re-reading Probability (RRP), the
probability of reading a region during the second and subsequent
passes. In the linear models, we used nested contrast coding and
deﬁned three contrasts that correspond to the three eﬀects that
we are interested in—mismatch eﬀect, match-interference eﬀect,
and mismatch-interference eﬀect. The interference eﬀects were
nested within the mismatch eﬀect. The contrasts were coded
such that having a positive coeﬃcient meant that the eﬀect was
in the predicted direction. Apart from these three contrasts,
trial number was used as a (centered) predictor. All
linear
mixed models were ﬁt with by-participant and by-item random
intercepts, and by-participant and by-item random slopes for the
three contrasts. For FPRP and RRP, only random intercepts were
used, since otherwise the models failed to converge. All reading
times were log transformed before ﬁtting the linear models. For
FPRP and RRP, generalized linear mixed models were ﬁt with a
binomial link function.

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

10

May 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 329

Patil et al.

Retrieval Interference in Reﬂexive Binding

TABLE 3 | Mean reading times at the reﬂexive with standard errors, percentages of ﬁrst pass regressions from the reﬂexive, percentages of re-readings
of the reﬂexive, and comprehension question response accuracies across four conditions.

Condition

FFD

FPRT

RRT

TRT

FPRP (%)

RRP (%)

Accuracy (%)

a. Match-interf.

b. Match

c. Mismatch-interf.

d. Mismatch

258 (6)

263 (7)

272 (8)

266 (9)

280 (8)

292 (10)

295 (10)

284 (9)

108 (14)

79 (11)

149 (20)

145 (15)

410 (18)

389 (17)

473 (24)

468 (20)

13

7

11

11

30

24

35

42

84

90

83

80

TABLE 4 | Linear mixed-effects model estimates, standard errors and
t-values across reading time measures; the asterisk indicates statistically
signiﬁcant (α = 0.05) effects.

TABLE 5 | Linear model estimates, standard errors and p-values for FPRP
and RRP; the asterisk indicates statistically signiﬁcant (α = 0.05) effects.

Effect

Estimate

Std. Error

p-value

Effect

Estimate

Std. Error

t-value

FFD

Intercept

Mismatch

Match-interference

Mismatch-interference

Trial

FPRT

Intercept

Mismatch

Match-interference

Mismatch-interference

Trial

RRT

Intercept

Mismatch

Match-interference

Mismatch-interference

Trial

TRT

Intercept

Mismatch

Match-interference

Mismatch-interference

Trial

5.512

0.023

−0.022

−0.025

0.001

5.575

0.011

−0.033

−0.028

0.001

5.679

0.043

0.022

−0.067

−0.001

5.9

0.146

0.036

0.016

0

0.027

0.026

0.034

0.038

0.001

0.029

0.03

0.053

0.04

0.001

0.052

0.066

0.094

0.082

0.001

0.049

0.043

0.057

0.057

0.001

201.387

0.89

−0.650

−0.653

1.751

194.555

0.356

−0.626

−0.718

2.203*

109.464

0.65

0.231

−0.818

−0.748

121.125

3.41*

0.637

0.273

0.4

3.5. Results
All mean reading times at the reﬂexive along with standard
errors, FPRP from the reﬂexive, RRP at the reﬂexive and
comprehension accuracy percentages are summarized in Table 3.
The results of
the statistical analysis are summarized in
Tables 4, 5.

3.5.1. Question-Response Accuracy
Overall average accuracy for trials that included a comprehension
question was 88% and average accuracy for target items was
84%. Accuracy values for comprehension questions across four
conditions are listed in Table 3, but are not
theoretically
interpretable because the questions targeted diﬀerent parts of the
critical sentence, not just the antecedent-reﬂexive relation as in
the Sturt follow-up study. We present these mean accuracies only
for completeness.

FPRP

Intercept

Mismatch

Match-interference

Mismatch-interference

Trial

RRP

Intercept

Mismatch

Match-interference

Mismatch-interference

Trial

−2.602

0.148

0.782

−0.111

0.004

−0.852

0.63

0.359

0.383

−0.006

0.258

0.256

0.374

0.35

0.006

0.176

0.154

0.225

0.206

0.003

<10−15

0.564

0.037*

0.751

0.431

<10−5
<10−4*

0.11

0.063

0.067

3.5.2. Eye Tracking Dependent Measures
A statistically signiﬁcant mismatch eﬀect was observed in TRT
and RRP, i.e., the conditions in which the stereotypical gender
of the accessible antecedent did not match the gender of the
reﬂexive were read more slowly and had higher probability of
re-reading than the conditions where it matched. A statistically
signiﬁcant match-interference eﬀect was observed in FPRP, with
the high interference condition showing more regressions than
the low interference condition.

3.6. Discussion
3.6.1. Early Effects
The results outlined above show an early eﬀect of match-
interference (E2) from the inaccessible antecedent in ﬁrst pass
regression probability, such that a gender match between the
reﬂexive and the inaccessible antecedent leads to a higher number
of ﬁrst pass regressions from the reﬂexive (see Figure 6). The
occurrence of a regression from a word reﬂects some diﬃculty
in integrating the word when it is ﬁxated and hence it is plausibly
an early eﬀect (Clifton et al., 2007). We are assuming that higher
number of retrieval errors should reﬂect in higher probability of
regression. First pass regressions cannot reﬂect the late processes
triggered at the end of a sentence or the processes reﬂected
by late measures such as second pass reading time. Assuming
that ﬁrst pass regressions reﬂect processing diﬃculty triggered
relatively early during the ﬁrst contact with the critical word,
the interference eﬀect is inconsistent with the conclusion of
Sturt (2003), that the online application of Principle A is not
aﬀected by interference from the inaccessible antecedent at early
stages of processing. Conclusions derived in Nicol and Swinney

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

11

May 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 329

Patil et al.

Retrieval Interference in Reﬂexive Binding

FIGURE 6 | Early effect of interference. Effects that are observed in “early”
eye tracking measures are considered to be early effects. Usually measures
like FFD, FPRT, and FPRP are considered to be early measures since they are
associated with reader’s ﬁrst exposure to a region.

(1989) and Xiang et al. (2009) are also not compatible with
these results. As a result, this study challenges the claim from
Phillips et al. (2011) and Dillon et al. (2013) that an antecedent
for a reﬂexive is retrieved using only structural cues without
considering the gender feature. Our ﬁndings are consistent with
those of Badecker and Straub (2002), Choy and Thompson
(2010), Cunnings and Felser (2013), Thompson and Choy (2009).

3.6.2. Late Effects
The eﬀect of accessible antecedent gender match (E1 and E3)
was also observed in the RRP and TRT (see Figure 7) such that
reading times were elevated and there were higher number of
re-readings when the accessible antecedent did not match the
gender of the reﬂexive (we are assuming that E1, the mismatch
eﬀect predicted in retrieval errors, should reﬂect in elevated
reading times). The absence of an early eﬀect of accessible
antecedent is diﬀerent from the ﬁnding of Sturt (2003), where
the eﬀect appeared at FFD. We also observed a marginal
eﬀect of mismatch-interference (E5) (p = 0.063) in the RRP.
Although the eﬀect doesn’t reach conventional signiﬁcance level,
it corroborates the patterns we observe in our exploratory data
analysis with cumulative progressions (see Section 3.6.4).

3.6.3. Regression Contingent Effects in FFD
As an exploratory data analysis, we analyzed FFD contingent
on the ﬁrst pass regressions—separate analysis for FFD followed
by regressions and FFD not followed by regressions. The two
patterns are plotted in Figure 8. FFD followed by regressions
show a pattern consistent with the retrieval times predicted by
the model. Although the match-interference eﬀect (E4) (t = 1.77)
and mismatch-interference eﬀect (E5) (t = 1.70) do not quite
reach conventional signiﬁcance levels, they show the trend of
interference eﬀect as predicted by the model. These FFDs also
show the main eﬀect of mismatch (E1 and E3) (t = 2.78) which
is consistent with the early mismatch eﬀect in Sturt (2003). FFD
not followed by regressions did not show this eﬀect.

FIGURE 7 | Late effect of match. Effects that are observed in “late” eye
tracking measures are considered to be late effects. Usually measures like
RRP and TRT are considered to be late measures since they involve reader’s
second and possibly subsequent exposures to a region.

3.6.4. Effects Revealed in Cumulative Progressions
As another way of exploratory data analysis, we examined an eye
movement measure called the cumulative progression, which has
been used earlier by Kreiner et al. (2008) and Cunnings and Sturt
(2014). The cumulative progression quantiﬁes how far a reader’s
eyes have traveled from the region of interest. The assumption
with analyzing cumulative progressions is that the further away,
in the direction of reading, a reader progresses from a region (in
one condition compared to another), the easier the information
in that region is for processing. It is a measure of continuous
eye movements, in the sense that it assigns a numeric value,
the distance, at each point in time that can be recorded by an
eye tracker. This makes it possible to compare the processing
cost between two conditions over a continuous period of time.
For example, in our case, we could examine if participants
consistently progress further away from the reﬂexive region in
the match conditions compared to the mismatch conditions after
entering the reﬂexive region for the ﬁrst time. And if they do,
then, by assumption, it implies that the reﬂexives are easier to
process in the match conditions than in the mismatch conditions.
Eﬀectively, we are assuming that faster retrievals at the reﬂexive
will result (in faster processing, and hence) in progressions that
are further away from the reﬂexive.

Cumulative progressions are computed by measuring the
distance between the position of the ﬁrst ﬁxation in the region

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

12

May 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 329

Patil et al.

Retrieval Interference in Reﬂexive Binding

FIGURE 8 | Regression contingent FFD.

FIGURE 9 | Progression differences plotted against timestamps starting at the ﬁrst ﬁxation in the reﬂexive region. Each curve represents an effect and the
gray area around it represents the 95% conﬁdence interval. The dotted vertical line denotes the position of the mean FPRT for the reﬂexives. (A) The mismatch effect
is obtained by subtracting the mean progressions in the two mismatch conditions from the mean progressions in the two match conditions, (B) the match-interference
effect is obtained by subtracting the mean progressions in the match condition from the mean progressions in the match-interference condition, and (C) the
mismatch-interference effect is obtained by subtracting the mean progressions in the mismatch condition from the mean progressions in the mismatch-interference
condition.

of interest and the subsequent eye positions, ignoring word
boundaries. In the earlier studies mentioned above the distance
was calculated in terms of characters (the number of characters
by which the current eye position is separated from the position
of the ﬁrst ﬁxation in the region of interest). Only forward
eye movements change the value of the measure; regressive
eye movements or no eye movements, as in ﬁxations, do not
change the value of the measure. This means that the sequence
of cumulative progressions for one trial
is a monotonically
increasing sequence—every subsequent number (representing
the distance) is greater than or equal to the previous number
(hence the name cumulative). Unlike in earlier studies, where the
distance was calculated in terms of characters, we calculate the
distance in terms of the number of screen pixels a participant has
progressed, which gives a more ﬁne-grained measure of distance.
As in Cunnings and Sturt (2014), we evaluate various eﬀects
by comparing the numerical diﬀerences in mean cumulative
progressions for diﬀerent conditions.

Figure 9 plots cumulative progression diﬀerences. Each panel
represents one of the three eﬀects in reading times that we
are considering here. Each point on curve is obtained by ﬁrst
averaging cumulative progressions across participants and items

for one condition at one timestamp, and then calculating the
diﬀerence between the averages across two conditions that are
compared. For the mismatch eﬀect curve, the averaging is done
for two pairs of conditions and then the diﬀerence between them
is calculated. The x-axis represents timestamps starting with the
ﬁrst ﬁxation in the reﬂexive region and extends till the next
1000 ms; two consecutive timestamps are 2 ms apart since the
eye tracker sampled every 2 ms (which means each curve is
composed of 501 points). The y-axis represents the diﬀerence
in pixels between averaged progressions of conditions that are
compared. It is crucial to note here that this is an analytic
approach, and it is only an exploratory data analysis. Since each
data point in this ﬁgure is averaged across participants and
items, it underestimates variance between participants and items.
Moreover, the 95% conﬁdence intervals are underestimates, and
with more conservative approach the plots may look consistent
with noise. Overall, we need a more rigorous statistical analysis to
do justice to the conclusions we are drawing based on cumulative
progressions.

The curve representing the mismatch-interference eﬀect
diverges at 434 ms from the x-axis on the positive side
and remains on the positive side. This implies that after the

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

13

May 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 329

Patil et al.

Retrieval Interference in Reﬂexive Binding

ﬁrst ﬁxation in the reﬂexive region, from 434 ms onwards,
participants speed up in the mismatch-interference condition
compared to the mismatch condition. This, in turn, is consistent
with the mismatch-interference eﬀect (E5) predicted by the
model. The curve representing the mismatch eﬀect diverges at
528 ms from the x-axis on the negative side and remains on
the negative side. This implies that the two mismatch conditions
are read slower than the two match conditions from 528 ms
onwards, after the ﬁrst ﬁxation in the reﬂexive region, which is
consistent with the mismatch eﬀect (E3) predicted by the model.
However, the match-interference eﬀect curve diverges from the
x-axis, initially on the positive side at 420 ms and then switches
to the negative side at 754 ms and then predominantly remains
on the negative side. The diversion in the positive direction is
opposite to what the model predicts, but the later diversion to
the negative side is consistent with the predictions of the model.
Eﬀectively, if we assume that faster cumulative progressions
from the reﬂexive region reﬂect faster retrievals at the reﬂexive,
the mismatch-interference eﬀect (E5) and the mismatch eﬀect
(E3) are visible in the cumulative progressions. Interestingly, the
mismatch-interference eﬀect also starts earlier than the mismatch
eﬀect.

3.6.5. Timing of Mismatch and Interference Effects
It is important to note that the predictions of the model are
not speciﬁc to early or late measures, but we expect that both
mismatch and interference eﬀects should occur during the same
time frame in an experiment because, in the model, both the
eﬀects take place during the same (sub)process. Moreover, the
absence of early mismatch eﬀect in our experiment (and also in
Cunnings and Felser, 2013 and Cunnings and Sturt, 2014) does
not support the argument in Sturt (2003) that binding accessible
antecedents inﬂuence early stages of processing, albeit it need not
necessarily speak against Sturt’s argument either, because early
eﬀects don’t always show up in early measures (Vasishth et al.,
2013).

In sum, the eye tracking study, through various measures,
supported the predictions of the cue-based retrieval model of
reﬂexive binding that assumes gender of the reﬂexive as one of
the retrieval cues. The mismatch eﬀects E1 and E3 were observed
in total reading time, re-reading probability and in cumulative
progressions from the reﬂexive. The interference eﬀect E2 was
observed in ﬁrst pass regression probability. The interference
eﬀect E4 was observed in ﬁrst pass regression probability and a
trend of this eﬀect was observed in the regression contingent ﬁrst
ﬁxation duration. The interference eﬀect E5 was observed in re-
reading probability, cumulative progressions from the reﬂexive,
and there was also a trend of this eﬀect in ﬁrst ﬁxation durations
that were followed by regressions. Along with replicating the
mismatch eﬀects, observed in Sturt’s experiments, the presence
of interference eﬀects (E4 and E5), which were absent in Sturt’s
experiments, makes the results consistent with the model’s
predictions.

4. GENERAL DISCUSSION

In this paper, we investigated the question: what kinds of cues are
used initially by the parser when resolving antecedent-reﬂexive

relations? The two positions on this question are: early use of
only structural cues (Nicol and Swinney, 1989; Sturt, 2003; Xiang
et al., 2009; Phillips et al., 2011; Dillon et al., 2013), or early
use of structural as well as other cues such as gender marking
(Badecker and Straub, 2002). We framed the theoretical question
within a computational model of sentence processing, the cue-
based retrieval model proposed in Lewis and Vasishth (2005) and
Lewis et al. (2006), and showed that if we assume that cue-based
retrieval involves structural as well as non-structural cues, the
model makes ﬁve predictions, repeated below:

E1. Mismatch eﬀect (RE): the retrieval errors for the two
mismatch conditions are higher than those for the two
match conditions.

E2.

Interference eﬀect (RE): the retrieval errors for the match-
interference and mismatch-interference conditions are
higher than those for the other two conditions.

E3. Mismatch eﬀect (RT): the retrieval times for the two
mismatch conditions are longer than those for the two
match conditions.

E4. Match-interference eﬀect (RT): the retrieval times for the
match-interference condition are longer than the match
condition.

E5. Mismatch-interference eﬀect (RT): the retrieval times for
the mismatch-interference condition are shorter than the
mismatch condition.

Eﬀects E1–E3 are attested in Sturt’s studies; but eﬀects E4 and
E5 are not. We hypothesized that Sturt failed to ﬁnd eﬀect E4
because the inaccessible antecedent had a diﬀerent grammatical
role (object) than the accessible antecedent (subject); i.e., it
was distinct enough from the accessible antecedent
to be
rejected successfully during search. We predicted that if both
the accessible and inaccessible antecedents had the subject role,
then a match-interference (E4) eﬀect would occur. Moreover if
grammatical cues are weighted heavily in the retrieval process
(Van Dyke and McElree, 2011), a subject distractor will induce
a higher interference eﬀect. We then conducted an eye tracking
study in which both the accessible and inaccessible antecedents
had the subject role, thereby increasing their similarity. We
showed that
in ﬁrst pass regression probability a match-
interference eﬀect is indeed seen, as predicted by the model. In
addition, as an exploratory data analysis, when we separately
analyzed the ﬁrst ﬁxation duration contingent on regressions,
the ﬁrst ﬁxation durations that were followed by regressions
showed marginal eﬀects consistent with the two interference
eﬀects E4 and E5. These ﬁrst ﬁxation durations also conﬁrmed
the eﬀect E3. The eﬀect E3 was observed in re-reading time
and total reading time as well. This result is consistent with
the model’s predicted mismatch eﬀect in retrieval times, and the
predicted mismatch eﬀect in retrieval errors. Further, in another
exploratory data analysis with an eye tracking measure called
cumulative progressions, which has been claimed to capture
processing diﬃculty on a continuous time scale, we found that
the interference eﬀect E5 and the mismatch eﬀect E3 are realized;
with E5, in fact, occurring earlier than E3. Though the analysis
with cumulative progressions involved only visual inspection, the

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

14

May 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 329

Patil et al.

Retrieval Interference in Reﬂexive Binding

visual patterns are consistent with these two eﬀects predicted by
the model.

In sum, the eye tracking study provided empirical evidence for
all the eﬀects predicted by the model, including the interference
eﬀects that were not observed in the earlier studies such as Sturt
(2003) and Xiang et al. (2009). There was clear support for the
mismatch and match-interference eﬀect predicted by the model.
Although the support for the mismatch-interference eﬀect was
not equally clear—it was only marginally signiﬁcant in two of
the eye tracking measures, and there was some evidence in the
exploratory data analysis with cumulative progressions—the two
interference eﬀects have important theoretical implications for
the generality of the retrieval mechanisms in sentence processing,
and so should not be ignored.

The interference eﬀects and the mismatch eﬀect have also
been observed in some other studies5. The mismatch eﬀect E3
has been found in the reading studies (eye tracking and/or self-
paced reading) such as Cunnings and Felser (2013) (Experiment
1 and 2), Cunnings and Sturt (2014) (Experiment 1), Dillon
et al. (2013) (Experiment 1 and 2), King et al. (2012), Parker
and Phillips (2014) (Experiment 1, 2, and 3), and Sturt and
Kwon (2013) (Experiment 3 and 4) with a design comparable
to Sturt’s experiment 1. The interference eﬀect E4 has been
found in the reading studies such as Badecker and Straub (2002)
(Experiment 3 and 4) and Mansbridge and Witzel (2012), and the
interference eﬀect E5 has been found in the reading studies such
as Cunnings and Felser (2013) (Experiment 2 in high working
memory span readers), King et al. (2012), Parker and Phillips
(2014) (Experiment 2 and 3) Sturt and Kwon (2013) (Experiment
3 and 4). In the visual world paradigm, an eﬀect equivalent
to the interference eﬀect E4 has been reported in Choy and
Thompson (2010), Clackson et al. (2011), Runner and Head
(2014), and Thompson and Choy (2009). Overall the pattern
appears to be that the mismatch eﬀect has been observed robustly,
although there are at least a handful of studies reporting the two
interference eﬀects as well.

4.1. Why Were the Interference Effects
Found Less Often in Earlier Studies?
Apart from the reasons mentioned in the motivation for the
design of the experiment reported here, namely the proximity
of the inaccessible antecedent to the reﬂexive and it being the
subject of the clause, there could be other reasons for the absence
of the interference eﬀect. The absence of the eﬀect could just be a
failure to ﬁnd an eﬀect that in fact exists, which may happen due
to low power of the experiment. For example, the eﬀect could be
masked by other confounding variables. Indeed, Cunnings and
Felser (2013, p. 23) found that participants with high working
memory spans show (in ﬁrst ﬁxation duration) an eﬀect in exactly

5In this paper we are considering only argument reﬂexives and only in English.
But interference eﬀects have also been reported for Mandarin reﬂexives (Jäger
et al., 2015b; Chen et al., 2016) and for non-argument positions such as English
reﬂexives inside picture noun phrases (Runner et al., 2006). On the other hand,
for the pronoun-antecedent dependency (which is subject to diﬀerent grammatical
constraints than the reﬂexive-antecedent dependency), Chow et al. (2014) failed to
replicate the interference eﬀect observed in the pronoun experiments reported in
Badecker and Straub (2002).

the direction predicted by the cue-based retrieval model (though
they didn’t interpret the eﬀect as an interference or intrusion
eﬀect). It is participants with low working memory span who
show longer ﬁrst ﬁxation durations in the interference condition
in the mismatch cases. If one were to ignore the working memory
span in the Cunnings and Felser data, the two diﬀerently-signed
eﬀects by span would cancel out, showing no diﬀerence between
the interference and no-interference condition in the mismatch
cases, exactly as found in the literature. Thus, since our data
and all previous experiments (except, of course, Cunnings and
Felser’s) do not take working memory capacity into account as
a variable, it is quite possible that we are missing an eﬀect that
is correctly predicted by the model. Of course, this raises the
question that the ACT-R model as currently implemented does
not explicitly model high working memory capacity participants.
In future work, we intend to explore the role of working memory
capacity in triggering the mismatch interference eﬀect.

Another possibility could be that the interference eﬀects
are not as strong as the mismatch eﬀect. The model, in fact,
predicts numerically smaller interference eﬀects compared to
the mismatch eﬀect (see Figure 4). Recently, Parker and Phillips
(2014) using sentences as in (10), found that the mismatch-
interference eﬀect is visible when the reﬂexive mismatches two
features, such as the number and gender (e.g., herself and
schoolboys), with the accessible antecedent, but not when it
mismatches only one feature. King et al. (2012) using sentences
as in (11), found that the mismatch-interference eﬀect is visible
when the reﬂexive is not adjacent to the verb [condition (b)
in (11)] allowing the information about the verb’s argument
structure, and hence the information about
the accessible
antecedent, to decay. These results possibly corroborate the
model’s prediction that
is
the mismatch-interference eﬀect
weaker than the mismatch eﬀect, and hence diﬃcult to detect.

(10)

{librarian/janitor}

The
{schoolgirl/schoolboy/schoolboys}
about the book.

said

that

the
reminded herself

(11)

a. Verb-adjacent: The mechanic who spoke

to

{John/Mary} sent {himself/herself} a package.

b. Verb-non-adjacent: The mechanic who spoke to

{John/Mary} sent a package to {himself/herself}.

Eﬀectively, our results are not only in line with the results
from Cunnings and Felser (2013), King et al. (2012), and Parker
and Phillips (2014), among others, but also provide convincing
evidence for
the model’s predictions with manipulations
independent of the memory span of the participants, with a
conﬁguration involving verb-adjacent reﬂexives, and with lowest
possible (= single) mismatch of retrieval cues with the accessible
antecedent.

4.1.1. Strictly Structured Access as an Alternative
Here, we discuss the strictly structured retrieval approach
proposed in Dillon et al. (2013) and Phillips et al. (2011)
for resolving reﬂexive-antecedent dependency, and examine
its claims in the light of existing experimental and modeling
ﬁndings. Although Phillips and colleagues
to the

refers

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

15

May 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 329

Patil et al.

Retrieval Interference in Reﬂexive Binding

mechanism as structured access, we refer to it as a strictly
structured access to emphasize the point that the approach
suggested in this paper does not ignore the structural constraints,
but it includes other constraints as well.

Dillon et al. (2013) supported evidence for the strictly
structured access with a set of computational and experimental
studies involving English reﬂexives and subject-verb agreement.
This experiment essentially replicated the interference asymmetry
eﬀect from Wagers et al. (2009) and the absence of interference
eﬀect in processing English reﬂexives from Sturt (2003). Based
on these results, they concluded that agreement dependency
and reﬂexive dependency employ diﬀerent retrieval mechanisms
for resolving the dependencies—agreement dependencies are
resolved using morphological features of the target noun phrase
whereas the antecedent for a reﬂexive is retrieved using only
structural constraints. They further compared the predictions
of a strictly structural cue based retrieval model of reﬂexives to
a model utilizing mixed cues—structural as well as agreement.
The mixed cue model predicted an interference eﬀect in retrieval
errors (similar to E2 above) and a mismatch-interference eﬀect
in retrieval times (similar to E5 above). The prediction of the
match-interference eﬀect (E4) was not reliably non-zero,
in
the sense that for some parameter combinations the model
didn’t predict any diﬀerence between the match and match-
interference condition. The structural cue based model predicted
no interference eﬀect in either retrieval errors or retrieval times.
The mismatch eﬀects in retrieval errors and retrieval times (E1
and E3), as predicted by the mixed cue model, were not discussed
in Dillon et al. (2013). On the basis of these predictions, Dillon
et al. (2013) concluded that the strictly structured access model
captures the reﬂexive binding data from their Experiments better
than the mixed cue model.

Although Dillon et al. (2013) replicated the ﬁndings in Sturt
(2003), the lack of interference eﬀect is subject to the same
alternative explanation that we suggested for Experiment 2 in
Sturt (2003): we hypothesized that reﬂexive binding uses the
grammatical role subject as one of the retrieval cues for retrieving
the correct antecedent. The absence of the interference eﬀect
could be due to (apart from power concerns) the fact that the
interfering antecedent had an object role in the experiments
above, which does not match one of the retrieval cues, reducing
the strength of interference. Badecker and Straub (2002) also
reported that the interference eﬀect is found when the interferer
is in the subject position. Moreover, Van Dyke and McElree
(2011) found that, in thematic binding, the interference eﬀect
due to the semantic match was present only when the distractors
matched syntactic cues along with semantic cues. If the retrieval
process gives higher weight to syntactic cues than semantic
cues, the absence of interference eﬀect could simply be due to
the absence of matching a grammatical role in the inaccessible
antecedent.

The predictions of the structured access model hold only for
a limited set of experiments and a limited set of eﬀects in those
experiments. The mismatch-eﬀects (E1 and E3) that have been
replicated in various studies like Sturt (2003), Cunnings and
Felser (2013) and also the one reported in this paper cannot be
explained by this model. The structured access model predicts

FIGURE 10 | The predictions of a strictly structural cue-based model
and a model with structural and agreement feature based cues. The
predictions are for the new experimental design and are generated across a
set of parameter values.

no diﬀerence between match and mismatch conditions (see
Figure 10). Furthermore, the interference-eﬀects (E2, E4, and E5)
observed in various reﬂexives studies like Badecker and Straub
(2002) Experiment 3, Sturt (2003) follow-up study, Cunnings and
Felser (2013) Experiment 2 and the one reported here cannot
be explained by this model. Consequently, a model assuming
structural as well as agreement features as retrieval cues predicts
a broader range of data than a strictly structured access model.

Dillon et al.

(2013)

(E4)—higher

further claimed that

the match-
interference eﬀect
reading times when the
inaccessible noun matches gender or number of the reﬂexive—is
not reliable evidence for interference from the grammatically
inaccessible antecedent, for mainly two reasons: (1) The cue-
based retrieval model doesn’t predict any diﬀerence in retrieval

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

16

May 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 329

Patil et al.

Retrieval Interference in Reﬂexive Binding

times between the match and match-interference conditions
for certain parameter combinations, since on the one hand
the cue-overlap (gender and number) between accessible and
inaccessible antecedents leads to an inhibitory eﬀect, and on
the other hand the retrieval of the inaccessible antecedent leads
to a facilitatory eﬀect; (2) The match-interference eﬀects can
be explained in terms of feature-overwriting (Nairne, 1990;
Gordon et al., 2001, 2004, 2006; Oberauer and Kliegl, 2006)
instead of interference at the time of retrieval. Consequently,
Dillon proposed that only a facilitatory eﬀect in mismatch-
interference can be considered as evidence for
retrieval
interference.

As far as the ﬁrst argument is concerned, we, in fact, show
that the cue-based retrieval model with mixed cues consistently
predicts a positive match-interference eﬀect across a set of
parameter values for Sturt’s two experiments (see Figures 4, 5).
Although the eﬀect for the modiﬁed design is not predicted to be
positive for all combinations of parameter values, for a certain set
of combination of values the eﬀect is non-zero and positive, and
only for a very small set of parameter values is the eﬀect predicted
to be zero.

The second argument,

in fact, applies to the mismatch-
interference eﬀect as well—the mismatch-interference eﬀect (for
this particular design) can also be explained in terms feature-
overwriting or encoding interference. Encoding interference is
a consequence of the feature overlap between the accessible and
inaccessible antecedents. In the design discussed here, the feature
overlap between the accessible and inaccessible antecedents is,
in fact, higher in the mismatch condition compared to the
mismatch-interference condition (“soldier” and “Fred” have the
same gender in the mismatch condition whereas “soldier” and
“Katie” have diﬀerent genders in the mismatch-interference
condition). This means between these two conditions,
the
interference conditions are reversed for encoding and retrieval
interference. Retrieval
reading
time for the mismatch-interference condition while encoding
interference predicts slower reading time for the mismatch
condition,
leading to exactly the same pattern of retrieval
times between the two mismatch conditions. Eﬀectively, this
conﬁguration makes it impossible to tease apart the two types
of interference theories using the experiment design considered
in this paper or in similar earlier studies including Dillon et al.
(2013). However, Jäger et al. (2015a) using self-paced reading
and eye-tracking studies with German and Swedish reﬂexives,
compared the predictions of the two interference theories. They
could not ﬁnd any evidence for encoding interference and
concluded that “invoking encoding interference may not be a
plausible way to reconcile interference eﬀects with a structure-
based account of reﬂexive processing.” If we assume that the

interference predicts

faster

retrieval process for reﬂexives in German, Swedish and English
are similar (especially because these are closely related languages)
then we can safely conclude that, even though our design does not
have the possibility of disentangling the two retrieval theories,
the eﬀects that we see in our experiment are driven by retrieval
interference.

In summary, we have presented a theory and computational
model of the access of antecedents for reﬂexive pronouns in
English, and used this theory to gain insight into empirical studies
that have yielded mixed results concerning the putative role of
non-structural cues. We used this analysis and the results of
further modeling to motivate a new empirical design that formed
the basis of an eye tracking study. Many of the results of the
eye tracking study are consistent with the model’s assumptions
concerning the early use of non-structural cues. These results
present a challenge for theories advocating the infallibility of the
human parser in the case of reﬂexive binding in English, and
provide support for the inclusion of agreement features such as
gender in the set of retrieval cues. In general, the results provide
further support for the deployment of a rapid, parallel cue-based
access mechanism in service of sentence parsing (McElree, 2000;
McElree et al., 2003; Lewis and Vasishth, 2005; Lewis et al., 2006),
and help to sharpen deeper explanatory questions concerning the
utility and selection of cues.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

UP wrote the model, SV and RL supervised the process. UP
conceived, setup, and carried out the experiment. UP and SV
analyzed the data. UP, SV, and RL wrote the manuscript.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We would like to thank William Badecker, Brian Dillon, Sol
Lago, Colin Phillips, Rukshin Shaher, Ming Xiang, and the two
reviewers for their helpful comments, and to Felix Engelmann,
Pavel Logaˇcev and Titus von der Malsburg for their technical
help at various stages of the eye tracking study. The eye tracking
experiment reported here was run at the ZAS in Berlin; many
thanks to Manfred Krifka for providing space to run this study.
Thanks for the support of the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(Project No. BO 2142/1-1) to UP, and the National Science
Foundation under Grant BCS-1152819 to RL.

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL

for this article can be found
at: http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fpsyg.

The Supplementary Material
online
2016.00329

REFERENCES

Aho, A. V., and Ullman, J. D. (1972). The Theory of Parsing, Translation and

Compiling Volume I: Parsing. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

Alcocer, P., and Phillips, C. (2012). Using Relational Syntactic Constraints in
Content-Addressable Memory Architectures for Sentence Parsing. Unpublished
manuscript. Available online at: http://www.colinphillips.net/wp-content/
uploads/2014/08/alcocer_phillips2012_v2.pdf (Retrieved March 4, 2016).

Anderson, J. R., Bothell, D., Byrne, M. D., Douglass, S., Lebiere, C., and Qin, Y.
(2004). An integrated theory of the mind. Psychol. Rev. 111, 1036–1050. doi:
10.1037/0033-295X.111.4.1036

Badecker, W., and Straub, K. (2002). The processing role of structural constraints
on the interpretation of pronouns and anaphors. J. Exp. Psychol. Learn. Mem.
Cogn. 28, 748–769. doi: 10.1037/0278-7393.28.4.748

Bates, D., and Sarkar, D. (2007). lme4: Linear Mixed-Eﬀects Models Using S4 Classes

(R Package Version 0.9975-11).

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

17

May 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 329

Patil et al.

Retrieval Interference in Reﬂexive Binding

Chen, Z., Jäger, L., and Vasishth, S. (2016). “How structure sensitive is the parser?
Evidence from Mandarin Chinese,” in Empirical Approaches to Linguistic
Theory: Studies of Meaning and Structure, Studies in Generative Grammar, eds
B. Stolterfoht and S. Featherston (Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter), 43–62.

McElree, B., Foraker, S., and Dyer, L. (2003). Memory and language memory
structures that subserve sentence comprehension. J. Mem. Lang. 48, 67–91. doi:
10.1016/S0749-596X(02)00515-6

Nairne, J. S. (1990). A feature model of immediate memory. Mem. Cogn. 18,

Chomsky, N. (1981). Lectures on Government and Binding. Berlin: Mouton de

251–269. doi: 10.3758/BF03213879

Gruyter.

Chomsky, N. (1986). Barriers. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Chow, W. Y., Lewis, S., and Phillips, C. (2014). Immediate sensitivity to
structural constraints in pronoun resolution. Front. Psychol. 5:630. doi:
10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00630

Choy,

J.

J.,

and Thompson, C. K.

in agrammatic
aphasia: processing to comprehension. Aphasiology 24, 551–579. doi:
10.1080/02687030802634025

(2010). Binding

Nicol,

J., and Swinney, D.

(1989). The role of structure in coreference
assignment during sentence comprehension. J. Psycholinguist. Res. 18, 5–19.
doi: 10.1007/BF01069043

Oberauer, K., and Kliegl, R. (2006). A formal model of capacity limits in working

memory. J. Mem. Lang. 55, 601–626. doi: 10.1016/j.jml.2006.08.009

Osterhout, L., Bersick, M., and McLaughlin,

(1997). Brain potentials
reﬂect violations of gender stereotypes. Mem. Cogn. 25, 273–285. doi:
10.3758/BF03211283

J.

Clackson, K., Felser, C., and Clahsen, H. (2011). Children’s processing of reﬂexives
and pronouns in English: evidence from eye-movements during listening. J.
Mem. Lang. 65, 128–144. doi: 10.1016/j.jml.2011.04.007

Parker, D., and Phillips, C. (2014). “Selective priority for structure in memory
retrieval,” in The 27th Annual CUNY Conference on Human Sentence Processing,
Columbus, OH.

Clifton, C., Staub, A., and Rayner, K. (2007). “Eye movements in reading words
and sentences,” in Eye Movements: A Window on Mind and Brain, ed R. van
Gompel (Amsterdam: Elsevier), 341–372.

Cunnings,

I., and Felser, C.

the processing of
10.1080/01690965.2010.548391

(2013). The role of working memory in
reﬂexives. Lang. Cogn. Process. 28, 188–219. doi:

Cunnings, I., and Sturt, P. (2014). Coargumenthood and the processing of

reﬂexives. J. Mem. Lang. 75, 117–139. doi: 10.1016/j.jml.2014.05.006

Dillon, B., Mishler, A., Sloggett, S., and Phillips, C. (2013). Contrasting intrusion
proﬁles for agreement and anaphora: experimental and modeling evidence. J.
Mem. Lang. 69, 85–103. doi: 10.1016/j.jml.2013.04.003

Engbert, R., and Kliegl, R. (2003). Microsaccades uncover the orientation of covert

attention. Vision Res. 43, 1035–1045. doi: 10.1016/S0042-6989(03)00084-1

Frazier, L. (1979). On Comprehending Sentences: Syntactic Parsing Strategies. PhD

thesis, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA.

Gelman, A., and Hill,

(2007). Data Analysis Using Regression and
Multilevel/Hierarchical Models. New York, NY: Cambridge University
Press.

J.

Gordon, P. C., Hendrick, R., and Johnson, M. (2001). Memory interference during
language processing. J. Exp. Psychol. Learn. Mem. Cogn. 27, 1411–1423. doi:
10.1037/0278-7393.27.6.1411

Gordon, P. C., Hendrick, R., and Johnson, M.

phrase type on sentence complexity.
10.1016/j.jml.2004.02.003

(2004). Eﬀects of noun
J. Mem. Lang. 51, 97–114. doi:

Gordon, P., Hendrick, R., Johnson, M., and Lee, Y. (2006). Similarity-based
interference during language comprehension: evidence from eye tracking
during reading. J. Exp. Psychol. Learn. Mem. Cogn. 32, 1304–1321. doi:
10.1037/0278-7393.32.6.1304

Jäger, L. A., Benz, L., Roeser, J., Dillon, B. W., and Vasishth, S. (2015a). Teasing
apart retrieval and encoding interference in the processing of anaphors. Front.
Psychol. 6:506. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00506

Jäger, L. A., Engelmann, F., and Vasishth, S. (2015b). Retrieval interference
in reﬂexive processing:
and
computational modeling. Front. Psychol. 6:617. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.
00617

from Mandarin,

experimental

evidence

King, J., Andrews, C., and Wagers, M. (2012). “Do reﬂexives always ﬁnd
a grammatical antecedent for themselves?,” in The 25th Annual CUNY
Conference on Human Sentence Processing, New York, NY.

Kreiner, H., Sturt, P., and Garrod, S. (2008). Processing deﬁnitional and
stereotypical gender in reference resolution: evidence from eye-movements. J.
Mem. Lang. 58, 239–261. doi: 10.1016/j.jml.2007.09.003

Lewis, R. L., and Vasishth, S. (2005). An activation-based model of sentence
skilled memory retrieval. Cogn. Sci. 29, 375–419. doi:

processing as
10.1207/s15516709cog0000_25

Lewis, R. L., Vasishth, S., and Van Dyke, J. A. (2006). Computational principles of
working memory in sentence comprehension. Trends Cogn. Sci. 10, 447–454.
doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2006.08.007

Mansbridge, M. P., and Witzel, J. (2012). “Binding accessibility and online
anaphora processing,” in The 25th Annual CUNY Conference on Human
Sentence Processing, New York, NY.

McElree, B.

(2000). Sentence

comprehension is mediated by content-
addressable memory structures. J. Psycholinguist. Res. 29, 111–123. doi:
10.1023/A:1005184709695

Phillips, C., Wagers, M. W., and Lau, E. F. (2011). “Grammatical illusions and
selective fallibility in real-time language comprehension,” in Experiments at the
Interfaces (Syntax and Semantics), Vol. 37, ed J. T. Runner (Bingley: Emerald
Group Publishing Limited), 147–180.

R Development Core Team (2009). R: A Language and Environment for Statistical
Computing. Vienna: R Foundation for Statistical Computing. ISBN: 3-900051-
07-0.

Runner, J. T., and Head, K. D. L. (2014). “What can visual world eye-tracking tell us
about the binding theory?,” in Empirical Issues in Syntax and Semantics 10, ed
C. Piñón (Paris: CSSP—Colloque de Syntaxe et Sémantique à Paris), 269–286.
Runner, J. T., Sussman, R. S., and Tanenhaus, M. K. (2006). Processing
reﬂexives and pronouns in picture noun phrase. Cogn. Sci. 30, 193–241. doi:
10.1207/s15516709cog0000_58

Sturt, P. (2003). The time-course of the application of binding constraints
in reference resolution. J. Mem. Lang. 48, 542–562. doi: 10.1016/S0749-
596X(02)00536-3

Sturt, P., and Kwon, N. (2013). “The processing of raising and nominal control,” in
The 26th Annual CUNY Conference on Human Sentence Processing, Columbia,
SC.

Thompson, C. K., and Choy, J. J. (2009). Pronominal resolution and gap ﬁlling in
agrammatic aphasia: evidence from eye movements. J. Psycholinguist. Res. 38,
255–283. doi: 10.1007/s10936-009-9105-7

Van Dyke,

J. A., and McElree, B. (2011). Cue-dependent

interference in

comprehension. J. Mem. Lang. 65, 247–263. doi: 10.1016/j.jml.2011.05.002

Vasishth, S., Brüssow, S., Lewis, R. L., and Drenhaus, H. (2008). Processing polarity:
how the ungrammatical intrudes on the grammatical. Cogn. Sci. 32, 685–712.
doi: 10.1080/03640210802066865

Vasishth, S., and Lewis, R. L. (2006). Argument-head distance and processing
complexity: explaining both locality and antilocality eﬀects. Language 82,
767–794. doi: 10.1353/lan.2006.0236

Vasishth, S., von der Malsburg, T., and Engelmann, F. (2013). What eye movements
can tell us about sentence comprehension. Wiley Interdisc. Rev. Cogn. Sci. 4,
125–134. doi: 10.1002/wcs.1209

Wagers, M. W., Lau, E. F., and Phillips, C. (2009). Agreement attraction in
comprehension: representations and processes. J. Mem. Lang. 61, 206–237. doi:
10.1016/j.jml.2009.04.002

Wong, T. J., Cokel, E. T., and Schooler, L. J. (2010). An Online Database of ACT-
R Parameters: Towards a Transparent Community-Based Approach to Model.
Philadelphia, PA: Drexel University.

Xiang, M., Dillon, B., and Phillips, C.

Illusory licensing eﬀects
across dependency types: ERP evidence. Brain Lang. 108, 40–55. doi:
10.1016/j.bandl.2008.10.002

(2009).

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest.

Copyright © 2016 Patil, Vasishth and Lewis. This is an open-access article distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use,
distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original
author(s) or licensor are credited and that the original publication in this journal
is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or
reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

18

May 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 329

