The EMBO Journal Vol.18 No.14 pp.4023–4034, 1999

PLENA and FARINELLI: redundancy and regulatory
interactions between two Antirrhinum MADS-box
factors controlling ﬂower development

Brendan Davies1, Patrick Motte2,3,
Emma Keck4, Heinz Saedler2,
Hans Sommer2 and
Zsuzsanna Schwarz-Sommer2

Leeds Institute for Plant Biotechnology and Agriculture,
University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, 4Department of Genetics,
John Innes Centre, Norwich NR4 7UH, UK and 2Max Planck Institut
fu¨r Zu¨chtungsforschung, Carl-von-Linne´ Weg 10, 50829 Ko¨ln,
Germany
3Present address: Department of Plant Biology, University of Lie`ge,
B-4000 Lie`ge, Belgium
1Corresponding author

We report the discovery of an Antirrhinum MADS-box
gene, FARINELLI (FAR), and the isolation of far
mutants by a reverse genetic screen. Despite striking
similarities between FAR and the class C MADS-box
gene PLENA (PLE), the phenotypes of their respective
mutants are dramatically different. Unlike ple mutants,
which show homeotic conversion of reproductive
organs
to perianth organs and a loss of ﬂoral
determinacy, far mutants have normal ﬂowers which
are partially male-sterile. Expression studies of PLE
and FAR, in wild-type and mutant backgrounds, show
complex interactions between the two genes. Double
mutant analysis reveals an unexpected, redundant
negative control over the B-function MADS-box genes.
This feature of the two Antirrhinum C-function-like
genes is markedly different from the control of the
inner boundary of the B-function expression domain
in Arabidopsis, and we propose and discuss a model
to account for these differences. The difference in
phenotypes of mutants in two highly related genes
illustrates the importance of the position within the
regulatory network in determining gene function.
Keywords: ﬂoral determinacy/homeotic mutants/MADS-
box/male sterility/regulatory network

Introduction
The study of Antirrhinum and Arabidopsis ﬂoral homeotic
mutants produced a simple combinatorial model to explain
how the regulated expression of a few genes could
determine the organ composition of the ﬂower (Coen
and Meyerowitz, 1991). The model proposes that three
functions are expressed in adjacent, overlapping whorls
such that the A-function is expressed in whorls 1 and 2,
the B-function in whorls 2 and 3, and the C-function in
whorls 3 and 4. Expression of the A-function alone
determines sepal development, co-expression of the A-
and B-functions or the B- and C-functions speciﬁes petals
or stamens, respectively, and expression of the C-function
alone results in carpel development. In B-function mutants,

reproductive organs.

petals and stamens are replaced by sepals and carpels,
In C-function mutants, perianth organs
respectively.
develop in place of
In both
Antirrhinum and Arabidopsis, a single C-function and two
B-function genes have been identiﬁed and shown to encode
MADS-box transcription factors (Sommer et al., 1990;
Yanofsky et al., 1990; Jack et al., 1992; Tro¨bner et al.,
1992; Bradley et al., 1993; Goto and Meyerowitz, 1994).
The MADS-box family is deﬁned by the presence of a
58 amino acid domain which is conserved between the
founding members; MCM1 (yeast), AGAMOUS and
DEFICIENS (plants) and SRF (animals) (Schwarz-Sommer
et al., 1990). Although MADS-box genes have been identi-
ﬁed and characterized in animals and yeasts (Shore and
Sharrocks, 1995), they are found most extensively in plants
(Theissen et al., 1996, Liljegren et al., 1998). The ⬎200
known plant MADS-factors, from many different species,
have been divided into sub-families based mainly on their
predicted amino acid sequences (Doyle, 1994; Purugganan
et al., 1995; Theissen et al., 1996). Often, genes from
different species which fall into one of these sub-families
have similar expression patterns and similar roles in
development. For example,
the B-function genes of
Antirrhinum [DEFICIENS (DEF) and GLOBOSA (GLO)]
and Arabidopsis [APETALA3 (AP3) and PISTILLATA (PI)]
are expressed mainly in the second and third whorls and
show similar mutant phenotypes. Similarly, the C-function
genes of Antirrhinum [PLENA (PLE)] and Arabidopsis
[AGAMOUS (AG)] are expressed in the third and fourth
whorls and show similar mutant phenotypes. Currently
identiﬁed functions of the MADS-box gene family include
the control of organ identity (see above), ﬂowering time
(Sheldon et al., 1999), meristem identity (Huijser et al.,
1992; Mandel et al., 1992; Kempin et al., 1995), regulation
of ovule development (Angenent et al., 1995), regulation
of fruit development (Gu et al., 1998) and control of root
architecture (Zhang and Forde, 1998).

Here we report the isolation of a novel Antirrhinum
MADS-box gene, FARINELLI (FAR), and a recessive far
mutant. We show that all our current criteria identify FAR
as a second C-function gene. However, far mutants display
none of the typical features of C-function mutants and
instead show reduced male fertility. Furthermore, the ple/
far double mutant reveals that PLE and FAR act redundantly
to prevent expression of the B-function genes, DEF and
GLO, in the fourth whorl. We propose a model for the
interactions of PLE and FAR and show that two crucial
differences could account for the variation in single and
double
in
Antirrhinum and Arabidopsis.

homeotic mutant

phenotypes

observed

Results
IsolationofasecondAntirrhinumC-functiongene
To identify further members of the MADS-box gene
family, an Antirrhinum ﬂoral cDNA library was screened

© European Molecular Biology Organization

4023

B.Davies etal.

Fig. 1. Sequence analysis of FAR. (A) The predicted amino acid sequences of AG, PLE and FAR were aligned using MacVector. For the purposes of
this alignment, AG was truncated at its N-terminal end. Identical residues are shown boxed and shaded. Gaps have been introduced to maximize
alignment. The MADS-box is underlined. MADS-box factors which are known to control similar processes in different species have been noted to
share a short stretch of amino acid identity at their C-terminal ends (Hansen et al., 1993). AG, PLE and FAR share the sequence LQLV in this
position. (B) Schematic diagram of the exons (boxes) and introns (lines) of the PLE and FAR genes. Shading within the boxes signiﬁes coding
regions. The information concerning PLE was compiled from Bradley et al. (1993) and from our sequence data (B.Davies and H.Sommer,
unpublished). The small shaded boxes in the second introns signify the position of the conserved sequence referred to in the text. (C) C-function
factor sequences from Antirrhinum (Bradley et al., 1993), Arabidopsis (Yanofsky et al., 1990), petunia (Tsuchimoto et al., 1993; Angenent et al.,
1994), tobacco (Kempin et al., 1993), cucumber (Kater et al., 1998) and maize (Mena et al., 1996) were collected and analysed by the GCG pileup
program (Devereux et al., 1984).

using the Arabidopsis C-function gene AG (Yanofsky
et al., 1990) as a probe. Sixteen strongly hybridizing
clones which did not correspond to PLE were identiﬁed,
and DNA sequence analysis showed that they were derived
from the MADS-box gene, FAR, which is closely related to,
but distinct from, PLE (Bradley et al., 1993) (Figure 1A). A
FAR probe was used to screen an Antirrhinum genomic
library and the DNA sequence of 7 kb spanning the FAR
coding region was determined. The FAR gene, like PLE,
comprises nine exons, the ﬁrst of which is non-coding
(Figure 1B). In both cases, the MADS-box is encoded by

the second exon and is preceded by 16 or 17 amino acids
(Figure 1A). This N-terminal extension is a characteristic
of C-function homeotic MADS-box factors, such as PLE
and AG, and related proteins such as AGL1 and AGL5
(Ma et al., 1991). Within the MADS-box, each pair of
factors is 95% identical and, over the entire protein
sequence there is 64–67% identity (Figure 1A). Thus,
based on the functions of the most closely related genes,
it appeared likely that FAR is a C-function factor involved
in determining the identity of the ﬂoral reproductive
organs. Another feature of the C-function genes, which is

4024

also shared by FAR, is the presence of a large intron after
the MADS-box-containing second exon (Figure 1B). There
is evidence to suggest that this intron contains regulatory
elements which contribute to the control of spatial and
temporal expression of PLE and AG (Bradley et al., 1993;
Sieburth and Meyerowitz, 1997). We note the presence of a
70 bp sequence (3581–3650 in the FAR genomic sequence),
including a direct repeat of the sequence CCAATCA,
which is 60% identical between sequences in this intron
of FAR (AJ239057), PLE (D.Bradley, R.Carpenter and
E.Coen, unpublished), AG (ATF13C5) and PTAG1
(AF052570), suggesting a possible role for this sequence
in the negative regulation of C-function gene expression
(Figure 1B).

Two types of FAR cDNA were identiﬁed in the cDNA
library at different frequencies. The DNA sequence and
predicted amino acid-coding potential of the rarer of the
two cDNAs was identical to the more common cDNA
except for an insertion of four codons (QQLF inserted
between amino acids 103 and 104). Comparison of the
cDNA and genomic sequences revealed that the rarer
variant is derived from differential splicing which makes
use of an alternative splice acceptor site within the third
intron. PCR analysis of this region from the 16 independent
FAR cDNA clones showed that four utilized the alternative
splice site. The variation occurs within a region of the
MADS-box protein known as the I-domain (Ma et al.,
1991), the length and sequence composition of which
have been postulated to affect
the heterodimerization
speciﬁcity amongst MADS-box transcription factors
(Huang et al., 1996). It is not known what, if any, function
is served by the inclusion of an additional four amino
acids in a minor variant of FAR, but it remains possible
that the presence of two forms of FAR alters its hetero-
dimerization potential.

tobacco and Antirrhinum,

Two C-function-like genes have been isolated from
several species including Antirrhinum (Bradley et al., 1993;
this report), petunia (Angenent et al., 1993; Tsuchimoto
et al., 1993), tobacco (Kempin et al., 1993; H.Sommer,
unpublished), cucumber (Kater et al., 1998) and maize
(Schmidt et al., 1993; Theissen et al., 1995; Mena et al.,
1996). In petunia,
the two
C-function-like factors form sub-families; FBP6, NTPLE
and PLE form one sub-family and NAG, PMADS3 and
FAR form the other (Figure 1C). AG is most closely
related to the FAR family. One of the two cucumber
factors, CUM1, falls into the same sub-family as AG,
whereas the other, CUM10, does not ﬁt into either sub-
family. It has been suggested that the two maize genes
ZAG1 and ZMM2 are members of a split C-function, each
performing a separate role in ﬂoral organ development
(Mena et al., 1996). However, since they are more related
to each other than to members of the two dicot sub-
is likely that a split C-function evolved
families,
independently in maize. Discussion of
the apparent
implications of these observations for the evolution of
class C genes and the splitting and/or switching of their
role in the control of different aspects of the C-function
is beyond the scope of this report. We shall focus rather
on developmental implications, since Antirrhinum is the
ﬁrst species in which mutants for both C-function genes
have been identiﬁed and where the contribution of each

it

Redundancy and regulation between two MADS-box factors

gene to the C-function can be studied independently and
in combination.

ComparisonofPLEandFARexpressionpatterns
Initial Northern blot and in situ hybridization experiments
suggested that the expression patterns of PLE and FAR
were identical, in that both are expressed in the third
and fourth whorls (not shown). However, more detailed
analysis, using sequential sections reveals slight differ-
ences in their expression patterns. At stage 4, when
expression of PLE ﬁrst becomes apparent (Bradley et al.,
1993), the expression patterns of PLE and FAR are very
similar (Figure 2A and C). Differences become apparent
by stage 6 when PLE expression is detected in the
developing stamen and the carpel primordia (Figure 2B).
FAR expression is also observed in these tissues and at
the lower border of PLE expression in a bowl-shaped
region linking the stamen primordia (Figure 2D). At
late stages of development, PLE and FAR show distinct
expression patterns (Figure 2E and F). In the anther, PLE
transcripts become localized to the region of the stomium
(arrowed in Figure 2E) whereas FAR is expressed pre-
dominantly in the connective. In the gynoecium, PLE is
expressed mainly in the developing ovules and to a lesser
extent in the placenta and carpel wall (Figure 2E). In
contrast, FAR expression is weaker in the developing
ovules and stronger in the placenta (Figure 2F).

To investigate the possibility that PLE controls the
expression of FAR, in situ hybridization experiments were
carried out using two PLE mutant alleles; ple-1, a loss-
of-function ple mutant, and Ple-888, a gain-of-function
ple mutant in which PLE is ectopically expressed. At
stage 6, PLE expression, which is conﬁned to whorls 3
and 4 in wild-type ﬂowers (Figure 2B), is detected strongly
in all whorls of the Ple-888 mutant (Figure 2G). PLE
expression can be seen on the inner surface of the organs
of the ﬁrst whorl (which will become carpeloid) and in
the second whorl organs (which will become staminoid).
In contrast, at this stage, little FAR transcription can be
detected in the outer whorls of Ple-888 mutant ﬂowers
(Figure 2H). In mature Ple-888 ﬂower buds, PLE tran-
scripts are still detected in all ﬂoral organs (Figure 2I),
and ectopic expression of FAR mimics that of PLE
(Figure 2J). Thus, ectopic FAR expression is induced by
ectopic expression of PLE, but there is a delay in the
induction of FAR. This delay could indicate that
the
induction of FAR by PLE is indirect and relies on a PLE-
dependent alteration of organ identity, or that PLE can
only induce FAR expression in combination with other,
later expressed factors. Alternatively, induction of FAR
expression could require higher levels of PLE than are
present at early stages of development of the outer organs
in Ple-888 mutants.

That PLE expression is not absolutely required for the
induction of FAR can be seen by studying the transcription
of FAR in ple mutants. ple-1 ﬂowers show all the character-
istics of a loss of C-function: reproductive organs are
replaced by perianth organs and the ﬂower becomes
indeterminate and produces many internal whorls of organs
(Figure 3F and G). Although these ﬂowers have no
stamens or carpels, reduced FAR expression can be detected
in all whorls internal to the second (Figure 2K and L).
ple-1 is not a null allele and occasionally produces a small

4025

B.Davies etal.

PLE is required for full expression of FAR and can induce
ectopic FAR expression at later stages.

Protein–proteininteractions
The similarities between FAR and other C-function genes
suggested a role in the determination of reproductive
organ identity. However, the fact that FAR expression
is observed in ple mutants lacking reproductive organs
indicated that FAR cannot substitute for PLE. To discover
a molecular basis for the failure of two such similar
proteins to provoke the same developmental response, we
analysed their protein–protein interactions as detected in
a yeast two-hybrid assay. We previously had identiﬁed
four MADS-box factors (SQUA, DEFH49, DEFH200 and
DEFH72) that interact with PLE (Davies et al., 1996b).
A similar screen was carried out with full-length FAR as
bait. Ten colonies which passed all the controls were
identiﬁed from 3.5⫻106 primary transformants (Table I).
Eight of the positives corresponded to DEFH200, one to
SQUA and one to DEFH49. As was the case with the
screens involving PLE, we did not identify any other
interacting MADS-box factors, such as those of the
B-function, and neither did we identify PLE or FAR
as FAR-interacting proteins. Subsequent cross-testing of
interactions by introducing pairs of cloned MADS-box
genes in the appropriate vectors into yeast also failed to
ﬁnd any evidence for interaction between FAR and FAR,
PLE, DEF, GLO or DEFH72, although they conﬁrmed
the interactions with DEFH200, SQUA and DEFH49
(Table II).

These experiments suggest

that differences in the
activity of PLE and FAR are unlikely to result from
absolute differences in their potential to interact with other
MADS-box factors, unless the apparent inability of FAR
to interact with DEFH72 makes a signiﬁcant difference
to its ability to induce developmental changes. Further
experiments will be required to determine if this differen-
tial interaction is responsible for the difference in activity.
Although only a single potential difference in protein–
protein interactions was detected, subtle alterations in the
stability of the heterodimers formed between the common
partners and FAR or PLE and/or in their DNA-binding
afﬁnity or speciﬁcity cannot be excluded.

Fig. 2. In situ analysis of PLE and FAR expression in wild-type and
mutant ﬂowers. Sections in the left hand column, with the exception of
(K), were probed with PLE (A, B, E, G and I). All sections in the
right hand column were probed with FAR (C, D, F, H, J and L). Serial
sections of stage 4 (A and C), stage 6 (B and D) and mature (E and
F) wild-type ﬂoral buds are shown. Sections of Ple-888, a semi-
dominant mutant in which PLE is ectopically expressed, are shown at
stage 6 (G and H) and mature stages (I and J). Sections through a
mature ﬂower bud of the recessive ple-1 mutant are shown
unhybridized (K) and hybridized with FAR (L). Developmental stages
were deﬁned according to Carpenter et al. (1995) and Zachgo et al.
(1995). Whorls are numbered and bracts (b) are indicated where
appropriate.

amount of pollen on the third whorl petals. In a ple null
mutant background, FAR expression is reduced further,
but not abolished (not shown). Thus expression of FAR is
not dependent on PLE although, directly or indirectly,

4026

Ectopicexpressionanalysisintransgenicplants
As a ﬁrst step to identify a function for the FAR gene in
wild-type ﬂower development, it was expressed under the
control of a constitutive promoter, in tobacco plants. It
has been shown previously that 35S::PLE tobacco plants
show the typical features of ectopic C-function expression
(Davies et al., 1996a). The plants are normal until ﬂower-
ing, when they produce abnormal ﬂowers with carpeloid
organs in the ﬁrst whorl and stamenoid organs in the
second whorl, although the homeotic conversion of the
second whorl organs is less complete than that of the ﬁrst
whorl organs. Figure 3B shows a typical ﬂower of a
35S::PLE tobacco plant with a dramatic conversion of the
ﬁrst whorl sepals towards carpeloidy (compare with wild-
type ﬂower in Figure 3A). In contrast, the ﬁrst whorl
sepals of 35S::FAR ﬂowers are often completely normal,
but sometimes grow to be slightly larger than is usual in
the wild-type and show slight carpeloidy. The organs of
the second whorl show a much more complete transition

Redundancy and regulation between two MADS-box factors

Fig. 3. Phenotypic analysis of ectopic expression of PLE and FAR in tobacco and loss of FAR function in Antirrhinum ﬂowers. Representative
tobacco ﬂowers are shown from wild-type (A), 35S::PLE (B) and 35S::FAR (C) plants. The normal anthers of wild-type Antirrhinum ﬂowers (D) are
compared with the empty, slightly shrunken anthers found in far mutant ﬂowers (E). The phenotype of the ple-1 single mutant ﬂowers with the
second (F) or second and third (G) whorls removed to reveal the inner organs. The phenotype of the ple-1/def-nic double mutant (H and I) is
shown, with the second and third, or second, third and fourth whorls removed to reveal the sepals in the ﬁrst whorl (‘1’) and petaloid organs in the
second whorl (‘2’) of the internal ﬂower. The arrow indicates the pedicel inside the fourth whorl. Flowers of the ple-1/far double mutant are shown
without organs internal to whorl 3 (J) or with second and third whorls removed (K). The whorls are numbered. Flowers in (D), (E) and (F) are
shown in front view, (G), (J) and (K) from the back, and (H) and (I) from the side.

to stamens than is seen in 35S::PLE ﬂowers (Figure 3C).
Pollen collected from second whorl anthers of 35S::FAR
plants has been used successfully in crosses. The ﬁlaments
of the second whorl stamens are often ﬂattened and
slightly petaloid. No abnormalities were observed in the
third and fourth whorls or in the vegetative tissues. These
experiments suggested that
the two C-function genes
might play distinct and complementary roles in ﬂower
development, with PLE mainly involved in female repro-
ductive organ development and FAR mainly involved in the
development of male reproductive organs. Representative
35S::PLE plants were crossed with 35S::FAR plants and the
progeny analysed. Purely additive effects were observed in
the double transgenics; the plants showed the strong ﬁrst
whorl carpeloidy seen in 35S::PLE lines combined with
strong second whorl staminoidy typical of 35S::FAR plants

Table I. Results of the two-hybrid library screen

Bait

HF7c(BD/FAR)

Trans-
formants
screened
3.5⫻106

His⫹
colonies
picked

450

LacZ⫹
colonies

Speciﬁc
interactions

33

10

Table II. Testing for interaction between known factors

PLE FAR SQUA

DEFH49 DEFH200 DEFH72 DEF GLO

PLE –
FAR –

–
–

⫹
⫹

⫹
⫹

⫹
⫹

⫹
–

–
–

–
–

4027

B.Davies etal.

Fig. 4. Transposon insertion mutants in the FAR gene. (A) A genomic
map of the FAR gene is shown indicating the sites and orientation of
integration of the transposon Tam3 in each of the two independent
mutants far-1 and far-2. The integration in far-2 is associated with a
deletion which includes exon 3. (B) A Northern blot of mRNA
isolated from wild-type (lane 1) and homozygous far-2 (lane 2) ﬂower
buds was probed with FAR and ACTIN as a loading control. The large
faint upper band in the lane probed with FAR probably derives from
transcriptional readthrough into the transposon.

(not shown). Whether the phenotypic differences between
the 35S::PLE and 35S::FAR transgenic plants result from
the absence of their heterodimerization partners or from
their inappropriate expression pattern or altered interaction
potential in tobacco with the Antirrhinum proteins was
not pursued.

Screeningfortransposoninsertions
Sequence analysis and yeast two-hybrid experiments had
shown similarity between PLE and FAR, yet in situ and
transgenic studies suggested that the two genes may play
different roles in ﬂower development. Furthermore, large-
scale Antirrhinum mutagenesis programmes consistently
had failed to produce a C-function-like mutant which was
not allelic with ple, providing further evidence that the
developmental role of FAR was not analogous to that of
PLE. In order to resolve these questions, a reverse genetic
PCR-based approach was taken to identify transposon
insertions in the FAR gene. Pools of DNA (E.Keck,
R.Carpenter and E.Coen, unpublished results) were
screened by PCR, leading to the identiﬁcation of two
individual plants, far-1 (Stock No. JIT2) and far-2 (Stock
No. JIT3), with insertions of
the transposon Tam3
(Figure 4A). The positions and orientation of the Tam3
insertions were mapped by PCR using gene-speciﬁc
primers and primers speciﬁc for the right and left borders.
In both cases, the orientation of the Tam3 element was
the same, with the left border of the element towards the
5⬘ end of the FAR gene, an orientation which previously
has resulted in loss of gene function, even when insertion
has occurred within introns (Bradley et al., 1993). Both
insertions were within the large second intron, with the
insertion in far-1 being further towards the 5⬘ end than
that in far-2. The insertion in far-2 is associated with a
deletion which has removed part of the coding region

4028

(Figure 4A). Southern blot analysis of the two plants
conﬁrmed the insertion of foreign DNA into the FAR gene
(not shown). far-2 homozygous plants were crossed with
wild-type, the resulting F1 plants were selfed and co-
segregation of the far mutant phenotype with the far-2
mutant allele was observed in the segregating F2 population
grown at low temperature. Loss of expression of the FAR
gene was shown for the homozygous far-2 plants by
Northern blot analysis (Figure 4B). In far-2 mutant plants,
the FAR transcript
is undetectable, although the actin
control demonstrates the integrity of the RNA.

Phenotypeoffarmutants
The two far mutant plants showed identical developmental
abnormalities and,
therefore, only far-2 was used for
further morphological and genetic studies. In contrast to
our expectations, homeotic changes were not observed
and the plants developed normally. Close inspection of
the mutant ﬂowers revealed a variable degree of male
sterility. The anthers of homozygous far mutant plants,
particularly when grown under warmer conditions,
appeared white (at early stages) or brown (at later stages)
and were slightly shrunken (Figure 3E). At lower temper-
atures, some pollen was formed in the mutant anthers but
always less than was seen in wild-type control plants.
Pollen development appears normal up to the early stages
of microspore development when callose begins to sur-
round the microspores. After this, a variable range of
defects appear, ranging from apparently normal develop-
ment to complete degradation of microspores and tapetal
cells (not shown). In extreme cases, the locules are either
completely empty or contain some empty, microspore-like
structures surrounded by a ﬁlamentous material, which
might be the remains of degenerated tapetal cells. Occa-
sionally, normal, fertile anthers were formed on far mutant
plants. When this happened, it was usually the upper pair
which were normal, whilst the lower pair often remained
empty, suggesting that the developmental process con-
trolled by FAR is also inﬂuenced by the ﬂoral symmetry
genes (Luo et al., 1996).

The male-sterile phenotype of far plants is similar to a
pre-existing Antirrhinum mutant, albidiﬂora (albi). In
order to test whether albi is also caused by a defect in
FAR, the FAR gene was PCR ampliﬁed from homozygous
and heterozygous albi plants and wild-type sisters, all of
which were derived from selﬁng the progeny of a cross
between albi (in a Si50 background) and the wild-type
165E. A FAR polymorphism was detected by digesting
the resulting PCR fragment with the enzyme AluI. The
polymorphism did not co-segregate with the albi mutation,
showing that, although similar in phenotype, albi and far
are unlinked (data not shown). Thus, far represents a
novel male-sterile mutant.

ExpressionofPLEinfarmutantplants
Since far mutants appear morphologically normal, with
the exception of empty anthers, it was likely that PLE
expression would also be normal in far mutants. However,
in situ hybridization experiments revealed that
in the
absence of FAR, the expression pattern of PLE expands.
PLE expression, which is conﬁned to the region of the
stomium in the mature wild-type anthers (Figures 5A and

Redundancy and regulation between two MADS-box factors

expression pattern in far mutants suggests that FAR nega-
tively regulates PLE. It is possible that in far mutants the
expansion of the PLE expression domain, into tissues
which would normally express FAR in wild-type ﬂowers,
compensates for the loss of FAR activity.

Geneticanalysisoffarmutants
ple-1/far double mutants were constructed and analysed.
Superﬁcial examination of the double mutants suggested
that ple-1 is epistatic to far since,
like ple (Bradley
et al., 1993), ple-1/far ﬂowers are indeterminate and show
homeotic conversion of reproductive organs to perianth
organs. However, more detailed investigation of the organs
produced in the third and fourth whorls of ple-1 and ple-1/
far ﬂowers revealed a surprising interaction between the
two genes. The third whorl of ple-1 mutant ﬂowers consists
of laterally non-fused petaloid organs which resemble
stamens in that their lower part is ﬁlament-like and narrow
and the upper part is slightly broadened and ﬂag-like
(Figure 3F). In contrast, the upper part of the third whorl
organs of the ple-1/far double mutant are broader and the
organs fully or partially fuse to the second whorl at their
lower part, similarly to a ple null mutant (Figure 3J). This
more pronounced petaloid morphology of ple-1/far double
mutants compared with ple-1 mutants suggests that
although FAR is unable to compensate for the loss of PLE,
it still plays some positive role in stamen organ identity.
A more dramatic effect of FAR on organ identity is
observed in the fourth whorl. In ple-1 mutants, the degree
and kind of homeotic fourth whorl
transformation is
variable (Figure 3F and G), but usually two to three
sepaloid/petaloid/carpeloid organs are formed. Within this
whorl, another mutant ﬂower develops to a variable extent
(Figure 3G), initiated by slightly sepaloid petals composed
of a mixture of petal and sepal tissue. This sepaloid feature
is observed more easily in the double mutant between
ple-1 and a weak allele of deﬁciens, def-nic (Schwarz-
Sommer et al., 1992). In the ple-1/def-nic double mutant,
the fourth whorl consists of two sepaloid carpels and,
internal to them, borne on a pedicel, a new ﬂower is
initiated by a whorl or spiral of ﬁve or more sepals
(Figure 3H and I), followed by petals with morphological
features characteristic of def-nic second whorl organs
(Figure 3I). In contrast, the fourth whorl of ple-1/far
mutant ﬂowers consists of four to ﬁve petals forming a
tube and corolla similar to the second whorl petals,
followed by further spirally arranged petals (Figure 3K).
Thus, in the double mutant, both the identity and the
number of organs produced in the fourth whorl are altered.
Since petal organ identity in Antirrhinum is determined
by the expression of the B-function genes DEF and GLO,
it seemed likely that the conversion of the fourth whorl
to petals in ple/far double mutants resulted from ectopic
expression of DEF and GLO. To test this, in situ experi-
ments were carried out on ple and ple/far double mutant
ﬂowers using DEF and GLO as probes. At stage 4,
expression of both DEF and GLO in ple-1 buds is similar
to that normally observed in wild-type buds (Figure 5C
and E). At the same stage in the ple-1/far double mutant,
expression of both genes is markedly stronger, although
the tissue speciﬁcity is maintained; GLO is conﬁned mainly
to the developing second and third whorls (Figure 5F) and
DEF is clearly detectable in the inner three whorls

4029

Fig. 5. Comparison of the in situ expression patterns of PLE, DEF and
GLO in wild-type and mutant ﬂowers. Sections of mature wild-type
and far mutant buds were probed with PLE (A and B). Serial sections
of early and late stages of ple and ple/far mutant ﬂower buds were
probed with DEF (left hand column, C, D, G and I) and GLO (right
hand column, E, F, H and J). The stages used were: stage 4 (C–F) and
late stage 6 (G–J). Whorls are numbered as in Figure 2.

2E), can now be detected throughout the anther, in a
pattern which looks like the superimposition of the expres-
sion patterns of FAR and PLE (compare Figures 2E and
F, and 5B). Similarly, in the carpel, expression of PLE,
which had been detectable mainly around the developing
ovules in the wild-type (Figures 5A and 2E), is now much
stronger and spread throughout the carpel wall and placenta
(Figure 5B). This increase and expansion of the PLE

B.Davies etal.

(Figure 5D). In mature ple-1 ﬂower buds, the expression
pattern is maintained, DEF being expressed mainly in the
second and third whorls, reduced in the fourth whorl
(arrowed in Figure 5G) and increased again in internal
whorls. Expression of GLO in mature ple buds is similar
to that of DEF, but as in younger stages, GLO transcripts
are less detectable in the fourth whorl than are those of
DEF (Figure 5H). In the ple-1/far double mutant, the
reduced expression of DEF and GLO in the fourth whorl
is no longer apparent and both transcripts are strongly
expressed in the organs internal to the ﬁrst whorl (Figure 5I
and J, fourth whorl arrowed in I). Thus, PLE and FAR act
independently to prevent the expression of the B-function
in the fourth whorl.

Discussion
ThedevelopmentalroleofFAR
In Antirrhinum, two MADS-box genes, PLE and FAR,
share typical features of C-function genes,
including
gene organization, sequence similarity and protein–protein
interaction potential. In ple mutant ﬂowers (Bradley et al.,
1993), the reproductive organs are converted homeotically
to perianth organs, and further perianth organs develop
inside the fourth whorl (Figure 3F and G). PLE is therefore
required to specify the identity of the stamens and carpels
and to confer ﬂoral determinacy. In the newly isolated far
mutant,
the only apparent phenotype is a failure to
complete normal pollen development. Analysis of ple/far
double mutants reveals an unexpected interaction between
the two genes and demonstrates that they are partially
redundant. In ple single mutants, the fourth whorl develops
as two sepaloid/carpeloid/petaloid organs (Figure 3G). In
contrast, the fourth whorl organs of ple/far double mutants
develop as four or ﬁve well-formed petals (Figure 3J and
K). Furthermore, the B-function genes, DEF and GLO,
which normally are mostly excluded from the fourth
whorl, become ectopically expressed there in the ple/far
double mutant (Figure 5I and J). Since the B-function
genes are largely conﬁned to the second and third whorls
in both ple and far single mutants, it seems that PLE and
FAR are redundant with respect to their ability to exclude
the B-function genes from the fourth whorl. In addition,
combination of a weak ple allele with far enhanced third
whorl petaloidy, suggesting a role for FAR in the control
of wild-type stamen identity.

The relative contribution of each gene to the develop-
ment of the reproductive organs is more difﬁcult to assess.
FAR is incapable of substituting for the organ identity
function of PLE, since no reproductive organs are formed
in ple mutants even though FAR is expressed. FAR is
involved in pollen development, but the small amount of
pollen which occasionally is produced in far mutant
anthers shows that it is not absolutely required. In contrast,
PLE can direct the formation of male and female reproduc-
tive organs in far mutants, although the anthers are
frequently empty. It could be that PLE, perhaps indirectly,
leads to the production of the limited amount of pollen
found in far mutants. Conversely, it could be the expansion
of PLE expression within the developing anthers of far
mutants which is responsible for the failure to undergo
normal pollen development. The phenotypic effect of the
loss of FAR function could be limited because PLE

4030

expression expands in far mutants. In contrast, in ple
mutants, FAR expression decreases and cannot compensate
for the loss of PLE. This dependence of FAR on the
expression of PLE is circumvented in transgenic plants
where FAR is controlled by the 35S promoter. Indeed,
ectopic expression of Antirrhinum FAR in transgenic
tobacco plants is sufﬁcient to cause the development of
stamens in the second whorl of tobacco ﬂowers. Pre-
liminary results with transgenic Antirrhinum plants conﬁrm
this, although the extent of homeotic transformation of
the ﬁrst and second whorls is less pronounced (I.Heidmann,
Z.Schwarz-Sommer and B.Davies, unpublished). In sum-
mary, FAR appears capable of functions similar to those
of PLE, but this is not apparent in the single mutants
because of the regulatory interactions between the two
genes.

these indicators,

Fromsequencetofunction
Various criteria have been used to assign MADS-box
genes to sub-groupings within the family. These include
overall sequence similarity, the presence of speciﬁc amino
acid residues at characteristic positions within the MADS-
domain, the length of the I-region, the presence or absence
of an N-terminal extension and a high degree of amino
acid sequence identity amongst the ﬁve or six C-terminal
amino acids. It has been supposed that some of these
indicators could be used to suggest functions for newly
discovered MADS-box genes (Theissen et al., 1996). In
the case of FAR,
together with the
expression pattern, suggested a typical C-function gene.
Ectopic expression experiments supported this, since
homeotic conversions of petals to stamens were observed,
although the more typical sepal to carpel conversions were
not apparent. Yeast two-hybrid screens for proteins capable
of interacting with FAR resulted in the isolation of almost
exactly the same subset of cDNAs as was identiﬁed when
the known C-function factor PLE was used in similar
experiments. From our understanding of the C-function,
it would therefore be expected that a loss-of-function far
mutant should result in homeotic conversion of the perianth
to reproductive organs and a loss of ﬂoral determinacy.
In fact, the far single mutants showed no homeotic changes
and no effects on determinacy. The defect in male fertility,
which is the only change apparent in far mutants, could
not have been predicted from either the sequence classi-
ﬁcation of FAR or from any of the subsequent biochemical
experiments. It also could not have been predicted that
mutation of the FAR gene would lead, in a ple mutant
background, to alterations in organ identity and number
in whorls which are unaffected in far single mutants. The
complications which obscured the developmental role of
FAR in Antirrhinum, redundancy and regulatory inter-
action, have been observed for other MADS-box genes
(Bowman et al., 1993; Liljegren et al., 1998) and demon-
strate that the developmental role of a gene is dependent
on both its primary sequence and its position within the
regulatory hierarchy. The implication of this result is that
it will be impossible to determine the developmental role
of other members of the MADS-box gene family unless
the appropriate mutants and mutant combinations are ﬁrst
isolated. Caution will be needed when interpreting the
effects of ectopic expression of MADS-box genes, especi-
ally when inferring their functions from heterologous

Redundancy and regulation between two MADS-box factors

Fig. 6. Differences between homeotic mutants of Antirrhinum and Arabidopsis. (A) A comparative schematic representation of the mutants and
double mutants of Arabidopsis (right) and Antirrhinum (left) referred to in the text. The whorls are numbered to highlight the differences between
the Arabidopsis and Antirrhinum B-function mutants (pistillata, apetala3, globosa and deﬁciens) and C-function mutants (agamous and plena). The
mutant phenotypes are described as follows: Arabidopsis ag (Bowman et al., 1991), pi (Jack et al., 1992), ap3 (Goto et al., 1994), sup, sup/ag, sup/
ap3, sup/pi (Schultz et al., 1991; Bowman et al., 1992), and Antirrhinum ple (Bradley et al., 1993; this report), def, glo (Schwarz-Sommer et al.,
1992; Tro¨bner et al., 1992), far, ple/far (this report). (B) A model to explain the observed differences in phenotypes in terms of regulatory gene
activity in the third and fourth whorls. B-function expression is shown in yellow, SUP (OCT in Antirrhinum) is shown at the boundary of the third
whorl in grey and C-function expression (AG in Arabidopsis, PLE and FAR in Antirrhinum) is shown in light blue. The barred lines leading from the
C-functions towards the circle indicate that the C-function represses production of a new whorl and causes termination. The barred lines leading
from the B-function and from SUP/OCT indicate that they act to prevent C-function-dependent termination. The arrow and barred line between PLE
and FAR indicate that PLE activates FAR and FAR represses PLE. Arrows and barred lines are not meant to imply direct interaction. Two key
differences in the regulatory control of OCT in Antirrhinum and SUP in Arabidopsis are proposed. First, unlike SUP, OCT expression is wholly
dependent on the expression of the B-function. This is shown by an arrow leading from B to OCT in Antirrhinum and a dotted red line leading from
B to SUP in Arabidopsis. Secondly, in Antirrhinum, the negative regulation exerted by OCT on the B-function can only occur in the presence of the
C-function PLE or FAR. This is indicated by barred lines running from both PLE and FAR and joining lines from SUP to the boundary of the
B-function expression domain. These two regulatory changes allow the model to predict the phenotypes of all the single and double mutants shown
in (A) and discussed in the text. The thin red barred line leading from AG to the B-function represents a potential minor regulatory interaction.

systems. As a consequence, reverse genetic strategies such
as the one used in this report will be required to understand
the contribution of these genes to plant development.

Controlofﬂoraldeterminacyindifferentspecies:
beyondtheABCmodel?
Although the Antirrhinum and Arabidopsis C-function
mutants ple and ag both consist of indeterminate whorls
of perianth organs, they differ with respect to the identity

and organization of certain whorls. In ple-1 ﬂowers, the
fourth whorl consists of two to three organs which surround
a new ﬂower, borne on a pedicel and initiated by sepaloid
organs (Figure 6A). A new ﬂower also develops in the
Arabidopsis ag mutant, but in this case the four sepaloid
organs of the ﬁrst whorl of the internal ﬂower form inside
the third whorl (Figure 6A). Thus, in Arabidopsis, the
new internal ﬂower of the C-function mutant is initiated
after three whorls, not after four whorls as in Antirrhinum.

4031

B.Davies etal.

In this interpretation of C mutant phenotypes in either
species, there is no homeotic transformation of carpels to
sepals, as proposed in the ABC model (see Introduction),
but rather initiation of a new ﬂower, albeit at a different
site, as shown above and discussed below. The different
phenotypes of
the two C-function mutants become
identical when they are combined with other mutants. In
ple/far double mutants, there is no initiation of a new
internal ﬂower (Figure 6A); all internal whorls consist of
petals. This is similar to the phenotype of the double
mutant between ag and superman/ﬂo10, which also fails
to initiate a new internal ﬂower and consists of sepals
surrounding multiple whorls of petals (Schultz et al.,
1991; Bowman et al., 1992). SUPERMAN/FLO10 (SUP)
acts at the boundary of whorls three and four to prevent
expression of the B-function in the fourth whorl, probably
by controlling the proliferation of B-containing cells (Sakai
et al., 1995). We show here that
in Antirrhinum the
B-function is negatively regulated by PLE and FAR.

An analogous phenotypic difference is apparent when
the B-function mutants of Antirrhinum (def and glo) and
Arabidopsis (ap3 and pi) are compared. In the Antirrhinum
B-function mutants, no fourth whorl organs develop due
to the antagonistic effect on determinacy between the B-
and C-functions (Tro¨bner et al., 1992); the B-function
prevents C-function-dependent
termination of develop-
ment (Figure 6A). In the Arabidopsis B-function mutants,
a fourth whorl develops,
indicating that, unlike in
Antirrhinum, the mechanism to prevent premature termin-
ation by the C-function must be at least partially indepen-
dent of the B-function (Figure 6A). It has been reported
that double mutants between sup/ﬂo10 and pi or ap3
produce only three whorls (Schultz et al., 1991), making
them more similar to the Antirrhinum single B-function
mutants def and glo (Figure 6A). The fact that sup/ﬂo10
single mutants produce a proliferation of stamens within
the third whorl shows that SUP and the B-function
act together to prevent C-function-dependent termination.
Taken together, these observations suggest that initiation
of fourth whorl primordia and subsequent termination of
ﬂower development in the centre of the ﬂower are con-
trolled differently in the two species and indicate that the
difference could centre on the role of SUP.

A possible explanation for the observed differences
in mutant phenotypes described above could be that
Antirrhinum lacks a SUP function and instead uses PLE
and FAR to regulate the B-function negatively. However,
the role of SUP in Arabidopsis cannot be taken wholly
by PLE and FAR in Antirrhinum because the B-function
is expressed in the third whorl, although both PLE and
FAR are active there, suggesting that PLE and FAR co-
operate with a spatially restricted function at the boundary
of whorls three and four and do not act independently to
prevent B-function expression there. A mutant with a
similar phenotype to sup/ﬂo10 has been found recently
in Antirrhinum and named octandra (oct) (R.Carpenter,
personal communication), suggesting that OCT performs
the function of a SUP-like gene in Antirrhinum. In order
to explain the observed differences between Antirrhinum
and Arabidopsis mutant phenotypes, we need to postulate
that OCT differs from SUP in two key ways. First, OCT
requires PLE or FAR in order to exclude the B-function
from the fourth whorl, whereas SUP can act independently

4032

of AG. This is supported by the fact that the B-function
does not expand into the fourth whorl of ag mutants (Jack
et al., 1992) but does in ple/far double mutants (this
report). Secondly, OCT expression or function is more
dependent on the B-function in Antirrhinum than is SUP
in Arabidopsis, although other
factors must also be
involved to control the expression of OCT at the boundary
between the third and the fourth whorl. Figure 6B illus-
trates how these differences in the regulation of and by
OCT/SUP could account for all the observed wild-type
and mutant phenotypes of Antirrhinum and Arabidopsis.
For simplicity and clarity, Figure 6B and the following
paragraphs do not consider that factors other than SUP/
OCT and the organ identity controlling functions are
involved in the control of organ initiation and determinacy
and that
the regulatory relationships are likely to be
indirect and more complex.

In the fourth whorl of Antirrhinum and Arabidopsis,
only the C-function, controlled by PLE/FAR or AG, is
expressed (Figure 6B). This leads to the formation of
carpels and termination of ﬂoral development. In the third
whorl of Arabidopsis, the co-expression of the B-function
genes, AP3 and PI, with AG leads to the production
of stamens, whilst AP3/PI and SUP prevent AG from
terminating ﬂower development in this whorl. Similarly,
in Antirrhinum, DEF/GLO and OCT prevent PLE or PLE/
FAR from terminating ﬂoral development
in the third
whorl. If OCT expression in Antirrhinum is dependent on
DEF/GLO, OCT will not be expressed in def and glo
mutants and development will terminate in the third whorl
because there is no DEF/GLO or OCT activity to counteract
the terminatory inﬂuence of PLE or PLE/FAR. In contrast,
Arabidopsis ap3 and pi mutants produce four whorls
because SUP, being partly independent of AP3/PI, will
still act to prevent AG-dependent termination in the third
whorl. In ap3/sup and pi/sup double mutants, termination
occurs with the production of third whorl carpels because,
as in Antirrhinum def and glo mutants, both the B-function
and SUP/OCT are absent.

In Arabidopsis ag mutants, AP3 and PI remain excluded
from the fourth whorl due to the activity of SUP. Thus,
in the fourth whorl, there is no C- or B-function activity
and a new ﬂower is produced. In Antirrhinum ple mutants,
DEF and GLO, which we suggest to be under the control
of PLE/OCT and FAR/OCT, expand slightly into the fourth
whorl as a result of a loss of PLE and a concomitant
reduction in FAR. Some residual control over DEF and
GLO is maintained in ple mutants due to the reduced
activity of FAR/OCT. The slight expansion of DEF and
GLO into the fourth whorl is sufﬁcient to prevent the
initiation of a new mutant ﬂower until after initiation of
the fourth whorl. Loss of FAR does not have similar
consequences because in the absence of FAR, PLE expres-
sion increases to compensate. In contrast,
the double
mutants ag/sup and ple/far show the same phenotype
because in neither case is the B-function prevented from
being expressed in the fourth whorl. The model
thus
predicts that OCT expression or function is absent in the
def and glo mutants and that these Antirrhinum B-function
mutants would produce four whorls if an OCT transgene
were to be expressed in the third whorl. This hypothesis
can be tested when OCT is isolated from Antirrhinum. It
also predicts that the concommitant loss of ple, far and

oct will not confer changes to ﬂoral morphology other
than those observed in the ple/far double mutant.

Materials and methods

cDNAlibraries,insituhybridizationandNorthernblotting
In situ and Northern blot expression analysis and cDNA library construc-
tion and screening were carried out as previously described (Sommer
et al., 1990; Huijser et al., 1992). Photographs were taken in dark ﬁeld
to detect
the silver grains and superimposed on calcoﬂuor-stained
epiﬂuorescence to visualize the underlying tissue. Sequencing was carried
out using the fmol cycle sequencing system (Promega) with sequence
analysis by MacVector (Oxford Molecular Group).

Two-hybridscreening
The predominant FAR cDNA was ampliﬁed using oligonucleotide primers
to introduce cloning sites. Ampliﬁcation was carried out using the
oligonucleotide primers 5⬘-ATAGGAATTCGCGTCTCTAAGCGATC-3⬘
and 5⬘-GGAAGGATCCATTTTCTCCAAGCGCC-3⬘ followed by diges-
tion with EcoRI and BamHI and insertion into pGBT9 to form the bait.
The bait included all the FAR coding sequences excluding the initiation
codon. Two-hybrid screens were carried out as previously described
(Davies et al., 1996b). Interactions were investigated both by screening
an Antirrhinum ﬂoral cDNA yeast expression library and by directly
testing for interaction between the FAR bait and previously isolated
MADS-box preys.

PCRpoolsscreening
The reverse genetic screen used here was established at the John Innes
Centre, Norwich, UK (E.Keck, R.Carpenter and E.Coen, unpublished).
Integrations of the transposable element Tam3 into the FAR gene were
detected by hybridization of the FAR probe to blots of PCRs containing
a gene-speciﬁc primer, a Tam3-speciﬁc primer and several pools of
genomic DNA from deﬁned sets of plants. Two DNA pools from the
John Innes Institute, Norwich, UK, were screened for integrations into
individual plants. The two pools were from the years 1992 and 1993
and were derived from 6350 and 6300 plants, respectively. The pools
were screened as 31 superpools of 450 plants, each of which was created
by combining three subpools of genomic DNA prepared from the leaves
of 150 plants. Positives were ﬁrst conﬁrmed on the subpools of 150 plants
and subsequently on 10 new subpools generated from batches of 15
separately collected leaves from those plants which contributed to the
positive subpool. Finally, seed collected from the 15 plants in each
positive pool was sown and the seedlings were tested to conﬁrm
integrations into FAR.

From the genomic sequence of FAR, four oligonucleotide primers
were chosen to match approximately the length and base composition
of the two primers speciﬁc for the left and right borders of the
Antirrhinum transposable element Tam3. The primers used were: FAR1F,
5⬘-CGTTTCTATTTTTGACTCTATGG-3⬘; FAR4F, 5⬘-CCATCCTCTT-
TGACAGTTCC-3⬘; FAR4R, 5⬘-GAGGATGGACAAATGAGAAC-3⬘;
FAR7R, 5⬘-GATTTAGTTTGTGTGCGATTC-3⬘; Tam3R, 5⬘-CTCGGC-
ACGTTTCACATCTTTA-3⬘; and Tam3L, 5⬘-CACGGCCCAATTCAC-
ATCTTTA-3⬘.
PCR was carried out in 50 µl reactions, and 5–10 µl of each superpool
reaction was dot blotted onto a nylon membrane using an eight channel
micropipette and the ﬁlter was baked and hybridized with a FAR
probe. Subsequent subpool screening was by Southern blotting of the
PCR products.

Geneticstocksandtransgenicplants
Antirrhinum majus plants were grown in a greenhouse at 18–25°C with
additional light during winter. A climate chamber at 15°C was used for
growth at lower temperatures. The following mutant and wild-type lines
were used in this study: ple-1 and def-nic (Stubbe, 1966) from the
Gatersleben seed collection, Ple-888 (Macho) (Schwarz-Sommer et al.,
1990; Lo¨nnig and Saedler, 1994), albidiﬂora Gatersleben, Sippe50
(Stubbe, 1966) and Gatersleben, 165E (niv-98::Tam3) Rosemary
Carpenter, Norwich. ple/far double mutants were isolated by selecting
plants in the F2 of a cross using ple-1/ple-1 ﬂowers, which occasionally
produce some pollen, to pollinate far-2/far-2 plants. The double mutants
were identiﬁed by selecting for a ple phenotype and testing for homo-
zygosity of far by PCR. Ple-1/def-nic double mutants were obtained in
the selfed progeny of plants heterozygous for both mutant alleles,
produced by crossing a def-nic plant with pollen from ple-1. Mutants

Redundancy and regulation between two MADS-box factors

and double mutants were identiﬁed by their phenotype and segregation
ratio (ple-1:def-nic:ple-1/def-nic ⫽ 28:22:5). In addition, plants with
elongated internodes and pedicels segregated in this population together
with the decrease of the apical dominance, most likely due to the
presence of a trait carried by the def-nic line. Segregation of this trait
conferred considerable variation to the mutant phenotypes, revealed by
the presence or absence of an internal pedicel when ple-1 was mutant,
and by decreased or enhanced male features of def-nic ﬂowers.

Tobacco transformation was as previously described (Davies et al.,
1996a). The FAR cDNA was ampliﬁed by PCR, cloned as a transcriptional
fusion behind the cauliﬂower mosaic virus (CaMV) 35S promoter
into the binary vector pPCV701, and the insert sequenced. Following
agrobacterial-mediated transformation of
tobacco, 26 kanamycin-
resistant plants were isolated, 18 of which showed clear morphological
changes. Selection for 35S::PLE and 35S::FAR transformants and for
the double transgenic was on hygromycin, kanamycin or both antibiotics,
respectively. All abnormalities segregated as dominant traits.

Acknowledgements
The authors are indebted to Enrico Coen and Rosemary Carpenter for
materials and generous help in screening their Antirrhinum PCR pools.
Thanks also to Des Bradley and Sandra Doyle for help during the
screening process, Rosemary Carpenter for information on the oct mutant
prior to publication, Iris Heidmann and Sabine Clemens for their help
in identifying the far mutant by PCR in segregating populations, and
Barry Causier, Enrico Coen, Marcos Egea-Cortines, Phil Gilmartin, Peter
Huijser and Mark Wilkinson for critical reading of the manuscript. This
work was supported by grants from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinsch-
aft (SFB 243) to Z.S.-S., EU-Biotech (BIO4-CT97-2217) to B.D. and
H.S., and The British Council (project No. 900) to B.D. and Z.S.-S.

References
Angenent,G.C., Franken,J., Busscher,M., Colombo,L. and van Tunen,A.J.
(1993) Petal and stamen formation in petunia is regulated by the
homeotic gene fbp1. Plant J., 4, 101–112.

Angenent,G.C., Franken,J., Busscher,M., Weiss,D. and van Tunen,A.J.
(1994) Co-suppression of the petunia homeotic gene fbp2 affects the
identity of the generative meristem. Plant J., 5, 33–44.

Angenent,G.C., Franken,J., Busscher,M., van Dijken,A., van Went,J.L.,
Dons,H. and van Tunen,A.J. (1995) A novel class of MADS box
genes is involved in ovule development in petunia. Plant Cell, 7,
1569–1582.

Bowman,J.L., Smyth,D.R.

(1991) Genetic
interactions among ﬂoral homeotic genes of Arabidopsis. Development,
112, 1–20.

and Meyerowitz,E.M.

Bowman,J.L., Sakai,H., Jack,T., Weigel,D., Mayer,U. and Meyerowitz,
E.M. (1992) SUPERMAN, a regulator of ﬂoral homeotic genes in
Arabidopsis. Development, 114, 599–615.

Bowman,J.L., Alvarez,J., Weigel,D., Meyerowitz,E. and Smyth,D.R.
(1993) Control of ﬂower development in Arabidopsis thaliana by
APETALA1 and interacting genes. Development, 119, 721–743.

Bradley,D., Carpenter,R., Sommer,H., Hartley,N. and Coen,E. (1993)
Complementary ﬂoral homeotic phenotypes result from opposite
orientations of a transposon at the plena locus of Antirrhinum. Cell,
72, 85–95.

Carpenter,R., Copsey,L., Vincent,C., Doyle,S., Magrath,R. and Coen,E.
(1995) Control of ﬂower development and phyllotaxy by meristem
identity genes in antirrhinum. Plant Cell, 7, 2001–2011.

Coen,E.S. and Meyerowitz,E.M. (1991) The war of the whorls: genetic

interactions controlling ﬂower development. Nature, 353, 31–37.

Davies,B., DiRosa,A., Eneva,T., Saedler,H. and Sommer,H. (1996a)
Alteration of
tobacco ﬂoral organ identity by expression of
combinations of antirrhinum mads-box genes. Plant J., 10, 663–677.
Davies,B., Egea-Cortines,M., de Andrade Silva,E., Saedler,H. and
Sommer,H. (1996b) Multiple interactions amongst ﬂoral homeotic
proteins. EMBO J., 15, 4330–4343.

Devereux,J., Haeberli,P. and Smithies,O. (1984) A comprehensive set of
sequence analysis programs for the VAX. Nucleic Acids Res., 12,
387–395.

Doyle,J.J. (1994) Evolution of a plant homeotic multigene family:
toward connecting molecular systematics and molecular developmental
genetics. Syst. Biol., 43, 307–328.

4033

Sommer,H., Beltra´n,J.-P., Huijser,P., Pape,H., Lo¨nnig,W.-E., Saedler,H.
and Schwarz-Sommer,Z. (1990) Deﬁciens, a homeotic gene involved
in the control of ﬂower morphogenesis in Antirrhinum majus: the
protein shows homology to transcription factors. EMBO J., 9, 605–613.
Stubbe,H. (1966) Genetik und Zytologie von Antirrhinum L. sect.

Antirrhinum. VEB Gustav Fischer Verlag, Jena.

Theissen,G., Strater,T., Fischer,A. and Saedler,H. (1995) Structural
characterization,
phylogenetic
evaluation of two pairs of AGAMOUS-like MADS-box genes from
maize. Gene, 156, 155–166.

chromosomal

localization

and

Theissen,G., Kim,J.T. and Saedler,H. (1996) Classiﬁcation and phylogeny
of the MADS-box multigene family suggest deﬁned roles of MADS-
box gene subfamilies in the morphological evolution of eukaryotes.
J. Mol. Evol., 43, 484–516.

Tro¨bner,W., Ramirez,L., Motte,P., Hue,I., Huijser,P., Lo¨nnig,W.-E.,
Saedler,H., Sommer,H. and Schwarz-Sommer,Z. (1992) GLOBOSA: a
homeotic gene which interacts with DEFICIENS in the control of
Antirrhinum ﬂoral organogenesis. EMBO J., 11, 4693–4704.

Tsuchimoto,S., van der Krol,A.R. and Chua,N.H.

(1993) Ectopic
expression of pMADS3 in transgenic petunia phenocopies the petunia
blind mutant. Plant Cell, 5, 843–853.

B.Davies etal.

Goto,K. and Meyerowitz,E.M. (1994) Function and regulation of the
Arabidopsis ﬂoral homeotic gene PISTILLATA. Genes Dev., 8,
1548–1560.

Gu,Q., Ferrandiz,C., Yanofsky,M.F. and Martienssen,R. (1998) The
FRUITFULL MADS-box gene mediates cell differentiation during
Arabidopsis fruit development. Development, 125, 1509–1517.

Hansen,G., Estruch,J.J., Sommer,H. and Spena,A. (1993) NTGLO: a
tobacco homologue of
the GLOBOSA ﬂoral homeotic gene of
Antirrhinum majus: cDNA sequence and expression pattern. Mol.
Gen. Genet., 239, 310–312.

Huang,H., Tudor,M., Su,T., Zhang,Y., Hu,Y. and Ma,H. (1996) DNA
binding properties of two Arabidopsis MADS domain proteins: binding
consensus and dimer formation. Plant Cell, 8, 81–94.

Huijser,P., Klein,J., Lo¨nnig,W.-E., Meijer,H., Saedler,H. and Sommer,H.
(1992) Bractomania, an inﬂorescence anomaly, is caused by the loss
of function of the MADS-box gene squamosa in Antirrhinum majus.
EMBO J., 11, 1239–1249.

Jack,T., Brockman,L.L. and Meyerowitz,E.M. (1992) The homeotic gene
APETALA3 of Arabidopsis thaliana encodes a MADS box and is
expressed in petals and stamens. Cell, 68, 683–697.

Kater,M.M., Colombo,L., Franken,J., Busscher,M., Masiero,S., Van
Lookeren Campagne,M.M. and Angenent,G.C.
(1998) Multiple
AGAMOUS homologs from cucumber and petunia differ in their
ability to induce reproductive organ fate. Plant Cell, 10, 171–182.

Kempin,S.A., Mandel,M.A. and Yanofsky,M.F. (1993) Conversion of
perianth into reproductive organs by ectopic expression of the tobacco
ﬂoral homeotic gene NAG1. Plant Physiol., 103, 1041–1046.

Kempin,S.A., Savidge,B. and Yanofsky,M.F. (1995) Molecular basis of

the cauliﬂower phenotype in Arabidopsis. Science, 267, 522–525.

Liljegren,S.J.,

Ferra´ndiz,C., Alvarez-Buylla,E.R.,

and
Yanofsky,M.F. (1998) Arabidopsis MADS-box genes involved in fruit
dehiscence. Flowering Newslett., 25, 9–19.

Pelaz,S.

Yanofsky,M.F., Ma,H., Bowman,J.L., Drews,G.N., Feldmann,K.A. and
Meyerowitz,E.M. (1990) The protein encoded by the Arabidopsis
homeotic gene agamous resembles transcription factors. Nature, 346,
35–39.

Zachgo,S., de Andrade Silva,E., Motte,P., Tro¨bner,W., Saedler,H. and
Schwarz-Sommer,Z. (1995) Functional analysis of the Antirrhinum
ﬂoral homeotic DEFICIENS gene in vivo and in vitro by using a
temperature-sensitive mutant. Development, 121, 2861–2875.

Zhang,H.M. and Forde,B.G. (1998) An Arabidopsis MADS box gene
that controls nutrient-induced changes in root architecture. Science,
279, 407–409.

Received March 30, 1999; revised and accepted May 20, 1999

Lo¨nnig,W.E. and Saedler,H. (1994) The homeotic Macho mutant of
Antirrhinum majus reverts to wild-type or mutates to the homeotic
plena phenotype. Mol. Gen. Genet., 245, 636–643.

Luo,D., Carpenter,R., Vincent,C., Copsey,L. and Coen,E. (1996) Origin

of ﬂoral asymmetry in Antirrhinum. Nature, 383, 794–799.

Ma,H., Yanofsky,M.F. and Meyerowitz,E.M. (1991) AGL1–AGL6, an
Arabidopsis gene family with similarity to ﬂoral homeotic and
transcription factor genes. Genes Dev., 5, 484–495.

Mandel,M.A., Gustafson-Brown,C., Savidge,B. and Yanofsky,M.F.
(1992) Molecular characterization of the Arabidopsis ﬂoral homeotic
gene APETALA1. Nature, 360, 273–277.

Mena,M., Ambrose,B.A., Meeley,R.B., Briggs,S.P., Yanofsky,M.F. and
Schmidt,R.J. (1996) Diversiﬁcation of c-function activity in maize
ﬂower development. Science, 274, 1537–1540.

Purugganan,M.D., Rounsley,S.D., Schmidt,R.J. and Yanofsky,M.F.
(1995) Molecular evolution of ﬂower development: diversiﬁcation of
the plant MADS-box regulatory gene family. Genetics, 140, 345–356.
of
SUPERMAN in maintaining Arabidopsis ﬂoral whorl boundaries.
Nature, 378, 199–203.

Sakai,H., Medrano,L.J.

and Meyerowitz,E.M.

(1995) Role

Schmidt,R.J., Veit,B., Mandel,M.A., Mena,M., Hake,S. and Yanofsky,
M.F. (1993) Identiﬁcation and molecular characterization of ZAG1,
the maize homolog of
the Arabidopsis ﬂoral homeotic gene
AGAMOUS. Plant Cell, 5, 729–737.

Schultz,E.A., Pickett,F.B. and Haughn,G.W. (1991) The FLO10 gene
product regulates the expression domain of homeotic genes AP3 and
PI in Arabidopsis ﬂowers. Plant Cell, 3, 1221–1237.

Schwarz-Sommer,Z., Huijser,P., Nacken,W., Saedler,H. and Sommer,H.
(1990) Genetic control of ﬂower development by homeotic genes in
Antirrhinum majus. Science, 250, 931–936.

Schwarz-Sommer,Z., Hue,I., Huijser,P., Flor,P.J., Hansen,R., Tetens,F.,
Lo¨nnig,W.-E., Saedler,H. and Sommer,H. (1992) Characterization of
the Antirrhinum ﬂoral homeotic MADS-box gene deﬁciens: evidence
for DNA binding and autoregulation of its persistent expression
throughout ﬂower development. EMBO J., 11, 251–263.

Sheldon,C.C., Burn,J.E., Perez,P.P., Metzger,J., Edwards,J.A., Peacock,
W.J. and Dennis,E.S. (1999) The FLF MAD box gene: a repressor of
ﬂowering in Arabidopsis regulated by vernalization and methylation.
Plant Cell, 11, 445–458.

Shore,P. and Sharrocks,A.D.

(1995) The MADS-box family of

transcription factors. Eur. J. Biochem., 229, 1–13.

Sieburth,L.E. and Meyerowitz,E.M. (1997) Molecular dissection of the
AGAMOUS control region shows that cis elements for spatial regulation
are located intragenically. Plant Cell, 9, 355–365.

4034

