Learning and Instruction 9 (1999) 1–18

Individual ways of interacting with the learning

environment — are they related to study

success?

Sari Lindblom-Yla¨nne*, Kirsti Lonka

Faculty of Medicine, P.O. Box 61, University of Helsinki, 00014 Helsinki, Finland

Abstract

This study concentrated on the study practices of advanced medical students, and on how
these are related to study success. All 67 participants were high achievers who had gone
through a demanding selection process. The subjects completed a questionnaire concentrating
on their study practices and conceptions of knowledge. Individual ways of interacting with
the learning environment were looked at in the light of interviews of 35 volunteer students.
The results showed that students’ individual study orchestrations were related to study success.
It was concluded that dissonant study orchestrations may develop because of the mismatch
between the demands of the learning environment and students’ personal goals.
1998
Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction

Research on student learning has shown the importance of study approaches for
study success (e.g., Marton & Sa¨ljo¨, 1976; Entwistle & Ramsden, 1983; Marton et
al., 1984). Recently, attention has been paid to students’ personal and individual
ways of dealing with their learning environment. In particular,
the differences

* Corresponding author. Tel: 1 358 9 19126860; Fax: 1 358 9 19126863;

E-mail: sari.lindblom-ylanne@helsinki.ﬁ

0959-4752/98/$ - see front matter (cid:211)
PII: S 0 9 5 9 - 4 7 5 2 ( 9 8 ) 0 0 0 2 5 - 5

1998 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.

(cid:211)
2

S. Lindblom-Yla¨nne, K. Lonka / Learning and Instruction 9 (1999) 1–18

between failing and disabled students and more successful ones have been investi-
gated (e.g., Meyer et al., 1990b; Entwistle et al., 1991).

Our research, however, concerns high achieving students in medicine and psy-
chology. We have explored student learning in higher education by using various
methodologies, looking at spontaneous strategy use (Lonka et al., 1994; Lahtinen et
al., 1997; S ), epistemologies and conceptions of learning (Lonka & Lindblom-
Yla¨nne, 1995, 1996; Lonka et al., 1996), instructional interventions (Lonka & Ahola,
1995; Meyer & Lindblom-Yla¨nne, 1997), and university selection procedures
(Lindblom-Yla¨nne et al., 1996a, b). This extensive research program has shown that
conceptions and epistemologies may affect the quality of study activities which, in
turn, have an impact on learning outcomes, and that it is possible to design inter-
ventions aiming at changing these activities (Lonka, 1997).

1.1. Some theoretical constructs in student learning

Our studies listed above as well as those previously published by others suggest
that students’ conceptions of learning, approaches to learning and the levels of pro-
cessing may be roughly divided into two categories: surface-level reproduction (or
memorizing) versus deep-level transformation (or construction) of knowledge, the
latter being associated with qualitatively better learning (Sa¨ljo¨, 1979; Marton et al.,
1984; Ryan, 1984; Thomas & Bain, 1984; van Rossum & Schenk, 1984; Bereiter &
Scardamalia, 1987; Vermunt & van Rijswijk, 1988; Entwistle & Entwistle, 1992;
Lonka et al., 1994). Various terminologies are used when talking about surface-level
and deep-level conceptions or approaches. In the present paper, we will refer to
this general distinction by using the terms “surface approach” and “deep approach”
(Marton & Sa¨ljo¨, 1976; Entwistle & Ramsden, 1983; Biggs, 1993).

Another relevant dimension in student learning is regulation activities. They aim
at controlling student learning activities at the metacognitive level. Processing actions
may be controlled either internally or externally, and students may differ in terms
of their tendency to express self-regulation, to depend on external regulation, or to
lack regulatory skills altogether (Vermunt & van Rijswijk, 1988). The reported
degree of self-regulation has been shown to be related to efﬁcient studying in medi-
cine (Lonka et al., 1993) and in many other domains (Vermunt & van Rijswijk,
1988).

Self-regulation in learning is most often related to the deep approach, whereas
external regulation is more likely to be associated with surface approach (Vermunt &
van Rijswijk, 1988; Beishuizen et al., 1994; Lonka & Lindblom-Yla¨nne, 1996). Other
combinations, especially self-regulation with the surface approach, may result in poor
learning outcomes (Beishuizen et al., 1994).

Yet another important determinant of study practices in higher education is stu-
dents’ conceptions of knowledge, that is, their general epistemologies. Perry (1970)
described the epistemological development of a college student as moving from a
primitive dualist conception of knowledge towards a more relativistic conception. In
the beginning, knowledge is seen as an unorganized set of discrete and absolute
truths (dualist orientation), but this conception gradually changes and knowledge is

S. Lindblom-Yla¨nne, K. Lonka / Learning and Instruction 9 (1999) 1–18

3

seen as an array of interpreted and integrated positions (relativistic orientation). We
have shown that dualism is related to surface approach and lack of regulatory skills
(Lonka & Lindblom-Yla¨nne, 1996).

Ryan’s data (Ryan, 1984) suggested that dualists more often reported knowledge
standards, whereas students classiﬁed as relativists more often reported comprehen-
sion standards when assessing their learning. Our results with Finnish medical and
psychology students were equivalent (Lonka & Lindblom-Yla¨nne, 1996).

Conceptualizations of learning and knowledge interplay as students progress in
their studies. Lonka et al. (1996) identiﬁed three core concepts of learning: Con-
structivity refers to the idea that knowledge and cognitive strategies are constructed
by the learner, and that learning involves qualitative modiﬁcation of schemata, not
just the accumulation of new information in memory. Active epistemology, which is
closely related to constructivity, refers particularly to beliefs about the learner’s role
in the learning process. Third, explaining learning in cognitive terms involves the
notion of mental representation. The nature of mental representations is thought to
determine understanding and to inﬂuence problem solving. Lonka et al. (1996) found
conceptions of learning and knowledge to be somewhat domain-speciﬁc, constructiv-
ist conceptions being most typical of advanced educational psychology students and
very rare among those who had no training in psychology. Active Epistemology was
not typical of psychology students only, but instead, related to a general level of
education. Our subsequent study (Lonka & Lindblom-Yla¨nne, 1996) showed that the
Constructivity and Representation scales were more closely associated with epistem-
ologies than with conceptions of learning: Ryan’s comprehension criteria (Ryan,
1984) were positively, but knowledge criteria as well as Perry’s Dualism scale nega-
tively, associated with these two scales (see Table 1). This is not surprising, as
constructive ideas by deﬁnition refer to the origin of knowledge.

1.2. Orientations to studying

Lonka & Lindblom-Yla¨nne (1996) explored students’ orientations to studying
dimension by dimension and we identiﬁed two main orientations, resembling those
found by Vermunt & van Rijswijk (1988); Vermunt (1996): reproduction-directed
versus meaning-directed orientation. Medical students scored more highly on the
former, whereas psychology students scored more highly on the latter. In addition,
two domain-speciﬁc orientations were found: constructive epistemology, referring to
a theoretical orientation, was typical of psychology students, whereas medical stu-
dents were more likely to express application-directed orientation. The four orien-
tations and the scales used in these studies and our previous studies (Lonka & Lind-
blom-Yla¨nne, 1995, 1996) are presented in Table 1.

In a following study (Lonka & Lindblom-Yla¨nne, 1995) we examined how orien-
tations, as described above, were connected with study success in medicine and psy-
chology among novice and advanced students. We found that constructive epistem-
ology, rare among medical students, was related to novice medical students’ study
success. Among advanced medical students, an orientation not typical of them, mean-
ing-directed orientation, was related to study success. We concluded that medical

4

S. Lindblom-Yla¨nne, K. Lonka / Learning and Instruction 9 (1999) 1–18

Table 1
Four orientations of studying

1.
1
1

1

2.
1
1
2
2

3.
1
1
2
2

4.
1
1
2
2

Externally regulated and reproduction-directed learning
Surface Approach (Entwistle & Ramsden, 1983)
External Regulation, Lack of Regulation, Intake of Knowledge, Stimulating Education,
Cooperation (Vermunt & van Rijswijk, 1988)
Dualism (Perry, 1968)

Self-regulated, meaning-directed, and goal-oriented learning
Deep Approach, Achievement Motivation (Entwistle & Ramsden, 1983)
Self-Regulation, Construction of Knowledge (Vermunt & van Rijswijk, 1988)
Surface Approach (Entwistle & Ramsden, 1983)
Lack of Regulation (Vermunt & van Rijswijk, 1988)

Constructive Epistemology
Comprehension Criteria (Ryan, 1984)
Constructivity, Representation (Lonka et al., 1996)
Dualism (Perry, 1968)
Knowledge Criteria (Ryan, 1984)

Application of Knowledge
Use of Knowledge (Vermunt & van Rijswijk, 1988)
Active Epistemology (Lonka et al., 1996)
Achievement Motivation (Entwistle & Ramsden, 1983)
Representation (Lonka et al., 1996)

Scales adopted from ASI (Entwistle & Ramsden, 1983), ILS (Vermunt & van Rijswijk, 1988), Perry’s
Seven Item Dualism Scale (Perry, 1968), Epistemological Standards (Ryan, 1984), and Conceptions of
Learning and Knowledge (Lonka et al., 1996).
1, Positive loading; 2, negative loading.

students’ learning environment may not support the most functional ways of study-
ing: in other words, those who represent the most typical orientation are not necessar-
ily among the best students.

1.3. Orchestrations as complex combinations of study approaches

Individual combinations of approaches or orientations may be called orches-
trations. Meyer (1991, p. 297) deﬁnes the concept of study orchestration as “concep-
tualized study approach adopted by individual students or groups of students.” This
concept recognizes three important aspects of student learning: the existence of quali-
tative individual differences in the manner in which students approach and engage
in learning tasks, the inﬂuence of context on such engagement, and differing concep-
tions of learning among individual students (Meyer, 1991). The relationship between
approaches, orientations and orchestrations is presented in Table 2. Meyer et al.
(1990a, b) have shown that different orchestrations are also related to study success.
In the case of medical studies, our previous research indicates that the pattern of
successful studying varies across different subdomains (Lonka et al., 1993) and dif-
ferent study phases (Lindblom-Yla¨nne et al., 1996a, b). Successful medical students

S. Lindblom-Yla¨nne, K. Lonka / Learning and Instruction 9 (1999) 1–18

5

Table 2
The relationship between approaches, orientations and orchestrations

Conceptual level

Operationalization

Approaches to study

Orientations to study

Study orchestrations

Dissonant study orchestrations

Individual scales
An example: Deep approach (Entwistle & Ramsden, 1983;
Entwistle, 1997)

Combinations of scales
An example: Meaning orientation (Biggs, 1993)

Individual/group level combinations of orientations or
scales
An example: Meaning orchestration (Meyer et al., 1990a)

A typical or maladaptive linkages between orientations or
scales
An example: A combination of meaning and reproducing
orientations (Meyer, 1991)

are able to use strategies ﬂexibly according to the course demands, and also to use
the strategies that are the most appropriate to their learning environment (Lonka et
al., 1993; Lonka & Lindblom-Yla¨nne, 1995). During basic medical studies successful
studying requires good domain-speciﬁc knowledge and text-comprehension skills,
particularly the ability to pull together the essentials of extensive texts (Lindblom-
Yla¨nne et al., 1996a). In addition to these skills, an increasingly high degree of deep-
level learning is needed towards the end of medical studies (Lindblom-Yla¨nne et
al., 1996b).

At ﬁrst, we looked at study orchestrations at the group level (Lonka & Lindblom-
Yla¨nne, 1995). Our methodology for evaluating “orchestrations” was different from
that used in previous research, and the term was used quite liberally: the original
concept of orchestration as described by Meyer et al. (1990a) included different
pathologies of learning scales, adopted from ASI (Entwistle & Ramsden, 1983),
which were not looked at in our study. Group orchestrations within each subject
group were examined by forming a variable based on scores obtained from the two
principal components reﬂecting reproduction-directed and meaning-directed orien-
tations: (1) a reproducing orchestration for students who scored above average on
reproduction-directed and below average on meaning-directed orientation; (2) a both-
low orchestration for students who scored below average on both components; (3)
a both-high orchestration for students who scored above average on both compo-
nents; and (4) a meaning orchestration for students who scored above average on
meaning-directed and below average on reproduction-directed orientation.

The most typical group orchestration of both novice medical and psychology stu-
dents was the both-high orchestration. We concluded that their orientation was not
yet established. However, advanced medical and psychology students’ group orches-
trations were totally different from each other: most typical of advanced medical

6

S. Lindblom-Yla¨nne, K. Lonka / Learning and Instruction 9 (1999) 1–18

students was a reproducing orchestration, whereas a meaning orchestration was the
most typical of advanced psychology students.

However, as Meyer et al. (1990b, p. 247) emphasize, the unit of analysis should be
the individual: “It has been clearly demonstrated and argued that the characteristics of
a group do not necessarily adequately represent or capture the range of individual
characteristics of those individuals who constitute it”. Therefore, after studying medi-
cal students’ group orchestrations, we wanted to go further in our analyses and con-
centrate on medical students’ individual study orchestrations and their relations to
study success. This study also goes to a deeper level by looking at individual study
orchestrations in the light of interviews.

1.4. Dissonant study orchestrations

We are especially interested in medical students’ dissonant study orchestrations.
Meyer deﬁnes the concept “dissonant orchestration” as unexpected and uninterpret-
able linkages between approaches to learning and perceptions of the learning environ-
ment (Meyer et al., 1990b; Entwistle et al., 1991). According to Meyer et al. (1990b),
dissonant study orchestrations must be looked at on an individual level, because
analyses at group level have not revealed any indication of severe confusion among
orientations. Unlike Meyer’s research, the present study concentrates on high-achiev-
ing students. Our students are advanced medical students who have passed a highly
selective entrance examination at the University of Helsinki. We wanted to examine
whether individual dissonant study orchestrations can be found among these good
students.

The general assumption in this study is that different study orchestrations are
related to study success. Further, it is hypothesized that dissonant study orchestrations
are related to below average success in medicine. However, it must be noted that
there were no measures for pathologies of learning in our study, and no affective
scales were used. It was also assumed that a mismatch between meaning orientation
and a traditional, teacher-centered environment would be reﬂected in the interview
data as low study satisfaction. This mismatch was thought to emerge in the ways
students organize their studying and how they use study strategies. Are there ways
of studying experienced as adaptive or maladaptive in relation to the learning
environment?

2. Method

2.1. Subjects

The subjects were 67 advanced medical students who returned the questionnaire
during their ﬁfth year of studies, the return percentage being about 60%. Of these,
35 volunteered to be interviewed.

S. Lindblom-Yla¨nne, K. Lonka / Learning and Instruction 9 (1999) 1–18

7

2.2. Materials

2.2.1. A task booklet of learning

The students had described their modes of studying by answering open-ended
questions and Likert-type questions, presented to them in a task booklet of learning.
In the open questions, they were ﬁrst asked to give their own subjective deﬁnitions
of learning. The scales for scoring the answers were taken from Lonka et al. (1996).
The Active Epistemology scale (1–4) estimated students’ roles in the learning process
from passive to active. The Constructivity scale (1–4) interpreted students’ concep-
tions of learning from seeing it as acquiring knowledge, to the construction of new
ideas. Responses on the Representation scale (1–4) were classiﬁed as not using the
representational terms in it (1), to mentioning mental schemata, knowledge structures
or other theoretical concepts (4). The scoring scales are reported in more detail in
Lonka & Lindblom-Yla¨nne (1996); Lonka et al. (1996).

Second, the subjects were given a comprehension monitoring probe (Ryan, 1984)
where they were asked to write their responses to a question concerning how students
determine whether they have understood the material to be learned well enough. Each
student’s response was analysed to determine the speciﬁc comprehension criteria he
or she employed (for more detail, see Lonka & Lindblom-Yla¨nne, 1996).

Finally, students rated a set of 71 statements concerning their learning approach,
and their regulation and conceptions of learning on a ﬁve-point scale. The scales,
taken from Entwistle & Ramsden (1983), were Surface approach, Deep approach
and Achievement motivation. Scales measuring regulation activities (Self-regulation
and External regulation in learning, as well as Lack of regulation), and conceptions
of learning, education and cooperation (Intake of knowledge, Construction of knowl-
edge, Use of knowledge, Stimulating education, Cooperation) were adopted from
Vermunt & van Rijswijk (1988). Perry’s Dualism scale (Perry, 1968) was also
embedded in the inventory, as in Ryan (1984). The scales used in the task booklet
of learning are reported in more detail in Lonka & Lindblom-Yla¨nne (1996). See
also Table 1.

2.2.2. Interviews

The semi-structured interviews (from 40 to 60 min) focused on learning strategies,
study behavior and perceptions of the learning environment. The interviews were
based on students’ answers in the task booklet of learning, especially to the two
open-ended questions described above. The students were asked to read their answers
again and to complete them if necessary. Moreover, clarifying questions were asked
to ensure that the students’ answers were correctly interpreted. This was especially
important because medical students are not used to describing their conceptions of
learning, or to analysing their study strategies, as are psychology students for
example (see Lonka & Lindblom-Yla¨nne, 1996).

2.2.3. Study success

Each student’s academic progress was scored on the basis of their grades from
separate preclinical and clinical courses. Preclinical medical studies usually last two

8

S. Lindblom-Yla¨nne, K. Lonka / Learning and Instruction 9 (1999) 1–18

years. The objective is to provide the student with a basic biomedical knowledge of
normal human anatomy and physiology. After this, clinical studies comprise the
main part of medical training. Students focus on the manner of occurrence, onset,
veriﬁcation, treatment and prevention of various diseases, bedside-manner teaching
being part of their daily routine (Laine et al., 1991).

2.3. Statistical procedures

The four most important preclinical courses, i.e., anatomy, physiology, pharma-
cology and medical chemistry, were selected to form a Preclinical Grade factor and,
moreover, four typical clinical courses, i.e., Children’s diseases, Child psychiatry,
Ophthalmology and Pulmonary diseases, were selected to form a Clinical Grade fac-
tor.

Factor analytic-correlational methodologies are useful for looking at trends within
larger groups (e.g., Lonka & Lindblom-Yla¨nne, 1995). However, examination of
subgroups may reveal groups of students who display different characteristics (Meyer
et al., 1990b; Seifert, 1996). This possibility was examined by performing a K-
means cluster analysis in order to have a closer look at individual students’ study
orchestrations. Initial cluster centers were selected using a K-means algorithm.
Analyses of variance (ANOVAs) were used to explore different student groups’ study
success during their preclinical and clinical study phases. Sheffe´’s post hoc test with
its signiﬁcant difference procedure was used for comparisons among the cluster
groups. SPSS for Windows was used in the analyses.

3. Results

3.1. Interpretation of the four-cluster solution

Statistically, the two-cluster solution of students with deep or surface approaches
would have been the best. Because our previous research already gave us information
about students’ typical approaches to learning, we wanted to use a solution with
more than two clusters to give more detailed information about different study orien-
tations. There were no notable statistical differences between three-, four- and ﬁve-
cluster solutions. Therefore, the four-cluster solution was chosen on a theoretical
basis.

Cluster 1 was entitled Meaning-oriented independent students. These students had
the most elaborated study practices and their conceptions of learning and knowledge
were most constructivist in nature. However, they preferred to work independently,
not in cooperation with others. This formed the smallest group of 11 students.

Cluster 2 was entitled Meaning-oriented students with a novice-like conception of
knowledge. These students were meaning-oriented, but their conception of knowl-
edge was more dualistic than that of the others. They were likely to see knowledge
as an unorganized set of discrete and absolute truths, not as an array of interpreted

S. Lindblom-Yla¨nne, K. Lonka / Learning and Instruction 9 (1999) 1–18

9

and integrated positions (see Perry, 1970). This group was the largest, consisting of
25 students.

Cluster 3 was entitled Reproduction-oriented and application-directed students.
These 17 students were reproduction-oriented, but they also they tried to apply their
knowledge in practice.

Cluster 4 was entitled Reproduction-oriented and externally regulated students.
These 14 students scored highly on Lack of regulation, Surface approach and Intake
of knowledge. The fact that they also had high scores on Cooperation indicates that
they were more likely to depend on other students than to be truly cooperative.

Table 3 shows the signiﬁcance testing of the means of the individual scales by
cluster. The means of the scales in the four clusters differed signiﬁcantly, except the
means of Construction of knowledge and Stimulating education. Scheffe´’s post hoc
test with its signiﬁcant difference procedure (a 5 0.05) was used for comparisons
among the four cluster groups. The comparisons showed that students who belonged
to Cluster 1 scored lower than students in the other clusters on Perry’s Dualism
scale and Intake of knowledge. Furthermore, these students scored lower on External
regulation than students in Clusters 2 and 4, lower on Lack of regulation and on
Surface approach than students in Clusters 3 and 4, and also lower on Use of knowl-

Table 3
Signiﬁcance testing of means of individual scales by cluster

Scale

Cluster 1
(n 5 11)
M

Cluster 2
(n 5 25)
M

Cluster 3
(n 5 17)
M

Cluster 4
(n 5 14)
M

F

Achievement
Motivation
Construction
Knowledge
Cooperation
Deep Approach
External
Regulation
Intake of
Knowledge
Lack of
Regulation
Dualism scale
(Perry)
Self Regulation
Stimulating
Education
Surface
Approach
Use of
Knowledge

2.68

3.82

1.76
3.48
1.91

2.33

1.75

1.94

2.67
3.15

2.17

4.18

2.77

4.25

3.14
3.98
2.45

3.17

2.02

2.72

2.63
3.54

2.29

4.62

2.15

4.05

2.25
3.10
2.46

3.68

2.42

2.69

2.02
3.69

3.03

4.67

2.68

4.01

3.30
3.38
2.60

3.63

3.40

2.64

2.28
3.43

3.30

4.47

3.67*

2.22

19.4***
11.70***
4.27**

28.43***

23.36***

4.89**

5.61**
1.80

17.51***

5.12**

Note: *P , 0.05; **P , 0.01; ***P , 0.001. Maximum score per scale is 5.

10

S. Lindblom-Yla¨nne, K. Lonka / Learning and Instruction 9 (1999) 1–18

Table 4
Means and standard deviations for preclinical grades in four clusters

Preclinical grade

Cluster

1

3.43
0.92

2

2.98
1.22

3

2.85
0.83

4

2.29
0.84

M
SD

Note: Maximum score is 6.

edge than students who belonged to Clusters 2 and 3. Further, students who belonged
to Cluster 2 scored lower than students in Clusters 3 and 4 on Surface approach,
Lack of regulation and Intake of knowledge. However, these students scored higher
on Deep approach than students in Clusters 3 and 4, higher on Cooperation than
students in Clusters 1 and 3, and higher on Achievement motivation than students
in Cluster 3. Students who belonged to Cluster 3 scored lower than students in Clus-
ters 1 and 2 on Self regulation. Finally, students who belonged to Cluster 4 scored
higher than students in Clusters 2 and 3 on Cooperation.

3.2. The relationship between the clusters and study success

Table 4 shows that students who belonged to Cluster 1 obtained the highest Pre-
clinical Grade, whereas students who belonged to Cluster 4 obtained the lowest Pre-
clinical Grade.

The one-way ANOVA design was also applied to examine the effects of cluster
membership (1 to 4) on the Preclinical Grade. The independent variable was cluster
membership and the dependent variable was the Preclinical Grade. The main effect
was signiﬁcant [F(3,63) 5 3,24, P 5 0.028]. Scheffe´’s post hoc test with its signiﬁ-
cant procedure (a 5 0.05) was used for comparisons among the four cluster groups.
The comparisons showed that students who belonged to the ﬁrst cluster Meaning-
oriented independent students achieved signiﬁcantly higher Preclinical Grades than
students who belonged to the fourth cluster Reproduction-oriented and externally
regulated students. The means of the other three cluster groups did not differ signiﬁ-
cantly from each other.

Further, Table 5 shows that students who belonged to Cluster 1 obtained the high-

Table 5
Means and standard deviations for clinical grades in four clusters

Preclinical grade

Cluster

1

3.43
0.64

2

3.19
0.69

3

3.00
0.63

4

2.89
0.59

M
SD

Note: Maximum score is 6.

S. Lindblom-Yla¨nne, K. Lonka / Learning and Instruction 9 (1999) 1–18

11

est Clinical Grade, whereas students who belonged to Cluster 4 obtained the low-
est grades.

The one-way ANOVA design was also applied to examine the effects of cluster
membership (1 to 4) on the Clinical Grade. The independent variable was cluster
membership and the dependent variable was the Clinical Grade. The main effect was
not signiﬁcant [F(3,63) 5 1,43, P 5 0.24]. Scheffe´’s post hoc test with its signiﬁcant
procedure (a 5 0.05) was used for comparisons among the four cluster groups.
The comparisons showed that the cluster groups did not differ signiﬁcantly from
each other.

3.3. A qualitative analysis of the fourth cluster, Reproduction-oriented and
externally regulated students — Are there dissonant study orchestrations among
them?

On the basis of our previous research, Cluster 4, Reproduction-oriented and exter-
nally regulated students, is typical of medical students, but not related to study suc-
cess. In all, there were 14 students in Cluster 4. When looked at as a group, it seems
to consist of students expressing a clear reproduction-directed orientation without
any mutually incompatible mixtures of orientation. However, when looked at indi-
vidually, it is possible that some of these students’ study orchestrations may be
dissonant in nature. Therefore, their study orchestrations were analysed in detail.
Interview data from eight of the Cluster 4 students also gave important background
information about these students.

Unlike reproduction-directed orientation (see Table 1) described in our previous
studies (Lonka & Lindblom-Yla¨nne, 1995, 1996), dissonant study orchestration con-
sists of atypical or maladaptive linkages between scales. The dissonant orchestration
is formed by loadings of scales which should not appear at the same time in one
student’s study orchestration if it were coherent. These combinations may vary: some
students may score highly on both a Surface and a Deep approach, and on both Self-
and External regulation, some on both a Surface approach and Self-regulation, and
some on both Deep approach and External regulation.

Four students were analysed as expressing a “purely” reproduction-directed orien-
tation, i.e., their orientation was theoretically logical and no atypical patterns of load-
ings on the scale scores were found. These four students had high scores on Surface
approach, External regulation and Lack of regulation and, further, low scores on
Deep approach and Self-regulation. Two of these students had a dualist conception
of knowledge, i.e., they saw knowledge as an unorganized set of discrete and absolute
truths instead of as an array of interpreted and integrated positions (Perry, 1970;
Lonka & Lindblom-Yla¨nne, 1996).

All these four students volunteered to be interviewed, and they all expressed prob-
lems with their study strategies. They were not satisﬁed with the way they studied
but, on the other hand, they had not been able to change their study strategies for
more effective ones. Subjects 3 and 13 were very uncertain about the way they were
expected to study, speciﬁcally about the how they should write their exams:

12

S. Lindblom-Yla¨nne, K. Lonka / Learning and Instruction 9 (1999) 1–18

S3: I study using an old, poor routine… I must admit that, even though I have
tried to change [my study habits], I always start reading in the same way: too
late in a hurry, and I never have time to read the book through… I pay too much
attention to detail, I can’t choose the essentials of the text. It’s very difﬁcult for
me to choose the essentials, because I don’t know what is essential. I may have
the bad habit of repeating what I have read all the time… Even when I was at
comprehensive school I repeated things about ten times… That’s why I usually
haven’t got time to read the material through, why I read so slowly… I can’t
continue before I have understood what I have read…. It’s unclear to me how
much we should learn — to me it seems too much. (28-year-old female, reproduc-
ing orientation)

S13: I haven’t any particular study habit, I’ve been frustrated from the beginning
of my studies… I feel that I can’t read the way I should, and sometimes I feel
that I don’t understand what the examiners want… I can’t answer in the exams
in the way they would like me to answer. Maybe I try too carefully to read every
detail… Were my school years too easy for me? I’m too lazy… At the beginning
I felt lost, and I still feel lost… I simply can’t. (25-year-old female, reproduc-
ing orientation)

Student 6 was not satisﬁed with the way the teaching and learning were organized
in the Faculty of Medicine, but still adopted the learning style which she thought
was favored by the teachers. Like students 3 and 13 above, she also seemed to lack
metacognitive skills to evaluate her own learning and knowledge:

S6: In the Medical Faculty it’s easy to forget how to think, because we have to
learn by heart… we haven’t got time to deal with things, we don’t think over the
things we have learned before having an exam. My conception of things has
remained very vague. The puzzling thing about learning is that if I think I can,
I can’t and, on the other hand, if I have doubts about my knowledge, I may
succeed better than I expected. (23-year-old female, reproducing orientation)

Student 14 found difﬁculties applying knowledge to practical situations. She separ-

ated knowledge from skills:

S14: It’s important for me to be able to follow difﬁcult things, too… to under-
stand… It may be more difﬁcult to retrieve knowledge from memory, but it’s not
as important as understanding during the ﬁrst phase of learning. To me, learning
is retrieving at least some of the things I have read about… also, learning is
practical skills… in my opinion, learning is primarily this ﬁrst part [understanding
and retrieving]… practical skills are not learning… they require training and
develop as time goes by. There may be almost too deep a gap between knowledge
and skill. (23-year-old female, reproducing orientation)

S. Lindblom-Yla¨nne, K. Lonka / Learning and Instruction 9 (1999) 1–18

13

The individual study orchestrations of the 10 remaining students in the fourth
cluster were categorized as dissonant. All these students had a proﬁle which con-
tained atypical patterns of scale scores.

Of the students expressing a dissonant study orchestration, four were among those
interviewed. All of these had changed or had been compelled to change their study
habits during their medical studies. Two of them expressed problems adapting to the
curriculum. Student 4 in particular was very frustrated with the way teaching and
learning were organized in the Faculty of Medicine. She felt that her ideas about
good learning were totally different from those of the faculty:

S4: I’m enormously disappointed with this organization, this has not suited me
in any way. The way we learn and study has been very difﬁcult for me, really.
I could even say that this faculty hinders studying, this is the simple truth.… We
learn by heart, studying is very school-like. There aren’t any discussions about
interesting subjects after lectures… we don’t go anywhere to talk about unclear
things. There isn’t any sense in the way they teach us… The study methods have
been very difﬁcult for me, enormously difﬁcult… The content is not difﬁcult,
only the way we study. This system has been very difﬁcult for me… There is
this conﬂict… if I had my own goals, I couldn’t achieve them in this system,
because the conﬂict is huge… You’re better to adapt to the system’s goals, i.e.,
pass the exams and other things… At least I haven’t got the strength to wonder
if I will become a good physician after learning this and this… I buried my own
goals a long time ago. (25-year-old female, dissonant study orchestration)

Student 4 expressed strong frustration concerning the organization of the curricu-
lum. She felt that this had severely disturbed her studies. Her academic record in
the Faculty of Medicine showed that she had been studying for nine years and still
had not graduated.

Student 9 also expressed problems ﬁnding adequate study strategies. She was parti-
cularly frustrated at the beginning of her studies but, unlike Student 4, she started
to change her study strategies from a surface approach towards more self-regu-
lated learning:

S9: There is a conﬂict between study habits and exams. The goal is to pass the
exam. It should rather be to do your work as well as you can and to understand.
Earlier I learned more by heart, now I study more for my future occupation, for
my own sake, and my motivation has been aroused. (24-year-old female, dissonant
study orchestration)

Students 1 and 2 described changes in their study strategies:

S1: There are many things that may not become clear to me only by reading alone
or they may be so difﬁcult that they demand discussion with someone else to
convince me that someone else has learned a particular thing in the same way.
This calms me and gives me the feeling of security. I can’t remember thinking

14

S. Lindblom-Yla¨nne, K. Lonka / Learning and Instruction 9 (1999) 1–18

over things at the beginning of the studies… I didn’t go into things and didn’t
feel I needed to. Later, I learned to sift information.… Sometimes I feel puzzled:
I’m used to thinking in a certain way, then I notice that it’s not so simple. Nothing
is 100% sure, there are always exceptions. Sometimes it feels as if this is a swamp.
(24-year-old female, dissonant study orchestration)

S2: My study strategies have started to change. I have started to use different
strategies. I have noticed that I can’t learn by only reading one book… more and
more often I pick up another book from the shelf or talk to someone. Studying
has become more conscious and more selective. (25-year-old female, dissonant
study orchestration)

In all, typical of students with dissonant study orchestration seemed to be that
they all expressed being in some kind of process of change in their study practices.
They also seemed to possess the metacognitive skills to evaluate their learning prac-
tices, unlike the four students expressing purely reproduction-directed orientation
who, in turn, admitted that they should develop more effective learning strategies,
but they did not know how.

4. Discussion

Interpretation of the four clusters revealed features which, on the basis of previous
research, have not been found earlier, the only exception being Cluster 4, Repro-
duction-oriented and externally-regulated students. Cluster 1, Meaning-oriented
independent students shows a typical proﬁle of a good student. Unfortunately, not
many students reﬂect this kind of orientation. Further, these same students scored
lowest on the Cooperation scale, which may indicate an inability to cooperate with
other students, or it may be due to the school-like curriculum in which meaning-
oriented students tend to walk their own paths.

Cluster 2, Meaning-oriented students with a novice-like conception of knowledge,
relates the deep approach to a dualist conception of knowledge. Previous research
has already shown this kind of conception to be characteristic of advanced medical
students (Ja¨rvinen, 1985; Viitala, 1991; Lonka & Lindblom-Yla¨nne, 1996). It is usu-
ally related to a reproduction-directed orientation. These data picked out those stu-
dents who scored highly on both the Dualism scale and meaning-directed orientation.
Thus, the medical curriculum does not seem to support the development of the stu-
dents’ conceptions of knowledge, because the majority of students belonged to
this cluster.

Cluster 3, Reproduction-oriented and application-directed students, shows that so-
called professional orientation is very typical of advanced medical students (see also
Lonka & Lindblom-Yla¨nne, 1995, 1996). However, the present data identiﬁed stu-
dents who combine professional orientation with reproduction-directed orientation.
This kind of pattern was not found in our previous research.

S. Lindblom-Yla¨nne, K. Lonka / Learning and Instruction 9 (1999) 1–18

15

Cluster 4, Reproduction-oriented and externally regulated students, is, according
to our previous research (Lonka & Lindblom-Yla¨nne, 1995, 1996), especially typical
of novice medical students. However, it was found in every ﬁfth advanced medical
student in the present study. This does not seem to be typical only of Finnish medical
students: Tooth et al. (1989) found that study habits among a group of entrants to
one British medical school showed declining deep and strategic approaches, and
increasing surface approaches.

The interviews with the students who belonged to Cluster 4 identiﬁed two qualitat-
ively different subgroups: those who were purely reproduction-directed in their orien-
tation, and those having dissonant study orchestrations. Typical of the four repro-
duction-directed students was an uncertainty about their study practices. They were
confused about how they should study and what would be the most effective way.
In particular, they were not conﬁdent about how they were expected to study medi-
cine. They were not pleased with the way they studied but were not able to change
their study practices either.

Typical of the four students with dissonant study orchestrations was that they
noticed a change in their study practices during their studies. It appears that the
learning environment in the medical school forced these students to study in a way
not typical of them. As Boekaerts (1997) pointed out, the goals that teachers set may
not be congruent with those generated and deﬁned by the students. The difference
between the demands of the learning environment and their own personal goals is
also expressed in the interviews. The dissonant study orchestration of the students
may be due to the conﬂict between the requirements of the learning environment
and the students’ individual study practices. This confusion may express either con-
structive or destructive friction (Vermunt, 1996) in the perception of the learning
environment. As compared to those students who expressed a pure reproduction-
directed orientation, these students may end up becoming truly competent physicians.
According to Entwistle et al. (1991, p. 259), students with disintegrated percep-
tions of their learning environment “seemed to lack a commitment to their new
academic environment, and associated confusion with their purposes in studying”.
This may be the case with our students with dissonant study orchestrations, too. In
our case, the reason for this confusion seems to be different from the data of
Entwistle et al. (1991): our students were committed to becoming good physicians,
but they were confused about whether their learning environment was optimal for
fostering their growth into competence. All these students appeared to be quite sure
about this purpose of studying; the problem seemed to be that their view differed
from that of the Faculty. It is possible that a major reason for the manifestation of
dissonant study orchestrations was that the traditional curriculum was not the best
environment for these students. They would probably have adapted better to a prob-
lem-based curriculum.

The student groups in the four clusters differ from each other in terms of study
success, as was expected. Those who belonged to Cluster 1, Meaning-oriented inde-
pendent students, succeeded best in their studies. This is in line with previous
research where meaning-directed orientation was related to above-average study suc-
cess (Entwistle and Tait, 1990; Meyer et al., 1990a, b; Entwistle et al., 1991; Lonka &

16

S. Lindblom-Yla¨nne, K. Lonka / Learning and Instruction 9 (1999) 1–18

Lindblom-Yla¨nne, 1995). Correspondingly, students who belonged to Cluster 4,
Reproduction-oriented and externally regulated students, achieved the lowest grades.
As mentioned before, our students were all high achievers, not failing students as
in the studies of Entwistle et al. (1991); Meyer et al. (1990b). Despite this, we were
able to ﬁnd statistically signiﬁcant differences between students with different study
orchestrations. This indicates that our measures were sensitive even to slight differ-
ences among students.

This study showed the importance of individual-based analysis of study orien-
tations. Our previous quantitative analyses of students’ approaches to studying and
study orientations were made in order to get an overview of students’ study orien-
tations in medicine and psychology (Lonka & Lindblom-Yla¨nne, 1995, 1996). As
mentioned earlier, our analyses on the group level did not reveal any dissonant study
orchestrations. Dissonant orchestrations were found when the individual was taken
as the unit of analysis, even though all the students were high achievers.

A question follows: Can we ﬁnd “problematic” students among high achievers?
How can we help such students? For this purpose, we have developed a “self-assess-
ment” inventory for students’ own use. This inventory is a shortened version of the
task booklet described in the Materials section, consisting of 50 Likert-type ques-
tions. Students answer the questions and then count their own scores on each scale,
and read interpretations of their results. There is also often the opportunity to talk
about the results with a teacher. The development of students’ metacognitive skills
is a very important component in developing study practices towards more effective
ones. This is thought
their studying
(Ja¨rvinen & Kohonen, 1995).

to lead students into self-reﬂection about

Moreover, it is possible to increase meaningful learning by reorganizing the learn-
ing environment. The medical students in this study studied in a traditional curricu-
lum, and this may be one of the reasons why they had problems with their self-
regulation. It appeared that the learning environment gave misleading clues about
how to study effectively. The curriculum is currently being totally overhauled
towards problem-based learning. Future research will show whether changes in the
learning environment will be reﬂected in students’ study orchestrations.

Acknowledgements

We gratefully acknowledge the comments of Professors Erik Meyer and Jan Ver-

munt on the previous version of this manuscript.

References

Beishuizen, J., Stoutjesdijk, E., & Van Putten, K. (1994). Studying textbooks: effects of learning styles,

study task, and instruction. Learning and Instruction, 4, 151–174.

Bereiter, C. and Scardamalia, M. (1987). The psychology of written composition. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence

Erlbaum Associates.

S. Lindblom-Yla¨nne, K. Lonka / Learning and Instruction 9 (1999) 1–18

17

Biggs, J. (1993). What do inventories of students’ learning processes really measure? A theoretical review

and clariﬁcation. British Journal of Educational Psychology, 63, 3–19.

Boekaerts, M. (1997). Self-regulated learning: a new concept embraced by researchers, policy makers,

educators, teachers, and students. Learning and Instruction, 2, 161–186.

Entwistle, A., & Entwistle, N. (1992). Experiences of understanding in revising for degree examinations.

Learning and Instruction, 2, 1–22.

Entwistle, N. (1997). Megacognitive and strategic awareness of learning processes and understanding.
A paper presented at the Conference of the European Association for Research on Learning and
Instruction (EARLI), Athens, Greece, August 26–30.

Entwistle, N. and Ramsden, P. (1983). Understanding student learning. London: Croom Helm.
Entwistle, N. J., Meyer, J. H. F., & Tait, H. (1991). Student failure: disintegrated patterns of study stra-

tegies and perceptions of the learning environment. Higher Education, 21, 249–261.

Entwistle, N., & Tait, H. (1990). Approaches to learning, evaluations of teaching and references for

contrasting academic environments. Higher Education, 19, 169–194.

Ja¨rvinen, A. (1985). La¨a¨ketieteen opiskelijoiden tieteellisia¨ ja ammatillisia ka¨sityksia¨ koskeva seurantatut-
kimus. (Follow-up study on the development of scientiﬁc and professional conceptions in medical
students). Acta Universitatis Tamperensis A 197. University of Tampere. (In Finnish).

Ja¨rvinen, A., & Kohonen, V. (1995). Promoting professional development in higher education through

portfolio assessment. Assessment and Evaluations in Higher Education, 20, 25–36.

Lahtinen, V., Lonka, K., & Lindblom-Yla¨nne, S. (1997). Spontaneous study strategies and the quality of

knowledge construction. British Journal of Educational Psychology, 67, 13–24.

Laine, I., Nikkarinen, T. and Wickholm, R. (1991). Introducing the Faculty of Medicine. Helsinki: Yliopis-

topaino.

Lindblom-Yla¨nne, S., Lonka, K., & Leskinen, E. (1996). Selecting students for medical school: what
predicts success during basic science studies? A cognitive approach. Higher Education, 31, 507–527.
Lindblom-Yla¨nne, S., Lonka, K. and Leskinen, E. (1996b). How do text comprehension skills predict
success in medical school? Poster presented at the Conference on Using Complex Information Sys-
tems, Poitiers, France, 4–6 September 1996.

Lonka, K. (1997). Explorations of constructive processes in student learning. Doctoral dissertation,

Department of Psychology, University of Helsinki. Helsinki: Yliopistopaino.

Lonka, K., & Ahola, K. (1995). Activating instruction — how to foster study and thinking skills in higher

education. European Journal of Psychology of Education, 10, 351–368.

Lonka, K., Joram, E., & Bryson, M. (1996). Conceptions of learning and knowledge — does training

make a difference? Contemporary Educational Psychology, 21, 240–260.

Lonka, K. and Lindblom-Yla¨nne, S. (1995). Epistemologies, conceptions of learning and study success
in two domains; medicine and psychology. Paper presented at the 6th Conference of EARLI, University
of Nijmegen, the Netherlands, 26–31 August 1995.

Lonka, K., & Lindblom-Yla¨nne, S. (1996). Epistemologies, conceptions of learning, and study practices

in medicine and psychology. Higher Education, 31, 5–24.

Lonka, K., Lindblom-Yla¨nne, S. and Maury, S. (1993). Study strategies, learning from text, and success
in medical school: a follow-up study. Paper presented at an invited Symposium on Improving Student
Quality of Learning in Higher Education: Research using Psychological Concepts and Research
Methods. Organiser: Professor Noel Entwistle, UK. IIIrd European Congress of Psychology, Tampere,
Finland, 4–9 July 1993.

Lonka, K., Lindblom-Yla¨nne, S., & Maury, S. (1994). The effect of study strategies on learning from

text. Learning and Instruction, 4, 253–271.

Marton, F., & Sa¨ljo¨, R. (1976). On qualitative differences in learning — I. Process and outcome. British

Journal of Educational Psychology, 46, 4–11.

Marton, F., Hounsell, D. and Entwistle, N. (1984). The experience of learning. Edinburgh, UK: Scottish

Academic Press.

Meyer, J. H. F. (1991). Study orchestration: the manifestation, interpretation and consequences of contex-

tualised approaches to studying. Higher Education, 22, 297–316.

Meyer, J. H. F. and Lindblom-Yla¨nne, S. (1997). The evaluative component of variation in student learn-

ing. Paper presented at the 7th Conference of EARLI, Athens, Greece, 26–31 August 1997.

18

S. Lindblom-Yla¨nne, K. Lonka / Learning and Instruction 9 (1999) 1–18

Meyer, J. H. F., Parsons, P., Dunne, T. T. (1990a). Individual study orchestrations and their association

with learning outcome. Higher Education, 20, 67-89.

Meyer, J. H. F., Parsons, P., Dunne, T. T. (1990b) Study orchestration and learning outcome: evidence

of association over time among disadvantaged students. Higher Education, 20, 245-269.

Perry, W. G. (1968). Patterns of development in thought and values of students in liberal arts college.
A validation of a scheme. U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, Ofﬁce of Education,
Bureau of Research, Final Report, Project No. 5-0825, Contract No. SAE 8973, April 1968.

Perry, W. G. (1970). Forms of intellectual and ethical development in the college years: a scheme. New

York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.

Van Rossum, E. J., & Schenk, S. M. (1984). The relationship between learning conception, study strategy

and learning outcome. British Journal of Educational Psychology, 54, 73–83.

Ryan, M. P. (1984). Monitoring text comprehension: individual differences in epistemological standards.

Journal of Educational Psychology, 76, 248–258.

Seifert, T. L. (1996). The learning strategies of bilingual versus monolingual students. British Journal of

Educational Psychology, 66, 73–82.

Slotte, V. and Lonka, K. Using notes during essay-writing: Is it always helpful? Educational Psychology,

in press.

Sa¨ljo¨, R. (1979). Learning in the learner’s perspective I. Some common sense conceptions. (Reports from

the Institute of Education No. 76). Sweden: University of Go¨teborg.

Thomas, P. R., & Bain, J. D. (1984). Contextual dependence of learning approaches: the effects of assess-

ments. Human Learning, 3, 227–240.

Tooth, D., Tonge, K., & McManus, I. C. (1989). Anxiety and study methods in preclinical students:

causal relation to examination performance. Medical Education, 23, 416–421.

Vermunt, J. D. H. M. (1996). Metacognitive, cognitive and affective aspects of learning styles and stra-

tegies: A phenomenographic analysis. Higher Education, 31, 25–50.

Vermunt, J. D. H. M., & Van Rijswijk, F. A. W. M. (1988). Analysis and development of students’ skill

in self-regulated learning. Higher Education, 170, 647–682.

Viitala, T. (1991). Ymma¨rta¨va¨tko¨ yliopisto-opiskelijat lukemansa? (Do University students comprehend

what they read?). Doctoral dissertation, Acta Universitatis Ouluensis E6, University of Oulu..

