Sustainability 2013, 5, 3926-3940; doi:10.3390/su5093926 

OPEN ACCESS 

 

sustainability 

ISSN 2071-1050 
www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability 

Article 

Between Discourse and Reality: The Un-Sustainability of  
Mega-Event Planning 

Christopher Gaffney 

Escola de Pós-Graduação em Arquitetura e Urbanismo, Universidade Federal Fluminense,  

Passo da Pátria 156, Bloco D, Sala 541, São Domingos, Niterói, Rio de Janeiro 24201-240, Brasil;  

E-Mail: ctgaffney@id.uff.br; Tel.: +55-21-2629-5490; Fax: +55-21-2629-5491 

Received: 22 July 2013; in revised form: 28 August 2013 / Accepted: 5 September 2013 / 

Published: 16 September 2013 

 

 

Abstract:  The  zero-sum  nature  of  mega-event  hosting  encourages  cities  to  escalate 

investment  with  an  eye  towards  convincing  event  rights  holders  that  a  positive  outcome 

will  result.  The  discursive  frameworks  of  ―legacy‖  and  ―sustainability‖,  the  global 

competition  to  attract  events  and  the  compressed  event  horizon  make  for  mega-event 

preparation regimes  that  may  seriously  compromise  long-term  urban  planning  agendas  in 

mega-event  hosts.  By  examining  the  sustainable  urban  planning  literature,  the  discursive 

frameworks  of  sustainability  in  the  International  Olympic  Committee  (IOC)  and  the 

discursive framing of the Rio 2016 bid, this paper will examine the  Olympic Golf project 

being implemented in Rio de Janeiro. Through this case study the paper argues that unless  

mega-event rights holders change their candidacy and selection processes, these events will 

inevitably be detrimental to their hosts. 

Keywords: sustainability; discourse; sports-mega events; urban planning; Rio de Janeiro 

1. Introduction  

―Matters of social justice, of economic development, of international relations, of democracy, 

of  democratic  control  over  technological  change  and  globalization  also  have  both  short  and  

long-term  implications.  For  a  given  policy  to  be  desirable,  it  must  meet  the  constraints  of 

sustainability  in  each  of  these  dimensions;  failure  in  any  one  is,  in  theory,  sufficient  cause  

for rejection‖ [1]. 

According to the United Nations, sustainable development, ―meets the needs of the present without 

compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs‖ [2]. The Report of the World 

Sustainability 2013, 5 

 

3927 

Commission on Environment and Development marked the expansion of a discursive framework that 

sought  to  direct,  encapsulate  and  justify  models  of  development  that  would  permit  economic  growth 

within  the  dominant  mode  of  production  while  encouraging  environmental  protection  and  social 

equality [3]. Despite its cooptation by public relations firms and marketing agencies into a process of 

―green  washing‖,  the  progressively  wide  usage  of  the  term  sustainability  during  the  1990s  can  be 

considered  an  important  victory  for  the  environmental  movement.  It  may  be  no  accident  that  the  term 

―sustainable development‖ gained significance in public policy debates at the same time as ―globalization‖. 

The relative ease with which the term sustainability was applied to environmental issues was partly 

due  to  the  universalizing  characteristics  of  the  ―environment‖.  All  humans  are  dependent  upon  the 

natural environment and the preservation of the world’s natural resources was easily understood as a 

goal that could unite individuals  across political,  economic  and social spheres.  Thus, what was good 

for globalization (read as the expansion of markets) could also be either marketed or misunderstood as 

sustainable practice [4]. Many  of the political economy critiques of sustainability discourse focus on 

the use of the term to promote new forms of consumption that mask the realities hidden in the global 

consumption  chains  [5].  As  the  concept  of  sustainability  became  increasingly  distanced  from 

environmental  matters  and  extended  to  the  realms  of  production  and  consumption  the  term  began  to 

lose  much  of  its  early  coherence.  Transnational  actors  and  capitalist  interests  widely  incorporated 

―sustainability‖ as a benchmark requirement for their corporate social responsibility programs. A result 

of  this  process  was  that,  ―the  capture  of  the  discourse  of  sustainable  development  from  the 

environmental  movement  by  the  transnational  capitalist  class  [has]  made  it  even  more  difficult  to 

mount a radical critique of capitalist consumerism than would otherwise have been the case‖ [6]. 

Government  and  corporate  organizations  have  been  cited  as  notable  proponents  of  the  use  and 

misuse  of  the  term,  claiming  everything  from  coffee  cups  to  foreign  policy  strategies  ―sustainable‖. 

The emptying of a once powerful discursive element has forced companies, governments and planning 

agencies  to  disaggregate  the  concepts  that  formerly  fell  under  this  umbrella.  In  the  context  of  urban 

planning, words such as resilience, robustness and durability have replaced sustainability. It could be 

that  the  discursive  shifts  in  the  sustainability  debate  work  their  way  up  from  levels  of  collective 

consciousness, become incorporated into top-down frameworks, lose their original signifiers and then 

are reworked at local scales before filtering up again. 

The  implementation  of  sustainable  practice  ran  into  difficulty  in  the  urban  arena,  where  disputes 

and  conflicts  of  interest  are  infrequently  resolved  through consensual  frameworks.  The  sustainability 

consensus  was  built  upon  the  idea  that  the  natural  environment  should  be  preserved  as  an 

anthropomorphic  universal.  However,  consensus  cannot  extend  to  the  realms  of  housing,  mobility, 

labor and social justice because one group or coalition always benefits at the cost of another. As Hayes 

and Horne identify, ―most definitions [of sustainable development] emphasize the relationship between 

social  organization,  economic  development  and  resource  preservation  in  at  least  some  form‖  [7].  

The  Brundtland  Report implies  that  sustainability  is  a concept  that  focuses  on long-term  planning  or 

the  development  of  public  policies  that  measure  today’s  actions  in  terms  of  future  needs.  The 

suggestion that there are sustainable public policies, especially in cities, that will be of mutual benefit 

for everyone is a trap that ignores the disputed and non-consensual nature of urban life. 

The urban impacts of global sports events increased with the expansion of global markets in the late 

1980s  and  1990s  [8–10].  The  conceptual  shift  of  urban  managers  towards  ideologies  of  urban 

Sustainability 2013, 5 

 

3928 

marketing  in a period  of increased competition for increasingly mobile forces of capital  ensured that 

sports  mega-events,  and  the  Summer  Olympics  in  particular,  could  be  used  as  top-down  drivers  of 

urban change. The Seoul Olympics of 1988 and the Barcelona Olympics of 1992 were both notable for 

their extensive urban interventions and the use of the Games to restructure space and social relations in 

their respective cities. The Barcelona Games in particular have been held up as a model for every other 

Olympic  city  to  follow,  even  though  long  term  urban  planning  results  have  been  ambiguous  [11].  

For  instance,  the  1992  Olympic  Stadium  has  no  primary  tenant  and  the  city  underwent  significant 

gentrification post-Games [12]. 

The  trajectory  of  urban  planning  regimes  in  Olympic  cities  is  a  rich  and  growing  field  of 

investigation  [13].  Here,  I  will  examine  the  ruptures  between  the  discursive  frameworks  of  the  Rio 

2016  bid  and  one  element  of  the  current  urban  reforms.  I  will  then  position  this  rupture  within  a 

discussion  of  urban  planning  and  sports  mega-events,  suggesting  that  under  the  current  mega-event 

planning structures, there is almost no way that a sustainable Olympic Games can be achieved. 

2. Sustainability, Urban Planning and Mega-Events 

The establishment of the The Olympic Partner (TOP) sponsor program in 1985 vastly increased the 

money  that  flowed  through  Olympic  Games,  while  associating  some  of  the  world’s  largest 

corporations with the IOC. With the inclusion of Dow Chemical, GE, McDonald’s and Coca-Cola, the 

TOP  program  also  associated  the  Olympic  Movement  with  some  of  the  least  environmentally 

sustainable  businesses  in  the  world.  The  increasingly  close  associations  between  the  IOC  and  

trans-national  business  interests  ensured  that  a  green  wave  would  crash  onto  Olympic  shores. 

Following the centennial Olympic congress in Paris in 1994, Environmental Protection was introduced 

as  an  ―Olympic  Pillar‖.  The  IOC’s  sustainability  discourse  has  been  refined  over  time,  reflecting 

changes  in  corporatist  attitudes  towards  the  environment  and  sustainable  development.  The  current 

framing  of  the  IOC’s  position  says  that,  ―The  IOC’s  role  with  respect  to  the  environment  is  to 

encourage  and  support  a  responsible  concern  for  environmental  issues,  to  promote  sustainable 

development in sport and to require that the Olympic Games are held accordingly‖ [14]. 

According to the IOC, the TOP Program, ―offers the opportunity to further the IOC’s sustainability 

agenda  by  working  with  partners  to  spread  key  messaging  to  the  widest  possible  audience,  and  also 

helps the worldwide TOP Partners achieve their own sustainability goals‖ [15]. The IOC thus creates 

conditions  for  their  ―partners‖  to  increase  profits  while  helping  to,  ―stimulate  the  economy  and 

generate investment, jobs and innovations‖ [15]. As I will demonstrate, the sustainability goals of the 

IOC are too generically defined to have much practical application for host cities and instead attend to 

the marketing parameters of multi-national corporations. 

Similar to the IOC, the International Federation of Association Football (FIFA) also has dedicated 

Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) directives that deal with sustainability. The FIFA initiatives are 

less ambitious than those of the IOC, with the stated goal of ―minimizing the negative impacts‖ of the 

World Cup [16]. This is a tacit admission that the FIFA World Cup has significant negative impacts on 

the  environment.  However,  FIFA’s  five  sustainability  pillars  are  actually  more  attuned  to  the 

definitions of sustainable urban development than those of the IOC because they do not solely focus on 

the  environmental  impacts  but  rather  on  the  ways  in  which  society  is  organized  and  cities  are 

Sustainability 2013, 5 

 

3929 

governed.  In  essence,  the  FIFA  Sustainable  Strategy  expands  its  scope  to  include  more  sustainably 

structured  systems,  but  has  no  way  of  guaranteeing  or  enforcing  those  practices.  The  intention  to 

advance the establishment of governmental ―best practice‖ before and during the games should ideally 

leave cities with a more robust governance framework for the future. FIFA’s sustainability directives 

are aimed at:  

(1). Accountability 
(2). Ethics and anti-corruption 
(3). Transparency 

(4). Respect for stake holder interests 
(5). Respect for rule of law 

They also identify five key areas for action: 

(1). Community involvement and development 

(2). Fair operating practices 
(3). Consumer issues 
(4). Labor practices 

(5). Human rights [16] 

The wide ranging goals of FIFA’s sustainability program reflect a well-articulated concern with the 

problems  that  have  been  associated  with  the  hosting  of  the  World  Cup  since  2002.  In  the  2002 

tournament,  held  jointly  in  Korea  and  Japan,  twenty  stadiums  were  built  or  remodeled  with  the 

majority having fallen into disuse. The hosting of the 2010 World Cup in South Africa brought to the 

fore  issues  of  human  rights  and  labor  practices.  That  FIFA  has  included  these  elements  into  their 

sustainability documents is laudable, but in the years leading up to the 2014 World Cup in Brazil there 

is  ample  documentation  to  suggest  that  in  each  of  the  ten  areas  identified  above,  there  have  been 

egregious violations [17,18]. 

Problematically,  neither  the  IOC  nor  FIFA  have  sustainability  measures  that  include  long-term 

urban  planning,  post-event  venue  use,  social  equity  or  democracy  in  their  discursive  frames.  The 

ultimate  measure  of  whether  or  not  an  urban  planning  regime  is  sustainable  is  if  it  increases  social 

equity [19]. The negative impacts of sports mega-events on urban planning regimes and on the urban 

and social fabrics are well documented [20–22]. In almost all cases, cities and countries have violated 

human  rights  and  the  right  to  the  city  in  the  preparation  and  hosting  of  sports  mega-events  [23].  

The inherent  paradox of these events is,  ―between the top-down, elite nature of mega-events and the 

sustainable  development  agenda‖  [7].  These  impacts  and  paradoxes  have  become  the  focus  of 

innumerable protests throughout Brazil as it prepares to host the 2014 World Cup and 2016 Olympics. 

While  the  sustainability  measures  of  both  the  IOC  and  FIFA  can  be  considered  positive  in  some 

respects,  they  are  inadequate  to  deal  with  the  fundamental  problem  that  the  events  themselves 

generate.  Global  mega-events  such  as  World  Expos,  Olympic  Games  and  large-scale  football 

tournaments typically occur within a seven-year time frame that brackets the moment of host selection 

to  event  realization.  In  order  to  capture  an  event,  mega-event  planning  processes  must  begin  well 

before  host  selection  and  involve  a  number  of  actors  that  are  external  to  the  prevailing  planning 

regimes of metropolitan areas. These coalitions create bid dossiers that are attuned to the interests of 

Sustainability 2013, 5 

 

3930 

stakeholders. While this would ideally include civil society groups, even in consolidated democracies 

such  as Canada  (Vancouver 2010) and Great  Britain (London 2012), civil society  groups are grossly 

underrepresented in the planning stages. 

The presentation of candidate city bid dossiers to event rights holders carries with it a promise that 

if selected, the city or country will provide guarantees to execute the project as a whole. The contract 

with  the  host  cities  becomes  law,  thus  obliging  the  hosts  to  deliver  on  the  promises  made  in  the 

dossier.  If  a  candidate  city  or  country  is  not  selected  to  host  an  event,  it  is  unlikely  that  proposed 

projects  will  be  realized.  This  may  indicate  that  mega-event  projects  are  superfluous  to  the  existing 

needs  of  the  city  or  that  without  the  mega-event  there  is  no  impetus  to  resolve  the  inevitable  

political conflicts that these projects call into being. Without significant input from civil society there 

will  be  no  way  to  consolidate  the  potential  gains  that  generating  long-term  city  planning  documents 

could generate. 

As in competitive sport, there can only be one winner in the dispute for a mega-event. The zero-sum 

nature of mega-event hosting encourages cities to escalate investment with an eye towards convincing 

event  rights  holders  that  a  positive  ―legacy‖  will  result.  The  discursive  framework  of  ―legacy‖,  

the  global  competition  to  attract  events  and  the  compressed  event  horizon  make  for  mega-event 

preparation regimes that may seriously compromise long-term urban planning agendas in mega-event 

hosts. The tendency to exaggerate ―legacy benefits‖ in order to position a candidature file within the 

discursive  framework  of  the  mega-event  rights  holder’s  particular  understanding  of  ―sustainability‖ 

stimulates a double movement. One, it sells the mega-event project as viable within the constraints of  

a  pre-established  discourse  that  is  external  to  the  local  context.  Two,  it  works  to  convince  local 

populations that the project has external merit and that the physical spaces of the city should be molded 

to  this  external  vision.  The  lack  of  public  stakeholder  participation  in  the  formulation  of  the  bid 

document is immensely problematic for sustainable urban planning. 

The  basic  questions  to  be  explored  in  the  case  study  are:  what  does  sustainable  urban  planning 

mean  in  the  context  of  sports  mega-event  planning  agendas  in  Rio  de  Janeiro?  What  kind  of 

sustainability is being proposed? Who will benefit from this? Where will the greatest impacts be felt? 

3. Case Study 

Rio  de  Janeiro  is  undergoing  a  series  of  urban  transformations  associated  with  mega-events  [24]. 

These large scale interventions are based in concepts of strategic planning and city marketing that use 

econometrics to measure successful urban policies [25]. The idea of making cities competitive in the 

global marketplace steers public policies towards the  ―rentability‖ of public services in the short and 

medium-term.  The  problems  inherent  to  these  strategies  have  been  amply  discussed  in  the  literature 

regarding  sustainable  urban  development  in  Brazilian  cities  [26–31].  There  are  currently  twelve 

Brazilian  cities  undergoing  significant  urban  restructuring  for  sports  mega-events.  Rio  de  Janeiro  is 

suffering  the  greatest  degree  of  intervention  as  it  will  host  the  major  infrastructural  requirements  in 

communications and national security for the 2104 World Cup as well as the 2016 Summer Olympics. 

The 2016 Olympic Games have ushered in the largest series of urban changes in the recent history 

of Rio de Janeiro. The initial budget of R$33 billion (US$ 16.5 billion in 2010) has undoubtedly risen 

since  October  of  2009,  but  the  Rio  2016  OCOG  has  not  at  the  time  of  writing  released  a  working 

Sustainability 2013, 5 

 

3931 

budget for the Summer Games. Since the announcement of the 2016 host city in October of 2009, the 

Rio de Janeiro city government  has pushed through a revised master plan that was adopted to include 

the multiple Olympic projects [32]. This new master plan reflects the mayor’s belief that, ―Rio’s plan is 

the Olympic Plan, and the Olympic Plan is Rio’s‖ [33]. The improvised revision of the city’s master 

plan  has  been  accompanied  by  an  extensive  list  of  executive  decrees  that  have  ―flexibilized‖  urban 

space in order for Olympic related projects to occur. These measures have undermined Rio’s fledging 

democratic institutions and reduced public participation in urban planning processes. These processes 

in  Rio  are  consistent  with  the  extraordinary  and  undemocratic  public  planning  measures  enacted  in 

recent and upcoming Olympic host cities such as Vancouver [34], London [35] and Sochi [36]. 

In order to get at the ways in which Olympic discourse is structured and implemented, I will apply 

some  techniques  of  Critical  Discourse  Analysis  (CDA)  to  the  Rio  2016  Bid  Books.  One  of  the 

premises  of  CDA  is  that  the  intentions  and  desires  of  individuals  and  institutions  can  be  discerned 

through an analysis of the words and strategies used in communication [37]. The analytic techniques of 

CDA  are  complicated  and  diverse  but  generally  aim  to  reveal  discourse  as  an  ―articulatory  practice‖ 

that  seeks  ―to  conceal  the  radical  contingency  of  social  relations  and  to  naturalize  relations  of 

domination‖ [38]. Here,  I examine the discursive content  of the Rio 2016 bid  books by counting the 

number of times that specific and interrelated words appear in the bid books. The broader literature on 

discourse analysis suggests that raw word counts are valuable data that can reveal the prejudices and 

partialities of authors and that the values a particular author (or group) holds can be discerned [39–41]. 

The analysis  of the word count presented in  Table 1 indicates that the concept  of sustainability is 

present  within  the  2016  Bid  Books,  but  that  it  has  been  somewhat  eclipsed  by  ―development‖  and 

―environment‖.  However,  because  the  word  sustainable  is  frequently  linked  with  the  words 

―development‖ and ―environment‖, if we were to combine the word counts for those three, they would 

be by far the dominant thematic. Interestingly, we can also discern the audience of this document to be 

a ―client‖ as well an attempt to assuage the clients’ potential concerns with security. The positioning of 

Rio  2016  at  the  service  of  clients  speaks  to  the  commercial  nature  of  the  event  and  raises  more 

questions about the nature of social equity and urban planning. Who are these clients and what services 

are they engaging? If clients are being drawn to Rio 2016, then why is the financial burden of hosting 

the  Games  on  the  Brazilians?  What  is  the  nature  of  the  security  program  being  devised  for  these 

clients? What environment is being developed and for whom? 

The  Rio  2016  Bid  Books  reflect  a  preoccupation  with  infrastructure,  a  key  component  of  urban 

development  and  one  of  the  weaknesses  of  the  previous  failed  bids  (2004  and  2012)  submitted  by 

Olympic coalitions in Rio de Janeiro. We can also identify the full incorporation of the term ―legacy‖ 

into  the  discursive  frame.  This  term  came  into  Olympic  parlance  after  the  Sydney  Games  in  2000.  

In the discursive fields that have emerged since Rio was announced as Olympic host, the term legacy 

(legado in Portuguese) has figured as a prominent feature of official discourse. The centrality of legacy 

has implications for sustainability as the term is used to justify all current urban interventions as being 

of indisputable lasting benefit for  Rio de Janeiro. This  is,  of course,  a problematic assertion and one 

that has been questioned widely in the media and in academic circles. 
 

 

Sustainability 2013, 5 

 

3932 

Table 1. Rio 2016 Bid Book Discourse Analysis [42].  

Word 

Citizen 

Transformation 

Education 

Social 

Culture 

Sustain(ability) 

Legacy 

Infrastructure 

Development 

Client 

Environment(al) 

Security 

Book 1 

Book 2 

Book 3 

Total 

2 

20 

27 

33 

52 

84 

52 

54 

62 

43 

134 

30 

1 

7 

11 

13 

14 

21 

52 

30 

57 

27 

34 

14 

8 

11 

5 

17 

8 

16 

25 

57 

26 

84 

29 

186 

11 

38 

43 

63 

74 

121 

129 

141 

145 

154 

197 

230 

If  we  maintain  the  demand  that  sustainable  urban  planning  increase  social  equity  through 

participatory  means,  the  discursive  framework  of  the  Rio  2016  Bid  Book  is  not  particularly 

encouraging. The low word counts for citizen, education and culture are the  negative counterparts of 

client  and  security.  It  may  be  that  this  discursive  framing  is  more  reflective  of  the  intentions  of  the 

event organizers than we would care to admit. In what follows, we shall examine one particular urban 

intervention  currently  underway  for  Rio  2016  that  will  explore  the  relationship  between  sustainable 

urban planning as it is happening on the ground. 

3.1. Rio 2016 Golf Project 

The  majority  of  urban  development  projects  for  Rio  2016  are  occurring  in  an  environmentally 

fragile region of the city. Barra de Tijuca and Jacarepaguá are two low-lying regions of Rio de Janeiro. 

They sit between two mountain ranges and the beach and are swampy marshlands with a high water 

table. The dominant residential landscape is one of high-rise closed condominium complexes that have 

limited  access  to  public  transportation.  The  region  is  dotted  with  large  shopping  malls  and  a  sixteen 

lane  highway  system  cuts  across  the  marshes.  Relatively  undeveloped  until  the  1980s,  the  Barra  de 

Tijuca  region  has  absorbed  the  largest  share  of  the  city’s  residential  construction  in  recent  decades. 

This  process  has  been  encouraged  by  a  series  of  urban  administrations  that  have  discouraged  strict 

occupation guidelines while permitting the real-estate sector to pursue maximum profits at the expense 

of  the  environment.  The  result  has  been  extreme  environmental  degradation  in  the  region’s  lake 

systems  and  increasing  pollution  of  the  water  table  [43].  More,  the  absence  of  effective  public 

transportation has created an apartheid residential landscape that greatly favors those who can afford 

an automobile and securitized housing. This in turn has worsened traffic congestion and furthered the 

socio-spatial divides that have long characterized Rio de Janeiro. 

Golf will return to the Olympics in 2016 after a 114 year absence. At the time of the 2016 host city 

announcement,  Rio  de  Janeiro  had  two  private  golf  courses  within  the  city  limits  and  no  public 

courses. Unlike the United States, Canada, and some European countries, golf in Brazil is the exclusive 

domain of the wealthy. There is no significant golf culture in Brazil and the existing courses in Rio de 

Sustainability 2013, 5 

 

3933 

Janeiro  are  located  in  some  of  the  city’s  wealthiest  areas  [44].  Golf  in  developing  countries  is  an 

extremely  problematic  practice  in  that  it  occupies  and  depredates  land  that  could  be  used  for  greater 

social benefit, creates leisure opportunities for high income residents, leads to a rise in housing prices 

and an increase in road traffic and crystallizes socio-economic inequalities [45]. 

The  desire  of  the  city  government  and  the  Rio  2016  coalition  to  locate  a  golf  course  proximate  

to  the  Olympic  Park  and  Olympic  Village,  in  addition  to  the  need  for  open  land  to  build  luxury  

hotels, encouraged the selection of an area known as the Reserva da Marapendi for the Rio 2016 Golf  

Course  [46].  The  Reserva  da  Marapendi  was  a  1,180,000  square  meter  Area  of  Environmental 

Protection (Área de Proteção Ambiental), established in 1973. The Reserva da Marapendi was one of 

the few remaining wetland spaces in the region and served as a significant lakeside biosphere reserve 

in a region that has suffered from waterway pollution and a significant loss of wildlife habitat [47]. 

After  some  high-profile  legal  battles  over  the  site  of  the  2016  Golf  Course  that  focused  on  the 

conflicts of interests between Rio 2016 stakeholders and land owners, the zoning laws for the Reserva 

de Marapendi were changed through an executive decree that was subsequently ratified by the Rio de 

Janeiro city council. Within  the text of the law,  we can  identify the presence of ―sustainability‖ as  a 

discursive trope that justifies the degradation of environmentally protected areas: 

[in] order to host the Olympic Games, it became necessary to modify some of the existing urban 

norms,  with  the  end  goal  of  reducing  the  financial  onus  on  the  municipal  budget  and  on  the 

construction of the infrastructure necessary for the realization of the Games. With this, we intend 

to  guarantee  not  only  the  reduction  of  costs,  but  also  the  sustainability  of  the  installations, 

turning them into an enduring legacy for the City.  

[An]…  installation  of  great  importance  for  the  realization  of  these  events  will  be  the  Olympic 

Golf  Course...that  is  characterized  by  being  an  ample  green  space  with  very  low  construction 

costs.  In  this  context,  to  make  possible  its  installation,  it  became  necessary  through  this 

Complementary  Legal  Project,  to  include  this  activity  (golf)  in  those  permitted  in  the  Area  of 

Environmental Protection of Marapendi, adopting the Environmental Zoning laws to the reality 

of  the  area,  which  has  already  been  altered  by  previous  anthropoid  activities,  and  also  altering 

the boundaries of the Natural Park of Marapendi [48]. 

The  narrative  presented  in  this  decree  is  that  the  environmental  reserve  had  already  been 

significantly  altered  by  human  activities,  that  opening  up  protected  areas  would  allow  the  city 

government  to  reduce  costs  in  the  hosting  of  the  Olympics,  and  that  an  Olympic  golf  course  would 

bring a more enduring legacy for the city than the preservation of the natural environment. The citation 

of ―previous anthropoid activities‖ intended to convince the reader that the area was not ―natural‖ but 

had  already  been  degraded  by  human  presence.  The  altering  of  the  park  parameters  becomes  a 

necessary good because the ―legacy benefit‖ will be the permanence of the golf course post-Games and 

a  reduction  of  the  social  cost  for  constructing  it.  In  short,  one  of  the  few  remaining  areas  of 

environmental  protection  in  the  Barra  de  Tijuca  region  has  been  appropriated  by  the  government, 

opened up for toxic land use patterns and handed over to a private development firm for recreational 

and real-estate purposes. 

The conflicts associated with the development of the Rio 2016 Golf Course are not limited to the 

legislative realm. Once Rio 2016 and the City had announced their intentions to build in Marapendi,  

Sustainability 2013, 5 

 

3934 

a  social  movement  called  Golfe  para  Quem?  (Golf  for  Whom?)  emerged.  Using  social  media  sites, 

Golfe  Para  Quem?  brought  attention  to  the  hidden  movements  behind  the  official  discourses, 

eventually  brining  to  light  the  business  relationships  between  the  city  government  and  one  of  the 

largest landholders in Barra de Tijuca [49]. Golfe Para Quem? also questioned the constitutionality of 

the  project,  citing  federal  laws  that  protect  the  Mata  Atlântica  biosphere  to  which  the  Reserva  da 

Marapendi pertains [50]. They were able to raise public awareness through a series of on-site protests, 

pamphleteering and media campaigns. They were ultimately unsuccessful in stopping the project. 

Another  troubling  element  of  the  zoning  modifications  for  the  area  was  the  shifting  of  the  height 

limitations for buildings in the Marapendi region from six to twenty-two floors. This change will allow 

for  the  construction  of  four  and  five  star  hotels  in  the  Marapendi  Reserve  as  well  as  for  the 

construction  of  covered  parking  garages  of  up  to  six  stories.  This  is  an  indication  that  the  region  is 

being  opened  for  real-estate  speculation.  The  Rio  2016  Organizing  Committee  announced  the 

beginning of the ―cleaning‖ of the Marapendi Reserve with the following statement: 

The work of cleaning the terrain that will receive the Rio 2016 Olympic Golf Course began after 

the  emission,  by  the  City  Secretary  of  the  Environment,  of  the  necessary  license  to  remove 

exotic vegetation from the area [51]. 

The  development  of  the  Barra  de  Tijuca  area  for  Olympic  events  will  undoubtedly  increase  

the  environmental  pressures  on  the  region.  The  golf  study  was  chosen  because  it  reflects  some  of  

the  earlier  notions  of  environmental  sustainability  and  reflects  the  inadequacy  of  this  term’s  use  in  

mega-event urban planning contexts. The public subsidization of a golf facility for the 2016 Olympics 

will  not  increase  social  equity.  Much  to  the  contrary,  the  Golf  project  will  contribute  to  high 

consumption  lifestyles  that  are  linked  with  an  industrial  complex  that  involves,  ―construction, 

agriculture, entertainment, hospitality, marketing and advertising‖ [45]. 

4. Conclusions 

The  most  obvious  contradiction  within  the  discourse  of  sustainability  and  mega-event  planning  is 

that  these  are  global  consumer  spectacles  that  have  as  their  end  goal  the  expansion  of  markets.  The 

carbon  footprint  of  the  World  Cup  has  never  been  accurately  measured,  but  reports  indicate  that  at 

least 18 tons of solid waste was collected after the  opening game of the 2013 Confederations Cup in 

Brasilia [52]. If we multiply this by the number of games (16) realized during the Confederations Cup 

we arrive at approximately 288 tons of solid waste. The presence of an aggressive recycling program 

in  many  of  the  stadiums  does  little  to  disguise  the  fact  that  had  the  event  not  happened,  the  solid  

waste would not have been generated.  Of course, solid waste is but one of a series of environmental 

concerns  that  the  early  sustainability  proponents  would  be  concerned  with.  The  inherent  fallacy  

of  ―sustainability‖  in  the  realm  of  mega  events  is  revealed  in  the  IOC’s  guide  to  sustainability  

through sport: 

―The OM [Olympic Movement] also works to facilitate peace by bringing people together in 

an  environment  that  celebrates  human  achievement.  By  promoting  peace,  the  OM  lays  the 

ground  for  a  better,  more  sustainable  future  by  creating  the  environment  in  which  sustainable 

development can take place‖ [53]. 

Sustainability 2013, 5 

 

3935 

The  above  quote  demonstrates  that  the  Olympics  themselves  create  the  conditions  through  which 

sustainability  can  be  achieved.  Of  course,  this  sustainability  is  dependent  on  the  continuance  of  the 

OM  itself  and  its  signature  events,  which  not  coincidentally,  generate  environments  propitious  for 

multi-national  corporations  to  sell  and  recycle  their  own  goods.  The  underlying  fallacy  of 

sustainability is that it justifies ever-higher levels of consumption through a discursive framework that 

masks the consumerist nature of the event. This same attitude was also evident in the case study, where 

the city government decreed that the elimination of an environmental protection area was necessary to 

reduce the costs of the event that the government had helped call into being. The case study is clearly 

one of weak ecological, democratic, urban and social sustainability. Though the Olympic Golf course 

is particularly poor, there do not appear to be broader attempts on the part of Rio 2016 to create more 

robust  sustainable  practices  that  will  develop,  ―new  lateral  civic  solidarities‖  or  ―attempt  to  find  and 

develop innovative, deliberative or participatory democratic forms‖ [7]. 

The fundamental problem relative to mega-event planning is that the urban projects associated with 

them are planned outside the realm of sustainable development and democratic practice. The IOC has 

not  yet  been  able  to  provide  a  solution  for  this  problem.  The  global  involvement  of  public  relations 

firms,  large  civil  construction  interests,  and  consultancy  networks  ensures  that  the  bid  projects  for 

mega-events  are  ever  more  articulated  and  produce  increasingly  homogenous  documents.  The 

discursive frames found in candidature dossiers are ever more similar, eliding the nuances of the urban 

and social fabrics in their hosts in order to appeal to the ideological imperatives of mega-event rights 

holders.  The  persistence  of  the  same  consulting  groups  in  the  preparation  of  Olympic  candidature 

dossiers  and  in  the  realization  of  the  games  themselves  has  made  for  proposals  so  uniform  that  the 

decision  making  processes  over  host  cities  is  exclusively  based  in  technical  criteria  and  not  in  the 

urban realities of potential hosts. However, if these technical criteria are almost exactly compatible and 

comparable,  the  decision  to  host  games  in  one  city  or  another  is  not  based  on  the  impacts  that  the 

Games will have on the hosts, but rather on the political and economic conditions that will guarantee 

their  realization[54].  Thus,  choosing  a  mega-event  site  is  about  expanding  markets  and  not  about 

sustainable practice. 

Mega-event projects are typically of such a large scale and the processes used to develop them so 

distant from the people who will both finance and be impacted by them, that once the documents are 

signed and the clock has started ticking on their realization, there is frequently no chance give to those 

most affected by them to give input or to organize and react. As we saw in the discourse analysis of the 

Rio  2016  candidature  file,  the  preoccupation  is  with  satisfying  clients  by  delivering  a  development 

product in a secure environment. 

In  order  to  engage  the  basic  tenets  of  sustainable  urbanism,  a  broad  based,  consensual  planning 

procedure  must  be  followed.  As  our  case  study  demonstrated,  mega-event  planning  actually  requires 

that the existing urban plans be overturned in order to meet the demands of the upcoming event. The 

creation of states and cities of exception is especially damaging to urban development given the very 

narrow political and financial interests that are often behind the design and implementation of the new, 

mega-event planning regime. These exceptions to the rule of law exacerbate the existing void between 

the discourse and reality of sustainability in urban planning and mega-event planning [26,55]. 

This  distance between discourse and reality  is at the heart of the conflicts and manifestations that 

are unfolding throughout Brazil. The ―Vinegar Revolt‖ of 2013 [56] has brought into sharper focus the 

Sustainability 2013, 5 

 

3936 

absence  of  long-term  planning  agendas  in  the  Brazilian  urban  system.  Instead  of  targeting  structural 

transformations during a decade of relative  stability and prosperity, the Brazilian state as  well as the 

Rio  de  Janeiro  municipal  and  state  governments  sought  to  sustain  consumerist  regimes  of  economic 

expansion. The articulation of a mega-event cycle in the city of Rio has accelerated trends away from 

sustainable urban planning. 

The  IOCs  evaluates  eight  items  of  a  city’s  candidacy:  motivation,  concept  and  legacy,  political 

support,  financing,  sport  installations,  accommodations,  transportation,  security,  public  opinion  and 

experience. These evaluation criteria do not take into consideration the needs and deficits of the city in 

the years leading up to the event. In the items above, there is no consideration of housing, education, 

sanitation,  health  care,  or  urban  mobility—fundamental  components  of  urban  sustainability  [57]. 

Transportation  concerns  are  limited  to  the  needs  of  the  event,  with  the  built  in  assumption  that  the 

urban plans proposed for the Games will attend the future demands of the city. If good urban planning 

calls  for  both  the  preservation  of  the  environment  for  future  generations  and  social  justice, then  it is 

clear that the Rio 2016 project advances neither. 

The sustainability discourse has not articulated with public planning or public policy in the context 

of sports mega-events in Brazil. To the contrary, the carrying off of urban infrastructure projects and 

Games related infrastructure has eroded democratic process (through use of executive decree and the 

construction of temporary and powerful Olympic Delivery Authorities), increased authoritarianism and 

resulted in a short term planning regime that conforms to the invented, discursively framed demands of 

the Games themselves. The planning horizon in Rio does not extend past 2016. This is consistent with 

the ways in which mega-events have damaged long term urban planning in other cities [22,58–60]. 

Core  issues  of  economic,  social  and  environmental  sustainability  can  be  compared  across 

developing nations  that  have  recently  or  will  soon  hold  mega-events. International  sports  federations 

need to massively re-think the planning cycles that their events force onto cities and countries. Seven 

years is not enough time to change the basic infrastructures of a metropolitan area. There needs to be 

independent  urban  planning  evaluation  committees  that  debate  and  discuss  bidding  process  with 

candidate.  The  restructuring  of  mega-event  planning  regimes  should  be  predicated  upon  the 

sustainability  of  urban  planning  in  candidate  cities.  Articulating  the  ways  that  this  can  happen  is  an 

area for future research and collaboration [61]. However, we suggest that the IOC, FIFA and the World 

Expo  immediately  incorporate  independent  urban  planning  experts  into  their  bid  evaluation 

committees so that institutional reforms can begin. 

Upon  further  reflection,  there  may  not  be  much  distance  between  the  discourse  and  reality  of  the 

Rio  2016  Olympic  bid  books.  We  have  presented  arguments  that  suggest  that  the  current  model  of 

urban  planning  associated  with  mega  events  is  not  sustainable  because  it  does  not  take  into  account 

local stakeholders, it is carried off in too short a time frame, it attends to externally driven discursive 

frames,  it  violates  basic  principles  of  environmental  sustainability  and  reduces  rather  than  increase 

social equity. 

The  story  of  Rio  2016’s  golf  course  reflects  all  of  these  trends:  it  required  the  destruction  of  an 

environmentally protected area by executive decree, will be paid for with public money, will attend to 

the  leisure  and  hospitality  demands  of  a  global  capitalist  class,  and  will  create  zones  of  social  and 

economic exclusion in a region of the city that is already highly territorialized and fragmented. This is 

but one example of many unsustainable projects that are currently under way for the next edition of the 

Sustainability 2013, 5 

 

3937 

Summer Olympic Games. In Rio de Janeiro, these projects have already resulted in grave violations of 

human  rights.  As  the  clock  ticks  down  to  2016,  these  projects  will  accelerate,  impacting  ever  more 

profoundly the social, economic and material environments of Rio de Janeiro. 

Acknowledgments 

I would like to thank Tessa Kaneene for her help in research and editing the text. I would also like 

to acknowledge the work of the Comitê Popular da Copa e das Olimpíadas and the Golfe Para Quem? 

movement for their activist work and research that made possible some of the observations in the text. 

Thank you also to the anonymous reviewers whose comments greatly strengthened the text. 

Conflicts of Interest 

The author declares no conflict of interest. 

References and Notes 

1.  Marcuse, P. Sustainability is not enough. Environ. Urban 1998, 10, 103–111. 
2.  Bruntdland  Commission.  Report  of  the  World  Commission  on  Environment  and  Development: 

Our Common Future; United Nations: New York, NY, USA, 1987. 

3.  Boff,  L.  Sustainable  development:  A  critique  of  the  standard  model.  Available  online: 

leonardoboff.wordpress.com/2012/02/06/sustainable-development-a-critique-of-the-standard-model/ 

(accessed on 12 August 2013).  

4.  Friedman,  T.L.  The  World  Is  Flat:  A  Brief  History  of  the  Twenty-First  Century;  Picador:  

New York, NY, USA, 2007. 

5.  Larner,  W.;  Walters,  W.  Global  Governmentality  Governing  International  Spaces;  Routledge: 

London, UK, New York, NY, USA, 2004. 

6.  Sklair, L. The Transnational Capitalist Class and the Discourse of Globalization. Camb. Rev. Int. Aff. 

2000, 14, 67–85. 

7.  Hayes,  G.;  Horne,  J.  Sustainable  development,  shock  and  awe?  London  2012  and  civil  society. 

Sociology 2011, 45, 749–764. 

8.  Shoval, N. A new phase in the competition for the olympic gold: The London and New York bids 

for the 2012 games. J. Urban Aff. 2002, 24, 583–599. 

9.  Gold, J.R.; Gold, M.M. Olympic Cities: City Agendas, Planning, and the World’s Games, 1896 to 

2012; Routledge: London, UK. 2007. 

10.  Goldman,  S.  Goldman  Sachs  Global  Economics,  Commodities  and  Strategy  Research.  In  The 

World  Cup  and  Economics  2010;  Goldman  Sachs  Global  Investment  Research  Division:  New 

York, NY, USA. 2010. 

11.  Gusmão  de  Oliveira,  N.;  Gaffney,  C.  Rio  de  Janeiro  e  Barcelona:  Os  Limites  do  Paradigmo 

Olímpico (in Portuguese). Available online: http://www.ub.edu/geocrit/b3w-895/b3w-895-17.htm 

(accessed on 12 August 2013).  

Sustainability 2013, 5 

3938 

 
12.  Tremlett, G. Billionaire superyachts cast a shadow over barcelona’s traditional barrios. Available 

online:  http://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/apr/21/billionaire-superyachts-barcelona-barrios. 

(accessed on 12 August 2013).  

13.  Kassens-Noor,  E.  Planning  Olympic  Legacies:  Transport  Dreams  and  Urban  Realities; 

Routledge: Oxon, UK, 2012. 

14.  International  Olympic  Committee.  2011  Olympic  Charter;  International  Olympic  Committee: 

Lausanne, Switzerland, 2011; Chapter 1, Rule 2, Paragraph 13. 

15.  International  Olympic  Committee.  Sustainability  through  Sport:  Implementing  the  Olympic 

Movement’s Agenda 21; International Olympic Committee: Lausanne, Switzerland, 2012. 

16.  Fifa.  FIFA  2014  World  Cup  Sustainability  Strategy-Concept;  Federacion  Internacional  de 

Football Association: Zurich, Switzerland, 2012. 

17.  Megaeventos  e  Violações  de  Direitos  Humanos  no  Brasil  (in  Portuguese).  Available  online: 

http://www.apublica.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/01/DossieViolacoesCopa.pdf  (accessed  on  7 

August 2013). 

18.  Gaffney, C. Securing the Olympic city. Georget. J. Int. Aff. 2012, 13, 75–82. 
19.  Campbell,  S.  Green  cities,  growing  cities,  just  cities?  Urban  planning  and  the  contradictions  of 

sustainable development. J. Am. Plan. Assoc. 1996, 62, 296–312. 

20.  Alegi, P. ―A nation to be reckoned with‖: The politics of World Cup stadium construction in Cape 

Town and Durban, South Africa. Afr. Stud. 2008, 67, 397–422. 

21.  Bearak, B. Cost of Stadium Reveals Tensions in South Africa. The New York Times, 12 March 2010. 

22.  Steinbrink,  M.;  Haferburg,  C.;  Ley,  A.  Festivalisation  and  urban  renewal  in  the  Global  South: 

socio-spatial consequences of the 2010 FIFA World Cup. S. Afr. Geogr. J. 2011, 93, 15–28. 

23.  Center on Housing Rights and Evictions (COHRE). Fair Play for Housing Rights: Mega-Events, 

Olympic  Games  and  Housing  Rights;  Center  on  Housing  Rights  and  Evicitions:  Geneva, 

Switzerland, 2007. 

24.  Gaffney,  C.  Mega-events  and  socio-spatial  dynamics  in  Rio  de  Janeiro,  1919–2016.  J.  Lat.  Am. 

Geogr. 2010, 9, 7–29. 

25.  Sánchez,  F.  A  Reinvenção  das  Cidades  Para  um  Mercado  Mundial  (in  Portuguese);  Editora 

Universitária: Argos, Greece, 2003; p. 596. 

26.  Vainer,  C.  Cidades  de  excesão.  In  Anais  do  XIV  Encontro  da  ENANPUR  (in  Portuguese); 

Associação Nacional de Pós-graduação e Pesquisa em Planejamento Urbano e Regional: Brasília, 

Brazil, 2011. 

27.  Arantes, O. A Cidade do Pensamento Ú nico: Desmanchando Consensos (in Portuguese); Editora 

Vozes: Petrópolis, Brazil, 2000. 

28.  Barchfield,  J.  Rio’s  Housing  Prices  Spell  Trouble 

in  Paradise.  Available  online: 

http://bigstory.ap.org/content/rios-housing-prices-spell-trouble-paradise (accessed on 6 May 2013). 

29.  Cardoso, A.L.; Leal, J.A. Housing markets in Brazil: Recent  trends and governmental responses 

to the 2008 crisis. Int. J. Hous. Policy 2010, 10, 191–208. 

30.  Raeder,  S.  Conflitos  no  ordenamento  territorial  em  sedes  de  megaeventos  esportivos.  Esporte  e 

Sociedade 2008, 4, 1–29, (in Portuguese). 

31.  Mascarenhas,  G.;  Bienenstein,  G.;  Sánchez,  F.  O  Jogo  Continua:  Megaeventos  Esportivos  e 

Cidades (in Portuguese); EdUERJ: Rio de Janeiro, Brasil, 2011. 

Sustainability 2013, 5 

3939 

 
32.  Câmera  Municipal  do  Rio  de  Janeiro.  Novo  Plano  Diretor  da  Cidade  do  Rio  de  Janeiro  – 

Complementary Law number 111 de 1 February 2011, (in Portuguese).  

33.  Quote  from  mayor  Eduardo  Paes  shown  in  a  video  presented  by  Rio  2016  President  Carlos 

Nuzman to the International Correspondent’s Association in November of 2011, (in Portuguese). 

34.  Shaw,  C.A.  Five  Ring  Circus:  Myths  and  Realities  of  the  Olympic  Games;  New  Society 

Publishers: Gabriola Island, Canada, 2008. 

35.  Raco,  M.;  Tunney,  E.  Visibilities  and  Invisibilities  in  Urban  Development:  Small  Business 

Communities and the London Olympics 2012; Urban Studies: Thousand Oaks, CA, USA, 2010. 

36.  The, E. Castles in the Sand. Available online: http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21581764-

most-expensive-olympic-games-history-offer-rich-pickings-select-few-castles  (accessed  on  10 

July 2013). 

37.  Jørgensen,  M.  Discourse  Analysis  as  Theory  and  Method;  Sage  Publications:  London,  UK, 

Thousand Oaks, CA, USA, 2002; p. 229. 

38.  Howarth,  D.  Power,  discourse,  and  policy:  Articulating  a  hegemony  approach  to  critical  policy 

studies. Crit. Policy Stud. 2010, 3, 309–335. 

39.  Chouliaraki,  L.;  Fairclough,  N.  Critical  discourse  analysis  in  organizational  studies:  Towards an 

integrationist methodology. J. Manag. Stud. 2010, 47, 1213–1218. 

40.  McHoul,  A.W.;  Rapley,  M.  How  to  Analyse  Talk  in  Institutional  Settings:  A  Casebook  of 

Methods; Continuum: London, UK, New York, NY, USA, 2001; p. 239. 

41.  Caldas-Coulthard,  C.R.;  Coulthard,  M.  Texts  and  Practices:  Readings  in  Critical  Discourse 

Analysis. Routledge: London, UK, 2013; p. 304. 

42.  The  Critical  Discourse  Analysis  method  employed  here  was  accomplished  by  scanning  the  Rio 

2016  Bid  Book  pdf  files  for  word  frequency.  In  each  book,  the  author  entered  a  search  word, 

noting  each  time  the  word  appeared,  checking  it  for  relevant  meaning.  While  somewhat 

subjective,  the  intention  was  to  note  the  deployment  of  a  sequence  of  words  that  could  form  a 

semantic network yet also operate independently to convey meaning to a target audience.  

43.  Silva, G. Processo de ocupação urbana da Barra da Tijuca (RJ): Problemas ambientais, conflitos 

sócio-ambientais, impactos ambientais urbanos. Pesquisa em Arquitetura e Construção 2006, 11, 

1–29, (in Portuguese). 

44.  There was one public source in the state of Rio de Janeiro (Japeri) but it has been cut through by 

the  extension  of  the  Arco  Metropolitano  highway.  It  served  a  low  income  community  as  an 

education  and  leisure  center.  Available  online:  http://www.japerigolfe.com.br/  (accessed  on  1  

July 2012). 

45.  Wheeler,  K.;  Nauright,  J.  A  global  perspective  on  the  environmental  impact  of  golf.  Sport  Soc. 

2006, 9, 427–443. 

46.  Gismondi,  L.  Rio  escolhe  empresa  americana  para  construir  campo  de  golfe  olímpico  (in 

Portuguese).  Available  online:  http://globoesporte.globo.com/olimpiadas/noticia/2012/03/sem-

pretensao-de-popularizar-o-golfe-projeto-do-campo-olimpico-e-escolhido.html  (accessed  on  5 

August 2013). 

47.  Rebelo,  P.  Condomínio  é  multado  por  despejar  esgoto  em  lagoa  da  Barra  da  Tijuca  (in 

Portuguese).  Available  online:  http://oglobo.globo.com/rio/condominio-multado-por-despejar-

esgoto-em-lagoa-da-barra-da-tijuca-6053637 (accessed on 11 September 2012). 

Sustainability 2013, 5 

3940 

 
48.  Rio de Janeiro City Hall. Projeto de Lei Complementar 113/1012(in Portuguese); City of Rio de 

Janeiro: Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 2012. 

49.  Brisolla, F. Pasquale Mauro é alvo de dezenas de processos em que é acusado de posse ilegal na 

região  da  Barra  (in  Portuguese).  Available  online:  http://oglobo.globo.com/rio/pasquale-mauro-

alvo-de-dezenas-de-processos-em-que-acusado-de-posse-ilegal-na-regiao-da-barra-2720984 (accessed 

4 July 2013).  

50.  Lima,  C.  Manifestantes  fazem  protesto  contra  campo  de  golfe  na  APA  de  Marapendi  (in 

Portuguese).  Available  online:  http://www.jb.com.br/rio/noticias/2013/02/23/manifestantes-fazem- 

protesto-contra-campo-de-golfe-na-apa-de-marapendi/ (accessed 1 September 2013).  
51.  Organizing Committee of the Rio 2016 Olympic Games press release, 20 March 2013. 
52.  Eighteen Tons of Trash are Collected at the Opening Game of the Confederations Cup. Available 

online: 

http://radioglobo.globoradio.globo.com/noticias/2013/06/17/DEZOITO-TONELADAS-

DE-LIXO-SAO-RECOLHIDAS-NA-ABERTURA-DA-COPA-DAS-CONFEDERACOES.htm 

(accessed on 15 June 2013). 

53.  International Olympic Committee. The Environment and Sustainable Development; International 

Olympic Committee: Lausanne, Switzerland, 2012. 

54.  Gusmão  de  Oliveira,  N.  O  Poder  dos  Jogos  e os  Jogos  do  Poder  (in Portuguese);  Universidade 

Federal do Rio de Janeiro: Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 2012; p. 450. 

55.  Agamben, G. State of Exception; University of Chicago Press: Chicago, IL, USA, 2005. 
56.  The urban manifestations that occurred in Brazil in June and July of 2013 were initially called the 

Vinegar Revolt after a São Paulo based journalist was arrested by the Military Police for carrying 

a bottle of vinegar. Vinegar is used to counteract the effects of tear gas on the respiratory system.  
57.  I differentiate between transportation and urban mobility. Transportation in relation to the Games 

Bid  Books  is  exclusively  targeted  at  moving  Games-related  individuals  between  venues,  tourist 

sites, hotels, and points of entry. Urban mobility addresses the fundamental rights of residents to 

the city and includes a broader geographic vision of metropolitan areas. In the Rio 2016 bid, none 

of  the  transportation  projects  have  any  connection  with  the  smaller  cities  that  comprise  the 

metropolitan region. 

58.  Stavrides, S. The Athens 2004 Olympics: Modernization as a State of Emergency, in Mega-Events 

and the City; Universidade Federal Fluminense: Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 2010. 

59.  Death,  C.  ―Greening‖  the  2010  FIFA  World  Cup:  Environmental  sustainability  and  the  

mega-event in South Africa. J. Environ. Policy Plan. 2011, 13, 99–117. 

60.  Shin, H.B. Unequal cities of spectacle and mega-events in China. City 2012, 16, 728–744. 
61.  Gollagher,  M.;  Hartz-Karp,  J.  The  role  of  deliberative  collaborative  governance  in  achieving 

sustainable cities. Sustainability 2013, 5, 2343–2366. 

©  2013  by  the  author;  licensee  MDPI,  Basel,  Switzerland.  This  article  is  an  open  access  article 

distributed  under 

the 

terms  and  conditions  of 

the  Creative  Commons  Attribution 

license 

(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/). 

