Music and Altered States 

of Consciousness:

Time is the Key
By Jörg C. Fachner

Allison Moreno Drexler

Overview

I. Origins of the field and definitions
II. Characteristics of music-listening effects
III. Neural aspects
IV. Psychophysiological measurements

A. Oohashi et al. (2002)
B. Hove et al. (2015)

V. Chemically induced or musically induced?
VI. Applications
VII. Discussion

Rouget (1985): A Theory of the Relations Between Music 
and Possession

“Trance is always associated with a greater or lesser degree 
of sensory overstimulation—noises, music, smells, agitation—
ecstasy, on the contrary, is most often tied to sensorial 
deprivation—silence, fasting, darkness”

Rouget, 1985 (cont’d)

Note: Do not confuse with the diametrical meanings of the terms “trance” and 
“ecstasy”

Characteristics of Effects of Music-Listening (Fachner, 2011)

Physiological changes:

Autonomous nervous system
Muscle tension
Blood flow in brain structures (emotion)* Depth of breathing
Dopamine release

Heart beat
Skin resistance (EDA)

Chills

Psychological:

Alteration of the focus of attention →  Empty content of memory 
(Dietrich, 2002) Transient hypofrontality & working memory reduced

Neural:

Increased activity

Decreased activity

Similar activation in ASC with euphoric effects, like cocaine

ventral striatum

amygdala

dorsomedial midbrain

left hippocampus

insula

orbitofrontal cortex

ventromedial prefrontal cortex

Rhythmic Body Movements (Vaitl, 2005)

Synchronization of external auditory 
stimuli with no control and no effort.

Rhythmic movement

Respiration synced to 

movement

Induces heart rate oscillations
“Respiratory sinus arrhythmia”

Respiratory/cardiac synchronization

Stimulate carotid receptors

*Slower HR

*Cortical arousal

*Higher pain thresholds
*Lower muscular reflexes
*Higher theta wave activity

This Is Your Brain on Music (Daniel Levitin, 2008)

Cascade of activation 

Auditory 
centers

Frontal 
regions 
BA44/47

Mesolimbic 

system

Nucleus 
accumbens

Dopamine 
release

Activation of cerebellum, basal ganglia, and brain structures 

involved in dopamine, motor, and timing processes.

Psychophysiological Measures
Oohashi et al. (2002)

Subjects: 3 healthy male Balinese performing ritual drama; only one reached ASC

Methods: EEG recordings while in movement; extensive removal of artefacts

Main result: During possession trance, power increases in theta and alpha frequencies.

Psychophysiological Measures

Hove et al. (2015)

Subjects:  15 shamanic practitioners from Germany & Austria (11 female)
Methods:  Rhythmic drumming (trance & non-trance conditions) presented on headphones for 
8 min. Simultaneous fMRI and EEG, and post-test questionnaire data were collected.

Psychophysiological Measures

Main Results: * Eigenvector centrality shows 3 hubs with higher values and one with a 

lower value during trance vs non-trance. 

* Posterior Cingulate Cortex-Seed analysis showed increased connectivity of 
control-network regions with the PCC default hub during trance.

Conclusion:

Shamanic trance involves a reconfiguration of connectivity between brain 
regions

Chemically Induced ASC and Music

Fachner calls for further research using both chemicals and music to study ASC processes in 
vivo.

Current Research:
Kaelner at el. (2015) explores whether music-evoked emotions are enhanced under LSD

Results:
LSD does enhance the emotional response to music, especially the emotions of “wonder”, 
“transcendence”, “power” and “tenderness”

Conclusion:
This effect could be adopted for psychotherapy following further research

Applications of ASC with music

Evolution:

Pre-linguistic communication:

* Transfer of information through absorption
* Group bonding through chanting
* Empathy, group solidarity, cohesion

Modern day - Shamanism:
 * Acquisition of insight

Modern day - Music Therapy:

* Breaking through habits
* Breaking through beliefs about reality
* Increased alertness for new/complex information

Discussion

1. Do you think that music as an induction method, an enabler for other induction 

methods, or both? How could we test the extent of music’s influence toward 
achieving altered states of consciousness?

2. Can music be attributed for the induction of trance through rhythmic body 

movements? What problems do you find with this concept?

3. We have shortly seen a study that overlaps LSD and music, can you think of a 

clever way to overlap other induction methods for future studies? What limitations 
does this encounter?

References

Cardeña, E. & Winkelmann, M. (Eds.). (2011). Altering Consciousness: Multidisciplinary 

Perspectives. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, LLC

Hove, M., Stelzer, J., Nierhaus, T., Thiel, S., Gundlach, C., . . . Merker, B. (2015). Brain 

Network Reconfiguration and Perceptual Decoupling During an Absorptive State of 
Consciousness. Cerebral Cortex, 1(9). DOI: 10.1093/cercor/bhv137

Kaelen, M., Barrett, F.S., Roseman, L., Lorenz, R., Family, N., . . . Carhart-Harris, R.L. (2015). 

Psychopharmacology, 232, 3607–3614. DOI 10.1007/s00213-015-4014-y

Oohashi, T., Kawaic, N., Hondae, M., Nakamurae, S., Morimotoh, M., Nishinai, E., & 

Maekawaj, T. (2002). Electroencephalographic measurement of possession trance 
in the field. Clinical Neuropsychology, 113, 435-445.

