Introduction to U.S. Law

Federalism and Congressional 

Power Part I

 

 

Goals of this session

● Obtain a basic understanding of:
– The source of government power.
– Why the federal government was needed.
– Why the federal government has limited powers.
– How American federalism works.
– The difficulty in allocating power in the federal 
government to states with different populations.

 

 

Warm-Up Exercises

● Take out your copy of the Constitution.

– Please read the Preamble
– In the Declaration of Independence Thomas 

Jefferson writes:
● “Governments are instituted among Men, deriving their 

just powers from the consent of the governed . . . .”

– In Lincoln's Gettysburg Address talks about:
● “government of the people, by the people, for the 

people.”

● What do these quotes and the preamble have 

in common?

 

 

Warm-Up Exercises

● Now read the following sections:

– Article 1, Section 1
– Article 2, Section 1 (first sentence) & Section 3:

● “he shall take Care that the Laws be faithfully executed”

– Article 3, Section 1

● What do these articles create?
● Now read Article 1, Section 2 

– There are five subsections here. Summarize and be ready to 

explain each.
● Clause 3, just first two sentences.

 

 

Warm-Up Exercises

● Now read Article 1, Section 3

– Just read the first clause, as well as the 17th 

Amendment.

– How many Senators does each state have?
– How were they originally chosen.
– How did the 17th Amendment change this?

 

 

Warm-Up Exercises

● Article 1, Section 8 is perhaps the most 

important section of the entire constitution.
– Before reading, as a group define the concept of 

federalism?

– Look over the chart on the next slide to obtain an 

understanding of two competing views of federalism 
that existed at the time of the drafting of the U.S. 
Constitution.

– Understand the role that the Articles of 

Confederation played in this (see background 
reading)

 

 

 

 

Warm-Up Exercises

● Article 1, Section 1 begins with the words:

– “All legislative Powers herein granted

herein granted shall be vested 

in a Congress of the United States . . . .”

– What is the significance of the words in red when 

read together with Article 1, Section 8?

● Read through this list and then see next slide for 

a summary of the powers vested in Congress.
– These are the so-called “enumerated powers” found 

of Congress.

 

 

Article 1, Section 8

● Spend, Tax, Finances (1, 2, 5, 6)
● Defense (1, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16)
● Commerce (1, 2, 3, 7, 8)
● Immigration (4)
● Bankruptcy (4)
● Create Courts (9)
● Create a National Capitol (17)
● Maritime Law (10)
● Misc (18)

 

 

Enumerated Powers Exercise

● You will be broken up into four groups, each 

representing one of the fours states that make up 
the country of Amerika United.

● Each group has a listed number of delegates to the 

Congress:
– Two Senators
– The remaining are Members of the House
– Select group members to be these delegates.

● Read carefully the characteristics of your state and 
the proposed law. Discuss how you should vote on 
the law to best represent your state's interests.

 

 

Enumerated Powers Exercise

● The law deals with an environmental issue. Go 

back and look at Article 1, Section 8.
– Where is Congress given the power to create 

environmental law?

– Read the Hodel case (see StudIP/Dateien).

● How is “interstate” defined?
● How is “regulate commerce” defined?

– Read Lopez (see StudIP/Ablaufplan for link)

● Does this help use better define “regulate commerce”
● What “three broad categories of activity” may Congress 

regulate under its commerce power?

 

 

Enumerated Powers Exercise

● Why do we need a federal government to pass 

environmental laws?
– Why can't we just leave this up to the states?

● Now that we know that Congress has the power 

to pass such legislation, let's vote on the 
proposed law.
– What is the result?
– NOTE – this is even more complicated once you 

factor in party loyalty.

 

 

The Great Compromise

 

 

 

 

Federalism

● To complete our overview of federalism and 
congressional power, read and summarize:
– Article 9: What is the general purpose here?

● What are they talking about in clause 1?
● How does the 16th Amendment change clause 4?
– Article 10: What is the general purpose here?
– 10th Amendment

● When read in conjunction with Article 1, Section 8 (the 

enumerated powers of Congress), how would you 
characterize American federalism? How do we know 
what powers the states have?

 

 

