|

|

䡬

Articles

Structure and Example in Modular
Political Phenomena: The Diffusion of
Bulldozer/Rose/Orange/Tulip Revolutions

Mark R. Beissinger

The article develops an approach to the study of modular political phenomena (action based in signiﬁcant part on emulation of the
prior successful example of others), focusing on the trade-offs between the inﬂuence of example, structural facilitation, and insti-
tutional constraints. The approach is illustrated through the example of the spread of democratic revolution in the post-communist
region during the 2000–2006 period, with signiﬁcant comparisons to the diffusion of separatist nationalism in the Soviet Union
during the glasnost’ era. Two models by which modular processes unfold are speciﬁed: an elite defection model and an elite learning
model. In both models the power of example is shown to exert an independent effect on outcomes, although the effect is consider-
ably deeper in the former than in the latter case. The elite defection model corresponds to the institutional responses to separatist
nationalism under glasnost’, while the elite learning model describes well the processes involved in the spread modular democratic
revolution among later risers in the post-communist region, limiting the likelihood of further revolutionary successes. The article
concludes with some thoughts about the implications of the power of example for the study of modular phenomena such as democ-
ratization, nationalism, and revolution.

S ince 2000, four successful revolutions have occurred

in the post-communist region, each overthrowing
regimes practicing fraudulent elections and bring-
ing to power new coalitions in the name of democratiza-
tion. These successful revolutions have inspired democratic
oppositions throughout the post-Soviet states toward emu-
lation, and democratic revolution has come to the center
of attention within the American government and
democracy-promoting NGOs as a strategy for democra-
tization. Like European monarchs after 1848, post-
Soviet strongmen have grown tremendously concerned
about the transnational spread of revolution. Most have
already taken countermeasures to stave off such a possi-
bility. Thus, post-Soviet Eurasia has become a region con-
sumed by the hope, fear, and aftermath of modular
revolutionary change.

Mark R. Beissinger is Professor of Politics, Princeton Uni-
versity (mbeissin@princeton.edu). The author is grateful to
the School of Social Science at the Institute for Advanced
Study at Princeton, the Wissenschaftskolleg zu Berlin, and
the University of Wisconsin-Madison for the opportunity to
pursue research for this essay. He would also like to thank
Nancy Bermeo, Valerie Bunce, Atul Kohli, Jon Pevehouse,
Grigore Pop-Eleches, Edward Schatz, Jack Snyder, Al
Stepan, Joshua Tucker, and two anonymous reviewers for
their feedback on an earlier version of this article.

I use the term “modular” in the way in which Tarrow
used the term to describe the spread of collective action
across groups.1 Modular action is action that is based in
signiﬁcant part on the prior successful example of
others—a model being, in one of Webster’s deﬁnitions,
“an example for imitation or emulation.” Modular phe-
nomena like the democratic revolutions that have occurred
among the post-communist states present a challenge for
social science theorizing, because the cross-case inﬂu-
ences that in part drive their spread violate the assump-
tion of the independence of cases that lies at the basis of
much social scientiﬁc analysis—both analyses based on
the Millian method, as well as those statistical analyses
that rely on the assumption that the result of each throw
of the political dice is independent of the results of prior
throws. In social science the problem of cross-case inﬂu-
ences is sometimes known as “Galton’s problem,” named
after Sir Francis Galton, who in 1889 criticized an analy-
sis of Edward Tylor that claimed to show correlations
between economic and familial institutions in a wide
variety of societies and explained them from a function-
alist standpoint. Galton questioned whether these cus-
toms were independent of one another, speculating that
they may have ultimately derived from an earlier com-
mon source. Modular phenomena based in the conscious
emulation of prior successful example constitute only one
form of cross-case inﬂuence; spillover effects, herding
behavior, path-dependence, and reputational effects are

DOI: 10.1017/S1537592707070776

June 2007 | Vol. 5/No. 2 259

䡬

䡬

|

|

䡬

䡬

Articles | Structure and Example in Modular Political Phenomena

other ways in which cases may be connected with one
another. Not all social phenomena are modular, and Gal-
ton’s problem is not a universal one. But in a globalizing,
electronic world in which local events are often moni-
tored on a daily basis on the other side of the planet, the
challenges posed to social scientiﬁc analysis by Galton’s
problem (and by modular behavior in particular) are grow-
ing in many spheres of activity.

Galton’s problem is a signiﬁcant issue within the study
of democratization and revolution. Since the 1980s it has
generally been recognized that democratization has come
in waves affecting particular world regions or groups of
countries within relatively compact periods of time, and
scholars ranging from Huntington to Whitehead have writ-
ten of the demonstration effects of one case on another.2
There is indeed considerable cross-national statistical evi-
dence, much of it coming from the international relations
ﬁeld, that demonstrates that cross-case inﬂuence has played
an important role in fostering democratization. Dividing
the world into seven regions, Pevehouse has shown in a
cross-national time-series study that, controlling for other
factors, an authoritarian regime’s odds of a democratic
transition are increased anywhere from 6 to 10 percent for
each country in its world region that is democratic.3 Yet,
much of the comparative politics literature on democrati-
zation continues to treat cases as if they were entirely inde-
pendent of one another and has failed to probe the
consequences that might ﬂow speciﬁcally from change
through example. A review article concerning what the
past two decades in the study of democratic transitions
have taught us, for instance, does not even raise the issue.4
This neglect of the implications of cross-case inﬂuence is
true to a large degree across the various schools of thought
within the democratization literature—both among those
focusing on the social structural pre-requisites for democ-
ratization, as well as those focusing on the speciﬁc context
of transition. The situation within the study of revolu-
tions is equally unsatisfactory. Revolutions have long been
known to be modular in nature; one need merely recall
late eighteenth- and early nineteenth-century revolutions
in the Americas and Europe, the revolutions of 1848, and
the revolutions of 1989. An older generation of historians
treated revolutions as inter-related phenomena, not as a
collection of unrelated cases.5 But while a few scholars
continue to place the cross-case aspects of revolution cen-
trally in their work, most social science theories of revo-
lutions treat cases as if they were entirely independent of
one another.6

My purposes in this article are two-fold: to lay out an
approach to the study of modular political phenomena
in general, and to analyze the modular democratic revo-
lutions currently taking place in the post-communist region
in accordance with this approach. The spread of demo-
cratic revolution to the post-Soviet states was not pre-
dicted by most analysts. Scholars who write about

260 Perspectives on Politics

democratic revolutions had argued that the most likely
regimes to experience democratic revolutions were sul-
tanistic regimes or frozen post-totalitarianisms ( Juan Linz’s
term for ossiﬁed communist regimes).7 None of the
regimes that have so far experienced modular democratic
revolution could be characterized in such terms. More-
over, prior to these revolutions most analysts believed
that the structural conditions for successful revolution in
the region were weak, and that governments would
undoubtedly repress any such attempt. Post-Soviet states
were believed to have reached some type of dismal equi-
librium of pseudo-democracy and corruption, and that
some version of authoritarianism was an inescapable part
of the post-Soviet legacy (the Baltic being the only excep-
tions). Even most Serbs, Georgians, Ukrainians, and Kyr-
gyz did not believe that such events were possible prior
to their occurrence.8 The rise of modular democratic rev-
olution in the post-communist states thus confounded
expert predictions and public expectations alike—not the
ﬁrst time this has happened in this part of the world.

Those analysts who were skeptical about the possibili-
ties for revolution in the post-communist region were per-
haps not so far off the mark. Taken individually, the
structural conditions for revolutionary success in each of
these countries could be seen as lacking in certain respects.
But analysts failed to take into consideration the power of
example. My argument is that within modular phenom-
ena the inﬂuence of example can substitute to some extent
for structural disadvantage, allowing some groups that
might be less structurally advantaged to engage in success-
ful action by riding the inﬂuence of the prior example of
others. Herzen called this history’s “chronological unfair-
ness,” for by taking advantage of the actions of one’s pre-
decessors, one does not have to pay the same price.9 I will
argue that, in the case of the democratic revolutions of the
post-communist region, without these cross-case effects,
failed revolution or even the absence of attempted revolu-
tion would have been much more widespread phenomena
than they have been, and groups that are less structurally
advantaged in terms of the factors facilitating revolution
or democratic transition have come to succeed due to the
ability to take advantage of the example of others.

After introducing the subject of modular democratic
revolution, I will lay out an approach to the study of
modular phenomena in general, focusing on the tradeoffs
between structural facilitation, the power of example, and
institutional constraints. I will illustrate this approach
through the example of the spread of modular democratic
revolution in the post-communist region, with compari-
sons to the diffusion of separatist nationalism in the Soviet
Union during the glasnost era—a modular process that I
have studied in depth elsewhere.10 In particular, I will
specify two models by which modular processes unfold:
an elite defection model and an elite learning model. As I
will show, in both models the power of example exerts an

䡬

|

|

important impact on outcomes, though the effect is con-
siderably deeper in the former than in the latter case. I will
also suggest that the elite learning model describes well
the processes involved in the spread of modular demo-
cratic revolution among later risers in the post-communist
region, limiting the likelihood of further revolutionary
successes. Finally, I will conclude with some thoughts about
what the implications of the power of example might be
for the study of modular phenomena such as democrati-
zation, nationalism, and revolution, and what precisely
we gain by integrating cross-case inﬂuences better into
our study of these subjects.

What Is Modular Democratic
Revolution?
In the study of collective action, the notion of modularity
has often been applied to the borrowing of mobilizational
frames, repertoires, or modes of contention across cases.
The revolutions that have materialized among the post-
communist states since 2000 are examples of a modular
phenomenon in this sense, with prior successful examples
affecting the materialization of subsequent cases. Each suc-
cessful democratic revolution has produced an experience
that has been consciously borrowed by others, spread by
NGOs, and emulated by local social movements, forming
the contours of a model.11 With each iteration the model
has altered somewhat as it confronts the reality of local
circumstances. But its basic elements have revolved around
six features:

1) the use of stolen elections as the occasion for massive

mobilizations against pseudo-democratic regimes;

2) foreign support for the development of local dem-

ocratic movements;

3) the organization of radical youth movements using
unconventional protest tactics prior to the election
in order to undermine the regime’s popularity and
will to repress and to prepare for a ﬁnal showdown;
4) a united opposition established in part through for-

eign prodding;

5) external diplomatic pressure and unusually large elec-

toral monitoring; and

6) massive mobilization upon the announcement of
fraudulent electoral results and the use of non-
violent resistance tactics taken directly from the work
of Gene Sharp, the guru of non-violent resistance in
the West.12

Sharp is the head of the Albert Einstein Institute in
Boston and the author of a manual on non-violent resis-
tance that has become a bestseller among would-be dem-
ocrats in the post-communist region. The philosophy
underlying Sharp’s understanding of how democratiza-
tion is to be achieved is the polar opposite of that which
scholars associated with the pacting school advocate. He

䡬

䡬

plainly speaks out against negotiating with dictators and
calls for a powerful and disciplined resistance force armed
with techniques of non-violent protest and a grand stra-
tegic plan for liberation.

Sharp’s ideas shaped the development of the civil dis-
obedience strategy of the Serbian opposition in 1999 after
several failed attempts at bringing down Milosˇevic´ and
were especially inﬂuential with the dissident student group
Otpor (Resistance), which played a central role in the
Bulldozer Revolution. Since then, Otpor activists have
become, as one Serbian analyst has put it, “a modern type
of mercenary,” traveling around the world, often on the
bill of the U.S. government or NGOs, in order to train
local groups in how to organize a democratic revolution.13
One of the signiﬁcant novelties of this wave of democratic
change has been the roles of the American government
and of democracy-promotion NGOs in fostering the spread
of democratic revolution. The U.S. government is said
to have spent $41 million promoting anti-Milosˇevic´ civil
society groups like Otpor prior to the Bulldozer Revolu-
tion. It even erected a series of transmitters around the
periphery of Serbia to provide objective news coverage
and established a special ofﬁce in Budapest to coordinate
its assistance program to Milosˇevic´’s democratic oppo-
nents.14 Since 2000, growing conﬂict between the U.S.
and a number of post-communist governments (particu-
larly Belarus, Ukraine, Russia, and Uzbekistan) over their
foreign policy orientations and internal human rights prac-
tices and the Bush administration’s embrace of unilateral
efforts to shape the world in American interest have been
responsible for a more aggressive approach toward foster-
ing democratization in the post-Soviet region. In Novem-
ber 2003, as the Georgian Rose Revolution was getting
under way, George W. Bush spoke before the National
Endowment for Democracy, where he called the Ameri-
can invasion of Iraq the beginning of a “global democratic
revolution”.15 Since then, we have seen active efforts by
the United States to support democratic revolutionaries
within the post-Soviet region and elsewhere. The United
States government spent $65 million promoting democ-
racy in Ukraine in the years immediately preceding the
Orange Revolution—much of it channeled through third-
party NGOs to Ukrainian NGOs and social movements,
many of which played a direct role in the Orange Revo-
lution.16 In October 2004 President Bush signed the
Belarus Democracy Act, which authorizes assistance to
pro-democracy activism in Belarus with the intention of
overthrowing the Lukashenka regime. In May 2005 Bush
traveled to Tbilisi, where he praised the Rose Revolution
as an example to be emulated throughout the Caucasus
and Central Asia. Foreign democracy-promoting NGOs
were not a signiﬁcant part of the Portuguese Revolution,
the “People Power” revolutions of East Asia, or the 1989
revolutions in East Europe. But under the inﬂuence of
the civil society communities that they serve and their

June 2007 | Vol. 5/No. 2 261

䡬

|

|

䡬

䡬

Articles | Structure and Example in Modular Political Phenomena

government funders, and often under pressure from repres-
sive states themselves, a number of American-based NGOs
(Freedom House, the National Endowment for Democ-
racy, the National Democratic Institute, the International
Republican Institute, and the Soros Foundation) have qui-
etly come to embrace more confrontational modes of fos-
tering change, even while seeking to promote democratic
evolution from within.17

The emulative character of these revolutions is evident
in the transnational linkages connecting them. Georgian
civil society activists ﬁrst formed links with Otpor in spring
2003 (six months before the Rose Revolution), when they
visited Belgrade on a trip sponsored by the Soros Founda-
tion. Within days of their return, they had created Kmara
(meaning “Enough”)—the Georgian version of Otpor—
then consisting of 20 activist students, eventually turning
it into a 3,000-strong movement. Otpor activists from
Serbia continued to interact with Kmara in the months
preceding the Rose Revolution, training them in tech-
niques of non-violent resistance, and were, as one of the
founders of Kmara noted, “a huge source of inspiration”
for the group. Kmara even borrowed the logo of Otpor
(the clenched ﬁst). The local Georgian branch of the Soros
Foundation helped support Kmara out of its $350,000
election support program, and Kmara and other opposi-
tion groups received signiﬁcant ﬁnancial and organiza-
tional support from the National Democratic Institute.18
In Ukraine, the youth movement Pora, which played the
central role in making the Orange Revolution, was mod-
eled in turn on Georgian and Serbian movements. Under
the inﬂuence of Georgian and Serbian examples, it devel-
oped its own action program in spring 2004. Fourteen
Pora leaders were trained in Serbia at the Center for Non-
Violent Resistance, an organization set up by Otpor activ-
ists to instruct youth leaders from around the world in
how to organize a movement, motivate voters, and develop
mass actions. Pora even conducted summer camps in civil
disobedience training for its members.19 Otpor activists
traveled to Ukraine to provide hands-on instruction in
how to mount an effective protest campaign. “They taught
us everything we know,” one leading member of Pora told
a Deutsche Welle correspondent.20 There was a visible
Serb and Georgian presence at the events in Kyiv. Indeed,
at many of the demonstrations the Georgian ﬂag was bran-
dished by protestors as a symbol of what the Orange Rev-
olution was seeking to achieve.

The Georgian leader Mikheil Saakashvili tells the story
of how a Kyrgyz opposition leader confronted him out-
side a Moscow hotel after the Rose Revolution, telling
him that he was the future Saakashvili of his country.21 A
number of Kyrgyz youth came to Ukraine during the
Orange Revolution as election observers; they returned
home to create a new movement, Kelkel (Renaissance),
modeled on Otpor and Pora.22 In March 2005 Kyrgyz
opposition leaders organized their own “Tulip Revolu-

262 Perspectives on Politics

tion” in the wake of fraudulent elections, drawing inspi-
ration from Georgia and Ukraine; instead of orange, they
sported yellow and pink, seizing a number of towns in
southern Kyrgyzstan, installing a power parallel to the gov-
ernment, and calling on Akaev to resign. Eventually, the
revolution spread to the north, leading to riots and the
violent storming of the presidential palace when a dem-
onstration of ten thousand, spearheaded by Kelkel, was
attacked by thugs loyal to the Akaev regime.

Each example of successful revolution brought about a
fresh rash of attempts at emulation. In the wake of the
Orange and Tulip revolutions, interest in modular demo-
cratic revolution among democratic activists throughout
the post-Soviet region was enormous. In Russia, univer-
sity students organized a movement known as “Walking
Without Putin”—a democratic youth group whose name
is a parody of the pro-Putin youth group “Walking
Together.” Other groups known as Red Pora, Russian Pora,
and Orange Moscow sprang into existence. In Belarus,
the youth movement Zubr (Bison), modeled on Otpor,
was in operation since 2001, inspired by the Serbian events.
Azerbaijani and Kazakhstani opposition leaders immedi-
ately ﬂew to Kyiv after the Orange Revolution to learn
how they might emulate the Ukrainian success.23 As one
leader of Pora noted, “In the last weeks of the Orange
Revolution I had more meetings with leaders of demo-
cratic movements from Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, Russia,
Moldova, and Belarus than with our own”.24 Youth move-
ments modeled on Otpor were also created in Albania,
Egypt, and Zimbabwe. The so-called “Cedar Revolution”
in Lebanon—so named by a State Department ofﬁcial
making the analogy between the massive protests in Bei-
rut and the modular democratic revolutions of the post-
communist region—gained some inspiration from events
in Georgia and Ukraine, including the youth orientation
of the protests, the construction of tent cities, the handing
out of ﬂowers to police, and the carnival atmosphere on
Martyr’s Square. However, it deviated signiﬁcantly from
the model in that it was not initiated in response to elec-
toral fraud, but was rather in reaction to the assassination
of former prime minister Raﬁq al-Hariri. Efforts to spread
the model in 2005 to Togo, Zimbabwe, and Egypt largely
failed, raising questions about whether the model is likely
to have much resonance beyond the post-communist
region.

Thus, each of these revolutions drew inspiration and
expertise from previous cases, and each has inspired a rash
of emulative activity. At the same time, each was based on
local initiative and local sources of dissatisfaction, and
each played itself out somewhat differently. They were not
manufactured abroad, though they did rely on some crit-
ical foreign (mainly U.S.) support. Nevertheless, Geor-
gian, Ukrainian, and Kyrgyz revolutions were heavily
inﬂuenced by preceding revolutions and took previous
cases as a model for their actions. These revolutions and

䡬

|

|

the numerous attempts to emulate them were not entirely
independent cases, but rather an interrelated modular phe-
nomenon in which opposition groups borrowed frames,
strategies, repertoires, and even logos from previously suc-
cessful efforts and gained inspiration from the acts of others.

Structure and Example in Modular
Political Action
How should we conceptualize causation within modular
phenomena such as the modular democratic revolutions
of the post-communist region—i.e., within a set of inter-
related cases rather than a set of independent cases? My
work on nationalist mobilization in the Soviet Union in
the glasnost era has something to contribute to this issue,
because modular democratic revolution shares certain
underlying similarities with the modular spread of nation-
alism.25 Both were sets of interrelated cases whose out-
comes were driven in part through the power of example,
leading to results that, prior to these events, seemed beyond
the imaginable. The cross-national inﬂuence of one nation-
alism upon another was critical to the processes of nation-
alist mobilization that brought about the collapse of the
Soviet state. In the glasnost tide of nationalism some agents
consciously sought to foster these cross-case inﬂuences so
as to spread contention spatially, while other agents
attempted to ride the tide generated from the actions of
others for similarly strategic reasons. Beginning in 1988,
after the spectacular rise of Baltic nationalism, nationalist
movements throughout the Soviet Union engaged in a
widespread sharing of information, pamphlets, expertise,
modes of challenge, and mobilizational frames. This was
in part an attempt by nationalist movements elsewhere to
capitalize on the prior successes of the Balts.26 Successful
contention in one context, through its example, weak-
ened political order in other contexts by raising expecta-
tions among challengers that state authority could be
successfully challenged through similar means, setting off
an explosion of emulative activity.

The tide of nationalism in the Soviet Union during the
glasnost period was a modular phenomenon par excel-
lence, and because I was able to unpack it with some
degree of rigor, I use it here as a paradigm for understand-
ing modular phenomena more generally. Based on this
experience, all modular political phenomena share ﬁve basic
features in common.

First, modular phenomena are made possible by the
sense of interconnectedness across cases produced by com-
mon institutional characteristics, histories, cultural afﬁn-
ities, or modes of domination, allowing agents to make
analogies across cases and to read relevance into develop-
ments in other contexts. These shared characteristics pro-
mote the monitoring of activity across cases by agents in
different contexts who see themselves in analogous struc-
tural positions. Ironically, these very same policies, insti-

䡬

䡬

tutional arrangements, and modes of domination which
in one temporal context are utilized to uphold order
become, under the inﬂuence of modular change, light-
ning rods for accelerated challenges to order across multi-
ple cases. In the modular democratic revolutions currently
taking place among the post-communist states, corrupt,
patrimonial, pseudo-democratic regimes that rely on elec-
toral fraud have found that the very tools that they have
used to maintain themselves in power have created oppor-
tunities for democratic oppositions to challenge them. Elec-
toral fraud became the deﬁning opportunity for challenging
these regimes precisely because these are regimes that rely
heavily on electoral falsiﬁcation to maintain themselves in
power, making them vulnerable at the point of elections.
Fairbanks (2004) has suggested that pseudo-democratic
regimes may be particularly susceptible to this type of
mobilizational challenge, in large part because these are
regimes that are pretending to be something they are
not.27 Mass confrontation is one way of undermining their
false pretensions to popular support. Even if it is known
ahead of time that the outcome of elections will be falsi-
ﬁed by the regime, the occasion of electoral mobilization
provides democratic oppositions with an opportunity to
create the kinds of networks necessary for carrying out
large-scale protest mobilization and for confronting author-
itarian regimes. The fact that elections occur at regular
intervals allows for iterative attempts at mobilization and
for preparation ahead of time.

In table 1 I have produced a list of 29 elections among
the post-communist states between January 2000 and
December 2006 whose elections have been judged to have
been seriously ﬂawed by the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). Given the central
role of ﬂawed elections in the revolutionary model as it
has developed in the four cases of successful revolution,
this sample could be understood as the set of moments
that these states were potentially vulnerable to modular
democratic revolution. The timing of fraudulent elections
has served as the frame for mobilizational opportunities
for several reasons: the outrage produced from stolen elec-
tions is greater when regimes have freshly engaged in elec-
toral fraud; removal of ofﬁcials is more difﬁcult to carry
out after they have been sworn into ofﬁce and have gained
the legal authority to rule; and regimes are generally more
vulnerable during the electoral cycle, easing the likelihood
of repression. In a modular process one might expect action
outside the basic parameters of the modular frame would
normally be associated with lowered chances of success,
since the model is speciﬁcally constructed to take advan-
tage of the vulnerabilities of those it challenges. Indeed,
in April 2005 Belarusian oppositionists attempted to uti-
lize the fresh experience of the Ukrainian and Kyrgyz rev-
olutions to stage their own revolution outside of the
electoral cycle; they were able to muster only 2,500 fol-
lowers to the streets, and many were arrested. Similarly, in

June 2007 | Vol. 5/No. 2 263

䡬

|

|

䡬

Articles | Structure and Example in Modular Political Phenomena

Table 1
Electoral opportunities for modular democratic revolution among post-Communist regimes
with ﬂawed elections, 2000–2006*

Country
Kyrgyzstan
Tajikistan
Russia
Georgia
Serbia and Montenegro
Belarus
Kyrgyzstan
Azerbaijan
Albania
Belarus
Ukraine
Armenia
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Georgia
Russia
Russia
Kazakhstan
Belarus
Ukraine
Uzbekistan
Kyrgyzstan
Tajikistan
Moldova
Albania
Azerbaijan
Kazakhstan
Belarus
Tajikistan

䡬

Date of election

Type of election

Presence of
electoral fraud

(OSCE)

Other forms
of electoral
violations
(OSCE)

Size

of largest
protest

20-Feb-00
27-Feb-00
26-Mar-00
9-Apr-00
24-Sep-00
15-Oct-00
29-Oct-00
5-Nov-00
24-Jun-01
9-Sep-01
30-Mar-02
19-Feb-03
25-May-03
15-Oct-03
3-Nov-03
7-Dec-03
14-Mar-04
19-Sep-04
13-Oct-04
31-Oct-04
26-Dec-04
27-Feb-05
27-Feb-05
6-Mar-05
3-Jul-05
6-Nov-05
4-Dec-05
19-Mar-06
6-Nov-06

legislative
legislative
presidential
presidential
presidential
legislative
presidential
legislative
legislative
presidential
legislative
presidential
legislative
presidential
legislative
legislative
presidential
legislative
legislative
presidential
legislative
legislative
legislative
legislative
legislative
legislative
presidential
presidential
presidential

yes
yes
no
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
no
no
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
no
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
no
yes
yes
yes
yes

2,000

—
—
—

600,000
300
3,000
15,000

2,000

—

—

25,000

—
300
100,000

—
—
—

—

—
—
—

—

—

3,000
1,000,000

15,000

20,000

20,000

Note: The OSCE also noted flaws in the Romanian elections of November-December 2004. However, despite these flaws, the
opposition won the presidential election. For these reasons I have not included this case among the data.

April 2004, in imitation of the Rose Revolution, Arme-
nian democratic activists attempted to organize a “Carna-
tion Revolution” outside of the electoral cycle, mounting
demonstrations of two to three thousand that called for
annulment of the fraudulent 2003 Armenian elections;
police dispersed the crowds violently, injuring up to a
dozen people.28

Because modular democratic revolution has been struc-
tured by the institutional contingency of elections, there
has generally been a limited time frame for revolutionary
action embedded within it, running from the time when
fraudulent results are announced to when fraudulently
elected ofﬁcials are formally sworn into ofﬁce. Indeed, the
tactic of the Serbian, Georgian, Ukrainian, and Kyrgyz
regimes was to certify the falsiﬁed electoral results and
swear in ofﬁcials as quickly as possible, establishing the
fraudulent electoral outcome as a fait accompli and mak-

ing it more difﬁcult to contest. In the Kyrgyz case the
revolutionary seizure of power occurred several days after
the fraudulently-elected parliament was sworn in, leading
to a post-revolutionary crisis that left the fraudulently-
elected parliament in place and undermining the original
rationale for the revolution. In 12 of these 14 countries
whose elections are listed in table 1, more than one ﬂawed
election occurred during the 2000–2006 period, reﬂect-
ing the iterative nature of opportunities for modular action.
Over the 2007–2010 period 13 additional elections are
scheduled to take place in those post-communist states
practicing ﬂawed elections in which modular revolution
has not yet occurred, at which time these states will again
be potentially at risk.

A second feature of modular political phenomena is
that emulation of prior success is the basic mechanism
that drives the spread of modular phenomena. Emulation

264 Perspectives on Politics

䡬

|

|

captures the analogy-making processes central to modular
action better than the notion of contagion. Contagion
models are often associated with spillover effects or herd-
ing behavior. Economists studying the spread of ﬁnancial
crises, for example, have focused on the herding behavior
of investors as an explanation of the mechanisms driving
sudden ﬂows of capital. Such behavior is shaped through
the power of conformity—i.e., the fear of the conse-
quences of acting differently from others.29 Contagion
models in political science have also revolved around spill-
over effects that rely upon geographic proximity as the
force behind (and indicator of ) diffusion, so that the con-
tact deriving from proximity drives the diffusion process,
often simply by the ways in which actions or groups tran-
scend adjoining political boundaries. Such processes are
different from the power of positive example, which is not
deﬁned by proximity or conformity, but rather by analogy
and the beneﬁts gained through association with prior
success. Serbia, Ukraine, Georgia, and Kyrgyzstan are sep-
arated from each other by thousands of miles, sharing
only their communist heritage and post-communist woes.
But nonetheless their revolutions inﬂuenced each other
profoundly. It is the example of prior success and the gains
one receives by associating oneself with successful exam-
ple that create the main incentives for the spread of mod-
ular phenomena. Each prior successful example raises the
probability of further action in other contexts by raising
expectations of the possibility for success. It does so by
showing, through analogy, that the seemingly impossible
is possible, by providing models for action that worked in
other contexts, and by creating a sense of the ﬂow and
direction of events that has an empowering effect.30

This leads to a third point about modular phenomena
in general: the weight of example in affecting behavior
across cases follows the pattern of a tipping model. At ﬁrst
the inﬂuence of example increases gradually over time with
each success. But it eventually hits a tipping point pro-
duced from the cumulative weight of successful examples,
as the onset of emulative action multiplies rapidly across
groups. This is illustrated in ﬁgure 1, which provides the
Kaplan-Meier estimates of the probability that a demo-
cratic revolutionary youth movement modeled on Otpor
or similar organizations was formed during the 1998–
2006 period in the fourteen post-communist states whose
elections have been judged by the OSCE to have been
seriously ﬂawed. Emulation of Otpor and its tactics began
shortly after the success of the Bulldozer Revolution, and
a signiﬁcant spurt in movement formation occurred in
the wake of the Rose Revolution. But after the Orange
Revolution in 2004, as ﬁgure 1 shows, a tipping point was
reached where movement formation spread rapidly across
groups. The temporally compact, sequential, step-like pat-
tern of action in ﬁgure 1 is typical of a modular phenom-
enon, reﬂecting the way in which prior action inﬂuences
subsequent cases.31

䡬

䡬

Figure 1
Probability of formation of democratic
revolutionary youth movements among
post-Communist regimes with ﬂawed
elections, 1998–2006 (Kaplan-Meier
estimates)

䡬

Of the 29 ﬂawed electoral cycles listed in table 1,
slightly more than half were characterized by an absence
of any attempt to mobilize protest demonstrations in the
wake of fraudulent elections.32 If we also classify these
cases as to whether a transnational inﬂuence was evident
in them (i.e., whether, in reading through the materials
associated with the election, local actors made direct ref-
erence to revolutionary events in other cases or there was
evidence that actors beyond the state were aiding revolu-
tion in the speciﬁc state involved), we see that, as might
be expected in a modular process, the presence of a trans-
national inﬂuence is associated with some degree of pro-
test action over ﬂawed elections (p⫽.009, Fischer’s exact
test, two-tailed). Thus, within modular democratic revo-
lution cross-case inﬂuence is not only identiﬁed with
accelerated movement formation, but with an increased
probability of action as well. Like all tipping phenom-
ena, modular phenomena eventually confront a second
tipping point where the effect of example on subsequent
action begins to diminish quickly and eventually fades—a
subject I will pursue in more depth.

Fourth, in addition to emulation, modular behavior
also involves active efforts by those who have already been
successful to spread action laterally, again largely for stra-
tegic reasons. The incentives for such behavior derive from
a conﬂuence of the demand for knowledge by others seek-
ing to emulate success and the strategic advantages obtained
by those who have already succeeded from what Spruyt
has termed “mutual empowerment”—the tendency to seek
support through the creation of structurally similar peers.33
Such an effort contains a strong strategic element, in that

June 2007 | Vol. 5/No. 2 265

|

|

䡬

䡬

Articles | Structure and Example in Modular Political Phenomena

the ability to roll back successful challenge is greatly dimin-
ished if others are engaged in similar actions. Moreover,
successful challengers often seek to reproduce themselves
elsewhere in order to consolidate support, harnessing the
power of numbers through promotion of groups else-
where sharing similar goals.34 There is often an ideologi-
cal component to such behavior as well in the genuine
belief in the rightness of one’s cause and its applicability to
those subject to analogous modes of domination or insti-
tutional constraint. As was true of the glasnost tide of
nationalism, modular democratic revolution has included
efforts to spread contention laterally by those who engaged
earlier in successful action.35 A banner strung up in the
tent camp in Kyiv’s Independence Square during the
Orange Revolution expressed the internationalist senti-
ments inspired by that revolt: “Today Ukraine, tomorrow
Belarus!”.36 Pora activists have joked about the creation of
a new Comintern for democratic revolution in the post-
Soviet states.37 But in fact Vladislav Kaskiv, the leader of
Pora, met with President Bush at the Bratislava summit
and received the president’s support for creating a center
to aid the spread of democratic revolution to Russia, Bela-
rus, Moldova, and Azerbaijan.38 Like Otpor and Kmara,
Pora has joined the ranks of international consulting cen-
ters engaged in the business of democracy promotion
through modular revolution, appearing with frequency in
Azerbaijan, Belarus, Kazakhstan, and other contexts where
the example of modular revolution has inspired local oppo-
sitions. Thus, one of the characteristics of modular polit-
ical phenomena in general is that the spread of modular
behavior is not simply a matter of the pull of example; it is
also in part a matter of the push of mutual empowerment
by those who have already succeeded. It is here, of course,
that modular processes can also intersect with geopolitical
interests, as, for instance, when foreign states or NGOs
provide resources, skills, and information necessary for
transporting the model.

A ﬁfth feature of modular phenomena is that the spread
of modular action is not a random process, but is shaped
across space and time by certain pre-existing structural
conditions. Essentially, as a modular phenomenon pro-
ceeds, increasing numbers of groups with less conducive
structural pre-conditions are drawn into action as a result
of the inﬂuence of the prior successful example of others.
This is illustrated visually in ﬁgure 2, which shows how
the timing of initial separatist action across groups in the
Soviet Union during the glasnost period intersected with
particular structural factors (speciﬁcally, a group’s popula-
tion size, the status of its federal unit, its level of urban-
ization, and its degree of linguistic assimilation—factors
which are statistically related to separatist mobilization
and are well-documented to be associated with nationalist
mobilization in other contexts). A closer look reveals that
initial separatist action accelerated within several, com-
pact periods of time (mid-1988, early 1989, and 1990)

266 Perspectives on Politics

due to the combined effect of institutional openings and
the inﬂuence of the prior actions of others. But ﬁgure 2
also starkly shows that both the likelihood of action and
the timing of action were systematically shaped by pre-
existing structural conditions. For instance, as can be seen
in ﬁgure 2a, large groups were not only more likely to
engage in separatist action; they also tended to engage in
action earlier. Similar patterns of differentiation in the
timing and likelihood of action are visible for the ethno-
federal status of a group, its level of urbanization, and its
degree of linguistic assimilation. Certain periods of cross-
national inﬂuence were associated with action by groups
possessing particular sets of structural advantages. For exam-
ple, in 1990 groups that were less urbanized and did not
possess union republics, but which were also less assimi-
lated tended to be mobilized into separatist action for the
ﬁrst time. Some features of groups, such as the degree to
which they were linguistically assimilated, did not come
to matter until later in the spread of the modular process,
while other factors, such as group size or union republic
membership, mattered mainly in the early part of the pro-
cess. Thus, structure and example interacted, so that the
likelihood and timing of action were produced in signiﬁ-
cant part out of an interaction between cross-case inﬂu-
ence and structural facilitation.

Analogous processes to those that shaped modular behav-
ior in the glasnost period have been at work in the mod-
ular spread of democratic revolution. Figure 3 provides
the Kaplan-Meier estimates of the probability of forma-
tion of democratic revolutionary youth movements by sub-
group for several of the structural factors for which one
might expect there to be (for theoretical reasons) a rela-
tionship with the phenomenon: gross enrollment rates in
tertiary education; infant mortality rates; oil exports; and
political rights (measured using the Freedom House seven-
point scale). Education has long been associated with
democratization, and the emergence of new elites through
the expansion of education has often been connected with
revolution as well.39 The rise of a new generation of stu-
dents in the post-communist states strongly oriented toward
Europe, steeped in liberal ideas, and willing to take risks
in their defense has been a critical factor in the spread of
modular democratic revolution in the region. One of the
characteristic features of these revolutions has been the
attempt to appeal to youth through the use of unconven-
tional protest tactics, rap music, logos, stickers, and pub-
lic relations akin to brand-name marketing.40 In the
Serbian, Georgian, and Ukrainian cases political controls
over higher education and attempts to rein in the inde-
pendence of universities in the midst of an expansion of
higher education provided the immediate impetus for the
organization of radical youth movements.41 Many studies
have also shown that democracy is most attractive in coun-
tries that have attained a certain level of economic growth
and that have a large middle class, so that, parallel to the

䡬

|

|

䡬

Figure 2
Probability of ﬁrst separatist demonstration by subgroup among forty Soviet nationalities,
1987–1992 (Kaplan-Meier estimates)

䡬

predictions of resource mobilization theory, we should
expect poverty (measured here as infant mortality) to be
negatively associated with the formation of revolutionary
democratic youth movements.42 There is also a large lit-
erature on the “resource curse” and its negative effects on
democracy.43 Ross has found evidence for three separate
mechanisms that might make oil-export economies more
likely to be associated with authoritarian rule: they are
better able to use low tax rates and patronage to dampen
democratic pressures; they have greater capacity through
the wealth generated form energy exports to strengthen
security forces and maintain their loyalty; and growth based
on oil export tends not to foster the kinds of social and
cultural changes (particularly, education) that generate pres-
sures toward democratic government.44 For obvious rea-
sons one would also expect movement formation to be
harder within more repressive political contexts than in
less repressive ones. There are two few cases by which to

test whether the differences in the formation of democ-
racy revolutionary movements by subgroups are statisti-
cally signiﬁcant. But the patterns in ﬁgures 3 suggest that,
as in the modular spread of nationalism during the glas-
nost era, groups that are less structurally advantaged have
not only acted with less frequency than those that are
structurally advantaged, but they also have tended to be
drawn into modular action later than those that are struc-
turally advantaged. In this sense, later risers in a modular
process generally rely more on the power of example than
structural facilitation in motivating action in comparison
with earlier risers.

Figure 4 generalizes this relationship, picturing the trade
offs within modular phenomena between the inﬂuence of
example on subsequent action and the minimal structural
requirements for action. Essentially, in a modular process
each example of prior successful action lowers the struc-
tural requirements for subsequent action by others. At

June 2007 | Vol. 5/No. 2 267

䡬

|

|

䡬

Articles | Structure and Example in Modular Political Phenomena

Figure 3
Probability of formation of democratic revolutionary youth movements by subgroup among
post-Communist regimes with ﬂawed elections (Kaplan-Meier estimates)

䡬

some point in a modular phenomenon this process reaches
a tipping point (t3 in the ﬁgure) where the structural
requirements for action drop precipitously, as groups with
less conducive structural conditions are drawn into action
by the cumulative inﬂuence of the prior successes of oth-
ers. Eventually, modular phenomena confront a second
tipping point (t4 in the ﬁgure) where the effect of example
on subsequent action begins to diminish rapidly and fade.
As the evidence presented earlier indicates, within modu-
lar democratic revolution the ﬁrst tipping point (t3) was
crossed in 2005 in the wake of the Orange Revolution,
when movement formation spread rapidly across groups,
so that groups engaging in action after this tipping point
are likely to possess less conducive structural conditions
for action than those who acted prior to the tipping point.
As I will suggest, because of the way in which institutions
have responded to modular democratic revolution, the
second tipping (t4) in ﬁgure 4 (where the power of exam-

268 Perspectives on Politics

ple begins to dissipate) was also crossed sometime after
the Tulip Revolution, so that whatever inﬂuence example
has exerted on democratic revolutionary outcomes has likely
already occurred.

Institutions and Outcomes in Modular
Political Processes
Two additional important elements of modular phenom-
ena are missing from ﬁgure 4: the role of institutions, and
the effect of example on political outcomes. A further
lesson we can derive about modular phenomena from the
glasnost experience is that example exercises its effects not
only on those who would look to it in support of change,
but also on those who would potentially oppose it. In
ﬁgure 5 I provide two models for how example could
affect those who oppose modular change. In what I call
the elite defection model (ﬁgure 5a), once example gains

䡬

|

|

䡬

Figure 4
Structural requirements for action and the
inﬂuence of example in modular phenomena

Figure 5
Inﬂuence of example and institutional
constraints on structural requirements for
success in modular phenomena

䡬

momentum and crosses the tipping point where modular
behavior accelerates across groups, a general expectation
about the direction in which events are ﬂowing demoral-
izes those representing established institutions, potentially
promoting defections among them and encouraging band-
wagoning behavior. Here, established elites entertain doubts
about their own legitimacy and the future of the struc-
tures they are defending, so that a demonstration of the
vulnerability of such structures in other contexts leads
them to co-opt opposition demands or to seek to bail out
before it becomes too late.

But there is a second way in which institutions can
respond to modular processes—one that corresponds to
the Russian proverb “Repetition is the mother of learn-
ing.” Under what I have called in ﬁgure 5b the elite learn-
ing model, established elites opposing modular change
learn the critical lessons of the model from its repeated
successes and failures and impose additional institutional
constraints on actors to prevent the model from succeed-
ing further. Under this model, established elites retain a
belief in the future of current institutions, hold that estab-
lished elites in other contexts where modular change was
previously successful squandered that future as a result of
foolish moves, and respond to the threat of modular change
by moving aggressively to prevent such challenges, repress-
ing them and raising the institutional constraints that they
face.

The elite defection model was precisely what occurred
throughout much of the Soviet Union as the glasnost mobi-
lizational cycle accelerated, with nomenklatura elites in
many places refashioning themselves as nationalists in an
attempt to coopt or pre-empt the spread of the module.
Soviet institutions had particular difﬁculties adjusting to

the modular spread of separatist nationalism in part because
they were themselves undergoing reform and were in a
state of disarray. Repeated massive mobilizations in dispa-
rate corners of the country demoralized those in power,
fostered elite divisions, undermined the morale of the mil-
itary and the police, and eventually created a sense of the
inevitable ﬂow of events toward Soviet breakup.45 More-
over, because the Soviet Union was a single institutional
space, once the modular process gained weight and insti-
tutional decay began to set in, it became difﬁcult to con-
tain the process of elite defection.

Elite co-optation and defection have played an impor-
tant role among early risers in the spread of modular dem-
ocratic revolution. In the Serbian, Georgian, Ukrainian,
and Kyrgyz cases, defections from the police and the armed
forces ultimately made repression impossible and were the

June 2007 | Vol. 5/No. 2 269

䡬

|

|

䡬

䡬

Articles | Structure and Example in Modular Political Phenomena

most immediate causes of revolutionary success in each of
these cases.46 In the Orange Revolution, even President
Kuchma ultimately defected from Yanukovych’s coalition,
leaving his chosen successor with few mechanisms by which
to suppress rebellion.

However, there is ample evidence that an elite learning
model is more relevant among later risers for modular
democratic revolution than it was for the modular spread
of nationalism in the glasnost era. This is evident in the
growing restrictions on civil society organizations in Rus-
sia, Belarus, Uzbekistan, Azerbaijan, and Kazakhstan. In
the wake of the Orange and Tulip Revolutions authoritar-
ian regimes have cracked down on opponents, closed down
or monitored more closely relations with democracy-
promoting NGOs, and established closer relations with
Russia as a way of providing international support against
the threat of transnational revolution.47 Some have estab-
lished their own pro-regime youth movements to coun-
teract the inﬂuence of transnational youth movements.48
Moreover, regimes have increasingly turned to manipulat-
ing elections without engaging in outright fraud, thereby
avoiding aspects of the model that might fuel opposition
mobilization. This involves various restrictions on oppo-
sition campaigning prior to elections, arresting or harass-
ing opposition activists, controlling media coverage, and
pre-empting opposition protest before it can get under
way. The role of democracy-promoting NGOs like Soros
and Freedom House in fostering modular democratic rev-
olution has also precipitated a backlash against them from
a number of post-Soviet states, which have begun to view
them as revolutionary organizations and to restrict their
activities. The Soros Foundation, for instance, no longer
operates in Belarus, Russia, Turkmenistan, and Uzbeki-
stan because of growing hostility from host governments.
In the wake of the latest revolutionary wave the transna-
tional NGO presence within a number of post-communist
states is waning, as those states threatened by revolution
close these organizations down or make operating condi-
tions increasingly difﬁcult. Thus, as a result of elite learn-
ing the institutional constraints facing potential later risers
within modular democratic revolution are greater than
those facing earlier cases, as regimes learn and engage in
efforts to prevent the spread of the model.

What the institutional responses to modular processes
suggest is that the impact of modular processes on politi-
cal outcomes can differ quite substantially depending on
the ways in which institutions react to them. The argu-
ment, depicted in ﬁgure 5, is that in modular political
phenomena there is an effect of example on political out-
comes under conditions of both elite defection and elite
learning, though the effect on outcomes is deeper and
more extensive in the former than in the latter case. These
effects of a modular process on outcomes occur at two
levels. First, there is the simple constitutive role played by
example in a modular process—that is, without the prior

270 Perspectives on Politics

example of others, there likely would have been no set of
cases in the ﬁrst place, since the cases themselves were
constituted by the emulation of the action of others or the
possibility of such emulation. Would strong Georgian or
Ukrainian separatist movements have emerged in the glas-
nost era without the prior effect of the Baltic example? Or
would a Rose or Orange revolution have occurred in Geor-
gia and Ukraine if there had been no previous Bulldozer
Revolution in Serbia? The answer to both questions is
likely “no.” In both of these modular processes, the actions
that were emulated were largely outside the realm of the
imaginable prior to the materialization of the example
that was emulated. Thus, the inﬂuence of example in a
modular process is built into the very phenomena that we
measure, so that success is in signiﬁcant part deﬁned by
successful emulation and failure by unsuccessful emula-
tion or a lack of attempt to emulate whatsoever.

But I would argue that there is also a more direct inﬂu-
ence of example on outcomes than simply this constitu-
tive effect. Rather, example can, in some cases, substitute
for structural advantage, thereby allowing some less struc-
turally advantaged cases to succeed where, in the absence
of cross-case inﬂuences, they would have been unlikely to
do so. Example is, of course, more effective in inspiring
action than in producing successful action. The glasnost
experience suggests that in a modular process there are
considerably more failures than successes among later ris-
ers. In the glasnost case this was true even under circum-
stances of elite defection (where institutional constraints
for late risers continue to drop) rather than elite learning
(where the institutional constraints facing late risers increase
sharply). This is suggested as well by an analysis of those
structural conditions that, based on the nature of the model,
on theory, or on case histories of the four successful revo-
lutions, one might expect to be associated with successful
modular revolution. Given the central role of stolen elec-
tions in the model, one would expect modular democratic
revolution to meet less success in cases in which electoral
fraud is not practiced. Indeed, in the March 2005 legisla-
tive elections in Moldova, though the opposition had pub-
licly vowed beforehand to replicate the Orange Revolution,
the absence of signiﬁcant electoral fraud made mobiliza-
tion to contest the results difﬁcult. Similarly, theory has
long suggested that mobilization is less likely in contexts
that are relatively open (where grievances can be co-opted)
or relatively closed (where they can be suppressed), and
that successful action is most likely in those cases located
in the middle—an inverted-U relationship between mobi-
lization and openness.49 Political opportunity theories
also suggest that divided government (as when there
is a signiﬁcant opposition presence within legislative
institutions or a regional power base for the opposition)
should increase the likelihood of mobilizational success.50
In Ukraine on the eve of the Orange Revolution, for
instance, Yushchenko’s party Our Ukraine controlled

䡬

|

|

approximately a quarter of the seats within the parliament
(and together with other opposition parties controlled
slightly less than a majority)—a base that aided signiﬁ-
cantly in the politicization of the electoral fraud issue (with
only a few defections from the government coalition, the
legislature voted no-conﬁdence in Yanukovych as prime
minister). In Georgia the major base for the opposition
was in Western Georgia in the area of Mingrelia—a region
long associated with Georgian nationalist Zviad Gamsa-
khurdia and in which Shevardnadze had always been
unpopular. It was from Mingrelia that Saakashvili launched
his three-kilometer-long column of vehicles that moved
on Tbilisi and carried out the demonstrations that ulti-
mately took over the Georgian parliament. Similar pat-
terns of legislative and regional support for opposition are
found in the other successful revolutions as well.51

Foran has argued that a necessary condition for suc-
cessful revolution is a robust political culture of opposi-
tion.52 Thus, one might expect that a tradition of large-
scale protest and opposition would facilitate successful
democratic revolution, since such a tradition means that
mobilizational networks are in place, activists are gener-
ally acquainted with the organizational and tactical aspects
of mobilizing large numbers (necessary for avoiding repres-
sion and encouraging elite defections), and pockets of
the population are also familiar (and comfortable) with
taking to the streets despite the dangers involved. Serbia,
Georgia, and Ukraine had signiﬁcant histories of protest
mobilization in the 1980s and 1990s that stand out in
comparison with many of the other states of the region—a
record paralleled only in Albania, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Moldova, and Russia. The cohesion of those institutions
charged with maintaining order is well known to consti-
tute the critical tipping point determining outcomes within
revolutionary situations.53 In all four cases of revolution-
ary success defections from the police and the armed
forces ultimately made repression impossible.54 A num-
ber of factors make such defections more likely: extremely
large demonstrations (Serbia, Georgia, and Ukraine);
extreme state weakness (Georgia and Kyrgyzstan);55 clan
or family connections between police and demonstrators
(Kyrgyzstan); opposition leadership by former ofﬁcials
with ties to the police or military (all four successful
cases); and the selection of outsiders to run police orga-
nizations (Ukraine). However, there is reason to believe
that among potential later-risers defections from the police
or military are less likely. In Russia, for instance, the
close association of the secret police (FSB) with the Putin
regime—including their use as a source of cadres for
stafﬁng top-level and regional positions—renders it less
likely that the secret police would defect, since the secret
police have a direct stake in the preservation of their
pervasive inﬂuence over government.

In table 2 I have summarized the presence of these
and other factors analyzed earlier (large or growing enroll-

䡬

䡬

ment in higher education, penetration by transnational
democracy-promotion NGOs, and the absence of an
energy-export economy) for the cases of successful revo-
lution and for those elections in the region that will take
place in the 2007–2010 period. As the patterns suggest,
four of these conditions (a conducive degree of political
openness, a recent tradition of protest, regional divisions
within the dominant cultural group, and opposition con-
trol over local government) need not be present for suc-
cessful revolution, though their presence may make success
more likely. The remaining six (the presence of electoral
fraud, signiﬁcant opposition representation in the legis-
lature, large or growing enrollments in higher education,
weakened ties between the regime and the police or mil-
itary, a signiﬁcant presence of transnational democracy-
promoting NGOs, and an absence of an energy-export
economy) are shared across all successful cases and may
well be necessary conditions for success. The purpose of
such an analysis is not to predict whether democratic
revolutions will or will not succeed in speciﬁc cases. Rather,
as table 2 shows, when one looks across this list of struc-
tural conditions facilitating revolutionary success, those
states that have yet to experience modular democratic
revolution face considerably less conducive conditions for
success than those which have already succeeded—with
the sole exception of Kyrgyzstan. Moreover, none of them
possess all six structural features commonly shared across
the four successful cases.

This should not be taken as evidence that outcomes in
a modular process are completely structurally determined
and that example has no independent effect on outcomes.
Rather, as the Kyrgyz case suggests and as is depicted in
ﬁgure 5, modular processes do have distinctive patterns of
outcomes that are not predictable by reference to struc-
ture alone, even under conditions of the elite learning
model (where the effect of example is offset to a signiﬁcant
degree by rising institutional constraints). This is true for
several reasons. First, once a modular process crosses the
initial tipping point, it emboldens oppositions to act where
they might otherwise not have acted, and anytime signif-
icant numbers are encouraged to act, there is always some
small probability, simply from chance effects, that some
will be able to succeed. Moreover, it is not at all clear that
elites always learn the right lessons necessary to prevent
the spread of the model, or may learn these lessons too
late. This is, at least, the way in which many leaders of the
post-Soviet states view the overthrow of Kyrgyzstan Pres-
ident Askar Akaev—and one reason why Uzbekistan Pres-
ident Islam Karimov inﬂicted an overwhelming blow two
months later against demonstrators in Andijan, mas-
sacring up to ﬁve hundred people in a brutal show of force
intended to arrest the further spread of revolution. By
contrast, Akaev at ﬁrst refused to give orders to use vio-
lence against demonstrators, against the advice of his own
aides. Indeed, the Tulip Revolution is a prime example of

June 2007 | Vol. 5/No. 2 271

䡬

|

|

䡬

Articles | Structure and Example in Modular Political Phenomena

Table 2
Structural advantages facilitating modular democratic revolution in prior successful
revolutions and in forthcoming elections, 2007–2010

l

a
r
o

t
c
e
e

l

i

e
v
s
n
e

t
x
e

f

o

e
s
u

t
s
a
P

d
u
a
r
f

e
r
u

t
c
u
r
t
s

a
)
s
t

h
g
i
r

y
t
i

n
u

t
r
o
p
p
o

l

a
c
i
t
i
l

o
P

l

a
c
i
t
i
l

o
p

,

U
-
d
e

t
r
e
v
n
i
(

f

o

n
o

i
t

a

t

n
e
s
e
r
p
e
r

e
r
u

t

l

a
s
g
e

i

l

n

i

t

n
a
c
i
f
i

n
g
S

i

n
o

i
t
i
s
o
p
p
o

t

n
e
m

l
l

o
r
n
e

i

g
n
w
o
r
g

/

e
g
r
a
L

b
n
o

i
t

a
c
u
d
e

r
e
h
g
h

i

n

i

l

e
a
c
s
-
e
g
r
a

l

f

o

n
o

i
t
i

d
a
r
t

t

n
e
c
e
R

t
s
e

t

o
r
p

n
h

i

t
i

w

i

e
m
g
e
r

i

s
n
o
s
v
d

i

i

l

a
n
o
g
e
r

i

g
n
o
r
t

S

p
u
o
r
g

l

a
r
u

t
l

u
c

t

i

n
a
n
m
o
d

r
e
v
o

l

o
r
t
n
o
c

n
o

i
t
i
s
o
p
p
O

t

n
e
m
n
r
e
v
o
g

l

a
c
o

l

n
e
e
w
e
b

t

y
r
a

s
e

i
t

d
e
n
e
k
a
e
W

t
i
l
i

/

m
e
c

i
l

o
p

d
n
a

l

a
n
o

i
t

a
n
s
n
a
r
t

y
b

n
o

i
t

a
r
t

e
n
e
P

s
O
G
N

n
o

i
t

o
m
o
r
p
-
y
c
a
r
c
o
m
e
d

SUCCESSFUL REVOLUTIONS, 2000–2006
Serbia 9-2000
Georgia 11-2003
Ukraine 11-2004
Kyrgyzstan 3-2005

+
+
+
+

+
+
+
0

+
+
+
+

+
+
+
+

+
+
+
0

0
+
+
+

+
+
+
0

+
+
+
+

FORTHCOMING ELECTORAL OPPORTUNITIES FOR MODULAR REVOLUTION, 2007–2010
Armenia 4-2007
Russia 12-2007
Uzbekistan 12-2007
Russia 3-2008
Armenia ?-2008
Azerbaijan 10-2008
Belarus 10-2008
Turkmenistan 12-2008
Moldova 3-2009
Kazakhstan 9-2009
Uzbekistan 12-2009
Tajikistan ?-2010
Azerbaijan 11-2010

0
+
+
+
0
0
0
+
0
+
+
+
0

+
0
0
0
+
0
0
0
+
+
0
0
0

+
0
+
0
+
+
+
+
0
+
+
+
+

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
+
0
0
+
0

+
0
0
0
+
0
0
0
+
0
0
0
0

0
+
0
+
0
0
+
0
0
+
0
0
0

+
+
0
+
+
+
0
0
+
0
0
0
+

+
0
0
0
+
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

+
+
+
+

+
+
0
+
+
+
0
0
+
+
0
0
+

䡬

t
r
o
p
x
e
-
y
g
r
e
n
e

f

o

e
c
n
e
s
b
A

y
m
o
n
o
c
e

+
+
+
+

+
0
0
0
+
0
+
0
+
0
0
+
0

f

o

r
e
b
m
u
n

t

n
e
s
e
r
p

e
v
i
t

l

a
u
m
u
C

s
n
o

i
t
i

d
n
o
c

9
11
11
7

7
4
2
4
7
3
3
2
6
5
2
4
3

aRating based on Freedom House scores (1-7 scale) for political rights in the year prior to these revolutions and (for forthcoming
cases) for 2006. A conducive political opportunity structure was defined as a score on the political rights scale in the 4–5 range.
bRating based on data from UNESCO.

how modular phenomena spread over time to cases in
which facilitating conditions are less conducive to success,
yet some of these less structurally advantaged cases at times
nonetheless succeed despite their disadvantages. The Tulip
Revolution occurred almost accidentally and in contradic-
tion with the plans of opposition leaders, who had viewed
the wave of unrest that eventually sparked the revolution
as merely a preparatory phase for a second wave of mobi-
lizations that was to attend upcoming presidential elec-
tions in June. But when government-associated thugs began
to beat demonstrators who had arrived in Bishkek from
the south, a backlash ensued that led to the unplanned
storming of the presidential palace by a core of motivated
and outraged youth. Prior to the Kyrgyz revolution, the
three successful modular revolutions mobilized numbers
ranging from a hundred thousand to up to a million par-

ticipants in peaceful protests. The Kyrgyz opposition, by
contrast, was at most capable of generating ﬁfteen thou-
sand participants in protests—hardly enough to force res-
ignation of Akaev through the kind of “people power”
tactics that had succeeded in Serbia, Georgia, and Ukraine.
Indeed, the Tulip Revolution succeeded only because it
was violent—an innovation on the revolutionary model
that originally inspired it due in signiﬁcant part to the
absence of sufﬁcient structural support for successful non-
violent action. Thus, a third way in which those who are
less structurally advantaged can succeed in a modular pro-
cess is through revision of the model in accordance with
their structural weaknesses. As a modular process devel-
ops, permutations on the model are likely, as groups with
less conducive structural conditions attempt to compen-
sate for their structural disadvantages by innovating on

272 Perspectives on Politics

䡬

|

|

the model. In sum, example can have a palpable and impor-
tant impact not only on the onset of action within a mod-
ular process, but also on outcomes of action, helping the
materialization of successful revolutions (or successful
nationalisms) where otherwise the structural conditions
for their success would have been lacking had cases occurred
in complete isolation from one another.

The Consequences of Modular
Change
We have seen that the effect of example on subsequent
behavior within modular phenomena is profound. Within
the modular democratic revolutions that have spread across
the post-communist states, prior cases of revolutionary
success have encouraged a widespread transnational bor-
rowing of revolutionary modes of confrontation, inciting
action where it otherwise would have been unlikely. Indeed,
in the wake of the Orange Revolution a tipping point was
crossed where example encouraged action even among
groups facing relatively unfavorable structural circum-
stances. We have also seen that example exercised an effect
on outcomes, helping to make successful revolution mate-
rialize in some circumstances where it otherwise would
have been unlikely on the basis of structural advantage
alone. The Tulip Revolution in Kyrgyzstan was the prod-
uct of such a process. But we have also seen that the effect
of modular phenomena on political outcomes varies
depending on how established elites among later risers
react to modular processes—whether they choose to co-opt
modular processes and defect, or whether they learn les-
sons from the model’s iterative character and take mea-
sures to prevent its further spread by imposing additional
institutional constraints. In contrast to the modular spread
of nationalism in the glasnost era, when institutions failed
to adapt to modular processes and co-optation of opposi-
tion demands and elite defection were widespread, we have
seen an elite learning process occurring among later risers
in the spread of modular democratic revolution, raising
the institutional constraints to action and likely limiting
the further effect of example on outcomes.

These effects of modular processes on outcomes point
to the reasons why we need to take into consideration the
cross-case inﬂuences of example in our research and the
purchase we gain on subjects like democratization, revo-
lution, or nationalism by incorporating the power of exam-
ple into our work. For one thing, one of the features of
modular political phenomena is the way in which modu-
lar change often takes us by surprise. The effect of exam-
ple is to make action and even successful action materialize
in cases in which they would not have otherwise been
likely, so that example makes possible action and out-
comes that structure alone would not have permitted.
Kuran has written about the element of surprise embed-
ded within revolutions due to what he calls preference

䡬

䡬

falsiﬁcation—the tendency of individuals to cover up their
genuine preferences for fear of repression, expressing them
only when the opportunity to do so materializes, setting
off a behavioral cascade.56 Kuran’s model focuses on change
across individuals rather than across cases. But one can
think of the cross-case inﬂuence of example within mod-
ular change in the language of Kuran. As I have argued, in
the context of modular change the rising weight of exam-
ple can in fact turn what might otherwise seem like an
impossible structural situation (a high threshold in Kuran’s
model) into a seemingly propitious one (a signiﬁcantly
lowered threshold). Thus, the cross-case inﬂuences of exam-
ple within modular phenomena are one explanation for
why the seemingly impossible can sometimes materialize.
Second, there is the issue of how the cross-case inﬂu-
ences within modular phenomena might affect traditional
social science ﬁndings on subjects such as nationalism, rev-
olution, or democratic transition, where modular change is
common. Since modular processes alter the way in which
the overall pattern of outcomes is produced, the set of causal
relationships underlying a phenomenon could look quite
different when the phenomenon occurs within the context
of modular change as opposed to when it occurs in isola-
tion from other cases. Indeed, one would expect that the
effect of example on outcomes would vary depending on
where a case is located temporally in the modular process
(before or after the tipping point) and whether the modu-
lar process is accompanied by elite defection or elite learn-
ing behavior among those potentially opposing its spread.
Third, there is the issue of the unintended side effects
of modular change. We have seen that as modular phe-
nomena spread and incite action where structural condi-
tions are less conducive to success, there is high potential
for permutations on modular action. Violence and civil
war, for example, have at times been incited through pro-
cesses of modular democratic change, as local actors, incited
to action by change in other contexts, innovate on exist-
ing models of action or become drawn into action that
leads in unintended directions.57 Indeed, as those involved
in these events testify, civil war was only narrowly averted
in the Georgian, Ukrainian, and Kyrgyz revolutions.58 We
have also seen that modular processes of change can lead
to situations of greater repression than was the case prior
to the onset of the modular process in contexts in which
the elite learning model applies. Thus, modular political
processes often have unintended side-effects that alter con-
siderably the nature of politics, even in cases in which
modular change does not succeed.

Finally, modular change has signiﬁcant implications for
what follows afterward.Through its ability to substitute for
the structural requirements that would have been necessary
had action occurred in isolation from other cases, the power
of example provides the possibility for what Foucault called
“chance-reversal”—that is, to turn unlikely nations into
seemingly inevitable nations, unlikely revolutions into

June 2007 | Vol. 5/No. 2 273

䡬

|

|

䡬

䡬

Articles | Structure and Example in Modular Political Phenomena

seemingly inevitable revolutions, and unlikely democratiz-
ers into seemingly inevitable democratizers. As Geddes
(1999) has shown, out of the 85 democratic transitions that
occurred from 1974 through 1999, only 30 developed into
stable democracies.59 Perhaps this rather lackluster record
could be explained in part by the fact that much demo-
cratic transition has occurred through modular change, with
countries riding the inﬂuence of the prior example of oth-
ers to democracy rather than developing the structural con-
ditions necessary for establishing stable democracy on their
own. Modular change thus leads to outcomes that are less
robust and less stable than might be expected under con-
ditions of the complete independence of cases, shaping the
nature of politics in the aftermath of change.

Notes
1 Tarrow 1998, 2005.
2 Huntington 1991; Whitehead 1996.
3 Pevehouse 2002. See also Gleditsch 2002.
4 Geddes 1999.
5 Palmer 1959; Hobsbawm 1962; Rudé 1966.
6 Tarrow 1998; Katz 1997; Selbin 1997. For reviews
of the literature, see Foran 1993; Goldstone 2001b;
Goodwin 2001. For a critique of the study of revo-
lutions for failing to recognize their interdependence
across time, see Sewell 1996.

7 See Thompson 2004; Linz and Stepan 1996.
8 Cohen 2001, 357; Karumidze and Wertsch 2005, 8,

23, 35, 37.

9 Quoted in Berlin 1960, xx.
10 For another perspective on the modular character of

these revolutions, see Bunce and Wolchik 2006.
Bunce and Wolchik include the elections in Slovakia
in 1998 and in Croatia in 2000 among the modular
processes involved in the post-communist electoral
revolutions.

11 Beissinger 2002.
12 Sharp 1993.
13 Quoted on National Public Radio 2004.
14 United States Institute of Peace, 2001, 5.
15 Barbash 2003.
16 USAID granted millions of dollars to the Poland-
America-Ukraine Cooperation Initiative (PAUCI),
which is administered by Freedom House. PAUCI
then sent these funds to numerous Ukrainian
NGOs. For details on funding and its role in the
Orange revolution, see Wilson 2005, 183–189.

17 For an analysis by Freedom House advocating “peo-
ple power” movements as the most promising path
to constructing stable democracy, see Karatnycky
and Ackerman 2005.

18 Anteleva 2003; Stojanovic 2004.
19 Yablokova 2004.
20 Quoted in Bojic 2005.

274 Perspectives on Politics

21 Karumidze and Wertsch 2005, 26.
22 Page 2005.
23 Pala 2004.
24 Russian 2000, January 24, 2005, in BBC

Monitoring.

25 Beissinger 2002.
26 See also Muiznieks 1995.
27 Fairbanks 2004.
28 RFE/RL Newsline, April 13, 2004.
29 See Noelle-Neumann 1984.
30 Hirschman 1991, 158.
31 For analogous processes within the glasnost tide of

nationalism, see Beissinger 2002, 128.

32 In one case (Albania in 2005) protest was unneces-

sary due to an opposition electoral victory.

33 Spruyt 1994, 167–171; see also DiMaggio and

Powell 1983.

34 DeNardo 1985.
35 Beissinger 2002, 160–162.
36 Karmanau 2004.
37 Dlugy 2005; Russian 2000, January 24, 2005, in

BBC Monitoring.

38 PrimaNews, March 3, 2005.
39 Lipset 1960; Goldstone 1991a, 39.
40 Garﬁeld 2004.
41 On Serbia, see Cohen 2001, 350. Pora was formed

in Ukraine in spring 2004 when students from
Sumy province marched on Kyiv protesting the
forced amalgamation of institutes. Russian 2000,
January 24, 2005, in BBC Monitoring. In Georgia,
students politicized as a result of growing corruption
within the university system.

42 See Przeworski, Alvarez, Cheibub, Limongi 2000 for

a review of the evidence; Jenkins 1983.

43 See, for instance, Karl 1997.
44 Ross 2001.
45 Beissinger 2002, 320–384.
46 For details, see United States Institute of Peace

2001, 9; Cohen 2001, 417, 425; Karumidze and
Wertsch 2005, 15, 39, 47, 54; Chivers 2005; Kuzio
2005b, 2004; MacWilliam 2005; Solovyov 2005.

47 Torbakov 2005.
48 Deheryan 2005.
49 Eisinger 1973.
50 Tarrow 1998.
51 Bujosevic and Radovanovic 2003; Khamidov 2002;
Abdyrazakov 2005; Korshak 2004; Williams 2004.

52 Foran 2005, 21–22.
53 Skocpol 1979.
54 Cohen 2001, 417, 425; Karumidze and Wertsch

2005, 15, 39, 47, 54; Chivers 2005; Kuzio 2005a,
2005b; Kuzio 2004; Solovyov 2005.

55 In Georgia, police defections to the opposition were

aided by the fact that on the eve of the revolution
they had not been paid for three months (one of the

䡬

|

|

advantages of mounting revolution in an extremely
weak state). Similarly, the weakness of the Kyrgyz
police, who had a reputation for corruption and
poor training and who had openly ﬁred on peaceful
demonstrators in the past, had long been a source of
concern to the regime and the international commu-
nity, including an OSCE effort since 2003 to train
them in methods of crowd control and “constructive
partnership” with the population; Eggleston 2003.

56 Kuran 1989.
57 Snyder 2000; Mansﬁeld and Snyder 2005.
58 See, for instance, Karumidze and Wertsch 2005, 71.
59 Geddes 1999.

References
Abdyrazakov, Sydyk. 2005. “Boiling Over.” Transitions

Online, March 21.

Anteleva, Natalia. 2003. “How to Stage a Revolution.”

BBC News December 4 (8:10 GT).

Barbash, Fred. 2003. “Bush: Iraq Part of Global Demo-

cratic Revolution.” Washington Post. November 6.

Beissinger, Mark R. 2002. Nationalist Mobilization and
the Collapse of the Soviet State. Cambridge, UK: Cam-
bridge University Press.

Berlin, Isaiah. 1960. Introduction. In Roots of Revolu-

tion: A History of the Populist and Socialist Movements
in Nineteenth Century Russia, by Franco Venturi. New
York: Alfred A. Knopf.

Bojic, Sesa. 2005. Serbian group exports protest know-
how. Civil Society [Rule of Law Foundation] March
19, at http://www.rol.org.ua/eng/article.cfm?deid⫽8.

Bujosevic Dragan, and Ivan Radovanovic. 2003. The
Fall of Milosevic: The October 5th Revolution. New
York: Palgrave Macmillan.

Bunce, Valerie J., and Sharon L. Wolchik. 2006. Favor-

able conditions and electoral revolutions. Journal of
Democracy 17 (4): 5–18.

Chivers, C. J. 2005. “How Top Spies in Ukraine Changed

the Nation’s Path.” New York Times, January 17: A1.

Cohen, Lenard J. 2001. Serpent in the Bosom: The Rise and

Fall of Slobodan Milosˇevic´. Boulder, CO: Westview
Press.

Deheryan, Suren. 2005. Voice of youth: Former student
activist enters National Assembly. ArmeniaNow, Febru-
ary 11 at http://armenianow.com/eng/?issue_id⫽64.

DeNardo, James. 1985. Power in Numbers: The Political
Strategy of Protest Rebellion. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.

DiMaggio Paul J., and Walter W. Powell. 1983. The
iron cage revisited: Institutional isomorphism and
collective rationality in organizational ﬁelds. American
Sociological Review 48 (2): 147–60.

Dlugy, Yana. 2005. “Group Ready to Change Ex-Soviet

World.” Agence France-Presse, January 2.

䡬

䡬

Eggleston, Roland. 2003. “Kyrgyzstan: OSCE Plans

Police Training.” Eurasianet, August 9.

Eisinger, Peter. 1973. The conditions of political protest
behavior in American cities. American Political Science
Review 67 (1): 11–28.

Fairbanks, Charles H., Jr. 2004. Georgia’s Rose Revolu-

tion. Journal of Democracy 15 (2): 110–24.

Foran, John. 1993. Theories of revolution revisited:

Toward a fourth generation? Sociological Theory 11
(1): 1–20

_. 2005. Taking Power: On the Origins of Third
World Revolutions. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.

Garﬁeld, Bob. 2004. “Revolution, Inc.” National Public

Radio, December 3.

Geddes, Barbara. 1999. What do we know about de-
mocratization after twenty years? Annual Review of
Political Science 2: 115–44.

Gleditsch, Kristian Skrede. 2002. All International Poli-
tics Is Local: The Diffusion of Conﬂict, Integration, and
Democratization. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Mich-
igan Press.

Goldstone, Jack. 2001a. An analytical framework. In

Revolutions of the Late Twentieth Century, ed. Jack A.
Goldstone, Ted Robert Gurr, Farrokh Moshiri. Boul-
der, CO: Westview.

_. 2001b. Toward a fourth generation of revolution-

ary theory. Annual Review of Political Science 4:
139–87.

Goodwin, Jeff. 2001. No Other Way Out: States and

Revolutionary Movements, 1945–1991. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.

Hirschman, Albert. 1991. The Rhetoric of Reaction.

Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Hobsbawm, E. J. 1962. The Age of Revolution, 1789–

1848. New York: New American Library.

Huntington, Samuel. 1991. The Third Wave: Democrati-

zation in the Late Twentieth Century. Norman, OK:
Oklahoma University Press.

Jenkins, J. Craig. 1983. Resource mobilization theory

and the study of social movements. Annual Review of
Sociology 9: 527–53.

Karatnycky, Adrian, and Peter Ackerman. 2005. How

Freedom Is Won: From Civic Resistance to Durable
Democracy. Washington, DC: Freedom House.
Karl, Terry Lynn. 1997. The Paradox of Plenty: Oil

Booms and Petro-States. Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press.

Karmanau, Yuras. 2004. “Belarus Opposition Streams to

Kiev.” Associated Press, December 20.

Karumidze, Zurab, and James V. Wertsch, eds. 2005.

Enough!: The Rose Revolution in the Republic of Georgia
2003. New York: Nova Science Publishers.

Katz, Mark N. 1997. Revolutions and Revolutionary

Waves. New York: St. Martin’s Press.

June 2007 | Vol. 5/No. 2 275

䡬

|

|

䡬

Articles | Structure and Example in Modular Political Phenomena

Khamidov, Alisher. 2002. “Kyrgyzstan’s Unrest Linked

Rudé, George. 1966. Revolutionary Europe, 1783–1815.

to Clan Rivalries.” Eurasianet, June 5.

Korshak, Stephan. 2004. “Ukraine’s ‘Orange Revolu-

tion’ and the Individuals Who Made It.” DPA,
December 20.

New York: Harper & Row.

Saidazimova, Gulnoza. 2005. “Kyrgyzstan: Could It
Emerge As Another Ukraine or Georgia?” RFE/RL
Newsline, March 22.

Kuran, Timur. 1989. Sparks and prairie ﬁres: A theory

Selbin, Eric. 1997. Revolution in the real world: Bring-

of unanticipated political revolution. Public Choice 61
(1): 41–74.

Kuzio, Taras. 2004. “Yanukovych-Gate Unfolds after

Ukrainian Elections.” Eurasia Daily Monitor, Decem-
ber 3.

_. 2005a. “Details Emerge of Second Russian Plot
to Assassinate Yushchenko.” Eurasia Daily Monitor,
January 5.

_. 2005b. “Did Ukraine’s Security Service Really
Prevent Bloodshed During the Orange Revolution?”
Eurasia Daily Monitor, January 24.

䡬

Linz, Juan J., and Alfred Stepan. 1996. Problems

of Democratic Transition and Consolidation: Southern
Europe, South America, and Post-Communist
Europe. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University
Press.

Lipset, Seymour Martin. 1960. Political Man: The Social

Bases of Politics. Garden City, NY: Doubleday.

MacWilliam, Ian. 2005. “Kyrgyzstan’s Friendly Revolu-

tion.” BBC News. March 26 (14:58:22 GMT).

Mansﬁeld, Edward D., and Jack Snyder. 2005. Electing
to Fight: Why Emerging Democracies Go to War. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press.

Muiznieks, Nils R. 1995. The inﬂuence of the Baltic

popular movements on the process of Soviet disinte-
gration. Europe-Asia Studies 47 (1): 3–25.

National Public Radio. 2004. “All Things Considered.”

December 23 (Global NewsBank).

Noelle-Neumann, Elisabeth. 1984. The Spiral of Silence.

Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Page, Jeremy. 2005. “From West to East, Rolling Revo-
lution Gathers Pace Across Former USSR.” The Times
(London), February 19.

Pala, Christopher. 2004. “Ukraine’s Election Crisis Has

Had Dim Mirror Images in Other Former Soviet
Republics.” New York Times, December 14, A17.

Palmer, R. R. 1959. The Age of Democratic Revolution: A

Political History of Europe and America, 1760–1800.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Pevehouse, Jon. 2002. “Democracy from the Outside-

In? International Organizations and Democratiza-
tion.” International Organization 56 (3): 515–49.
Przeworski, Adam, Michael E. Alvarez, José Antonio
Cheibub, and Fernano Limongi. 2000. Democracy
and Development: Political Institutions and Well-Being
in the World, 1950–1990. Cambridge, UK: Cam-
bridge University Press.

Ross, Michael Lewin. 2001. “Does Oil Hinder Democ-

racy?” World Politics 53 (3): 325–361.

276 Perspectives on Politics

ing agency back in. In Theorizing Revolutions, ed.
John Foran. New York: Routledge.

Sewell, William H., Jr. 1996. Three temporalities: To-
ward an eventful sociology. In The Historic Turn in
the Human Sciences, ed. Terrence J. McDonald. Ann
Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.

Sharp, Gene. 1993. “From Dictatorship to Democracy:

A Conceptual Framework for Liberation.” Cam-
bridge, MA: Albert Einstein Institution.

Skocpol, Theda. 1979. States and Social Revolutions: A

Comparative Analysis of France, Russia, and China.
New York: Cambridge University Press.

Snyder, Jack L. 2000. From Voting to Violence: Democra-

tization and Nationalist Conﬂict. New York: W. W.
Norton.

Sodruzhestvo Nezavisimykh Gosudarstv. 2002. So-
druzhestvo Nezavisimykh Gosudarstv (statisticheskii
ezhegodnik). Moscow: Mezhgosudarstvennyi statis-
ticheskii komitet SNG.

Solovyov, Dmtry. 2005. “Kulov’s Former Jailer Tips Him

for Kyrgyz President.” Moscow Times, March 29: 2.

Spruyt, Hendryk. 1994. The Sovereign State and Its Com-

petitors. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Stojanovic, Dusan. 2004. “Nonviolent Revolution for
Export from Serbia.” Associated Press, October 31.

Tarrow, Sidney. 1998. Power in Movement: Social Move-

ments and Contentious Politics. 2d ed. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.

_. 2005. The New Transnational Activism. Cam-

bridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Thompson, Mark R. 2004. Democratic Revolutions: Asia

and Eastern Europe. London: Routledge.

Torbakov, Igor. 2005. “Russia Hopes to Stem Revolu-
tionary Tide in CIS by Strengthening Ties with Ka-
zakhstan.” EurasiaNet, February 23.

United States Institute of Peace. 2001. “Whither the

Bulldozer? Nonviolent Revolution and the Transition
to Democracy in Serbia.” Washington, DC.

Whitehead, Laurence, ed. 1996. The International Di-

mensions of Democratization: Europe and the Americas.
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

Williams, Daniel. 2004. “Ukrainian Town Basking in
the ‘Orange’ Afterglow: Westernized Lviv Supplied
People and Spirit to the Protest in Kiev.” Washington
Post December 15: A20.

Wilson, Andres. 2005. Ukraine’s Orange Revolution. New

Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Yablokova, Oksana. 2004. “Youthful Pora Charges Up

the People.” Moscow Times, December 3.

䡬

