Cocaine and Parallel Polities in the Brazilian Urban Periphery: Constraints on Local-Level
Democratization
Author(s): Elizabeth Leeds
Reviewed work(s):
Source: Latin American Research Review, Vol. 31, No. 3 (1996), pp. 47-83
Published by: The Latin American Studies Association
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2503884 .
Accessed: 15/05/2012 12:17

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

The Latin American Studies Association is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to
Latin American Research Review.

http://www.jstor.org

COCAINE 

AND 

PARALLEL 

POLITIES 

IN  THE  BRAZILIAN 

URBAN 

PERIPHERY: 

Constraints  on  Local-Level  Democratization* 

Elizabeth Leeds 

Massachusetts Institute of Technology 

The observation  that redemocratization  in Latin America  is a frag- 
ile  process  has  become  a commonplace  in the  social  science  literature of 
the  past  few  years.  The  social  movements  crucial  to  the  return  of  pro- 
cedural  democracy  have,  we  are told,  lost  their  momentum  to  the  very 
forces they  helped  to restore. Electoral democracy  has  returned  in many 
places  with  neoclientelistic  overtones  that  are eroding  the  gains  in  con- 
sciousness  achieved  in  the  nonelectoral  years  (Hagopian  1993). The  ab- 
sence  of  a common  enemy,  most  often  an  authoritarian  military  regime, 
has  tended  to  mask  less  visible  but  often  equally  pernicious  enemies  in 
the form of violence  that is nonofficial  but tolerated nonetheless  (Pinheiro 
1992). And  although  procedural  democratic  practices  may  have returned 
for  the  middle  classes,  nothing  inherent  in  the  transition  to  democracy 
guarantees  either  procedural  or  substantive  democracy  for  the  lower 
classes  (Huggins,  ed.,  1991; O'Donnell  1992; Fox 1994a).1 

*This article is part of a larger study  on the relationship  between  squatters and the state in 
Brazil. Research has been supported  by the Social Science Research Council  in an Advanced 
Grant on  Latin America  and  the Caribbean,  the  Bunting  Institute  of Radcliffe  College,  the 
John D. and  Catherine  T. MacArthur Foundation  in an institutional  grant to the Center for 
International Studies  at Massachusetts  Institute  of Technology, and the office  of the Dean  of 
the  School  of  Humanities  and  Social  Sciences  at  MIT. Interviews  were  carried  out  with 
leaders  in  twenty-five  favelas,  and  inmates  in  three 
government  officials,  community 
prisons  in  Rio  in  1987-1988, 1989, 1991, 1994, and  1995. I would  like  to  thank  my  research 
assistant  Maria Severa  da  Silva,  community  leaders,  and  especially  those  associated  with 
the Centro de Direitos  Humanos  Bento Rubiao for their many  hours of sharing  experiences 
and insights.  For obvious  reasons,  they  must  remain anonymous.  I would  also like to thank 
Martha  Huggins,  Susan  Eckstein,  and  Mick  Moore  as  well  as  the  anonymous  LARR 
reviewers  for perceptive  comments  on  earlier drafts  of  this  article. 

1. Procedural  democratic  practices  are  defined  here  as  those  that  support  free  speech, 
open  elections,  freedom  of  association,  and  the  unhindered  operation  of  political  parties. 
These  practices  are  employed  as  criteria  distinct  from  the  notion  of  substantive  democ- 
racy  suggesting  that  equal  opportunity  for  all  segments  of  the  population  through  such 
rights as adequate  education,  health,  and housing  should  be considered  an essential  part of 
democratization.  Whether  social  and  economic  variables  should  be  considered  part of  the 
definition  of democracy  is a major issue  in current discussions  of democratic  transition.  See, 

Latin American  Research Review  volume  31,  number  3  ?  1996 

47 

Latin American Research Review 

Political  transition  from authoritarian  to  procedurally  democratic 
regimes  has  been  accompanied  in Latin America  by  an economic  transi- 
tion  that  has  dramatically  increased  poverty.  Generally  recognized  as  a 
consequence  of  the  debt  crisis  and  the  subsequent  economic  restructur- 
ing that required drastic reductions  in state spending,  the economic  tran- 
sition  has  hurt traditionally  unprotected  and  vulnerable  popular  sectors 
disproportionately.  The  state  usually  has  not  participated  in  providing 
basic  services  such  as  health  services,  education,  urban  infrastructure, 
and  a  nonrepressive  policing  system,  yet  economic  restructuring  has 
helped  create a space for alternative  actors to assume  an expanded  role in 
the  social,  economic,  and  political  spheres  of  popular  sectors.  Nongov- 
ernmental  organizations  (NGOs)  have filled  a considerable  void  in provi- 
sion  of  basic  services,2  but  they  are  only  one  set  of  alternative  actors 
operating  to  fill  in  the  vacuum. 

These  shortcomings  of democratic  transitions  and  the  deleterious 
effects  of  economic  transitions  have  coincided,  in  the  past  decade,  with 
the  growth  of  what  might  be  called  Latin  America's  first  indigenous 
multinational  enterprise  (Quijano  1993) and  its  first  true  form  of  eco- 
nomic  integration:  the  production,  processing,  and  international  distri- 
bution  of cocaine.  While  the  particular phase  and  form of the  enterprise 
differs  from country  to country, the political  and  economic  consequences 
in all countries  of cocaine-related  activities  have fallen primarily  on those 
economic  sectors  that  have  been  denied  the  "benefits"  of  democratic 
transition.  Consider  the  following  well-publicized  incident.3 

In the  late 1980s, Brazil's largest  squatter  settlement,  the  favela  of 
Rocinha in Rio de Janeiro's elite South Zone  (Zona Sul) with  an estimated 
population  of 150,000 to 200,000,4 erupted  in  a show  of violence  against 

for  example,  the  points  made  by  Terry Karl  (1990). Although  she  defines  democracy  in 
terms  of  procedural  political  practices  (1990, 2), she  notes  the  importance  of  substantive 
issues  in  the  survivability  of  democracies  in  the  Latin  American  context.  Karl observes, 
'Ironically,  the  conditions  that  permit  democracies  to  persist  in  the  short-term  may  con- 
strain their  potential  for resolving  the  enormous  problems  of  poverty  and  inequality  that 
continue  to characterize  the continent.... 
[Elven  as these  democracies  guarantee  a greater 
respect  for  law  and  human  dignity  when  compared  to  their  predecessors,  they  may  be 
unable  to carry out  the  substantive  reforms  that address  the lot  of their poorest  citizens.  If 
this scenario  should  occur, they would  become  the victims  of their successful  consolidation, 
and  the  democratic  transitions  of  the  1980s  that  survive  could  prove  to  be  the  'frozen' 
democracies  of  the  1990s" (Karl 1990,13). 

2.  See,  for example,  the  unpublished  proceedings  of  the  conference  Models  of  Develop- 
ment  and  the  Elimination  of  Poverty  in  Latin America,  organized  by  the  Latin American 
Program at the Woodrow  Wilson  Center, Washington,  D.C., 1-3  Dec.  1993, particularly  the 
paper by  Charles A.  Reilly, "Revisiting Participation and  Reinventing  Empowerment: NGOs 
and  Local Authorities  in  Latin America."  See  also  Reilly  (1994). 
3.  See  accounts  in  Rio  newspapers  beginning  on  17 Aug.  1987. 
4.  Estimates  of favela populations  are notoriously  inconsistent  and  inaccurate. Estimates 
of  the  Rocinha  population  range  from a low  of  32,966  (Cavallieri 1986, 21) to  the  200,000- 
250,000  range  often  cited  in  the  press.  The  absurdly  low  estimate  is  based  on  the  official 
figures  of  the  Instituto  de  Planejamento  of  Rio  de  Janeiro (IPLAN-Rio),  derived  from the 

48 

COCAINE  AND  FAVELA  POLITICS 

its middle-class  surroundings  that the local and national  press sensation- 
alistically  labeled  "a civil  war." According  to the  official  explanation  put 
forth  by  the  community's  residents  association,  the  event  began  as  a 
peaceful  demonstration  by  Rocinha  residents,  protesting  chronic  police 
violence  against  favela  residents.  Unofficial  explanations  claimed  that 
Rocinha  was  protesting  the  transfer  of  the  favela's  leader  of  the  drug 
trade  (who  had  recently  been  arrested)  from  a  prison  where  he  could 
maintain  contact  with  the  community  to a tighter  security  prison  where 
access was  more difficult. Because Rocinha occupies  a massive  hill through 
which  a  tunnel  has  been  built  to  link  two  major elite  residential  areas, 
favela  residents  gathered  to  protest  in  a four-lane  viaduct,  the  entrance 
and  exit of the tunnel.  This strategy  caused  a traffic jam eight  kilometers 
long.  Typically violent  police  treatment of the protesters,  which  included 
beatings  and  tear gas,  was  ineffective  in  dispersing  the  population  and 
stimulated  some  residents  to start throwing  rocks down  the hill onto  cars 
coming  through  the tunnel.  The police  could  not control this  sniper-type 
action.  The rock attacks  did  not  stop,  some  claimed,  until  the  drug  lord 
called  from prison  to  call off  the  assault. 

This incident  exemplifies  a contradictory  set of conditions  expand- 
ing  in  the  five  hundred  favelas  and  public  low-income  housing  projects 
(conjuntos) of  Rio  de  Janeiro. Residents  of  these  areas  constitute  about  a 
third of the  municipal  population.  Distribution  and  sale  of cocaine  from 
these  communities  primarily  to  the  middle  and  upper  classes  have  cre- 
ated  a  complex  set  of  economic  and  political  relationships  among  the 
communities,  the  drug  gangs,  and  the  state.  These  relationships  have 
largely  resulted  from  the  selective  presence  and  absence  of  the  state, 
constituting  what  I  call  "structural violence"  and  continuous  violence 
and repression  against  the lower  classes.5 This article deals  more broadly 
with  the  constraints  on  redemocratization  and  governance  at the  grass- 
roots level  in the Brazilian urban periphery  when  adverse  socioeconomic 

Cadastro de Favelas of  1983. The  Cadastro was  conducted  by  the  Secretaria  Municipal  de 
Desenvolvimento  Social  (SMDS), using  as  its  base  the  1980 census  taken  by  the  Instituto 
Brasileiro de Geografia  e Estatistica (IBGE). The latter figures  are viewed  as problematic  by 
SMDS personnel.  Yet one  finds  inconsistencies  in IPLAN-Rio's own  figures  from the  same 
period.  For example,  the  figure  of  722,424 was  given  as the  total  favela population  for the 
municipality  of  Rio  in  a 1986 IPLAN  publication  (Cavallieri 1986, 20), while  the  figure  of 
1,700,000  was  given  in  the  1983 Cadastro de favelas (Rio  de  Janeiro 1983, 5).  The  Cadastro 
reported  377 favelas,  but  a 1988 municipal  publication  cited  1,600,000  people  living  in 480 
favelas  and  on 487 loteamentos clandestinos (clandestine  lots)  (Bielschowsky  1988,11-12). For 
purposes  of  this  article,  I consider  the  higher  figures  more  accurate. 

5.  Structural violence or institutionalized violence is defined  here as conditions  that cause  or 
lead  to  highly  unequal  distribution  of  basic  resources,  such  as  poor  or nonexistent  health 
services  and  inadequate  public  education,  mass  transportation,  and  urban  services  that 
result in high rates of subnutrition,  infant mortality, dropping  out of school,  alcoholism,  and 
similar characteristics  of an urban underclass.  This list, while  not exhaustive,  typifies  most 
developing  countries  and  increasingly  significant  segments  of  U.S. urban  populations. 

49 

Latin American Research Review 

conditions  and  a  repressive  state  presence  stimulate  alternative,  extra- 
legal  forms  of  economic  and  political  organization.6  This study  seeks  to 
explain  the fact that as the larger Brazilian polity  grows  more democratic 
procedurally, democracy  at the local level  in working-class  settlements  is 
being  increasingly  shortchanged.  Squatter  populations  in  particular  are 
caught  between  the  illegal  violence  of  drug  dealers  and  the  official  vio- 
lence  of  security  forces. 

More  particularly,  this  article  will  discuss  the  political  use  and 
effects  of the distribution  and sale of cocaine  in urban low-income  neigh- 
borhoods  in  Rio  de  Janeiro. I will  argue  that  the  physical  and  criminal 
violence  resulting  from  the  drug  trade  is  a visible  and  tangible  form  of 
the violence  used  by  the state and  that it masks  a structural-institutional 
and  more  hidden  violence  while  perpetuating  neoclientelistic  political 
relationships  with  these  low-income  communities.  The state's manner  of 
responding  to  drug-dealing  in  favelas  represents  a  latter-day  example 
(following  a series  of historical  parallels)  of repressing  lower-class  "aber- 
rant behavior"  and  thereby  repressing  significant  segments  of  an  entire 
class.  More  important,  the  omnipresence  of  drug  dealing  threatens  the 
fragile  process  of  building  grassroot  democratic  structures  that  could 
empower  and  mobilize  low-income  communities.7 

The State as Protector-For Whom and against What? 

The overwhelming  images  emanating  recently  from Rio de Janeiro 
in  the  national  and  international  press  portray  a  city  under  siege,  one 
needing  protection  from  the  armed  forces  because  the  institution  tradi- 
tionally  assigned  to  safeguarding  the  public-the 
become 
too  corrupt and  too  involved  with  the  trafficking  in drugs  and  weapons 
that  it  is  supposed  to  guard  against.  In  allegedly  protecting  the  popu- 
lace, the armed forces invaded  and occupied  selected  favelas just prior to 

police-has 

6.  I have deliberately used  the more generalized  term Brazilian urban periphery even  though 
this  study  is  based  primarily  on  the  case  of  Rio  de  Janeiro. Rio's  unique  characteristics 
include  its geographical  configuration,  its role as Brazil's prime  tourist  attraction,  its over- 
publicized  level  of  violence,  and  the  particular  form  in  which  criminal  organization  has 
evolved,  but  it  nonetheless  shares  certain  tendencies  with  several  other  larger  Brazilian 
cities.  Briefer research  trips  to  Sao  Paulo,  Porto  Alegre,  and  Belo  Horizonte  have  located 
several  of  the  variables  crucial  to  the  formation  of  'parallel  polities":  drug  dealing  in 
favelas,  high  levels  of  police  corruption  and  violence,  and  educational  systems  and  labor 
markets  that offer  adolescents  few  'legitimate"  economic  options. 

7. While  this article analyzes  the effects  of drug  dealing  on the social  and  political  life of 
favelas,  the violence  associated  with  organized  crime in Rio de Janeiro has become  part of 
the  daily  consciousness  of  the  Brazilian population  in general.  'Organized  crime" used  to 
refer to the illegal  numbers  game  (the jogo do bicho) but has now  come  to mean  in the public 
mind  the favela-based  organizations  engaged  in drug  dealing,  supplemented  by robberies 
and  trafficking  in  weapons.  Although  the  general  population  is  aware  of  the  presence  of 
organized  crime,  largely  via  mass  media,  those  who  reside  in  favelas  and  low-income 
housing  projects  are  the  ones  who  must  live  with  the  daily  threat  of  violence  and  the 
arbitrary rule  of  parallel  systems  of  power. 

50 

COCAINE  AND  FAVELA  POLITICS 

the  second  round  of  gubernatorial  and  presidential  elections  in Novem- 
ber 1994. According  to Brazilian security  forces and the local and national 
media,  the  favelas  were  the  source  of drugs  and  weapons.  How  can this 
highly  antidemocratic  phenomenon  at the  local  level  be  explained  when 
Brazil seems  to be proceeding  with  its democratic  agenda  at the national 
level?  And  why  is  the  task  of  safeguarding  the  civilian  population  at all 
class  levels  so  difficult  to  carry out  in  Brazil's major cities? 

One  answer  lies  in the ambiguous  notion  of the state as protector. 
If  analysts  are  to  assume  that  it  is  the  duty  of  the  state  to  protect  its 
citizens  against  certain basic dangers-such 
as threats to personal  safety, 
property, and civil  and human  rights-then  we  must  also assume  that all 
segments  of society  have the right to be equally  protected  and  that some 
consensus  exists  as to what  constitutes  threats to safety, whether  to indi- 
viduals  or to  society  as  a whole. 

A decade  ago, Charles Tilly voiced  his concerns  about the growing 
importance  of military rule in Third World countries  in an essay  on state- 
making  as organized  crime (see Tilly 1985). Based on his earlier historical 
work  on  the  formation  of  nation-states  in  Europe,  he  argued  that  ban- 
ditry, gangland  rivalry, policing,  and  making  war all belong  on  the same 
continuum  in  the  process  of  state  building,  which  tends  to  monopolize 
the  concentrated  means  of violence.  Key to his argument  was  the  notion 
that  states  act as  protectors  of  their  populations  from both  external  and 
internal dangers,  whether  real or perceived,  legitimate  or fabricated. Tilly 
explained, 

To the extent that the threats against which a given government protects its 
citizens are imaginary or are consequences of its own activities, the government 
has organized a protection racket....  Political observers have recognized that, 
whatever else they do, governments organize and, wherever possible, monopo- 
lize violence. It matters little whether we take violence in a narrow sense, such as 
damage to persons and objects, or in a broad sense, such as violation of people's 
desires and interests; by either criterion, governments stand out from other orga- 
nizations by their tendency to monopolize the concentrated means of violence. 
(Tilly 1985, 171) 

The idea  of the  state as double-edged  protector-one 

that creates 
the  perception  of  danger  from  which  the  country  is  to  be  saved-is 
a 
useful  organizing  principle  for my examination  of the emergence  of par- 
allel powers  at the local level  and the role of the state in that process. This 
article will  begin  by  discussing  the  origins  of current organized  crime in 
Rio  in  the  repressive  era of  the  1960s and  1970s. In an  effort  to  "protect 
society"  from  the  two  perceived  evils  of  common  criminals  and  leftist 
political  militants,  the  Brazilian  state  inadvertently  created  the  form  of 
organized  crime against  which  it now  seems  compelled  to protect society. 
Next,  the  article will  describe  the  dynamic  of  the  "local-level  protector" 
operating  within  the  context  of  "nonprotected  communities"-the 
fave- 

51 

Latin American Research Review 

las. These communities  are only  one category  among  an array of compar- 
ative  examples  of  the  emergence  of  parallel  polities  resulting  from  the 
perceived  absence  of the state. The final sections  will  analyze  the political 
impact  on the organization  of local-level  communities  and  the role of the 
state  in  perpetuating  that impact. 

The Roots of Parallel Power 

The present  scope  and  structure  of  drug  distribution  in  Rio  have 
largely  resulted  from  actions  taken  by  the  military  regime  in  the  late 
1960S8 to address  concerns  alleged  about  "national security."9 First of all, 
the  military  decided  in 1969 to classify  both  political  prisoners  (many  of 
whom  had been  involved  in bank robberies to finance  political  activities) 
and  "common  bank  robbers"  (assaltantes with  no  political  motives)  as 
national  security  risks. These two  groups  were separated  from the rest of 
the "common criminals" and housed  together  in the same section  of a Rio 
maximum-security  prison,  the  Penitenciario  Candido  Mendes  on  Ilha 
Grande,  an  island  off  the  coast  of  Rio.10 Appalling  conditions  in  the 
prisons  included  systematic  torture  and  no  basic  amenities  (mattresses, 
linens,  blankets,  soap).11 

The political  prisoners,  who  were  mostly  middle-class,  educated, 
and  leftist,  came to prison  with  an organizational  structure  and an ideol- 
ogy  of the "collective" that they passed  onto the "common bank robbers," 
who  were later called  "o coletivo" (the collective).12 The collective  adopted 

8. The Regime  Militar held  power  from 1964 to 1984. It manifested  various  phases,  from 
the relatively  milder period  under  Humberto  Castelo  Branco (1964-1966)  and Artur Costa e 
Silva  (1966-1968)  to  the  more  repressive  years  of  1969 to  1978 under  Emilio  Garrastazu 
M6dici  (1970-1973) and  Ernesto Geisel  (1974-1978). The gradual  opening  to the  democratic 
process  occurred from 1978 to 1984, under Joao Figueiredo.  For a thorough  discussion  of the 
evolution  of  the  Regime  Militar, see  Maria  Helena  Moreira Alves,  State and Opposition in 
Brazil, 1964-1984.  The. measures  in  question  were  imposed  during  the  repressive  phase  of 
the  late 1960s. 

9.  An interesting  parallel exists  between  Brazil and Jamaica in terms  of the consequences 
of  state  action  on  the  direction  and  form  of  drug  trade. See  Gunst's  (1995) analysis  of  the 
Jamaican government's  role  in  constraining  marijuana  production  and  distribution  in  the 
1970s while  creating  space  for  cocaine  and  crack selling  as  well  as  the  growth  of  posses 
(gangs)  in Jamaica and  the  United  States 

10. For accounts  of  the  origins  of  the  Falange  Vermelho  on  Ilha Grande,  see  the  ghost- 
written  memoir  of William  da Silva  Lima, one  of its founders,  Quartocentos contra um: Uma 
historia do Comando Vermelho (Lima 1991) and  the study  by Eduardo Campos  Coelho  (1987). 
11. Coelho  remarked  about  prisons  in  the  mid-1970s,  "the deplorable  conditions  of  the 
prisoners  and  the  abandonment  by  the  state  removes  all credibility  from the  implementa- 
tion  of humanizing  policies,  impels  the prison  population  toward  a brutal  struggle  to gain 
the  minimum  comforts  of prison,  and  reinforces  the natural  inclination  of the system  to be 
closed,  rigid,  and  repressive"  (Coelho  1987, 114). Since  that  time,  prison  conditions  have 
improved  little  (see  Americas  Watch 1989). 

12. William da Silva  Lima reported  that the two  groups  did  not coexist  without  tensions, 
claiming  that the  middle-class  political  prisoners  wanted  to retain their separateness,  their 
identity  as political  prisoners  as distinct  from the nonpolitical  prisoners.  This separateness 

52 

COCAINE  AND  FAVELA  POLITICS 

the organizational  form and  some  of the  anti-state  ideology  of the politi- 
cal  prisoners,  if  only  to  secure  their  own  rights  as  prisoners.  They  also 
learned  from  the  political  prisoners  principles  of  political  organization 
and  a collective  consciousness  that was  new  to the  Brazilian prison  sys- 
tem. The limits  of such  politicization  and  the form it took were described 
by  a former  political  prisoner.  When  I interviewed  him  in  1988, he  was 
holding  a position  of  responsibility  in  a municipal  secretariat  of  Rio  de 
Janeiro: "In truth, there existed  a very great potential  for revolt essentially 
because  the  larger  system  had  as  its  dominant  values  what  they  [the 
prisoners]  could  not  hope  to  attain.  So  it didn't  become  a revolt  against 
the  system,  but  rather a revolt  to gain  what  the  system  had  to offer. The 
common  prisoners  inherited  a little  of  the  radical  discourse  of  the  Left; 
they  inherited  much  of the  value  system  of current society  and  many  of 
the  practices  of  traditional  politicians."13  That  basic  conservatism,  de- 
spite  "radical" training,  still tends  to dominate  the current relationship  of 
drug  groups  to  the  favelas,  a point  that  will  be  discussed  further.14 

In the  mid-1970s,  the  political  prisoners  were  transferred  back  to 
prisons  on the mainland.  The colectivo  was  integrated  into the rest of the 
prison  population  and came to be known  as the  "lei de seguranya" (the law 
of security), presumably  because  they  maintained  order within  the prison 
population  by punishing  inmates  who  engaged  in robbery and  rape. The 
group  developed  a  code  of  behavior,  the  basis  of  an  internal  system  of 
authority  not  unlike  that  described  for  prison  systems  in  the  United 
States.15 Building  on  their  collective  consciousness,  the  lei  de  seguranca 
began a system of voluntary monetary contributions from prisoners, which 

contradicted  "an old  tradition  of  prisons  in  which  revolutionaries  and  political  prisoners, 
when  sharing  the same  floor  and bread (chio e pdo), grew  together  sharing  the same  ideal." 
The  actions  of  the  political  prisoners  were  based  on  political  motivations:  they  were  in- 
tended  to  contradict  the  claims  of  the  military  dictatorship  that  there  were  no  political 
prisoners  in Brazil and  to make  the  national  and  international  public  aware of  their plight 
(Lima  1991, 47-49).  Although  recognizing  the  political  strategy,  the  "mass"  found  this 
stance  elitist.  For an  account  of  earlier collaborations  in  the  1930s between  revolutionaries 
and  "common prisoners,"  see  Ramos  (1953). 

13. Joan Moore  made  a similar  observation  in  her  (1977) study  of  Chicano  gangs  in  Los 
Angeles.  Although  they  challenged  the outside  world  (meaning  rival gangs  and  the Anglo 
community)  with  graffiti,  talk, and  symbolic  vandalism,  the  real challenge,  especially  for 
older  gang  members,  was  to make  it in  the  Anglo  world  and  gain  a certain  respectability. 
Moore  commented,  "Gang  members  are  extraordinarily  proud  of  those  clique  members 
who  have  made  it in  the  Anglo  system....  Older  members  of  the  powerful  Clanton  gang 
formed  an association  that now  holds  reunions,  accompanied  by  good  dance  bands,  good 
liquor, and  the  other  signs  of  making  it" (1977, 38). 

14. A number of authors writing  on social banditry  in Latin America have pointed  out the 
essential  conservatism  of banditry, that "more often  than not, banditry  represents  an adap- 
tation  to, rather than  resistance  against,  an  exploitative  regime  and  that  in  the  process,  it 
works  to  maintain  that system"  (Joseph  1990, 10). 

15. Moore  (1977)  discussed  a  similar  dynamic  in  her  study  of  Chicano  gangs  in  Los 
Angeles.  Her chapter entitled  "Prisons and the Barrios" describes  the complex  relationships 
existing  among  barrio  gangs,  the  community,  and  prison-based  organizations  (1977, 93- 
127). 

53 

Latin American Research Review 

constituted  a "kitty" for obtaining  basic  necessities  as well  as for financ- 
ing  prison  escapes.  They  had  learned  from  the  political  prisoners  the 
techniques  of  hunger  strikes  and  sending  letters  to  the  press  and  other 
entities  to  denounce  violations  of  human  rights. 

The  prison  authorities  found  these  new  tactics  troublesome  and 
therefore integrated  the group into the larger mass  of prisoners,  hoping  to 
dilute  their strength and organization.  Instead,  the power  of the colectivo 
was  strengthened  and  expanded.  In an attempt  to diffuse  the new  orga- 
nizational  strength,  prison  authorities  then  transferred  the  members  of 
the  lei  de  seguranca  to  several  other  prisons,  which  effectively  spread 
and further reinforced the notion  of collective  action.  Today, the organiza- 
tion is known  as the Falange Vermelho, or more recently as the Comando 
Vermelho, the largest and best-organized  of five  separate and  often  com- 
peting  prison  organizations.16  The current leaders  of  the  Comando  Ver- 
melho  have become  folk figures,  if not heroes,  among  the favelas  and  the 
population  at large, thanks to the press.17 By now, the "coletivo" generation 
of the 1970s has largely been replaced by new  leaders who  have learned to 
use  organizational  skills,  inside  prisons  and  in  favelas,  to  build  lucrative 
cocaine-dealing  networks,  but largely without  the  coletivo  mentality. 

The emergence  of cocaine as a lucrative new  commodity  in the late 
1970s  radically  changed  the  opportunities  for  prison-based  organized 
crime.18 The Comando  leadership  perceived  cocaine  dealing  as a way  to 

16. The  original  name  of  the  Comando  Vermelho  was  the  Grupo  Uniao  Gremio  Recre- 
ativa  e  Esportiva  do  Presidio  Ilha Grande.  The  name  "Falange Vermelho"  (and  later  "Co- 
mando  Vermelho") was  created by  prison  personnel  who  wanted  to project the image  of a 
dangerous  and  politically  subversive  alternative  military  group.  The  names  Falange  and 
Comando  Vermelho were  then  picked  up by  the press  and  have stuck  since  the 1970s. This 
information  surfaced  in  an  interview  with  a  former  police  reporter  and  novelist  well  ac- 
quainted with  that period. As William da Silva Lima explained,  "the 'Comando Vermelho'. . . 
was  not  an  organization  but,  above  all,  a kind  of behavior,  a way  of surviving  in times  of 
adversity.  What kept us  alive  and  united  was  not  a hierarchy or a material structure  but  a 
sympathy  that we  developed  with  one  another  during  the most  difficult  time  of our lives" 
(Lima  1991, 83-84). 

17. Edmundo  Campos  Coelho  contrasted  the  more  "normative" Lei de  Seguranca  of the 
1970s with  the  currently  more  calculating  and  profit-oriented  Comando  in  terms  of  two 
representative  leaders: "William [da Silva Lima, of the older bandit  generation]  exercised  a 
type  of normative  power;  Escadinha  [a younger  bandit]  a remunerative  power. The Lei de 
Seguranca  sought  to  mobilize  an  involvement  of  a  moral  nature;  the  new  leaders,  of  a 
'calculating'  nature"  (Coelho  1988, 114). 

18. A  distinction  should  be  made  between  the  organized  crimes  of  drug  dealing,  bank 
robbing,  and  kidnapping  as  practiced  by  groups  like  the Falange  (or Comando)  Vermelho 
and  the  organization  of  the  technically  illegal  numbers  racket,  the  jogo  de  bicho.  While 
bicheros (participants  in the numbers  racket) have a marked presence  in favelas, they  do not 
depend  on  symbiotic  relationships  like  those  between  favelas  and  the  drug  groups.  The 
sales points  of the jogo de bicho  are found  all over Rio and  relatively  openly, while  much  of 
the  drug  dealing  centers  in  favela  communities,  thus  requiring  a  degree  of  cooperation 
between  the  residents  and  traffickers.  Another  fundamental  difference  between  the  two 
forms  of  organized  crime  is  the  essential  base  of  their power. The jogo  de  bicho,  although 
not devoid  of violence,  has traditionally  depended  on a process  of negotiating  and  creating 

54 

COCAINE  AND  FAVELA  POLITICS 

maintain  high  profits  without  having  to provide  the  large police  payoffs 
often  required  for  robbing  banks.19 After  cocaine  dealing  became  the 
main  enterprise,  one  prominent  member  of  the  Comando  leadership  (a 
resident  of a favela in the North  Zone)  reportedly  proclaimed,  "Now  we 
are self-sufficient."20  Subsequently,  when  police  repression  against  drug 
dealers  increased  during  the  gubernatorial  administration  of Wellington 
Moreira Franco in 1987 and 1988, bank robberies increased  markedly.21 By 
the  late  1980s, a  supplementary  crime  appeared:  kidnapping  well-to-do 
members  of  the  upper  and  upper-middle  classes  and  using  the  ransom 
money  to buy  cocaine  in  neighboring  producer  countries.22 By 1994, so- 
phisticated  weaponry  had been  added  to the portfolio  of commodities  to 
be  traded.  Certain  groups  of  traffickers,  mainly  in  favelas  located  near 
the airport and port areas, have begun  to specialize  in selling  weapons  to 
drug  traffickers  in  other  favelas  for  defense  against  invasion  by  police 
and  rival drug-trafficking  groups.23 Thus when  conditions  permit,  deal- 
ing in cocaine and related commodities  increases,  and with  it the involve- 
ment  of  the  traffickers' communities.  Because  the  leaders  of  the  Falange 
or  Comando  Vermelho  in  the  late  1970s and  early  1980s were  rooted  in 
favelas  throughout  Rio,  the  growth  of  the  drug  trade  in  those  commu- 
nities  naturally  followed.  Falange  leaders  viewed  the  favelas  as  a  rela- 
tively  safe  venue  with  a modicum  of  community  support.24 Drug-deal- 

clients in which  the personalistic  and  paternalistic  structure  of each group  (usually  led by a 
single  individual)  is  maintained  by  ties  of  loyalty  of  a  familial  kind.  The  more  collective 
nature  of drug-based  crime maintains  its power  through  violence  or threat of it. The latter 
point  was  made  by  Luis Antonio  Machado  da  Silva  (see  Silva  1994,164). 

19. The  costs  and  risks  associated  with  bank  robbing  exceeded  the  money  received, 
according  to  William  da  Silva  Lima: "bank robbing  doesn't  pay  off  as  well  as  you  might 
think.  It requires  a lot  of  people,  and  if the  presence  of  a specialized  gang  is  noted  by  the 
police,  then  the  repression  increases  for everyone"  (Lima  1991, 85). 

20.  Related  in  an  interview  with  former  police  reporter  Valerio  Meinel,  whose  novel 
Avestruz, dguia e cocaina is a thinly  veiled  fictional  account  of certain segments  of organized 
crime  in  Rio. 

21. Ant6nio  Carlos (Caio) Ferraz, leader of the community  of Vigario Geral, reported the 
response  of  the  favela's  drug  trafficker, Flavio  Negao,  when  asked  what  he  would  do  if 
drugs  were  legalized:  "Man,  you  can  legalize,  but  we'll  find  another  racket." See  Ferraz 
(1995). 

22.  Between  1989 and  1992, the  number  of  kidnappings  in  the  state  of  Rio  de  Janeiro 
increased  by 133 percent  (from 39 in 1989 to 124 in 1992). The rates remain elevated,  with  90 
kidnappings  recorded  in  1994  (Fernandes  and  Carneiro  1995, 17).  Kidnapping  is  by  no 
means  limited  to drug  traffickers, however.  Police involvement  in kidnapping  was  recently 
publicized  in  "Golpe no  bom  astral," Veja, 1 Nov.  1995, pp.  75-76. 

23.  Weapons  are obtained  in  several  ways.  They  may  be  stolen  from military  munitions 
depots  or imported  by  air or sea,  thanks  to  customs  officials  (under the  jurisdiction  of  the 
federal police)  who  accept bribes to let the  merchandise  into  the  country  without  notifying 
authorities.  Interviews  with  high-level  police  officials  in  the  state  of  Rio  de  Janeiro in  1994 
suggested  that arms smuggling  and trafficking are now considered a far greater problem than 
cocaine  sales.  Elise Ackerman's article in  the  Miami-based  weekly  New  Times described  the 
means  by  which  arms smuggling  from Miami to Brazil is carried out.  See Ackerman  (1995). 
24.  According  to  William  da  Silva  Lima,  "We began  to  install  ourselves  in  favelas  as  a 

matter  of  security.  We respected  the  community  and  were  welcomed"  (Lima  1991, 85). 

55 

Latin American Research Review 

ing,  primarily  in marijuana,  has  gone  on  in favelas  for decades,  with  the 
boca de fumo ("mouth of  smoke"  or drug  distribution  point)  being  a con- 
stant  feature  of  favela  life.  The power  accompanying  the  financial  gains 
from cocaine, however, has boosted  drug-dealing  to unprecedented  prom- 
inence  in the economic  and  political  life of the community.  Although  the 
precise  extent  of  the  power  of the  Comando  is not  known,  its  scope  has 
grown  markedly  during  my  eight  years  of  studying  its  presence  in  fa- 
velas.25 

Brazil  is  primarily  a  country  of  cocaine  distribution  and  trans- 
shipment  rather than  cocaine  production  and  processing.26 As  such,  the 
level  of cocaine-related  activity  in Brazil varies  according  to the amounts 
of the drug  being  produced  in the primary  supplier  and  processor  coun- 
tries  of  Bolivia,  Peru,  and  Colombia.  The dramatic  rise  in  coca-leaf  pro- 
duction  in Bolivia from 35,000 metric tons in 1978 to 171,000 metric tons in 
1985 in  the  Chapare  region  alone  (Healy  1986, 112) and  the  estimated 
current  value  of  the  cocaine  trade  in  the  Peruvian  economy  of  1 to  1.2 
billion  dollars  (Mason  and  Campany  1993) both  correspond  to  the  mas- 
sive  increase  in  the  value  of  cocaine  distributed  in  Rio  during  the  same 
period.27 Although  a large  cocaine  trade  flourishes  in  Sao  Paulo  and  at 

25.  Although  journalistic  reports  of  the  scope  of  the  Falange  or  Comando  Vermelho 
should  be  read with  skepticism,  they  nevertheless  convey  some  sense  of  its power.  Carlos 
Amorim  reported  a 1990 Globo figure  estimating  that 90  percent  of  Rio's 480  favelas  were 
dominated  by  the  group,  some  two  and  a half  million  residents  of  Rio  (see  Amorim  1993, 
29). A  more  realistic  assessment  of  the  current situation,  based  on  interviews  with  favela 
leaders  in July 1994, suggests  a pattern  of alliances  rather than any strict organization,  with 
allegiances  currently  split  between  two  prison  or crime  organizations,  the  Comando  Ver- 
melho  and  the Terceiro Comando.  Groups of favela drug-dealing  organizations  tend  to ally 
themselves  with  one  group  or the  other  without  strict or all-encompassing  control. 

26.  Virtually  all  the  recent  literature  on  drugs  in  Latin America  rarely mentions  Brazil. 
Exceptions  are a one-sentence  notation by Peter Reuter that almost all the cocaine in Europe 
is  shipped  through  Brazil  (1985, 90)  and  the  article  by  Velez  and  Lado  (1995), which  dis- 
cusses  Brazil's potential  as a drug  superpower.  A form of cocaine  called epadu has begun  to 
be  cultivated  in the northwestern  Brazilian Amazon,  but quantities  are relatively  insignifi- 
cant  in  comparison  with  Andean  cocaine. 

27.  The difficulty  of estimating  the total economic  value  of the  cocaine  trade for specific 
countries  has  been  noted  by  various  researchers  writing  on  Bolivia,  Peru,  and  Colombia. 
For example,  Alvarez  (1992) described  the problems  in estimating  the total land-use  poten- 
tial and the amount  of labor involved  in trying to determine  the value  of coca production  in 
Peru. She estimated  that its aggregate  value  falls between  500,000,000  and 1.2 billion  (2 to 4 
percent  of  Peru's  gross  domestic  product),  an  industry  generating  3  to  4  percent  of  all 
Peruvian employment.  In Bolivia, the producer country that most directly affects the amount 
of  cocaine  flowing  into  Brazil, coca  production  in  1987 represented  nearly  a  third  of  total 
national  agricultural  output  in 1987. In 1988, it totaled  6.4 percent  of Bolivia's gross  national 
product  and  almost  60 percent of the total manufacturing  sector. Some  150,000 persons  are 
engaged  in the  coca-cocaine  cycle  (coca cultivation,  sulfate  production,  and  the processing 
industry),  equaling  7 percent  of  the  economically  active  population  in  Bolivia  (Machicado 
1992). For a  comprehensive  essay  discussing  the  economic  value  of  cocaine,  see  "Recent 
Literature  on  Drugs  in  Bolivia"  in  Healy  (1995).  Estimates  of  export  values  present  an 
entirely  different  set  of  problems  and  divergent  figures.  In  discussing  the  difficulties  in 
estimating  the  size  of  the  Colombian  illegal  income  from  drugs,  Francisco  Thoumi  has 

56 

COCAINE  AND  FAVELA  POLITICS 

lower levels  in other cities, Rio has become  the major distribution  location 
for  transshipment  to  Europe  and  the  United  States  and  for  sale  to  the 
tourist  trade,  which  is  vital  to  the  Rio  economy.  The  Brazilian  Policia 
Federal  reported  in  1994 seizing  11.8 metric  tons  of  cocaine  on  its  way 
from Colombia  to Europe and  the United  States. This total surpasses  the 
1993 figure of 7 metric tons  (U.S. Department  of State 1995). The monetary 
value  of cocaine  in Brazil is considerably  less  than  the billions  of dollars 
reported  for the  Andean  countries.  But the  amounts  reported  suggest  a 
multimillion  dollar  business  benefiting  a  wide  range  of  the  Brazilian 
population.28 

As  with  most  economic  activities  and  most  organized  criminal 
activity,  the  drug  trade  in  Rio  is  structured  hierarchically, with  the  co- 
caine  distributed  from  favelas  and  conjuntos  at  the  lower  end  of  the 
distribution  chain and  sales  mainly  to a middle-class  clientele.  The king- 
pin wholesalers  of Rio's drug  trade are rarely identified  (unlike the situa- 
tion in Colombia),  and  if they  appear in public,  it is usually  in the society 
columns  with  no  mention  of  their  illicit  activities.  A  bitter  complaint 
made by the lower-level  traffickers is that the anonymous  tubaroes (sharks 
or  "big boys")  are rarely touched,  while  the  lower-class  distributors  are 
often violently  hunted  down.  Within the class structure of the drug  trade, 
these  distributors  are the vulnerable  and exploited  ones.29 But within  the 

suggested  that profits  have  fluctuated  between  2 and  5 billion  dollars  annually  (1995,199). 
Similar discussions  of the economic  value  of coca and  cocaine  can be found  in Tullis (1995, 
esp.  chaps.  2 and  5)  and  in  Bagley  and  Walker (1995). 

28.  Estimates  of the  monetary  value  of cocaine  dealing  in Rio are even  less  reliable than 
the  coca and  cocaine  figures  cited  for the  the  Andean  countries.  The most  accessible  come 
from  the  Rio  and  Sao Paulo  dailies  and  the  national  newsweeklies,  but  none  of  them  are 
particularly reliable given  that most publications  have their own  political  agendas  regarding 
such sensitive  statistics.  In 1987, the more active  favelas were reported to have taken in some 
350,000  dollars  each  per  month,  with  66  drug-dealing  points  in  Rio  totaling  around  ten 
million  dollars per month.  See 'A explosao  do  droga nos  guetos  do  Rio," Isto E, 2 Sept. 1987, 
pp. 21-22.  A more recent discussion  of the size of the Rio cocaine trade by Juliana Resende,  a 
reporter for 0  Estado de Sido Paulo, refers to 344  locations  selling  monthly  a total of two  tons 
of marijuana and cocaine, with  fifteen  of the most  active  favelas  selling  962 kilos per month 
(no monetary  value  given)  (see Resende  1995, 61). The difficulty  in obtaining  accurate drug 
statistics  arises from the decentralized  structure  in which  much of the trading is carried out. 
Additionally,  the  significant  amount  of  cocaine  siphoned  off  by  various  police  agencies 
would  suggest  that the  police  are not  interested  in  divulging  accurate statistics  on  drugs. 
29.  The complex  hierarchy of drug  dealing  is mirrored in all countries involved  in cocaine 
trade. In the countries that produce and process cocaine, the lowest and most exploited level is 
occupied  by  peasant  smallholders  producing  coca  leaves  (campesinos), the  coca transporters 
(zepes or  motobones in  Bolivia), and  producers  of  the  sulfate  base  (pisacocas). Specialization 
continues,  involving  decreasing  numbers  as  the  refined  product  reaches its destination  and 
the relatively  small  numbers  in the  "narcobourgeoisie" accumulate  monopolistic  profits (see 
Suarez Salazar 1993, 88, 90). Except for the  wvell-known Colombian  kingpins  who  have been 
captured or killed in recent years (only to be replaced by other entrepreneurs), those profiting 
the most from cocaine tend to keep a low profile and frequently enjoy a certain protection from 
prosecution. On the situation in Peru, Edmundo Morales cited a local saying that the group in 
power  "no pueden  jugar con  fuego  porque  tienen  cola de  paja" (the group  in power  cannot 
afford to play  with  fire because  they  have tails of straw) (Morales 1990, 102). 

57 

Latin American Research Review 

social structure of favelas, they  are either revered or grudgingly  respected 
or feared.  Their presence  is  never  neutral. 

The Context 

Favelas have existed  in Rio since the end of the nineteenth  century, 
populated  first by refugees  of the Canudos  War in Bahia in the late 1800s 
along  with  freed slaves  after slavery  was  formally  abolished  in 1888. The 
first  growth  spurt  in  favelas  occurred  during  the  push  to  industrialize 
during  the  era  led  by  Getu'lio Vargas in  the  1930s  and  1940s  and  then 
another  during  the  massive  migration  from  the  Brazilian  Northeast  to 
Rio and  Sao Paulo in the 1960s and 1970s. Current estimates  of the favela 
population  in Rio range from a million  to two  and  a half million  persons, 
depending  on who  is counting.  Favelas have  sprung  up  in all sections  of 
the  city, elite  as well  as working-class  industrial  areas. They vary  in size 
from a few  hundred  residents  to more  than  two  hundred  thousand  and 
are found  on  terrain ranging  from  steep  hills  to  swampy  flatlands.  The 
terrain of a favela and the manner  in which  it was  settled  (whether  it has 
wide  urbanizable  streets or the narrow winding  paths  preferred by drug 
dealers)  determine  its  "suitability" for illegal  activity.  The legal  status  of 
favela  land  is  equally  varied,  with  landownership  ranging  from  private 
parties to the municipal,  state, or federal government,  church entities,  the 
military, or even  favela  residents  themselves. 

Favelas are generally  stable communities  involving  long-term  resi- 
dence  and  populations  that span  several  generations,  depending  on  the 
age of the settlement.  This relative stability  has produced  in most  favelas 
a social  cohesion  and  sense  of community  that (despite  complaints  about 
physical  hardships)  usually  creates loyalty  to and a sense  of identity  with 
a particular  community  as  well  as  with  being  a favelado.30 Favelas  have 
improved  a good  deal physically  in the last twenty-five  years, largely due 
to the residents'  efforts, but they  still exemplify  the oppressive  inequality 
prevailing  in  Brazilian  society.  The  most  relevant  examples  of  this  in- 
equality  for the  Rocinha  community  are the  totally  inadequate  facilities 
for education  and health. Only  four elementary  schools  within  the bound- 
aries of the community  serve at most 1,500 students  out of a population  of 
150,000  to  200,000.  Children  not  served  by  these  schools  try  to  get  into 
public  schools  in  the  surrounding  middle-class  communities  but  often 
fail. Some fifteen day-care centers and seven  community  preschools  serve 
children up to five years old.  Rocinha has no secondary  schools,  although 

30.  In the 1960s, when  I first started my research in favelas, the term favelado was  used  by 
the middle  and upper classes  as a term of derision,  equivalent  to marginal or criminal. Today, 
it is often  used  as  a badge  of identity  by  favela residents  themselves,  usually  in relation  to 
"the outside"  to  designate  a kind  of  class  pride,  as  in  "Eu sou  favelado."  The  term  is  not 
generally  used  that way  within  favelas.  For a discussion  of political  uses  of the term inside 
favelas,  see  Segala  (1991, 317-18). 

58 

COCAINE  AND  FAVELA  POLITICS 

one  of the Catholic community  centers runs  occupational  training classes 
for adolescents.  The entire community  is served  by only  two  small health 
clinics,  one  run  precariously  by  the  municipality  of  Rio  and  another  by 
the  residents'  association  of  a  subneighborhood  of  Rocinha.  Almost  all 
medical  needs  must be absorbed by the inadequate  public hospitals  in the 
surrounding  middle-  and  upper-class  areas. 

A significant  majority of favela residents  are employed  in industry 
or the  growing  service  sector, with  periods  of  unemployment  mirroring 
employment  conditions  in the larger society.  Although  the  economic  cri- 
ses  of the  last  decade  in Brazil are reflected  at the  local  level  in elevated 
rates of unemployment,  underemployment,  and  self-employment,31  var- 
ious  forms  of  informal-sector  economic  activity,  legal  or  illegal,  have 
always  been  part of favela life. The international  growth  of cocaine  deal- 
ing  in  the  last  decade  has  strongly  affected  favelas  and  conjuntos  with 
physical  structures conducive  to clandestine  activity  Any illegal informal- 
sector  activity  carries  with  it  implications  that  are  absent  from  many 
"legal" informal-sector  activities.  Like many  "legal" informal-sector  ac- 
tivities,  clandestine  activity  feeds  off  and  is  fed  by  social  and  economic 
inequities.  But its illegality  requires a certain environment,  a certain space 
that  favelas  and  housing  projects can  provide. 

Cocaine, Clients, and Parallel Community Power: Local-Level Protectors 

Of  the  five  hundred  favelas  and  housing  projects  in  the  munici- 
pality  of Rio de Janeiro (excluding  the municipalities  of the metropolitan 
area outside  the city), virtually  all have drug-dealing  groups,  even though 
the  scope  of  operations  and  local  impact  may  vary  considerably.  The 
number  of people  in a single  community  involved  economically  in  drug 
activity  can total as many  as several  hundred.  In the larger communities, 
drug-generated  work  manifests  a diverse  set  of  specializations,  such  as 

31. Although  economic  conditions  have  deteriorated  significantly 

in  the  past  decade 
throughout  Brazil, Rio has  experienced  a particularly  severe  decline,  losing  ground  to Sao 
Paulo,  Belo  Horizonte,  and  Porto  Alegre  in  industrial  and  financial  investment.  A  recent 
national  study  by  the  Brazilian census  bureau,  the Instituto  Brasileiro de Geografia  e Esta- 
tistica  (IBGE), found  that in the state of Rio de Janeiro during  the 1980s, the real income  of 
the  poorest  fifth  of  the  population  declined  by  24  percent,  while  the  overall  per  capita 
income  of the state fell by 15 percent. The inability  to attract new  investment  combined  with 
a  drastic  cut  in  federal  public  investment  and  a  50  percent  decrease  in  jobs  in  the  civil 
construction  sector have led  to a mushrooming  of informal-sector  jobs, most  of which  were 
not connected  to the national welfare system  (Oliveira 1991, 7). This is in the larger context of 
the  trend  in  Brazil in  the  1980s toward  loss  of  salaried  jobs  with  correspondly  fewer  Bra- 
zilians  being  entitled  to benefits  from the social welfare system  (IBGE 1994, xxv). A study  by 
IBGE researcher Jane Souto  de  Oliveira  pointed  out  that in  the  difficult  task  of  measuring 
the  size  of  the  informal  sector, a fine  line  barely  separates  work,  unemployment,  begging, 
and  illegal  activities  (Oliveira 1991, 6). Similarly, a study  by  S6nia Rocha of the Instituto  de 
Pesquisa  Econ6mica  Aplicada  (IPEA)  showed  that  of  nine  state  capitals  studied,  Rio  de 
Janeiro was  one of only  two  in which  the percentage  of the poor increased  during  the 1980s, 
from 27 to  32 percent  (Rocha  1994, 126). 

59 

Latin American Research Review 

women  who  wrap  packages  of  cocaine  (endoladoras),32 young  boys  who 
are lookouts  (olheiros), somewhat  older boys  who  make deliveries  (avioes) 
or sell  at locations  within  the  favela  (vapores), older  adolescents  who  pa- 
trol the area sporting  visible  weapons  (seguranqas), accountants  who  keep 
the books,  the man who  handles  "public relations" to stay on good  terms 
with  the  community,  and  the  drug  lord  (o dono). Locals refer to the  drug 
groups  variously  as  "o grupo," "a quadrilha" (the gang),  "a rapaziada" (the 
boys),  or  more  recently,  "o movimento." Whatever  the  specific  position 
held,  most of those  participating  in drug-related  activity  find it one of the 
few  viable  economic  options  open  to  them.33 

The  nature  of  the  interaction  between  the  drug  group  and  the 
community  is  determined  by  the  personality,  leadership  style,  and  per- 
sonal  philosophy  of  the  drug  leader.  Such  interaction  includes  support 
and  protection  offered  to  the  community,  the  drug  group's  relationship 
with  the residents'  association,  public  display  of armed  strength,  and the 
extent  of  drug  use  among  members  of  the  group.  Characteristics  of  a 
"good  dono"  include  appearing  concerned  about  the  basic  welfare  of 
community  residents,  eschewing  gratuitous  violence,  and  discouraging 
drug  use  among  youngsters.  This  kind  of  dono  usually  grew  up  in  the 
community  and  enjoys  a certain amount  of respect  within  it. Respect  for 
him  extends  even  to those  who  want  nothing  to do  with  the  drug  trade. 
An  example  found  in  the  favela  called  Morro  do  Sossego  (Tranquility 
Hill) in the North Zone (Zona Norte) of Rio points to the somewhat  contra- 
dictory  and conservative  nature of the  "good dono." As of 1995, a form of 
gun-exchange  operated  there  in  which  children  exchanged  toy  guns  for 
crayons  and  paper. When  asked  who  paid  for the  drawing  supplies,  the 
woman  who  was  running  the program replied  that it was  the dono.34 The 
powerful  and  well-respected  dono  is  best  exemplified  by  "Meio  Kilo," 
the  folk-hero  of  Jacarezinho,  one  of  Rio's  largest  favelas  (about  150,000 
inhabitants). Meio  Kilo was  killed  in 1987 after a daring  attempt  to escape 
from  prison.  His  funeral  drew  thousands.  Two weeks  after his  death,  a 

32.  The  name  comes  from the  word  dolar (dollar), reflecting  the  fact that  the  paper  cus- 
tomarily  used  to  wrap  marijuana  packets  was  green.  Another  of  the  few  jobs  held  by 
women  are mulas, who  transport  large  packets  of  cocaine  (two  to  three  kilos)  from  favela 
wholesalers  to  retail outlets  in  other  favelas.  Women  generally  participate  only  in  limited 
ways  in favela-based  drug  dealing  because  the men in charge tend to hold  traditional views 
regarding  the  role of women.  For a discussion  of  the  role of women  in  trafficking  and  the 
relatively  rare instances  of  women  in  positions  of  control  in  the  drug  groups,  see  Zaluar, 
esp. chap. 23, "Mulher do bandido:  Cr6nica de uma  cidade  menos  musical"  (1994, 224-34). 
33.  Robert Shirley's  ethnography  of  Morro  da  Cruz,  the  largest  squatter  community  in 
Porto Alegre,  estimates  that the  main  economic  activity  in the  community  is drug  traffick- 
ing,  which  employs  "a large number, probably  hundreds  of  young  people  of  the  region  as 
lookouts,  runners,  and  couriers"  (Shirley  1990, 265). 

34.  I would  like  to  thank  architect  and  urban  planner  Manuel  Ribeiro  for sharing  this 
information  with  me. For a profile of another  "good dono" in Rio, see Ventura (1994), which 
contains  a lengthy  interview  with  the recently  deceased  Flavio Negao  of the favela Vigario 
Geral. 

60 

COCAINE  AND  FAVELA  POLITICS 

record was  produced  with  a song  honoring  him,  and  the  segment  of the 
community  that revered  him  most  sought  unsuccessfully  to  erect a bust 
in his honor in one  of the favela's public  squares. Meio Kilo's successor  as 
drug  lord, in contrast,  tended  to be unnecessarily  violent  and  cared little 
about  community  welfare.  When  he was  killed  several  months  later, few 
attended  his  funeral,  and  nothing  was  done  to  commemorate  him.35 

It clearly  matters  that  the  drug  groups  have  the  "support" of  the 
community,  which  must  not cooperate  with  the police.  In fact, anyone  in 
the community  suspected  of being  an informer by the drug  group is dealt 
with  harshly-either 
expelled  from  the  community  or  even  killed.  Al- 
though  favela  residents  are usually  uneasy  about  such  forced  coopera- 
tion,  they  have  little  or no  respect  for the  police,  who  traditionally  have 
treated  favela  residents  with  disdain  and  violence  simply  because  they 
are favelados  or live  in  a particular  public  housing  project. 

The use of excessive force and similarly discriminatory actions against 
marginalized  populations  represent a universal  phenomenon.  The conse- 
quences of such actions, however, vary according to the organizational and 
social-structure options  available to the oppressed  population.  In the inner 
cities  of the United  States, one  reaction could  be prolonged  urban rioting. 
In Rio, as  well  as  in  many  U.S. inner cities,  a longer-term  consequence  is 
accepting  to various  degrees  an alternative  security  or welfare system. 

For example,  in exchange  for the  "protection" and  anonymity  that 
a community  may  offer  the  drug  group,  it can often  expect  in return  an 
array of  services  ranging  from  internal  security,  to  money  for an  ambu- 
lance  or taxi to the hospital,  to money  for medicines,  soup  kitchens,  day- 
care centers,  parties  for  children  on  special  occasions,  and  other  emer- 
gency  funds  in cases  of extreme  hardship. The local dono  determines  the 
extent  of redistribution  of drug  profits. While  a smaller  percentage  of the 
community  may  receive  direct monetary  benefits  from this  drug-created 
alternative  welfare  system,  the  community  as  a whole  benefits  from the 
internal security  system  provided  by the drug  group. In most  favelas  and 
housing  projects, robbery, rape, and other kinds  of interpersonal  violence 
are often met by equally  violent  reactions by the dono,  who  may mete out 
his own  form of justice. Comments  were made frequently by a wide  range 
of residents,  such  as the favela resident  in Rocinha who  observed,  "I can 
sleep  with  my  doors  and  windows  open.  Now  I have no  fears about  my 
daughter  walking  through  the  favela  at 1 A.M."36 

35.  In an insightful  political  ethnography  of the associational  life and politics  in the favela 
of Santa Marta in Rio's Zona Sul, Atilio  Machado  Peppe  pointed  out the inherent long-term 
potential  danger  of  the  good  dono  becoming  a role model  for the  youth  of  the  favela.  He 
observed,  "Bandits who  are strategically  'good,'  'charming,'  and  'sociable'  can  attain their 
spurious  objectives  more  effectively  than  the  taciturn  and  brutal  thugs  of  other  gangs" 
(Machado  1992, 432). 

36.  Alternative  security  systems  in  favelas  actually  existed  well  before  drug  dealers. 

61 

Latin American Research Review 

Such a comment  reveals  the importance  to the  local population  of 
the security  provided  by the drug  group as well  as the informal means  of 
resolving  problems  with  "antisocial behavior." Just as  the  larger society 
(the segment  of the citizenry  served  to some  degree by the formal institu- 
tions  of the society)  defines  what  is acceptable or aberrant behavior, drug 
groups  that have gained  significant  power  impose  their own  code  on the 
surrounding  community,  defining  what  kind  of  violence  is  allowed  and 
who  is  permitted  to  carry  it  out.  The  perception  by  favela  residents 
the formal justice system  does 
indeed,  by most of the working  class-that 
not  work  for  them  has  led  a  portion  of  that  population  to  accept  an 
alternative  justice  system.37 

Such acceptance  is revealed  in a 1987 study  carried out by the Rio 
branch of the Ordem dos  Advogados  do Brasil (OAB), the Brazilian coun- 
terpart of the American  Bar Association.  It set up a law clinic in the North 
Zone  favela of Morro de Coroa. Lawyers working  in the clinic found  that 
56  percent  of  the  sample  surveyed  preferred  "informal channels"  of  re- 
solving  conflict,  as compared  with  20 percent  who  preferred formal pro- 
cesses  of adjudication  and 24 percent who  expressed  no preference  (OAB 
1987, 34). The  study  concluded  that  the  sense  of  alienation  from  formal 
institutional  channels  felt  by  favela  populations  fosters  an  autonomous 
system  of  maintaining  order  (OAB 1987, 50).38 

The press has exhibited  a tendency  to romanticize  the drug  groups 
and  leaders  like Meio  Kilo and  his colleague  from the North  Zone  favela 
of Juramento, the still imprisoned  "Escadinha," as social bandits, modern- 
day  Robin Hoods  righting  the wrongs  of an unjust and  violent  society  in 
the  tradition  of  Lampiao,  Brazil's most  famous  social  bandit.  Although 
these  leaders  may  feel  an  obligation  to  give  something  back  to  their 

Alison  Raphael  noted  the  role of  "bambas" (tough  guys)  in the 1920s in policing  and  main- 
taining  order within  the  favelas  (1980, 38). 

37.  The  erosion  of  official  institutions  and  the  emergence  of  alternatives  has  also  been 
noted  as a consequence  of drug  dealing  in Colombia.  According  to Thoumi,  'An even  more 
important  effect  on  government  is  the  weakening  of  official  institutions  which  occurs  as 
many  activities  began  to  fall  outside  the  legal  system.... 
For instance,  personal  security 
begins  to be provided  by the private sector....  However,  since contracts in the underground 
economy  cannot be enforced  through  the official court system,  a new  justice system  evolves 
in  which  accounts  tend  to  be  settled  violently.  .  .  .  One  result  of  this  situation  is  the 
impotency  of formal  institutions  in providing  adequate  protection  to the weak  as the level 
of  social  aggression  rises.  .  ." Thoumi  (1987, 47).  Although  a  parallel  with  the  Brazilian 
situation  exists  in Colombia,  a significant  difference  is that in Colombia,  those  institutions 
had  functioned  in  the  past,  whereas  for the  segment  of  the  Brazilian  population  affected 
most  by  drug  dealing,  the  same  types  of  institutions  had  never  functioned  effectively  in 
Brazil. Thus  the  alternative  institutions  created by  the  drug  dealers  filled  a void  that had 
always  been  there. 

38. The  OAB  study  noted  that  the  punishments  applied  to  those  violating  the  "lei  do 
fumo"  (law  of the drug  group)  varied  from house  arrest to summary  execution,  with  such 
intermediate  measures  as barring  a person  from  certain  areas of  the  favela,  temporary  or 
permanent  expulsion  from the  favela,  beating  the  person,  shooting  the  hand  of  a thief,  or 
pronouncing  a death  sentence  on  a rapist. 

62 

COCAINE  AND  FAVELA  POLITICS 

communities,  they  are first and  foremost businessmen  who  are using  the 
physical  space  of  the  favela  or  conjunto  as  the  locus  of  operation  for  a 
highly  lucrative  informal-sector  activity.  For that  space  to  be  available 
and  protected,  they  must  offer  something  in  return.  The  services  men- 
tioned  are valuable  only  because  the  state  does  not  provide  them  and 
because  the  state  entities  charged  with  providing  essential  security  ser- 
vices-the  Policia Militar and  the  Policia Civil-act 
instead  as a corrupt 
and  repressive  force that often  persecutes  and  kills instead  of protecting. 

The Repressive Presence of the State: Police Violence, Corruption, and 
Parallel Security 

The  public  service  most  conspicuously  absent  from  Rio's favelas 
(and  consequently  the  most  prevalent  "alternative"  service  offered  by 
Rio's drug  gangs)  is  internal  security.  Although  many  favelas  and  con- 
juntos  have  a  post  of  the  Policia  Militar  stationed  within  the  physical 
space  of their communities,  few  favelados  have enough  confidence  in the 
police  to  seek  them  out  when  a problem  arises.  This lack of  trust  in  the 
police  stems  from a long-standing  tradition  of Brazilian police  abuse  and 
violence  against  the  lower  classes  in  general  and  favela  and  conjunto 
residents  in  particular.39 

Such abuse  is carried out with  equal  severity  by  the two  branches 
of  the  police  that  deal  with  public  security.  The  Policia  Militar is  a uni- 
formed  state  force  (not  military  but  civilian,  despite  its  name).  Its tradi- 
tional  role for the past 150 years has been  to ensure  public  security  (Hol- 
loway  1993). Its current  role  is  to  serve  as  a  publicly  visible  uniformed 
force  for patrolling  streets  and  controlling  traffic and  to  provide  shock- 
troop details  for special  operations.  During  the  most  repressive  phase  of 
the  military  regime,  the  Policia  Militar was  subsumed  under  the  armed 
forces  in  1969  for  the  alleged  purpose  of  "defending  Brazil's  national 
security interests." Controlling social and political unrest, including counter- 
guerrilla  warfare,  became  a  political  justification  for  using  repressive 
tactics  against  the  civilian  Brazilian population  of  all classes.  After 1974, 
when  the  regime  believed  the  political  threat had  decreased,  the  Policia 
Militar  was  assigned  the  role  of  combating  conventional  crime,  but  it 
continued  to employ  the same heavy-handed  and violent  techniques  used 
against  guerrillas  (Pinheiro  1991b, 172). The  involvement  of  the  Policia 
Militar in a "war on  crime" was  expanded  further in a 1977 amendment 
awarding  it the  same  legal  guarantees  that existed  during  the late 1960s, 
"thus obliterating the boundaries  between  the 'ongoing war'  against guer- 

39.  See the study  by Maria Victoria Benevides  (1985,239) on police  violence  and  the need 
to fill daily  quotas  of arrests. Such quotas  are filled  most easily  by arresting favela residents, 
who  are perceived  by police  as potential  criminals.  Police abuse  has  also been  documented 
by  Chevigny  (1991) and  Americas  Watch (1993b). 

63 

Latin American Research Review 

rillas  and  the  control  of  common  crime"  (Pinheiro  1991b, 173). Thus  the 
Brazilian  state  once  again  created  a  mechanism  for  violence  by  fusing 
common  or  civilian  elements  with  political  and  military  segments.  As 
when  the  state  brought  together  common  criminals  and  political  pris- 
oners  during  the  dictatorship  and  inadvertently  helped  reshape  violent 
criminal  organization  into  its  current  form,  the  state  similarly  helped 
create the mechanism  of violent  police  repression  by assigning  a military 
role and  raison  d'etre  to  a civilian  police  force. 

For  example,  it  has  become  common  practice  in  Brazil  for  the 
police,  on  the  pretext  of searching  for criminals,  to carry out  "blitzes" in 
favelas,  routinely  knocking  down  residents'  doors,  arresting residents  for 
vagrancy  who  happened  to  be  without  identity  cards  when  stopped, 
flying  helicopters  so  low  that roofs  are blown  off, indiscriminately  firing 
weapons,  and  extorting  cash  and  drugs  from  residents  under  threat  of 
arrest.40 The head  of the Batalhao de Choque  (shock troops) of the Policia 
Militar in Rio told me that when  competing  drug  groups  stage shoot-outs 
in favelas,  the police's  task is made  easier.41 In reality, these  actions  create 
a situation  in which  the boundary  between  police  and  criminal activity  is 
eliminated,  and  consequently  favela  populations  no  longer  know  whom 
they  can  trust.42 

The second  force,  the  Policia  Civil,  is  a plainclothes  organization 
with  a  largely  investigatory  function.  It has  the  dubious  distinction  of 
being  the more corrupt of the two  police  forces. The fact that the police  in 
Rio and many  other Brazilian municipalities  are corrupt is hardly open  to. 
debate.43 Interviews  with  high-ranking  police  and justice officials  yielded 

40.  Anthropologist  Alba  Zaluar  studied  Cidade  de  Deus,  a housing  project built  in  the 
1960s  on  the  periphery  of  Rio  to  which  residents  were  sent  when  several  favelas  were 
eradicated  (1983). Zaluar noted  a frequent comment  made  by adolescents  who  opted  to join 
the  drug  dealers:  "It's the  police  who  create the  bandits."  She  also  noted  the  "process of 
repression-fear-revolt"  among  the youths  as well  as the menacing  and threatening  presence 
of  police  that  she  witnessed 
innumerable  times  during  her  fieldwork.  The  local  police 
station  did  not  even  bother  to hide  using  torture  on  those  arrested,  guilty  or not:  "On the 
contrary, this well-known  fact is part of the image  of the all-powerful  police  that guarantees 
the  fear they  [seek  to] inspire"  (1983, 254). 

41. Interview  in  Rio, July 1994. The subtext  of  this  comment  seems  to be,  "Let them  kill 
each  other  off  so  that  we  don't  have  to  do  it." No  consideration  is  given  to  the  innocent 
majority of the community  whose  lives  are placed  at risk. See also the description  of violent 
action by the Policia Militar during  the war between  rival drug  gangs  in the favela of Santa 
Marta in  August  1987 (Machado  1992, 397-98). 

42.  In a seminar  on  the media  and  urban violence,  Coronel  Nazareth  Cerqueira, head  of 
the  Policia  Militar of  the  state  of  Rio  de Janeiro, noted  the  intense  media  scrutiny  of  arms 
possessed  by  drug  traffickers.  He  pointed  out  that  little  attention  is  paid  to  the  police 
corruption,  the  "great weapon  that organized  crime has at its disposal  to allow  it to operate 
freely"  (FAPERJ 1993, 37). 

43.  The  following  section  is  based  on  interviews  with  Antonio  Carlos  Biscaia,  former 
Attorney  General  of  the  state  of  Rio  de  Janeiro; Helio  Luz,  newly  appointed  head  of  the 
Policia  Civil  of  the  state  of  Rio  de  Janeiro; other  officials  in  the  justice  system  of  Rio  de 
Janeiro; and  members  of the judiciary  and  human  rights community  in Belo Horizonte  and 

64 

COCAINE  AND  FAVELA  POLITICS 

such observations  as these: "Few crimes are committed  without  the knowl- 
edge  and  permission  of  the  police";  "When  we  talk  about  'organized 
crime,'  we're  really  taking  about  the  police";  and  "Brazil's  overriding 
problem  is that of impunity."  In a study  of corruption  among  the Policia 
Civil  in  Rio  in  the  mid-1980s,  Julita Lemgruber  quoted  police  officials 
who  acknowledged  that police  involvement  in illegal  activities  is routine, 
and  when  one  source  of  illicit  revenues  dries  up,  they  turn  to  others. 
Lemgruber  reported,  "The police  are entering  into  other  areas  because 
they  lost  the  money  from the  bicho [the jogo de bicho, the  illegal  numbers 
racket],  which  they  always  considered  a  complement  of  their  salary" 
(Lemgruber  1987, 25). Moreover, the police,  like the drug  traffickers, have 
turned  to kidnapping  in the past  decade  to supplement  their revenues.44 
Clearly, the police  do  not operate  in a vacuum  and  are responding  to the 
norms  prevailing  in other segments  of the criminal justice system.  As one 
high-ranking  member  of  the  Rio criminal justice  system  commented,  "It 
is less  expensive  for a lawyer  to pay  off  a member  of  the  Policia  Civil  at 
the  initial  stages  of  an  investigation  than  to  pay  off  a  judge  at  a  later 
stage."45 

While  society  as  a whole  suffers  from  police  corruption  and  vio- 
lence,  the  lower  classes,  especially  those  living  in  favelas,  suffer  dispro- 
portionately.  Documentation  of  police  involvement  in  drug  dealing  has 
established  the  police  role  in  escorting  shipments  of  drugs  and  guns  to 
favelas  as well  as in killing  other corrupt  police  and  blaming  favela drug 
dealers for those  murders. The most  violent  example  of such involvement 
was  the  massacre  by  plainclothes  policemen  (acting  as  a  rogue  death 
squad)  of twenty-one  innocent  residents  of the favela of Vigario Geral in 
August  1993, only  a month  after the  Candelaria  police  massacre  of  eight 
street  children  in  downtown  Rio.  Originally  explained  as  retaliation  for 
the killing  of four members  of the Policia Militar by drug  traffickers from 
Vigario Geral,46 the  killer police  were  in fact retaliating  against  the  drug 

Porto Alegre.  See  also  the  interview  with  Helio  Luz in  Xico Vargas and  Telma Alvarenga, 
"Um  estranho  no  ninho,"  Veja-Rio, 23 Aug.  1995, p. 4. 

44.  See  also  Lemgruber  (1985). Regarding  the  involvement  of  the  Policia  Civil  in  recent 
kidnappings,  see  the  declarations  of  Helio  Luz  reported  in  "Golpe no  bom  astral," Veja, 1 
Nov.  1995, pp. 75-76.  A  recently  released  internal  report of the  Policia  Civil  estimated  that 
80  percent  of  the  police  (9,600  members  of  a  force  of  12,000)  were  dishonest  and  were 
collecting  a million  dollars  a month  in extortion  money  from drug  dealers  and  kidnappers. 
See  Diana  Jeano Schemo,  'A Common  Bond: Fear of  Each Other," The New  York Times, 24 
Dec.  1995, p. A15. 

45.  Personal interview  with  an anonymous  member of the criminal justice system,  17 July 

1995, Rio  de Janeiro. 

46.  See  Americas  Watch  (1993a); Ventura  (1994, esp.  48-52,  67,191); and  Ferraz  (1994). 
Ferraz is a favela leader  and  director of Casa da Paz in Viga4rio Geral. In figures  paralleling 
U.S.  statistics  on  inner  cities,  the  age  group  most  affected  by  drug-related  violence  is 
adolescents,  mainly  boys  between  the  ages  of  twelve  and  seventeen.  Four-fifths  of  the 
deaths  in  this  age  category  stem  from  police  intervention  or  gang  wars  (Fernandes  and 
Carneiro 1995, 14). 

65 

Latin American Research Review 

dealers  for having  cheated  them  out  of  a shipment.  In taking  no  action 
against  transgressors  within  its  ranks,  the  state  has  thus  become  an  ac- 
complice  and  a partner in crime.  In favelas  at least,  democracy  has  been 
preempted  by the creation of a "narcocracy . . . , the economic  and  politi- 
cal  structures  evolving  from  a  widespread  direct  and  indirect  involve- 
ment  in  the  drugs  business"  (Sage  1989, 49). 

Defining Aberrance 

The defining  by the state or by dominant  classes  of certain behav- 
iors and practices among  the popular  classes  as aberrant or antisocial  and 
therefore subject to repression has occurred repeatedly  in history. Brazil is 
no exception.  Studies  by Thomas  Holloway  (1989,1993) and Martha Hug- 
gins  (1985) have investigated  police  repression  throughout  the nineteenth 
and  early  twentieth  centuries  of  capoeiras, young  male  slaves  and  mem- 
bers  of  the  free  black  lower  classes  who  engaged  in  dancelike  fighting 
techniques  based  on  African-linked  martial  arts.  Capoeiras  served  as 
bodyguards  for influential  individuals  and  helped  keep  peace  at public 
events  such  as  processions  and  festivals  (Huggins  1985, 123). They  were 
nonetheless  viewed  by  the  police  as  a  problem  requiring  social  control 
and  regulation  (Holloway  1989, 674; 1993, 223-28).  It is not far-fetched  to 
draw  parallels  between  capoeira  gangs  of  the  nineteenth  century  and 
today's  favela-based  drug  dealers,  who  engage  in  activities  subject  to 
repression  when  practiced  by  the  lower  classes  but  often  tolerated  when 
practiced  by  the  middle  class  or  by  the  police  themselves.  In  both  in- 
stances,  the  gangs  have served  certain positive  social  functions  in a seg- 
ment  of  society  where  social  and  political  institutions  did  not  or do  not 
function.  Today, however, capoeira as an art form is accepted  by society  as 
a valid  cultural  expression  of  Afro-Brazilian  life.47 

Other  practices  accepted  today  as  valid  cultural  expressions  of 
working-class  life  were  similarly  repressed  in  the  nineteenth  and  early 
twentieth  centuries  in Brazil. For example,  public  celebration  of Carnival 
by  the  lower  classes  was  prohibited  and  subject to police  persecution  in 
an  era when  only  white  persons  of  means  could  celebrate  in  the  streets 
(Queiroz 1985,18; Raphael 1980,52,  54, 76). Houses  of candomble' and other 
forms  of  Afro-Brazilian  religious  expression  were  also  declared  illegal 
and  subjected  to  police  repression  (Maggie  1988). These  practices  (or at 
least the modern-day  versions  of them)  are now  accepted  as valid  and le- 
gal and  are practiced  even  by  segments  of the middle  classes.  But the is- 

47.  Peter Singelmann  studied  a  similar  phenomenon  in  the  Brazilian  Northeast,  where 
armed bandits  (cangageiros) frequently clashed  with  landlords  (coroneis). The landlords  main- 
tained  their  own  independent  militias,  whose  activities  resembled  those  of  the  bandits. 
According  to Singelmann,  "The difference  was  that the  landlords,  through  their control of 
the  police  and  the  courts,  were  able  to  have  the  cangaceiros  labeled  criminals"  (1975, 60). 

66 

COCAINE  AND  FAVELA  POLITICS 

sue of drugs  and  their distribution  and consumption  has remained  a pre- 
text for control  and  repression  of  the  lower  classes  for over  a century. 

Accusations  of  drug  taking  and  trafficking  historically  have been 
applied  selectively  to underclass  and  minority  populations.48  For exam- 
ple,  John Helmer's  (1975) study,  Drugs and Minority Repression, reported 
for the United  States that throughout  the nineteenth  and twentieth  centu- 
ries,  minority  populations  have  been  unjustly  accused  of  drug  use  and 
distribution  far beyond  the  evidence.  Helmer  asserts  that  the  allegedly 
excessive  use  of  opium  by  Chinese  immigrants  in  the  late  nineteenth 
century, of cocaine  by blacks  in the early twentieth  century, and  of mari- 
juana by  Mexicans  during  the  depression  were  all myths  created during 
periods  of  economic  constraint.  In each  case,  these  targeted  populations 
were  displacing  U.S.-born  white  workers  in  the  labor  markets  of  San 
Francisco,  New  York, and  the  Southwest.49  Whether  the  issue  is  acces- 
sibility  to jobs or accessibility  to other  kinds  of resources  (such  as  living 
space  in preferred urban areas), drug  use  as a pretext for class repression 
has  been  widespread  in  both  countries.  Blaming  favelas  for  the  drug- 
related  ills  of society  easily  becomes  a pretext  for viewing  favelas  as  the 
source  of  all  Brazilian  social  ills  and  calling  once  more  for  their  eradi- 
cation. 

A  system  of  repression  that  has  existed  for  a  hundred  and  fifty 
years and the behavior adopted  to enforce its norms are not easily changed. 
During  the  first  gubernatorial  term  of  Leonel  Brizola  (1983-1987),  an 
attempt  was  made  to improve  the human  rights  record of the police  and 
the correction system  by creating a more benign  relationship  between  the 
Policia Militar and favelas. Police were prohibited  from carrying out blitz- 
type  attacks and arresting favelados  simply  for carrying no identity  card. 
The  success  of  the  effort  depends  on  which  segment  of  the  population 
one asks. Favela residents  recognized  and  appreciated  the change  during 
the earlier Brizola years. But a large segment  of the middle-class  popula- 
tion attacked Brizola for his populist  and demagogic  methods  and accused 
him  stimulating  the  drug  trade  by  tying  the  hands  of  the  police.  The 

48.  Brazil  (especially  Rio)  is  no  exception  to  this  pattern.  See  the  study  by  Julio Cesar 
Adiala  (1986) arguing  that  the  myth  of  the  connection  linking  the  use  of  marijuana  as  an 
African  derivation  to the  Afro-Brazilian  population  has  served  to fortify  racially discrimi- 
natory  policy  in Brazil. Former public  defender  Lizst Vieira observed,  "It is not the middle 
class  who  is  indicted.  Those  indicted  in  the  criminal  courts  are  the  poor,  the  popular 
sectors." The sons  and daughters  of the middle  and upper  classes  bribe officials  before they 
ever  reach the  indictment  stage:  "Those who  have  money  escape  indictment"  (Vieira 1985, 
80, 84). 

49.  The argument  is also  made  in a 1992 book  by  Mathea  Falco, a lawyer  who  served  as 
Assistant  Secretary of State for International Narcotics  Matters in the Jimmy Carter admin- 
istration. In explaining  the adoption  of the Marijuana Tax Act in 1937, during  the depression 
when  competition  for jobs by  foreign  laborers was  viewed  as  a threat,  Falco commented, 
"once these  drugs  were  linked  in  the  public  mind  with  dangerous  foreigners  and  racial 
minorities,  popular  attitudes  formed  that persist  until  today"  (Falco  1992). 

67 

Latin American Research Review 

commander  of  the  Policia  Militar  in  Rio,  whose  idea  it  was  to  create  a 
more  responsive  police  force  better  integrated  with  the  community,  ac- 
knowledged  with  frustration  the difficulty  of changing  in a year or two  a 
police  mentality  built  up  over  a century  and  a half.50 

Parallel Power Systems in Comparative Perspective 

The emergence  of alternative  political  and  social  groups  as a gen- 
eral response  to societal  inequities  has  been  well  documented  in various 
cases  throughout  history:  the  phenomenon  of  banditry  (as  documented 
by  Eric Hobsbawm  and  Anton  Blok  for  Southern  Europe  and  by  Ben- 
jamin  Orlove  for  Peru  and  Peter Singelmann  for  Brazil);51 gangs  in  the 
United  States (see Moore 1977; Jankowski 1991; Padilla 1992); and the drug 
cartels  in  Colombia  (Bagley  1986; Thoumi  1987), Jamaica  (Gunst  1995), 
and  Sendero  Luminoso  in rural and  urban Peru (Burt 1994). The specific 
roles  in  society  played  by  these  groups  vary  markedly,  but  they  share 
certain key characteristics. The most basic is the precondition  of economic 
crisis  and  social  tension  in  a  given  society  that  combine  to  produce  in- 
creasing  levels  of  poverty.  Hobsbawm's  early  analysis  of  the  causes  of 
banditry  in Southern  Italy noted,  "it tended  to become  endemic  in terms 
of pauperization  and  economic  crisis" (1969,17). Banditry became  "not a 
program  for  peasant  society  but  a  form  of  self-help  to  escape  peculiar 
circumstances"  (1969, 20). 

Banditry  flourished  best  where  inaccessibility  and  administrative 
inefficiency  and  complication  were  the  rule.  Orlove,  describing  the  phe- 

50.  In  interviews  in  1988, 1991, and  1994, Colonel  Carlos  Magno  Nazareth  Cerqueira, 
commander  of the Policia Militar of Rio de Janeiro, expressed  great frustration over dealing 
with  entrenched  practices  and  attitudes  within  the  ranks  of  the  police.  Nilo  Batista, then 
Secretary  of  Justice  and  Lieutenant  Governor  of  the  state,  oversaw  both  the  civil  and 
military police  and assumed  the governorship  when  Leonel Brizola entered the presidential 
race in early 1994. Batista said in a published  interview  on the model  for reorganizing  police 
services  to the community,  "what we have to conquer are the relations  within  the corps and 
that's  a  gradual  process"  (Batista  1994, 70).  The  difficulty  in  reforming  long-entrenched 
police  institutions  has  been  documented  extensively  in a 1992 study  by  Guaracy Mingardi 
that examined  the failed  attempts  by the Franco Montoro administration  in the state of Sao 
Paulo  to  create  lasting  reforms  within  the  Policia  Civil.  During  both  Brizola  administra- 
tions,  the  state  government's  attempt  to  establish  a new  model  of  community-police  rela- 
tions  took the form of a pilot project entitled  Centros Comunitarios  de Defesa  da Cidadania. 
Established  initially  in three communities,  the centers claim  to include  local offices  for civil 
defense;  public  defenders;  municipal  clerks for obtaining  official  identity  cards, labor cards, 
and  birth,  marriage,  and  death  certificates;  local branches  of  the  civil  and  military  police; 
mediation  services;  small  claims  courts; social  workers  to deal  with  family  problems,  bene- 
fits,  and  welfare  services;  an  employment  office;  and  a bank. 

51. The subject of  social  banditry  and  specifically  the  response  to  Hobsbawm's  agenda- 
setting  works,  Primitive Rebels and  Bandits, has  developed  into  a virtual  growth  industry 
See  Gilbert  Joseph's  comprehensive  discussion  of  the  phenomenon  with  regard  to  Latin 
America  (1990). My article does  not seek to engage  in that discussion  but rather to point out 
certain  historical  parallels  with  the  preconditions  leading  to banditry  in  its various  forms 
(rural and  urban)  and  with  some  of  the  consequences  of banditry 

68 

COCAINE  AND  FAVELA  POLITICS 

nomenon  of abigeato (cattle rustling)  in the Southern  Peruvian  highlands 
of  the  early 1970s, observed  that inaccessibility  (lack of roads  and  police 
stations)  and a complicit peasant  population  willing  to provide  safe haven 
largely  determined  the  success  of  cattle  rustlers.  Orlove's  description  of 
the  sanctuary  provided  by  peasant  communities  could  well  describe  the 
relationship  of  drug  traffickers to  favela  communities.  As  long  as  either 
bandits  or  traffickers  appeared  to  be  providing  benefits  to  the  commu- 
nity,  they  were  given  the  benefits  of  protection.  According  to  Orlove, 
"The  complicity  of  the  peasantry  in  helping  the  rustlers  to  escape  is 
perhaps  the crucial  factor...  When  hacendados  and  policemen  attempt 
to capture rustlers,  the peasants  claim not to have seen  them  and offer no 
information  on  their  movements.  Similarly, rustlers  can  rely  on  most  of 
the  local  populace  to warn  them  of these  pursuers,  especially  the  police, 
and  conceal  them  if necessary"  (Orlove 1980,190). 

Benefits to the community  clearly differ according to the particular 
historical and geographical  context. Highland  Peruvian  peasants  who  felt 
oppressed  by  large  landowners'  increasing  encroachment  on  communal 
agricultural  and  grazing  lands  felt  "protected" by  cattle  rustlers  who  re- 
fused  to raid peasant  enterprises.  In the eyes  of the peasantry, the rustlers 
were  limiting  the  landowners'  power  while  allying  themselves  with  the 
peasants  (Orlove  1980, 191). Two decades  later, the  growing  presence  of 
Sendero  Luminoso  in Lima's barriadas, in an urban  revival  following  the 
arrest  of  Abimael  Guzman,  reflects  economic  crisis,  increased  poverty, 
and  a calculated  strategy  to provide  goods  and  services  (often  "offered" 
coercively)  in  exchange  for political  support  and  loyalty  (see  Burt 1994; 
Burt and  Lopez  Ricci 1994). 

Whether  involving  rural peasants,  urban  gang  members,  or revo- 
lutionaries,  a  social  and  political  relationship  emerges  because  of  the 
injustice  in  society  perceived  by  the  community  and  the  opportunity  to 
profit from  "unprotected spaces"  perceived  by  "the outlaws."  U.S. gangs 
operating  in the inner cities  of most  large urban centers  offer the kind  of 
security  and  protection  the  police  rarely provide.  Protection  from crimi- 
nals in other neighborhoods,  exploitive  merchants,  or developers  seeking 
to  remove  or gentrify  a neighborhood  are all  "services" documented  by 
several  recent studies  of U.S. urban gangs.  In all three studies  to be cited, 
long  histories  of police  harassment  created a prime  rationale  for the mu- 
neighborhoods  providing  the  gangs  with 
tual  protection  service-the 
safe haven from police  in return for gang  protection  from noncommunity 
predators  (including  harassing  police).  The  dynamic  of  the  community- 
bandit  relationship  is a complex  and  shifting  one,  sometimes  seeming  to 
take  on  overtones  of  social  or  political  protest  while  at  others  seeming 
more  fundamentally  business-oriented.  As  Blok and  Orlove  have  noted 
regarding  Southern  Italian banditry,  "the image  of the  heroic brigand  in 
popular  consciousness  can  serve  to  awaken  and  maintain  a  sense  of 

69 

Latin American Research Review 

protest, but this image is usually contradicted by the actual behavior of 
the bandit" (Orlove 1980,181). 

Frequently, the labels that society affixes to members of an under- 
class provide the very identity that gang members (in U.S. and Latin 
American cities) can use to justify their activities. Felix Padilla observed 
about Puerto Rican gang behavior in  Chicago, "the most obvious re- 
sponse was to act out the part implied in the deviant label" (Padilla 1992, 
6). Joan Moore remarked in her study of Los Angeles Chicano gangs, "as 
a symbolic response to the world, the gang sub-culture develops its own 
logic" (1977, 37). And the outlaw image projected by some of the more 
notorious drug traffickers in Rio's favelas originated in the "marginal" 
label attached to favelas by the middle and upper classes and also in the 
image projected in the Rio press of the romantic but violent and anarchis- 
tic bandit. Drug dealers, in proclaiming that they are carrying out the 
"law of the hill" (lei do morro) or the "law of smoke" (lei do fumo, a name 
dating back to the days when marijuana was the main illegal substance), 
frequently act out the self-fulfilling prophecy established by society "la' 
em baixo" (down below, as opposed to up on the hill).52 

Drugs and "Legitimate" Local-Level Authority 

The presence of  the drug  trade in  almost all Rio's favelas and 
housing projects has serious implications for legitimate power and au- 
thority and for the independence of local-level political organization and 
governance. Virtually all favelas and  housing projects have residents' 
associations whose  officers are elected by members of the community. 
The association and its leaders represent the community to the formal 
administrative structures of the municipality or the state and act as a 
mediator vis-a-vis the external polity. As the drug groups become more 
powerful in favelas, tension increases over the real or potential threat to 
elected authority. Because of their financial advantage and formidable 
armed strength, the drug groups often pressure local elected officials on 
community policy and even run for office, thus seeking to become "legiti- 
mate" and respectable within the community. 

The following incident was related by the leader of a North Zone 
favela, a woman of thirty-four who  was being pressured constantly to 
share her power with  the drug leader. As  president of the favela resi- 
dents' association, which built and operated the community nursery, she 
was asked by the drug lord to let him become the vice-president of the 
association. Such a position would give him legitimacy and allow him to 

52.  The distinction  between  "lei do morro" and  "lei do asfalto" certainly  existed  long before 
the  dominating  presence  of  drug  traffickers  (see  Segala  1991 on  the  complexities  of  the 
distinction).  But the terms have taken on new  connotations  in the last decade,  now  that the 
"lei do  morro" has  come  to  mean  the  power  of  drug  dealers. 

70 

COCAINE  AND  FAVELA  POLITICS 

dispense  favors in the community.  Because the day-care center employed 
ten  favela residents,  he  argued  that he  would  be  able  to hire five  people 
and  thus  make  them  indebted  to him.  It would  also  give  him  access  to a 
space  for holding  parties  and  other drug-related  activities.  The president 
responded  in a way  that reduced  her isolation  and  vulnerability  by plac- 
ing  herself  within  the  collectivity.  Instead  of  replying  as  an  individual, 
she convened  a meeting  of the community,  which  was  attended  by eighty 
favela residents.  The community  members  responded  to the  drug  group 
by saying,  "Look, we're very  satisfied with  the way  [the association  presi- 
dent]  works.  She  is  someone  who  really  fights  for the  community,  who 
has really brought some  organization  to the hill. If you guys  want  to work 
[with  us],  then  let's  unite  our  forces,  not  divide  the  movement."  The 
president  then  explained  to  the  drug  group  the  democratic  way  of  run- 
ning  a favela organization:  "I will  not substitute  anyone  on my slate. The 
only  way  that will  happen  is in the next election.  If you  want  to run your 
own  slate  of  candidates,  you  can."  The  drug  group  remained  uncon- 
vinced.  They  wanted  power  sharing  without  the  responsibility  of  the 
position,  and  the impasse  was  never resolved  to either side's  satisfaction. 
This  kind  of  episode,  which  has  occurred  repeatedly  in  favelas, 
reveals  the  delicate  balance  between  the  fledgling  democratic  commu- 
nity  organization  and  local-level  authoritarian  forces  with  the potential 
to threaten  legitimate  leaders  into  submission.  As  the  former  president 
of a well-known  South  Zone  favela  remarked,  "You have  to have  politi- 
cal savvy  and  survival  skills  (jogo de cintura) to know  when  to stand  firm 
and  when  to  give  way."  One  of  the  most  difficult  issues  facing  elected 
community  officials  is their stance  vis-a-vis  law  enforcement,  especially 
during  moments  of  intergang  rivalry  or  police  invasion  to  search  for 
and  arrest or kill drug  traffickers.  Community  leaders,  who  themselves 
have  usually  been  maltreated  by  the  police,  are  acutely  aware  of  the 
community's  aversion  to  violent  police  tactics.  They  have  little  respect 
for  police  but  are nevertheless  often  perceived  as  taking  sides,  labeled 
either as linked  to the drug  group  if they  do not cooperate  with  police  or 
as  police  informers  if they  do  not  assert  their  authority  as  community 
leaders  to keep  the  police  out.53 A growing  tendency  is to expel  or even 

53.  A  similar  dynamic  has  existed  among  coca  growers  in  Peru,  the  forces  of  Sendero 
Luminoso,  and  the  coca-eradicating  and  security  forces of the  Peruvian  government.  Coca 
growers find themselves  in a situation  paralleling  that of favela leaders in Rio. Coca growing 
is  viewed  by  the  Peruvian  government  as  political  support  for  Sendero,  while  Sendero 
guerrillas  have interpreted  refusal to grow  coca as political  support  for the government.  As 
Mason  and  Campany  have  pointed  out,  "To grow  coca  is  to  risk  harsh  sanctions  at  the 
hands  of  the  Government  and  to  refuse  to  grow  coca  is  to  risk  sanctions  at the  hands  of 
Sendero" (Mason  and  Campany  1993, 3). Similarly, migrants  to the  area near Lima's Carre- 
tera Central who  had  fled  the  violence  of  the  Ayacucho  region  found  themselves  caught 
between  the demands  of Sendero  in Lima to grant favors and  the suspicions  of the security 
police  (Smith  1992,134). 

71 

Latin American Research Review 

kill  community  leaders  who  are perceived  by  drug  traffickers  as police 
informers.54 

Nowhere  is this  situation  more evident  than  in the  favela of Santa 
Marta, where  drug  traffickers were able to take advantage  of the commu- 
nity's  aversion  to  police  violence.  Protesting  police  violence  but  keeping 
silent  about the traffickers' violence  ended  up  strengthening  the hand  of 
the  latter.  In  the  late  1980s,  traffickers  managed  to  win  control  of  the 
residents'  association  by  supporting  a  slate  of  candidates  whom  they 
perceived  as  sympathetic  to  their  interests  and  therefore  less  likely  to 
involve  police  in  matters  of  community  security.  In  1990  the  reigning 
traffickers invaded  the  headquarters  of the  residents'  association  to pre- 
vent  the  installation  of a community  telephone,  presumably  fearing  that 
it  would  give  the  favela  more  access  to  the  police.  The  secretary  of  the 
association  protested  the  traffickers'  action  and  was  killed  two  months 
later, accused  of being  a police  informer. At  his  funeral,  the  president  of 
the  association  accused  the  drug  traffickers of  killing  the  secretary. The 
president  too  was  assassinated  three months  later, along  with  his wife.55 
Because  of  basic  distrust  of  the  police  by  favela  residents,  a  dia- 
logue  between  favela associations  and the police  has become  increasingly 
difficult.  Residents  are never  sure when  their civil  rights  will  be violated 
or whether  the  police  themselves  are involved  with  the  drug  traffickers. 
One  favela  president  commented,  "We're between  a  rock  and  a  hard 
place.  It ends  up  being  a perverse  reversal,  whereby  the  absence  of  the 
state  [in  the  form  of  the  police]  becomes  beneficial.  The  more  the  state 
intervenes,  the  more  it  tries  to  overstep  boundaries,  and  the  more  the 
credibility  of  the  residents'  association  is  placed  in  doubt."56 

The  development  of  parallel  power  systems,  in  part the  result  of 
repression  and  corruption  by  official  forces,  means  that  favela  popula- 

54.  The Federacao de  Favelas do  Estado  de Rio de Janeiro (FAFERJ) recorded  more than 

twenty-five  assassinations  of  favela  leaders  between  1987 and  1995. 

55.  This account  is based  on  interviews  with  community  leaders  of Santa Marta in 1992 
and  on descriptions  of events  in Machado  (1992, 429-30).  Two rival newspapers  in Rio, the 
Jornal do Brasil and  0  Globo, were  filled  with  accusations  and  counteraccusations  regarding 
the  association  leaders'  involvement  with  the  drug  traffickers.  But  whether  or  not  these 
leaders  were tied  to the drug  trade is irrelevant  to the larger point.  Either way, the unscru- 
pulous  power  of  the  drug  dealers  and  the  dilemma  that  leaders  face  over  calling  in  the 
police  means  that the community  as a whole  is constantly  exposed  to dangers  on both sides 
from two  violent  armed  forces. 

56.  The  generalizability  of  this  phenomenon  to  other  Brazilian  large  cities  is  noted  in 
Teresa Caldeira's study  of the effects  and perpetuation  of violence  in Sao Paulo. Speaking  of 
a working-class  community  (one  of  several  Sao  Paulo  neighborhoods  examined),  she  ob- 
served,  "they fear both  the police  who  confuse  them  with  criminals  and  the criminals  who 
threaten them  in their neighborhoods....  Working-class  people  feel paralyzed  between  the 
fear of the police,  the fear of the criminal's vengeance,  and  ...  a view  that the justice system 
is unable  to provide  any justice" (Caldeira 1992,183). Caldeira concluded,  "One of the most 
paradoxical  effects  of  the  experience  of  continuous  arbitrariness and  injustice  suffered  by 
the  working  classes  is  that the  rule  of  law  is  perceived  as  an  additional  form  of  injustice" 
(1992, 190). 

72 

COCAINE  AND  FAVELA  POLITICS 

tions  are  caught  between  two  armed  forces-the  police  and  the  drug 
groups. A recent study  carried out by a nongovernmental  human rights or- 
ganization  in Rio underscores  the fundamental  dilemma  of being  trapped 
between  these two  forms of violence.  Protest of police violence  and corrup- 
tion by  a collective  demonstration  may  be  allowed  by  the  rules  of demo- 
cratic process  and  may  reinforce the  empowerment  of  local-level  associa- 
tions.  But protesting  the violence  of drug  groups  means  risking one's life 
and ends up dividing  and destroying  local-level  collective  action. Thus the 
climate of fear imposed  by the drug groups erodes the sense  of collectivity 
(Centro Bento  Rubiao 1994, 64).  Such  tension-filled  intracommunity  rela- 
tionships  have  grave  implications  for  the  viability  of  local-level  popular 
participation  in  democratizing.  Local  associations  run  the  risk  of  being 
removed from their mediating  role with  the state by the actions of the drug 
gangs.57 

The State and Drug  Dealing: Creating the Perception of Threat and 
Re-creating Clientelism 

The  often  delicate  balance  of  power  within  a community  and  ef- 
forts by community  leaders  to build  a strong grassroots  movement  in the 
face  of  threats  like  those  posed  by  the  drug  groups  can  be  upset  and 
thwarted  by strategies  of a state or municipal  government  that frequently 
uses  the  presence  of  the  drug  groups  for its  own  political  ends.  Brazil's 
favelas  have been  a political  commodity  for the larger polity  for decades. 
In  the  1950s  and  prior  to  the  crackdown  by  the  military  hard-liners  in 
the  1960s,  when  elections  were  allowed  and  parties  operated  relatively 
openly,  one  of  the  few  political  resources  available  to  favelas  were  cli- 
entelistic  relationships  established  with  politicians  (Leeds  and  Leeds 
1976; E. Leeds 1978). Votes were traded  (or at least  promised)  in exchange 
for meager  favors  from  politicians,  either  to  individuals  in  favelas  or to 
the  community  as  a  whole.  The  relationship  between  favelas  and  the 
outside  polity  was  a symbiotic  one,  with  each side  extracting  some  good 
or service  from the other. Thus the channels  through  which  the squatters 
dealt  with  the outside  polity  were  limited  to a series  of manipulations  of 
patronal ties  in a context  where  political  parties  were largely  elitist  and  a 
lack of mass-based  parties provided  little possibility  for substantial  gains 
through  the  formal  party  system.  As  in  all  such  patronal  relationships 
where  resources are uneven,  outside  politicians  tried to foster the favelas' 
dependency  on  their  benefactors  at  election  time.  Only  so  much  was 

57.  See  also  Alba  Zaluar's  comment,  "The intimidation  of witnesses  and  leaders  of resi- 
dents'  associations  in  various  parts  of  the  state  of  Rio de  Janeiro has  grave consequences, 
for it destroys  what  has  come  to be  the  way  out  of  the  cycle  of  poverty  and  violence:  the 
demands  for political,  social,  and  civil  rights as a part of this nation,  as its citizens"  (Zaluar 
1994, 95). 

73 

Latin American Research Review 

promised at any one election in order to leave the favela needing favors at 
the next election and ready once again to swap favors for votes. 

In the mid-1960s, a burgeoning statewide favela federation emerged 
that sought to  question the basic state and national policies that had 
created favelas in  the first place. This group demanded that the state 
provide the kinds of services that would eliminate clientelistic and depen- 
dent relationships. But in the increasingly repressive yet clientelistic polit- 
ical atmosphere of the authoritarian regime in the late 1960s and early 
1970s, the federation as an independent political body did not last long. It 
evolved into yet another of the many clientelistic channels of the guber- 
natorial administration of Antonio de Padua Chagas Freitas in the 1970s, 
which became a well-oiled political machine within the military regime.58 
The events of the last two decades have created a somewhat differ- 
ent dynamic between favelas and the outside polity. The opposition move- 
ments created during the later years of the military regime in the late 
1970s and early 1980s brought with them the resurgence of a favela move- 
ment with a renewed sense of political consciousness-the  concept of 
citizenship and the right to demand from the state what rightfully be- 
longs to citizens. Thus favelas added to their set of political resources a 
great deal more leverage than in the 1950s and early 1960s, before heavy 
repression began under the military regime. Clientelism has not entirely 
disappeared, however. In fact, in dealing with a more sophisticated and 
demanding electorate in the favelas, the state has found it necessary to 
counter the new consciousness with more elaborate efforts to maintain 
the existing clientelistic relationships. The set of  state practices of  the 
earlier period, known today as the "politica de bica d'agua" (politics of the 
water tap) has been re-created at the end of the twentieth century on a 
larger scale, by politicians running for office as well as by incumbents 
wishing to retain electoral support. The emergence of parallel political 
forces resulting from drug dealing has facilitated the re-creation of clien- 
telistic relationships, as shown by the following example. 

This episode demonstrates public officials' exploiting the presence 
of drug groups as a pretext for intervening with force in the name of 
public safety and good government while using the drug groups to attain 
political access to the community. A  few months before the municipal 
elections in November 1988, the governor of the state of Rio de Janeiro at 
the time, Wellington Moreira Franco, tried to make good on a 1986 elec- 
tion pledge to do away with drugs and violence in Rio in a period of six 
months. Moreira Franco launched a plan using hunt-and-kill tactics in 
favelas that aimed to purge the most notorious favelas of their drug gangs 

58.  For a thorough  discussion  of  the  Chagas  Freitas machine,  see  Eli Diniz  (1982), espe- 
cially  chap. 4, "Articulando bases  de  sustenc,o."  This period  is also  discussed  in Valladares 
(1978) and  Gay  (1994). 

74 

COCAINE  AND  FAVELA  POLITICS 

and thereby ease  middle-class fears that Rio was  becoming what the 
press called "another Beirut." Following the massacre of  several drug 
dealers in Rocinha, the governor set up a program that claimed to provide 
expanded health care, legal aid, a job bank, and "all the basic sanitation 
that had been lacking for years." As one of Rio's largest favelas, Rocinha 
clearly represented a  potential goldmine of  votes.  But the  governor's 
claim of saving Rocinha from drugs and violence three months before the 
election held little credibility for the residents, who had heard such prom- 
ises many times before. A year later, little remained but the promises, and 
in the following election, the governor's operatives were making deals 
with  the  new  drug  dealers to  allow  unimpeded  campaigning by  his 
party's candidates.59 

As already mentioned, a similar operation called Operagao Rio was 
carried out from October 1994 through July 1995. Although the idea had 
been discussed as early as May 1994, the decision to send in the army to 
occupy selected favelas was not actually implemented until just before the 
second round of gubernatorial and presidential elections in November. The 
operation was billed as a plan to disarm favelas, rid them of drugs, reduce 
crime rates in Rio, and incorporate favelas into the rest of the city with the 
rights of citizenship in the fullest sense. The actual operation accomplished 
none of these goals. A  few drug dealers were arrested, but crime rates 
citywide continued to rise (Fernandes and Carneiro 1995,31), and innocent 
favela residents suffered gross abuses of their human rights.60 Once again 
the primary beneficiary of  the campaign was  the middle class, which 
experienced a temporary and illusory sense of security, along with the 
politicians who could claim to be cleaning up Rio.61 And once more, the 

59.  See  in  particular  Adriana  Bacellar, "Rocinha vive  de  promessas,"  Jornal do Brasil, 12 
Sept. 1988, city section,  p. 5. Use by the state of a perceived  security  threat to further its own 
political  agenda  is certainly not new. In addition  to Charles Tilly's work, Brown (1990) noted 
about Egypt  in the 1920s that defining  banditry  as a national  problem  was  an integral part 
of state building  (p. 259). One reason  that banditry  drew  such  attention  was  that Egyptian 
rulers  "could  further  their  ambitious  state-building  program  by  discovering  a  threat  to 
public  security  and by  the national  crisis of law  and  order created by banditry. If banditry 
was  a national  problem,  then the Egyptian  state would  have to meet the challenge; it would 
have  to  construct  new  institutions  or  strengthen  the  existing  ones  in  order  to  defeat  the 
newly  discovered  threat" (Brown  1990, 268). 

60.  Human  rights abuses  that occurred during  Operacao Rio are thoroughly  documented 
in the 1996 report made  by Human  Rights Watch/Americas  (see Americas  Watch 1996) and 
in  Resende  (1995). 

61. Partisan  politics  and  electoral  considerations  were  clearly  factors  in  the  timing  of 
Operacao  Rio.  Fernando  Henrique  Cardoso  had  just  been  elected  president  in  the  first 
round  of  the  election  on  3 Oct.  1994. In the  second  round  on  15 Nov.  1994, the  two  front- 
runners  in the  gubernatorial  election  were  the Partido  Democratico  Trabalhista (PDT),  the 
party  of  Leonel  Brizola,  and  the  Partido  Social  Democratico  Brasileiro  (PSDB), Cardoso's 
party. The agreement  between  the  state  and  federal  governments  to  provide  joint military 
operations  was  signed  on 31 October. It was  initially  opposed  by the PDT governor  and the 
PDT gubernatorial  candidate  as potentially  threatening  to human  rights.  The PSDB candi- 
date blamed  Rio's rising tide of violence  and drug  dealing  on the liberal policies  of the PDT, 

75 

Latin American Research Review 

issue of violence was perceived narrowly as that of drugs emanating from 
favelas. 

Political exploitation of  the  drug  issue  can  take several forms. 
Playing on  the  public's fear by  proposing superficial quick fixes  that 
frequently exacerbate the violence within favelas is  just one. Another 
more blatant form is  creating alliances between candidates for public 
office and drug groups that tend to occur in communities where the drug 
groups are particularly powerful. These kind of linkages recall the earlier 
period in  the 1950s and 1960s, when  a candidate's cabo eleitoral (ward 
heeler) was often a political leader in the favela who could guarantee a cer- 
tain number of votes through personal influence. More recently, especially 
in favelas with an educated leadership, favela leaders have attempted to 
remain noncommittal, to allow open access and encourage an open dia- 
logue with all candidates, frequently by means of such events as candi- 
dates' night. But that trend has been countered by the growing power of 
the drug groups. Less scrupulous candidates have been known to bypass 
legitimate authorities in favelas, preferring to gain more exclusive access 
to the favela via drug groups that can allow the candidate to campaign in 
any way or can pressure the residents' association to prohibit campaign- 
ing by other candidates. One community leader in Rocinha described the 
death threats he received when he was campaigning for a mayoral can- 
didate opposed by the residents' association and the drug group. Drug 
groups can also pressure residents to vote in a particular way The trade-off 
is votes for the candidate in exchange for money and legitimate influence 
for the traffickers, who often want to get rid of their "marginal" images 
while gaining powerful friends in the right places.62 Just like the political 
education of prisoners during the military dictatorship, who learned to use 
the methods of collective action for their own survival, the drug groups' 
involvement in electoral politics is similarly aimed at survival. But in learn- 
ing to play the electoral game, the drug groups run the risk of distorting 
the democratic process with the help of vote-hungry politicians and of 
helping re-create an even more pernicious form of patronage politics.63 

depicting  Rio as  unprotected  and  in need  of  federal  intervention.  Cardoso's  victory  in  the 
first round gave him clout to take a pro-intervention  stance. When the tide of public opinion 
turned  in  favor of  intervention,  both  candidates  supported  the  idea,  but  the  PSDB candi- 
date  won  the  election.  See Americas  Watch (1996, 14) and  Resende  (1995, 22). 

62.  Drug  traffickers also  create alliances  with  legitimate  business  owners  in the favela to 
gain  economic  and  political  advantages.  Machado  has  described  the dual-purpose  alliance 
functioning  in the favela of Santa Marta in 1988-1989, when  traffickers used  local businesses 
for money  laundering  as well  as creating ties with  Brizola's PDT. The PDT had won  control 
of  the  municipality 
in  1988  and  sought  to  unseat  the  longtime  slate  of  officers  in  the 
residents'  association  (who  had  served  for eight  years) because  they  were aligned  with  the 
Partido de Trabalhadores (PT). The drug  traffickers perceived  their interest as better served 
by aligning  themselves  with  the PDT, and  they  were therefore happy  to help  unseat  the PT 
officers  of  the  association  (see  Machado  1992, 407). 

63.  A parallel situation  on a grander  scale has  developed  in Colombia,  where  large-scale 

76 

COCAINE  AND  FAVELA  POLITICS 

Conclusions 

Comparatively speaking, the extent and monetary value of Brazil's 
drug dealing is significantly less than that reported for the Andean coun- 
tries. Similarly, the degree of violence associated with drug dealing is also 
markedly less  in  Brazil as  a  whole.  Why, then, should researchers be 
concerned about an activity that, in global perspective, is relatively insig- 
nificant? The answer lies in the idea that local-level democratic gover- 
nance is essential for democratization of the larger polity.64 In a society 
like Brazil, where the poorer segments of the population are frequently 
ignored by the state except in the form of police repression, the need to 
create autonomous local forms of decision making and service provision 
becomes part of survival. When those forms are eroded by parallel, au- 
thoritarian, and frequently violent power structures, then formal demo- 
cratic structures of the national polity become meaningless. 

The form that drug dealing has taken in favelas, due to the state's 
failure to provide basic services and state repression in creating the per- 
ception of danger to justify heavy-handed police or military action, has 
permitted the establishment of new channels of clientelistic relationships. 
The drug dealers themselves have in many instances created a forced 
symbiosis-alternative  welfare "services" in exchange for protection and 
anonymity-while  undermining the authority of legitimately elected lo- 
cal leaders. During the eight years in which I have monitored the relation- 
ship between drug groups and favela associations, the autonomy of these 
associations has gradually been eroded. What in earlier years was  de- 
scribed by favela leaders as a delicate balance of coexisting forces has 
now become the dominance of the drug groups in a majority of favelas. 
The Brazilian state has used the presence of drug groups as an 
excuse for repressive tactics that, during this period of redemocratization, 
can be legitimized only if certain activities are defined as aberrant, anti- 
social, and requiring protection. Paradoxically, that process has created a 
situation in which favela populations are better off without the presence 
of the state when the state is represented by police and security forces. 
The state and those candidates seeking to become a part of the state con- 
tinue their traditional practice of courting votes with promises, using the 

drug  dealing  led  the biggest  kingpins  to attempt  to establish  political  power. Carlos Lehder 
(now  imprisoned  in  the  United  States)  founded  a  political  party  called  the  Movimento 
Civico  de  Liberaci6n  Nacional,  which  has  been  characterized  by  observers  as  "a kind  of 
eclectic blend  of fascism  and anarchy" (Bagley  1986, 95). Lehder attracted a following  in the 
poor barrios of several Colombian  cities where  he and his henchmen  distributed  large sums 
of  money 

64.  See the discussion  by Jonathan Fox of the importance  of democratization  at the  local 
level  as  a  fortifier  of  democratic  consolidation  at  the  national  level:  "If authoritarian  en- 
claves  persist,  democracy's  consolidation  at the  national  level  may  be  jeopardized.  Long- 
standing  exclusionary  practices  will  not  disappear  because  of the  signing  of decrees  or the 
transfer  of  the  sash  of  power  in  national  capitals"  (Fox  1994b, 106). 

77 

Latin American Research Review 

violence associated with drug dealing and the lack of services in fave- 
las as pretexts for clientelistic overtures. Parallel power structures thus 
have arisen in a space left empty by the lack of truly protective state struc- 
tures. In Rio, the state is absent in fundamental ways but remains ready 
to intervene to take advantage of situations arising out of that vacuum. 

REFERENCES 
ACKERMAN,  ELISE 

1995 

"Guns R Us." New  Times, 7-13  Sept.,  pp. 11-19 (published  in  Miami). 

ADIALA,  JULIO  CESAR 

1986 

0  problema da maconha no Brasil: Ensaio sobre racismo e drogas." Serie Estudos  no. 52. 
Rio de  Janeiro: Instituto  Universitario  de  Pesquisas  do  Rio  de  Janeiro. 

ALVAREZ, ELENA 

1992 

"Coca Production  in  Peru."  In  Drug  Policy in  the Americas, edited  by  Peter  H. 
Smith,  72-87.  Boulder, Colo.: Westview. 

ALVES,  MARIA  HELENA  MOREIRA 

1985 

State and Opposition in Military Brazil. Austin:  University  of Texas Press. 

AMERICAS  WATCH  (HUMAN  RIGHTS  WATCH/AMERICAS) 

1989  Prison Conditions in Brazil. New  York: Americas  Watch. 
1993a  The Killings in Candeldria and Vigdrio Geral: The Urgent Need to Police the Brazilian 
Police. A Human  Rights Watch Short Report 5, no. 11. New  York: Americas  Watch. 
1993b  Urban Police Abuse in Brazil: Summary Executions and Tortures in Sdo Paulo and Rio 

de Janeiro after Five Years. New  York: Americas  Watch. 

1996  Fighting Violence with Violence: Human Rights Abuse and Criminality in Rio de Janeiro. 
A  Human  Rights  Watch  Short  Report  8,  no.  2(B).  New  York: Human  Rights 
Watch. 
AMORIM,  CARLOS 

1993  Comando Vermelho: A  historia secreta do crime organizado. 4th  ed.  Rio  de  Janeiro: 

Record. 

BAGLEY,  BRUCE 

1986 

"The Colombian  Connection:  The Impact of Drug  Traffic in Colombia."  In PACINI 
AND  FRANQUEMONT,  89-100. 

BAGLEY,  BRUCE,  AND  WILLIAM  0.  WALKER III,  EDS. 

1995  Drug Trafficking in the Americas. New  Brunswick,  N.J.: Transaction. 

BATISTA,  NILO 

1994 

"Entrevista: Policia renovada  e centros comunitarios,  solucoes  para um pais real." 
Proposta 22, no.  60  (Mar.):67-73. 

BENEVIDES,  MARIA  VICTORIA 

1983 

1985 

"Violencia,  povo  e  policia:  Violencia  urbana  na  grande  imprensa."  Paper  pre- 
sented to the Associacao Nacional de P6s-Graduacao em Ciencias Sociais (ANPOCS), 
Aguas  de  Sao Pedro, 26-28  October. 
"Violencia  da  policia  e  violencia  do  bandido:  Uma  relacao causal?" Revista OAB 
22  (July):237-45. 

BIELSCHOWSKY,  RICARDO 

1988 

"Programa plurianual  de  urbanizacao  de  favelas  e loteamentos  de baixa renda." 
Pensar e Fazer, pp. 11-18. Rio  de  Janeiro: Prefeitura  da  Cidade  de  Rio  de  Janeiro, 
Secretaria Municipal  de  Desenvolvimento  Social. 

BLOK,  ANTON 

1974  The Mafia of a Sicilian Village, 1860-1960: A  Study of Violent Peasant Entrepreneurs. 

Prospect  Heights,  Ill.: Waveland. 

BROWN,  NATHAN 

1990 

"Brigands  and  State-Building:  The  Invention  of  Banditry  in  Modern  Egypt." 
Comparative Studies in Society and History 32, no. 2  (Apr.):258-81. 

78 

COCAINE  AND  FAVELA  POLITICS 

BURT,  JO-MARIE 

1994 

"Political  Violence  and  the  Grassroots  in  Lima,  Peru."  Paper  presented  to  the 
Conference  on  Inequality  and  New  Forms  of  Representation  in  Latin America, 
Columbia  University,  New  York, 3-4  March. 

BURT,  JO-MARIE,  AND  JOSE  LOPEZ  RICCI 

1994 

"Shining  Path  after  Guzmdn."  NACLA Report on  the Americas 28,  no.  3  (Nov.- 
Dec.):6-9. 

CALDEIRA,  TERESA  PIRES  DO  RIO 

1992 

"City of  Walls: Crime,  Segregation,  and  Citizenship  in  Sao  Paulo."  Ph.D.  diss., 
University  of  California,  Berkeley. 

CARVALHO,  MARIA  ALICE  REZENDE  DE 

1988 

"Guerra no  Rio." Presenqa: Revista de Polftica e Cultura, no.  11 (Jan.):88-101. 

CAVALLIERI, PAULO  FERNANDO 

1986 

"Favelas cariocas: Mudancas  na infra-estructura."  Cuatro Estudos. Rio de Janeiro: 
Instituto  de Planejamento  Municipal,  Secretaria Municipal  de Planejamento, Pre- 
feitura  da  Cidade  de  Rio  de  Janeiro. 

CENTRO  DE  DEFESA  DE  DIREITOS  HUMANOS  BENTO  RUBIAO 

1994  Favelas e organizaqdes comunitdrias. Petr6polis: Vozes. 

CHEVIGNY,  PAUL  G. 

1991 

"Police  Deadly  Force  as  Social  Control:  Jamaica,  Brazil,  and  Argentina."  Serie 
Dossie no.  2.  Sao  Paulo:  Nucleo  de  Estudos  de  Violencia,  Universidade  de  Sao 
Paulo. 

COELHO,  EDMUNDO  CAMPOS 

1987  A  oficina do diabo: Crise e conflitos no sistema penitencidrio do Rio de Janeiro. Rio: 

Espaco  e  Tempo  and  IUPERJ. 
"Da  Falange  Vermelho  a  Escadinha:  0  poder  nas  pris6es."  Presenqa: Revista de 
Polftica e Cultura 11 (Jan.):106-14. 

1988 

DINIZ,  ELI 

1982  Voto e mdquina polftica: Patronagem e clientelismo no Rio de Janeiro. Rio  de  Janeiro: 

Paz  e  Terra. 

FALCO,  MATHEA 

1992  The Making of a Drug-Free America. New  York: Random  House. 

FAPERJ (FUNDAIAO  DE  AMPARO  A  PESQUISA  DO  RIO  DE  JANEIRO) 

1993 

Semindrio Midia e violencia urbana. Rio  e Janeiro: FAPERJ. 

FERNANDES,  HELOISA  RODRIGUES 

"Authoritarian Society:  Breeding  Grounds  for Justiceiros." In  HUGGINS, 
61-70. 

ED.,  1991, 

FERNANDES,  RUBEM  CESAR,  E  LEANDRO  PIQUET  CARNEIRO 

"Criminalidade,  drogas  e  perdas  economicas  no  Rio de  Janeiro." Rio de Janeiro: 
Nucleo  de  Pesquisas  ISER. 

FERRAZ,  ANTONIO  CARLOS  (CAIO) 

"Vigario Geral: De  palco  da  chacina  a cenario  de  esperanca."  Manuscript. 
"Interview." Revista Democracia, no. 109 (Jan.-Feb.):16-19. 

1991 

1995 

1994 
1995 

1993 

FONSECA,  CLAUDIA 

FOX,  JONATHAN 

"Bandidos  e mocinhos:  Antropologia  da violencia  no  cotidiano."  Humanas, Re- 
vista do IFCH-UGRGS 16, no.  2  (July-Dec.):67-89 
(published  in  Porto  Alegre). 

1994a  "The Difficult  Transition from Clientelism  to Citizenship:  Lessons  from Mexico." 

World Politics 46,  no.  2 (Jan.):151-84. 

1994b  "Latin America's  Emerging  Local Politics." Journal of Democracy 5, no.  2:105-16. 

GAY, ROBERT 

1994  Popular Organization and Democracy in Rio de Janeiro: A  Tale of Two Favelas. Phila- 

delphia,  Pa.: Temple  University  Press. 

GUNST,  LAURIE 

Holt. 

1995  Born fi  Dead: A Journey through the Jamaican Posse Underworld. New  York: Henry 

79 

Latin American Research Review 

HAGOPIAN,  FRANCES 

1993 

"After Regime  Change:  Authoritarian  Legacies,  Political  Representation,  and  the 
Democratic  Future of  South  America."  World Politics, no. 45  (Apr.):464-500. 

HEALY, KEVIN 

1986 

1995 

"The Boom within  the Crisis: Some  Recent Effects of Foreign Cocaine Markets on 
Bolivian  Rural Society  and  Economy." In PACINI  AND  FRANQUEMONT 
1986, 101-43. 
"Recent Literature on  Drugs  in  Bolivia." In BAGLEY  AND  WALKER  1995, 201-16. 

HELMER,  JOHN 

1975  Drugs and Minority Oppression. New  York: Seabury. 

HOBSBAWM,  ERIC 

1969  Bandits. New  York: Delacorte. 

HOLLOWAY, THOMAS 

1989 

"A Healthy  Terror': Police Repression  of Capoeiras in Nineteenth-Century  Rio de 
Janeiro." Hispanic American Historical Review 69, no. 4  (Nov.):637-76. 

1993  Policing Rio de Janeiro. Stanford,  Calif.: Stanford  University  Press. 

HUGGINS,  MARTHA 

1985  From Slavery to Vagrancy in Brazil. New  Brunswick,  N.J.: Rutgers University  Press. 
1991 

"Introduction: Vigilantism  and the State-A  Look South and North." In HUGGINS, 
ED.,  1991,  1-18. 

HUGGINS,  MARTHA,  ED. 

New  York: Praeger. 

1991  Vigilantism and the State in Modern Latin America: Essays in  Extra Legal Violence. 

IBGE  (INSTITUTO  BRASILEIRO  DE  GEOGRAFIA  E  ESTATISTICA) 

1994  Mapa do mercado de trabalho no Brasil, no. 2. Rio de Janeiro: Diretoria de Pesquisas, 

Secretaria de  Planejamento,  Orcamento  e Coordenacao. 

JANKOWSKI,  MARTIN  SANCHEZ 

1991 

Islands in the Street: Gangs and American Urban Society. Berkeley  and  Los Angeles: 
University  of  California  Press. 

"On  the  Trail of  Latin  American  Bandits:  A  Reexamination  of  Peasant  Resis- 
tance."  LARR 25, no.  3:7-53. 

"Dilemmas  of Democratization  in Latin America." Comparative Politics 23, no. 1:1- 
21. 

JOSEPH,  GILBERT M. 

KARL,  TERRY LYNN 

1990 

1990 

1976 

LEEDS,  ANTHONY,  AND  ELIZABETH  LEEDS 

'Accounting  for  Behavioral  Differences:  Three  Political  Systems  and  the  Re- 
sponses  of Squatters  to Them  in Brazil, Peru, and  Chile." In The City in Compara- 
tive Perspective: Cross-National Research and New  Directions in  Theory, edited  by 
John Walton and  Louis  Masotti,  193-247.  Beverly  Hills,  Calif.: Sage. 

LEEDS,  ELIZABETH 

1978 

"Favelas e comunidade  politica: A continuidade  de estrutura  de controle social." 
In Anthony  and  Elizabeth  Leeds,  A  Sociologia do Brasil Urbano," 186-247.  Rio  de 
Janeiro: Zahar. 

LEMGRUBER,  JULITA 

1985 
1987 

"O Policia  Civil:  Conflitos  e  contradiqoes." Revista OAB 22 (July):207-36. 
'A face oculta da acao policial."  Violencia, suplemento  de Ciencia Hoje, no. 5, pp. 23, 
24-26. 

LIMA,  WILLIAM  DA  SILVA 

1991  Quatrocentos contra um: Uma historia do Comando Vermelho. Rio: ISER and  Vozes. 

MACHICADO,  FLAVIO 

1992 

"Coca Production  in  Bolivia.'  In Drug Policy in  the Americas, edited  by  Peter H. 
Smith,  88-98.  Boulder: Westview. 

MAGGIE,  IVONE 

1988 

"Medo  de  feitico:  Relac6es  entre  magia  e  poder  no  Brasil." Ph.D.  diss.,  Univer- 
sidade  Federal  de  Rio  de  Janeiro. 
MASON,  T.  DAVID,  AND  CHRISTOPHER  CAMPANY 

1993 

"Guerrillas, Drugs,  and  Peasants: The Rational Peasant  and  the War on Drugs  in 

80 

COCAINE  AND  FAVELA  POLITICS 

Peru." Paper presented  to  the  American  Political  Science  Association,  Washing- 
ton,  D.C., 2-5  September. 

MEINEL,  VALERIO 

1987  Avestruz, dguia e cocafna. Rio  de  Janeiro: Espaco  e  Tempo. 

MINGARDI,  GUARACY 

1992  Tiras, gansos e trutas. Sao Paulo: Pagina  Aberta. 

1977  Homeboys, Gangs, Drugs, and Prison in the Barrios of Los Angeles. Philadelphia,  Pa.: 

MOORE,  JOAN  W. 

Temple  University  Press. 

MORALES,  EDMUNDO 

1990 

1987 

1992 

"The  Political  Economy  of  Cocaine  Production:  An  Analysis  of  the  Peruvian 
Case."  Latin American Perspectives, no. 17 (Fall):91-109. 

OAB  (ORDEM  DOS  ADVOGADOS  DO  BRASIL) 

"Relat6rio de  pesquisa:  Formas  comunitarias  de  intermediacao  de  conflitos."  In- 
house  document,  Rio  de  Janeiro. 

O'DONNELL,  GUILLERMO 

"Transitions, Continuities,  and  Paradoxes."  In Issues in Democratic Consolidation, 
edited  by  Scott  Mainwaring,  Guillermo  O'Donnell,  and  J. Samuel  Valenzuela. 
Notre  Dame,  Ind.: University  of  Notre  Dame  Press. 

OLIVEIRA,  JANE  SOUTO  DE 

1991 

"Desigualdades  sociais  no  Rio: A  violencia  quotidiana."  In Rio de todas as crises: 
Serie estudos no.  81:4-16. 

ORLOVE,  BENJAMIN 

1980 

"The Position  of  Rustlers  in  Regional  Society:  Social  Banditry  in  the  Andes."  In 
Land and Power in Latin America, edited  by  Benjamin Orlove  and  Glynn  Custred, 
179-94.  New  York: Holmes  and  Meier. 

PACINI,  DEBORAH,  AND  CHRISTINE  FRANQUEMONT,  EDS. 

1986  Coca and Cocaine's Effects on People and Policy in Latin America. Cultural  Survival 

Report  no. 23. Cambridge,  Mass.: Cultural  Survival. 

PADILLA,  FELIX M. 

Press. 

1992  The Gang as  an  American Enterprise. New  Brunswick,  N.J.: Rutgers  University 

PEPPE,  ATILIO  MACHADO 

1992 

'Associativismo  e  politica  na  favela  de  Santa  Marti  (RJ)." M.A.  thesis,  Univer- 
sidade  de  Sao Paulo. 

PINHEIRO,  PAULO  SERGIO 

1991a 
1991b  "Police and Political Crisis: The Case of the Military Police." In HUGGINS, 

'Autoritarismo  e  transicao." Revista USP, no. 9:45-56. 

ED.,  1991, 

1992 

167-88. 
"Social Violence  of Transitions: Comparative  Perspectives  in New  Democracies." 
Paper presented  to  the  Latin American  Studies  Association,  Los Angeles,  24-27 
September. 

QUEIROZ,  MARIA  ISAURA  PEREIRA  DE 

1985 

"Escolas  de  samba  do  Rio  de  Janeiro  ou  a  domesticacao  da  massa  urbana." 
Cadernos CERU, 2d series, no. 1:7-35 (published  by the Centro de Estudos  Rurais e 
Urbanos). 

QUIJANO,  ANIBAL 

1993 

"Que  America  Latina  6: Entrevista."  Brasil Agora 2,  no.  36:7  (published  in  Sao 
Paulo). 

RAMOS,  GRACILIANO 

1953  Memorias de cdrcere. Rio  de  Janeiro: Olympio. 

RAPHAEL,  ALISON 

1980 

1993 

REILLY, CHARLES  A. 

"Samba and  Social  Control:  Popular  Culture  and  Racial  Democracy  in  Rio  de 
Janeiro." Ph.D.  diss.,  Columbia  University. 

"Revisiting  Participation  and  Reinventing  Empowerment:  NGOs  and  Local Au- 
thorities  in  Latin America."  Paper presented  at the  conference  Models  of  Devel- 

81 

Latin American Research Review 

opment  and  the Elimination  of Poverty  in Latin America," 1-3  Dec., Latin Amer- 
ica Program, Woodrow  Wilson  Center, Washington,  D.C. 

REILLY, CHARLES  A.,  ED. 

1994 

Joint Ventures in Urban Policy: NGO-Municipal Collaboration in Democratizing Latin 
America. Washington,  D.C.: Inter-American  Foundation. 

RESENDE,  JULIANA 

1995  Operaqflo Rio: Relato de uma guerra brasileira. Sao Paulo: Pagina  Aberta. 

REUTER,  PETER 

1985 

"Eternal Hope: America's Quest  for Narcotics  Control." The Public Interest, no. 79 
(Spring):79-85. 

RIBEIRO,  LUIZ  CESAR  DE  QUEIROZ,  AND  ORLANDO  ALVES  DOS  SANTOS  JUNIOR,  EDS. 

1994  Globalizaqflo, fragmentaqflo e reforma urbana. Rio  de  Janeiro: Civilizacao  Brasileira. 
RIO DE JANEIRO,  INSTITUTO  DE  PLANEJAMENTO  MUNICIPAL,  PREFEITURA DE  SECRETARIA MUNICIPAL 
DE  DESENVOLVIMENTO  SOCIAL 

1983  Cadastro de favelas. 2d  ed.,  vol.  1. Rio  de  Janeiro: Instituto  de  Planejamento  Mu- 

nicipal. 

ROCHA,  SONIA 

1994 

"Renda e pobreza nos metr6poles brasileiras.' In RIBEIRO AND  SANTOS  JUNIOR, 121-45. 

SADEK,  MARIA  TERESA,  ED. 

1995 

0  judiciario em debate: Serie justiqa. Sao  Paulo:  Instituto  de  Estudos  Econ6micos 
Sociais  e Politicos  de  Sao Paulo  (IDESP) and  Editora Sumare. 

SAGE,  COLIN 

1989 

"Drugs  and  Economic  Development  in  Latin America:  A  Study  in  the  Political 
Economy of Cocaine  in Bolivia." In Corruption, Development, and Inequality, edited 
by  Peter Ward, 38-57  London  and  New  York: Routledge. 

SEGALA,  LYGIA 

1991 

"O riscado  do balao japones: Trabalho comunitario  na Rocina (1977-1982)." M.A. 
thesis,  Universidade  Federal  de  Rio  de  Janeiro. 

SHIRLEY, ROBERT 

"Re-creating Communities:  The Formation  of Community  in a Brazilian Shanty- 
town."  Urban Anthropology 19, no.  3:255-76. 

SILVA, LUIS  ANTONIO  MACHADO  DA 

"Violencia e sociabilidade:  Tendencias  na atual  conjuntura urbana no Brasil." In 
RIBEIRO  AND  SANTOS  JUNIOR  1994, 147-68. 

1990 

1994 

1975 

1992 

1993 

1987 

SINGELMANN,  PETER 

SMITH,  MICHAEL  L. 

SUAREZ  SALAZAR,  LUIS 

THOUMI,  FRANCISCO 

"Political  Structure  and  Social  Banditry  in  Northeast  Brazil." Journal of Latin 
American Studies 7, pt.  1 (May):59-83. 

"Shining Path's Urban Strategy: Ate Vitarte." In The Shining Path of Peru, edited  by 
David  Scott Palmer, 127-47.  New  York: St. Martin's. 

"Drug  Trafficking  and  Social  and  Political  Conflicts  in  Latin  America:  Some 
Hypotheses.'  Latin American Perspectives 20, no. 1 (Winter):83-98. 

"Some Implications  of  the  Growth  of  the  Underground  Economy  in  Colombia." 
Journal of Inter-American Studies and World Affairs 29, no. 2 (Summer):35-53. 

1995  Political Economy and Illegal Drugs  in Colombia. Boulder, Colo.: Lynne Rienner. 

TILLY, CHARLES 

1985 

"War Making  and  State Making  as Organized  Crime." In Bringing the State Back 
In,  edited  by  Peter  Evans,  Dietrich  Rueschemeyer,  and  Theda  Skocpol.  Cam- 
bridge:  Cambridge  University  Press. 

TULLIS,  LAMOND 

1995  Unintended Consequences: Illegal Drugs and Drug Policies in Nine Countries. Boulder, 

Colo.: Lynne Rienner. 

U.S.  DEPARTMENT  OF  STATE,  BUREAU  FOR  INTERNATIONAL  NARCOTICS  AND  LAW  ENFORCEMENT 
AFFAIRS 
1995 

International Narcotics  Control Strategy Report. Washington,  D.C.: Government 
Printing  Office 

82 

COCAINE  AND  FAVELA  POLITICS 

VALLADARES,  LICIA  DO  PRADO 

1978  Passa-se uma casa: Andlise do Programa de Remoqflo de Favelas do Rio de Janeiro. Rio de 

Janeiro: Zahar. 

VELEZ DE  BERLINER,  MARIA,  AND  KRISTIN  LADO 

1995 

"Brazil, the  Emerging  Drug  Superpower."  Transnational Organized Crime 1, no. 2 
(Summer):239-60  (published  in  London  and  Portland,  Ore., by  Frank Cass). 

VENTURA,  ZUENIR 

1994  Cidade Partida. Sao Paulo: Companhia  das  Letras. 

VIEIRA,  LIZST 

1985 

"Maconha, um problema politico." In Maconha em Debate, edited  by Maria Sabina, 
75-88.  Sao Paulo: Brasiliense. 

ZALUAR,  ALBA 

1983 

"Condominio  do  diabo:  As  classes  populares  urbanas  e  a  l6gica  do  'ferro'  e 
fumo."  In  Crime, violencia e poder, edited  by  Paulo  Sergio  Pinheiro,  251-77.  Sao 
Paulo: Brasiliense. 

1985  A mdquina e a revolta: As organizaqdes populares e o significado da pobreza. Sao Paulo: 

1994  Condominio do diabo. Rio de  Janeiro: Revan  and  Editora Universidade  Federal de 

Brasiliense. 

Rio  de  Janeiro. 

83 

