P E R S P E C T I V E

Leadership for 

Quality and Innovation: 
Challenges, Theories, and a 
Framework for Future Research

JOHN R. LATHAM, UNIVERSITY OF NORTHERN COLORADO

© 2014, ASQ

This  perspective  paper  discusses  current  issues  facing 
leaders,  what  researchers  and  practitioners  know 
about  leadership  theory  and  practice,  and  what  they 
need  to  know  to  improve  leadership  in  the  future. 
A  key  issue  in  leadership  research  is  that  there  has 
been  no  convergence  toward  a  reasonable  number 
of  cogent  leadership  theories.  The  current  knowledge 
about  leadership  consists  of  narrow  definitions  of 
leader  effectiveness  that  are  disconnected  from  their 
context, so the application to practice is difficult. More 
research  is  needed  that  develops  leadership  frame-
works  and  models  that  integrate  transformational, 
servant, and spiritual leadership theories and include 
the context and a definition of success based on cre-
ating  value  for  multiple  stakeholders.  A  framework 
for  future  leadership  research  is  proposed  along  with 
a “call to action.”

Key  words:  ambidextrous  organization,  diversity, 
innovation,  leadership  failures,  leadership  theories, 
quality,  servant  leadership,  spiritual  leadership, 
stakeholders, sustainability, transactional leadership, 
transformational leadership

INTRODUCTION

Leadership continues to be a popular topic for quality 
professionals, organizational leaders, researchers, con-
sultants, and a variety of commentators. Unfortunately, 
there are numerous examples of leadership failures, 
ranging  from  ethical  disasters  to  the  workers  who 
hate their boss and their job. Both reduce individual 
engagement and reduce organizational performance. 
However, after years of practicing and researching lead-
ership, there is still no reasonable number of cogent 
and  coherent  theories  for  leaders  to  follow  that  will 
predict  success.  To  make  matters  worse,  the  task  of 
leadership  at  all  organizational  levels  seems  to  be 
getting  more  and  more  difficult.  Perhaps  too  much 
credit for organizational success and failure is given 
to leaders, but there is consensus among scholars and 
practitioners  that  it  is  important  and  it  does  make 
a  difference.  W.  Edwards  Deming  understood  the 
importance of leaders using their influence to improve 
quality by attending training sessions on quality princi-
ples and practices. Deming even walked out when some 
executives refused to attend their company’s training.

LEADERSHIP IS 
INCREASINGLY DIFFICULT

The number and type of stakeholders exerting pressure 
on organizations has increased from a narrow focus on 
investors and customers and now includes stakeholders 

www.asq.org 11

such as employees, suppliers, and partners, along with 
the community and the natural environment. Similar 
to the quality crisis of the 1980s, many leaders today 
have proposed that creating value for multiple stake-
holders requires trade-offs between the stakeholders in 
a “zero sum game.” Alternatively, creating value for 
the multiple stakeholders could be done with innova-
tion  and  imagination  by  reinventing  the  methods 
and systems so they produce more value for all stake-
holders. The good news is there are many “proof of 
concept”  examples  such  as  those  described  in  Esty 
and Winston (2009) and ASQ’s Socially Responsible 
Organization initiative.

Modern organizations must be ambidextrous (i.e., 
able to execute and innovate) in order to be success-
ful because of the multiple environmental pressures 
they  face  and  because  they  must  organize  a  diverse 
workforce to do this work. Organizations that are only 
good  at  one  or  the  other  will  not  survive,  let  alone 
thrive,  in  the  coming  decades.  Those  that  are  only 
good at execution will end up making reliable products 
that few will buy. Organizations that are only good at 
innovation and strategy will experience “boom bust” 
cycles, with many early sales only to experience a steep 
decline when they cannot deliver on their promises. 
Unfortunately, some quality departments are perceived 
as having their foot on the brake when the innovative 
marketing  department  puts  its  foot  on  the  gas.  The 
good news is, some organizations have demonstrated 
that it is possible to run the business and change the 
business  simultaneously,  by  weaving  these  two  con-
cepts throughout the organization’s strategies, systems, 
scorecards, and incentives (see Clarke American 2001, 
30).  To  succeed  now  and  in  the  future,  leaders  will 
have to design organizations with the ability to do both 
with an increasingly diverse workforce operating in a 
complex global environment.

Leading these boundaryless organizations requires 
individuals who recognize that people and communi-
ties are not just a means to an organizational outcome, 
but are also an end in, and of, themselves. There is no 
shortage of advice on how to lead, but unfortunately 
the validity of this advice varies widely and it is not 
clear how much of this advice might best be applied 
to  address  the  current  issues  given  the  numerous 

12 QMJ VOL. 21, NO. 1/© 2014, ASQ 

compounding variables. The modern workforce con-
tinues to increase in diversity (on many dimensions), 
complicating  the  leadership  task  in  an  increasingly 
global environment. Organizations and their complex 
global supply chains comprise groups from around the 
world creating and delivering products to diverse and 
global customer segments while operating in a wide 
variety of situations, governing rules, cultures, political 
policies, and so forth. In addition, these human-created 
complex systems are increasingly unstable and thus 
unpredictable, raising risk and anxiety among leaders 
everywhere. So where does one go from here?

WHAT IS EFFECTIVE 
LEADERSHIP?

While there is no shortage of concepts comprising the 
many leadership theories, there is little consensus on 
what constitutes effective leadership (Gordon and Yukl 
2004). The current leadership body of knowledge is a 
fragmented and “messy landscape” comprising inputs 
from  a  variety  of  contributors  including  academics, 
practitioners,  and  consultants,  with  numerous  self-
proclaimed experts and commentators thrown in for 
good measure. Academics propose competing leader-
ship theories and research, and continue to research 
only their favorite theory, without integrating the find-
ings of these different theories. On the other end of the 
spectrum, there are thousands of books on leadership 
and even more articles and blog posts. Unfortunately, 
some of the advice is nonsense made up to “fill” blog 
posts so the authors can increase their authority on 
the topic in the eyes of their online followers. Typically, 
theories  eventually  go  through  a  convergent  phase 
where  the  models,  constructs,  and  relationships  are 
tested, eliminated, refined, and so forth in a process of 
narrowing down the number of competing theories. 
However, once created, leadership theories are seldom 
discarded (Glynn and Raffaelli 2010). This “academic 
amnesia” (Sayles and Stewart 1995) has resulted in a 
situation where, according to Hunt and Dodge (2000), 
one can leave the field of leadership research for an 
extended period of time and return to find that it is 
as if he or she had never left. In addition, none of the 

Leadership for Quality and Innovation: Challenges, Theories, and a Framework for Future Researchcurrent theories seem to be a complete answer to the 
leadership challenges of the 21st century.

Possibly  the  most  researched  leadership  theories 
over the past 30 years have been the complementary 
transformational and transactional leadership theories 
(e.g., Bass 1999). The positive effects of both of these 
theories  on  quality  improvement  and  firm  perfor-
mance were confirmed by Laohavichien, Fredendall, 
and Cantrell (2009). However, while transformational 
leadership  has  been  widely  successful,  it  appears  to 
be incomplete for the challenges facing current lead-
ers and does not prevent abuses of power and allows 
for the ends to justify the means. Servant leadership 
has emerged as an alternative, and much of the work 
to  synthesize  the  competing  servant  leadership  con-
cepts and validate this theory has been accomplished 
over the past decade by van Dierendonck (2011) and 
van Dierendonck and Nuijten (2011). In addition, a 
related research thread is the recent interest in spiritual 
aspects of leadership to better understand the internal 
dimensions of leaders and followers (Fry and Kriger 
2009).  There  is  quite  a  bit  of  overlap  among  these 
theories (and others), yet they continue to be treated by 
researchers as separate and distinct.

WHAT IS NEEDED TO 
FURTHER DEVELOP 
LEADERSHIP THEORY?

Is it possible that the quest of the last 50-plus years 
to  find  the  universal  definition  of  effective  leader-
ship  has  been  misguided  and  unattainable?  The 
inability  for  researchers  to  converge  on  a  universal 
answer may be an indication that there is not a uni-
versal  answer  to  leadership.  Part  of  the  problem  is 
researchers may have the ontological and epistemo-
logical assumptions wrong. In order to find and test 
a universal answer, the phenomenon needs to be one 
that  operates  free  of  context  and  includes  measur-
able variables and predictable relationships. However, 
organizations are human-created constructs occupied 
by humans who appear to have free will and thus do 
not  always  obey  the  immutable  natural  laws  of  sci-
ence. Humans also seem to come in a wide variety of 

personalities, capabilities, motivations, and so forth, 
and  when  combined  into  groups,  the  permutations 
appear infinite. Yet, 88 percent of leadership studies in 
the past have been quantitative (Glynn and Raffaelli 
2010). In one’s desire to be credible to other physical 
(read “real”) scientists, many social science problems 
including  leadership  have  been  investigated  using 
positivist and post-positivist methods with quantitative 
measurement and probability samples to ensure gen-
eralizability.  For  more  on  the  evolution  of  research 
traditions in American business schools, see Khurana 
(2007).  Unfortunately,  going  through  the  motions 
of “good” science has not resulted in knowledge that 
is widely generalizable. Good qualitative and mixed 
methods research is difficult to do well. There is an 
inherent risk of drawing conclusions from investiga-
tions  into  social  phenomena  that  are  simply  wrong 
(Feynman  1974).  Maybe  what  is  needed  is  a  “con-
silience”  of  knowledge  in  the  leadership  field  that 
combines  multiple  sources  of  evidence  into  a  more 
comprehensive and deeper understanding of the leader-
ship phenomenon (see Wilson 1999).

Also  needed  is  a  common  and  comprehensive 
definition of success in order to assess leadership effec-
tiveness. All too often people evaluate and “hold up” 
leaders as highly successful examples based on a single 
measure  of  success  such  as  economic  profit.  When 
they peel back the “veil” they often find that the leader 
created the economic success at the expense of one or 
more other stakeholders such as the workforce, suppli-
ers and partners, society, or the environment. This is 
problematic for both practitioners seeking to emulate 
successful leaders and researchers attempting to evalu-
ate the existing leadership theories. It does not take 
great leadership to reallocate resources and value from 
one stakeholder group to another. What is needed is 
a more comprehensive understanding of how the key 
aspects of leadership (the individual, behaviors, and 
activities) can create the environment for the systems 
thinking and design thinking required to create value 
for multiple stakeholders (see Figure 1).

Finally,  through  a  process  of  synthesis,  elimina-
tion, and refinement, researchers need to converge on a 
smaller set of theories that explains effective leadership. 
The good news is there appears to be a high degree of 

www.asq.org 13

Leadership for Quality and Innovation: Challenges, Theories, and a Framework for Future ResearchFigure 1  Framework for future leadership research

Individual
leaders

The interal perspective
(not visible)

The style

Leaders’
behaviors

Leaders’
activities

The system

Organization

systems,
culture +
followers

The environment

(quality + innovation)

Value for
multiple

stakeholders

The outcomes

The context

(internal + external factors)

overlap between some leadership theories, providing 
opportunities for synthesis. For example, many aspects 
of transformational, servant, and spiritual leadership 
theories were identified as consistent with the compo-
nents of the framework for leading the transformation 
to  performance  excellence,  including  the  individual 
leader characteristics, leadership behaviors and activities, 
and organizational culture (Latham 2013a; 2013b). In 
addition, there needs to be more research and analysis 
on how the existing theories are influenced by context; 
what works, what doesn’t work, and under what condi-
tions. For example, recent findings by Zimmerer (2013) 
indicate that servant leadership is considered to be an 
effective leadership style by the multiple generations in 
organizations today, thus relieving leaders of the need 
to adjust their style for each generation of followers. 
Finally, future research and analysis needs to include a 
comprehensive definition of success, such as the results 
category of the Baldrige Award Criteria for Performance 
Excellence, and avoid adopting leadership theories that 
result in value for only a few stakeholders.

CONCLUSION

Only the brave need apply! One might begin by working 
on a meta-analysis of the existing leadership theories, 
beginning with the four leadership theories that were 
identified in Latham (2013a; 2013b) as closely linked 

14 QMJ VOL. 21, NO. 1/© 2014, ASQ 

to  performance  excellence.  The  main  limitations  of 
transformational and transactional leadership theories 
could be, at least partially, remedied by integrating key 
constructs and concepts from values-based leadership 
theories such as servant leadership and spiritual leader-
ship. Once this initial step, along with the integration 
of key concepts from other relevant leadership theories, 
is complete, researchers can begin conducting research 
studies  that  are  comprehensive  and  address  the  key 
aspects depicted in the framework for future leadership 
research (see Figure 1). This “call to action” is for lead-
ership scholars and scholar-practitioners to rise to the 
challenge, collaborate with practitioners, and conduct 
grand (comprehensive) research studies that include 
both the actual contexts, along with a comprehensive 
definition of success from a multistakeholder perspective 
in order to synthesize what works and eliminate what 
does not work from the existing field of leadership theory. 
In short, there need to be theories that explain how 
leaders can create value for multiple stakeholders, and 
researchers need to have the courage to throw out the 
theories that do not. This will require a departure from 
the established narrow, typically quantitative, approaches 
to leadership research and theory. Those who take up this 
challenge may want to study Emerson’s 1837 address 
to the Phi Beta Kappa Society at Cambridge titled “The 
American Scholar” and take to heart his notion, “free 
should the scholar be, free and brave.”

Leadership for Quality and Innovation: Challenges, Theories, and a Framework for Future ResearchREFERENCES

Bass,  B.  M.  1999.  Two  decades  of  research  and  development 
in  transformational  leadership. European  Journal  of  Work  & 
Organizational Psychology 8, no. 1:24.

Clarke American. 2001. Clarke American Checks, Inc. MBNQA 
application summary.

Emerson,  R.  W.  1837.  The  American  scholar.  In The  Complete 
Works  of  Ralph  Waldo  Emerson,  centenary  edition,  ed.  E.  W. 
Emerson, 8115. Boston and New York: Houghton Mifflin.

Esty, D. C., and A. S. Winston. 2009. Green to gold: How smart 
companies use environmental strategy to innovate, create value, 
and  build  competitive  advantage.  Hoboken:  John  Wiley  and 
Sons.

Feynman,  R.  P.  1974.  Cargo  cult  science. Engineering  and 
Science 4.

Fry, L., and M. Kriger. 2009. Towards a theory of being-centered 
leadership: Multiple levels of being as context for effective leader-
ship. Human Relations 62, no. 11:30.

Glynn, M. A., and R. Raffaelli. 2010. Uncovering mechanisms of 
theory  development  in  academic  field:  Lessons  from  leadership 
research. The Academy of Management Annals 4, no. 1:43.

Gordon,  A.,  and  G.  Yukl.  2004.  The  future  of  leadership 
research:  Challenges  and  opportunities.  German  Journal  of 
Human Resource Research 18, no. 3:8.

Hunt,  J.  G.  J.,  and  G.  E.  Dodge.  2000.  Leadership  deja  vu  all 
over again. Leadership Quarterly 11, no. 4:24.

Khurana, R. 2007. From higher aims to hired hands: The social 
transformation  of  American  business  schools  and  the  unfulfilled 
promise  of  management  as  a  profession.  Princeton:  Princeton 
University Press.

Laohavichien, T., L. D. Fredendall, and R. S. Cantrell. 2009. The 
effects of transformational and transactional leadership on quality 
improvement. Quality Management Journal 16, no. 2:18.

Latham,  J.  R.  2013a.  A  framework  for  leading  the  transforma-
tion  to  performance  excellence  part  I:  CEO  perspectives  on 
forces,  facilitators,  and  strategic  leadership  systems. Quality 
Management Journal 20, no. 2:22.

Latham,  J.  R.  2013b.  A  framework  for  leading  the  transforma-
tion  to  performance  excellence  part  II:  CEO  perspectives  on 
leadership behaviors, individual leader characteristics, and orga-
nizational culture. Quality Management Journal 20, no. 3:22.

Sayles, L. R., and A. Stewart. 1995. Belated recognition for work-
flow entrepreneurs: A case of selective perception and amnesia in 
management thought. Entrepreneurship, Theory and Practice 19, 
no. 3:7-24.

van  Dierendonck,  D.  2011.  Servant  leadership:  A  review  and 
synthesis. Journal of Management 37, no. 4:1228-1261.

van  Dierendonck,  D.,  and  I.  Nuijten.  2011.  The  servant  leader-
ship  survey:  Development  and  validation  of  a  multidimensional 
measure. Journal of Business and Psychology 26, no. 3:249-267.

Wilson,  E.  O.  1999.  Consilience: The unity of knowledge.  New 
York: Vintage Books.

Zimmerer, T. E. 2013. Generational perceptions of servant lead-
ership: A mixed methods study. Ph.D. diss., Capella University.

BIOGRAPHY 

John Latham is director of the Monfort Institute at the University 
of  Northern  Colorado.  As  a  leadership  scholar-practitioner  he 
has  more  than  30  years  of  combined  experience  as  a  leader, 
leadership  consultant,  and  leadership  researcher.  He  has 
worked  on  a  wide  variety  of  leadership  issues  and  topics,  from 
researching  leading  organization  transformation  from  the  CEO 
perspective,  to  an  international  consultant  to  senior  executives 
on leading change and organization design, to vice president of 
corporate quality and business excellence for a $1.3 billion man-
ufacturing  company  with  operations  in  40  countries.  He  served 
nine  years  on  the  Malcolm  Baldrige  National  Quality  Award 
board of examiners and as a judge for the Colorado Performance 
Excellence,  VA  Carey,  and  Army  Communities  of  Excellence 
awards.  He  earned  a  doctorate  from  Walden  University  in 
1997  and  an  MBA  from  Chapman  University  in  1992.  He  has 
published leadership and organization design articles in Quality 
Management Journal, INNOVATION, Quality Progress, and oth-
ers. He received the 2013 Gryna Award for his 2012 paper on 
management  system  design.  He  is  a  Senior  member  of  ASQ,  a 
Certified  Quality  Engineer  (CQE),  and  a  past  section  chair.  He 
can be reached by email at john@johnlatham.me or through his 
website at www.johnlatham.me.

www.asq.org 15

Leadership for Quality and Innovation: Challenges, Theories, and a Framework for Future Research