REVIEW OF SYNTACTIC PRINCIPLES OF

HEURISTIC-DRIVEN THEORY PROJECTION

CHRISTOPH FINKENSIEP, RENATO GARITA AND MARINA HOLZER

Abstract. This is a summary and review of the paper written by Angela
Schwering, Ulf Krummack, Kai-Uwe K¨uhnberger and Helmer Gust titled Syn-
tactic Principles of Heuritic-Driven Theory Projection. The Heuristic-Driven
Theory Projection (HDTP)is a mathematically sound framework for analogy
making. It’s proposed as the ﬁrst theory for analogies that uses a logic-based
approach.

1. Introduction

Given the importance of analogy from a cognitive perspective and the complexity
of the analogical process [1], it seems prudent to have several theories that approach
the construction of analogies from diﬀerent perspectives. Since there’s no theory
out there which has a strong logical foundation to analogies, HDTP is a welcoming
addition.

The paper Syntactic Principles of Heuritic-Driven Theory Projection [3] de-
scribes the analogy process as one by which a knowledge domain (target) can be
enriched by comparing its structural relationships and rules with another domain
(source).

According to the paper, making analogies is a three step process. The ﬁrst step
is retrieval and it aims to ﬁnd a source domain for the target domain. The second
step is mapping which builds an analogical relation between the source and target
domains by identifying common structures and mapping concepts and relations.
The third step is the transfer which transfers knowledge from the source domain
to the target domain using the analogical relationship. HDTP can do the mapping
and transfer provided that it is given a source and target domains.

2. Analogical mechanisms with HDTP: mapping and transfer

The idea about mapping in an analogical process is to detect structures in the
source domain that are common or can be applied in the target domain. HDTP
uses anti-uniﬁcation to create a generalization of both domains.

2.1. Anti-uniﬁcation. Anti-uniﬁcation can be formally described as follows: given
two formulas s and t, ﬁnd a generalization G of s and t so that there exists some
substitutions α and θ that transform G into s and t respectively.

A least general generalization (lgg) is preferred thus making the substitutions less
complex. It is also ideal if the generalization can preserve as much of the structure
of both domain terms as possible and that the generalization is not structurally
more complex than the original terms.

Anti-uniﬁcation can be either ﬁrst-order where the substitution is done from
variables to terms or it can be a higher-order where variables can take arguments

1

2

CHRISTOPH FINKENSIEP, RENATO GARITA AND MARINA HOLZER

and generalizations can be more complex. To avoid unnecessary complexity some
basic substitutions are proposed:

• Renaming: exchanging variable names.
• Fixation: replaces a variable by a function symbol.
• Argument insertion: replaces a set of arguments by a function term.
• Permutation: rearrangement of arguments.

The complexity of the generalization can then be calculated by summing the
predeﬁned values that represent the computational complexity of the basic substi-
tutions for both domains.

Since the mapping process looks for structural commonalities in many levels we
need a way to reach this structural knowledge that is not obvious immediately.
That is what re-representation is used for.

2.2. Re-representation. When making analogies the structural commonalities
usually become visible during the analogy making process. The representation
of the domains can be changed to make the implicit analogous structures explicit.
In the context of logical representation this can be done by ﬁnding formulas that
posses a common structure leading to a generalization while considering not only
the axiomatizations of the domains but the theories containing the formulas derived
from them.

The generalization can then cover at least some of the formulas that have struc-
turally common characteristics between both domains. Once all the axioms from
a domain are covered (directly or indirectly) the computation of the analogical
relations can be stopped.

Once all the relations are established the transfer process can be started.

2.3. Transfer. The goal of the transfer process is to make the translation from the
source domain to the target domain.

For HDTP the transfer process consists in transferring formulas that are not
covered by the generalization, given that these represent the knowledge that is
truly new for the target domain. After this transfer the consistency of the logical
system is checked by a theorem prover. There’s no general applicable method to
judge the usefulness of analogical inferences.

The type of transfers that can be achieved with HDTP consist in:

• Create new statements in the target domain using the existing vocabulary.
• Introduce entirely new concepts into the target domain.

Once the transfer step is ﬁnished the analogical process is complete. But the

question remains if HDTP is plausible as a cognitive theory.

3. Cognitive plausibility of HDTP

The authors of the paper name several reasons why HDTP can be considered a

cognitive plausible model for analogy making:

to logical inferences.

• Logical languages are good to model knowledge domains but are restricted
• There’s an agreement between researchers that analogy is based on the
• It is also accepted that analogies rely on large and deeply interconnected

alignment of relational or structural commonalities.

systems of relations between elements of a domain.

REVIEW OF SYNTACTIC PRINCIPLES OF HEURISTIC-DRIVEN THEORY PROJECTION 3

into the capacity to have several conceptualizations of the domains.

• The capacity to do many-to-many mappings with HDTP can be translated
• Relational categories are better learned with common abstract relational
• Detecting analogical structures is connected with seeing a domain from
• High-level cognition is an integrated and interactive process.
• Creativity can be seen as a product of using analogies in an abductive

structures and rules.

diﬀerent perspectives.

process or of analogical generalization.

All these points are tackled partially or completely by HDTP.

4. Conclusion

This paper describes the syntactical principles of HDTP in detail. The frame-
work is well speciﬁed and supported by analogical theories and the utilization of a
logical representation seems like a powerful tool to meet the requirements of analogy
making.

The paper raises some issues that we found equally important like the open
problem of logical inference being or not enough to represent all knowledge domains
where analogies can be applied.

Other issues not dealt with in the paper have to do with how to choose heuristics
that can be applied on diﬀerent contexts and that work in such a complex process.
Or what happens when a domain can have diﬀerent axiomatizations at diﬀerent
levels of representation.

Since the paper was published in 2009, there has already been some progress re-
garding the semantics, the role of heuristics and the algorithms to compute analogies
with HDTP [2].

References

[1] Douglas R. Hofstadter. Analogy as the core of cognition. In Dedre Gentner, Keith J. Holyoak,
and Boicho N. Kokinov, editors, The Analogical Mind: Perspectives from Cognitive Science,
pages 499–538. 2001.

[2] Krumnack Ulf Schmidt, Marti and, Helmar Gust, and Kai-Uwe K¨uhnberger. Heuristic-driven
theory projection: An overview. In Henry Prade and Gilles Richard, editors, Computational
Approaches to Analogical Reasoning: Current Trends, pages 163–194. Springer Berlin Heidel-
berg, Berlin, 2014.

[3] Angela Schwering, Ulf Krumnack, Kai-Uwe K¨uhnberger, and Helmar Gust. Syntactic principles

of heuristic-driven theory projection. Cognitive Systems Research, 3(10):251–269, 2009.
E-mail address: cfinkensiep@uni-osnabrueck.de
E-mail address: rgaritafigue@uni-osnabrueck.de
E-mail address: maholzer@uni-osnabrueck.de

