This article was downloaded by: [Leeds Metropolitan University]
On: 26 February 2012, At: 12:53
Publisher: Routledge
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954
Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH,
UK

Tourism Geographies: An
International Journal of Tourism
Space, Place and Environment
Publication details, including instructions for authors
and subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rtxg20
Poor but Happy: Volunteer
Tourists’ Encounters with
Poverty
Émilie Crossley a
a Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK

Available online: 20 Feb 2012

To cite this article: Émilie Crossley (2012): Poor but Happy: Volunteer Tourists’
Encounters with Poverty, Tourism Geographies: An International Journal of Tourism
Space, Place and Environment, DOI:10.1080/14616688.2011.611165

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14616688.2011.611165

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Full terms and conditions of use: http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-
and-conditions

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes.
Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-
licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly
forbidden.

The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any
representation that the contents will be complete or accurate or up to
date. The accuracy of any instructions, formulae, and drug doses should be
independently verified with primary sources. The publisher shall not be liable
for any loss, actions, claims, proceedings, demand, or costs or damages

whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection
with or arising out of the use of this material.

Downloaded by [Leeds Metropolitan University] at 12:53 26 February 2012 Tourism Geographies
iFirst 2011, 1–19

Poor but Happy: Volunteer Tourists’
Encounters with Poverty

´EMILIE CROSSLEY
Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK

Abstract This article explores how young volunteer tourists encounter and negotiate poverty
in rural Kenya. Using a longitudinal psychosocial methodology, I demonstrate how poverty can
be conceptualized as a threatening ‘object’ to volunteer tourists, inducing unconscious anxiety
by challenging Western materialistic lifestyles and identities. Volunteer tourists negotiate this
anxiety in three ways: by transforming poverty into a source of moral redemption; by allowing
poverty to become subsumed into a seductive, exotic landscape so that it can be admired and
consumed; and by constructing impoverished communities as ‘poor but happy’. It is argued
that these neutralizing constructions act as barriers, preventing the intimate engagement with
communities that volunteer tourism promises and lessening the potential of poverty to shock,
move and even change those who come into contact with it.

Key Words: Poverty, volunteer tourism, psychosocial, subjectivity, defences, investment,
authenticity, Kenya

Introduction

In recent years, tourism researchers have become increasingly interested in under-
standing the manifold links between tourism and poverty. Examples from within this
diverse ﬁeld include work on pro-poor tourism, where tourism is considered as a
mechanism for alleviating poverty (Hall 2007), explorations of the relationship be-
tween tourism and post-colonialism (Hall & Tucker 2004) and poverty tourism or
‘poorism’ – the latest market niche which involves travel to poor parts of the world
and even tours of slums (Freire-Medeiros 2011). This last area of work presents an
interesting departure from traditions that have looked into the systemic workings of
tourism in relation to poverty, instead pointing directly at the tourists themselves
who are demanding impoverished places as their holiday destinations. In this sense,
poverty tourism has afﬁnities with the more established practice of volunteer tourism;
the only real divergence between the two being the level of tourist involvement in
trying to reduce poverty. Given this growing trend, it is now more important than ever
to consider tourism at the level of tourist subjectivity, so that we can understand the

Correspondence Address: ´Emilie Crossley, Cardiff School of Social Sciences, 1–3 Museum Place, Cardiff
CF10 3BD, Wales, UK. Fax: +44 (0)29 2087 4175; Tel.: +44 (0)29 2087 4436; Email: CrossleyE@
cardiff.ac.uk
ISSN 1461-6688 Print/1470-1340 Online /11/00/00001–19 C(cid:1) 2011 Taylor & Francis
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14616688.2011.611165

Downloaded by [Leeds Metropolitan University] at 12:53 26 February 2012 2

´E. Crossley

motivations and desires that lead people to travel to poor parts of the world and the
responses that tourists have to their encounters with poverty.

In this article, I want to consider a variety of tourism that brings people from West-
ern countries into contact with poverty through the creation of volunteer projects in
Third World countries. By claiming to provide an ameliorative function in poor com-
munities, volunteer tourism clearly engages with the pro-poor tourism agenda, and
the personal involvement of tourists as consumers of holidays in poor places and, sup-
posedly, agents of change makes this an interesting area for the exploration of tourist
subjectivities in encounters with poverty. The growth of volunteer tourism stems in
part from the alternative and sustainable tourism movements instigated in the 1970s
and early 1980s, which also bore comparable and intersecting niche markets, such
as community tourism and ecotourism (Pearce 1992; Wearing 2001). According to
Lyons and Wearing (2008: 6), alternative tourism ‘reconﬁgures the tourist destination
as an interactive space’ where agency, creativity and intersubjective encounter replace
the passive, ‘Othering’ gaze of more conventional touristic practices, and they situate
volunteer tourism as a ‘contested’ form within this broad category. The addition of
volunteer labour to this reconﬁgured space sets up volunteer tourism as a potentially
ethical model for travel to poorer parts of the world; one that stresses sustainability,
reciprocity (bringing beneﬁts to host communities and guests alike), instigates a dif-
ferent form of touristic practice that avoids objectifying other people and places, and
contains the potential to foster a sense of altruism and social responsibility (McGehee
& Santos 2005; Wearing & Wearing 2006; Lyons & Wearing 2008).

Despite volunteer tourism’s facilitation of the movement of (largely) afﬂuent
tourists to poor parts of the world, there has been limited engagement within academia
concerning volunteer tourists’ responses to poverty, with most studies attempting
to adopt a more holistic approach to capturing the volunteer tourism ‘experience’
(e.g. Wearing 2001; Broad 2003; McIntosh & Zahra 2007). Providing an interesting
exception, however, Simpson’s (2004) work on the pre-university gap year has pro-
duced some worrying ﬁndings regarding young volunteer tourists’ comprehension
of poverty. Simpson (2004: 688) found that volunteers were unwilling to accept that
poverty, as they had witnessed in ‘developing’ countries, was a feature of Western
society and, instead, went to great lengths to differentiate these two spaces:

rather than ﬁnding commonality between the developed and developing worlds,
students are emphasizing difference and establishing a dichotomy of ‘them
and us’. Poverty is allowed to become a deﬁner of difference, rather than an
experience shared by people marginalized by resource distribution. Poverty
becomes an issue for ‘out there’, which can be passively gazed upon, rather
than actively interacted with.

Such a discursive distancing, or spatial Othering, may not only prevent volunteer
tourists from developing a nuanced, politicized appreciation of the problem of poverty,

Downloaded by [Leeds Metropolitan University] at 12:53 26 February 2012 Poor but Happy: Volunteer Tourists’ Encounters with Poverty

3

but may also create an obstruction to the development of empathy with local people.
Simpson also found evidence of the romanticization of poverty, as volunteer tourists
tended to portray materially deprived societies as happy with their ways of life and
as adequately compensated for their poverty by emotional, spiritual or community
‘wealth’. Even when poverty was acknowledged by Simpson’s participants as being
negative, it seemed to induce no feelings of concern or guilt in them, nor any sense
of urgency to act to resolve the problem, which seems perplexing given their role
as volunteers. Instead, the volunteers expressed how observing poverty had made
them feel ‘lucky’ and enabled them to develop greater ‘appreciation’ for their own
situation and wealth (Simpson 2004: 688).

In a very different take on encounters with poverty, Zahra and McIntosh (2007) set
out to explore the emotional and cathartic experiences of young volunteer tourists by
speaking to people about memories of their trip a number of years after having volun-
teered. Their research claimed that confrontations with poverty and human suffering
were particularly powerful catalysts that generated experiences of a depth and signiﬁ-
cance not found within mainstream tourism. They observed that, ‘Suffering provoked
emotive reactions including sentimental outbursts of grief, tears, action, giving away
money, and even escape’ (Zahra & McIntosh 2007: 117). The volunteer tourists’
emotional reactions were also coupled with intellectualizations of a similar ilk to
those found in Simpson’s (2004) work, with talk again of the happiness, resilience
and the spiritual wealth of poor communities. However, despite these fascinating
ﬁndings, Zahra and McIntosh (2007) and Simpson (2004) provide no theoretical
explanation of why encounters with poverty should induce emotionality or lead to
particular representations of poor communities, thus leaving our comprehension of
these phenomena incomplete.

Given the diverse terrain of intellectual, emotional and behavioural responses
to poverty in volunteer tourism that the above studies allow us to glimpse, the
potential for research into these topics has clearly not been exhausted. This article
attempts to complement existing work in this area by presenting a psychosocial
exploration of volunteer tourists’ subjectivities. I begin by setting out the theoretical
foundations for understanding subjectivity psychosocially, emphasizing the roles
of ‘defence’ and ‘investment’ in the spatial practices of volunteer tourists, before
turning to a discussion of the psychosocial, longitudinal methodology used in this
research. The paper then presents a selection of my research ﬁndings, demonstrating
how poverty undergoes various defensive transformations through volunteer tourist
subjectivities, becoming a source of redemption and an authentic, exotic object that
can be consumed. This analysis builds on Simpson’s (2004) work by showing how
volunteers are simultaneously invested in poor communities’ happiness and suffering,
creating a set of dilemmatic responses. I consider these ﬁndings in the context of
volunteer tourism’s supposed shift from a tourism of passivity and ‘gazing’ to one
of intimacy and reciprocity (Wearing 2001; Wearing & Wearing 2006), arguing that
the responses to poverty documented may not only prevent volunteer tourists from

Downloaded by [Leeds Metropolitan University] at 12:53 26 February 2012 4

´E. Crossley

being affected by and gaining a deeper awareness of the hardship suffered by others,
but may also act as broader barriers to engagement with host communities.

Researching Tourist Subjectivities

In recent years, the growing diversiﬁcation of tourist practices, and particularly the
expansion of the ‘new tourisms’, has challenged tourist studies to reconsider the
fundamental notion of who counts as a ‘tourist’ and how this ﬁgure can be theorized
and researched (Franklin & Crang 2001; McCabe 2005). Volunteer tourism provides
a particularly interesting example of such diversiﬁcation as it draws the subject into
a complex and often contradictory arena, attempting to fuse work with leisure, travel
with integration into a community and the hedonism of mainstream tourism with a
sense of philanthropy and ethical conduct. Yet attempts to study this practice have
been constrained by an unwillingness to engage with theory, leading to a body of
literature which is highly descriptive of, in particular, volunteer tourists’ motivations,
experiences and values. This sort of descriptivism has been noted as a problem across
many areas of tourism studies (Britton 1991; Mowforth & Munt 1998; Kingsbury
2005). However, given the widely accepted metaphorical signiﬁcance of the tourist in
social theory (Dann 2002) and the more speciﬁc importance of the volunteer tourist
as an instantiation of contemporary ethical discourses, I suggest that it is necessary
to think more creatively about how we can open up new interdisciplinary spaces in
order to devise convincing theorizations of tourist subjectivity.

Previous engagements with tourists ‘in the ﬂesh’ (Desforges 2000) have exempli-
ﬁed various dimensions through which tourist subjectivity is constituted and practised.
Such work has shown us how tourists discursively construct holiday destinations (e.g.
MacCannell 1976; Urry 1990; Young 1999; Bærenholdt et al. 2004), how identities
are built in intimate connection with visited places (e.g. Dixon & Durrheim 2000;
McCabe & Stokoe 2004) and how mobilities and experiences in spaces of tourism
form narrative resources that feed into broader biographies and provide tourists with
cultural capital that can be brought back home (e.g. Neumann 1992; Desforges 2000;
Noy 2004). However, whilst the methods employed in these bodies of work proﬁ-
ciently capture many features of tourist subjectivity, others may be getting overlooked
or may not be considered as legitimate objects of study within broadly social con-
structionist approaches. Here I am alluding to such things as tourists’ desire for
places, fantasies of travelling, enjoyment whilst away or feelings of sadness or even
guilt for travellers visiting poor communities. These aspects of tourist subjectivity
intersect with and, to some extent, are regulated by discursive and narrative structures
and yet, I argue, cannot be fully understood through a solely discursive framework
because of their emotional, experiential and potentially unconscious basis.

As a complement to this existing work, I want to suggest that psychosocial stud-
ies holds great potential for grasping elements of tourist subjectivity that other ap-
proaches may elide. Psychosocial studies can be conceived of as a body of work which

Downloaded by [Leeds Metropolitan University] at 12:53 26 February 2012 Poor but Happy: Volunteer Tourists’ Encounters with Poverty

5

attempts to theorize subjectivity and identity in ways that avoid the pervasive dualisms
entrenched in social research; these include divisions between agency/structure, in-
dividual/society, personal/collective and mind/body (Henriques et al. 1984; Frosh
2003). As in discursive psychology, psychosocial researchers try to understand the
discursive formation of subjectivity through talk, text and interaction, conceptualizing
subjects non-dualistically as simultaneously enabled and constrained by the discursive
resources and practices available to them (Wetherell 1998; Wetherell & Edley 1999).
However, for many this analytical strategy is insufﬁcient for explaining why subjects
maintain particular identity positions even when these may produce contradictions
and be problematic for them (Edley 2006). Thus, psychosocial theorists appeal to a
range of extra-discursive elements to complement and enhance their theorizations,
including explorations of affect, embodiment and psychodynamics (Cromby 2005;
Frosh & Baraitser 2008). According to the psychosocial approach, then, the subject
is a complex conﬁguration of interpermeating psychic and social processes, which
results in a unique but inherently social ‘arena of personal subjectivity’ (Frosh et al.
2003).

To further reﬁne this concept of the psychosocial, I want to brieﬂy explore two
salient aspects of subjectivity which become available to research through this ap-
proach and suggest how each might be applied to the study of tourist subjectivities.
First, tourists must be considered as what Hollway and Jefferson (2000) call ‘de-
fended subjects’, who develop complex and often spatially expressed mechanisms to
ward off anxiety that poses a constant threat to the integrity and functioning of the
Self. Hollway’s work (1989; Hollway & Jefferson 2000) draws on Kleinian theory
to conceptualize such unconscious defence mechanisms as intersubjective processes,
which pass between people and are intrinsically relational rather than operating within
each individual. This theorization allows defences to be interpreted as dynamic and
social forces, thereby avoiding psychological reductionism. The concept of defence
may be particularly relevant to the study of difﬁcult encounters in tourism, such as
tourists being confronted by poverty through volunteer tourism or travel to slums, as
these encounters may be particularly anxiety provoking.

The second concept is that of ‘investment’, which refers to the conscious and
unconscious ‘reasons’ behind a subject’s adoption of particular subject positions and
use of certain discourses (Frosh & Saville Young 2008). These ‘reasons’ may arise
from a variety of sources, such as social positioning, personal biography, emotions
and defence mechanisms, and incorporating these elements into analyses provides
psychosocial researchers with a way of ‘thickening’ and enriching interpretations of
personal narratives (Frosh & Saville Young 2008: 110). Investment can help us to
think about why tourists take up identity positions, as opposed to just how, and allows
motivations for travelling to be interpreted more creatively (Frosh et al. 2003). For
example, an investment in the position of ‘volunteer tourist’ may arise partly from
desires and fantasies of travelling to remote and unusual destinations in poor parts
of the world, and may also involve defensive reasons, such as assuaging the anxiety

Downloaded by [Leeds Metropolitan University] at 12:53 26 February 2012 6

´E. Crossley

generated by the prospect of travelling to these poor areas as an afﬂuent Western
traveller. Utilizing such psychosocial concepts, therefore, reveals new dimensions of
tourist subjectivity whilst also providing bodies of theory that can be drawn upon to
go beyond mere description.

Method

The present research aimed to investigate the experiences and subjectivities of ten
young British people, aged 18 to 24 years, who were about to undertake a structured
volunteer programme in Kenya of between one and three months in duration. The
programme, offered by a commercial provider, involved a mixture of environmental
conservation and community projects run in rural locations experiencing high levels
of socio-economic deprivation, alongside more mainstream touristic activities, such
as safaris and days on the beach. In order to become familiar with the programme
and to interview my participants, I joined the group (which comprised nearly ﬁfty
people in total) in Africa for a month’s overt participant observation in July 2010.
During this time I kept a daily reﬂexive ﬁeld diary, recording the day’s events,
thoughts and feelings I had about the activities, noteworthy topics of conversation
within the group, reﬂections after interviews, and my dreams. I hoped that as well as
providing me with a more detailed understanding of volunteer tourism, this ﬁrsthand
involvement would help to bring out personal meanings that (consciously or not)
I was bringing to the research context (Birkeland 2005); thus providing material
that could be used to deepen my reﬂexive practice and enrich the interpretation of
data.

In its methods this research sought to go beyond the conventional qualitative modes
of enquiry in the ﬁeld, in which volunteer tourists’ experiences are most commonly
captured either through conversations held in the ethnographic site (e.g. Broad 2003;
Simpson 2004; Gray & Campbell 2007) or using retrospective interviews following
a volunteer placement (e.g. Wearing 2001). Whilst being a popular method in the
study of travel narratives, particularly regarding changing conceptions of self and
identity as a result of youth travel (Neumann 1992; Desforges 2000; Noy 2004),
retrospective interviews produce representations of the past refracted through the
present and such accounts will inevitably contain omissions and exaggerations of
certain elements. Therefore, in an attempt to transcend these ‘snapshot’ approaches,
a longitudinal methodology was used that would allow me to conduct repeated in-
depth narrative interviews with the participants across a period of approximately
eleven months. Interviews took place prior to, during and twice after the volunteer
tourism placement, allowing me to examine how opinions, aspirations, identities and
experiences ﬂuctuated, metamorphosed and were actively negotiated by participants
through time. This resulted in a total of 40 interviews, each lasting between 15 and
90 minutes, although for the purposes of this article only material from the ﬁrst two
waves of interviews will be drawn upon.

Downloaded by [Leeds Metropolitan University] at 12:53 26 February 2012 Poor but Happy: Volunteer Tourists’ Encounters with Poverty

7

The interviews were designed to elicit narratives about the participants’ lives
and their involvement in volunteer tourism. In keeping with the psychosocial
theorization of subjectivity outlined above, a format was used that would allow
narratives to emerge relatively undirected by the interviewer so that links and disjunc-
tions in the interviewee’s speech could be examined for evidence of unconscious or
emotional associations (Hollway & Jefferson 2000; Cartwright 2004). Each digitally
audio-recorded interview started with a broad, open-ended question and subsequent
questions were guided mainly by the ﬂow of the participant’s narrative, asking for
elaborations and further reﬂections at various points. After exhausting this process, a
small number of additional questions relating to theoretically or thematically salient
areas were posed. The second, third and fourth wave of interviews were used to
explore new material based on events that had occurred since our last conversation,
as well as following up themes from previous interviews.

After the interviews had been transcribed verbatim and anonymized, the analysis
commenced with a basic discursive/narrative reading before attempting to explain
participants’ investments in particular identity or attitudinal positions by exploring
unconscious or affective mechanisms. Together with this psychosocial reading, I tried
to explore spatio-temporal patterns made apparent by the longitudinal generation
of data, such as the fulﬁlment or frustration of desires expressed by participants
before departing for their trip and the retrospective framing of experiences in Kenya.
Finally, I used data from my reﬂexive ﬁeld diary to enable comment on volunteer
tourist practices that were either not mentioned in the interviews or did not feature
substantially in them. Where data are shown as part of the analysis below, excerpts are
labelled by, for example, (Amy 1, 18:11), which denotes the ﬁrst interview with Amy
starting at 18 minutes 11 seconds in (see Appendix for transcription conventions).

Psychosocial Dynamics of Volunteer Tourism

In this analytical section I want to show the potential of using a psychosocial approach
to interpret volunteer tourist subjectivities. This approach allows us to understand how
responses to poverty in tourism are not simply intellectual or emotional products of
the individual, but are expressive of powerful forces and dynamics occurring at the
nexus of socio-cultural forms and lived, unique subjectivities. Using this framework,
and by tracing the shifts in participants’ accounts across time and space, I will show
how volunteer tourists negotiate the poverty that they encounter and demonstrate
how it is necessary to take into consideration the defensive and desirous functions
of tourist subjectivities in order to adequately interpret their responses. In addressing
these elements of volunteer tourist subjectivities, this research explores previously
uncharted terrain in tourism geography.

The following data were selected because of their relevance to a theoretical interest
in poverty which, although framing the research in its rationale and interpretation,
did not drive the line of questioning during the interviews. The ﬁndings are presented

Downloaded by [Leeds Metropolitan University] at 12:53 26 February 2012 8

´E. Crossley

in three sections representing the various responses to poverty that emerged from
the participants’ narratives. These focus on poverty as a force for internal moral
transformation, as an exotic feature of the Kenyan landscape and as a dismissible
element of the lives of the ‘happy poor’, respectively. The three responses featured
in the majority of participants’ accounts, although their occurrence and level of
elaboration varied between participants. For example, whilst gaining appreciation
through encountering poverty was cited by two-thirds of participants as a motivation
for their travels, fewer followed this through in subsequent interviews. However, it
should be stressed that the purpose of this analysis is not to establish the norms of
volunteer tourist subjectivities, but rather to explore the forms of subjectivity made
available by this context.

Redemptive Poverty

Poverty is a potentially problematic ‘object’ for young volunteer tourists to deal with.
For those embroiled and invested in a culture that celebrates afﬂuence, materialism
and consumption, poverty signiﬁes lack, failure and Otherness. Yet the frequent
media exposure it receives makes poverty and the suffering it brings unavoidable for
the general public, lodging it permanently in the Western psyche. Volunteer tourists
who choose to travel to and work with poor communities are placing themselves
in a situation where they must confront the realities of how other people live, but
although the tourists have come as helpers and want to feel positive about the impact
their labour is making, I argue that poverty remains unsettling and threatening to them.
In this ﬁrst analytical section I want to explore how volunteer tourists negotiate and
resolve the threat that poverty presents for them by seeking personal transformation
in the form of a gained sense of ‘appreciation’. This aspiration is traced from before
our departure for Africa through to later stages when ‘appreciation’ has supposedly
been attained.

Nearly all of the volunteer tourists I spoke to stated in their ﬁrst interview that
they wanted to develop a greater sense of ‘appreciation’, ‘perspective’, ‘respect’ or
‘gratitude’ through travelling as a volunteer to Kenya. In their accounts, this pursuit
of ‘appreciation’, which I feel is the term that captures most accurately the sentiment
being expressed, took one of two forms in relation to materialism. In the ﬁrst version,
‘appreciation’ would allow the volunteer tourists to recognize the good fortune of
their material wealth, as shown in the following passage taken from the ﬁrst interview
with Amy:

´Emilie: What are the different things that you’re hoping to get out of, of going?
Amy: Um (.) think to kind of have a bit more respect for kind of everything
that I own at the moment. [ ´Emilie: Hmm] ‘Cause I mean I’ve got a new iPod,
a new phone, a new camera . . . Um, just kind of a bit more appreciation for
everything, um ‘cause I recognize that what I have is, you know, really great

Downloaded by [Leeds Metropolitan University] at 12:53 26 February 2012 Poor but Happy: Volunteer Tourists’ Encounters with Poverty

9

like, I shouldn’t be so (laughs) like down in myself and thinking you’ve got
nothing when actually (.) you’ve got so much more than a lot of people have
(Amy 1, 18: 11).

For Amy, encountering poor people lacking in possessions promises to add personal
value to her own things and legitimizes her veneration of materiality in the form of
giving thanks for what she has. In contrast, the excerpt from Lisa’s interview, below,
demonstrates a different permutation of the ‘appreciation’ discourse in which she
seeks, or expects, a refutation of Western materialism, echoing ﬁndings from Zahra
and McIntosh (2007) and Zahra (2011):

´Emilie: What sort of different view (.) on things [Lisa: Yeah] what d’you, what
sort of view d’you mean?
Lisa: Um, I dunno like (.) like kind of the materialistic side of things like that
(.) you like here you, you don’t really (.) you take for granted like what you
have and then [ ´Emilie: Hmm] I think a lot of it’s gonna be (.) to do with coming
back with a different perspective on it, just [ ´Emilie: Hmm] thinking it’s just
stuff it doesn’t matter (Lisa 1, 27: 32).

Discursively, or performatively, the accounts given by Amy and Lisa provide justiﬁca-
tions for their desire to travel to Africa that exceed the pure hedonism associated with
mainstream tourism products; ‘appreciation’ has connotations of moral betterment
that sit well within the ethical framework of volunteer tourism. However, I believe
that more is going on in these accounts than simply the positive presentation of Self.
The pursuit of ‘appreciation’ also provides a defensive function for young volunteer
tourists. Poverty presents a challenge to the lifestyles, materialism and indulgences
of afﬂuent Western subjects and can therefore induce feelings of guilt or unconscious
anxiety as the Self is threatened by this spectre. By seeking ‘appreciation’, volunteer
tourists are able to demonstrate an acknowledgement of poverty whilst also preserv-
ing their present lifestyle and Self. By dissolving ignorance and replacing this with
gratitude, ‘appreciation’ becomes an ethical end in itself, allowing volunteer tourists
to resume their lives back in the West in the knowledge that they have undergone
a personal, internal transformation. This removes the onus for volunteer tourists to
maintain efforts to combat poverty once they have returned home and because this is
a modiﬁcation of the Self rather than of the Other it is a much more easily attainable
resolution.

We can see this process in action by following Lisa as she undergoes this trans-
formation. Here, Lisa is recounting an emotional experience she has recently had
at a local primary school, where she had what she describes as ‘a bit of a mental
breakdown’ after learning that some pupils were not in school uniform because their
families could not afford it:

Downloaded by [Leeds Metropolitan University] at 12:53 26 February 2012 10

´E. Crossley

Lisa: I just cried and cried and cried, and I just, I- like it just, it’s just, I like
as much as it was upsetting I think it was a really, really good like lesson for
me? [ ´Emilie: Yeah] Because like I, I was sat, I was sat there like just getting so
upset thinking about what I’d spend £2 on - that’s’ not even a coffee (.) and yet
there’s a child that can’t afford a school uniform because they, like they don’t
have £2 and it just, oh god it just hit me like I got the biggest reality check in
the world at that point . . . I know it sounds silly but when I look back on it
now I actually like smile about it ‘cause it’s made me realize that like (.) stuff’s
not that important anymore. [ ´Emilie: Yeah] It’s like obviously it’s not, you’re
not gonna change everything, it’s just the lifestyle isn’t it but [ ´Emilie: Hmm] it
like, even if you just think about it (Lisa 2, 16: 30).

What is telling about this passage is the satisfaction that Lisa is able to draw from a
seemingly distressing episode during her stay in Kenya. She can look back on this
upsetting time and ‘smile’ because of the redemptive ‘appreciation’ that it has instilled
in her. This process, in which a negative experience leads to a positive lasting outcome,
is reminiscent of the literature on trauma in psychology. Janoff-Bulman and Berger
(2000) argue that people who undergo traumatic life events frequently experience
positive outcomes, such as the development of greater appreciation for their lives
and the reassessment of priorities. However, what makes Lisa’s case different is the
lesser degree of trauma, its anticipated nature and the cultural context that renders her
encounter traumatic and implicates her identity in a problematic way. By examining
how Lisa’s narrative allows her to continue with her lifestyle after Kenya, we can see
that ‘appreciation’ carries strategic and defensive signiﬁcance rather than just being
a natural post-trauma response.

In the ﬁnal part of Lisa’s account we can see the inertia and continuity of lifestyle
that ‘appreciation’ permits; Lisa accepts that her materialistic lifestyle is unlikely to
‘change’ drastically as a result of her experience, but insists that it is enough to simply
have a changed state of mind and be able to ‘just think about it’. Thus, ‘appreciation’
defends the Self against anxiety induced by what is now a neutralized object and
allows volunteer tourists to maintain a Western lifestyle in a guilt-free way. This is
similar to the ideological function Cremin (2007) sees the gap year as providing, in
which subjects are returned to ‘the same’ after a successful period of travel. Not only
is poverty neutralized in this process, but because a positive change is brought about in
the Self poverty actually becomes transformed from a threatening, anxiety-inducing
object into one associated with moral redemption – delivering Western subjects from
a state of ignorance and ingratitude. What makes this particularly interesting from a
geographical perspective is that moral redemption is performed by volunteer tourists
as a spatial practice, involving travel to spaces charged with enough potency, in terms
of extremes of poverty, to bring about the transition to an ‘appreciative’ state of mind.
This spatial practice of defence is problematic for volunteer tourism, not only
in the sense that it effectively helps to legitimize and perpetuate apathy and global

Downloaded by [Leeds Metropolitan University] at 12:53 26 February 2012 Poor but Happy: Volunteer Tourists’ Encounters with Poverty

11

disparities in wealth, but also because it modulates the encounter between hosts and
guests. As the quest for ‘appreciation’ begins long before departure, encounters with
the Other and with poverty are stripped of their radical, transformational potential
and can instead only be apprehended through premeditated defensive mechanisms.
Although, as we have seen, poverty retains its potential to shock and distress volunteer
tourists, the outcome of such experiences becomes largely a foregone conclusion.

Problematic Seductions

Volunteer tourism promises to take the traveller beyond the realms of normal tourist
experience; from gazing at a landscape to interacting with its people, from consuming
a place to helping to construct it, and from purchasing staged tourist displays to
witnessing the ‘reality’ of a place. Yet, these distinctions are not clear-cut and, for
some, conventional tourist conduct may be so ingrained that it becomes difﬁcult to
snap out of this mode of practice, even when shifting to a volunteer tourist role. In
this section I will show how poverty can become embedded in a seductive landscape
of Otherness, authenticity and the exotic, and thus a problematic object of volunteer
tourists’ desire. I will draw particular attention to how consumption of people, places
and poverty through photography and other instantiations of the ‘tourist gaze’ (Urry
1990) stands in stark and potentially damaging opposition to the ethical, reciprocal
and de-commodiﬁed ideals of volunteer tourism (Wearing & Wearing 1999; Wearing
2001).

During the ﬁrst wave of interviews, most of my participants did not have many
preconceptions about what Kenya would be like, with the most consistent description
referring to a place that would be hot, dry, dusty and dilapidated. However, after we
had arrived in Africa, it became apparent that there were feelings of deep ambivalence
arising in relation to the landscape with which we were confronted. This appeared to
be because the volunteer tourists found themselves admiring features of a landscape
that represented simultaneously authenticity and poverty. The following passage
encapsulates this sentiment well:

◦

Mud huts

◦

I- I didn’t know whether that’d be a myth or there would be
Ash:
actually be mud huts, you know kinda thing. I-, but it is [ ´Emilie: Yeah, yeah]
you know it is, they’re living in houses of mud and stick. (laughs) You know
just like ah no, no they’ll have brick. [ ´Emilie: Yeah] (coughs) (.) That was good
though. Real, not good for them I suppose but I suppose they’re pro- probably
not bothered (laughs) but you know, [ ´Emilie: Hmm]
(Ash 2, 24:
13).

◦
authentic

◦

I had asked Ash to tell me whether Kenya was as he had expected it to be and he
expresses his surprise at the presence of ‘mud huts’, a stereotypical image of rural
Africa that he takes as a marker of what is ‘real’ and ‘authentic’. However, Ash
seems aware that he is celebrating a feature of poverty when he assesses the huts as

Downloaded by [Leeds Metropolitan University] at 12:53 26 February 2012 12

´E. Crossley

‘good’ but then acknowledges that this form of housing may not be ‘good’ for those
having to dwell in them. In a similar passage, Sarah also demonstrates an ambivalent
relationship towards the African landscape:

´Emilie: What did you make of the landscape and everything?
Sarah: Um it’s c- it was crazy. When we were landing in the plane and you can
see like all the huts at the side and you’re like oh my god it actually looks like
that. [ ´Emilie: Yeah] And then when you’re driving through and it’s like (.) and
like one of the ﬁrst people I saw was like a woman with a vase on her head
carrying [ ´Emilie: Yeah] something. Like, it is cool (.) and everything’s, it’s like
really sad that there’s poverty and that everything’s like that (.) but.
´Emilie: Yeah (.) w- why is it sad?
Sarah: ‘Cause it’s so different. ‘Cause everything’s all run down and they
haven’t got like (.) you just take what you’ve got at home for granted, don’t
you? [ ´Emilie: Hmm] And then you see the people like (.) living with barely
anything and walking around like (.) in like a dishevelled town [ ´Emilie: Hmm]
and it’s like, it’s like one of the main cities, yet it’s like (.) falling apart. [ ´Emilie:
Hmm] It’s yeah (.) I like it but it is sad if you [ ´Emilie: Yeah] think about it
(Sarah 2, 03: 03).

Here, we can see the recurrence of stereotypical features of the exotic African land-
scape – mud huts and a woman carrying a pot on her head – and the excitement and
delight in Sarah’s voice when she was telling me this was tangible. Yet Sarah too feels
the need to qualify and restrain her enthusiasm by acknowledging that the landscape
she admires is also one that afﬂicts those who live in it. Sarah’s ﬁnal statement, ‘I
like it but it is sad’, demonstrates her inability to resolve this tension.

In addition to these accounts of experiencing the African landscape, I found it
fascinating to observe the very conventional touristic conduct that took place during
the month that I spent with my participants. The volunteer tourists took their cameras
with them everywhere we went, including to the sites of projects where we would
be doing dirty, manual work; there was a preoccupation with capturing in images
everything that we saw or did. Thus, in addition to photographing landscapes and
one another, it became the norm to photograph people’s homes and local people
themselves. I witnessed the tourists pointing their cameras at small children that they
had not yet spoken to and was horriﬁed when we visited a class at one of the local
schools only for the majority of the group to start photographing the students as the
teacher was trying to introduce us. There was also an ‘incident’ of pictures being
taken of a woman in traditional dress, standing with her children who, as it later
transpired when somebody asked her permission, did not want to be photographed.
These observations seemed to reveal how not only were traditional ‘mud huts’ and
other features of the built environment becoming subsumed into the seductive African
landscape, but so too were the people. Local people, many of whom were extremely

Downloaded by [Leeds Metropolitan University] at 12:53 26 February 2012 Poor but Happy: Volunteer Tourists’ Encounters with Poverty

13

poor, were themselves becoming markers of an exotic, authentic Otherness that could
be celebrated, objectiﬁed and ultimately consumed through practices of the tourist
gaze. The marketing of Third World countries as authentic, unspoiled and primitive –
a discourse which implicates indigenous people as much as features of the landscape –
is well documented (Silver 1993). In a study based in Eastern Indonesia, Cole (2007)
shows how tourists preferred visiting villages which appeared poorer, thereby repro-
ducing this connection between poverty and perceived authenticity through touristic
practice. However, the present research complements this existing literature by show-
ing how tourists actively negotiate place meanings, often dilemmatically, rather than
passively reproducing the images fed to them as consumers.

Psychosocially, we can understand what is happening here as the harnessing of
volunteer tourists’ desire by seductive landscapes that have in part been forged by the
Western cultural imagination (Terkenli 2002; Cartier 2005). Africa becomes seduc-
tive because its Otherness is cast in fantasy as exotic, providing exciting, colourful and
disorderly contrasts to the mundane, and as authentic, presenting a vision of society
untainted by the disorientating simulacra, pluralism of social formations and erasure
of traditions symptomatic of post-modernity (Munt 1994). Poverty is easily absorbed
as a feature of this seductive landscape and thus also becomes subject to tourists’
desires. I would argue that this also provides a defensive function, as the conversion of
poverty into just another consumable object in the landscape neutralizes the threaten-
ing properties otherwise associated with it. In this context, the ambivalence observed
in the volunteer tourists’ responses to the Kenyan landscape can be interpreted as a
conﬂict arising from the conscious recognition of poverty as a negative feature of the
landscape and the unconscious enjoyment of poverty-as-Otherness that stems from a
participation in Western cultural fantasy.

These ﬁndings show the difﬁculty of matching the practice of volunteer tourism
to its ambitious ideals. With conventional touristic behaviour so pervasive, the objec-
tiﬁcation of people and places in Third World countries still occurs and the cavalier
use of photography is likely to produce a barrier to the engagement and intimacy
with local people that volunteer tourism endorses, as well as enacting damaging
power relations. Additionally, there is a risk that the identiﬁed practices of experienc-
ing poverty as part of a consumable landscape makes it decipherable for volunteer
tourists as part of an aesthetic and cultural framework rather than an economic
and social one, with a potential result of masking, romanticizing and trivializing
poverty.

Contented Communities

Lisa: they literally have nothing and they’re so happy. They’re just happy
playing. You see them in their like raggedy, torn clothes and they’re not bothered
(Lisa 2, 19: 24).

Downloaded by [Leeds Metropolitan University] at 12:53 26 February 2012 14

´E. Crossley

Some of the volunteer tourists had heard stories from others who had gone before them
about how contented and happy people were, despite the poverty, in Africa. Others
reacted with surprise at the swathes of smiling, waving children found in every village
that we arrived at. In this section I want to examine how the picture painted by Lisa
above of the poor but happy children became extended by the volunteer tourists I
spoke with to characterize all of the local people. I will show how volunteer tourists
are simultaneously invested in host communities being poor and also happy, and
how these investments must be negotiated. Before departing, many of the volunteer
tourists told me about wanting to help poor communities:

Sarah: I like the thought of helping people and everything like that, helping
them get along. And it’s, it’s not a nice thought is it to think of them like (.)
not being very happy (laughs). So it’s nice to go out there and actually do
something rather than sit here and do nothing about it (Sarah 1, 03: 08).

Here, poor people are depicted as unhappy. Volunteer tourists are, in a way, invested
in such bleak images of poor communities because it creates a sense of urgency and
need that allows the volunteer tourist to positively assume the role of ‘helper’ in a way
that afﬁrms their sense of agency. The opposition drawn in Sarah’s account between
going ‘out there’ to ‘do something’ rather than sitting ‘here’ and doing ‘nothing’ also
emphasizes the spatial dynamics of helping, in which it is assumed that action cannot
be taken remotely. Instead, the problem of poverty is located in anOther place and an
assumption is made that it can be ameliorated only by journeying to that place; thus,
philanthropy is sought through travel.

Sarah was surprised and possibly disappointed to ﬁnd that the people she had
travelled all this way to help were not as unhappy as she had expected them to be.
Instead the volunteer tourists encountered poverty with a smiling face – communities
that they came to understand as ‘poor-but-happy’ (Simpson 2004). Below, Kate
reﬂects on this conundrum, which leads her to compare her home society with the
one that she has travelled to:

Kate: You know, back home there’s, kids are always, the babies, the toddlers
that are, they’re always crying, always screaming, you can hear them on the
bus and the, it’s just not like that here? I’m not quite sure why that is . . . I
dunno whether it’s ‘cause you have little you appreciate more and (.) whether
it’s more about like family and love and friends and that kind of thing rather
than material possessions that our Western world’s become (Kate 2, 10: 13).

Here we ﬁnd the ideal of ‘appreciation’ imprinted on to the host communities and
contrasts are drawn between the ‘screaming’ children ‘back home’ and the con-
tented children ‘here’. Far from appearing desperate and in need of development
and assistance from Westerners, such as the volunteer tourists, the Kenyans arise as

Downloaded by [Leeds Metropolitan University] at 12:53 26 February 2012 Poor but Happy: Volunteer Tourists’ Encounters with Poverty

15

an embodied critique of Western society and materialism, for despite their socio-
economic deprivation they are the happiest of the two societies because of the wealth
they draw from alternative sources such as ‘family and love and friends’. Simpson’s
(2004) research on the gap year also found accounts that constructed local people
as ‘poor-but-happy’, with young people claiming that the locals did not mind being
materially poor, thereby romanticizing and trivializing poverty. As an extension of
the defences against poverty as a source of anxiety outlined in the ﬁrst analytical
section, these stereotypical portrayals of poor communities as contented and happy
neutralizes their disturbing potential. In this way, extending the very noticeable exu-
berance of the local children to characterize the whole society created a comforting
illusion for the volunteer tourists.

However, what seemed to arise for many volunteer tourists was a sense of con-
tradiction between the cultural stereotype of contented Third World societies and
their own distress at sights of poverty, and between their desire for local people to be
suffering so that they could then be helped and for them to be happy so as to not be
troubled by this suffering. The following excerpt, in which Tess is telling me about
being upset by an encounter with a sick boy from the local village who was unable
to play with the other children, exempliﬁes these tensions:

Tess: I didn’t want to cry, I hate crying near them ‘cause they like just must
think like, I don’t know, I don’t want to look like they’re a sob story, d’you
know what I mean? [ ´Emilie: Yeah] I don’t want them to think like, it’s ﬁne,
they’re happy, ‘cause they are, most like the majority of people are so happy
here like I’m sure they didn’t (.) ask for mo-, some ask for more but [ ´Emilie:
Hmm] you know they all seem quite happy but I really just had to walk away
and just kind of collect myself but that’s the only thing that really got to me
‘cause it just, they’re so young I suppose and like (.) don’t know, they deserve
more I suppose (Tess 2, 13: 54).

What is immediately striking about Tess’s account is her concern about how her
behaviour might be interpreted by the locals as judgmental and disparaging. And yet
the strength of feeling roused in her by the sight of the little boy is such that she
struggles not to cry despite her worries about making the local people feel like a
‘sob story’. Tess stresses over and over that the people here are ‘happy’, almost in an
attempt to reassure herself rather than me, but ﬁnishes by reﬂecting that the children –
simultaneously the bearers of the broadest smiles and those who bear the effects of
poverty the most – ‘deserve more’.

For volunteer tourism, these constructions and negotiations of host communities
present various challenges. Competing investments in cultural stereotypes, be it of
the ‘poor and destitute’ or ‘poor but happy’ variety, provide lenses through which
communities can be seen and experienced, potentially changing volunteer tourism
from an arena for authentic and mutual cultural exchange to one that reinforces

Downloaded by [Leeds Metropolitan University] at 12:53 26 February 2012 16

´E. Crossley

cultural preconceptions through desirous and defensive ‘appropriation’ (Hollway
2004).

Conclusions

In this article I have tried to make the case for studying volunteer tourists’ encounters
with poverty, given the increasingly interrelated nature of these two social phenomena,
and for studying tourist subjectivity psychosocially. I have shown how responses to
poverty in tourism are shaped in part by defence mechanisms operating to protect the
Self against threatening objects and by investments in particular portrayals of host
communities. By deploying psychosocial concepts, it has been possible to go beyond
simply describing these responses and instead to explain why, through the operation of
particular mechanisms, volunteer tourists respond in the ways that they do. We can see
from these explorations how poverty’s capacity to shock, move and leave potentially
life-changing impressions on people is dampened because it is perceived through
the lens of cultural stereotypes and fantasies, imprinting images of the ‘exotic’,
‘authentic’ and of ‘happy’ communities upon ‘voluntoured’ destinations, and because
it must be constantly negotiated by volunteer tourists who are simultaneously invested
in poverty and threatened by it.

In evaluating the ethics of volunteer tourism and other forms of tourism that bring
people into contact with poverty, it is necessary to consider tourist subjectivities as
a factor of as much relevance as material outcomes for host communities. These
subjectivities form the basis for beneﬁcial contact and engagement as well as for
potentially nefarious objectiﬁcation and stereotyping, ultimately shaping what all
parties involved take from their encounters with the other. I have attempted to show
how, as well as modulating perceptions of poverty, psychosocial processes may
constitute barriers blocking the engagement and intimacy with local people that
sits at the core of the volunteer tourism ethos. Volunteer tourism providers should
be aware of the ways in which tourists potentially stereotype host communities or
romanticize poverty, and must also be mindful of their own role in propagating
such representations. In light of these ﬁndings, we should heed Simpson’s (2004)
suggestion that the industry should advocate a ‘pedagogy of social justice’ to enable
volunteer tourists to develop more complex and politicized understandings of their
hosts in the Third World. However, such a pedagogy should be mindful of the difﬁcult
emotional responses involved in volunteer tourism and would, therefore, have to go
beyond simply the dissemination of information.

The psychosocial exploration undertaken in this article may provide a method-
ological opening for other tourism geographers to explore, as it provides a model
of tourist subjectivity with psychological depth and, therefore, greater explanatory
power, whilst resisting individualization and psychological reductionism. One po-
tentially productive application of the methodology would be in the ﬁeld of tourism
emotions, as an increasing number of researchers are beginning to assess difﬁcult

Downloaded by [Leeds Metropolitan University] at 12:53 26 February 2012 Poor but Happy: Volunteer Tourists’ Encounters with Poverty

17

feelings in tourist encounters for their political, moral and transformative poten-
tialities (Zahra & McIntosh 2007; Tucker 2009; Crossley 2012). The psychosocial
approach has the potential to complement this existing work by providing theoretical
resources which deal explicitly with difﬁcult emotions and defences against them.
Furthermore, future research will be able to build on the current work by continuing
to explore tourists’ encounters with poverty, whether in a volunteer tourism context or
not, and by using theorizations that allow us to comprehend the complex negotiations
that tourists experience through these encounters.

Appendix: Transcription Notation

(.) Short, untimed pause in the ﬂow of speech
text Emphasized word(s)
(text) Non-speech sounds, such as laughter
◦
text
text? A question or raised intonation at the end of a phrase
te- Preceding sound is cut off

Word(s) spoken quietly

◦

Acknowledgements

The research for this article was supported ﬁnancially by the UK Economic and Social
Research Council. I also wish to thank my supervisors, Prof Valerie Walkerdine and
Dr Gabrielle Ivinson, the participants who gave up their time to speak to me, and the
anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments on earlier drafts.

References

Bærenholdt, J. O., Haldrup, M., Larsen, J. & Urry, J. (2004) Performing Tourist Places (Aldershot, UK:

Ashgate).

Birkeland, I. J. (2005) Making Place, Making Self: Travel, Subjectivity, and Sexual Difference (Farnham,

UK: Ashgate).

Britton, S. (1991) Tourism, capital, and place: Towards a critical geography of tourism, Environment and

Planning D: Society and Space, 9(4), pp. 451–478.

Broad, S. (2003) Living the Thai life – A case study of volunteer tourism at the Gibbon Rehabilitation

Project, Thailand, Tourism Recreation Research, 28(3), pp. 63–72.

Cartier, C. (2005) Introduction: Touristed landscapes/seductions of place, in C. Cartier & A. A. Lew
(Eds) Seductions of Place: Geographical Perspectives on Globalization and Touristed Landscapes,
pp. 1–20 (Abingdon: Routledge).

Cartwright, D. (2004) The psychoanalytic research interview: Preliminary suggestions, Journal of the

American Psychoanalytic Association, 52(1), pp. 209–242.

Cole, S. (2007) Beyond authenticity and commodiﬁcation, Annals of Tourism Research, 34(4), pp. 943–960.
Cremin, C. (2007) Living and really living: the gap year and the commodiﬁcation of the contingent,

Ephemera, 7(4), pp. 526–542.

Downloaded by [Leeds Metropolitan University] at 12:53 26 February 2012 18

´E. Crossley

Cromby, J. (2005) Theorising embodied subjectivity, International Journal of Critical Psychology, 15,

pp. 133–150.

Crossley, ´E. (2012) Affect and moral transformations in young volunteer tourists, in D. Picard & M.
Robinson (Eds) Emotion in Motion: The Passions of Tourism and Travel, (Farnham, UK: Ashgate).

Dann, G. M. S. (Ed.) (2002) The Tourist as a Metaphor of the Social World (Wallingford, UK: Cabi).
Desforges, L. (2000) Travelling the world: Identity and travel biography, Annals of Tourism Research,

27(4), pp. 926–945.

Dixon, J. & Durrheim, K. (2000) Displacing place-identity: A discursive approach to locating self and

other, British Journal of Social Psychology, 39, pp. 27–44.

Edley, N. (2006) Never the twain shall meet: A critical appraisal of the combination of discourse and

psychoanalytic theory in studies of men and masculinity, Sex Roles, 55, pp. 601–608.

Franklin, A. & Crang, M. (2001) The trouble with tourism and travel theory? Tourism Studies, 1(1),

pp. 5–22.

Freire-Medeiros, B. (2011) Touring Poverty (Abingdon: Routledge).
Frosh, S. (2003) Psychosocial studies and psychology: Is a critical approach emerging? Human Relations,

56, pp. 1547–1567.

Frosh, S. & Baraitser, L. (2008) Psychoanalysis and psychosocial studies, Psychoanalysis, Culture &

Society, 13(4), pp. 346–365.

Frosh, S. & Saville Young, L. (2008) Psychoanalytic approaches to qualitative psychology, in: C. Willig &
W. Stainton-Rogers (Eds) The Sage Handbook of Qualitative Research in Psychology, pp. 109–126
(London: Sage).

Frosh, S., Phoenix, A. & Pattman, R. (2003) Taking a stand: Using psychoanalysis to explore the positioning

of subjects in discourse, British Journal of Social Psychology, 42(1), pp. 39–53.

Gray, N. J. & Campbell, L. M. (2007) A decommodiﬁed experience? Exploring aesthetic, economic
and ethical values for volunteer ecotourism in Costa Rica, Journal of Sustainable Tourism, 15(5),
pp. 463–482.

Hall, C. M. (2007) Pro-Poor Tourism: Who Beneﬁts? Perspectives on Tourism and Poverty Reduction

(Clevedon, UK: Channel View).

Hall, C. M. & Tucker, H. (Eds) (2004) Tourism and Postcolonialism: Contested Discourses, Identities and

Representations (Abingdon: Routledge).

Henriques, J., Hollway, W., Urwin, C., Venn, C. & Walkerdine, V. (1984) Changing the Subject: Psychol-

ogy, Social Regulation and Subjectivity (London: Routledge).

Hollway, W. (1989) Subjectivity and Method in Psychology (London: Sage).
Hollway, W. (2004) Editorial, International Journal of Critical Psychology, 10, pp. 5–12.
Hollway, W. & Jefferson, T. (2000) Doing Qualitative Research Differently: Free Association, Narrative

and the Interview Method (London: Sage).

Janoff-Bulman, R. & Berger, A. R. (2000) The other side of trauma: Towards a psychology of appreciation,
in: J. Harvey & E. D. Miller (Eds) Loss and Trauma Handbook, pp. 29–44 (Abingdon: Routledge).

Kingsbury, P. (2005) Jamaican tourism and the politics of enjoyment, Geoforum, 36, pp. 113–132.
Lyons, K. D. & Wearing, S. (2008) Volunteer tourism as alternative tourism: Journeys beyond Otherness,
in: K. D. Lyons & S. Wearing (Eds) Journeys of Discovery in Volunteer Tourism: International Case
Study Perspectives, pp. 3–11 (Wallingford, UK: Cabi).

MacCannell, D. (1976) The Tourist: A New Theory of the Leisure Class (New York: Shocken).
McCabe, S. (2005) ‘Who is a tourist?’: A critical review, Tourist Studies, 5(1), pp. 85–106.
McCabe, S. & Stokoe, E. H. (2004) Place and identity in tourists’ accounts, Annals of Tourism Research,

31(3), pp. 601–622.

McGehee, N. G. & Santos, C. A. (2005) Social change, discourse and volunteer tourism, Annals of Tourism

Research, 32(3), pp. 760–779.

McIntosh, A. J. & Zahra, A. (2007) A cultural encounter through volunteer tourism: Towards the ideals of

sustainable tourism?, Journal of Sustainable Tourism, 15(5), pp. 541–556.

Downloaded by [Leeds Metropolitan University] at 12:53 26 February 2012 Poor but Happy: Volunteer Tourists’ Encounters with Poverty

19

Mowforth, M. & Munt, I. (1998) Tourism and Sustainability: New Tourism in the Third World (London:

Routledge).

Munt, I. (1994) The ‘Other’ postmodern tourism: Culture, travel and the new middle classes, Theory,

Culture and Society, 11, pp. 101–123.

Neumann, M. (1992) The trail through experience: Finding self in the recollection of travel, in: C. Ellis
& M. G. Flaherty (Eds) Investigating Subjectivity: Research on Lived Experience, pp. 176–201
(London: Sage).

Noy, C. (2004) This trip really changed me: Backpackers’ narratives of self-change, Annals of Tourism

Research, 31(1), pp. 78–102.

Pearce, D. G. (1992) Alternative tourism: Concepts, classiﬁcations, and questions, in: V. L. Smith & W.
R. Eadington (Eds) Tourism Alternatives: Potentials and Problems in the Development of Tourism,
pp. 15–30 (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvannia Press).

Silver, I. (1993) Marketing authenticity in Third World countries, Annals of Tourism Research, 20,

pp. 302–318.

Simpson, K. (2004) ‘Doing development’: The gap year, volunteer-tourists and a popular practice of

development, Journal of International Development, 16, pp. 681–692.

Terkenli, T. S. (2002) Landscapes of tourism: Towards a global cultural economy of space?, Tourism

Geographies, 4(3), pp. 227–254.

Tucker, H. (2009) Recognizing emotion and its postcolonial potentialities: Discomfort and shame in a

tourism encounter in Turkey, Tourism Geographies, 11(4), pp. 444–461.

Urry, J. (1990) The Tourist Gaze: Leisure and Travel in Contemporary Society (London: Sage).
Wearing, S. L. (2001) Volunteer Tourism: Experiences that Make a Difference (London: Cabi).
Wearing, S. L. &Wearing, M. (1999) Decommodifying ecotourism: Rethinking global–local interactions

with host communities, Society and Leisure, 22, pp. 39–70.

Wearing, S. L. & Wearing, M. (2006) ‘Rereading the subjugating tourist’ in neoliberalism: Postcolonial

otherness and the tourist experience, Tourism Analysis, 11(2), pp. 145–162.

Wetherell, M. (1998) Positioning and interpretative repertoires: Conversation analysis and post-

structuralism in dialogue, Discourse and Society, 9(3), pp. 387–413.

Wetherell, M. & Edley, N. (1999) Negotiating hegemonic masculinity: Imaginary positions and psycho-

discursive practices, Feminism & Psychology, 9(3), pp. 335–356.

Young, M. (1999) The social construction of tourist places, Australian Geographer, 30(3), pp. 373–389.
Zahra, A. (2011) Volunteer tourism as a life-changing experience, in: A. M. Benson (Ed.) Volunteer

Tourism: Theory Framework to Practical Applications, pp. 90–101 (Abingdon: Routledge).

Zahra, A. & McIntosh, A. J. (2007) Volunteer tourism: Evidence of cathartic tourist experiences, Tourism

Recreation Research, 32(1), pp. 115–119.

Notes on Contributor
´Emilie Crossley is a doctoral candidate in the School of Social Sciences at Cardiff
University, UK. Her research interests include psychosocial studies and the relation-
ships between volunteer tourism, poverty and youth travel.

Downloaded by [Leeds Metropolitan University] at 12:53 26 February 2012 