Neuropsychologia 42 (2004) 707–712

Rapid publication

Haptic face recognition and prosopagnosia

Andrea R. Kilgour a,∗

, Beatrice de Gelder b, Susan J. Lederman c
a Department of Clinical Health Psychology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Man., Canada R3E 3N4

b Cognitive Neuroscience Laboratory and FC Donders Center for Cognitive Brain Imaging, Tilburg University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands

c Department of Psychology, Queen’s University, Kingston, Ont., Canada K7L 3N6

Received 23 October 2002; received in revised form 28 January 2003; accepted 7 November 2003

Abstract

Cases of cross-modal inﬂuence have been observed since the beginning of psychological science. Yet some abilities like face recogni-
tion are traditionally only investigated in the visual domain. People with normal visual face-recognition capacities identify inverted faces
more poorly than upright faces. An abnormal pattern of performance with inverted faces by prosopagnosic individuals is characteristi-
cally interpreted as evidence for a deﬁcit in conﬁgural processing essential for normal face recognition. We investigated whether such
problems are unique to vision by examining face processing by hand in a prosopagnosic individual. We used the haptic equivalent of the
visual-inversion paradigm to investigate haptic face recognition. If face processing is speciﬁc to vision, our participant should not show
difﬁculty processing faces haptically and should perform with the same ease as normal controls. Instead, we show that a prosopagnosic
individual cannot haptically recognize faces. Moreover, he shows similar abnormal inversion effects by hand and eye. These results suggest
that face-processing deﬁcits can be found across different input modalities. Our ﬁndings also extend the notion of conﬁgural processing to
haptic face and object recognition.
© 2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Touch; Face-inversion effect; Multisensory

1. Introduction

Cases of cross-modal inﬂuence have been noted since
the beginning of psychological science. In 1839, Brewster
reported that observers who saw indented objects (e.g.,
engraved seals) through an optical device that inverted ap-
parent concavity, also experienced a haptic inversion effect
when they explored these objects simultaneously by touch
(Brewster, 1839). The corresponding question—is failure
to recognize what one sees also associated with a failure
to recognize what one touches—has rarely been raised.
In light of the ongoing debate on face speciﬁcity and the
importance of prosopagnosia to this discussion, it appears
highly relevant to ask whether a deﬁcit in face recogni-
tion by vision might be associated with a deﬁcit in face
recognition by touch (i.e., the haptic system).

Neurologically intact individuals process faces more by
their overall conﬁguration than by their local features (de
Gelder & Rouw, 2000a; Freire, Lee, & Symons, 2000).
To investigate this conﬁgural or holistic (Tanaka & Farah,
1993) recognition strategy, researchers have predominantly

∗

Corresponding author. Tel.: +1-204-787-5187; fax: +1-204-787-3755.
E-mail address: akilgour@exchange.hsc.mb.ca (A.R. Kilgour).

0028-3932/$ – see front matter © 2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2003.11.021

used the inversion effect, which is deﬁned as a decrease in
performance when recognizing inverted as oppose to up-
right faces (Valentine, 1988; Yin, 1969). Results that show
a relatively stronger inversion effect for faces than for other
mono-oriented objects have also been interpreted as evi-
dence that faces occupy a special status (Diamond & Carey,
1986) among visually apprehended objects. This weaker in-
version effect for non-face objects is presumably due to
recognition that is more strongly based on features and less
disrupted by inversion (Leder & Bruce, 2000).

for

faces

The inversion effect plays an important role in understand-
ing the visual deﬁcits of patients with a category-speciﬁc
recognition deﬁcit
(prosopagnosia). Some
prosopagnosic individuals do not demonstrate the typical
inversion effect, while others process inverted faces bet-
ter than upright faces (de Gelder & Rouw, 2000b; Farah,
Wilson, Drain, & Tanaka, 1998). The paradoxical inversion
effect (de Gelder & Rouw, 2000b) indicates that conﬁgural
processing is disrupted but not totally absent. When the need
for conﬁgural processing is removed (by inverting the face),
a feature-based analysis can be performed more easily.

Previous studies have been conﬁned to investigating face
recognition and its deﬁcits in the visual modality only. Yet
there is no intrinsic link between vision and face recognition

708

A.R. Kilgour et al. / Neuropsychologia 42 (2004) 707–712

or prosopagnosia. In fact, intact lower-level visual abili-
ties ﬁgure prominently among the diagnostic criteria for
prosopagnosia. And disorders of higher cognition can either
be limited to a single sensory modality or occur across more
than one modality (Feinberg, Gonzalez-Rothi, & Heilman,
1986), depending on whether the information is available to
more than one sensory system. Haptic face recognition has
recently been demonstrated in normal individuals (Kilgour
& Lederman, 2002); however, it has never been studied in
prosopagnosics.

Can a prosopagnosic individual recognize faces solely by
touch? We investigated this question using a haptic inversion
paradigm in which our prosopagnosic participant, LH, was
required to decide whether two faces (or two non-faces) were
the same or different from one another. To date, LH’s sense
of touch has never been assessed formally. We therefore also
evaluated his sensorimotor hand function.

2. Method

2.1. Participants

2.1.1. Patient

LH is a 51-year-old man who sustained bilateral
occipito-temporal, right frontal, and anterior temporal le-
sions subsequent to a motor vehicle accident in 1968. He
has been prosopagnosic since that time. Detailed neuropsy-
chological information can be obtained in other reports
(Etcoff, Freeman, & Cave, 1991; Farah, Levinson, & Klein,
1995; Farah, Tanaka, & Drain, 1995; Levine, Calvanio, &
Wolf, 1980).

2.1.2. Control group

We tested seven gender-, age- and education-matched,
neurologically intact participants as controls for LH (mean
age = 51.3 years, S.D. = 2.3). These participants com-
pleted four blocks (18 trials/block) with the same stimuli
that we presented to LH. The blocks consisted of faces and
teapots, each presented in upright and inverted positions.
Additionally, each control-group participant completed a vi-
sual face-recognition test (Benton, Sivan, Hamsher, Varney,
& Spreen, 1994), and was within normal limits.

All participants provided informed consent. The General
Ethics Research Board of Queen’s University has given ap-
proval to this study.

2.2. Materials and procedures

2.2.1. Assessment of sensorimotor hand function

LH was blindfolded in all conditions but for visual
face recognition. Four preliminary tests assessed LH’s
cutaneous thresholds, ﬁne motor dexterity and haptic
object-recognition capabilities. To determine LH’s tactile
sensitivity, we used von Frey hairs, consisting of nylon
monoﬁlaments of varying diameters, each calibrated to

bend with the application of a speciﬁc pressure. The stim-
uli were applied to the volar surface of the index ﬁnger
of each hand. LH was required to state whether or not he
detected the stimulus. A two-alternative (Y/N) adaptive
forced-choice procedure was used, with the pressure thresh-
old calculated as the average of the pressures corresponding
to ﬁve changes in response direction.

We measured LH’s tactile acuity using a two-point dis-
crimination test. We used a set of four octagonal-shaped
disks, each containing pairs of rounded metal prongs (1 mm
diameter) arranged around the disk circumference in order of
increasing inter-prong separation. The inter-prong distance
was measured from the center of each prong and ranged
from 1.2 to 9.0 mm in 0.2-mm steps. The prongs were ap-
plied perpendicularly to the long axis of the volar surface of
the index ﬁnger with just enough pressure for LH to deter-
mine that he was being stimulated. LH’s task was to decide
whether he felt one or two points. A two-alternative adaptive
forced-choice procedure was used, with the two-point touch
threshold calculated as the average of the inter-gap distances
corresponding to ﬁve changes in response direction.

LH’s ﬁne motor control was assessed using the Grooved
Pegboard Test (Lafayette Instrument, 1970), a task that re-
quires the participant to unimanually place 25 metal pegs
into holes as quickly as possible.

LH’s ability to haptically identify common objects was
tested using a set of 24 household objects presented to his
right (dominant) hand. He was required to name these ob-
jects as quickly and as accurately as possible.

2.2.2. Discrimination of face and non-face objects

We assessed LH’s haptic ability to discriminate whether
an object was an upright facemask, inverted facemask, up-
right teapot, or inverted teapot. All the faces and the teapots
were made of stoneware clay. Fig. 1 shows three pairs of
both the facemasks and the teapots. The clay facemasks were
models of 36 female volunteers (for details see Kilgour &
Lederman, 2002). We presented an exemplar from one of
these four categories of stimuli one at a time and asked LH
to identify the category to which it belonged. Each combi-
nation of object-type by orientation was presented on one
quarter of the 64 trials. LH was required to state whether or
not the object was an upright face.

2.2.3. Visual face-matching

We also tested LH’s ability to discriminate the face-
masks visually. This task was completed after the primary
face/nonface experiment. The methodology was identical to
that described below for the haptic task.

2.2.4. Haptic inversion paradigm

LH performed a 2AFC same/different face discrimina-
tion task. A “standard” facemask was presented to LH, who
manually explored it with no time restriction. The standard
face was then replaced with a second “comparison” face-
mask to explore. LH was required to state whether the two

A.R. Kilgour et al. / Neuropsychologia 42 (2004) 707–712

709

Fig. 1. Examples of the facemask and teapot stimuli used. The three rows on the left of the ﬁgure show three different pairs of faces selected to be
similar to one another. The three rows on the right are pairs of teapots designed to be similar to one another.

faces were the “same” or “different”. Thirty-six different
clay facemasks were paired together based on their being
both visually and tactually similar to one another. There
were a total of 108 trials consisting of different combina-
tions. One half of the trials were presented in an upright
orientation, and the other half were presented in an in-
verted orientation. Within each orientation, one half of the
trials consisted of the same face presented twice; during
the remaining trials, two different faces were presented.
The experiment was carried out in blocks, which alternated
between upright and inverted orientations. The ‘same’ and
‘different’ trials were presented in random order. As the
control condition, we tested LH’s ability to discriminate be-
tween teapots presented in both upright and inverted orien-
tations. The experimental design was identical to that of the
faces, with the exception that LH completed only 36 trials
in total, with 18 upright and 18 inverted pairs. Teapots were
chosen as control stimuli because they shared some critical
characteristics with faces (canonical orientation, common
conﬁguration, overall feature similarity, and exemplar-level
recognition).

3. Results

performance was slower than that of an age-matched nor-
mative sample. He performed the test with the dominant
and non-dominant hands in 217 and 236 s, respectively. The
data for the normative sample are 68 s (S.D. = 9.4) and
75 s (S.D. = 10.5), respectively. However, like normals,
LH made no errors.

LH successfully identiﬁed 19 of 24 (79%) common
household objects by touch alone. For two of the ﬁve
incorrectly named objects, LH described their function.
Moreover, the three remaining unidentiﬁed objects were
also identiﬁed relatively poorly by a neurologically in-
tact sample (Jessel, 1985): 52, 43, and 18% correct. Thus,
LH’s accuracy was comparable to that of the neurologi-
cally intact sample (overall 88% accuracy). However, he
was relatively impaired in terms of his response times
for naming the common objects: the mean response time
for the neurologically intact sample (n = 23) was 3.3 s
(S.D. = 1.9), whereas LH’s mean response time was
5.6 s (S.D. = 6.5). With these preliminary tests we con-
clude that the accuracy of LH’s haptic performance on
the face-processing task was not due to impairments in
sensory-motor hand function. His sensory thresholds fell
within normal
limits. However, we expected LH’s per-
formance with the faces to be slower than the control
group.

3.1. Assessment of sensorimotor hand function

3.2. Discrimination of face and non-face objects

LH’s sensory thresholds for tactile pressure sensitivity
and tactile spatial acuity were both within normal lim-
its (2.69 mg, and 3.2 mm, respectively). LH showed some
impairment on the Grooved Pegboard Test
(Lafayette
Instrument, 1970) of ﬁne motor control inasmuch as his

We tested LH’s ability to haptically discriminate upright
faces from a set of upright faces, inverted faces, upright
non-face objects (teapots), and inverted non-face objects
(teapots). Of 64 presentations, LH made one error when he
failed to identify an upright facemask as such.

710

A.R. Kilgour et al. / Neuropsychologia 42 (2004) 707–712

LH did not show any advantage when touching as opposed
to seeing upright facemasks: his ability to haptically dis-
criminate between two upright faces was at chance, as it was
when he looked at them.
The control group performed above chance in all four
conditions: upright facemasks (t(6) = 4.7, P = 0.005);
inverted facemasks (t(6) = 11.2, P < 0.0001); upright
teapots (t(6) = 12.1, P < 0.0001); inverted teapots (t(6) =
23.0, P < 0.0001). However, the control group showed
a different pattern of results than LH: they demonstrated
the inversion effect that is typically found with visual face
stimuli. That is, the control group performed better with up-
right faces than with inverted faces (t(6) = 2.6, P = 0.04).
However, there was no inversion effect with the teapots:
the accuracy of discriminating between teapots did not
differ with orientation, (t = −1.08, P = 0.32). We there-
fore note that the control group generally had no difﬁculty
discriminating between two upright faces, but their perfor-
mance deteriorated when the faces were inverted. LH, on
the other hand, was unable to discriminate between faces
above chance level when they were presented in the up-
right position; his performance was 1.5 standard deviations
below that of the mean of the control group. Furthermore,
contrary to the control group, LH improved slightly (i.e.,
relative to chance) when the faces were presented in the
inverted position, and his performance was closer to that of
the control group (z = −0.9). Although LH had difﬁculty
discriminating between upright teapots (z = −2.0, relative
to controls), he had no difﬁculty when they were inverted
and his performance was similar to that of the control group
(z = −0.2).

Fig. 2. Mean accuracy (%; panel A) and response time (s; panel B) as a
function of stimulus type by participant. Error bars represent S.E.M.

3.3. Haptic face-matching accuracy

3.4. Haptic face-matching response time

Fig. 2 (panel A) shows how accurate LH and the con-
trol group were when required to judge members of face
pairs presented in the same orientation as being the same
or different. Given that each trial produced a response that
was either correct or incorrect, the data were analyzed using
the binomial distribution. Analysis of variance could not be
used to compare means as our dichotomous data violated
the assumptions of that statistical technique. Of the four
conditions—upright faces, inverted faces, upright teapots,
and inverted teapots—LH’s ability to determine whether two
stimuli were the same or different was at chance level only
for the upright faces (P = 0.14). His performance with the
inverted faces was not statistically different from that with
the upright faces (P = 0.33), but it was better than chance
(P = 0.04). LH’s accuracy in discriminating between the
upright teapots was signiﬁcantly above chance (P = 0.04).
The inverted-teapot condition was statistically better than the
upright-face condition (P = 0.01) in addition to being sig-
niﬁcantly better than chance (P = 0.001). The superior per-
formance with inverted non-face objects is consistent with
earlier ﬁndings that LH was signiﬁcantly better when visu-
ally matching non-face objects (de Gelder & Rouw, 2000b).

LH’s deﬁcit in haptic-face processing is clearly apparent
in the data shown in Fig. 2 (panel B), which presents the
response times corresponding to the accuracy results (panel
A). Response time was calculated as the total time spent hap-
tically exploring the ﬁrst and second stimulus objects prior
to responding whether they were the same or different. We
entered these data into a 2× 2× 2 analysis of variance, with
Participant (LH versus controls) as the between-subjects
factor, and stimulus (faces versus teapots) and orientation
(upright versus inverted) as the within-subjects factors. Av-
eraged across participants and conditions, mean response
time for incorrect trials (29.8 s, S.D. = 16.2) and correct
trials (22.8 s, S.D. = 11.5) were not statistically different
from one another (t(31) = 1.91, P > 0.05); therefore, all
trials were analyzed. Although not statistically signiﬁcant,
there was a trend for incorrect trials to be slower than cor-
rect trials. Table 1 shows a breakdown of the response times
by condition and participant. There was a main effect of
Participant, F(1, 6) = 22.34, P = 0.003: overall, LH was
slower than the control group. There was also a main effect
of Stimulus, F(1, 6) = 18.04, P = 0.005: all participants
(LH and controls) were faster responding to teapots than

A.R. Kilgour et al. / Neuropsychologia 42 (2004) 707–712

711

Table 1
Mean response times (s) and standard deviations (in parentheses) for
correct and incorrect trials as a function of condition and participant

Condition

LH

Control group

Correct

Incorrect

Correct

Incorrect

Facemasks
Upright
Inverted

Teapots

40.5 (15.1)
40.7 (11.5)

43.8 (17.5)
46.8 (15.0)

19.77 (5.5)
19.34 (6.2)

22.22 (6.4)
19.35 (6.5)

Upright
Inverted

29.0 (7.5)
29.7 (6.9)

30.0 (3.8)
36.4 (23.4)a

19.1 (5.1)
16.7 (4.8)

20.5 (4.4)
20.7 (6.7)

a The large S.D. in this condition is attributable to the fact that only
two trials contributed to this mean, one of which was anomalously large
(52.9 s).

to faces. However, the stimulus × participant interaction
term was also statistically signiﬁcant, F(1, 6) = 14.05,
P = 0.01: LH was notably and statistically slower than the
control group when responding to the faces but statistically
equivalent when responding to the teapots. Although there
was no inversion effect apparent in the response–time data
for either LH or the control group, our data strongly sup-
port a face-speciﬁc processing deﬁcit in LH. One reviewer
suggested that LH might have been slower with faces than
teapots simply because he might have experienced more
hesitancy when touching faces as opposed to teapots. We
do not believe this to be the case for two reasons. First, it
is not clear why this would occur inasmuch as the faces
were inanimate masks, as opposed to real faces. Second, the
videotapes indicated that LH began exploring faces immedi-
ately and without interruption. It is difﬁcult to interpret these
response–time data further. Ideally, we would have found
a face-inversion effect for the control group consistent with
the accuracy data for the face-inversion effect. Similarly,
we would have found a paradoxical teapot-inversion effect
for LH corresponding to his accuracy data. The inherent
variability of response–time data and the limited number of
participants may have contributed to the absence of these
effects.

3.4.1. Visual face-matching

To ensure that LH was processing the facemasks as
faces per se, as opposed to non-face objects, we also tested
LH’s ability to perform the same/different task with the
facemasks visually. His visual accuracy was similar to his
haptic performance. When the faces were presented in the
upright orientation, his accuracy was only 55% (chance =
50%). He also performed at chance level when the faces
were inverted (61% correct). The control group was not
tested visually with the facemasks for two reasons. First,
they were tested with a standardized visual face recogni-
tion test (Benton et al., 1994). Second, previous research
(Kilgour & Lederman, 2002) on a visual match-to-sample
task with the same set of facemasks showed a ceiling
effect.

4. Discussion

LH’s visual prosopagnosia has been well documented.
To our knowledge, LH is also the ﬁrst documented case of
haptic prosopagnosia. Our data conﬁrm that LH’s ability
to identify faces haptically was as deﬁcient as it was visu-
ally; moreover, the patterns of matching impairment were
very similar. LH did not demonstrate the normal inversion
effect that is found with control participants either visu-
ally or haptically. Although he demonstrated some general
deﬁcits in terms speed of information processing, his ac-
curacy in matching two upright non-face objects was 72%
correct, and he did so as quickly as the control group. In
contrast, LH’s ability to match two upright faces was only
at chance level and he was signiﬁcantly slower than nor-
mal controls in doing so. Moreover, his ability to match
two inverted faces was somewhat better, being above chance
level.

Similar to previous ﬁndings in the visual domain of a
paradoxical inversion effect for objects (de Gelder & Rouw,
2000b), LH showed a haptic paradoxical inversion effect for
the teapots. We did not test his ability to match teapots visu-
ally for two reasons. First, logistical constraints limited the
amount of time available with LH. Second, as stated earlier,
de Gelder and Rouw (2000b) have documented this effect
with LH. They argued that conﬁgural processing mecha-
nisms are applied to non-face objects, as well as faces. They
interpreted their ﬁndings of a paradoxical object-inversion
effect as due to deﬁcient conﬁgural-processing mechanisms
that interfere with intact feature-based processing mecha-
nisms. Our data are consistent with this interpretation. This
also raises a question as to whether our ﬁndings reﬂect an
impairment of subordinate-level object recognition rather
than an impairment of face recognition. If this were the case,
however, LH would not have shown normal processing of
the inverted teapots, as they are also processed at the subor-
dinate level.

The existence of visual prosopagnosia is used as evidence
of a face-speciﬁc neural system that is independent of the
visual object-recognition system used to process non-face
objects (Farah, Levinson, et al., 1995). Observations of
prosopagnosics’ behavior and how far it deviates from
“normal” only allow us to indirectly infer an association be-
tween the brain damage and behavior. Our observations of
LH’s haptic behavior similarly allow us to speculate about
the neural substrates that underlie the ability to process faces
haptically. Several brain regions are possible candidates.

One possibility is that haptic presentation of faces may
activate neural substrates that are also involved in visual face
recognition. There has been considerable research impli-
cating the involvement of the fusiform gyrus (Haxby et al.,
1994; Kanwisher, McDermott, & Chun, 1997; Puce,
Allison, Gore, & McCarthy, 1995). As this area is included
in the areas that are damaged in LH, the fusiform gyrus
probably fails to provide proper functional support when
LH is attempting to recognize faces by touch.

712

A.R. Kilgour et al. / Neuropsychologia 42 (2004) 707–712

As there is additional evidence that other extrastriate vi-
sual regions are activated in haptic object recognition tasks
(Deibert, Kraut, Kremen, & Hart, 1999; James et al., 2002;
Ostry & Romo, 2001), these cortical areas may also be
involved in haptic face recognition. The regions tradition-
ally include areas within the parietal lobes (supramarginal
and angular gyri; Deibert et al., 1999). More recently, the
lateral occipital complex (LOC), which was thought to be
a visual area, has been implicated as part of a multimodal
object-related network involved in haptic object processing
(Amedi, Malach, Kendler, Peled, & Zohary, 2001; James
et al., 2002).

LH’s brain damage does not include sensorimotor areas
in the parietal lobes presently known to be involved in hap-
tic (real) object recognition (Deibert et al., 1999; Ostry &
Romo, 2001). This sparing is underscored by his normal
performance when recognizing teapots haptically. Another
possibility is that his intact LOC is recruited when both faces
and teapots are processed haptically. Recruitment of this area
may be sufﬁcient for processing teapots; however, haptic
face processing may require the additional involvement of
the fusiform gyrus, which is not functionally available to LH.
Another possibility is that haptic face-recognition impli-
cates the claustrum, which has been shown to be involved
in haptic-visual cross-modal transfer (Hadjikhani & Roland,
1998) and is intact in LH. Therefore, it is not unreasonable
to suggest that haptic information may be processed nor-
mally, relayed to the claustrum and from there to the infer-
otemporal cortex involved in visual face recognition. Again,
we propose that LH’s damaged inferotemporal cortex may
prevent apprehension of the haptic face representation.

Acknowledgements

This research was supported by a CIHR seed grant and
NSERC operating grant to SJL and by an NSERC-PGSB
award to ARK. We wish to thank Dr. D. Held and Monica
Hurt for their assistance. We also extend our thanks to LH
for his time. Correspondence should be addressed to Andrea
R. Kilgour: akilgour@hsc.mb.ca.

References

Amedi, A., Malach, R., Kendler, T., Peled, S., & Zohary, E. (2001).
Visuo-haptic object-related activation in the ventral visual pathway.
Nature Neuroscience, 4, 324–330.

Benton, A. L., Sivan, A. B., Hamsher, K. de S., Varney, N. R., & Spreen,
O. (1994). Contributions to neuropsychological assessment. A clinical
manual (2nd ed.). New York: Oxford University Press.

Brewster, D. (1839). Letters on Natural Magic. New York: Harper.
de Gelder, B., & Rouw, R. (2000a). Conﬁgural face processes in acquired
and developmental prosopagnosia: Evidence for two separate face
systems? Cognitive Neuroscience, 11, 3145–3150.

de Gelder, B., & Rouw, R. (2000b). Paradoxical conﬁguration effects for
faces and objects in prosopagnosia. Neuropsychologia, 38, 1271–1279.

Diamond, R., & Carey, S. (1986). Why faces are and are not special:
An effect of expertise. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
115, 107–117.

Deibert, E., Kraut, M., Kremen, S., & Hart Jr., J. (1999). Neural pathways

in tactile object recognition. Neurology, 52, 1413–1417.

Etcoff, N. L., Freeman, R., & Cave, K. R. (1991). Can we lose memory for
faces? Content speciﬁcity and awareness in a prosopagnosic. Journal
of Cognitive Neuroscience, 3, 25–41.

Farah, M. J., Levinson, K. L., & Klein, K. L. (1995a). Face perception and
within-category discrimination in prosopagnosia. Neuropsychologia,
33, 661–674.

Farah, M. J., Tanaka, J. W., & Drain, H. M. (1995b). What causes the
face inversion effect? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception & Performance, 21, 628–634.

Farah, M. J., Wilson, K. D., Drain, H. M., & Tanaka, J. W. (1998).
The inverted face inversion effect
in prosopagnosia: Evidence for
mandatory, face-speciﬁc perceptual mechanisms. Vision Research, 35,
2089–2093.

Feinberg, T. E., Gonzalez-Rothi, L. J., & Heilman, K. M. (1986).
Multimodal agnosia after unilateral left hemisphere lesion. Neurology,
36, 864–867.

Freire, A., Lee, K., & Symons, L. A. (2000). The face-inversion effect as
a deﬁcit in the encoding of conﬁgural information: Direct evidence.
Perception, 29, 159–170.

Hadjikhani, N., & Roland, P. E.

transfer of
information between the tactile and visual representations in the human
brain: A positron emission tomographic study. Journal of Neuroscience,
18, 1072–1084.

(1998). Cross-modal

Haxby, J. V., Horwitz, B., Ungerleider, L. G., Maisog, J. Ma., Pietrini,
P., & Grady, C. L. (1994). The functional organization of human
extrastriate cortex: A PET-rCBF study of selective attention to faces
and locations. The Journal of Neuroscience, 14, 6336–6353.

James, T. W. et al., (2002). Haptic study of three-dimensional objects
activates extrastriate visual areas. Neuropsychologia, 40, 1706–
1714.

Jessel, A. (1985). Cutaneous spatial resolution and haptic recognition of
common objects in elderly and young adults. Unpublished Honours
thesis, Queen’s University, Kingston, Ont., Canada.

Kanwisher, N., McDermott, J., & Chun, M. M. (1997). The fusiform
face area: A module in human extrastriate cortex specialized for face
perception. The Journal of Neuroscience, 17, 4302–4311.

Kilgour, A. R., & Lederman, S. J. (2002). Face recognition by hand.

Perception & Psychophysics, 64, 339–352.

Lafayette Instrument. (1970). Grooved Pegboard Test. Lafayette, IN:

author.

Leder, H., & Bruce, V. (2000). When inverted faces are recognized: The
role of conﬁgural information in face recognition. Quarterly Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Human Experimental Psychology, 53A,
513–536.

Levine, D. N., Calvanio, R., & Wolf, E. (1980). Disorders of visual
behavior following bilateral posterior cerebral lesions. Psychological
Research, 41, 217–234.

Ostry, D. J., & Romo, R. (2001). Tactile shape processing. Neuron, 31,

173–174.

Puce, A., Allison, T., Gore, J. C., & McCarthy, G. (1995). Face-sensitive
regions in human extrastriate cortex studied by functional MRI. Journal
of Neurophysiology, 74, 1192–1199.

Tanaka, J. W., & Farah, M. J.

(1993). Parts and wholes in face
recognition. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Experimental Psychology, 46A, 225–245.

Valentine, T. (1988). Upside-down faces: A review of the effects of
inversion upon face recognition. British Journal of Psychology, 79,
471–491.

Yin, R. K. (1969). Looking at upside-down faces. Journal of Experimental

Psychology, 81, 141–145.

