(cid:36)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:36)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:3)(cid:36)(cid:83)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:41)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:72)

Chantal Mouffe

New Literary History, Volume 43, Number 4, Autumn 2012, pp. 629-640
(Article)

(cid:51)(cid:88)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:55)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:45)(cid:82)(cid:75)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:43)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:78)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:56)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:51)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:86)
DOI: 10.1353/nlh.2012.0038

For additional information about this article
http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/nlh/summary/v043/43.4.mouffe.html

                                   Access provided by University of Virginia Libraries __ACCESS_STATEMENT__ (Viva) (7 Aug 2015 15:22 GMT)

An Agonistic Approach to the Future of Europe 

Chantal Mouffe

Today the european project is at a crossroads and unfortunately 

its survival cannot be taken for granted. Important decisions need 
to be made to secure the future of the European Union. It is too 
early to know which direction the EU will follow, but the consequences 
of those decisions will be far reaching. There is a general agreement 
among the advocates of the EU that more integration is necessary, but 
there  are  wide  disagreements  about  how  to  visualize  such  a  process. 
The  grounds  of  those  disagreements  are  multiple:  besides  being  the 
expression of political differences, they also entail philosophical diver-
gences that need to be brought to the fore to grasp what is at stake in 
the current debate.

An important divergence concerns the place that national identities 
should play in the future of the EU and in its modes of integration. In 
order to address this issue, it is necessary to have a proper understanding 
of the nature of collective identities and their resilience. Indeed, contrary 
to all those who expected the generalization of postconventional and 
postnational forms of identity, what we are today witnessing is a rein-
forcement of national identities. And when this is not the case, it is not 
the supranational level that is becoming more important, but rather the 
increasing role played by regional forms of identification. This indicates 
that, while the nation-states might be losing some of their power and 
prerogatives—and it must be said that even with respect to the extent of 
this loss there are very serious disagreements among theorists—this is not 
accompanied by a disappearance of national forms of identification. In 
fact, one could even argue that the opposite is happening: witness, for 
example, the increasing role they play in sport competitions. Hence the 
need to acknowledge that, at least for the foreseeable future, national 
forms of allegiance are unlikely to disappear, and it is futile to expect 
people to relinquish their national identity in favor of a postnational 
European  one.  To  try  to  impose  a  form  of  European  integration  in 
denial of this fact would be a very dangerous strategy that could only 
lead to negative reactions against the European project. 

My  concern,  as  a  political  theorist,  is  that  many  conceptions  of  a 
postnational Europe are informed by an individualistic and rationalistic 

New Literary History, 2012, 43: 629–640

630

new literary history

framework which blinds them to the process of the creation of collec-
tive identities. As a result, they are unable to acknowledge the nature 
and role of national forms of identification and thus fail to understand 
the depth of the challenge that European integration is facing. I would 
like to suggest a different approach and show how it allows us to better 
envisage a variety of issues raised by the future of European integration. 
My argument will be organized around a double question. First, I will 
put forward an alternative to the dominant rationalistic approach, one 
that  permits  us  to  apprehend  the  mode  of  constitution  of  collective 
identities. In the latter part of the essay, I examine the implications of 
this new approach for our understanding of the EU.

Collective Identities

Let us begin by delineating the framework which informs my analysis 
of collective identities. Taking my bearings from a theoretical perspec-
tive  which  asserts  the  relational  character  of  all  identity,  my  point  of 
departure is the notion of the “constitutive outside.” This term has been 
proposed by Henry Staten to refer to a number of themes developed by 
Derrida through notions like “supplement,” “trace,” and “différance.” 
The general aim is to highlight the fact that the creation of an identity 
always implies the establishment of a difference. Of course in Derrida 
this is done at a very abstract level to refer to any form of objectivity. 
I  have,  for  my  part,  been  interested  in  elucidating  the  consequences 
of such a thesis for the construction of collective identities. Once it is 
acknowledged that every identity is relational and that the affirmation 
of  a  difference  is  a  precondition  for  the  existence  of  any  identity,  we 
can  understand  why  collective  identities,  which  require  the  creation 
of a “we,” can only exist by the demarcation of a “they.” Indeed every 
form of collective identity means drawing a frontier between those who 
belong to the “we” and those who are outside it. This has very important 
implications in the field of politics, which is always concerned with col-
lective identities. I develop this idea later with respect to the EU, but 
it  is  important  first  to  examine  the  nature  of  the  bond  which  makes 
possible the “we” of collective identity. 

Since my reflections are informed by the antiessentialist approach to 
discourse  theory  that  I  originally  elaborated  in  Hegemony  and  Socialist 
Strategy: Towards a Radical Democratic Politics, written jointly with Ernesto 
Laclau,  it  is  clear  that  I  do  not  envisage  this  bond  as  something  that 
would stem from an already existing common essence to be found, for 
instance in a primordial national belonging.1 From the point of view of 

an agonistic approach

631

discourse theory, the problem is not that people need to acknowledge 
their true identity. Indeed one of the key theses of this approach is that 
there is no essential identity, but only forms of identification. This is, 
of course, also true as far as collective identities are concerned. While 
some  of  these  identities,  such  as  nation-based  ones,  might,  thanks  to 
long periods of historical sedimentation, appear to be natural, they are 
always contingent constructions, made possible through a variety of prac-
tices, discourses, and language games, and they can be transformed and 
rearticulated in different ways. This does not mean, however, as Jürgen 
Habermas argues in his polemic with Dieter Grimm, that such identities 
could be created through his paradigm of communicative rationality and 
a procedural method of legitimation.2 This is a rationalistic conception 
which leaves aside what I take to be a crucial element: the role played 
by the affective dimension in the process of identification.

To grasp what is at stake in this process, it is necessary to take account 
of the insights provided by psychoanalysis. Freud, for instance, brought to 
the fore the crucial role played by affective libidinal bonds in processes of 
collective identification. As he asserts in Group Psychology and the Analysis 
of  the  Ego, “a group is clearly held together by a power of some kind: 
and to what power could this feat be better ascribed than to Eros, which 
holds together everything in the world.”3 A collective identity, a “we,” 
is the result of a passionate affective investment which creates a strong 
identification between the members of a community. This dimension is 
overlooked by Habermas as well as by theorists of “second modernity” 
like  Ulrich  Beck  and  Anthony  Giddens,  who  believe  that  we  now  live 
in an age where so-called postconventional identities have eliminated 
what they see as “archaic passions,” and who call for the establishment 
of a “postnational” order ruled by cosmopolitan law and informed by 
communicative rationality.

There is another important aspect which is generally overlooked in 
the discussion among political theorists. Freud also highlights the double 
nature of the libidinal drives in his references to Eros and Thanatos. In 
Civilization and Its Discontents, for instance, he presents a view of society 
as perpetually threatened with disintegration because of the inclination 
to aggression present in human beings. According to Freud, “men are 
not  gentle  creatures  who  want  to  be  loved,  and  who  at  the  most  can 
defend themselves if they are attacked: they are, on the contrary, crea-
tures among whose instinctual endowments is to be reckoned a powerful 
share of aggressiveness.”4 It is necessary to acknowledge this aggressive 
instinct and to realize that, in order to check it, civilizations have used 
different  methods.  One  such  method  consists  of  fostering  communal 
bonds through the mobilization of the libidinal instinct of love, so as to 

632

new literary history

establish a strong identification between the members of a community 
in order to bind them into a collective identity. This affective dimension 
plays a very important role in the case of national forms of identification, 
which is why such forms cannot be easily discarded. They represent a 
crucial way of constituting collective identities by providing an important 
terrain of distinction between “we” and “they.”

A question that needs to be asked at this point concerns the possible 
types of relation that exist between “we” and “they.” Freud was well aware 
that this relation could be one of enmity. He declared, for instance, that 
“it is always possible to bind together a considerable amount of people 
in love, so long as there are other people left over to receive the mani-
festation  of  their  aggressiveness.”5  Once  this  has  been  acknowledged, 
the problem that we encounter is the following. If collective identities 
are  always  constructed  on  the  mode  of  we/they,  how  can  we  prevent 
this relation becoming one of enmity toward the “they”? This is one of 
the central issues I address in my work on democracy, where I examine 
the consequences, for democratic politics, of the ever-present possibil-
ity  of  the  emergence  of  antagonism.  In  The  Return  of  the  Political,  The 
Democratic Paradox, and On the Political, I develop my reflections on “the 
political,” understood as the antagonistic dimension which is inherent 
in all human societies.6 A crucial distinction needs to be made between 
“the political” and “politics”; “the political” refers to this dimension of 
antagonism, which can take many forms and emerge out of diverse social 
relations, but which can never be eradicated. Politics, on the other hand, 
refers to the ensemble of practices, discourses, and institutions which 
seek  to  establish  a  certain  order  and  to  organize  human  coexistence 
in conditions which are always potentially conflictual because they are 
affected by the dimension of “the political.” 

Put in a nutshell, the argument goes as follows: since collective identi-
ties are always based on a we/they distinction, one has to realize that they 
can, under certain conditions, take the form of a friend/enemy confron-
tation, that is, become the locus of an antagonism. As Carl Schmitt has 
pointed out, this happens when the “they” is perceived as putting into 
question the identity of the “we” and as threatening its existence. There 
is  no  way  in  which  such  a  possibility  could  ever  be  totally  eliminated 
without  also  requiring  the  disappearance  of  collective  identities.  One 
of the main tasks for democratic politics, then, consists in keeping this 
possibility at bay by providing the institutions, practices, and language 
games thanks to which antagonism can, so to speak, be sublimated and 
transformed into “agonism.” What I mean by “agonism” is a relationship 
of “adversaries.” Contrary to the antagonistic friend/enemy relation in 
which  there  is  no  shared  symbolic  terrain  and  in  which  the  different 

an agonistic approach

633

sides  aim  at  eliminating  their  opponent,  in  an  agonistic  relation  the 
adversaries share a common symbolic space and they recognize, at least 
to some degree, the legitimacy of the claims of their opponents. A sort 
of “conflictual consensus” exists between the various groups. They agree 
about the ethical principles which should inform their political associa-
tion, but they disagree about their interpretation. 

I have so far elaborated this agonistic model of democracy with refer-
ence to politics within the nation-state; at that level, the relationship of 
we/they is envisaged in terms of conflicting hegemonic political projects. 
Here I would like to scrutinize its relevance for European integration. 
How could we think of an agonistic model for Europe? What would an 
agonistic Europe look like? In fact the creation of the EU could be seen 
as a very good example of keeping antagonism at bay by constructing 
an agonistic configuration. Let us remember the intentions of people 
like  Jean  Monnet  and  Robert  Schuman,  who  were,  after  the  Second 
World War, among the main advocates of the European project. Their 
aim  was  to  create  institutions  which  would  impede  the  emergence  of 
another manifestation of antagonism between France and Germany. They 
understood that this could only be done by creating a “we” that would 
incorporate both countries, jointly with others, in a common project. 
The first institutional form of the “we” was of an economic nature, the 
European Coal and Steel Community, and the other forms of integra-
tion were developed later. 

Of course Monnet and Schuman also had political as well as cultural 
concerns from the start. They did not, however, envisage the disappear-
ance of national identities and the erasure of their different and often 
conflicting interests. Rather, they hoped that those involved in the Euro-
pean Community would, through their participation in shared projects, 
create a bond rendering it less likely that they would again treat each 
other as enemies. This is exactly what I have in mind when I speak of 
keeping antagonism at bay by establishing institutions allowing conflict 
to take an agonistic form. There is no doubt that, if we look at it from 
such  a  viewpoint,  the  European  project  has,  so  far,  been  successful, 
though it could of course always unravel.

European Integration

When we envisage the future of Europe from this agonistic standpoint, 
what are the lessons to be drawn for the way in which the process of 
European integration should proceed? Which form of integration would 
allow Europe to establish a form of agonistic relation characterized by a 

634

new literary history

“conflicting consensus” between its different nations? Such an agonistic 
Europe would clearly have to acknowledge the multiplicity and diversity 
of collective identities existing in its midst and to give due weight to their 
affective dimension. Its aim should be to create a bond among different 
nations, while nonetheless respecting their differences. The challenge 
of  European  integration  resides  in  combining  unity  and  diversity,  in 
creating a form of commonality that leaves room for heterogeneity. This 
is why it is necessary, I submit, to relinquish all attempts to construct a 
homogeneous postnational “we” in which the diverse forms of national 
“we”  would  be  overcome.  The  negation  of  the  national  “we,”  or  the 
fear that such a negation could happen, is responsible for much of the 
resistance to European integration, and could in fact lead to the emer-
gence of multiple forms of antagonism between the different nations 
constitutive of the European Union.

In thinking about the mode of integration best suited for an agonistic 
Europe, I have found the reflections of the French legal theorist Olivier 
Beaud particularly useful.7 Beaud proposes to rediscover the notion of a 
“federal union,” according to which federalism consists of a specific form 
of union among several political entities. The aim of such a federation 
is for states to constitute jointly a new political entity and to maintain, at 
the same time, their own political existence as states. While acknowledg-
ing the need for some form of European identity, and while making a 
distinction between insiders and outsiders (a requisite of any form of 
federal union, which always refers to a spatial entity with determinate 
borders), a federal union also conceives of the diversity of the component 
states as something which is valued and must be maintained. It thus takes 
account of the constitutive duality of a Europe “united in its diversity” 
and would not aim at eradicating national differences.

In fact, this way of envisaging a federal union serves as a good argu-
ment in its favor for all those who remain attached to the existence of 
nation-states. Under conditions of globalization, there is no doubt that 
the different European states are no longer in the condition of being able 
to face alone the numerous challenges with which they are confronted. 
Hence the need to create wider forms of union. Conceived as a “federal 
union,” the EU could be the solution to this challenge. Instead of being 
seen as threatening the interests of nation-states, it would provide the 
conditions for their survival in a globalized world. 

Which democracy?

Another  question  concerns  the  issue  of  democracy.  At  what  level 
would democracy be exercised in such a model of integration? Let us 

an agonistic approach

635

first  recall  the  view  against  which  I  am  arguing,  according  to  which 
the EU should aim at creating, at the European level, a homogeneous 
demos which would be the bearer of sovereignty and the central place 
where democracy is to be exercised. This view, defended by some supra-
nationalists,  is  predicated  on  the  transfer  of  peoples’  allegiance  from 
their own nation-states to the EU. If one rejects such a view, this also 
means that democracy at the European level cannot be conceived as a 
mode of representative democracy writ large. 

According to the felicitous expression proposed by Kalypso Nicolaïdis, 
we should rather envisage the EU on the model of a “demoi-cracy,” a 
union of states and peoples which acknowledges the plurality and per-
manence of the different demoi which constitute its parts. It is a union 
which respects the national identity of its members as expressed in their 
political and constitutional structures. The exercise of democracy at the 
level of the different nation-states, then, would not be relinquished and 
replaced by a new set of institutions corresponding to a homogeneous 
European demos. Nicolaïdis stresses three important shifts with respect 
to the prevalent model of European integration: “The first one: from 
a common identity towards shared identities; the second one: from a 
community  of  identity  towards  a  community  of  projects;  and  finally: 
from  a  multilevel  conception  of  governance  towards  multi-centered 
forms of governance.”8

Nicolaïdis’s view dovetails in several respects with the agonistic con-
ception  that  I  am  trying  to  elaborate,  taking  account  of  the  need  to 
acknowledge  and  preserve  the  plurality  of  spaces  for  the  exercise  of 
democracy and the need to constantly balance two levels of democracy, 
the  European  and  the  national,  while  also  recognizing  the  tensions 
existing between them. But we should go even further and introduce 
a third element, the regional one, because regional forms of indenti-
fication also can play an important role, as can be seen for instance in 
Spain and in Italy.

This  is  where  some  of  the  views  about  federalism  elaborated  by 
Massimo Cacciari are particularly relevant, although his starting point 
is  different.9  Cacciari  sees  the  modern  state  as  being  torn  apart  as  a 
consequence of two big movements: one micronational and the second 
supranational. The modern state is threatened from the inside by the 
pressure of regionalist movements and from the outside by the growth 
of  supranational  powers  and  institutions  and  the  increasing  power  of 
world finance and transnational corporations. The answer to such a situ-
ation is what Cacciari calls “federalism from the bottom” and opposes 
“federalism from the top.” This federalism from the bottom needs to 
recognize the specific identity of different regions and different cities, 
not in order to isolate them or separate them from each other, but on 

636

new literary history

the contrary, in order to establish the conditions of an autonomy that is 
conceived and organized on the basis of multiple relations of exchange 
between these regions and cities. Despite the fact that he attributes a 
lesser role to the nation-state than I do, some of Cacciari’s ideas could 
be integrated into my agonistic model. What he advocates is a type of 
federal union in which the component units are not limited to nation-
states and in which different regions would also play an important role. 
I find particularly interesting his claim that such a union would allow for 
autonomy to be exercised in systems which are integrated in a conflic-
tive mode and that it would thus combine solidarity and competition. 
This is in my view a crucial insight for the elaboration of an agonistic 
model for Europe.

Incorporating Cacciari’s insights, we could imagine an EU that would 
not only be a “demoi-cracy” composed of nation-states, but that would 
include a multiplicity of different kind of demoi, where democracy could 
be exercised at different levels and in a multiplicity of ways. Such a view 
articulates  and  takes  account  of  different  forms  of  collective  identity, 
including not only national but also regional ones. It also acknowledges 
the increasing importance of cities and their new modes of cooperation 
through  various  international  networks.  Cacciari  also  points  out  the 
possibility of organizing regional units on a transnational level in many 
places where cultural or economic forms of unity already exist, as is the 
case, for instance, on the borders between France and Spain, France and 
Italy, or Austria and Italy. This way of visualizing the EU would allow for 
an effective pluralism of democratic units and allow us to envisage a real 
“agonistic” mode of relation between them. While nations are important, 
it is necessary to acknowledge other significant forms of allegiance, as 
well as spaces for democratic participation. The EU could, in this way, 
give people the possibility of participating in a variety of demoi where 
they can exercise their democratic rights, without having to discard their 
national and regional allegiances.

With  respect  to  democracy,  another  issue  needs  to  be  emphasized. 
Most of the theorists who are trying to elaborate models for enhancing 
democracy in the EU—not only those who advocate the creation of a 
supranational  state—are  working  within  the  paradigm  of  deliberative 
democracy. They assert, albeit in different ways, that the way to solve the 
problem of a “democratic deficit” and to ground the EU’s democratic 
legitimacy is to establish an European public sphere in which citizens 
could, thanks to a variety of deliberative procedures, become informed 
and exchange opinions so as to develop a public spirit. They believe that 
the key issues are those concerning the creation of informed arenas of 
dialogue in which people can deliberate and reach an agreement about 

an agonistic approach

637

the public good. To be sure, there are many varieties of such delibera-
tive proposals with regard to the EU; however, they all share the idea 
that through informed participation and discussion citizens will reach 
agreement about the best policies. 

An important part of my work in the field of political theory has been 
dedicated to criticizing the deliberative democracy model for its rational-
ist and individualistic framework. For instance, in The Democratic Paradox, 
examining its two main versions, the Rawlsian and the Habermasian, I 
argue that they are unable to acknowledge the antagonistic dimension 
of “the political.”10 Both Rawls and Habermas assert, albeit in different 
ways, that the aim of democracy is to establish a rational agreement in 
the public sphere. Their theories differ with respect to the procedures 
of deliberation which are needed to reach such a goal, but their objec-
tive is the same: to reach a consensus on the “common good” without 
excluding anyone. Although they claim to be pluralist, it is clear that 
theirs is a pluralism whose legitimacy is only recognized in the private 
sphere and has no constitutive place in the public domain. Both scholars 
are adamant that democratic politics requires the elimination of passions 
from the public sphere, leaving them unable to adequately apprehend 
the process by which political identities are created. 

These  shortcomings  of  the  deliberative  model  are  inevitably  repro-
duced in the diverse attempts to use it to enhance democracy in the EU. 
This is why I want to stress that it is important, when we envisage the 
different possible forms of democratic participation to be established at 
a variety of levels in the European demoi-cracy, to conceive such forms 
according to an adversarial and agonistic model rather than a delibera-
tive one. Once the crucial role played by affects and passions in politics 
is acknowledged, the central question becomes that of finding ways to 
mobilize them towards democratic ends. There needs to be a politiciza-
tion of the European project that would allow the citizens of the various 
demoi to engage in confrontation and to articulate adversarial perspec-
tives and visions on the future of the EU and its place in the world.

In the present conjuncture, the need for a democratic confrontation 
about the nature of the EU is absolutely vital. Indeed many people on 
the left are beginning to doubt the possibility of an alternative to the 
neoliberal model which has been the driving force in the construction 
of  the  EU.  The  EU  is  increasingly  perceived  as  being  an  intrinsically 
neoliberal  project  that  cannot  be  reformed.  Because  it  appears  futile 
to try to transform its institutions, the only solution that remains is to 
exit. Such a pessimistic view is, no doubt, the result of the way in which 
all attempts to challenge the prevalent neoliberal rules are presented 
as anti-European attacks on the very existence of the Union. Without 

638

new literary history

the possibility of making legitimate criticisms of the current neoliberal 
hegemony,  it  is  not  surprising  that  a  growing  number  of  people  are 
turning to Euroscepticism, fearing that more European integration can 
only mean a reinforcement of a neoliberal Europe.  

Such a position could lead to the collapse of the European project, 
and it is urgent, therefore, to think about how to create the conditions 
for democratic contestation within the EU. In this respect, interesting 
insights are provided by James Tully, who argues in favor of an open-
ended  model  of  democracy,  which,  contrary  to  the  deliberative  one, 
acknowledges  a  multiplicity  of  actors  and  spaces  of  disputation,  and 
where  procedures  will  not  have  a  metademocratic  status  but  where  it 
would also be possible to contest the procedures themselves.11 Tully also 
insists on the need to acknowledge the existence of two different forms 
of democratic negotiation. The first involves challenging and modify-
ing prevailing norms, while in the second diverse members share the 
same norms but act differently in accordance with them. This second 
form—which points to the existence of a diversity of practices within a 
field of shared rules—has not received enough attention, Tully argues, 
because  political  theorists  tend  to  believe  that  norms  can  be  applied 
and  followed  in  only  one  right  way.  I  agree  with  the  importance  of 
putting into question this rationalist postulate, so as to make room for 
a  multiplicity  of  legitimate  interpretations  of  shared  ethico-political 
principles. This is precisely what I mean by the notion of a “conflictual 
consensus”  as  providing  the  framework  for  an  agonistic  debate  in  a 
pluralist  democratic  society.  This  same  notion  is  also  relevant  for  the 
EU when we envisage the kind of common bond which is necessary to 
link together its different demoi. 

Europe in a Multipolar World

A final issue concerns the role that the EU should play in the global 
context. Here again my target is Habermas. Contrary to what he argues, I 
do not think we should see the EU as the vanguard in the establishment 
of  a  cosmopolitan  order  that  is  based  on  the  universalizing  of  liberal 
democracy.12 I disagree with the theoretical premises that inform such a 
vision. One of the main problems with the cosmopolitan approach is that 
it postulates a world beyond hegemony and beyond sovereignty, therefore 
negating the very dimension of “the political.” Moreover it is predicated 
on the universalization of the Western model and thus does not make 
room for pluralism. If, as I am arguing, the world should be conceived 
as a pluriverse, not a universe, this means recognizing that the Western 

an agonistic approach

639

form of liberal democracy is not the only way in which the democratic 
ideal can be institutionalized. Given that the Western model represents 
only one possible political form of life among others, we should accept 
that democracy can find different forms of inscription according to a 
variety  of  contexts.  This  is  where  the  idea  of  “multipolarity”  becomes 
relevant as an alternative to cosmopolitanism.

  According  to  the  theoretical  approach  that  I  am  defending,  the 
challenge  that  we  are  facing  is  the  following:  if  we  acknowledge  that 
every order is an hegemonic order and that there is no possible world 
beyond hegemony, but we also acknowledge the negative consequences 
of a unipolar world organized around the hegemony of a central power 
and  the  need  for  pluralism,  where  do  we  turn?  My  suggestion  is  that 
the only solution lies in the pluralization of hegemonies. This is why, 
against those cosmopolitans who argue for the unification of the world 
around  a  single  model,  and  for  the  creation  of  a  global,  all  inclusive 
“we” without a corresponding “they,” a consistency that would coincide 
with humanity as such, the model that I advocate is a multipolar order. A 
multipolar world would acknowledge diversity and heterogeneity without 
attempting to overcome them through the imposition of a supposedly 
superior and more advanced form of political organization.

 To be sure, this multipolar structure would not eliminate conflicts, 
but these conflicts are less likely to take an antagonistic form than in a 
world in which a single hegemonic power forces other nations to adopt 
its model under the pretense of universality. When legitimate political 
channels  do  not  exist  for  the  expression  of  conflicts  and  grievances, 
these conflicts turn into antagonisms and tend to express themselves in 
extreme forms. The best way to avoid this antagonistic turn is to create 
the conditions that make it possible for conflicts to manifest themselves 
in the agonistic mode. The existence of a plurality of hegemonic centers 
could  create  the  conditions  for  the  establishment  of  various  regional 
poles, whose specific concerns and traditions would be seen as valuable 
and where different forms of democracy could eventually be established. 
Instead of taking the role of the vanguard in the unification of the world, 
the EU should be visualized as one important region in this multipolar 
world. A pole that will hopefully play a positive role in the fostering of 
agonistic pluralism in the world—but this, of course, depends on the 
kind of European Union that its politicians and citizens will construct.

University of Westminster

640

new literary history

NOTES

Freud,  Civilization  and  its  Discontents,  Standard  edition,  vol.  21  (London:  Vintage, 

Freud, Civilization, 114.

Jürgen Habermas, The Inclusion of the Other: Studies in Political Theory (Cambridge, MA: 

Sigmund Freud, Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego, Standard edition, vol. 18 

1  Ernesto Laclau and Chantal Mouffe, Hegemony and Socialist Strategy: Towards a Radical 
Democatic Politics (London: Verso, 2001).
2 
MIT Press, 1998), 155–64.
3 
(London: Vintage, 2001), 92.
4 
2001), 111.
5 
6  Chantal Mouffe, The Return of the Political (London: Verso, 1993); The Democratic Para-
dox, (London: Verso, 2000); On the Political (London: Routledge, 2005).
7  Olivier Beaud, “La question de l’homogeneité dans une fédération,” Lignes 13 (2004): 
114. Those ideas are developed in Olivier Beaud, Théorie de la Féderátion (Paris: PUF, 2007).
8  Kalypso Nicolaïdis, “Demos et Demoï: Fonder la constitution,” Lignes 13 (2004): 98–99.
9 
See a presentation of his ideas in “The Philosopher Politician of Venice,” Soundings 
17 (2001): 25–34.
10  Mouffe, Democratic Paradox, chapter 4.
11  James Tully, “A New Kind of Europe? Democratic Integration in the European Union,” 
Critical Review of International and Political Philosophy 10, no. 1 (2007): 71–86.
12  See, for instance, Habermas, The Divided West, trans. Ciaran Cronin (Cambridge: Polity, 
2006), 39–48.

