Vol  18  2014

ANALYSIS

275

EdinLR Vol 18 pp 275-279
DOI:  10.3366/elr.2014.0212

Piercing the Corporate Veil:  Prest v Petrodel

Resources Ltd

The  Supreme Court in Prest v  Petrodel Resources Ltd'  has taken  the opportunity  to
restrict the occasions  when the corporate  veil may be lifted.

A.  THE FACTS

A wealthy Nigerian oil-trader, Michael Prest,2  divorced his wife, Yasmin, but refused
to pay  any of the  lump  sum  or maintenance  payments  to which  she was  entitled  in
terms of their divorce.  In the words of Lord Sumption,  "the husband's  conduct of the
proceedings has been characterised by persistent obstruction, obfuscation  and deceit,
and  a contumelious  refusal to comply with rules of court and specific orders."  Prest
was formerly  an executive with the colourful  oil trader, Marc  Rich, who  died in 2013,
having spent many years  on the  run from the American  courts for sanctions-busting
and  tax evasion.
When the enforcement proceedings relating to the divorce settlement were being
heard  in  the  lower courts,  Moylan  J used  his  powers  under  sections  23-25  of the
Matrimonial  Causes  Act  1973 to order  that Prest  should procure  the conveyance  of
the  matrimonial home  to his  ex-wife  and make  various  other payments.  In addition
Moylan  J  ordered  the  transfer  of seven  UK  properties,  legally  owned  by  British
companies  that  Prest  controlled,  to  Prest's  ex-wife  in  partial  satisfaction  of a  lump
sum  order. The judge  directed those  companies to execute  such  documents as would
give  effect  to the  transfer  of the  properties  to  her. The transfer  of the  matrimonial
home  took place  but the  decision  relating to  the  seven  properties  was  appealed  by
the companies  that Prest controlled. They sought to set aside the judge's order on the
grounds  that the judge had no jurisdiction  to make  such  an  order. The decision was
appealed to the Supreme  Court.

All  the Justices of the Supreme  Court clearly thought that Prest should be  made  to
pay the  sums  due under  the divorce  settlement and  Lord Sumption  found  a way  to

B.  THE DECISION

1  [2013]  UKSC  34, [2013]  2 AC 415.
2  Details  of  Prest s  background  and  his  business  career, 

in  his  own  words,  may  be  found
at  http://powerlistfoundation.org.uk/about-us/trustees/item/38-michael-j-prest. Another  view  of  his
business activities  (and indeed Marc Rich's)  maybe found at http://www.businessweek.com/stories/2005-
07-17/the-rich-boys.

3  Prest at para  4.

276

THE  EDINBURGH  LAW  REVIEW

Vol 18  2014

do so.  The  companies  that Prest controlled,  and which  owned the  seven properties,
had been  in  existence  for  some years  and  in  some  cases  had  owned  the properties
before  Prest's  marriage. There was no suggestion that the companies  had been set up
as  a  method of avoiding any legal obligations  or that the companies  were  being run
dishonestly. While  Lord  Sumption  may have  wished  to pierce  their  corporate  veils
to make  the companies  transfer  the properties he felt unable to  do so because  there
had been  no  attempt to  hide  anything.  There  was  no  evidence  that  the  companies
were deliberately  set up to evade an obligation or frustrate the operation of law, these
grounds being, in his view, the occasions  when the veil should be pierced.4

Having  failed  in this  respect,  Lord  Sumption  turned  to  section  24  (1)(a)  of the
Matrimonial  Causes Act  1973 which  empowers  a judge  to  make  an  order requiring
one  party  to  the  marriage  to  transfer  to  the  other  "property  to  which  the  first-
mentioned party  is  entitled, either  in possession  or reversion".  Moylan  J had  made
an  order  under  that  section  requiring  the  companies  to  transfer  the  properties  on
the grounds that, since Prest had the effective control of the companies,  he was in the
same position as he would have been if he were the beneficiary of a bare trust or if the
companies were his nominees.'  The effect of Moylan J's assumption was to disregard
the corporate  veil  in the context  of matrimonial  disputes  and specifically when  one
party had control of a company. Lord Sumption  indicated that there were  no special
virtues  applicable  to  the  Matrimonial  Causes  Act  1973 which  allowed company law
matters in matrimonial disputes to be treated any differently from any other company
law matters.'  Merely because  someone  has control of a company does not mean that
that person  is  the  beneficial  owner  of the  company's  assets.'  If the  controller  of a
company were  deemed  to be  the  beneficial  owner  of his  company's  assets it  could
mean that  an honest  controller, who  had respected  the  separate  legal personality of
the company, could find himself the beneficial owner of his company's assets when he
had no intention  of being in that position. 8
Moylan J may have  erred on the  corporate  veil point, but an  order under  section
24(l)(a) was  still possible  if Prest could be found to be "entitled, either in possession
or reversion"  to  the  properties.  Lord  Sumption  held that  the  properties  owned by
the companies were indeed owned beneficially by Prest by means of a resulting trust,
rather than by piercing the corporate  veil.
A  resulting trust  is  a  specific  term  of English  law. "Resulting"  in this  context  is
from the  Latin resultare, to  spring back, meaning  that under  certain circumstances
a transfer  may not be  seen  as final  and,  despite  the transferee's  apparent ownership
of the  asset,  the ownership  "springs  back" to  the transferor.  A  common  example  is
when  an  asset  is transferred  to another  person  or company for a particular  purpose
but  that  purpose  is  not  the  one  for which  that the  asset  is  used  or the  purpose  is
impossible to fulfil.  The transferee  only  holds  the asset  as  a resulting trustee for the
transferor who  is the  beneficial  owner  of the  asset  and  in these  circumstances  the

4  Prest at para 36.
5  Para 39.
6  Para 40.
7  Para 41.
8  Para 42.

Vol  18  2014

ANALYSIS

277

asset  "springs  back"  to the  transferor.9  Megarry  VC  stated  in Re  Sick  and Funeral
Society  of St John's Sunday  School, Golcar'0  that  "a  resulting trust  is  essentially  a
property concept;  any property that  a  man  does  not  effectually  dispose  of remains
his  own".  The  important  word  is  "effectually".  Although  Prest  had  transferred  the
properties  to  the various  companies,  sometimes  only  for  £1,  given  the  smallness  of
the consideration,  the reluctance of the companies to comply with any of the previous
court orders and, in particular, the refusal to give details of the completion  statements
or  loan  agreements  for the  purchases  of  the  various  properties,  it  was  acceptable
to  draw the  adverse  inference  that the  companies  were  acting  as  resulting  trustees
for  Prest and that  Prest retained the beneficial  ownership  of the properties.  In that
case  the  properties  constituted  assets  that  "sprang back"  to  him personally. As  the
properties were his, even if the titles to the properties were in the companies' hands,
the companies  could be  required to transfer the properties  to his wife.  The essential
point was  not who  controlled  the  companies  but  for whose  benefit  the  companies
owned the properties.

In the process  of arriving at  this  solution to  Mrs Prest's  difficulties,  the  Supreme
Court  thoroughly  examined  the  concept  of  piercing  of  the  corporate  veil.  Lord
Sumption  and  Lord  Neuberger  set  out  for  the  future  the  law  on  corporate  veil-
piercing and have restricted it only to those  occasions when  a company is being used
to evade a legal obligation or to frustrate the operation  of law. Other recent corporate
veil  cases  such  as  VTB  Capital plc v  Nutritek International Corpo"  and Chandler
v  Cape plc,'2  show  a  similar  reluctance  to  pierce  the  veil."  Lord  Neuberger's
judgement in Prest also  looked at piercing  the veil  in the  Commonwealth  and in the
USA. 14  Given  the  absence  of consensus,  he  decided  that it was  almost  impossible
to  specify  exactly  when  the  corporate  veil  should  be  pierced  and  that  perhaps
the whole  concept  should be  abandoned. 1  However,  given  the  weight of previous
cases,  he was  persuaded  that  Lord  Sumption's  limited  formula  of piercing  the  veil
only  where  there  was  evasion  of a  legal  obligation  or  frustration  of the  operation

9  Barclays Bank Ltd v  Quistclose Investments Ltd [1970]  AC 567,  Twinsectra Ltd v  Yardley [2002]  UKHL
12,  [2002] 2 AC  164.
10  [1972]  2 All  ER 439.
11  [2013]  UKSC 5,  [2013]  2 WLR 398.
12  [2012]1  WLR 3111.
13  It  is  interesting,  however,  that  in the  recent  case of Cramaso LLP  v Viscount Reidhaven s  Trustees
[2014]  UKSC  9, the trustees  tried to maintain  that they could  not be held liable  for a statement made
about  the benefits  of a lease  of a grouse  moor, which turned out to be inaccurate, when  the person  to
whom the statement was made was not the corporate body that ultimately leased the moor. The person
to whom  the statement was  made used a limited  liability partnership  (of which he was  a member)  to
take a lease  of  the moor. The  Supreme Court did  not accept  the trustees'  view, and  held that it was
foreseeable  that the individual to whom the statement was  made might  not necessarily choose  to take
a lease of the moor  in his own  name but might  instead use a corporate body in whose name  the lease
ultimately  might  be  taken.  Most  cases  of veil-piercing  are  to make  a  director  or  member liable  for
something that he is trying to avoid by using a corporate body. Here the veil is being "parted" (for want
of a better word) to allow a benefit to a member to be  attributed to his limited liability partnership.

14  Prest at paras  75-78 per Lord Neuberger.
15  Para 79.

278

THE  EDINBURGH  LAW  REVIEW

Vol 18  2014

of  the  law  was  acceptable16  except  where  Parliament  specifically  allowed  for  it
in statute. 17

So what is meant by evasion  of a legal obligation  or frustration  of the operation  of
law? A good example in Lord Sumption's eyes' 8  was Gilford Motor Co Ltd v  Horne 9
where  Horne  unsuccessfully  tried  to  avoid  a  restrictive  covenant,  preventing  him
soliciting  former  clients,  by  using  a  company  owned  by  his  wife  and  an  employee
to solicit them instead."

By contrast, many previous cases, in Lord Sumption's view, do not strictly speaking
involve  veil-piercing  but  are  either  examples  of  concealment  or  occasions  when
some  other  method  would  achieve  the  proper  result.  For example,  in  Trustor AB
v  Smallbone2 '  a  director  concealed  misappropriated  assets  in  a  company resulting
in  the  company's  veil  being  pierced  and  the  funds  returned  to  the  true  owners.
Lord  Sumption  said  that  this  case,  albeit  coming  to  an  acceptable  result,  was  not
a case  where  veil-piercing  should  have  taken  place.  It was  more  that  the company
was  concealing  the  funds  as  agent  or  nominee  for the  director  and  the  company
was  a knowing recipient  of the funds. 22  As  an example  of an  alternate remedy being
available, where  there  is  fraud the presence  of an  intermediary company  ostensibly
committing the fraud is irrelevant since fraud never leaves the fraudster. Lord Rodger
in  Standard Chartered Bank  v  Pakistan National Shipping Corporation (No  2)23
pithily stated it thus:  culpa tenet suos auctores.

Overall, to use  Lord Sumption's words 25
There is a limited principle of English law which applies when a person is under an  existing
legal  obligation or liability or subject to an  existing  legal restriction which  he deliberately
evades or whose  enforcement  he deliberately  frustrates  by interposing  a company  under
his control.  The  court may  then  pierce  the corporate  veil  for  the purpose,  and  only  for
the purpose, of depriving  the company or  its controller of the advantage  that they would
otherwise  have  obtained  by  the  company's  separate  legal  personality.  The  principle  is
properly described as  a limited one, because in almost every  case where the test is satisfied,
the facts will in practice disclose a legal relationship between the company and its controller
which will make it unnecessary to pierce the corporate veil. Like Munby J in Ben Hashem,2 6

16  Para 81.
17  For example, Insolvency Act  1986 s 43 and Matrimonial  Causes Act  1973 s 37.
18  Prest at  para 29.  Ironically, Lord  Neuberger  does  not appear  to share  Lord  Sumptions view  of this
case, see paras  69-72 where  Lord Neuberger  seems  to suggest  that the case could have been  decided
by reference  to agency rather than piercing  the veil.

19  [1933]  Ch 935.
20  Another  example,  quoted by Lord  Sumption with approval, can  be  found in Jones v  Lipman [1962]  1

21  [2001]  3 All ER 987.
22  In a sense,  it makes  no difference whether  the funds were being  hidden in a company or  in any other

WLR  832.

agents bank  account: whoever had the funds was required  to return the funds  to the true owner.

23  [2002]  3 WLR  1547.
24  This succinct phrase is not easily rendered into English. Not only does it mean  that someone who does
something improper cannot pass the blame or liability onto his subordinates,  but it also means that the
responsibility for  an  improper act attaches  to or remains with the person who arranged it.

25  Prest, per Lord  Sumption at para 35.
26  Ben Hashem v  Al Shayif [2009]  1 FLR  115.

Vol  18  2014

ANALYSIS

279

I consider that if it is not necessary to pierce the corporate veil, it is not appropriate to do
so, because on that footing  there is no public policy imperative which justifies that course.

C.  CONCLUSION

The whole  point of company  law is that the  corporate  veil  should  generally protect
the  directors  and shareholders  and Prest maintains that view  All  the Justices of the
Supreme Court agreed with  Lord Sumption's point as  outlined above.  Their reasons
for  doing  so  may  not  have  been  entirely  consistent,  Lord  Neuberger  in  particular
being  at variance  with  Lord  Sumption  as  to  when  exactly  concealment  took place.
However,  the overall point is that the  corporate  veil  is not  to be  lightly pierced  and
where it is pierced it should be on the two  grounds  indicated.  It is  of course  a great
deal  easier  to pierce  the veil where both  the company and  the individuals  are easily
identified  (perhaps  by being  single  member  companies)  and when  it is  possible  to
see  that  the  company is  being  used  to  avoid  the  individual's  obligations.  This  case
does not resolve  some of the wider  issues  for companies  such  as  directors'  apparent
ability to walk  away from  responsibility  for highly  questionable  activity-  the topical
example being banks' sales of PPI-but it does not pretend to deal with such  matters.
It restricts veil-piercing to two specific grounds  and some other rule will be needed if
a director or controlling shareholder is to be found liable in those  circumstances.

And what happened to the unhappy couple? As at mid-November 2013,  Prest was
facing possible proceedings  for contempt  of court because he had  still not made  the
payments  to his wife,  apparently being unable to  do so because  he required surgery
to remove tumours in the arches of his feet .27  Finally, it is perhaps ironic that this case
features an individual who so conspicuously evaded his own obligations and frustrated
enforcement  of court  decrees  against  him. To  his  credit,  at least he  did not  use  his
companies  to do so.

Nicholas Grier
Edinburgh Napier University

EdinLR Vol 18 pp 279-284
DOI:  10.3366/elr.2014.0213
The Challenge of "Best Evidence" in Rape Trials:
The Victims and Witnesses  (Scotland) Act 2014

The  investigation  and prosecution of rape  and other sexual  offences  has undergone
extensive  reform  over  the  last  three  decades  in  Scotland.  Yet  these  progressive

27  See  http://www.businessweek.com/news/2013-11-18/oil-trader-faces-u-dot-k-dot-jail-for-missing-690-

000-divorce-payments.

