502

B H A B H A, H O M I

reﬁned this picture, placing less emphasis
on the requirement of systematicity (con-
cepts are “miniature theories” [2006: xxii])
and by arguing that the relationship be-
tween concept and object is, at root, met-
aphorical. A metaphor asks us to compare
two terms according to a ground, and this
has several consequences:
it brings out
something both new and speciﬁc in the
objects compared and it places them in
new frames of references. In the same
way, theoretical concepts are not meant
to coincide with the object they help de-
scribe. They pull out new aspects of the
object and introduce it into a new frame of
reference (Bal 1994). By insisting on the
generality of concepts and their heuristic
rather than representative function, Bal is
able to treat concepts as speciﬁc but at the
same time nomadic, capable of “traveling”
from one discipline to another (2002).

SEE ALSO: Cultural Studies; Genette,
Gerard; Narratology and Structuralism

REFERENCES AND SUGGESTED READING

Bal, M. (1985). Narratology: Introduction to the
Theory of Narrative (trans. C. van Boheemen).
Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

Bal, M. (1991). Reading Rembrandt: Beyond the
Word–Image Opposition. New York: Cambridge
University Press.

Bal, M. (1994). Scared to death. In M. Bal & I. E.
Boer (eds.), The Point of Theory: Practices of
Cultural Analysis. New York: Continuum.

Bal, M. (1999a). Introduction. In The Practice
of Cultural Analysis: Exposing Interdisciplinary
Interpretation. Stanford: Stanford University
Press.

Bal, M. (1999b). Memories in the museum: Pre-
posterous histories for today. In Acts of Memory:
Cultural Recall in the Present. Hanover, NH:
University Press of New England.

Bal, M. (1999c). Quoting Caravaggio: Contemporary
Art, Preposterous History. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

Bal, M. (2002). Travelling Concepts in the Human-
ities: A Rough Guide. Toronto: University of
Toronto Press.

Bal, M. (2006). A Mieke Bal Reader. Chicago: Uni-

versity of Chicago Press.

Cherry, D. (ed.) (2008). About Mieke Bal. Oxford:

Wiley-Blackwell.

Genette, G. (1980). Narrative Discourse: An Essay in
Method (trans. J. E. Lewin). Ithaca: Cornell
University Press.

Silverman, K. (2008). Je vous. In D. Cherry (ed.),

About Mieke Bal. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.

Bhabha, Homi
ANKHI MUKHERJEE

Homi K. Bhabha is a foundational ﬁgure
for postcolonial theory. He was born in
Bombay, India, in 1949, educated at the
University of Bombay and Christ Church,
Oxford, and is at present Professor of the
Humanities in the Department of English
and American Literature
at Harvard
University.

Bhabha’s most signiﬁcant book, arguably,
is The Location of Culture, a collection of
writings published in 1994, which includes
deﬁnitive versions of his inﬂuential essays
“The other question,” “Of mimicry and
man,” “Signs taken for wonders,” and
“DissemiNation.” Nation and Narration,
edited by Bhabha, is another central text in
his oeuvre, containing a variety of contribu-
tions on national narratives. “Foreword:
Remembering Fanon: Self, psyche, and
the colonial condition,” Bhabha’s 1986
introduction to the Pluto edition of Frantz
Fanon’s Black Skin, White Masks, played a
key role in the 1980s revival of Fanon’s work
and in the resurgence of critical appropria-
tions of Fanon in the academy, which Henry
Louis Gates, Jr., (1991) has termed “critical
Fanonism.” Bhabha is also the author of
several inﬂuential critical articles, such as
“At the Limits” (1989), a commentary on
the aftermath of Salman Rushdie’s Satanic
Verses, “Queen’s English” (1997), a study of

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

hybridized speech,
“Cosmopolitanisms”
(2000),onthepluralisticnatureofcosmopol-
itanism, and “Adagio” (2005), a reﬂection on
the legacy of Edward Said.

Bhabha’s work has provided many valu-
able conceptual leads and catchphrases to
postcolonial theory: nation and narration,
anticolonial agency, third space or the place
of hybridity, ambivalence and uncanny
doubles, mimicry, pedagogic and performa-
tive nationality. Bhabha formulates a post-
colonial method that draws on high Euro-
pean theory – Sigmund Freud and Jacques
Lacan, Hannah Arendt, M. M. Bakhtin,
Jacques Derrida, Michel Foucault,
to
name the major inﬂuences – and teases
and tests it in reappraisals of the phenom-
enon of colonialism and the quandaries
of the postcolonial condition. Bhabha’s the-
oretical formulations engage with literary
texts (by Joseph Conrad, Henry James, V. S.
Naipaul, Salman Rushdie, Toni Morrison,
for example) as well as nonﬁction writings
by J. S. Mill, Frantz Fanon, and Charles
Taylor. Bhabha writes in an eloquent and
sometimes difﬁcult style, and famously won
the runner-up award in the 1998 “Bad
Writing Competition” (from the journal
Philosophy and Literature) for a line from
The Location of Culture.

In “Signs taken for wonders,” Bhabha
examines the role of the English book in
the perpetuation of English cultural rule.
Bhabha argues that the fetishized English
book – the sign taken for wonders, whether
it is the Bible or a canonical text – is a site of
colonial ambivalence. Bhabha provides
two distinct and seemingly contradictory
accounts of this ambivalence or “splitting”
of the voice of authority. He argues that it is
a constitutional undecidability in the very
edicts of Englishness that makes possible
anticolonial and postcolonial intervention
and subversion: the colonized disarticulate
the voice of the colonizer at the very point of
its splitting. He also suggests, however, that

B H A B H A , H O M I 503

colonial ambivalence is invented when mas-
ter texts are subjected to acts of repetition in
the “dark unruly spaces of the earth.” In “Of
mimicry and man: The ambivalence of co-
lonial discourse,” Bhabha outlines his view
of colonial mimicry as a discursive opera-
tion in which the excess produced by the
ambivalence of mimicry – “almost the same,
but not quite” – serves to undermine and
make uncertain the totalizing discourses of
the colonial system. Mimicry, Bhabha says,
works like camouﬂage, not a repression of
difference, but a form of resemblance that
defers presence by displaying it partially and
metonymically. Through his conceptualiza-
tion of mimicry, Bhabha problematizes the
old colonial relationship between a mono-
lithic power and its faceless victims. Bhabha
suggests instead that the colonial presence is
always ambivalent, split between its appear-
ance as deliberative and its articulation as
repetition and difference. Bhabha illustrates
this process by ﬁrst noting the fetishistic
marks of European cultural and disciplinary
presence in the space of
the colony –
cricket ﬁelds, European clubs, colonial
courts, theaters, mock Etons, the English
book. The function of these “transparencies
of authority,” as Bhabha terms them, is not
to satisfy the demands of European nostal-
gia but to exert a normalizing inﬂuence over
the native, to re-form the African or Indian
as a copy of
the displaced European
“original.” This double exercise of power,
which acts to authorize the European and
civilize the native, gives rise to mimicry.
The colonial disciplinary regime fails to
produce allegories of Englishness and pro-
duces instability and hybridity instead,
and colonial subjects “who are almost the
same, but not quite, not white,” “less than
one and double.” The colonist’s identity is
jeopardized by the emergence of the sup-
plement and the counterfeit. The identity
of the colonized, in turn, is not simply a
mimesis of the European original, but a

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

504

B H A B H A, H O M I

mask of mimicry that is more menace than
resemblance.

Bhabha’s terms of exegesis in The Loca-
tion of Culture are “the arbitrariness of the
sign, the indeterminacy of writing, [and] the
splitting of
the subject of enunciation”
(1994a: 175–6). His concepts of mimicry
and hybridity are a version of Derridean
differance,
the difference within binary
terms that supersedes them: it is in the
uncanny space between dominant cultural
formations that Bhabha ﬁnds “the location
of culture.” Bhabha’s organizing principle
is a deconstruction of the “sign” and his
particular emphasis is on the indeterminacy
in cultural and political
judgment. He
seeks to move from what he calls the
“pedagogical” aspect of cultural identiﬁca-
tions (ﬁxed, exclusive, discriminatory) to
the “performative” aspect of the articulation
of identities, or what he calls “the disruptive
temporality of enunciation.” Enunciation
(meaning both speaking and performance)
is the scene of creative heterogeneity, of
differing and deferring: It is through the
vicissitudes of enunciation that the borders
between objects or subjects or practices are
reconstituted. Bhabha identiﬁes his critical
task as postcolonial translation, which seizes
upon the contradictory and ambivalent
space of cultural statements. Postcolonial
agency thus emerges as a politics of reloca-
tion and reinscription that
in
“representational undecidability.”

rejoices

as

the

Bhabha draws heavily on Jacques Lacan’s
ideas on mimicry in The Four Fundamental
Concepts of Psychoanalysis (Lacan 1981) to
conceptualize a colonial subject who is the
same
colonizer but different.
The mimic man, not quite, not white, is
a partial representation of the colonizer.
Far from being reassured, the colonizer
sees a grotesquely displaced image of him-
self: the familiar, transported to distant
parts, becomes uncannily transformed.
Bhabha undermines the model of mimicry

that locates the other as a ﬁxed phenome-
nological entity, opposed to the self. The
subject of desire, according to Bhabha is
never simply a “Myself,” just as the Other
is never simply an “It-self.” In the foreword
to Fanon’s Black Skin, White Masks
(Bhabha 1986), Bhabha turns Fanon’s
idea of the dualistic nature – black skin,
white masks – of colonial pathology into an
altogether philosophical meditation on the
idea of Man as his alienated image, not self
and other, but the alienated and othered self
as inscribed in the complex of colonial
identities. Bhabha lauds Fanon for putting
the psychoanalytic question of the desire of
the subject to the historical condition of
colonial man, though he concedes that
this insight into the ambivalences of iden-
tiﬁcation in Fanon’s early work is eventually
sacriﬁced to the insurgent political need to
name and frame the other in the language of
colonial racism. Bhabha’s psychoanalytic
“remembering” – as distinct from a trans-
lation – of Fanon has been criticized as
obscuring Fanon’s paradigm of colonial
condition as one of unmitigated antago-
nism between native and invader (Benita
Parry) and repressing the Manichaean his-
tory of colonialism in favor of colonial
ambivalence
Jan Mohamed).
Bhabha’s “misreading” of Fanon has been
used by other commentators as a critical
instance to highlight the gap between aca-
demic and political anticolonialism, and
also between the expatriate postcolonial
intellectual ﬂoating in global space, and
the class- and ethnicity-bound, immobi-
lized postcolonial with no access to inter-
stitial or neutral ground.

(Abdul

Nation and Narration is a source book for
postcolonial theory’s ongoing interrogation
of the idea of nation. Bhabha’s unique con-
tribution to the question of nation forma-
tion is to link nations with narratives of
nations. In sharp contrast with ideas of
the nation as a self-identical and consistent

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

community that is untouched by the depre-
dations of history, Bhabha proposes a
“double narrative movement.” He sees
the nation as an object of a nationalist
pedagogy, vested with the continuity and
accumulated authority of
its past, but
also as subjects of a process of signiﬁca-
tion which denies that past history in live
performances of a heterogeneous and
processual identity. The pedagogic narra-
tives of nationality are revised and rewritten
by migrant and marginalized narratives.
Bhabha documents how political solid-
arity is bestowed upon cultural difference
and heterogeneous histories by the self-
contained idea of nations: he also celebrates
the “marks of difference” shored by desta-
bilizing iterations of that idea.

Bhabha sees the distinction between the-
ory and political practice dismantled in a
liminal “third space.” Theory, he argues in
The Location of Culture, is not necessarily
elitist and Eurocentric. Theory and politics
are not disparate entities and are mobilized
in the productive matrix of writing, which
deﬁnes the social and makes it available for
action. In an interview titled “The Third
Space,” Bhabha extends the idea of the third
space to imply the opening up of a hybrid-
ized space – that allows new positions
to emerge – in postcolonial revisions of
colonial discourse. He locates the diasporic
subject in the borderline place and disjunc-
tive temporality of the third space. In the
context of the clash of cultures brought
about by the publication of The Satanic
Verses, Bhabha reinforces Rushdie’s vision
of emergent social identities that do not
respond to either “Islamic fundamentalists”
or “Western literary modernists.” These
subjectivities do not draw upon a pure
past or a holistic and unicultural present
for authentication, but live in doubt, ques-
tioning, and a rich confusion of cultural
imperatives. The boundary becomes the
place where the terms of cultural engage-

B H A B H A , H O M I 505

ment, whether antagonistic or collaborative,
are continually negotiated and cultural
hybridities that emerge in moments of his-
torical transformation are authorized.

Bhabha’s current work is around ideas of
global citizenship and global discourse, and
how aesthetic and ethical experiences inﬂu-
ence cultural citizenship. It issues a call to
“de-realize” or defamiliarize democracy, so
that its occlusions and injustices can come
to light, and the democratic ideal can be
applied to “other” contexts. In the essay
“Democracy de-realized,” Bhabha
also
anticipates a cosmopolitanism “outside
the box of European intellectual history,”
one that privileges circumferences as well
as centers, and gives rise to global citizen-
ship. The territorial location of global citi-
zenship, Bhabha says,
is “postnational,
denational or transnational,” and such
a community is best constituted through
feelings of
fragmentedness (“partiality”)
and through a shared historical sense of
transitional time.

SEE ALSO: Bakhtin, M. M.; Derrida,
Jacques; Fanon, Frantz; Foucault, Michel;
Freud, Sigmund; Gates, Henry Louis; Lacan,
Jacques; Postcolonial Studies and Diaspora
Studies; Said, Edward

REFERENCES AND SUGGESTED
READINGS

Bhabha, H. K. (1986). Foreword: Remembering
Fanon: Self, psyche, and the colonial condition.
In F. Fanon, Black Skin, White Masks. London:
Pluto.

Bhabha, H. K. (1989). At the limits. Artforum,

27(9), 11–12.

Bhabha, H. K. (ed.) (1990). Nation and Narration.

London: Routledge.

Bhabha, H. K. (1994a). The Location of Culture.

London: Routledge.

Bhabha, H. K. (1994b). Signs taken for wonders:
Questions of ambivalence and authority under

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

506

B L O O M, H A R O L D

a tree outside Delhi, May 1817. In The Location of
Culture. London: Routledge, pp. 102–122.

Bhabha, H. K. (1994c). Of mimicry and man: The
ambivalence of colonial discourse. In The Loca-
tion of Culture. London: Routledge, pp. 85–92.
Bhabha, H. K. (1997). Queen’s English. Artforum,

35(7), 25–27.

Bhabha, H. K. (2000). Cosmopolitanisms. Public

Culture, 12(3), 577–590.

Bhabha, H. K. (2003). Democracy De-realized.

Diogenes, 50(1), 27–35.

Bhabha, H. K. (2005). Adagio. Critical Inquiry,

31(2), 371–380.

Gates, H. L., Jr. (1991). Critical Fanonism. Critical

Inquiry, 17(3), 457–470.

Hallward, P. (2001). Absolutely Post-Colonial: Writ-
ing Between the Singular and the Speciﬁc.
Manchester: Manchester University Press.

Huddart, D. (2006). Homi K. Bhabha. London:

Routledge.

Lacan, J. (1981). The Four Fundamental Concepts
of Psychoanalysis (trans. A. Sheridan; ed. J.-A.
Miller). New York: Norton.

Seshadri-Crooks, K.

(2000). Surviving theory:
A conversation with Homi K. Bhabha.
In
F. Afzal-Khan and K. Seshadri-Crooks (eds.),
The Pre-occupation of Postcolonial Studies.
Durham, NC: Duke University Press, pp.
369–380.

Young, R. J. C. (1990). White Mythologies: Writing

History and the West. London: Routledge.

Young, R. J. C. (1995). Colonial Desire: Hybridity in
Theory, Culture and Race. London: Routledge.

Bloom, Harold
CLAIRE FEEHILY

Harold Bloom (b. 1930) is an American
academic and one of the most prominent
postwar literary critics. Since 1959, in many
books, articles, and reviews, he has written
about an extensive range of individual wri-
ters and genres; more recently his concerns
have included religious themes, mysticism,
the Bible, and Jewish culture. Bloom’s works
on Romanticism, poetic inﬂuence, and Aes-
theticism were of signiﬁcant academic in-
ﬂuence. But his international success is also
derived from bestselling work for a wider

readership. In particular, Bloom is associ-
ated with a spirited and polemical defense of
Western canonical
literature against the
“School of Resentment,” his term for the
theoretical criticism within English Studies
in higher education. Bloom was born
in New York City in 1930, the son of
working-class Yiddish-speaking parents.
After winning a scholarship from the State
Department of Education, he graduated
from Cornell University in 1951. He gained
his PhD from Yale University in 1955
and has continued to work at Yale, holding
the title of Sterling Professor of Humanities
since 1983. Between 1988 and 2004 Bloom
was also Berg Professor of English at New
York University. He is a MacArthur Prize
Fellow,
the American
Academy, and a past Charles Eliot Norton
Professor at Harvard University.

a member of

Bloom’s earliest work, in the 1950s and
’60s, arose from his doctoral study of
Shelley. Bloom has emphasized the inﬂu-
ence of two critics upon his work: M. H.
Abrams, a prominent scholar of Romanti-
cism at Cornell; and the Canadian literary
critic Northrop Frye. Bloom’s published
studies of both Shelley and Blake, Shelley’s
Mythmaking (1959) and Blake’s Apocalypse
(1963), as well as more general studies,
defend the critical proﬁle and reputation
of Romantic poetry, which, Bloom argues,
had suffered through the inﬂuence of T. S.
Eliot, neo-Christian formalist criticism, and
the new critics. Bloom’s revisionism lay
in his view that Romanticism’s inﬂuence
had been an enduring one, which could
be identiﬁed in the work of twentieth-
century poets, notably W. B. Yeats.

In the 1970s, notably in The Anxiety of
Inﬂuence
(1973), Bloom developed his
highly inﬂuential analysis of poetic inﬂuence
and the “intra-poetic” relationships between
poets and the work of earlier writers. In work
that showed a deepening interest in Freud,
Bloom presented the history of Western

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

