Facilitating pro-poor tourism with the private sector 

Lessons learned from ‘Pro-Poor Tourism Pilots in 

Southern Africa’ 

 

Working Paper 257 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Caroline Ashley 

October 2005 

Overseas Development Institute 
111 Westminster Bridge Road 

London SE1 7JD 

UK 

also produced as a Pro-Poor Tourism Partnership Paper 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ISBN 0 85003 778 6 
 
© Overseas Development Institute 2005 
 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or 
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or 
otherwise, without the prior written permission of the publishers. 

 

Contents 

 
Acronyms 
Preface and acknowledgements 
 
1 

Introduction 

1.1  Background to the project 
1.2  The wider context of the project 

 

 

 
2 

 
3 
 
4 

 
5 

 
6 
 
7 

Pilot Sites 

2.1  Spier Leisure 
2.2  Rocktail Bay Lodge 
2.3  Sun City Resort 
2.4  Southern Sun 
2.5  Ker & Downey, Tanzania 

Different Ways of Doing Business Differently: Local Linkage Options 

What Does it Mean for the Company? 

4.1  Project impacts within the companies 
4.2  How to implement linkages? Strategies and challenges 
4.3  Why implement linkages? Business benefits 

What Does it Mean for the Local Economy? 

5.1  Impacts to date at the local level 
5.2  How significant are the impacts? 

External Facilitation: How can it Encourage Business Change? 

What is the Long Term Significance of this Approach Likely to be? 

7.1  Significance to tourism debates 
7.2  To the tourism sector within South Africa 
7.3  Policy Implications 

 
Appendix 1: Further Information 
 
References 
 

iv 
v 

1 
1 
2 

3 
3 
3 
4 
5 
5 

6 

8 
8 
8 
11 

13 
13 
17 

20 

25 
25 
26 
27 

29 

30 

 

iii

 

 

 
BEE 
 
BLCF   
 
BLT 
 
CSI 
CSR 
 
 
IFC 
 
LPG 
 
NGO 
PDI 
 
 
PPT 
SBP 
 
SMME  
WS 
 
WTTC  

Acronyms 

Black Economic Empowerment 
Business Linkages Challenge Fund 
Business Linkages in Tourism 
Corporate Social Investment 
Corporate Social Responsibility 
International Finance Corporation 
Low Powered Gas 
Non-Governmental Organisation 
Previously Disadvantaged Individuals 
Pro-Poor Tourism 
Small Business Project 
Small, Micro and Medium Enterprise 
Wilderness Safaris 
World Tourism and Travel Council 

 

iv

 

Preface and acknowledgements 

 
This paper is based on the experience of a three year project, ‘Pro-poor tourism pilots, Southern 
Africa’ (PPT Pilots), which ran from 2002-2005. It draws on the expertise, input and commitment 
of  many  people  who  made  the  project  work.  ‘PPT  Pilots’  was  a  collaboration  between  Clive 
Poultney of Mboza Tourism and ODI. It was implemented in partnership with PPT facilitators Zeph 
Nyathi and Gareth Haysom, with our pilot site partners from Wilderness Safaris, Spier, Sun City, 
Southern Sun and Ker and Downey, and with members of our Advisory Board: Adrienne Harris 
(Tourism Business Council of South Africa), Jennifer Seif (Fair Trade in Tourism South Africa), 
Didi Moyle (South Africa Tourism), and Peggy Drodskie (South African Chamber of Business).  
 
Thanks  go  to  all  our  partners  in  Southern  Africa,  and  also  to  other  members  of  ODI  who  were 
involved: Dorothea Meyer, Livia Iotti, Oliver Reichardt, Douglas McNab. 
 
The  project  was  funded  by  the  Business  Linkages  Challenge  Fund  of  the  UK’s  Department  for 
International Development, with additional sponsorship from British Airways. BLCF also funded 
the  sister  project,  which  was  to  set  up  a  self-sustaining  PPT  business,  ‘Business  Linkages  in 
Tourism’. 
 
This report draws heavily on the project overview report which was presented to the final project 
workshop in Johannesburg (in May 2005), and on the project monitoring report by Douglas McNab 
(September 2005). Both are available on www.pptpilot.org.za 
 
This  report  covers  lessons  learnt  on  a  variety  of  levels.  Many  of  the  detailed  lessons  about  how 
tourism  companies  can  implement  local  linkages  are  covered  in  much  more  depth  in  the  ‘How 
To…?’  series,  which  is  a  by-product  of  this  project.  See  www.odi.org.uk/rpeg/research/pro-
poor_tourism/howto.html 
 
We encourage others to use the information and ideas in this report to support the implementation 
of local linkages by tourism companies. But please acknowledge that the material comes from the 
PPT Pilots project, implemented by Mboza Tourism and the Overseas Development Institute, 2002-
2005. Please send copies of material produced to us at: c.ashley@odi.org.uk and 
bizlink@tbcsa.org.za. 

 

v

 

 
 
 

 

 

1

1  Introduction 

 
1.1  Background to the project  
  
The  Pro-poor  Tourism  Pilot  project  (PPT  Pilots)  was  established  in  May  2002.  The  aim  of  PPT 
Pilots was to work directly with 5 pilot partners1 to help them implement pro poor tourism and to 
learn from their experience. The facilitators promoted strategies that tourism companies could use 
to increase the local development impact of their business, and which also made business sense to 
the company. By using these as a pilot, the project aimed to then share good practice with the wider 
industry.  
 
Two core programme components: 
1.  Close  collaboration  with  five  companies  at  ‘pilot  sites’.  This  has  involved  the  design  of  local 
linkages, and facilitation of their implementation.  
2.  Communication  with  tourism  players  across  the  industry  in  Southern  Africa  to  develop  PPT 
awareness and expertise.  
 
The first phase of the project involved setting up partnerships with 5 pilot sites. The project was 
then ‘launched’ in October 2002, and implementation began. The five sites were: 
•  Spier Leisure (Western Cape): a 155 bed four-star hotel in the winelands 
•  Wilderness Safaris’ Rocktail Bay (Kwa Zulu Natal): a 10 lodge and family unit luxury bush 

camp on the Maputaland coast 

•  Sun  International’s  Sun  City  Resort  (North  West  Province);  the  largest  resort  in  South 

Africa, providing over 1,500 rooms in three to five star hotels and entertainment 

•  Southern Sun’s Sandton Complex (Gauteng): a complex of 6 three to five star hotels in the 

heart of Johannesburg 

•  Ker & Downey safari and hunting sites, Tanzania: Tanzania’s largest hunting operator with 

hunting block concessions covering 32,000 square kilometres.  

 
The selection of pilot partners was based on a number of factors. As the aim of the project was to 
facilitate change within the company, the obvious criteria was that the companies should want to do 
more on local linkages and should want PPT input to help achieve that. This was true of all the 
partners. As another aim was to demonstrate an approach and learn lessons about replication, it was 
also important to have partners from different sectors in the industry. Thus Sun City and Southern 
Sun represented the large mainstream corporate sector, Wilderness Safaris (Wilderness) and Spier 
the well-established medium size company, and Ker and Downey, a safari company. The products 
covered included urban business tourism, coastal wilderness, winelands, entertainment resort and 
hunting safaris. Preliminary discussions were held with a number of other companies elsewhere in 
Southern  Africa.  Several  were  interested  in  the  approach,  but  were  less  able  to  make  a  firm 
commitment to the project due to competing priorities. 
 
A range of ‘local linkages’ with local suppliers, tourism enterprises, community trusts, and local 
residents  were  promoted.  The  approach  emphasises  the  need  to  go  beyond  ad  hoc  community 
support, to do business differently in ways that stimulate local linkages and benefits. 
 

                                                 
1 The original project plan proposed 6, but it soon changed to 5. 
 

 

2 
1.2  The wider context of the project  
 
Pro-poor tourism: PPT Pilots stemmed from previous work on pro poor tourism (Ashley, Roe and 
Goodwin  2001),  which  demonstrated  that  there  was  much  that  companies,  communities,  non-
governmental organisations and governments could do to increase the impact of tourism on poverty 
reduction. It appeared however, that beyond calls for businesses to adopt PPT, there was no direct 
facilitation  for  the  private  sector  to  help  them  to  do  so,  nor  to  test  what  elements  of  PPT  were 
commercially feasible. Therefore the explicit purpose of this project was to work with companies to 
see  how  much  they  could  achieve,  and  with  what  facilitation.  This  approach  also  built  upon 
previous  facilitation  work  that  Clive  Poultney  had  done  for  Wilderness  Safaris,  and  which  was 
demonstrating the considerable need and potential for local level facilitation. 
 
Transformation in South Africa: since democratisation in South Africa in 1993, there has been a 
political push towards ‘black economic empowerment’ (BEE) and transformation of the formerly 
white-run economy. Tourism in 2002 remained a very white industry (as it is today, TBCSA 2004). 
The project was established in the context of the need for the industry to increase its practical and 
demonstrable  implementation  of  BEE.  However, the  PPT  approach  focuses  on  links  with  people 
that are poor, and on business that are small and local as well as black-owned, so it overlaps but is 
not synonymous with the BEE agenda. 
 
Pro-poor growth: pro poor tourism is part of a wider developmental agenda for ‘pro poor growth’, 
meaning  not  just  faster  growth,  but  growth  which  benefits  and  includes  poorer  segments  of  the 
population.  The  need  for  pro-poor  or  broad-based  growth  has  been  evident  for  some  time,  but 
answers on how to operationalise it are scarce (Zepeda, 2004). The Pilots project was in a small 
way applying principles of pro-poor growth at a micro level to tourism sites.  
 
Beyond Corporate Social Responsibility and the role of the private sector in development: there is 
growing recognition that businesses need to move beyond philanthropy and a narrow interpretation 
of  ‘corporate  social  responsibility’  (CSR)  to  an  approach  to  doing  business  that  enhances 
development impact by drawing on their core competencies.2 This is the underlying principle of the 
PPT  Pilots  project,  which  seeks  to  facilitate  ‘linkages’  between  business  operations  and  local 
entrepreneurs or residents. The project seeks to distinguish this from a pure philanthropic approach 
which is more common in the tourism sector.  
 

                                                 
2 See for example http://www.odi.org.uk/PPPG/activities/country_level/odpci/index.html and Warner (2002) 
 

 

3

2  Pilot Sites 

 
The approach to PPT adopted at each pilot site was quite different, given their different operating 
environments and local contexts. For more detail on progress at each site, see the project monitoring 
and evaluation report (McNab 2005). 
 
 
2.1  Spier Leisure  
Spier, a property of approximately 500ha, is located in the Stellenbosch Winelands region of the 
Western Cape. This property was purchased by the Enthoven family in 1993, opened to the public 
in  1995,  and  in  November  2000  Spier  opened  The  Village  at  Spier,  a  155  room  4-star  hotel.  In 
partnership with Moyo, Spier opened the 800 seat restaurant ‘Moyo at Spier’ in November of 2003. 
Spier’s current product offering includes retail outlets, and hosting of a range of environmental and 
arts  organisations  in  addition  to  the  hotel,  restaurants  and  wine  production.  Annual  revenue  was 
ZAR92  million  in  2003/2004.  Principles  of  social  equity  and  environmental  integrity  have 
underpinned  the  business  from  the  start.  Thus  Spier  was  already  supporting  a  number  of  social 
projects when it joined PPT pilots, though these were implemented in an ad hoc way.  
 
In late 2002, Spier appointed a Sustainability Director and undertook to overhaul several aspects of 
core  business.  One  of  these  included  revision  of  procurement  policy,  which  was  done  with  PPT 
support. One aim has been to increase sourcing from local, small, previously disadvantaged (pdi) 
businesses. Several new enterprises have entered the supply chain, with more in the pipeline. A new 
on-site laundry, opened in August 2004, has already expanded its Spier contracts and staffing. A 
township supplier is now supplying liquid petroleum gas (lpg) to Spier deli, and also expanding. 
Other new suppliers include a township paper-making project, fuelwood supply, deck construction, 
and clearing vegetation. By mid 2005, seven new suppliers were in place, all selected using the pro-
poor approach in which PPT assisted. Spier continues to apply this approach to new contracts. 

A process of internal change to facilitate more sustainable business practices – including the shift 
to local suppliers – has been undertaken within Spier. Questionnaires sent to all suppliers increased 
awareness  among  suppliers  and  staff  about  a  range  of  issues,  including  their  local  economic 
impact. Results have been included in Spier’s first Sustainability Report, launched in April 2005 
(Spier 2005)  

Enterprise  linkages:  laundry,  liquid  petroleum  gas,  fuel  wood,  crafts,  greetings  cards,  construction,  clearing  alien 
vegetation  
Enterprise linkages in the pipeline: organic produce, recycled soap, chemical supplies 
Non-enterprise linkages: Kayamandi township: support to B&B’s and tourism development 
 
2.2  Rocktail Bay Lodge 
Rocktail Bay Lodge is an up-market coastal destination in the Greater St Lucia Wetland Park in 
KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa, offering diving and safaris in the coastal forest. The lodge attracts 
mainly a middle class clientele from Europe and the US. Occupancy has increased steadily to reach 
approximately 70% in recent years, and this, coupled with low seasonal fluctuations in occupancy, 
makes the lodge one of the most successful of Wilderness Safaris’ operations. Wilderness Safaris is 
a large, up-market and expanding safari/lodge operator that currently operates over 50 camps/lodges 
in  seven  Southern  African  countries.  In  the  past  few  years  the  company  has  received  a  host  of 
awards for its ‘responsible tourism’ initiatives and policies.  

 

 

 

 

 

4 
  
Rocktail Bay lodge is co-owned by Wilderness, a commercial bank, the conservation agency, and 
the neighbouring Mqobela community. It is operated by Wilderness Safaris. The community owns a 
14.5% share in the lodge owning company, and a 12.5% share in the lodge managing company. The 
Mqobela  ward  community,  falling  within  the  Tembe  Tribal  Authority,  is  comprised  of  284 
homesteads  with  a  population  of  approximately  1,500.  It  is  a  remote  rural  area,  on  the  edge  of 
protected area, several hours drive from a major town. In addition to the equity share, a number of 
local linkages existed at the start of the Pilots project: a high proportion of staff came from the local 
community,  and  enterprise  linkages  included  a  local  taxi  operator  to  transport  staff,  a  Policing 
Forum, and casual labour for routine maintenance work.  
 
PPT  facilitation  at  Rocktail  Bay  assisted  WS  in  strengthening  the  existing  partnership  with 
Mqobela Community while helping to develop a new partnership with the Mpukane community 
around a new diving lodge at Mpukane, near Rocktail. Approval of the new lodge by government 
has been slow and the environmental impact assessment process is now underway, but meanwhile 
short  term  employment  opportunities,  such  as  clearing  the  airstrip,  have  been  created.  A  new 
community tour for Rocktail Bay guests is going well. 

Wilderness Safaris is currently launching a new brand which highlights its role in contributing to 
local people’s lives. With the launch of this, PPT facilitation concluded with training for staff and 
community partners in destinations on putting partnerships into practice. 
 
Enterprise/employment linkages: community tour, local contractors cutting airstrip, increased local security forum, new 
staff training, recruitment of Mpukane staff for new lodge, union involvement in wage negotiations and avoidance of 
retrenchments 
Enterprise linkages in the pipeline: local child minders, furniture suppliers 
Non-financial linkages: Strengthened partnership with Mqobela Trust, Mpukane Trust established and partnership with 
WS negotiated, support to Mqobela school, facilitation of Mqobela/ Mpukane boundary dispute 
 
2.3  Sun City Resort  
Sun  City  South  Africa  is  an  internationally  renowned  casino  and  golf  resort  located  next  to 
Pilanesburg National Park in the North West Province, 160 km north-west of Johannesburg. It has 
four hotels from the 3-4 star Cabanas, to the 5 star ‘Palace of the Lost City’, offering a total of over 
1,500  rooms,  and  attracting  over  600,000  guests  annually.  Thus,  Sun  City  and  its  visitors  have 
massive marketing and purchasing power to contribute to the development of PPT linkages. 
 
In  2002,  the  Corporate  Social  Investment  (CSI)  Director  was  already  running  a  substantial  CSI 
programme  focused  on  education  and  health.  With  PPT  input,  Sun  City  increased  its  focus  on 
enterprise  development  within  its  CSI  programme.  An  existing  survivalist  glass-recycling 
enterprise,  RECOPRO,  has  been  upgraded  with  new  equipment  and  skills  so  that  it  can  supply 
personalised engraved glasses to Sun City and guests. Sun City has purchased the equipment and 
training. New RECOPRO members have also been trained to produce greetings cards from recycled 
paper with the aim of meeting Sun City’s requirement for approximately 1000 cards per week in 
season. Sales of cards started in June 2005 at 500 a week. At the same time Sun City commissioned 
a  scoping  report  to  identify  other  potential  suppliers  in  North  West  Province,  and  started  a 
Development Forum with the local municipality to cooperate on local economic development. 
 
Enterprise linkages: Hand-made cards, recycled engraved glasses 
 

 

 

5

2.4  Southern Sun 
Southern  Sun  Hotels  is  one  of  the  largest  hotel  groups  in  Africa,  operating  80  hotels  in  seven 
African countries. The PPT partner site consisted of six hotels and the Sandton Convention Centre 
in the Sandton precinct of Johannesburg, the economic hub of Southern Africa. The 4- and 5-star 
InterContinental, Crown Plaza and Holiday Inn hotels, have a total room capacity of approximately 
1,700  and  thus  provide  the  potential  for  a  variety  of  linkage  opportunities  with  their  ‘poor’ 
neighbours.  Southern  Sun  Hotels  already  has  considerable  interest  and  involvement  in  Black 
Economic Empowerment. In 2002, Southern Sun Hotels was seeking to broaden its transformation 
and CSR policy and strengthen its contribution to poverty alleviation. A key concern for the partner 
sites  in  Sandton  was  the  creation  of  new  or  stronger  links  with  its  immediate  neighbour,  the 
Alexandra township (known as Alex). 
 
Options for a township tour in Alex and a variety of township products, such as jazz evenings and 
festivals, were discussed with the Alexandra Chamber of Commerce (Alex Coc). Proposals such as 
recycling  the  hotel’s  soap  and  old  linen  through  local  small  women’s  enterprises  were  also 
explored. This pilot stalled for various reasons. One is that the partnership between Southern Sun 
and  Alex  Chamber  of  Commerce  did  not  flourish.  Several  meetings  were  held,  but  there  were 
multiple institutional objectives , a lack of financial resources to help Alex CoC implement their 
agenda, and a lack of deliverables. When the key Director in Southern Sun left the company, there 
was no momentum built up to keep the projects going, and the pilot stalled. This is a good case 
study  for  the  potential  pitfalls  when  trying  to  develop  linkages.  It  illustrates  the  critical  need  to 
establish  a  strong  partnership  at  the  start,  and  the  risk  of  initiatives  stalling  if  a  key  champion 
moves on.  
  
Enterprise linkages: [Alexandra township tour stalled] 
 
2.5  Ker & Downey, Tanzania  
KER AND DOWNEY (K&D), Tanzania, operates in many rural areas of Tanzania. Working with 
PPT, it has been looking at how to restructure its range of community donations and interventions. 
Community  relations  and  anti-poaching  are  handled  through  its  separate  charity,  Friedkin 
Conservation  Fund  (FCF).  Discussion  has  focused  on  developing  natural  resource  management 
partnerships  in  which  K&D  camp  managers  and  neighbouring  communities  strategically  plan 
together. While this would benefit the company and community over the long term, there are few 
incentives  for  the  company  to  shift  from  current  partnerships  to  a  long-term  approach.  PPT 
facilitation helped the FCF staff to plan for a more strategic approach, and opened up discussions at 
company level. But in order to secure greater impact at local level plus better recognition for the 
industry from government, there remains a need to increase their links with the community and to 
work on a convergence of private and community sector interests around more profitable use of the 
resource base.  

Non-financial linkages: Consideration of revised community benefits approach 

 

 

6 

 

3  Different Ways of Doing Business Differently: Local Linkage 

Options 

 
The local linkages implemented by Spier, Wilderness, and Sun City go well beyond conventional 
philanthropic donations - although donations of time, funds, or infrastructure can contribute to the 
linkage. They are ways to do business differently, so that commercial functions are fulfilled, and at 
the same time more local impact is achieved. For example, core services are procured, and local 
entrepreneurs  get  contracts.  New  products  are  developed  for  guests,  and  local  dancers  and  chefs 
earn an income. A new lodge site is secured, and the community gets equity. These linkages do not 
only draw on company post-tax profits, but on core competencies and assets of the company – its 
procurement budget, volume of guests, need for new products or sites, and business expertise. 
 
It is important to note that there are different types of linkage – focusing only on opening up the 
supply chain, or only on supporting community tourism enterprise, would be a mistake. Figure 1 
outlines  how  different  parts  of  the  business  operation  can  be  linked  to  local  entrepreneurs  or 
partners.  As  can  be  seen,  different  pilot  partners  focused  on  different  types  of  linkage.  It  is 
important  to  assess  which  type  of  linkage  makes  business  sense,  rather  than  just  focus  on  the 
initially  obvious.  For  example,  Spier  shifted  focus  from  acting  as  a  ‘gateway’  to  local  tourism 
businesses  to  opening  up  its  supply  chain,  because  this  fitted  better  with  strategic  corporate 
objectives. 
 

SMMEs = small, medium and micro enterprises. 
 
Philanthropic donations can be substantial and directly targeted to current social needs. Compared 
to philanthropic approaches, these business linkages generate a smaller immediate injection of cash 
to local communities. But over time the potential for economic development is high. For example, 
Spier  Leisure’s  total  procurement  in  2004  was  ZAR  75  million.  For  historical  reasons,  black 

 

 

 

7
suppliers account for a fraction of that. Spier’s management would like to shift 10% of procurement 
to local small and black suppliers. Such an injection into the local economy of R7.5 million would - 
simply in cash flow terms – far outweigh their philanthropic spend on a wide array of initiatives, 
and would be a cash injection equivalent to a 50% increase in the local wage bill.  
 
One of the impacts of PPT facilitation has been to encourage company management to think along 
these lines, and to embrace the idea of doing business differently. For example, at Sun City, where 
implementation on the ground has been slow, there is nevertheless notable progress in getting the 
linkage approach onto the corporate agenda.  
 
The  linkages  encouraged  by  PPT  Pilots  are  all  local,  as  the  aim  is  to  develop  links  with  poorer 
neighbours, not just with black companies per se. Local may be defined in terms of kilometres (10, 
20,… depending on location), though in practice the linkages facilitated were generally within a few 
kilometres  of  the  site.  The  partners  are  also  relatively  poor,  being  mainly  micro-enterprises  and 
local residents.  
 
 
 

 

8 

 

4  What Does it Mean for the Company? 

 
4.1  Project impacts within the companies 
 
The  aim  of  PPT  Pilots  was  to  assist  companies  to  do  business  differently  by  providing  on-site 
facilitation. The direct impact of the project was on the companies, in two ways:  
 

•  Changes in company approach, strategy or plans – how managers think. 
•  Progress in actual implementation of linkages – what they do.3 

 
At  Spier,  change  in  management  approach  was  already  happening,  but  PPT  input  made 
considerable  impact  on  implementing  supply  chain  reform,  and  developing  a  PPT  procurement 
approach that can now be continued. At Wilderness Safaris, the corporate approach to partnerships 
was  already  evolving.  PPT  input  helped  to  develop  it  at  this  time  of  expansion  and  negotiation, 
increase  the  synergy  between  approaches  at  head  office  and  lodge  management  level,  and  make 
considerable  progress  on  the  ground  in  liaison  with  community  trusts.  At  Sun  City,  PPT  input 
achieved  most  in  pushing  local  linkages  onto  the  agenda,  raising  their  profile,  and  building 
commitment.  Implementation  of  linkages  during  the  lifetime  of  the  project  was  slow,  and  done 
mainly  by  Sun  City.  But  the  influence  of  the  approach  on  Sun  City’s  action  continues,  with  the 
company  now  investigating  procurement  options  in  North  West  province  and  participating  in  a 
Development Forum. At Southern Sun, initial progress was made both within the company and in 
discussing  linkages  with  partners,  but  this  never  got  as  far  as  changing  practice  within  Southern 
Sun. At Ker and Downey, PPT input helped to focus discussion around a more strategic approach to 
community benefit. This was readily adopted by staff in the affiliated charity, but not yet embraced 
by the commercial directors.  
 
At  all  sites,  particularly  Sun  City  and  Ker  and  Downey,  simply  pushing  local  linkages  up  the 
corporate agenda is an achievement, given the competing priorities of executives. This process can 
be drawn out over 2 years, but then influence company behaviour for years ahead. Thus increased 
awareness of PPT linkage options is an important impact in its own right.  
 
Although  in  theory  changes  in  company  thinking  precede  changes  in  company  practice,  in  fact 
practical progress helped to reinforce changes in policy. At Spier, facilitation of new laundry supply 
on the ground was able to reinforce management commitment and hence the rate at which other 
new supply initiatives were brought on stream. At Sun City, practical development of the new card 
and glass suppliers helps build commitment to a wider local procurement initiative.  
 
4.2  How to implement linkages? Strategies and challenges 

 

Doing business differently and developing local business linkages is not easy. The experience of the 
PPT Pilots demonstrates ten key challenges and concomitant tips, for implementation. 

1.  A champion who drives the process is essential, as is top management leadership. Pro-poor 
approaches will always be just one of many actions on a company’s agenda, and unless there 
is a champion they are likely to remain on the ‘to do’ list. At Wilderness Safaris, Spier, and 
Sun  City,  there  have  been  champions  in  different  senior  positions  –  CEO,  owner, 

                                                 
3 See McNab (2005) for more detail on impacts at each site. 
 

 

9
Sustainability Director, Corporate Affairs Director – but all have been essential. At Ker and 
Downey, the champion role is in a separate charitable Trust (Friedkin Conservation Trust), 
which makes it harder to influence corporate strategies. 

 
2.  Considerable  amount  of  time  input  is  needed,  and  therefore  so  is  a  staff  member  or 
facilitator  who  can  do  this.  This  person  who  does  the  legwork  of  implementing  new 
procedures may well be a different person to the ‘champion.’ Indeed at Sun City, the lack of 
time available for the CSI Director (who also has other management roles) was a constraint, 
which Sun City recognised when they appointed a full time CSI assistant in January 2005. 
At  Spier  and  Rocktail  Bay,  the  geographic  presence  and  more  intensive  facilitation  from 
PPT Pilots has meant that much has been achieved that company staff on their own would 
not have been able to achieve.  
For example at Spier, the SD Director commented: ‘The physical presence of Gareth Haysom – an 
individual able to commit the necessary time and in possession of the appropriate skills – enabled progress to 
be made much more quickly than would otherwise have been the case. Moreover, Gareth came for free. Spier 
did not need the PPT philosophy, they shared the values already and would have implemented without PPT 
assistance. But having Gareth enabled progress at a much quicker rate because staff lacked the skills or were 
unable to input the time required.’  

3.  Beyond the champion, wider buy-in across staff and management is needed. While the 
champion can catalyse a process, s/he will have to engage other key operational staff (chefs, 
the  Buyer,  or  Guest  Relations  Officers)  to  succeed  in  changing  business  practice. 
Stimulating  interest  or  support  among  staff  is  a  first  step,  but  full  implementation  may 
require  changes  in  job  functions,  expectations  of  staff,  and  Key  Performance  Indicators. 
This means moving away from assessing only financial performance. 
For  example,  at  Rocktail  Bay,  there  was  initially  some  mis-match  in  expectations  of 
community partnerships between executives in Johannesburg and the lodge manager. When 
a  new  management  couple  came,  the  increased  pace  and  confidence  with  which  linkages 
were  addresses  was  noticeable.  Resistance  from  some  staff  was  encountered  at  Spier.  .  It 
proved  important  to  work  hard  with  those  staff  whose  day  to  day  job  was  changed  by 
adoption of local suppliers. Spier have established new performance indicators to ensure that 
each department reports on its progress in achieving a range of non-financial indicators. At 
Sun City, various staff will be involved in bringing cards and glasses into the supply chain: 
these include, Guest Relations Officers who put the engraved glasses in VIP rooms, hotel 
managers’  secretaries  who  manage  the  greetings  cards,  concessionaires  running  bars  who 
supply empty bottles for recycling, and the accounts department who  will need to handle 
invoices  from  the  new  SMME.  Success  will  depend  on  staff  in  each  part  of  the  business 
knowing and adopting their role.  

4.  Learn by doing: get practical and get going, and adapt from there. Garnering support from 

others in the company and community is only likely once they can see practical results.  
At Sun City, the success of Thula Baba babysitting and of a hydroponics project supplying 
lettuces to the resort already demonstrated how local linkages might work. Implementation 
of linkages with RECOPRO in turn has demonstrated how to expand the approach, and thus 
paved the way for management commitment to wider initiatives.  

5.  The  process  is  not  just  about  changing  company  practice,  but  also changing  attitudes  to 
communities and local entrepreneurs. This is particularly so where history has led to deeply 

 
 

 

 

 

10 

 

entrenched  paternalistic  approaches  to  communities,  or  to  assumptions  that  local 
entrepreneurs cannot deliver reliably on the part of Buyers and Chefs. 
At Klein Begin laundry at Spier, one of the two washing machines broke down in the first 
month. It seemed that this accident might go to confirm attitudes of the sceptics, that when 
things  go  wrong,  new  suppliers  are  too  risky.  In  fact,  the  owner  Bernie  Samuels,  used  a 
variety of equipment and contacts to ensure the napkins were delivered clean the next day. 
This helped to change attitudes and show that he was a supplier who could be relied on.  

6.  A  slow  pace  must  be  accepted,  and  expectations  managed  –  without  dampening 

enthusiasm. Change is likely to be incremental – one thing leads to another.  
Wilderness  Safaris’  regional  manager  for  Maputaland,  Patrick  Boddam-Whetham,  states 
that  managing  community  expectations  has  been  one  of  the  greatest  challenges  of  their 
partnership approach in the region (pers comm. Sept 2004). If the community expects great 
benefits soon, the frustration that is later encountered can undermine the linkages.  

 
7.  Finding the right partners in the community is key. It is also often a difficult first step.  

In the Southern Sun PPT Pilot, the plan was to set up a partnership between Southern Sun 
and the Alexandra Chamber of Commerce. A few meetings were held by PPT facilitators, 
and further work done with partners between meetings. But it never reached the stage where 
a partnership between the two was developing independently and sustainably.  

8.  Combine a mentoring relationship with local partners, with commercial realism and quality 

standards.  
A critical factor in the success of the Klein Begin laundry is that the relationship with Spier 
involved  considerable  mentoring,  but  with  no  deviation  from  strict  quality  standards  and 
commercial contracts. A tender process was followed, and after this a detailed Service level 
Agreement  drawn  up  (www.pptpilot.org.za/papers/SpierSLA.pdf)  detailing  the  quality 
standards to be achieved. At the same time the PPT facilitator gave advice to the owner, 
both during the compilation of the SLA, and afterwards as the initial problems in running 
the business needed to be smoothed out. For example, he identified a commercial cleaning 
company to give advise on removing black paint spots, and helped liaise with the staff at 
Moyo, to ensure that communication about workloads and use of lockable baskets to hold 
dirty napkins overnight, would enable the laundry business to be run more efficiently.  
Similarly at Wilderness Safaris, the company are well aware of the need to encourage local 
entrepreneurs, while not exposing the core business to excessive risk. The new community 
tour, for example, started as an option on the blackboard, before becoming a core part of the 
itinerary. In the words of the CEO, explaining the level of risk that is tolerable from local 
partnerships: ‘If the result is bad tomatoes, it’s not a problem. If the result is unqualified 
boatmen, it’s not possible.’ 

Mentoring can be provided by outsiders (government, NGOs or companies) and it can be in 
the corporate interests to source and purchase mentoring for its new suppliers – as Spier is 
doing  for  the  new  vegetation  clearing  contract.  Mentoring  can  greatly  strengthen  the 
capacity of the new supplier to meet quality and reliability standards. It can – and should – 
also  help  the  supplier  to  enter  into  new  markets,  whether  this  is  serving  other  tourism 
businesses,  a  domestic  market,  or  export  sales.  Given  the  seasonality  and  risk  within 
tourism, it is important to help new suppliers secure other clients if their businesses are to 
thrive.  

 

 

 

 

11

 
 
9.  Success  lies  in  finding  local  linkages  that  help  address  current  drivers  of  change  in  the 
company and complement core business concerns. There is no point investing in linkages 
that conflict with core business. Where linkages are risky, they should be pursued as an add-
on at first. Local linkages should fit into bigger strategic objectives – whether these are to 
build local social licence to operate, to revamp the brand, to win new concessions, broaden 
out and improve BEE performance or diversify the guest product.  
For WS the partnerships have made business sense because they help consolidate access to 
lodge sites in conservation areas, and they have become part of the distinctive Wilderness 
brand  in  the  region.  At  Sun  City,  the  new  local  suppliers  fit  with  CSI  goals  to  include 
enterprise support and increase recycling, and with commercial objectives of responding to 
the growing interest of business and international customers concerning social performance 
of the business. For Spier, the shift to local suppliers is an integral part of achieving priority 
strategic sustainability goals. 

10. Partnership  with  others  will  be  needed.  Bring  in  expertise  from  others,  whether  it  is  in 
community development, small business support, or technical aspects of production such as 
cleaning or recycling. This can be highly productive, but also challenging if it involves new 
ways of working. 

The glass recycling at RECOPRO is done with equipment and training from a recycled glass 
company. The recycled cards were initially made with paper, technology and training from 
an  NGO  that  makes  recycled  paper,  however,  the  partnership  between  the  NGO  and  Sun 
City did not continue and Sun City then provided RECOPRO with training to make their 
own recycled paper.  

 

 

 
These are just ten of the tips learnt from the pilot sites. A great many more tips are covered in the 
‘How To…?’ Series, which comprises four briefs on different types of linkages, each containing a 
dozen tips and detailed practical advice.4 
 
4.3  Why implement linkages? Business benefits 

 

Experience of the PPT Pilots and other companies suggests that there isn’t a single ‘business case’ 
for  a  PPT  approach  to  business,  but  several  business  cases,  the  relevance  of  which  will  vary  by 
setting.  

1.  ‘Social licence to operate.’ It is not just the legal or official licences that matter, but also 
acceptance of a company’s legitimacy amongst local institutions that matters. Partnerships 
create local support for Wilderness Safaris in the rural area around Rocktail Bay, which is 
very  important  when  it  comes  to  guest  safety,  dealing  with  Government,  and  developing 
new products.  

2.  Enhanced brand. Spier has been able to acquire Fair Trade in Tourism accreditation which 
builds  the  brand  and  enables  an  entirely  different  level  of  exposure.  The  success  of 
Wilderness  Safaris’  partnership  lodges  and  the  enthusiasm  of  guests  for  the  partnership 
approach is reflected in the incorporation of partnerships into a new brand being launched in 
2005.  This  emphasises  how  Wilderness  holidays  change  lives  –  not  just  of  guests  but  of 
communities.  

                                                 
4 Ashley et al 2005. See http://www.pptpilot.org.za/IFC_tooltips.htm 
 

12 

 
3.  Diversification of products for guests. Rocktail Bay guests now enjoy a community tour as 
a  regular  part  of  the  itinerary.  Southern  Sun  was  aiming  to  provide  jazz  evenings  and 
shebeen visits for their clients.  

4.  Government procurement, preferred partner, recognition. For Spier, recognition from 
local government is important and evident. Spier is used as a case study by government, has 
access to decision-makers that enables it to present Spier’s view of local developments, and 
new initiatives proposed by Spier have found a receptive audience. For Wilderness Safaris, 
their  record  in  community  partnerships  has  helped  in  winning  bids  for  new  sites  within 
Public Private Partnerships.  

5.  Awards,  publicity  and  marketing.  Wilderness’  community  partnerships  often  feature  in 
media coverage, and one of their Namibian partnership lodges, Damaraland Camp, recently 
won a WTTC Tourism for Tomorrow award. Spier estimates that acquiring Fair Trade in 
Tourism certification led to over 52 mentions in print, between October 2003 and end 2004. 
The value of this coverage for 2004 was over R300,000. 

6.  Cost Saving. Local supplies may not always save costs, particularly if procurement is done 
via  negotiated  discounts  with  bulk  suppliers.  But  in  some  cases  cost  savings  can  be 
considerable, particularly for services. Klein Begin laundry has saved Spier over R200,000 
in laundry costs. Spier recently agreed a contract for clearing alien vegetation with a local 
black  entrepreneur.  Even  after  adding  in  Spier’s  costs  for  paying  for  mentoring  from  a 
professional company, the contract was still significantly cheaper than the next alternative. 

7.  Staff morale. Staff morale can be enhanced through local linkages. At Sun City staff are 
kept informed of CSI activities and given opportunities to participate directly at times. Staff 
morale boosts customer service. Developing linkages can complement broader changes in 
corporate governance, by identifying wider needs for staff training, or revision of procedures 
relating to procurement, contractor payments, or internal communication.  

8.  Access to responsible financing. It is no coincidence that both Spier and Wilderness have a 
strong  relationship  with  the  international  development  bank,  International  Finance 
Corporation. IFC emphasises responsible business in their investments. The investment in 
Spier and discussions with Wilderness predate and are separate from the Pilots project, but 
illustrate  that  responsible  business  behaviour  can  help  attract  international  sources  of 
finance.  

 
Trading off costs and benefits?  
Overall, costs and benefits vary in each situation, but it seems that the long-term gains can be 
considerable,  but  so  can  the  short  term  challenge  of  implementation.  Thus  the  question  is 
whether companies are willing and able to invest sufficiently in the immediate costs (‘get over 
the hump’) in order to realise the long term gains to the local economy and their business.  

 

 
 

 

 

13

5  What Does it Mean for the Local Economy? 

 
5.1  Impacts to date at the local level 
 
Warning!  This  report  does  not  assess  the  total  impacts  of  the  tourism  businesses  on  the  local 
economy.  It  is  only  looking  at  the  incremental  impact  created  by  new  linkages  that  result  from 
doing business differently and in which PPT facilitation played a part. Only direct local impacts are 
identified – whether these are financial flows or other impacts felt directly by local people involved 
in  the  linkages.  Induced  (or  second  round)  effects  due  to  these  people  spending  their  money  or 
operating differently locally are not considered. Local impacts resulting from a knock-on effect on 
behaviour  of  others  –  such  as  tourists’  expenditure  on  curios  or  local  charity  –  are  also  not 
considered. The degree to which a linkage can be attributed to PPT Pilots is not explored: in all 
situations a number of causal factors interact. Thus this section addresses the question: what direct 
local impacts are derived from the linkages being implemented by pilot partners and to which PPT 
Pilots contributed? 
 
The  different  types  of  local  impacts  from  a  company  implementing  new  local  linkages  can  be 
broadly divided into: 

•  Net financial benefits to date: wages, new jobs, enterprise earnings  
•  Non-cash benefits – access to expertise, markets, skills, contacts 
•  Pipeline and potential impacts from on-going implementation of the linkage approach. 
 

Cash earned to date due to new linkages at the pilots sites5 is fairly low, given that new suppliers 
are only just – or yet to be – up and running. The largest cash flows are to Spier’s new suppliers, 
where total contract value to date is R 562,000 (approx GB£50,000) to eight enterprises so far. The 
annual value of on-gong contracts is similar at R589,000 with others to be contracted as needed. 
The  enterprises  are  owned  by  survivalist  or  micro  (though  skilled)  entrepreneurs,  and  employ 
unskilled staff, most of whom were previously unemployed. For example, the laundry, following 
two  expansions,  has  created  6  new  full-time  and  4  new  part-time  jobs  (all  staff  were  previously 
unemployed  and  all  but  one  are  women)  plus  the  owners’,  and  did  not  displace  any  jobs  at  the 
previously contracted established laundry (see Table 1). 

                                                 
5 The wide range of other local cash flows, particularly wages to existing local staff, are not taken into account here.  
 

 

14 
 
 
Table 1: Spier’s new procurement from small black and local suppliers, August 04-August 05. 
 
Product and supplier 

Contract value6, ZAR 

Job creation 

Sustained 
jobs 
 

 

Up to Aug 
05 
148,980 
57,000 

On-going 
value p.a. 
270,000 
114,000 

Of wh 
women 
9 
 

Of wh prev’ly 
unemployed 
10 
 

New 
jobs 
11 
0 

0 

 

 

 

 
14 

 
12 

2,000 

2 
8 

 
20 

 

1 

2 

 
 

8 

3 

- 

- 
- 

120,000 

2* 
9 

 
33 

4* 

7* 

190,000 

As needed 

As needed 

As needed 

10,000 
35,000 

None lost7 
3 

25,000 
180,000 

 
589,000 

 
562,000 

Laundry:Klein Begin laundry 
Lpg gas: Harare Energy 
Centre 
Cards: Siyazama 
Papermaking 
Deck construction: Appolus 
Construction 
Building work: Pillay 
Construction 
Fuel wood: Alfred Antony 
Clearing alien vegetation: 
Alfred Antony 
 
Total 
* temporary jobs, only for the duration of the contract. 
 
New contracts and jobs have also been created at Rocktail Bay and Sun City, such that in total, new 
linkages during the period of PPT facilitation have created 69 new jobs, of which 38 are regular and 
31 are contract jobs. At Rocktail Bay, the most tangible impacts should be over 30 new jobs and 
community equity shares in Manzangwenya lodge. Although the partnership and recruitment have 
been agreed between WS and the community, delays in agreement with Government have meant 
that WS and the PPT facilitators have meanwhile focused on creating other multiple shorter term 
contracts and strengthening the basic partnership.  
 
Less tangible benefits take many forms. Firstly, there are the non-cash benefits to new contractors. 
For them, the value of linkages goes well beyond the Rand received. They gain information, ideas, 
and  skills  from  the  company,  access  to  new  expertise  or  markets,  and  they  themselves  gain 
enhanced reputation and hence marketability by virtue of their supply contract. The small enterprise 
at Sun City, RECOPRO, had earnt little regular income from selling cards and glasses to Sun City 
by  June  05,  but  the  owner-members  were  reporting  report  on  their  new  confidence,  skills  and 
expectations  for  the  future.  At  Rocktail  Bay,  the  use  of  local  contractors  for  the  widening  the 
airstrip was highly significant for local people because it was the first time that they – rather than 
outside  contractors  -  had  taken  on  such  work.  To  secure  this  local  leaders  attended  at  least  18 
meetings with Forestry officials. The owner of Harare Energy Centre gained profile from his Spier 
contract,  and  was  then  asked  to  become  the  Black  Economic  Empowerment  partner  of  another 
larger  company.  These  type  of  benefits  are  important  to  enable  new  suppliers  to  make  ‘outward 
linkages’ (Warner 2002) to gain other contracts in the market and expand their business.  
 
Non-cash benefits are critical for many local partners who are not suppliers. At Wilderness Safaris, 
PPT facilitation has helped with unionization, which in turn led to wage negotiations that avoided 
redundancies. The community Trust at Mqobela has been strengthened, and that at Mpukane has 
been helped to get going so it can partner Wilderness Safaris at their new Manzangwenya site and 
create a new partnership lodge.  
 

                                                 
6 Rounded to the nearest thousand. 
7 No jobs were lost at the previously contracted laundy. 
 

 

15
Pipeline benefits stem from continued implementation of the linkages approach by the company, 
both with existing local partners and with others. Specifically: 
- Completion of the partnership lodge with the Mpukane community will create employment for 30 
local staff, and could generate around R700,000 per year in local wages.8 
- On-going implementation of the pro-poor approach to procurement by Spier as part of its strategic 
shift of its supply chain. If 10% of procurement can be shifted to small, black and local suppliers, 
this would be roughly R7.5 million per year in contracts. 
-  A shift to local sourcing from across North West Province by Sun City, drawing on the approach 
used with RECOPRO.  

 
Thus the local impacts to be realised from continued and expanded implementation of linkages by 
the Pilot partners far outweighs the current impacts. Progress to date can be seen as just first steps in 
rolling out a new way of doing business. 
 
The range of impacts of new linkages at Wilderness, Sun City and Spier are summarised in Table 2.  

                                                 
8 Based on 2004 data for Rocktail Bay for permanent staff and casual labour. 
 

Key community impact 

Key company / other impact 

16 temp jobs created 
1 job created 
3 jobs created  
4 jobs created 
4 new jobs  
2 temp jobs created  
Unknown number of jobs to be created 

Table 2 Summary table of impacts of linkages implemented across the pilot projects  
 
Linkages 
WS ROCKTAIL BAY 
Local enterprise / contract 
Airstrip Clearing 
Airport security 
Community Tour  
Horse trails 
Security increased  
Supply of beach furniture 
Baby sitting 
Local employment 
Recruitment and training of staff for 
new lodge  
Brought COSATU union into 
negotiation, end 2003 
Other 
Strengthened link between WS and 
KwaMqobela  
Creation of Mpukane Trust and 
partnership with WS  
Support to Mqobela school 
Facilitation of Boundary Issue 

Trust better able to engage with lodge and use 
community income.  
Community will have a share in new lodge via 
Trust and partnership agreement.  
New equipment; donations from tourists.  
Emerging clarity on long standing issue. 

6 jobs retained through PPT-assisted union 
negotiations.  

Improved customer access 
Protection of infrastructure 
New product to offer guests 
New product for guests 
Decreased risk for guests 
Will facilitate activities at beach 
New guest service  

Facilitated wage bargaining. 

Approx 28 jobs to be created 

Local work force ready for training 

Assisted WS who lack time or local knowledge 
to be involved 
Partnership helps WS set up new lodge; gain 
official permission  

Resolution of conflict over ownership claims of 
RB Lodge 

Airstrip use 

Wider on-going potential 

SUN CITY - SMME enterprise 
RECOPRO glass-recycling 

WS/PPT approaching companies re payment 
of a fee to community. 
Operation of Manzangwenya lodge with local staff, equity and supplies. Further roll-out of local 
partnership approach to new sites in Greater St Lucia. Strengthening of WS partnership model 
across the business to include more SMME links. 

4 jobs created; training; new equipment 

Enhanced products for Sun City; seen internally as 
part of a longer term shift to local enterprise 
support  
Supply of cards for VIPs; seen internally as part of 
shift to local enterprise support 

RECOPRO card-making 

2 jobs created; training; new equipment 

Wider on-going potential 

SPIER - Local enterprise / contract 
Klein Begin Laundry 

Harare Energy Centre 

Siyazama Papermaking 

Wooden deck construction  

Building construction  

Fuel wood supplier  

Kayamandi township: support to 
B&Bs and tourism development 
Alien Clearing 

Wider on-going potential 

Across all sites 

Expansion of RECOPRO and linked products/enterprises. Introduction of other SMMEs in into 
Sun City supply chain. Other contribution to the local economy facilitated via the new 
Development Forum.  

New business; training; equipment; 11 jobs 
created 

Income to existing township enterprise 
strengthened 
Increased income to existing enterprise 

Significant saving, est. at over ZAR200,000; 
showed enterprise dev. through in-sourcing is 
viable  
Demonstrated a township operator can deliver to 
required standard 
Demonstrated local supplier can meet value 
aspiration 
Demonstrated linking with HDI suppliers is viable

New income flow to HDI contractor; 4 jobs 
created over period of contract 
New income flow to HDI contractor; 7 jobs 
created over period of contract 
Regular income for supplier; 2 jobs created 
over period of contract 
Broader skill set of local people; first direct 
integration into mainstream tourism economy
Long-term contract include professional 
mentorship. 9 new jobs created 
Continued increase in supply contracts to small, black, local businesses due to continued 
application of pro-poor approach to procurement across Spier departments 
69 new jobs: 38 regular, 31 short-term. 
24 ‘linkages’ created. Tangible expansion 
opportunities for several enterprises 

Reinforced view that approach of seeking out HDI 
suppliers is viable 
Potential for future work, now relationship is 
established 
Opportunity to develop linkages with this group as 
well as play a direct role in tourism development  
Significant cost saving; build long term regional 
capacity  

Demonstration of strategic approach to local 
linkages and enterprise development  

(Note: Linkages shown in italics are ‘in the pipeline’).

 

16
 

 

 

17
Finally, looking beyond the 5 pilot sites, wider local impacts should derive from replication of 
the approach by other companies. The principle of a ‘pilot’ project was to pilot an approach that 
can be tested and then used by others. Two main avenues for wider uptake are: 
 
(1)  In  May  205,  Business  Linkages  in  Tourism  (BLT)  was  launched  –  a  non-profit  business 
providing services in PPT facilitation, drawing on the experience and skills developed during 
PPT Pilots. This opens the way to spread the PPT approach far beyond the Pilots to others in the 
industry. BLT is already working on strategic development of linkages in Kozi Bay and other 
parts of Kwa Zulu Natal9.  
 
(2)  In  September  2005,  a  series  of  ‘How  To…?’  briefs  on  implementing  local  linkages  was 
launched, drawing heavily on the valuable lessons learned by the companies at the pilot sites. 
These  are  written  for  operational  staff,  published  in  collaboration  with  the  Tourism  Business 
Council  of  South  Africa,  the  Department  of  Trade  and  Industry  and  the  Department  of 
Environmental  Affairs,  and  are  being  disseminated  widely  within  the  South  African  tourism 
industry.  
 
Practical  experience  of  implementing  local  linkages  is  spread  from  the  pilot  sites  to  a  wider 
industry and government audience through the BLT, the ‘How To…?’ series, presentations and 
meetings,  and  material  on  the  project  website.  At  a  time  when  the  Black  Economic 
Empowerment Scorecard for the tourism industry10 in South Africa is encouraging companies to 
look at their socio-economic performance, lessons from PPT Pilots and services of BLT provide 
opportunities for companies to seize on practical advice to move forward. This impact is thus 
potentially the largest, but is the most unknown. 
 
 
5.2  How significant are the impacts? 
 
Given  the  range  of  benefits  to  the  local  economy,  how  significant  are  these  in  the  wider 
development context? 
 

1)  very significant to specific families, not yet to levels of local poverty 

For those entrepreneurs and staff who have secured contracts or employment, there is no doubt 
that their earnings are very significant. They will each be supporting a wider household. Rural 
unemployment  rates  are  often  said  to  exceed  50%  and  given  the  lack  of  alternative 
opportunities, all the new jobs would be highly valued. Nevertheless, given the scale of local 
poverty, the small number of people affected to date by new linkages would have little impact 
on overall poverty in, for example, the townships around Spier, the municipalities around Sun 
City, or the wards around Rocktail Bay.  
 
However, overall operation of the enterprises probably are already having significant impact in 
their locality. Spier pays around R15-17 million a year in wages to local staff. Rocktail Bay is a 
much  smaller  scale  venture,  but  based  in  a  remote  community  of  around  1,500  people.  Two 
percent of the local households have an employee at the lodge. The lodge is the only commercial 
venture of any scale in the community. Sun City employs thousands of staff, the vast majority 
from the surrounding area. Thus while the new linkages have not yet dented local poverty, the 
tourism business itself will have done. 
                                                 
9 See www.tbcsa.org.za/blt 
10 The Tourism BEE Charter and Scorecard, 8 May 2005 (DEAT 2005) is a framework for scoring tourism 
companies for their contribution to Black Economic Empowerment across a range of categories such as ownership, 
skills development and preferential procurement.   
 

 

18 
 

2)  Small relative to existing local benefit from tourism, but disproportionately 

significant for their potential to increase and multiply 

If  existing  wages  outweigh  benefits  from  new  linkages,  does  this  mean  that  facilitating  new 
local linkages is largely irrelevant? No. Clearly wages of local staff are far and away the largest 
cash benefit to local households from tourism. In the safari lodge sector, they generally account 
for over 70% of total local earnings from a lodge11. Anything that can be done to boost wages 
will have an enormous effect, whether it is ensuring payment of a minimum wage, or enabling 
local staff to progress to higher paid jobs. However, the potential to boost wage income from an 
on-going  business  is  likely  to  be  limited,  other  than  through  expansion  of  the  operation.  The 
reason for focusing on creation of new linkages, particularly with local SMMEs, is that there is 
vast potential here for increase. 
 
This is demonstrated by the case of Spier. If Spier can shift 10% of its procurement budget to 
local suppliers, the extra injection of R7.5 mn into local pockets would be roughly equivalent to 
half the local pay roll. Shifting procurement is much more likely and feasible than increasing the 
pay roll by 50% (indeed the latter has just been reduced for efficiency gains, but this has not 
affected the overhaul of procurement).  
 
It is not just the increase in terms of cash value of contracts that matters, but also the potential 
for just one supply contract, one mentoring arrangement, or one equity partnership to lead to 
other business ideas and skills and ultimately to a more thriving local economy. 
 

3)  Small so far relative to project input, large in future via expansion and replication 

Donor funding for the project was £224,000. Pilot partners contributed their own time, resources 
and on-site costs. Some very rough estimates of impacts relative to donor inputs are: 
 
Firstly taking account only of cash-based linkages already secured: 
•  If new local contracts secured run for 4 years, local contract values match donor input. 
 
•  New local wages add up to around 40% to 50% of donor input if regular jobs are assumed to 
last 2 years on average and contract jobs for 4 months on average. If 2 years’ worth of the 
new jobs at Manzangwenya lodge are included, local wages account for around 80% of grant. 

 
Given the high value of non-cash benefits (not valued here), this suggests that current benefits 
already match costs.  
 
If pipeline and future impacts are included, the high potential value of the approach is clear. 
• 

If 10% of Spier's procurement is shifted locally, the value of local contracts per year would 
be three times donor spend on the project.  

 
Once other replication benefits are taken into account – by other pilot partners or via uptake of 
lessons by the wider industry - benefits far outweigh donor spend.  
 
It is difficult to assess effectiveness compared to other comparable uses of grant funds. As noted 
in the following section, direct impacts on local enterprise and jobs are lower than in some other 
projects  that  focus  exclusively  on  brokering  linkages.  Compared  to  the  Poverty  Relief 
Programme  (PRP)  of  South  Africa’s  Department  of  Environmental  Affairs  and  Tourism,  the 
project compares very well. The primary aim of PRP is poverty alleviation through sustainable 

                                                 
11 Koch, E. & and Massyn, P. J. forthcoming. The African Safari Lodge and Sustainable Rural Development: 
Lessons learnt from six case studies in Southern Africa and proposals about how to extend these to other ASLs. 
 

 

19
work opportunities, the cost per job created is approximately R81,000 (over £7,000) with the 
majority of jobs created being temporary jobs (DEAT 2004). In PPT Pilots the cost per job is 
less than half than (just over £3,000 per job), with the majority of them permanent jobs, and jobs 
being just one part of the spread of benefits achieved.  
 

 

20 

 

6  External Facilitation: How can it Encourage Business Change? 

 
Beyond  this  project,  there  are  several  organisations  seeking  to  promote  business  linkages 
between corporates and SMMEs, or corporates and communities. The linkage approach adopted 
by  this  project  was  direct  facilitation  provided  to  the  company.  Facilitation  meant  having 
discussions  with  management,  scoping  and  presenting  options,  liaising  with  partners,  and 
carrying out work on the ground with new suppliers or community partners. Implementing this 
at  5  very  different  corporate  sites  led  to  many  lessons  about  what  facilitation  can  achieve  in 
different circumstances. 
 
The effect of PPT input on companies was highly variable. Contributions of PPT facilitation can 
be distinguished at different ‘levels’ or stages, which are tabulated in Table 3 with indication of 
which level was achieved at which site. 
 
Table 3: different levels of corporate change affected by PPT facilitation 
 
1  Getting  PPT  linkages  discussed,  giving  them  a  higher  profile,  and 
building awareness of a range of options and a more strategic approach 
to community benefit and ways of doing business differently; 

Sites where this was a major focus 
Sun  City,  Ker 
Southern Sun, Wilderness Safaris 

PPT facilitation can contribute to: 

and  Downey, 

2  Garnering management commitment to investing in local linkages; 
3  Scoping a variety of linkage options and identifying priorities 
4  Facilitating  a  shift  to  a  more  strategic  approach  to  community  work, 

Sun City, Ker and Downey 
Sun City, Spier, Wilderness Safaris 
Wilderness Safaris, Spier 

internally within the company 

5  Facilitating  implementation  of  linkages  with  local  entrepreneurs  and 

communities; 

6  Contributing  to  lesson-learning  within  the  company  about  linkages 

approaches and what is required to implement them further.  

Spier, Wilderness Safaris 

Spier, Wilderness Safaris 

The balance between these levels varies at the different sites, according to the internal situation 
of  the  company.  Where  a  more  strategic  linkages  approach  was  entirely  new,  and  PPT  visits 
infrequent, as at Ker and Downey, PPT impact was mainly at level 1. Similarly at Sun City, 
where getting the enterprise approach going was a challenge and achievement, the main impacts 
were at levels 1 to 3, though with some implementation too. At Spier and Wilderness Safaris, 
management commitment to local linkages was already in place and the PPT facilitators were 
nearby, often on hand. Thus PPT facilitation was able to achieve further impacts at levels 4-6, 
by helping to roll out the approach within the company, and moving along implementation with 
local partners.  
 
The  key  role  of  the  facilitation  was  to  help  companies  ‘over  the  hump’  of  getting  going  on 
linkages. Facilitation helped to reduce the initial ‘transaction costs’ whether these were internal 
costs of getting management buy in, or cost of actual implementation. Factors that contributed to 
the success of facilitation were: 
•  Detailed local and corporate knowledge of the facilitators 
•  The  presence  of  company  champions  that  were  seeking  to  move  the  linkages  agenda 

forward, and saw PPT facilitation as a means to make progress; 

•  The  fact  that  local  linkages  were  already  rising  up  the  agenda,  and  input  of  outsiders 

helped to raise the profile of the issue. 

 
Factors that constrained the effectiveness of facilitation at some sites were: 
• 
•  competing corporate priorities leading to delays before PPT issues were addressed 

the need to move the company agenda along prior to any implementation;  

 

 

 

 

• 

• 

21
the  need  for  partners/micro  businesses  to  be  created  and  build  capacity  took  time:  they 
were not ‘ready made; partners;  
the pilot companies are relatively small in industrial terms, and the areas they are located 
in  are  rural  and  not  commercially  highly  developed.  Thus  compared  to,  for  example, 
linkages around a mining project, there was a smaller set of feasible options. 

•  project resources were stretched across the sites and the amount of time spent at some sites 

could usefully have been higher.  

 
Finally, the fact that facilitation was virtually free (in-kind costs but not cash charges) had pros 
and cons. The companies may not have used PPT at all in the first place, had it required fees. 
The fact that companies were not ‘clients’ also added to the independence of the facilitators and 
the CSI Director at Sun City commented that this added to their weight. On the other hand, it 
meant there was less pressure on them to make good use of their PPT resource.  
 
These reflections have implications for replication of PPT facilitation more widely. Firstly, for 
the question of which companies to work with, it suggests that either:  
 
1.  it  can  be  most  effective  strengthening  implementation  for  companies  that  already  have 

management buy-in to a PPT approach; 

2.  if  focused  on  companies  where  such  buy-in  is  only  emerging,  a  lengthy  time-scale  and 

intensive interaction is needed 

3.  regular and frequent interaction with facilitators can achieve much more than sporadic visits.  
 
Secondly, there is the question of what scale of local partner to seek linkage with? The pilots 
projects focused on micro-entrepreneurs and local residents, rather than linkages with small or 
medium enterprises. This partly reflects the pro-poor focus, and the aim of the project and the 
companies to reach poor neighbours directly. The focus on micro businesses is also a reflection 
of the focus on ‘local’ and of the reality of what is available in the locality: there are many more 
local black entrepreneurs or survivalist businesses than established medium black enterprises in 
the immediate vicinity of the pilot sites (excepting Southern Sun). The fact that linkages were 
with survivalist or new businesses slowed down the pace of implementation, but did mean that 
beneficiaries were both local and un-skilled or semi-skilled. 
 
 
Other lessons about how to make facilitation effective are captured in Box 1. 

or  
 

and 
 

 

 

 

 

22 
 

 

Box 1: Lessons learned for effective facilitation of doing business differently 
 

1.  Views  and  visits  of  an  outsider  can  help  build  the  profile  of  a  linkages  approach,  create 

space for discussion, and thus build top management support. 

2. 

Get  practical.  While  building  management  support  is  essential,  getting  started  on 
implementation  of  the  most  feasible  projects  can  act  as  a  valuable  demonstration  of  the 
approach. 

3.  Work with a champion inside the company. But if the linkage depends only on the drive of 
one champion inside the company, it is highly vulnerable to collapse if that person moves 
on. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

10. 

terms, 

Transaction  costs  of  identifying  local  partners,  ensuring  they  have  capacity  to  be 
business  partners,  explaining 
logistics, 
negotiating terms, etc can be high. Facilitation can substantially reduce these costs, if there is 
sufficient facilitator’s time available. 

levelling  expectations,  dealing  with 

The facilitator should not do so much that the company need to do nothing and does not 
acquire its own skills in building linkages. Facilitation always needs to be done in a way that 
is  building  links  between  staff  in  the  corporate  and  people  in  the  locality  so  they  can 
continue their own relationship, and apply their new skills to new linkages.  

Focus on linkages that relate to corporate drivers of change, or help deal with current 
challenges in an innovative way, and that make long term business sense to the company. If 
the linkage is entirely tangential to operations, it will not compete with other priorities. 

A long time frame is needed. Often there will be current corporate priorities that have to 

be handled first, before linkages gain their place on the management agenda.  

Help  the  company  to  plan  for  internal  change  management,  as  well  as  external  action 
with  local  partners.  In  particular,  help  to  identify  staff  who  need  to  be  involved  in 
implementing the linkage and help ensure that they are given the information and resources 
for it.  

Build networks of innovators and help in identifying other outsiders who can contribute. 
A  company  may  not  have  experience  of  using  specialised  companies  for  mentoring  new 
suppliers,  NGOs  for  SMME  support,  or  government  business  development  schemes,  but 
such inputs can be invaluable. Put them in touch with other companies investing in linkages 
to exchange ideas. 

Assess  impact  in  several  ways:  impact  on  company  attitude/policies  and  company 
practice; impact on involvement of local people and enterprises in tourism, and impact on 
people’s earnings/skills/lives. Main types of impact will vary considerably according to the 
initial degree of corporate buy-in to linkages and stage of implementation.  
 

Catalysing  linkages  between  corporates  and  SMMEs  is  an  area  of  growing  attention.  For 
example, IFC now has ‘linkage advisors’ whose role is to help ensure that major IFC investment 
projects incorporate a programme of action to ensure the investment acts as an anchor for local 
SMME linkages. Another BLCF-funded project, Small Business Project (SBP), creates linkages 
by  supporting  Business  Centres  which  broker  communication  between  large  corporates  (e.g. 
mines) and established small and medium enterprises.  
 
The  PPT  Pilots  project  adopted  a  quite  specific  and  labour-intensive  approach  to  facilitating 
linkages, which was via direct, on-site advice and facilitation within the company. The project 
has since led to two other approaches to supporting linkages. The first is the establishment of 
‘Business Linkages in Tourism’ as a business unit that supports linkages via commercial advice 
to  companies,  or  via  donor  programmes  working  with  SMMEs  in  an  area.  This  approach  is 
similar to PPT Pilots, except that facilitation service provided to companies will be on a fee-
paying  basis,  while  donor-funded  linkages  work  is  likely  to  be  for  a  destination  not  one 

i)  The facilitation was not focusing primarily on creating new contracts, as some initiatives 
are. A major focus was increased support for a linkage approach within the company, 
analysis of options, and establishment of new policies and partnerships. These in time 
lead to linkage but are not the same as focusing specifically on creating linkages based 
on pre-existing corporate demand.  

ii)  Linkages  were  created  with  suppliers  and  partners  that  were  new,  not  with  existing 
businesses. SBP in contrast is mainly linking existing SMMEs to corporates. The new 
suppliers  needed  a  high  degree  of  mentoring.  Although  some  of  this  was  provided 
directly  by  the  PPT  facilitator,  much  came  from  either  the  corporate  partner  itself  or 
from outside expertise.  

iii) The facilitation approach adopted was direct support inside the company, which is labour 
intensive. This contrasts with the SBP approach of supporting Business Advice Centres 
that  essentially  broker  contacts  for  interested  companies  and  can  thus  deal  with  much 
higher volumes. The inside facilitation was needed to help pilot a new approach.  

iv) Finally, PPT Pilots contained a substantial lesson-learning element, precisely because the 
aim  wasn’t  just  to  broker  new  contracts  but  to  test  out  and  demonstrate  a  different 
approach  to  business.  This  increased  the  cost  of  the  project  beyond  that  of  a  pure 
implementation project, but also increased the range of outputs and potential impacts.  

 

23
company. The second is a more hands-off approach relying on sharing lessons from experience 
of pilot partners and other companies, mainly via the ‘How To…?’ series. 
 
Compared to other projects that seek to support linkages, the costs of the intensive PPT Pilots 
approach were relatively high. For example, SBP reports that in the five years from 1998, its 
support to Business Centres reached 80 corporates, creating 958 linkages worth R1, 353 million, 
involving 600 SMEs and 3,000 new jobs. Aggregate data for all BLCF projects to date suggest 
that roughly, £4.5 million of grants to around 60 projects supported 2,047 business linkages (an 
average of 100 linkages per £220,000 of grant), with each linkage creating an average of 8 jobs. 
Within  the  PPT  Pilots  project,  linkages  created  so  far  from  the  £225,000  of  grant,  stands  at 
around 24 (depending on exactly how a ‘linkage’ is defined), with most creating fewer than 8 
jobs each. However, as noted above, the number of linkages and jobs is continuing to increase, 
and the replication impact of this project is high12.  
 
The higher cost of jobs and linkages created within PPT Pilots can be attributed to four factors: 

 
However,  if  a  linkage-facilitation  approach  was  to  be  scaled  up  more  widely  in  the  tourism 
sector,  it  would  be  important  to  consider  how  to  increase  reach  while  containing  costs.  PPT 
Pilots experience suggests four issues for consideration.  
 
One issue is whether to prioritise brokering linkages with small and medium businesses that are 
already established – (where they exist ) rather than micro-enterprises. This approach has been 
explicitly adopted by SBP’s Business Bridge program (SBP 2005), in order to increase the value 
and  impact  of  linkages  created.  This  approach  may  also  be  reflected  in  Sun  City’s  push  to 
procure from North West province, where a wider range of established small businesses may 
well be found. Such businesses would recruit the target beneficiaries (poor un-skilled and semi-
skilled people) as they expand, but would not be run by them. Thus the direct participants would 
be  chosen  only  according  to  business  objectives,  not  business  and  social.  However,  in  some 
tourism areas such an approach simply is not feasible if the aim is to secure local linkages, given 
the low skills base and low levels of formal sector activity.  
 
                                                 
12 These figures must be interpreted with enormous caution, as no more than ball-park figures, because of the 
critical question of ‘what can be attributed to a project?’ If this is answered differently in different projects, then 
this can easily account for ratios that differ by a factor of 2 or 3, or even 5 or 10. 
 

 

24 
Another question is whether to focus only on those companies where top level buy-in is already 
significant enough to lead to rapid implementation. This is the ideal, and might become more 
feasible  in  the  South  African  context  as  the  BEE  Scorecard  and  existing  demonstrations 
encourage  CEOs  to  adopt  linkages.  However,  it  does  not  answer  the  question  of  what  to  do 
where companies in the tourism mainstream need further encouragement for the development 
potential of their business is to be harnessed.  
 
A  third  option  is  to  focus  on  destinations  not  single  companies.  If  buy-in  from  a  number  of 
companies operating in one area could be secured (a big if), there would be economies of scale 
in encouraging them all to work more with local businesses.  
 
A further area to consider is how to make maximum use of the range of business development 
support agencies that can provide mentoring to local partners and suppliers. Their services to 
SMMEs  can  be  an  invaluable  complement  to  facilitation  that  focuses  on  the  corporate  or  on 
brokering linkages with small businesses. However, total reliance on outsiders for the mentoring 
would not be appropriate, as mentoring provided directly by the corporate partner is likely to be 
high value and tailor made to need.  
 
  

 

 

25

7  What is the Long Term Significance of this Approach Likely to 

be? 

 
7.1  Significance to tourism debates 
The  PPT  Pilots  project  has  successfully  demonstrated  an  approach  to  doing  tourism  business 
differently, and to enhancing local benefits from tourism. This is highly significant given that it 
has long been argued that there is potential for tourism to contribute more to reducing poverty, 
but there has been little empirical evidence of what businesses themselves can do to achieve this. 
The pilots’ experience shows that there are many different ways for businesses to build local 
linkages, and that though the initial transaction costs are high,  such strategies can make long 
term business sense. 
 
At  a  time  when  the  World  Tourism  Organisation,  the  UN  Conference  on  Trade  and 
Development and the New Partnership for African Development (NEPAD) are calling on world 
leaders  to  recognise  and  harness  the  contribution  of  tourism  to  the  Millennium  Development 
Goals, 
important  addition. 
Recommendations  on  how  tourism  companies  can  invest  in  local  linkages,  and  can  be 
encouraged to do so by governments, need to be incorporated into this agenda.  

tourism  companies  are  an 

the  role  of 

these 

lessons  on 

To business and MDG debates 
The demonstration of PPT Pilots is also significant to current discussions about how exactly the 
private  sector  can  make  a  greater  contribution  to  the  Millennium  Development  Goals.  It 
reinforces arguments that companies need to move beyond philanthropic CSR and find ways to 
harness their core competencies for development gain. In the tourism sector, sharing ‘business 
DNA’  with  local  enterprises,  increasing  local  entrepreneur  access  to  the  tourism  market,  and 
using their procurement power to support local suppliers are invaluable ways for businesses to 
utilise their core competencies.  
 
Most  discussion  about  the  role  of  the  private  sector  in  contributing  to  development  has  been 
based on experience in extractive sectors (mining, gas) or in the agricultural commodities for 
which there is fair trade. In this context, the comparisons and contrasts with the tourism sector 
that can be derived from PPT Pilots are: 
 

i.  Business action for creating greater local linkages and economic impact can be done in 
the tourism sector, as in other sectors. It can be commercially viable and deliver local 
development. 

ii.  Because  tourism  companies  and  operations  are  smaller  (than,  say  mines),  the  initial 
transaction  costs  of  setting  up  linkages  are  proportionately  higher.  Therefore,  a 
destination-wide  approach  becomes  important  to  achieve  economies  of  scale,  and/or 
there  is  a  need  for  subsidised  provision  of  public  goods  and  reduction  of  market 
failures that reduce the transaction costs for companies of engaging with SMMEs. 

iii.  Bringing SMMEs into the supply chain is a key area of potential in tourism, as in other 
sectors,  particularly  in  provision  of  services.  However,  other  kinds  of  linkages  also 
have  high  potential  in  the  tourism  sector,  particularly:  legal  partnerships  with  local 
people  to  share  equity  or  generate  commercial  returns  to  their  natural  assets;  and 
downstream linkages that stimulate local tourism services, such as cultural and heritage 
products. 

 

 

 

 

26 
 

iv.  Key  elements  of  the  business  case  in  the  tourism  sector  are,  as  in  other  sectors,  the 
need to manage reputational risk and to ensure local social licence to operate. However 
in tourism there are additional potential benefit of diversification of the product offer, a 
more distinctive product and brand, and direct gains in terms of customer experience 
and satisfaction. This is because the tourists come to the site of production and can see, 
hear of, or experience the linkages for themselves.  

 
7.2  To the tourism sector within South Africa 
Within South Africa, the approach has great potential significance across the tourism industry. 
Its  long  term  impact  depends  on  take  up  by  other  companies.  Wilderness  and  Spier  are  both 
distinctive in being companies that are value-driven, and the same is true of several other sites 
with linkages, such as Fair Trade in Tourism (FTT-SA) accredited sites. The question is whether 
more  companies  will  follow  them,  as  the  market  leaders  develop  business  models  and  lower 
risks. Nothing is guaranteed, but wider uptake seems likely. Other companies face commercial 
pressures to rebrand, gain local social licence, demonstrate their post-apartheid credibility etc, 
and so there are reasons why the more mainstream companies should also adopt linkages.  
 
This  is  good  moment  for  linkages  approaches  to  be  adopted  more  widely  in  South  Africa, 
because the new Tourism Black Economic Empowerment Scorecard is designed to encourage 
companies  to  look  beyond  narrow  BEE  (i.e.  ownership  of  equity)  to  a  range  of  BEE  factors. 
Companies  will  be  scored  on  other  matters  such  as  affirmative  procurement,  enterprise 
development  and  community  development,  all  of  which  can  achieved  through  a  linkages 
approach. Nevertheless, it is also possible for companies to ignore the scorecard (if they are not 
dependent on government custom) or to maximise their scores by dealing with a few large black 
owned businesses, rather than with the local pro-poor agenda.  
 

To tourism development outside South Africa 
Looking  beyond  South  Africa,  the  tourism  industry  is  significant  and/or  growing  in  the  vast 
majority of developing countries, accounting for the main source of foreign exchange in all but 2 
of the least developed countries (Roe et al, 2004). Thus if these approaches to local linkages can 
be replicated outside South Africa, they can contribute to poverty reduction in the majority of 
developing countries.  
 
The extent to which South African approaches can be replicated needs consideration. There are 
certainly  distinctive  features  of  South  Africa  that  contributed  to  PPT  Pilots.  Specifically,  in 
south Africa, the post-apartheid BEE agenda results in a range of policies that explicitly create 
incentives for businesses to change their practice – at least in terms of black people, if not local 
and  poor  people.  Incentives  include  criteria  in  concession  allocations  that  encourage 
partnerships, and the BEE Scorecard for tourism. However, the BEE agenda also distracts from 
the PPT agenda, because the focus on race can make it harder to focus attention on poor and 
local beneficiaries. Outside South Africa, direct policy incentives relating to who benefits from 
tourism  are  substantially  less.  However,  incentives  that  are  created  by  local  community 
expectations  and  local  risk  management,  and  by  investors,  international  tour  operators  and 
tourists, apply in other developing countries not just South Africa.  

The apartheid legacy affects potential for linkages in another way. The gulf between established 
companies and SMMES is vast, because of historical segregation. The political context results in 
market  failure.  This  gulf  makes  it  harder  to  build  linkages,  though  also  means  that  there  are 

 

 

 

27
more ‘low hanging fruit’ to pluck (i.e. easy winners) by creating commercially obvious linkages 
that would have occurred naturally in other economies. 

Another  consideration  is  that  margins  appear  to  be  relatively  high  in  South  African  tourism. 
Tourism boomed after democratisation and when the Rand weakened to around ZAR 18 to £1. 
Since the Rand strengthened (to around ZAR 11-12: £1), prices have not gone down. If this is 
correct, it may make it easier for firms to be investing in measures that involve short term cost 
for long term gain.  

 

 

These South African specifics made it a good place to test out a linkages approach, but they do 
not invalidate the approach elsewhere. It is likely that businesses in other countries would face 
fewer  policy  incentives  for  linkages,  but  they  would  still  face  a  range  of  incentives  from 
residents,  investors  and  guests.  They  may  also  face  fewer  transactions  costs  of  implementing 
linkages where there is more historical interaction. The types of linkages they can pursue, and 
the range of business benefits such as customer satisfaction and social licence to operate, would 
be expected to be broadly the same. Testing out these assumptions and the replicability of the 
linkages approach in other developing countries should be a priority next step.  
 
7.3  Policy Implications  
 
The findings from PPT pilots suggest a range of policy implications for national governments 
and  international  agencies  to  encourage  pro-poor  business  linkages  in  developing  country 
tourism sectors 
 

1.  Push the agenda: it is important to keep moving debates beyond CSR as philanthropy 
or just environmentalism, to focus on ‘doing business differently.’ Although this might 
be  obvious  to  some  engaged  in  business  debates,  this  is  not  obvious  in  tourism!  For 
example,  the  World  Travel  and  Tourism  Council’s  report  on  sustainability  action  by 
tourism companies (WTTC 2002) starts with a call to go beyond corporate philanthropy 
to corporate social responsibility. However, of the wide range of examples quoted, the 
vast majority were companies making donations, not doing business through linkages. 

2.  Invest in SMME support and the operating environment: this is essential for SMME 
linkage in tourism or other sectors. It needs to include business development, training, 
appropriate  regulations  and  assistance  to  comply  with  regulations,  infrastructure 
development, and legal rights. 

 
3.  Create incentives for corporates: government can provide incentives for companies to 
invest  in  local  linkages  through  a  range  of  measures  such  as  tourism  licensing, 
concession allocations, , marketing support, and more generally via political expectations 
and the climate of debate. 

4.  Reduce  transaction  costs:  even  if  companies  have  incentives  and  realise  potential 
business benefits of local linkages, initial transaction costs of change may deter them. 
Governments and outside agencies can help them over the ‘hump’ by brokering contacts 
and  sharing  information  and  good  practice  tools.  Local  and  regional  government  can 
play  a  critical  role  by  catalysing  destination-wide  initiatives  which  can  achieve 
economies of scale and reduce risks for individual companies. 

. 
5.  Focus tourism policy and regulation on broad based participation: tourism policy is 
traditionally focused on boosting visitor numbers (‘bums in beds’), but it is important for 

 

 

 

28 

 

overall policy to focus also on who participates in the sector and to develop strategies to 
widen  participation  (i.e.  not 
tourism. 
Internationally, this is often stated in broad tourism policies, it is not always reflected in 
regulations and departmental actions).  

tourism  but  more  pro-poor 

just  more 

International  Finance  Corporation,  SBP,  Business  Partners 

6.  Include  tourism  in  linkage  approaches:  to  date,  linkage  approaches  such  as  those 
employed  by 
for 
Development13 have been most active in the extractive industries. The linkages approach 
would need to be adapted slightly for tourism, given the smaller size of average company 
and the somewhat different range of local linkages. Nevertheless, PPT Pilots shows there 
is great potential for linkage facilitation approaches to be applied in tourism.  

7.  Further testing, implementation and research. A priority is to test out and implement 

the linkage approaches with tourism companies beyond South Africa.  

For the research agenda, priority topics are:  
• 

the  development  benefits  of  doing  business  differently  –  how  effective  a  tool  for 
local economic development is investment in facilitating linkages?;  

•  quantification of business costs and benefits – what do they amount to for a company 

and what determines their scale? 

•  effectiveness  of  different  linkage  facilitation  approaches  –  which  approaches  are 

most effective, in tourism and beyond? 
replicability of the South African linkages – can the linkages approach be effectively 
adopted by tourism companies throughout the developing world?  

• 

 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 

                                                 
13 of the World Bank, Care and others: see 
http://www.odi.org.uk/PPPG/activities/country_level/odpci/msp/BPDPartnershipUpdate1_05.04.pdf 
 

 

29

Appendix 1: Further Information  

Business Linkages in Tourism 
Business Linkages in Tourism is a new business unit that has developed out of the pilot projects. 
It has been established to provide services to industry and government to facilitate pro-poor 
approaches in the tourism industry. 
BLT provides strategic planning and facilitated delivery of: 
- Product development based on local business linkages 
- Procurement of goods and services locally 
- Cultural and heritage product development 
- Sustainable local partnerships for tourism development 
- Development of clusters and networks, for tourism-led development 
Contact Adrienne Harris (bizlink@tbcsa.org.za) for further information. 

 

How to...? guides for Tourism Companies 
The  How  To…?  series  of  Tools  and  Tips  for  Tourism  Companies  on  Boosting  Local 
Economic  Impact  has  been  developed  to  provide  practical,  on-the-ground  advice  for  tourism 
companies wishing to increase their pro-poor impact: 

 

 

-  Brief 1: Boosting procurement from local businesses 
-  Brief 2: Stimulating local cultural and heritage products 
-  Brief 3: Building local partnerships 
-  Brief 4: Setting corporate priorities and managing internal change. 

 
Copies can be downloaded from http://www.pptpilot.org.za/IFC_tooltips.htm or hard copies can 
be ordered from Adrienne Harris, Business Linkages in Tourism: bizlink@tbcsa.org.za  
 
Electronic outputs: www.pptpilot.org.za 
The project website contains further information from the project and the pilot sites. Material 
includes: 
- A Monitoring & Evaluation report for the 3 year pilot project. 
- A project overview report  
- A supplier questionnaire that was piloted at Spier to survey existing supplier relationships, 

along with the Excel file used to analyse and present results. 

- A submission on the Black Economic Empowerment scorecard proposed by the government, 

raising issues about the risk of the smallest black suppliers being squeezed out. 

Plus other papers, briefs and leaflets that were produced during the project.  

Executive Summary  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To contact the project team for more specific enquiries: 
 
Clive Poultney 
Mboza Tourism Projects 
PO Box 95636 
Waterkloof 1045 
South Africa 
Cell: +27 (0) 824910062 
Email: pptsa@iafrica.com 

Caroline Ashley 
Overseas Development Institute  
111 Westminster Bridge Road 
London SE1 7JD 
United Kingdom 
Tel: +44 (0) 2079220342 
Email: c.ashley@odi.org.uk 

www.pptpilot.org.za 

 

 

 

30 

 

References 

 
Ashley, C, Poultney, P., Haysom, G., McNab, D., and Harris, A. (2005) How To…? Tools 
and Tips for South African Tourism Companies on Local Procurement, Products and 
Partnerships. Business Linkages in Tourism, Overseas Development Institute, Tourism 
Business Council of South Africa, Department of Trade and Industry, and Department 
of Environmental Affairs, South Africa.  

 
Ashley, C., Roe, D. & Goodwin, H. (2001) Pro-poor Tourism Strategies: Making Tourism 

Work for the Poor ODI,CfRT,IIED  

 
DEAT (2004) Socio-Economic Impact of Poverty Relief Funded Projects 

http://www.environment.gov.za/ProjProg/PovRelief/poverty_relief_impact_200620032
.html. Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism, Johannesburg, South Africa.  

 
DEAT (2005) Tourism BEE Charter and Scorecard 
http://www.environment.gov.za/TourismIndaba_2005/docs/tourism_bee_charter_scorecard
.pdf. Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism, Johannesburg, South Africa. 

 
Koch, E. & and Massyn, P. J. (forthcoming) The African Safari Lodge and Sustainable 

Rural Development: Lessons learnt from six case studies in Southern Africa and 
proposals about how to extend these to other ASLs. MAFISA, Johannesburg, South 
Africa. 

 
McNab, D. With contributions from Ashley, C., Haysom, G., Nyathi, Z. & Poultney, C. 

(2005) Monitoring and Evaluation Report of the Pro-Poor Tourism Pilots Project ODI 

 
SBP (2005) Business Bridge Unpublished report. Small Business Project, Johannesburg, 

South Africa. 

 
Spier (2005) Sustainability Report for 2005 Spier Holdings, Stellenbosch, South Africa.  
 
TBCSA (2004) South African Tourism Industry Empowerment and Transformation 
Annual Review Tourism Business Council of South Africa, Johannesburg, South Africa.  
 
Warner, M, (2002) Optimising the Development Performance of Corporate Investment 
Building the Case for a Core Competences Approach ODI, London.  
 
WTTC (2002) Corporate Social Leadership in Travel & Tourism World Travel and 

Tourism Council, London, UK.  

 
Zepeda, E. (2004) Pro-poor growth: what is it? One Pager # 1. UN Information Centre. 
 

 

