Aesthetic 
Politics in 
Fashion

Aesthetic 
Politics in 
Fashion
Elke Gaugele
(Ed.)

Publication Series of the Academy of Fine Arts Vienna
Eva Blimlinger, Andrea B. Braidt, Karin Riegler (Series Eds.)
Volume 14

On the Publication Series

We are pleased to present this new volume in the publication series of the 
Academy of Fine Arts Vienna. The series, published in cooperation with our 
highly committed partner Sternberg Press, is devoted to central themes of 
contemporary thought about art practices and art theories. The volumes in 
the series comprise collected contributions on subjects that form the focus 
of discourse in terms of art theory, cultural studies, art history, and research 
at the Academy of Fine Arts Vienna and represent the quintessence of inter-
national study and discussion taking place in the respective fields. Each vol-
ume is published in the form of an anthology edited by staff members of the 
Academy of Fine Arts Vienna. Authors of high international repute are invited 
to write contributions dealing with the respective areas of emphasis. Re-
search activities such as international conferences, lecture series, institute-
specific research focuses, or research projects serve as the points of depar-
ture for the individual volumes.

With this book we launch volume 14 of the series. Aesthetic Politics in Fashion 
illustrates how fashion can be discussed at the nexus of design, art, politics, 
and globalism. In this sense, the concept of fashion is seen from the perspec-
tive of a committed position within the arts (as opposed to the cultural indus-
tries), enabling insights often neglected in publications on the cultural signifi-
cance of fashion. Thus, topics like space production, fashion ethics, 
decolonization practices, and alternative concepts within fashion practice 
take center stage in this publication. This critical and differentiated approach 
to fashion is paradigmatic for how textile practices are discussed and taught 
at the Institute for Education in the Arts of the Academy of Fine Arts Vienna, 
and with this publication we would like to invite an international audience to 
participate in this discourse. We would like to thank the editor Elke Gaugele 
for an excellent job in putting this book together.

The Rectorate of the Academy of Fine Arts Vienna
Eva Blimlinger, Andrea B. Braidt, Karin Riegler

Contents 

Editor: Elke Gaugele
Project/manuscript editors: Martina Fineder, Birke Sturm, Elke Gaugele
Editorial assistance: Mira Sacher, Elisabeth Pfalzer, Caitlin Blachfield
Editorial coordination: Kathrin Wojtowicz
Copyeditor/proofreader: Charlotte Eckler
Design: Miriam Rech, Markus Weisbeck, Surface, Frankfurt am Main/Berlin
Cover Images: BRADARIC OHMAE s/s 2012 “PICTURES SEEN”
Photos: Peter Garmusch
Printing and binding: Generál Nvomda Szeged?? 

The books colour scheme is based on the Pantone Fashion Color Report Spring 
Womens Colours 2014.

ich denke “Cover-
images” kommt 
gleich nach “de-
sign”, und soll BRA-
DARIC OMAHE in 
Großbuchstaben?
erkennt man so, 
dass die COVER 
fotos von Peter 
Garmusch sind?
oder andere formu-
lierug

ist 
Ange-
fragt

ISBN XXX

© 2014 Akademie der bildenden Künste Wien, Sternberg Press
All rights reserved, including the right of reproduction in whole or in part in any 
form.

Sternberg Press
Caroline Schneider
Karl-Marx-Allee 78
D-10243 Berlin
www-sternberg-press.com

Aesthetic Politics in Fashion: An Introduction
Elke Gaugele 

Aesthetic Economies

Aesthetic Economies of Fashion: An Introduction
Eva Flicker 
 
The Tension of Mallarmé’s Deception Manoeuver:   
Temporal, Territorial, and Financial Economies in Fashion 
Birke Sturm 

It’s All About the Image: The Cooperation between the 
Fashion Industry and Celebrities 
Endora Comer-Arldt 

Andy’s Heritage: Collaborations between Fashion, Art,  
and Louis Vuitton  
Monica Titton 

Life Which Writes Itself: Retrospecting Art, Fashion, and  
Photography in Bernadette Corporation
Ilka Becker 

10 

22

30

44

60

76

Production of Space

Fashion and the Production of Space: An Introduction
Barabara Schrödl 

It All Started with a Bicycle: Spring/Summer 2013 
Tanja Bradaric and Taro Ohmae 
 
Framing “Saints and Sinners”: Methods of Producing Space 
in Fashion Shows: Michael Michalsky’s Fall/Winter 2009 Collection
Alicia Kühl 

Fashion Film: Spaces of Exclusivity and the Globalization  
of Accessibility 
Sabina Muriale 

The Waywardness of Fashion: Society in the Subjunctive 
Michael R. Mueller 

Alternative Aesthetic Politics

Alternative Aesthetic Politics: An Introduction
Elke Gaugele and Monica Titton 

Dressing the Tiger: Decolonization and Style Racism in  
South-Asian Fashion 
Ruby Sircar 

“Jute Not Plastic”: Alternative Product Culture between  
Environmental Crisis and Fashion 
Martina Fineder 

On the Ethical Turn in Fashion: Policies of Governance and  
the Fashioning of Social Critique 
Elke Gaugele 

“Performing Whiteness”: Revisioning White Textiles in  
Visual Culture
Birgit Hähnel 

Image Credits 
Biographies 

98

104

112

130

146

164

174

186

204

228

246
252

Aesthetic Politics 
in Fashion 
An Introduction

Elke Gaugele

Elke Gaugele

11

For fashion theory there has always been trouble at the intersection of aesthetics 
and politics. Modernity has drawn out fashion as a figure of ambivalence that 
implicates homogenization as individuation, which sells hierarchy as democ-
ratization, and poses normalization as opposition. In terms of politics, the 
episteme of fashion has been historically engaged in the program of enlight-
enment, with its contradicting signifiers of freedom and dependence, as well 
as drawing spatial, social, and corporeal orders, defined by the coloniality of 
power. As such, fashion became a hegemonial cultural practice of Western 
nation building, driven by the paradoxes of communization, individualization, 
and gendering. In parallel with the emergence of industrialized consumer  
society and as a component of the new spirit of capitalist economy, fashion 
evolved into a mass phenomenon. In the context of aesthetics, fashion had 
been construed in antinomy to art as a temporal, transitory aesthetic phe-
nomenon, theorized as a self-oppositional aesthetic dynamics, entangled with 
the ephemeral and contemporary aspects of everyday life. This has changed 
throughout the era of globalization; emphasized now are the communalities 
of fashion and art; their conjunctions are fostered, not least as a model for a 
globalized aesthetic economy.

Aesthetic Metapolitics 

Aesthetic Politics in Fashion proposes modes of critical thinking on the pres-
ent junctions of design, art, politics, and global capitalism. It therefore out-
lines a perspective on fashion as an aesthetic metapolitics and aims to trans-
mit some of the energy from vivid discussions of the framework on the 
interchanges of politics and aesthetics posited by French philosopher Jaques 
Rancière to the body of Fashion Studies. Aesthetic metapolitics, as Rancière 
(2006) suggests, aims for the conjunction of art and life. The metapolitical 
project of modernity attempts to realize what politics can only give the ap-
pearance of achieving: to change not only the laws and orders of the state, 
by which politics are limited, but also the specific forms of individual lives.1 By 
creating sublime aesthetic involvements in freedom and equality, and by its 
incorporation of collective experiences, aesthetic metapolitics creates com-
mon as well as individual life forms. Art and politics, “like forms of knowl-
edge,” Rancière proposes, “construct ‘fictions’, that is to say material rear-
rangements of signs and images between what is seen and what is said, 
between what is done and what could be done.”2 This imaginative capability 
and this potential for materialization are forms of knowledge that also pertain 
to fashion and its body of aesthetic politics. This programmatically defines 

1 

2 

 Jacques Rancière, “Die Politik der Ästhetik,” 
archplus, no. 178 (June 2006): 94–98.
 Jacques Rancière, The Politics of Aesthetics: 

The Distribution of the Sensible, trans.  
Gabriel Rockhill (London: Continuum, 
2004), 39.

12

Introduction

Elke Gaugele

13

the following perspective on fashion and on the study of fashion as an aes-
thetic metapolitics.

Artistic Regimes, Fashion, and the Distribution of the Sensible 

The episteme of fashion was involved historically in the junctures of aesthet-
ics and politics, which Rancière examined under the perspective of the Distri-
bution of the Sensible, defining “variations of sensible intensities, percep-
tions, and the abilities of the bodies.”3 Accordingly, Rancière introduces three 
artistic regimes: the ethical regime, the representative regime, and the aes-
thetic regime of the arts.4 

All three regimes can be considered as long-term historical structures that 
coexist, intermingle, and are active in terms of a longue durée over events. 
The so-called ethical regime of images recurs on Plato’s ideal state and char-
acterizes the pedagogical functions of the arts to adapt to an authoritarian 
class hierarchy.5 The second artistic regime—the representative—admittedly 
calls upon the autonomy of the arts in relation to the political. But at the same 
time it is designed as a pragmatic and mimetic principle that develops into 
forms of normativity by defining the rules of good or bad art as well as the hi-
erarchy of genres corresponding to political boundaries.6 At the end of the 
eighteenth century, the third regime arises parallel to the “incoherent label 
‘modernity’”: the aesthetic regime of the arts.7 There, art is attributed to au-
tonomy and freedom in the sense of intermingling potentially all existing dis-
tributions of the sensible.8 The aesthetic regime of the arts reversed opposi-
tions between high and low and broke up the interrelationship between 
“subject matter and mode of representation.”9 Rancière illustrates this using 
French literature of the nineteenth century as a mirror of the fashion system: 
through “clothes, or gestures of an ordinary individual (Balzac),” when young 
women were “caught in the equal force of style as an ‘absolute manner of 
seeing things’ (Flaubert).” 10 At that point the concept of the aesthetic regime 
and the emergence of a new sensorium is closely linked to the aesthetic ap-
pearances of fashion. The aesthetic regime, Rancière further states, makes 
art into an “autonomous form of life” and by that “sets down the autonomy of 
art and its identification with a moment in Life’s self-formation.”11

The insight that—through the softening of the hierarchies of the arts and by 
the crossing-over of aesthetic practices in the modern age a new sensorium 
of fashion, art, and life arose—is for Fashion Studies certainly nothing new;12 it 
even goes back, in fact, to Charles Baudelaire’s definition of modernity.13 While 
Baudelaire can be considered as paradigmatic for his artistic critique of capi-
talism, fashion had been defined as a “political economy of the performative 
self”14 and developed as a cultural industry that connects economy and art.15

However, after the normalization of creative selves within a “regime of cre-
ativity”16 in the course of the second half of the twentieth century, even now 
with the highly correlated contemporary background of globalization and 
capitalism, the model of the aesthetic regime is still more than relevant. 
Strong evidence lies in its geo- and bio-political aspects, as the fashion sys-
tem epitomizes the process of the globalization of capitalism.17 Since the 
fashion business resembles more the forms of artistic practice than those of 
other industries, its increasing importance also symptomizes the conver-
gence of economic and artistic logics within global neo-capitalism.18 Fashion 
and art create imaginations and fictions of contemporaneity and the conflu-
ences of the fashion and art market are momentous for the new era of global-
ization after 1989. Their significance lies in the geopolitical production of 
contemporary imaginations and their aesthetic presence in fashion. 

Within this cultural matrix, however, it is striking to look through the kaleido-
scope of the different artistic regimes conceptualized by Rancière as histori-
cally based systems of possibilities. Designed on different, deep-historical 
levels in the sense of longue durée, the three artistic regimes reveal different 
modes of functions and effects of aesthetics and politics, expressed to vary-
ing degrees as the consequence of contemporary globalization processes. 
This makes them noteworthy tools for contemporary analyses of aesthetics 
and politics and likewise for the investigation of aesthetic politics in fashion. 
Contemporary trends such as Ethical Fashion, for example, could be set in re-
lation to the ethical regime.19 Rankings between the arts and their different 

3 
4 
5 

6 

 Ibid., 39.
 Ibid., 20–30.
 Ibid., 20; Ruth Sonderegger, “Ästhetische 
Regime,” Bildpunkt: Regimestörungen 
(Spring 2010): 8–10; http://www.igbildende 
kunst.at/bildpunkt/2010/regimestoerungen 
/sonderegger.htm. 
 Rancière, Politics of Aesthetics, 21;  
Sonderegger, “Ästhetische Regime,” 8–10. 
 Rancière, Politics of Aesthetics, 24.
 Sonderegger, “Ästhetische Regime,” 8–10.
 Rancière, Politics of Aesthetics, 32.

7 
8 
9 
10   Ibid.
11 
12   Elizabeth Wilson, Adorned in Dreams: 

 Ibid., 26.

Fashion and Modernity (London: I.B. Tauris, 
2003).

13   Charles Baudelaire, “Modernity,” in The 

Painter of Modern Life: And Other Essays, 
trans. and ed. Jonathan Mayne (London: 
Phaidon Press, 1995), 12–15; Luc Boltanski 
and Ève Chiapello, The New Spirit of Capi-
talism, trans. Gregory Elliot (London: Verso, 
2005), 38. 

14   Adam Briggs, “Capitalism’s Favourite Child: 

The Production of Fashion,” in Fashion 
Cultures Revisited: Theories, Explorations 
and Analysis, ed. Stella Bruzzi and Pamela 
Church Gibson (London: Routledge, 2013), 
186–99.

15   Boltanski and Chiapello, New Spirit of 

Capitalism, 38. 

16   Andreas Reckwitz, Die Erfindung der 

Kreativität: Zum Prozess gesellschaftlicher 
Ästhetisierung (Berlin: Suhrkamp, 2012).

17   Patrik Aspers, “A Note on Global Capitalism,” 
in Global Capitalism: The Road Ahead, ed. 
Bharti Thakar (Hyderabad: Icfai University 
Press, 2010), 3–16.

18   Boltanski and Chiapello, New Spirit of 

Capitalism: 8; Ève Chiapello, “Evolution 
and Co-Optation: The ‘Artist Critique’ of 
Management and Capitalism,” Third Text 6, 
no. 18 (2004): 593.

19   See in this volume Elke Gaugele, “On the 
Ethical Turn in Fashion—Policies of Gover-
nance and the Fashioning of Social Critique,” 
204–27. 
soll immer das ganze kapitel 
genannt werden?

14

Introduction

Elke Gaugele

15

genres, as for example between the applied or fine arts or between art and 
fashion are revealed—under the perspective of the representative regime—as 
social and societal hierarchies of the sensible. The aesthetic regime, as dis-
cussed above, creates new social and economic spaces of imagined global 
communities through the appearances of fashions. On the level of everyday 
practices, fashion accomplishes a new sensorium of shared fictions and cul-
tural belonging.

Art, Aesthetics, and the Economy of Fashion

Nevertheless, in the course of the modern age, fashion and art established 
two particular and differentiated social and economic systems with their own 
criteria, rules, and value creation processes.20 Even Simmel had already point-
ed to the cross-references as well as to the boundaries between the different 
spheres: “Thus fashion can to all appearances and in abstracto absorb any 
chosen content: any given form of clothing, of art, of conduct, of opinion 
may become fashionable. And yet many forms in their deeper nature show a 
special disposition to live themselves out in fashion, just as others offer in-
ward resistance.”21

Both the art and the fashion system have developed through mutual ex-
change processes as well as by statements of autonomy: proclamations that 
fashion if necessary can be design, but would never be art; or that art by no 
means wants to be fashion.22 Even so this positioning, distinction, and rela-
tioning within a cultural industry is highly interesting as an aesthetic politics 
from a social as well as an economic point of view, as these are significant for 
a new era of global capitalism after 1989. The development of the fashion 
landscapes of the new millennium is characterized by the extension of the 
two major fashion conglomerates LVMH and Kering, the new brand identity of 
formerly PPR, buying in as many leading design houses as they can.23 Now 
that more labels than ever before are consolidated under the same roof, this 
means a major transformation of the luxury fashion industry into the econom-
ic model of an umbrella holding.24 Currently it sets out the guidelines under 
which the brands operate, based on the accumulation of the “artistic and fi-
nancial potential” of its labels and builds on strategies of “creativity” and “em-
powering imagination.”25 Targeting for a geopolitical production of imagina-
tions of the contemporary and their aesthetic presence through fashion and 
art, the consortium constantly sets up new art enterprises. It establishes gal-
leries, sponsors art fairs as well as major exhibitions and pushes brand collab-
orations with artists, so that present fashion merchandise seems to be run 
more by visiting artists and/or celebrities than by permanent in-house design-
ers.26 Ten years ago, art theorist Isabelle Graw (2004) already characterized 
the collaborations between fashion and the art market, as the dernier cri, the 

latest thing. She points out that the fashion-shaped arts and art-shaped fash-
ions of the 1990s and 2000s are the effects of networks within a visual indus-
try that builds its image production and visibility on the corporative struc-
tures of this new cultural-industrial completion. This promotes not only the 
entering of fashion logics or celebrity structures into the art world, but also 
the adoption of art practices and of gestures of artistic ideals of freedom in 
the field of fashion.

Joanne Entwistle (2009) has framed another perspective on the Aesthetic 
Economy of Fashion.27 Based on ethnographic fieldwork on fashion buyers 
and models, she outlines an aesthetic economy that values and distributes 
fashion as an aesthetic product and aesthetics as its key value. The aesthetic 
economy of fashion builds upon cultural knowledge as well as on aesthetic 
sense and sensibility, which comprises its essential form of capital: “aesthet-
ics are the product/s and, as such, are the center of the economic calcula-
tions of the practice.”28

Side by side, operative techniques related to the art world were introduced to 
foster artistic reasons as a spirit of capitalism.29 Luc Boltanski and Ève Chia-
pello (1999/2005) reveal that the development of flexible neo-capitalism re-
sults from an incorporation of the elements of an artistic critique into the 
economic system. These are assimilated into the “spirit of capitalism,” as an 

20  Isabelle Graw, “Der letzte Schrei: Über 
modeförmige Kunst und kunstförmige 
Mode,” Texte zur Kunst, no. 56 (December 
2004): 80–95.

21   Georg Simmel, “Fashion,” International 

Quarterly, no. 10 (1904): 153; http://www.
modetheorie.de/fileadmin/Texte/s/Simmel- 
Fashion_1904.pdf.

22   Graw, “Der letzte Schrei”; see also Isabelle 

Graw, High Price: Art Between the Market 
and Celebrity Culture (Berlin: Sternberg 
Press, 2010).

23	 	LVMH	(=	Moët	Hennessy	•	Louis	Vuitton),	PPR	
(= Pinault Printemps Redoute Group); see 
also Stella Bruzzi and Pamela Church  
Gibson, “Introduction. The Changed Fashion 
Landscape of the New Millenium,” in Fashion 
Cultures Revisited: Theories, Explorations 
and Analysis, ed. Stella Bruzzi and Pamela 
Church Gibson (London: Routledge, 2013), 
1–8.

24   Endora Comer-Arldt, “It’s All about the  

Image: The Cooperation Between the 
Fashion Industry and Celebrities,” in this 
volume, 44–59.

25   All quotes are phrases of brand strategies 

from the website of the Kering Group; 
http://www.kering.com/en/group/
about-kering#empowering.

26  Bruzzi and Church Gibson, Fashion Cul-
tures Revisited; see also Monica Titton, 
“Andy’s Heritage: Collaborations Between 
Fashion, Art, and Louis Vuitton,” in this 
volume, 60–75. Here she demonstrates 
the examples of the Kering-Group’s hold-
ing, the Palazzo Grassi in Venice, the art 
institution Prada Foundation in Venice, 
and the “Fondation Louis Vuitton” in Paris. 
She also highlights the role of Marc Jacobs 
within Louis Vuitton, cooperating with the 
artists Takashi Murakami, Richard Prince, 
Yayoi Kusama, and Stephen Sprouse; and 
in 1988, Louis Vuitton’s cooperations with 
the artists César, Arman, Sol LeWitt, Sandro 
Chia, and James Rosenquist.

27   Joanne Entwistle, The Aesthetic Economy 
of Fashion: Markets and Value in Clothing 
and Modelling (Oxford: Berg, 2009).

28   Ibid., 55.
29  Boltanski and Chiapello, New Spirit of 

Capitalism; Chiapello, “Evolution and Co-
Optation,” 593.

16

Introduction

Elke Gaugele

17

“ideology that justifies engagement in capitalism.”30 This relates to the con-
vergence of economic and creative logics as well as to management’s sup-
port for creative modes of functioning. Arguing that capitalist accumulation 
stands in close connection with the forms of critique aimed at it, Boltanski 
and Chiapello also refer, in addition to the “artistic critique,” to a second an-
tagonistic mode of criticism.31 This social critique—inspired by socialists and 
Marxists—mainly points to exploitation, inequality, and poverty among workers 
as well as the destruction of social bonds and collective solidarity.32 Fashionable 
apparel is predominantly manufactured in places—sometimes sweatshops—
with low pay, long forced overtime, piecework labor, poor health and safety, 
abusive management, child labor, lack of job security, and barriers to union-
ization.33 Therefore, contemporary fashion cultures reveal an interesting field 
of tension between modes of artistic and social critique. Through the trend of 
Ethical Fashion, the fashion system began to adopt and display the critical 
discourse on its own exploitative modes of production. Ethical Fashion incor-
porates and performs issues of a global political agenda: climate change, 
social inequality, and collective values. With it a new agenda arose in the 
aesthetic politics of fashion.

Aesthetics and Politics of Fashion: Strands and Chapters

Taking this dynamic framework as a productive point of departure, this an-
thology brings together different angles within interdisciplinary studies that 
are motivated by the question of aesthetic politics in contemporary fashion. 
Researchers examine aesthetics, economies, and politics of fashion from a 
number of perspectives such as: art history, cultural science, sociology,  
design, and fashion studies. They debate fashion as a cultural phenomenon at 
the intersections of artistic, creative, economic, and everyday practices.  
Furthermore, they also focus on alterative aesthetic politics based on postco-
lonial strategies, reflections on critical whiteness, and ecological and ethical 
demands. Demarcations and overlaps, hierarchies, and alignments are dis-
cussed within the contexts of fashion, the arts, and styles regarding their ma-
terial constitution and symbolic realization. 

On the other hand, Aesthetic Politics in Fashion investigates the key issues 
that currently strategize, frame, and form fashion as an aesthetic metapoli-
tics. These are set out in the strands of aesthetic economies as well as in the 
production of space, and furthermore in the motivations for alternative aes-
thetic politics. The first chapter, “Aesthetic Economies,” focuses on the col-
laboration of artists, media, and fashion labels. These are investigated as visu-
alization strategies for fashion marketing. The chapter starts with a study of 
Mallarmé’s nineteenth-century magazine “La dernière mode,” along with its 
underlying marketing strategy, and continues with topical research on fashion, 

celebrities, and Louis Vuitton’s commercialization of the arts. Further, it exam-
ines Bernadette Corporation’s critical art practices towards fashionable celebrity 
artists and the arty anti-fashion poses of fashion models. The second chapter, 
“Production of Space,” investigates spaces and media spaces of fashion and 
art in relation to the regimes of power, gaze, and representation. It examines 
how new global spaces of exclusivity are produced in contemporary fashion 
shows as well as in digital fashion films. Finally, fashion is sketched out here 
as a sphere of liminality that designs imaginations for a “Society in the Sub-
junctive.” “Alternative Aesthetic Politics,” the third chapter, reflects the increase 
of alternative aesthetic practices and their significance for ecological and 
postcolonial lifestyles. It examines Indian textiles as signifiers of decoloniza-
tion and eco-designs as well as ethical fashion as a carrier for values such as 
trust, honesty, and, social justice. It proposes critical whiteness studies as a 
new perspective on a globalized fashion industry, which is inspected here for 
post- and neocolonial processes. 

These three lines that presently dominate fashion as an aesthetic metapolitics 
are theorized in introductory essays at the beginning of each chapter: aesthetic 
economies, production of space, and alternative aesthetic politics.

30  Boltanski and Chiapello, New Spirit of 

Capitalism, 8.

31   Ibid., 38.

32   Ibid., 37.
33  Briggs, “Capitalism’s Favourite Child,” 

186–99.

19

18

Introduction

Literature

Aspers, Patrik. “A note on Global Capitalism.” 
In Global Capitalism: The Road Ahead. Edited 
by Bharti Thakar, 3−16. Hyderabad: Icfai Uni-
versity Press, 2008. 

Baudelaire, Charles. The Painter of Modern 
Life: And Other Essays. Translated and edited 
by Jonathan Mayne. London: Phaidon Press, 
1995.

Boltanski, Luc and Ève Chiapello. The New 
Spirit of Capitalism. Translated by Gregory  
Elliot. London: Verso, 2005.

Briggs, Adam. “Capitalism’s Favourite Child: 
The Production of Fashion.“ In Fashion Cul-
tures Revisited: Theories, Explorations and 
Analysis. Edited by Stella Bruzzi and Pamela 
Church Gibson, 186–99. London: Routledge, 
2013.

Bruzzi, Stella and Pamela Church Gibson. 
Fashion Cultures Revisited: Theories, Explora-
tions and Analysis. London: Routledge, 2013.

Chiapello, Ève. “Evolution and co-optation. 
The ‘artist critique’ of management and capi-
talism.” Third Text, no. 18:6 (2004): 585–94.

Entwistle, Joanne. The Aesthetic Economy of 
Fashion: Markets and Value in Clothing and 
Modelling. Oxford: Berg, 2009.

Graw, Isabelle. “Der letzte Schrei: Über  
modeförmige Kunst und kunstförmige Mode.”
Texte zur Kunst, no. 56 Mode (December 
2004): 80–95.

Graw, Isabelle. High Price: Art Between the 
Market and Celebrity Culture. Berlin: Stern-
berg Press, 2010.

Rancière, Jaques. The Politics of Aesthetics: 
The Distribution of the Sensible. Translated 
with an introduction by Gabriel Rockhill.  
Afterword by Slavoj Žižek. London: continuum, 
2004.

Rancière, Jaques. “Die Politik der Ästhetik.” 
archplus, no. 178 (June 2006): 94–98.

Rancière, Jaques. Dissensus: On Politics and 
Aesthetics. Edited and translated by Steven 
Corcoran. London: continuum, 2010.

Reckwitz, Andreas. Die Erfindung der Kreativ-
ität: Zum Prozess gesellschaftlicher Ästhe-
tisierung. Berlin: Suhrkamp, 2012.

Simmel, Georg. “Fashion.” International Quar-
terly, no. 10 (1904): 130−55. Accessed July 
28, 2013. http://www.modetheorie.de/filead 
min/Texte/s/Simmel-Fashion_1904.pdf.

Sonderegger, Ruth. “Ästhetische Regime.” 
Bildpunkt: Regimestörungen (Spring 2010): 
8–10. Accessed February 20, 2014. http://
www.igbildendekunst.at/bildpunkt/2010/re-
gimestoerungen/sonderegger.htm.

Wilson, Elizabeth. Adorned in Dreams: Fashion 
and Modernity. London: I.B. Tauris, 2003.

Aesthetic 
Economies

Aesthetic  
Economies of 
Fashion
An Introduction

Eva Flicker 

Eva Flicker

23

Pelt, leather, fiber, pigment, metal, stone—nylon, polyester, polyacrylic. Mate-
riality is an important factor for clothes and a minor aspect in fashion dis-
course. The necessity of garment is basically a physiological one but mainly 
and historically deeply imbedded in complex social and cultural dynamics 
that we usually do not reflect in our daily lives. 

Fashion refers to the materiality and visuality of cultures. But dematerializa-
tion does not mean, that fashion is only a world of signs and symbols. Aes-
thetic values in fashion are the central product in aesthetic economies and 
may of course generate economic materiality. One crucial process in be-
tween is attraction. 

As a medium of communication, fashion spreads a wide range of negotiations 
in diverse social directions, in social, political, cultural, religious, moral, sexu-
al, or economic structure.1 Clothes and fashion influence both, technologies 
of the body and the self as well as technologies of expression and representa-
tion. Simmel argues that fashion is a product of class distinction with the aim 
of following those from the same ranks and being distinguished from those in 
lower positions.2 Fashion communicates distinction and belonging—we shift 
between the individual subject and the collective or group, minor and major 
social systems. 

In aesthetic economies, aesthetics act as the central value and attraction as 
the central communication. Though aesthetics is a fluid value shifting fluently, 
paradoxically the permanent change of qualities of aesthetics represent the 
constancy of aesthetic economies. “However, aesthetic values do not come 
out of the nowhere; they certainly do not reside in the disembodied signs of 
contemporary capitalism, but are generated internally to the field of production 
itself, by the routine actions and practices of individuals and institutions.”3

Creating, producing, exchanging, selling, marketing, seeing, touching, listen-
ing, wearing, watching, admiring, discarding, demonstrating, performing, 
commenting, blogging, painting, picturing, imaging, spacing… . The com-
plexity of fashion is overwhelming; we find all aspects of modern societies: 
power, hegemony, social inequality, distinction, culture, gender, etc. So I de-
cided to stretch some outstanding ambivalences and contraries within fash-
ion and aesthetic economies—without raising claim to completeness—as in-
troduction before shortly announcing the following four contributions.

1  Daniel Devoucoux, Mode im Film: Zur Kultur-

anthropologie zweier Medien (Bielefeld: 
Transcript, 2007), 29.

2  Georg Simmel, “Die Mode,” in Die Listen 
der Mode, ed. Silvia Bovenschen (Frank-
furt/Main: Suhrkamp, 1986), 182. First 

published in German in 1911.

3  Joanne Enwistle, “The Aesthetic Economy: 

The Production of Value in the Field of 
Fashion Modelling,” in Journal of Consumer 
Culture 2 (Nov. 2002): 322, doi:10.1177/ 
146954050200200302.

24

Aesthetic Economies—An Introduction

Eva Flicker

25

Originality—Imitation 

“Nichts ist so verbreitet (und damit so wenig originell) wie der Wunsch nach 
Originalität.” [Nothing is as universal (and thus so unoriginal) as the desire to 
be original.]4 How to stand out, when everyone wants to stand out, or even 
needs to be outstanding in our society of expression and self-expression? 
Managing the balancing act between being original and being the original is 
a challenge. There is no original without the impulse to copy and imitate. New 
fashion styles arrive after centuries of nearly all combinations of styles, fashion 
recalls, and recombinations of materials, forms, and colors: the new occurs 
within the old, and nostalgia is remixed with future times, swinging between 
the familiar collective traditions and the unfamiliar in the revenant 
unacquainted. 

Luxury—Poverty 

Interests in fashion were not restricted to the female in earlier centuries; they 
extended also to the male upper class.5 Fashion and styles included not only 
clothes, hairstyling, shoes, make-up, jewelry, but also the way of talking, what 
to say, how to behave, to socialize, etc. The more barriers diminished be-
tween the social classes, the more diffusion of clothing styles there was into 
lower classes. Within this trickle-down process, the distinction of prosperity 
was cloned with single pieces as products of fashion economies. Fashion in-
dustries producing fake styles were exported to countries with large popula-
tions of low-wage workers. The global North is swamped by textiles produced 
in the global South and East. Global textile supermarket chains supply lower 
income populations with affordable fashions. And so, social inequality is no 
longer visible through shabby clothes or shoes with holes. Fashion is separat-
ed from social habitus and the economic system of low-price fashion contrib-
utes to a simulation of prosperity and pretends a fictitious wealth. This prac-
tice of concealment of social inequality pushes poverty and precariousness 
out of the visible public and into the private and invisible sphere.

Popular Culture—Creative Industries 

“What is the case that the excitement which accompanied the emergence of 
a new fashion design star could be traced through a series of precise promo-
tional strategies involving fashion editors, fashion writers, fashion buyers 
(who need something avant-garde to liven up a window display) as well as an 
array of stylists, photographers, models and friends from college, all of whom 
might be said to constitute a ‘network’?”6 Fashion industries are a remarkable 
part of the growing creative industries and the globalized markets in fashion 

play crucial roles. Markets are social constructions. “Actors relate to other 
actors, most notably to other actors on the same dividing line of producers 
and consumers.”7 Fashion amounts to a hybrid of art, media, and economy, 
stretching the logic in all directions. 

Elites—Celebrities 

Film has created stars since the early twentieth century and demonstrated 
the star’s luxury lifestyle in film but also in private life. “Mass culture is im-
mersed in fashion and gravitates toward stars and idols, prodigiously suc-
cessful and attractive figures, who inspire infatuation and adulation in the ex-
treme.”8 With a time lag and through social processes, a trickle-down effect 
spreads upper class values as simulation to lower classes. Boulevard mass 
media and social media play with servile imitation and hysteria and link stars 
and celebrities symbolically to their fan communities. Wearing the same 
shoes as a movie star and buying a wedding dress similar to that of a royal 
princess opens fashion cultures to fashion markets and fashion consumers all 
over the world. “Fashion sales have rocketed when promoted by A-list ac-
tresses, top models, and popular media personalities, as well as elite society.”9 
Mass media create “it-girls.” The phenomenon of a young woman absorbing 
attraction with a special expression or attribute or “quality” is not new. 
Whereas the female “special” characteristic could also have been a quality of 
mind in the 1920s and 1930s, it is nowadays mainly reduced to fashion and 
bodily attraction. 

Women—Men 

Power, body, and gender are an intertwined complex that was reserved for ar-
istocracy for long time. Court cultures authorized men and women to exhibit 
prosperity with their body in exclusive garments. Images and pictures of fe-
male fashion styles throughout the centuries until the present demonstrate 

4  Elena Esposito, Die Verbindlichkeit des 

Vorübergehenden: Paradoxien der Mode 
(Frankfurt/Main: Suhrkamp, 2004), 81.
Ibid., 160.

5 
6  Angela McRobbie, “Fashion as a Culture 
Industry,” in Fashion Cultures: Theories, 
Explorations and Analysis, ed. Stella Bru-
zzi and Pamela Church Gibson (London: 
Routledge, 2000), 258.

7  Patrik Aspers, Markets in Fashion: A Phe-

nomenological Approach (Stockholm: City 
University Press, 2001), 49.

8  Gilles Lipovetsky, The Empire of Fashion: 
Dressing Modern Democracy (Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press, 1994), 181.

9  James Laver, Costume and Fashion: A 

Concise History (London: Thames & Hud-
son, 2012), 296.

10  Valerie Steele, Fetish: Fashion, Sex and 

Power (New York: Oxford University Press, 
1996); Monika Seidl and Eva Flicker, “Fash-
ionable Queens. Body – Power – Gender,” 
in Austrian Studies in English (Vienna: Pe-
ter Lang, 2014).

26

Aesthetic Economies—An Introduction

Eva Flicker

27

the gendered social order of fashion.10 At least since the age of Enlighten-
ment and the processes of democratization in the nineteenth century, fash-
ionable men are said to be mashers, homosexuals, or ridiculous.11 Normative 
gender roles and gender stereotypes exclude fashion styles from politics and 
business. Political functions and economic elites require visual representa-
tion. Pictures of political events are laden with symbolic value; women are 
still a small minority. Female politicians are imprisoned in a double bind com-
munication: when they perform and dress according to feminine patterns, 
they might be seen as soft players in the hard field of politics.12 When they ac-
cept male dress codes such as the dark suit, they refuse to emphasize the 
gender shift in politics. No matter how they devise their roles, they remain 
imprisoned in a situation that does not allow for undoing gender, at least on a 
visual level and they are always regarded and judged on this basis. No matter 
which way they chose, the double bind is fixed within the complex field of 
communication of politics and media. What is optically striking in visual polit-
ical communication is the imbalance between the dominant group of those 
wearing dark suits and the occasional individual with a different style.13 Mod-
els in fashion start to cross these gender borders. While we have been used 
to seeing women in men’s clothes for a while now, male models access the 
catwalk in women’s dresses. Unisex as a visual code in both directions is a 
new dynamic of irritation and attraction in the media, but not yet grounded in 
everyday life.

Aesthetic economies and the field of fashion have recourse to functional log-
ics of art, mass media/social media, and economics while creating particulari-
ties. Intertwined relations between creators, producers, and consumers are 
imbedded in social structure and cultural and visual knowledge.14 Selective 
choices seemingly made by individuals refer to a bunch of social differences 
and inequalities, practices of distinction, needs for belonging and codes of 
communication. In information economies, the increasing overflow of infor-
mation in all societal aspects challenges processes that select for relevance 
and so attraction moves to a scarce and contested commodity. Within the 
economy of attraction,15 it is the currency with which capital is constructed. 
The common basis is economic and cultural capital, social habitus, and taste 
(Bourdieu 1982, Gronow 1997) in diverse variations of prestige in different so-
cial classes.

The following four contributions of the first chapter, “Aesthetic Economies,” 
aim at analyzing sensible relations between actors in fashion and art—produc-
ers, communicators, and consumers. 

Birke Sturm titles her contribution “The Tension of Mallarmé’s Deception  
Manoeuver: Temporal, Territorial, and Financial Economies in Fashion.” The 
author analyzes the magazine La dernière mode, which was edited by the 

French symbolist poet and man of letters Stéphane Mallarmé (1842–1892). 
The essay discusses the journal’s production context and different female 
writers and how far they seem to be “a coup de bleuff” as a virtual figure cre-
ated by Mallarmé himself. The magazine grew to an important style bench-
mark among European and international elites in the nineteenth century and 
created images of fashion clothes for “ladies and children,” as well as recipes 
and home interior decorating advice. The invention and investigation of up-
per class lifestyle and the stereotypical role of women is reflected in three di-
mensions: temporal, territorial, and financial economies. 

Endora Comer-Arldt, in her essay “It’s All About the Image: The Cooperation 
between the Fashion Industry and Celebrities,” sheds a light on the relation 
and co-operation between the fashion industry and celebrities. Practices of 
celebrity marketing and fashion marketing are intertwined—mainly due to 
media visibility. Hollywood stars as fashion models and TV-stars as gaze at-
tractors set visual stimuli for a wide audience. Dominant classes or groups set 
standards of desirability with symbolic and emotional needs and trickle-down 
effects. Endora Comer-Arldt describes the evolution of celebrity culture in 
mass media as significant for the development of co-operation between the 
fashion industry and celebrities of all kinds in popular culture by mentioning 
some prominent examples.

Monica Titton entitles her contribution “Andy’s Heritage: Collaborations be-
tween Fashion, Art, and Louis Vuitton” and unfolds her insight by showing 
connections between artists and fashion labels. The author focuses on exam-
ples of handbags of Luis Vuitton created by artists such as Takashi Murakami 
and Richard Price. The role of the Japanese and the US-American artist dem-
onstrate the intertwining of globalized markets in art and fashion. Internation-
al brands create new images with the use of visual codes, logos, and surpris-
ing eclectic modifications. The dualistic structure of avant-garde and 
commercialization is embedded in a re-contextualization of art, economy, and 
social distinction.

Ilka Becker examines the works of a heterogeneous artist collective, the  
Bernadette Corporation, under the aspect of aesthetic politics in her article 
“Life Which Writes Itself: Retrospecting Art, Fashion, and Photography in the 

11  Barbara Vinken, Angezogen: Das Geheim-

14  John Berger, Ways of Seeing (London: 

Penguin, 1972).

15  Georg Frank, Ökonomie der Aufmerksam-

keit: Ein Entwurf (Munich: DTV, 2007).

16  Cited by Ilka Becker, “Life Which Writes  

Itself—Retrospecting Art, Fashion, and 
Photography in the Bernadette Corpora-
tion,” in this volume: 76–97.

nis der Mode (Stuttgart: Klett-Cotta, 
2013), 70.

12  Anne Hollander, Sex and Suits (New York: 

Knopf, 1995).

13  Eva Flicker, “Fashionable (Dis-)order in 

Politics: Gender, Power and the Dilemma 
of the Suit,” in International Journal of Media 
& Cultural Politics 9, vol. 2 (2013): 214.

28

Aesthetic Economies—An Introduction

Bernadette Corporation.” On one hand, she bases this on an essay by Ulrich 
Bröckling about “being different differently.”16 On the other hand, she uses 
the observation that, in recent years, art and fashion have grown closer to-
gether as accomplices and that—in regard to the culture of consumption—
neither an affirmative nor negative stand seems appropriate from the side of 
art. Becker interprets positions that are established in an intermediate field 
between art, fashion and politics; Bernadette Corporation’s position is one 
that brings fixed identities on a visual level into a flow, as a refusal of identity 
politics. 

Eva Flicker

Literature

29

Aspers, Patrik. Markets in Fashion. A Phenom-
enological Approach. Stockholm: City Univer-
sity Press, 2001.

Berger, John. Ways of Seeing, London: Penguin, 
1972.

Hollander, Anne. Sex and Suits. New York: 
Knopf, 1995.

Laver, James. Costume and Fashion. A Concise 
History. Fifth edition. London: Thames &  
Hudson, 2012.

Bourdieu, Pierre. Die feinen Unterschiede. 
Kritik der gesellschaftlichen Urteilskraft. 
Frankfurt/Main : Suhrkamp, 1982.

Lipovetsky, Gilles. The Empire of Fashion. 
Dressing Modern Democracy. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 1994.

Devoucoux, Daniel. Mode im Film. Zur Kultur-
anthropologie zweier Medien. Bielefeld: Tran-
script, 2007.

Enwistle, Joanne. “The Aesthetic Economy: 
The Production of Value in the Field of Fashion 
Modeling.” In Journal of Consumer Culture 
(Nov. 2002), 317–39.

Esposito, Elena. Die Verbindlichkeit des  
Vor-übergehenden: Paradoxien der Mode.  
Frankfurt/Main: Suhrkamp, 2004.

Flicker, Eva. “Fashionable (dis-)order in politics: 
Gender, power and the dilemma of the suit.” 
In International Journal of Media & Cultural 
Politics 9:2 (2013), 201–219, doi: 10.1386/
macp.9.2.201_1

McRobbie, Angela. “Fashion as a Culture  
Industry,” in Fashion Cultures. Theories,  
Explorations and Analysis. Edited by Stella 
Bruzzi and Pamela Church Gibson, 253–63. 
London: Routledge, 2000.

Seidl, Monika, and Eva Flicker. Fashionable 
Queens. Body – Power – Gender, book series 
Austrian Studies in English. Vienna: Peter 
Lang, 2014. 

Simmel, Georg. “Die Mode.” In Die Listen 
der Mode. Edited by Silvia Bovenschen. 
Frankfurt/Main: Suhrkamp, 1986. Originally 
published in German in 1911.

Steele, Valerie. Fetish. Fashion, Sex and Power. 
New York: Oxford University Press, 1996.

Frank, Georg. Ökonomie der Aufmerksamkeit. 
Ein Entwurf. Munich: DTV, 2007.

Vinken, Barbara. Angezogen. Das Geheimnis 
der Mode. Stuttgart: Klett-Cotta, 2013.  

Gronow, Jukka. The Sociology of Taste. London: 
Routledge, 1997.

The Tension  
of Mallarmé’s  
Deception  
Manoeuver:  
Temporal,  
Territorial,  
and Financial  
Economies  
in Fashion 

Birke Sturm

Birke Sturm

31

La dernière mode—The Mallarméan Deception

It is almost impossible to imagine the world of fashion without fashion maga-
zines demonstrating the latest clothes to wear. Fashion magazines build a 
platform of examples, models, and suggestions that money can buy for a 
reader in search of self-aestheticization. At the same time, fashion magazines 
deliver tips concerning a suitable lifestyle, which can be implemented in 
one’s everyday life. However, this cannot be regarded as a new development. 
It was already in the middle of the nineteenth century that such magazines 
built a strong economic force and were accessible to a large readership.1  
Especially fashion pictures, which were often attached as so-called fashion 
plates, built up an important forum for the bourgeois lady who wanted to  
appear well-dressed, beautiful, and last but not least, modern.2 Except for the 
images, which have been replaced by photographs in the meantime, these 
fashion magazines were quite similar to the ones we know today. Among other 
things, they predominantly included advertisements for fashion boutiques as 
well as cultural tips and diverting readings. If we think of its economical factors, 
especially three different economies of fashion can be reconstructed on the 
basis of these magazines. As fashion with its huge market value is obviously 
part of our capitalist society, the financial dimension comes to mind quite 
quickly. Another economic dimension is temporal: fashion changes and peo-
ple follow in order to keep up with time, to be up-to-date. Last but not least, 
there is a territorial dimension. Fashion is not bound to a single continent. On 
the contrary, fashion is global—no matter whether the production or the con-
sumption of fashion is concerned. 

These economies were already part of the magazine La dernière mode, which 
was edited by the symbolist poet and man of letters Stéphane Mallarmé 
(1842–1892). Eight editions of this magazine appeared every first and third 
Sunday per month from September 1874 to December 1874. It started out with 
an edition of 3000, a number that was reduced to 1000 under a different 
printer in November 1874.3 Within this period of time Mallarmé’s magazine 
showed innovative changes concerning the style and appearance of fashion 
and at once offered the poet’s idea of modernity. On the one hand, the maga-
zine shows a modern view on how to deal with fashion, which goes beyond 
exterior appearance, straight towards the soul. Simultaneously, Mallarmé’s 
way of writing about fashion stresses the importance of the temporal, the ter-
ritorial, as well as the financial economy of fashion and makes them leading 

1  Anne Higonnet, Berthe Morisot’s Images 

of Women (Cambridge, MA: Harvard  
University Press, 1992), 90.

2  Tamar Garb, Bodies of Modernity: Figure 

and Flesh in Fin-de-Siècle France (London: 
Thames & Hudson, 1998), 87.

3  Philip Nicolas Furbank and Alex Cain, “La 
dernière mode, and Its Pre-history,” in Mal-
larmé on Fashion: A Translation of the 
Fashion Magazine “La dernière mode” with 
commentary, ed. Philip Nicolas Furbank 
and Alex Cain, (Oxford: Berg, 2004), 8.

32

The Tension of Mallarmé’s Deception Manoeuver

Birke Sturm

33

and recurring subjects of discussion throughout the magazine. Speaking 
about the human soul in a capitalist-oriented context seems to be absurd at 
first glance. However, Roland Barthes describes La dernière mode in the fol-
lowing: “If it were a matter of a dialectic of the serious and the frivolous, i.e., 
if the frivolity of Fashion were immediately taken as absolutely serious, we 
would then have one of the most elevated forms of the literary experience: 
i.e., the very movement of the Mallarmean dialectic apropos of Fashion itself 
(Mallarmé’s La dernière mode).”4

This article will follow the dialectic of “the serious and the frivolous” that 
Barthes briefly mentions in a footnote. Thus, the effort as well as the decep-
tion that Mallarmé undertook in order to edit his fashion magazine and the 
range of meanings that fashion involves will be described in order to finally 
examine temporal, financial, and territorial aspects of fashion that were also 
part of his project.4

Apart from some unsteadily reoccurring characters, the main authors of the 
magazine can be listed as following: “Madame Marguerite de Ponty,” who filled 
the section “La mode” with the latest news concerning Parisian fashion for the 
lady. She is described as “une femme du monde qui est aussi un littérateur 
distingué.”5 It is worth noticing that this lady is not referred to as a female writ-
er as one might suspect, but that the male “littérateur” was chosen: a mistake 
that might not have happened accidentally. Due to her English name “Miss 
Satin,” another character, is worried about her readers’ trust in the fourth edi-
tion of the magazine.6 However, only two editions later, she is described as a 
very well-known Parisian lady whose actual name remains a secret.7 She was 
responsible for the section “Gazette de la Fashion” and discussed shops and 
places where the latest fashion could be found. Another person labeled as “Ix” 
wrote about Parisian theater plays within “Chronique de Paris.” Additionally, 
books that were supposed to be a must-read for every lady—whether she was 
intellectual or not—were part of this section (La dernière mode 6: Maisons de 
Confiance). His identity was said to have been revealed one day in the sixth 
edition; however, such a revelation never took place.

These characters seem to be quite shady. And it is indeed because of these 
strange characters that Jean-Pierre Lecercle was perfectly right when he called 
Mallarmé’s magazine a “coup de bleuff”—a deception manoeuver—in his publi-
cation Mallarmé et la mode (1989).8 The reason for this is that none other than 
Mallarmé himself was hidden behind all the characters presented above. 

What Mallarmé created with his fashion magazine—the surface of which ap-
pears like any other magazine published at this time—is a reflection of mod-
ern culture: a reflection that shows and supports what Mallarmé must have 
analyzed in detail before the publication; a mirror that subversively found its 

way back into the culture it reflected. The subscribers didn’t know anything 
about these means of production. And Mallarmé’s time and effort speaks for 
itself: Apart from the sections “La mode,” “Gazette de la Fashion,” and “Chro-
nique de Paris,” the magazine came with images of fashionable clothes for la-
dies and children and descriptions of these outfits, as well as tips for recipes 
and homely interior design in the section “Carnet d’Or” (The golden note-
book). In addition, the correspondence with subscribers also made up an im-
portant part of La dernière mode. Only the last section of the magazine, 
which consisted of either poems or prose texts, seems to really have been 
written by contemporary authors, among them Mallarmé himself. At the end 
of each edition, Mme de Ponty dedicated herself to advice on education 
about how to make offspring a part of modern life. 

La dernière mode—Fashion and the Female Soul

But why did Mallarmé start such an enterprise? At a first glance, it seems as if 
his concern was quite simple: giving ladies instructions in matters of taste.9 
However, a close reading of the magazine gives a deeper impression. It seems 
as if Mallarmé, who had a deep interest in the decorative arts and beautiful 
things for some time really identified with his readers. Thus, he took up the 
allure of a female concerned with her own appearance as well as the pleasures 
of life. However, even though this sounds highly superficial, his reflections  
go far beyond the surface.10

Prose texts and verses were part of each magazine. In the first edition, Ix asks 
the question whether these are in vogue and fashionable or at least ought to 
be so. According to him it would be wrong to regard this question as being 
frivolous. The reason for this is as follows: “For it proceeds from an axiom: 
that all women love verse, as they do perfumes or jewels or the characters in 
novels; it is as dear to them as their own selves.”11 Consequently, the value of 

4  Roland Barthes, The Fashion System, 

trans. Matthew Ward and Richard Howard 
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 
1990), 242. 

5  Stephane Mallarmé, “Les maisons de con-
fiance,” La dernière mode 6 (1874). As the 
magazine does not involve any page num-
bers, I refer to the section from which is 
quoted (here: “Les maisons de 
confiance”).

6  Mallarmé, “Gazette de la Fashion,” La 

7  Mallarmé, “Les maisons de confiance,” La 

dernière mode 4.

dernière mode 6.

8  Jean-Pierre Lecercle, Mallarmé et la mode 

(Paris: Séguier, 1989), 23.

9  Rachel Bowlby, “Modes of Modern Shop-

ping: Mallarmé at the Bon Marché,” in The 
Ideology of Conduct: Essays on Literature 
and the History of Sexuality, ed. Nancy 
Armstrong and Leonard Tennenhouse 
(London: Methuen, 1987), 193.

10  Furbank and Cain, “La dernière mode,” 6. 
Furbank and Cain also describe here that, 
when the International Exhibition took 
place in London in 1871, Mallarmé was 
asked to review the French stand. Accord-
ing to the man of letters all invention had 
ceased in the sphere of furnishing. 

34

The Tension of Mallarmé’s Deception Manoeuver

Birke Sturm

35

a new book is judged with the help of the criterion of accidental and various 
interests of women, such as perfume or jewels. Ix continues: “To please them, 
or at least deserve to do so: I know of no ambition, becoming a triumph if one 
succeeds, that is more fitting for a work in prose or in verse. They say that 
there are no real readers any longer, and perhaps this is true; but there are 
women readers. Only a woman, in her freedom from politics and gloomy 
cares, has leisure, once her dressing is done, to feel the need to dress her 
soul as well.”12

Indeed, Mallarmé describes women of the upper class, free from obligations, 
as having the chance for a life full of pleasure-seeking frivolity, which is close-
ly linked to fashionable clothes. According to him, a female lifestyle gives 
women the unique opportunity to care for their own soul. It is that which 
makes her a proper reader.

On the one hand, it seems as if Mallarmé exposed a lighter and more relaxed 
part of his character than he does in his poetry. However, his gaze at the ma-
terial is definitely serious. 

Ulrich Lehmann describes Mallarmé’s switch into female identities as an in-
vestigation of the social status of women. La dernière mode offered him the 
opportunity to dedicate himself to futile, simple, and domestic things, which 
were connected to the female gender and regarded to be non-male.13

Guy Michaud (1953) went further and stressed a feminine precocity in Mallar-
mé’s character, proclaiming a queer reading in his consistency of the identifi-
cation with femininity.14 And even if we can only speculate about the actual 
purpose behind Mallarmé’s venture of publishing this fashion magazine, it is a 
fact that Mallarmé defended against the fast end of his editorship and that he 
only accepted it reluctantly.15 In addition, the intensive examination of the 
functioning of fashion, which results in the revelation of its economies, 
proves the bourgeois woman’s deep interest in the modern world. 

No matter whether Mallarmé transgressed gender roles or investigated wom-
en’s status in society, in any case, as Rachel Bowlby correctly points out, he 
saw feminine frivolity as an important counterpart in a life that seemed to be 
too masculine and therefore too serious.16 Nevertheless, this does not mean 
that femininity can be said to be superficial in Mallarmé’s eyes. If we keep in 
mind that for Mallarmé the aesthetic ideal was reached best via words and 
language,17 and if we recall the above quotation about the female “freedom 
from politics and gloomy cares,”18 Mallarmé’s concern seems to reach deep. 
He regards women readers as the only proper readers of his time and thus 
sees a woman’s chance to reach these pure ideas and “dress her soul as 
well.”19 In contrast to this transcendent background, the magazine expresses 

temporal, territorial, and financial economies of fashion in modern society, 
which will be discussed in the following. 

The Fast-Moving Nature of Fashion Styles—
Temporal Economies in La dernière mode

When it comes to time, especially two economies are obvious in Mallarmé’s 
magazine. On the one hand, the fugacity as well as the fast-moving nature of 
fashion styles must be considered. On the other hand, it is the time the wom-
an reader has on her hands in order to find her orientation and become part 
of the world of fashion.

In the beginning of Baudelaire’s essay The Painter of Modern Life (1863), he 
describes beauty “as made up, on the one hand, of an element that is eternal 
and invariable, though to determine how much of it there is is extremely diffi-
cult, and, on the other, of a relative circumstantial element, which we may like 
to call, successively or at one and the same time, contemporaneity, fashion, 
morality, passion.”20 

Thus, he regards modernity, which is “the transient, the fleeting, the contin-
gent” as “one half of the art, the other being the eternal and immovable.”21 It 
is this changing and futile element that Baudelaire works out theoretically and 
that ought to become an important practical part within each of Mallarmé’s 
eight editions of La dernière mode.

At the very beginning of the first edition, Madame Marguerite de Ponty dedi-
cates herself to the importance that time has for fashion. On September 6, 
1874—between seasons—it was not the best point in time to speak about fash-

11  Mallarmé, “Chronique de Paris,” La 

2000), 75.

dernière mode 1; Furbank and Cain, “The 
Journal, Fortnight by Fortnight, with Com-
mentary,” in Furbank and Cain, Mallarmé 
on Fashion, 30. Philip Nicolas Furbank and 
Alex Cain published an English translation 
of Mallarmé’s fashion magazine in 2004. 
In the following, I will give the page of the 
English translation as well as the section 
and edition of the original French maga-
zine whenever it comes to direct 
quotations.

12  Mallarmé, “Chronique de Paris,” La 

dernière mode 1 (1874); Furbank and Cain, 
“Fortnight by Fortnight,” 30.

13  Ulrich Lehmann, Tigersprung: Fashion in 

Modernity (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 

14  Guy Michaud, Mallarmé. L’Homme et 
l’Oeuvre (Paris: Hatier-Boivin, 1953).
15  Lehmann, Fashion in Modernity, 87.
16  Bowlby, “Modes of Modern Shopping” 

194.

17  Lecercle, Mallarmé et la mode, 112.
18  Mallarmé, “Chronique de Paris,” La 

dernière mode 1 (1874); Furbank and Cain, 
“Fortnight by Fortnight,” 30.

19  Furbank and Cain, “Fortnight by Fort-

night,” 30.

20 Charles Baudelaire, The Painter of Modern 
Life, trans. P. E. Charvet (London: Penguin, 
2010), 4.
21  Ibid., 17.

36

The Tension of Mallarmé’s Deception Manoeuver

Birke Sturm

37

ion. Therefore, the first edition starts out with the words: “Too late to speak of 
summer fashions and too soon to speak of winter ones (or even autumn ones).”22 
Indeed, fashion in the course of time is a prevailing topic in nearly all of her arti-
cles. In the following edition she writes about how many pretty things she 
glimpsed during the previous two weeks. And she uses the word “glimpsed” on 
purpose, “because preparations for autumn are not completed yet, and the 
great creators of Fashion will not let [people] see their preliminary sketches.”23

Nevertheless—or rather thanks to—a “flagrant indiscretion,” which is not dis-
cussed in further detail, Mme de Ponty can already help her readers out with 
some definite news concerning the best choice of the latest version of shoes 
and hats,24 a version that will be unique because “fashion does not repeat it-
self.”25 In the next edition she refers to the complete transformation that fash-
ion has already undergone during that autumn and that it would still undergo, 
as shown in the last edition, in order to describe “a thousand charming whim-
sies, indispensable extras for daytime wear.”26 After a couple of remarks con-
cerning, for example, necklaces, scarves, and bows, as well as how to wear 
them, she reassures that all these novelties were known to her, “before it was 
known at the last races in the Bois de Bologne” (a place of fashionable gath-
ering, where the latest fashion could be seen). One glimpse there was 
enough to confirm her prefabricated opinion.27 All in all, Mme de Ponty pres-
ents herself as a confidant for the lady who wants to know what to wear. A 
trait that is also obvious in the fifth edition, when Mme de Ponty describes 
how to dress up for different events such as dinner parties or trips to the 
countryside. There is no need to worry about the huge choice of materials for 
Mme de Ponty’s readers. Thanks to her descriptions, as she claims, her read-
ers will be able to foresee the following two months—which was in her view a 
rather long period of time in the field of fashion.28 

Apart from the fast moving and varied fashion styles, time is of importance 
for the female readers to find their way through the jungle of fashion. In this 
context Mme de Ponty is not the only one to help out. The dynamic Miss Satin 
gives tips on where to buy certain products in the section “Gazette de la 
Fashion” and some “cartes-de-visites” present a number of shops that sell 
them. The temporal economy of fashion is therefore immediately linked to the 
financial one. 

Fashion on the Global Market: Territorial Economies in La 
dernière mode

Territorial economies, as they appear in the magazine, are also connected to 
financial economies. Thus, as it was typical for fashion magazines in those 
days, La dernière mode was sold far beyond the borders of France.29 Apart 

from England, Germany, and Austria, the magazine names its price for Australia, 
the USA, as well as some countries in South America, to name only a few. 

The magazine shows an international orientation not only concerning the circu-
lation, but also in terms of content. When we leave fashion for a moment,  
various suggestions for different recipes show a global orientation. Consequently, 
Mallarmé assumed the role of a creole lady to describe the making of a chicken 
stew.30 In addition, he explains under his alias Zizi, a “bonne mulâtre de Surat, 
how to make jam out of coconuts for everybody who was tempted to buy this 
fruit and had little use for it now.”31 Not only exotic ingredients were presented. 
In order to help the readers with authentic recipes and to give his magazine 
an authentic flair, Mallarmé made up characters with a colonial background. 
However, a global exchange was not only proclaimed in the field of food and 
recipes; also fashion was shown as part of a global market. This is especially 
thematized in the columns of the two fashionable ladies Mme de Ponty and 
Miss Satin. Even though Marguerite de Ponty writes that in Paris there is 
“nothing exquisite that it cannot offer for sale,”32 she describes strange and 
big jewels with a “certain intimate charm”33 that the ones of her own country 
lack. Elsewhere she points at a “collier-de-chien,” a necklace for women that 
women were supposed to be given by their husbands, showing the initials of 
both of them and which was known in London, Vienna, St. Petersburg, and 
New York.34

The reason for that is given in one of Miss Satin’s texts: 

“The management has commissioned me to make a confession. It shall be 
brief and loyal. In your Journal, we had forgotten the Ladies of the foreign 
colony in Paris, and indeed foreign Ladies everywhere: forgotten them all! 

22  Mallarmé, “La Mode,” La dernière mode 1 

(1874); Furbank and Cain, “Fortnight by 
Fortnight,” 21.

23  Mallarmé, “La Mode,” La dernière mode 2 

(1874); Furbank and Cain, “Fortnight by 
Fortnight,” 21.

24  Mallarmé, “La Mode,” La dernière mode 1 

(1874); Furbank and Cain, “Fortnight by 
Fortnight,” 21. Especially the Chapeau 
Berger and the Chapeau Valois were men-
tioned in the magazine to be very famous 
at that time.

25  Mallarmé, “La Mode,” La dernière mode 2 

(1874); Furbank and Cain, “Fortnight by 
Fortnight,” 53.

26 Ibid. 
27  Mallarmé, “La Mode,” La dernière mode 3 

(1874); Furbank and Cain, “Fortnight by 
Fortnight,” 75.

28  Mallarmé, “La Mode,” La dernière mode 5 

(1874); Furbank and Cain, “Fortnight by 
Fortnight,” 122.

29  This was not unusual for fashion maga-

zines in those days. For example, the 
French magazine La mode illustrée was 
also available in England.

30 Mallarmé, “Carnet d’Or,” La dernière mode 
4 (1874); Furbank and Cain, “Fortnight by 
Fortnight,” 107.

31  Mallarmé, “Carnet d’Or,” La dernière mode 
6 (1874); Furbank and Cain, “Fortnight by 
Fortnight,” 153f.

32  Mallarmé, “La Mode,” La dernière mode 1 

(1874); Furbank and Cain, “Fortnight by 
Fortnight,” 22.

33 Ibid.
34 Mallarmé, “La Mode,” La dernière mode 3 

(1874); Furbank and Cain, “Fortnight by 
Fortnight,” 74.

38

The Tension of Mallarmé’s Deception Manoeuver

Birke Sturm

39

We were so preoccupied with yourselves, Ladies, that it was as if the fes-
tivities in London or Moscow or Vienna did not exist. In consequence, what 
a shower of letters there has been, bearing bizarre postage-stamps and 
delicately hinting that susceptibilities have been injured! Nor is that all. The 
ladies of Paris were soon sending us requests for new kinds of information.”35

Referring to a couple of letters she received from subscribers concerning that 
topic, Miss Satin concludes: “[W]hat such letters reveal is the need for a rap-
prochement between all members of High Society, whether belonging to Paris, 
the home of all elegances, or to other, perhaps far-flung centres of fashion-
able life.”36

Thus, the world of fashion is described as highly international in Mallarmé’s 
magazine and the international impact that fashion already had in those days 
is reflected perfectly well. In the same edition in which Miss Satin focuses on 
the international readership and the importance of their intercommunication 
and agreement, Mme Marguerite de Ponty writes about the British fashion de-
signer Charles Frederick Worth (1825–1895).37 After his apprenticeship in Eng-
land he came to work in Paris. As he was enormously famous for his feminine 
fashion, Marylène Delbourg called him “le grand organisateur de l’univers 
feminine.”38 Worth was not only well known in Great Britain and France. In 
Austria he was known as Empress Elisabeth’s outfitter. The most famous ex-
ample is certainly the dress in which Franz Xaver Winterhalter painted her in 
1865. It shows the Empress with white stars in her loosely braided hair and 
wearing a strapless dress of white tulle and golden appliqués. Two editions 
after the reference to Worth, Mme de Ponty describes the newest ball gowns 
and makes the reader aware that the way of wearing them comes from the 
East (without explaining what he means by “East” in any further detail).39 
Therefore, even though Paris can be regarded as the capital of the nineteenth 
century, Mallarmé’s accomplishments stress the importance of international 
relations as an economic factor of fashion.

In conclusion, it is clear that fashion must be regarded as a global phenome-
non in Mallarmé’s days. For Mallarmé, fashion was supposed to be of highest 
importance not only for the so-called Parisienne, but also for women world-
wide. His magazine offered a platform on which international news in the 
fashion business could be exchanged.

The Fashionable Lady as Sustaining Economic Power— 
Financial Economies in La dernière mode

As typical for fashion magazines in those days (and still nowadays), La dernière 
mode supported a feminized economy of a beautiful woman made up by 

commodities. The fashionable lady comprised a pillar for the new consumer 
society of the nineteenth century. A woman who dressed up represented the 
magic as well as the superficial excess that money made affordable in modernity.40 
Mallarmé’s magazine presented an enormous number of rules and instructions 
and reassured the speed in which fashion styles novated and had to be 
followed.

As soon as the first signs of fashion were in sight “at this Moment of renewal,” 
Mme de Ponty wishes “to reclothe our lady-reader from top to toe.”41 Through-
out each magazine plentiful images and suggestions are presented. Black and 
white engravings of the newest fashion are described in color and material to 
give a clear idea of the illustration. The aim of the magazine was last but not 
least to show Parisian life with all “its pleasures and its duties everywhere on 
the public scene and in private.”42 Celebrations and the way women were 
dressed for different events were highly important as can be seen by Mme de 
Ponty’s accomplishments: “Celebrations simply for their own sake? Yes, and 
because they are an excuse, and an occasion, for dressing up. ‘Go there’ and 
‘Here is how you should go’: these words will constantly be found in our column, 
and ‘Madame, with such-and-such a toilette you could well stay at home, 
saved from the tedium of the long hours by this silk or that lace, enchanted 
and as it were made new to yourself.”43

A similar (more or less) decadent attitude is revealed throughout each edi-
tion, for example, when Miss Satin points at ladies “who greatly dislike this 
filling of the pockets of rich manufacturers, and insist, obstinately, that things 
in Paris are going to the dogs. This is recognized as a problem “for gazetters” 
like herself. However, this is dismissed as beside the point with the uncom-
passionate words: “Not everyone is lucky; not everyone can buy ‘blue-of-
dreams’ […] gowns, nor otter-fur-coloured tunics of pure Tibetan wool.”44 The 
unfair distribution of luck and the clearness that fashion cannot be available 
for everybody did not prevent Mme de Ponty from writing about “laws, de-
crees, projects, and pronunciations” according to which one needs to dress 

35  Mallarmé, “Gazette de la Fashion,” La 

dernière mode 4 (1874); Furbank and Cain, 
“Fortnight by Fortnight,” 100.

36 Ibid.
37  Mallarmé, “La Mode,” La dernière mode 4 

(1874); Furbank and Cain, “Fortnight by 
Fortnight,” 97.

38 Marylène Delbourg-Delphis, Le chic et le 
look: Histoire de la mode féminine et des 
mœurs de 1850 à nos jours (Paris:  
Hachette, 1981), 47.

39 Mallarmé, “La Mode,” La dernière mode 6 

(1874); Furbank and Cain, “Fortnight by 

Fortnight,” 143.

40 Garb, Bodies of Modernity, 11.
41  Mallarmé, “La Mode,” La dernière mode 2 

(1874); Furbank and Cain, “Fortnight by 
Fortnight,” 51.

42  Mallarmé, “La Mode,” La dernière mode 4 

(1874); Furbank and Cain, “Fortnight by 
Fortnight,” 95.

43 Ibid.
44 Mallarmé, “Gazette de la Fashion,” La 

dernière mode 5 (1874); Furbank and Cain, 
“Fortnight by Fortnight,” 124.

40

The Tension of Mallarmé’s Deception Manoeuver

Birke Sturm

41

this season.45 Baudelaire wrote about a woman’s right or even duty to devote 
herself “to the task of fostering a magic and supernatural aura about her ap-
pearance; she must adorn herself, to be adored. It follows, she must borrow, 
from all the arts, the means of rising above nature, in order the better to con-
quer the hearts and impress the minds of men.”46 Thus, only a couple of years 
later, La dernière mode gave practical and instructive support for women to 
live up to these standards that Baudelaire (well-known to Mallarmé) had fixed 
before.

Although the magazine’s main focus is the female appearance, it goes far be-
yond it including in each edition, for example, the way women were supposed 
to dress their offspring too. The clothes presented were no less exclusive than 
those for the children’s mothers. A “costume en cheviotte” (La dernière mode 
3)—a coat of a special Scottish sheep’s wool for a six-year-old girl—is only one 
example I would like to give here. At the same time, advice on education is 
given in each edition so that children could be introduced to cultural life from 
a very early age. The surrounding of such a modern lifestyle was not to be 
missed either. A variety of the aforementioned recipes and menu suggestions 
as well as proposals for furnishing the housing space and tips for cultural 
events were part of the magazine. Thereby, the events themselves were as 
important as the chance to glimpse the latest trends of fashion while visiting 
them.

Consequently, the magazine La dernière mode points beyond instructions for 
the female appearance. Again and again, it confirms a lady’s task of obtaining 
the aesthetically valuable things in life that money could buy. This is why Ra-
chel Bowlby sees the establishment of a prejudice that is still current today. In 
her view, the magazine creates a picture of the natural woman in which female 
readers can recognize themselves and in which the one thing for women to 
do is to go shopping.47

“The Serious and the Frivolous”

Finally, the tension of Mallarmé’s fashion magazine lies first of all in his own 
masquerade and his writing from the point of view of different, mainly female 
characters that were part of the production. But the tension goes further: 
Mallarmé’s magazine is a serious statement on fashion in modern society and 
reveals his own devotion to it. For Mallarmé, fashion goes deep. Mallarmé’s 
idea is that only women in their freedom of politics could enjoy the pleasures 
of a newly developed modern culture; a lifestyle which was supposed to give 
them the possibility to take care of their souls. For him, they were the only 
real readers. However, this idea is embedded into the temporal, territorial, 
and financial economies of fashion, which were already in full swing in those 

days and not questioned at all by the author. They give the magazine a highly 
superficial flair in spite of all its intensity. Accordingly, Barthes’s description 
of Mallarmé’s magazine that describes it as “a dialectic of the serious and the 
frivolous” turns out to be extremely appropriate.48 The Mallarméan dialectic 
seems to involve absolutely taking seriously what actually seems to be insig-
nificant. For the man of letters, fashion is of high significance.

45 Mallarmé, “La Mode,” La dernière mode 7 

(1874); Furbank and Cain, “Fortnight by 
Fortnight,” 163.

46 Baudelaire, Painter of Modern Life, 46.
47  Bowlby, “Modes of Modern Shopping,” 202.
48 Barthes, Fashion System, 242.

42

The Tension of Mallarmé’s Deception Manoeuver

43

Literature:

Barthes, Roland. The Fashion System. Trans-
lated by Matthew Ward and Richard Howard. 
Berkeley: University of California Press, 1990. 

Baudelaire, Charles. The Painter of Modern 
Life. Translated by P. E. Charvet. London: Pen-
guin, 2010.
 
Bowlby, Rachel. “Modes of modern shopping: 
Mallarmé at the Bon Marché.” In The Ideology 
of Conduct: Essays on Literature and the His-
tory of Sexuality. Edited by Nancy Armstrong 
and Leonard Tennenhouse, 185–205. London: 
Methuen, 1987. 

Delbourg-Delphis, Marylène. Le chic et le 
look. Histoire de la mode féminine et des 
mœurs de 1850 à nos jours. Paris: Hachette, 
1981.

Furbank, Philip Nicolas, and Alex Cain. “La 
dernière mode, and its Pre-history.” In Mallar-
mé on Fashion. A Translation of the Fashion 
Magazine La dernière mode with Commen-
tary. Edited by Philip Nicolas Furbank and 
Alex Cain, 1–13. Oxford: Berg, 2004a.

Furbank, Philip Nicolas, and Alex Cain. “The 
Journal, Fortnight by Fortnight, with Com-
mentary.” In Mallarmé on Fashion. A Transla-
tion of the Fashion Magazine La dernière 
mode with Commentary. Edited by Philip 
Nicolas Furbank and Alex Cain, 17–208. Ox-
ford: Berg, 2004b.

Garb, Tamar. Bodies of Modernity. Figure and 
Flesh in Fin-de-Siècle France. London: 
Thames and Hudson, 1998.

Higonnet, Anne. Berthe Morisot’s Images of 
Women. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press, 1992.

Lecercle, Jean-Pierre. Mallarmé et la mode. 
Paris: Séguier, 1989.

Lehmann, Ulrich. Tigersprung. Fashion in  
Modernity. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000.

Mallarmé, Stéphane. La dernière mode 1–8. 
Paris, 1874. 

Michauld, Guy. Mallarmé: l’homme et l’oevre. 
Paris: Hatiet-Boivin, 1953.

It’s All About  
the Image:
The Cooperation 
Between the 
Fashion Industry 
and Celebrities

Endora Comer-Arldt

Endora Comer-Arldt

45

 

 “The fashion industry has always been associated with glamour and the 
work of journalists; photographers and models are therefore important to 
the process of defining fashion. In a world saturated with images, the im-
age of a fashion house or label has to be carefully manufactured across a 
number of economic and cultural sites—advertising, marketing, magazines, 
shop design. The role of these agents therefore needs consideration in a 
‘systems of provision’ approach.”1

Talking about the image of a fashion house, the collaboration between celeb-
rities and the fashion industry2 is a good way to scrutinize the hybridity of 
fashion as an economic business and cultural moment. It combines the pro-
duction, distribution and consumption of fashion through fashioned bodies 
as “agents.” With her book The Aesthetic Economy of Fashion, published in 
2009, Joan Entwistle introduced a new approach by analyzing the way the 
fashion system works from a combined cultural and economic perspective. 
Based on her fieldwork in model agencies and department stores, she exam-
ines how fashion, as an aesthetic product, is valued and distributed. Using 
this research, and with reference to Bourdieu’s Capital Theory and Callon 
Entwistle’s The Actor Network Theory, she develops a theoretical framework, 
which defines fashion as an aesthetic economy—fashion as its own market, 
which operates within the same economic and cultural calculations as other 
so-called heavy industries.

Paving the Way

This article shows how the cooperation between fashion industry and celebrities 
became established as part of an economic system within the aesthetic econ-
omy of fashion, an economy that depends on a visual environment. As fash-
ion is distributed by images (fashioned bodies) in magazines, billboards, TV 
campaigns and everyday life, the production and distribution of the images 
has to “be manufactured carefully.”

Hence, images are strongly connected to the body; a new actor has become 
more and more relevant within the last decades—the celebrity body. This can 
be shown by taking a historical look at the development of fashion marketing 
and celebrity marketing.

1 

Joanne Entwistle, The Fashioned Body: 
Fashion, Dress and Modern Social Theory 
(Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, 2000), 210.
2  Fashion industry is understood as an eco-
nomic system of fashion companies, fash-
ion magazines (media) and consumers. 
The starting point here is that fashion  

understands itself as art but is also sold as 
a commodity. To ensure this, different 
players are involved in the production of 
visual stimuli for the sale of goods to the 
consumer. In this respect, the term used 
for fashion industry stands for the produc-
tion of consumption.

46

It’s All About the Image

Endora Comer-Arldt

47

In 1928, the American marketing professor Paul Nystrom stated in his mono-
graph Economics of fashion that fashion does not need any known “role 
model.”

 

 “The usual reports of what is worn by social notables do not seem to be as 
valuable now as they formerly were as a means of predicting fashions. The 
masses apparently do not imitate individual notables to the extent that 
they formerly did. Today fashion appears to be more of a social or popular 
movement in which the imitation is largely of types and ideals, rather than 
of persons. […] In other words, it is believed that simple, physical counts 
made at successive intervals and analyzed coldly and dispassionately for 
trends is a much more scientific method of determining the direction of 
fashion than dreamy surveys of what Princess this, Duchess that, or Lady 
so-and-so wore.”3

Paul Nystrom would not have been aware, eighty years ago, that the role and 
function of “social notables” would be used by the fashion industry to devel-
op a new business strategy within the aesthetic economy. 

As celebrities are present in our daily lives through the media, fashion com-
panies soon realized that the celebrity body offers a perfect ad space for dis-
tributing their fashion label and image, which can be inferred from the spe-
cialized literature on fashion marketing and branding.4 Hence, fashion 
companies reacted to social and economic changes by institutionalizing ce-
lebrity marketing as a new marketing and distribution strategy. 

Based on the assumption that designer fashion understands itself as art but is 
also sold as a commodity,5 different actors are involved in the production of 
visual stimuli for the sale of goods. Celebrities achieved an important role 
within the fashion industry during the last decades. A whole new industry, in-
volving different actors, developed around the cooperation.

To show which value-making image strategies are used to promote fashion, 
this article analyses the historical, economic, and social context in which the 
cooperation established.6

Concern here is not with another history of fashion but, rather, to emphasize 
certain changes within society and the economy, which are crucial for the es-
tablishment and intensification of the cooperation. The article focuses delib-
erately on the period from the 1980s until today, since a break in the mutual 
relationship between fashion and celebrities began after the 1970s. Accord-
ing to Isabelle Graw, the fashion world has been increasingly governed by the 
principles of “celebrity culture” since the 1970s.7 A change in the perception 
of fashion and fashion designers already appeared in the 1960s when there 

was a close link between fashion and pop culture. Designers themselves were 
viewed as pop stars.8 Although from the 1960s major social and economic 
developments occurred (e.g., the formation of a celebrity culture) the mentioned 
period is understood as a time when the partnership between fashion industry 
and the celebrity system “took off.” This was due to two developments: First, 
new fashion designers and styles appeared since the 1960s and stated a polarity 
to the traditional French fashion understanding and hegemony. The second 
development has to do with the spread of media. Media offers the platform for 
the visual circulation and distribution of the celebrity body and is therefore a 
basic requirement for the cooperation between fashion companies and 
celebrities. 

Economic conditions are crucial for the establishment of the cooperation. 
Without the upcoming of a service economy and certain changes within com-
pany structures, the cooperation couldn’t develop into its own economic 
system.

Fashion Newcomers

As Barbara Vinken describes in Die Mode nach der Mode, the self-image of 
the French fashion houses started to change by the end of the 1960s. If 
French fashion was equated with aristocratic hegemony only consumable by a 
“few selected,” the “trickle down”9 started to decompose in the 1970s.10 Vinken 
further points out the change of designers of the 1980s from the Western, 
respectively French, hegemony of fashion and the strict categorization of 

3  Paul F. Nystrom, Economics of Fashion 

(New York: Ronald Press, 1928), 32.

4  However, literature such as Fashion Mar-

keting (Bohdanowicz/Clamp) and Marketing 
Today’s Fashion (Mueller/Smiley), pub-
lished during 1994 and 1999, still do not 
mention celebrity marketing. This is 
changing with the turn of the century, es-
pecially from 2005 on. Authors such as 
Mark Tungate (2005), Uche Okonkwo 
(2007), Michel Chevalier and Gerald Maz-
zalovo (2008), Jean-Noel Kapferer and 
Vincent Bastien (2009) or Tim Jackson 
and David Shaw (2009) analyze various 
forms of celebrity fashion marketing.

5  Gertrud Lehnert, “Mode und Modern,” in 

Kulturanthropologie des Textilen, ed. 1 
Gabriele Mentges (Berlin: Edition Ebers-
bach, 2005), 256.

6  The published monograph of Pamela 

Church Gibson about Fashion and Celebrity 
Culture (2012) focuses on the cultural per-
spective without taking into consideration 
the economic dimension. 
Isabelle Graw, “Alle Macht der Chefredak-
tion,” Texte zur Kunst, January 7, 2010; 
http://www.textezurkunst.de/daily/cate-
gory/reiche-roemer/.

7 

8  Elizabeth Wilson, Adorned in Dreams: 

Fashion and Modernity (London: Rutgers 
University Press, 1985), 158.

9  The theory is based on the assumption 

that “lower social classes” orient to domi-
nant class of society; see Elena Esposito, 
Die Verbindlichkeiten des Voruebergehen-
den: Paradoxien der Mode (Frankfurt/
Main: Suhrkamp, 2004), 19–22.

10  Barbara Vinken, Mode nach der Mode: 

Kleid und Geist am Ende des 20. Jahrhun-
derts (Frankfurt/Main: Fischer, 1993), 57.

48

It’s All About the Image

Endora Comer-Arldt

49

people. Her work accords to Pierre Bourdieu’s thoughtson The new clothes of 
the bourgeoisie (1975), in which he describes how the relationships within the 
field of haute couture began to change. While the ruling class of haute cou-
ture relies on established patterns and traditions in their distribution strategy, 
new labels (mainly prêt-a-porter) established a new path of differentiation to 
the rulers.

 

 “The game of the newcomers is almost always to break some existing con-
ventions (e.g., by introducing previously excluded color mixtures or materi-
als), but always within the framework of propriety and without putting the 
rule of the game or the game itself into question. They are in league with 
the freedom, the imagination and the new (which are often identified with 
the youth). While the ruling institutions refuse exaggeration and promote 
art by excluding advertising and the effect, which means in double negative, 
the litotes, the understatement,  ‘balanced’ and at ‘refinement’ …”11  

lektorat:
die FN dazu wäre: Nagasa-
wa, Shin’ya, “Marketing Prin-
ciples of Louis Vuitton. The 
strongest brand strategy,” 
Waseda Business & Econom-
ic Studies, no.44 (2008): 
41–54.

While the “ruling class” focused on approved models and traditions in their 
distribution strategy, newcomers (primarily ready to wear) find another way to 
differ from the existing haute couture model. 

Soll eine Fußnote hin?

Bourdieu’s remarks connect to the role and function of the French Comité 
Colbert (including Louis Vuitton, Dior, Chanel, etc.), which brings together 
over seventy-five French luxury labels. The Comité Colbert is an association 
founded in 1954 by French luxury companies, which use the Comité as a fo-
rum for joint strategic orientation. In an interview with the business magazine 
Brand Eins, the association mentioned that they discussed how they could 
use common strategies to position products in the international market. The 
word “marketing” was, however, frowned upon here.12 Also in the reception of 
newcomers the Comité insists on certain values. Although the conditions for 
new members are very strict, the Comité sees “renewal” as part of the self-
concept. “There is a reputation to uphold. Newcomers must deliver their cus-
tomers the best quality, creativity and an international presence and they 
can’t afford weakness. For the best quality, the new must strive to captivate 
their customers, be creative and international presence and cannot afford any 
weaknesses.”13 

For their marketing strategy, the Comité Colbert—as a union of luxury brands 
with a long tradition in their craft—has used their traditional values in the first 
place since the 1950s. Mainly American fashion companies could not fall back 
on such traditional values or “craftsmanship.” Although Italian fashion compa-
nies rely on a long tradition in craftsmanship they were not seen as exclusive 
and creative enough. Nevertheless, American and Italian fashion companies 
developed reputable labels with collections at the bridge and prêt-a-porter 
market. These newcomers relied on other values as marketing tools, such as 

celebrity marketing. They succeeded by causing symbolic and emotional 
needs at a specific target group. Even without a haute couture tradition, 
American and Italian fashion companies managed to add a certain value to 
their product lines and to establish corresponding luxury segments. 

One of the first who understood to use new ways to market professionally and 
strategically for the conquest of the American market is certainly Giorgio  
Armani. Shin’ya Nagasawa describes that, 

 

 in addition to the validity of the four general marketing principles (product, 
price, place and promotion), especially publicity takes in the promotion as 
a decisive factor.

Giorgio Armani took this concept into consideration and focused his market-
ing and recognition on publicity. To make his fashion and label known and de-
sirable he used celebrities. After starting his career at Nino Cerruti 1881, Armani 
decided in 1975 to establish his own company with his business partner, Sergio 
Galleoti: Giorgio Armani SpA.14 During his work at Cerruti, Armani could al-
ready get first insights of the cooperation between movie stars and fashion 
houses, even if he was not directly involved in movie projects. As Cerruti used 
movie projects with stars as an “add on” for his marketing, Armani centered 
his marketing on celebrities.15

He dressed Richard Gere in the film American Gigolo (1980) and built cooper-
ations with celebrities in the decades following. In the mid-1980s, Armani be-
came one of the highest paid designers in the world16 by using the media 
presence of celebrities as marketing tool. Especially dressing celebrities for 
the Oscar ceremony meant, and still means, a successful form of publicity. In 
1991, the American magazine Women’s Wear Daily called the Academy Awards 
“The Armani Awards.”17 After Giorgio Armani opened his boutique in 1988 in 
Beverly Hills, he also started to intensify and professionalize the cooperation 
with celebrities. He hired Lee Radziwill18 as “special events coordinator.” She 
was responsible for linking well-known people who attract frequent publicity 
to the label Giorgio Armani. In the first place she covered the market on the 
East Coast. To also cover the West Coast with all of its Hollywood activity, in 

11  Pierre Bourdieu and Yvette Delsaut, “Die 

neuen Kleider der Bourgeoisie,” Kursbuch, 
no. 42 (1975): 176. Translated from Ger-
man by ECA.

12  Karin Finkenzeller, “Botschafter des 
Savoir-faire,” Brand Eins, no. 43 (July 
2010): 132. 

13  Ibid., 135.
14  Dana Thomas, Deluxe: How Luxury Lost its 

Lustre (New York: Penguin Books, 2007), 
113.

15  Ibid., 113–18.
16  Teri Agins, The End of Fashion: The Mass 
Marketing of the Clothing Business (New 
York: William Morrow, 1999), 159.

17  Ibid., 137.
18  American society lady, younger sister of 

Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis.

50

It’s All About the Image

Endora Comer-Arldt

51

1988 Armani hired Wanda McDaniel as “director of entertainment industry 
communications.” McDaniel worked closely with celebrity publicists, agents 
and managers to ensure the public and media presence of Armani not only at 
official events, such as the Academy Awards, but also in daily life.

“Rich and famous,” was the glamor image Armani used to sell his fashions; his 
success shows how well his publicity marketing strategy worked out.19 Also 
Versace pursued this strategy. He convinced celebrities such as Madonna, 
Courtney Love, Elton John, Eric Clapton, etc., to wear his fashions in public.20

In the 1990s, at the latest, celebrities were the new fashion models and many 
designers now used celebrities as marketing and advertising instruments. Mi-
uccia Prada describes the situation of the 1990s in a Vogue interview as 
follows:

 

 “Of course, to dress an actress is very much of this time. And, of course, if 
you are a designer, you are very pleased when Uma Thurman and Nicole 
Kidman wear your clothing to search for events. But now there is too much 
pressure to dress the actresses in Hollywood. Every year, people in my of-
fice in New York, say, ‘Do some things for the Oscars’ and I say, ‘But if I do 
not know how an actress wants to present herself, what she wants to ex-
press, how can I design a dress for her? I can not.’”21 

What began as a loose form of “red carpet dressing” and “product place-
ment,” transformed in the years that followed into a solid, institutionalized, 
and contractually designed cooperation that in first place Italian and Ameri-
can Designers as Giorgio Armani, Versace, Dolce & Gabbana, Donna Karan, 
Marc Jacobs, Tommy Hilfiger, Ralph Lauren, etc., used.22 

Another aspect that worked to the advantage of this cooperation was that a 
general social-economic and also technological shift occurred.

 

 “The restructuring of the field of fashion is only the equivalent—and the ef-
fect—to the restructuring of the field of power (as the objective relations 
between factions of the ruling class field), which led many observers to see 
the signs of the downfall of the ruling class, which is in fact only a reorga-
nization of the division of labor accompanied by a change of groups, have 
access to new modalities to profits and prestige of bourgeois existence ...”23 

Based on Bourdieu’s remarks regarding the changes within the field of fash-
ion, this can also indicate a general shift in the economic power, which is re-
lated to neoliberalism. A new labor group, e.g., managers, are highly connect-
ed to success shown as a factor of income, recognition and power. Success 
became a new category for the personal achievement: the belief that if you 

worked hard enough, you could (financially) achieve everything. Celebrities 
are also part of newly reorganized labor groups. 

As Caroline Evans states, the use of celebrities around the turn of the century 
can also be regarded as a “statement of money.”24 Against this background, 
celebrities took on a core function with the advent of neoliberalism as a “role 
model.” They reflect the belonging to—as defined by Bourdieu—the group, 
which “has access to new modalities of profits and the prestige of bourgeois 
existence.”

… Spreading Media

This access was also provided by the increasing presence of consumer cul-
ture as well as the media landscape, because the reception of the coopera-
tion took place in the form of visual and material consumption. Celebrities are 
consumable through the Internet, television and radio, film, newspapers, and 
magazines. Except for their presence in radio, celebrities are connected 
through images and words.

Only through the evolving media landscape, which guarantees permanent  
access to information, a celebrity culture emerged. Global media access was 
enabled by deregulation and the privatization of television in the 1980s, as 
well as by new satellite technology. However, these media opportunities also 
required “acquiring information” for filling the daily media program. In her  
essay “Always on Display: Affective Production in the Modeling Industry,”25 
Elizabeth Wissinger describes the role and function of the model within the 
media landscape. 

 

 “A model’s work is to produce content for attention-gathering and calibrat-
ing technologies such as photography, television, and the Internet. Be-
cause of the diverse information channels and programs, the search results 
in many options: [...] so you search for more subject matter. And in that 
search, the media writes about the lives of models, which I don’t think any-
one would have been concerned with twenty years ago.”26 

19  Agins, End of Fashion, 147–53.
20 Ibid., 139.
21  “1990s. Miuccia Prada takes stock of fash-

ion on the precipice of the twenty-first 
century. Interview with Miuccia Prada.” 
Vogue (November 1999): 498. 

22  Results from own doctoral thesis research.
23  Bourdieu and Delsaut, “Die neuen 

Kleider,” 177. 

24  Caroline Evans, Fashion at the Edge: Spec-
tacle, Modernity and Deathliness (London: 
Yale University Press, 2007), 113.

25  Patricia Ticineto Clough and Jean Halley, 
The Affective Turn: Theorizing the Social 
(London: Duke University Press Books, 2007).

26  Clough and Halley, Affective Turn, 251.

52

It’s All About the Image

Endora Comer-Arldt

53

The advent of celebrity culture can therefore be understood against the back-
ground of this development. The beginning of celebrity culture and the 
meaning of celebrities as commodities coincide with the spread of television 
and the media system. The faster the medial system developed, the greater 
was the demand for new faces and stories within the celebrity system. Celeb-
rities changed from their original professions as actors, entertainers, singers, 
etc., into purchasable products. Similarly, with regard to the role and function 
of the model, celebrities became a raw material within the medial system to 
edit and market it. The evolution of celebrity culture meant a significant de-
velopment for the cooperation between the fashion industry and celebrities, 
since the presence of celebrities has changed to marketable and tradable 
goods. 

This is also reflected by the results of the research literature on the advent of 
celebrity culture. Thus, Ellis Cashmore for example describes in her book  
Celebrity / Culture (2006) that celebrity culture developed as a part of society 
in the late 1980s and early 1990s. This development was supported by the 
media system, which promote celebrity status through the praise and criticism 
of certain personalities since the most important characteristic for the exis-
tence and presence of celebrities is their “visibility.” 

… Economic Conditions

Celebrity culture and the marketing of celebrities is to be regarded as a de-
velopment that was caused not only by social change but also by economic 
upheaval as the transition of the highly industrialized economy to a service 
economy in the late 1970s and early 1980s.27

Companies focused on their core business and began restructuring by out-
sourcing certain work areas to suppliers. By the 1990s at the latest, the con-
cept of “lean production” took hold completely.28 Productions were increas-
ingly outsourced and subcontracted to suppliers in low-wage countries. This 
transition to a service economy has also been accompanied by establishing 
service functions such as marketing, research and development, transport 
and financial services, etc., within the companies. Many of such companies 
focused on the transition of the business organization to lean management as 
well as on building their brand image. The idea linked to this was that suc-
cessful companies produce primarily brands (and brand images) and not 
products.

Already in the 1980s, Boltanski and Chiapello describe the introduction of 
new management structures. These were characterized mainly by the word 

“flexibility.” This meant both, an internal flexibility in terms of circulation of 
work organization and techniques, as well as an external, which was charac-
terized by a networked professional organization.29 

These changes had an impact on the organizational forms and structures 
within the fashion business. A study published in 1999 by Marie-Laure Djelic 
and Antti Ainamo analyzes different forms of organization that have been es-
tablished in the French, Italian and US-American luxury fashion industry. In 
their study, they outline national examples, which they define as “umbrella 
holding” for France; “flexible embedded network” for Italy; and “virtual orga-
nization” for the United States.

To understand the meaning of the brand, the brand image, and the brand val-
ue it is important to take a brief look at the different examples. As these ex-
amples show, the shift within the organizational structures can be retraced; it 
can also be related to Bourdieu’s description of the “newcomers” and the 
meaning of marketing respectively celebrity marketing as part of the brand’s 
management of the fashion companies.

HOLDING 

Finance, Personnel…

CORE

bitte Text in Grafiken 
genau durchsehen.

COMMON SERVICES (or potentially so)

Logistics, Martketing, Advertising

Distribution, Manufacturing, Subcontracting

INDIVIDUAL HOUSE

INDIVIDUAL HOUSE

INDIVIDUAL HOUSE

BRAND NAME 1

Design

Manufacturing, 
Sales, Brand, 
Management

BRAND NAME 2

Design

Manufacturing, 
Sales, Brand, 
Management

BRAND NAME 3

Design

Manufacturing, 
Sales, Brand, 
Management

PERIPHERY

Some subcontracting:
Second lines or accessories

No subcontracting

Some subcontracting:
Second lines or accessories

Fig. 1
Djelic and Ainamo, depiction of the “umbrella holding” organizational model in the fashion  
industry, 1999.

27  Michael Hardt, “Affective Labor,” Boundary 

2, no. 2, (Summer 1999): 89–100.

28  Luc Boltanski and Ève Chiapello, The New 

Spirit of Capitalism (London: Verso, 
2005), 112.
29  Ibid., 262.

54

It’s All About the Image

Endora Comer-Arldt

55

As Djelic and Ainamo state, the French “umbrella holding” is ideally represented 
within the LVMH30 conglomerate as a prime example. The model concentrates 
primarily on diversification, meaning that one label offers different products 
such as perfumes, cosmetics, and accessories. This also includes secondary 
clothing lines that positioned, for example, in another segment as ready-to-
wear, bridge- or mass-clothing. This model highly relates to the understanding 
of the Comité Colbert. The main focus concentrates on the name of the fash-
ion house and on keeping in house the core functions of “their crafts.”
Compared to the French model, the Italian “flexible embedded network” fo-
cuses mainly on the establishment of subsidiaries and the cooperation within 
a close network. While the French model brings several labels together under 
one roof, the Italian model concentrates its core business more on product 
diversification. To achieve higher market coverage they center on the out-
sourcing of production. While the self-understanding of the French model for 
market penetration is primarily on the “design” and “creation,” the Italian 
model prefers the mechanization, standardization, and flexible production 
through a whole network of suppliers.31

CORE AND PERIPHERAL MODULES IN THE ITALIAN TRAJECTORY

DESIGN

BRAND 

MANAGEMENT

QUALITY 
CONTROL

bitte Text in Grafiken 
genau durchsehen.

CORE

MANUFACTURING—

CORE

DISTRIBUTION—

CORE

PERIPHERY
(OUTSOURCED)

MANUFACTURING—
network or reular  
subcontractors

DISTRIBUTION—
franchise network

Fig. 2
Djelic and Ainamo, depiction of the “flexible embedded network” organizational model in the 
fashion industry, 1999.

Unlike the French model, the design, brand management and quality control 
are disconnected in favor of individual flexible modular corporate functions. 
Except for a few core functions the majority of production and distribution 
are awarded to an established and stable network of suppliers. This allowed 
Italian fashion companies to flexibly address market demands and to respond 

STRATEGIC DECISION MAKING

CORE

DESIGN 
MATERIAL

BRAND  

MANAGEMENT 
COMMUNICATION

QUALITY  
CONTROL

MANAGEMENT  

OF  

SUBCONTRACTORS

DISTRIBUTION 

PLAN

PERIPHERY
(OUTSOURCED)

DESIGN CREATION
(freelance designers)

BRAND 

MANAGEMENT
(subcontractors)

MANUFACTURING

DISTRIBUTION 

(multiple subcontractors 

(multiple licenses and 

and licenses)

outlet stores)

Fig. 3
Djelic and Ainamo, depiction of the “virtual organization” model of organization in the fashion 
industry, 1999.

to demands without losing quality. Herein consists, according Djelic and Ain-
amo, a substantial difference between the American and Italian models.32 As 
the Italian fashion companies can fall back on a tradition of “craftsmanship,” 
they keep those functions also in house. 

While also the American “virtual organization” couples the production from 
the core business, this model does not work in fixed network structures; in-
stead, it assigns short-term as well as locally and regionally unbound produc-
tion orders. In an international comparison, the so-called core business takes 
the strategic management. Even more than the Italian model, the American 
organization concentrates on a consistent modularization of business 
functions.

A variety of business functions has been outsourced and monitored in the 
context of strategic business development. Many American companies decid-
ed, in comparison contrast to Italian companies (these are often still in found-
ing family or owner-conditions), for an Initial Public Offering (IPO)33 in order to 
have the necessary capital to finance strategic decisions. Compared to 
French companies, Americans had fewer merger and acquisition (M&A)34 

30 The French luxury goods conglomerate, 

Louis Vuitton Moët Hennessy.

31  Marie-Laure Djelic and Antti Ainamo, “The 
Coevolution of New Organizational Forms 
in the Fashion Industry. A Historical and 
Comparative Study of France, Italy and 
the United States,” Organization Science 
10, no. 5 (1999): 630.

32  Ibid., 631.
33 A stock market launch where a private 
company offers shares of stock to the 
public.

34 Refers to the corporate strategy for a 

company to grow in its sector by selling, 
buying, dividing or combining different 
companies. 

56

It’s All About the Image

Endora Comer-Arldt

57

transactions. The restructuring of business organizations and the M&A wave 
of the late 1990s show that, in all international companies, the brand, gained 
importance as an intangible asset, gained importance. Due to the positive ac-
ceptance and standing of the brand within the market, it became possible for 
companies to sell their businesses for even more than they are worth regard-
ing with regard to revenue or operating funds. That is the intangible number 
behind the “brand value” or “brand equity” of a company. The more popular a 
brand among consumers, the higher the “brand valuation.”35 In this context 
the role of the celebrity must be understood as an instrument to construct 
brand awareness and brand value, which leads to a return on investment 
(ROI) for the company.

Resume—Celebrities and Fashion Industry—A Visual 
Dependency

The outlined changes were crucial for the setup of the cooperation between 
fashion industry and celebrities. Due to changes within established cultural 
fashion structures and economic conditions, fashion houses became aware of 
the fact that they have to invest in their brand image. As Cashmore states, 
while the idea of celebrities in the 1960s was still in its “infancy,” the upcom-
ing celebrity culture was set up in the context of a “production system” in 
which the fashion industry took part and from which it benefited.36 The coop-
eration with fashion companies was also important for celebrities as they 
used this form of partnership to support and distribute their own brand im-
age. As the survival of celebrities depends on their presence within the media 
system, they discovered another marketing tool for themselves. This hap-
pened first in the recourse of established marketing strategies from the fra-
grance advertising. The role of the celebrities often corresponded with the 
advertised product. A good example is Joan Collins advertising for Revlon. 
The name of the fragrance Scoundrel coincided with her role as Alexis Car-
rington in the American TV series, Denver Clan.37

Celebrities need visibility to build a brand around themselves; also the spe-
cialized sales literature can be read in this regard. In the late 1980s, American 
marketing and communications professors Philip Kotler and Irving Rein pub-
lished the book High Visibility. The Professional Guide to Celebrity Marketing. 
They describe primarily how the marketing of celebrities has changed over 
the last years, and how a separate industry has been built up around celebri-
ties, an industry that is, just as the fashion industry, pending on visualizing 
strategies to sell the celebrity product. As the fashion industry and celebrities 
are in need of the same distributing mechanisms, their cooperation turned 
out to be an economic win-win situation. Due to the outlined social and eco-
nomic changes, the cooperation developed an independent production system 

as part of an aesthetic economy, which is not only related to material pro-
duction. Thus, concerning the role and importance of celebrities for fashion 
houses, Valerie Steele stated correctly that “[f]ashion today is not about de-
signing and manufacturing clothes; it is about communicating an image.”38 
To communicate, develop, and support the image of fashion houses, celebri-
ties are important agents within an aesthetic economy. The shifts within the 
fashion industry since the 1960s, the upcoming celebrity culture and the so-
cial economic changes were crucial for the establishment of the cooperation.

35  Jean-Noel Kapferer and Vincent Bastien, 
The Luxury Strategy: Break the Rules of 
Marketing to Build Luxury Brands (New 
York: Kogan Page, 2009), 120–22.

36 Ellis Cashmore, Celebrity/Culture (Lon-

don: Routledge, 2006), 11. 

37  An American sitcom that was shown in the 

1980s.

38 Valerie Steele, Fashion, Italian Style (New 

York: Fashion Institute of Technology, 
2003), 107.

59

58

It’s All About the Image

Literature

Agins, Teri. The End of Fashion. The Mass 
Marketing of the Clothing Business. New 
York: William Morrow, 1999.

Boltanski, Luc and Ève Chiapello. The New 
Spirit of Capitalism. London: Verso, 2005.

Bourdieu, Pierre and Yvette Delsaut. “Die 
neuen Kleider der Bourgeoisie.” Kursbuch, 
no. 42 (1975): 172–82.

Cashmore, Ellis. Celebrity/Culture. London: 
Taylor & Francis, 2006.

Clough, Patricia Ticineto and Jean Halley. The 
Affective Turn. Theorizing the Social. London: 
Duke University Press Books, 2007.

Comité Colbert. 2012. Accessed May 22, 
2013. http://www.comitecolbert.com/.

Djelic, Marie-Laure and Antti Ainamo. “The 
Coevolution of New Organizational Forms in 
the Fashion Industry. A Historical and Com-
parative Study of France, Italy and the United 
States.” Organization Science, vol. 10, no. 5 
(1999): 622–37.

Entwistle, Joanne. The Fashioned Body. Fashion, 
Dress and Modern Social Theory. Oxford: 
Blackwell Publishers, 2000.

Entwistle, Joanne. The Aesthetic Economy of 
Fashion. Markets and Values in Clothing and 
Modeling. New York: Berg, 2009.

Esposito, Elena. Die Verbindlichkeiten des 
Vorübergehenden. Paradoxien der Mode. 
Frankfurt/Main: Suhrkamp, 2004.

Evans, Caroline. Fashion at the Edge. Spectacle, 
Modernity and Deathliness. London: Yale Uni-
versity Press, 2007.

Finkenzeller, Karin. “Botschafter des Savoir-
faire.” Brand Eins, no. 43 (July 2010): 130–35.

Graw, Isabelle. “Alle Macht der Chefredaktion.” 
Texte zur Kunst, January 7, 2010. Accessed 
April 10, 2011. http://www.textezurkunst.de/
daily/category/reiche-roemer/.

Hardt, Michael. “Affective Labor.” Boundary 2, 
no. 2, (Summer 1999): 89–100.

Kapferer, Jean-Noel and Vincent Bastien. The 
Luxury Strategy. Break the Rules of Marketing 
to Build Luxury Brands. New York: Kogan 
Page, 2009.

Lehnert, Gertrud. “Mode und Modern.” In Kul-
turanthroplogie des Textilen. Edited by Gabri-
ele Mentges. Berlin: Edition Ebersbach, 2005.

Nagasawa, Shin’ya. Marketing Principles of 
Louis Vuitton. The Strongest Brand Strategy. 
Waseda Business & Economic Studies, no. 44 
(2008): 41–54.

Nystrom, Paul F. Economics of Fashion. New 
York: Ronald Press, 1928.

Rein, Irving, Philip Kotler, and Martin Stoller. 
High Visibility. The Making and Marketing of 
Professionals into Celebrities. Chicago:  
McGraw-Hill Companies, 1987.

Steele, Valerie. Fashion, Italian Style. New 
York: Fashion Institute of Technology, 2003.

Thomas, Dana. Deluxe. How Luxury Lost Its 
Lustre. New York: Penguin Books, 2007.

Unknown Author. “1990s. Miuccia Prada 
takes stock of fashion on the precipice of the 
twenty-first century. Interview with Miuccia 
Prada.” Vogue, November 1999: 498.

Vinken, Barbara. Mode nach der Mode. Kleid 
und Geist am Ende des 20. Jahrhunderts.  
Frankfurt/Main: Fischer, 1993.

Wilson, Elizabeth. Adorned in Dreams. Fashion 
and Modernity. London: Rutgers University 
Press, 1985.

Andy’s Heritage:
Collaborations 
between 
Fashion, Art, and 
Louis Vuitton

Monica Titton

Monica Titton

61

The Intersection Between Fashion and Art

Over the past decade, the relationship between fashion and art has become a 
widely discussed topic in the media and academic research in fashion and 
cultural studies, art history, and sociology alike. Today, the intersections be-
tween fashion and art can be observed from various perspectives. Media 
strategies related to the representation and enactment of art are increasingly 
employed in the fashion world and vice versa: on the one hand, exhibition 
openings and art fair attendances have grown into society events comparable 
to Paris fashion week.1 On the other hand, fashion shows by designers such as 
Hussein Chalayan, Viktor & Rolf, or Iris van Herpen are reminiscent of happen-
ings or performance art, not least because of the experimental and avant-
garde character of the clothes presented on the runway.

Also the conditions of production and marketing of fashion and art bear 
strong similarities, as art critic Isabelle Graw asserts: “The ‘art scene’ that was 
formerly described along the metaphor of a small enterprise, today would be 
portrayed more aptly as a ‘visual industry,’ particularly because of its structur-
al similarities to other cultural industries such as Hollywood or the fashion in-
dustry.”2 Globally operating art galleries such as Gagosian or White Cube face 
multinational holding companies such as Kering (formerly PPR) or the LVHM-
Group that comprise international fashion brands but also cosmetic brands, 
watch-making companies, and even private museums for modern art, such as 
the “Palazzo Grassi” in Venice, owned by Kering, or the “Fondation Louis Vuit-
ton” in Paris, owned by the LVHM Group.3

A systematic inquiry of the crossover between fashion and art represents a 
complex academic endeavor not only because of the wide analytic scope but 
also because of the internal segmentation and diversity of both the field of 
fashion and art.4 Therefore, in the present paper I focus only on one facet of 
the intersection between fashion and art. I analyze collaborations between 
fine artists and fashion designers on a common product by the example of 
the cooperation between Marc Jacobs for the fashion label Louis Vuitton with 
the artists Takashi Murakami and Richard Prince in 2003 and 2008, respec-
tively. The thus resulting limited editions of handbags were hybrid products 
half way between fashion accessory and piece of art, which makes them an 
interesting artifact for a sociological analysis of the relationship between 
fashion and art. 

1 

2 
3 

Isabelle Graw, “Der letzte Schrei: Über 
modeförmige Kunst und kunstförmige 
Mode,” Texte zur Kunst, no. 56 (2004): 81.
Ibid. Translated from the German by MT.
Isabelle Graw, Der große Preis: Kunst 
zwischen Markt und Celebrity-Kultur (Co-
logne: Dumont, 2008), 143; Diana Crane, 

Fashion and Its Social Agendas: Class, 
Gender, and Identity in Clothing (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 2000), 133. 
4  Efrat Tseëlon, “Authenticity,” in Fashion 

and Art, ed. Adam Geczy and Vicky  
Karaminas (New York: Berg, 2012), 113–21.

62

Andy’s Heritage—Collaborations Between Fashion, Art, and Louis Vuitton

Monica Titton

63

I now turn to a brief examination of the key figures from the history of fashion 
and art history that can be considered predecessors to the cooperation be-
tween Murakami, Prince, and Marc Jacobs before discussing these case stud-
ies in detail. 

Schiaparelli, Dalí, Cocteau—Historical Precursors

Since the beginning of the twentieth century, the works of fine artists served 
as a source of inspiration for fashion designers, who incorporated artistic vi-
sual elements (color palettes, shapes, and design principles) into their de-
signs. One of the most famous examples is the mini dress inspired by the ab-
stract paintings of Piet Mondrian designed by Yves Saint Laurent in 1967.5 
Also fine artists were inspired to experiment within the creative field of fash-
ion: around 1900, exponents of Art Nouveau Henry van de Velde and Anna 
Muthesius designed so-called “reform dresses,” loosely cut gowns meant to 
liberate women from the health risks and bodily restriction of the corset.6 In 
the 1920s, artists belonging to the circle of Russian Constructivism such as 
Ludmilla Popova and Wladimir Tatlin extended their artistic vision to the de-
sign of clothing.7 There are numerous other examples of artists and fashion 
designers switching their trade; however, I will not elaborate further on the 
existence of mutual historical references between fashion and art.8

Elsa Schiaparelli was the first fashion designer to actually collaborate with 
Surrealist artists on designs for clothing and accessories in the 1930s.9 At the 
time, the eccentric Italian designer was Coco Chanel’s antipode. In contrast 
to the reduced cuts and muted colors preferred by Chanel, Schiaparelli used 
extravagant fabrics and worked with strong color contrasts, and employed in-
novative construction techniques.10 Her gowns were worn by Hollywood ac-
tresses such as Mae West, Katherine Hepburn, and Marlene Dietrich, and her 
work was also appreciated by intellectuals and artists at the Paris salons.11 In 
1937, she designed the famous “lobster dress,” a cream-white, silk evening 
gown on which Salvador Dalí had painted a lobster. A year before, Dalí had 
used the crustacean in his sculpture Lobster Telephone. Schiaparelli and Dalí 
collaborated on several other garments and accessories, but Dalí was not the 
only artist with whom she collaborated—she also worked with Jean Cocteau, 
Leonor Fini, Christian Berard, Man Ray, and Louis Aragon.12 Schiaparelli can 
thus be considered a pioneer of fashion design whose creations are studied 
and re-interpreted to this day and whose ideas have become part of fashion’s 
common knowledge. When Schiaparelli used one of Dalí’s lip-shaped sofas to 
decorate her shop in Paris it was a very unusual sight. Today there are hardly 
any differences in the interior design of avant-garde fashion boutiques and 
art galleries.13 Schiaparelli also hired artists to design advertising campaigns 
and to array shop window displays—both have become current practices in 

the fashion industry. Particularly in the luxury segment of the fashion indus-
try, the proximity to fine art is employed as a marketing strategy, especially 
by fashion brands Louis Vuitton and Prada.14 The artistic collaborations that 
became characteristic for Schiaparelli’s oeuvre, were repeated with compara-
ble success only by Marc Jacobs, creative director of Louis Vuitton, as I delin-
eate in the following section.

Louis Vuitton and the Arts

French leather worker Louis Vuitton founded his company in Asnières in 1854 
and from its very beginning, it targeted a luxury market. Vuitton’s first clients 
were wealthy Parisians who bought the innovative, lightweight suitcases for 
their travels to mundane holiday locations such as Nizza and St. Moritz. Al-
ready in the 1880s and 1890s, Vuitton started the international expansion of 
the company with a shop in London and the distribution of the merchandise 
in the United States.15 Louis Vuitton quickly grew into one of the first interna-
tional luxury brands, intent on maintaining a distinguished image by sponsor-
ing sailing trips or rallies and by selling customized suitcases for artists and 
members of the jet set. Since the late 1970s, the organizational structure of 
the company adapted to its growing size and global reach, a development 
that culminated in the merger with Moët Hennessy in 1987. In the 1990s, the 
majority shareholder of the LVMH group (Louis Vuitton Moët Hennessy Group), 
Bernard Arnault, bought a considerable number of fashion houses (Céline, 
Kenzo, Givenchy, Fendi, Donna Karan, etc.) and hired young, talented fashion 
designers to take over their creative direction.16 In 1996, Arnault appointed 

6 

5  Gill Gasparina, I love Fashion: L’art con-
temporaine et la mode (Paris: Editions 
Cercle d’Art, 2006), 11; Valerie Steele, 
“Fashion,” in Fashion and Art, ed. Adam 
Geczy and Vicky Karaminas (New York: 
Berg, 2012), 19.
Ingrid Loschek, Reclams Mode- und 
Kostümlexikon (Stuttgart: Reclam, 2005), 
412.
Ibid., 345; Djurdja Bartlett, “Stile e social-
ismo: quando la moda doveva essere 
arte,” in Moda e Arte, ed. Marco Pedroni 
and Paolo Volonté (Milan: Franco Angeli, 
2012), 69–86.

7 

8  For a general overview, see Alice MacKrell, 

Art and Fashion: The Impact of Art on 
Fashion and Fashion on Art (London: Bats-
ford, 2005); Gasparina, I love Fashion; 
Steele, “Fashion,” 13–27; Marco Pedroni 
and Paolo Volonté, eds., Moda e Arte  
(Milan: Franco Angeli, 2012). 

9  Loschek, Reclams Mode- und Kostüm-

lexikon , 571; Crane, Fashion and Its Social 
Agendas, 170; Steele, “Fashion,” 17.

10  Sandra Miller, “Dal ballo al museo: come 

l’abito diventa opera d’arte,” in Moda e 
Arte, ed. Marco Pedroni and Paolo Volonté 
(Milan: Franco Angeli, 2012), 51–68.

11  Annette Hellmeister, Die Pariser Haute 

Couture (Trier: WVT, 1996), 75.

12  Dilys E. Blum, Shocking! The Art and Fash-

ion of Elsa Schiaparelli (New Haven, CT: 
Yale University Press, 2003), 135.

13  Crane, Fashion, 163; Nicky Ryan, “Prada 

and the Art of Patronage,” Fashion Theory 
11, no. 1 (2007): 14.

14  For the case of Prada, see Ryan, “Prada 

and the Art of Patronage,” 7–24.

15  Paul-Gérard Pasols, Louis Vuitton: Die  

Erfindung des Luxus (Munich: Collection 
Rolf Heyne, 2005).

16  Dana Thomas, Deluxe: How Luxury Lost Its 
Luster (London: Penguin Books, 2007), 18.

64

Andy’s Heritage—Collaborations Between Fashion, Art, and Louis Vuitton

Monica Titton

65

American designer Marc Jacobs as creative director of Louis Vuitton with the 
intention to increase the fashionable prestige of the brand and to reposition it 
on the fashion market. Jacobs was appointed to design ready-to-wear-collec-
tions of clothing and at the same time to modernize the brand by transform-
ing the handbags from their status as “classics”—once-in-a-lifetime invest-
ments—into coveted fashion accessories. He did so by diversifying the 
product range; he utilized new materials such as jeans and patent leather in 
the design of the handbags and thereby fetishized them as seasonally chang-
ing “it-bags.”

A handful of renown and established artists had collaborated with Vuitton a 
few years before creative director Marc Jacobs worked with Murakami, Prince, 
and recently Yayoi Kusama. In 1988, artists César, Arman, Sol LeWitt, Sandro Chia, 
and James Rosenquist were asked to design a silk foulard measuring 90 x 90 
centimeters for Louis Vuitton. The foulards were produced in a limited edition—
just like the handbags designed two decades later—but were conceived as 
collector’s items in the first place. Moreover, the materiality of a silk foulard is 
somewhat related to a canvas and therefore simulates the traditional tool of a 
fine artist much more than a handbag does. However, beyond the difference 
in the marketing and the formal design, the artistic collaborations in 1988 can 
be viewed in relation to the ones that took place over the past couple of 
years.

Starting from 2001, Marc Jacobs repeatedly hired creative partners in the 
design of new limited handbag collections for Louis Vuitton. Stephen Sprouse, 
who was a protagonist of the New York fashion scene in the 1980s and re- 
invented himself as a graffiti artist in the 1990s, designed a collection of hand-
bags in cooperation with Marc Jacobs in Spring 2001. The collection was a 
huge commercial success and Sprouse was hired to design another collection 
in the ensuing year. Marc Jacobs always referred to Sprouse as an “artist” in 
all the interviews and official press releases—a deceptive appellation if Sprouse’s 
status as an artist is measured by the standard criteria that designate the  
profession (education in an Art Academy, exhibition in galleries, art fairs and 
international art shows).17 Sprouse had organized his first and only art show  
in 1989, when, inspired by Andy Warhol, he exhibited six screen prints of Sid 
Vicious, the deceased bass player of British punk band The Sex Pistols. 

The promotion of Stephen Sprouse as an artist, a personality who could rather 
be located at the intersection between fashion and art if compared with  
Takashi Murakami and Richard Prince, suggests two conclusions. First, the label 
of “artist” is associated with more prestige than the label “designer,” a fact 
that seems to be particularly important for Louis Vuitton as a brand, as becomes 
apparent in the company’s systematic positioning in the proximity to art to 
enhance the brand prestige. Secondly, the label “artist” appears to be a fluid 

and malleable definition. Even though the inclusion in the art system and its 
institutions is restricted according to certain parameters, it is nevertheless 
possible to “pass as an artist” through the recognition of an institution stocked 
with sufficient definatory power. Marc Jacobs stated that no less a figure than 
Marcel Duchamp served as a role model for his collaboration with Sprouse: 
“I think that what we undertook [...] with Stephen Sprouse was unconsciously 
inspired by Marcel Duchamp, with his mustache-painting on the Mona Lisa 
that became the provocative L. H. O. O. Q. That is, the Monogram graffiti tag-
ging is actually a tribute in the form of a desecration.”18 Jacobs repeated 
this claim in all his interviews with the fashion press, thereby further enhancing 
the embedding of the Sprouse-Vuitton-bags within an artistic context. Even  
if the marketing and publicity by Louis Vuitton did not lead to the consecration 
of Sprouse within the art system, the attention derived from the collaboration 
boosted his late career in the fashion industry (after the assignment at Vuitton, 
Sprouse worked with fashion brands Diesel, Target, and the furniture producer, 
Knoll International). 

With his ostentatious contextualization of Sprouse in art history, Jacobs indi-
cated which elements of the handbag collections were to be considered “art.” 
While the graffiti signature could be regarded as a simple design element, 
Jacobs constituted it into an artistic intervention and into a re-interpretation of 
a piece of art by one of the most important artists of the twentieth century. 

Takashi Murakami

In 2003, Marc Jacobs hired another partner for an artistic collaboration on  
a limited series of handbags. The first collection (Spring/Summer 2003) that 
resulted from the collaboration between Marc Jacobs and Japanese artist  
Takashi Murakami was so successful that the artist was commissioned to create 
two more collections, in 2004 and 2008 respectively. 

For the first collection, Multicolor Monogram, Murakami simply changed the 
colors of the characteristic Louis Vuitton monogram canvas. Its brown back-
ground was tinted white; the beige signs were imbued into thirty-three differ-
ent shades of pink, yellow, blue and green. For the second collection, Cherry 
Monogram (Spring/Summer 2005), Murakami designed a pattern with cherry 
blossoms in his characteristic manga style printed on the LV canvas in various 
versions.19 The third collection, Monogramouflage Canvas, was presented in 

17  Howard S. Becker, Art Worlds (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1982), 181. 
18  Stéphane Gerschel, Louis Vuitton:“Icons” 

(New York: Assouline, 2007), 5. 

19  Gill Gasparina, “33 Colors,” in Louis Vuitton: 

Art, Fashion and Architecture, ed. Simon 
Castets (New York: Rizzoli, 2009), 40–63.

66

Andy’s Heritage—Collaborations Between Fashion, Art, and Louis Vuitton

Monica Titton

67

summer 2008. This time, the background was tinged with a militaristic cam-
ouflage color palette, and the signs were turned black. This collection was 
not as commercially successful as the first two collections, probably because 
the appearance of the bags deviated too much from their initial appearance 
and thus could not be recognized at first glance as status symbols, losing 
much of their “fashionable” connotation.

Fig. 4
Takashi Murakami, Eye Love SUPERFLAT White, 2003 (used as a canvas design for the collaboration 
with Louis Vuitton).

One of the reasons why the Multicolor Monogram collection was so success-
ful to be permanently integrated into the range of Louis Vuitton designs is 
precisely the fact that, despite the change of colors, the logo remained rec-
ognizable, while the highly fetishized logo almost seemed to disappear in the 
third collection. Another factor that contributed to the huge commercial suc-

cess of the collection designed by Murakami is the cult-like following of Louis 
Vuitton in Japan, one of the largest sales markets of the brand.20 Thanks to 
the cooperation with Murakami, the brand managers of Louis Vuitton diversi-
fied the image of the brand so as to appeal to a young, urban class of Europe-
an and American customers who are able to decipher and appreciate the vi-
sual codes of Japanese pop culture. From the perspective of the Japanese 
market, the collaboration with Murakami appears to be a perfect match for 
the customers’ expectations. Therefore, it can be assumed that the collabora-
tion was a big financial profit for both sides. 

It is evident that the commercial proceeds obtained—thanks to the maximiza-
tion of the brand’s prestige—were the primary motivation for the brand Louis 
Vuitton to pursue the collaboration with Murakami. Despite the lack of official 
numbers, it is safe to assume that Murakami must have been paid a large 
amount of money for his work—however, I assert that an analysis of this phe-
nomenon would be too narrowly considered if the financial gain would be re-
garded as Murakami’s only motivation for his cooperation with Vuitton. 
Hence, in light of his creative work, the intervention with Vuitton appears as a 
coherent continuation of his career as “artist impresario.”21

In his work, Murakami addresses the culture of kawaii (which literally means 
“cute,” “adorable,” or “sweet”): an aesthetic praxis that is characteristic for 
Japanese society, and revolves around infantilization and minimization, reflected 
in the enormous popularity of manga comics and anime movies in Japan.22 The 
lacking account-taking of Japan’s traumatic involvement in the Second World 
War, its Americanization and the tension between individualism and a strong 
community spirit are recurring themes in Murakami’s work. He comments on 
these topics with the means of his visual language that is deeply influenced 
by Japanese pop culture.23 Murakami defines his art as “superflat” because he 
uses the traditional, two-dimensional, so-to-speak flat Japanese aesthetic for 
the development of his own autonomous artistic position. In the catalogue for 
his solo exhibition in Los Angeles in 2005, curator Amanda Cruz comments 
on Murakami’s art as follows: “His work so perfectly mimics consumer obses-
sions that it embodies all the ambiguities and contradictions inherent in those 
tropes. […] With his uncanny ability to mirror his culture he is more the Japanese 
equivalent of Andy Warhol than someone intent on critiquing things.”24

20 Thomas, Deluxe, 81–84.
21  Kitty Hauser, “Superflat,” Artforum Inter-

national 43, no. 2 (2004): 129; Pamela 
Church Gibson, “Nuove alleanze: mondo 
dell’arte, case di moda e celebrità,” in Pe-
droni and Volonté, Moda e Arte, 203–18.
22  Dana Friis-Hansen, “The Meaning of Mu-

rakami’s Nonsense: About ‘Japan’ Itself,” in 
Takashi Murakami: The Meaning of the 

in ibid., 14.

Nonsense of the Meaning, ed. Amanda 
Cruz, Midori Matsui, and Dana Friis-Hansen 
(New York: Abrams Books 1999), 30–41.

23  Midori Matsui, “Toward a Definition of To-
kyo Pop: The Classical Transgressions of 
Takashi Murakami,” in ibid., 23.

24  Amanda Cruz, “DOB in the Land of Otaku,” 

68

Andy’s Heritage—Collaborations Between Fashion, Art, and Louis Vuitton

Monica Titton

69

Indeed, the parallels between Murakami’s works and Pop art, and particularly 
Andy Warhol cannot be denied: besides his language, culturally influenced 
by Pop, his production practices virtually qualify him as one of Warhol’s heirs. 
In homage to Warhol, Murakami called his studio “Hiropon factory” that he 
had founded in 1996 in Tokyo. In 2001, he set up the art production company 
Kaikai Kiki Company with an office in Sapporo and one in New York. The 
company is involved in a vast range of activities ranging from art production 
to merchandise design, managing and agent services and freelance work.25
 
Even if art critics were skeptical about the cooperation between Murakami and 
Vuitton, no harm came to his career as an artist he is still invited to all the big 
art fairs and international exhibitions as the Biennale in Venice and his works are 
shown in museums all over the world. The collaboration with Louis Vuitton 
even inspired Murakami to incorporate the monogram canvas into his own 
work and thereupon to reflect it in his artistic vision. 

In the retrospective, aptly titled “Copyright Murakami” held at the Museum 
of Contemporary Art in Los Angeles from October 2007 to February 2008, 
Murakami incorporated a fully operative Louis Vuitton store as an integrative 
part of the exhibition into the Museum.26 In the shop, visitors could buy 
handbags that were designed especially for the occasion, as well as other 
items of merchandise such as key chains or prints. The event caused con-
troversial media debates because Murakami had de facto obtained the con-
servation of the bags in an art museum and had therefore fulfilled the first 
step in their consecration as art objects.

Richard Prince

In 2007, Marc Jacobs asked American artist Richard Prince to collaborate with 
him on a limited edition of handbags for Louis Vuitton, presented on the runway 
of the Spring/Summer collection 2008 in Paris in October 2007. When the run-
way show began, twelve models dressed in transparent white nurse uniforms 
with matching bonnets and surgical masks made out of black lace, strutted 
down the catwalk, each of them carrying one of the handbags designed by 
Prince. The performance on the catwalk was based on Prince’s Nurse Paintings, 
a series of works representing nurses in a sixties look before a roughly painted 
background. 

The look of the handbags was very different from their original appearance, 
unlike those designed by Murakami. The monogram canvas and the logo were 
barely visible anymore, they had been spray painted with colors or completely 
covered, printed with writing or comics, the leather and canvas mix was re-
placed by suede leather, plastic, and neoprene. Indeed, the handbags differed 

in their design, color, and style as much from each other as they did from 
Prince’s most recent painting series that they were based on.

As had been the case with the Murakami-collection, the Prince collection was 
discussed enthusiastically in fashion magazines, accompanied by pictures of 
celebrities wearing the eclectic handbags as an ultimate proof of their fash-
ionable allure. Even if official sales figures are not available, it is known that 
the Prince collection was not as commercially successful as the ones created 
by Murakami. However, the brand Louis Vuitton profited from the collaboration 
with Prince: its sophisticated yet experimental image was solidified and the 
strategy of increasing the brand’s prestige was realized. The collaboration 
with Louis Vuitton in 2007 was neither the first time that Prince came into 
contact with the fashion world. In 2001, he had photographed a fashion port-
folio for the magazine Purple and in 2010 for the Japanese fashion magazine 
POP.

As in the case of Murakami, it is worth looking into Richard Prince’s development 
as an artist in order to reconstruct the rationale behind his collaboration  
with Louis Vuitton. In the coffee table book Louis Vuitton, Art, Fashion and 
Architecture Prince is quoted as follows in an essay by Glenn O’Brien: “If this 
works, Richard said, I can retire.”27 Prince does not even try to give an elabo-
rate account about his artistic motivation; he rather articulates the provoca-
tion that his collaboration with Vuitton could terminate his career as a fine 
artist. Prince apparently dissociates himself from any artistic ambition and 
invalidates every form of criticism that could aim precisely at his financial 
gain obtained from the collaboration. However, it is this particular ironic, 
elusive attitude that is typical for Prince and only consequential in light of 
his self-enactment as an artist. 

From a very abstract point of view, the commonality between Murakami and 
Prince lies in their systematic recourse to the symbols, signs, and pictures of 
consumer culture. Contrary to Murakami, however, Prince denies making any 
statements about his art, a singularity that art critic Rosetta Brooks defines 
as the formula for his success: “The key to the success of Prince’s work is the 
way in which he presents both his art and himself, characterized by a mute-
ness—or even a deliberate obfuscation—regarding his intentions. By side-
stepping a straightforward response to questions of intentionality, Prince re-

25  Sarah Thornton, Seven Days in the Art 

World (London: Granta, 2008), 185.

26  Peter Schjeldahl, “Buying It: A Murakami 

Retrospective,” New Yorker, April 14, 
2008; http://www.newyorker.com/arts/ 
critics/artworld/2008/04/14/080414 

craw_artworld_schjeldahl?currentPage=1. 
27  Glenn O’Brien, “Prince, Richard,” in Louis 
Vuitton: Art, Fashion and Architecture, ed. 
Simon Castets (New York: Rizzoli, 2009), 
322.

70

Andy’s Heritage—Collaborations Between Fashion, Art, and Louis Vuitton

Monica Titton

71

fuses to close down meaning, or even to suggest any particular goal towards 
which the work might be heading.”28 This evasive and deceptive stance to-
wards his art is paradoxically part of the reason why Prince is not only highly 
acclaimed within the art world but also a very successful player on the art 
market. His art is accessible also to those art collectors who are interested in 
“expensive” art (such as, among others, Marc Jacobs)29 and who have been 
important agents in the consecration of Pop art as a legitimate art form 
since the 1960s.30 

Next to artists such as Sherry Levine, Robert Longo, Jack Goldstein, and Cin-
dy Sherman, Richard Prince is an exponent of appropriation art, a movement 
that emerged in the 1970s in New York City and in which the central artistic 
strategy consists in the appropriation of someone else’s pictures.31 At the be-
ginning of his career, Prince mainly took photographs of advertisings for ex-
pensive watches, ink pens, perfume, or furniture arrangements.32 The repro-
duction, appropriation, and recontextualization of pre-existing elements 
remained constant features throughout the various periods of his work. The 
“Joke series” consists of a series of pictures of retraced cartoons from “The 
New Yorker” and layered, blurred chauvinistic jokes. One of the joke paint-
ings then served as an inspiration for one of the Louis Vuitton bags: the car-
toon was sewn in blue silk thread on a rectangular evening clutch bag made 
of yellow pony fur. 

As in the case of Murakami, I sustain that the collaboration of Richard Prince 
with Louis Vuitton can be considered a coherent perpetuation of his artistic 
self-understanding. During the last decade, Prince has withdrawn progres-
sively from his critical position and his work has become increasingly self-
referential. Graw describes the development in the work of Prince as follows: 
“[T]he conceptual Prince, whose early work still engaged the social condi-
tions of consumer capitalism (luxury goods, fashion, lifestyle), is sacrificed 
on the altar of the traditional Prince, whose works orbit exclusively around 
the universe defined by his own taste (cars, girls with large breasts).”33 Con-
sidering Prince’s designs for Louis Vuitton with Graw’s critique in mind, one 
is inevitably reminded of the picture series from his latest work period; the 
Vuitton handbags almost look like a retrospective printed on leather and 
plastic. Murakami’s mimetic interpretation of the monogram canvas appears 
like the work of a veritable designer compared to the collection designed by 
Richard Prince. The Louis Vuitton lettering was simply embedded into art 
works and then printed on new handbag models designed by Marc Jacobs. 
In the statement quoted above about his potential retirement after the col-
laboration with Louis Vuitton, Prince unmasks his contribution as a purely 
commissional work and steps back from every form of artistic responsibility. 
Therefore he could be criticized by members of the art system for his super-
ficiality and shallowness, but at the same time, this gesture of overt blunt-

ness protects him from any criticism from the very same art system because 
in the end, they are only handbags. 

Conclusion

In conclusion, I want to analyze the collaborations between Murakami and 
Prince with Louis Vuitton within the framework of the sociology of art. In 
Bourdieu’s art theory, the field of artistic production is conceived as divided 
in two subfields: the field of pure production on the one hand and the field 
of large-scale production on the other hand.34 Bourdieu argues that every 
segment of artistic production, from literature to theater to fine art, is char-
acterized by a dualistic structure of avant-garde and its antagonist commer-
cial sector,35 or, “the opposition between art and money.”36 Zahner suggests 
that in the 1960s a new, third subfield took shape, and that Pop artist Andy 
Warhol made a significant contribution to its emergence. Drawing upon the 
work of Bourdieu and Crane,37 Zahner defines this new sub-field as “subfield 
of extended production.”38 She argues that American Pop artists have perma-
nently changed the mechanisms of evaluation and marketing of art. The eco-
nomic boom in post-war America fostered the development of mass media 
and an unprecedented educational expansion. Pop art appeared as an art 
form that the emerging, well-funded middle class could apprehend, quite 
unlike the complex and complicated art form of Abstract Expressionism. Ex-
ponents of Pop art exploited symbols and signs from consumer culture that 
middle class audiences were familiar with and that demanded relatively little 
background knowledge in art history to be appreciated.39 In addition, Pop 
artists developed a new form of self-understanding and assumed a different 
position towards questions of commercialization and dissemination of their 
art from the previous generation of artists. Andy Warhol was a key figure in 
the establishment of a new notion of art and demystified the modernist con-

28  Rosetta Brooks, “A Prince of Light or Dark-

Museum, New York”.

ness?,” in Richard Prince, ed. Rosetta 
Brooks, Rian, Jeff, Sante, Luc (London: 
Phaidon, 2003).

29 Thornton, Seven Days in the Art World, XV.
30 Nina Tessa Zahner, Die neuen Regeln der 
Kunst. Andy Warhol und der Umbau des 
Kunstbetriebs im 20. Jahrhundert (Frank-
furt/Main: Campus, 2006), 254.

31  Brooks, “A Prince of Light or Darkness?,” 34. 
32  Isabelle Graw, “Reconsidering Prince. On 
Richard Prince at the Solomon R. Guggen-
heim Museum, New York,” Texte Zur Kunst, 
no. 68 (December 2007), 30 http://www.
textezurkunst.de/68/reconsidering-prince/.
33 Graw, “Reconsidering Prince. On Richard 

Prince at the Solomon R. Guggenheim 

34 Pierre Bourdieu, The Rules of Art: Genesis 
and Structure of the Literary Field, trans. 
Susan Emanuel. (Stanford: Stanford Uni-
versity Press, 1996), 121.

35 Ibid.
36 Ibid., 91.
37  Diana Crane, The Transformation of the 
Avant-Garde. The New York Art World, 
1940–1985 (Chicago: Chicago University 
Press, 1987).

38 Ibid., 277; Zahner, Die neuen Regeln der 
Kunst. Andy Warhol und der Umbau des 
Kunstbetriebs im 20. Jahrhundert, 248. 
39 Crane, The Transformation of the Avant-

Garde. The New York Art World, 1940–
1985, 64.

72

Andy’s Heritage—Collaborations Between Fashion, Art, and Louis Vuitton

Monica Titton

73

ception of art sustained by Abstract Expressionists by producing art works 
for different target groups.40 The modernist understanding of art corre-
sponds to Bourdieu’s characterization of the field of pure production within 
the artistic field understood as “an inverse economy whose particular logic 
is based on the very nature of symbolic goods—realities with two aspects, 
merchandise and signification, with the specifically symbolic values and the 
market values remaining relatively independent of each other.”41 Takashi Mu-
rakami’s self-conception as artist and entrepreneur qualifies him as a post-
Warhol artist par excellence and as a representative of the subfield of ex-
tended production conceptualized by Zahner. 

Richard Prince is also often discussed in the context of Pop art; however, in 
his case the connections to Warhol are not as evident as in the case of Mu-
rakami, also because the systematic play with artistic clichés is part of his at-
titude and artistic positioning. Prince’s career, from his critical early period 
to his institutional and commercial success to the collaboration with Louis 
Vuitton, is nevertheless influenced by the transformations of the art field de-
scribed by Zahner and Crane. The shift in the art world did not only affect 
artists, but also all the other agents and institutions involved in the conse-
cration of art: art collectors, the system of galleries and museums and art 
critics42 that affected and indirectly shaped Prince’s career as a conceptual 
post-Pop artist.

Prince’s capacity to operate in a grey zone where the appropriation of Ameri-
can Pop culture icons constantly risks blending into a re-affirmation of the 
appropriated imagery, indeed puts into question the very notion of art works 
as authentic individual products set forth by Bourdieu. As Tseëlon argues, 
“many people (designers, artists, critics, curators, or theorists) who address 
the question of the relationship between art and fashion implicitly reify the 
concept of art as a nonutilitarian, authentic original creation, expressing its 
creator’s individuality (thoughts, feelings, values) [...].”43 Both Murakami and 
Prince overcome the notion of authentic, singular and individual art works 
and the myth of the artist as creative genius in their artistic practices—either 
by enacting art as the result of an artistic guild/merchandise factory/Warholian 
enterprise or by undermining the very concept of authorship and singularity. 
In this post-modernistic logic of contemporary art as an ever-referential, al-
ways connotative and self-reflexive practice lies the fundamental similarity 
to the aesthetic practice of fashion design and the link to the ongoing and 
multifaceted dialogue between art and fashion. Thus, the collaborations dis-
cussed in this paper are ultimately a consequence resulting from this cre-
ative similitude. Yet they differ from other encounters between fashion and 
art insofar as the LVMH-Group shaped the co-operations into global market-
ing spectacles and conspicuous consumption events for a new art-literate 
clientele of luxury goods. 

40 Ibid., 10; Zahner, Die neuen Regeln der 
Kunst. Andy Warhol und der Umbau des 
Kunstbetriebs im 20. Jahrhundert, 248.
41  Bourdieu, The Rules of Art: Genesis and 

Structure of the Literary Field, 141.

42 Zahner, Die neuen Regeln der Kunst. Andy 
Warhol und der Umbau des Kunstbetriebs 
im 20. Jahrhundert, 251–77.
43 Tseëlon, “Authenticity”, 112. 

74

Andy’s Heritage—Collaborations Between Fashion, Art, and Louis Vuitton

Monica Titton

75

Pasols, Paul-Gérard. Louis Vuitton: Die Erfind-
ung des Luxus. Munich: Collection Rolf 
Heyne, 2005.

Steele, Valerie. “Fashion.” In Fashion and Art. 
Edited by Adam Geczy and Vicky Karaminas, 
13–41. New York: Berg, 2012.

Ryan, Nicky. “Prada and the Art of Patron-
age.” Fashion Theory—The Journal of Dress, 
Body, and Culture, no. 11: 1 (2007): 7–24.

Schjeldahl, Peter. “Buying It. A Murakami retro-
spective.” The New Yorker, April 14, 2008.  
Accessed August 2, 2013. http://www.newy-
orker.com/arts/critics/artworld/2008/04/14/ 
080414craw_artworld_schjeldahl?currentPage=1.

Sholis, Brian. “Boy Wonder.” Arforum Diary, 
March 3, 2007. Accessed August 2, 2013. 
http://artforum.com/diary/id=18845.

Thomas, Dana. Deluxe: How Luxury Lost its 
Luster. London: Penguin Books, 2007.

Thornton, Sarah. Seven Days in the Art World. 
London: Granta, 2008.

Tseëlon, Efrat. “Authenticity.” In Fashion and 
Art. Edited by Adam Geczy and Vicky Karami-
nas, 113–21. New York: Berg, 2012.

Zahner, Nina Tessa. Die neuen Regeln der 
Kunst. Andy Warhol und der Umbau des 
Kunstbetriebs im 20. Jahrhundert. Frankfurt/
Main: Campus, 2006. 

Literature

Bartlett, Djurdja. “Stile e socialismo: quando 
la moda doveva essere arte.” In Moda e Arte. 
Edited by Marco Pedroni and Paolo Volonté, 
69–86. Milan: Franco Angeli, 2012.

Becker, Howard S. Art Worlds. Berkeley: Uni-
versity of California Press, 1982.

Blum, Dilys E. Shocking! The Art and Fashion 
of Elsa Schiaparelli. New Haven: Yale Univer-
sity Press, 2003.

Bourdieu, Pierre. The Rules of Art: Genesis 
and Structure of the Literary Field. Translated 
by Susan Emanuel. Stanford: Stanford Univer-
sity Press, 1996.

Brooks, Rosetta. “A Prince of Light or Dark-
ness?” In Richard Prince. Edited by Rosetta 
Brooks, Jeff Rian, Luc Sante, 26–69. London: 
Phaidon, 2003.

Castets, Simon. Louis Vuitton: Art, Fashion 
and Architecture. New York: Rizzoli, 2009.

Crane, Diana. Fashion and Its Social Agendas: 
Class, Gender, and Identity in Clothing. Chi-
cago: Chicago University Press, 2000.

Crane, Diana. The Transformation of the 
Avant-Garde. The New York Art World, 1940–
1985. Chicago: Chicago University Press, 
1987.

Cruz, Amanda. “DOB in the Land of Otaku.” In 
Takashi Murakami. The Meaning of the Non-
sense of the Meaning. Edited by Amada Cruz, 
Midori Matsui and Dana Friis-Hansen, 14–19. 
New York: Abrams Books, 1999.

Friis-Hansen, Dana. “The Meaning of Muraka-
mi’s Nonsense: About ‘Japan’ Itself.” In Ta-
kashi Murakami. The Meaning of the Non-
sense of the Meaning. Edited by Amanda 
Cruz, Midori Matsui and Dana Friis-Hansen, 
30–41. New York: Abrams Books, 1999.

Gasparina, Gill. “33 colors.” In Louis Vuitton: 
Art, Fashion and Architecture. Edited by Si-
mon Castets, 40–63. New York: Rizzoli, 2009.

Gasparina, Gill. I love Fashion: L’art contem-
poraine et la mode. Paris: Editions Cercle 
d’Art, 2006.

Gerschel, Stéphane. Louis Vuitton: Icons. 
New York: Assouline, 2007.

Gibson, Pamela Church. “Nuove alleanze: 
mondo dell’arte, case di moda e celebrità.” In 
Moda e Arte. Edited by Marco Pedroni and 
Paolo Volonté, 203–18. Milan: Franco Angeli, 
2012.

Graw, Isabelle. “Der letzte Schrei: Über mo-
deförmige Kunst und kunstförmige Mode.” 
Texte zur Kunst, no. 56 (2004), 80–95.

Graw, Isabelle. “Reconsidering Prince. On 
Richard Prince at the Solomon R. Guggen-
heim Museum, New York.” Texte Zur Kunst, 
no. 68 (2007). Accessed August 2, 2013.
http://www.textezurkunst.de/68/
reconsidering-prince.

Graw, Isabelle. Der große Preis: Kunst zwisch-
en Markt und Celebrity-Kultur. Cologne: Du-
mont, 2008.

Hauser, Kitty. “Superflat.” Artforum Interna-
tional, no. 2, vol. 43 (2004): 129 and 286.

Hellmeister, Annette. Die Pariser Haute Cou-
ture. Trier: WVT, 1996.

Loschek, Ingrid. Reclams Mode- und Kostüm-
lexikon. Stuttgart: Reclam, 2005.

MacKrell, Alice. Art and Fashion: The Impact 
of Art on Fashion and Fashion on Art. London: 
Batsford, 2005.

Matsui, Midori. “Toward a Definition of Toyko 
Pop: The Classical Transgressions of Takashi 
Murakami.” In Takashi Murakami. The Mean-
ing of the Nonsense of the Meaning. Edited by 
Amanda Cruz, Midori Matsui and Dana Friis-
Hansen, 20–29. New York: Abrams Books, 
1999.

Miller, Sandra. “Dal ballo al museo: come 
l’abito diventa opera d’arte.” In Moda e Arte. 
Edited by Marco Pedroni and Paolo Volonté, 
51–68. Milan: Franco Angeli, 2012.

O’Brien, Glenn. “Prince, Richard.” In Louis 
Vuitton: Art, Fashion and Architecture. Edited 
by Simon Castets, 322. New York: Rizzoli, 
2009.

Life Which 
Writes Itself:
Retrospecting 
Art, Fashion, and 
Photography in 
Bernadette 
Corporation

Ilka Becker

Ilka Becker

77

During the last decades, art and fashion have become accomplices in mani-
fold ways. Being the target of parody, pastiche, and representational critique 
in the 80s’ so-called “pictures generation”1 of artists, discussions on fashion 
and brands have changed in the course of the globalization debate since the 
90s. On the one hand, tactical interventions such as ad-busting entered the 
art context. On the other hand, a new type of the “celebrity artists,”2 perform-
ing model poses in fashion magazines and showing off with luxurious “identi-
ty goods,”3 entered the scene. Similarly, glossy photos of models (e.g., as vis-
itors of art fairs) appear on the agenda of art magazines.4 In this condition of 
permanent outdoing and immanence, which at first gaze doesn’t seem to al-
low any useful alternative, the idea of critique as a mode of resistance seems 
outmoded in the same way that affirmative attitudes by artists towards con-
sumer culture seems powerless. Really? According to Jacques Rancière, one 
should get out of this discourse of impotence. But what about the multiple 
visibilities that flexible consumerism produces? What is the effect of showing 
pictures of fashion models in a gallery or museum space, such as Bernadette 
Corporation has done? And how can the problems that are created and ex-
posed by this practice be discussed in terms of aesthetic politics?

Modeling the Self

In his essay on “being different differently,”5 sociologist Ulrich Bröckling dis-
cusses a mode of subjectivation in the contemporary culture of corporate 
and “realistic” capitalism which he calls the entrepreneurial self.6 He de-
scribes this self as engendered by a regime of subjectivity that makes devi-
ance from the norm normative itself. Thus, subjectivation is “the ensemble of 
forces acting on individuals and advising them to grasp and ‘model’ them-
selves in a specific way.”7 The entrepreneurial self is always in a state of be-
coming, seemingly trying to be different, avoiding to mimic others, but in ac-
tual fact following the conformist tyranny of originality, distinction, and 
self-fashioning. According to Bröckling, this form of self-governance requires 
new forms of tactical moves. Too quickly the market incorporates any mode 

2 

1  See Douglas Eklund, The Pictures Gener-

ation, 1974–1984 (New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press, 2009), exhibition 
catalogue.
Isabelle Graw, Der große Preis: Kunst 
zwischen Markt und Celebrity Kultur (Co-
logne: DuMont, 2008), 163–86.
Ibid., 137.
Ibid., 185.

3 
4 
5  Ulrich Bröckling, “Jenseits des kapitalist-
ischen Realismus: Anders anders sein,” 

in Kapitalistischer Realismus: Von der 
Kunstaktion zur Gesellschaftskritik, ed. 
Sighard Neckel (Frankfurt/Main: Cam-
pus, 2010), 281–301.
Ibid., 281; see also, Ulrich Bröckling, Das 
unternehmerische Selbst: Soziologie ein-
er Subjektivierungsform (Frankfurt/Main: 
Suhrkamp, 2007).

6 

7  Bröckling, Selbst, 81. Translated from 

the German by IB.

78

Life Which Writes Itself

Ilka Becker

79

of alterity. With his concept, Bröckling implicitly refers to a debate set off in 
the 90s by authors such as Tom Frank, who wrote about the commodification 
of dissent in his much-discussed articles in The Baffler, or Tom Holert and 
Mark Terkessidis, who published their book on The Mainstream of Minorities 
in 1996.8 In their diagnosis of Pop culture and body politics in post-Fordism, 
Holert and Terkessidis called this phenomenon “consumption of dissidence.”9  
Also, they emphasized the meaning of representation for the aesthetic self-
definition of control society, representation being “the imagination and the 
image of something in another medium.”10 

Associated with this debate, media and visual culture studies initiated a range 
of publications dealing with the constitutive role of images within the form of 
globalized sovereignty then called Empire by Hardt/Negri in 2000.11 Accord-
ing to them, Empire is a regime of immanence and as such the “political sub-
ject”12 of the current world order with its new governmental logic and struc-
ture. For example, Samuel Weber seized on the Heideggerian concept of the 
“world as a picture”13 (Weltbild) in order to apply it to contemporary mass me-
dia culture. In his book, Mass Mediaura, he regards the “‘cinematic’ structure 
of that picture”14 as an effect of reproduction. The subject here is depicted 
“as being ‘in the picture.’”15 Following this thesis, “being different” is a matter 
of “being in the picture,” of making visible the bodily and textile codes of dis-
tinction in a fashionable mode. Thus, the idea of being different not only lies 
in the heart of the contemporary regime of subjectivity, but in the heart of 
fashion as a phenomenon of modernity in general, as Georg Simmel has al-
ready stated in 1895.16 

Staying with the Problem

Ulrich Bröckling comes to the conclusion that the only way to avoid the apo-
ria of resistance—which instantly becomes marketable in flexible consumer-
ism as just another mode of “being different”—is a “being different different-
ly.” Following this idea, anyone who wants to convert the regime of being 
different has to develop a tactics with a heuristic quality: neither following 
the logics of the market, nor the logics of opposition. Bröckling’s idea of tac-
tical moves is comparable with musical improvisation and introduces a disor-
der into the “police order,” as Jacques Rancière calls it. “Police,” for Rancière, 
is not exactly the institution of police as an executive power, but a govern-
mental order processing a distribution of the sensible and putting things and 
human beings in the “right place.”17 Hence, the “art of being different differ-
ently”18 means to situatively invalidate and interrupt police order without go-
ing back to any fixed position, any identity, any hegemonial knowledge. It 
means to situate and answer to problems, to stay “with the trouble”19 instead 
of identity politics.

The problem with tactics is that analyzing and writing about it seems to re-
duce its potency at first view. Not forgetting that one is at risk of speaking ex-
actly from the position of authority and knowledge which is a central element 
of police order and which itself is being problematized by tactical activism. 
The perspective of scholarly writing, then, is in danger of narrowing a tactics 
exactly to those codes of distinction that again are central for the social 
imagination of the entrepreneurial self. The same problem seems to exist on 
the side of visual production, once it has entered galleries and museums. 
What remains to be done is to focus the problem of the self itself, circling 
around the seducing and addicting power of commodity, fashion, and image. 
 

Deconstructing the Grammar of Fashion

Bernadette Corporation can be briefly described as a heterogeneous group 
of cultural producers. Their approach is to deconstruct the logic of the mar-
ket, both subverting an expressing the forms of flexible adaption that are at 
stake. As Stephan Geene writes, BC is taking as a raw material what Karl Marx 
was trying to exorcize from commodity, its false pretense.20 On its website, 
instead of an introductory self-portrayal, Bernadette Corporation has posted 
a feature by curator Bennett Simpson published in Artforum in 2004.21 Thus, 
the members of “BC”—such is the brand logo of the fictional corporation—

8  See Thomas Frank, The Conquest of Cool 

(Chicago: Chicago University Press, 1997); 
Thomas Frank and Matt Weiland, Com-
modify Your Dissent: Salvos from “The 
Baffler” (New York: Norton, 1997); Tom 
Holert and Mark Terkessidis, Der Main-
stream der Minderheiten (Berlin: Edition 
ID-Archiv, 1996).

9  Tom Holert and Mark Terkessidis, “Einfüh-

rung in den Mainstream der Minderheit-
en,” in Der Mainstream der Minderheiten: 
Pop in der Kontrollgesellschaft, ed. Tom 
Holert and Mark Terkessidis (Berlin: Edi-
tion ID-Archiv, 1996), 6.

10  Ibid., 18.
11  Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri, Empire: 

Die neue Weltordnung (Frankfurt/Main: 
Campus, 2000).

12  Ibid., 9.
13  Martin Heidegger, “Die Zeit des Weltbil-
des,” in Holzwege (Frankfurt/Main: Klos-
termann, 1950), 82.

14  Samuel Weber, “Mass Mediauras: Art, 

Aura and Media in the Work of Walter Ben-
jamin,” in Mass Mediauras: Form, Tech-
nics, Media, ed. Alan Cholodenko (Stan-

ford, CA: Stanford University Press 1996), 
81.

15  Ibid, 86.
16  See Georg Simmel, “Zur Psychologie der 
Mode: Soziologische Studie,” in Die Zeit: 
Wiener Wochenschrift für Politik, Volk-
swirtschaft, Wissenschaft und Kunst 5, no. 
54 (October 12, 1895), 22–24.

17  See Jacques Rancière, Das Unvernehmen: 

Politik und Philosophie (Frankfurt/Main: 
Suhrkamp, 2002); Jacques Rancière, Die 
Aufteilung des Sinnlichen: Die Politik der 
Kunst und ihre Paradoxien, ed. Maria Muh-
le (Berlin: b_books, 2006).

18  Bröckling, Das unternehmerische Selbst, 

288.

19  Donna Haraway, “When Species Meet: 
Staying with the Trouble,” Environment 
and Planning D: Society and Space 28, no. 
1 (2010): 53–55. 

20 See Stephan Geene, “Greater Gatsby,” 

Texte zur Kunst, no. 58 (June 2005): 138.
21  See Bennett Simpson, “Techniques of To-
day,” Artforum International 43, no. 1 (Sep-
tember 2004); http://www.bernadettecor-
poration.com/introduction.htm. 

80

Life Which Writes Itself

Ilka Becker

81

avoid establishing a fixed and seemingly authentic voice. Rather, the auctori-
al function of defining what BC is or could be, is delegated to the curatorial 
voice. Following its own myth making, it was only in 2013, when its first “ret-
rospective,” “2000 Wasted Years,” took place in Artists Space, New York and 
ICA London, that core members Bernadette La Huy, Antek Walczak, and John 
Kelsey gave interviews, historicizing BC in order to highlight a shift in their 
practice at the same time:22 a shift from radical politics of self-abandonment 
to a more “regular” visibility in the art context, concomitant with an increased 
presence of the group in solo gallery shows during the last years.23 

BC is less a programmatic art group than an experimental and “collective pro-
duction context”24 with varying members and a shared interest in fashion, art, 
film, economics, and politics without “political identity.”25 It started in 1994 by 
organizing parties in New York downtown nightclubs. Soon, BC established a 
fashion label for women’s wear which was characterized by an underground DIY 
style mixing haute couture and the vernacular culture of street wear, appropriat-
ed logos and no name elements, “high and low end looks in single items.”26 

While BC’s clothes were presented in magazines such as Harper’s Bazaar or 
Purple in the 1990s, the formation itself published three issues of a fashion 
magazine titled Made in USA27 from 1999 to 2001, after ending the fashion la-
bel and reorganizing the group’s structure and reinforcing their “tactical self-
fashioning”28 with the BC logo. For example, the third issue of the magazine 
combined black and white photographs of fashion models in dummy-like 
poses with texts by artists and theorists in an experimental layout. The idea 
was to disrupt—using techniques of montage and appropriation—the usual 
concept of fashion magazines that are providing a certain lifestyle in a con-
sumable mode. As Sean Deyoe, graphic designer of the third issue, put it:

 

 “Page-within-page devices previewed what was to come or replayed what 
one had already seen. Articles began in what appeared to be their middle. 
Sections were designed to perfectly mimic other magazines. Titles looked 
like ads and ads like titles. On every page, a reader was acutely aware of 
the construction of an ‘image’ and therefore also aware of how that image 
was meant to (or meant not to) aid in the their own construction of self.”29 

By playing with typography and design in Made in USA, Bernadette Corpora-
tion continued its anti-fashion strategies of the 1990s on an advanced, more 
abstract level. They combined photographs and hijacked logos with a frag-
mentary, discursive, and artistic framework. The issues featured, for example, 
a photo collage of designer Susan Ciancolo, a text by art critic and writer 
Chris Kraus, an interview with artist Vanessa Beecroft, and contributions by 
artists Jutta Koether and Rita Ackermann. The combination of images and text 
was used by BC as a key method to make visible the status of the photo-

graphic image in commodity culture and to test the possibilities of rewriting 
the grammar of fashion in a non-identitary way. Also, the mixing of styles 
could be understood as an instrument for revisiting and working through the 
political implications of aesthetic strategies in youth cultures since the 1970s. 
At that time, punk had started a radical clarification of the semantic relations 
of fashion signs and set off the sign politics of 1980’s style wars.30 And, while 
first wave hip-hop culture in the late 1980s appropriated and restaged brands 
and accepted styles such as Adidas, linking their textile signs with political 
claims, brand culture of the 1990s required new strategies. Fashion photo-
graphy was characterized by heroin chic and the market performed its ability 
to absorb and exploit even the most hidden niche of street culture in the 
mode of a commodification of dissent.31 Hence, especially ad-busting aimed 
at escaping this trap by deconstructing the immaterial capital of symbols, 
which enables the global exploitation of sweatshop workers, without simply 
regressing to the anti-fashion-reflex of punk.32

Beyond the Entrepreneurial Self

As Bennett Simpson states, it made no sense for BC in the 1990s to follow the 
modernist model of critique from outside, as “critique was the hottest com-
modity going: BC began modeling itself after the secret stars of business—
the producers, agents, and captains of the worldwide image machines.”33 
Hence, the figure of the critical philosopher could only be introduced in 
terms of parody. BC did so with the absurd figure of Werner von Delmont (the 
alter ego of artist Stefan Dillemuth) in Get Rid of Yourself (2003, DV, color, 

22  See Kalya Guthrie, “The Contagious Retro-

spective: Q+A with Bernadette Corpora-
tion,” Art in America (September 5, 2012); 
http://www.artinamericamagazin.com/
news-opinion/conversations/2012-09-05/
bernadette-corporation-artists-space. 

6:20 min., color, sound, Electronic Arts 
Intermix.

27  The magazine was named after the “worst 

movie Jean Luc Godard ever made,” ; 
http://www.bernadettecorporation.com/
musa.htm.

23  Such as Greene Naftali, New York (2009), 

28  Bennett Simpson, “Bernadette Corpora-

Galerie NEU, Berlin (2010), and Galerie 
Meyer Kainer, Vienna (2011).

24  Jutta Koether, “Ausleben: Jutta Koether 

besucht Bernadette Corporation, ” Texte 
zur Kunst, no. 49 (March 2003); http://
www.textezurkunst.de/49/ausleben. 
Translated from the German by IB. 

25  Ibid.
26  Jason Farago, “Bernadette Corporation: 

‘Don’t Have Sex with Each Other,’” Guardian, 
March 24, 2013; http://www.theguardian.
com/artanddesign/2013/mar/24/berna 
dette-corporation-ica. BC’s fashion shows 
are documented in the film Bernadette 
Corporation: Fashion Shows, 1995–97, 

tion,” in Corporate Mentality, ed. Aleksandra 
Mir (New York: Sternberg Press, 2003), 
153–54.

29  Sean Deyoe; http://www.theroyalacademy.

org/DOD/MadeInUSA.

30 See Diedrich Diederichsen, “Radical chic,” 

Die Zeit, no. 37 (September 4, 2003); 
http://www.zeit.de/2003/37/
Jugendbewegung.

31  Thomas Frank, “Art as Lifestyle (Monocul-
turalism),” The Baffler, no. 4; https://www.
thebaffler.com/past/art_as_lifestyle. 

32 Ibid.
33 Simpson, “Bernadette Corporation,” 153.

82

Life Which Writes Itself

Ilka Becker

83

sound, 61 min.). The film deals with the paradoxes of political activism and 
the role of its anonymous protagonists in Empire after 9/11. During the shoot-
ings in Genua in 2001, BC cooperated with the post-situationist Le Parti Imag-
inaire, a collective that is linked to the anti-globalization movement. Get Rid 
of Yourself is a rhythmic montage of documentary footage shot during the G8 
riots that intervene with and are ruptured by takes featuring model and ac-
tress Chloe Sevigny: “Provisionally aligning itself with the so-called ‘Black 
Bloc’ movement—with the arrogance of its discourse as well as the force and 
style of their resistance—Get Rid of Yourself is an encounter with emerging, 
non-instituted or identity-less forms of protest that refuse the representation-
al politics of the official Left.”34

A key technique of the film is the displacement of images, voices, and signs,35 
for example, by employing voice-over comments by activists from the Black 
Bloc; and by passing this voice on to Chloe Sevigny, who is declaiming a kind 
of manual for riots, studded with political reflections on Empire. She acts as if 
she was learning them by heart, being deeply involved in her role as an ac-
tress, but at the same time her declamation sounds authentic. In so doing, 
she’s not only exposing the paradoxical and performative structure of the 
protests themselves. The activists become desubjectivized, being trans-
formed into ambivalent figures that are indistinguishable from a fictional 
character. Furthermore, she implicitly points to possible relations of her per-
sona as a model and actress—known from her work with artists like Larry 
Clark, Kim Gordon, or Harmony Korine—to the intermingled histories of politi-
cal resistance and youth culture. For example, she states that the punk move-
ment in the 70s provided “a whole counterworld of subjectivities, who no lon-
ger wanted to consume, no longer wanted to produce, no longer even 
wanted to be subjectivities.”

Besides its considerations of the return of political activism in Empire after 
9/11, the film unfolds the underlying politics of visibility in its adaptive tactics 
between camouflage, media, and fashion. One of the commentators men-
tions that the police is well organized, because they are all dressed the same. 
But the demonstrators, as he continues, are uniformed in black as well, be-
cause “if everybody is looking the same, it is far more difficult to spot out in-
dividuals.” Moving through the streets becomes a question of improvisation 
as well as “a coordinated thing, a musical.” Thus, the montage of the picture 
plays with the constitutive relations between mask (riot), makeup (model), 
and the politics of visibility. The crowd is becoming opaque by uniforming 
and being obscured by the fog of burning shop fronts and barricades. By this, 
BC’s images are always on the edge of being associated with the seeming no-
go of “radical chic.” But they are dealing with this problem offensively, as 
they explain in a statement: 

 

 “We were trying to expose the idea of exposure as such, in spectacular de-
mocracy today. Exposure in the street and in the magazine. As a kind of 
virtuosity shared by models and by protesters alike. Also, a play on the aes-
thetics of black… from Malevich to Zapatista Marcos. If the Black Bloc [sic!] 
can be described as a collective elaboration of techniques of showing up 
without showing up, as a game of being there and not, or showing up to 
confuse the field of political and media representation with their chaotic an-
onymity and camera-smashing picturesqueness … then the fashion model, 
too, may have a radical potential lying dormant in her … who knows? What 
might be the Black Bloc [sic!] version of a modeling agency, of a fashion 
shoot?”36

As BC mention furthermore, Get Rid of Yourself was meant to destabilize the 
idea of the Black Block as well as to take up the aesthetics of politics in order 
to “keep the line between aesthetics and politics alive and problematic, rath-
er than suppressing it and denying it.” Here, especially, the concept of expo-
sure comes into play in a double sense: as disclosure of a political dissent 
and as photographic process underlying the fashion image. According to my 
thesis, it indicates a shift in photographic meaning in a biopolitical sense: 
from “the light which writes itself”37 to the life which writes itself within the 
technical sensorium of mediality.

Radical Black—White Cube

The symptomatic merging of fashion and politics described by BC frequently 
occurs in fashion photography, the street being a category for photography 
as well as for fashion and riot. Not only the atmospheric reframing of teargas 
clouds which are making violent police actions invisible during riots, but also 
the style of clothing used by the demonstrators are being incorporated in 
fashion style and photography.

In a fashion pictorial by photographer Krzysztof Herholdt titled Black Block 
White Riot, a male model assumes typical poses, dressed mainly in black, but 
also in grey and white clothes. He is wearing accessories associated with 

34 Ibid. 
35  See Bennett Simpson, “Techniques of To-
day,” Artforum International 43, no. 1 (Sep-
tember 2004); http://www.bernadettecor-
poration.com/introduction.htm.

36 Bernadette Corporation, “Statement,” in 
Klartext: A Series of Discussions with In-
ternational Artists, Activists, Curators, and 

Theoreticans (Berlin: Künstlerhaus 
Bethanien and Volksbühne, January 14–16, 
2005); http://klartext.uqbar-ev.de/docu-
ments/abstracts/Bernadette-state-
mEN_01.pdf.

37  See Jacques Rancière, “What Medium Can 

Mean,” in Pharresia, no. 11 (2011): 36.

84

Life Which Writes Itself

Ilka Becker

85

Fig. 5
Bernadette Corporation, Made in USA Issue No. 1, 
Fall/Winter 1999–2000, 1999.

Fig. 6
Bernadette Corporation, Made in USA Issue No. 3, 
Spring/Fall 2001, 2001.

86

Life Which Writes Itself

Fig. 7–10
Bernadette Corporation, 
Get Rid of Yourself, 2003.

88

Life Which Writes Itself

Ilka Becker

89

Fig. 11 
Krzysztof Herholdt, Black Block White Riot, 2010.

anti-globalization riots: a helmet, a gas mask, a Molotov cocktail, knuks. One 
of the photographs is a composite montage showing a motion sequence of 
him throwing a brick stone. The picture is obviously invoking a Levi’s ad cam-
paign by photographer David Vasiljevic from 2008. 

In some of the pictures, his face and arms are covered with dirt, suggesting 
his performance deriving directly from street fight as an activist of civil war, 
and fashion being his feature of recognizability. But within the contemporary 
regime of subjectivity as described by Bröckling, he is not involved in any 
politics of aesthetics in the sense of Rancière: this would mean changing a 
situation and generating new forms of relations in the tempo-spatial sensorium 
of the social world.38 But in Herholdt’s pictorial, serving as primary signifier 
of differentness, fashion is bringing with it the unstableness and fast change 
of its frenzied codes. The black marks of dirt in the bright face underlie a 
multiple readability: street dirt, camouflage, makeup. Thus, the techniques of 
disguise, appropriation, and misuse of clothing used by street activists are 

Fig. 12 
David Vasiljevic, 
Levi’s ad campaign, 2008.

deployed to enhance the air of sexiness attributed to the model. Advertising 
not only serves to sell a certain commodity, but its function is to reproduce 
the young body as commodity itself.

The Model as Model

In their 1999 polemical book Raw Materials for a Theory of the Young-girl, the 
anonymous French collective Tiqqun39 introduce the figure of the Young-girl 
functioning as a blueprint-being and model citizen of consumer society within 
the Empire’s “anthropotechnical project.”40 For them, this figure is an ab-
straction of collective desires, the embodiment of seduction and consumption, 
herself being the ideal commodity. So the Young-girl with its symbolic sur-
plus, as polemically described by Tiqqun, is an abstraction just as the male 
model in Herholdt’s fashion shoot. Similar to art, fashion seems to function 

Fig. 13
Bernadette Corporation, installation view of  
The Complete Poem, 2009.

38 See Jacques Rancière, “Politik der Ästhetik,” 

archplus, no. 178 (June 2006): 94–98.

39 Tiqqun is a French collective of authors 

and activists founded in 1999.

40 Tiqqun, Raw Materials for a Theory of the 

Young-Girl (Los Angeles: Semiotext(e), 

2010), 12. An anonymous English transla-
tion of Tiqqun, Premiers matériaux pour 
une Théorie de la Jeune-Fille (Paris: Édi-
tions Mille et une nuits, 2001), was pub-
lished on younggirl.jottit.com, January 
2010. 

90

Life Which Writes Itself

Ilka Becker

91

form of self-abandonment, playing with the notion of a commodified body 
and the sphere of a photo studio. In the “Black Chapter,” there are similarities 
between Karl Lagerfeld’s “reductive black method,” where the “white is only 
there to enter the blackness,” and artistic avant-garde from Fautrier to Malev-
ich’s black square.48

Fig. 15
Richard Avedon, portrait of Andy Warhol, director 
Paul Morrissey, actor Joe Dallesandro, actor Candy 
Darling, and members of The Factory, 1969.

Life Which Writes Itself

In 2009, one year before the Black Block White Riot pictorial for Fiasco Maga-
zine was published, BC showed a group of mostly black and white photo-
graphs and combined them with the 130-page “epic poem”49 “A Billion and 
Change” that was displayed horizontally in clean, minimalistic vitrines as a 
genuine artwork.50 In each line it included the letters “b” and “c” as a formal 
rule. The somehow paradoxical exhibition-title, The Complete Poem, high-
lighted the poetic, experimental, and fragmentary character of the text, 
which counteracted the assertion of completeness itself. Moreover, one 
could only read the texts in a slowed down tempo and an uncomfortable po-
sition, as the vitrines where quite low and a book edition of the poem didn’t 
exist until 2010.51

41  Sabeth Buchmann, “Fetish,” in Magazin 

Textuelle Bildhauerei, no. 5 (October 
2010).

42 Tiqqun, Theory of the Young-Girl, 33.
43 See Luc Boltanski and Ève Chiapello, Der 

neue Geist des Kapitalismus (Konstanz: 
UVK 2006), 481. Originally published in 
French in 1999. 

44 Bernadette Corporation, Reena Spaulings 

(New York: Semiotext(e), 2004).

45 Tiqqun, Theory of the Young-Girl, 123.
46 Ibid., 17: 12.

47  Ibid., 18: 25.
48 See Bernadette Corporation, Reena 
Spaulings, 187–98. See also Stephan 
Geene, “Greater Gatsby,” Texte zur Kunst, 
no. 58 (June 2005): 138–39.

49 Chris Kraus, “The Complete Poem/ 

Bernadette Corporation,” in Where Art Be-
longs (Los Angeles: Semiotext(e), 2011), 51.
50 Greene Naftali Gallery, New York, Septem-

ber 17 to October 17, 2009.

51  Bernadette Corporation, The Complete 

Poem (Cologne: Walther König, 2011). 

Fig. 14
Bernadette Corporation, 
Ars Nova, 2009.

here as a “‘magic belief’ system that maintains the conviction that one en-
gages in voluntary and self-determined work.”41 The Young-girl’s appearance 
is an overdetermined, pure visibility, a vanishing point of representation, and 
so she “resembles her photo,”42 instead of the photo resembling her. In this 
sense, she can be of any gender or age, her main characteristics being her 
alienation, which suggests that there was a form of authenticity found behind 
her. This demand of a codified authenticity and originality again is internal-
ized by capitalism and concerns the commodity as well as the commodified 
body and subject.43 The fashion model is one of the ideal roles of the figure of 
the Young-girl, as elaborated in BC’s novel Reena Spaulings in 2004.44 In this 
book, BC obviously took the Theory of the Young-girl as a model itself for the 
design of main character, a museum guard becoming a famous model for un-
derwear and it-girl in New York. 

Wishing to become thing-like, the Young-girl is the perfect commodity, or, as 
Tiqqun writes: “In the act of selling herself, she is trying to acquit herself of 
herself [...]. But this never happens.”45 She is the “new physiognomy of Capi-
tal,” a living currency, a form of Empire life and an object of “selection, man-
agement, and attenuation.”46 Every one of her activities is “directed to self-
valorization” and reification. Thus, the “Young-girl is a lie whose apogee is the 
face.”47 Self-control goes hand in hand with loss of self. This mode of dis-
tance to the self is taken up by BC in Reena Spaulings and transformed into a 

92

Life Which Writes Itself

Ilka Becker

93

While the poetics worked out in the text seemed to be programmatic for BC’s 
collective writing technique under its brand status, the photographs were a 
commissioned work by fashion photographer David Vasiljevic, parasiting on 
his authorship and style. BC had asked him to restage an ad campaign he had 
realized for Levi’s jeans in 2009—in the same style, but with different models 
of no-name clothing. 

He used a seamless, white backdrop, as Richard Avedon did in his iconic photo 
shooting with Warhol and his superstars in the 60s, cited in the 90s by Steven 
Meisel in a Calvin Klein jeans ad with Joe Dallesandro as model. Thus Vasiljevic 
symbolically superimposed the modernist white of the white cube, signifying 
neutrality and rationality, and the blank page of the book with the cited photo-
graphic backdrop, “on which a handful of androgynous, vacant-faced models 
pose[d] conspicuously mirrors the whiteness of the poem’s pages.”52 In his 
restaging of his own photo-shoot for BC, the models are “advertising nothing 
but themselves and by extension, life in jeans.”53

As David Joselit states regarding the “2000 Years” retrospective show of BC 
in 2012, style—which is not only a key category of fashion but also of art his-
tory—is a “bankrupt concept”54 in contemporary art, remaining alive only as a 
verb, as styling: “Styling (as opposed to style) offers distinctive opportunities 
for artists. While the noun was linked to a set of fairly stable practices, the 
very purpose of styling is to manipulate and transform the status quo. Styling 
is the creature of fashion and consumerism not because it is inherently corrupt, 
but simply because consumerism requires creativity and perpetual change, 
and that is what styling does—it is dynamic rather than inert.”55

In his view, BC offer an insight in this function of styling as an “opportunistic 
tool.” This conclusion could be transferred to the photographic practices in 
BC’s installations. While the function of the medium was the separation from 
mimesis in modernism,56 today’s function of photography is relationalism, as 
described in Reena Spaulings. The subject itself appears in the modus of re-
production, which means not individually, but in the mode of replaceability. 
Therefore The Complete Poem is not so much about photography’s specificity, 
but the ways of participating in a milieu of mediality as tempo-spatial sensorium. 
In this context, the exhibition displays employed by BC constitute the dispos-
itive making visible the photographic ambivalence between documentation 
(having-been) and construction (repetition). Be it in the form of a graphic tab-
leau, a screen, a projection, a showcase, or a frame, in BC’s work the display 
appears in its hybrid mediality (the “medium as milieu”)57 and as such is an 
example for the art of the distribution of the sensible in the digitalized Empire 
aesthetics. Photography isn’t “light which writes itself”58 anymore, but life, 
that writes itself—in the sense of the model’s body as a “living currency.” In 
consequence, those photographs don’t reveal any punctum or anything be-

Fig. 16
Steven Meisel, jeans ad campaign for  
Calvin Klein with Joe Dallesandro, 1995.

hind their surface. As discursive images they speak of nothing other than the 
non-identity of the photographed and the “individual body” as a spin-off of 
the cliché.

Conclusion

Jacques Rancière speaks of the “twofold requirement that constitutes the 
aesthetic regime of art: that aesthetic experience involves autonomy and that 
art is always simultaneously something other than art. On this basis, it is pos-
sible to analyze the variant ways of thinking the medium as forms of transfor-
mation of that twofold requirement.”59 Thus, one could conclude that the 
practice of BC which is situated in the codes of art and art institutions, must 
provide a residue of “something other than art” to be able to reflect on the 
main problem: the shift from mode to modeling which is the logic of the en-
trepreneurial self. Nevertheless, the “productive contagion” they aim for is 
only possible in the combination of image / images and text as an operation 
which produces a being different differently.

52  Bernadette Corporation, “The Complete 

Poem. Synopsis”, http://printedmatter.
org/catalogue/moreinfo.

53  Greene Naftali Gallery, Bernadette Corpo-
ration, Press Release, New York, Septem-
ber 17 to October 17, 2009; http://artnews.
org/greenenaftali/?exi=1628.

54 David Joselit, “The Power to Style: On Ber-

nadette Corporation at Artists Space, New 
York,” Texte zur Kunst, no. 88 (December 
2012): 174.
55  Ibid., 175.
56 Rancière, What Medium Can Mean, 35.
57  Ibid., 37.
58  Ibid., 36.
59 Ibid., 37.

94

Life Which Writes Itself

Ilka Becker

95

Rancière, Jacques. “What Medium Can 
Mean.” In Pharresia, no. 11 (2011).

Simmel, Georg. “Zur Psychologie der Mode. 
Soziologische Studie.” Die Zeit. Wiener 
Wochenschrift für Politik, Volkswirtschaft, 
Wissenschaft und Kunst, vol. 5, no. 54 (Octo-
ber 12, 1895): 22–24.

Simpson, Bennett. “Bernadette Corporation.” 
In Corporate Mentality. Edited by Alaksandra 
Mir, 153–54. New York: Sternberg Press, 
2003: 153.

Simpson, Bennett. “Techniques of Today.” 
Artforum International, vol. 43, no. 1 (Septem-
ber 2004). Accessed August 8, 2013. http://
www.bernadettecorporation.com/introduc-
tion.htm.

Stakemeier, Kerstin and Johannes Paul Rather. 
“Kapitalismus funktioniert (einfach!)” Texte 
zur Kunst, no. 80 (December 2010).

Tiqqun. Raw Materials for a Theory of the 
Young-girl (orig. 1999). Los Angeles: 
semiotext(e), 2010.

Weber, Samuel. “Mass Mediauras. Art, Aura 
and Media in the Work of Walter Benjamin.” In 
Ibid., Mass Mediauras. Form, Technics, Media. 
Edited by Alan Cholodenko, 76–241. Stanford, 
CA: Stanford University Press, 1996: 81. 

Literature

Bernadette Corporation. Reena Spaulings. 
New York, Los Angeles: Semiotext(e), 2004.

Frank, Thomas. The Conquest of Cool. Chica-
go: University of Chicago Press, 1997.

Bernadette Corporation. The Complete Poem, 
Cologne: Walther König, 2011. 

Geene, Stephan. “Greater Gatsby.” Texte zur 
Kunst, no. 58 (June 2005): 138–39.

Boltanski, Luc and Ève Chiapello. Der neue 
Geist des Kapitalismus, Konstanz: UVK 1999.

Bröckling, Ulrich. “Jenseits des kapitalistisch-
en Realismus: Anders anders sein.” In Kapital-
istischer Realismus. Von der Kunstaktion zur 
Gesellschaftskritik. Edited by Sighard Neckel, 
281–301. Frankfurt/Main: Campus, 2010.

Bröckling, Ulrich. Das unternehmerische 
Selbst. Soziologie einer Subjektivierungs-
form. Frankfurt/Main: Suhrkamp, 2007.

Frank, Thomas and Matt Weiland. Commodify 
Your Dissent: Salvos from The Baffler. Edited 
by Thomas Frank and Matt Weiland. New 
York: Norton, 1997.

Holert, Tom and Mark Terkessidis, Der Main-
stream der Minderheiten. Edited by Tom 
Holert and Mark Terkessidis. Berlin: Edition 
ID-Archiv, 1996.

Diederichsen, Diedrich. “Leben im Loop.” In 
Eigenblutdoping. Edited by Diedrich Died-
erichsen. Cologne: Kiepenheuer & Witsch, 
2008.

Diederichsen, Diedrich. “Radical chic.” Die 
Zeit, no. 37 (September 4, 2003). Accessed 
August 9, 2013. http://www.zeit.de/2003/37/
Jugendbewegung.

Eklund, Douglas. The Pictures Generation, 
1974–1984. Edited by Douglas Eklund. Exh. 
cat., The Metropolitain Museum of Art. New 
Haven: Yale University Press, 2009. 

Farago, Jason. “Bernadette Corporation: 
‘Don’t have sex with each other.’” The Guardian, 
March 24, 2013. Accessed August 8, 2013. 
http://www.theguardian.com/artand-
design/2013/mar/24/
bernadette-corporation-ica. 

Frank, Thomas. “Art as Lifestyle (Monocultur-
alism).” The Baffler, no. 4. Accessed August 9, 
2013. https://www.thebaffler.com/past/
art_as_lifestyle. 

Graw, Isabelle. Der große Preis. Kunst zwisch-
en Markt und Celebrity Kultur, 163–86. Co-
logne: DuMont, 2008.

Hardt, Michael and Antonio Negri. Empire. 
Die neue Weltordnung. Frankfurt/Main: Cam-
pus, 2000.

Haraway, Donna. “When Species Meet: Stay-
ing With the Trouble.” Environment and Plan-
ning D: Society and Space, vol. 28, no. 1 
(2010): 53–55.

Heidegger, Martin. “Die Zeit des Weltbildes.” 
In Ibid., Holzwege, 69–104. Frankfurt/Main: 
Klostermann, 1950.

Holert, Tom and Mark Terkessidis. “Einfüh-
rung in den Mainstream der Minderheiten.” In 
Der Mainsream der Minderheiten. Pop in der 
Kontrollgesellschaft. Edited by Tom Holert 
and Mark Terkessidis, 5–19. Berlin: Edition ID-
Archiv, 1996.

Koether, Jutta. “Ausleben. Jutta Koether be-
sucht Bernadette Corporation.” Texte zur 
Kunst, no. 49 (March 2003). Accessed August 
8, 2013. http://www.textezurkunst.de/49/
ausleben.

Kraus, Chris. “Indelible Video.” In Ibid., Where 
Art Belongs. Los Angeles: semiotext(e), 2011: 
119–39.

Kraus, Chris. “The Complete Poem/Berna-
dette Corporation.” In Ibid., Where Art Be-
longs. Los Angeles: semiotext(e), 2011, 
44–56.

Rancière, Jacques. Das Unvernehmen. Politik 
und Philosophie. Frankfurt/Main: Suhrkamp, 
2002.

Rancière, Jacques. Die Aufteilung des Sinnli-
chen. Die Politik der Kunst und ihre Paradox-
ien. Edited by Maria Muhle. Berlin: b_books, 
2006.

97

Production 
of Space

Fashion and the 
Production of 
Space
An Introduction

Barbara Schrödl

Barbara Schrödl

99

“Production of Space” refers to the work La production de l’espace, published 
in 1974 by the Marxist sociologist and philosopher Henri Lefebvre. Its quintes-
sence is the proposition: “[T]he (social) space is a (social) product.”1 For ana-
lytical reasons, Lefebvre distinguishes three dimensions of social space: spatial 
practice, representation of space, and spaces of representation. Spatial prac-
tice comprises production and reproduction, thus specific places and spatial 
ensembles. Representation of space relates to our imaginations and pictures 
of space. Spaces of representation means space as it is anticipated through 
imagination and pictures by people acting in it and with it. One speaks of the 
perceived, the devised, and the experienced; the three dimensions are intrin-
sically tied to each other. They are part of one process, the process of the 
production of social spaces, which we perceive, imagine, and experience every 
day. If space is analyzed according to Lefebvre as a social product, it is sub-
jected to historicity; every society produces its own space.

The chapter “Production of Space,” which analyzes the phenomenon of fashion 
under the aspect of spatial production, is, by referencing Lefebvre, put into 
a context of current discussions of spatial theory. This discussion was started 
by Michel Foucault. In 1967 he declared in his essay “Of Other Spaces” that 
the “present epoch will perhaps be above all the epoch of space.”2 He drew 
the consequence out of his observance that history, which had been the big 
obsession of the nineteenth century, has lost its importance: “We are at a 
moment, I believe, when our experience of the world is less that of a long life 
developing through time than that of a network that connects points and 
intersects with its own skein.”3 He thereby announced the “topological turn.” 
The category of space had not played much of a role in humanities and social 
sciences for a long time. This changed radically in the 1990s. It had become 
apparent that important developments of the present could not be explained 
satisfactorily without a new awareness for spatial aspects; attention was given 
to structures of coexistence. Differences, analogies and interdependencies of 
places were examined. In the process, micro- as well as macrostructures, and 
especially their interactions, were of interest. Increasingly, space was under-
stood as emerging out of interactions between matter and social constructions. 
In this process the dimensions of deeds came into focus. The sociologist 
Martina Löw declares that “Space is a relational (An)Ordnung of social goods 
and humans in places.”4 Her specific writing style refers to order and to its 
creation. Alongside Löw’s spatial-sociological assumptions, there is special 

1  Henri Lefebvre, “Die Produktion des Rau-
mes,” in Architekturwissen: Grundlagen-
texte aus den Kulturwissenschaften, Band 
2: Zur Logistik des sozialen Raumes, ed. 
Susanne Hauser, Christina Kamleithner, 
and Roland Mayer (Bielefeld: Transcript, 

2012), 387. First published in 1974.

2  Michel Foucault, “Andere Räume,” in ibid., 

231. First published in 1967.
Ibid., 231.

3 
4  Martina Löw, Raumsoziologie (Frankfurt/

Main: Suhrkamp, 2001), 224.

100

Fashion and the Production of Space

Barbara Schrödl

101

attention to be paid to the philosopher Gernot Böhme’s concept of atmo-
sphere in contemporary discourses of space. Böhme deals with the space of 
personal attendance, which is not “relative to our imaginations, but relative 
to our physical experience.”5 To him the relation between space and feeling 
is of interest. He says: “Atmospheres are tuned spaces or to refer to Schmitz: 
spatially poured, quasi objective feelings. Atmospheres are something spa-
tial, and they can be received by surrendering to them or by experiencing 
their character in the way they modify our feelings or, rather, how we at least 
respond to them.”6

Böhme regards the term atmosphere as fundamental to a new aesthetics. 
This new aesthetics is supposed to react to an increasingly aestheticized real-
ity. Atmosphere is linked to the actual stage of capitalist development in the 
advanced industrial nations, a phase in which aesthetic work represents a big 
part of the work of society as a whole. This phase is characterized by the fact 
that basic needs are covered. A specific aspect of the practical value of 
goods now becomes important: the use of goods in the context of being ap-
plicable for orchestration. Böhme uses atmosphere in an explicitly critical 
way. Those subjected to the claims and manipulations of atmospheres are to 
be identified. 

This short overview of the concepts of the present theory of space gives us 
the sense that fashion and space are indeed to be seen in a close relation. But 
the theory of space so far shows little interest in fashion. Even the theory of 
fashion has not yet taken the topological turn. Fashion is still interpreted 
mainly as a connotational system. Only recently have categories such as ac-
tion and perception—and therefore also space—come increasingly into focus. 
Gertrud Lehnert titled a newly published anthology Räume der Mode (Spaces 
of fashion).7 For analytical reasons she distinguishes three dimensions of rela-
tionships between space, humans, and clothing: “Fashion as Space,” “Space 
Adopting Body Techniques,” and “Settings: Spaces/Places.”8 One is reminded 
of Henri Lefebvre’s La production de l’espace. Like Lefebvre, the author cre-
ates a trichotomy; furthermore, she extends his conception of space, which 
puts the social practices into focus in the direction of a cultural studies con-
cept of a cultural practice. She refers to the spatiality of clothing in “Fashion 
as Space.” Fashion differs from sculpture through its purpose: it is worn. 
Clothes are in close interchange with the body that wears them. They retrace 
the bodyline, or shape it. Sometimes they make themselves independent as 
textile sculptures. As “Space Adopting Body Techniques,” Lehnert defines the 
subject’s direction through the fit and the suitability of clothing for different 
occasions, whereupon the notions of suitable are fast changing. In this process, 
she notes, the body is not expressed but rather created. “Settings: Spaces/
Places” refers to settings of staging and representation of fashion. In refer-

ence to Martina Löw’s theory generation, the author emphasizes that fashion-
able actions constitute those settings in the first place. Furthermore, Hermann 
Schmitz’s theories of space are used to tie space to body. The settings which 
can be localized in materialized reality as well as in texts and pictures, are 
disclosed as spaces “which create in Modekörpern a third entity in interaction 
with the human body and clothing” and represent “spaces of experience.”9

The three theoretical contributions of the chapter “Production of Space” aim 
at analyzing the regime of gaze, relations of power, and strategies of fashion 
in different settings. Two articles focus on fashion shows, thereby on fashion 
marketing. One text examines fashion as an example of transgressing aesthetic 
borders and as a specific space of liminality. The view on the forth contribu-
tion, a fashion editorial, is prestructured by those perspectives, yet this fashion 
rather encourages our thinking about the spatiality of clothing and our ideas 
of adequate clothes for eco-correct transportation by means of biking, which 
is a lifestyle for young urban clientele. One could say that the articles bear 
reference to Lehnert’s concretization of the three dimensions of social space 
by Lefebvre for the purpose of realizing the interrelations of space, humans, 
and clothing, which brings in a clearly more political dimension in the shift of 
his conception of space from social practices towards cultural practices. 

“It All Started with a Bicycle” was the name Tanja Bradaric and Taro Ohmae 
gave their Spring/Summer 2013 collection. The bicycle in the collection’s 
name points to biking and thereby to an extremely up-to-date form of move-
ment based on physical strength—albeit supported by a device. Indeed it is 
an alluring thought to slip into the jackets, shirts, dresses, or skirts of the col-
lection, mount a bike, cruise through the city and feel not only wind, body, 
and fabric, but also the gazes of onlookers. The pictures show outfits of di-
verse plasticity of apparel. The range goes from retracing the body line with 
close-fitting garments to a considerable transformation of the body’s plasticity. 
The garments are made of either elastic or loose-fitting fabrics. This style 
never confines, is never too voluminous, and rarely reaches below the knee. 
It shows ample skin through length, slits, cut-outs, and perforated fabrics. 
The collection seems to aim not only at the least possible restriction of natural 
movements but also at expressing the mobility of the human body. 

In her essay “Framing ‘Saints and Sinners’: Methods of Producing Space in 
Fashion Shows: Michael Michalsky’s Fall/Winter 2009 Collection,” Alicia Kühl 

5  Gernot Böhme, Architektur und Atmo-

(Munich: Wilhelm Fink, 2012).

sphäre (Munich: Wilhelm Fink Verlag, 2006), 
16. Translated from the German by BS.
Ibid. 

6 
7  Gertrud Lehnert, Räume der Mode  

8  Gertrud Lehnert, “Mode als Raum, Mode 
im Raum: Zur Einführung,” in Räume der 
Mode, ed. Gertrud Lehnert (Munich: Wil-
helm Fink, 2012), 7–23.
Ibid., 8–11.

9 

102

Fashion and the Production of Space

shows the concept of the space of the fashion show by means of an actual 
fashion. In the fashion show, she sees that the place (e.g., the fashion city 
Berlin), the location (e.g., the Zionskirche), and the so-called imaginary space 
fuse into the actual space of the fashion show. This could be described as  
atmosphere in the sense of Gernot Böhme. Following Erika Fischer-Lichte, the 
space of the fashion show could also be interpreted as a performative space. 
The fashion show as a performative act would be defined through boundaries 
and framing. After all, Kühl construes the fashion show as a ritual, namely, as 
a ritual for negotiating the latest.

In “Fashion Film: Spaces of Exclusivity and the Globalization of Accessibility” 
Sabina Muriale explores a quite new setting of staging and representing fashion, 
which some designers use as an alternative to the catwalk, while others use it 
as complement. Opposite to a fashion show, which is tied to an actual place 
and a certain time, she interprets the fashion film as a step towards democra-
tizing fashion, which is closely linked to commercial interests. Fashion film is 
a marketing instrument. Nevertheless, it can take on artistic qualities. There-
fore Muriale localizes it, as fashion itself, between art and commerce. The 
view on fashion film could illustrate that fashion criticism amounts to capitalism 
criticism. 

Finally, Michael R. Mueller defines the aesthetic politics of fashion as the cre-
ation of a sphere of liminality, which designs the imagination as “The Way-
wardness of Fashion: Society in the Subjunctive.” At that point Mueller refers 
to Georg Simmel, who had outlined aesthetic action as an essential mode of 
societal life. Aesthetics is not only concerned with reflecting the social, but 
with giving it form. He argues that fashion is part of a liminal aesthetics that 
confronts the order of everyday life with unusual perspectives or codes of 
behavior, seeking for new societal forms and other spaces.

Barbara Schrödl

Literature

103

Böhme, Gernot. Architektur und Atmosphäre. 
Munich: Wilhelm Fink, 2006.

Lehnert, Gertrud. Räume der Mode, Munich: 
Wilhelm Fink, 2012.

Lehnert, Gertrud. “Mode als Raum, Mode im 
Raum: Zur Einführung.” In Räume der Mode. 
Edited by Gertrud Lehnert, 7–23. Munich:  
Wilhelm Fink, 2012.

Löw, Martina. Raumsoziologie. Frankfurt/
Main: Suhrkamp, 2001.

Schmitz, Hermann. Entseelung der Gefühle. 
In Neue Phänomenologie und philosophische 
Emotionstheorie. Edited by Kerstin Ander-
mann and Undine Eberlein, 21–33. Berlin: 
Akademieverlag, 2011.

Böhme, Gernot. “Atmosphäre als Grundbeg-
riff einer neuen Ästhetik.” In Einfühlung und 
phänomenologische Reduktion: Grundlagen-
texte zu Architektur, Design und Kunst. Edited 
by Jörg Friedrich Gleiter and Thomas Fried-
rich, 287–310. Berlin: LIT Verlag, 2007.

Foucault, Michel. “Andere Räume.” Originally 
published 1967. In Architekturwissen: Grundla-
gentexte aus den Kulturwissenschaften, Band 
2: Zur Logistik des sozialen Raumes. Edited by 
Susanne Hauser, Christina Kamleithner and 
Roland Mayer, 231–39. Bielefeld: Transcript, 
2012.

Lefebvre, Henri. “Die Produktion des Raumes.” 
Originally published 1974. In Architekturwis-
sen: Grundlagentexte aus den Kulturwissen-
schaften, Band 2: Zur Logistik des sozialen 
Raumes. Edited by Susanne Hauser, Christina 
Kamleithner and Roland Mayer, 387–96. 
Bielefeld: Transcript, 2012. 

It All Started 
with a Bicycle 

Tanja Bradarić and Taro Ohmae

106

It All Started with a Bicycle  

Tanja Bradarić and Taro Ohmae

107

Bradaric Ohmae, It All Started with a Bicycle, 
Spring/Summer 2013 collection.

108

It All Started with a Bicycle  

Tanja Bradarić and Taro Ohmae

109

Framing “Saints 
and Sinners”
Methods of 
Producing 
Space in Fashion 
Shows: Michael 
Michalsky’s Fall/
Winter 2009 
Collection 

Alicia Kühl

Alicia Kühl

113

A Debate is ignited. Is it permissible to use Churches for Fa-
shion Shows?

“The pews were not moved. But the cross was covered over and a catwalk set 
up in the center aisle. It took eight days for the heater fans to drive the cold 
out of the church. The girls waited in the sacristy and on the organ loft for 
their cue. And Luca Gadjus, the model who lives just around the corner, 
opened a fashion show that was an iconoclastic act and at the same time a 
profession of faith.”1

This is how fashion journalist Alfons Kaiser began his article “Jesus must love 
Michalsky,” on the Fall/Winter 2009 fashion show featuring creations by  
Michael Michalsky, held in a Protestant church on January 30, 2009. Although 
Michalsky does not attend church often, according to his account he is a de-
vout Christian and of the view that “there is a place for everyone under God’s 
roof, even if some people sometimes claim the opposite,” a statement he 
gave to the Südkurier as part of an article2 responding to the Church’s rejec-
tion of homosexuality under the then Pope Benedict XVI.3 The fashion show 
venue chosen seemingly without hesitation by the designer, who in the past 
has worked for Levi Strauss and Adidas and since 2006 heads a label under 
his own name, was the Protestant Zion Church of the Sophien Parish in Berlin.

Michalsky’s choice and the controversial reactions that arose awakened my 
interest in the use of urban spaces for fashion shows and led to the question 
of whether their unusual staging evoked the production of a unique kind of 
space within the urban spaces. 

After outlining the contentious issue of this particular show and describing 
what actually happened in the Zion Church, this article proposes a theoretical 
approach to fashion show spaces. My research reveals that setting frames is 
a valuable method of producing space and is therefore taken into special 
consideration. Furthermore, thinking about frames in fashion shows leads in-
evitably to the question of whether fashion shows can be characterized as 
rituals.

1  Alfons Kaiser, “Jesus muss Michalsky  

lieben,” Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, 
January 31, 2009; http://www.faz.net/ak 
tuell/gesellschaft/mode/berliner-mode 
woche-jesus-muss-michalsky-lieben- 
1760045.html. Translation from the  
German by AK.

2  Caroline Bock, “Heilige und Sünder – Der 
Designer Michael Michalsky,” Südkurier, 
January 29, 2009; http://www.suedkurier.
de/unterhaltung/lifestyle/trends/Heilige-

und-Suender-Der-Designer-Michael-
Michalsky;art495,3614842. Translation 
from the German by AK.

3  Tellingly, Vogue proclaimed soon thereaf-
ter that Michalsky was the “new pope of 
German fashion,” as cited in Max Ernst 
Walbersdorf, “Von Heiligen und Sündern: 
Über die neue Kollektion Michael Michal-
sky H/W 09/10,” March 13, 2009; http://
www.vogue.de/fashion-shows/designer/
designer-von-heiligen-und-suendern.

114

Framing “Saints and Sinners”

Alicia Kühl

115

Despite Kaiser’s rather favorable coverage, using church premises for non- 
religious purposes such as a fashion show has not always met with universal 
approval. The chairman of the International Martin Luther Foundation, Thomas 
A. Seidel, vehemently rejected “such a mindless and impious utilization,” and 
posits instead: “One longs for a courageous Christian who would put an 
end to such a vanity fair with the same energetic verve as Jesus cleansed the 
Jerusalem temple of the money changers.”4

Seidel found Michalsky’s appearance at the end of the show particularly repul-
sive, which Kaiser described as follows: “Michalsky himself had no doubt as to 
his divine mission. At the end of the show the messenger of the gods emerged 
from the sacristy and graced the stage. After lapping up the applause and then 
turning to leave, the audience could read on his back in large letters: ‘Jesus 
loves me’. Let’s believe it!”5

A segment broadcast on the television station rbb interpreted the repositioning 
of the pews away from the altar towards the catwalk6 to the effect that the 
disciples were not to “pray in the direction of the cross, but solely in the direc-
tion of his [Michalsky’s] creations.”7

Was this fashion show blasphemous and did Michalsky actually stage-manage 
his presence as a messiah? According to the press release issued by the 
Sophien Parish, supporting fashion, design, art, and music by making available 
sacral premises is to be welcomed, for the parish wishes to open up its doors 
to the secular world. As long as the event does “not use sacral elements for 
its own purposes,” then it must be assumed that a desecration of the building 
does not take place.8 According to an article by the journalist Liva Haensel,9 
most of the activities were agreed to in advance with the pastors of the parish 
and the press office of the Regional Church authority, whereby the director of 
the Sophien Parish’s cultural office, Thekla Wolff, acted as intermediary—

Fig. 25
Michalsky, Fall/Winter 2009 collection signet.

Wolff later claimed that she knew nothing of plans to use a signet10 in which 
the letter “M” was carried by a lamb/the Lamb of God and depicted against 
the backdrop of a stained-glass window and cross.

This brief sketch of the debate seemed necessary to clarify the explosive  
nature of this fashion show held during the Berlin Fashion Week and to do 
justice to the critical voices. At the same time, the following considerations 
will forgo taking sides for or against such a utilization of sacral space. In-
stead, I am primarily interested in investigating how the space of a fashion 
show is produced, taking this show as an example, and in the discussion as to 
what extent a fashion show can be described as a ritual—not necessarily a 
Christian one, which would seem obvious here, but in terms of it being an act 
of transformation.11 Precisely in this fashion show’s balancing act between 
fashion spectacle and its liturgical resemblance—which we shall assume for 
the moment—basic traits of ritual action can be discerned and reconstructed.

A Description of the Fashion Show Atmosphere of “Saints 
and Sinners”

As one of around 500 guests, one entered the Zionskirche in January 2009 
and took a seat in one of the pews of the thirty meter-long main aisles, 
flanked by monumental pillars. The pews were set up facing the middle of the 
aisle, where a reflective black catwalk was positioned at eye height, even 
towering over the altar. The space was darkened completely at the begin-
ning. Where the altar and crucifix are usually positioned, a black gate opened 

4  “Kritik an Fashion Week,” Thüringer Allge-

the German by AK.

meine, February 3, 2009; http://www.luther 
-stiftung.org/dokumente/presse/Thueringer 
Allgemeine%2003.02.2009.pdf. Translated 
from the German by AK.

5  Alfons Kaiser and Anke Schipp, “Im Metallic-
Mantel der Geschichte,” Frankfurter Allge-
meine Zeitung, February 2, 2009; http://
www.faz.net/aktuell/gesellschaft/mode/
modestadt-berlin-im-metallic-mantel-der-
geschichte-1775334.html. Translated from 
the German by AK.

6  Here Kaiser’s description was not quite 

correct; although they were not removed, 
the pews were repositioned to face the 
central aisles.

7  As cited in “Gehen Prostituierte und Kirche 

Hand in Hand?” Idea Spektrum (June, 
2009): 9; http://www.luther-stiftung.org/
dokumente/thesen/IdeaSpecktrum_Zions 
kirche_04.02.2009.pdf. Translated from 

8  Press release quoted in “Gehen Prostituierte 

und Kirche Hand in Hand?”

9  Liva Haensel, “Drahtseilakt unterm Kreuz,” 
February 15, 2009; http://www.luther-stift 
ung.org/dokumente/thesen/Die%20
Kirche%20-%20Drahtseilakt%20unterm 
%20Kreuz%20von%20Liva%20Haensel 
%2015.02.2009.pdf.

10  Like the print pattern of the collection, the 

signet was created in collaboration with 
Japanese artist Shinpei Naito.

11  In conformity with Matthias Warstat, “rituals” 
are understood generally as transformative 
actions in social contexts which are re-
peatedly performed according to a deter-
mined, passed down pattern. See Matthias 
Warstat, “Lexikonartikel zum Begriff Ritual,” 
in Metzler Lexikon Theatertheorie, ed. Erika 
Fischer-Lichte et al. (Stuttgart: Metzler, 
2005), 274.

116

Framing “Saints and Sinners”

Alicia Kühl

117

slowly, gradually letting a ray of blinding white light fall, becoming more and 
more intense, on the catwalk.

This imposing moment is then underlined by the playing of dramatic, fanfare-
like vocals, which segues into the hard, accelerated beat of Depeche Mode’s 
“Personal Jesus.” Luca Gadjus takes to the catwalk as the first face, but it is 
not until the second model, Toni Garrn, emerges that it becomes clear how 
the fake long ponytails of the women swing in perfect tact to the song, a 
movement symbolizing the sounds of the lashing whip from “Personal Jesus.”

Partly studded with Swarovski crystals, the stained-glass window prints of the 
long dresses and jeans are combined with shiny materials in metallic optics, 
with studded leather jackets, lace veils, fur jackets, white sneakers, hoodie 
sweaters, and shirts with clerical collars. In the collection Michalsky plays, as 
the title “Saints and Sinners” suggests, with the image of a woman, stylized 
into a Domina, at once erotic and cool, on the one hand, and a reticent, seri-
ous, but nonetheless casual man with a side parting on the other. Even when 
Michalsky in the making-of-video denies any difference between saints and 
sinners, saying that in his “definition of church and religion […] either every-
one is a sinner or no-one is a sinner,”12 this attribution to the sexes is relatively 
obvious and stringent. At the end of the fashion show Michalsky expresses 
his thanks dressed in a leather jacket, emblazoned on the back with “Jesus 
loves me.” And then it’s off to the old city bath in the Oderberger Straße for 
the aftershow party.

Fig. 26
Michalsky, Fall/Winter 2009 collection show.

Fig. 27
Toni Garrn parades on the catwalk. Michalsky, Fall/
Winter 2009 collection show.

The Production of Space13

The remark by one viewer of the show—that “the location is different and 
along with it the brand!”14—directs my attention to how space is utilized (for a 
different purpose) as a strategy for staging a fashion event, a strategy other 
designers resort to extensively.

The following will draw on an in-depth exploration of different theories on 
space that have led to, or respectively constitute, the spatial, topographical, 
respectively topological turn.15 Space is always socially constructed; that 
means that space as such can only then be experienced when humans have 

12  Quote from the official “Making-of-video” 

(1:55 min); http://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=HR-2ZuS-uV8. Translated from 
the German by AK.

13  My considerations here take up ideas first 

sketched two years ago in Alicia Kühl, 
“Wie Kleidung zu Mode wird: Prozesse der 
Verräumlichung in Modenschauen,” in 
Räume der Mode, ed. Gertrud Lehnert 
(Paderborn: Fink, 2011), 57–74. See also 
Sophia Rost, “Designer ziehen Räume an: 
Neue Trends oder ‘Schicht im Schacht’ in 
der Mode? Ein Gespräch mit Alicia Kühl,” 

in Portal Wissen (Universität Potsdam, 
January 2013), 89–91.

14  As cited in: “Making-of-video” (2:55 min). 

Translated from the German by AK.

15  An elaborate introduction to his theoreti-

cal approach as well as some of the fol-
lowing arguments can be found in my dis-
sertation, which will presumably be 
published in 2014 under the working title 
“Modenschauen. Die Behauptung des 
Neuen in der Mode” at the University of 
Potsdam.

118

Framing “Saints and Sinners”

Alicia Kühl

119

IMAGINARY

SPACE

LOCATION

PLACE

}

Mergence of the three 
types of space into the 
space of the fashion show 

Fig. 28
Alicia Kühl, Overlapping of place, location, and imaginary space, 2013.

formed, built, entered, or lived in it, experienced something in it, or talked 
about it and so made it recognizable and endowed it with meaning. In terms 
specific to the fashion show it has to be differentiated between three types of 
space: the place, the location, and the so-called imaginary space. In the mo-
ment of its staging, all three merge to form the space of the fashion show. 

The designations chosen for these spaces are not based on existing terminology 
but are the result of careful deliberations, which come closest to my view. By 
the place of a fashion show I am referring to the geographical place where it is 
held, but one that, based on the “coloration” it is given in the fashion business, 
also has social, political, and economic connotations. For instance, while Paris 
stands for haute couture, as an emerging fashion city Berlin is associated 
with street wear, green fashion, or “anything goes.” The fashion vision of Berlin 
is yet to be attached to a special profile, indicating that this spatial type of 
place has a relativist composition. The term location is used while referring to 
a concrete point within a place at which or in which the fashion show is 
staged. This could mean enclosed spaces (such as tents, industrial buildings, 
railway stations, swimming pools, the Zion Church, etc.) or spaces outdoors, 
either accessible to the general public or private (such as a park or garden, a 
beach, a pedestrian zone, etc.). The imaginary space is the space the designer 
creates in his/her imagination, for example the dream Karl Lagerfeld had of 
his Chanel iceberg landscape (Fall/Winter 2010), as he himself explained in 
an interview.16 This space is not locatable topographically, but a product of 
the imaginative creativity of the designer and production team. Moreover, 
this space is not just a sketch of the fashion show drawn up by the designer 
but embraces everything that is to be experienced in this space. It is an imag-
ined space that envelops its viewers with an atmosphere and thus evokes the 
perceptions, associations, and feelings that the designer intends. In the inter-
action between the three spatial types, however, all that was intended is in-
fluenced hic et nunc17 by the physical presence of all involved and the actions 
they perform, intermingling it with the atmospheres already adhering to the 

place and location.18 What can now be experienced in the overlapping of the 
spaces is what I would like to call the space of the fashion show, which is per-
formative and ephemeral.

It could be assumed that the imaginary space comprises the initial place and 
decisively influences the search for a suitable location. However, it can fre-
quently be the case that an exceptional location, which a designer already 
has in mind, influences the formation of the imaginary space, or the imaginary 
space only functions in combination with a specific location. One could even 
ask if the collection on show is not influenced by the imagined space or the 
chosen location. It is quite clear in our fashion show example that the design 
of the clothes (stained-glass window prints, collars) and the decision for the 
location of the Zion Church in Berlin are mutually dependent. Indeed, in this 
case it may even be speculated that the search for an exceptional location 
preceded the design process, or at least steered it in a specific direction.

But back to the space of the fashion show as the result of a fusion between 
place, location, and imaginary space: a similar approach is to be found in Erika 
Fischer-Lichte’s theory of the performative, whereby what she designates to 
be the performance space corresponds to our fashion show space. As she sees 
it, spatiality first comes about in and through a performance, turning space 
into a mobile and performative space that is embedded in an architectural-
geometric space, which exists prior to, during, and after the performance: 

 

 “The spatiality of the performance needs to be distinguished from this ar-
chitectonic-geometric space. The materiality of the performance, whether 
it be spatial, corporeal, or phonetic in nature, is produced first in and 
through the performance—it is generated performatively. Spatiality arises 
through the possibilities utilized to set the various participants or groups 
of participants into a relationship with one another, to organize and to 
structure their movements through space or in space as well as their per-
ception. No matter how the possibilities are exploited they have an impact 
on the spatiality of the performance, for every movement by persons, ob-
jects, or light, every sound made, is capable of changing it.”19

16  Karl Lagerfeld in interview with Tim Blanks, 

18  Various uses of atmospheres inherent to 

locations are explained in Alicia Kühl, 
“Wie Kleidung zu Mode wird.”

19  Erika Fischer-Lichte, Performativität: Eine 

Einführung (Bielefeld: Transcript, 2012), 
58. Translated from the German by AK.

accessed July 3, 2013, http://www.style.
com/fashionshows/video/
F2010RTW-CHANEL.

17  On the presentist dimension or what 

Fischer-Lichte means by hic et nunc, see 
Erika Fischer-Lichte, Ästhetik des Perfor-
mativen (Frankfurt/Main: Suhrkamp, 
2004), 161.

120

Framing “Saints and Sinners”

Alicia Kühl

121

viewers?

Furthermore, the performance space is also an immersive space, i.e., one that 
draws the viewer in or respectively one into which the viewer can plunge. 
Here the atmosphere is essential, playing a pivotal role in how the space is 
experienced. Gernot Böhme has pertinently described atmospheres as being 
neither something material nor inhering to the subject; instead, “spaces are 
in as far as they are ‘tinged’ by the presence of things, people, or the constel-
lations of the setting, i.e., by their ecstasies.”20 According to Fischer-Lichte, 
in an atmospheric space the viewers feel their lived experience in a very spe-
cific way: the atmosphere penetrates into and breaches the boundary of the 
body. The performative space is thus “a liminal space in which metamorpho-
ses are passed through and transformations take place.”21 Cultural anthropol-
ogist Victor Turner was a key figure in elaborating the concept of liminality, 
describing ritual as a transgressing of boundaries and entering into threshold 
states of betwixt and between. Before returning to our considerations of the 
fashion show, seeking to identify its features as a ritual, it seems advisable to 
discuss one of the key tasks facing a designer and fashion show producer, 
namely, the practice of setting boundaries and framing.    

BS

S

A

A

LOCATION

PLACE

The Practice of Setting Boundaries and Framing

Boundaries separate two areas from one another in order to emphasize one 
area from the other. They do not simply exist (as territorial boundaries are 
also not naturally given) but are the result of social procedures. What are the 
types of boundaries in a fashion show? Firstly, there is the boundary set be-
tween the three aforementioned types of space—place, location, and imagi-
nary space; secondly, within the fashion show space we have a gap or bound-
ary between the audience [A] and the stage [S], between the stage and the 
backstage [BS], and furthermore between object (clothes) and the viewing 
subject, between a viewer and the persons sitting on either side, between the 
viewer and the model, between seats in the coveted front row and the stand-
ing room at the back, etc. Interestingly, in “Saints and Sinners,” these bound-
aries largely coincide with the boundaries between the parish’s part of the 
church and the clergyman’s, hence between the profane and sacred. Setting 
up boundaries in a location by analogy with the ones already given proves to 
be an effective strategy of mutual reinforcement. When we sketch these 
boundaries from a bird’s-eye view, their setting resembles a set of frames. 
This raises the question as to why boundaries are needed in a fashion show 
and who determines what is to be distinguished or framed from what and 
why. My thesis is that the frame of a fashion show is no longer set only for the 
purpose of highlighting the new creation featured, but that the framing itself 
can represent the new. Fashion show spaces come about through the afore-
mentioned interaction between three types of space in the moment that the 
boundaries between them dissolve—but also through a boundary being set 
between what the designer wishes to mark as the new in distinction from the 
old, for which the audience stands symbolically (whether they factually are or 
not). This boundary is visible prior to the fashion show and is underlined; it is 
prohibited, for example, to set foot on the catwalk prior to the show or take a 
look behind the scenes in the backstage area (exclusion). These boundaries 
are dissolved during and after the fashion show to enable the audience to be-
come part of the performance and witnesses at the presentation of new cre-
ations (inclusion).

A host of authors have elaborated theoretical underpinning for the concepts 
or terms of boundary and frame, whereas in my view the most fruitful are 
those articulated in the theoretical considerations of the performative, in 
sociology, and in theories on ritual.22 In the essay collection Ritualität und 
Grenze,23 Erika Fischer-Lichte approaches the concept of boundary through a 

Fig. 29
Alicia Kühl, Possible frames in a location, 2013.

20 Gernot Böhme, Atmosphäre: Essays zur 

neuen Ästhetik (Frankfurt/Main: 
Suhrkamp, 1995: 33), translated from the 
German by AK. See also his considerations 
on the atmosphere in a church: Gernot 

Böhme, Architektur und Atmosphäre (Pad-
erborn: Fink, 2006), 139–50.

21  Fischer-Lichte, Ästhetik des Performativen, 

208. Translated from the German by AK.

122

Framing “Saints and Sinners”

Alicia Kühl

123

historical performance: Gertrud Eysoldt’s portrayal of Elektra in a play by 
Hugo von Hoffmannsthal in Berlin in 1903 marked a turning point in the art of 
acting. Through her expressive, wild performance, Eysoldt breaches the tra-
ditional boundary between the semiotic (i.e., her role) and her own body. The 
audience was no longer able to distinguish between fiction and reality—their 
identification with Eysoldt’s own body was too powerful. There was thus no 
longer any play in the sense of “as if” or “make believe,” the acting no longer 
imitated a reality it merely pretended to embody, but actually constituted re-
ality. This had a profound impact on the boundary between the audience and 
stage: the transgression of the boundary erected between the semiotic and 
physical body passed over to the audience. At least during the time of the 
performance the audience also passes through a physical transformation, 
lending the performance a ritual dimension. Fischer-Lichte emphasizes that 
this transgression can be considered an “artistic technique”—in other words 
something intentionally employed by artists as a strategy for staging an event.

In this example the boundary transgression and transformation are based on 
the physical co-presence of audience and actors. Here we need to keep in 
mind that in the fashion show it is not just the body of the other that can be 
experienced through the senses and processed cognitively and emotionally; 
there are a host of additional elements which constitute the particular atmo-
sphere of a show (such as media-generated images, sounds, smells, tempera-
tures, senses of broad open or narrow constricting space, etc.). The afore-
mentioned immersion, the inclusion of the viewer into a space through 
plunging into an atmosphere, takes place through a multidimensional bound-
ary transgression.

As for the frame, an approach prevalent in art studies that considers this in 
terms of the framing given to an artwork would seem an obvious starting 
point. However, because the “fashion show” as a total work of art is not as a 
single artifact but a performative act, this notion of framing is not particularly 
applicable. Instead we need to turn to sociology and, once again, theories of 
ritual and theater, which translate the principle behind the framing of a pic-
ture, namely the inclusion through exclusion, to the communication between 
individuals.

In his essay “The Sociology of Space”24 Georg Simmel explores the concepts 
of the boundary and the frame. Simmel uses both terms as a sociological 
metaphor to describe contexts of meaning and behavior: “The boundary is 
not a spatial fact with sociological consequences, but a sociological fact that 
forms itself spatially.”25

 

 “The frame of a structure, its self-contained boundary, has a very similar 
significance for the social group as for a work of art. It performs two func-

tions for the latter, which are really only two sides of a single function: 
closing the work of art off against the surrounding world and holding it to-
gether. The frame proclaims that a world is located inside of it, which is 
subject only to its own laws, not drawn into the determinations and chang-
es of the surrounding world. In so far as it symbolizes the self-contented 
unity of the work of art, the frame at the same time strengthens its reality 
and its impression. Similarly, a society is characterized as inwardly homo-
geneous because its sphere of existence is enclosed in acutely conscious 
boundaries and conversely, the reciprocal unity and functional relationship 
of every element to every other one gains its spatial expression in the en-
closing boundary.”26

In Steps to An Ecology of Mind the anthropologist Gregory Bateson also takes 
up the analogy of the framing of pictures, explaining that in communicative 
structures “perception of the ground must be positively inhibited and percep-
tion of the figure (in this case the picture) must be positively enhanced.”27 
Here, he too emphasizes the ideas of inclusion and exclusion as well as con-
trasting, thus drawing on psychological concepts from Gestalt theory. In 
Bateson’s sense, frames can activate specific perception patterns, initiate 
cognitive and emotional processes, and guide modes of behavior.

In his Frame Analysis Erving Goffman assumes even more emphatically that 
there is an interchanging relationship between frame and event. As he under-
stands it, within the so-called primary framework there are, besides the natural 
variants (e.g., events of nature), the social frameworks which “provide back-

22  Next to the publications cited in the fol-

lowing, please note in addition: Burckhard 
Dücker, Rituale: Formen – Funktionen – 
Geschichte; Eine Einführung in die Ritual-
wissenschaft (Stuttgart: Metzler, 2007); 
Henrik Jungaberle, Rituale erneuern: Ritual-
dynamik und Grenzerfahrung aus inter-
disziplinärer Perspektive (Gießen: Psycho-
sozial-Verlag, 2006); Henrik Jungaberle, 
Rituale in Bewegung: Rahmungs- und  
Reflexivitätsprozesse in Kulturen der Ge-
genwart (Berlin: LIT Verlag, 2006); Hans 
Körner and Karl Möseneder, Rahmen: 
Zwischen Innen und Aussen; Beiträge zur 
Theorie und Geschichte (Berlin: Dietrich 
Reimer, 2010); Georg Simmel, “Der Bild-
rahmen: Ein ästhetischer Versuch,” in Der 
Tag: Moderne illustrierte Zeitung, November 
18, 1902; Victor Witter Turner, “Betwixt 
and Between: The Liminal Period in Rites 
de Passage,” in Symposium on New Ap-
proaches to the Study of Religion, ed.  
Melford E. Spiro (Seattle: Proceedings of 

the American Ethnological Society, 1964), 
4–20; Victor Witter Turner, “Liminalität 
und Communitas,” in Ritualtheorien: Ein 
einführendes Handbuch, ed. Andréa  
Bellinger (Wiesbaden: VS Verlag für Sozial-
wissenschaften, 2008), 251–64; Herbert 
Willems, Rahmen und Habitus: Zum theo-
retischen und methodischen Ansatz Erving 
Goffmans (Frankfurt/Main: Suhrkamp, 
1997).

23  Erika Fischer-Lichte, “Ritualität und Grenze: 
Eine Einführung,” in Ritualität und Grenze, 
ed. Erika Fischer-Lichte (Tübingen: 
Francke, 2003), 11–30.

24  Georg Simmel, “The Sociology of Space,” 
in Simmel on Culture, ed. David Frisby et 
al. (London: Sage, 2000), 137–69. First 
published in German in 1903.

25  Ibid., 143.
26  Ibid., 141.
27  Gregory Bateson, Steps to an Ecology of 

Mind (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 2000), 187. First published in 1972.

124

Framing “Saints and Sinners”

Alicia Kühl

125

ground understanding for events that incorporate the will, aim, and controlling 
effort of an intelligence, a live agency, the chief one being the human being.”28 
Limiting actions through primary social frames means that the participants 
understand what is happening, rendering meaningless aspects of the scene 
into something meaningful. Through keys, defined as a set of conventions, “a 
given activity, one already meaningful in terms of some primary framework, is 
transformed into something patterned on this activity but seen by the partici-
pants to be something quite else.”29 One frequently cited example for such a 
transformation are soccer games, where specific actions by individual radical 
fans are transposed into a new frame, lending them the character of a fight 
and thus possibly escalating into outright acts of violence.30

Frames are thus, according to Goffman, organizational principles for events 
that the individual has formed out of experience or based on his/her 
knowledge. Taking up the approaches of Bateson and Goffman, the authors 
Weinhold, Rudolph, and Ambos have come up with a definition of frames 
fruitful for grasping the dynamics of rituals:

 

 “Frames are understood as individual or collective, conscious or unconscious 
knowledge structures and organizational principles which structure physical 
and social (and thus also ritual) realities. With a frame actors involved in 
the ritual are defining which acts, elements, and events are salient and cor-
rect in the respective situation and which are not. Frames are cognitive-
affective and thus action-guiding sets of information. While frame is under-
stood as a concept describing structures, framing designates the process 
of perceiving and interpreting a situation. On the individual level this en-
tails actualization of frames, on the social and cultural levels the constitu-
tive process of establishing, changing, and communicating frames.”31

Two important characteristics emerge from this: firstly, frames enclose some-
thing so as to emphasize it; and secondly, to a certain extent frames can en-
sure that events are experienced and understood in a specific way, and those 
involved respond in a specific way. In terms of the fashion show this means 
that, as an event, it is the result of interaction between planning and emer-
gence—planning because the designer and his/her team, through composing 
a fashion show space, deliberately set a frame around what is to be present-
ed as an “artistic technique,” the intention being to distinguish it from an 
“outside.” And emergence because within the time of the fashion show this 
set frame is dissolved—inside and outside briefly become one.

However, the frame not only encloses the new but also is in itself new. Up un-
til now, our premise was that the frame encloses and makes something that is 
to be presented on the stage clearly discernible. The aspiration of the design-
ers is to show something on the stage that is innovative in the sense of a 

“never-seen-before-in-this-form.” The whole fashion system cannot function 
without the old being supplanted by the new. What happens however, when 
there are no more innovations in fashion design—or at least have consider-
ably diminished and that which is shown is “only” quotes, deconstructions, 
and combinations of older fashions and styles, in other words nothing genu-
inely new? To where has innovativeness been displaced? I state that the strat-
egies of rendering the new visible, namely the framings, are themselves to be 
visible, discussed, communicable, and saleable. What is shown and declared 
as the new in Michalsky’s “Saints and Sinners” is initially nothing material 
such as the clothing, but the contextualization of the clothing itself which is 
given through the spatial and social frames of the church. This context is 
captured in what I call a “memory image” (Erinnerungsbild) of the show, 
which is later recoupled to the clothing in the negotiation process which fol-
lows every fashion show.32

The Fashion Show—A Ritual?

Is it possible to discern a ritual character in the fashion show, namely as a so-
cial process for negotiating (what is new), which would legitimatize defining 
the fashion show as a ritual?

Generally, the new and the ritual, as Burckhard Dücker has explained in detail, 
are not mutually exclusive but in fact depend upon one another.33 Indeed, the 
new is only possible within the framework of seriality, and a series, i.e., a re-
curring order, is ensured when it is affirmed over and again in a similar ritual 
act. The ritual needs the new so as to be able to verify and confirm itself—and 
the new needs the ritual as a vehicle to come into the world:

 

 “If ‘the new’ is recognized as such it has passed through a ritual negotia-
tion process, as for example in a fashion show, industry trade fair, or 
awards ceremony, which leads from a marked beginning (proposition, pre-
sentation) through to a consequential end (acceptance or rejection). In this 

28  Erving Goffman, Frame Analysis: An Essay 

on the Organization of Experience (Bos-
ton: Northwestern University Press, 1986), 
22. First published in 1974.

31  Ibid.
32  For further discussions on the nature of 

29  Ibid., 43–44.
30 See Jan Weinhold, Michael Rudolph, and 

Claus Ambos, “Framing als Zugang zur 
Ritualdynamik,” in Rituale in Bewegung: 
Rahmungs- und Reflexivitätsprozesse in 
Kulturen der Gegenwart, ed. Henrik 
Jungaberle (Berlin: LIT Verlag, 2006), 25.

the new, the so-called “memory image” 
and on strategies of recoupling, please 
note my forthcoming dissertation as men-
tioned in note 15.

33 Burckhard Dücker, “‘Alle Jahre wieder…’ – 
‘Was gibt’s Neues?’ Das Neue und das Rit-
uelle als Kategorien der Kulturwissen-
schaft,” in Das Ursprüngliche und das 
Neue: Zur Dynamik ritueller Prozesse in 
Geschichte und Gegenwart, ed. Burckhard 
Dücker and Gerald Schwedler (Berlin: LIT 
Verlag, 2008), 32. Translated from the 
German by AK.

126

Framing “Saints and Sinners”

Alicia Kühl

127

way ‘the new’ unfolds a specific social dimension that reveals itself as a 
narrative context creating meaning which revolves around the participat-
ing persons.”34

According to Dücker it is unproblematic to characterize the fashion show as a 
ritual by virtue of its negotiating what is new. As discussed above, rituals are 
also dependent upon and shaped by the existence and use of boundaries and 
frames, both of which are clearly evident in a fashion show. A further refer-
ence point is the phenomenon of brackets as observed by Goffman.35 These 
are signs that alert actors to the beginning, the progression, or the end of an 
action or a ritual. Fashion shows are shaped and pervaded by such brackets: 
as a rule they follow the same pattern (parade with first and last face, finale, 
and appearance of the designer), involve the same persons (professional 
models), take place in the same locations (e.g., official fashion week tents), in 
the same cities (the “fashion capitals”) and at the same times of year (in six-
month cycles). Fashion shows that deviate from this regime attract special at-
tention, for example, when an unusual location is selected, amateur models 
booked, or the order of events reversed.

Moreover, as Fischer-Lichte and the anthropologists she draws on (in particular 
Arnold van Gennep and Victor Turner) underline, various phases are passed 
through in a ritual, whereby the status of the person involved is altered or 
affirmed. Passing through these phases can occur spatially, i.e., crossing spa-
tial thresholds or transgressing boundaries. In the moment of crossing those 
involved find themselves on a threshold that “forms the passage from one or-
der to another” and “leads them into a liminal state.”36 Therefore, a fashion 
show can be seen as a kind of fictive transformation in which the models sim-
ulate, but do not actually consummate, a transgression of the boundary sepa-
rating the old from the new.

All fashion shows—and not just Michalsky’s—exhibit a ritual character. Those 
elements of “Saints and Sinners” so vehemently criticized, for instance the 
opening of the portal mimicking the Gates of Heaven, equating the catwalk 
with an altar and casting Michalsky as a “Creator” can be perceived as a blas-
phemous commentary. At the same time, however, this is more of an exag-
geration or perhaps even persiflage of the ritual character of fashion shows in 
general, the character that Michalsky’s show called attention to in the first 
place. 
 

34 Ibid., 21.
35 Goffman, Frame Analysis, 251; Weinhold 

et al., “Framing als Zugang,” 25.

36 Fischer-Lichte, Ästhetik des Performa-

tiven, 258. Translated from the German by 
AK.

128

Framing Saints and Sinners

Alicia Kühl

129

Karl Lagerfeld in interview with Tim Blanks. 
Accessed July 3, 2013. http://www.style.com/
fashionshows/video/F2010RTW-CHANEL.

Official “making-of-video” of Michael Michalsky 
Fall/Winter 2010. Accessed July 2, 2013. 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HR-2ZuS 
-uV8.

“Gehen Prostituierte und Kirche Hand in 
Hand?” Idea Spektrum (6/2009): 9. Accessed 
July 2, 2013. http://www.luther-stiftung.org/
dokumente/thesen/IdeaSpecktrum_Zions 
kirche_04.02.2009.pdf.

“Kritik an Fashion Week.” Thüringer Allgemeine, 
February 3, 2009: 7. Accessed July 2, 2013. 
http://www.luther-stiftung.org/doku mente/
presse/ThueringerAllgemeine%20
03.02.2009.pdf. 

Turner, Victor Witter. “Liminalität und Com-
munitas.” In Ritualtheorien. Ein einführendes 
Handbuch. Edited by Andréa Bellinger, 251–
64. Wiesbaden: VS Verlag für Sozialwissen-
schaften, 2008.

Walbersdorf, Max Ernst. “Von Heiligen und 
Sündern. Über die neue Kollektion Michael 
Michalsky H/W 09/10.” March 13, 2009. Ac-
cessed July 2, 2013. http://www.vogue.de/
fashion-shows/designer/
designer-von-heiligen-und-suendern.

Warstat, Matthias. “Lexikonartikel zum Begriff 
Ritual.” In Metzler Lexikon Theatertheorie. Ed-
ited by Erika Fischer-Lichte et al., 274–78. 
Stuttgart: Metzler, 2005.

Weinhold, Jan, Michael Rudolph and Claus 
Ambos. “Framing als Zugang zur Ritualdy-
namik.” In Rituale in Bewegung. Rahmungs- 
und Reflexivitätsprozesse in Kulturen der Ge-
genwart. Edited by Henrik Jungaberle, 19–31. 
Berlin: LIT Verlag, 2006.

Willems, Herbert. Rahmen und Habitus. Zum 
theoretischen und methodischen Ansatz Erving 
Goffmans. Frankfurt/Main: Suhrkamp, 1997.
 Other documents online:

Literature:

Bateson, Gregory. Steps to An Ecology of 
Mind. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
2000. First published in English 1972.

Bock, Caroline. “Heilige und Sünder – Der De-
signer Michael Michalsky.” Südkurier, January 
29, 2009. Accessed July 2, 2013. http://www.
suedkurier.de/unterhaltung/lifestyle/trends/
Heilige-und-Suender-Der-Designer-Michael-
Michalsky;art495,3614842.

Böhme, Gernot. Architektur und Atmosphäre. 
Paderborn: Fink, 2006. 

Böhme, Gernot. Atmosphäre. Essays zur 
neuen Ästhetik. Frankfurt/Main: Suhrkamp, 
1995. 

Dücker, Burckhard. “‘Alle Jahre wieder…’ – 
‘Was gibt’s Neues?’: Das Neue und das Ritu-
elle als Kategorien der Kulturwissenschaft.” 
In Das Ursprüngliche und das Neue. Zur Dy-
namik ritueller Prozesse in Geschichte und 
Gegenwart. Edited by Burckhard Dücker and 
Gerald Schwedler, 15–69. Berlin: LIT Verlag, 
2008. 

Dücker, Burckhard. Rituale. Formen – Funk-
tionen – Geschichte. Eine Einführung in die 
Ritualwissenschaft. Stuttgart: Metzler, 2007.

Fischer-Lichte, Erika. “Ritualität und Grenze.” 
In Ritualität und Grenze. Edited by Erika 
Fischer-Lichte, 11–30. Tübingen: Francke, 
2003.

Fischer-Lichte, Erika. Ästhetik des Performa-
tiven. Frankfurt/Main: Suhrkamp, 2004.

Fischer-Lichte, Erika. Performativität. Eine 
Einführung. Bielefeld: Transcript, 2012. 

Goffman, Erving. Frame Analysis. An Essay on 
the Organization of Experience. Boston: 
Northwestern University Press, 1986. First 
published in English 1974.

Haensel, Liva. “Drahtseilakt unterm Kreuz.” 
February 15, 2009. Accessed July 2, 2013. 
http://www.luther-stiftung.org/dokumente/
thesen/Die%20Kirche%20-%20Draht-
seilakt%20unterm%20Kreuz%20von%20
Liva%20Haensel%2015.02.2009.pdf.

Jungaberle, Henrik. Rituale erneuern. Ritual-
dynamik und Grenzerfahrung aus inter-
disziplinärer Perspektive. Gießen: Psychoso-
zial-Verlag, 2006.

Jungaberle, Henrik. Rituale in Bewegung. 
Rahmungs- und Reflexivitätsprozesse in Kul-
turen der Gegenwart. Berlin: LIT Verlag, 
2006.

Kaiser, Alfons and Schipp, Anke. “Im Metallic-
Mantel der Geschichte.” Frankfurter Allgeme-
ine Zeitung, February 2, 2009. Accessed July 
2, 2013. http://www.faz.net/aktuell/gesell-
schaft/mode/modestadt-berlin-im-metallic-
mantel-der-geschichte-1775334.html.

Kaiser, Alfons. “Jesus muss Michalsky lieben.” 
Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, January 31, 
2009. Accessed July 2, 2013. http://www.faz.
net/aktuell/gesellschaft/mode/berliner-
modewoche-jesus-muss-michalsky-lieben-1 
760045.html.

Körner, Hans and Karl Möseneder. Rahmen. 
Zwischen Innen und Aussen: Beiträge zur 
Theorie und Geschichte. Berlin: Dietrich  
Reimer, 2010. 

Kühl, Alicia. “Wie Kleidung zu Mode wird. 
Prozesse der Verräumlichung in Moden-
schauen.” In Räume der Mode. Edited by  
Gertrud Lehnert, 57–74. Paderborn: Fink, 2011. 

Rost, Sophia. “Designer ziehen Räume an. 
Neue Trends oder ‘Schicht im Schacht’ in der 
Mode? Ein Gespräch mit Alicia Kühl.” In Portal 
Wissen, Universität Potsdam (2013/1 “Schich-
ten”), 89–91.

Simmel, Georg. “The Sociology of Space.” In 
Simmel on Culture. Edited by David Frisby et 
al., 137–69. London: Sage, 2000. First pub-
lished in German 1903.

Simmel, Georg. “Der Bildrahmen: Ein ästhe-
tischer Versuch.” Der Tag. Moderne illustri-
erte Zeitung (November 18, 1902).

Turner, Victor Witter. “Betwixt and Between: 
The Liminal Period in Rites de Passage.” In 
Symposium on New Approaches to the Study 
of Religion. Edited by Melford E. Spiro, 4–20. 
Seattle: Proceedings of the American Ethno-
logical Society, 1964.

Fashion Film
Spaces of 
Exclusivity and 
the Globalization 
of Accessibility  

Sabina Muriale

Sabina Muriale

131

From Physical to Virtual—The Global Scope of Online  
Fashion Presentations

The fashion show is not quite the final destination of a new collection; that 
would be the customers. But it is a strategically important objective for both 
marketing and advertising. The first impression or so-called “pre-sensation” 
of journalists, critics, buyers, or in this particular case the customers, is decisive 
for the product turnover. At the same time, not only are the clothes presented 
in different styles, but a global image of a brand is also conveyed.

Fashion shows are integral parts of the fashion industry; therefore, it is sur-
prising that over the decades the catwalk has undergone minimal change. It 
has become at most more complicated and subsequently more expensive in 
its production:2 The catwalk acts inter alia as a stage for pretentious settings 
or lavish performances that are sometimes even compared to art installations. 
For Chanel’s Spring/Summer show 2012, Karl Lagerfeld transformed the 
Grand Palais in Paris into an oversized water world. A swarm of models strutted 
through a purified white water world complete with corals and all manner of 
aquatic creatures. A huge, shimmering curtain reminiscent of a waterfall, sup-
plied the already opulent setting a note of even more dramatic, climatic 
grandeur. 

Or recall the performance at the end of Alexander McQueen’s show for his 
spring/summer collection of 1999: the model Shalom Harlow rotated on a 
platform, embedded in the stage floor, in a white sleeveless dress with petticoat 
lining. Like a pirouetting ballerina atop a clockwork music box, the model  
appeared rooted to the ground. Only her arms and upper body were moving to 
the rhythm of the rotating disc in an unstable, almost vulnerable way. This 
“mechanical ballet”3 was flanked by two robots, taken from a car factory,4 which 
sprayed the model’s dress with black and yellow paint. In McQueen’s words, 
this was a carefully prepared project that took one week to choreograph, or 
rather to program the robots. He was inspired by an art installation by the art-
ist Rebecca Horn in which two rifles shot each other with blood-red color.5

1  N°47 The “Pre-sensation” Is the Destina-
tion—Wear the Enfolding Past, Touch the 
Contemplative Present and Smell the 
Soundperfume of the Time to Come. 
http://www.bless-service.de/BLESS_new/ 
N/Eintrage/2012/9/24_N47_The_Presensation 
_is_the_destination.html.

2  Cf. Hayley Mills, “Catwalk Set Trends:  

Womenswear Autumn/Winter 2009/10,” 
WGSN Fashion Trend Forecasting & Analysis, 
April 6, 2009; www.wgsn.com.

3  Shalom Harlow studied ballet in the 

1980s. See “Shalom Harlow,” Vogue; www.
vogue.com/voguepedia/Shalom_Harlow.

4  “The Towering Genius of Alexander  

McQueen,” The Hapsical (blog), February 
15, 2010; http://hapsical.blogspot.co.
at/2010/02/towering-genius-of-alexander- 
mcqueen.html.

5  “Dress, No. 13, Spring/Summer 1999,” The 
Metropolitan Museum of Art (blog); http://
blog.metmuseum.org/alexandermcqueen/
dress-no-13/.

132

Fashion Film

Sabina Muriale

133

However, these two examples are linked to a traditional catwalk, i.e., defiling 
of the models, who present the collection live and locally in front of the invited 
audience. Live, local, invited audience, etc., are keywords, which will be dis-
cussed in this essay as they are important in relation to new forms of fashion 
presentation in the digital age.

It is only in recent years that we have seen a hype growing around new forms 
of fashion presentation that utilize the world wide web and other digital tools 
for its own merit. The digital fashion film is only one variation of many examples 
on which we will focus in the following. Especially illustrated by the coop-
eration between fashion film director Ruth Hogben/SHOWstudio and London 
based designer Gareth Pugh.

This kind of fashion presentation generates controversial opinions on fashion 
critics at any times, but also on fashion designers. Suzy Menkes, fashion editor 
of the International Herald Tribune, commented on Gareth Pugh’s fashion film 
of his spring/summer 2012 collection:6 “They are the champions of the Inter-
net age designers who can tap into the ultra-modernity of image and sound 
as part of a multimedia experience.”7 But she warned, thinking of Mugler’s 
collaboration with Lady Gaga, for more caution: “Do not forget the clothes!”8 
And this leads us directly to a debate about pros and cons of digital fashion 
film and its experiences with a new aesthetic. The rise of a visual industry had 
already begun. But let us start first with a retrospect on digital fashion pre-
sentation and its development over the years, before we continue to observe 
and discuss current fashion films or other exclusive presentation forms in the 
following chapter. In the end we will analyze the relationship between spaces 
of exclusivity and the globalization of accessibility under the perspective of 
network capitalism. 

First Streams and Fashion Films by Helmut Lang & SHOWstudio 

Helmut Lang was one of the first to live-stream his New York debut show for 
his Fall/Winter 1998/99 collection, solely for an online audience.9 At that time, 
it was a scandal for all those who wanted to adorn themselves with the limited 
front-row seats. And yet a lot has happened since then. It has already become 
a mainstream phenomenon that fashion shows are broadcasted directly via 
the web, and it is worth nothing that there are significantly larger audiences 
than fifteen years ago. The Internet renders the exchange of information simple 
and allows access to the (fashion) business, regardless of one’s physical loca-
tion. Particularly in the age of digital culture and Generation Y, imagery from 
fashion shows are shared—thanks to bloggers and social media applications 
such as Twitter, Instagram, etc.—in reasonably good quality on the personal 
computers of dedicated followers of fashion. At first glance, separate and 

Fig. 30 a, b and c
BLESS, Collection 47: The “Pre-sensation” Is the Destination—Wear the Enfolding Past, Touch the Con-
templative Present and Smell the Soundperfume of the Time to Come, 2012.

exclusive fashion shows are outdated and are no longer the shortest or most 
practical way to promote collections.10 Meanwhile, ever more fashion compa-
nies use the possibilities of the medium of film and incorporate these films 
selectively into a communication strategy in their presentations.

There are various approaches: the film may be used as a substitute for or to 
accompany the traditional catwalk. Depending on the content, this could be a 
sequence of various outfits from a collection, or the film could portray an  
(abstract) story; from using traditional cinematography through to using a 
cutting edge, digital process.

Thirteen years ago, in 2000, the fashion film platform SHOWstudio was also 
one of the first that pushed the trend and developed its own specific type of 
fashion film.11 Nick Knight—co-founder of this platform—explains that fashion 

6  See SHOWstudio, http://showstudio.com/

project/gareth_pugh_ss_2012.

http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/
fashion/news/out-of-fashion-designers-
finding-new-ways-to-sell-their-style- 
6669578.html.

10  Ibid., 8.
11  There are, however, also further platforms 
for the fashion film medium: Dazed Digital 
(the online platform of London style mag-
azine Dazed & Confused) and A Shaded 
View on Fashion Film (formed by mother 
of all fashion bloggers, Diane Pernet).

7  Suzy Menkes, “Don’t Forget the Clothes!” 

New York Times, September 9, 2011; 
http://www.nytimes.com/2011/09/30/
fashion/mugler-and-gareth-pugh-dont-
forget-the-clothes.html.
Ibid., 8.

8 
9  Cf. Harriet Walker, “Out of Fashion:  

Designers Finding New Ways to Sell Their 
Style,” Independent, February 9, 2012; 

134

Fashion Film

Sabina Muriale

135

and film work together as a matter of course because clothes have a strong 
visual effect and are especially designed for shaping and movement.12 The  
experimental filmmaker and Knight’s former assistant, Ruth Hogben,13 supports 
him when she describes the relationship between clothing and film and si-
multaneously opens a window into this manipulation of controlling the cine-
matic significance using textile as well as gender-occupied attributions: “If 
you see a garment once, it communicates one thing, but if you see it repeti-
tively, you concentrate on its intimately changing form and movement. Each 
film is led by the elements of the different garments: sometimes it moves to 
the bass and sometimes it goes against the beat; chiffon might feel feminine, 
whereas metallic could be aggressive [...].”14

Hogben’s own descriptions of her working method are significant with regard 
to our debate about the rise of a visual industry. Image building and stirring 
up emotions are further keywords in our analysis of fashion film as a market-
ing concept.

Ruth Hogben and Gareth Pugh’s World of Emotions and 
Needs—Desire Pre-programmed

Gareth Pugh is one of the designers who has, since 2009, recognized the op-
portunity of viral marketing and advertising, as well as the artistic potential of 
a fashion film. For several years, in collaboration with Ruth Hogben, he has 
been integrating in his presentations digitally edited films as an alternative to 
the catwalk. Meanwhile, Hogben produces and directs a fashion film each 
season for Pugh, and she seems dedicated when she describes the ethos and 
standards of her work: “I try to make a representation of every piece of fabric, 

every shape and sculpture. I am trying to convey Gareth’s world. I play with 
scale; physically some parts are quite claustrophobic. There is a lot of free-
dom, depth and space—a vast, endless infinity of the world.”15

As Pugh presented his Spring/Summer 2011 collection through an eleven-
minute digital film as part of Paris Fashion Week,16 this was hotly debated in 
the press. The question of whether there is a need for a conventional fashion 
show in this day and age, was asked by Suzy Menkes, among others.17 Pugh 
required only a single, albeit huge, screen and two solitary models (Kristen 
McMenamy ahead)18 for the presentation of his entire collection. This film, just 
over eleven minutes long, copied the effects of a kaleidoscope with its inter-
rupted movements and multiple reflections. The use of light and the arrange-
ments of space, do not follow terrestrial logic. The absence of gravity and 
time are forming the new fundamental laws to be comprehended by the 
spectator. Everything is artificial and highly aesthetic and right at the begin-
ning a kind of a Genesis occurs. Out of a black nothingness, a metal cube ap-
pears and reminds us of Stanley Kubrick’s opening scene in 2001: A Space 
Odyssey from 1968.19

12  Cf. Lauren Davis, “Fashion Film Creative 

15  Menkes, “Is a Runway Show Really Neces-

Talent: Top 10,” WGSN Fashion Trend Fore-
casting & Analysis, December 20, 2010; 
www.wgsn.com.; Lauren Davis, “Fashion 
Film: The Digital Future,” WGSN Fashion 
Trend Forecasting & Analysis, December 
9, 2010; www.wgsn.com.

13  Other filmmakers are inter alia Sarah 

Chatfield (YSL) or Katerina Jebb 
(Givenchy).

14  Davis, “Fashion Film,” 10.

sary?” New York Times, September 29, 
2010; http://www.nytimes.com/2010/09 
/30/fashion/30iht-rshow.html. 

16  See SHOWstudio, http://showstudio.com/
project/gareth_pugh_ss_2011/fashion_film. 

17  Menkes, “Is a Runway Show Really 

Necessary?”

18  Jonathan Baker is the second model in 

this film, who is visible for only short 
sequences.

136

Fashion Film

Sabina Muriale

137

But this was not his first move to amaze his audience with recent digital cre-
ations. He already organized a space of exclusivity and global accessibility for 
his Fall/Winter 2009/10 show. On one hand he limited the access to his show 
and released high-resolution images only for a certain number of people. And 
on the other hand, he published a fashion film on SHOWstudio’s website with 
deep-resolution images of his collection. This game between the boundaries 
of accessibility and exclusivity continues to fan the awareness and desire for 
the illustrated fashion. But beside this marketing artifice, how does Ruth Hog-
ben’s method of filmmaking work?

Her fashion films may convey in an abstract way not merely the textile vision 
of a fashion designer, but also the image of a fashion company. In some of 
Hogben’s films, one finds only virtual transformations of clothing, body, time, 
and space without narration. Artificially generated images appear like avatars, 
as an abstract expression of what we once understood of clothing and body, 
and what we had defined before as time and space. Hogben’s intention is less 
about showing details of a textile structure or a pattern in motion, but repre-
senting a particular vision and evoking an emotional response.20

Suzy Menken’s benevolent opinion on this matter is: “There is a general feeling 
that after a quarter of a century of catwalk shows, with zombie-faced models 
walking up and down, with no interaction between clothes and audience, this 
system is coagulating fashion blood rather than making pulses race.”21

But what are exactly the benefits for producer and viewer of such a complex 
formation of a new cinematic aesthetic?

The Digital Fashion Film—Benefits and Objections to Going 
Online

Professional fashion shows cost an enormous amount every season with  
significant repeated costs for locations, models, and so on.22 Subsequently, 
the financial aspect underpins a different approach in the search for alterna-
tives to the traditional catwalk. Production costs should be reduced as much 
as possible.23 The transformation of fashion shows into fashion films has also 
formed a new viewer benefit. Lars von Bennigsen, CEO of Temperley London, 
points out the new and highly necessary event character of the medium: “[…] 
consumers may in turn wake up to the fact that spending millions on catwalks 
does not necessarily make a good or desirable product. Catwalks will hope-
fully be always around, but maybe in a less formulaic and boring way. After all, 
fashion is a creative industry and it is amazing that the form of showing 
clothes has not changed for so long. It only got more expensive.”24

Nick Knight even expands upon von Bennigsen’s statement, considering the 
logistical problems of travelling with the entire fashion-entourage of models, 
buyers, and journalists and the significant carbon footprints generated.25 But 
does it really save money if you change from a traditional catwalk to a digital 
fashion film? “[I]t was not any easier—and certainly not any less expensive—to 
take the image option, even if it avoided the ‘uncontrollable stress’ of the live 
format,” espoused Gareth Pugh to fashion journalist Suzy Menkes26 and re-
mains in an undeviating mood for fashion film. Viktor & Rolf, like other fashion 
companies, returned to a live-in-person format after the extra effort and costs 
of their virtual fashion show in October 200827 had not been appreciated.28 
The production of a digital film—even if it is eventually released with only a 
few megabytes on YouTube—is still labor intensive and expensive with the 
current state of technology. Perhaps this is because the fashion film is still an 
evolving, emerging format.

But will the virtually transferred fashion film replace the traditional catwalk? 
Caroline Evans, professor of fashion history and theory at Central Saint Martins, 
states a clear “no.” The exclusivity is decisive for designer fashion, or a luxury 
label, more than the immediacy and thrill of this new media.29 Despite many 

19  And also Kubrick’s quote on his intention 

for 2001: A Space Odyssey shows refer-
ences to Hogben’s approach: “I tried to 
create a visual experience, one that by-
passes verbalized pigeonholing and di-
rectly penetrates the subconscious with 
an emotional and philosophic content. I 
intended the film to be an intensely sub-
jective experience that reaches the viewer 
at an inner level of consciousness, just as 
music does....”; Gene D. Phillips, Stanley 
Kubrick: Interviews (Jackson: University of 
Mississippi Press, 2001), 47.

20 “Gareth Pugh Womenswear S/S10 Film 
Prequel,” Dazed Digital; http://www.daz 
eddigital.com/fashion/article/4620/1/gareth 
-pugh-womenswear-s-s10-film-prequel.

21  Menkes, “Is a Runway Show Really 

Necessary?”

22  Trend researcher Cher Potter gives con-
crete figures: £25,000 to £40,000 must 
be estimated at least for a fashion show 
and plus €10,000 to €15,000 for a top 
model. Cf. Menkes, “Is a Runway Show  
Really Necessary?” For America’s top 
fashion show locations like Bryant Park in 
New York: $28,000 and $58,000. Cf.  
Estelle Marandon, “Chic durch die Krise,” 
Die Zeit, April 6, 2009; http://www.zeit.de/
online/2009/08/mode-sparen; Christina  
Binkley, fashion and style journalist, cal-

culates for a small to medium sized show, 
even $150,000 to $300,000; Cf. Christina 
Binkley, “For Couture Shows, Digital Catwalk 
Is the New Fashion,” Wall Street Journal, 
January 23, 2012; http://online.wsj.com/
article/SB1000142405297020380650457
7177251392311874.html. 

23  Shared catwalks are another attempt to 

save costs. For example Topshop acts as a 
host and presents several designers on a 
common fashion show. Cf. Cher Potter, 
“Future Fashion: New Forms of Designer 
Communication,” WGSN Fashion Trend 
Forecasting & Analysis, May 14, 2009; 
www.wgsn.com.

24  Mills “Catwalk Set Trends,” 2.
25  Ibid., 14.
26  Menkes, “Is a Runway Show Really 

Necessary?”

27  One model presented their entire spring/

summer 2009 collection. See SHOWstudio 
Website, http://showstudio.com/project/
inside_the_house_of_viktor_rolf/viktor_rolf_ 
spring_summer_2009_show.

28  Cf. Binkley, “Digital Catwalk Is the New 

Fashion.”

29  Cf. Donatien Grau, “An Intellectual Fash-
ion—Caroline Evans,” AnOther Magazine; 
http://www.anothermag.com/current/
view/1826/Caroline_Evans.

138

Fashion Film

Sabina Muriale

139

other positive comments on fashion film as an alternative, fashion show 
producer Etienne Russo also does not believe that the Internet, and the possi-
bilities of social media or Web 2.0 will replace the traditional catwalk. For this, 
the live experience of the fashionistas or consumers and journalists is far too 
important.30 Ed Filipowski, co-president of KCD, agrees.31 He does not long for 
the day when all the runway shows are virtual: “I’m a fashion purist [...]. I can’t 
wait to go to my first couture show tomorrow morning.”32

Both men are of the same opinion that rather different digital marketing for-
mats will be developed and can coexist alongside the catwalks. Examples of 
this are seen in the use of augmented reality tools during a fashion show and 
of interactive apps for smartphones as well. London based designer Emilio de 
la Morena examined the direct sale-ability of his Autumn/ Winter collection 
2009 via a mobile phone app.33 The audience voted via this app for individual 
pieces and Morena could estimate a possible sale of his collection, and thus 
he was able to plan the further process of the upcoming production.34

But what information is processed directly? Essentially, it is merely an inven-
tory of the moment, a short click for a yes or no, or, as Doug Rushkoff point-
edly defines in his latest book Present Shock: “to capture the slipping mo-
ment.” Without questioning the motivations of such short-term actions: “It is 
simply an effort to key off what we have just done in order to manipulate our 
decisions in the future. Their campaigns encourage the kinds of impulsive be-
havior that fool us into thinking we are living in the now while actually just 
making us better targets for their techniques.”35 

The Promise of Exclusivity Within the Concept of Global  
Accessibility—Oxymoron or Corollary

We can also speak of a further step in the globalization of fashion in terms of 
accessibility, in which former exclusive fashion shows are now open to the 
digital public—globally and instantaneously. Everyone can get involved, and 
everyone is allowed to share their penny’s worth.36 Even commenting, critiqu-
ing, and copying occur. Especially in the world of social media and other net-
work possibilities. It is a paradise for all copycats. This is a known trade-off 
when one releases their latest collection as a digital film via the Internet: 
once the fashion film is in circulation, one relinquishes control over who can 
see the latest collections and who can judge (e.g., on blogs). This is a fact 
that the fashion business is unwilling to accept.37

Put plainly, it is a direct line to customer acquisition and product marketing. A 
traditional catwalk will never be able to offer these advantages because it is 
dependent on a physical location and on an announced date. And it looks like 

even a new designer’s work ethic has emerged. Sara Zenic, a graduate of UK 
fashion college Central Saint Martins, explains the new type of client relation-
ship: “We want to present our work in a less extravagant way. We want our 
presentations to be made more through communication and collaboration, 
with a more tailored approach.”38

But what does it mean for all the busy bees of digital multipliers such as fashion 
bloggers and the like? It seems that a new form of “prosumers”39 have evolved 
around Web 2.0 and social media. Briefly explained: as a prosumer, one is 
consumer and producer concurrently.40 It is a new hybrid of an old production 
process and already known capitalist hierarchy. One consumes information, 
evaluates, and distributes it over the Internet, or via social media portals. This 
is often unpaid, during lunch or leisure time, because of their dedication to the 
product or brand. Just think of all the numerous fashion bloggers, who freely 
promote the products of their favorite brands.41

This phenomenon is not as new as we think. According to sociologists Luc 
Boltanski and Ève Chiapello, we have been witnessing for decades the emer-
gence of a New Spirit of Capitalism bound to the rise of network capitalism.42 
The new, unlimited possibilities in the time of digital age and social media give 
us new approaches to raise profit through a global network. But the commu-
nicative and creative possibilities of the Internet lead us to think too easily of 
democratization and freedom.43 Both are core concepts of a “new spirit of 
capitalism” that serve as a mainspring of creative network capitalism.  Boltanski 
and Chiapello put it in a nutshell when they explain: 

30 Cf. Walker, “Out of Fashion,” 8.
31  KCD is a worldwide operating fashion PR 
and production company from New York 
that has recently launched a digital cat-
walk by invitation only. That means limited 
access via log-in data as a replacement 
for a traditional catwalk on their website. 
See: KCD Worldwide Project Website, 
http://www.digitalfashionshows.com.
32  Binkley, “Digital Catwalk Is the New  

York: Current, 2013), 8.

36 See, for example, the social network  

Fashion,” 25.

33 This app is based on a program called 
Near Field Communication. That NFC  
program for data transmission is a form of 
contactless communication between 
smartphones, tablets or other devices. 
See NFC Near Field Communication Web-
site, http://www.nearfieldcommunication.
org.

34 Cf. Potter, “Future Fashion,” 18.
35  Douglas Rushkoff, Present Shock (New 

Pinterest in pinboard-style (www.pinterest.
com), which allows users to share and spread 
a countless number of images taken from the 
Internet to the public net-community.

37  Cf. Walker, “Out of Fashion,” 8.
38 Potter, “Future Fashion,” 18.
39  The term “prosumer” goes back to Ameri-

can futurologist Alvin Toffler. Cf. Alvin 
Toffler, The Third Wave (New York: Bantam 
Books, 1980).

40 Cf. George Ritzer and Nathan Jurgenson, 
“Production, Consumption, Prosumption—
The Nature of Capitalism in the Age of the 
Digital ‘Prosumer,’” Journal of Consumer 
Culture 10, no. 1 (March 2010): 13–36; 
http://joc.sagepub.com/content/10/1/13.
full.pdf+html?ijkey=KKTk6xYE6Vq1c.

41  Cf. Toffler, Third Wave, 37.
42  See Luc Boltanski and Ève Chiapello, The 
New Spirit of Capitalism (London: Verso, 
2007), 107.

43 Cf. Ritzer and Jurgenson, “Production, 

Consumption, Prosumption,” 38.

140

Fashion Film

Sabina Muriale

141

 

 “[…] capitalism is obliged, if it is to succeed in engaging the people who 
are indispensable to the pursuit of accumulation, to incorporate a spirit 
that can provide attractive, exciting life prospects, while supplying guaran-
tees of security and moral reasons for people to do what they do. And this 
composite amalgam of grounds and reasons turns out to be variable over 
time, depending upon the expectations of those who must be mobilized 
and the hopes they have grown up with, as well as the forms taken by ac-
cumulation in different periods.”44 

These benefits can be misused for a justification of capitalism, which makes a 
possibility of critique more difficult. In our case we just need to replace the 
promised benefits with the keywords of “democratization” and “freedom” and 
we are currently right in the middle of a further chapter in The New Spirit of 
Capitalism of the digital age. The widespread presumption that a free Internet 
with its various usage possibilities supports a democratic move within the 
fashion industry is starting to totter.

Yet, Nick Knight still adheres to his vision, and fortifies his position on positive 
achievements of the Internet. He even considers fashion film as an art form 
that has been freed from the constraints of an elitist predominance: “Artists 
have forever had to go through a system of patronage—from the Medicis and 
the Church to record companies and book publishers. Now you can produce 
art and put it up, and people can judge it on its own merit. I think that’s a fun-
damentally different relationship between art forms and the audience.”45

With this statement, Knight emphasizes unintentionally the previously men-
tioned justification for capitalism, or a marketing product such as fashion 
film. But—and that is a new point—he argues through an “artistic critique.”46 
Fashion film becomes art and the pretended democratic Internet is the best 
way to spread artistic freedom globally. 

Art theorist Isabelle Graw describes this fusion of the art and fashion world as 
part of a visual industry in which “the responsibility for image production and 
visibility remains no longer with single artists or retailers, but with larger networks 
or cooperations.”47 The emergence of fashion film as an art form can also be seen 
as a targeted co-branding strategy. Fashion charges itself to a higher level with 
artistic authenticity: “it is primarily the (justified) hope for image transfer.”48

What precisely does this fusion of fashion and art mean, especially in relation 
to the fashion film, which is not made solely for irrigation and art apprecia-
tion, but strongly focused on creating customer loyalty? It sounds rather like 
a communication relationship between buyer and seller, but with high aes-
thetic and artistic standards. Consequently, the reassessment of a marketing 
tool as a new art form is first of all co-branding on both sides. Internet-users 

are indeed the “producers” with their power of likes and dislikes, but the prof-
it, or the potential for it, is still owned by the company, or rather SHOWstudio 
or, finally, the glorified fashion label.49

Do We Need a New Fashion Term? 

And the question arises: how does fashion evolve? Is it now the number of 
clicks and like-buttons on the Internet? Does fashion develop through the in-
fluence of a visual industry and the amounts of images that are transmitted 
via the boundless Internet? Is this the new generator for a “fashionable” 
movement? Or is it solely the quantity of personal relationships gained 
through an emotion-stoking visual medium? 

Because emotions create connections between people, create identities, and 
social affiliations, visual media contributes a new, soul-catching coup of the 
fashion industry. Caroline Evans recognizes these efforts as a clear manipula-
tion of the fashion industry that finds its way between commercial interest 
and visual aesthetics. Even though she talks about fashion shows per se, her 
statement can also be transferred on fashion film: 
 

 “[…] the fashion show can be understood both in the context of com-
merce, and in the context of the late-twentieth-century concern with im-
age and identity. For our identities and identifications are framed and given 
shape by the context of commercial relations, and fashion is a modern par-
adigm that brings together commerce, culture, and identity in a particular-
ly (post)-modern formation on the runway.”50

Yet there is also a trend that avoids the Internet and prefers the exclusiveness 
of a traditional catwalk. In exaggeration the catwalk can even be brought back 
to a salon format that is only made accessible for a selected audience.51 The 
American designer Tom Ford, for example, keeps his presentations strictly lim-
ited: 100 guests at the most, no photos or reviews.52 He thereby swims 

44 Cf. Boltanski and Chiapello, New Spirit of 

Capitalism, 24–25.

45 Ruth Marshall-Johnson, “Nick Knight, Pho-

tographer, Director & Founder of Show-
studio,” WGSN Fashion Trend Forecasting 
& Analysis, July 22, 2011; www.wgsn.com.
46 Cf. Boltanski and Chiapello, New Spirit of 

48 Cf. ibid.

Capitalism, 419.

47  Isabelle Graw, “Der letzte Schrei: Über 
modeförmige Kunst und kunstförmige 
Mode,” Texte zur Kunst, December 2004; 
http://www.textezurkunst.de/56/
der-letzte-schrei/. 

49 Cf. Ritzer and Jurgenson, “Production, 

Consumption, Prosumption,” 38.

50 Caroline Evans, “The Enchanted Spectacle,” 

Fashion Theory 5, no. 3 (2001): 304. 

51  Cf. Potter, “Future Fashion,” 18.
52  Cf. Susannah Frankel, “Ready To Wear: 

Fashion Shows Are Becoming Ever-More 
Exclusive Affairs,” Independent, February 
2, 2011; http://www.independent.co.uk/
life-style/fashion/frankel/ready-to-wear-
fashion-shows-are-becoming-evermore-
exclusive-affairs-2213737.html.; cf. Walker, 
“Out of Fashion,” 8. 

142

Fashion Film

Sabina Muriale

143

against the current to make every and any “fashionable” detail accessible on 
the Internet, and at the same time he gives a clear image of its brand that 
wants to be created only for a handful of selected customers. In the opinion 
of several fashion critics regarding these kinds of digital fashion shows, a 
desire for fashion is built upon exclusivity53 and not on accessibility. Ford hits 
the nail on the head with his exclusive salon concept.

It should be noted that such a trend is not the result of an uncertainty with 
respect to the myriad possibilities and latest digital technologies, or of a 
longing for simpler times—a search for authenticity in a world which becomes 
increasingly artificial or, rather, digital. This is all about image. The exclusivity 
becomes part and parcel of the concept of the brand.

Nick Knight has a more pragmatic approach and still insists on the positive 
marketing-characteristics of the Internet-savvy fashion film: “There has been 
a massive change [...]. The public are seeing clothes as they are shown, rather 
than in magazines three months later. And they want them when they see 
them.”54 Knight has certainly no fear of the masses or of a so-called mainstream. 
He rather sees potential for direct sales and marketing. At least this is the  
final goal of the digital fashion film.

Conclusion

Fashion films have become an essential tool for advertising and marketing for 
the global fashion and luxury industry and are increasingly being used as a 
presentation medium.55 Whether to replace or to complete a traditional cat-
walk, in the end, all efforts to find alternatives for traditional catwalks imply 
the desire to present and to sell a global image of the brand—still exclusively 
or globally communicated through the Internet, but always focused on the 
customer. As such, the fashion film as a marketing tool is a different approach 
by the fashion industry to catch and influence consumers by “arousing emo-
tions” (Ruth Hogben). Gareth Pugh and his film team have so far produced 
the most successful examples—particularly in the opinion of critic Suzy 
Menkes. They are producing films that have on the one hand an abstract artis-
tic form and the other hand can skillfully represent the fashionable vision of 
the designer and the brand image. The fashion film is not only target-oriented 
toward journalists, buyers, or other business insiders. Through its digital 
form, it will quickly spread on the Internet on YouTube and other platforms to 
reach users and therefore potential customers, not only simultaneously but 
also globally. Open communication and pseudo-democratization are once 
again the arguments that we already have demystified and identified as a 
controlled part of network capitalism and visual industry. Users of Internet 

distributed fashion films are among the new prosumers of our time. They 
provide through free content sharing, their likes and dislikes, and contribute 
voluntarily beneficial for the production studio and the advertised brand. 
Fashion happens on image building in fashion films through aroused emotions 
and, therefore, influenced identification with the label and in achieving the 
viral spread by users on the Internet. 

The previous examples demonstrate the ambivalence and flexibility of fashion. 
Fashion and its protagonists switch back and forth between viewpoints and 
perceptions and draw their potential for inspiration and innovation from all of 
the opposites such as art and commerce or naturalness and artificiality. In the 
meantime the former crossover experiment is officially declared by its maker/
producer as a new art form. A factor already described as a rise of a visual in-
dustry regarding the fusion and co-branding/network capitalism of the art 
with the fashion world and vice versa by Isabelle Graw. The boundaries between 
the two systems are already more permeable and the transitions have be-
come consistently blurred, albeit through a targeted strategy.56 Shown in ex-
amples of Nick Knight, Gareth Pugh, and Ruth Hogben’s fashion film creations, 
this digital visual economy is part of an absolute commercialization, which 
has to be consciously observed and discussed on a socio-, consumer-, and 
capitalism-critical basis.  

53  Cf. Grau, “An Intellectual Fashion,” 27; cf. 

Potter, “Future Fashion,” 18.

54 Cf. Walker, “Out of Fashion,” 8. 
55  Meanwhile, major brands cooperate with 

prestigious directors to produce their 
fashion films (e.g., David Lynch for Dior, 
Martin Scorsese for Chanel and Kenneth 
Anger for Missoni). However, in the opin-
ion of Nick Knight, such cooperations are 
not necessarily positive for the film be-
cause the directors take up too much 
space through their own celebrity aura 
and create a distraction. The brand’s im-
age or the designer’s vision should be pri-

oritized. Cf. Davis, “Talent,” 10. This exam-
ple shows the business-political strategy 
of trading-up. In the language of market-
ing, this means to make a product more 
valuable by charging it with value and de-
sirability, e.g., through artistic positions or 
celebrities. Cf. Magdalena Kröner, “A New 
Love Affair: Clothes, Art and Moving Im-
ages,” Goethe Institute, November, 2010, 
accessed August 5, 2012, http://www.
goethe.de/kue/des/prj/mod/thm/
en6800847.htm.

56 See Graw, “Der letzte Schrei.” 

Sabina Muriale

145

Mills, Hayley. “Catwalk Set Trends: Womens-
wear Autumn/Winter 2009/10.” WGSN Fashion 
Trend Forecasting & Analysis, April 6, 2009. 
Accessed April 8, 2009. www.wgsn.com.

Owens, Jay. “Is Fashion Ready For a New Aes-
thetic,” Business of Fashion Website. Ac-
cessed May 16, 2012. http://www.businessof-
fashion.com/2012/05/is-fashion-ready 
-for-a-new-aesthetic.html.

Phillips, Gene D., Stanley Kubrick: Interviews. 
Jackson, MI: University of Mississippi Press, 
2001.

Ritzer, George and Jurgenson, Nathan. “Pro-
duction, Consumption, Prosumption—The  
nature of capitalism in the age of the digital 
‘prosumer’.” Journal of Consumer Culture, 
vol. 10, no. 1 (March 2010): 13–36. Accessible 
online: http://joc.sagepub.com/content/ 
10/1/13.full.pdf+html?ijkey=KKTk 6xYE6Vq1c.

Robinson, Brett T. Appletopia: Media Technology 
and the Religious Imagination of Steve Jobs. 
Waco, TX: Baylor University Press, 2013.

“Shalom Harlow,” Vogue Online. Accessed 
August 5, 2013. www.vogue.com/voguepedia/ 
Shalom_Harlow.

Toffler, Alvin. The Third Wave. New York: Bantam 
Books, 1980.

Walker, Harriet. “Out of fashion: Designers 
finding new ways to sell their style,” The Inde-
pendent, February 9, 2012. Accessed February 
10, 2012. http://www.independent.co.uk/life-
style/fashion/news/out-of-fashion-designers-
finding-new-ways-to-sell-their-style-6669578. 
html.

144

Fashion Film

Literature

Berrie, Nicole. “Debating Fashion Week’s Role 
in the Digital Age.” Style.com. July 24, 2012. 
Accessed March 17, 2014. http://www.style.
com/stylefile/2012/07/debating-fashion-weeks-
role-in-the-digital-age.

“Gareth Pugh Womenswear S/S10 Film Pre-
quel,” Dazed Digital. Accessed August 10, 
2012. http://www.dazeddigital.com/fashion/
article/4620/1/gareth-pugh-womenswear 
-s-s10-film-prequel.

Binkley, Christina. “For Couture Shows, Digi-
tal Catwalk Is the New Fashion.” Wall Street 
Journal, January 23, 2012. Accessed March 17, 
2014. http://online.wsj.com/article/SB100014
24052970203806504577177251392311874.
html.

Boltanski, Luc and Ève Chiapello. The New 
Spirit of Capitalism. London, New York: Verso, 
2007.

Davis, Lauren. “Fashion Film Creative Talent: 
Top 10.” WGSN Fashion Trend Forecasting & 
Analysis, December 20, 2010. Accessed 
March 17, 2014. www.wgsn.com.

Davis, Lauren. “Fashion Film: The Digital Fu-
ture.” WGSN Fashion Trend Forecasting & 
Analysis, December 9, 2010. Accessed March 
17, 2014. www.wgsn.com.

Rushkoff, Douglas. Present Shock. New York: 
Current, 2013. 

Grau, Donatien. “An Intellectual Fashion—
Caroline Evans.” AnOther Magazine. Ac-
cessed March 13, 2013. http://www.another-
mag.com/current/view/1826/Caroline_Evans.

Graw, Isabelle. “Der letzte Schrei: Über mo-
deförmige Kunst und kunstförmige Mode,” 
Texte zur Kunst, December 2004. Accessed 
August 8, 2013. http://www.textezurkunst.
de/56/der-letzte-schrei/. (English version: 
http://sarah-morris.info/?/Press/TextezurKunst/)

Hapsical. “The Towering Genius of Alexander 
McQueen.” The Hapsical Blog. Accessed Au-
gust 5, 2013, http://hapsical.blogspot.co.
at/2010/02/towering-genius-of-alexander-
mcqueen.html.

Kröner, Magdalena. “A New Love Affair: 
Clothes, Art and Moving Images,” Goethe In-
stitute, November, 2010. Accessed August 5, 
2012. http://www.goethe.de/kue/des/prj/
mod/thm/en6800847.htm.

“Dress, No. 13, Spring/ Summer 1999” The 
Metropolitan Museum of Art Blog. Accessed 
August 5, 2013. http://blog.metmuseum.org/
alexandermcqueen/dress-no-13/.

Marandon, Estelle. “Chic durch die Krise,” Die 
Zeit, April 6, 2009. Accessed March 17, 2014. 
http://www.zeit.de/online/2009/08/
mode-sparen. 

Elardo, Dawn. “Zaha Hadid Designs A Chanel 
Underwater-World-Runway.” The News Gal-
lery, October 21, 2011. Accessed August 5, 
2013. http://www.thenewsgallery com/2011/ 
10/zaha-hadid-designs-chanel-underwater.
html.

Evans, Caroline. “The Enchanted Spectacle.” 
Fashion Theory, vol. 5, no. 3 (2001): 271–310. 

Frankel, Susannah. “Ready To Wear: Fashion 
Shows are Becoming Ever-More Exclusive Af-
fairs,” The Independent, February 2, 2011. Ac-
cessed March 17, 2014. http://www.indepen-
dent.co.uk/life-style/fashion/frankel/ 
ready-to-wear-f ashion-shows-are-becoming-
evermore-exclusive-affairs-2213737.html.

Marshall-Johnson, Ruth. “Nick Knight, Pho-
tographer, Director & Founder of Showstudio.” 
WGSN Fashion Trend Forecasting & Analysis, 
July 22, 2011. Accessed March 17, 2014. www.
wgsn.com.

Menkes, Suzy. “Don’t Forget the Clothes!” 
New York Times, September 9, 2011. Ac-
cessed August 23, 2012. http://www.nytimes.
com/2011/09/30/fashion/mugler-and-gareth-
pugh-dont-forget-the-clothes.html.

Menkes, Suzy. “Is a Runway Show Really Nec-
essary?” New York Times, September 29, 
2010. Accessed August 14, 2012. http://www.
nytimes.com/2010/09/30/fashion/30iht-
rshow.html. 

The  
Waywardness  
of Fashion
Society in the 
Subjunctive 

Michael R. Mueller

Michael R. Mueller

147

Aesthetic action is far more than an incidental accessory to social life; it con-
tains a political dimension as well. This point has been addressed already by 
Georg Simmel.1 In his view, aesthetic action is an essential mode of societal 
life that is concerned not only with reflecting it but with giving it form. Of the 
observations that come to mind to support this view, two are particularly 
noteworthy. There is, first of all, the fact that religious and political dispensa-
tions are prone to resort to prestigious forms of art such as architecture and 
clothing to invest themselves with emotional relevance. Even more to the 
point for Simmel was another observation. Responding to the rationalization 
and anonymization of societal life, quite a few of his contemporaries chose to 
play the aesthetic card, developing a plethora of new lifestyles. He concluded 
that wherever industrialized societies release individuals from the then estab-
lished order, such individuals tend to set off in search of a personal lifestyle 
congenial to them, complete with appropriate forms of clothing and 
furniture.2

Fig. 31 
Steven Varble, Soho Street Art, New York, 1975.

Fig. 32 
Comme des Garçons, Spring/Summer 
Collection, 1997.

1 

 Georg Simmel, “Soziologische Ästhetik,” 
in Das Individuum und die Freiheit (Berlin: 
Wagenbach, 1984), 167–77. First published 
in 1896.

2  Georg Simmel, Philosophie des Geldes, 
Gesamtausgabe vol. 6 (Frankfurt/Main: 
Suhrkamp, 1995). First published in 1900.

148

The Waywardness of Fashion

Michael R. Mueller

149

While aesthetic interventions are therefore instrumental in bolstering order—
or in creating it in the first place—they are also excellent tools for those seek-
ing to create disorder. Aesthetic action is by no means limited to prestigious 
forms. Its possibilities range from minimal deviations to the demonstrative 
transgression of ideological, moral, and social boundaries. Cases in point are 
different types of the aesthetics of unseemliness or the hyperbolical mise-en-
scènes we are familiar with from performance art and street parades (e.g.: fig. 31). 
Complex hybrid forms of such liminal, i.e., transgressive aesthetics crop up 
again and again in fashion and fashion photography (fig. 32). 

And where fashion challenges the traditional corporeality of clothing, futurist 
or tachiste painting impugns the whole idea of the “two-dimensional” identity 
of pictures (e.g. fig. 42). But not even the decidedly beautiful is immune to 
border transgressions. One example that comes to mind is Thomas Hoepker’s 
controversial rendering of 9/11 (fig. 33), a photograph that fundamentally 
challenges the ways of seeing this event, which was established by CNN and 
other media companies.

Fig. 33 
Thomas Hoepker, 9/11 From Brooklyn, 2001.

Through the different contexts, these and similar types of aesthetics are 
found to be utterly different; yet, structurally, they have two things in com-
mon. On the one hand, they penetrate to or even transcend the limits of what 
everyday reasoning can routinely handle. They throw a wrench into the works 
of our everyday perception and action styles and push our assorted received 
wisdoms to the sidelines at least for a time.3 On the other hand, such aesthetic 

transgressions are also an integral part of the life of any society and cannot 
be automatically labeled as exceptional or as crisis phenomena. They are due 
neither to degeneracy of the “will to the state” or of the will to order4 nor to 
the idiosyncrasies of isolated individuals or of small groups. There seems to 
be a substantial body of evidence that most societies have ritual measures at 
their disposal for accommodating such border transgressions whilst at the 
same time providing structures for their control. Such measures are becom-
ing more and more media based. 

My topic here is this very societal organization of aesthetic border transgres-
sions, which started out as ritual before increasingly shifting into the modern 
medial realm. What I will mainly concern myself with is an aspect of the societal 
creation of order that is central to an understanding above all of the flow of 
aesthetic commerce between art, fashion, or street and club cultures. I pro-
pose to start with a handful of classic forms of—and theories about—aesthetic 
border transgressions before moving on to the role that such border trans-
gressions play in fashion and art and I will end with some thoughts on the 
socio-political significance of this kind of waywardness.

From the Dionysian Work of Art to the Aesthetics of 
Unseemliness

One of the best-known mythical figures associated with the transgression of 
the limits imposed by everyday life is Dionysus, the god of drunkenness, ec-
stasy, and frenzy; also of blood frenzy and sensual pleasure, at once both cruel 
and prurient. He is the thorn in the flesh of all people to whom order is dear, 
grabs them by their desires and goads them to wreak havoc with the order 
they have created. In ancient Greece he represented the victory of sensuality 
over rationality. The feast dedicated to him, the Dionysia, originally conceived 
as a carnivalesque revelry, matured into a festive ritual and gave birth to com-
edy and tragedy—enactments of the comic and tragic aspects of the Diony-
sian dissolution of order.5

The Greek myth of Dionysus and Greek tragedy famously inspired Friedrich 
Nietzsche to conceive an aesthetic theory that goes under various names, 

3  Cf. Alois Hahn, “Kunst, Wahrnehmung und 

Sinndeutung,” in Diesseitsreligion: Zur 
Deutung der Bedeutung moderner Kultur, 
ed. Anne Honer, Ronald Kurt, and Jo 
Reichertz (Konstanz: Universitätsverlag 
Konstanz, 1999), 153–82.

4  Simmel, Philosophie des Geldes. Transla-

tion from the German by MM.

5  Wolfgang Schuller, Griechische Geschichte 

(Munich: Oldenbourg Wissenschaftsver-
lag, 1991), 41; cf. Eric R. Dodds, Die 
Griechen und das Irrationale (Darmstadt: 
Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 
1991); cf. Louise Bruit Zaidman and Pau-
line Schmitt Pantel, Die Religion der 
Griechen: Kult und Mythos (Munich: C.H. 
Beck, 1994).

150

The Waywardness of Fashion

Michael R. Mueller

151

including the “Dionysian world view.”6 Nietzsche identifies Dionysian ecstasy 
with a key experience in life—that of an all-engrossing collapse of order. “All 
the caste-like divisions which necessity and arbitrary power have established 
between men disappear; the slave is a free-man, the aristocrat and the man 
of lowly birth unite in the same Bacchic choruses.”7 Crucially, such instances 
of the toppling of the prevailing order are no freak accidents in Nietzsche’s 
view: they are brought about deliberately by society, partly through the use of 
intoxicants, partly also by artistic practice often involving music. 

Emile Durkheim has emphasized the role of pictorial forms of expression for 
such ritual border transgressions over Nietzsche’s foregrounding of music. 
Drawing for his view on ethnological studies and travelogues dealing with 
Australia’s Aborigines, he attributes special significance to the disguises and 
masks worn by each participant in these rituals. For “the decorations he 
dons and the masks he uses to cover his face give material form to this internal 
transformation even more than they induce it.”8 The transition to ecstatic 
states of mind is by no means caused solely by physiological stimulants. What 
is decisive for Durkheim is the use of pictorial symbolic forms. The power  
to fascinate embodied in what lies outside the prevailing order is due also, 
Durkheim concludes, to culturally nurtured notions about the extra-ordinary, 
that is, to liminal aesthetics of the kind represented by masks, disguises, and 
other pictorial forms. 

A comprehensive theory of the demarcation and transgression of aesthetic 
borders was formulated in the 1960s by Victor Turner.9 His analysis focuses on 
life in modern industrialized societies (notably the civil rights, black power, 
and hippie movements). His theory of liminality assumes the existence of a 
structured domain of everyday life where each of us is assigned fixed roles, 
functions and positions. Adjacent to this domain is the unstructured sphere 
of liminality from which everyday order is excluded. Some people only pay 
temporary visits to this out-of-the-ordinary domain (on ritual or festive occa-
sions or in the context of other types of “events”), while others, as Turner is at 
pains to emphasize, take up permanent residence in it (religious virtuosos, 
political dissidents, mendicant monks, rockers and hippies). What is crucial in 
each case is that the borders separating these domains are highlighted by 
aesthetic markers, known as liminal symbols. It is remarkable in sociological 
terms that the classic ritual liminal symbols studied by Turner and the modern 
medial and performative aesthetics of fashion and the performing and visual 
arts exhibit astonishing formal similarities (isomorphisms).

Systems of Liminal Aesthetics in Fashion and Art
One of the most important liminal symbolic forms identified by Turner is (par-
tial) nakedness. As a liminal symbol, nakedness renders its “wearer”—this may 
sound like a paradox—invisible. It does so by eliminating from sight all the 
telltale hallmarks of ordinary societal existence: those who depart the orderly 
realm of everyday life, so-called “liminal beings,” may be “[…] disguised as 
monsters, wearing only a strip of clothing or even go naked,”10 but whatever 
option they choose they shed all references to a societal rank, role or 
position. 

Fig. 34 
Alas and Piggott, Kate Moss, 1999. 

Fig. 35
Inez van Lamsweerde and Vinoodh Matadin, 
Thank you Thighmaster, 1991.

6  Friedrich Nietzsche, “Die dionysische 

Weltanschauung,” in Die Geburt der 
Tragödie: Unzeitgemäße Betrachtungen; 
Kritische Studienausgabe, vol. 1 (Munich: 
DTV, 1999), 551–77. First published in 1870.
7  Friedrich Nietzsche, “The Dionysiac World 

View,” in The Birth of Tragedy: And Other 
Writings (Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 1999), 120. First published in 
German in 1870.

8  Émil Durkheim, The Elementary Forms of 
Religious Life (New York: Oxford Universi-
ty Press, 2001), 163–64. First published in 
French in 1912. 

9  Victor Turner, The Ritual Process: Structure 

and Antistructure (Chicago: Aldine Pub-
lishing, 1969).

10  Turner, The Ritual Process, 95.

152

The Waywardness of Fashion

Michael R. Mueller

153

That symbolic forms of nakedness may become detached from concrete ac-
tions and become part of the medial pictorial baggage of a society is hardly 
to be doubted, given the evidence, among other things, provided by fashion 
and art. What you get in fashion is bodies whose distance from everyday life 
is almost excessively elaborated, bodies in unusual situations, in mise-en-
scènes that cannot be accommodated within familiar horizons of interpreta-
tion. Such body images offer—in contrast to the body attired for everyday 
life—few docking points for projections of social status or societal function. 

And the projection areas that even the unclothed body provides can be  
rendered inoperable: Cindy Sherman, Vinoodh Matadin, Inez van Lamsweerde 
(fig. 35) and other artists create pictures that are impervious to the biological 
or sexual categories of everyday perception. The mise-en-scène of nakedness 
creates what in terms of its aesthetic effect amounts to a lacuna: perception 
has no routines to fall back on and is reduced to treading water. The carpet 
under the received wisdoms of everyday life is pulled away. 

Such hyperbolic rejections of the mundane and the familiar can of course 
also be achieved in other ways. The ethnologist Klaus E. Mueller, for instance, 
speaks of ritual clowns that were a common sight anywhere in the world until 

Fig. 38 
Richard Avedon, Andy Warhol, 1969.

Fig. 39
Anders Edstöm, Martin Margiela’s Spring/
Summer 1994 collection, 1993.

well into the nineteenth century: “Their outward appearance borders on the 
grotesque […]. They walk around […] in decaying rags, their faces disfigured 
by paint […], their hair matted and dishevelled […].” “Occasionally they would 
turn violent, sometimes running the entire gamut to unbridled destructive-
ness.”11 Such burlesque opponents to the orderly cosmos of everyday life are 
not unknown in the twentieth century. Yohji Yamamoto, (fig. 36) for instance, 
puts his models in such a manner on the catwalk. Steven Klein realizes an 
aesthetics of unseemliness in his pictures (fig. 37). Eugen Schrick, Guenter 
Brus, Oleg Kulik and others resort the body to realize such aesthetics. A less 
drastic but no less poignant example is a portrait by Richard Avedon showing 
Andy Warhol from 1969 (fig. 38). 

Foregrounding the blemish, it emphasizes what traditional aesthetic criteria 
strive to play down. Another example is an arrangement by Martin Margiela 
from 1994 (fig. 39) with its asymmetrical fall of folds, its unsutured layers of 
fabric and undefined hems. In all these cases what we get is a disclaimer to 

Fig. 36 
Yohji Yamamoto, Spring/Summer  
Collection, 2010.

Fig. 37
Steven Klein, Arene Homme Plus, 
2001/02. 

11  Klaus E. Müller, Der Krüppel: Ethnologia pas-
sionis humanae (Munich: C.H. Beck, 1996), 
227. Translated from the German by MM.

154

The Waywardness of Fashion

Michael R. Mueller

155

the ideals of clarity, harmony, and sublimity that have traditionally served as 
benchmarks for aesthetic orders until recently, a “negative aesthetic habitus,” 
which, in Wolfgang Iser’s view, acts “as a permanent attack on the conven-
tions from which we take our bearings.”12

Disempowering key expectations relating to our everyday perception ranks 
foremost among the sociological functions of any type of liminal aesthetics. 
Dismissive and negative, this momentum is complemented by its twin, which 
is anticipatory, fanciful, and fictional in essence. It is evident in the projection 

Fig. 40
Marc Jacobs, Spring/Summer Collection, 
2010.

Fig. 41 
Max Ernst, La Vierge corrigeant l’enfant Jésus 
devant témoins: André Breton, Paul Eluard et le 
peintre, 1926.

of possibilities of perception and behavior that are considered downright 
impracticable from a sober, common-sense point of view. Such fanciful and 
fictional projections are comparatively easy to realize by resorting to a method 
of representation that is part of the stock in trade of street parades, party cul-
tures, and religious festivals: the master becomes the slave, the slave the mas-
ter; the old comport themselves as if they were still in the prime of their youth; 
women act as men, men women; animals stand in for human beings, etc.13

Examples for such inversions of the order of everyday life are not difficult to 
find elsewhere. Think of “underwear as outerwear,” a 90s fashion trend  
(fig. 40) that brought what was considered intimate and personal out into the 
public domain to be shared by all and did so in a breezy, matter-of-fact way 
rather than as an embarrassed concession. 

Even more drastic is Max Ernst’s painting of Mary dishing out corporal punish-
ment (fig. 41). Here our imagination is confronted with an idea that it would 
hardly be capable of conceiving on its own: Mary spanking Jesus. All of these 
examples reveal what different types of liminal aesthetics are good at from a 
sociological point of view: they enable or provoke notions and perceptions 
that are all but inconceivable as long as established perspectives are in 
charge. Liminal aesthetics—I am here drawing on literary hermeneutics and 
philosophical anthropology—arranges things and circumstances in an unorth-
odox or even heterodox way. By deliberately aiming to create dissonances, it 
appeals to the imagination to devise alternative dispensations. It challenges 
us to see and think in the subjunctive: “It might well be / have been like this.”14

What is most remarkable here from a sociological point of view is that such 
an appeal to the imagination is potentially directionless and unbiased as to 
the result. This becomes especially clear in the context of decidedly non-iron-
ical representations, such as Thomas Hoepker’s 9/11 photograph (fig. 34). Not 
published before 2006, it has an unmistakable potential to irritate established 
interpretations and habits of perception about this event. It does not repre-
sent any confident point of view but the necessity to explore other 
perspectives. 

Structurally, even if not in every individual case, liminal aesthetics tend to induce 
a state in which perception, as Walter Schulz (1985) has put it, “floats.”15 While 
not putting forward unambiguous conclusions per se, it opens up a horizon of 
possibilities for perception and imagination. Instead of offering full-blown 
ideological positions, this kind of aesthetics holds out the possibility of tran-
scending the relatively narrow perspectives that such positions entail. 

12  Wolfgang Iser, Der Akt des Lesens (Mu-

nich: Wilhelm Fink, 1976), III. Translation 
from the German by MM.

13  The most consistent disempowerment of 
everyday order patterns and perceptual 
expectations is achieved through the de-
personalized representation of the human 
body. The figure of the dog is thoroughly 
typical here: it is to be found both in the 
context of the early disco movement (see 
Müller, “Body”) and in Oleg Kulik’s perfor-
mance art. In both cases it calls into doubt 
the axiomatic assumption underpinning 

all social life that we are persons rightfully 
entitled to our place in society. 

14  Cf. Iser, Der Akt des Lesens, 291; Hans 

Robert Jauß, Ästhetische Erfahrung und 
literarische Hermeneutik (Munich: Wilhelm 
Fink, 1982), 31–44; Hans-Georg Soeffner, 
Symbolische Formung: Eine Soziologie des 
Symbols und des Rituals (Weilerswist: V 
elbrueck Wissenschaft, 2010), 209–24.

15  Walter Schulz, Metaphysik des Schwebens: 

Untersuchungen zur Geschichte der  
Ästhetik (Pfullingen: Neske, 1985).

156

The Waywardness of Fashion

Michael R. Mueller

157

consummate rhetorical skill, etc., are consistently denied aesthetic recogni-
tion.17 A similar treatment is meted out by action and performance art such as 
the performance of the artists’ collective “Clara Mosch” in 1979 in the GDR 
(cf., fig. 43): Instead of discrete genres and audiences what you get is the 
Gesamtkunstwerk, the total work of art, which fuses painting, dance, drama, 
music into one single entity and, at least in some cases, strives for a fusion of 
audience and spectacle. The institutions of art as we used to know them, with 
their clearly defined roles, routines, genres and styles, are being stripped of 
their contours at least in aesthetic-situational contexts.18

Fig. 44 
Corinne Day, Vogue, 1993.

Fig. 45
Corinne Day, The Face, 1993.

The same institutional self-abrogation has been a guiding principle for impor-
tant movements within fashion since the 1990s. Especially noteworthy here 
are the border transgressions of fashion photography that are frequently if 
not entirely aptly referred to in the literature as the products of New Realism. 
If we assume that photographs of the sort reproduced in figs. 44 and 45 are 
fashion photographs—an assumption encouraged by the fact that they have 
appeared in fashion magazines—this adscription is countermanded by their 
realism, which may even include the occasional nod to destitution. Conversely, 
if you decide they are really documentary photographs, this diagnosis is made 

16  Arnold Gehlen, Zeit-Bilder: Zur Soziologie 

und Ästhetik der modernen Malerei 
(Frankfurt/Main: Athenaeum, 1960), 212. 
Translation from the German by MM.

17  Michael R. Müller, Stil und Individualität: Die 

Ästhetik gesellschaftlicher Selbstbehaup-
tung (Munich: Wilhelm Fink, 2009), 179–218.

18  Karl-Siegbert Rehberg, “Verkörperungs-
Konkurrenzen: Aktionskunst in der DDR 
zwischen Revolte und ‘Kristallisation,’” in 
Performance und Bild: Performance als 
Bild, ed. Christian Janecke (Berlin: Philo 
Fine Arts, 2004), 115–61.

Fig. 42 
Lucio Fontana, Concetto spaziale, 1964–65.

Fig. 43 
Clara Mosch, Aktion Baumbesteigung Rügen, 
1979.

Liminal aesthetics confront the order of everyday life with unusual perspectives 
or codes of behavior. This has a profound relevance for those societal institu-
tions and venues where such forms of expression are developed, such as mod-
ern art museums. Arnold Gehlen drew attention to the role played by abstract 
art in this context as early as 1960. If a work of art such as Lucio Fontana’s 
Concetto spaziale (fig. 42) is interpreted, on the basis of its signature format 
or the fact that it was originally hung on a wall, as a painting, this categoriza-
tion is contradicted by the work’s curious object character. Conversely, if it is 
understood as an object or a sculpture, such an adscription sits uneasily with 
its pictorial character. Against a backdrop of traditional categories such a 
work remains “ambiguous” in that “it is doubtful whether it is a work of art in 
the first place.”16

In the same way such ostensibly unambiguous categories as “artist” and 
“work of art” are liable to be shattered. Andy Warhol for instance consistently 
repudiated the traditional ideal of the artist. All the traditional attributes asso-
ciated with “genius,” such as contemplative mastery, irrepressible expressivity, 

158

The Waywardness of Fashion

Michael R. Mueller

159

dubious by elements that are specific to fashion—poses, suitable captions, the 
magazine format, ads for consumer goods, etc. The glamorous habitus of 
fashion and the realistic habitus of documentation cancel each other out and 
create a lacuna: fashion, as the institution that we thought we know, loses its 
societally distinctive profile in such images. In close analogy to what we have 
noted in the discussion of relevant trends in art, such fashion contradicts its 
own societal definition. 

As is made quite clear structurally by examples such as those named above, 
the aesthetic challenge to everyday order or its abrogation is by no means 
confined to club or street cultures or to older ritual forms. Instead, liminal 
aesthetics emerge from such ritual forms and become part of the medial and 
artistic baggage of societies. One question remains to be asked: what are the 
implications for a society if significant use is made of such types of liminal 
aesthetics in the key spheres of aesthetic activity, art, and fashion? 

Society in the Subjunctive

Nietzsche and Durkheim, as has already been said, have taught us to view the 
dissolution of societal order not as a freak occurrence but as an event that is 
deliberately brought about and usually plays itself out in a regulated manner. 
Turner has shown that there is a wide range of historical and societal forms 
for liminality to take. It was and is practiced in rites of passage; it is to be found 
in the shape of modern escapist practices and “subcultures”; it is forcibly 
experienced by social outcasts while being deliberately sought as a permanent 
way of life by others. In the thesis I am proposing, liminality as described 
above is seeking another and relatively new societal form: the challenge it 
mounts against everyday order is in this case no longer restricted to certain 
times nor to the marginal lifestyles of tiny minorities. It is part of a reality that 
tends to be medially organized more and more so that relevant events, actions 
and mise-en-scènes only become socially visible through photographs, video 
recordings or blogs; or, the border transgressions in question rely exclusively 
on pictorial media for their realization. 

As in ritual, the realization of border transgressions in pictorial media involves 
a distance from everyday life and a domesticating effect. At the same time—
and this must not be overlooked—it is the ritual or the image that makes sure 
that border transgressions become available as models for social learning 
and for repetition. They do so by providing forms of realization in the fields of 
music, clothing, and media technology that are required for such cross-border 
traffic to become possible. Nor is that all: ritual and the pictorial media are 
each capable of replacing actual infringements of taboo, genuine frenzy, and 
real revolts by symbolic representations (in the form of action that is only 

hinted at or of mere images). This does not mean that they are thereby de-
prived of a facilitating effect. On the contrary: their fictional detachment is 
conducive to engendering what Max Scheler called a Phantasieüberschuß 
(surplus of fantasy).19 The very fact that the countless practical, moral and 
ideological constraints of everyday life are sidelined creates possibilities of 
conceiving and enacting what would be beyond the reach of everyday com-
mon sense. 

The types of liminal aesthetics that have been at the center of this analysis are 
therefore neither a priori politically emancipative nor are they a mere medial 
illusion. Their cultural significance consists in the thus enabled confrontation 
between society’s routine life and those improbable possibilities of perception, 
conduct, and existence that would otherwise remain forever beyond the pale.

19  Max Scheler, Die Stellung des Menschen 

im Kosmos (Bonn: Bouvier, 1986), 30. First 
published in German in 1928.

160

The Waywardness of Fashion

Michael R. Mueller

161

Smedley, Elliott. “Escaping to Reality: Fashion 
photography in the 1990.” In Fashion Cultures: 
Theories, Explorations and Analysis. Edited by 
Stella Bruzzi and Pamela Church Gibson, 
143–56. London: Routledge, 2007.

Soeffner, Hans-Georg. Symbolische Formung: 
Eine Soziologie des Symbols und des Rituals. 
Weilerswist: Velbrueck Wissenschaft, 2010.

Spies, Werner. Max Ernst: Die Retrospektive, 
54. Ostfildern: Dumont, 1999. 

Tannenbaum, Allan. New York in the 70s. 
Berlin: Feierabend, 2003.

Turner, Victor. “Betwixt and Between. The 
Liminal Period in Rites de Passage.” In The 
Forest of Symbols. Edited by Victor Turner, 
93–111. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1967.

Turner, Victor. The Ritual Process: Structure 
and Antistructure. Chicago: Aldine Publishing, 
1969.

Warner Marien, Mary. Photography: A Cultural 
History. London: Lawrence King Publishing, 
2010. Originally published in English in 2002. 

Literature

Breitz, Candice. Andy Warhol – Photography. 
Hamburger Kunsthalle/The Andy Warhol  
Museum, exh. cat., Thalwil: Edition Stemmle, 
1999.

Bright, Susan, Face of Fashion. London:  
National Portrait Gallery Publications, 2007.

Bruit Zaidman, Louise and Pauline Schmitt 
Pantel. Die Religion der Griechen: Kult und 
Mythos. Munich, C.H. Beck, 1991.

Dodds, Eric R. Die Griechen und das Irrationale. 
Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesell-
schaft, 1991.

Durkheim, Émil. The Elementary Forms of Re-
ligious Life. New York: Oxford University 
Press, 2001. Originally published in French in 
1912. 

Evans, Caroline. Fashion at the Edge. New  
Haven: Yale University Press, 2007.

Gaensheimer, Susanne and Sophie von Olfers. 
Not in Fashion. Photography and Fashion in the 
90s. Leipzig: Kerber, 2011.

Gehlen, Arnold. Zeit-Bilder: Zur Soziologie 
und Ästhetik der modernen Malerei. Frankfurt/
Main: Athenaeum, 1960.

Gunsenheimer, Antje. Grenzen: Differenzen, 
Übergänge: Spannungsfelder inter- und tran-
skultureller Kommunikation. Bielefeld: Tran-
script, 2007.

Hahn, Alois. “Kunst, Wahrnehmung und 
Sinndeutung.” In Diesseitsreligion: Zur Deutung 
der Bedeutung moderner Kultur. Edited by Anne 
Honer, Ronald Kurt, and Jo Reichertz, 153–82. 
Konstanz: Universitaetsverlag Konstanz, 1999.

Iser, Wolfgang. Der Akt des Lesens. Munich: 
Wilhelm Fink, 1976.

Jauß, Hans Robert. Ästhetische Erfahrung und 
literarische Hermeneutik. Munich: Wilhelm 
Fink, 1982.

Müller, Klaus E. Der Krüppe: Ethnologia pas-
sionis humanae. Munich: C. H. Beck, 1996.

Müller, Michael R. “The Body Electric: Das 
Problem autonomer Lebensführung und die 

kollektive Sehnsucht nach Selbstverlust.” In 
Der Sinn der Politik. Beiträge zur kulturwis-
senschaftlichen Politikanalyse. Edited by  
Michael R. Müller, Thilo Raufer and Darius  
Zifonun, 77–104. Konstanz: UVK, 2002.

Müller, Michael R. Stil und Individualität. Die 
Ästhetik gesellschaftlicher Selbstbehauptung, 
Munich: Wilhelm Fink, 2009.

Nietzsche, Friedrich. “The Dionysiac World 
View.” In The Birth of Tragedy: And Other 
Writings. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1999. Originally published in German 
in 1870.

Nietzsche, Friedrich. “Die dionysische Welt-
anschauung.” In Die Geburt der Tragödie, Un-
zeitgemäße Betrachtungen. Kritische Studien-
ausgabe vol. 1, 551–77. Munich: DTV, 1999. 
Originally published in German in 1870.

Rehberg, Karl-Siegbert. “Verkörperungs-
Konkurrenzen. Aktionskunst in der DDR 
zwischen Revolte und ‘Kristallisation.’” In Per-
formance und Bild – Performance als Bild. Ed-
ited by Christian Janecke, 115–61. Berlin: Philo 
Fine Arts, 2004.

Scheler, Max. Die Stellung des Menschen im 
Kosmos. Bonn: Bouvier, 1986. Originally pub-
lished in German in 1928.

Schuller, Wolfgang. Griechische Geschichte. 
Munich: Oldenbourg Wissenschaftsverlag, 
1991.

Schulz, Walter. Metaphysik des Schwebens: 
Untersuchungen zur Geschichte der Ästhetik. 
Pfullingen: Neske, 1985.

Schulz-Hoffmann, Carla. Lucio Fontana.  
Munich: Prestel, 1983.

Simmel, Georg. “Soziologische Ästhetik.” In 
Das Individuum und die Freiheit, 167–77.  
Berlin: Wagenbach, 1984. Originally published 
in German in 1896.

Simmel, Georg. Philosophie des Geldes. 
Gesamtausgabe vol. 6, Frankfurt/Main: 
Suhrkamp, 1995. Originally published in  
German in 1900.

163

Alternative 
Aesthetic 
Politics 

Alternative 
Aesthetic 
Politics
An Introduction

Elke Gaugele and Monica Titton

Elke Gaugele and Monica Titton

165

As part of ecological, ethical and postcolonial lifestyles, alternative aesthetic 
politics can be described as one of the propulsive strands within the globaliza-
tion of fashion. This line of an aesthetic metapolitics in contemporary fashion 
has been historically formed by the anti-colonial independence movement as 
well as by the Western reform, youth, feminist, and ecological movement. 
Both movements were as much opposed to the Western regime of fashion as 
they had been epistemologically excluded from it. Terms such as “traditional 
folk costumes” or “non-Western styles,” but also classifications such as un-
fashionable or anti-fashion still bear witness to this temporally, socially, and 
spatially riving fashion phenomenon. Historically it was even reaffirmed by a 
colonially biased, modern fashion theory in which, for example, Georg Sim-
mel’s understanding of fashion had at that point been limited to a “higher civ-
ilization.”1 Based on a colonial-racist theorization, Simmel wrote about “savag-
es,” “primitive races,” or “primitive conditions of life,” who would be afraid of 
“anything new” that they could “not understand” or “not assign to a familiar 
category.”2

Both movements—decolonization as well as Western dress reform—intrigu-
ingly already met in the style of Mahatma Gandhi. In London he had been ad-
vised by Anglo-Irish authors to doff his suit and to wear an imagined Indian 
reform costume for leading the masses to freedom and liberty.3 For his style 
of decolonization, Gandhi chose the look of an ascetic fakir, wearing a dhoti 
handloom woven cloth around his hips, completed by a homespun hand-wo-
ven khadi-shawl. Furthermore, he staged himself with his spinning wheel and 
along with it, handmade textiles as signifiers for decolonization and 
independence.

In the 1970s, Cultural Studies defined style—in contrast to fashion—as a politi-
cized term for subcultural practices. This “resistance through style paradigm”4 
has been closely linked to the everyday practices of subcultural white working 
class youth groups as well as to those of young black immigrants in Britain. As 
a postcolonial strategy, style was considered as a semiology narrating the his-
torical sequence of migration routes, e.g., from Africa via Jamaica to Great 
Britain. Style also could be deciphered as “a phantom history of race relations 
since the War.”5 Exemplified by the Rastafarian movement, the meaning of 
style had been symbolically filled up with emancipatory postcolonial politics 

1  Georg Simmel, “Fashion” International 
Quarterly, no. 10 (1904): 130−55; http://
www.modetheorie.de/fileadmin/Texte/s/
Simmel-Fashion_1904.pdf.
Ibid. 

2 
3  See Ruby Sircar, “Dressing the Tiger: De-
colonization and Style Racism in South-
Asian Fashion,” in this volume, 174–85.;  

Dipeash Chakrabarty and Homi Bhabha, 
Habitations of Modernity: Essays in the 
Wake of Subaltern Studies (Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, 2002), 67–69.
4  Oliver Marchart, Cultural Studies (Kon-

stanz: UTB, 2008), 100–30.

5  Dick Hebdige, Subculture: The Meaning of 

Style (London: Routledge, 1979), 31.

166

Alternative Aesthetic Politics—An Introduction

Elke Gaugele and Monica Titton

167

“refracting the system of black and white polarities, turning negritude into a 
positive sign, a loaded essence, a weapon at once deadly and divinely licensed.”6 
Within style politics the styles of the Black Power movement, of Black Cool 
and its celebrations of Negritude, were rated as the “darkest of rebellions”7 
and with that valued with the highest subcultural capital. With good reason 
the concept of style had been criticized; for its blindness towards gender and 
commodification, for its subcultural romanticism based on Marxist ideas, and 
for its outlines of grass-roots resistance. Nevertheless, it has brought about 
an alternative aesthetic politics as a utopian strategy and an ideal, where 
style emancipation deconstructs the categories of race and class and creates 
idealistic spaces, where “anti-European values available to the dispossessed 
black could begin to congregate.”8

Hence, the 1970s also saw an expansion of the fashion industry in many 
emerging economies, calling into question Simmel’s notion of fashion as a 
mainly Western phenomenon.9 The introduction of prêt-à-porter collections in 
the late 1950s and early 1960s challenged the “aristocratic hegemony” of 
French haute couture and introduced new fashion designers attuned to the 
political and social changes around them, which they translated into new aes-
thetic forms.10 Designers like Yves Saint Laurent and Zandra Rhodes drew 
their inspirations from travels to Morocco, Afghanistan, and India, and resus-
citated Orientalist11 and “ethnic” fashion trends by proposing fashionable ad-
aptations of kaftans, saris, and colonial uniforms (as in Yves Saint Laurent’s 
1968 “Saharienne” collection).12 At the same time, in 1969 the Indian designer 
Ritu Kumar started her career by designing contemporary fashion in recourse 
to vernacular-historic handicrafts.

However, this exoticization of places and costumes also went hand in hand 
with an inclusion of Asian and black fashion models, epitomized in the launch 
of a sari collection by Hermès in October 2011. Throughout the past two de-
cades, the gradual globalization of fashion production was facilitated by “the 
neoliberal erosion of protectionism,”13 i.e., the cutback of economic charges 
that protected the Western clothing industries. 

As part of globalization processes after 1989, we also witness a veritable boom 
of new fashion media outlets so that fashion is discussed here as an “aesthetic 
metapolitics,” which Rancière conceptualizes primarily as a regime typical for 
modernity. As a form of metapolitics, the aesthetic inextricably intertwines art 
and life so as to encompass specific forms of life—not only the laws and orders 
of the state pertaining to the domain of politics.14 Today we witness an expan-
sion of media images that is similar to the increase of fashion magazines in 
the late nineteenth century.15 This expansion of visual reproductions and dis-
seminations through media16 has historically created a new social and aes-
thetic sensorium through fashion, which is currently establishing itself once 

again. Once more, as an expansion of fashion’s aesthetic metapolitics, this 
development can be framed with recourse to Rancière’s notion of art as an 
aesthetic regime “of perception, sensation and interpretation.”17 In very much 
the same way as art is “constituted and transformed by welcoming images, 
objects and performances that seemed most opposed to the idea of fine art,”18 
fashion has also perpetually redefined and renewed itself since modernity, 
not only in terms of fads and trends, but also in terms of what is considered 
fashion—or anti-fashion, for that matter. In this context, fashion’s specificity 
consists in its capacity for creating identificatory spaces through its media. 
Fashion media permanently re-affirm fashion’s gendered, racialized regime 
of conduct. While the aesthetic regime of fashion guarantees the fortification 
of its power structures, in the context of globalization this configuration  
simultaneously opens and expands spaces for the production of alternative 
aesthetic politics in the form of countercultural and postcolonial representa-
tions of identities, bodies and styles. Today, fashion as an aesthetic politics 
orients itself toward global cultural participation. In contrast to nineteenth-
century concerns about fixating national belonging, the imagined communities 
of contemporary fashion assemble the new middle classes and emerging 
elites in global contemporaneousness.19

The four essays compiled in this chapter analyze these developments from 
different angles. Ruby Sircar’s exploration, “Dressing the Tiger—Decoloniza-
tion and Style Racism in South-Asian Fashion,” traces the textile and fashion 
history of modern India for its colonizing, decolonizing, and neo-colonizing 
patterns. Fashion and textiles are laid out here as antithetic transcultural  
signifiers; for colonial admiration as well as for postcolonial independence, as 
ongoing eras of exoticization and as reiterating patterns of style-racisms.

Ibid., 37.
Ibid., 31.
Ibid., 32.

6 
7 
8 
9  Patrik Aspers and Frédéric Godart, “Soci-
ology of Fashion: Order and Change,” An-
nual Review of Sociology, no. 39 (2013).
10  Pierre Bourdieu and Yvette Delsaut, “Le 

Couturier et sa griffe: Contribution à une 
théorie de la magie,” Actes de la recher-
che en sciences sociales, no. 1 (1975): 
7–36.

11  A style which had already been en vogue 

in the 1910s thanks to Paul Poiret, see 
Nancy Troy, Couture Culture: A Study in 
Modern Art and Fashion (Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press, 2003).

12  Frédéric Monneyron, La frivolité essentielle 

(Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 
2001), 59.

13  Adam Briggs, “‘Capitalism’s Favourite 

Child’ – The Production of Fashion,” in 
Fashion Cultures Revisited, ed. Stella Bruzzi 
and Pamela Church Gibson (London: Rout-
ledge, 2013: 194).

14  Jacques Rancière, The Politics of Aesthetics: 

The Distribution of the Sensible, trans.  
Gabriel Rockhill (London: Continuum, 
2004), 96.

15  Jennifer Craik, The Face of Fashion: Cultural 
Studies and Fashion (New York: Routledge, 
1993), 47.

16  Christopher Breward, Fashion (Oxford: 

Oxford University Press, 2003), 115.

17  Jacques Rancière, Aiesthesis: Scenes from 

the Aesthetic Regime of Art, trans. Zakir 
Paul (London: Verso 2013), X.

18  Ibid.
19  Benedict Anderson, Imagined Communities: 

Reflections on the Origin and Spread of 
Nationalism (London: Verso, 2006).

168

Alternative Aesthetic Politics—An Introduction

Elke Gaugele and Monica Titton

169

Martina Fineder’s study “‘Jute Not Plastic’: Alternative Product Culture between 
Environmental Crisis and Fashion” investigates how the alternative product 
culture in the 1970s was critically dependent on new, adequate media outlets 
to disseminate its environmentalist messages from the perspective of Materi-
al Culture Studies.

Elke Gaugele’s research, “On the Ethical Turn in Fashion—Policies of Gover-
nance and the Fashioning of Social Critique” inspects the commodification of 
trust and honesty after the global financial crisis in 2007−08 as well as its 
modes of Othering. Also, the United Nations’ shift from blue helmets to ethi-
cal fashion is investigated here as an eager embracement of the luxury 
industry.

Birgit Haehnel’s chapter “‘Performing Whiteness: Revisioning White Textiles in 
Visual Culture” shows how performances of whiteness are produced and rep-
resented in fashion media imagery as well as through art images and their 
disseminations from a Visual Culture Studies approach.

Taken together, they examine the study of fashion as an aesthetic metapolitics 
within contemporary globalizing processes from the following approaches: 
Postcolonial and Critical Whiteness Studies, Material and Visual Culture Studies, 
and Studies on the Critique of Capitalism.

Fashion, Postcolonial, and Critical Whiteness Studies

For Fashion Studies this chapter proposes postcolonial as well as critical 
whiteness studies as a perspective; for the analysis of visual culture as well for 
investigations on the global apparel industry. Fashion critique has blamed the 
lack of racial diversity in the visual representation of fashion for a long time.20 
In the forefront of 2013 fashion shows was the launch of a Diversity Coalition 
of black American and British models, the campaign of which blasts the busi-
ness for its whitewashed model casts; furthermore, in five out of nine seasons, 
Asian models have even less representation than black models.21 Critical 
Whiteness Studies also urges the critical analysis of performing whiteness, 
including the gaze, as an ethnic performance and political attribution that 
constitutes a racist politics in fashion.22 This approach could be also trans-
ferred to strategies and modes of othering within contemporary green life-
styles when, for example, faces of black fashion models are painted with green 
make-up in order to express ecological consciousness. Alternative fashions 
are inspected critically in this chapter in two respects: for their participations 
in neocolonial developments and for their own creation of style racisms. Re-
ferring to Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak, who states that the idea of a Third 
World itself is part of a neocolonial process, neocolonialism is basically de-

fined by economics rather than by territory or culture.23 Spivak’s postcolonial 
critique of contemporary politics in human rights cultures reveals that under-
lying the contemporary ethical regime of fashion are political governance and 
politics of class.24 A growing luxury market for Western as well as for African, 
Asian, and subcontinental elites is built up on this neocolonial economy, pre-
sented and marketed as “alternative aesthetic politics.” Therefore, the East-
ernization, Orientalization, and currently also Africanization of fashion histori-
cally expose once more the idealized notions and spaces of nature and 
culture that promise to find what has been seemingly lost in the Western in-
dustrialized world.25

Inspecting contemporary processes of self-ethnification of fashion designs, 
i.e., the so-called Indian style, brings to light exotic parameters that are close-
ly linked to what colonialism defined as Hinduism in the late nineteenth cen-
tury. Concurrently, the inspection also reiterates style racisms that quote anti-
Western colonial sentiments.26

Materiality and Material Culture

Materiality is one of the crucial components that formed an alternative aes-
thetic politics from a postcolonial as well as from an environmental and ethi-
cal perspective. Daniel Miller states that materiality is one of the driving forc-
es “behind humanity’s attempts to transform the world in order to make it 
accord with beliefs as to how the world should be.”27 For all enquiries in this 
chapter, the materiality of cloth and the historically emblematic reiterating 
reprocessing of specific textile materials are crucial for the creation of a sen-
sorium of alternative politics.

20 Minh-Ha T. Pham, “Why Fashion Should 

Stop Trying to Be Diverse,” Threadbared, 
September 30, 2013; http://iheartthread-
bared.wordpress.com/2013/09/30/just-
stop/; Bethann Haridson, Naomi Campell, 
and Chanel Imam, Diversity Coalition 
(blog); http://balancediversity.com.

21  Pham, “Why Fashion Should Stop Trying 
to Be Diverse”; Haridson et al., Diversity 
Coalition.

22  Gwendolyn Audrey Foster, Performing 

Whiteness: Postmodern Re/Constructions 
in the Cinema (New York: State University 
Press, 2003).

23  Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak, “Neocolonial-

ism and the Secret Agent of Knowledge: 
an interview with Robert J.C. Young,” in 

Neocolonialism, Oxford Literary Review 13 
(1991): 220–51; online at http://www.
robertjcyoung.com (2007), 44. 

24  Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak, “Righting 

Wrongs,” The South Atlantic Quarterly, no. 
2/3 (Spring/Summer 2004): 523−48.

25  Jackie Stacey, “The Global Within: Con-
suming Nature, Embodying Health,” in 
Global Nature, Global Culture, ed. Sarah 
Franklin, Celia Lury, and Jackie Stacey 
(London: Sage, 2000), 112. 

26  See Ruby Sircar, “Dressing the Tiger:  

Decolonization and Style Racism in South-
Asian Fashion,” in this volume, 174–85.

27  Daniel Miller, “Materiality: An Introduction,” 

in Materiality, ed. Daniel Miller (Durham, 
NC: Duke University Press, 2005), 2. 

170

Alternative Aesthetic Politics—An Introduction

Elke Gaugele and Monica Titton

171

Focusing on postcolonial processes, textile materials and the materiality of 
the handmade had played an important role within India’s way to indepen-
dence. As a political act of resistance and a strategy of decolonization, this 
also meant getting rid of the reliance on British hemp and textile production. 
At that time the term khadi, which entails all kinds of hand-spun and hand-
woven textiles, became a signifier for resistance. Furthermore, this fabric took 
in the struggles of the working class, which were connected through the fight 
over cotton and hemp products.28

Developing an alternative political sensibility, the post-1968 Western environ-
mental movement has shaped the question of materiality as well as the cri-
tique of materialism. Once again, specific materials such as jute or hemp, or 
handicraft techniques, turned into textile signifiers for alternative commodity 
cultures as they symbolically united anti-capitalist, anti-imperialist and eco-
logical critique.29 While eco-dresses as well as eco-textiles of that time were 
still considered as unfashionable from a mainstream perspective, today’s ethi-
cal and eco-fashions stand at the center of a globalized commodity culture. 
Therefore, a new production of smooth, soft, and light, sustainable materials 
arose. Within this next generation of environmental lifestyles we detect a new 
material culture of fashion and with it an alternative aesthetic politics, with its 
claims of transparency: about materials, manufacturing details, working con-
ditions, price calculations, and even about the carbon footprint of the cloth. 
At present, we observe interesting analogies between the slow food move-
ment and sustainable fashion and between vegan eating and dressing as 
modes of consumption. In that sense the materiality of alternative and post-
colonial lifestyles on all layers constitutes a sensorium for ethical, political, 
and also religious cultural belongings.

Globalization, Capitalism, and Critical Social Theory

The contributions collected in this chapter tackle the effects of globalization 
and network capitalism on fashion both as an industry and as an aesthetic 
metapolitics. Global governance tools such as multilateral trade agreements 
and environmental regulations contributed to an intensification of global  
hierarchies and worsening inequalities of labor conditions. Thereby, global-
ization unfolded a negative dialectic and with ethical fashion it provided 
grounds for a revitalization of early capitalist and colonial humanitarian aids 
and class-specific practices.30 The discourse revolving around the production 
and consumption of eco/sustainable fashion thereby also assumes religious 
undertones: from redemption to purity and righteousness, it is reminiscent 
of Weber’s characterization of the Protestant ethic of capitalism.31 Further-
more, with its mantras and shibboleths, eco-fashion evokes a generic, holistic 
understanding of ecology and humanity, as well as fragments of a diluted, 

Bitte alle 
titel konrol-
lieren
“:” oder 
“—”

globalized notion of Buddhist and Hindu teachings. The consumption of 
ethically, morally, and ecologically “correct” garments creates a ranking between 
“good” and “bad” consumers that echoes the inequalities responsible for the 
very necessity of “eco-fashion.” Ethical fashion with its emphasis on class-
specific values such as honesty reflects the dialectic amalgamation between 
social critique and capitalism.32

With recourse to Weber’s classic analysis of the Protestant ethic of capitalism, 
Boltanski and Chiapello argue that throughout its history, capitalism as an eco-
nomic system has had to go beyond mere economic goals (i.e., the accumula-
tion of wealth) and incorporate the very arguments of its opponents in order 
to legitimize its existence.33 As in the past, Boltanski and Chiapello argue, capi-
talism has been able to incorporate the economic critique and to thereby con-
solidate its economic structures and ethical and moral system of values.

At the turn of the twentieth century, Werner Sombart declared that “fashion is 
the favored child of capitalism.”34 Like many other historical accounts of nine-
teenth-century fashion, his clear-cut verdict was inadequate. As we discussed 
earlier, alternative aesthetic politics could emerge only thanks to the mobili-
zation of the critique of capitalism. Critique against the economic and cultur-
al agenda of globalized capitalism, but also the outcries against the devasta-
tion of the environment and the protests against colonial imperialism were 
vital stimuli for the emergence of the aesthetic metapolitics of fashion. Fash-
ion as a social and aesthetic phenomenon is entrenched in a heterogeneous 
network of global economic interdependencies, political and cultural pro-
cesses and strategies of aesthetic signification. In the face of its contempo-
rary kaleidoscopic configuration, fashion must be theorized as bearing spac-
es of global contemporaneousness, as a force that aggregates new middle 
classes and emerging elites on a global scale and thus creates symbolic 
spaces shaping new subjectivities and imagined communities.

28  Ruby Sircar, “Dressing the Tiger: Decolo-
nization and Style Racism in South-Asian 
Fashion,” in this volume, 174–85.

29  See Martina Fineder, “‘Jute Not Plastic’: 

Alternative Product Culture between Envi-
ronmental Crisis and Fashion,” in this vol-
ume 186–203.

30 Patrik Aspers, “A Note on Global Capital-

ism,” in Global Capitalism: The Road 
Ahead, ed. Bharti Thakar (Hyderabad: Icfai 
University Press, 2008), 13.

31  Max Weber, The Protestant Ethic and the 

Spirit of Capitalism, trans. Talcott Parsons 

(London: Routledge, 2001). 

32  See Elke Gaugele, “On the Ethical Turn in 
Fashion: Policies of Governance and the 
Fashioning of Social Critique,” in this vol-
ume 204–27.

33 Luc Boltanski and Ève Chiapello, The New 
Spirit of Capitalism, trans. Gregory Elliot 
(London: Verso, 2005).

34 Werner Sombart, Economic Life in the 
Modern Age, ed. Nico Stehr and Rainer 
Grundmann (New Brunswick, NJ: Transac-
tion Publishers, 2001), 225.

172

Alternative Aesthetic Politics—An Introduction

Elke Gaugele and Monica Titton

173

Spivak, Gayatri Chakravorty. “Neocolonialism 
and the Secret Agent of Knowledge.” Inter-
view with Robert J.C. Young. Online 2007, 
1−44. www.robertjcyoung.com. 

Stacey, Jackie. “The Global Within: Consum-
ing Nature, Embodying Health.” In Global Na-
ture, Global Culture. Edited by Sarah Franklin, 
Celia Lury, and Jackie Stacey, 97–145. London: 

Sage, 2000.
Troy, Nancy. Couture Culture. A Study in Modern 
Art and Fashion. Cambridge: MIT Press, 
2003.

Weber, Max. The Protestant Ethic and the 
Spirit of Capitalism. Translated by Talcott 
Parsons. London: Routledge, 2001. 

Literature

Anderson, Benedict. Imagined Communities: 
Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Na-
tionalism. London: Verso, 2006.

Aspers, Patrik and Frédéric Godart. “Sociolo-
gy of Fashion: Order and Change.” Annual Re-
view of Sociology, no. 39 (2013), 171–92.

Aspers, Patrik. “A Note on Global Capitalism.” 
In Global Capitalism: The Road Ahead. Edited 
by Bharti Thakar, 3−16. Hyderabad: Icfai Uni-
versity Press, 2008.

Boltanski, Luc and Ève Chiapello. The New 
Spirit of Capitalism. Translated by Gregory El-
liot. London: Verso 2005.

Bourdieu, Pierre and Yvette Delsaut. “Le Cou-
turier et sa griffe: contribution à une théorie 
de la magie.” Actes de la recherche en scienc-
es sociales, no. 1 (1975): 7–36.

Breward, Christopher. Fashion. Oxford: Ox-
ford University Press, 2003.

Briggs, Adam. “‘Capitalism’s Favourite 
Child’—The Production of Fashion.” In Fashion 
Cultures Revisited. Edited by Stella Bruzzi and 
Pamela Church-Gibson, 186–99. London: 
Routledge, 2013.

Chakrabarty, Dipesh and Homi K. Bhabha. 
Habitations of Modernity. Essays in the Wake 
of Subaltern Studies. Chicago: Chicago Uni-
versity Press, 2002.

Craik, Jennifer. The Face of Fashion: Cultural 
Studies and Fashion. New York: Routledge, 
1993.

Fineder, Martina. “‘Jute Not Plastic’: Alterna-
tive Product Culture between Environmental 
Crisis and Fashion.” In this volume 186–203.

richtig?

Foster, Gwendolyn Audrey. Performing White-
ness: Postmodern Re/Constructions in the 
Cinema. New York: State University of New 
York Press, 2003.

Franklin, Sarah, Celia Lury, and Jackie Stacey. 
Global Nature, Global Culture. London: Sage, 
2000.

Gaugele, Elke. “On the Ethical Turn in Fash-
ion: Policies of Governance and the Fashion-
ing of Social Critique.” In this volume  
204–27.

Hebdige, Dick. Subculture: The Meaning of 
Style. London: Routledge, 1979.

Marchart, Oliver. Cultural Studies. Konstanz: 
UTB, 2008.

Miller, Daniel. Materiality. Durham: Duke Uni-
versity Press, 2005.

Monneyron, Frédéric. La frivolité essentielle. 
Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 2001. 

Pham, Minh-Ha T. “Why Fashion Should Stop 
Trying to be Diverse,” Threadbared, Sept. 30, 
2013. Accessed Feb 28, 2014. http://iheart-
threadbared.wordpress.com/2013/09/30/
just-stop/.

Rancière, Jacques. Aiesthesis: Scenes from 
the Aesthetic Regime of Art. Translated by  
Zakir Paul. London: Verso, 2013. 

Rancière, Jacques. The Politics of Aesthetics: 
The Distribution of the Sensible. Translated 
by Gabriel Rockhill. London: Continuum, 
2004.

Simmel, Georg. “Fashion.” International Quar-
terly, no. 10 (1904): 130−155: 136. Accessed 
July 28, 2013. http://www.modetheorie.de/fil-
eadmin/Texte/s/Simmel-Fashion_1904.pdf.

Sircar, Ruby. “Dressing the Tiger: Decoloniza-
tion and Style Racism in South-Asian Fashion.” 
In this volume, 174–85.

Sombart, Werner. Economic Life in the  
Modern Age. Edited by Nico Stehr and Rainer 
Grundmann. New Brunswick: Transaction 
Publishers, 2001.

Spivak, Gayatri Chakravorty. “Righting 
Wrongs,” The South Atlantic Quarterly, vol. 
103, no. 2/3 (Spring/Summer 2004): 523−48. 
Accessed July 28, 2013. http://muse.jhu.edu/
journals/saq/summary/v103/103.2spivak.
html.

Dressing  
the Tiger
Decolonization 
and Style Racism 
in South-Asian 
Fashion

Ruby Sircar

Ruby Sircar

175

Since early modernity, beginning with the marriage of steam and cotton in 1750 
and the thus triggered industrialization, there was a tightly knitted exchange 
of materials between the British dominion India and Europe. This exchange, 
which came along with an intensive creolization of textile styles and formal 
parameters, can be documented on all levels of custom and trading. When 
counting the years backward from the early 2000s we may follow a red thread 
of exotic and glittering sari materials through the centuries: in the 2000s  
Selfridges promoted the so-called Bollywood style, in the aftermath of the 
New Asian Cool era and as an advertisement of the London-based musical 
sensation “Bombay Dreams” (2002) by Andrew Lloyd-Webber.1 Further down 
the years: Manish Arora’s Phish Label co-operation with brands such as Ree-
bok and Swarovski (also early 2000s–2010s), which tried to hang on to the 
defined Western love for exotic sparkles and a subcontinental, imagined need 
for European/Western high end/street brands; the Beatles and international 
jet set of the 1960s, who promoted the Nehru jacket which was picked up re-
peatedly by Italian fashion producers such as Etro;2 the 1930s and 1920s ex-
travaganza for an Indian as well as European high end consumer such as Lady 
Mountbatten (the Vicereine of India) who had Cartier produce her celebrated 
Tutti Frutti set or the khaki-drenched uniforms of colonial power soldiers 
(from Canada, to Africa via India and onto Oceania).

How may these epochs and eras of exotication be differentiated? And what 
exactly is happening today? How has the exchange between India and the 
Western fashion market changed over the last 20 years? What is the hidden 
political realism behind a change of stylistics and formal languages in textiles 
and fashion?

In 1992 the Indian central government decided to end the socialist market 
economy and replace the former through a more liberal enterprise system, 
thus supporting export schemes and development plans. For the fashion in-
dustry this was a two-edged possibility: on the one hand non-regional high 
end and high-street brands gained access (especially after 1996) to the Indian 
metropolitan consumer and the fashion industry. For example: Hermès de-
signed a sari line between 2008 and 2012, Louis Vuitton campaigned the 
opening of their Mumbai flagship store in Mumbai’s Taj Land’s End by launch-
ing their ninth city travel guide (2003) or Swarovski’s hitting South-Asian soil 
in 2001 in Mumbai. But also Indian designers began producing for a larger 
global audience. Thus styles, developed by designers such as Manish Arora or 
Ritu Kumar, became almost undistinguishable between those developed by 

1  See Valerie Rigsbee, “Bombay Dreams,” 
September 26, 2013, http://www.broad-
waymusicalhome.com/shows/bombay.
htm. 

2  See Sothebys, “The Mountbatten Jewels,” 
The Royal Magazine, June 25, 2008, http://
www.royal-magazin.de/england/mount-
batten-jewels.htm.

 Doppelpunkt im titel? oder untertitel weg

176

Dressing the Tiger—Decolonization and Style Racism in South-Asian Fashion

Ruby Sircar

177

such brands as Etro. Nevertheless, the consumers and their prime interest for 
consuming certain brands differ widely. Contemporary Indian designers are 
still mainly consumed within a growing Asian and Arab market, mirroring the 
growing self-confidence of consumers and markets—which no longer require 
European or Western brands and labels to mark their self-esteem and aplomb, 
even indulging in style racisms clearly quoting anti-Western/European/colo-
nial sentiments. This development clearly states the following questions: who 
is being represented and clothed? What happens to these styles and its carrier 
fashion when reaching a non-Indian consumer circle? To whom do brands 
and designers such as Etro, Burberry, and Hermes—on the one hand—and 
Arora, Kumar, and We the PPL as contemporary and politically left-winged 
neo-nation labels—on the other hand—cater? The latter quoting the Indian 
freedom fighter Subhash Chandra Bose, the Tiger of Bengal: “Give me blood 
and I will give you freedom!” (Indian Rally in Burma, 1944). Gandhi is dead.

History: The Nineteenth Century, Salons, and the Labor 
Movement

When in the 1750s the first wave of industrialization hit Great Britain and 
rolled over Europe a change of perception of material and its exchange with 
the Empire’s colonies took place, materiality was redefined and stylistics were 
either pidginized, imagined or creolized. This can be easily sketched through 
developments such as Europe’s fascination with Far Eastern styles3 or the re-
imagination of a uniquely Pan-African style of wax printing, all produced on 
the British isles; as well as copying the imperial Mughal peacock designs: re-
naming it after a Scottish village and selling the industrially and machine-
made paisley scarves to an ever-growing British population, all yearning for 
colonial glory and bought self-esteem.

The British Raj’s government, as well as the East India Company, followed two 
key notions at the beginning of their colonial textile style and parameter ex-
change. Firstly, form follows function: British natives/original citizens must be 
allowed to adopt local styles as per their usefulness to survive tropic climates 
and diseases. Inventions such as pith helmets, jodhpurs, khakis and pajamas, 
etc., found their way from native/local clothing into fancy military gears and 
later into the Western everyday household. Secondly, the Empire sought for a 
solution of marketing the found colonial diversity within the region of origin 
as well as on the British Isles, other colonies and the Western world at large. 
As well as offering cheaper ways of producing certain textiles such as chintz 
and silk, styles such as paisleys and ikats, patolas, madras checks, etc., were 
reproduced. They first found the possibility for the latter peacock/paisley 
weave in crafty tartan weaves from Scotland. Later, machine crafted textiles 
from Southern France and Vienna replaced British craftsmanship.4

For both key notions they found historically well-documented answers and 
possibilities. The textile industry was, next to the heroine enterprise, the sec-
ond and important pillar to the British Empire in India. Thus on the one hand 
they crossed and annexed successfully manufacturing structures on the sub-
continent, creating a larger need for drug supply. Further, by using raw fabric 
material to manufacture cheap textiles for the large Indian market, they also 
caused a breakdown in the Indian homespun tradition. On the other hand 
they found profitable markets in Europe and defined exotic styles, arts, and 
crafts anew. Apart from interior textiles (from rugs to cushion covers and wall 
hangings) Indian style and fashion, subcontinental fabrics became bon ton 
for the European masses after 1857/8. The nostalgic, yet—unlike the African—
not barbaric, thus wearable innate styles influenced European fashions from 
then on highly. Why not barbaric? India and her princely houses, her wealth 
and the impressive Mughal culture could not be neglected as non-culture but 
had to be at least respected from the crafty side as cultural, thus British deni-
zen-worthy products. Especially clothing styles and textile fashions from with-
in the realms of the northern and northwestern territories, the Mughal era and 
the splendorous courts of the Indian Princes have received such a nostalgic 
yearning.5

It is, furthermore, interesting that from the very beginning, the products were 
not merely designed for European/Western customers. Also subcontinental 
customers were considered, as well as how to use them for promoting indus-
trialization in Europe and its enterprises. We may trace this development on a 
large political and regional development scale in 1821 with the introduction of 
a uniform sari style6 as well as a Puritan-designed ideal sari blouse, which is 
still valid as a folk costume accessory today. Further racist ideals can be seen 
in court dress and white beauty definers from the 1840s onwards, as well as 
developing an Indian men’s costume by simplifying the Mughal court dress 
and Farsi bourgeois costume.7 One must also not forget John Forbes Watson’s 
(1827–1892) work for the India House (now the Victoria and Albert Museum in 
London) when cataloguing and categorizing Indian textile wealth. His idea for 
“portable industrial museums” led to the publication of The Collections of 
the Textile Manufactures of India in 1866, eighteen volumes of mounted and 

3  See Kashmiri/Pashmina shawl fashion,  

Japonism, Orientalism, and Chinese silks 
and lacquer ware.

4  Angela Völker, “Die Produktion von ‘Wiener 

Shawls’ in der ersten Hälfte des 19. Jahr-
hunderts,” in Documenta textilia, Fest-
schrift für Sigrid Müller-Christensen  
(Munich: Bayerisches Nationalmuseum, 
1981), 409–22. 

5  Anna Jackson, Amin Jaffer, and Christiane 

Lang, Maharaja: Die Pracht der indischen 
Fürstenhöfe; Katalogbuch zur Ausstellung 
in München, Kunsthalle der Hypo-Kultur-
stiftung (Munich: Hirmer, 2010), 25.

6  Judith Benhamou-Huet, 21st-Century  

Embroidery in India: In Their Hands (Lon-
don: Prestel, 2009), II–IV.

7  William Dalrymple, The Last Mughal: The 
Tale of a Dynasty: Delhi, 1857 (New Delhi: 
Vintage, 2007), 87–89.

178

Dressing the Tiger—Decolonization and Style Racism in South-Asian Fashion

Ruby Sircar

179

classified samples of Indian textiles containing seven hundred examples in 
all. The samples were mostly taken from Indian textiles shown at the 1855 Paris 
International Exhibition. Thirteen sets of the books were distributed in Britain, 
mostly to textile manufacturing districts; seven went to India.8 This allowed 
local British producers to copy and to market possible and imagined exotic/
Indian styles. The exercise in colonial marketing is taken further when enter-
ing the South-Asian princely courts—from Jaipur all the way south to Mysore. 
Now a new market of promises opened its doors to European producers and 
haute couture. Cartier, for example, built its wealth on princely jewels and 
wealth. They played and used or generated the interest of the princely houses 
in European contemporary fashion by marking them as the peers or carrying 
vessels of modernity. But also artists such as Man Ray, Constantin Brancusi 
and architects such as Le Corbusier profited from the Europeanization of the 
court system in the late nineteenth century. The wish to join an international 
aristocratic jet set, thus not being compared with other objects of the Raj, 
drove the princely court to support Art Deco artists, modern architecture, and 
the fashion industry. Early twentieth-century fashion and women magazines 
such as Vogue were funded by the Princes of Mysore and Hyderabad to portray 
and show case the beauty and wealth of their princesses (see: Vogue, Spring 
1924) flouncing off saris and jewelry to the envy of the vicereine and con-
sorts.9 While Cartier had earlier catered to the style and taste of the princes, 
imitating Mughal Renaissance patterns, when creating head sets and Polo 
watches, Mountbatten’s diadem cum necklace is full of racism towards the 
Empire’s objects—a show of glee to earlier financial supporters who had 
bought their piece of Western polish through their diamonds and heirlooms.

Apart from the world of the Indian and European courts and the growing in-
ternational jet set, the 1920s also witnessed another movement: the urge for 
religious and political independence was carried out on textile wings too. The 
style, which was mainly supported by congressional politicians in Gandhi’s 
vicinity, became known as khadi. The term khadi covers all kinds of hand-spun 
and hand-woven textile products. The cloth can be found traditionally all over 
South Asia, from Afghanistan to Bangladesh and Burma. Nevertheless, the 
movement was shaped ideologically by Gandhi who tried to free the subcon-
tinent from the reliance on British hemp and textile production. The goal was 
to disrupt the transport from India to the Isles of cotton, which was made into 
clothing and then sold again to Indians. Thus, khadi became the cloth of inde-
pendence and the Swadeshi movement, because Gandhi saw it as a possibili-
ty for rural self-employment and rural self-reliance. He himself donned, on re-
turning from his studies and work in Europe and South Africa, always a dhoti, 
a hand-loom cloth wrung around his hip and a shawl made from khadi which 
he himself had spun on his charkha (spinning wheel). The anti-colonial imple-
mentation of this mythical and simple cloth still lingers on today, when con-
temporary designers such as Basant Rai, Ritu Kumar or Rohit Bal, We the PPL 

use it in their designs. An interesting side note to the use of khadi is that   
Indian languages (spoken or textile) are often used to mark anti-imperial 
movements in English-speaking science fiction (films, literature) such as the 
Jedis in the latest Star War episodes, who fight the Dark Side. The use of the 
cloth as something indigenous to the whole subcontinent is, just as imagined, 
a mere political demonstration and was applied by Gandhi to his theories.

Why? If we follow the documentation of Dipesh Chakrabarty in Habitations of 
Modernity,10 we will discover that Gandhi was not wearing indigenous cos-
tumes. He was advised by Anglo-Irish authors based in London’s Bloomsbury 
to acquire the look of an ascetic fakir who celibately leads the masses to 
freedom and liberty.11 Donning khadi styles can be also seen with other inter-
nationally acclaimed Indian leaders of the time, such as Swami Vivekananda, 
who started his journey to the Parliament of the World Religions in Chicago in 
1893 dressed in Western costume. On his way through New York he hit ground 
with various feminist salons, which advised him to rather wear an imagined 
Indian reform costume than to don Western evening garb during his Vedanta 
and Yoga lessons, which he made popular in the West. Also the Nobel Prize 
winning poet Rabindranath Tagore, who came from a well-educated Bengali 
background just as Vivekananda, was advised to represent himself as a modern 
Indian teacher and educator. He was advised in 1919 by his theosophic friend 
Annie Besant, who herself wore a sari to show her native solidarity.

Costumes and styles described so far can be followed till today. The question, 
however, is: which racisms are repeated from the mid-twentieth century till 
today and how are they reproduced or are there hidden emancipatory traces? 
Apart from the resistance woven into khadi cloth there is of course the inlaid 
history of the working class, connected through the fight over cotton and 
hemp products. Gandhi’s visits to the mills in Manchester and Lancashire were 
poignant moments; in 1931 the hand-loom war was on. Gandhi showed his 
sympathy and empathy with the British and migrant workers at these mills 
and their bitter and desperate everyday situation. The workers in Manchester, 
Lancashire, and further down in London also showed their understanding and 
empathy with the Indian cause as both groups perceived themselves to be 

8  See Victoria and Albert Museum, “Indian 
Textiles and Empire: John Forbes Watson. 
Collections of the Textile Manufactures of 
India,” http://www.vam.ac.uk/content/
articles/i/indian-textiles-and-empire 
-john-forbes-watson. 

9  Nevertheless, the latter’s Tutti Frutti dia-

dem and necklace is, until today, the best 
documented example of the exchange be-
tween fashions and an understanding of 
how to present, according to modernity, 

regional possibilities. Cartier offered to 
use Indian gems, such as rubies, sap-
phires, and emeralds to carve exotic fruits 
(out of which not all are native to South-
Asian soil and flora). 

10  Dipesh Chakrabarty and Homi Bhabha, 
Habitations of Modernity: Essays in the 
Wake of Subaltern Studies (Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, 2002), 67–69.

11  Ibid.

180

Dressing the Tiger—Decolonization and Style Racism in South-Asian Fashion

Ruby Sircar

181

slaves to merchandise and subaltern states. Not only were Indian manufactur-
ers and consumers boycotting British textiles, but also Indian imported goods 
to the Isles were restricted by the British government. The media suddenly 
had to document the unexpected. Gandhi was welcomed by the workers who 
understood his and the Indian cause visibly and audibly, thus bridging from 
working class to working class. One must not forget that the majority of Brit-
ish mill workers at that time perceived themselves as subalterns and colonial 
objects, as quite a large number hailed either from Ireland, Southern, and 
Eastern Europe or even South Asia. The workers applauded the prime issue of 
Gandhi’s visit—the round table conference in London requiring the preserva-
tion of indigenous textile manufacturing. Even though the Congress Party had 
of course larger and more universal goals (such as freedom), Gandhi picked 
this as his personal priority.

The Last Fifty Years: From Hippies and Dropouts to the  
Global Cat Walks and All the Way Back

“India will never be out of fashion!” This quote from India’s leading women 
fashion designer Ritu Kumar12 may be applied to the exoticisms beginning in 
the early nineteenth century on various levels of cultural production. If we 
take textiles and fashion into regard we may be baffled at the realization that 
Empire-based racisms and preconceptions have doubled and multiplied in 
the last fifty or so years by finally hitting the mass market. This movement is 
easily decipherable when following the industrialization of production and 
the ways cheap material maneuvered colonialism into neo-liberal enterprises 
such as neo-colonialism and globalization. By looking again at the given ex-
amples of haute couture, Gandhi, Vivekananda, Tagore, and Annie Besant one 
can observe the development as follows

1. 

2. 

 Haute couture becomes high street by being marketed through the me-
dia, such as the movies. A vivid example is Fritz Lang’s Indian Epic (The 
Tiger of Eschnapur and The Indian Tomb, both 1959) in which the Indian 
prince and his court all don so-called towel or widow turbans, a kind of 
turban which was also worn by Vivekananda, undistinguishable of all 
marks of cast and regionalism as is otherwise decipherable with this 
piece of costume. Vivekananda who was also the original model for Peter 
Seller’s The Party (1968) and Jimi Mistry’s adoption in The Guru (2002).

 The so-called Indian style and exotic parameters are closely linked to 
what colonialism defined as Hinduism in the late nineteenth century. 
These religious/spiritual concepts are reflected through a certain fashion. 
From the late 1960s to the early 1980s, this fashion is supported by 
styles worn by The Beatles, when the first generation of twentieth century 

dropouts and anti-intellectual Western elites hit the subcontinent. Using 
the bought clothes, they designed their own understanding of Indian spir-
ituality; Oshos, Prabhupadas, and other religious leaders pop up. It is a 
popular repetition of the fashion earlier promoted by linguists and authors 
such as Hermann Hesse, Vivekananda, and the theosophs of the earlier 
half of the century. While Besant supported Krishnamurti and Tagore, the 
new (self-fashioned) gurus no longer aimed to link themselves with the In-
dian region and culture; they rather chose design as a certain perspective 
for Western audiences. Their dresses/clothes do not mirror a certain caste 
or their inherited social and regional standing but instead Western-imag-
ined Indian outfits. Their textile styles and mantras became icons for pop-
ular personae such as George Harrison, Boy George, and Stevie Wonder 
(see the Hare Krishna mantra). Nevertheless, in the 1990s another sense of 
self-fashioning starts to intervene with the orientation towards the West. 
Gurus and leaders such as Sri Sri Ravishankar begin to wrap local lifestyle 
and the teachings of Osho together, addressing thus the newly found In-
dian urge to create a post-colonial identity, which is superior and free of 
former Western influences. This movement also strongly supports nation-
alistic undercurrents in the Indian global/international society.

3. 

 Concentrating on the world of luxury and imagining a glorious (colonial 
and princely) past, as well as embedding into this a political conscious-
ness and emancipatory act is what the Italian fashion industry promotes 
from the 1960s onwards. On the one hand, it comes as an aftermath to 
such stylistic iconic films as Fritz Lang’s Indian Epic; on the other it is a 
clear and misogynist bow towards a specific political class within the In-
dian freedom movement: the Nehru jacket—a reflection of the 1960s 
to 1970s—places its wearer well between the image of a gentleman and 
connoisseur of the Beat generation, knowing about Nehru’s socialist 
leanings, as well as his playboy image in the chit-chattering yellow press. 
Thus, the fashion industry picks up on independent India with a flair of 
wonder and romanticism.

4. 

 The first Indian label is established—not a government-owned enterprise 
such as Cottage Industries Emporium, which quotes the khadi move-
ment and claims to produce fair fashion, according to a Gandhian ethos. 
Fabindia is a community-owned enterprise (at least on the production 
side of the enterprise). But, unlike a direct link to Gandhi and thus bridging 
into an emancipatory consciousness with a national flavor, like so many 

12  See Sreya Basu, “India Never Goes Out of 

Fashion”; http://getahead.rediff.com/re-
port/2009/sep/10/glamour-ritu-kumar-at-
kolkata-fashion-week.htm. 

13  See Manish Arora, “About Manish,” http://

www.manisharora.com/index.php/
about-manish.

182

Dressing the Tiger—Decolonization and Style Racism in South-Asian Fashion

Ruby Sircar

183

other designers and brands in the last third of the twentieth century,  
Fabindia rather links to urban myths at large and caters to an urban Indian 
upper class only (at least till the end of the 1990s). Being founded by the 
grandson of Mark Twain, Fabindia was fast in understanding the necessity 
to cater and create a new Indian style that was not bound to colonialism 
and the fight for independence, but brought in a new understanding of 
the customer’s role in a globalized world. The fashions also reflect a market 
niche which gapped between those wearing the 1960s Nehru jackets 
and those admiring Western dropouts. With the change of Indian Central 
government export policies in the mid-1990s Fabindia also began expand-
ing to Europe and North America. Here, the company not only catered 
to the needs of the international Indian elite, but also to customers which 
would consume high end exotic fashion such as Burberry’s eclectic 
styles, Etro, Ermengildo Zegna, but also more sober and minimalist schools 
such as the Antwerp Six, etc., thus also reflecting or quoting the costumes 
developed in the early 1820s by the colonial powers and local elites to 
manifest certain styles. The often quoted Nehru jacket with its mandarin 
collar is after all the modernist outlook on a Farsi/Punjabi achkan or 
Mughal court sherwani. Further, the clothing line and interests developed 
and broadcasted by Fabindia for a larger audience were picked up by 
designers such as Rohit Bal to design sherwanis for the cabin crew of 
British Airways on the route to South Asia.

Now, what is the difference between today and the 1940s? The biggest differ-
ence is not the change in an outside perception, which still plays off the 
image of India as the destination of dreams, but the change in self-perception. 
India is no longer a country as designed by the outside, or as described by 
such movements as Jute statt Plastik (which propagated in Germany in the 
late 1970s and 1980s reusable jute bags instead of plastic shopping bags 
that not only helped to prevent waste in Europe but that also supported local 
farmers in Bangladesh and elsewhere); or bourgeois goodwill movements 
which fought a fight against neo-imperial and neo-colonial capitalist (textile) 
enterprises but very often used the same trampled marketing paths, with 
different product stylistics.

Feeding Back—What are Today’s Expectations?

Looking at the development of these different epochs, the question arises: 
How do they differ? And: What is happening today? How did the exchange of 
textile and fashion material change in the last twenty years? What is the agen-
da of political realism, what is the principle and language of styles hidden 
and how are they used?

These questions can be followed up on all levels of consumed and marketed 
fashion/textile products, if we take a closer look at Manish Arora’s coopera-
tion with Reebok, Swatch, Nespresso, and Swarovski through the brand 
Phish,13 before becoming creative director of Paco Rabanne in 2011. Who to 
the glee of the Indian public conquered the heights of former colonial pow-
ers, supposedly designing and formulating their style and fashion. Running a 
global brand against neo-colonial waves of enterprise such as the sari collec-
tion by Hermès,14 which copy the exact marketing strategies applied by Carti-
er and others a century earlier on the Indian princes. Indeed, the styles used 
by Arora as well as Western/global labels to lure consumers are flippantly 
alike; only the market strength differs. While Indian designers cater to a larger 
international Asian and Oriental market and not yet global masses, they do 
reach a certain string of confused twenty-first century nationality and region-
ality that builds on the opposition and survival of former colonial times. Thus 
very often, even stylistic racisms go unnoticed by the Western politically 
aware eyes.

Nevertheless, how is this development supported by governmental regional 
politics? In 1992, the Indian central government decided that they would greet 
capitalism and related market formats and end socialist market principles on 
the subcontinent, furthering production conditions in textiles and fashion 
that are closely interlinked with those pre-Independence situations which were 
fought for by Gandhi and his principles. Rural manufacturing became even 
more marginalized and had to escape to such niches as described by Suraiya 
Hasan Bose for NorBlack NorWhite in 2011:15 new high-end fashion labels pick 
up on them temporarily, and government run emporia still support hand loom, 
but high street consumers are unwilling to invest in everyday hand loom 
products. This very much brings us back to Gandhi’s dilemma in the 1920s 
and 1930s. But, as the Indian metropolitan areas are growing and with them 
an eco-friendly and nationalist bourgeoisie, bohemian hand-loomed items as 
a carrying material for certain ideas of regional self-empowerment, even 
though only imagined, survives, having lost the swadeshi’s longing for anti-
force, at least on a theoretical level.

14  See Shoba Narayan, “Saris from Paris,” 

http://www.ft.com/cms/s/2/6547b042-2a 
76-11e1-9bdb-00144feabdc0.html#axzz2j 
QU2bEev. 

15  See NorBlackNorWhite, “NBNW does  
Hyderabad,” February 24, 2014, http://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=r0r48 
MqtjGg#t=41. 

184

Dressing the Tiger—Decolonization and Style Racism in South-Asian Fashion

185

Literature

Arora, Manish. “About Manish.” Accessed  
November 1, 2013. http://www.manisharora.
com/index.php/about-manish.

Basu, Sreya. “India never goes out of fash-
ion.” Accessed February 26, 2014. http://geta 
head.rediff.com/report/2009/sep/10/glam 
our-ritu-kumar-at-kolkata-fashion-week.htm.

Benhamou-Huet, Judith. 21st-Century Embroi-
dery in India: In Their Hands, II–IV. London: 
Prestel, 2009.

Chakrabarty, Dipesh and Homi Bhabha. 
Habitations of Modernity. Essays in the Wake 
of Subaltern Studies. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 2002.

Dalrymple, William. The Last Mughal: The Tale 
of a Dynasty: Delhi, 1857. New Delhi: Vintage, 
2007. 

Jackson, Anna, Amin Jaffer, and Christiane 
Lang. Maharaja: Die Pracht der indischen 
Fürstenhöfe. Exh. cat. Kunsthalle der Hypo-
Kulturstiftung. Munich: Hirmer, 2010.

Narayan, Shoba. “Saris from Paris.” Accessed 
November 1, 2013. http://www.ft.com/cms/
s/2/6547b042-2a76-11e1-9bdb-00144feab 
dc0.html#axzz2jQU2bEev.

Rigsbee, Valerie. “Bombay Dreams.” September 
26, 2013. Accessed November 1, 2013. http://
www.broadwaymusicalhome.com/shows/
bombay.htm.

Singh, Radhika. The Fabric of Our Lives: The 
Story of Fabindia. New Delhi: Penguin Global, 
2011.

Sothebys, “The Mountbatten Jewels.” The 
Royal Magazine, June 25, 2008. Accessed  
November 1, 2013. http://www.royal-magazin.
de/england/mountbatten-jewels.htm.

Victoria and Albert Museum. “Indian textiles 
and Empire: John Forbes Watson. Collections 
of the Textile Manufactures of India.” Accessed 
November 29, 2013. http://www.vam.ac.uk/
content/articles/i/indian-textiles-and-empire- 
john-forbes-watson.

Völker, Angela. “Die Produktion von ‘Wiener 
Shawls’ in der ersten Hälfte des 19. Jahrhun-
derts.” In Documenta textilia, Festschrift für 
Sigrid Müller-Christensen, 409–22. Munich: 
Bayerisches Nationalmuseum, 1981. 

“Jute Not  
Plastic”
Alternative  
Product Culture 
between  
Environmental 
Crisis and  
Fashion

Martina Fineder

Martina Fineder

187

 

 “Time marched on, IKEA and wooden furniture also entered on their  
triumphal march; the first man on the Moon had long been a legend, and 
ecological problems increasingly dominated daily events. Wood, even 
when coated with a layer of plastic and impregnated with highly toxic  
media, was ‘in’, plastic was ‘out.’”1

  —Günter Beltzig, “My Sixties”

These words by the furniture designer Günter Beltzig put in a nutshell a cen-
tral complex of problems facing the Western design and consumer culture of 
the 1970s, the reciprocal effects arising from environmental crisis in combina-
tion with the quest for an environmentally friendly product culture. The main 
impulse behind this development is generally held to be a reawakened love of 
“nature.” Starting out from a new systemic understanding of the relationship 
between human being and nature, the blue planet was declared to be “Space-
ship Earth” (as coined by Richard Buckminster Fuller) and subsequently con-
ceived as a “boat,” which threatened to sink with everyone in it. This anxiety 
about the “repercussions on the life and ‘environmental’ conditions of human 
beings themselves ensuing from their social utilization of nature” (as de-
scribed by Karl-Werner Brand),2 was projected as a result in consumerist-criti-
cal actions such as “Jute Not Plastic,” and also in random, market-conformist 
innovations such as the IKEA principle. In this charged field between the po-
larities of counter-culture and mainstream, design and anti-design, consumer 
society and its critique, the following essay pursues the question of how the 
new social value of nature is negotiated through making and consuming 
things. Following design historian Judy Attfield, this will involve an attempt to 
reach a dialectical understanding of design and consumption as processes 
through which “individuals and groups construct their identity, experience 
modernity and deal with social change.”3 According to anthropologist Daniel 
Miller, this article sees “the stance to materiality” as “the driving force behind 
humanity’s attempts to transform the world in order to make it accord with 
beliefs as to how the world should be.”4

1  Günter Beltzig, “My Sixties,” http://www.

beltzig-playdesign.de.

2  Karl-Werner Brand, “Die Umweltbewegung 

(inklusive Tierschutz),” in Die sozialen Be-
wegungen in Deutschland seit 1945: Ein 
Handbuch, ed. Roland Roth and Dieter 
Rucht (Frankfurt/Main: Campus, 2008), 
220. See also Anna Bramwell, Ecology in 
the 20th Century: A History (New Haven, 
CT: Yale University Press, 1990). 

3  Judy Attfield, Wild Things: The Material 
Culture of Everyday Life (London: Berg, 
2000). Attfield’s approach is shaped by 
the work of British anthropologist Daniel 

Miller, Material Culture and Mass Con-
sumption, 1989, where the focus does not 
lie—as in Marxist design critique of the 
1970s—on the difference between “good” 
and “bad” design and consumption but on 
processes of objectification. See also 
Daniel Miller, Materiality (Durham, NC: 
Duke University Press, 2005), and his 
most recent book Consumption and its 
Consequences (Cambridge: Polity Press, 
2012). 

4  Miller, “Materiality: An Introduction,” in 

Materiality, 2.

188

“Jute Not Plastic”

Martina Fineder

189

The New Environmental Awareness

The irruption of the environmental crisis in the mass media during the 1970s 
made an intense impact on public awareness. A number of alarmist publica-
tions contributed to this and warned about the ephemerality of the planet 
from diverse perspectives. In 1971 Schon möglich, dass die Erde sterben muß 
(The Earth may have to die), and Müllplanet Erde (Earth planet of trash) were 
published, in 1972 Die totale Autogesellschaft (The total automobile society) 
and in 1975 Ein Planet wird geplündert (A planet is being plundered) written 
by the influential politician Herbert Gruhl.5 But a real shock wave broke out af-
ter the report of the Club of Rome, published in 1972, on the Limits to Growth 
in the Western industrial nations. Radio, television, and the major German 
newspapers helped to spread an atmosphere of crisis. The report was borne 
out by the oil crisis of 1973, which drew diverse energy-saving programs and 
car-free Sundays in its wake, and it provided for severe cracks in the model of 
progress and the related expectations of prosperity that were anchored firmly 
in the mindset of West German citizens.6 The new understanding of global re-
source contexts and the fear of the planet’s ephemerality intensified the 
awareness aroused by reports of human and ecological catastrophes in coun-
tries of the so-called “Third World.”

From the political perspective, a paradigmatic change took place after the fail-
ure of 1968: the focus of the social movement in the fight against exploitation 

of the working classes by capitalism shifted rapidly towards the protest 
against the exploitation of nature.7 Originating in various milieus in the well-
educated middle class, the new environmental awareness became the deter-
mining factor in developing an alternative political sensibility that was strong-
ly influenced by questions of lifestyle. The jute bag came to be the most 
pertinent symbol of the alternative lifestyle. 

The brown shopping bag with the slogan “Jute Not Plastic” throws down a 
challenge to replace artificial substances with natural materials and is a dec-
laration of solidarity with people who have to suffer under unfair trade condi-
tions. Jute had always been the main vector in debates on issues of cultural 
rights and ownership, hence, during the 1970s with its constant supply of ca-
tastrophe scenarios, jute united the anti-capitalist, anti-imperialist, feminist, 
and ecological critiques of large-scale industry (first and foremost nuclear 
power).8 For Manon Maren-Grisebach, on the executive of the Green Party, 
the sale of “jute bags made for example by the poorest of the poor in Peru” 
were the “expression of our hatred of environmental destruction as well as 
our love of these suffering under the yoke of conniving money sharks.”9 “The 
bag,” remembers Gert Nickoleit, project manager of the action “Jute Not Plas-
tic,” “stood for a different way of life.” “With it you were saying: I care for the 
environment and I’m doing something for the poorest of the poor.”10 This ethi-
cal attitude toward consumption is embodied as well in a self-knitted jumper 
and linen sandals, but also in rattan furniture, Japanese balloon lamps and un-
treated, do-it-yourself wooden furniture. To reiterate the words of Maren-

5  Christian Schütze, Schon möglich, dass 
die Erde sterben muss: Anfänge öffentli-
cher Meinung zum Thema Umweltschutz, 
Merkur, no. 25 (1971), 470–85; Hans Re-
imer, Müllplanet Erde (Hamburg: Hoff-
mann und Campe, 1971); Hans Dollinger, 
Die totale Autogesellschaft (Munich: Carl 
Hanser Verlag, 1972); Herbert Gruhl, Ein 
Planet wird geplündert: Die Schreckensbi-
lanz unserer Politik (Frankfurt/Main: S. 
Fischer, 1975). A detailed summary of this 
literature can be found in Jost Hermand, 
Grüne Utopien in Deutschland: Zur Ge-
schichte des ökologischen Bewußtseins 
(Frankfurt/Main: Fischer Taschenbuchver-
lag, 1991). 

6  Cf. Brand, “Umweltbewegung”; Arne An-
dersen, Der Traum vom guten Leben: All-
tags- und Konsumgeschichte vom 
Wirtschaftswunder bis heute (Frankfurt: 
Campus, 1999); Hermand, Grüne Utopien 
in Deutschland.

7  A detailed study of this paradigmatic shift 

can be found in Klaus Eder, “The Rise of 

Fig. 46
Nikolaus Jungwirth and Gerhard 
Kromschröder, A shopping bag made 
of jute bearing the words “Jute Not 
Plastic“ and the sub-line “Handmade 
in Bangladesh”, 1994.

Grünen, 21.

12  Ibid., 23.

Counter-Culture Movements against Mo-
dernity: Nature as a New Field of Class 
Struggle,” Theory, Culture & Society 7, no. 
4 (1990): 21–47.

8  Cf. Susanne Küchler, “Materials and De-

sign,” in Design Anthropology: Object Cul-
ture in the 21st Century, ed. Alison J. 
Clarke (Vienna: Springer, 2011).

9  Manon Maren-Grisebach, Philosophie der 

Grünen (Munich: Günter Olzog, 1982), 
21–23.

10  The action was supported in the Federal 

Republic by the trade organization of 
Gepa (Gesellschaft zur Förderung der 
Partnerschaft mit der Dritten Welt / Soci-
ety for Promoting Partnership with the 
Third World). See the interview with Gert 
Nickoleit by Jörg Burger, “Plastik statt 
Jute,” Zeit online, no. 24 (June 8, 2006); 
http://www.zeit.de/2006/24/
Selbst-schuld-Jutetuete_xml.

11  Maren-Grisebach, Philosophie der 

190

“Jute Not Plastic”

Martina Fineder

191

Grisebach: “The appearance is the sole sign of the inside.”11 The origin and 
manufacture of clothing, utility objects, and furnishings ought to be able to 
manifest this attitude and be “more committed to the heart than to the 
purse.”12

A New Lifestyle Needs a New Style of Product

In 1973 the Des-In group was formed at Germany’s Offenbach University of 
Design. In contrast to many young people working and studying in this 
branch who rejected product design, the group members wanted to use 
products to take a stand against “the negative situation of our society and the 
diverse reasons for this.”13 Their aim was to pursue a “post-industrial,” decen-
tralized and self-determined, sensuous method of production, based among 
other things on the critique propagated by Robert Jungk of large-scale indus-
try and the conditions of ownership related to it. According to Jungk, a “hu-
mane and democratic society […] should create a new technology that corre-
sponds to its concepts.”14 The group therefore sought a product style capable 
of combining an ethical yet sensuous and hedonistic lifestyle with socially 
and ecologically acceptable methods of production. A new lifestyle needs a 
new “style of product,” Jochen Gros, founding member of the Des-In group, 
stated in the form magazine.15

With the motto “Small series make you free,” they propagated the rediscovery 
of handicraft; the combination of “head and hands” was seen as a key weap-
on in combating alienation from the social and natural environment.16 The de-
mand of “More sensuousness through ornament” manifests the group’s reac-
tion not only to Functionalism’s prohibition of ornament, which they 
provocatively reformulated into “Form Phallus Function,” but also their quest 
for a procedure to “make fundamental ways of thinking palpable to the sens-
es, to the eyes, and enable them to be grasped by brain and hand.”17 This 
search is also characterized by feelings of belonging to nature and the preoc-
cupation with appropriate symbols of nature, which could be corresponding-
ly mediated, visualized and (re-)imagined through nature and naturalness:

 

 “Nothing in the range of technical products reminds us today of the 
prime model of harmonious sensuousness in nature. On the other hand, 
symbols expressing the memory of nature have never been completely 
eradicated from our daily life. On the contrary, we seem to be clinging to 
them more than ever, the less nature—destroyed, poisoned and de-
spoiled—still corresponds to what we seek in it. We can see this in such 
things as the growing popularity of room plants, floral stickers, rustic de-
signs, Chinese imports, etc.”18

Fig. 47 
Des-In, lampshade crafted of recycled 
jute, ca. 1977.

The floral stickers are the so-called “Pril flowers” invading households on liq-
uid detergent bottles to spread gaiety on kitchen and bathroom tiles. Beate 
Rosebrock, founding member of the Des-In group, calls the stickers “the true 
plague of the times” and “pseudo-ornament.”19 Her description seems to tally 
with the fears of the influential designer and former director of the University 
of Ulm, Tomás Maldonado; in his essay “Umwelt und Revolte” (“Design, Nature, 
and Revolution”) of 1972, he fears that the new environmental awareness 
could become high fashion and thus might miss its purpose.20 Countering 
this, Des-In uses a language of forms and symbols that does more justice to 
the new appreciation of nature than pop flowers designed for the market.21 

13  Jochen Müller, “Des-In & Entwurfs-

beispiele für eine alternative Produktions-
form (Des-In & Design Examples for an Al-
ternative Form of Production),” 
(typewritten diploma thesis, Offenbach 
University of Design, Department of Prod-
uct Design, 1977), 4. Müller is co-founder 
of the Des-In Group, formed of a core of 
twelve male and female students sur-
rounding the young Professor Jochen Gros 
at the School of Design in Offenbach/Main. 
In the years between 1973 and 1978 
among the members were (in alphabetical 
order): Philine Bracht, Bernd Brokhausen, 
Ingrid Ute Ehlers, Klaus Gebauer, Jochen 
Gros, Michael Kurz, Eberhard Lacher,  
Irmtraud Hagmann, Lothar Müller, Beate 
Rosebrock, Dieter Rosenburger, Norbert 
Wagner, and Michael Walz.

14  Robert Jungk, Berliner Extradienst 3, no. 
40 (1969): 4; as quoted in Müller, “Des-In 
& Entwurfsbeispiele,” 3.

15  Jochen Gros, “Eine Design-Initiative: 

des:in,” FORM. Zeitschrift für Gestaltung, 
no. 79 (1977): 15.

16  See Jan Kotig, “Neues Gewerbe—Neues 
Leben: Zur Versöhnung von Handarbeit 
und Industrie,” Werk und Zeit, no. 3 (1978): 
37–39. This Werk und Zeit edition is enti-
tled Kopf und Hände (Head and Hands).
17  Müller, “Des-In & Entwurfsbeispiele,” 24.
18  Jochen Gros, “Mehr Sinnlichkeit im 

Produkt-Alltag: Funktionalismus und äs-
thetische Aspekte des Produktdesigns,” 
hfg forum 1: Zeitung der Hochschule für 
Gestaltung Offenbach am Main 1, no. 1 
(Winter 1976/77); n.p.

19  Beate Rosebrock, interview by Martina 

Fineder, Frankfurt/Main, 2011.

20 Maldonado was not alone with this anxi-

ety. The French Group (among them Jean 
Baudrillard) warned of the dangers of a 
“mythologizing of nature” as early as 1970 
at the international design conference in 
Aspen. In their statement “The Environ-
mental Witch-Hunt,” French intellectuals 
and artists saw an instrument in eco-hys-
teria that might actually drown out politi-
cal problems. 

21  See Müller, “Des-In & Entwurfsbeispiele,” 6. 

192

“Jute Not Plastic”

Martina Fineder

193

from the design scene back in the early 1970s. Among others, Tomás Maldo-
nado has outlined such scenarios in the publication Umwelt? Design wird in 
Frage gestellt (Environment? Design under Question) as early as 1970:
 

 “Out of the blue we now discover that the blue sky—at least above our 
big cities and industrial zones—is no longer blue but gloomy, coal-black 
and threatening; the sky, a reservoir of air, has now been transformed 
into a reservoir of poison. In other words, the sky, heaven, is no longer 
heavenly, and we are not really sure today whether we can go on living 
under such an inhospitable roof. A short time ago I saw the following 
sentence written on a poster showing the marching protest movement: 
“don’t breathe […].” Consequently the next slogan might very well be: 
‘Don’t drink anything.’ And the one after that ‘Don’t walk anywhere.’”24

Fig. 48
Des-In, series of lampshades crafted of a discarded offset printing plates, ca. 1977.

They developed their ornamental vocabulary mainly from the recycling of ev-
eryday objects. Using simple tools and devices, the young designers refash-
ioned printed metal packaging, discarded car tires, offset printing plates and 
tea chests from ocean transport into new utility objects and furniture. In a se-
ries of lampshades made by hand from discarded offset printing plates and 
printed metal food packaging they experimented with butterfly and moth 
forms and various blossom forms.22 

The printing plates previously used for printing travel brochures, art cata-
logues, and food packaging are likewise rich resources for pictures, patterns, 
and texts, as are the metal food containers. By using such materials the group 
propagated a kind of ornamental richness of poor materials.23 A lampshade 
from the series shows the picture of a dreamy little town nestling harmoni-
ously between riverbank and carefully cultivated landscape. 

Above the little town, as far as we can see without color, the sky is blue—no 
chimney stacks, no smoke, no smog, a hospitable sky, under which you can 
go fishing directly at the gates of the city. This image of bygone days con-
trasts the depressing scenarios such as were circulated by critical voices 

Fig. 49
Des-In, lampshade crafted of a discarded offset printing plate, ca. 1977.

22  On Des-In recycling products, see Martina 

Fineder, “Recycling-Design revisited: Mit 
der Des-In Gruppe auf der Suche nach 
einer sinnlichen produktkultur (1974–
1978),” in de Towards Postcolonial Fashion, 
ed. Elke Gaugele, Sabina Muriale, and 
Ruby Sircar (Weinheim: Beltz Verlag, 
2014). 

23  See, for instance, Müller, “Des-In & Ent-

wurfsbeispiele,” 29.

24  Tomás Maldonado, untitled contribution, 
in Design? Umwelt wird in Frage gestellt, 
ed. Der Themakreis, Internationales De-
sign Zentrum Berlin (Berlin: Internation-
ales Design Zentrum Berlin, 1970), 88.

194

“Jute Not Plastic”

Martina Fineder

195

The critical confrontation with the environmental situation in design is not an 
invention of the 1970s, but was already heralded in the design world in the 
late 1950s at the Werkbund Conference “Die große Landzerstörung” (The 
great land destruction). In 1959 the Werkbund president Hans Schwippert 
gave people food for thought by saying in his opening talk that although 
modern design had produced a great number of high-quality drinking glass-
es, unfortunately, actual enjoyment of the drink had been missed out on. This 
was not so surprising, he said, because in the meantime wine was deteriorat-
ing and water was scarcely drinkable.25 Wine—as seen on one of the Des-In 
lampshades—sparked off far-reaching environmental protests in the 
nineteen-seventies. 

tional borders.26 The anti-nuclear movement caused the topic of environmen-
tal protection to grow in public interest from the mid-1970s onwards.27 At the 
time Des-In produced a papier-mâché lampshade with the yellow-and-red 
logo of the anti-nuclear movement—the laughing sun.

Fig. 50
Des-In, lampshade crafted of a discarded offset printing plate, ca. 1977.

The resistance of winegrowers in Whyl on the Rhine against the construction 
of a nuclear power station in the Kaiserstuhl winegrowing area whipped up 
momentous anti-nuclear demonstrations with international impact. The fear 
of the destructive force of atomic energy united the farmers with political ac-
tivists from the most diverse camps and with anxious citizens throughout the 
Federal Republic. “Better active today than radioactive tomorrow,” was a slo-
gan of the Whyl winegrowers, who attained popularity well beyond the na-

Fig. 51
Des-In, papier-mâché lampshade with the laughing sun of the anti-nuclear movement, ca. 1976.

Another lampshade fashioned out of a honey jar shows busy bees flying be-
tween flower and hive. The hive, which forms the center of the lovingly de-
signed advertisement illustration, is surrounded by a radiant aura. On one half 
of the shade we can read the words “Genuine,” “Bees,” “Honey,” “Medicine,” 
“Whole,” “Nature.” The side half of the jar reveals that it is bees’ honey from 
Germany. 

25  Hans Schwippert,“Die Große Landzer-

störung,” Werk und Zeit 8, no. 12 (Decem-
ber 1959): 1–2; as quoted in Paul Betts, 
The Authority of Everyday Objects: A Cul-
tural History of West German Design 
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 
2004), 255. 

26  Fritjof Capra, Wendezeit: Bausteine für ein 
neues Weltbild (Munich: Knaur, 1988); ap-

pendix to the special edition. The physi-
cist, who lives in the USA, mentions that 
the slogan was popular even in the USA. 

27  A detailed description of the development 
of the anti-nuclear movement in Germany 
can be found in Roland Roth and Dieter 
Rucht, eds., Die sozialen Bewegungen in 
Deutschland seit 1945: Ein Handbuch 
(Frankfurt/Main: Campus, 2008).

196

“Jute Not Plastic”

Martina Fineder

197

Fig. 52+53 
Des-In, lampshades fashioned 
out of a honey jar, ca. 1977.

And there’s much more: German beekeepers vouch for the “genuineness,” to 
wit, the naturalness of the product. This gives the product an extra authenti-
cation. The combination of aureole and product description promises good 
health and harmony for body, mind and soul, which can be consumed 
through the product. In addition, we may mention at this point that a connec-
tion was already being made in the first half of the twentieth century between 
a healthy bee population and the preservation of the human living environ-
ment, among others, by the anthroposophist, designer and architect Rudolf 
Steiner. As the century ran its course, bee mortality became the harbinger of 
the end of mankind: no more bees = no more people, was the much-quoted 
simile, generally ascribed to Albert Einstein.28

Designing and Consuming Nature

The alternative movement’s feelings of being part of nature are strongly influ-
enced by its knowledge about these contexts. Thus, the visual and material 
culture is correspondingly symbolic and psychologically loaded. Trees, floral 
and faunal motifs are used to express the new values of alternative interest 
groups and their forums: The left-wing Munich newspaper Blatt (Leaf), for in-
stance, chooses a large, evidently not artificially trimmed tree for its logo. 
The editing team used this logo to express the newspaper’s culture of an 
open organization based on democracy.29 The Pflasterstrand (Concrete 
Beach), one of the most influential alternative magazines of the Federal Re-
public, alludes with its floral, art nouveau lettering to the history of the alter-
native movement. The feminist network Selbsthilfe e.V. (Self-Help) has the 
wild boar as logo. The alternative Nuremberg newspaper, the Plärrer (which 
means bowler), has a perky beaver advertising the “genuine hand-made” 
Roots shoes from Canada.

Designer Dorothee Becker (formerly Maurer-Becker) who in 1976 opened the 
legendary design boutique “Utensilo” in the chic Munich suburb of 
Schwabing, has chosen a cricket for her logo.

Dorothee Becker loves the beautiful, natural noise made by the insect and si-
multaneously marvels at its efficient locomotion. This combination of emotion 
and functionality is a manifestation of her fondness for practical and beautiful 
things.30 In elaborately arranged shop window decorations she manages to 
combine the value culture of Good Design with the new ideas of good con-
sumerism. In doing so, the range of products she has compiled remains faith-
ful to the principles of classical modern design (thus including Functionalism)—
longevity, material simplicity, modest elegance and so on. Nevertheless, she 
indulges in a certain sensuous frisson with decorative objects, even bibelots. 
This approach can indeed be compared to the Des-In work method. But it can 
also be seen in the context of “humanizing modernism” as cultivated by the 
US designer couple Charles and Ray Eames.31 Like the Eameses for the or-
chestration of their home in California, Becker frequently implements figures, 
materials, pictures, and other home accessories, which either derive from na-
ture or evoke associations of it. This aspiration has an affinity to the material 
culture of Asia, especially Japanese tea culture as the epitome of elegance, 

28  Full quote: “When bees at last disappear 
from the Earth, Man has only four more 
years to live. No more bees, no more polli-
nation, no more plants, no more animals, 
no more people.” 

29 See Blatt 1, no. 1 (July 1973): editorial 

statement.

30 Dorothee Becker, interview by Martina 

Fineder, Munich, 2010. 

31  Pat Kirkham, “Humanizing Modernism: 

The Crafts, ‘Functioning Decoration’ and 
the Eameses,” Journal of Design History 11, 
no. 1 (1998): 15–29. 

198

“Jute Not Plastic”

Martina Fineder

199

are woven skillfully into landscapes of longing and desire. Wallowing in nostal-
gia, fantasy trips to the ‘exotic’ Far East (and as introduced in the following, 
imaginings about the untouched wilds of Scandinavia), also all promise roman-
tic and extraordinary encounters and experiences of nature.32 These products 
and product scenarios offer “landscapes of longing” for the modern Western-
er harassed by feelings of alienation, but have been created through the very 
same feelings. For sociologist Jackie Stacey, who comprehensively examines 
the Easternization of nature, idealized ideas of nature promise to find else-
where what is meant as lost in the Western industrialized world.33

Such re-mediations, no matter how topical they are, are influential in shaping 
our imaginations of a thing’s origin and its relation to nature. As they mediate 
particular ideas of nature, they may also contribute to the authentication of 
products and materials. The Swedish furniture company IKEA seems very 
much aware of this. For instance, the German edition of the 1978–79 catalogue 
shows a simple set of wooden shelves standing in the midst of a forest.

A friendly, grunting elk sits in front of it. The shelves appear to have been 
made directly on site. The happy elk communicates to us that his living envi-
ronment is in no way endangered by the manufacture of the shelves; quite 
the contrary, the animal seems to take part in making use of it. According to 
Jan Kotig, here the human-nature relationship is embodied enduringly 
through such shelves: “Because the tree always remains inherent in a shelf, 
which is yet again part of the forest with its plants and animals, and of course 
the human beings who make use of it.”34

For the educated middle class the reasonably priced IKEA furniture has been 
regarded as the epitome of alternative consumer culture ever since the open-
ing of the first West German branch near Munich in 1974. The do-it-yourself 
furniture made of bright pinewood stands for an environmentally friendly pro-
duction method and a democratic business enterprise and consumer culture. 
Another edition of the 1978–79 catalogue promotes the concern with the 
words Unser Stammbaum ist die Kiefer (Our family tree is the pine). The 

32  Compare the work of Sarah Franklin, Celia 

Lury, and Jackie Stacey, Global Nature, 
Global Culture (London: Sage, 2000). 
Here as elsewhere, the examination of the 
Westerners’ longing for the “exotic na-
ture” of the Far East is shaped by Edward 
Said’s book of 1978, Orientalism: Western 
Concepts of the Orient (New York: 
Pantheon). 

33 Jackie Stacey, “The Global Within: Con-
suming Nature, Embodying Health,” in 
Global Nature, Global Culture, ed. Sarah 

Franklin, Celia Lury, and Jackie Stacey 
(London: Sage, 2000), 112. 

34 Jan Kotig, “Das neue Gewerbe” (The New 
Crafts), page three of a manuscript from 
the unpublished collection of documents 
accompanying the exhibition “Neues 
Gewerbe und Industrie” (New Crafts and 
Industries) at the International Design 
Centre Berlin, November 2–December 31, 
1977, (2nd edition), composed by Kay 
Klockenhoff.

Fig. 54–57
Dorothee Maurer, Details of a shop window in Dorothee Maurer’s shop “Utensilo”, about 1976.

simplicity, functionality and the respectful treatment of natural resources, 
and is blended with examples of European product culture. In window display 
views we constantly find postcards that convey impressions of the harmonious 
relationship between the human being and nature in the Far East. The post-
card in the display window shown here has a woman in traditional Japanese 
costume with a paper umbrella over her head, walking through a bamboo 
forest.

The curtailed picture detail does not suggest further embedding of the scene 
in time or space. The second postcard shows a woman with two small children 
at an open fireplace. We see an imposing mountainous massif in high-altitude 
Tibet spread out in the background. 

Here also, any further context is left open to the audience’s imagination. Those 
images perfectly serve as necessary counterparts to the modern world. In 
combination with other elements of the window displays, such as dried plants, 
stuffed animals, ginger roots, pine cones, tropical fruits, shells, stones and 
eggs, herbs and flower-based soaps, also traditional glass jewelry, the postcards 

200

“Jute Not Plastic”

Martina Fineder

201

younger generation utilized the pine wood furniture for their symbolic protest 
against the small-town, stuffy home-living style of the parent generation, as-
sociated with heavy oak furniture. Moreover, the Scandinavian pine acted as 
an excellent demarcation line for keeping out the historically negative conno-
tations of the German forest. The German forest, intimately connected with 
German cultural history and likewise a fundamental part of the romantic fairy-
tale and spiritual landscape, was loaded heavily with negative significance 
through the fascist Blut-und-Boden (blood and soil) ideology. The Scandina-
vian forest, in contrast, is a democratic forest for the young generation. It is 
therefore better suited to assimilating the new feelings of belonging to 
nature. 

The variety of products and product scenarios introduced here illustrate how 
furnishing and decorative objects, self-knitted jumpers and linen sandals, and 
also other articles of everyday use convey the new social and cultural value of 
nature, but likewise create new feelings of belonging to nature. Thus, the new 
yearning for nature is simultaneously the driving force for avoiding and com-
batting consumerism, and also the impetus for a new form of consumption 
and new design. These reciprocal processes generate a field charged be-
tween the polarities of consumerism and its critique, design and anti-design, 
alternative culture and mainstream. In fact, in daily life it was (and is) difficult 
to distinguish between environmentally friendly and environmentally harmful 
products. In this context we remember the formaldehyde scandal surround-
ing the Billy shelves or the uproar over the jute bags, which were proved to 
contain an excessive concentration of dangerous and toxic chemical resi-
dues. But, corresponding to the dialectical way of observing design and con-
sumerism introduced at the beginning of this essay as processes through 
which individuals and groups define their relationships to the social and natu-
ral environment, the range of things—from the jute bag, the Des-In lamp-
shades to the IKEA shelves—are the physical manifestations of the new alter-
native stance to production and consumption in the 1970s.35

Fig. 58
IKEA, cover of the German catalogue edition, 1978/79.

35  This essay is a development of the paper 
presented in 2011 in Barcelona at the con-
ference Design Activism and Social 
Change, “Jute, Not Plastic! Designing and 
Consuming Nature,” and part of my thesis 
project “The Promise of the Alternative: 
Environmentally Critical Design and Con-
sumption in 1970s West Germany.” 

202

“Jute Not Plastic”

Martina Fineder

203

Said, Edward. Orientalism: Western Concepts 
of the Orient. New York: Pantheon, 1978. 

Schütze, Christian. “Schon möglich, dass die 
Erde sterben muss: Anfänge öffentlicher Mei-
nung zum Thema Umweltschutz.” Merkur, no. 
25, 1971, 470–85. 

Stacey, Jackie. “The Global Within: Consuming 
Nature, Embodying Health.” In Global Nature, 
Global Culture. Edited by Sarah Franklin, and 
Celia Lury, and Jackie Stacey, 97–145. London: 
Sage, 2000. 

Schwippert, Hans. “Die Große Landzer-
störung.” Werk und Zeit, no. 12 (December 
1959): 1–2. 

Literature

Andersen, Arne. Der Traum vom guten Leben: 
Alltags- und Konsumgeschichte vom Wirt-
schaftswunder bis heute. Frankfurt/Main: 
Campus, 1999. 

Attfield, Judy. Wild Things: The Material Cul-
ture of Everyday Life. London: Berg, 2000.

Beltzig, Günter. “My Sixties.” Accessed July 
30, 2013. http://www.beltzig-playdesign.de. 

Bramwell, Anna. Ecology in the 20th Century. 
A History. New Haven: Yale University Press, 
1990.

Brand, Karl-Werner. “Die Umweltbewegung 
(inklusive Tierschutz).” In Die sozialen Bewe-
gungen in Deutschland seit 1945: Ein 
Handbuch. Edited by Roland Roth and Dieter 
Rucht, Frankfurt/Main: Campus, 2008: 
219–44.

Burger, Jörg. “Plastik statt Jute” (Interview 
with Gert Nikoleit). In Zeit online – Die ZEIT, 
no. 24, June 8, 2006. Accessed July 30, 2013. 
http://www.zeit.de/2006/24/Selbst-schuld-
Jute tuete_xml.

Capra, Fritjof. Wendezeit: Bausteine für ein 
neues Weltbild. Munich: Knaur, 1988.

Dollinger, Hans. Die totale Autogesellschaft. 
Munich: Carl Hanser Verlag, 1972.

Eder, Klaus. “The Rise of Counter-Culture 
Movements Against Modernity: Nature as a 
New Field of Class Struggle.” Theory, Culture 
& Society, vol. 7, no. 4 (1990): 21–47.

Franklin, Sarah, Celia Lury, and Jackie Stacey. 
Global Nature, Global Culture. London: SAGE, 
2000.

Gros, Jochen. “Eine Design-Initiative: des:in.” 
form. Zeitschrift für Gestaltung, no. 79 (1977): 
15–17.

Gros, Jochen, “Mehr Sinnlichkeit im Produkt-
Alltag: Funktionalismus und ästhetische  
Aspekte des Produktdesigns.” hfg forum 1: 
Zeitung der Hochschule für Gestaltung Offen-
bach am Main, vol. 1, nr. 1, Winter 1976/77 
(not paginated).

Gruhl, Herbert. Ein Planet wird geplündert: 
Die Schreckensbilanz unserer Politik. Frank-
furt/Main: S. Fischer, 1975.

Maren-Grisebach, Manon. Philosophie der 
Grünen, Munich: Günter Olzog Verlag, 1982.

Hermand, Jost. Grüne Utopien in Deutsch-
land: Zur Geschichte des ökologischen  
Bewußtseins. Frankfurt/Main: Fischer 
Taschenbuchverlag, 1991. 

Kirkham, Pat. “Humanizing Modernism: The 
Crafts, ‘Functioning Decoration’ and the 
Eameses.” Journal of Design History, vol. 11, 
no. 1 (1998): 15–29.  

Kotig, Jan. “Das neue Gewerbe.” (Page three 
of a hand copied manuscript from the collection 
of documents accompanying the exhibition 
“Neues Gewerbe und Industrie” [New Crafts 
and Industries] at the International Design 
Centre Berlin, November 2—December 31, 
1977, composed by Kay Klockenhoff.)

Küchler, Susanne. “Materials and Design.” In 
Design Anthropology: Object Culture in the 
21st Century. Edited by Alison J. Clarke, 130–
41. Vienna: Springer, 2011.

Maldonado, Tomás. Untitled contribution in 
Design? Umwelt wird in Frage gestellt. Edited 
by Der Themakreis, Internationales Design 
Zentrum Berlin, 1970: 88–89.

Miller, Daniel. Material Culture and Mass Con-
sumption. Oxford: Blackwell, 1989.

Miller, Daniel. “Materiality: An Introduction.” 
In Materiality. Edited by Daniel Miller. Durham: 
Duke University Press, 2005: 1–50.

Miller, Daniel. Consumption and its Conse-
quences. Cambridge: Polity Press, 2012. 

Müller, Jochen. “Des-In & Entwurfsbeispiele 
für eine alternative Produktionsform (Des-In 
& Design Examples for an Alternative Form of 
Production).” (Typewritten) diploma thesis at 
the Offenbach University of Design, Department 
of Product Design, 1977.

Reimer, Hans. Müllplanet Erde. Hamburg: 
Hoffmann und Campe, 1971.

On the  
Ethical Turn in  
Fashion  
Policies of 
Governance and 
the Fashioning 
of Social  
Critique 

Elke Gaugele

Elke Gaugele

205

“The Earth is in an environmental crisis,” announced Antwerp fashion design-
er Bruno Pieters at the opening of his fashion label, Honest By, in 2012. Dame 
Vivienne Westwood held up the phrase “Climate Revolution” on a banner for 
her 2013 spring collection at the London Fashion Week. Performing as a cli-
mate warrior on the stage at the Paralympics, she even challenged the audi-
ence to “Buy Nothing.” An “honest buy” at Honest By—the “world’s first trans-
parent company” by Bruno Pieters—on the other hand is a question of honor 
and honesty. His enterprise, based on the mission of transparency and trace-
ability, offers consumers to “do something good” through ethical spending. 

Fig. 59 
Vivienne Westwood, Climate Revo-
lution, 2012.

Fashion set up a new arena of aesthetic politics, where designers and labels 
seem to compete as activists demonstrating and struggling against climate 
change, the ecological crisis, overconsumption, and exploitation of labor. 
Therefore, a new paradigm of fashion has to be outlined. After many small 
fashion labels had begun as social entrepreneurs and introduced alternative 
production, material, and consumption strategies ranging from “up-cycling,” 
“cradle to cradle,” “social design,” “eco-textiles,” and “vegan” clothes up to 
“D.I.Y.,” the ethical turn moved into the core business of the contemporary 
fashion industry. As eco fashion activist Katherin Hamett states, for main-
stream brands, ethical fashion became “an economic imperative, not just a 
moral one.”1

Ethical claims on the global fashion industry have taken two routes. On the 
one hand, there is the rise of a commercial alternative production chain of 
green, ethical, and organic products that demands an ethical commitment of 

1  Nathaniel Dafydd Beard, “The Branding of 
Ethical Fashion and the Consumer: A Luxury 
Niche or Mass-Market Reality?,” Fashion 
Theory: The Journal of Dress, Body and 

Culture 12 (2008): 447−68; cit. Kathrin 
Hamnett from Jessica Brinton, “The Green 
Dream,” Sunday Times Style Magazine, 
May 11, 2008, 26–29.

206

On the Ethical Turn in Fashion 

Elke Gaugele

207

Fig. 60
Honest By, Bruno Pieters’s Spring 2012 
collection. 

its members. On the other hand, ethics have been incorporated into the tradi-
tional segments of the garment industry.2 In parallel with their fast fashion 
production, the apparel industry launched double strategies trying to change 
their image by also coining the new terms of “social fashion,” “ethical fashion,” 
“eco fashion,” “sweatshop-free fashion,” or “planet-friendly” fashion. Since the 
1980s, organizations and consumers increasingly directed pressure on garment 
retailers to trade and produce more ethically. NGOs such as Clean Clothes 
Campaign (CCC) or the International Labor Organization (ILO) had been con-
stantly fighting for more than a decade for solidarity and better working con-
ditions for the workers and the casualties in the sweatshops of the global 
fashion industry, until in 1999 the United Nations opened its Global Compact 
as a strategic policy initiative for businesses. Although the UN Global Compact’s 
aims for a global standardization of ethical codes has been heavily criticized 
for its blue-washing effects, the United Nations began to discover ethical 
fashion as its political tool for global governance. Fulfilling a political “jump 
[…] from blue helmets, to food aid to fashion,”3 the United Nations intensified 
programs on ethical fashion as an instrument of global governance and de-
velopment policy by teaming up with the luxury industry.

“Ethics is a fashionable word,” the French philosopher Jaques Rancière diag-
nosed in his essay “The Ethical Turn of Aesthetic and Politics.”4 Various fashion 
theorists focused on ethical fashion, characterizing it in the range from a par-
adox (Black 2008) up to a utopian promise (Clarke 2008); as celebrity activ-
ism (Winge 2008; Church Gibson 2012), an oxymoron (Clarke 2008), a green 
commodity fetish (Winge 2008), a precarious pedestal (Thomas 2008) and a 
necessity (Beard 2008).5 Drawing on Rancière’s distrust in the “overturning of 
aesthetics into ethics”6 as a point of departure, my essay traces the disciplin-
ary, riving, and hierarchizing functions of the “ethical regime” within the aes-
thetic and political dimensions of the contemporary ethical turn in fashion. By 
investigating examples from both labels Honest By and Vivienne Westwood, 

I will contextualize their political frameworks and juxtapose these in opposition 
to an analysis on contemporary politics of human rights cultures, as Gayatri 
Chakravorty Spivak has outlined.7 Consequently, I will follow the redeployment 
processes of social differences, global hierarchies, and economic capital that 
are reflected by the ethical turn in fashion, exploring how they are produced 
within the economic and political networks that reclaim ethical fashion as their 
eco-governmental tool. Therefore, three strands of the new ethical regime of 
fashion will be outlined: the Western commodification of trust and honesty 
after the global financial crisis in 2007−08 and its modes of othering; the UN’s 
shift from blue helmets to ethical fashion as a political tool for governance 
and development policy in Africa and its embracement of the luxury industry; 
and the integration of social critique as ethical capital and a new spirit of 
global capitalism. 

Crisis, Commodification, and the Fashioning of Trust and 
Honesty 

Since the mid-1980s Honest Fashion has been associated with Dries van Noten 
and his modest and untheatrical design as one of Antwerp Six. The term is 
said to have been brought into circulation by Suzy Menkes, fashion critic of 
the International Herald Tribune.8 Labeling his enterprise Honest By, Pieters, 
who graduated from the Royal Academy of Fine Arts in Antwerp in 1999, 
builds on this tradition. While protest movements against fast fashion and 
NGOs had been reclaiming social, ethical, and ecological guidelines for the 

2  Patrik Aspers, “Ethics in Global Garment 
Markets,” in The Moralization of Market, 
ed. Nico Stehr, Christoph Henning, and 
Bernd Weiler (London: Transaction Press, 
2006), 287–307.

3  Natalie Domeisen and Prema de Sousa, 
“Why Is the United Nations Working in 
Fashion?” International Trade Forum  
Magazine, no. 3 (2006); http://www.trade 
forum.org/Why-is-the-United-Nations 
-Working-in-Fashion.

4  Jacques Rancière, “The Ethical Turn of 

Aesthetics and Politics,” Critical Horizons 
7, no. 1 (2006): 1−20.

5  Sandy Black, Eco-chic: The Fashion Para-

dox (London: Black Dog, 2011); Hazel 
Clarke, “Slow+Fashion – an Oxymoron – or 
a Promise for the Future…?,” Fashion The-
ory: The Journal of Dress, Body and Cul-
ture 12 (2008): 427–46; Theresa M. Winge, 
“‘Green Is the New Black’: Celebrity Chic 
and the ‘Green’ Commodity Fetish,” Fash-
ion Theory: The Journal of Dress, Body and 

Culture 12 (2008): 511–24; Pamela Church 
Gibson, “Sustainable Fashion in the Age of 
Celebrity Culture,” in The Sustainable 
Fashion Handbook, ed. Sandy Black (Lon-
don: Thames & Hudson, 2012), 20–24; Sue 
Thomas, “From ‘Green Blur’ to Ecofashion: 
Fashioning an Eco-Lexicon,” Fashion The-
ory: The Journal of Dress, Body and Cul-
ture 12 (2008): 525–40; Beard, “Ethical 
Fashion and the Consumer.”

6  Rancière, “Aesthetics and Politics,” 16.
7  Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak, “Righting 
Wrongs,” The South Atlantic Quarterly 
103, no. 2/3 (Spring/Summer 2004): 523–
48; http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/saq/
summary/v103/103.2spivak.html.

8  Peter Bäldle, “Mode aus Belgien: Dries 

Van Noten - Der stille Revolutionär,” Süd-
deutsche Zeitung Online, February 25, 
2011; http://www.sueddeutsche.de/leben/
mode-aus-belgien-dries-van-noten-der-
stille-revolutionaer-1.1032934-3.

208

On the Ethical Turn in Fashion 

Elke Gaugele

209

fashion industry for over twenty years, Pieters himself explained in a com-
pletely relaxed mood that he had been enlightened to honesty in fashion dur-
ing his sabbatical year in South India. From that time on, the former art direc-
tor for Hugo Boss explicates, Mahatma Gandhi’s mantra: “Be the change you 
want to see in the world” became his driving force.9 Beforehand, economists 
had in fact prognosticated the growth of ethical markets as a driving force 
and had given advice on how to green and to even spiritualize commodities. 
Furthermore, the global financial crisis in 2007−08 has actually evoked a 
Western debate on Trust Design, for example by Premsela, the Dutch Institute 
for Design and Fashion, that started working on solutions for how design 
could answer the contemporary crisis.10 Trust Designers summarize: “When 
the global financial crisis hit in 2009, trust catapulted from a personal 

thought during a handshake to a defining ingredient of our daily lives and 
business.”11 Their approaches, such as “Trust is the New Currency,” corre-
spond in a broader way to that of Honest By using the materiality of clothes 
as a symbol to create presence for a sensorium of trust. Honest By uses fash-
ion as a fabric to enforce a presence of socially, ethically, and ecologically 
controlled relations.12 As part of a new commodification originating from cri-
sis, fashion becomes the carrier of emotions like trust or of virtues like hones-
ty. In response to that, honesty has become highly relevant in Western con-
sumer decisions, just as social responsibility and environmental 
consciousness.

For his first honest collection for women and men, Pieters created a minimal-
istic line consisting of fifty-eight clear, purist pieces in black, white, gray, and 
beige. Upright pleated trousers, slim shirts and tees, frank bomber jackets 

Fig. 62
Honest By, Lookbook I, Autumn/Winter 2012 
collection. 

Fig. 61
Honest By. Lookbook I. Autumn/Winter 2012 collection. 

9  Tamsin Blanchard, “Bruno Pieters’s Honest 

By: The Only Way Is Ethics,” Telegraph, 
March 9, 2013; http://fashion.telegraph.
co.uk/columns/tamsin-blanchard/
TMG9918892/Bruno-Pieterss-Honest-By-
The-only-way-is-ethics.html.

10  Scott Burnham and the Netherlands Insti-
tute for Design, Premsela, “Trust Design: 
The Relationship between Design and 
Trust,” Trust Design; http://trustdesign.org.

11  Ibid.
12  Hans-Georg Soeffner, Auslegung des All-
tags: Der Alltag der Auslegung; Zur wis-
senssoziologischen Konzeption einer sozi-
alwissenschaftlichen Hermeneutik 
(Frankfurt/Main: Suhrkamp, 1989), 162.
13  Bruno Pieters, “Lookbook I,” Honest By, 

January 2012; http://www.honestby.com/
en/page/92/bruno-pieters.html

14  Winge, “Green Is the New Black,” 512.

210

On the Ethical Turn in Fashion 

Elke Gaugele

211

As a web platform, Honest By invites other designers to present their “ethical,” 
“vegan,” or “green” looks, so that, besides from Bruno Pieters’s designs, the 
whole palette of fashion and accessories is offered: garments by Calla, Muriée, 
and Nicolas Andreas Taralis, jewelry from Heaven Tanudiredja and vegan 
shoes by Maison des Talons. All products are showcased with an undertone of 
revelation: 100 percent transparency about “material information,” “manufac-
turing details,” “price calculation,” and even about the “carbon footprint”—
fashion’s CO2 emission. We not only get to know that a sweater produces an 
output of 2.31 kg of CO2, corresponding to 14.44 car kilometers or burning a 
light bulb for 88.85 hours, but we also are taught that a tree would need 
about 259 days to neutralize the emissions. The label presents itself as sus-
tainable by offering this information about every garment right up to the 
smallest button and the thinnest thread. In addition, it also names the manu-
facturers of its threads and buttons.18

Beside such information, the web page offers filters to search the collections 
by the following categories: organic, vegan, recycled, skin-friendly, and 
European. 

Fig. 64
Bruno Pieters, Honest By, Filter By, 2012. 

Honest By classifies cloth in a specific manner that draws analogies between 
the materiality of ethical fashion and organic or even vegan food, grown from 
ecological plants by regional farming. Additionally, the self seems to be capable 
of swallowing up and incorporating feelings of trust, safety, and placing. Piet-
ers even emphasizes this in press interviews: “Like organic food, the quality is 
actually better, the organic cotton is better.”19 “We believe in animal welfare,” 
is another dogma of Honest By. The label mostly denies animal fiber by dis-

15  Burnham, “Trust Design.” 
16  Bruno Pieters, “A Man of Mystery: An In-

terview with Nicolas Andreas Taralis,” 
Honest By News, July 15, 2012; http://
www.honestby.com/en/
news/64/a-man-of-mystery.html.

17  Thomas, “Fashioning an Eco-Lexicon,” 533.

18  Honest By, “Carbon Footprint and Manu-
facturing Details,” http://www.honestby.
com/en/product/66/jersey/flecked-grey-
unisex-cotton-jersey-puzzle-crew-neck-
sweater.html. 

19  Blanchard, “Bruno Pieters’s Honest By.”

Fig. 63
Fidus and Gusto Gräser, activists of the German 
Reform Movement, ca. 1900.

and sweaters, prissy wrap dresses; virtuous jersey pants and pullovers with 
honorable epaulettes became available as limited editions.13 Thus the fashion 
collection gives expression to the whole palette of conservative middle-class 
virtues. Asymmetry is to be found only in the women’s fashion, under the hon-
est linen tops and wrap skirts. The collection makes references to the black 
and white contrasts of modernity. But at the same time, natural colored piec-
es do also refer to the material history of anti-fashion and the styles of the re-
form dress area from around 1900. Other styles resemble the stereotypical 
body images associated with hippie subculture and its sociopolitical values of 
animal and human rights and environmental issues.14

The firm therefore designs dogmas starting with “we believe in” or “we re-
spect.” Correspondingly, the debate on Trust Design regards ecology and 
sustainability as promises based on religious belief: “Faith is trust. Faith is 
connection to a promise. Trust is a promise. Sustainability is a promise. Green 
design is a promise. The object may not hold the promise in itself, but it is a 
connection to a promise.”15 Asking Nicolas Taralis “How green are you in your 
daily life?” Bruno Pieters receives the following answer: “To quote a famous 
friend: it ain’t easy bein’ green.”16 Sue Thomas confirms in her book From 
“Green Blur” to Ecofashion that ethical fashion has a quasi-religious implica-
tion “in which ethical referred to philosophically guided actions and behav-
iors as determined by their impact on others.”17

212

On the Ethical Turn in Fashion 

Elke Gaugele

213

tributing vegan shoes and by sourcing most of the woolen textiles either from 
recycling or from regional organic animal farming. In reference to organic 
food trends and eco lifestyles this might even evoke new fashion out-com-
ings: e.g., as a fashion vegetarian who never wears anything animal, such as 
leather, fur, or horns. It might also create a consumer behavior as a fashion 
flexitarian, who asks only now and then for wool or silk—and even then it 
should be consumed in the most modest way. In an exemplary manner, Pieters 
shows how this should come from recycled materials or from certified region-
al organic animal farming. The design theorist Hazel Clarke had also pointed 
out parallels between the slow food movement and sustainable solutions for 
fashion. In this context, she described three lines: “the valuing of local re-
sources and distributed economies; transparent production systems with less 
intermediation between producer and consumer; and sustainable and sensorial 
products that have a longer usable life and are more highly valued than typical 
‘consumables.’”20 

Apparel is regarded, right after food, as the key market of green economics 
and its sales increased tenfold since 2000. In 2012 the Ethical Consumer Mar-
kets Report refers that sales in ethical clothing have risen in the UK from £5 
million in 2000 up to £150 million in 2012.21 In the interest of ethical consum-
erism, market researchers also recommend the neo-regionalization of prod-
ucts because this should foster the meaning and sensuality of commodities. 

Green Styles of Othering: Bruno Pieters and Vivienne 
Westwood

Honest By introduces the category “European” as a material classification of 
its collection. From a culture-historical perspective, the interconnection of 
fashion and European draws on the spatial policies of Western costume history 
as well as on the epistemologies of fashion theories of the late Enlighten-
ment. Here, fashion had been classified as a Western phenomenon of enlight-
ened and advanced societies. In this epistemic tradition of modernity fashion 
has been defined as an expression of culture, civilization, and communization 
and in a colonial meaning as a phenomenon of “advanced nations,” respec-
tively a genuine European appearance.22

Ensuing the white body images which are coded by the website’s filter as “Eu-
ropean” in 2012, Honest By accentuates the visual representation of the Euro-
pean by white body and costume images. In resemblance to colonial strategies 
of othering, these are contra-positioned by a black model visualizing the column 
“the world responds.”23 The model’s green-painted black face contrasts the 
white bodies categorized as “European” through fashion. Made up with green 
color, the black face seems to represent a model of the noble savage express-

Fig. 65 and 66
Honest By, othering: Green-faced 
black model, 2012.

20 Clarke, “Slow+Fashion—an Oxymoron,” 429.
21  The Co-operative, Ethical Consumer Markets 
Report 2012, http://www.ethicalconsumer.
org/linkclick.aspx?fileticket=96yXzu8nyrc
%3D&tabid=1557.

22  Christian Garve, Über die Moden: Versuche 

über verschiedene Gegenstände aus der 
Moral, der Literatur und dem gesellschaftli-

chen Leben (Breslau: Wilhelm Gottlieb Korn, 
1792; Frankfurt/Main: Insel, 1987), 23. Cita-
tions refer to the Frankfurt/Main edition.

23  Honest By, “The World Responds,” Honest 

By News, January 30, 2012, http://www.
honestby.com/en/news/18/the-world-re-
sponds.html.

214

On the Ethical Turn in Fashion 

Elke Gaugele

215

ing Western ecological consciousness. This pattern had been repeated in au-
tumn 2013 when Honesty By introduced the collection of South African fashion 
designer Pholoso Selebogo, naming her a “native” and a “true fashion 
princess.”24 

Similar green-facing strategies could also be observed at Vivienne Westwood’s 
Show, “Climate Revolution” at London Fashion Week in September 2012. Also, 
here the green make-up on the black skin of the models causes associations of 
a green colonization that makes and marks black bodies green. However, by  
presenting various faces made up in different colors from blue to pink, Westwood 
breaks this style of “black skin—green mask” and deconstructs in opposite to 
Pieters’s ethnification and racialization. Nonetheless Westwood also reiterates 
figures of green colonization on the level of her vestimental codes as well as 
on her active resistance blog. Referring to former NASA-consultant James 
Lovelock’s Gaia theory, Westwood terms the “the Human Race” an “endangered 
species” and offers enlightenment, also for the self-help market, on how to 
“Get A Life.”25

From a closer perspective, her Climate Revolution Shirt reveals the sketch of a 
map outlining a global order, where the northern European and Northern 
American space is marked as green. Here the climate of the green Northern 
space seems to be threatened by global warming, represented by a much 
bigger South which is coded as red hot, explosive, and therewith as politically 
charged. This also refers to James Lovelock, whose green world order is based 
on environmentalist activism in favor of nuclear energy and with it on nucleonic 
metaphors: “Gaia and her life-forms have evolved together in a self-regulating 

Fig. 67
Vivienne Westwood, Climate Revolution T-shirt, 2012.

system, and together they create the atmosphere which keeps her cool. If this 
harmony is broken then Gaia can no longer sustain or tolerate those same life-
forms; she, herself will find a new equilibrium by moving to a hot-state.”26

Westwood’s T-shirt thus highlights the centrality of the Western world by ex-
pressly underlining the graphic design of a green Northern Europe and America 
by the term “peace” and the word “yes” that is even enhanced by a checkmark. 
These landmarks of her politics of style transport a western mission to green 
up and thereby pacify the southern hemisphere. This supremacy could be set 
also in the political context both of Agenda 21 and the United Nations fashion 
programs. Their Marrakesh-Process had started in 2003 with seven task forces 
for sustainable consumption and production trying to implement eco-labeling 
and sustainable lifestyles and education in Africa.27

Fig. 68
Honest By, website, 2012. 

24  Bruno Pieters, “An African Princess of 

Style,” Honest By News, September 2013, 
http://www.honestby.com/en/news/153/
an-african-princess-of-style.html.

25  Vivienne Westwood, “The Human Race: Our 

Survival,” 7 Wonders. Get a Life: Vivienne 
Westwood (blog), January 20, 2012, http://
www.activeresistance.co.uk/ar/?p=1354.

26 James Lovelock, “Gaia Theory,” 7 Wonders. 

Get a Life: Vivienne Westwood (blog),  
January 20, 2012, http://www.activeresis-
tance.co.uk/ar/?p=1354.

27  United Nations, “The Marrakech Process: 

Issues – Sustainable Lifestyles & Educa-
tion for Sustainable Consumption,” http://
esa.un.org/marrakechprocess/pdf/Issues_
Sus_Lifestyles.pdf

216

On the Ethical Turn in Fashion 

Elke Gaugele

217

Bruno Pieters and Vivienne Westwood are both players within the new supra-
national political and economic fashion networks that support ethical fashion 
and pursue the development of luxury markets. While Vivienne Westwood be-
came an actor for the United Nations Ethical Fashion Initiative, Pieters also 
shares governmental networks himself. Shortly after the opening of his label, 
his website announced that he will participate at the Copenhagen Fashion 
Summit in May 2012, where more than a thousand key stakeholders from the 
fashion industry, CSR experts, and EU politicians gathered, and also the new 
ethical fashion code had been introduced by the UN. 

From Blue Helmets to Fashion—Policies of Governance

Hosted by the International Trade Center (ITC)—a Joint Body Initiative of the 
United Nations and the World Trade Organization located in Geneva—the UN 
Ethical Fashion Initiative had been established in 2006. A leading article from 
2006 entitled “Why is the United Nations Working in Fashion?” outlines the 
UN’s move from Blue Helmet interventions and humanitarian assistance to 
fashion as a political tool for governance and development aid. Following 
Rancière’s notions of the ethical turn of aesthetics and politics from 2006, he 
describes the emergence of a new international landscape, where ethics has 
established its reign chancing from its initial form of the humanitarian into 
the form of “inﬁnite justice against the axis of evil” that should legitimize the 
War on Terror after 2001.28 One could also speak of a third form of these ethical 

Fig. 69
Trading bases of the Ethical Fashion Initiative, 2014.

regimes: trying to develop governance by an Ethical Fashion Initiative. The 
contemporary ethical discourse, Rancière summarizes: “is only the point of 
honor given to the new forms of domination.”29 That human rights culture 
runs on an unremitting Northern-ideological pressure, even when it is from 
the South, Gayatri Chakravorty Spivaks points out in Righting Wrongs.30 Con-
temporary ethical discourses based on the idea of human rights could act as 
forces of hierarchization as they “may carry within itself the agenda of a kind 
of Social Darwinism—the fittest must shoulder the burden of righting the 
wrongs of the unfit—and the possibility of an alibi.”31 According to Spivak, 
ethical practices create hierarchical orders, where the subjects and dispensers 
of the work of righting wrongs “shared above a class line that to some extent 
and unevenly cuts across race and the North-South divide.”32 

The United Nations started to set up its ethical fashion program for countries 
that have suffered from civil conﬂicts such as Ivory Coast, Sri Lanka, Ethiopia, 
and Mozambique. Aiming to bride “the work of development and the fashion 
system” the initiative is mainly focused on bringing off a new niche market for 
luxury fashion: “We connect the poorest of the poor to the markets of the 
world via fashion.”33

Since then the new ethical regime of fashion has been built up to an economy 
in Africa involving more than 7,000 artisans and establishing trading bases in 
Haiti, Kenya/Nairobi and Ghana/Accra. They are mainly producing for Western 
luxury labels including Venturini Fendi, Sass & Bide, Stella McCartney or  
Hollywood’s Jeweler Chan Luu’s and three additional major brands: United  
Arrows, Macy’s (USA), Manor (CH), and Myer (AU). In 2010 even a second UN 
fashion initiative titled Fashion4Development (F4D) started under the patron-
age of Bengal supermodel Bibi Russell. On the one side, F4D gives start-up 
assistance for African designers. On the other side, it educates unemployed 
women in sewing and tailoring for the garment production on orders from 
fashion outlets.34 As a political tool to push the UN’s F4D developmental targets, 
a marketing website was launched in June 2012 for African designers: “a global 
platform to advance the millennium development goals.”35 Niche markets and 
especially crafts, named as “the skills of the artisans”36 are rated high within 

28  Rancière, “Aesthetics and Politics,” 7.
29  Ibid., 18.
30 Spivak, “Righting Wrongs,” 527.
31  Ibid., 524.1 
32 Ibid.
33 Domeisen and de Susa, “Why Is the United 

Nations Working in Fashion?”

34 United Nations, Department of Public In-

formation, News and Media Division, 
“Press Conference on ‘Fashion 4 Develop-

ment, A Global Platform to Advance the 
Millennium Development Goals,’” New 
York, June 28, 2012, http://www.un.org/
News/briefings/docs/2012/120628_Fashion.
doc.htm.

35  Fashion4Development, Store Website, 

http://store.fashion-4-development.com.

36 International Trade Center, “Ethical Fashion 

Initiative,” http://www.intracen.org/ex-
porters/ethical-fashion/the-initiative.

218

On the Ethical Turn in Fashion 

Elke Gaugele

219

the UN initiatives as strategies for developing countries that are not set up to 
compete with high-volume, low-cost manufacturing states. 

Also Vivienne Westwood used the economic structures of the UN Ethical 
Fashion Initiative when she produced her Ethical Fashion Africa Collection in 
Kenya.37 Conversely, Westwood’s collection also worked as a flagship cam-
paign for the Ethical Fashion Initiative using the same political watchwords 
“We are not a charity” or even calling upon women’s emancipation, with a 
nod to the “white woman’s burden of the fittest”:38 “Our overarching goal is to 
empower women.”39 Simone Cipriani, the leader of the UN-Fashion initiative 
keeps the notion of this ethical added-value in mind, when he speaks about a 
mutual benefit for luxury designers: “We connect the most marginalized people 
to the top of fashion’s value chain for mutual benefit.”40 As her part of this 
swap Westwood receives the status of a do-gooder. “It’s quite incredible to 
think that we might be able to save the world through fashion,” Westwood 
spread in press interviews.41

The same sentiments are echoed by artist Jürgen Teller who had photographed 
the Ethical Fashion Africa Collection in Kenya: “We had been part of some-
thing good, not such fashion-idiots.”42 Following Spivak’s diagnosis at that point, 
one could see connections between world governance and a self-styled inter-
national society.43 ITC’s executive director Patricia Francis even enhances 
political interconnection between ethical fashion and governance on her level: 
“The glossy world of fashion is far removed from blue helmets, food aid, or 
peace treaties—but it is also part of the United Nations’ work to ensure the 
world’s people have better, safer lives.”44 Spivak, however, gives her voice to 
the concerns about global social movements: 
 

 “The leaders from the domestic ‘below’—for the subaltern an ‘above’—
not realizing the historically established discontinuity between them-
selves and the subaltern, counsel self-help with great supervisory benev-
olence. This is important to remember because the subalterns’ obvious 
inability to do so without sustained supervision is seen as proof of the 
need for continued intervention.”45

With its slogan “This is not charity, this is work” the UN initiative aims for both: 
pacification strategies and a working business where—using Spivak’s term, 
“subaltern”—artisans and textile workers produce an ethical capital as an add-
ed value for Western consumers as well as for the global fashion industry. It is 
remarkable that “Righting Wrongs” uses textile metaphors to define the sub-
altern at the same time also emphasizing their removal from the “dominant 
loom” at a historical moment: “[…] see the same knit textile as a torn cultural 
fabric in terms of its removal from the dominant loom in a historical moment. 
That is what it means to be a subaltern.”46 The “subordinate subaltern,” Spivak 
writes, is as diversiﬁed as the “recipients of Human Rights activity.”47

jetzt ist es 6,9x4,5 
cm groß

Fig. 70
Jürgen Teller, Vivienne Westwood, Ethical Fashion Africa 
Collection, 2011.

 

 “I use the word subordinate here because they are the recipients of human 
rights bounty, which I see as ‘‘the burden of the ﬁttest,’’ and which […] has 
the ambivalent structure of enabling violation that anyone of goodwill as-
sociates with the white man’s burden.”48

Ethical Fashion with its value added chain of “ethical capital” as a new sort of 
capital produces new fields of producing social and global hierarchies. Under 
the signs of a so-called mutual benefit a new “fashion’s value chain”49 
emerged fabricating a class of ethically better people and morally superior 

37  Vivienne Westwood, “This Is Not Charity, 
This Is Work,” Vivienne Westwood Ethical 
Fashion Initiative Collection, January 28, 
2011, http://www.viviennewestwood.co.
uk/w/news/
this-is-not-charity-this-is-work.
38 Spivak, “Righting Wrongs,” 524.
39 International Trade Center and Ethical 
Fashion Initiative, “We Use Fashion as a 
Vehicle out of Poverty, at the Same Time 
Fulfilling Fashion’s Desire to Be More Fair,” 
http://www.intracen.org/exporters/
ethical-fashion/.

40 Suzy Menkes, “A Matchmaker Helps Arti-
sans Find Luxury Jobs,” New York Times, 
November 14, 2012, http://www.nytimes.
com/2012/11/15/fashion/a-matchmaker- 
helps-artisans-find-luxury-jobs.html?_r=0.
41  Olivia Bergin, “Vivienne Westwood’s Mis-
sion to Save the World, One Handbag at a 

Time: The British Designer’s New Range of 
Handbags Will Benefit the People of Kenya 
Who Handmake Them,” Telegraph, August 
9, 2011, http://fashion.telegraph.co.uk/
news-features/TMG8691362/Vivienne-
Westwoods-mission-to-save-the-world-
one-handbag-at-a-time.html.

42  Elisabeth Raether, “Es sieht gut aus in Af-

rika,” ZEITmagazin, no. 41, October 6, 
2011, http://www.zeit.de/2011/41/
KollektionWestwood.

43 Spivak, “Righting Wrongs,” 550.
44 Domeisen and de Susa, “Why Is the United 

Nations Working in Fashion?”

45 Spivak, “Righting Wrongs,” 535.
46 Ibid., 544.
47  Ibid., 546.
48 Ibid., 544.
49 Menkes, “Matchmaker Helps Artisans.”

220

On the Ethical Turn in Fashion 

Elke Gaugele

221

consumers. Correspondingly a definition of luxury highlighting the accumula-
tion of ethical capital had been distributed by the networks of the Ethical 
Fashion Initiative and its partners of the global luxury industry: today’s luxury 
should be socially responsible and ethical; true luxury should be sustainable 
also under economic viewpoints. This definition had been also disseminated 
at the International Herald Tribune 2012 Luxury conference entitled “Empow-
ering African Artisans” in which actors of the Ethical Fashion Initiative such as 
Cipriani, Fendi, and Westwood had been invited as speakers under the pa-
tronage of fashion critic Suzy Menkes. At the same time the conference con-
tributors also discussed Africa’s potential as an ultimate consumer of luxury 
goods.50

Global capitalism is defined as profit making in global markets.51 In an effort 
to accumulate ethical capital, contemporary global luxury fashion brands de-
velop communication strategies not only for transparency and traceability, 
but also presenting themselves as do-gooders giving development aid and 
charity. Also, Honest By donates twenty percent of its profit to humanitarian 
aid projects. From a historical perspective, these practices of ethical fashion 
stand both in the colonial tradition of White Charity and in a history of indus-
trialization in which textile labor had been a social instrument of gender and 
class distinction. Currently these practices of a hierarchical structuring are 
redefined and adapted by the neoliberal global economy under the signs of 
ecology, social justice, and ethical consumption. At the same time, this is his-
torically connected to class-specific gestures of doing good and welfare 
practices of early stages of modern, western-liberalist capitalism in which 
women in need had been taught and employed for textile workshops and 
housework. Thus the UN Ethical Fashion Initiative calls upon “female empower-
ment” and emphasizes that their employees live in “slums” and “rural areas.”52 
The simple economic act of remunerating people acceptably for their labor is 
transformed into a performative ethical act of class hierarchy. Therefore Sim-
one Cipriani, Head of the United Fashion Initiative, claims to create a new 
business model: “a system to organize employment and therefore give dignity 
to people. Another kind of fashion is possible, bringing social and environ-
mental sensibility.”53 Global capitalism is still in an early stage, states sociolo-
gist Patrik Aspers, “and in the same way as capitalism caused social commod-
ities in the West during its early phases, global capitalism does in the 
developing world.”54 In parallel the idea of a Third World itself is part of a neo-
colonial process as neocolonialism was basically defined by economics rather 
than by territory or culture.55

 
 
 

The New Spirit of Global Capitalism and the Fashioning of 
Social Critique

In their essay “Le couturier et sa griffe” Pierre Bourdieu and Yvette Delsaut 
(1975) highlight that reorganizations in the field of fashion can be seen as an 
equivalent of restructurings in the field of power.56 The reorganization of the 
hegemonies of labor division is accompanied by a social transformation, 
where altered groups shape their access to the profit and prestige of the 
bourgeoisie through novel modalities. As debated above ethical fashion as 
well as ethical consumption with its modes of producing ethical capital can 
be seen as part of a new spirit of global capitalism characterized by ethical, 
political, and moral values, which at the same time creates new forms of su-
premacy. Luc Boltanksi and Ève Chiapello had introduced the concept of The 
New Spirit of Capitalism as the respective ideology that justifies engagement 
in capitalism.57 They argue in continuation of Max Weber, who defined ethos 
as the center of the “spirit of capitalism” and as a set of ethical motivations, 
which although their purpose might at first sight be foreign to capitalist logic, 
inspire entrepreneurs to accumulate capital.58 Weber stresses that rational 
modern capitalism just exists though the ethical restriction of the legitimate 
forms of monetary acquisition.59 Concepts of Honest Fashion can be seen as 
part of such a “new spirit” anchored in: a social and artistic critique on the 
obscurity of financial capitalism after its 2007−08 crisis and in reference to 
class-specific values of earlier capitalist stages of nineteenth-century 
liberalism. 

In 1904 Georg Simmel had already formatted an analogy of fashion and honor 
for the modern age by underscoring the class-formative function of both: 
“Fashion [...] is a product of class distinction and operates like a number of 

50 International Herald Tribune, “The Prom-
ise of Africa. The Power of the Mediterra-
nean,” Luxury Conference Rome, Novem-
ber 15–16, 2012, http://www.
ihtconferences.com/luxury-2012/press-
coverage.aspx.

51  Patrik Aspers, “A Note on Global Capital-

ism,” in Global Capitalism: The Road 
Ahead, ed. Bharti Thakar. (Hyderabad: Ic-
fai University Press, 2008), 13.

52  International Trade Center and Ethical 

Fashion Initiative 2013.

53  Menkes, “Matchmaker Helps Artisans.”
54 Aspers, “Note on Global Capitalism,” 13.
55  Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak, “Neocolonial-

ism and the Secret Agent of Knowledge: 
An interview with Robert J.C. Young,” in 
Neocolonialism. Oxford Literary Review 13 

couturier et sa griffe: Contribution à une 
théorie de la magie,” Actes de la recher-
che en sciences sociales, no.1 (January 
1975): 736. 

57  Luc Boltanksi and Ève Chiapello, The New 

Spirit of Capitalism (London: Verso, 
2005), 9.

58  Ibid., 8.
59 Gabriele Wagner and Philipp Hessinger, 

(1991): 220–51, online at hhtp://www.
roberttjcyoung.com (2007), 2. 

56 Pierre Bourdieu and Ivette Delsaut, “Le 

“Max Webers Protestantismus: These und 
der neue Geist des Kapitalismus,” in Ein 
neuer Geist des Kapitalismus? Paradoxien 
und Ambivalenzen der Netzwerkökonomie, 
ed. Gabriele Wagner and Philipp Hessinger 
(Wiesbaden: Springer VS, 2008), 9−40.

222

On the Ethical Turn in Fashion 

Elke Gaugele

223

other forms, honor especially, the double function of which consists in revolv-
ing within a given circle.”60 Relating to Simmel, honor is originally a “class 
standard” (Standesehre) and with that a successful stabilizer of corporate for-
mations of modernity that aims for cohesion against other circles or states.61 
Also the transference of social duty in individual welfare is according to Simmel 
a criterion that constitutes honor, and makes it an extremely successful stabi-
lizer of estate-based societies controlling and standardizing its corporate 
formations. Honor supports respect and does stabilize the regularity and fos-
tering within the life processes of a specific class, Simmel argues: 
 

 “… honor owes his character, and above all its moral rights, or the fact 
that the individual in his personal honor at the same time represents and 
maintains that of his social circle and his class. These moral rights, how-
ever, are frequently considered unjust by those without the pale. Thus 
fashion on the one hand signifies union with those in the same class, the 
uniformity of a circle characterized by it, and uno actu, the exclusion of 
all other groups.”62

Generating the prestige and the profit of its ethical capital, Honest Fashion 
interweaves both class distinctive and cohesive strategies of honor and fashion 
and thereby initiates a symbolic transubstantiation.63 Ethical consumers paying 
for sustainable materials, fair wages and charity, show off a more or less luxu-
rious distance from economic needs. Hence the ostentation of a negative 
economical conditionality redefines economic power structures and its related 
class-specific habitus.64 Even ethics consultants and fashion academics like 
Sue Thomas point out the riving social structures underlying ethical fashion 
as a term with its supposition of imposed correctness: “A polarizing disjuncture 
exists between ethical and unethical clothing, and therefore it can be a pre-
carious pedestal when clothing is described as ethical.”65 Following Rancière’s 
concept of the “ethical regime” the pedagogical role of the arts lies in the 
assimilation of people to the modes of existence. Under the perspective of 
the “ethical regime” art operates as a normative entity that introduces individuals 
into an authoritarian structure of class hierarchies.66 As stylization of life, Ethical 
Fashion had become part of the habitus of socially conscious, upwardly-mobile 
people performing new Lifestyles of Health and Sustainability: as an ethos of 
involvement, responsibility, and social justice.67

The spirit of capitalism itself is characterized by historically alterable patterns of 
values, which mainly result from a dynamic relationship between capitalism 
and critique.68 Boltanski and Chiapello point out two forms of critique leading 
historically back to the nineteenth century: “the artistic critique, which elaborates 
demands for liberation and authenticity, and the social critique, which denounces 
poverty and exploitation.”69 Critique has got the role of a motor in changes of 
the spirit of capitalism.70 While themes from the artistic critique were integrat-
ed into the discourse of capitalism and therefore have been partially satisfied 

during the 1990s, we see a revival of social critique in the twenty-first century.71 
Ethical Fashion definitely signifies a shift towards a new spirit of capitalism, 
where global capitalism aims to integrate social critique into its system. As 
Boltanski and Chiapello outlined, capitalism cannot be generated exclusively 
out of its own resources and needs an orientation toward the common good, 
as it requests reasons for committed engagement.72 Ethical fashion is a product 
of a dialectics operation, where global capitalism needs and uses the opponents 
of globalization to generate its ethos: “As a result, it needs its enemies, people 
whom it outrages and who are opposed to it, to find the moral supports it 
lacks and to incorporate mechanisms of justice whose relevance it would oth-
erwise have no reason to acknowledge.”73 

But during the last decades there has also been built up analogousness between 
the mobility of new protest movements and capitalist structures, so that 
many NGOs took root where traditional humanitarian organizations had lost 
ground.74 Ethical fashion mirrors this dialectic and also ambivalent incorpora-
tion of social critique in contemporary discourses of global capitalism.75 In the 
course of this, the networks in which fashion producers such as consumers 
and even their critics are involved become a presentation surface where new 
economic power relations as well as a new spirit of capitalism is negotiated. 
Fashion designers such as Vivienne Westwood or Bruno Pieters are part of 
this new spirit of global capitalism focusing on the fashioning of social critique 
by teaching benevolence as well as cultural relativism and with it cultural 
absolutism at its best. What is formulated as a conversion of political debates 
over methods is at the same time part of the sensorium of a green economics, 
which meets the “crisis” with the design of “trust in trust,” and not least also 
in its “ethical regime” of global governance.

60 Georg Simmel, “Fashion,” International 
Quarterly no. 10 (1904): 133; http://www.
modetheorie.de/fileadmin/Texte/s/Simmel- 
Fashion_1904.pdf.

61  Georg Simmel, “The Persistence of Social 
Groups: I,” American Journal of Sociology, 
no. 3 (1897): 681; http://www.brocku.ca/
MeadProject/Simmel/Simmel_1897a.html.

62  Simmel, “Fashion,” 134.
63 Bourdieu and Delsault, “Couturier,” 29.
64 Pierre Bourdieu, Die feinen Unterschiede: 
Kritik der gesellschaftlichen Urteilskraft, 
trans. Bernd Schwibs and Achim Russer 
(Frankfurt/Main: Suhrkamp, 1992), 102. Dis-
tinction: A Social Critique of the Judgment 
of Taste, trans. Richard Nice (Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 1984).

65  Thomas, “Fashioning an Eco-Lexicon,” 533.
66 Rancière’s concept of the “ethical regime” 

overlaps with Bourdieu’s habitus model 
that conceptualizes the habitus as an orga-
nizing practice for the internalization and 
production of hierarchical class division. 
Bourdieu, Die feinen Unterschiede, 278.
67  Bourdieu, Die feinen Unterschiede, 102; 
Richard Florida, The Rise of the Creative 
Class: And How It’s Transforming Work, 
Leisure, Community and Everyday Life 
(New York: Perseus Book Group, 2002).
68 Boltanski and Chiapello, New Spirit of 

Capitalism, 4.

69 Ibid., 346.
70  Ibid., 28.
71  Ibid., 346.
72  Ibid., 28.
73  Ibid.
74  Ibid., 389.
75  Ibid., 346.

224

On the Ethical Turn in Fashion 

225

Literature

Aspers, Patrik. “Ethics in Global Garment 
Markets.” In The Moralization of Markets. Edit-
ed by Nico Stehr, Christoph Henning, and 
Bernd Weiler, 287−307. London: Transaction 
Press, 2006.

Aspers, Patrik. “A note on Global Capitalism.” 
In Global Capitalism: The Road Ahead. Edited 
by Bharti Thakar, 3−16. Hyderabad: Icfai Uni-
versity Press, 2008.

Bäldle, Peter. “Mode aus Belgien: Dries Van 
Noten – Der stille Revolutionär.” Süddeutsche 
Zeitung Online, February 25, 2011. Accessed 
August 4, 2013.http://www.sueddeutsche.de/
leben/mode-aus-belgien-dries-van- 
noten-der-stille-revolutionaer-1.1032934-3.

Beard, Nathaniel Dafydd. “The branding of 
Ethical Fashion and the Consumer: A Luxury 
Niche or Mass-market Realitiy?” Fashion The-
ory: The Journal of Dress, Body and Culture, 
vol. 12  (2008): 447–68.

Bergin, Olivia. “Vivienne Westwood’s Mission 
to Save the World, One Handbag at a Time. 
The British designer’s new range of handbags 
will benefit the people of Kenya who hand-
make them.” Telegraph, August 9, 2011.  
Accessed July 14, 2013. http://fashion.tele 
graph.co.uk/news-features/TMG8691362/
Vivienne-Westwoods-mission-to-save-the-
world-one-handbag-at-a-time.html.

Black, Sandy. The Sustainable Fashion Hand-
book. London: Thames & Hudson, 2012.

Black, Sandy. Eco-chic: The Fashion Paradox. 
London: Black Dog, 2011.

Blanchard, Tamsin. “Bruno Pieters’s Honest 
By: The only way is ethics.” Telegraph, March 
9, 2013. Accessed July 19, 2013. http://fash-
ion.telegraph.co.uk/columns/tamsin-
blanchard/TMG9918892/Bruno-Pieterss-Hon-
est-By-The-only-way-is-ethics.html.

Boltanksi, Luc and Ève Chiapello. The New 
Spirit of Capitalism. London: Verso, 2005.

Bourdieu, Pierre and Ivette Delsaut. “Le cou-
turier et sa griffe: contribution á une théorie 
de la magie.” Actes de la recherche en sciences 
sociales, no. 1 (January 1975): 7–36.

Bourdieu, Pierre. Distinction: A Social Critique 
of the Judgment of Taste. Translated by Richard 
Nice. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press, 1984. 

Bourdieu, Pierre. Die feinen Unterschiede. 
Kritik der gesellschaftlichen Urteilskraft. 
Translated by Bernd Schwibs and Achim 
Russer. Frankfurt/Main: Suhrkamp, 1992.

Brinton, Jessica. “The green dream.” Style 
The Sunday Times. May 11, 2008: 26−29.

Burnham, Scott, and Premsela, The Nether-
lands Institute for Design. “Trust Design:
The relationship between design and trust.” 
Trust Design. Accessed July 17, 2013. trustdesign.
org.

Clarke, Hazel. “Slow+Fashion—an Oxymoron—
or a Promise for the Future…?” Fashion Theo-
ry: The Journal of Dress, Body and Culture, 
vol. 12  (2008): 427−46.

Clean Clothes Campaign. “Conscious? Not 
Really....” March 25, 2013. Accessed July 14, 
2013. http://www.cleanclothes.org/news/ 
2013/03/25/conscious-not-really

Domeisen, Natalie and Prema de Sousa. “Why 
is the United Nations Working in Fashion?”  
International Trade Forum, Iss. 3 (2006).  
Accessed June 18, 2013. http://www.trade 
forum.org/Why -is-the-United-Nations -Work-
ing -in-Fashion.

Fashion4Development. Store Website. Ac-
cessed August 4, 2013. http://store.fashion-4- 
development.com/.

Florida, Richard. The Rise of the Creative 
Class: And How It’s Transforming Work, Lei-
sure, Community and Everyday Life. New 
York: Perseus Book Group, 2002.

Garve, Christian. Über die Moden: Versuche 
über verschiedene Gegenstände aus der  
Moral, der Literatur und dem gesellschaftli-
chen Leben. Breslau: Wilhelm Gottlieb Korn 
1792. Reprint Frankfurt/Main: Insel 1987.

Gibson, Pamela Church. “Sustainable Fashion 
in the Age of Celebrity Culture.” In The Sustain-
able Fashion Handbook. Edited by Sandy Black, 

20–24. London: Thames and Hudson, 2012.
International Trade Center. “Ethical Fashion 
Initiative.” Accessed July 14, 2013. http://
www.intracen.org/exporters/ethical-fashion/
the-initiative.

International Trade Center, Ethical Fashion 
Initiative. “We use fashion as a vehicle out of 
poverty, at the same time fulfilling fashion’s 
desire to be more fair.” Accessed July 14, 
2013. http://www.intracen.org/exporters/
ethical-fashion/.

Lovelock, James. “Gaia Theory.” Get a Life: 
Vivienne Westwood (blog). January 20, 2012. 
Accessed July 14, 2013. http://www.activere-
sistance.co.uk/ar/?p=1354.

Menkes, Suzy. “A Matchmaker Helps Artisans 
Find Luxury Jobs.” New York Times. Novem-
ber 14, 2012. Accessed July 14, 2013. http://
www.nytimes.com/2012/11/15/fashion/ a 
matchmaker-helps-artisans-find-luxury-jobs.
html?_r=0.

Pieters, Bruno. “An African Princess of Style.” 
Honest By News. September 2013. Accessed 
September 6, 2013. http://www.honestby.
com/en/news/153/an-african-princess-of-
style.html.

Pieters, Bruno. “A Man of Mystery: An Inter-
view with Nicolas Andreas Taralis.” Honest By 
News. July 15, 2012. Accessed September 8, 
2012. http://www.honestby.com/en/
news/64/a-man-of-mystery.html.

Raether, Elisabeth. “Es sieht gut aus in Afrika.” 
ZEITmagazin, no. 41. October 6, 2011.  
Accessed August 2, 2013. http://www.zeit.
de/2011/41/KollektionWestwood.

Rancière, Jacques. “The Ethical Turn of Aes-
thetics and Politics.” Critical Horizons 7, no. 1 
(2006): 1−20.

Sambo, Terrence, “IHT Luxury Summit: The 
Promise of Africa. The Power of the Mediter-
ranean.” International Herald Tribune,  
November 15–16, 2012. Accessed March 17, 
2014. http://www.ihtconferences.com/luxu-
ry-2012/press-coverage.aspx.

Simmel, Georg. “Fashion.” International 
Quarterly, no. 10 (1904): 130–55. Accessed 

July 28, 2013. http://www.modetheorie.de/fil-
eadmin/Texte/s/Simmel-Fashion_1904.pdf.

Simmel, Georg. “The Persistence of Social 
Groups: I.” American Journal of Sociology, no. 
3 (1897): 662–69. Accessed July 28, 2013. 
http://www.brocku.ca/MeadProject/Simmel/
Simmel_1897a.html.

Soeffner, Hans-Georg. Auslegung des Alltags: 
Der Alltag der Auslegung; Zur wissenssoziolo-
gischen Konzeption einer sozialwissen-
schaftlichen Hermeneutik. Frankfurt/Main: 
Suhrkamp, 1989.

Spivak, Gayatri Chakravorty. “Righting 
Wrongs.” The South Atlantic Quarterly 103, no. 
2/3 (Spring/Summer 2004): 523–48. Accessed 
July 28, 2013. http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/
saq/summary/v103/103.2spivak.html.

Spivak, Gayatri Chakravorty. “Neocolonialism 
and the secret Agent of Knowledge, an inter-
view with Robert J.C. Young.”  In Neocolonial-
ism. Oxford Literary Review 13 (1991): 220-51. 
Online, www.robertjcyoung.com (2007): 1–44.

The Co-operative Group. Ethical Consumer 
Markets Report 2012. Accessed July 22, 2013. 
http://www.ethicalconsumer.org/linkclick.as
px?fileticket=96yXzu8nyrc%3D&tabid=1557.

Thomas, Sue. “From ‘Green Blur’ to Ecofash-
ion: Fashioning an Eco-Lexicon.” Fashion The-
ory: The Journal of Dress, Body and Culture 12 
(2008): 525–40.

United Nations. “The Marrakech Process. Is-
sues—Sustainable Lifestyles & Education for 
Sustainable Consumption.” Accessed on July 
7, 2013. http://esa.un.org/marrakechprocess/
pdf/Issues_Sus_Lifestyles.pdf

United Nations, Department of Public Infor-
mation, News, and Media Division. “Press 
Conference on ‘Fashion 4 Development, A 
Global Platform to Advance the Millennium 
Development Goals.’” New York, June 28, 
2012. Accessed July 12, 2013. http://www.
un.org/News/briefings/docs/2012/120628_
Fashion.doc.htm.

Wagner, Gabriele and Philipp Hessinger. 
“Max Webers Protestantismus-These und der 
neue Geist des Kapitalismus.’” In Ein neuer 

226

On the Ethical Turn in Fashion 

Elke Gaugele

227

Geist des Kaptialismus? Paradoxien und Am-
bivalenzen der Netzwerkökonomie. Edited by 
Gabriele Wagner and Philipp Hessinger, 
9–40. Wiesbaden: Springer VS, 2008.

Westwood, Vivienne. “This Is Not Charity, This 
Is Work.” Vivienne Westwood Ethical Fashion 
Initiative Collection, January 28, 2011. Ac-
cessed July 14, 2013. http://www.vivienne 
westwood.co.uk/w/news/this -is -not -charity 
-this-is-work.

Winge, Theresa M. “‘Green is the New Black’: 
Celebrity Chic and the ‘Green’ Commodity Fe-
tish.” Fashion Theory: The Journal of Dress

“Performing 
Whiteness”
Revisioning 
White Textiles in 
Visual Culture

Birgit Haehnel 

Birgit Haehnel 

229

Whiteness in Fashion

This text focuses on performances of whiteness as an aesthetic politics in 
fashion, art, and visual culture. How can the semantic of white clothes in 
fashion be understood as a visual signal of whiteness and which strategies are 
used to subvert this ethnicized representations of dominant culture? First of 
all I like to emphasize that in general, white textiles do not have this symbolic 
meaning, but the discursive and institutional contextualization is responsible 
for the aesthetic production of whiteness by white dresses. For this reason it 
is necessary to have a closer look not only at the dresses’ visual representa-
tions but also at the textual framing. As a reaction to the constancy of struc-
tural racism in spite of public and political consciousness-raising actions, the 
Critical Whiteness Studies, or Kritische Weißseinsforschung in German-speak-
ing countries, puts weight on the construction of the dominant culture in a 
process of becoming white as an ethnic performance and political 
attribution.1

Referring to Gwendolyn Audrey Foster, who analyzes the permanent staging 
of whiteness in Hollywood films, I would like to speak of “performing white-
ness.” In respect to Judith Butler, this phrase points to the realization of 
whiteness as an ongoing process of creating meaning which fixes mental im-
ages and stereotypes in the collective memory. Recognizing the performative 
character of becoming white would help to change dominant power 
relations.2

Critical analysis of classical Hollywood cinema had already brought into mind 
that whiteness is a simulacrum without a beginning. The failed search for a 
pure white “race,” which was shown to not exist, generates the simulacrum 
and, through myriad ways and means, still allows the vision to become real. 
Special cinematic technologies such as light exposures, measurement of the 
degree of light reflection on the skin, and white makeup as a concept of 
whitefacing were developed in order to whiten performers and actresses who 
were thought to be never white enough. I will show how white clothes are 

1  See also Maureen Maisha Eggers et al.  
Mythen, Masken und Subjekte: Kritische 
Weißseinsforschung in Deutschland  
(Münster: Unrast-Verlag, 2005); Gabriele 
Dietze et al., Weiß—Weißsein—Whiteness: 
Kritische Studien zu Gender und Rassis-
mus (Frankfurt/Main: Lang, 2006); Ruth 
Frankenberg, White Women—Race Mat-
ter:. The Social Construction of Whiteness 
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota 
Press, 1993); Rosa Reitsamer and Jo Sch-
meiser, Born to Be White: Rassismus und 

Antisemitismus in der weißen Mehrheits-
gesellschaft (Vienna: IG Bildende Kunst, 
2005); Eske Wollrad, “Getilgtes Wissen, 
überschriebene Spuren: Weiße Subjektiv-
ierungen und antirassistische Bildungsar-
beit,” in Rassismus bildet, ed. Anne 
Broden and Paul Mecheril, 141–62 (Biele-
feld: Transcript, 2010).

2  Gwendolyn Audrey Foster, Performing 

Whiteness: Postmodern Re/Constructions 
in the Cinema (New York: State University 
of New York Press, 2003).

230

“Performing Whiteness”—Revisioning White Textiles in Visual Culture

Birgit Haehnel 

231

 Doppelpunkt im titel? oder untertitel weg

used in visual media for similar reasons.3 I like to investigate, in which context 
the semantics of white dresses become markers of whiteness in fashion politics. 
Forster’s analytical term “performing whiteness” is very useful for analyzing 
the theatrical presentations within the fashion industry. Furthermore, it is an 
apt measure to determine when modish styles transform into bizarre repre-
sentations of whiteness, exposing the perfidious masquerade as a fake. Art is 
particularly suited, in a postcolonial context, for exposing visual structures of 
dominant culture in a critical way. For this reason, the following introduces 
examples that create a parody of whiteness or which, by intervening into the 
performance of whiteness, even overcome the marker of racial dominance. 

Ladies in White Costumes

Re-inventions of white supremacy through photos are used playfully in fashion. 
From time to time, lifestyle magazines pick up the semantic of the European 
Grand Dame dressed in white, such as the US-American Vogue Magazine in 
1990, showing photos of the model Christy in Africa. 

With the headline “Tropical Whites,” it refers to European colonial fantasies. 
With respect to Roland Barthes’s “Written Clothing,”4 text and pictures produce 
a special fashion context which allusively defines white clothes belonging to 

the former colonial oppressors and therefore as markers of whiteness. At the 
beginning of the twentieth century, advertising that employed images of 
women in white dresses became popular, especially in the context of an exotic 
setting. The noblesse of European ladies in white garments symbolized “notions 
of purity in the fragrance given off by the snow white linen of a clean house-
hold, an amalgam that reached into the colonies. The white dress ennobles 
every social setting overseas and thus draws a clear line between rich and poor, 
between European and indigenous cultures.”5

During the Weimar Republic, fashion- and self-conscious women in white suits 
symbolized the Modern Age, usually in combination with the representation  
of new technologies such as automobiles and modern architecture. “Liberated 
from all the frills, this clothing represents most radically the reformist goals of 
dynamism and progress, based on a logical rational design of the world.”6 
This rationalism of the world was also attributed to European culture to define 
its superior civilization against wilderness and barbarism in other continents. 

German National Costumes as After-Images 

In 1990 the fashion journal Elle represented diverse collections with descrip-
tions of different ethnical stereotypes. Interestingly, Germany is presented as 
a multicultural nation with the headline Deutschland bunt—wir und die Aus-
länder (Germany multicolored—we and the foreigners). The well-meant inten-
tion turns migrant and conflict-ridden diversity in Germany positive by using 
colorful clothing. But it simultaneously evokes a latent mental image of a 
monochrome or less colorful dress code for Germany without foreigners. The 
advertisement’s language game of a multicultural, colorful society, provokes 
these associations. In succession to the United color advertisement for a mul-

Fig. 71
Hans Feurer, “Tropical whites”—Christy in Africa,  
American Vogue, May 1990.
Photo: Hans Feurer. 

3  See Eva Warth, “Die Inszenierung von  

Unsichtbarkeit: Zur Konstruktion weißer 
Identität im Film,” in Projektionen: Rassis-
mus und Sexismus in der Visuellen Kultur, 
ed. Birgit Haehnel et al. (Marburg: Jonas 
Verlag 1997), Barbara Schrödel, “Strahlend-
weiße Wäsche, weibliche Unschuld, das 
Wirtschaftswunder und der Tod: Weibli-
ches Sterben in einem deutschsprachigen 
Spielfilm der 1950er Jahre,” in Das letzte 
Hemd: Zur Konstruktion von Tod und Ge-
schlecht in der materiellen und visuellen 
Kultur, ed. Karen Ellwanger (Bielefeld: 
Transcript, 2010), 193-214.

4  Roland Barthes, Die Sprache der Mode 

(Frankfurt/Main: Suhrkamp, 1985), 13–27.
5  Birgit Haehnel, “Lady in White: A Type of 

6 

Woman between Fashionable Change and 
Constancy,” in Anziehen – Transkulturelle 
Moden // Dressed up – Transcultural Fashion. 
Querformat. Zeitgenössisches, Kunst, Pop-
ulärkultur 6, 2013 (Bielefeld: Transcript, 
2014), 117-22.
Ibid., 121. For the photo montages of mod-
ern-styled women and technological inno-
vations, see also Christiane Keim, “Anord-
nungen und Gegenüberstellungen: 
Weiblichkeit und Mode im medialen Diskurs 
der Architekturavantgarde,” in Erblätterte 
Identitäten: Mode—Kunst—Zeitschrift, 
Stadthaus Ulm, ed. Katharina Ahr, Susanne 
Holschbach, and Antje Krause-Wahl (Mar-
burg: Jonas Verlag, 2006), 81–88 exhibi-
tion catalogue.

232

“Performing Whiteness”—Revisioning White Textiles in Visual Culture

Birgit Haehnel 

233

What seems at first like a provocation soon fits very well into the public’s  
general mood, which emerged in the forefront of the FIFA World Cup 2006. 
Worn by the dark-skinned model, the combination of white trousers, shirt, 
and a black-red-gold belt turns inevitably to a political plea for Germany, 
which was advertised by a major publicity campaign in advance of the World 
Cup 2006. Du bist Deutschland10 (You are Germany) emphasizes the diversity 
of the German population—in view of parentage, skin color, age and gender—
in order to gain a positive national image. Besides party politics, this event 
was sponsored by the economy only. The call for the individual to improve 
Germany is entirely in line with the neoliberal ideology of “anything-goes.”11

Gronbach’s “confession design” corresponds with the need for a new national 
feeling after German reunification in 1989. What seems to be at first hand 
apolitical was soon defined as positiv politisch engagiert (positively politically 
involved).12

The positive image of a peaceful and at the same time highly efficiency-driven 
new Germany is ideally reflected in Gronbach’s corporate identity and her 
product lines.13 The gloomy burden of history and the dullness of actual right-
wing symbols were highlighted by white clothes. Textual discourse charges 
the stylish laxity of patriotism with meaning: current Germano-mania is coupled 
with experienced tolerance for foreigners gained by a successful coming to 
terms with the past. It is declared that this mentality is hardly found in other 
countries and therefore could represent the whole nation.14

While Barthes focuses on the “language of fashion,” I would like to emphasize 
additionally the “represented clothing.”15 In visual history, as I have mentioned 
above, there still exists a discourse about white clothes underlining national 
and colonial interests. In contrast to the direct language, pictures are less 

7  Cf. Christa Thelen, “Der neue Höhenflug 
der deutschen Mode: Schwarz-Rot-Gold,” 
Petra (January 2005): 46–49.

8  See Barthes, Die Sprache der Mode.
9 

Ina Soetebeer, “Mode in Schwarze-Rot-
Gold,” Deutsche Welle, March 31, 2009, 
http://www.dw.de/.
mode-in-schwarz-rot-gold/a-4133612.

10  See “Kampagne: Wir in Deutschland,” FAZ.
net, September 24, 2005, http://www.faz.
net/aktuell/wirtschaft/netzwirtschaft/
kampagne-wir-in-deutschland-1256557.
html.
11  Ibid.
12  See Ingrid Loschek, “Vielseitig und poli-
tisch engagiert – Eva Gronbach und ihre 
Kollektion,” Goethe-Institut e. V. Online-

Redaktion, October 2006 / January 2009, 
http://www.goethe.de/kue/des/prj/mod/
dsg/abc/de4084364.htm; “Eva Gronbach 
im Lifestyle Magazine iQ,” May 7, 2003, 
http://www.evagronbach.com/.

13  See Petra Engelke, “Eva Gronbach: Die 

Köpfe zu erreichen ist ein großes Gefühl,” 
interview at Cafe Hallmackenreuther on 
May 19, 2004 in Cologne, Galore 3 (2004): 
140–45; http://www.evagronbach.com/
pdf/galore.pdf.

14  See Thelen, “Der neue Höhenflug der 
deutschen Mode,” 49; “Evas Liebe zu 
Schwarz-Rot-Gold,” Süddeutsche Zeitung, 
November 17–18, 2001, 6. 

15  Barthes, Die Sprache der Mode.

Fig. 72
Eva Gronbach collection, mutter erde  
vater land, 2003. 

ticultural society in the 1990s, this latent mental image becomes evident 
about fifteen years later. 

In 2005 the fashion journal Petra published an article about the history of 
German fashion with the collection “mutter erde vater land” (mother earth fa-
ther land) of the designer Eva Gronbach on top of the development.7 

Two models dressed in white are posing in front of a white curtain. Against 
this blending setting the colors of the belt become more obvious. The ac-
companying text addresses them as accessoires in the German national colors 
and identifies the white emblem on the breast of the forward-standing woman 
as the national heraldic animal. The author of the fashion article, Christa Thelen, 
instrumentalized national symbols on white dresses, appealing to a supposed 
German team spirit. In the place of multicolored fashion for a hybrid nation, 
now the white textile with national symbols unifies diversity into one people. 
Instead of creating a playful and sneering fashion design, national symbols 
are reloaded with new content by the iconic and written form of clothing, to 
use Roland Barthes’ expressions.8 In 2001 Gronbach had already provoked 
controversy and discussions in the same direction with her statement, Liebes-
erklärung an Deutschland (Declarations of love to Germany).9

234

“Performing Whiteness”—Revisioning White Textiles in Visual Culture

Birgit Haehnel 

235

clear and more complex. Nevertheless, they provoke visual analogies—coming 
into mind as after-images. In cultural production, the effect is used as a meta-
phor to describe the after effect of pictures over history. Thus, using white 
dresses in a German national context is not by chance since pictures of the 
past are still effective in the present as after-images.16

On which archetypes Gronbach’s fashion photos were based becomes obvious 
in contrast to a more critical approach made by the artist Anselm Kiefer in 
1990.

Fig. 73
Anselm Kiefer, Lilith on the Red Sea (detail), 1990.

Kiefer’s picture Lilith on the Red Sea is very well known for its aesthetical 
commands of remembering the German past. In the recent context of the 
work, the use of white clothing is interesting. On a monumental canvas, the 
artist attached wavelike curved sheets of lead on which ash-covered gar-
ments with tufts of black hair were scattered in smaller and larger sizes. The 
clothes, which must have been white once, now became dirty, drifting with-
out bodies over the leaden heaviness of the greyish sea. They are traces of 
dead female bodies, adults, and children. Kiefer allegorized the history of the 
Jews’ persecution and murder during fascism in the female figures of Lilith 

and her daughters. Furthermore, their absence points to the loss of the anni-
hilated Jewish culture and what this means to German culture. The ash-cov-
ered clothes carry the traumatic memory of Nazi Germany’s terror—the Shoa.17

This picture also evokes ideas of white garments before pollution. In the 
twentieth century, bleaching white tricots and shirts underlined the health and 
welfare of the suntanned wellness body in the context of the life reform 
movement. This aesthetical setting was used in the context of Nazi propaganda 
in order to aryanize white body images. For example, on a calendar sheet of 
family advertisement in 1938, the designer Ludwig Hohlwein confirms the racial 
purity of the adults by using white clothes.

As a second skin, it carries the values of civilizational superiority, which are 
closely connected with the phantasm of a “white” skin in order to underline 
aryan values. The suntanned bodies are ennobled by the blending white tex-
tiles as pure-bred, whereby a dominant culture of whiteness in the context of 
a German nation is performed.18

Returning to Kiefer’s work of art, the latently produced counter image of white 
garments could be understood as a metaphorical attribution to Jews who 
once thought themselves to be Germans and were very brutally disappointed. 
The white dresses on Kiefer’s panel metaphorically point to the assimilation of 
the Jews into the German nation or in other words—to their becoming German. 
In this context white textiles stands for German-ness. Against this background 
the actual performance of German nationalism in bleaching white clothing 
and national symbols in fashion journals makes one suspicious, even if it is not 
the same context. As after-images the fashion photos of Gronbach’s collec-
tion operate within a global market earthed in Deutscher Heimat19 re-inventing 
white clothes in a spectacular way of whitewashing. The confession belongs 
to the economic ideology of increasing profit, which is enforced by sensation. 
National symbols could be easily instrumentalized by it. The focus on a re-
laxed handling of these symbols propagates a casual lifestyle for those who 

16  See Peter Friese, After Images: Kunst als 
soziales Gedächtnis, Neues Museum Wes-
erburg Bremen (Frankfurt/Main: Revolver, 
2004), exhibition catalogue; Viktoria 
Schmidt-Linsenhoff, “On and beyond the 
Color Line: Afterimages of Old and New 
Slavery in Contemporary Art since 1990,” 
in Slavery in Art and Literature: Approach-
es to Trauma, Memory, and Visuality, ed. 
Birgit Haehnel and Melanie Ulz (Berlin: 
Frank & Timme, 2010), 64f.

17  See Lily Fürstenow-Khositashvili, “Anselm 

Kiefer—Myth versus History” (PhD diss., 

Humboldt-Universität Berlin, 2011), 97–98, 
113–15, http://edoc.hu-berlin.de/docviews/
abstract.php?id=39789; Doreet LeVitté-
Harten, Anselm Kiefer Lilith (New York: 
Marian Goodman Gallery, 1990).

18  Cf. Haehnel, “Weiße Hemden—Reine Kör-

per: Zwischen Gesundheitskult und Rassen-
wahn,” in Do It with Others: Postkoloniale 
Perspektiven und Alternativen in Mode, 
Kunst und Textil (Weinheim: Belz-Verlag, in 
preparation).

19  See Engelke, “Eva Gronbach.”

236

“Performing Whiteness”—Revisioning White Textiles in Visual Culture

Birgit Haehnel 

237

can effort it, gained by hard labor. In the image of the “self-made man” or the 
“self-made woman,” economic ideology weakens intellectual, particularly crit-
ical, expert knowledge in order to convert it into a market strategy and profit 
from its implementation. But this actually has nothing to do with either the 
acceptance of immigrants in Germany or a national identity as a multicultural, 
migration society.

Subversions of Whitening Dress Codes

The change of perception from white standardization to the parody of white-
ness through clothing is imprinted in one of Max Abadian’s photos. In 2009 
he did photo shoots with US-American pop singer Lady Gaga for the fashion 
magazine 944.20 As a portrait it speaks to the many self-inventions of Lady 
Gaga to a pop diva controlled by media.21 There is no pure identity; it has al-
ready vanished in a sequence of simulacrums in media spectacle. Interesting 
enough, in 2011 it was the cover of the journal Texte zur Kunst where the artifi-
ciality of the female image dressed in white attracts the eye. The porcelain 
complexion with lightly rouged cheeks, the pale lips und reddish blond hairs 
with rough, teased curls of a wig play with issues of covering and uncovering. 
A capricious hat with white laces, feathers, and pearls covers half of the flirt-
ing face like a mask. Indications of this are the black inkings, which corre-
sponds to the darkly made up eyes and strongly defined eyelashes. Through 
the embroidered gauze of the white outfit, the skin of the arms appears only 
partly. The half-figure portrait hides the lower part of the body. The forward-
pushing pose is taken back by her left arm crossed over her breast. In this 
change between showing and hiding, the question arises: Is there still some-
one behind the masquerade? 

The mask-like appearance of the woman reminds one of Cindy Sherman’s ear-
ly photographs from the 1970s. The Untitled Film Stills, for example, decon-
struct the creation of Euro-American femininity in media.22 Sherman’s exag-
gerated restagings of white female stereotypes aim to expose voyeurism. But 
at the same time the models refuse to be looked at, never entirely showing 
themselves. In this process, conventional female images transform into paro-
dy. A similar aesthetic belongs to the art journal’s cover image. Dressing in 

20 See Max Abadian, “Photos of Lady Gaga 
2009,” http://www.944.com/944/ladyga-
ga/ ; http://gagallery.org/thumbnails.
php?album=470.

21  See Vanessa Grigoriadis, “Growing Up 

Gaga: The Self-Invented, Manufactured, 
Accidental, Totally On-Purpose New York 
Creation of the World’s Biggest Pop Star,” 

New York Times, March 28, 2010, http://
nymag.com/arts/popmusic/
features/65127.

22  See Gabriele Schor, Cindy Sherman: The 

Early Works: Catalogue Raisonne, 1975–
1977 (Ostfildern: Hatje Cantz, 2012), exhi-
bition catalogue.

Fig. 76
Gerhard Keil, Die Turnerinnen, 1939.

Fig. 75
Gerhard Keil, Turner, 1939.

Fig. 74
Ludwig Hohlwein, Neues Volk, 1938.

238

“Performing Whiteness”—Revisioning White Textiles in Visual Culture

Birgit Haehnel 

239

großes “B”

cal statement to recognize visual structures of performing whiteness 
including the gaze, which constitutes fashion politics, too.

The last example I wish to introduce is about the empowerment of a Black 
women artist through re-interpreting the white robe. In 1989 Maud Sulter, 
born in Scottland, created the image of a dark-skinned woman dressed in 
white as a direct response to the lack of positive images of black women in 
the public.

The work is part of the catalogue ZABAT,25 where Sulter addresses representa-
tion of black women in Western culture in studio portraits of creative black 
women, each representing one of the nine muses of classical antiquity. In the 
recent image the woman artist Della Street performs Terpsichore—the muse 
of dance. She created the costume as part of a dance performance and in-
stallation called The Quizzing Glass. It is about the relationship between wom-
en within the power hierarchy of the mistress and the slave. The piece of py-
rite in the hand of Terpsichore, the so-called “fool’s gold,” points to foolish 
material values of white European societies which lead to the “gold rush” and 
slavery work. But the photo does not show a mere change of roles from white 
and black women. Using visual citations Sulter emphasizes the racist and sex-
ist implications of black women’s representations in art history and visual cul-
ture. Many European ladies were portrayed in white robes referring to the 
whiteness of antiquity which functions as the ground of European civilization. 
Ideal female beauty was connected with the wealth of ownership of white linen 
and silk and contrasted with the uncivilized non-owners of these. These pic-
tures, which have been reproduced so many times, help to construct the dif-
ference between Europe as superior in a process of othering in view of the 
occupation of and commercial trading in the colonies. Around 1800, the values 
and norms produced in art were transferred into daily life via the gauzy muslin 
dresses of the Empire style.26

The wig and particularly the lace-trimmed silk gown in Sulter’s portrait em-
phasize through their bright white color against the dark background the 
(Marburg: Jonas-Verlag, 2004), 8–18.

23  See Dagmar Schulze, “Unterschiede 

zwischen Frauen: Ein kritischer Blick auf 
den Umgang mit ‘den Anderen’ in der  
feministischen Forschung weißer Frauen,” 
Beiträge zur feministischen Theorie und 
Praxis 27 (1990): 45; Stanley M. James and 
Abena P.A. Busia, eds., Theorizing Black 
Feminism (London: Routledge, 1993).

24  See Viktoria Schmidt-Linsenhoff, “Weiße 

Blicke: Bild- und Textlektüren zu Ge-
schlechtermythen des Kolonialismus,” in 
Weiße Blicke: Geschlechtermythen des 
Kolonialismus, ed. Viktoria Schmidt-Lin-
senhoff, Karl Hölz, and Herbert Uerlings 

25  See Maud Sulter, ZABAT: Poetics of a Family 

Tree (Hebden Bridge: Uraban Fox Press, 
1989).

26  See Angela Rosenthal, “Calliopes Reisen: 

Maud Sulters politische Collgagen,” in 
Projektionen: Rassismus und Sexismus in 
der Visuellen Kultur, ed. Birgit Haehnel et 
al. (Marburg: Jonas Verlag, 1997), 243–61; 
Viktoria Schmidt-Linsenhoff, Ästhetik der 
Differenz: Postkoloniale Perspektiven vom 
16. Bis 21. Jahrhundert, vol. 1 (Marburg: Jo-
nas Verlag, 2010), 158–81.

Fig. 77
Max Abadian, Lady Gaga, 2011.

white brings to mind several mental images: marriage dresses, seductive la-
dies in white robes of noble European societies, patriarchal fantasies of fe-
male purity and virginity. The eccentric white costume as well as the doll-like 
appearance of the female model on the art journal’s cover are performing the 
image construction of the white diva, while they simultaneously also parody 
these images by revealing their aesthetic structures. 

Under the photo a word written in white letters pronounced with an exclama-
tion mark guides the interpretation process: Feminism is defined as an over-
drawn form of white femininity like the photo above. The artificial appearance 
of the single woman formulates a critique of an aesthetical level, which re-
calls the strong Women of Color’s protests of the racism of white feminists 
based on their privileged positions.23

The white lady’s parody in Max Abadian’s photo undercut the order of the reg-
imen of white gazes, identifying not only femininity as a masquerade but also 
the ethnicizing of whiteness. It gives an ironic comment on ethnocentrism 
and the racializing gaze within a white feminism.24 Looking at it more closely, 
something appears awkwardly shaped—the female figure is not as pleasing as 
the photo models in fashion journals. Perhaps this photo will offer a perspec-
tive for a future feminism: No female power in baggy trousers, nor haute-cou-
ture styled postfeminism—instead the picture could be understood as a criti-

240

“Performing Whiteness”—Revisioning White Textiles in Visual Culture

Birgit Haehnel 

241

beauty of the dark skin. In the catalogue ZABAT, the Terpsichore image is un-
derlined by poetical lines that refer to former paintings of black court ser-
vants. Following Angela Rosenthal the figurations were used in order to light-
en the skin of white ladies’ portraits. That’s why she interprets this aesthetical 
practice by using the words of Valerie Amos and Parmar Pratibha as an exam-
ple of “the fundamental way in which white women have benefitted from the 
oppression of Black people.”27

Instead of the white female body, Sulter uses white tools to warm up the dark 
skin color of the woman in the portrait. The white robe refers to the wealth of 
Western colonialism based on the transatlantic slave trade. The painted tex-
tile material carries European values of pureness, nobleness and ideal female 
beauty. The brilliant white clay addresses the European longing to become 
whiter than white. But with Della Street in a white robe of the eighteenth cen-
tury Sulter creates an after-image of the visual history of slavery. She refers to 
and transforms the art-historical archetypes into a portrait of a well-known 
Black woman. Thus, she intervenes in dominant processes of constructing 
public memory on an aesthetic level, which was dominated by white looks 
with all its denial of a problematic or even traumatic past. Maud Sulter and 
Della Street’s intentions were to decolonize the aesthetic structure of repre-
senting the Black female body. The photo refuses a discriminating white look 
on the lady and empowers the critical black look on the strong personality of 
Della Street. 

The subversiveness lies in the interpictorial structure between this photo and 
the standard. Within this structure the white textile play an important part, 
because it refers to the ideology of classicism but put a different weight on its 
meaning. The white garment on the dark brown female body is not the ro-
manticized counterpart of white femininity, but opens the concept of classi-
cism for transcultural issues.28

To conclude, the aesthetic politics of fashion working on the meaning of the 
white dress is not as much untroubled as it seems to be. Often texts and im-
ages in fashion journals re-establish in an apparently playful way national and 
colonial contexts but nevertheless transport racializing values of whiteness at 
the same time. Critical interventions through art and photography had lead to 
new concepts of perceiving white clothing, but still refer to the previous pic-
tures. While stylistic interventions in fashion such as Gronbach’s in Petra and 
Christy’s in Vogue recur on former values of colonialism and nationalism to in-
strumentalize them for economic reasons, the more critical photographic 
staging of strong Black women’s subjectivity or the construction of white 
womanhood break out of the dominant visual structure. The liberation from 
discriminating stereotypes by appropriation and transformation intervenes in 
the genealogy of hegemonic picture discourse. The aesthetic superscription 

Fig. 78
Maud Sulter, Terpsichore (from the ZABAT series), 1989.

27  Valerie Amos and Pratibha Parmar, “Chal-
lenging Imperial Feminism,” Feminist Re-
view 17 (1984): 5; see also Rosenthal, 
“Maud Sulters politische Collagen,” 247.

28  See Schmidt-Linsenhoff, Ästhetik der Dif-

ferenz, 171.

242

“Performing Whiteness”—Revisioning White Textiles in Visual Culture

constructs after-images, which as postcolonial images nevertheless transport 
ideologies of former times, but disrupts the power-keeping process by trans-
forming them at the same time. The performance in Sulter’s photo lets go of 
the black and white symbolism. Because it focuses on interpictorial struc-
tures in a complex and very critical way, they are going to subvert them and 
give way for new politics in fashion. 

Birgit Haehnel 

Literature

Abadian, Max. “Photos of Lady Gaga 2009.” 
Accessed October 20, 2013. http://www.944.
com/944/ladygaga/ and http://gagallery.org/
thumbnails.php?album=470.

Amos, Valerie and Pratibha Parmar. “Chal-
lenging Imperial Feminism.” Feminist Review, 
August 17, 1984: 3-20.

Barthes, Roland. Die Sprache der Mode. 
Frankfurt/Main: Suhrkamp, 1985.

Dietze, Gabriele and Martina Tißberger et al. 
Weiß – Weißsein – Whiteness: Kritische Studien 
zu Gender und Rassismus. Frankfurt/Main: 
Lang, 2006. 

Eggers, Maureen Maisha and Grada Kilomba, 
et al. Mythen, Masken und Subjekte: Kritische 
Weißseinsforschung in Deutschland. Münster: 
Unrast-Verlag, 2005.

Engelke, Petra. “Eva Gronbach: Die Köpfe zu 
erreichen ist ein großes Gefühl” Galore 
(2004), 140–45. Accessed July 27, 2013. 
http://www.evagronbach.com/pdf/galore.pdf.

FAZ.net. “Kampagne Wir in Deutschland.” 
September 24, 2005. Accessed July 15, 2013. 
http://www.faz.net/aktuell/wirtschaft/netz-
wirtschaft/kampagne-wir-in-deutsch-
land-1256557.html.

Foster, Gwendolyn Audrey. Performing White-
ness: Postmodern Re/Constructions in the 
Cinema. New York: State University Press, 
2003.

Frankenberg, Ruth. White Women—Race Mat-
ters: The Social Construction of Whiteness. 
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 
1993.

243

Grigoriadis, Vanessa. “Growing Up Gaga: The 
Self-Invented, Manufactured, Accidental, To-
tally On-Purpose New York Creation of the 
World’s Biggest Pop Star.” New York Times. 
March 28, 2010. Accessed October 20, 2013. 
http://nymag.com/arts/popmusic/
features/65127.

Gronbach, Eva. iQ, May 7, 2003. Accessed 
July 27, 2013. http://www.evagronbach.com/.

Haehnel, Birgit. “Lady in White: A Type of 
Woman between Fashionable Change and 
Constancy.” In Anziehen – Transkulturelle 
Moden // Dressed up – Transcultural Fashion. 
Querformat. Zeitgenössisches, Kunst, Pop-
ulärkultur, 117-22, Bielefeld: Transcript, 2014.

Haehnel, Birgit. “Weiße Hemden – Reine Körper: 
Zwischen Gesundheitskult und Rassenwahn.” 
In Do It with Others: Postkoloniale Perspektiven 
und Alternativen in Mode, Kunst und Textil. 
Weinheim: Belz-Verlag, forthcoming.

Keim, Christiane. “Anordnungen und Gegen-
überstellungen: Weiblichkeit und Mode im 
medialen Diskurs der Architekturavantgarde.” 
In Erblätterte Identitäten: Mode – Kunst – 
Zeitschrift. Stadthaus Ulm. Edited by Katharina 
Ahr, Susanne Holschbach, and Antje Krause-
Wahl, 81-88. Marburg: Jonas, 2006, 81–88. 
Exhibition Catalogue.

LeVitté-Harten, Doreet. Anselm Kiefer Lilith. 
New York: Marian Goodman Gallery, 1990.

Loschek, Ingrid. “Vielseitig und politisch en-
gagiert – Eva Gronbach und ihre Kollektion.” 
Goethe-Institut e. V. Online-Redaktion, October 
2006 / January 2009. Accessed July 15, 2013. 
http://www.goethe.de/kue/des/prj/mod/dsg/
abc/de4084364.htm. 

Friese, Peter. After Images: Kunst als soziales 
Gedächtnis. Neues Museum Weserburg Bre-
men. Frankfurt/Main: Revolver, 2004. Exhibi-
tion catalogue.

Reitsamer, Rosa, and Jo Schmeiser. Born to 
be White: Rassismus und Antisemitismus in 
der weißen Mehrheitsgesellschaft. Vienna: IG 
Bildende Kunst, 2005.

Fürstenow-Khositashvili, Lily. “Anselm Kiefer 
– Myth versus History.” PhD dissertation, 
Humboldt-Universität Berlin, 2011. Accessed 
July 27, 2013. 
http://edoc.hu-berlin.de/docviews/abstract.
php?id=39789.

Rosenthal, Angela. “Calliopes Reisen. Maud 
Sulters politische Collagen.” In Projektionen: 
Rassismus und Sexismus in der Visuellen Kultur. 
Edited by Birgit Haehnel et al., 243–61. Marburg: 
Jonas Verlag, 1997.

Schmidt-Linsenhoff, Viktoria. Ästhetik der 

245

244

“Performing Whiteness”—Revisioning White Textiles in Visual Culture

 Doppelpunkt im titel? oder untertitel weg

Differenz: Postkoloniale Perspektiven vom 16. 
Bis 21. Jahrhundert, vol. 1, 158–81. Marburg: 
Jonas Verlag, 2010.

Schmidt-Linsenhoff, Viktoria. “On and be-
yond the Color Line: Afterimages of Old and 
New Slavery in Contemporary Art since 
1990.” In Slavery in Art and Literature: Ap-
proaches to Trauma, Memory, and Visuality. 
Edited by Birgit Haehnel and Melanie Ulz, 59–
92. Berlin: Frank & Timme, 2010.

Schmidt-Linsenhoff, Viktoria. “Weiße Blicke: 
Bild- und Textlektüren zu Geschlechtermy-
then des Kolonialismus.” In Weiße Blicke. Ge-
schlechtermythen des Kolonialismus. Edited 
by Viktoria Schmidt-Linsenhoff, Karl Hölz, 
and Herbert Uerlings, 8–18. Marburg: Jonas-
Verlag, 2004.

Schor, Gabriele. Cindy Sherman: The Early 
Works: Catalogue Raisonne, 1975–1977. Ostfil-
dern: Hatje Cantz, 2012. Exhibition 
Catalogue.

Schrödel, Barbara. “Strahlendweiße Wäsche, 
weibliche Unschuld, das Wirtschaftswunder 
und der Tod: Weibliches Sterben in einem 
deutschsprachigen Spielfilm der 1950er 
Jahre.” In Das letzte Hemd: Zur Konstruktion 
von Tod und Geschlecht in der materiellen 
und visuellen Kultur. Edited by Karen Ell-
wanger, 193–214. Bielefeld: Transcript, 2010.

Schulze, Dagmar. “Unterschiede zwischen 

Frauen: Ein kritischer Blick auf den Umgang 
mit ‘den Anderen’ in der feministischen 
Forschung weißer Frauen.” Beiträge zur femi-
nistischen Theorie und Praxis 27 (1990): 45.

Soetebeer, Ina. “Mode in Schwarze-Rot-
Gold.” Deutsche Welle, March 31, 2009. Ac-
cessed July 15, 2013. http://www.dw.de/
mode-in-schwarz-rot-gold/a-4133612.

Süddeutsche Zeitung. “Evas Liebe zu 
Schwarz-Rot-Gold.” November, 17/18, 2001.

Sulter, Maud. ZABAT: Poetics of a Family Tree. 
Hebden Bridge: Uraban Fox Press, 1989.

Thelen, Christa. “Der neue Höhenflug der 
deutschen Mode. Schwarz-Rot-Gold.” Petra 
(January 2005): 46–49.

Warth, Eva. “Die Inszenierung von Unsicht-
barkeit: Zur Konstruktion weißer Identität im 
Film.” In Projektionen: Rassismus und Sexismus 
in der Visuellen Kultur. Edited by Birgit Haehnel, 
et al., 125–30. Marburg: Jonas Verlag, 1997.

Wollrad, Eske. “Getilgtes Wissen, über-
schriebene Spuren: Weiße Subjektivierungen 
und antirassistische Bildungsarbeit.” In Ras-
sismus bildet. Edited by Anne Broden and 
Paul Mecheril, 141–62. Bielefeld: Transcript, 
2010.

246

Image Credits

Image Credits

247

Aesthetic Economies
It’s All About the Image—The Co-operation  
between Fashion Industry and Celebrities 
Endora Comer-Arldt (PP. XX) 

Fig. 1
Marie-Laure Djelic and Antti Ainamo, “The  
Coevolution of New Organizational Forms in 
the Fashion Industry. A Historical and Com-
parative Study of France, Italy and the United 
States.” Organization Science, 1999: 631. 
Fig. 2
Marie-Laure Djelic and Antti Ainamo, “The  
Coevolution of New Organizational Forms in 
the Fashion Industry. A Historical and Com-
parative Study of France, Italy and the United 
States.” Organization Science, 1999: 631. 
Fig. 3
Marie-Laure Djelic and Antti Ainamo, “The  
Coevolution of New Organizational Forms in 
the Fashion Industry. A Historical and Com-
parative Study of France, Italy and the United 
States.” Organization Science, 1999: 633. 

Andy’s Heritage—Collaborations between Fashion, 
Art, and Louis Vuitton
Monica Titton (PP. XX)

Fig. 4
Takashi Murakami, Eye Love SUPERFLAT White, 
2003, acrylic on canvas mounted on board / 
120 x 120 x 5 cm. Gift of Takashi Murakami to 
the Louis Vuitton Collection. Courtesy: Takashi 
Murakami and KaiKai Kiki Co., Ltd., © 2003  
Takashi Murakami / KaiKai Kiki Co., Ltd.

Life Which Writes Itself—Retrospecting Art, 
Fashion, and Photography in Bernadette 
Corporation
Ilka Becker (PP. XX)

Fig. 5
Bernadette Corporation, Made in USA Issue 
No. 1, Fall/Winter 1999–2000 collection, 1999, 
magazine cover, 24.8 x 19.1 cm. Courtesy: the 
artists and Greene Naftali, New York.
Fig. 6
Bernadette Corporation, Made in USA Issue No. 
3, Spring/Fall 2001 collection, 2001, magazine 
cover, 26.7 x 20.3 cm. Courtesy: the artists 
and Greene Naftali, New York. 
Fig. 7
Bernadette Corporation, Get Rid of Yourself, 
2003, videostill, screenshot by the author. 
Courtesy: the artists and Greene Naftali,  
New York. 
Fig. 8
Bernadette Corporation, Get Rid of Yourself, 

2003, videostill, screenshot by the author. 
Courtesy: the artists and Greene Naftali,  
New York.
Fig. 9 
Bernadette Corporation, Get Rid of Yourself, 
2003, videostill, screenshot by the author. 
Courtesy: the artists and Greene Naftali,  
New York.
Fig. 10 
Bernadette Corporation, Get Rid of Yourself, 
2003, videostill, screenshot by the author. 
Courtesy: the artists and Greene Naftali,  
New York. 
Fig. 11
Krzysztof Herholdt, Black Block White Riot, 
2010, fashion pictorial, Fiasco Magazine,  
September 2010. © the artist and Fiasco 
Magazine.
Fig. 12
David Vasiljevic, Levi’s ad campaign, 2008. 
Photo: © the artist and Levi Strauss & Co. 
Screenshot by the author. Accessed March 1, 
2014. http://models.com/work/levis-levis-fw-08.
Fig. 13
Bernadette Corporation, The Complete Poem, 
2009, installation view at Greene Naftali. 
Courtesy: the artists and Greene Naftali,  
New York.
Fig. 14
Bernadette Corporation, Ars Nova, 2009,  
inkjet print, 55.9 x 43.2 cm. Courtesy: the  
and Greene Naftali, New York.
Fig. 15 
Richard Avedon, portrait of Andy Warhol and 
members of The Factory: Gerard Malanga, 
poet; Viva, actress; Paul Morrissey, director; 
Taylor Mead, actor; Brigid Polk, actress; Joe 
Dallesandro, actor; Andy Warhol, artist, New 
York, October 9, 1969, Richard Avedon: Murals 
and Portraits, exh. cat., Gagosian Gallery, New 
York 2012. © Gagosian Gallery / The Richard 
Avedon Foundation. 
Fig. 16
Steven Meisel, Kate Moss and Joe Dallesandro, 
Calvin Klein ad campaign, 1995. Photo: Steven 
Meisel. © the artist, Calvin Klein.

Production of Space
It All Started with a Bicycle—Spring/Summer 2013 
Tanja Bradaric and Taro Ohmae (PP XX)

Figs. 17–25
Bradaric-Ohmae, It All Started with a Bicycle, 
Spring/Summer 2013 collection, 2013. Model: 
Michaela Schwarz-Weismann. Photos: Jork 
Weismann. Courtesy: Bradaric-Ohmae.

248

Image Credits

249

Framing “Saints and Sinners”—Methods of Pro-
ducing Space in Fashion Shows: Michael Michal-
sky’s Fall/Winter 2009 Collection
Alicia Kühl  (PP. XXX)

Fig. 26
Michalsky, Fall/Winter 2009 collection signet. 
Courtesy: Michalsky.
Fig. 27
Michalsky, Fall/Winter 2009 collection show. 
Screenshot by the author, taken from the offi-
cial video. Courtesy: Michalsky.
Fig. 28
Toni Garrn, Michalsky Fall/Winter 2009 collection. 
Courtesy: Michalsky.
Fig. 29
Alicia Kühl, “Overlapping of place, location, 
and imaginary space,” 2013. Courtesy: Alicia 
Kühl.
Fig. 30
Alicia Kühl, “Possible frames in a location,” 
2013. Courtesy: Alicia Kühl.

Fashion Film—Spaces of Exclusivity and the  
Globalization of Accessibility 
Sabina Muriale  (PP. XXX)

Fig. 31
BLESS, Collection 47: The “Pre-sensation” Is 
the Destination—Wear the Enfolding Past, 
Touch the Contemplative Present and Smell 
the Soundperfume of the Time to Come, 2012. 
Lookstripe. Courtesy: BLESS.

The Waywardness of Fashion—Society in the 
Subjunctive 
Michael R. Mueller (PP. XXX)

Fig. 32
Steven Varble, Soho Street Art, New York, 1975. 
Photo: © Allan Tannenbaum. Tannenbaum,  
Allan. New York in the 70s. Berlin: Feierabend, 
2003: 83.
Fig. 33
Comme des Garçons, Spring/Summer Collection, 
1997. Caroline Evans. Fashion at the Edge, New 
Haven: Yale University Press, 2007: 268.
Fig. 34
9/11 From Brooklyn, 2001. Photo: © Thomas 
Hoepker. Gunsenheimer, Antje. Grenzen:  
Differenzen, Übergänge: Spannungsfelder  
inter- und transkultureller Kommunikation. 
Bielefeld: transcript, 2007: 90.
Fig. 35
Alas and Piggott, Kate Moss magazine cover. 
Numero, 1999. Photo: © Alas and Piggott. 
Courtesy: Bright.
Fig. 36
Inez van Lamsweerde and Vinoodh Matadin, 
Thank you Thighmaster, 1991. Courtesy: 

Gaensheimer/Olfers. Gaensheimer, Susanne 
and Sophie von Olfers. Not in Fashion.  
Photography and Fashion in the 90s. Leipzig:  
Kerber, 2011.
Fig. 37
Yohji Yamamoto, Ensemble, Spring/Summer 
Collection, 2010. The Wall Street Journal, Oct. 
9, 2009. Accessed May 9, 2011. www.wsj.com. 
Fig. 38
Steven Klein, Arene Homme Plus, 2001/02. 
Photo: Steven Klein. Courtesy: Bright. Bright, 
Susan. Face of Fashion. London: National Por-
trait Gallery Publications, 2007: 122.
Fig. 39
Richard Avedon, Andy Warhol, 1969. Courtesy: 
Hamburger Kunsthalle / The Andy Warhol  
Museum. Breitz, Candice. Andy Warhol—Pho-
tography. Hamburger Kunsthalle/The Andy 
Warhol Museum, exh. cat., Thalwil: Edition 
Stemmle, 1999: 353.
Fig. 40 
Anders Edstöm, Martin Margiela’s Spring/
Summer 1994 collection, 1993. Photo: ©  
Anders Edstöm. Courtesy: Gaensheimer/Olfers. 
Gaensheimer, Susanne and Sophie von Olfers. 
Not in Fashion. Photography and Fashion in the 
90s. Leipzig: Kerber, 2011. 
Fig. 41
Marc Jacobs, Spring/Summer Collection, 2010. 
Accessed August 1, 2013.  www.tumblr.com.
Fig. 42
Max Ernst, La Vierge corrigeant l’enfant Jésus 
devant témoins: André Breton, Paul Eluard et 
le peintre, 1926. Spies, Werner. Max Ernst: Die 
Retrospektive, 54. Ostfildern: Dumont, 1999: 54.
Fig. 43
Lucio Fontana, Concetto spaziale, 1964–65. 
Schulz-Hoffmann, Carla. Lucio Fontana.  
Munich: Prestel, 1983: 86.
Fig. 44
Clara Mosch, Aktion Baumbesteigung, Rügen 
1979. Rehberg, Karl-Siegbert. “Verkörperungs-
Konkurrenzen. Aktionskunst in der DDR 
zwischen Revolte und ‘Kristallisation.’” In  
Performance und Bild – Performance als Bild. 
Edited by Christian Janecke, 115–61. Berlin: 
Philo Fine Arts, 2004: 129.
Fig. 45
Corinne Day, Vogue 1993. Photo: © Corinne 
Day. Courtesy: Smedley. Smedley, Elliott.  
“Escaping to Reality: Fashion photography in 
the 1990.” In Fashion Cultures: Theories, Ex-
plorations and Analysis. Edited by Stella Bruzzi 
and Pamela Church Gibson, 143–56. London: 
Routledge, 2007: 150.

Fig. 46
Corinne Day, The Face, 1993. Photo: © 
Corinne Day. Courtesy: Mary Warner Marien. 
Warner Marien, Mary. Photography: A Cultural 
History. London: Lawrence King Publishing, 
2010: 487.

Alternative Aesthetic Politics
“Jute Not Plastic”—Alternative Product Culture 
between Environmental Crisis and Fashion
Martina Fineder (PP. XXX)

Fig. 47
Des-In, Lampshade, ca. 1976. Courtesy: Des-In/
private collection of Beate Rosebrock. 
Fig. 48
Des-In, Lampshade series, ca. 1977. Courtesy: 
Des-In/private collection of Beate Rosebrock.
Fig. 49
Des-In, Lampshade, ca. 1977. Courtesy: Des-In/
private collection of Beate Rosebrock.
Fig. 50
Des-In, Lampshade, ca 1976. Papier-mâché. 
Courtesy: Des-In/private collection of Beate 
Rosebrock.
Figs. 51+52
Des-In, Lampshades, about 1977. Courtesy: 
Des-In/private collection of Jochen Gros.
Figs. 53+54+55+56
Jochen Gros, Details of a shop window in  
Dorothee Becker’s shop “Utensilo,” ca. 1980. 
Courtesy: Des-In/private collection of Jochen 
Gros.
Fig. 57
IKEA, cover of the German catalogue edition, 
1978/79. Courtesy: IKEA.

On the Ethical Turn in Fashion: Policies of Gover-
nance and the Fashioning of Social Critique 
Elke Gaugele  (PP. XXX)

Fig. 58
Vivienne Westwood, Climate Revolution, London 
Fashion Week, September 17, 2012. Screenshot 
by the author. Courtesy: Vivienne Westwood.
Fig. 59
Honest By, Bruno Pieters’s Spring 2012 collec-
tion. Screenshot by the author.  http://www.
honestby.com. Courtesy: Bruno Pieters.
Fig. 60
Bruno Pieters. Lookbook I, Autum/Winter 2012. 
Screenshot by the author. http://www.honest-
by.com/en/category/4/aw-2012.html. Courtesy: 
Bruno Pieters.
Fig. 61
Honest By, Lookbook I, Autumn/Winter 2012 
collection. Screenshot by the author. http://
honestby.com/en/lookbook/92/4/9.html. 
Courtesy: Bruno Pieters.

Fig. 62
Photo of Fidus and Gusto Gräser, ca. 1900, 
http://www.gusto-graeser.info/Diefenbach/
zeittafel_diefenbach.html.
Fig. 63
Bruno Pieters, Honest By, Categories of trans-
parency. Screenshot by the author. http://
www.honestby.com. Courtesy: Bruno Pieters.
Fig. 64
Bruno Pieters, Honest By, Filter By. Screenshot 
by the author. http://www.honestby.com/en/
category/3/collections.html. Courtesy: Bruno 
Pieters.
Fig. 65
Honest By, othering: Green-faced black model, 
2012. Photo: model, 2012. Courtesy: Bruno 
Pieters.
Fig. 66
Vivienne Westwood, Green othering, Climate 
Revolution, London Fashion Week September 
17, 2012. Photo: Vivienne Westwood. Courtesy: 
Vivienne Westwood.
Fig. 67
Vivienne Westwood, Climate Revolution  
T-shirt, Climate Revolution, London Fashion 
Week, September 17, 2012. Courtesy: Vivienne 
Westwood.
Fig. 68
Copenhagen Fashion Summit May, 2012. 
Screenshot by the author from the Honest By 
website. http://www.honestby.com. Courtesy: 
Bruno Pieters.
Fig. 69
Trading bases of the Ethical Fashion Initiative, 
2014. Photo: Trading bases, 2014. Courtesy: 
Ethical Fashion Initiative.

Fig. 70
Jürgen Teller, Vivienne Westwood, Ethical 
Fashion Africa Collection, 2011. Photos: © Jür-
gen Teller. http://nanciemwai.com/2011/08/
vivienne-westwood-aw-1112-campaign. Cour-
tesy: Jürgen Teller and Vivienne Westwood.

“Performing Whiteness”—Revisioning White Tex-
tiles in Visual Culture
Birgit Haehnel  (PP. XXX)

Fig. 71
Hans Feurer, “Tropical whites”—Christy in Africa, 
American Vogue, May 1990.
Photo: Hans Feurer. 
Fig. 72
Eva Gronbach collection, mutter erde vater 
land, 2003. Courtesy: Christa Thelen. “Der 
neue Höhenflug der deutschen Mode. 
Schwarz-Rot-Gold.” In Petra, January 2005, p. 
46.

250

Fig. 73
Anselm Kiefer, Lilith on the Red Sea,  
Hamburger Bahnhof, Berlin, 1990. Pastel 
chalk, emulsion, ash, linen, lead on canvas, 
280 x 625 cm. Photo: Birgit Haehnel. 
Fig. 74
Ludwig Hohlwein, Neues Volk, 1938. Calendar 
page. Offset print, 42 x 29.7 cm. Museum f. 
Kunst und Gewerbe, Hamburg, Inv. Nr. E 
1971/129. Die Grundrechte im Spiegel des 
Plakats – 1919 bis 1999. Edited by Kai Artinger. 
Berlin, 2000: 69, ill. 1.
Fig. 75
Gerhard Keil, Turner, 1939, oil on canvas, 215.5 
x 155.5 cm. Dresden, Galerie Neue Meister, 
Staatliche Kunstsammlungen Dresden, AK 
Kunst und Propaganda im Streit der Nationen 
1930–1945, Deutsches Historisches Museum 
Berlin. Edited by Hans-Jörg Czech and Nikola 
Doll, Dresden: Sandstein, 2007, p. 318, ill. D/31.

Fig. 76
Gerhard Keil, Die Turnerinnen, 1939, oil on 
canvas, 215.5 x 155.5 cm, Staatliche Kunstsam-
mlungen Dresden, Galerie Neue Meister. Ac-
cesssed Dec. 2, 2013. http://galleria.thule-ital-
ia.com/keil.html.
Fig. 77
Max Abadian, Lady Gaga. Feminism, magazine 
cover, Texte zur Kunst, December 2011, 22: 84. 
Photo: Birgit Haehnel.
Fig. 78
Maud Sulter, Terpsichore (from the ZABAT  
series), 1989. Cibachrome print, 152.4 x 121.9 
cm, Arts Council Collection, Hayward Gallery, 
London. Accessed Dec. 2, 2013. http://www.
lightsgoingon.com/2012/09/365-day-
357-maud-sulter. Courtesy: the artist.

251

252

Biographies

Biographies

253

Ilka Becker, Ph.D., studied Art History, Ger-

man Philology, and Philosophy in Cologne; 
in 2006 she completed her doctoral stud-
ies with a dissertation on “Fotografische 
Atmosphären” (photographic atmo-
spheres); since 1992, art critic; since 1996 
curator; 1996/97 scientific archival work 
of the photographic collection at the Rhe-
inisches Landesmuseum Bonn; from 1998 
to 2000 editor at Texte zur Kunst; from 
1998 to 2002 scientific assistant at Uni-
versity of Cologne; from 2003 to 2008 
scientific assistant for the research project 
“Medien und kulturelle Kommunikation” 
(media and cultural communication); from 
2003 to 2008 teaching and project at the 
Hochschule für Bildende Künste HBK 
Braunschweig and at the Universities of 
Bonn and Cologne; in 2010, participation in 
the project “Schnittraum – Raum für Kunst 
und Diskussion” in Braunschweig (with 
Corinna Schnitt and students at the HBK 
Braunschweig); since 2009, faculty mem-
ber and since 2013 professor at the Institut 
für Kunstwissenschaft, HBK Braunschweig. 
Publications (selections): Just not in Time. 
Inframedialität und non- lineare Zeitlich-
keiten in Kunst, Film, Literatur und Philoso-
phie, eds. Ilka Becker, Michael Cuntz, and 
Michael Wetzel (Munich: Wilhelm Fink, 
2011); Fotografische Atmosphären. Rhetor-
iken des Unbestimmten in der zeitgenös-
sischen Kunst (Munich: Wilhelm Fink, 
2010); Unmenge – Wie verteilt sich Hand-
lungsmacht? eds. Ilka Becker, Michael 
Cuntz, and Astrid Kusser (Munich: Wilhelm 
Fink, 2009).

 
Tanja Bradaric, is currently pursuing a Ph.D. 
as a doctoral student at the Vienna Fine 
Arts Academy. After her undergraduate 
work in the fashion studios of Veronique 
Branquinho and Raf Simons, she went to 
Paris to work for Balenciaga and Chloé. 
Her special interest of research lies in the 
fashion industry’s power relations and 
means of production, as well as the com-
petition and the synergies between fash-
ion metropolises. Based on her experi-
ence and empirical work, she founded in 
2011 the fashion label Bradaric Ohmae.

Endora Comer-Arldt, completed her graduate 
studies in 2006 at the Technical Universi-
ty in Darmstadt with a Masters degree in 
History and Education. From 2003 to 
2007 she worked as project manager in 

youth and adult education for a non-gov-
ernmental organization in developing an 
institution for young immigrants. From 
2007 to 2012 she was a consultant for an 
international firm for personnel and cor-
porate consultation. In 2014 she finished 
her dissertation, “Producing Images. Die 
Zusammenarbeit von Modeindustrie und 
Celebrities als ästhetische Ökonomie” 
(The cooperation between the fashion in-
dustry and celebrity system as an aesthet-
ic economy) at the Academy of Fine Arts 
Vienna. In 2012 she was lecturer at the 
Wella Stiftungsprofessur at the Technical 
University of Darmstadt and, since Sep-
tember 2012, she has worked for Medi-
abrands, an international media, market-
ing, and communications firm.

 
Martina Fineder, is a design historian and cul-

tural scientist. Her work focuses on the 
ecologically and socially motivated cul-
ture of design and the consumer society. 
A trained product designer and co-found-
er of D+ Buero for Design, she shifted her 
interests to design history and the materi-
al culture studies, teaching and research-
ing at the Academy of Fine Arts Vienna, 
the University of Applied Arts Vienna and 
the Vienna University of Technology. Her 
doctoral thesis focuses on “The Promise 
of the Alternative. The development of 
critical design and consumer culture in 
West Germany’s 1970s.” 
She also works as a curator for institutions 
like the MAK – The Museum of Applied 
Arts Vienna, where she co-curated the ex-
hibition “Nomadic Furniture 3.0 – New 
Liberated Living?” (2013). Together with 
Thomas Geisler she initiated the establish-
ment of the Victor J. Papanek Foundation 
(2011). Martina is the co-editor of the  
German re-edition of Design for the Real 
World (2009). 

Eva Flicker, Ph.D., is professor at the Institute 
for Sociology at the University of Vienna. 
Her professional concentrations are on 
Film and Media Sociology, Visual Sociology, 
Gender Studies, Organizational Sociology, 
and group dynamics. From 2008 to 2012 
she organized the Gender Studies pro-
gram at the University of Vienna. From 
2010 to 2013 she was a faculty member of 
GIK – Gender Initiativkolleg at the University 
of Vienna. 
Current projects include: “Fashionable 

254

Biographies

255

Queens: Fashion – Power – Gender,” fol-
lowing an international symposium in  
December 2010 at the University of Vienna, 
together with Monika Seidl (publication  
in 2014); “Alte/r/n in den Medien,” a project 
on the representation of age and elderly 
people in media; poverty and social in-
equality in Austrian film; and “Fashionable 
Power”– images of women politicians in 
international media.

Elke Gaugele, is an academic in Empirical 

Cultural Studies (Ph.D.), a writer, curator, 
and professor of Fashion and Styles at the 
Academy of Fine Arts Vienna. At the Insti-
tute for Education in the Arts (IKL) she 
chairs an innovative study program that 
brings together conceptual art and design 
practices with critical studies in fashion 
and popular cultures. Prior to this, she 
was assistant professor at the Institute for 
Art and Art Theory, in the department of 
Textile Studies at the University of Co-
logne, Research Fellow at the Department 
for Visual Arts Goldsmiths/University of 
London, and a Lise-Meitner-Habilitation 
grant recipient as well as a recipient of the 
Maria-Goeppert-Mayer guest professor-
ship from the state of Lower Saxony. Her 
recent work as international researcher, 
lecturer and author focuses on the episte-
mologies of fashion and design, on gen-
der, biopolitics and aesthetic politics, on 
postcolonial approaches in fashion and 
design studies and on craftivist practices. 
A selection of publications includes: 
Craftista! Handarbeit als Aktivismus, eds. 
Elke Gaugele, Sonja Eismann, Verena Kuni, 
and Elke Zobl (Mainz: Ventil, 2011); Techno-
Naturen. Design&Styles, eds. Elke Gaugele 
and Petra Eisele, (publication series by the 
Academy of Fine Arts Vienna and Schlee-
brügge.editor, 2008); “Fashion Design,” in 
Design Dictionary. Perspectives on Design 
Terminology (Board of International Re-
search in Design), eds. Michael Erlhoff and 
Tim Marshall. (Cambridge, MA: Birkhäuser, 
2008).

Birgit Haehnel, Ph.D., is an art historian with 
research interests focusing on Postcolo-
nial Studies and Gender Studies in the field 
of art and visual culture. She currently 
heads the research project supported by 
the German Research Foundation (DFG) 
“Weiße Umhüllungen – Weiße Verblendun-
gen. Zur Bedeutung des weißen Tuchs in 

der visuellen Kultur seit dem 20. Jahrhun-
dert” at the Technical University of Darm-
stadt and at CePoG (Centrum für Postco-
lonial und Gender Studies) at the University 
of Trier. Lectures and publications on art 
in the seventeenth, nineteenth, and twen-
tieth centuries on the semantics of skin 
color (racism critique), art theory, mobility 
concepts, bio politics and trauma re-
search. Recent study areas: textiles, mi-
gration, and Critical Whiteness Studies. 

Alicia Kühl, Ph.D., completed her Cultural  

Science studies at the University of 
Leipzig with a Master’s degree and has 
just completed her doctor thesis entitled 
“Fashion Shows. Claiming the New in 
Fashion” („Modenschauen. Die Behaup-
tung des Neuen in der Mode“) at the Uni-
versity of Potsdam under Prof. Dr. Gertrud 
Lehnert. Her doctoral thesis is based on 
the theory that the scene of invention has 
shifted from fashion design to fashion 
show design, thereby putting not only the 
position and function of the fashion show 
into question but also the apparel within 
the fashion cycle. In the winter semester 
of 2010, she was a lecturer at the Universi-
ty of Potsdam and since April 2011 she has 
been a postgraduate scholarship recipient 
from the German Research Foundation 
(DFG) under the title “Visibility and Visual-
isation. Hybrid Forms of Pictorial Knowl-
edge.” Her research interests lie in the 
theory and history of fashion as well as in 
the concepts of space, performance, at-
mospheres and newness.  
A selection of publications includes:  
Modetheorie. Klassische Texte aus zwei 
Jahrhunderten, eds. Alicia Kühl, Gertrud 
Lehnert, and Katja Weise. (Bielefeld:  
Transcript, forthcoming in 2014). “Die 
Choreotopografie oder das Schreiben von 
Modenschau-Räumen (WT),” in Die Medial-
ität der Mode, edited by Rainer Wenrich, 
(Bielefeld: Transcript, 2014). “Mode ist 
Fernweh. Das Thema Reise in der Moden-
schau,” in Querformat (6). (Bielefeld: Tran-
script, forthcoming). “Wie Kleidung zu 
Mode wird. Prozesse der Verräumlichung 
in Modenschauen,” in Räume der Mode. 
Edited by Gertrud Lehnert (Paderborn: 
Fink Wilhelm, 2012). For further informa-
tion see: www.sichtbarkeit-sichtbarmac-
hung.de.   

Michael R. Müller, Ph.D., completed his doctoral 

studies at the University of Konstanz and 
is Professor of Sociology at the University 
of Vechta. Prior to this he was a junior 
professor at the Institut für Kunst und Ma-
terielle Kultur at the Technical University, 
Dortmund, and Senior Fellow at the Kultur-
wissenschaftliches Institut Essen. His re-
search focuses on: figurative hermeneutics, 
sociological aesthetics, cultural anthro-
pology of fashion and textiles, and the so-
ciology of science, media, and the body, 
and research of political culture. 
A selection of publications includes:  
“Medial Beauty. Three Sociological Theses 
on Late Modern Body Aesthetics,” (together 
with A. Sonnenmoser) in Globalizing Beauty: 
Aesthetics in the Twentieth Century, edited 
by H. Berghoff and T. Kühne (New York: 
Palgrave Macmillan, 2013). “‘Apartheid’ 
der Mode. Eine symboltheoretische Revision 
der formalen Modesoziologie,” in Sozialer 
Sinn. Zeitschrift für hermeneutische Sozial-
forschung, vol. 2, 2012; “Figurative Her-
meneutik. Zur methodologischen Konzep-
tion einer Wissenssoziologie des Bildes,” 
in Sozialer Sinn. Zeitschrift für herme-
neutische Sozialforschung, vol. 1, 2012; 
Körper Haben. Die symbolische Formung 
der Person, eds. Michael Mueller, H. G. 
Soeffner, and A. Sonnenmoser (Wei-
lerswist: Velbrueck Wissenschaft, 2011); 
Stil und Individualität. Die Ästhetik gesell-
schaftlicher Selbstbehauptung, (Munich: 
Wilhelm Fink, 2009). 

Sabina Muriale, is a cultural anthropologist, 
curator, and lecturer at the Academy of 
Fine Arts Vienna in the discipline of fashion 
and styles. She is moreover the PR and Art 
Director of the fashion label Edwina Hörl, 
Tokyo, as well as a buyer and shop manager 
of the Viennese shu!. In her doctoral work 
she investigates the presentational forms 
of contemporary fashion in the digital age.  
Her research concentrations include: pre-
sentational forms of contemporary fashion 
in museums and fashion shows, interaction 
between art and fashion, as well as tech-
noculture and new marketing strategies of 
the fashion industry in the age of social 
media and other digital tools.

Taro Ohmae is a fashion designer and holds a 
Bachelor of Arts from Bunka Fashion College, 
Tokyo and a Master of Arts in fashion  
design from the University of Applied Arts, 

Vienna. He has worked with Veronique 
Branquino, Bernhard Willhelm, Radic& 
Morgner, Chloe, Wendy&Jim, and  
Balenciaga. Together with Tanja Bradaric, 
he launched the fashion label BRADARIC 
OHMAE in 2011. The Vienna-based label 
has won a number of awards: iD-Interna-
tional Emerging Designer Awards, Golden 
Centre Mall Prize, Dunedin, New Zealand 
(2012); Fashion Award of the City of Vienna 
(Modepreis der Stadt Wien) (2013); Vienna 
Awards for Fashion and Lifestyle, Category 
Accessory Designer (2014).

Barbara Schrödl, Ph.D. is art historian with re-
search concentrations in the media history 
of art history, cultural-scientific research 
of clothing, myths about artists, art and 
film, as well as the visual culture during 
the Nazi and post-war eras. Since 2005, 
she is assistant professor at the Institut für 
Kunstwissenschaft und Philosophie at the 
Catholic-Theological Private University 
Linz and since 2009 lecturer in the disci-
pline of fashion and styles at the Academy 
of Fine Arts Vienna. Prior to this, from 
1995 to 1999, she was scientific research-
er at the University of Bremen, from 2001 
to 2002 guest professor at the Berlin Uni-
versity of the Arts with numerous teaching 
fellows at universities and art colleges in 
Germany, Austria, and Switzerland.  
Publications on cultural-scientific research 
into clothing include: “Introduction,” to-
gether with Karen Ellwanger, Traute Helmers 
and Heidi Helmhold, and “Weiße Wäsche, 
‘reine’ und doch schuldige Frauen, das 
Wirtschaftswunder und der Tod. Weiblicher 
Opfertod im Künstlerspielfilm der 1950er 
Jahre,” in Totenkleidung. Zur Konstruktion 
von Tod und Geschlecht in der materiellen 
und visuellen Kultur, eds. Barbara Schrödl, 
Karen Ellwanger, Heidi Helmhold and 
Traute Helmers, (Bielefeld: Transkript, 
2010); “Fighting Machines, Authorities in 
Need of Protection and a Dominant Woman. 
Leather Clothing in German Films of the 
1940’s and 1950’s / Kampfmaschinen, 
schutzbedürftige Autoritäten und eine 
dominante Frau. Lederbekleidung in 
deutschen Filmen der 1940er und 1950er 
Jahre,” in Macht-Leder-Lust. Verborgene 
Codes der Lederbekleidung im 20. Jahr-
hundert, edited by Rosita Nenno and 
Christian Rathke, exh. cat. Deutsches 
Ledermuseum, (Bielefeld: Offenbach 
2008).

256

257

by Stella Bruzzi and Pamela Church Gibson 
(London: Routledge, 2013); “Erschöpfte 
Prominenz / Exhausted Celebrities,” in  
Leistung und Erschöpfung. Burnout in der 
Wettbewerbsgesellschaft, eds. Sighard 
Neckel and Greta Wagner, (Berlin: Suhrkamp, 
2013); “Fashion in the City. Street-Style-
Blogs and the Limits of Fashion’s Democ-
ratization,” in Texte zur Kunst, 78, June 
2010.

Ruby Sircar is a cultural producer and cur-
rently teaching as Senior Artist at the 
Academy of Fine Arts Vienna, where she 
received and published her Ph.D. in Post-
Colonial and Cultural Studies. She was  
Research Fellow at the Jan van Eyck Acade-
mie Maastricht and Research Coordinator 
for the Initiative of Minorities in Vienna. 
Her work was shown, among other places, 
at the Gallery for Contemporary Art 
Leipzig, Künstlerhaus Stuttgart, Essor Gal-
lery Project Space London, and Shedhalle 
Zurich. Her work focuses on cultural and 
migrative translation and knowledge 
production. 

Birke Sturm, studied Art Education and English 

at the Universities of Regensburg, Aber-
deen and Vienna and at the Academy of 
Fine Arts Vienna, where she completed 
her teaching degree in these subjects in 
2008 with honors. She received a merit 
award from the Academy of Fine Arts  
Vienna for her thesis. From 2008 to 2012 
she was an assistant and finally student 
advisor in the Department of Fashion and 
Styles at the Academy of Fine Arts Vienna. 
Since 2009 she has taught English at the 
Oberstufenrealgymnasium at the Lauder 
Chabad Campus Vienna. She is currently 
working on a Ph.D. thesis on different 
promises of feminine beauty ideals in 
modernism. 

Monica Titton is a sociologist working in the 
fields of the sociology of fashion, the soci-
ology of culture, media and critical social 
theory. She is a doctoral candidate in the 
Department of Sociology at University of 
Vienna, where she worked as a research 
assistant between 2008 and 2012, and 
where she currently teaches Sociology at 
undergraduate level. From October 2012 
to March 2013 she was a visiting researcher 
at the London College of Fashion (Universi-
ty of the Arts, London, UK). Her research in-
terests include the links between fashion, 
collective, and personal identity dynam-
ics, cultural transformations and society. 
Her Ph.D. thesis deals with the cultural 
significance of fashion and street style 
blogs as fashion media in their own right.  
A selection of publications includes:  
“Styling the Street. Fashion Performance, 
Stardom and Neo-Dandyism on Street 
Style Blogs,” in Fashion Cultures Revisited: 
Theories, Explanations and Analysis, edited 

258

259

This publication was kindly supported by Gesellschaft der Freunde der  
bildenden Künste.

Verteilung der Seitenzah-
len in jeweiligen Kapiteln
(muss nicht sein…)
hier evtuell den Satz mit 
dem Colour Scheme?

