A neural basis for inference in perceptual ambiguity

Philipp Sterzer, and Andreas Kleinschmidt 

PNAS

 2007;104;323-328; originally published online Dec 26, 2006; 

doi:10.1073/pnas.0609006104 

This information is current as of March 2007.
 

Online Information
& Services
 

Supplementary Material
 

References

 

E-mail Alerts

 

Rights & Permissions

 

Reprints

 

Notes:
 

High-resolution figures, a citation map, links to PubMed and Google Scholar,
etc., can be found at: 
www.pnas.org/cgi/content/full/104/1/323
 
Supplementary material can be found at: 
www.pnas.org/cgi/content/full/0609006104/DC1
 
This article cites 41 articles, 9 of which you can access for free at: 
www.pnas.org/cgi/content/full/104/1/323#BIBL
 
This article has been cited by other articles: 
www.pnas.org/cgi/content/full/104/1/323#otherarticles
Receive free email alerts when new articles cite this article - sign up in the box
at the top right corner of the article or
To reproduce this article in part (figures, tables) or in entirety, see: 
www.pnas.org/misc/rightperm.shtml
 
To order reprints, see: 
www.pnas.org/misc/reprints.shtml
 

click here

. 

 

A neural basis for inference in perceptual ambiguity

Philipp Sterzer†‡§ and Andreas Kleinschmidt¶㥋**

†Department of Neurology, Johann Wolfgang Goethe University, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, D-60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany; ‡Department of Psychiatry,
Charite´ University Hospital/St Hedwig Hospital, Turmstrasse 21, D-10559 Berlin, Germany; ¶Institut National de la Sante´ et de la Recherche Me´ dicale Unite´
562, Cognitive Neuroimaging, 91401 Orsay Cedex, France, 㛳Commissariat a` l’Energie Atomique, Direction des Sciences du Vivant, De´ partement de Recherche
Me´ dicale, Service Hospitalier Fre´ de´ ric Joliot, Orsay, 91401 Cedex, France; and **Universite´ Paris-Sud, Orsay, 91405, France

Edited by Marcus E. Raichle, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, and approved November 8, 2006 (received for review
October 11, 2006)

When looking at ambiguous visual stimuli, the observer experi-
ences frequent spontaneous transitions between two competing
percepts while physical stimulation remains unchanged. Despite
recent advances in understanding the neural processes underlying
such perceptual rivalry, a key question has remained unresolved:
Does perceptual rivalry result merely from local bistability of
neural activity patterns in sensory stimulus representations, or do
higher-order areas play a causal role by shifting inference and,
thus, initiating perceptual changes? We used functional MRI to
measure brain activity while human observers reported successive
spontaneous changes in perceived direction for an ambiguous
apparent motion stimulus. In a control condition, the individual
sequences of spontaneous perceptual switches during bistability
were replayed by using a disambiguated version of the stimulus.
Greater activations during spontaneous compared with stimulus-
driven switches were observed in inferior frontal cortex bilaterally.
Subsequent chronometric analyses of event-related signal time
courses showed that, relative to activations in motion-sensitive
extrastriate visual cortex, right inferior frontal cortex activation
occurred earlier during spontaneous than during stimulus-driven
perceptual changes. The temporal precedence of right inferior
frontal activations suggests that this region participates in initiat-
ing spontaneous switches in perception during constant physical
stimulation. Our ﬁndings can thus be seen as a signature of when
and where the brain ‘‘makes up its mind’’ about competing
perceptual interpretations of a given sensory input pattern.

apparent motion 兩 bistable perception 兩 functional MRI

We usually experience our perception of the visual world as

unitary and stable even though the information available
to our brains is often noisy or ambiguous. How does the brain
nonetheless ‘‘make sense’’ of this information? From a theoret-
ical perspective, translating the images cast onto the retina into
meaningful percepts can be addressed as an inference problem,
but related neurophysiological evidence is sparse (1). This need
for inference is best illustrated by ambiguous stimuli as the
Necker cube or the apparent motion quartet (2, 3) (Fig. 1), where
perception typically fluctuates spontaneously between two mu-
tually exclusive interpretations of the same sensory input. Such
bistable perception is paralleled by activity changes in separate
neuronal populations that represent one or the other perceptual
interpretation (4), but what causes the change to occur in the first
place remains unclear. In binocular rivalry, where discrepant
information is presented to the two eyes, neural activity at the
earliest visual processing stages correlates with spontaneous
perceptual fluctuations (5–9), suggesting a ‘‘gate-keeping’’ func-
tion of these structures in visual awareness. Alternatively, per-
ceptual changes could be initiated by a higher-level process that,
by way of inference, can stabilize, bias, or topple the current
interpretation of the sensory input (10, 11).

These two scenarios differ in the causal chain assumed to
underlie changes in visual awareness, but it remains difficult to
infer causality from correlative neurophysiological measures.
Still, temporal precedence is generally considered good evidence
in favor of a putative causal role (12). Invasive neurophysiolog-

ical recordings would therefore appear ideally suited to resolve
this question but suffer from the uncertainty of where exactly to
place recording electrodes, for instance, in the frontal lobe.
Functional neuroimaging provides whole-brain coverage and has
indeed shown activations related to perceptual change not only
in visual but also frontal and parietal regions (10, 13–16).
However, the conventional amplitude-based analytical tech-
niques used in these studies could not clarify whether fronto-
parietal regions respond to a feed-forward signal from the
sensory cortex that is driven by perceptual change or whether
these regions generate a feedback signal to the sensory cortex
before perceptual change. Recent novel analytical approaches
have shown that the temporally dispersed neurovascular re-
sponse is reliable enough to resolve latency differences in the
range of a couple of hundreds of milliseconds (17–22). Here, we
used such techniques to analyze the onset latencies of functional
MRI (fMRI) activiations during spontaneous perceptual
changes in bistable apparent motion (rivalry) compared with
stimulus-driven changes in a matched control condition (replay)
where the sequence of reversals as reported in the preceding
rivalry condition was replayed by using a disambiguated version
of the apparent motion quartet (Fig. 1). We hypothesized that a
top-down process, where frontal or parietal regions play a causal
role in initiating perceptual change, should be associated with an
earlier onset of activations in these regions during spontaneous
compared with stimulus-driven perceptual changes, relative to
activations in visual cortex [supporting information (SI) Fig. 5].

Results
We first mapped transient activations that occurred whenever
perception changed, irrespective of whether this happened spon-
taneously during rivalry or in response to a stimulus change
during replay. In our paradigm, change in perception refers to a
change in direction of apparent motion (from vertical to hori-
zontal or vice versa, see Fig. 1), and activation refers to a signal
increase over and above constant ongoing sensory processing. As
reported with similar paradigms (16, 23–25), switch-related
activations occurred at the lateral occipitotemporal junction,
corresponding to the human motion complex (hMT⫹/V5) (Fig.
2A). Additionally and again in accord with previous findings (13,
14, 16), we observed a distributed activation pattern associated
with perceptual switches that included bilateral inferior frontal
lobe regions and the right inferior parietal lobule but also the
calcarine cortex, consistent with early visual areas V1/V2 (see SI

Author contributions: P.S. and A.K. designed research; P.S. performed research; P.S. ana-
lyzed data; and P.S. and A.K. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
This article is a PNAS direct submission.
Abbreviations: fMRI, functional magnetic resonance imaging; hMT⫹/V5, human motion
complex; BOLD, blood oxygenation level dependent; HRF, hemodynamic response func-
tion; ROI, region of interest.
§To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: philipp.sterzer@charite.de.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/cgi/content/full/
0609006104/DC1.
© 2006 by The National Academy of Sciences of the USA

E
C
N
E
I
C
S
O
R
U
E
N

www.pnas.org兾cgi兾doi兾10.1073兾pnas.0609006104

PNAS 兩

January 2, 2007 兩 vol. 104 兩 no. 1 兩 323–328

Fig. 1.
Stimulus display. Ambiguous and disambiguated versions of the
apparent motion quartet used in the rivalry and replay conditions, respec-
tively, are shown. The single frames alternated at 4 Hz. When looking at the
rivalry stimulus, perception is bistable and ﬂuctuates spontaneously between
periods of horizontal and vertical apparent motion perception. Disambigu-
ated versions of the stimulus were used to change participants’ perception of
apparent motion with the same temporal sequence as during the rivalry
condition.

Table 1). As in these studies, we also found several further
activations related to the preparation and execution of motor
reports, e.g., in the hand representations of the left primary
sensorimotor cortex and the cerebellum as well as in the
supplementary motor area (14).

We next tested whether those regions that responded to
perceptual changes in both conditions, rivalry as well as replay,
showed differences in response amplitude between these two
conditions. Greater response amplitudes during spontaneous vs.
stimulus-driven perceptual switches were found bilaterally in
inferior frontal regions (Fig. 2B; see also SI Table 2). This result
is in general agreement with findings from a previous study (14)
that used a similar paradigm with a rivalry and a replay condition
but a different stimulus (binocular rivalry). In contrast to this
earlier study, no significant response amplitude differences were
detected in parietal or occipital regions (14).

Finally, and thus addressing the key issue of this study, we
asked whether there was evidence for temporal precedence of
inferior frontal lobe activations over those in other brain regions,
especially those in hMT⫹/V5. There is ample evidence to suggest
that perceived changes in motion direction, no matter whether
they are spontaneous or stimulus-driven, are reflected by event-
related hMT⫹/V5 activations (16, 23–28). We hypothesized that
if the inferior frontal cortex was causally involved in inducing
switches during bistable perception, then frontal activations in
association with spontaneous perceptual switches should pre-
cede those in hMT⫹/V5. Regional variations in the shape of the
hemodynamic response (18, 22) might invalidate any direct
comparison of response onsets across regions. We overcame this
problem by testing our hypothesis as the region-by-condition
interaction that probed whether an earlier onset of activations
during spontaneous as opposed to stimulus-driven switches
occurred in frontal regions over and above any potential differ-
ences in hMT⫹/V5. A finding of earlier frontal activations
during spontaneous compared with stimulus-driven switches
relative to hMT⫹/V5 activations would hence argue for a role of

Fig. 2.
Transient activation during perceptual switches. (A) Regions com-
monly activated in response to both spontaneous and stimulus-driven per-
ceptual switches are rendered in blue onto a standard anatomical template
image (n ⫽ 12, random effects, for visualization thresholded at P ⬍ 10⫺5,
uncorrected, cluster threshold k ⬎12 voxels). Numbers 1–6 indicate the re-
gions that were subsequently used for detailed analyses of signal time courses
(see Figs. 3 and 4): 1, 2 ⫽ right and left inferior frontal cortex; 3, 4 ⫽ right and
left hMT⫹/V5; 5 ⫽ right inferior parietal lobule; 6 ⫽ left sensorimotor cortex.
(B) Greater response amplitudes during spontaneous as opposed to stimulus-
driven switches were observed in bilateral inferior frontal regions and are
shown in red (x, y, z ⫽ ⫺45, 18, and 0, P ⬍ 0.001; and x, y, z ⫽ 66, 18, 12, P ⬍
0.016, small-volume corrected; thresholded for visualization at P ⬍ 0.005,
uncorrected, cluster threshold k ⬎12 voxels). (C) Earlier responses during
spontaneous as opposed to stimulus-driven switches were observed in the
right inferior frontal gyrus (x, y, z ⫽ 63, 18, and 15; P ⬍ 0.017, small-volume
corrected; thresholded for visualization at P ⬍ 0.005, uncorrected, cluster
threshold k ⬎12 voxels). Latency differences were assessed by using a pub-
lished voxel-wise method (21).

frontal regions in inducing spontaneous perceptual switches (SI
Fig. 5).

In a first step, we used a previously described voxel-wise
method that allowed us to capture slight timing variations in
blood oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD) responses by using
a canonical hemodynamic response function (HRF) and its
temporal derivative as model functions (21). Testing for earlier
response onsets in spontaneous vs. stimulus-driven switches, we
found a significant difference in the right inferior frontal cortex
at virtually the same location where switch-related activations
were greater in amplitude during rivalry than replay (Fig. 2C, see
also SI Table 3). No indication of significant onset-latency
differences was detected in any of the other regions that acti-
vated during switches.

To validate these results independently with a different ap-
proach, we then analyzed our data using a Fourier set of basis
functions, which avoids assumptions about the shape of the
hemodynamic response (29) (Fig. 3). From the resulting re-
sponse fits, we measured onset latencies for both conditions in
each participant at the exact individual frontal lobe location that
responded more strongly during rivalry than replay switches. For

324 兩 www.pnas.org兾cgi兾doi兾10.1073兾pnas.0609006104

Sterzer and Kleinschmidt

Fig. 4. Onset-latency differences. Onset-latency differences between re-
gional brain activations during perceptual switches in the rivalry and those in
the replay condition averaged across participants (0 on the x axis ⫽ response
onset in the replay condition). The numbering of the bars 1–6 corresponds to
the numbering of the regions in Fig. 2. Right inferior frontal response onsets
during rivalry occurred on average 784 ms ⫾200 SEM earlier, whereas no such
difference was detectable in other frontal or parietal regions and hMT⫹/V5.
Error bars indicate standard errors. *, P ⬍ 0.002 (two-tailed paired t test for
onset-latencies of responses to spontaneous compared with stimulus-driven
switches).

vations in bistable motion perception (16, 24–26, 28) has led to
the suggestion that separate direction-selective neuronal popu-
lations coding for different directions of motion might be in
rivalry and that, at perceptual switches, one of these populations
displays a transient rise in activity. This interpretation is sup-
ported by the electrophysiological observation in monkeys that
responses of directionally selective cells in MT signal the per-
ceived direction of motion in ambiguous motion stimuli (27).
Spontaneous fluctuations and adaptation of percept-related
neural activity would then be two mechanisms contributing to
perceptual dominance of either percept during ongoing rivalry.
In this study, event-related hMT⫹/V5 activations were indis-
tinguishable between spontaneous and stimulus-driven percep-
tual changes. This suggests that hMT⫹/V5 activity reflects
perceived changes in motion direction irrespective of whether
they are ‘‘real’’ or generated spontaneously in the absence of any
stimulus change. We also found extremely stable relationships
without evidence of latency shifts between the activations in
hMT⫹/V5 and the key presses reporting perceptual changes as
well as the activations in the primary sensorimotor hand repre-
sentation. These two observations indicate that the sensory and
perceptual differences between the two conditions were so
subtle that they were reflected neither in the fMRI responses
recorded at the level of visual cortex nor in the delay of reporting
the changes. Reaction-time differences between reporting spon-
taneous as opposed to stimulus-driven perceptual changes
should have translated into condition-dependent latency differ-
ences between the motor cortex and hMT⫹/V5, which is at odds
with our chronometric findings. Moreover, our approach was not
sensitive to putative reaction-time differences between rivalry
and replay, because our critical result, a region-by-condition
interaction for latencies, was based on chronometric analyses of
frontal lobe activity referenced against the timing of a neural
signal, the response in hMT⫹/V5, instead of a behavioral report
(SI Fig. 5).

Although responses in sensory and motor areas were insen-
sitive to the actual condition, activity in frontal lobe regions
differed between the two conditions not only in amplitude but,
more importantly, also in timing. Simply put, we used the replay
condition to measure the minimal latency of neural processes
that might occur just because perception has changed. The

E
C
N
E
I
C
S
O
R
U
E
N

Fig. 3.
Event-related signal time courses. Circles represent the signal change
per 2-s time bin averaged across participants (error bars indicate standard
error), and smooth lines represent the average ﬁtted response from a fourth-
order Fourier model (29). Postswitch time (s) is plotted on the x axes and
percentage signal change on the y axes. Responses to spontaneous perceptual
switches (rivalry condition) are plotted in red and responses to stimulus-driven
switches (replay condition) are plotted in blue. The data and ﬁtted responses
were extracted from individual participants’ response maxima in a prior-
deﬁned ROIs. The numbering of the panels 1–6 corresponds to the numbering
of the regions in Fig. 2. The individual ﬁtted responses were used for the
assessment of response-onset latencies (see Fig. 4).

comparison, we sampled data from the individual response
maxima common to rivalry and replay switches, i.e., right inferior
parietal cortex, hMT⫹/V5 bilaterally, and left sensorimotor
cortex (see SI Fig. 6). Strikingly, we found the response onset in
right inferior frontal cortex to occur, on average, ⬇800 ms earlier
during rivalry compared with replay (Fig. 4), confirming the
result of the voxel-wise analysis. No significant latency difference
was detectable in any other region, resulting in a significant
region-by-condition interaction (P ⬍ 0.003, repeated-measures
ANOVA).

Discussion
In this study, we compared the amplitude and timing of brain
activations during spontaneous changes in visual perception with
those during stimulus-driven changes. Although these two types
of perceptual change recruited largely overlapping brain struc-
tures, greater response amplitudes during spontaneous percep-
tual changes were observed in inferior frontal cortical regions
bilaterally. Crucially, we could also demonstrate that, relative to
brain responses during stimulus-driven switches, right inferior
frontal activations occurred earlier than those in other brain
regions, most notably those in hMT⫹/V5.

According to evidence from neurophysiological studies in
nonhuman primates (30, 31) and human fMRI studies (32),
subjective fluctuations in perception are reflected by relative
activity levels of neuronal populations representing either per-
ceptual content. The finding of switch-related hMT⫹/V5 acti-

Sterzer and Kleinschmidt

PNAS 兩

January 2, 2007 兩 vol. 104 兩 no. 1 兩 325

latency of the frontal responses in the replay condition therefore
determines the earliest possible time point for feed-forward
effects caused by processes occurring at lower visual processing
stages. Conversely, any earlier activation in the rivalry condition
inevitably, and irrespective of its absolute latency, expresses that
perception will change.

One concern could be that the earlier response onset in the
right inferior frontal lobe merely reflected the fact that this
region also showed greater response amplitudes during rivalry
than during replay. However, this scenario is unlikely for several
reasons. First, we did not find a difference in response latency in
left inferior frontal cortex, where the response amplitude dif-
fered as much as in the right inferior frontal cortex (Fig. 3). This
result shows that greater BOLD responses are not systematically
associated with earlier response onsets. Furthermore, we used
two different and independent analytical approaches to deter-
mine latency, both of which gave mutually confirmatory results.
One of our approaches used a bias-free model that captures
variations in amplitude or duration without translating them into
an estimated difference in onset (29). Finally, there is no
indication from previous studies that greater neural responses
per se can lead to an earlier onset of the BOLD response (22, 33).
It is also noteworthy that frontal and occipital switch-related
activations were comparable in strength (Fig. 3), which makes it
unlikely that potential neural latency differences in the occipital
cortex might have been undetectable because of substantially
weaker BOLD responses.

We found no significant latency effects in other regions that
might also have been expected to show temporal precedence in
our setting as, for instance, in the left inferior frontal and right
inferior parietal lobes. Of course, one explanation may be that
fMRI chronometry simply lacks the temporal resolution to
detect what could be a whole chain of incremental latency
differences at the various stages of the visual-processing hier-
archy. We thus cannot exclude the possibility of temporal
precedence at the neural level in other regions (34), but our
results do suggest that the latency difference in the right inferior
frontal cortex is on a larger scale than elsewhere. Interestingly,
recent work using noninvasive MRI-based fiber-tracking has
revealed direct connections between the inferior frontal and
lateral occipital cortex in humans (35). Such a frontooccipital
‘‘fast-track’’ may provide the anatomical routing for the physi-
ological responses we studied. We observed a latency difference
of ⬇800 ms between right inferior frontal activations during
spontaneous and stimulus-driven switches, which (in the absence
of a latency difference in hMT⫹/V5) indicates that the neural
process that initiates a spontaneous perceptual reorganization
may start several hundred milliseconds before perception actu-
ally switches. This interval seems surprisingly long, no matter
whether one assumes interactions by direct connections or a
cascade involving intermediate processing levels at other sites
such as the parietal lobe. Conceivably, however, the process of
perceptual reinterpretation may require recursive interactions
between high-level and sensory areas that could last for a few
hundred milliseconds before eventually resulting in a perceptual
switch. Such a mechanism would not need to be associated with
earlier fMRI signal increases in hMT⫹/V5, because the driving
force in the sensory area before a perceptual reversal could be
adaptation to the still-dominant percept.

The notion that adaptation of percept-related neural activity
may also play an important role in perceptual bistability (4) is not
irreconcilable with a causal role of higher-order processes in
initiating a perceptual switch as previously suggested (11, 36).
The actual alternations of perception could be determined by the
joint effect of local processes embedded into a more global
process. That is, whenever local processes (e.g., adaptation) act
to destabilize activity that underpins the currently dominating
percept, higher-order evaluative processes can take effect and

initiate a perceptual reorganization that translates into and
stabilizes a new ‘‘balance of power’’ in specialized visual areas.
This interpretation is further supported by behavioral alteration
of perceptual bistability that has recently been described in
patients with prefrontal cortex lesions (37).

Our results cannot necessarily be extended to studies using
binocular rivalry, where perceptual ambiguity is generated by
interocular sensory conflict. This latter setting may involve
additional mechanisms specifically operating at the monocular
levels of stimulus processing (5, 8, 9). Conversely, our findings
can very well be extended to ‘‘real-life’’ visual perception,
because the ambiguity in interpreting natural visual scenes falls
within the range between the two extremes probed by our
experiment. On one end, the rivalry condition maximizes the
need for perceptual inference; perception cannot be informed by
physical stimulus properties when sensory input is perfectly
ambiguous, and thus remains ‘‘arbitrary.’’ On the other end, the
replay condition is almost perfectly unambiguous and thus
requires little if any inference. By using these two extremes, our
experiment showed arbitrating neural activity by virtue of la-
tency differences, but we propose that the same inferential
mechanisms are also called upon after any sensory input change
and that their activity level depends on the degree of perceptual
ambiguity in the sensory input.

Although apparent motion paths and object identities across
frames are confounded in our rivalry stimulus, it appears intu-
itive to suspect a spatial inference to act on percept selection.
This speculation is compatible with earlier observations that
central symbolic (endogenous) cues activate right inferior fron-
tal cortex more than salient peripheral (exogenous) cues, par-
ticularly when cues are invalid, and this mismatch of expectation
and sensory input yields reorienting (38). In the rivalry case,
expectation would correspond to the currently dominant per-
cept. With progressive adaptation of the related hMT⫹/V5
signal, the mismatch or error would increase and might drive
reorienting. In the replay case, this error signal would also arise
but only briefly once sensory input changes. This interpretation,
which draws on predictive coding theory (39), would thus also
account for the smaller and later switch-related activations that
we observed in the inferior frontal cortex during replay. To-
gether, our results provide empirical neurofunctional evidence
for theoretical models of visual perception that are grounded in
Bayesian and related frameworks (1, 40) instead of relying purely
on feed-forward architectures (41).

Materials and Methods
Experimental Paradigm and fMRI Data Acquisition. Twelve healthy
right-handed participants aged 28–39 years (8 males; written
informed consent) with normal or corrected-to-normal vision
participated in a fMRI experiment on a 3T whole-body scanner
with gradient booster and standard head coil (Trio; Siemens,
Erlangen, Germany). We obtained blood oxygenation-sensitive
(T2* weighted) echo-planar image volumes every 2 s (echo time
30 ms; flip angle 60°; 34 contiguous transverse slices, voxel size ⫽
3.3 ⫻ 3.3 ⫻ 3 mm).

During scanning, participants were presented with alternating
blocks of the rivalry and replay conditions (Fig. 1). The stimuli
were projected onto a screen located 25 cm from their eyes and
viewed by means of a mirror attached to the head coil. During
rivalry, a bistable apparent motion quartet consisting of a white
central fixation cross and two white dots was presented. The
latter were flashed simultaneously in diagonally opposite corners
of an implicit rectangle in 4-Hz alternation with two dots in the
other two corners (Fig. 1). This yields spontaneously alternating
perception of horizontal or vertical apparent motion, both
perceived directions being mutually exclusive (2, 3); for a
demonstration of this phenomenon see http://psy.ucsd.edu/chip/
illu㛭ambig㛭apprnt㛭mot.html from the laboratory of V. S. Ram-

326 兩 www.pnas.org兾cgi兾doi兾10.1073兾pnas.0609006104

Sterzer and Kleinschmidt

achandran). Background luminance was 12 cd/m2, dot and
fixation cross luminance 76 cd/m2, dot diameter 25⬘ of visual
angle, and center-to-center horizontal dot distance 2°. The
vertical dot distance was adjusted individually for each partici-
pant in preceding behavioral sessions to obtain approximately
equal average durations of stable horizontal and vertical motion
perception. It thus varied across individuals between 2°32⬘ and
3°13⬘. Participants were chosen for imaging if they reported
clear-cut transitions between stable states of horizontal and
vertical apparent motion perception without experiencing fur-
ther percepts (e.g., circular motion or flicker) and if the percepts
lasted on average at least 8 s, thus optimizing power for the
event-related analysis. The participants were instructed to main-
tain fixation on the central cross and to indicate changes of
motion direction by key presses, by using the right index finger
for perceptual switches to vertical and the right middle finger for
switches to horizontal motion perception. All participants con-
firmed after scanning that they could clearly determine and
report the transitions between vertical and horizontal apparent
motion in both conditions. Interreversal times between percep-
tual switches followed a ␥ distribution as generally found for
bistable stimuli (13, 14, 16, 25, 42). Mean percept duration across
all participants was 13.08 ⫾ 0.37 s (SEM) and thus well suited for
an event-related analysis of fMRI signals. There was no signif-
icant difference in duration of stable horizontal and vertical
motion perception (12.65 ⫾ 0.36 s (SEM) vs. 13.50 ⫾ 0.42 s, P ⫽
0.071, Wilcoxon test).

For replay, a disambiguated version of the apparent motion
quartet was used to repeat the sequence of horizontal and
vertical percepts as reported by the participant in the preceding
rivalry condition. The stimulus also consisted of a central fixation
cross and two dots flashing simultaneously at 4 Hz (see Fig. 1),
dot sizes and distances being identical to the rivalry condition.
For horizontal apparent motion, two dots in the upper left and
lower left corners of an implicit rectangle were shown in
alternation with two dots in the upper right and lower right
corners. Accordingly, two dots in the upper left and right corners
alternating with two dots in the lower left and right corners
yielded vertical apparent motion. Scanning comprised 3 rivalry
and 3 replay runs of 245 scans each. Stimuli were displayed and
key presses registered by using ERTS software (Experimental
Run Time System, Version 3.18, 1996, J. Beringer, Darmstadt,
Germany).

Imaging Data Analysis. fMRI data were analyzed by using SPM2
(www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm). After removal of the first five scans,
all functional image volumes were realigned, unwarped, slice-
timing corrected, spatially normalized into Montreal Neurolog-
ical Institute (MNI) neuroanatomical space (www.bic.mni.
mcgill.ca/brainweb), and smoothed by using a 10-mm full-
width-at-half-maximum Gaussian kernel. We removed low-
frequency fluctuations by a high-pass filter with a cut-off at 128 s
and used an autoregressive model of order one (AR (1) ⫹ white
noise) to correct for temporal autocorrelations.

A mixed-effects analysis was adopted, using a two-stage
procedure. First, a fixed-effects analysis was applied to the
preprocessed data of each participant by using the general linear
model implemented in SPM2. This model fits the data with a
linear combination of regressors in a design matrix to produce
3D maps of parameter estimates (␤weights), which represent the
contribution of a particular regressor to the data. The design
matrix consisted of six regressors. There were two experimental
conditions, spontaneous switches (occurring during rivalry) and
stimulus-driven-switches (during replay), both of which were
modeled by using three regressors in the following way: each
participant’s individual average reaction time from stimulus
change to key press during replay (average across participants
843 ⫾ 14 ms) was subtracted from the times at which the key

presses occurred to create a sequence of estimated time points
of the actual perceptual switches in both conditions. The evoked
hemodynamic responses to these perceptual switches were mod-
eled as ␦ (‘‘stick’’) functions convolved with a canonical HRF as
implemented in SPM2 and both its temporal and dispersion
derivatives. For each participant, t maps of the effects for both
switch-types as well as separately for both event types relative to
a baseline of stable motion perception were computed by using
the HRF regressors and then submitted to second-level analyses
(random-effects).

The main effect for perceptual switches,

irrespective of
whether they occurred during the rivalry or the replay condition,
was assessed by performing a one-sample t test on all t maps for
both event types. This contrast was inclusively masked with all
voxels that were activated by both single-switch types at P ⬍
0.001, uncorrected, to limit the analysis to regions where both
conditions contributed positively. Differential effects (sponta-
neous ⬎ stimulus-driven switches and vice versa) were assessed
by using paired t tests. For the main effect of perceptual switches,
activations were considered significant at P ⬍ 0.05, by using a
family-wise error correction for multiple comparisons across the
whole brain and, alternatively at P ⬍ 0.001, uncorrected, if
predicted by previous findings, or in the case of a response in the
homologous contralateral area at P ⬍ 0.05, corrected. The
analysis of differential effects was constrained to candidate
regions that were defined a priori on the basis of previous
findings (13–16). These regions of interest (ROI) included the
inferior frontal cortices, right inferior parietal cortex, and ex-
trastriate occipital regions showing switch-related responses, i.e.,
in hMT⫹/V5 bilaterally. We used spherical search volumes
(diameter, 20 mm) centered on the maxima of the main effect for
both switch types in these regions and corrected for multiple
comparisons across the voxels within these search volumes
(small-volume correction).

Latency differences between conditions were assessed in two
steps, by using two separate and independent analyses. First, we
used a previously described method (21) that is based on the
voxel-wise computation of ratios of the parameter estimates for
the temporal derivative and the HRF. In brief, latency maps for
each participant and each condition were created by transform-
ing the derivative/HRF ratio for each voxel with a sigmoidal
logistic function. A paired t test was then performed on the
second level to test for between-condition latency differences
across participants. To restrict this analysis to voxels with a
positive response in both conditions and where the HRF pro-
vided a reasonable fit to the data, the second-level maps were
masked with t maps of voxels activated by both single-event types
at P ⬍ 0.001, uncorrected. For statistical inference, we again
used a small-volume correction for the same ROIs as in the
original analysis, with a significance threshold of P ⬍ 0.05,
corrected.

To validate the results further from this voxel-wise analysis
(21), we assessed the onset latencies in a more detailed analysis
based on event-related signal time courses in each individual
participant. A common approach in previous fMRI studies
investigating response latencies was the use of HRF models
(usually based on ␥ functions) parameterized with respect to
onset latency (17, 19, 20, 22). To account fully for the variability
in response shapes due to regional differences in vascularization
and the duration of neural responses, the model used also has to
be parameterized for other variables, such as peak latency and
response width. Because these parameters may be interdepen-
dent and the resulting parameter estimates hence influenced by
each other, we took a different approach and used a model that
is free of a priori assumptions with regard to response shape.
Importantly, the selection of voxels was guided by our original
analysis using the HRF, but the fine-grained information re-
garding the exact response onset was assessed by using a Fourier

Sterzer and Kleinschmidt

PNAS 兩

January 2, 2007 兩 vol. 104 兩 no. 1 兩 327

E
C
N
E
I
C
S
O
R
U
E
N

model that can, in principle, fit any response shape as a linear
combination of its basis functions (29). We first determined in
each participant the individual peak voxel for regions that had
shown a group effect for spontaneous ⬎ stimulus-driven switches
at a lowered statistical threshold (P ⬍ 0.05, uncorrected; in 4 of
12 participants, the threshold had to be lowered to P ⬍ 0.1 to
identify response maxima for this contrast; see SI Fig. 6).
Inclusive masking with voxels surviving P ⬍ 0.05, uncorrected,
in both respective single contrasts was used in each participant
individually to restrict the onset-latency analysis to voxels show-
ing a positive response and where the HRF provided a reason-
able fit to the data in both conditions. Individual maxima for
ROIs not showing significant activity differences were analo-
gously determined from the main effect for all perceptual
switches. We extracted data from individual peak voxels rather
than averaging across entire ROIs to maximize the sensitivity
and specificity of our analysis. However, because of spatial
smoothing (see above) the signal in each single voxel neverthe-
less represents a weighted average of nearby voxels in the range

of the smoothing kernel used. The data were then reanalyzed
with a fourth-order Fourier set windowed with a Hanning
function, which has proven useful for characterizing the tempo-
ral aspects of evoked hemodynamic responses (29). Condition-
specific onset latencies were then calculated for each participant
from the slope of the resulting fitted responses in each ROI. The
onset was operationally defined as the time at which the slope
exceeded 10% of the maximum slope in the ascending part of the
BOLD response. This measure accounts for, but is not con-
founded by differences in response amplitude. Again, onset
latencies were subjected to second-level analyses testing across
participants for significant differences between conditions
within each region (one-sample t tests) and for a condition-by-
region interaction (repeated-measures ANOVA).

We thank Karl Friston for expert advice on chronometric analyses and
Stanislas Dehaene and Geraint Rees for helpful comments on an earlier
version of the manuscript. This work was supported by the Volkswagen
Foundation (P.S. and A.K.) and by the German Research Society (P.S.).

1. Kersten D, Yuille A (2003) Curr Opin Neurobiol 13:150–158.
2. von Schiller P (1933) Psychologische Forschung 17:179–214.
3. Ramachandran VS, Anstis SM (1983) Nature 304:529–531.
4. Blake R, Logothetis NK (2002) Nat Rev Neurosci 3:13–21.
5. Haynes JD, Deichmann R, Rees G (2005) Nature 438:496–499.
6. Haynes JD, Rees G (2005) Curr Biol 15:1301–1307.
7. Polonsky A, Blake R, Braun J, Heeger DJ (2000) Nat Neurosci 3:1153–1159.
8. Tong F, Engel SA (2001) Nature 411:195–199.
9. Wunderlich K, Schneider KA, Kastner S (2005) Nat Neurosci 8:1595–1602.
10. Kleinschmidt A, Buchel C, Hutton C, Friston KJ, Frackowiak RS (2002)

Neuron 34:659–666.

11. Leopold DA, Logothetis NK (1999) Trends Cogn Sci 3:254–264.
12. Parker AJ, Krug K (2003) Curr Opin Neurobiol 13:433–439.
13. Kleinschmidt A, Bu¨chel C, Zeki S, Frackowiak RSJ (1998) Proc R Soc London

14. Lumer ED, Friston KJ, Rees G (1998) Science 280:1930–1933.
15. Portas CM, Strange BA, Friston KJ, Dolan RJ, Frith CD (2000) Proc R Soc

16. Sterzer P, Russ MO, Preibisch C, Kleinschmidt A (2002) NeuroImage 15:908–

B 265:2427–2433.

London B 267:845–850.

916.

100:1415–1419.

17. Bellgowan PS, Saad ZS, Bandettini PA (2003) Proc Natl Acad Sci USA

18. Buckner RL, Bandettini PA, O’Craven KM, Savoy RL, Petersen SE, Raichle

ME, Rosen BR (1996) Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93:14878–14883.

19. Calhoun V, Adali T, Kraut M, Pearlson G (2000) Magn Reson Med 44:947–954.
20. Formisano E, Linden DE, Di Salle F, Trojano L, Esposito F, Sack AT, Grossi

D, Zanella FE, Goebel R (2002) Neuron 35:185–194.

21. Henson RN, Price CJ, Rugg MD, Turner R, Friston KJ (2002) NeuroImage

22. Miezin FM, Maccotta L, Ollinger JM, Petersen SE, Buckner RL (2000)

15:83–97.

NeuroImage 11:735–759.

4821.

3413.

4221.

6:616–623.

18:456–471.

23. Muckli L, Kriegeskorte N, Lanfermann H, Zanella FE, Singer W, Goebel R

(2002) J Neurosci 22:RC219.

24. Sterzer P, Eger E, Kleinschmidt A (2003) NeuroReport 14:2337–2441.
25. Sterzer P, Kleinschmidt A (2005) Eur J Neurosci 21:3097–3106.
26. Castelo-Branco M, Formisano E, Backes W, Zanella F, Neuenschwander S,

Singer W, Goebel R (2002) Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99:13914–13919.

27. Dodd JV, Krug K, Cumming BG, Parker AJ (2001) J Neurosci 21:4809–

28. Kleinschmidt A, Thilo KV, Buchel C, Gresty MA, Bronstein AM, Frackowiak

RS (2002) NeuroImage 16:873–882.

29. Friston KJ, Frith CD, Frackowiak RS, Turner R (1995) NeuroImage 2:166–172.
30. Leopold DA, Logothetis NK (1996) Nature 379:549–553.
31. Sheinberg DL, Logothetis NK (1997) Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94:3408–

32. Tong F, Nakayama K, Vaughan JT, Kanwisher N (1998) Neuron 21:753–759.
33. Boynton GM, Engel SA, Glover GH, Heeger DJ (1996) J Neurosci 16:4207–

34. Williams ZM, Elfar JC, Eskandar EN, Toth LJ, Assad JA (2003) Nat Neurosci

35. Ffytche DH, Catani M (2005) Philos Trans R Soc London B 360:767–779.
36. Rees G, Kreiman G, Koch C (2002) Nat Rev Neurosci 3:261–270.
37. Windmann S, Wehrmann M, Calabrese P, Gunturkun O (2006) J Cogn Neurosci

38. Kincade JM, Abrams RA, Astafiev SV, Shulman GL, Corbetta M (2005)

J Neurosci 25:4593–4604.

39. Rao RP, Ballard DH (1999) Nat Neurosci 2:79–87.
40. Pouget A, Dayan P, Zemel RS (2003) Annu Rev Neurosci 26:381–410.
41. Riesenhuber M, Poggio T (2002) Curr Opin Neurobiol 12:162–168.
42. Borsellino A, De Marco A, Allazetta A, Rinesi S, Bartolini B (1972) Kybernetik

10:139–144.

328 兩 www.pnas.org兾cgi兾doi兾10.1073兾pnas.0609006104

Sterzer and Kleinschmidt

