The Role and Importance of 

for Chinese Outward Foreign Direct Investments

the Chinese Government

Philippe Gugler, University of Fribourg, Switzerland

Marc Fetscherin, Rollins College, United States

a
CHINESE OUTWARD FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENTS show 
strong positive trend over recent years and have attracted considerable
attention from academia and the business press. Many observers and
commentators express interest in the role the Chinese government
king of Chinese multinational

plays in the activities and decision-ma 

enterprises (MNEs) in connection with their foreign direct investments

(FOi).

. This article makes a contribution by investigating the relationship be-
tween the Chinese .government and MNEs in connection with their
oiJtward foreign direct investment (OFDI). We present a 2x2 matrix
where one dimension includes the interest (high/low) of the Chinese
government and the other the interest of MNEs (high/low). We argue
that, in market-seeking and strategic asset-seeking, bath interests are
aligned and high, while for effcency-seeking' motives Chinese come
pany interests are high but government interests are relatively low. In
regard to resource-seeking motives and balancing foreign currency re-
serves, Chinese government interests are high but company interests
relatively low. Our matrix allows us to understand the role and interests
king procéss as weil as
of the Chinese government in the decision-ma 
the relationships with Chinese companies in outward foreign direct in-
vestments.

Trends and Patterns in Chinese FDI

China's OFDls have shown a strong positive trend over recent years.
At the beginning of the 1990s, outfows were only marginal, at about
US$ 800  million (UNCTAD WIR 2009). But since 2003, Chinese OFOI
has demonstrated impressive growth, increasing from US$ 2.8 billion
in 2003 to US$ 52. billion in 2008 (UNCTAD WIR 2009: 53). However,
DI is c1early accelerating, it is still small by any relative
measure. In 2006, Chinese OFDI accounted for only 1.5 percent of the
ln 2008, China's share of world FOI reached 2.8 percent

while Chinese OF 

worlds total FOI. 

(UNCTAD WIR, 2009).

Most Chinese OFOls are in neighbouring Asian countries, especially

those in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) (MOF-
COM, 2008:67-68). China'sSpecíal Administrative Region, Hong Kong,
attracts by far the highest amount of OFDI. In 2008 it was the preferred
destination of 63 percent of Chinese OFDI (MOFCOM, 2008: 67). A sig-
nificant amount probably constitutes round-tripping investments or
investménts to offshore financial centres or to re-investments back to
China due to favorable tax situations in Hong Kong and other countries.

Therefore, Hong Kong and other offshore financíal centers are transit
points for Chinese ODFI that need ta be factored into the reported sta-
tistics and analyses.

Looking at Chinese FDI in terms of stock flows, leasing and business ser-
vices are the. most popular sectors, accounting for USS 54.5 billion, fol-
lowed by the financial sector (US$ 36.7 billion), wholesale and retailing
(USS 29.8 billion) and mining with US$ 22.8 billion in 2006 (MOFCOM,
2008: 80). The importance of the financíal sector may be i1lustrated by
the fact that, according to MOFCOM(Chinese Ministry of Commerce),
Chinese state-owned commercial banks had established 47 branch of-
fices, 31 affliated institutions and 12 representative offces in 19 coun-
tries in 2006, including the United States, Japan and Great Britarn (MOF-
COM, 2006: 51). Our data for this article are based mostly on offcial data
provided by MOFCOM, but some authors cite a lack of disclosure and
transparency in data sources about Chinese foreign direct investments
(see article from Derek Scissors in this issue).

The best way to understand the strategies of Chinese MNEs is to link
their preferred investment destinations with their maininvestment
sectors since a close relationship exists between the sectoral and geo-
1 ustrates that Chinese
graphical distribution of Chinese OFDI. .FigUre 1 il 
OFDI in the Middle East and Africa targets mainly extractive industries.
According to UNCTAD (2008), the Chinese government supports the
development of Chinese firms' activities in Africa, especially in sec-
tors such as energy and resource exploitation. OFDI in manufacturing
is prevalent in Eastern Europe (especíally transport equipment), Latin
America (mostly heavy industry) and Asia (electronics). Sales, market-
ing and support activities are generally performed in Western European
countries and in North America. International.mergers and acquisitions
are the primary mode of entry of Chinese firms in developed econo-
mies. However, Chinese firms have not yet invested heavily in manufac-
turing and sectors with high added value. As far as production activities,
transport is the key sector in Western Europe, while ICT plays an impor-
tant raie in North America.

Figure 1 suggests that Chinese MNEs follow a regionalization strategy
rather than a global one (Rugman & Doh, 2008: 134 ff.). The 12 larg-
est Chinese firms have the highest average percentage of intraregional
sales and assets. This observation is not specific to Chinese MNEs but
refers to most MNEs as Rugman (2008) found out (see also Sukpanich &
Rugman, 2009). This contrasts with the inference of the press that Chi-
nese OFOI is a global strategy led, or at least influenced, by the govern-
ment.

12

AIB Insights

Vol.  10, No.4

Figure 1: Share of Chinese OFDI in the World

e ~lI.¡.tlllll'¡¡.
'oc of ChIna'. Off 2.79%
ey Ousters ieT, Transport EqUlpment
ey Actlv1es Sfler Marketing, Support

__ -~=-_J

tock of Chlna's oroi

Br _ Virgìn Is.
eaymao Is.

il.05V
5.69% -1

2.07% 1

Manvfi)H:turingg" -

~-'~-_..~~-"'~.~"1
flecron!,s, Heavy Industry . J'

in OFDI. FOI by any Chinese
firm requires approval by the
Chinese authorities, including
MOFCOM, the State Admin-
istration of Foreign Exchange

(SAFE), and the National De-

velopment and Reform Com-
mission (NDRC). Through this
approval process, the Chinese
government ensures that ail
investment activities, even if
executed by privately owned
companies, conform to gov-
ernment policies and goals.

Clearly, this needs to be taken
into consideration when ana-
Iyzing the motivations and
strategies of Chinese MNEs

Source: Own illustration based on MOFCOM, Statistical Bulletin on Chinese OFOI, 2008.

Government Primacy over Foreign Direct Investmel'ts

A number of points need to be raised to outline the relationships be-
tween the Chinese government and the private sector for Chinese
OFOI. For many years, typical private sector business was non-existent
in China. With the economic liberalization and the introduction of pri-
vate ownership in the 1980s, private sector activities took root. They
were partially built on individual entrepreneurial initiatives and state
policies such as the one on privatization (Gugler & Boie, 2009). Some
"national champions'; and most have
companies are identified as future 
aclQse relationship with the government (Morck et aL., 2007). Since the
"going global" strategy adopted by the government at the end of the
1990s, both Chinese State-Owned Enterprises (SOEs) and private en-
terprises are engaged in FOI. But most of the large-scale investment
projects that weigh heavily in FOI statistics have so far been executed
by Chinese SOEs. The shares of FOI flows coming from SOEs under the
Central Government in recent years were 73.5 percent (2003),82.3 per-
cent (2004), and 83.2 percent (2005). The remaining shares of FDI flows
are split among investments of SOEs administered by regional govern-
ments, non-SOEs owned collectively, and privately-owned companies.
The success of SOEs abraad is quite Iimited due to their lack of competi-
tiveness and know-how and becausethe acquisitions usually reflect a
political agenda rather than business needs.

Neither the trends nor motives for Chinese OFOI can be understood
without reference to government policies and the raie of the Chinese

government. This is especially true in the 

case of China. China's OFOI
is still highly regulated, even though policies have shifted from pro-
hibition to graduai opening and finally to active promotion, at least
for some SOEs in strategic sectors or industries (Gugler & Boie, 2009:
29-30). Morck et aL. (2007) assessed the connections between govern-
ment and business in China, confirming the government's central raié

Vol.  10, NO.4

investing internationaL. The
following Figure 2 illustrates a
~onceptual framework outlining the interests of the government ver-
sus the interests of Chinese companies. This 2x2matrix maps the four

motives of OF 

DI (market seekers, effciency seekers, resource seekers

as
and strategic asset seekers (Dunning & Lundan, 2008: 67 ffJ) as weil 
the huge trade surplus and the management of extensive currency re-
serves Chinese companies, state-owned or private, hold.

High

Gavernment

Interest

Balancing Foreign
Currency Reserves

Resource-seeking

Strategie asset-seeking

Market-seeking

,

Efficíency-seeking

.

Law

Law

Chinese Corpørate

Interest

High

Source: Own illustration. Based also on Gugler and Boie, 

2008.

Modellmplications

(1) Our framework suggests that an area of increasing OFOI might exist
where government and company interests are high, such as market.
seeking and strategie asset-seeking.

continued on page 74

AIB Insights

13

eontinued from page 73

"market-seeking FOI is byfarthe mosteommon type
As noted by UNCTAD, 
of strategy for develaping-country TNCs in their process of internatianaliza-
tian" (UNCTAD WIR, 2006: 158). Several recent studies point to the rise
of market-seeking motives driving Chinese MNEs toward large markets

(Zhang, 2003). The FIAS/MIGA global survey confirms the prevalence
of Chinese market-seeking FDI. In their study of Chinese FOI fram 1984
to 2001, Buckley et aL. (2007) show that market-seeking was a key mo-
tive for Chinese FDI. However, during this period, Chinese firms moved
away from market-seeking strategies in nearby foreign markets toward
securing raw materials in riskier markets (Buckley et aL., 2007). Chinese

companies that have invested abroad for market-seeking purposes
include Haier, TCL, and Huawei Technologies. They have ail made re-
peated efforts to enter the more affuent developed economies such

as the US.

While the UNCTAD global survey indicates that strategie asset-seeking
FOI is a relatively modest motive for developing-country MNEs (14%
compared to 51% for market-seeking FOi), the situation is quite differ-
ent for Chinese MNEs (UNCTAD WIR, 2006: 162). Among Chinese MNEs,
51 percent regard strategic asset-seeking as an important motive for
their FDI, compared to 85 percent for market-seeking, 39 percent for
effciency-seeking and 40 percent for resource-seeking FOI (UNCTAD

WIR, 2006: 168). Strategic asset-seeking often seeks to acquire informa-
tion and knowledge on how to operate internationally. However, as the
experience of Chinese firms in this area grows, their goal has turned to-
ch as advanced proprietary technology and
ward intangible assets, su 
intangible strategic assets such as brand names (Buckley et aL., 2007:
505). Chinese firms increasingly use mergers and acquisitions to acquire
strategic assets with a view to building their competitive advantage.
The acquisition of foreign technologies and brands is often regarded as
a shortcut to establish a company as an international player. Prominent
examples include Shanghai Automotive Industry Corporation (SAIC)
acquiring MG Rover, Lenovo acquiring IBM's PC division, or the recent
acquisition in 2010 ofVolvo by Zhejiang Geely Holding Group. However,
the success of these investments remains to be seen.

(2) Another situation occurs where government interests are high and
company interests low. One might also argue that because the govern-
ment interests are so high, there are almost no private companies in
that industry and only SOE which are under the government control.
Most resource-seeking investments fall into this category, as do invest-
ments balancing fareign curreney reserves. The Chinesegovernment
c1early has an interest in a strong economy and therefore supports
MNEs' international investments. China's powerful economic develop-
ment machine requires a steady supply of natural resources, including
ferrous and non-ferrous materials, precious metals, minerais, oil and gas.
But the country is comparatively poor in most natural resources except
coal. Chinese companies have therefore been very active in resaurce-
seeking. FOI in natural resources is mainly driven by availability rather
than proximity. The destinations for Chinese OFOI include resource-rich
countries in Africa and Central Asia, together with Australia, Russia and
Canada (Buckley et aL., 2007: 511). According to UNCTAD (UNCTAD WIR,

2009), the Chinese government and Chinese MNEs generally regard
natural resources as an important reason to invest abraad. Because se-
curing resources for their growing home economy is a strategie priority,
a large proportion of Chinese MNEs engaged in these efforts are state-
owned. The top three Chinese outward investors are ail companies in
the natural resources field. In 2002 alone, CNPC aequired two oilfields
in Azerbaijan and, together with Petrochina, the companies Devon
Energy Corp. (Indonesia) and Salyan Oil (Azerbaijan). CNOOC acquired
Repsol-YPF SA (Indonesia). Chinese companies also acquired fishery,
timber andagricultural products. For example, Huaguang Forest Co.Ld.
acquired the Rayonier Ine. timberland operation (New Zealand).

(3) Finally, there exist investments where government interests are low,
but company i nterests high. Most effcieney-seeking investment falls into
this category. For Chinese companies, however, effcíency-seeking FDI
is relatively unimportant because of low costs in their home economy
(UNCTAD WIR, 2006: 160). This result confirms studies indicating that,
given the low production costs in China, effciency-seeking does not
play a major role for Chinese MNEs going global (Buckley et aL., 2007:
SOl). But effciency-motivated Chinese FOis may increase in the future

(UNCTAD WIR, 2006: 160).

Government involvement has negative implications along with the
positive. Corporations need the freedom to base strategie decisions on
market requirements rather than fulfilling institutional instructions and
goals. Foreign partners may take a critical view of strong government
intervention. Child and Rodriguez (2005) state that successful interna-
tional Chinese firms are non-SOEs or companies that have made ar-
rangements to protect themselves from bureaucratic interference.

There are also many deals that fail and deserve further investigation.
From 2005 through 2009, China saw at least 40 business deals, each
worth US$ 100 million or more, fall through. Prominent failed deals in-
c1ude Chinalco, which bid US$ 19.5 billion for a larger stake in Rio Tinto
in 2009; CNOOC attempted in 2005 to buy UNOCAL for US$ 18 billion
but was sidetracked by US politicians. In 2008 the China Development
Bank's bid for Germany's Dresdner Bank was killed by Chinese regula-
tors.

Concludin9 Remarks

This article briefly presents and discusses the raie of the Chinese gov-
erhment in MNE foreign direct investments. We present a 2x2 matrix
where one dimension shows the interests (high/low) orthe Chinese
gòvernment and the other dimension the interest of Chinese MNEs
(high/low) for their outward foreign direct investments.

For example, where the interest of the Chinese government and Chi-
nese companies are high and aligned, we expect the scale and the
speed in which those investments will be conducted and executed to
be large and fast. Lenóvo, for example, acquired IBM's PC division while
Volvo was acquired by Zhejiang Geely Holding Group.

The matrix allows us to c1assify and distinguish between different FOi

14

AIB Insights

Vol.lûi No.4

MOFCOM. 2008. Statistical bulletin of Chinas outward foreign di-
rect investment 2008. http://hzs2.mofcom.gov.cn/accesso-

ry/200909/1253869308655.pdf. Accessed 7 May 2010.

Morck, R., Yeung, B., & Zhao, M. 2007. Perspectives on China's outward

foreign direct investment. Journal of International Business Stud-
ies, 39: 337-350.

Rugman, A. 2008. How global are TNCs from emerging markets? ln K.P.
Sauvant (Ed.), The rise of transnational corporations from emerg-
ing markets: 86-106. Northampton: Edward Elgar.

Rugman,A, & Doh J P. 2008. Multinational development. New Haven and

London: Yale University Press.

Sukpanich, N., & Rugman A. M, 2010. Multinationals and the interna-
tional competitivenessof ASEAN firms. In P. Gugler & J Chaisse

(Eds), Competitiveness of the ASEAN countries: Corporate and regu-
la  tory drivers. Northampton: Edward Elgar.

UNCTAD WIR. 2006. World investment report 2006. New York and Geneva:

United Nations Press.

UNCTAD WIR. 2008. World investment report 2008. New York and Geneva:

United Nations Press.

UNCTAD WIR. 2009. World investment report 2009. New York and Geneva:

United Nations Press.

Zhang, A. 2003. Chinas emerging global business: Political economy and

institutional investigations. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Acknowledgement

This research is supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation.

notives and it describes the government roie. This helps foreign gov-
,rnments as weil as senior executives of non-Chinese companies not
)nly to assess the relationship between them and the Chinese com-
)any but the relationship between them and the Chinese government,
Nhether locaL, regional or nationaL.

3ut, given the way the Chinese government is using OFDI to strategical-
y support the development of the Chinese economy and companies, it
emains ta be seen whether this is convincing and the kind and level of
òreign government resistance.

\Iready today, China's pervasive government involvement in its pri-
iate sector causes foreign 'policymakers to worry about the impact
)f non-commercial bidders, national security and economic security.
=hinese data on OFOI lack full disclosure and transparency, according
:0 some researchers, We therefore encourage lB researchers to further
nvestigate the relationship among the Chinese government, Chinese
:ompanies and their individual and cumulative effect on the success of
=hinese FOI. Additional questions for study include: What are the short-
md long-term implications for the competitiveness of Chinese MNEs?
s such a tight government involvement in Chinese MNEs sustainable in
Es for OFOI? What is the re-
~he long run? What is the role of Chinese SM 
ationship among the different levels of Chinese government and how
::oes it impact Chinese MNE OFOI? These are just a few questions we
::ropose for further investigation:

References

Buckley, P. J, Clegg, L. J, Cross, A. R., & Liu, X. 2007, The determinants of
Chinese outward foreign direct investment. Journal of Interna-
tional Business Studies, 38: 499-518.

Child,J, & Rodriguez, S. B. 2005. The internationalization ofChinese firms:
A case for theoretical extension? Management and Organization
Review, 1: 381-410.

Dunning, J H., & Lundan,S. M. 2008. Multinational 

enter  prises and the

global economy (2nd ed.). Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.

FIAS/MIGA, Battat, J 2006. Firm survey - Chinese outward foreign direct

investment. http://rru.worldbank.org/Documents/PSDFo-

rum/2006/joe_battat.pdf. Accessed 13 May 2008.

Gugler, P., & Boie, B. 2008. The Chinese international investments: Cor-
porate and government strategies. Working paper 2008/23, NCCR

Trade Regulation, Bern.

Gugler, P., & Boie, B. 2009. The rise of Chinese MNEs. In J Chaisse & P
Gugler (Eds), Expansion of trade and FOI in Asia: 25-57. London
and New York: Routledge.

MOFCOM. 2006. Statistical bulletin of Chinas outward foreign direct in-
vestment 2006. http://preview.hzs2.mofcom.gov.cn/accesso-
ry/20071 0/1192783779118.pdf. Accessed 13 May 2008.

Vol.lO, No.4

AIB Insights

15

