•  Types	  of	  study	  

Self	  Study	  2	  

Summary:	  „Introduction	  to	  research	  methods	  in	  psychology“	  	  
(Howitt,	  D.,	  Cramer,	  D.	  2011)	  

	  
	  
Aims	  and	  hypotheses	  in	  research	  (pp.	  25-­‐39)	  
	  
o  Descriptive	  or	  exploratory	  studies	  
!  Describing	  the	  in	  detail	  the	  characteristics	  and	  features	  of	  the	  in	  
thing	  in	  question	  
!  Case	  studies	  
!  Content	  analysis	  
o  Evaluation	  of	  outcome	  studies	  
!  Testing	  the	  effectiveness	  of	  an	  intervention	  "	  e.g.	  of	  psycho-­‐
therapeutic	  treatments	  
!  Randomized	  controlled	  trials	  
o  Meta-­‐analytic	  studies	  
of the range of studies which have investigated a particular topic	  
	  

!  Has the aim of statistically summarising and analysing the results 

•  Aims	  of	  research	  

•  Four types of hypothesis 

! 

o  The researcher needs to have a coherent understanding of what purposes 
o  Presenting the aims of their studies with enough clarity and expaning its 

the research will serve and how likely it is to serve these purposes. 
relevance." What can the researcher contribute? 
 

o  Verbs	  that	  allude	  to	  causality:	  	  
Influences,	  affects,	  leads	  to,	  results	  in,	  has	  an	  effect	  on,	  brings	  
about,	  causes	  	  
o  Direction,	  hypotheses	  and	  statistical	  analysis	  
!  Null	  hypothesis	  (there	  is	  no	  relationship	  between	  the	  variables)	  and	  
alternate	  hypothesis	  (there	  is	  a	  relationship)	  "	  Since we are dealing 
null hypothesis. 	  
testing is for testing non-directional hypotheses.	  
o  Four	  possible	  combinations:	  
!  Causal	  and	  directional	  
!  Non-­‐causal	  and	  directional	  
!  Causal	  and	  non-­‐directional	  
!  Non-­‐causal	  and	  non-­‐directional	  

with probabilities, we do not say that we have proven the hypothesis or 
!  One-tailed testing is testing a directional hypothesis whereas two-tailed 

	  	  	  	  	  	  

Research	  Questions	  

1. Why	  is	  it	  so	  easy	  for	  infants/children	  to	  learn	  a	  language	  in	  comparison	  to	  adults?	  
Is	  it	  only	  the	  way	  of	  learning	  this	  language	  (permanent	  exposure	  to	  the	  language,	  
100%	  context	  learning	  etc.)	  or	  does	  the	  infant’s	  brain	  have	  “advantages”	  in	  
comparison	  to	  an	  adult’s	  brain	  –	  and	  if	  it	  is	  so,	  are	  these	  advantages	  somehow	  to	  
retain,	  regain	  or	  substitute?	  
	  2. What	  is	  intuition?	  If	  it	  is	  a	  distinct	  cognitive	  process,	  what	  are	  its	  specific	  neural	  
correlates	  that	  characterize	  it	  as	  such?	  
	  3. What	  is	  the	  self?	  How	  is	  it	  possible	  that	  from	  a	  certain	  age	  on	  we	  are	  able	  to	  
distinguish	  between	  ourselves	  and	  others?	  	  
	  	  
I	  created	  a	  weekly	  alert,	  but	  until	  now	  I	  only	  got	  the	  message	  “Your	  search	  did	  not	  
retrieve	  any	  items“.	  

My	  NCBI:	  

	  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

