Narrative Exposure Therapy 

for the Treatment of Traumatized 

Children and Adolescents (KidNET): 

From Neurocognitive Theory 

to  Field Intervention 

Frank Neuner, PhD*, Claudia Catani, PhD, 
Martina Ruf,  MA,  Elisabeth Schauer, PhD, 
Maggie  Schauer, PhD, Thomas Elbert, PhD 

Department of Psychology,  University  of Konstanz,  Box D25,  D-78457 Konstanz,  Germany 

Current evidence  and  practice 

Violence against children, including maltreatment at home, sexual abuse, 
and  child  labor,  are  common  phenomena  worldwide.  In  addition,  many 
children  are  affected  by  violence  caused  by  political  conflicts,  unrest,  and 
war. Current wars are characterized by high levels of deliberate and system(cid:173)
atic  violence  against  the  civilian  population  [1],  including  victimization  of 
women and children.  More than 30  countries are affected  by current wars, 
and the populations of many now peaceful countries suffer from the after(cid:173)
maths of a  recent armed conflict.  In addition,  the number and intensity  of 
environmental disasters is increasing. Environmental disasters mainly affect 
low-income  countries  with  poor  facilities  for  an  adequate  emergency 
response  [2].  In  some  regions,  war  and  environmental  disaster  co-occur 
[3],  causing  severe  acute  emergencies  and  a  long-lasting  mental  health 
impairment in the population. 

Although  children  can  be  astonishingly  resilient  even  in  face  of severe 
disasters  and atrocities,  high levels  of traumatic events increase the risk  of 
developmental  difficulties  and  psychologic  disorders.  Many  studies  have 
shown  increased  rates  of mental  disorders  in  children  affected  by war  [4]. 

This  work  was  supported  by  the  Ministry  of Science,  Research  and  the  Arts  of Baden(cid:173)

Wiirttemberg, the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, and the European Refugee Fund. 

*  Corresponding author. 
E-mail address:frank.neuner@uni-konstanz.de (F.  Neuner). 

642 

The most prevalent disorder is posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), which 
consists predominantly of intrusive thoughts, flashbacks, nightmares, avoid(cid:173)
ance behavior, and increased  levels  of arousal.  The prevalence of PTSD in 
children  in  war-affected  populations  ranges  from  20%  among  Lebanese 
children who were exposed to bombings and terror attacks [5] to 44% in sur(cid:173)
viving  orphans  10  years  after  the  Rwandan  genocide  [6].  A  survey  in  the 
war-affected  northeastern  region  of Sri  Lanka  showed  that  19%  to  25% 
of the Tamil children already were suffering from  PTSD before the region 
was hit by the devastating tsunami flood wave in 2004 [7]. After the tsunami, 
PTSD  rates  of 40%  were  found  in communities affected  by  both war and 
disaster  [8].  In addition,  Catani  and co-workers  [3]  found  a  high  level  of 
family  violence  in  these  communities.  Confirming  a  general  dose-effect 
model  [9],  PTSD  in  children  was  predicted  mainly  by  the  cumulative 
exposure  to  trauma  including  war,  disaster,  and  family  violence  in  this 
population. 

Longitudinal  studies  show  that trauma symptoms in children  are  more 
than  simply  a  behavioral  problem  that  dissipates  over  time  as  the  child 
matures.  Rates  of  spontaneous  remission  in  traumatized  children  are 
remarkably low [10].  In a large proportion of severely war-traumatizedchil(cid:173)
dren, PTSD can persist for more than  10  years even when the children are 
living in a  safe environment [11].  As  a consequence, intervention strategies 
for severely traumatized children in war-affected populations are necessary 
to prevent a downward spiral in development.  Intervention research in this 
area is still in its infancy, however, and common practice rarely is informed 
by scientific  knowledge.  Even  though  regions  in  crisis  and  refugee  camps 
often attract humanitarian workers from many different countries, psycho(cid:173)
social  activities  are restricted mostly to interventions such as  creative play 
therapy,  the  indiscriminate  distribution  of  psychoeducational  material, 
and  supportive  counseling.  Most  often,  the  interventions  provided  by 
humanitarian  workers  and  health  professionals  have  been  developed  ad 
hoc without a solid theoretic background, and the efficacy of these methods, 
including play activities, is doubtful [12]. 

In  recent  years,  knowledge  about  the  treatment  of PTSD  in  children 

living in high-resource countries has increased rapidly. There now is consid(cid:173)
erable evidence supporting different variants of cognitive behavioral therapy 
(CBT) for the treatment of school children who  have PTSD resulting from 
multiple  traumatic  events,  including sexual  abuse  [13]  and  other forms  of 
violence [14].  In general, CBT programs include psychoeducation, cognitive 
interventions,  training  of affective  coping  skills,  and  exposure  therapy. 
Several  randomized  trials  have  shown  that  in  treating  PTSD  symptoms 
CBT is  more effective  than standard care,  unspecific  therapy,  or no treat(cid:173)
ment  [15].  Follow-up  studies  have  demonstrated  that treatment  gains  are 
maintained for up to 2 years [16]. 

Unfortunately,  no  randomized  controlled  study  has  included  child  war 
victims  or  traumatized  refugees.  Some  pragmatic  treatment  programs 

