The Case Brief

A “case brief” is a method for taking organized notes on a “case,” which is how lawyers often refer to a
written court opinion. There are probably as many different possible case brief formats as there are 
lawyers. This format is meant only to be a sample to teach you how case briefs work, and how some 
typical sections within case briefs work. It is not meant to identify the “one perfect case brief format.” 
The descriptions of each element in the format are meant to provide only a basic overview.

Caption – simply set forth the name of the case, the court in which it was heard, and the citation
• EXAMPLE: Hammontree v. Jenner, California Court of Appeals, 20 Cal.App.3d 528, 97 

Cal.Rptr. 739 (1971).

• Citation: The citation is information about the case that the reader can use to find the case in a 

library or database like Westlaw, and to assess the relevance of the opinion to future cases. 

• Parties: the “name of case” contains the names of the parties involved in the case. In a criminal

case, one of the parties is always the state. In civil cases the parties are private individuals or 
entities.

Procedural History - How did this case advance through the court system to the point it is now? That 
is, who sued who, and on what basis? If this is a criminal case, what charges were filed against the 
defendant? If it is a civil case, what was the cause of action (e.g. negligence)?  In either kind of case, 
have any motions been made and ruled on (e.g. Motion for Summary Judgment, Motion for Directed 
Verdict)? Was the case decided by a jury or judge? What was the precise decision that was made at the 
trial court? That is, in a civil case, did the court find in favor of the plaintiff or the defendant? In a 
criminal case, did the court find that the defendant was guilty or not guilty? Was there another appellate
decision after the trial court and before this court? What specifically did that court rule?

Facts:  The facts you include in your fact section will vary depending on the issues before the court in 
the case you are reading. Your facts will generally include the “legally significant facts” and the 
“relevant background facts.” Legally significant facts: Facts which, if they were different, might mean 
that the outcome of the case would be different. Relevant background facts: Facts that help you 
understand, organize, or think about the legally significant facts. HINT: the facts section of a case is 
often extensive and contains facts that are not terribly important to your case brief. To determine what 
are important facts, complete this part of your case brief after reading the entire case. Relevant facts are
often discussed by the court later in the case as part of its analysis. Facts that appear in the analysis are 
usually significant facts.

Issue(s): In this section, identify the legal question(s) that the court is answering. Generally, a formal 
issue statement will include 3 elements: (1) the legal context (usually the area of law is relevant, and 
maybe a particular statute or other enacted law), (2) the narrow legal question (a yes or no question), 
and (3) the factual context. A less formal issue statement will just identify the narrow legal question and
perhaps some facts. Thus, a formal issue statement might be: “Under Ohio’s dog owner liability statute,
which allows an owner to escape liability for a dog’s bite if the victim was ‘committing a trespass or 
other criminal offense,’ [legal context] can an owner avoid liability [narrow legal question] if the victim
was committing a civil trespass when he was bitten? [facts]” A less formal issue statement might say, 
e.g., “Can a dog owner avoid liability for his dog’s bite if the victim was committing a civil trespass 
when he was bitten?”

Holding: Normally, use of the word “holding” means “the rule of the case” – in other words, the legal 
rule in the context of the facts of this case. NOTE – this is what we are looking for when we read a 

case, as this rule might be precedent! Often, a more formal holding will have the same elements as a 
formal issue statement (stated as a pronouncement rather than as an issue or question, of course). Thus, 
a formal holding might say, “Under the dog owner liability statute, a dog owner can avoid liability for a
dog bite when the victim was committing a civil trespass at the time of the attack because civil trespass 
is included in the meaning of the phrase ‘trespass or other criminal offense.’” NOTE – if you have 
phrased your issue as a question that can be answered with yes or no, the holding section of your case 
brief might simply contain either “yes” or “no”. However, this should only be done if you are confident
that the issue is written well enough to allow you understand what the holding of the case is when you 
come back and read your case brief at a later date.

Reasoning/Rationale: How did the court get from the issue to the holding? Did it break the case down 
into sub-issues? What rules (from past precedent or statutes) did it use? How did it apply the rule(s) to 
the facts before it? Did it analogize the current case to or distinguish it from previous cases? Did it rely 
on relevant policy arguments to help it choose between two or more logically possible options? Did it 
have a purpose or objective in mind when it applied the rule? Did the court modify the original rule to 
get the result?

The reasoning section is usually the most important part of the case brief. In general, you want to work 
in two steps. First, identify the issues that the court analyzed. Courts may refer to lots of issues; you 
want to identify the issues or sub-issues that they analyzed: the issues that they reached a conclusion on
by using the law and the facts. After you identify the issues they analyzed, look for three elements for 
each issue you have identified: (1) the rule (or governing legal principle), (2) the court’s explanation of 
what that rule means, and (3) how the rule applies to the facts of the case. You don’t necessarily have to
write these three things out as separate elements, but having them in mind can help you as you mentally
organize the court’s analysis. Also keep in mind that usually we are reading cases with a purpose or 
research question in mind, and this section should be limited only to that purpose.

Outcome – In this section, record how the court disposed of the case. Did it affirm, reverse, reverse 
and remand, vacate? Try to use the precise procedural terms here. For example, motions are “granted,” 
or “denied.” They are not “upheld” or “overturned.” An appellate court “reverses” or “affirms” or 
“vacates” or “reverses and remands” a decision submitted to it for review. It does not “strike down” or 
“overrule” the decision submitted to it. These terms have precise legal meanings, and so you should 
strive to use them accurately.

Analysis – if you are creating a case brief as part of a research project, here is where you would write 
notes to yourself about how you think the case might be used for the research. If you are writing a brief 
for class, here you might note how this case fits into the broad topic being discussed in class.

Source: based on a handout created by Professor Mary Beth Beazley

