Methodological nationalism and beyond: 
nation-state building, migration and the  

social sciences 

ANDREAS WIMMER AND NINA GLICK SCHILLER 

Abstract  Methodological  nationalism  is  understood  as  the  assumption  that  the 
nation/state/society is the natural social and political form of the modern world. We 
distinguish three modes of methodological nationalism that have characterized main-
stream social science, and then show how these have influenced research on migra-
tion. We discover parallels between nationalist thinking and the conceptualization of 
migration in postwar social sciences. In a historical tour d’horizon, we show that this 
mainstream concept has developed in close interaction with nation-state building pro-
cesses in the West and the role that immigration and integration policies have played 
within them. The shift towards a study of ‘transnational communities’ – the last phase 
in this process – was more a consequence of an epistemic move away from methodo-
logical nationalism than of the appearance of new objects of observation. The article 
concludes by recommending new concepts for analysis that, on the one hand, are not 
coloured  by  methodological  nationalism  and,  on  the  other  hand,  go  beyond  the 
fluidism of much contemporary social theory. 

 
After the first flurry of confusion about the nature and extent of contemporary pro-
cesses  of  globalization,  social  scientists  moved  beyond  rhetorical  generalities  about 
the decline of the nation-state and began to examine the ways in which nation-states 
are  currently  being  reconfigured  rather  than  demolished.  That  nation-states  and 
nationalism  are  compatible  with  globalization  was  made  all  too  obvious.  We  wit-
nessed the flouring of nationalism and the restructuring of a whole range of new states 
in  Eastern  Europe  along  national  lines  in  the  midst  of  growing  global  interconnec-
tions. The concomitance of these processes provides us with an intellectual opening to 
think about the limitations of our conceptual apparatus. It has become easier to under-
stand that it is because we have come to take for granted a world divided into discrete 
and  autonomous  nation-states  that  we  see  nation-state  building  and  global  inter-
connections  as  contradictory.  The  next  step  is  to  analyse  how  the  concept  of  the 
nation-state  has  and  still  does  influence  past  and  current  thinking  in  the  social 
sciences, including our thinking about transnational migration. 

It is our aim in this article to move in this direction by exploring the intellectual 
potential of two hypotheses. We demonstrate that nation-state building processes have 
fundamentally shaped the ways immigration has been perceived and received. These 
perceptions have in turn influenced, though not completely determined, social science 

Global Networks 2, 4 (2002) 301–334. ISSN 1470–2266 
© 2002 Andreas Wimmer and Nina Glick Schiller 

301 

Andreas Wimmer and Nina Glick Schiller 

theory and methodology and, more specifically, its discourse on immigration and inte-
gration.  We  are  designating  as  methodological  nationalism  the  assumption  that  the 
nation/state/society is the natural social and political form of the modern world.1 

The  article  is  organized  into  four  sections.  The  first  discusses  four  modes  of 
methodological  nationalism  and  shows  their  importance  in  social  science  thinking. 
We  then  demonstrate  how  the  study  of  transnational  migration  was  influenced  and 
limited by the constraints of methodological nationalism. Third, we sketch out a his-
torical  perspective  that  allows  us  to  see  how  nation  building,  the  control  and  res-
triction of immigration and the rise of a social science preoccupation with migration 
are  interlinked  processes  developing  in  a  transnational  field  of  social  forces.  The 
fourth section focuses on the last phase in this process and describes the recent waves 
of research on globalization and transnational migration. 

Only  now  that  nation-states  have  lost  some  of  their  power  to  transnational  cor-
porations and supranational organizations can we see, looking backward, what shape 
modernity has taken during the last 200 years. It was cast in the iron cage of national-
ized  states  that  confined  and  limited  our  own  analytical  capacities.  Reflecting  the 
current conceptual liberation, the influence of methodological nationalism has begun 
to  be  examined  in  history  (Bender  2001;  Rodgers  1998),  geography  (Taylor  1996), 
sociology  (Beck  2000)  and  anthropology  (Glick  Schiller  2000;  Glick  Schiller  et  al. 
1992, 1995; Wimmer 1996a). Perhaps it was more difficult to see the world in three 
dimensions when the sun stood at its zenith. In the evening, shadows grow and allow 
us to perceive the environment in clearer contours. 

What  we  discover  in  this  twilight  is  how  transnational  the  modern  world  has 
always been, even in the high days when the nation-state bounded and bundled most 
social  processes.  Rather  than  a  recent  offspring  of  globalization,  transnationalism 
appears as a constant of modern life, hidden from a view that was captured by metho-
dological  nationalism.  Thus,  the  value  of  studying  transnational  communities  and 
migration  is  not  to  discover  ‘something  new’  –  though  this  represents  a  highly 
rewarding strategy of research in our contemporary intellectual environment – but to 
have contributed to this shift of perspective away from methodological nationalism. A 
thorough  reflection  on  the  history  of  transnational  social  relations  and  their  recent 
‘discovery’ may thus be an appropriate starting point for rethinking the history of the 
social sciences in general. It may help us develop the perspective of an ‘observer of 
second  order’,  as  Niklas  Luhmann  once  said,  from  which  we  can  observe  both  the 
social scientists observing the social world as well as the effects that this has on this 
world and how, at the same time, the forces of the social world shape the outlook of 
the social scientists. 

Three modes of methodological nationalism 

Our  argument focuses  on  what  we  perceive  as  the  major, dominant  trends  in  social 
science thinking of the past century. We do not discuss coterminous currents that con-
tradicted  the  hegemonic  discourse.  Especially  in  times  of  intensified  global  inter-
connections, theories reflecting these developments appeared and provided tools for 
analysis  not  coloured  by  methodological  nationalism.  The  most  obvious  of  these 
currents was political economy in the Marxian tradition, always devoting attention to 
capitalism as a global system rather than to its specific national manifestations, and 

302 

