British Educational Research Journal
Vol. 40, No. 4, August 2014, pp. 699–717

DOI: 10.1002/berj.3108

Legitimating status: perceptions of
meritocracy and inequality among
undergraduates at an elite British university

Natasha Kumar Warikooa* and Christina Fuhrb
aHarvard University Graduate School of Education, Cambridge, USA; bUniversity of
Oxford, Department of Sociology, Oxford, UK

Given the frequent critiques of elite universities for admitting low numbers of state school graduates
and, more recently, British Afro-Caribbean students, how do students attending those universities
make meaning of the admissions process? Through an analysis of 46 one-on-one in-depth inter-
views with undergraduates attending Oxford University, we show that students believe in the fair-
ness of the admissions process, while lamenting the lack of opportunities for educational
advancement faced by some disadvantaged youth in British society. Despite their understanding
that many British youth do not have access to educational experiences that make Oxbridge an
attainable goal, most students do not support changes to make access more equitable across class or
racial/ethnic lines. This perspective, which legitimates the status students gain through matricula-
tion at an elite university, supports the maintenance of unequal access to an Oxford education
despite the advantages that education is known to confer to graduates. The findings demonstrate
elites acknowledging the disadvantages of particular groups in society without acknowledging their
own advantages in the same system. They do so by recognizing two elements of merit: (1) intelli-
gence, which most students assumed led to their own admission; and (2) cultivation of that intelli-
gence, which requires elite secondary schools and which most students see as disadvantaging
particular groups in society. In the paper we highlight differences in meaning-making between grad-
uates of grammar, comprehensive and private schools.

Modern western societies operate on the premise that status is achieved rather than
inherited. Meritocracy—a system in which rewards are distributed based on individ-
ual merit rather than, for example, inheritance or payment—serves to legitimate the
status hierarchy in modern industrial democracies, in contrast to the inherited and
coercive dominance of elites in traditional societies (Young, 1958; Weber, 1968;
Bourdieu & Passeron, 1977). Lipset and Bendix (1992) argue that social mobility in
fact characterizes modern industrial societies. The status attainment literature docu-
ments just how much social mobility takes place by showing that education level is
associated with adult earnings independent of parents’ level of education (Blau &
Duncan, 1967). Still, the degree to which individuals can actually change their social
status has been questioned by many (Bourdieu, 1984; Bowles & Gintis, 1976; Kara-
bel & Halsey, 1977). Michael Young, in the book that coined the term ‘meritocracy’
(1958), warned against a system in which elites use notions of ‘merit’ to reproduce
status and hence to sustain inequality in society.

*Corresponding author. 6 Appian Way, 4th Floor, Cambridge, MA 02138, United States. Email:
Natasha_warikoo@gse.harvard.edu

© 2013 British Educational Research Association

700 N. K. Warikoo and C. Fuhr

The education system is a key site through which meritocracy is legitimated while
simultaneously status is reproduced (Bourdieu & Passeron, 1977). Early research
focuses thereby on schools. Bourdieu and Passeron (1977) demonstrate how schools
maintain society’s status hierarchy and consequent inequalities by expecting an
unspoken set of behaviors, dispositions and styles for success in school. These tastes,
behaviors and dispositions—cultural capital—are internalized by high status children
from their parents and are not explicitly taught in school but are necessary for school
success and consequently for status attainment. Overall, we also know that adults’
levels of education are correlated with the degree to which they perceive social
rewards to be fairly distributed on the basis of merit; those with higher levels of educa-
tion are more likely to believe that their country is a meritocracy (Duru-Bellat & Ten-
ret, 2012).

Studies focusing on higher education show that only those who are successful
in the stratified education system have the chance to attend elite universities and
thus are able to achieve elite status, and that success is mediated by family back-
ground (Shiner & Modood, 2002; Archer et al., 2003; Reay et al., 2005). Fur-
thermore, access to information on higher education and the application process
is mediated by social class (Archer et al., 2003; Reay et al., 2005). Recent
research has also shown that among applicants to Oxford University, cultural
capital plays a significant role in many admissions decisions (Zimdars et al.,
2009).1 Once students matriculate, elite universities promote the creation and
perpetuation of elite status in their students, through (1) constructing social cate-
gories such as ‘Oxbridge graduate’ that provide advantages on the job market
and in politics; and (2) promoting the notion that their graduates have important
qualities that differentiate them from non-graduates (Kamens, 1977; Meyer,
1977; Collins, 1979). In Britain, the notion of an Oxbridge graduate’s intellectual
qualities and qualifications for leadership in society extend well beyond the cam-
pus walls to the larger society, and hence matriculation symbolically endows
students with membership in that high status group.

Both the status attainment (Blau & Duncan, 1967; Lipset & Bendix, 1992) and the
reproduction (Bourdieu & Passeron, 1977; Willis, 1977) models of education empha-
size the degree to which structural opportunities and barriers exist or do not exist in
education (Davies, 1995; Stevens, 2008). Neither of these prominent perspectives,
however, focuses on how individual actors make meaning of their place in educational
institutions. In spite of the rich body of research on admissions and access to higher
education in Britain, studies have not yet analyzed how students themselves make
meaning of their success in the admissions contest to elite higher education. Not only
institutions but also the individuals that institutions and gatekeepers reward have an
interest in maintaining the legitimacy of the criteria for success in the institution.2 In
order to embrace their elite status students attending elite universities must maintain
the legitimacy of the contest for admission despite well-publicized inequalities in who
attends their universities related to school type (state or private) and race (for exam-
ple, see Harris, 2010; Lammy, 2010; Vasagar, 2010b; Parel & Ball, 2013). What do
those who succeed in admission to elite British universities make of their status posi-
tion, especially given the disproportionate number of students from advantaged back-
grounds?

© 2013 British Educational Research Association

