West European Politics,
Vol. 31, Nos. 1–2, 195 – 210, January–March 2008

The Changing Politics of Organised
Interests

PHILIPPE C. SCHMITTER

Since the mid-1970s, Western European politics have undergone signiﬁcant changes –
and this has been particularly marked in the arena of ‘interest politics’. In this article I
list some apodictic statements about these changes and speculate about their potential
explanations. To the extent that these descriptive generalisations have some accuracy
and that the potential explanations have some validity, we can then conclude that the
hegemony of political parties is declining. This is not to say that parties will be replaced
by either associations or movements. These three forms of representation are not locked
into a zero-sum game. In the past, they have grown together and supported each other.
Nothing says that they cannot also decline together in the present. What we can say,
however, is that there has been a generalised loosening of the links between interests and
organisations.

‘Interests’ in West European Politics – in practice or in the journal – purport
to explain everything and, therefore, they do not explain anything. Scratch
the surface of almost any WEP article and you will ﬁnd that the answer to
‘why did he or she act politically?’ will usually be: ‘because it was in his or
her interest to do so’. Ask ‘why did he or she have such an interest in the ﬁrst
place?’ or, even worse, ‘why did he or she think that such an action or policy
would eventually lead to the satisfaction of that interest?’ and you will only
rarely get a convincing answer.

Albert Hirschman (1977) has meticulously traced the origins of this
concept and how it became such an omnipresent explanation for political
action – despite the recentness of its usage and the ambiguity of its meaning.
He argues that its rise in the political lexicon parallels the emergence of
capitalism and, hence, has impregnated political thinking with analogies of
market competition. It has become so commonplace that what used to be
called ‘greed’ and regarded as a despicable vice by the ancients has become a
universally expected and even benevolent motive among the moderns – so
much so that those who still seem to be acting in the name of its antithesis,

Correspondence Address: philippe.schmitter@eui.eu

ISSN 0140-2382 Print/1743-9655 Online ª 2008 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/01402380701834994

196 P. C. Schmitter

i.e. ‘passions’, are usually regarded as idiosyncratic and dangerous. National
patriotism, religious zeal, moral certainty, family honour, tribal loyalty,
personal glory and so forth are considered atavistic and more likely to lead
to irresolvable conﬂicts and perverse outcomes than good old, prosaic but
dependable, ‘interests’.

Just because so many political analysts rely so much upon a notion of
interests does not mean that they agree on how to deﬁne it. Following
Hirschman, there seem to be three elements in common. First, interests
are self-regarding in the sense that their pursuit is expected – rightly or
wrongly – to produce a diﬀerential and favourable net beneﬁt to the actor
involved, despite the fact that quite frequently arguments in favour of them
are phrased exclusively in terms of the beneﬁt they would bring to a wider
collectivity, e.g. the community, the nation, the public or the planet. Second,
interests are calculated by the actors themselves – again, rightly or wrongly –
to be of beneﬁt rather than pursued instinctually or un-reﬂexively due to
some prior and over-riding ethical indoctrination, social conditioning or
cultural conformity, even though these same actors may include in their
calculation the probability that others will react on such ethical, social or
cultural grounds. Third, interests are consciously recognised, which follows
from the previous two elements, in the sense that actors are aware of their
existence (if often anxious to disguise them behind collective labels) and
suﬃciently concerned about their satisfaction that they are willing to act
politically to obtain them (if also aware that it makes sense to ‘free-ride’ on
the actions of others).1

Up to this point, the presumption seems to have been that the actors
involved are exclusively individual human beings and, therefore, that a
political science founded primarily on the pursuit of interests and the
conﬂict among them has to be based on ‘methodological’ as well as
‘epistemological’ individualism. Not at all! ‘Actors’ as expressed above can
just as well be collectivities – admittedly composed of individuals and
dependent in varying degrees upon their contributions – but quite capable of
regarding their own collective self-interests, making calculations about these
interests and developing as well as inculcating interest consciousness in
others. Indeed, one could argue that individuals would be incapable of
recognising and evaluating their interests on their own, without
the
assistance of various collectivities in the workplace, social setting, cultural
milieu and political environment that provide them with the reference points
and identities that they need prior to making such an assessment. An
isolated individual would be helpless without groups based on functional,
territorial and/or symbolic identities.

Actual research on ‘the politics of interests’ as evidenced in WEP and the
political science literature on Western Europe in general has focused
overwhelmingly on organisations – permanently constituted and collectively
governed – as its basic unit of observation and analysis. Of course, there
exists a parallel literature on public opinion as formed by individual citizens

