SDI_38_1  2/16/07  12:11 PM  Page 71

Laying the Foundations of Democracy?
Reconsidering Security Sector Reform

Under UN Auspices in Kosovo 

IRENE BERNABÉU*

University of Granada, Spain

This article explores the relationship between security sector reform
(SSR) and democratic transition in post-conflict contexts, drawing on
Kosovo as a case. The study focuses in particular on the justice sector
in Kosovo, reviewing the ways in which security, the rule of law and
democracy have been intertwined. The article first outlines the context
of the international mission in Kosovo, before proceeding to consider
how  the  objectives,  needs  and  constraints  of  different  actors  have
influenced the reform of the security institutions and the democrati-
zation process. Thereafter, it discusses the concepts of SSR and demo-
cratic  transition,  briefly  reviewing  the  UN  discourse  and  record  in
SSR-related activities. Finally, it explores the interplay of these factors
in the Kosovo justice sector reform process. The main finding stem-
ming from this analysis is that not only do SSR and democratization
agendas  interfere  with  each  other,  but  measures  adopted  to  cope 
with security challenges related to the post-conflict context can also 
affect them both. Furthermore, this finding demonstrates that a well-
developed UN theoretical discourse is still not matched by the reality
of UN practices in the field.

Keywords
Nations • rule of law • Kosovo

security sector reform • democratic transition • United

OVER THE LAST TWO DECADES, United Nations peace operations

have increasingly broadened the scope of their activities to include a
strong justice, law and order component. In post-conflict situations,
where society may be highly polarized, violence rampant, and state institu-
tions near collapse, the aim of such activities is to guarantee the necessary 
stability and security so that peace and the political process are not jeopard-
ized. Accordingly, UN missions have become involved in the reform of secu-
rity institutions, alongside a variety of activities aimed at democratization.

© 2007 PRIO, www.prio.no

SAGE Publications, http://sdi.sagepub.com

Vol. 38(1): 71–92, DOI: 10.1177/0967010607075973

Downloaded from 

sdi.sagepub.com

 at UNIVERSITAET OSNABRUECK on April 18, 2016

SDI_38_1  2/16/07  12:11 PM  Page 72

72

Security Dialogue vol. 38, no. 1, March 2007

Drawing on Kosovo as a case, this article seeks to explore the relationship
between  security  sector  reform  (SSR)1 and  democratic  transition  in  post-
conflict  contexts.  The  study  will  focus  in  particular  on  Kosovo’s  justice 
system, reviewing the ways in which security, the rule of law and democracy
are  intertwined.  Security  institutions  are  central  to  state  authority,  and 
any  change  or  reform  involving  these  institutions  will  affect  institutional 
dynamics and political processes. Even so, decisions pertaining to the reform
of security institutions may be subordinated to the needs, objectives and con-
straints of different agents involved, and on some occasions marred by the
necessity of making progress in the political arena. As a result, the reform
agenda  may  suffer  from  lack  of  coherence  and  coordination,  and  become
subject  to  political  bargains.  Conversely,  in  such  an  extreme  scenario  as
Kosovo, the democratization process may be hampered by decisions related
to the security sector on the premise that some degree of security and order is
needed to make democratic developments feasible. However, the risk here is
that  actors  may  find  themselves  tempted  to  sidestep  the  democratization
agenda when trying to find shortcuts to deal with pressing threats to security
and public order.

Therefore, at the core of this study is the question of the delicate balance
between security, the rule of law and democracy, on the one hand, and the
needs, constraints and objectives of the different actors, on the other – at the
highly uncertain but decisive moment in which the foundations of a new order
are  being  laid  by  the  United  Nations  Interim  Administration  Mission  in
Kosovo (UNMIK). This question is highly relevant both to Kosovo and to the
UN itself – in view of future missions the latter may take on – for, as pointed
out by Shain & Linz (1995: 5), the behaviour of interim governments ‘may
define how successful new regimes will be in minimizing violence by chan-
nelling dissent into legally accepted means of dispute resolution, establishing
the  accountability  of  the  new  governments  and  their  organs,  producing  a 
culture of human rights, fostering reconciliation rather than confrontation,
and subordinating the military and the security forces’. If the aim is to build a
democratic security sector in Kosovo, it is not enough to restore a semblance of
order. This order should be achieved through legally recognized procedures.
If  a  democratic  culture  is  to  take  root,  the  gap  between  the  international
authorities’ democratic discourse and their behaviour should be minimized.
Thus, the article is introduced by an outline of the context of the interna-
tional  mission  in  Kosovo.  It  then  proceeds  to  consider  how  the  objectives,
needs  and  constraints  of  different  actors  may  influence  the  reform  of  the
security institutions and the democratization process. Thereafter, it will dis-

1 This article treats as SSR activities those that UNMIK and KFOR have carried out in order to rebuild new
local security institutions in the province, and not those that UNMIK and KFOR may have undertaken in
order to establish their own institutional infrastructure or with a view to maintaining security and the
rule of law in the province.

Downloaded from 

sdi.sagepub.com

 at UNIVERSITAET OSNABRUECK on April 18, 2016

