Psychopharmacology (2009) 206:515–530
DOI 10.1007/s00213-009-1561-0

REVIEW

From drugs to deprivation: a Bayesian framework
for understanding models of psychosis

P. R. Corlett & C. D. Frith & P. C. Fletcher

Received: 10 February 2009 / Accepted: 29 April 2009 / Published online: 28 May 2009
# The Author(s) 2009. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com

Abstract
Introduction Various experimental manipulations, usually
involving drug administration, have been used to produce
symptoms of psychosis in healthy volunteers. Different
drugs produce both common and distinct symptoms. A
challenge is to understand how apparently different manip-
ulations can produce overlapping symptoms. We suggest
that current Bayesian formulations of information process-
ing in the brain provide a framework that maps onto neural
circuitry and gives us a context within which we can relate
the symptoms of psychosis to their underlying causes. This
helps us to understand the similarities and differences
across the common models of psychosis.
Materials and methods The Bayesian approach emphasises
processing of information in terms of both prior expectan-

P. R. Corlett : P. C. Fletcher
Department of Psychiatry, Brain Mapping Unit,
University of Cambridge,
Downing Site,
Cambridge CB2 3EB, UK

C. D. Frith
Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging,
12 Queen Square,
London WC1N 3BG, UK

P. R. Corlett
Abraham Ribicoff Research Facility, Connecticut Mental
Health Centre, Yale University Medical School,
New Haven, CT, USA

P. C. Fletcher (*)
Department of Psychiatry, Addenbrooke’s Hospital,
University of Cambridge,
P.O. Box 255, Cambridge CB2 2QQ, UK
e-mail: pcf22@cam.ac.uk

cies and current inputs. A mismatch between these leads us
to update inferences about the world and to generate new
predictions for the future. According to this model, what we
experience shapes what we learn, and what we learn
modifies how we experience things.
Discussion This simple idea gives us a powerful and
flexible way of understanding the symptoms of psychosis
where perception, learning and inference are deranged. We
examine the predictions of the cognitive model in light of
what we understand about
the neuropharmacology of
psychotomimetic drugs and thereby attempt to account for
the common and the distinctive effects of NMDA receptor
antagonists, serotonergic hallucinogens, cannabinoids and
dopamine agonists.
Conclusion By acknowledging the importance of percep-
tion and perceptual aberration in mediating the positive
symptoms of psychosis, the model also provides a useful
setting in which to consider an under-researched model of
psychosis—sensory deprivation.

Keywords Bayesian learning . Prediction error . Perception .
Belief . Psychotomimetic drugs

Introduction

[The] world is …what we make of it. Once our mould
for world making is formed it most strongly resists
change. The psychodelics (sic) allow us, for a little
while, to divest ourselves of these acquired assump-
tions and to see the universe again with an innocent
eye (Osmond 1957).

516

Psychopharmacology (2009) 206:515–530

In the first review of psychotomimetic drugs and their
clinical implications, Humphrey Osmond outlined what he
felt were the future directions for the field of model
psychoses. He emphasised a number of themes, including
the importance of drug-induced alterations in perceptions
and expectations. This is an interesting starting point for
our paper because, as has often been noted (Corlett et al.
2007; Freedman 1974; Maher 1974; McGhie and Chapman
1961), such alterations may be an important component of
the state of emerging psychosis (see Corlett et al. 2007 for
discussion).

Drug models of psychosis need a cognitive neuroscience
perspective. Without it, though the pharmacology of such
models may be understood with great subtlety and
sophistication, our understanding of how the pharmacology
links to the symptoms will remain incomplete (Kandel
1999; Kapur 2003). It may ultimately prove that this link
will be critical in understanding how it is that such apparently
different manipulations lead to common symptoms.

The cognitive framework that we apply derives from a
current
theory of brain function (Friston 2005a) and
emphasises the hierarchical interactions between top-down
and bottom-up processes, which enable our perception and
prediction of the world (Friston 2005a; Mumford 1992).
Our suggestion is that all experimental interventions that
induce psychotic symptoms affect the interaction between
subjects' predictions about the world and the sensory inputs
that
this
interaction shapes experience and learning and, when it is
disrupted, these will be correspondingly altered, engender-
ing the altered experiences that characterise the effects of
psychotomimetic drug administration (Freedman 1974) as
well as the early stages of endogenous psychoses (Maher
1974; McGhie and Chapman 1961).

they encounter. Under normal circumstances,

Having drawn attention to the key features of this model,
we will outline how the processes might be implemented in
the brain. We will go on to consider how each of the major
psychotomimetic drugs interacts with this model of brain
function and therefore how these apparently very different
neurochemical manipulations may produce common psy-
chological effects. There are, however, notable differences
between the psychotomimetic drugs, and we will attempt to
account for these within the scheme. Finally, we will test
the predictions of our model with reference to sensory
deprivation—a preparation that induces psychotic symptoms
non-pharmacologically (Bexton et al. 1954; Scott et al. 2007).

Learning, expectation and mismatch: Bayesian ideas
of how we experience the world

Bayesian perspectives on cognitive processing are now
very widespread (Shanks 2006). They emphasise a central

theme that has long been present even in models that do not
that of perception as ‘uncon-
explicitly mention Bayes:
scious inference’ (Barlow 1990; Helmholtz 1871/1971).
The key insight offered here is that our perception (our
experience of the world) is conditional upon what we
expect and in turn leads to inferences about the world,
which alter
future expectations. There are numerous
illusions which reflect this simple truth, producing their
effects by appealing to prior beliefs such that incoming
sensory information is seemingly altered to fit with these.
This is the essence of Bayes' Theorem: Incoming informa-
tion is interpreted in light of our prior expectations.

Critical to understanding such models is the recognition
inputs,
that mismatches between expected and actual
known as prediction errors (Rescorla and Wagner 1972;
Schultz and Dickinson 2000), are important in learning and
experience. Bayesian treatments of learning and perception
represent subjects' beliefs—their predictions about
the
world—as a probability distribution (Kruschke 2008). A
key problem faced by the brain is to infer the causes of
sensory events in the environment (Friston 2005a) and to
use those causes in cognition and comportment (Mumford
1992). A measure of its success at any time is if the
environment is well-predicted, that is, if prediction error
(also referred to as ‘free energy’; Friston 2005a) engen-
dered by environmental events is minimised. To meet the
challenge of minimising error, new information must be
integrated with existing world models, where necessary
leading to updating of these models such that recurrence of
that particular information can be made predictable.

level,

the level of

the computational

In terms of David Marr's levels of analysis (Marr 1982),
the model offers an explanation of what the brain must
achieve: First at
it predicts its
to respond adaptively to its
sensory inputs in order
environment. Second, at the algorithmic level, it employs
a hierarchical Bayesian strategy to make and adapt this
prediction. Third, at
implementation, we
suggest that feedback (NMDA) and feed-forward (AMPA)
signalling in the hierarchy are responsible for the specifi-
cation of the priors (or predictions) and the prediction error
respectively and that, furthermore, the impact of a particular
prediction error is modulated by various slow, modulatory
neurotransmitters (dopamine and acetylcholine).

The same interactive framework has been applied to
single neurons, whose behaviour is driven by their inputs as
well as their expectancies based on prior experience
(Deneve 2008a, b; Fiorillo 2008). In one such model, the
inputs are specified by glutamatergic signals incumbent
upon the cell. In these finer-grained treatments, priors are
specified by the number and functional status of potassium
channels in the cell membrane, which modulate the cell's
responsivity to stimulation (Fiorillo 2008). We note with
interest
individuals with an autoimmune disorder,

that

