 

Explanation in Cognitive Science 

Researcher Interview #4: Prof. Gordon Pipa (IKW) 

18.12.2014 

 

1.  Introduction. Current research (goals and scientific problems the group works on) 

 
1.1. Which cognitive phenomena have you been most interested in over the course of your 

career (i.e., visual perception, edge detection)? Which particular aspects of these 
phenomena? 

 

1.2. Could you give some concrete examples of current research projects?  

 

1.3. Do you aim to do fundamental research, or do you try to develop practical applications? 

Or perhaps both? 

 

1.4. Did you find something surprising to you or something unexpected during these projects? 

Did that change your understanding of right theoretical, methodological approach, 
explanation in general? 

 

2.  Methodological position and methods used for current research.  

 
2.1. From which educational or research background did you come to cognitive science? 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2.2. How does your background influence the research topics you investigate, and the 

methods you use? 

2.3. You are currently leading the Neuroinformatics Research Group. Could you explain us, 

what does the term „Neuroinformatics“ mean?  

 

2.4. What is specific about Neuroinformatics approach? How does this approach compare to 

more traditional cognitive neuroscience? 

 

2.5. Do you also perform experiments/measurements in your projects or use any raw data? If 
so, which parameters of a living organism do you measure? E.g. electrical activity? BOLD 
responses? Behavioral measures? What kind of experiments do you conduct to measure 
these parameters? 

2.6. [Why are those parameters particularly important or revealing?]  

2.7. Do you use mathematical models to represent and analyze your results? What kind of 

models and which mathematical frameworks do you rely on? Could you name some 
theories/give some examples? Why those frameworks? 

 

2.8. How does the modeling and experimenting interact? Is there a specific organization of 
work (that is, are experiments performed first, or the models created)? When do you 
decide, that the model works? 

1 

 

2.9. Do you sometimes develop simulations? If so, what kinds of simulations? What are the 
benefits or drawbacks of simulations as opposed to experiments on living organisms?   

 

2.10. 

What are practical constraints on your work? What would you do if they were not 
there? Do you wish you could use other experiments, e.g. given infinite time, resources, 
collaborative opportunities?  

 
 

3.  Understanding of Explanation in Cognitive Science 
 

3.1. What, in your view, is the difference between describing a cognitive phenomenon, and 

explaining it (More details? Identifying its causes? Reducing it to something simpler? 
Unifying it with other phenomena? Acquiring knowledge, how to implement the same 
mechanism? Or the same capacity)? 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3.2. Which sort of questions do you aim to answer in your research (e.g.: what a particular 

phenomenon is? How it works? How is it implemented? All of the above?)? 

3.3. When you develop a model or simulation of some cognitive phenomenon, at which level 

should it resemble a real-world cognitive system? Should it only mimick observed 
behavior, or also take into account specific implementational features? What is the right 
level of abstraction or idealization for understanding cognition? 

3.4. To what extent do you believe the findings of your research will generalize to non-human 

animals? Conversely, do you often exploit what is known about animal cognition in your 
own research? 

 

3.5. What are your criteria for a good explanation? Is it more important to predict the details 

correctly or to create a broad theory that captures the "essence" of this capacity?  

3.6. Are there competing models or explanations for the phenomena you are working on? Why 

are your models/explanations better than the others? Or do they just capture different 
aspects of the same phenomena? 

3.7. Do you explicitly deal with philosophical considerations about scientific explanations in 

your work? 

 

4.  Interdisciplinarity of Cognitive Science.  

 
4.1. Do you experience practical differences resulting from people in cognitive science having 

different backgrounds? Do you, e.g., see a difference of explanation between e.g. 
physicists, psychologists, neuroscientists?  
 

4.2. Is cognitive science an integrated discipline? Is knowledge in cognitive science acquired 

just by summing up findings from different fields and explanations from different 
disciplines, or there is a specific cognitive science approach or explanation? If so, explain it 

2 

 

