Industrial Health 2004, 42, 196–206

Original Article

Participatory Approaches to Improving Safety and
Health under Trade Union Initiative
—Experiences of POSITIVE Training Program in Asia—

Tsuyoshi KAWAKAMI1*, Kazutaka KOGI1, Naoki TOYAMA2 and Toru YOSHIKAWA1

1 Institute for Science of Labour, Japan, 2-8-14, Sugao, Miyamae-ku, Kawasaki, 216-8501 Kanagawa, Japan
2 Tokyo Occupational Safety and Health Center, Z-Building, 7-10-1, Kameido, Koutou-ku, 136-0071 Tokyo, Japan

Received February 19, 2004 and accepted March 1, 2004

Abstract:  The participatory, action-oriented training program in occupational safety and health
named POSITIVE (Participation-Oriented Safety Improvements by Trade Union InitiatiVE) was
established in Pakistan and extended to other countries in Asia.  The steps taken in the development
of the POSITIVE program included collecting local good examples in safety and health, developing
an action-checklist, testing a participatory training program, and conducting follow-up activities to
examine local achievements.  Training manuals were compiled to provide workers with the practical,
easy-to-understand information on safety and health improvements and on the positive roles of
trade unions.  Trade union trainers trained in the methodology conducted serial POSITIVE training
workshops in Pakistan and then in Bangladesh, Mongolia, Nepal, the Philippines and Thailand and
recently in China.  These workshops resulted in many low-cost improvements at the workplace
level.  These improvements were carried out in the technical areas of materials handling, workstations,
machine safety, physical environment, and welfare facilities.  The trade union networks have been
vital in reaching an increasing number of grass-root workplaces and in expanding the program to
other countries.  This included the visits to Mongolia and Thailand of Pakistani trade union trainers
to demonstrate the POSITIVE training.  The participatory training tools used in the POSITIVE
program such as the action checklist and group discussion methods were commonly applied in
different local situations.  Participatory approaches adopted in the POSITIVE program have proven
useful for providing practical problem-solving measures based on the local trade union initiative.

Key words:  Participatory training, Occupational safety and health, Action checklist, Low-cost
improvement, Trade union, Networking

Introduction

As rapid industrialization grows, securing safety and health
at work is becoming an increasingly important concern for
trade unions in Asia.  Many new production technologies
being applied have had both positive and negative effects
in terms of safety and health.  Workers are still facing
traditional and emerging work-related risks1–3).  Such risks

*To whom correspondence should be addressed.

include handling of heavy materials, transferred production
machines, work-stations not fitted to local workers, hazardous
substances banned or strictly regulated in industrially
developed countries, and poor welfare facilities at the
workplace.  Monotonous and repetitive patterns of work
seen in assembly lines need special attention in view of the
growing need for preventing musculoskeletal disorders and
psychosocial stress4).  Diversifying working time arrangements
such as shift and night work require adequate measures to
counter the adverse health and social effects5–7).  As in other

POSITIVE TRAINING PROGRAM IN ASIA

197

developing regions, workers in industrially developing
countries in Asia need practical safety and health support
measures suited to the local situations.

Trade union networks in Asia have been increasingly
developed to promote grass-root level activities of workers.
Awareness is growing that the knowledge of the risks
associated with the transferred technologies and of the
practical  countermeasures  to  be  taken  should  be
communicated to the grass-root level.  It is true that, despite
resource constraints, local workplaces have demonstrated their
initiative to improve safety and health, resulting in multiple
improvement examples8–11).  These improvements have been
built on local wisdom and available resources12, 13).  Workers
and trade unions had the potential to play the greater roles
in improving safety and health at the enterprise level.  It has
been a real challenge for the trade unions in Asia to provide
and extend workable support through their networks to fortify
the initiative of grass-root workers14).

It is striking that participatory approaches to improving
safety and health are gaining momentum in many countries
in Asia15–19).  Action tools aimed at active participation of
both workers and employers have been playing dynamic
roles in facilitating concrete improvement actions20, 21).  Action
checklists, group work dynamics and photo sheets showing
local good examples present typical examples of the action
tools.  Applying new participatory training methods, the small
enterprises in the Philippines that participated in the Work
Improvement in Small Enterprises (WISE) project in the
Philippines from 1994–1996, with the technical assistance
of the ILO and the financial assistance of the United National
Development Programme (UNDP), produced over 2,000
improvement examples22).  These improvements covered
multiple technical areas using the locally available materials
at low-cost23–25).  Local trade union trainers as well as
employer and government trainers jointly organized and
implemented the WISE training courses in the Philippines.
Participatory approaches established in the WISE program
have thus been adapted to the trade union-specific situations
with a view to strengthening the trade union initiative in
improving safety and health.  The WISE program pointed
to the importance of building sustainable safety and health
practices on participation of local people.  The participated
local workers and employers had gained self-confidence to
take more assertive roles in their workplaces.  It was
considered that extending participatory approaches to more
workers at the grass-root workplaces would be possible
through action-oriented support for local trade union
initiatives and networks.  The new program built on local
trade union practice and needs was required.  Such urgent

needs were communicated to the Japan International Labour
Foundation (JILAF) by Pakistani trade union leaders.  Thus,
a participatory training program to improve safety and health
under the trade union initiative was first built in Pakistan in
1994.  The program has gradually expanded, during the
subsequent decade, to Bangladesh, the Philippines, Mongolia,
Thailand and Nepal and recently to China.  JILAF has
provided the financial and logistical support while the
Institute for Science of Labour (ISL), Japan offered technical
assistance to develop the contents of the program.  The new
program was named as POSITIVE (Participation-Oriented
Safety Improvement by Trade Union InitiatiVE).  Based on
these experiences, some common features of local trade union
initiatives in improving safety and health and the growth of
the POSITIVE program are discussed.

Methods

Establishing POSITIVE training program in Pakistan

National trade union centers in Pakistan had strong concern
over workers’ safety and health problems and requested
technical cooperation to JILAF.  Practical problem-solving
measures to strengthen workers’ own capacities to identify
safety and health risks were expected.  The measures were
required to be easy-to-apply at the workplace level and to
assist workers in producing practical improvement proposals
to convince their employers.

International experiences of the successful intervention
measures at the workplace level were reviewed.  The ILO’s
WISE program in the Philippines22–25) and other participatory
training experiences in Japan, Malaysia26) and Thailand16)
were referred to.  The successes in intervention measures
commonly focused on learning steps from local good
examples and the group discussion methods to enhance the
active involvement of local people.  Action-checklists have
commonly played a central role in assisting local workers
and employers to identify feasible solutions.  Stress was
placed on looking at multiple action needs of local workplaces
and starting with low-cost feasible actions.  Participatory
intervention measures using action-checklist exercises and
group work processes were considered particularly relevant
to the new training program to be built on the trade union
initiative.

The four-day pilot POSITIVE training workshops were
conducted in Karachi in 1994 and Faisalabad in 1995 in
Pakistan.  The participants were local trade union leaders
and members.  The training program was designed to be
action-oriented for meeting the immediate needs of local
workers covering five technical areas; materials handling,

