C H A P T E R  2 3 

Emotions  in  the  Wild 

The  Situated  Perspective  on  Emotion 

Paul Griffiths and Andrea Scarantino 

x.  Introduction 

Many  theoretical  traditions  have  contrib-
uted  to  the  scientific  elucidation  of emotion, 
but  philosophers  facing  the  question,  W h a t 
is  an  emotion?  h a v e  concentrated  on  t w o 
in  particular. 1  Philosophical  cog-
of  these 
nitivism  is  inspired  by  the  appraisal  tradi-
tion  in  p s y c h o l o g y  (e.g.,  Arnold,  i960,  1970; 
Scherer,  1999),  T h e  alternative  neo-Jamesian 
approach  is  inspired  by  the  somatic  marker 
hypothesis  in  a f f e c t i v e  neuroscience  ( D a m a -
sio,  1996;  Panksepp,  1998).  Cognitivists  iden-
tify  emotions  w i t h  representations  of  the 
stimulus  situation,  or  evaluative  judgments 
(Solomon,  1976,  1993).  Neo-Jamesians  iden-
tify  emotions  w i t h  states  of  bodily  arousal, 
which  are  detected  by  the  brain  as  affect 
(Prinz,  2004b).  Both  these  views  of  emo-
tion  parallel  t h e  v i e w  of  cognition  that  has 
been  called  into  question  by  situated  cog-
nition  research  (Smith,  1999;  Clark,  1997). 
In  both  theories,  emotions  are  conceived 
as  internal  states  or  processes  and  the  role 
of  the  e n v i r o n m e n t 
is  confined  to  pro-
viding  stimuli  and  receiving  actions.  Thus, 
although  Prinz  advocates  embodied  emo-

tions  (Prinz,  2004a),  his  contribution  does 
not  emphasize  the  role  of the  environment, 
assimilating  emoting  to  perceiving  actual  or 
as-if  changes  of  one's  own  body  (Damasio, 
1999).  In  a  further  parallel  with  traditional 
views  of  cognition,  both  cognitivists  and 
neo-Jamesians  focus  on  the  contributions 
that  emotions  make  to  the  organism's  inter-
nal  psychological  economy.  T h e  primary 
function  of  emotions,  on  both  accounts,  is 
to  provide  the  organism's  decision-making 
systems  with  information  about  the  signifi-
cance  of  a  stimulus  situation. 

This  chapter  describes  a  very  different 
perspective  on  emotion,  according  to  w h i c h 
emotions  are  the  following: 

2. 

1.  Designed to function  in  a  social  context: 
an emotion  is  often  an  act of relationship 
reconfiguration  brought  about  by  deliv-
ering  a  social  signal; 
Forms  of  skillful  engagement  with  t h e 
world that  need not  be  mediated by  con-
ceptual  thought; 
Scaffolded  by  the  environment,  b o t h 
synchronically, 
in  the  unfolding  of  a 
particular  emotional  p e r f o r m a n c e ,  and 

3. 

4 3 7 

paul  g r i f f i t h s  a n d  a n d r e a  s c a r a n t i n o 

diachronicallv,  in  the  acquisition  of  an 
emotional  repertoire; 

4.  Dynamically  coupled  to  an  environ-
ment  that  both  influences  and  is  influ-
enced  by the  unfolding  of the  emotion. 

We  draw  heavily  on  transactional  accounts 
of emotion proposed by some contemporary 
psychologists  (Fridlund, 
1994;  Parkinson, 
1995;  Parkinson,  Fischer,  &  Manstead,  2005; 
Russell  &  Fernandez-Dols,  1997).  Although 
these authors do not, to our knowledge, con-
ceive  of their  work  as  a  contribution  to  the 
situationist  literature  that  is  the  focus  of 
this  volume,  we  contend  that  their  propos-
als constitute  a  fairly exact,  affective paral-
lel to situationist ideas about cognition.  The 
primary  aim  of  this  chapter  is  to  demon-
strate  that  a  situated  approach  to  emotion 
already  exists and is backed by  a substantial 
experimental literature.  This body of theory 
and  data  could  make  a  major  contribution 
to  fleshing  out  the  general  situationist  per-
spective on the mind. 

We  emphasize  that  adopting  the  situa-
tionist  perspective  does  not  require  deny-
ing  the  results  produced  by  other  theoret-
ical  traditions  in  psychology,  such  as  the 
affect-program tradition, or even the heuris-
tic  value  of  alternative  theoretical  perspec-
tives.  Instead, the situated perspective shifts 
our  theoretical  focus  to  neglected  phenom-
ena  and  questions.  The  situated  approach 
to  emotion  is  at  its  most  compelling  when 
applied to exemplars  like  anger in  a  marital 
quarrel  or  embarrassment  while  delivering 
a  song  to  an  audience.  These  are  cases  in 
which  the  emotion  has  a  temporal  course 
of  development  and  involves  an  ongoing 
exchange  of  emotional  signals  (e.g.,  facial 
actions,  tones  of voice).  This  switch  in  the 
focus of emotion theory parallels the way  in 
which  situated  cognition  research  switches 
the  focus  of  cognitive  science  from  exem-
plars like  theorem  proving to  engaged,  real-
time exemplars like navigation in a cluttered 
environment. 

Finally,  the  situated  perspective  on  emo-
tion has some points in common with active-
vision accounts of situated perception  (Noe, 
2004).  In  traditional  models  of  emotional 

appraisal,  the  organism  receives  information 
from  the  environment  and  uses  it  to  deter-
mine  the  emotional  significance  of  the  sit-
uation  that  confronts  it.  In  contrast,  the 
situated  perspective  envisages  organisms 
probing  their  environment  through  initial 
emotional  responses  and  monitoring  the 
responses  of  other  organisms  to  determine 
how  the  emotion  will  evolve  (see  section  5). 

2.  Social  Situatedness 

A  situated  perspective  on  the  mind  recog-
nizes  that  it  is  designed  to  function  in  an 
environmental  context  and  that  aspects  of 
the  environment  m a y be  causal  components 
of  mental  mechanisms  (Clark  &  Chalmers, 
1998).  Research  on  situated  cognition  has 
often emphasized the reliable physical prop-
erties  of  the  environment,  properties  that 
can be exploited to  reduce cognitive load. In 
contrast,  a  situated  perspective  on  emotion 
emphasizes  the  role  of social  context  in  the 
production  and  management  of an  emotion, 
and  the  reciprocal  influence  of  emotion  on 
the  evolving  social  context.  Behaviors  that 
have  traditionally  been  viewed  as  involun-
tary  expressions  of  the  organism's  psycho-
logical  state  are  instead  viewed  as  signals 
designed  to  influence  the  behavior  of other 
organisms,  or  as  strategic  moves  in  an  ongo-
ing  transaction  between  organisms.2 

One  of  the  most  important  experimen-
tal  paradigms  for  a  situated  perspective  on 
emotion  is  the  study  of  audience  effects  -
differences  in  emotional  response  to  a  con-
stant  stimulus  which  reflect  differences  in 
the  expected  recipient(s)  of  the  emotion. 
Among  the  most  dramatic  effects  are  those 
obtained  for  the  production  of the  so-called 
Duchenne  smile  -  the  pattern  of  move-
ment  of mouth  and  eyes  generally  accepted 
as  a  pancultural  expression  of  happiness 
(Ekman,  1972).  Ten-pin bowlers  are presum-
ably  happiest  w h e n  they  make  a  full  strike 
and  less  happy  w h e n  they  knock  down  a 
few  pins.  However,  bowlers  rarely  smile 
after  making  a  full  strike  when  facing  away 
from  their  bowling  companions  and  smile 
very  often  after  knocking  down  a  few  pins 

