Journal of Economic Perspectives—Volume 18, Number 3—Summer 2004 —Pages 135–146

Where Ricardo and Mill Rebut and
Conﬁrm Arguments of Mainstream
Economists Supporting Globalization

Paul A. Samuelson

M ost noneconomists are fearful when an emerging China or India,

helped by their still
low real wage rates, outsourcing and miracle
export-led developments, cause layoffs from good American jobs. This

is a hot issue now, and in the coming decade, it will not go away.

Prominent and competent mainstream economists enter into the debate to
educate and correct warm-hearted protestors who are against globalization. Here is
a fair paraphrase of the argumentation that has been used recently by Alan
Greenspan, Jagdish Bhagwati, Gregory Mankiw, Douglas Irwin and economists John
or Jane Doe spread widely throughout academia.

Yes, good jobs may be lost here in the short run. But still total U.S. net
national product must, by the economic laws of comparative advantage, be raised in
the long run (and in China, too). The gains of the winners from free trade,
properly measured, work out to exceed the losses of the losers. This is not by
mysterious fuzzy magic, but rather comes from a sharing of the trade-induced
rise in total global vectors of the goods and services that people in a democ-
racy want. Never forget to tally the real gains of consumers alongside admitted
possible losses of some producers in this working out of what Schumpeter
called “creative capitalist destruction.”

Correct economic law recognizes that some American groups can be hurt
by dynamic free trade. But correct economic law vindicates the word “cre-
ative” destruction by its proof [sic] that the gains of the American winners are
big enough to more than compensate the losers.

y Paul A. Samuelson is Professor of Economics and Institute Professor Emeritus, Massachu-
setts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

136

Journal of Economic Perspectives

The last paragraph can be only an innuendo. For it is dead wrong about
necessary surplus of winnings over losings—as I proved in my “Little Nobel Lecture
of 1972” (1972b) and elsewhere in references here cited (see also Johnson and
Stafford, 1993; Gomory and Baumol, 2000). The present paper provides explica-
tion of the popular polemical untruth.

Here Ricardian equilibrium analysis will presuppose no permanent loss of jobs
either in China or America. Instead, it focuses on the vital question, “Will inven-
tions A or B lower or raise the new market-clearing real wage rates that sustain
high-to-full employment in both places?”

Act I(a) of the present paper ﬁrst rigorously investigates by twenty-ﬁrst century
Ricardo-Mill analysis the following contrived scenario: In the autarky absence of any
trade at all, China’s precisely measured real income per capita is set at one-tenth of
U.S. autarky real income. This for the reason that China’s labor productivities are
speciﬁed here to average out to only one-tenth those of the United States. Quasi-
realistically, China’s total labor population is posited here to be ten times that of the
United States—so that in autarky any biasing effects of differences in total regional
size can be kept out of the analysis. In this example, only a good 1 and a good 2 are
involved. And, a` la the young J. S. Mill, demand tastes are everywhere assumed to
be the same: more precisely, consumers even-handedly always spend their dispos-
able incomes 50-50 on good 1 and on good 2.

Despite the initial overall 10-to-1 superiority of the United States in absolute
productivity, my example stipulates that in good 1, China’s inferiority of produc-
tivity is much worse than one-tenth; in good 2 China’s inferiority vis-a-vis the United
States is not as bad as one-tenth. Differences in opinion make for horse-race bets.
Differences in relative (!) geographical productivities between good 1 and good 2
explain the bounties from specialization and trade. Vive les diffe´rences!

In Act I(a)’s ﬁrst part, geographical specialization and fair free trade are shown
to happen to double exactly each place’s measurable autarky real income. So far,
a big brownie point for the economist debaters.

Act I(b) goes on to address how the United States and China will fare when
Schumpeterian technical improvement in China has quadrupled her labor’s pro-
ductivity in good 2, which is the good that China has been exporting to the United
States. In my stipulated example, China’s average productivity still remains far
below that of the United States. But, remember that so too are China’s real wages
far below the United States’.

In a nutshell, the new fair trade equilibrium must deﬁnitely create for the
United States a better real net national product— better because we can buy our
imports cheaper now. China’s good 2 elevated productivity does also in my Mill-
Ricardo scenario raise her real net national product; and it happens to do so equally
with the United States— even though China’s terms of trade do deteriorate some-
what, albeit not enough to lower China’s per capita net national product when
demand elasticity is Mill-like. Acts I(a) and I(b)’s valid numerical deductions are
pluses for the economist proglobalization debaters.

Act II, however, deals some weighty blows against economists’ oversimple

