Americas Program Report
Rio de Janeiro: Control of the Poor Seen as
Crucial for the Olympics
By Raul Zibechi | January 18, 2010

The prospect of the FIFA World Cup in 2014 followed by the Olympic Games in 2016 has reignited the
debate about public security in a country where there is an undeclared war taking place in the favelas
between the military police, paramilitary groups, and drug traffickers, but where the principal victims
are the poor.

the Brazilian military is in charge of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). There, as in
Rio, the military police have to use diggers to first clear
the streets, a form of “combat engineering” to overcome
a logistical problem pioneered in Brazil.

In comparing what happens in the favelas of Rio with the
reality of Kabul and Port-au-Prince, the conservative right
wing is deliberately attempting to criminalize the poverty
concentrated in Rio’s 750 favelas inhabited by 1.5 mil-
lion people. The feeling of an escalation in the war was
reinforced when, on Oct 17, two weeks after Rio was
awarded the Olympic Games, a police helicopter was
shot down over the favela known as Morro dos Macacos (
the Hill of Monkeys).

The mountain sides around Rio have been home to poor
migrant workers for over 50 years. They live in precari-
ous conditions without water, electricity, sanitation,
healthcare, or education. Statistics show that 20 people
per day are assassinated in Rio, turning the city into
what the sociologist Vera Malaguti terms “a laboratory of
genocidal techniques.”2 The police in Rio have the dubi-
ous reputation of being the police force with the highest
kill rate in the world. This is not to say that they are out
of control and kill on a whim. Brazil is a paradise of wild
capitalism, with the largest gap of economic inequality in
the world. Rio is its star, with frantic real estate specula-
tion intensifying as the big events approach.

Feared BOPE

Violence in Brazil is not only very high but also continues
to grow alarmingly. In 2006 there were almost 50,000
homicides (49,145 to be exact, or 26.3 per 100,000
inhabitants). In the state of Rio de Janeiro 2008 statistics

Americas Policy Program

w w w. a m e r i c a s p o l i c y. o r g
A New World of Citizen Action, Analysis, and Policy Options

A favela in Rio de Janeiro.

“The day to day reality that Rio police confront in the
favelas is very similar to that which NATO troops face in
Afghanistan,” says Kaiser Konrad, director of Defesanet, a
magazine specializing in military issues.1 He goes on to
say that Rio is one of the most complex theaters of war
in the world, in part due to its diverse geographical ter-
rains such as jungle and mountain ranges. “The danger
encountered by a Western soldier patrolling certain parts
of Kabul is the same as that encountered by a soldier or
policeman called into one of Rio’s hot spots,” he con-
cludes.

In the favelas, the drug traffickers have dug out ditches
and built barricades with large cement blocks or boulders
in order to prevent the progress of the “caveirao,” an
armored vehicle the size of a bus which is used by the
military police when they enter the favelas. The same
tactics are reproduced in the poor areas in Haiti, where

show 5,717 homicides, or 35.8 per 100,000 inhabitants.
There were also, however, 5,095 disappeared people,
many of them victims of intentional violence and buried
in clandestine graves.3

Figures relating to police brutality in Rio are jaw-drop-
ping: in 2003, 1,195 people were killed in police actions.
Of these, 65% had clear signs of having been executed,
i.e. they had at least one bullet in the back. “In 2004, the
police killed 983 people, in 2005 there were 1,098, in
2006, 1063. In 2007, this number rose to 1,330, in 2008
1,137. This adds up to 6,806 people killed by police in
six years.”4 The vast majority are poor and black inhabi-
tants of the favelas aged between 15 and 29. The majori-
ty were assassinated by BOPE, the Special Police
Operations Battalion, or the elite special forces of the mil-
itary police in Rio de Janeiro.

The book, Elite Force, published in 2005, was the first
book that portrayed the actions of BOPE from the inside.
It was co-authored by two former members of BOPE who
had worked in special operations for five years and by an
ex-secretary of national public security. The book, which
was a best-seller and inspired the Golden Bear winning
film of 2008, claimed that BOPE is “the best urban war-
fare force in the world, being the most technical, the
most prepared, and the most powerful.”5

The authors state that both North American and Israeli
defense forces come to Rio to train with BOPE because
“there is no other place in the world where one can train
every single day.” Even though BOPE is often accused of
disproportionate brutality, the force’s honesty is recog-
nized and trusted, in contrast with the military police,
who most people consider corrupt and in collusion with
the drug traffickers.

BOPE was created in 1978, during the military dictator-
ship, but only received its public security mandate in
1991. Originally BOPE was conceived as a war machine:
“It does not receive training in how to interact with civil-
ians or how to control those who break the law: its sole
purpose is to invade enemy territory.”6 The hymn chant-
ed in training states that the mission is to “invade the
favela and crush everybody.” The emblem of the force is
a knife embedded in a skull; its color is black. For many
years the force was comprised of 150 members; recently
it was increased to 400.

Entrance to the force is similar to all military recruitment:
extreme hardship, with excessive physical tests that put
the applicant very close to death and thereby ferment his
insensitivity. Participants recount that training consisted
of “marching 100 kilometers, on foot and without rest,
almost dying of hunger and thirst, completely wiped out
by physical exhaustion, legs and rear ends on fire … but
the worst by far was the ritual of humiliation during the
wind down: they had to dig their own graves and simu-
late their own death, symbolizing that they had reached
the bottom of the abyss.”7

Once inside the favela, BOPE behaves exactly like an
occupying army. “At night we don’t take prisoners,” say
the authors, acknowledging that BOPE is a lethal force
that shows no respect for life or for the dubious rule of
law that prevails in Rio. They concede that the actions of
BOPE have had dreadful and far-reaching consequences:
“The shoot to kill policy pursued that didn’t allow for the
surrender of the offender provoked a paradoxical effect:
it increased their resistance, as well as the rate of vio-
lence directed against the police.”8

The justice system, in effect, collaborates with these
actions by issuing “decrees of resistance” which, accord-
ing to Tim Cargill of Amnesty International, protect the
police by ensuring that the deaths resulting from these
elite force actions are exempt from investigation.9

In addition to BOPE, there is also evidence of illegal mili-
tias comprised of both former and active police mem-
bers, as well as firemen, ex-military, and other state
agents. While the northern zone of Rio is engulfed in a
feud between drug gangs, the western zone is increasing-
ly dominated by these paramilitary groups who now con-
trol 88 favelas while the drug gangs’ control has been
reduced to 71.

“The current mayor of Rio, Eduardo Paes, campaigned
on a platform which defended the power of the paramili-
taries.”10 As soon as the paramilitaries expel the drug
gangs, they impose on the favelas a form of feudal sys-
tem which strictly controls the population, and which is
similar to that which Colombian paramilitaries inflict on
areas they control. “They charge for security. Also for
healthcare. Pirated cable TV costs 20 reais (12 dollars). At
night there is a curfew,” recounts a young woman from
the Vila Sape favela.

p. 2

www.americaspolicy.org
A New World of Citizen Action, Analysis, and Policy Options

