Session 13
July 4th, 2016

wrap up & clinical trials for psychotherapy

Nadine Maas
nmaas@uos.de

1

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33

INTRODUCTION: Different lines of research suggest that altered states of consciousness (ASCs) could be
used for therapeutic purposes1 because they might have the ability to trigger different viewpoints in
the subject that receives the therapy, and since the individual's perspective is an important aspect in
(the treatment of) most psychological disorders this might help to relieve symptoms. This review will
give   a  short   overview  on  some  induction  methods   that  could  be   relevant   for  clinical   uses,  two
pharmaceutical   and   one   non-pharmaceutical   ones,   namely   MDMA,   LSD/Psilocybin   and   sleep
deprivation. After a short summary on the topic of ASCs (1), I will review those three different types of
induction methods (MDMA (2), LSD/Psilocybin (3), and sleep deprivation (4)) regarding their relevance
for psychotherapy.
1) ALTERED STATES OF CONSCIOUSNESS: When talking about altered states of consciousness, one first
has to define what an 'altered' state of consciousness is. That means, a definition of a 'normal' or
'regular' state of consciousness is needed so one can see if deviations from this 'normal' state can be
categorized   accordingly.   Since   everyday   subjective   experiences   underlie   fluctuations   triggered   by
external and internal influences2, one needs to determine a 'baseline' level for every subject to relate
experimentally induced ASCs to and evaluate experimental data, and then need ASCs that have a short
duration (as opposed to pathologic conditions) to study them experimentally. A baseline level should
be   measured   while   the   subject   is   as   calm   and   cognitively   as   well   as   physically   unengaged   and
stressfree, since even a small uneasiness or uncontrolled motion can produce artifacts that will distort
the result and function as a counfounding variable. 
ASCs have been embedded in different cultures in religious or medical procedures for ages before
people in the western world like Albert Hofmann discovered new ways of inducing them. In the
western world and outside of the chemistry lab, those substances were mainly used for recreational
purposes and after some time their users faced huge obstacles because of restricted social acceptance
of those substances. Facing these problems regarding the handling of psychoactive substances, an idea
like the 'LSD driver's license' evolved, the idea that people could get non-prosecuted access to certain
substances   after   they   complete   a   course   for   save   usage   and   get   their   'driver's   license'   for   the
substance. One argument for the demanded liberalization of drug policies has been the idea that, using
a rational scale to assess the harm of drugs, there are many activities that are much more dangerous
than using pharmacological substance to achieve ASCs but do not require any form of formal training,
horse riding for example3. Furthermore,  there were no useful guidelines to safe administration, which
would be a prerequisite to control the risks of those substances. While many methods used to induce
ASCs are of pharmacological nature (like taking LSD, Psilocybin or MDMA), there are also some non-
pharmacological ones like holotropic breathwork (Stanislav Grof), Kundalini Yoga (wich also relies
1 Majić Schmidt & Gallinat (2015), Mithoefer et al. (2011, 2013).
2 Pekala (2013).
3 Nutt (2007).

