Downloaded from 

genesdev.cshlp.org

 on October 26, 2011 - Published by 

Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 

Plant hormone receptors: perception is everything
Brenda Chow and Peter McCourt

Genes Dev.
Access the most recent version at doi:

 2006 20: 1998-2008

10.1101/gad.1432806
 

References

This article cites 82 articles, 51 of which can be accessed free at:
http://genesdev.cshlp.org/content/20/15/1998.full.html#ref-list-1
 

Article cited in: 
http://genesdev.cshlp.org/content/20/15/1998.full.html#related-urls
 

Email alerting
service

Topic
Collections

Receive free email alerts when new articles cite this article - sign up in the box at the
top right corner of the article or

click here

 

Articles on similar topics can be found in the following collections
 (cid:160) (cid:149)

Plant Biology

 (27 articles)

To subscribe to 
http://genesdev.cshlp.org/subscriptions
 

Genes & Development

 go to: 

Copyright © 2006, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press

(cid:160)
(cid:160)
(cid:160)
(cid:160)
(cid:160)
(cid:160)
Downloaded from 

genesdev.cshlp.org

 on October 26, 2011 - Published by 

Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 

REVIEW

Plant hormone receptors: perception
is everything

Brenda Chow1 and Peter McCourt1,2
1Department of Botany, University of Toronto, Toronto M5S 3B2, Canada

Despite the bewildering ability of higher plants to
change their development with respect to the environ-
ment, there appear to be only a few hormones that func-
tion to organize growth and development. With the re-
cent identification of three plant hormone receptors, the
molecular identities of all the major plant receptors are
now known. Some plant hormones such as cytokinins,
ethylene, and brassinosteroids (BR) use well-character-
ized signaling modules such as those involving receptor
kinases, but in the case of the ethylene and BR receptors,
there appear to be additional functions aside from the
hormone they perceive. Auxin and gibberellin percep-
tion require unique mechanisms where the receptors are
components involved in ubiquitination-dependent pro-
teolysis. With plant hormone receptors in hand, com-
parisons can now be made between plants and other
kingdoms as to how hormones control growth and de-
velopment.

Multicellular organisms, whether plants or animals, co-
ordinate their growth and development at a tissue and
organ level by using extracellular signaling molecules to
communicate between cells. In animals, these extracel-
lular signals usually take the form of small proteins or
peptides, like insulin, or small organic-based hormone
molecules, such as steroids or retinoids. In the case of
plants, the organic class of hormones has historically
dominated since these molecules influence numerous
aspects of growth and development (Davies 1995). In-
triguingly, although a number of the plant hormone
structures have similar animal counterparts, plant hor-
mones seem to have a much broader range of function
(Fig. 1). A single plant cell can respond to more than one
hormone, while a single hormone can affect different
tissues in different ways. Obviously, any understanding
of how this developmental complexity is initiated by
these simple organic molecules first requires an under-
standing of how they are perceived. Until recently, how-
ever, the molecular properties of plant hormone percep-
tion were fragmentary compared with animal studies

due to the difficulties in biochemical purification of re-
ceptors.

Unlike animal systems, where organs and glands are
discrete, plant development is a continuum of growth
and differentiation in which cells and tissues both pro-
duce and respond to many hormones. Biochemical analy-
sis is further compromised by the cell wall and the
plethora of secondary chemical products that plants syn-
thesize. Fortunately, with the arrival of modern Arabi-
dopsis genetics, mutations were identified that increased
or decreased the response of a whole plant to a particular
hormone. With the mutants in hand, genes could be iso-
lated without the need for sophisticated biochemistry,
and in the past few years, receptors to many of the major
plant hormones have been identified. This has allowed
biochemical studies and has also initiated a comprehen-
sive comparison of how multicellular plants and ani-
mals, which most likely evolved independently, use
similar organic-based hormones to organize develop-
ment.

In this review, because of the strong influence of ge-
netic analysis on plant hormone studies, we have limited
ourselves to receptors where in vivo studies have pro-
vided the reagents for in vitro experiments. We have
focused on five receptors, as a sufficient body of work
exists for these to allow both informed mechanistic con-
clusions and general comparisons to animal counter-
parts. We have not dealt with the recent identification of
a receptor for abscisic acid (ABA) as the role of this re-
ceptor in general ABA signaling is not clear at this time
(Razem et al. 2006). We have also not dwelt on the
subtleties of mutant screens or details of phenotypes as
these topics have been covered in detail by a large num-
ber of excellent reviews. Sufficient information is now
available to allow receptors to be classified with respect
to their biochemical properties rather than by the hor-
mone they perceive. This type of organization allows
comparisons not only between different plant hormone
systems but also, where possible, to receptors in other
kingdoms.

[Keywords: Arabidopsis; hormones; development; signal transduction]
2Corresponding author.
E-MAIL mccourt@botany.utoronto.ca; FAX (416) 978-5878.
Article is online at http://www.genesdev.org/cgi/doi/10.1101/gad.1432806.

Two-component-based hormone receptors

Two-component regulators derive their name from the
transfer of phosphates between a collection of signature

1998

GENES & DEVELOPMENT 20:1998–2008 © 2006 by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press ISSN 0890-9369/06; www.genesdev.org

