IntroductionIt is not uncommon for lay persons to erroneously believe that criminal inves-tigative analysis, commonly referred to as “criminal proﬁling,” is synonymous with forensic psychology, especially with the rise in popular-ity of television programs on proﬁling that in-corporate psychological concepts. Further con-fusion may occur because practitioners in both ﬁelds read the same research, interview the same criminals, attend the same seminars, develop professional relationships, and cite one anoth-er’s scholarship. However, what happens when forensic psychologists advance opinions about criminal matters based on the extrapolation of academic research on psychological concepts involving sexual homicide cases and reject the opinions of professional criminal proﬁlers who incorporate law enforcement analysis coupled with criminal evidentiary considerations into their work? Timothy Masters, who spent over 9 years in a Colorado prison for the murder of Peggy Hettrick, was released on January 22, 2008. Shortly thereafter, all homicide charges were dropped based on new DNA evidence pointing to other suspects. Masters, who always main-tained his innocence, was convicted largely on the testimony of forensic psychologist, Dr. Reid Meloy. His violent sketches and stories produced when he was an adolescent were used as evidence to arrest and convict him in 1999 of killing Peggy Hettrick in 1987, a convic-tion that was upheld by the Colorado Court of Appeals and the Colorado Supreme Court. Masters’s prosecution raises troubling questions, primarily because it pivoted on the controversial opinions of a board certiﬁed forensic psycholo-gist who analyzed Timothy’s sketches and con-Criminal Investigative Analysis, Forensic Psychology, and the Timothy Masters Casehis paper offers an analysis of the series of events that occurred when a homicide detective contacted an international expert in forensic psychology to assist in the arrest process and the prosecu-tion of a targeted sexual homicide suspect. The forensic psycholo-gist developed a psychological proﬁle of a killer using narrative and drawings made by the suspect to conclude that the suspect’s fantasy was the motive and behavioral preparation for the sexual murder, regardless of the fact that the forensic psychologist knew that there was no direct or physical evidence linking the suspect to the crime. In this article, the authors examine the case of Timothy Masters, who was arrested and convicted of sexual murder based on the testimony of a forensic psychologist while the opinion of a crimi-nal investigative analyst was ignored. By Frank S. Perri, JD, MBA, CPA, and Terrance G. Lichtenwald, PhD(cid:22)(cid:25)(cid:36)(cid:33)(cid:42)(cid:2)(cid:25)(cid:43)(cid:46)(cid:40)(cid:32)(cid:47)(cid:2)(cid:5)(cid:43)(cid:40)(cid:40)(cid:37)(cid:32)(cid:33)This article is approved by the following for continuing education credit:The American College of Forensic Examiners International provides this continuing education credit for Diplomates. After studying this article, participants should be better able to do the following:1.  Understand the difference between criminal investigative analysis and forensic psychology.2.  Consider ethical considerations when offering forensic psychological opinions.3.  Implement Daubert factors when evaluating the appropriateness of forensic testimony.KEY WORDS: Reid Meloy, Timothy Masters, criminal investigative analysis, forensic psychology,Roy Hazelwood, sexual homicide, motive fantasy, pseudo-profileTARGET AUDIENCE: Criminal investigators and psychologistsPROGRAM LEVEL: BasicDISCLOSURE: The author has nothing to disclose.PREREQUISITES: NoneCE ARTICLE: 3 CE CREDITS52 THE FORENSIC EXAMINER® Summer (cid:81)(cid:85)(cid:85)(cid:40)www.acfei.comcluded the drawings reﬂected speciﬁc personal-ity traits, a motive and behavioral preparation to commit sexual homicide. Masters was convicted without a single shred of direct evidence, such as a confession, or physical evidence such as DNA, and was sentenced to life in prison without pa-role.  In this article, the authors review the sexual homicide investigation leading to the arrest of Timothy Masters, analyze the reasoning of the forensic psychologist’s theories used to justify the prosecution, include former FBI proﬁler Roy Hazelwood’s analysis of the sexual homi-cide that was never revealed to the defense, and provide an analysis of the legal implications of the case together with recommendations for fo-rensic psychological practitioners.The Sexual Homicide InvestigationIn 1987, 15-year-old high-school sophomore Timothy Masters lived with his father in Fort Collins, Colorado, a university town on the plains east of the Rocky Mountains. On February 11, 1987, the murdered body of Peggy Hettrick was found in a ﬁeld not far from his residence. Hettrick’s private areas were mutilated; with surgical precision, her killer removed her left nipple, areola, and part of her vulva. She was stabbed in the lower back causing a rib to break and then dragged into a ﬁeld as evidenced by the drag marks in the soil. The body had been partially disrobed and positioned on its back with the legs slightly apart and arms over the head, ex-posing the right breast and pubic area. After the delivery of the fatal wound, a bloody trail indicated that the perpetrator dragged the vic-tim’s body 103.5 feet into the ﬁeld where it was found. According to law enforcement, Timothy Masters was an early suspect because he saw the body on the way to school but failed to report it. Without consulting an attorney, he and his dad allowed detectives to search their home and Tim’s school locker, where the police retrieved his writings, sketches, and survival-knife collection. Timothy’s school locker con-tained a hand-drawn map of what appeared to be the ﬁeld where Hettrick’s body was found and a sketch of a person dragging a body. In his backpack were two Mother’s Day cards he had made years before, while his mother was still alive. The detectives also found a calendar with a date circled reﬂecting the date that Timothy’s mother died four years ear-lier. Peggy Hettrick had been mur-dered one day shy of the February 12th anniversary of the death of Timothy’s mother. Detective Francis Gonzales found Masters at school, and Masters told him he ▲ Timothy Masters at the age of 15▲ Timothy Masters when released from prisonSummer 2009 THE FORENSIC EXAMINER® 53(800) 592-1399