	  

1	  

Study Skills 
 
Terry Eagleton, Literary Theory: An Introduction, Minneapolis: U of MN P, 2008. 

"Introduction: What is Literature?" (Excerpts) 

Group 1 

[…]  There  have  been  various  attempts  to  define  literature.  You  can  define  it,  for  example,  as 
'imaginative'  writing  in  the  sense  of  fiction  -  writing  which  is  not  literally  true.  But  even  the 
briefest reflection on what people commonly include under the heading of literature suggests that 
this will not do. Seventeenth- century English literature includes Shakespeare, Webster , Marvell 
and  Milton;  but  it  also  stretches  to  the  essays  of  Francis  Bacon,  the  sermons  of  John  Donne, 
Bunyan's  spiritual  autobiography  and  whatever  it  was  that  Sir  Thomas  Browne  wrote.  […]  A 
distinction between 'fact' and 'fiction'; then, seems unlikely to get us very far, not least because 
the distinction itself is often a questionable one. […] 

Perhaps  one  needs  a  different  kind  of  approach  altogether.  Perhaps  literature  is  definable  not 
according to whether it is fictional or 'imaginative', but because it uses language in peculiar ways. 
On this theory, literature is a kind of writing which, in the words of the Russian critic Roman 
Jacobson,  represents   an  'organized  violence  committed  on  ordinary  speech'.   Literature 
transforms  and  intensifies  ordinary  language,  deviates  systematically  from  everyday  speech.  If 
you  approach  me  at  bus  stop  and  murmur  'Thou  still  unravished  bride  of  quietness'  then  I  am 
instantly aware that I am in the presence of the literary. I know this because the texture, rhythm 
and  resonance  of  your  words  are  in  excess  of  their  abstract  able  meaning  -or  as  the  linguists 
might more technically put it, there is disproportion between the signifiers and the signified. Your 
language draws attention to itself, flaunts its material being, as statements like 'Don't you know 
the drivers are on strike?' do not.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

	  

Group 2 

2	  

[…]  Under  the  pressure  of  literary  devices,  ordinary  language  was  intensified,  condensed, 
twisted, telescoped, drawn out, turned on its head. It was language 'made strange'; and because of 
this  estrangement,  the  everyday  world  was  also  suddenly  made  unfamiliar.  In  the  routines  of 
everyday  speech,  our  perceptions  of  and  responses  to  reality  become  stale,  blunted,  or,  as  the 
Formalists  would  say,  'automatized'.  Literature,  by  forcing  us  into  a  dramatic  awareness  of 
language, refreshes these habitual responses and renders objects more 'perceptible'. By having to 
grapple with language in a more strenuous, self-conscious way than usual, the world which that 
language  contains  is  vividly  renewed.  The  poetry  of  Gerard  Manley  Hopkins  might  provide  a 
particularly graphic example of this. Literary discourse 'estranges or alienates ordinary speech, 
but in doing so, paradoxically, brings us into a fuller, more intimate possession of experience. 
Most  of  the  time  we  breathe  in  air  without  being  conscious  of  it:  like  language,  it  is  the  very 
medium in which we move. […] 

The Formalists, then, saw literary language as a set of deviations from a norm, a kind of linguistic 
violence:  literature  is  a  'special'  kind  of  language,  in  contrast  to  the  'ordinary'  language  we 
commonly  use.  […]  For  the  Formalists,  in  other  words,  'literariness'  was  a  function  of  the 
differential  relations  between  one  sort  of  discourse  and  another;  it  was  not  an  eternally  given 
property.  They  were  not  out  to  define  'literature',  but  'literariness'  -  special  uses  of  language, 
which could be found in 'literary' texts but also in many places outside them. […] 

To  think  of  literature  as  the  Formalists  do  is  really  to  think  of  all  literature  as  poetry. 
Significantly, when the Formalists came to consider prose writing, they often simply extended to 
it the kinds of technique they had used with poetry. But literature is usually judged to contain 
much  besides  poetry  -to  include,  for  example,  realist  or  naturalistic  writing  which  is  not 
linguistically self-conscious or self-exhibiting in any striking way. […] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

