R E V I E W S

MAKING SENSE OF IT ALL:
BACTERIAL CHEMOTAXIS

George H. Wadhams and Judith P. Armitage

Abstract | Bacteria must be able to respond to a changing environment, and one way to respond
is to move. The transduction of sensory signals alters the concentration of small phosphorylated
response regulators that bind to the rotary flagellar motor and cause switching. This simple
pathway has provided a paradigm for sensory systems in general. However, the increasing
number of sequenced bacterial genomes shows that although the central sensory mechanism
seems to be common to all bacteria, there is added complexity in a wide range of species.

In an ever-changing environment, it is essential that
organisms  are  able  to  sense  these  changes  and  to
respond appropriately. Possible responses include alter-
ations in gene expression and/or active movement
towards or away from an environment. Most sensory
pathways in eukaryotic organisms rely on serine, threo-
nine or tyrosine protein kinases, whereas the most com-
mon  sensory  pathways 
in  prokaryotes  use  a
histidine–aspartate phosphorelay (HAP) system. HAP
systems have at least two components — a dimeric
histidine protein kinase (HPK) and a response regula-
tor (RR)1. HAP systems are also found in many lower
eukaryotes, in which they control processes such as
osmoregulation in, for example, Saccharomyces cere-
visiae 2, Candida  albicans3
and  Dictyostelium
discoideum4. They are also found in plants, in which
they control, for example, ethylene-mediated fruit
ripening5 and blue-light responses. The Arabidopsis
thaliana genome has genes for 16 HPK and 24 RR
homologues.

Bacteria can sense a vast range of environmental
signals, from the concentrations of nutrients and toxins
to oxygen levels, pH, osmolarity and the intensity and
wavelength of light. Genome sequencing has identified
over 600 HAP systems and some individual bacterial
species contain more than 130 (REF. 6) — for example,
Myxococcus xanthus has about 140 HAP systems (J. R.
Kirby, personal communication). Despite the extremely
high homology between the components of HAP sys-
tems, numerous pathways operate in individual bacteria

without significant crosstalk. Although most of these
HAP systems are involved in the regulation of gene
expression, one of the most well-understood pathways
regulates motile behaviour. Chemotaxis operates as part
of a complex network of signals that balance to produce
a physiological response that is suited to a specific envi-
ronment (BOX 1). Here, we describe the basic bacterial
chemosensory pathway, as well as some of the varia-
tions of this system. However, first we provide a general
overview of HAP systems.

Histidine–aspartate-phosphorelay systems
HAP systems rely on the trans-autophosphorylation of a
His residue that resides in one monomer of the HPK
dimer by the γ-phosphoryl group of an ATP molecule
that  is  bound  to  the  kinase  domain  of the  other
monomer. This phosphoryl group is then transferred to
an Asp residue on a separate RR protein to alter its activ-
ity and generate a response. Some systems incorporate
several His–Asp phosphorylation steps, which possibly
allows  for  complex  regulatory  control  as  discussed
below7,8.

Numerous HAP systems have been identified in
different bacteria (FIG. 1). Most of the HPKs involved
(for example, EnvZ; FIG. 1a) have an N-terminal region
that spans the membrane twice, which results in an
intervening periplasmic domain that can sense an
extracellular  signal. The  C-terminal  cytoplasmic
region comprises a linker or HAMP DOMAIN (‘histidine
kinases, adenylyl cyclases, methyl-binding proteins

HAMP DOMAIN
(‘Histidine kinases, adenylyl
cyclases, methyl-binding
proteins and phosphatases’
domain). A domain that is
broadly conserved in histidine
protein kinases, chemoreceptors
and phosphatases. It contains
two amphipathic helices, and is
presumed to have a role in signal
transduction.

Department of
Biochemistry,
University of Oxford,
Oxford OX1 3QU, UK.
Correspondence to J.P.A.
e-mail: judith.armitage@
bioch.ox.ac.uk
doi:10.1038/nrm1524

1024 | DECEMBER 2004 | VOLUME 5

www.nature.com/reviews/molcellbio

©  2004 Nature  Publishing Group

R E V I E W S

Box 1 | Chemotaxis as part of a complex network of signalling pathways

Pathogenicity
Motility and chemotaxis are required for many pathogenic species to colonize and invade a host. Bacteria sense a wide
range of signals — including temperature and pH changes, nutrient concentrations, osmolarity and oxygen — and
they integrate this information to generate the pathogenic response. Chemotaxis can, for example, guide Helicobacter
pylori to the mucus lining of the stomach97, free-living Vibrio anguillarium to the surface of fish121, and Agrobacterium
tumefaciens to wounded plants122. Each species responds to specific, relevant chemoattractants and other sensory
signals then control the expression of virulence genes. Interestingly, it is not clear whether Vibrio cholera — which can
live in biofilms in aquatic environments or in the human small intestine123, and has a spectacular range of
histidine–aspartate-phosphorelay systems (~ 30), methyl-accepting chemotaxis proteins (~40) and chemotaxis
protein (Che) homologues (3 CheW, CheA, CheB, CheR and CheV proteins, 4 CheY proteins and 1 CheZ protein) —
uses chemotaxis to swim to the villi of the small intestine. However, motility is known to be essential for
pathogenicity124.

Symbiotic associations
Chemotaxis probably guides free-living rhizobia to the environment around legume root hairs, which contains a higher
concentration  of nutrients. The correct host–symbiont contact then triggers the formation of NODULES and the
subsequent nitrogen fixation by bacteria125. In a different type of symbiotic association, the squid Euprymna scolopes
uses bioluminescence to confuse preditors. The marine bacterium Vibrio fischeri is only bioluminescent at high cell
densities (~1010 ml–1), and chemotaxis guides free-living bacteria to the squid light organs, in which the colony size
increases. Eventually, the concentration of a diffusible autoinducer (N-acyl homoserine lactone) reaches the level that is
required to induce the expression of bioluminescence genes126.

Biofilms 
Many bacterial species are not normally free living, but are associated with surfaces in complex polysaccharide
biofilms, in which microcolonies of different species coexist and compete for diffusing nutrients127. Biofilms are
involved in fouling — for example, on oil rigs, teeth and medical implants, and in the lungs of cystic-fibrosis
patients128 — and they protect bacterial colonies from antimicrobial agents. Biofilm formation and development
results from large numbers of interacting sensory signals — for example, QUORUM SENSING129, osmolarity and charge
sensing, and also chemotaxis. In biofilms, many species lose flagella, but induce the expression of type-IV PILI, which
allow them to ‘twitch’ along surfaces (BOX 2). Biofilms are far from static entities and they mature, develop and shed
bacteria, which swim to new locations.

and phosphatases’domain), a dimerization domain and a
kinase domain that interacts with its cognate RR. Some
HPKs lack the periplasmic and transmembrane domains,
for example, CheA (chemotaxis protein A; FIG. 1c) and
NtrB. CheA interacts with transmembrane receptors (see
below), whereas NtrB interacts with cytoplasmic sensors.
Some transmembrane HPKs have several transmem-
brane regions, for example, PrrB (also known as RegB)
has four transmembrane helices and KinB has six8,9
(FIG. 1d). Other HPKs have further cytoplasmic domains
— for example, aerobic-respiration-control sensor pro-
tein-B (ArcB) has a cytoplasmic PAS (PER,ARNT, SIM) DOMAIN, a
fused RR domain and an extra histidine-containing
phosphotransfer (HPt) DOMAIN (FIG. 1b).

HAP-system signalling is initiated by trans-autophos-
phorylation within the HPK dimer. As mentioned above,
the γ-phosphoryl group of an ATP molecule that is
bound to the kinase domain of one monomer is trans-
ferred to a His residue in the other monomer. The phos-
phoryl group is then transferred to the conserved Asp
residue of the relevant RR, which results in the activation
of the output domain of the RR (FIG. 1). RRs can undergo
spontaneous dephosphorylation by transferring the
phosphoryl group to water, and the half-lives of the dif-
ferent phosphoryl–Asp RRs vary from a few seconds to
hours. However, in many cases, the half-life is reduced
by the presence or activation of a phosphatase, which
might be the HPK itself. More complex versions of
HAP  systems  with  numerous  His–Asp–His–Asp

phosphotransfer steps are widespread, particularly in
eukaryotes, and such systems have been characterized
in detail in relation to osmoregulation in S. cerevisiae, as
well as sporulation in Bacillus subtilis 8 (FIG. 1d). HPt
domains, which can add extra phosphotransfer steps,
have no catalytic activity and the cognate RR functions to
take or transfer the phosphoryl group from the HPt
domain. The reason for numerous steps is unclear, but
studies on the oxygen-sensing Arc pathway (FIG. 1b) indi-
cate that it might assist in complex regulatory control8.

Bacterial chemotaxis as a model system
Bacterial chemotaxis is the biasing of movement
towards regions that contain higher concentrations of
beneficial, or lower concentrations of toxic, chemi-
cals. The signalling pathway that is involved has been
most  extensively  studied  in  the  enteric  bacteria
Escherichia  coli and  Salmonella  enterica  serovar
Typhimurium10,11. Structural and biochemical details
are now available for every step of the pathway, which
makes it one of the most well-understood of all sen-
sory pathways.

Most sequenced bacterial genomes include homo-
logues of genes that are known to encode components
of flagella and chemosensory pathways, which indicates
that motility is widespread (BOX 2) and probably pro-
vides a selective advantage, especially in non-homoge-
neous, nutrient-limiting environments. However, all
bacteria in which motility has been studied seem to be

NODULE
A swelling on the roots of
nitrogen-fixing plants that
contains symbiotic nitrogen-
fixing bacteria.

QUORUM SENSING
The ability of bacteria to sense
their own cell density by
detecting the concentration of
signalling molecules that have
been released in their
environment.

PILI
Short, polymerized-protein
projections that protrude from
the bacterial cell and are used for
surface attachment and
twitching motility.

PAS DOMAIN
(PER, ARNT, SIM domain).
A domain that is involved in
recognizing stimuli such as light,
oxygen, redox potential, energy
status and small ligands.

HPt DOMAIN
(Histidine-containing
phosphotransfer domain). These
domains are ~120 amino acids
long and contain a histidine
residue that can participate in
phosphoryl-transfer reactions.
They function as
phosphoreceivers and
phosphodonors, and can
therefore be used to create
multistep phosphorelay systems.

NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY

VOLUME 5 | DECEMBER 2004 | 1 0 2 5

©  2004 Nature  Publishing Group

