Original Article |

doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2796.2010.02281.x

Physical activity and risk of cognitive decline: a meta-analysis
of prospective studies

F. Soﬁ1,2,3, D. Valecchi1, D. Bacci1, R. Abbate2, G. F. Gensini1, A. Casini3 & C. Macchi1

From the 1Don Carlo Gnocchi Foundation, Centro S. Maria agli Ulivi, Onlus IRCCS; 2Department of Medical and Surgical Critical Care, Thrombosis
Centre, University of Florence; and 3Regional Agency of Nutrition, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Careggi, Florence, Italy

Abstract. Soﬁ F, Valecchi D, Bacci D, Abbate R, Gensini
GF, Casini A, Macchi C (Centro S. Maria agli Ulivi, On-
lus IRCCS; Thrombosis Centre, University of Flor-
ence; Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Careggi,
Florence, Italy). Physical activity and risk of cognitive
decline: a meta-analysis of prospective studies.
J Intern Med 2011; 269: 107–117.

Objective. The relationship between physical activity
and cognitive function is intriguing but controversial.
We performed a systematic meta-analysis of all the
available prospective studies that investigated the
association between physical activity and risk of cog-
nitive decline in nondemented subjects.

Methods. We conducted an electronic literature search
through MedLine, Embase, Google Scholar, Web of
Science, The Cochrane Library and bibliographies of
retrieved articles up to January 2010. Studies were
included if they analysed prospectively the associa-
tion between physical activity and cognitive decline in
nondemented subjects.

Results. After the review process, 15 prospective stud-
ies (12 cohorts) were included in the ﬁnal analysis.

These studies included 33 816 nondemented sub-
jects followed for 1–12 years. A total of 3210 patients
showed cognitive decline during the follow-up. The
cumulative analysis for all the studies under a ran-
dom-effects model showed that subjects who per-
formed a high level of physical activity were signiﬁ-
cantly protected ()38%) against cognitive decline
during the follow-up (hazard ratio (HR) 0.62, 95%
conﬁdence interval
(CI) 0.54–0.70; P < 0.00001).
Furthermore, even analysis of low-to-moderate level
exercise also showed a signiﬁcant protection ()35%)
against cognitive impairment (HR 0.65, 95% CI 0.57–
0.75; P < 0.00001).

Conclusion. This is the ﬁrst meta-analysis to evaluate
the role of physical activity on cognitive decline
amongst nondemented subjects. The present results
suggest a signiﬁcant and consistent protection for all
levels of physical activity against the occurrence of
cognitive decline.

Keywords: cognitive decline, dementia, exercise, physi-
cal activity.

Introduction

It is unquestionable that physical activity has positive
effects on health; indeed, over the last few decades, a
large body of evidence has shown that physical activ-
ity helps to reduce the risk of cardiovascular and
cerebrovascular diseases, diabetes, obesity, hyper-
tension and some cancers [1]. Moreover, it has been
demonstrated that an active lifestyle impacts on all
causes of mortality. With ageing, some cognitive
functions such as attention, memory and concentra-
tion decline, becoming slower and inefﬁcient, as for
some physical functions such as walking and bal-
ance. These manifestations are the result of neural

cell loss in the frontal, parietal and temporal lobes [2]
and strongly depend on an ipofunction of the mono-
aminergic and cholinergic pathways [3]. Many of
these cognitive changes are evident and can cause
mild disability, even if a state of dementia is not
reached.

Cognitve decline is heterogeneous, depending on var-
ious factors. Many studies have shown an inverse
relation between physical activity and the risk of
developing cognitive decline [4, 5], but the cause of
the association has not been clearly established. Indi-
viduals who remain active throughout life, especially
during middle age, generally have better cognitive

ª 2010 The Association for the Publication of the Journal of Internal Medicine

107

F. Soﬁ et al. |

Physical activity and risk of cognitive decline

performance during later life, so preserving their cog-
nitive functions for longer. Recent evidence suggests
that in addition to reducing vascular risk factors,
physical activity may increase directly the production
of neurotrophic factors in the brain [6].

The results of a recent meta-analysis showed that
physical exercise is able to reduce the incidence of
neurodegenerative diseases; in particular, dementia
and Alzheimer’s disease [7]. By contrast, few and con-
ﬂicting data are available on the possible protective
role of physical activity on the occurrence of cognitive
decline, independent of the onset of neurodegenera-
tive disease [8–18].

Therefore, the aim of this study was to conduct a
meta-analysis of all the available prospective cohort
studies that investigated the association between
physical activity and cognitive decline in nondement-
ed subjects.

Methods

Selection of studies

Studies that investigated the possible association be-
tween physical activity and cognitive decline in non-
demented adults were identiﬁed through a computer-
ized search of all electronic databases: MedLine
(source: PubMed, 1966 to January 2010), Embase
(1980 to January 2010), Web of Science, The Cochra-
ne Library (source: The Cochrane Central Register of
Controlled Trials, 2009, issue 1), Clinicaltrials.org
and Google Scholar. Relevant keywords relating to
physical activity as Medical Subject Heading terms
and text words (‘physical activity’ or ‘physical exer-
cise’ or ‘exercise’, or ‘ﬁtness’ or ‘training’) were used in
combination with words relating to cognitive impair-
ment (‘cognitive decline’ or ‘cognitive function’, or ‘cog-
nitive impairment’ or ‘cognitive loss’, or ‘dementia’, or
‘cognition’ or ‘memory’). We limited the search strat-
egy to prospective cohort epidemiological studies,
with no language restrictions, supplemented by man-
ually reviewing the reference list of all retrieved arti-
cles.

Two investigators (FS, DV) assessed all potentially
relevant articles for eligibility. The decision to in-
clude or exclude studies was hierarchical and made
on the basis of the following: (i) the study title; (ii) the
study abstract; and (iii) the complete study manu-
script. In the event of conﬂicting opinions between
investigators, disagreement was resolved through
discussion.

Eligible studies were included if they met all of the fol-
lowing criteria: (i) a prospective cohort design; (ii) the
association between physical activity and cognitive
function as the primary or secondary outcome; (iii)
nondemented subjects evaluated at baseline; (iv)
clear deﬁnitions of methods used to assess cognitive
performance and cognitive decline; (v) reported data
on physical activity levels in relation to cognitive func-
tion; and (vi) reported estimates of association be-
tween physical activity and cognitive decline. Accord-
ingly, studies were excluded if: (i) the design was
cross-sectional, case control or interventional; (ii)
outcomes other than those of interest for the meta-
analysis were considered; (iii) patients with dementia
or cognitive decline at baseline were included in the
study; (iv) the association between physical activity
and cognitive decline was not reported; or (v) esti-
mates of the association between physical activity
and the decline in cognitive function were not
presented (Data S1).

The outcome of interest for the current meta-analysis
was cognitive decline or cognitive impairment, de-
ﬁned as decline in cognitive functioning tests at fol-
low-up examination (see Table 1 for further informa-
tion about tests used to measure cognitive function).

Data extraction

All data were reviewed and separately extracted by
two independent investigators (FS and DV) using a
standardized form. The following patient characteris-
tics were recorded: data and study cohort, country of
the study cohort, baseline year, number of subjects
at baseline, gender of the cohort, years of follow-up,
age of the study cohort at baseline, deﬁnition of out-
come of interest, methods used to assess cognitive
function and physical activity, hazard ratio (HR) and
conﬁdence interval (CI) values for risk of cognitive de-
cline, and adjustment for confounding factors in mul-
tivariate models.

Statistical analysis

We used Review Manager (RevMan; version 5.0.23 for
Macintosh; Copenhagen, Denmark) to pool results
from the individual studies.

Pooled results are reported as HR and are presented
with 95% CI with two-sided P values using a random-
effects model
(DerSimonian and Laird method).
P < 0.05 was considered to be statistically signiﬁ-
cant. When available, we used the results of the origi-
nal studies from multivariate models with the most

108 ª 2010 The Association for the Publication of the Journal of Internal Medicine Journal of Internal Medicine 269; 107–117

