The Interaction of the Bilingual’s Two Phonetic 
Systems: Differences in Early and Late Korean-

English Bilinguals 

 

Wendy Baker 

Brigham Young University 

 
 
1. Introduction 
 

One  of  the  basic  questions  of  bilingual  research  is  to  what  extent  the  bilingual’s  two  phonetic 
systems  influence  each  other,  a  question  that  has  occupied  a  prominent  place  in  bilingual  research 
almost from the outset of the field (see, for example, Weinreich, 1953).  Recent studies in bilingual 
first  language  acquisition  (BFLA)  demonstrate  that,  at  least  in  simultaneous  bilingual  acquisition, 
infants exposed to two languages are developing what appear to be two phonetic/phonological systems 
from  the  beginning  (Johnson  and  Wilson,  2002;  Kehoe,  2002;  Bosch  and  Sebastian-Galles,  2001, 
Vihman, 2002), although their two systems may differ from monolinguals of either language (Mack, 
1989; Bosch, Costa, & Sebastian-Galles, 2000).   

In late bilingualism (i.e., when a second language is learned in adulthood), where one language 
system is already established when a second is learned, most likely a separate system for the second 
language  does not develop in the beginning.  In fact, most researchers agree, at least as initial stages of 
L2  learning,  adults  perceive  and  produce  both  native  (L1)  and  second  language  (L2)  vowels  and 
consonants (“sounds” for short) as instances of  similar L1 sounds.  In fact, it is only after extensive 
exposure to the second language that separate long-term memory representations (categories) for L2 
sounds are formed, if at all (Flege, Meador, & MacKay, 1999).   

The differences between these two types of bilingualism indicate that several factors most likely 
influence  both  the  extent  the  two  languages  influence  each  other  and  the  direction  of  the  influence 
(Flege, 1995; Piske, Flege, McKay, & Meador, 2002; Khattab, 2002).  The purpose of this study is to 
examine  how  two  factors,  the  amount  of  similarity  between  native  (L1)  and  second-language  (L2) 
sounds,  and  age  at  the  time  of  second  language  learning,  determine  how  the  L1  and  L2  phonetic 
systems interact both at initial and more advanced stages of L2 learning. 

The first factor, the amount of similarity between L1 and L2 sounds (or cross-language similarity),  
at least in late L2 learning, heavily determines how much the L1 influences the L2 (Flege, MacKay, 
and Munro, 1999; Best, 1995; Flege, 1995).  In particular, the more similar L2 sounds are to L1 sounds, 
the more likely the L1 will influence how L2 sounds are perceived and produced.  For example, Flege, 
Bohn,  &  Jang  (1997)  showed  that  learners  of  English  perceived  and  produced  English  vowels 
differently  depending  on  their  native  language.    In  addition,  Aoyama,  Flege,  Guion,  Yamada,  & 
Akhane-Yamada  (2003)  have  determined  that  Japanese  learners  of  English  identify  English  /r/  as 
being  more  similar  to  Japanese  //  than  this  Japanese  consonant  is  to  English  /l/.    These  same 
Japanese learners are more likely to produce English /r/ more accurately than English /l/.  These and 
many other studies indicate that cross-language similarity is an important factor in how much the L1 
and L2 interact in bilinguals (Best, 1995; Guion, Flege, Akhane-Yamada, & Pruitt, 2000). 

The second factor that may influence the organization of a bilinguals’ L1 and L2 phonetic systems 
is the learner’s age at the time of learning a second language.  In particular, in early bilinguals (i.e., 
those  that  learn  a  second  langauge  in  childhood),  the  native  language  seems  to  exert  less  of  an 
influence on the perception and production of the L2, suggesting that cross-language similarity  may 
play less of a role in early than in late bilinguals (Baker, Trofimovich, Mack, and Flege, 2001).  .  For 
example,  Flege,  MacKay  and  Meador  (1999)  found  that  early  Italian-English  bilinguals  were  more 
accurate in their perception and production of English vowels than were late Italian-English bilinguals, 

(cid:13)© 2005 Wendy Baker. ISB4: Proceedings of the 4th International Symposium on Bilingualism, ed. James(cid:10)Cohen, Kara T. McAlister, Kellie Rolstad, and Jeff MacSwan, 163-174. Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.regardless of the degree of similarity between English and Italian vowels.  Similarly, Aoyama, Flege, 
Guion, Yamada, & Akhane-Yamada (2003) determined that early Japanese-English bilinguals over the 
course of 1 year were able to improve in the production of English /r/ and /l/ more than late bilinguals. 
These studies suggest that age at the time of learning a second language plays a significant role on how 
much of an influence the L1 has on the perception and production of the L2.  That is, the L1 exerts a 
greater degree of influence on the L2 of late than early bilinguals (Munro, Flege, & MacKay, 1996;  
Mack & Trofimovich, 2001; Piske, Flege, MacKay, & Meador, 2002). 

One hypothesis for these differences between early and late bilinguals is that, because their native 
language system is still developing, early bilinguals are less likely than late bilinguals to identify L2  
sounds with L1 sounds at the onset of L2 learning (Baker, Trofimovich, Mack, & Flege, 2002). This 
may  be  because,  as  L1  segment  categories  develop  through  childhood  (Ohde,  Haley,  &  McMahon, 
1996; Sharma, Kraus, McGee, & Nicol, 1997; Hazan and Barrett, 2001), they become more powerful 
attractors of L2 segments, exerting a greater influence on how the L2 is perceived and produced (Flege, 
1992; Walley & Flege, 1999).  Thus, adults, because their native system is fully developed, are more 
likely  than  children  to  equate  L2  sounds  with  L1  sounds.    If  this  is  indeed  the  case,  then  it  would 
explain why the two phonetic systems interact with each other less in early than late bilinguals.   The 
purpose of this study is to test this hypothesis.  

Thus  this  current  study  examines  whether,  because  children’s  L1  sounds  are  less  powerful 
attractors  of  L2  sounds,  early  bilinguals  are  less  likely  than  late  bilinguals  to  identify  L2  with  L1 
segments at the onset of L2 learning and (2) whether this likelihood translates into the two phonetic 
systems interacting with each other less in early than late bilinguals. In particular, it was predicted that 
(1) for both early and late bilinguals the degree of influence of the two languages on each other would 
be greater for similar than less similar sounds, (2) early bilinguals would be less affected by the cross-
language relationships in their production of English and Korean vowels than would late bilinguals in 
initial stages of L2 learning, and (3) in later stages of L2 learning early bilinguals would be more likely 
than late bilinguals to keep their two languages  separate.  To test these hypotheses, two experiments 
were conducted.  In Experiment 1, early and late native Korean speakers with little English experience 
judged and rated the similarity between English and Korean vowels.  In Experiment 2, beginning early 
and  late  native  Korean  learners  of  English,  as  well  as  more  advanced  early  and  late  bilinguals 
produced  six  Korean  and  eight  English  vowels  in  CVC  word  contexts.  The  influence  of  the  two 
languages  on  each  other  was  investigated  by  comparing  whether  bilinguals  were  able  to  produce 
differences between English and Korean vowels.    

 

2. Experiment 1:  cross-language identification 
 

The  purpose  of  Experiment  1  was  to  determine  whether  children  are  less  likely  than  adults  to 
identify L2 sounds as L1 sounds, which in turn might explain why the L1 and L2 phonetic systems of 
children  and  adults  influence  each  other  differently.    To  explore  this  hypothesis,  20  native  Korean 
speakers (10 children and 10 adults) were asked to judge the similarity between English vowels and 
Korean vowels in a cross-language perceptual identification task.  

 

2.1 Participants 
 

The participants of this experiment were 10 child (mean age: 8.8; range: 7-9 years) and 10 adult 
(mean  age:  22.7;  range:  20-23  years)  native  Korean  speakers  who  had  resided  in  the  U.S.  for  on 
average less than 1 year.  The participants were recruited based on their limited English ability, with 
the goal that both the children and adults would have as similar English experience to each other as 
possible.    The  participants  completed  a  language  background  questionnaire  that  determined  their 
English  language  experience.    Answers  to  this  language  background  questionnaire  revealed  that  the 
children  had,  on  average,  2.3  months  in  the  United  States  (range:    2-16  months)  and  none  had 
experience with English previously, whereas the adults had resided in the United States for 4.3 months 
(range:  1-18 months) and had limited exposure to native English speakers before coming to the United 
States.  Participants also rated their ability to speak, comprehend, read, and write English on a 10-point 
Likert scale (where “1” = “I don’t know any English” and “10” = “I am a native speaker of English).  

• 164 •

