GTAT: all too breakable FT 09.10.2014 

Steve Jobs loved glass. For the first iPhone, he personally persuaded the head of Corning to 

make millions of tough “gorilla glass” screens on very short notice, even though it had not 

made gorilla glass in years.  

Apple’s focus on screens has endured – but the success of its screen makers has not. The 

latest version of the iPhone was expected to use sapphire (rather than glass) screens. But GT 

Advanced Technologies, which partnered Apple last year to build the biggest sapphire factory 

in the world, has filed for bankruptcy. Once a $3bn market capitalisation company, it is now 

worth less than $200m.  

The story of GTAT illustrates why Apple’s margins are so fat and those of its suppliers are so 

thin. Before Apple, GTAT struggled as a designer of photovoltaic equipment looking for a 

new lease of life. It had never manufactured sapphire before but it had a small business 

designing sapphire furnaces and it needed to diversify. So a deal with Apple to make sapphire 

must have looked too good to pass up: Apple would even provide a $580m pre-payment 

(basically a loan) to fund the factory’s start-up costs.  

The pre-payment was attached to capacity targets – and could even be clawed back under 

certain circumstances. Apple did not guarantee a purchase volume but it did wrangle an 

exclusivity commitment  

FT graphic from GTAT, which stopped selling furnaces to its regular customers to focus on 

the factory.  

For GTAT, Apple’s lifeline turned out to be nothing of the sort. The iPhones did not use 

sapphire screens after all; the Watch does, but in smaller quantities. Revenues in the first half 

of 2014 fell by a third, while operating losses widened to $140m. GTAT’s sales of sapphire 

fell behind schedule through the summer, says UBS. And the last tranche of Apple’s pre-

payment never came through. Neither company will say what happened – perhaps a 

manufacturing snag was to blame. Then GTAT filed for bankruptcy. Sapphire may be the 

second-hardest mineral on the planet but life as an Apple supplier can break just about 

anybody. 

 

