Article

Three worlds of welfare capitalism or more?

A state-of-the-art report

Wil Arts and John Gelissen*, Tilburg University, The Netherlands

from 

typologies  ensuing 

Summary This  paper  surveys  the  debate
regarding  Esping-Andersen’s 
typology  of
welfare  states  and  reviews  the  modified  or
alternative 
this
debate. We confine ourselves to the classifica-
tions  which  have  been  developed  by  Esping-
Andersen’s  critics  in  order  to  cope  with  the
following  alleged  shortcomings  of  his  typol-
ogy:  (1)  the  misspecification  of  the  Mediter-
ranean welfare states as immature Continental
ones;  (2)  the  labelling  of  the  Antipodean
welfare  states  as  belonging  to  the  ‘liberal’
regime  type;  (3)  a  neglect  of  the  gender-
dimension  in  social  policy.  We  reconstruct
several typologies of welfare states in order to
establish, first, whether real welfare states are
quite  similar  to  others  or  whether  they  are
rather unique specimens, and, second, whether
there are three ideal-typical worlds of welfare
capitalism  or  more.  We  conclude  that  real
welfare  states  are  hardly  ever  pure  types  and
are usually hybrid cases; and that the issue of
ideal-typical welfare states cannot be satisfac-
torily answered given the lack of formal theo-
rizing  and  the  still  inconclusive  outcomes  of
comparative  research.  In  spite  of  this  conclu-
sion  there  is  plenty  of  reason  to  continue  to
work  on  and  with  the  original  or  modified
typologies.

Key words comparative social policy 
analysis, typology, welfare state regimes,
worlds of welfare capitalism

Résumé Nous  présentons  un  état  des  lieux
des  débats  qui  ont  entouré  la  typologie  des
Etats  providences  proposée  par  Esping-
Andersen ainsi que des typologies modifiées ou
alternatives qui ont été présentées par la suite.
Nous  nous  limiterons  aux  classifications  qui
ont  été  proposées  par  les  critiques  du  travail
d’Esping  Andersen  qui  visaient  à  dépasser  les
«prétendues»  limitations  de  sa  typologie.1)
une mauvaise spécification des Etats Providence
méditerranéens  comme  des  Etats  providences
continentaux  inachevés  2)  la  labelisation  des
Etats  providences  des  Antipodes  comme
appartenant  au  régime  de  type  «libéral» 3)  la
non prise en compte de l’effet «genre» dans les
politiques sociales. Nous avons reconstruit dif-
férentes  typologies  d’Etats  Providences afin
d’établir,  tout  d’abord  si  la  réalité  des  Etats
Providences est unique ou si certains sont fort
semblables et ensuite s’il existe trois idéal type
d’Etats providences ou davantage?

Nous  sommes  arrivé  à  la  conclusion  que:
premièrement les Etats providences réels sont
rarement  des  cas  purs  mais  constituent  bien
plus des hybridations. En deuxième lieu, on ne
peut répondre de manière satisfaisante à la ques-
tion  de  savoir  le  nombre  d’idéal  types  d’Etats
Providences  du  fait  de  l’absence  de  théorisa-
tion  adéquate  et  parce  que  les  résultats  des
recherches  comparatives  ne  permettent  pas  de
conclure dans un sens ou un autre. Troisième-
ment, en dépit de cette conclusion, il existe de
multiples raisons pour continuer à travailler sur
et à partir des typologies originales ou modifiées.

* Author to whom correspondence should be sent: John Gelissen, Department of Sociology, Tilburg
University, PO Box 90153, 5000 LE Tilburg, The Netherlands.

Journal of European Social Policy 0958-9287 (200205)12:2 Copyright © 2002 SAGE Publications, London, Thousand 
Oaks and New Delhi, Vol 12 (2): 137–158; 023114

138

Arts and Gelissen

Introduction

When  Esping-Andersen  (1990)  published  his
Three  Worlds  of  Welfare  Capitalism it  was
received  with  applause  (Offe,  1991;  Cnaan,
1992;  Hicks,  1991;  Kohl,  1993).  After  a  few
years, the book even became a modern classic.
Nevertheless,  Esping-Andersen  (1993;  1994;
1996; 1997; 1999) has been forced time after
time  by  both  his  critics  and  his  adherents  to
elaborate on his original arguments. The tenet
of  Esping-Andersen’s  treatise  of  the  welfare
state was that, for a long time in both the the-
oretical  and  empirical  literature,  too  little
attention had been given to cross-national dif-
ferences in welfare state structures.1 In spite of
this putative lack of attention he could – theo-
retically and empirically – stand ‘on the shoul-
ders  of  giants’.  Theoretically,  the  work  of
Marshall  (1950;  1963;  1965;  1981)  and
Titmuss (1958; 1974) laid the foundations for
Esping-Andersen’s  typology  (Boje,  1996:  19).
Empirically, he could profit from the compar-
ative  research  by,  among  others,  Wilensky
(1975),  Flora  and  Heidenheimer  (1981),
Mommsen (1981) and Flora (1983; 1986). He
argued  that  we  are  entering  better  times
because ‘the most intensive activity of welfare
state  theorising  at  the  moment  has  become
identifying  diversity,  specifying  welfare  state
typologies’  (Esping-Andersen,  1994:  715).
Research  has  to  follow  theory’s  lead  because
‘only comparative empirical research will ade-
quately  disclose  the  fundamental  properties
that  unite  or  divide  modern  welfare  states’
(Esping-Andersen,  1990:  3).  In  his  ‘seminal’
book he suited the action to the word by con-
structing  today’s  best-known  and  most  fre-
quently  used  typology  of  welfare  states,  and
by empirically testing whether distinct welfare
states  that  resemble  his  ideal-types  can  be
observed.

For  accomplishing  this  feat,  he  not  only
received wide critical acclaim and constructive
critism, but also some negative criticism. The
more amicable critics argue that his typology
has merits but is neither exhaustive nor exclu-
sive and therefore needs revising. Others refer

Journal of European Social Policy 2002 12 (2)

to  theoretical  and  methodological  shortcom-
ings  (cf.  Lessenich  and  Ostner,  1998).  The
more hostile critics feel that typologies as such
have no explanatory power and, therefore, his
scheme does not contribute to proper theoriz-
ing about what is happening with and within
welfare states (cf. Baldwin, 1996).

In  this  paper,  we  give  an  overview  of  the
debate  about  Esping-Andersen’s 
typology
during the last decade and review the state of
the  art  of  typifying  welfare  states  at  the  turn
of  the  millennium.  The  pivotal  questions  are
as follows: How and why has the welfare state
developed? How and why do national welfare
systems differ from one another – or are they
similar  to  each  other?  Do  welfare  states
cluster  into  different  regime  types  and,  if  so,
how and why? It is not our intention to raise
new  questions.  Our  objective  is  to  settle
affairs,  for  the  time  being,  by  giving  an
overview  of  what  we  think  is  the  gist  of  the
discussion,  by  weighting  the  most  important
arguments  and  taking  stock  of  the  modelling
business. To achieve this goal, we elaborate on
earlier overviews by Abrahamson (1999), Arts
and  Gelissen  (1999)  and  Kohl  (2000).  First,
we  review  the  debate  with  respect  to  Esping-
Andersen’s typology and modified versions of
it.  Second,  we  try  to  establish  whether  there
are three ideal-typical worlds of welfare capi-
talism  or  more.  Third,  we  outline  which
authors  identify  which  national  states  as
belonging to a particular type of welfare state.
This means that we will not only look at ideal
worlds  of  welfare  capitalism,  but  also  at  real
ones.

Ideal-types

Do typologies based on ideal-types have theo-
retical and empirical value as Esping-Andersen
assumes?  The  conclusion  emerging  from  the
philosophy of science literature is clear: not if
ideal-types are goals in themselves, but only if
they are the means to a goal; namely, the rep-
resentation of a reality, which cannot (yet) be
described  using  laws  (Klant,  1984).  This

