Leading Edge

Review

Bacterial Genomics and Pathogen Evolution

David M. Raskin,1 Rekha Seshadri,2 Stefan U. Pukatzki,1 and John J. Mekalanos1,*
1 Department of Microbiology & Molecular Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA
2 The Institute for Genomic Research, 9712 Medical Center Drive, Rockville, MD 20850, USA
*Contact: jmekalanos@hms.harvard.edu
DOI 10.1016/j.cell.2006.02.002

The availability of hundreds of bacterial genome sequences has altered the study of bacte-
rial pathogenesis, affecting both design of experiments and analysis of results. Comparative
genomics and genomic tools have been used to identify virulence factors and genes in-
volved in environmental persistence of pathogens. However, a major stumbling block in
the genomics revolution has been the large number of genes with unknown function that
have been identiﬁed in every organism sequenced to date.

Introduction
Over 250 bacterial genome sequences are currently avail-
able in public databases, representing hundreds of spe-
cies as well as multiple strains of the same species. The
study of these genomes by both computational and exper-
imental approaches has signiﬁcantly advanced our under-
standing of the physiology and pathogenicity of many
microbes and provided insights into the mechanisms and
history of genome evolution. This review will discuss spe-
ciﬁc examples, with an emphasis on how ‘‘postgenomic’’
methods have been utilized to identify genes that are es-
sential for bacterial growth or pathogenesis. There are
two general categories of postgenomic studies—those
that are based primarily on analysis of sequence informa-
tion itself and those that require some use of genomic se-
quence information but not based on direct sequence
analysis. Direct sequence analysis has the advantage of
enabling genome-level analysis of pathogens that are dif-
ﬁcult to manipulate genetically and permitting examination
of small differences such as single nucleotide polymor-
phisms (SNPs). However, the accuracy of bioinformatic
genomic annotations remains unclear since there have
been no reported attempts to conﬁrm functional assign-
ments of genes on a genome-wide scale. It is imperative
not only to improve annotation quality but also to dovetail
computational approaches with empirical studies, espe-
cially those that seek to unravel the functions of the numer-
ous hypothetical genes still found in genomes.

Multiple genome-level empirical approaches have been
developed for investigating gene function. Some do not
require prior knowledge of genomic sequence, but this re-
view will focus on those strategies that do, including a va-
riety of microarray technologies, proteomic methods, and
certain types of molecular genetic studies (e.g., genetic
footprinting techniques). These strategies have the advan-
tage of possessing some intrinsic experimental validation,
even though data are collected on the genomic scale.

Pathogenic Species in the Bacterial Genomic Era
Through a combination of critical
insight and chance,
pathogenic bacterial species were the ﬁrst free-living
organisms to be sequenced and thus have occupied

a unique place in the history of the genomic era. The ge-
nome of a laboratory strain of Haemophilus inﬂuenzae
was the ﬁrst bacterium to be sequenced and was followed
by an isolate of Mycoplasma genitalium (Fleischmann
et al., 1995; Fraser et al., 1995). In each of these cases,
the genome sequences provided immediate insights into
the biology of these bacterial species but less about
pathogenicity in part because the strains selected were
attenuated laboratory strains that had likely lost many
virulence-related loci. Nonetheless,
the genomes did
provide some explanations for curious physiological prop-
erties. For instance, growth of H. inﬂuenzae in vitro re-
quires large amounts of glutamate. The genome sequence
showed the absence of three TCA cycle genes in this spe-
cies. Glutamate can be converted to a-ketoglutarate by
glutamate dehydrogenase and then shunted into the re-
maining TCA cycle pathway, explaining the dependence
on exogenously supplied glutamate. In the case of M. gen-
italium, the genomic sequence revealed an almost com-
plete lack of enzymes involved in amino acid synthesis,
de novo nucleotide biosynthesis, and fatty acid biosynthe-
sis, providing an explanation for some of the undeﬁned
fastidious growth requirements of this species. Because
both H. inﬂuenzae and M. genitalium grow in host tissues,
these two examples illustrate that either the host milieu
can be nutrient rich or the physiology of bacteria in vivo
is very different from what is observed under laboratory
growth conditions.

The ﬁeld of comparative genomics next addressed
questions that could only be approached after multiple ge-
nomes were available for analysis. For example, after the
ﬁrst two bacterial genomes were sequenced, Mushegian
and Koonin (1996) tried to determine the minimum number
of genes necessary for life by comparing them and deter-
mining which genes were present in both. M. genitalium
contains only 468 protein-coding genes, while H. inﬂuen-
zae contains 1703 protein-coding genes. They identiﬁed
240 M. genitalium genes with orthologs in H. inﬂuenzae
but found that there were still genes missing from several
basic metabolic pathways. Based on the hypothesis that
this could have resulted from nonorthologous gene dis-
placement, they identiﬁed an additional 16 M. genitalium

Cell 124, 703–714, February 24, 2006 ª2006 Elsevier Inc. 703

genes to cover necessary functions and concluded that
256 genes were the minimum gene content necessary.
More recently Gil et al. (2004) have used experimental
data sets to eliminate more dispensable genes, while re-
taining the key biochemical pathways predicted to be
essential for a free-living cell. They found 206 genes could
make up a minimal gene set. Both of these approaches
clearly vastly underestimate the number of genes required
for growth in the ‘‘real world’’ of the host where all nutrients
are seldom available and where host-mediated processes
demand the specialized survival genes that are essential
for pathogenicity.

The H. inﬂuenzae genome also provided the ﬁrst exam-
ple of how little we know about bacterial physiology. Of
a total of 1743 annotated H. inﬂuenzae genes, 736 were
of unknown function. Many of these hypothetical genes
are now known to exist as orthologs in other bacterial ge-
nomes that have since been sequenced. In many bacteria,
close to one-half of all putative genes have no known func-
tion. While the tools of comparative genomics can predict
that some highly conserved ‘‘hypothetical’’ genes are
likely to be important in microbial evolution, they cannot
ascribe function per se without usually more computa-
tional or experimental information. Annotation programs
can tell us whether the protein products of these genes
contain membrane-spanning or DNA binding domains,
nucleotide binding motifs, phosphorylation or kinase do-
mains, or other functional information. Thus, these com-
putational methods are essential ﬁrst steps in formulating
hypotheses about possible gene function across the
expanse of bacterial genomic information. However, the
integration of information obtained through genomic se-
quencing efforts, bioinformatics analysis, and experimen-
tal validation is still a signiﬁcant challenge when trying to
deﬁne virulence mechanisms in the post-genomic era.

Virulence Gene Discovery in the Pre- and
Postgenomic Eras
How has microbial genomics changed the way virulence
genes are discovered? In the pregenomic era, virulence
factors were typically identiﬁed either by biochemical ap-
proaches or through forward or reverse genetic screens.
For example, a toxin active on mammalian cells might
be puriﬁed and its gene then identiﬁed through its primary
amino acid sequence. A transposon insertion mutant
might be isolated that attenuated the replication of a path-
ogen in a given host (Leung and Finlay, 1991) or that
encoded a gene coordinately regulated with a known vir-
ulence gene (Taylor et al., 1987). A virulence phenotype
might be recapitulated by cloning a virulence gene into
a heterologous organism (Isberg et al., 1987). Bacterial
genomics has certainly facilitated these classical ap-
proaches but has also allowed virulence genes to be
identiﬁed through other strategies. These employ compu-
tational methods, genetic signatures, physical linkage to
accessory genetic elements, or biochemical and genetic
approaches that depend on comprehensive genome-

704 Cell 124, 703–714, February 24, 2006 ª2006 Elsevier Inc.

sequence information. Several examples of these are dis-
cussed below.
Computational Methods
The annotation phase of a genomic sequencing project
frequently reveals putative genes coding for virulence fac-
tors with sequence similarity to known genes. Targeted
genetic methods can then be used to inactivate the puta-
tive virulence gene and then develop an appropriate assay
for its biochemical activity (Lin et al., 1999). For organisms
that are not amenable to genetic manipulation, identifying
sequence similarity to known virulence genes is one of the
few available methods for understanding virulence, such
as the identiﬁcation of conserved type III secretion genes
in Chlamydia species (Kalman et al., 1999). Sequence sim-
ilarity to unique host proteins (e.g., tyrosine phosphatases)
or host functional motifs (e.g., RGD integrin binding se-
quences) might also be used to identify new putative viru-
lence genes. In some cases, the host-related protein re-
vealed by genome sequencing can be conﬁrmed to have
the predicted biochemical activity despite the fact that
a role in virulence cannot not be demonstrated with the
available animal models (Vance et al., 2004).
Genetic Signatures
Many virulence gene products are subject to positive se-
lection at the level of the host through, for example, es-
cape from protective immune responses, adaptive host-
range, or functional mutations. Thus, genomic sequence
information can identify putative virulence genes by iden-
tifying genetic signatures of such selective pressure. For
example, polynucleotide repeats have been shown in
Haemophilus, Bordetella, and Neisseria species to modu-
late the stochastic on or off expression of surface proteins
and lipopolysaccharide-modifying enzymes through slip
strand mutational events, a process important for phase
variation of immunogenic factors leading to increased
persistence in the host (van Belkum et al., 1999). Genome
sequences have revealed numerous likely virulence genes
that display evidence of slip strand control in their pro-
moter and coding sequences. Other stochastic genetic
mechanisms for alteration of gene expression (e.g., invert-
ible elements encoding promoters) or coding sequence
(e.g., retroelement diversity generating sequences) can
be revealed through genomic sequence analysis and
then used to implicate their associated genes in virulence
related processes (Doulatov et al., 2004). Unique paralo-
gous gene families that display high degrees of sequence
variation (particularly nonsynonymous amino acid substi-
tutions) are often revealed through genomic sequencing
and later shown to correspond to virulence gene products
(Fleischmann et al., 2002). Finally, the presence of predic-
tive DNA motifs (e.g., iron regulation mediated by Fur) in
the promoter region of a gene can be used to predict the
gene’s involvement in pathogenicity by coregulation with
known virulence factors.
Physical Linkage to Accessory Genetic Elements
Accessory genetic elements (plasmids, prophages, trans-
posons, and islands) are known to frequently encode
virulence factors. Such elements can exist as unlinked

