European Journal of Industrial Relations

© The Author(s), 2009. Reprints and permissions: 
http://www.sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav

Volume 15 Number 1 pp 49–69    www.sagepublications.com

Torben Krings

Dublin City University, IRELAND

A Race to the Bottom? Trade Unions, 

EU Enlargement and the Free Movement 

of Labour

ABSTRACT ■ When eight countries from Central and Eastern Europe joined 
the EU in 2004, unions in some countries argued that significant wage 
differentials between the old and the new member states necessitated 
transitional restrictions on free movement, but others insisted that 
employment standards should be protected by the enforcement of rights, 
not by restrictions. This article explores variations in union policies in 
comparative perspective, examining Austria, Germany, Ireland and the UK. 
KEYWORDS: EU enlargement ■ free movement of labour ■ labour standards 
■ migration ■ trade unions 

Introduction

When Irish Ferries announced in autumn 2005 that it aimed to replace 
over 500 of its mostly unionized Irish staff with cheaper agency work-
ers  from  Eastern  Europe,  it  sparked  off  huge  public  protests.  At  a 
‘National  Day  of  Protest’  organized  by  the  Irish  Congress  of  Trade 
Unions  (ICTU)  100,000  people  went  to  the  streets  to  protest  against 
‘exploita tion’, ‘displacement’ and ‘a race to the bottom’. ICTU refused 
to  enter  negotiations  for  a  new  social  partnership  agreement  until 
issues  of  employment  standards  were  addressed  (Flynn,  2006).  Similar 
trans national  disputes  involving  workers  from  the  new  member  states 
(NMSs)  have  occurred  in  other  countries.  In  Vaxholm  in  Sweden,  the 
refusal of a Latvian construction company to pay its workers the local 
rates  prompted  a  union  blockade  of  a  building  site  in  2004  (Woolfson 
and Sommers, 2006). In Germany, allegations about underpayment and 
poor  working  conditions  emerged  in  the  meat  industry  where  service 
providers  from  Poland  paid  their  workers  ‘poverty  wages’  (Tenbrock 
and Wielinski, 2007).

These disputes illustrate the potential social consequences of the free 
movement of labour in an enlarged EU. Given significant cross-national 

DOI: 10.1177/0959680108100165

Downloaded from 

ejd.sagepub.com

 at Universitaet Osnabrueck on April 15, 2016

European Journal of Industrial Relations 15(1)

differences in wages and living standards between the ‘old’ EU15 countries 
and the NMSs, trade unions in the former have expressed concerns about 
a  ‘race  to  the  bottom’  resulting  from  eastern  enlargement.  They  have 
found difficulty in adapting to globalization and EU enlargement. First, 
they have to face the prospect of parts of production being relocated to 
Eastern Europe and Asia in the name of ‘competitiveness’ (or threats of 
relocation to keep wages down). Second, the inflow of migrant workers 
into service industries that cannot be ‘offshored’ can fulfil a similar pur-
pose  of  reducing  wage  costs  (Menz,  2005),  and  the  accession  of  eight 
countries from Central and Eastern Europe (CEE) to the EU in 2004 has 
created a new dynamic of labour migration that poses many challenges 
to trade unions.

Generally,  trade  unions  in  the  industrialized  world  have  ambivalent 
atti tudes towards migrant labour that can be situated ‘on a continuum 
rang ing  from  exclusion  to  inclusion’  (Kahmann,  2006:  186).  Despite  a 
tradition  of  international  solidarity,  unions  are  embedded  in  particular 
national  societies  and  tend  to  represent  primarily  the  interest  of  their 
national memberships (Penninx and Roosblad, 2000). Historically, they 
were  often  hostile  towards  the  inflow  of  migrant  labour,  as  a  surplus 
of  workers  exerts  downward  pressure  on  wages  (Goldthorpe,  1984). 
Furthermore,  the  recruitment  of  workers  from  abroad  adds  not  only 
to  the  quantitative  supply  of  labour  but  also  brings  about  qualitative 
change:  the  workforce  becomes  more  fragmented  with  language  and 
cultural  differences,  and,  it  has  to  be  said,  racism  to  which  the  labour 
movement was no stranger in the past (Castles and Kosack, 1973; Miles 
and Phizacklea, 1992).

When most West European countries started to recruit foreign labour 
in the 1950s to sustain the post-war economic boom, unions were initially 
concerned  about  this  move.  However,  when  it  became  apparent  that  to 
resist the import of foreign labour was not a viable option, unions every-
where demanded that migrants should receive the same pay and working 
conditions as indigenous work ers (Castles and Kosack, 1973). Apart from 
this  core  demand,  trade  union  responses  towards  immigration  varied 
con siderably across Europe. In some countries they actively promoted 
the  integration  of  immigrants  in  the  workplace  and  wider  society,  but 
in  others  they  took  no  initiatives  to  improve  the  situation  of  foreign 
workers (Cachón and Valles, 2003; Penninx and Roosblad, 2000).

It  is  often  assumed  that  trade  unions  today  would  favour  restrictive 
policies, as structural unemployment has become a feature of many West 
European  countries  (Penninx  and  Roosblad,  2000).  However,  some 
writers  have  recently  challenged  this  ‘conventional  wisdom’  (Watts, 
2002: 1) by arguing that in the light of globalization and the transnational-
ization of labour markets, unions are not necessarily predisposed towards 

50

Downloaded from 

ejd.sagepub.com

 at Universitaet Osnabrueck on April 15, 2016

