DAKAR

Migrants’ long-distance
relationships and social
networks in Dakar

Abdou Salam Fall

SUMMARY:  This  paper  describes  the  changes  in  the  relation-
ships between migrants in Dakar and their relatives in rural home
areas, and how traditional kin structures are gradually replaced
by new solidarity networks in the city. While remittances are an
important resource for rural households, especially during the
“hungry  months”  before  the  new  harvest,  migrants’  visits  are
not linked to regular seasonal agricultural work but rather to oc-
casional participation in family ceremonies, suggesting a decrease
in temporary migration and a more permanent urban residence.

I. INTRODUCTION

THE PERSISTENCE OF strong migratory flows from rural ar-
eas to the towns, and in particular Dakar and its suburbs, is a
key problem facing Senegal. The logic of these population move-
ments is both individual and collective and is intrinsically linked
to imbalances in the areas of origin. Migrating means enlarging
one’s  living  space  and  making  a  commitment  elsewhere  on  a
temporary,  regular  or  permanent  basis.  Through  migration,
workers  relocate  and  rearrange  themselves  in  an  area  wider
than  their  original  environment.  Rather  than  simply  a  move-
ment  of  individual  players,  groups  or  communities  are  being
formed which are bringing economic units into contact across
space.

Through complex social networks, migrants maintain relation-
ships, on an occasional but more or less permanent basis, with
their  places  of  origin.  There  are  several  reasons  for  adopting
such a strategy. In some areas where the crisis in agriculture is
most severe, household dependence on contributions from mi-
grants to the city appears to be irreversible. In Serer country,
heads of household told us that “...a family with no migrants
cannot live decently.”(1)

Migration generally involves establishing new links but with-
out breaking up former relationships of a structural or func-
tional nature. The reasons given by Pontié and Lericollais pro-
vide  an  illustration  of  this  rationale  employed  by  many  rural
societies with regard to human relations:

“The  nature  of  social  and  religious,  as  well  as  economic,
relationships between migrants and their societies of origin

Environment and Urbanization, Vol. 10, No. 1, April 1998

135

the 

Dr Abdou Salam Fall is a soci-
ologist  at 
Institut
Fondamental  d’Afrique  Noire
(IFAN), University Cheikh Anta
Diop, Dakar, where he teaches
urban  sociology.  His  main
research  interests  are  in  the
areas  of  urbanization,  migra-
tion, poverty, social networks
and 
local  development.

Address:  BP.  206, 
IFAN,
Université  Cheikh  Anta  Diop,
Dakar, Senegal.

1.  Fall, A.S. (1992), “Une réponse
à la crise de l’agriculture, la mi-
gration  des  Sereer  du  Siin
(Sénégal)  in  Société,  Espace,
Temps No.1, pages 138-148.

DAKAR

2.  Pontié,  G.  and  A.  Lericollais
(1991), “Relations à distance des
migrants sereer”, communication
at  the  seminar  on  “Processus
d’insertion  urbaine  et  itinéraires
résidentiels,  professionnels  et
familiaux”,  Sally-Portudel,  Sen-
egal, 27-30 May.

3.  Fall, A.S. (1991a), “Résaux de
sociabilité  et  insertion  urbaine
dans l’agglomération de Dakar”,
PhD Sociology thesis, University
of Cheikh-Anta Diop, Dakar.

4.  Fall, S.A. (1991c), “Du ques-
tionnaire biographique quantitatif
aux  entretiens  approfondis  sur
les  réseaux  de  sociabilité  en
ville?”  in  “Pratiques  sociales  et
travail  en  milieu  urbain”,  Les
Cahiers  No.14,  ORSTOM/SUD,
Paris, pages 37-50.

is to a large extent dependent on the opportunity they have
of returning home to farm, in the event of failing to achieve
the purpose of migration, on ‘retirement’ or if the family situ-
ation - e.g. the death of an older relative - so requires. For a
migrant, this potential access to a few fields, even after a
very long absence, is as much a mark of recognition of his
membership of the village and of lineage as of economic ne-
cessity”.(2)

This paper addresses migrants’ relationships with their home
areas from the perspective of urban networks. One way of un-
derstanding the operation of a network is to determine who the
migrant approached in order to find work and accommodation,
and in order to maintain links, or not, with his or her home of
origin. This social network constitutes a complex web of social
relations which is a basis for receiving migrants and/or a means
of social, occupational and residential integration, and of hu-
man solidarity and preferential relationships. This network may
be identified as a kind of social staging post, but one which is
set up parallel to the social apparatus and institutions and which
sometimes stands in opposition to them.(3) The significance of
urban integration networks as new social relationships imposed
by current living arrangements is compared with the persist-
ence or the development of links with home areas.

II. METHODOLOGY

THE STUDY METHODOLOGY was both quantitative and quali-
tative.  Migrants  living  in  various  parts  of  greater  Dakar  were
interviewed using a quantitative biographical questionnaire to
measure urban integration patterns. Four questions addressed
remote relationships: visits made by migrants to their places of
origin;  remittances  of  money  or  food  sent  by  migrants  or  the
support  they  receive;  ownership  of  assets  prior  to  migration;
and the possibility of resorting to migrant networks, particu-
larly through people located in Dakar, to gain access to jobs or
housing.  In  order  to  analyse  these  data  in  greater  depth,  life
history interviews were conducted with a structured sub-sam-
ple.(4)

The  two  methods  are  complementary.  They  both  start  with
the  individual  and  move  on  to  the  social  group  using  an  ex-
ploratory, in-depth approach, focusing on the survival strate-
gies adopted by individuals and groups.

III. URBANIZATION

WITH AN ANNUAL growth rate close to 3 per cent, the popula-
tion  of  sub-Saharan  Africa  is  expected  to  double  by  the  year
2020, thus becoming the fastest growing region in the world.
While the African population doubled between 1950 and 1980,
the urban population increased five-fold over the same period.
This distinctive feature is the result of two convergent phenom-

136

Environment and Urbanization, Vol. 10, No. 1, April 1998

