Violence and the Social Construction
of Ethnic Identity
James D. Fearon and David D. Laitin

Paul Brass. 1997. Theft of an Idol. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Francis M. Deng. 1995. War of Visions: Con ict of Identities in the Sudan.
Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.

Bruce Kapferer. 1988. Legends of People/Myths of State: Violence, Intolerance,
and Political Culture in Sri Lanka and Australia. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian
Institution Press.

John McGarry and Brendan O’Leary. 1995. Explaining Northern Ireland: Broken
Images. Oxford: Blackwell.

Ge´rard Prunier. 1995. The Rwanda Crisis: History of a Genocide. New York:
Columbia University Press.

Susan L. Woodward. 1995. Balkan Tragedy: Chaos and Dissolution After the
Cold War. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.

Is there case study evidence of a relationship between the social construction of
ethnic identities and the probability of ethnic war? The mere observation that ethnic
identities are socially constructed does not by itself explain ethnic violence and may
not even be particularly relevant. Our purpose here is to see if we can reject the null
hypothesis that the social construction of ethnicity has little or no bearing on the
likelihood of ethnic violence. Our procedure is to examine closely the narratives of
expert observers of some highly violent episodes of ethnic relations. Although a
different set of case studies might yield different overall conclusions, the narratives
we examined contain useful clues about the mechanisms that link identity construc-
tion and ethnic violence.1

We are indebted to Paul Brass, Kanchan Chandra, Francis Deng, Lynn Eden, Page Fortna, Gary Her-
rigel, Peter Katzenstein, Rene´ Lemarchand, John McGarry, William Sewell, Jack Snyder, Ronald Suny,
and Susan Woodward for comments on earlier drafts of this article.

1. On mechanisms and social explanation, see Hedstro¨m and Swedberg 1998.

International Organization 54, 4, Autumn 2000, pp. 845–877
r 2000 by The IO Foundation and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology

846 International Organization

We  rst develop the theoretical implications of the observation that ethnic identi-
ties are socially constructed for explaining ethnic violence. After analyzing what the
statement ‘‘ethnic identities are socially constructed’’ might mean, we develop two
ways to construe the claim that processes of constructing identities help to explain
ethnic violence. If individuals are viewed as the agents who construct ethnic identi-
ties, then constructivist explanations for ethnic violence tend to merge with rational-
ist, strategic analyses, particularly those that emphasize elite manipulation of mass
publics but also those that see violence stemming from ethnic interactions ‘‘on the
ground.’’ In contrast, if ‘‘discursive formations’’ or cultural systems are seen as the
agents that construct ethnic identities, then constructivist explanations for ethnic vio-
lence tend to merge with culturalist accounts that stress the internal logic of cultur-
ally speci c ways of thinking, talking, and acting. In this approach, some or all
discourses of ethnicity create a disposition to violence.

In the second section we turn to the books under review, using them as a ‘‘sample’’
to assess which mechanisms from the theory section seem to matter empirically and
as a source for new ideas about links between identity construction and ethnic vio-
lence. We  nd considerable evidence linking strategic aspects of the construction of
ethnic identities to violence, and more limited evidence implicating speci c cultural
or discursive systems. If there is a dominant or most common narrative in the texts
under review, it is that large-scale ethnic violence is provoked by elites seeking to
gain, maintain, or increase their hold on political power. An interesting feature of
several of these case studies is that internal con icts between extremists and moder-
ates belonging to a single ethnic group spur leaders or dissidents to provoke violence
with members of an out-group. Violence has the effect, intended by the elites, of
constructing group identities in more antagonistic and rigid ways. These newly con-
structed (or reconstructed) ethnic identities serve to increase support for the elites
who provoked the violence while favoring the continuation or escalation of violence.
A major puzzle in this story is why ethnic publics follow leaders down paths that
seem to serve elite power interests most of all. None of the authors systematically
addresses this question, but their case studies provide a number of interesting sugges-
tions. Two of the authors, Bruce Kapferer and Ge´rard Prunier, answer the question by
arguing that ethnic publics are conditioned or constituted by ethnic discourses that
predispose them to violence against ethnic others. At least in Kapferer’s book, we
note that this discursive constructivist approach all too easily falls into a primordial-
ist mode of interpretation that constructivists eschew; it tends to treat ethnic dis-
courses as unchanging essences that strongly determine individuals’ actions.2 Sev-
eral other possible answers to the ‘‘why do publics follow?’’ question receive some
support in the case studies, the most intriguing of which is the possibility that ‘‘fol-
lowers’’ often are not so much following as pursuing their own local or personal
agendas not directly related to ethnic antipathy.

2. A major problem besetting culturalist accounts, as Brubaker and Cooper argue, is that to avoid the
trap of ‘‘ ‘essentialism’ by stipulating that identities are constructed,  uid, and multiple,’’ culturalists are
hard pressed to ‘‘understand the sometimes coercive force’’ of identity. Brubaker and Cooper 2000, 1. We
address this irony in the second section.

