Freedom and Necessity 
A. J. Ayer 

When I am  said to have done something of my 
own  free  will  it  is  implied  that  I  could  have 
acted  otherwise;  and  it  is  only  when  it  is  be(cid:173)
lieved  that  I could have  acted  otherwise  that  I 
am  held  to  be  morally  responsible  for  what  I 
have done. For a man is not thought to be moral(cid:173)
ly responsible for an action that it was not in his 
power to  avoid.  But if human behaviour is  en(cid:173)
tirely  governed  by  causal  laws,  it  is  not  clear 
how  any  action  that  is  done  could  ever  have 
been avoided. It may be said of the agent that he 
would have acted otherwise if the causes of his 
action had been different,  but they  being  what 
they were, it seems to follow that he was bound 
to act as  he did.  Now  it is  commonly assumed 
both that men are capable of acting freely, in the 
sense that is required to make them morally re(cid:173)
sponsible,  and that human behaviour is entirely 
governed by causal laws:  and it is  the apparent 
conflict  between  these  two  assumptions  that 
gives  rise  to  the  philosophical  problem  of the 
freedom of the will. 

Confronted with  this  problem,  many  people 
will be inclined to agree with Dr. Johnson:  'Sir, 
we  know  our  will  is  free,  and  there's  an  end 
on't.'  But,  while  this  does  very  well  for  those 
who  accept  Dr.  Johnson's  premiss,  it  would 
hardly  convince  anyone  who  denied  the  free(cid:173)
dom of the  will.  Certainly,  if we  do  know  that 
our wills are free, it follows that they are so. But 
the logical reply to this  might be that since our 
wills  are  not  free,  it  follows  that  no  one  can 
know that they are: so that if anyone claims, like 
Dr.  Johnson,  to know  that they are,  he  must be 
mistaken. What is evident, indeed, is that people 
often believe themselves to be acting freely; and 
it  is  to  this  'feeling'  of  freedom  that  some 
philosophers appeal when they wish, in the sup(cid:173)
posed interests of morality, to prove that not all 
human  action  is  causally  determined.  But  if 
these philosophers are right in their assumption 
that a man cannot be acting freely if his action is 
causally determined, then the fact that someone 
feels  free  to  do,  or not  to  do,  a  certain  action 
does not prove that he really is  so. It may prove 
that the  agent does not himself know what it is 
that makes  him act in  one  way rather than  an-

other: but from the fact that a man is unaware of 
the  causes of his  action, it does  not follow  that 
no such causes exist. 

So much may  be  allowed to  the  determinist; 
but  his  belief that  all  human  actions  are  sub(cid:173)
servient to causal laws still remains to be justi(cid:173)
fied.  If,  indeed,  it is  necessary that every event 
should have a cause, then the rule must apply to 
human behaviour as  much  as  to  anything  else. 
But why should it be supposed that every event 
must have a cause? The contrary is not unthink(cid:173)
able. Nor is the law of universal causation a nec(cid:173)
essary presupposition of scientific thought. The 
scientist may try to discover causal laws, and in 
many cases he succeeds; but sometimes he  has 
to  be  content  with  statistical  laws,  and  some(cid:173)
times he comes upon events which, in the pres(cid:173)
ent state of his knowledge, he is not able to sub(cid:173)
sume under any  law  at all.  In  the  case of these 
events  he  assumes  that  if  he  knew  more  he 
would  be  able  to  discover  some  law,  whether 
causal or statistical, which would enable him to 
account  for  them.  And  this  assumption  cannot 
be disproved. For however far he may have car(cid:173)
ried his investigation, it is always open to him to 
carry it further; and it is always conceivable that 
if he  carried  it  further  he  would  discover  the 
connection  which  had  hitherto  escaped  him. 
Nevertheless,  it  is  also  conceivable  that  the 
events  with which he  is  concerned are  not sys(cid:173)
tematically  connected  with  any  others:  so  that 
the reason why he does not discover the sort of 
laws  that he requires is  simply that they do  not 
obtain. 

Now in the case of human conduct the search 
for explanations has  not in  fact been altogether 
fruitless.  Certain  scientific  laws  have  been  es(cid:173)
tablished; and with the help of these laws we do 
make a number of successful predictions about 
the ways in which different people will behave. 
But these predictions do not always cover every 
detail. We may be able to predict that in certain 
circumstances  a  particular  man  will  be  angry, 
without being able to prescribe the precise form 
that  the  expression  of his  anger  will  take.  We 
may  be  reasonably  sure  that he  will  shout,  but 
not  sure how loud his  shout will  be,  or exactly 

From  Philosophical Essays (Macmillan,  1954).  Reprinted with permission of the publisher. 

662 

FREEDOM AND NECESSITY 

663 

what  words  he  will  use.  And it is  only a small 
proportion of human actions that we are able to 
forecast  even  so  precisely  as  this.  But  that,  it 
may be said, is because we have not carried our 
investigations very far.  The science of psychol(cid:173)
ogy is  still in its infancy and, as  it is developed, 
not only will more human actions be explained, 
but the  explanations will go into greater detail. 
The ideal of complete explanation may never in 
fact be attained: but it is theoretically attainable. 
Well, this may be so:  and certainly it is impossi(cid:173)
ble to show a priori that it is not so:  but equally 
it cannot be shown that it is. This will not, how(cid:173)
ever, discourage the scientist who, in the field of 
human behaviour, as elsewhere, will continue to 
formulate  theories  and  test  them  by  the  facts. 
And  in  this  he  is justified. For since he  has  no 
reason  a priori  to  admit that there  is  a limit  to 
what he can discover,  the fact  that he  also can(cid:173)
not be sure that there is no limit does not make 
it unreasonable for him  to  devise  theories,  nor, 
having  devised  them,  to  try  constantly  to  im(cid:173)
prove them. 

But now  suppose it to be claimed that,  so far 
as men's actions are concerned, there is a limit: 
and  that  this  limit  is  set  by  the  fact  of human 
freedom.  An  obvious objection is  that in  many 
cases in which a person feels  himself to be free 
to do, or not to do, a certain action, we are even 
now  able  to  explain,  in causal  terms,  why  it is 
that he  acts  as  he does.  But it might be  argued 
that even if men are  sometimes mistaken in be(cid:173)
lieving  that  they  act  freely,  it  does  not  follow 
that they are always so mistaken. For it is not al(cid:173)
ways the case that when a man believes that he 
has  acted  freely  we  are  in fact  able  to  account 
for  his  action  in  causal  terms.  A  determinist 
would say that we should be able to account for 
it  if we  had  more  knowledge  of  the  circum(cid:173)
stances,  and  had  been  able  to  discover  the  ap(cid:173)
propriate natural laws. But until those discover(cid:173)
ies  have  been  made,  this  remains  only  a pious 
hope. And may it not be true that, in some cases 
at least,  the reason  why  we  can  give  no  causal 
explanation  is  that  no  causal  explanation  is 
available;  and  that  this  is  because  the  agent's 
choice  was  literally  free,  as  he  himself felt  it 
to be? 

The  answer  is  that  this  may  indeed  be  true, 
inasmuch as it is open to anyone to hold that no 
explanation  is  possible  until  some  explanation 
is  actually  found.  But even  so  it does  not give 
the moralist what he wants. For he is anxious to 
show  that  men  are  capable  of acting  freely  in 
order to infer that they can be morally responsi-

ble for what they do. But if it is a matter of pure 
chance that a man should act in one way rather 
than  another, he  may be free  but he can hardly 
be  responsible.  And  indeed  when  a  man's  ac(cid:173)
tions  seem  to  us  quite  unpredictable,  when,  as 
we say, there is no knowing what he will do, we 
do not look upon him as a moral agent. We look 
upon him rather as a lunatic. 

To  this  it  may  be  objected  that  we  are  not 
dealing  fairly  with  the  moralist.  For  when  he 
makes  it  a  condition  of my  being  morally  re(cid:173)
sponsible  that  I  should  act  freely,  he  does  not 
wish to imply that it is purely a matter of chance 
that I act as I do. What he wishes to imply is that 
my actions are the result of my own free choice: 
and it is  because they  are  the result of my own 
free choice that I am held to be morally respon(cid:173)
sible for them. 

But now we must ask how it is  that I come to 
make  my choice.  Either it is  an  accident that I 
choose to act as  I do or it is not. If it is an acci(cid:173)
dent,  then it is  merely a matter of chance that I 
did not choose otherwise;  and if it is  merely  a 
matter  of chance  that  I  did  not  choose  other(cid:173)
wise,  it is  surely  irrational to  hold  me  morally 
responsible for choosing as I did. But if it is not 
an accident that I choose to  do one thing rather 
than  another,  then  presumably  there  is  some 
causal  explanation  of my  choice:  and  in  that 
case we are led back to determinism. 

Again,  the  objection  may  be  raised  that  we 
are  not doing justice to the moralist's case.  His 
view  is  not  that  it  is  a  matter  of chance  that  I 
choose to act as  I do,  but rather that my choice 
depends  upon  my  character.  Nevertheless  he 
holds that I can still be free in the sense that he 
requires;  for  it is I who am responsible for  my 
character. But in what way am I responsible for 
my  character?  Only,  surely,  in  the  sense  that 
there is  a causal connection between what I do 
now and what I have done in the past. It is only 
this that justifies the statement that I have made 
myself what I am:  and  even  so this  is  an  over(cid:173)
simplification,  since  it  takes  no  account  of the 
external  influences  to  which  I  have  been  sub(cid:173)
jected. But, ignoring the external influences, let 
us  assume  that it is  in fact  the  case  that I have 
made  myself what  I am.  Then  it  is  still  legiti(cid:173)
mate to ask how it is  that I have come to make 
myself one  sort of person  rather  than  another. 
And if it be  answered  that it  is  a matter of my 
strength of will, we can put the same question in 
another form  by  asking  how  it  is  that  my  will 
has  the  strength  that it has  and  not some  other 
degree of strength. Once more, either it is an ac-

