G Model
CHIABU-2753;  No.  of  Pages  13

ARTICLE IN PRESS

Child  Abuse  &  Neglect  xxx  (2014)  xxx–xxx

Contents  lists  available  at  ScienceDirect

Child   Abuse  &   Neglect

Long-term   effects   of   child   abuse   and   neglect   on   emotion
processing   in   adulthood夽
Joanna   Cahall   Young∗,  Cathy   Spatz   Widom
Psychology  Department,  John  Jay  College  of  Criminal  Justice/CUNY  Graduate  Center,  USA

a   r   t   i  c   l   e  

i   n   f   o

a   b   s   t   r   a   c   t

Article  history:
Received  3  August  2013
Received  in  revised  form  1  March  2014
Accepted  20  March  2014
Available  online  xxx

Keywords:
Child  abuse  and  neglect
Emotion  processing
IQ
Psychopathy
Psychopathology

To  determine   whether   child   maltreatment   has   a  long-term   impact   on  emotion   processing
abilities   in   adulthood   and   whether   IQ,   psychopathology,   or   psychopathy   mediate   the   rela-
tionship  between   childhood   maltreatment   and   emotion   processing   in   adulthood.   Using
a  prospective   cohort   design,   children   (ages   0–11)   with   documented   cases   of   abuse   and
neglect   during   1967–1971   were   matched   with   non-maltreated   children   and   followed   up
into  adulthood.   Potential   mediators   (IQ,   Post-Traumatic   Stress   [PTSD],   Generalized   Anx-
iety  [GAD],   Dysthymia,   and   Major   Depressive   [MDD]   Disorders,   and   psychopathy)   were
assessed   in   young   adulthood   with   standardized   assessment   techniques.   In   middle   adult-
hood  (Mage =  47),   the   International   Affective   Picture   System   was   used   to  measure   emotion
processing.   Structural   equation   modeling   was  used   to  test   mediation   models.   Individuals
with   a  history   of  childhood   maltreatment   were   less   accurate   in   emotion   processing   overall
and  in   processing   positive   and   neutral   pictures   than   matched   controls.   Childhood   physical
abuse  predicted   less   accuracy   in   neutral   pictures   and   childhood   sexual   abuse   and   neglect
predicted   less   accuracy   in   recognizing   positive   pictures.   MDD,   GAD,   and   IQ  predicted   over-
all   picture   recognition   accuracy.   However,   of   the   mediators   examined,   only   IQ   acted   to
mediate  the  relationship   between   child   maltreatment   and   emotion   processing   deﬁcits.
Although   research   has   focused   on   emotion   processing   in   maltreated   children,   these   new
ﬁndings   show   an   impact   child   abuse   and   neglect   on  emotion   processing   in   middle   adult-
hood.   Research   and  interventions   aimed   at   improving   emotional   processing   deﬁciencies   in
abused  and   neglected   children   should   consider   the   role   of   IQ.

©  2014   Elsevier   Ltd.   All   rights   reserved.

A  key  component  of  social  competence  is  emotion  processing,  which  includes  emotion  perception,  communication,  inter-
pretation,  and  regulation  of  emotion  (Halberstadt,  Denham,  &  Dunsmore,  2001).  Emotions  function  to  provide  information
about  the  environment  and  prepare  for  a  behavioral  response,  triggering  the  appetitive  or  defensive  systems,  depending  on
the  situation  (Bradley,  Codispoti,  Cuthbert,  &  Lang,  2001).  Theories  of  emotion  suggest  that  behavioral  responses  to  emotions
are  directly  related  to  emotion  processing  (Halberstadt  et  al.,  2001).  This  paper  brings  together  research  on  child  maltreat-
ment,  emotional  development,  and  psychopathology  to  examine  the  consequences  of  child  abuse  and  neglect  for  emotion
processing  in  adulthood.

夽 This  research  was   supported  in  part  by  grants  from  Eunice  Kennedy  Shriver  NICHD  (HD40774),  NIMH  (MH49467  and  MH58386),  NIJ  (86-IJ-CX-0033  and
89-IJ-CX-0007),  NIDA  (DA17842  and  DA10060),  NIAAA  (AA09238  and  AA11108),  and  the  Doris  Duke  Charitable  Foundation  to  the  second  author.  Points  of
view   are  those  of  the  authors  and  do  not  necessarily  represent  the  position  of  the  United  States  Department  of  Justice.
∗ Corresponding  author.

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chiabu.2014.03.008
0145-2134/©  2014  Elsevier  Ltd.  All  rights  reserved.

Please  cite  this  article  in  press  as:  Young,  J.  C.,  &  Widom,  C.S.  Long-term  effects  of  child  abuse  and  neglect  on  emotion
processing  in  adulthood.  Child  Abuse  &  Neglect  (2014),  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chiabu.2014.03.008

G Model
CHIABU-2753;  No.  of  Pages  13

ARTICLE IN PRESS

2 

J.C.  Young,  C.S.  Widom  /  Child  Abuse  &  Neglect  xxx  (2014)  xxx–xxx

Childhood  maltreatment  and  emotion  processing

In  general,  child  maltreatment  has  been  found  to  disrupt  the  normal  process  of  emotional  development.  First,  studies
of  maltreating  parents  suggest  that  they  show  less  positive  emotion  and  more  negative  emotion  than  non-abusive  parents
(Bugental,  Blue,  &  Lewis,  1990;  Kavanagh,  Youngblade,  Reid,  &  Fagot,  1988).  It  is  also  believed  that  maltreating  parents  tend
to  be  isolated  themselves  and  to  isolate  their  children  from  interaction  with  others,  providing  fewer  nonparental  models  of
emotional  communication  (Salzinger,  Feldman,  Hammer,  &  Rosario,  1993).

Second,  a  child  who  receives  inconsistent  or  harsh  caregiving  has  difﬁculty  predicting  the  consequences  of  his/her  behav-
ior  (Dadds  &  Salmon,  2003)  and  this  may   be  manifest  in  deﬁcits  in  processing  emotional  information.  For  example,  maltreated
children  have  been  found  to  show  speciﬁc  deﬁcits  in  understanding  (Shipman  &  Zeman,  1999),  recognizing  (Pollak,  Cicchetti,
Hornug,  &  Reed,  2000),  and  expressing  emotion  (Gaensbauer,  1982)  and  are  at  risk  for  exhibiting  social  delays  (Kim  &
Cicchetti,  2010),  deﬁcits  in  empathy  (Beeghly  &  Cicchetti,  1994),  and  decreased  engagement  in  prosocial  behavior  (Koenig,
Cicchetti,  &  Rogosch,  2004).  These  ﬁndings  reveal  general  deﬁcits  in  emotion  processing  in  maltreated  children,  but  the
question  remains  about  whether  these  deﬁcits  would  persist  into  adulthood.

Using  tests  of  facial  emotion  recognition  (FER),  Pollak  and  Sinha  (2002)  found  that  children  with  physical  abuse  histories
were  better  able  to  identify  facial  displays  of  anger  compared  to  controls.  Several  other  studies  using  event-related  potentials
and  behavioral  evidence  have  found  a  sensitivity  bias  to  perceive  anger  in  physically  abused  children  (Pollak  &  Sinha,  2002;
Pollak,  Vardi,  Pultzer-Bechner,  &  Curtin,  2005;  Shackman,  Shackman,  &  Pollak,  2007)  and,  more  generally,  in  a  sample  of
maltreated  children  (Curtis  &  Cicchetti,  2011,  2013;  Leist  &  Dadds,  2009;  Masten  et  al.,  2008;  Pollak,  Klorman,  Brumaghim,
&  Cicchetti,  2001).  In  an  attempt  to  explain  these  ﬁndings,  Pollak  et  al.  (2005)  suggested  that  in  abusive  home  environments
children  learn  to  associate  anger  with  threat  of  harm  and  therefore,  they  are  hypervigilant  to  anger  in  their  environment.
Masten  et  al.  (2008)  elaborated  on  this  theory  to  suggest  that  maltreated  children  become  better  prepared  to  identify  threat-
ening  situations  through  hypervigilance  of  emotions.  For  example,  these  children  may   be  more  sensitive  to  anger  in  their
abuser  and  fear  of  those  around  them  because  both  sensitivities  could  help  them  identify  threat  quickly  and  potentially  avoid
additional  abuse  (Masten  et  al.,  2008).  Consistent  with  these  theories,  Shackman  et  al.  (2007)  have  shown  that  maltreated
children  show  enhanced  selective  attention  to  angry  facial  expressions  posed  by  their  mothers.  Thus,  this  body  of  research
would  suggest  that  individuals  with  histories  of  childhood  physical  abuse  might  be  less  likely  to  show  deﬁcits  in  processing
negative  emotional  pictures  and  more  likely  to  show  deﬁcits  for  pictures  with  positive  or  neutral  valence.

Very  little  research  has  examined  emotion  recognition  in  neglected  children.  In  earlier  research,  Bousha  and  Twentyman
(1984)  found  that  neglecting  parents  were  less  expressive  and  engaged  with  little  exchange  of  affective  information  in  inter-
actions  with  their  children  and,  thus,  provided  less  support  in  learning  to  understand  emotions  more  generally.  Impoverished
social  and  emotional  environments,  which  are  often  present  in  cases  of  neglect,  prevent  the  development  of  normal  emo-
tional  skills  (Pollak  et  al.,  2000)  and  may   cause  a  blunted  pattern  of  emotional  reactivity  (Gilles,  Berntson,  Zipf,  &  Gunnar,
2000;  van  der  Vegt,  van  der  Ende,  Kirschbaum,  Verhulst,  &  Tiemeier,  2009).  Pollak  et  al.  (2000)  reported  that  neglected
children  had  more  difﬁculty  in  recognizing  emotional  expressions  in  a  vignette  than  a  control  group  or  physically  abused
children.  When  rating  the  similarity  between  facial  expressions  of  different  emotions,  neglected  children  saw  fewer  distinc-
tions  between  emotions  compared  to  the  other  two   groups  (Pollak  et  al.,  2000).  However,  this  is  the  only  study  to  investigate
emotion  perception  deﬁcits  speciﬁc  to  neglected  children.  Most  studies  have  included  only  physically  abused  children  or
maltreated  children  (i.e.  physically  abused  and/or  neglected  children).  To  our  knowledge,  no  studies  have  focused  on  sexually
abused  children,  and  the  existing  literature  is  based  almost  exclusively  on  studies  of  children,  with  no  research  investigating
the  long-term  effects  of  childhood  abuse  and  neglect  on  adult  emotion  processing  ability.

Potential  mechanisms  linking  childhood  maltreatment  and  emotion  processing

If  the  impact  of  child  abuse  and  neglect  on  emotion  processing  extends  into  adulthood,  what  might  be  some  of  mecha-
nisms  that  lead  to  these  outcomes?  Research  has  increasingly  shown  that  childhood  abuse  and  neglect  can  result  in  a  cascade
of  negative  consequences  across  multiple  domains  of  functioning  (Gilbert  et  al.,  2009;  Widom,  2000)  that  might  explain  an
increased  risk  for  deﬁcits  in  emotion  processing  abilities  for  individuals  with  histories  of  child  abuse  and/or  neglect.  Specif-
ically,  child  abuse  and  neglect  has  been  associated  with  cognitive  deﬁcits  in  general  and  various  forms  of  psychopathology
that  may   lead  to  emotion  processing  deﬁcits.

First,  several  studies  have  reported  that  abused  and  neglected  children  are  at  increased  risk  for  lower  academic  perfor-
mance  and  intelligence  in  childhood  (Eckenrode,  Laird,  &  Doris  1993;  Jonson-Reid,  Drake,  Kim,  Porterﬁeld,  &  Han,  2004;
Lansford  et  al.,  2002)  and  that  these  effects  of  childhood  maltreatment  extend  into  young  adulthood  (Perez  &  Widom,  1994).
Thus,  it  is  possible  that  deﬁcits  in  intelligence  lead  to  general  deﬁcits  in  performance  on  processing  tasks,  particularly  those
that  involve  memory,  and  this  ﬁnding  may   help  explain  why  maltreated  children  perform  worse  on  these  tasks.

It  is  also  possible  that  some  of  the  psychological  consequences  that  have  been  associated  with  child  abuse  and  neglect
have  a  negative  impact  on  performance  on  emotion  processing  tasks  in  adulthood.  For  example,  individuals  with  histories  of
abuse  have  been  found  to  exhibit  more  symptoms  of  anxiety  disorders  (Springer,  Sheridan,  Kuo,  &  Carnes,  2007).  A  separate
body  of  research  reveals  that  individuals  with  higher  levels  of  anxiety  symptoms  show  deﬁcits  in  emotion  perception  (Mogg
&  Bradley,  1999)  and  emotion  regulation  (Suveg,  Morelen,  Brewer,  &  Thomassin,  2010),  and  individuals  with  PTSD  have
shown  an  attentional  bias  to  trauma-related  stimuli  (Buckley,  Blanchard,  &  Neill,  2000).  In  work  by  Pollak  et  al.  (2001),

Please  cite  this  article  in  press  as:  Young,  J.  C.,  &  Widom,  C.S.  Long-term  effects  of  child  abuse  and  neglect  on  emotion
processing  in  adulthood.  Child  Abuse  &  Neglect  (2014),  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chiabu.2014.03.008

