Peace and Conflict Studies (1.112) 

Module: Governance and Peacebuilding, Part 1 

 

 

Instructor: Dr. Hendrik Hegemann, Lecturer in International Relations & Peace and Conflict Studies, 
hendrik.hegemann@uni-osnabrueck.de 
  

Essay Questions for 4 ECTS, 6-8 pages (plus front page)  

Deadline: 10 February 2017 

 

 

 

Essay  papers  do  not  provide  extended  theoretical  discussions  or  detailed  case  studies.  Rather,  the 

goal is to develop, explicate and defend a clear, pointed argument addressing one of the designated 

essay questions. Essay papers have an introduction, a main part and a conclusion. You do not need to 

include  a  distinct  theory  chapter,  but  please  refer  to  and  apply  the  relevant  academic  concepts 

mentioned  in  the  question.  You  should  also  illustrate  and  strengthen  your  argument  by  brief 

references to specific cases of conflict/conflict management. 

 

 

Please, choose one of the following questions!  

 

1.  Is  conflict  always  a  bad  thing?  In  elaborating  on  this  question,  please  also  refer  to  the 

concept of “conflict” and its main characteristics.  

2.  What are  benefits  and limitations of the concept of “structural violence”?  How helpful is it 

for conflict analysis and management? 

3.  Distinguish and discuss the terms “negative” and “positive peace”. In how far are these terms 

helpful for conflict management?  

4.  Which level of analysis – if any – is most important to analyze and understand conflicts, or a 

specific kind of conflict?  

5.  Why do people fight: greed versus grievance?  Which argument – if any – do you find more 

compelling for the analysis of conflicts, or a specific kind of conflict? 

6.  How new are “new wars”? In which respects do they differ from “old wars”, or not? 

7.  How new is “new terrorism”? In which respects does it differ from “old terrorism”, or not? 

8.  Choose  two  approaches  of  conflict  management.  What  are  their  comparative  advantages 

and disadvantages?  

9.  Discuss the concept of “liberal peace”. What are its main achievements and drawbacks? 

