Federal Reserve Bank of New York

Staff Reports

Crime, House Prices, and Inequality: The Effect of UPPs in Rio

Claudio Frischtak
Benjamin R. Mandel

Staff Report no. 542

January 2012

This paper presents preliminary ﬁ ndings and is being distributed to economists 
and other interested readers solely to stimulate discussion and elicit comments. 
The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and are not necessarily 
reﬂ ective of views at the International Growth Centre, the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York, or the Federal Reserve System. Any errors or omissions are the 
responsibility of the authors.

Crime, House Prices, and Inequality: The Effect of UPPs in Rio
Claudio Frischtak and Benjamin R. Mandel 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, no. 542
January 2012
JEL classiﬁ cation: O18, O15, R30, K42 

Abstract

We use a recent policy experiment in Rio de Janeiro, the installation of permanent police stations 
in low-income communities (or favelas), to quantify the relationship between a reduction in crime 
and the change in the prices of nearby residential real estate. Using a novel data set of detailed 
property prices from an online classiﬁ eds website, we ﬁ nd that the new police stations (called 
UPPs) had a substantial effect on the trajectory of property values and certain crime statistics since 
the beginning of the program in late 2008. We also ﬁ nd that the extent of inequality among resi-
dential prices decreased as a result of the policy. Both of these empirical observations are consis-
tent with a dynamic model of property value in which historical crime rates have persistent effects 
on the price of real estate.

Key words: wealth distribution, amenity value, real estate
 

Frischtak: International Growth Centre and InterB Consultoria Internacional de Negócios (e-mail: 
claudio.frischtak@interb.com.br). Mandel: Federal Reserve Bank of New York (e-mail: benjamin.
mandel@ny.frb.org). This research was conducted with restricted access to real estate listings data 
provided by www.ZAP.com.br. The authors gratefully acknowledge ZAP and the support of Eduardo 
Gama Schaeffer and Caio Bianchi for facilitating access to these data. Victor Chateaubriand, Diego 
Gilsanz, and Felipe Katz provided superb research assistance. The views expressed in this paper are 
those of the authors and do not necessarily reﬂ ect the position of the International Growth Centre, the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, or the Federal Reserve System.

