The Myth of Personal Security: Criminal Gangs, Dispute Resolution, and Identity in Rio de
Janeiro's Favelas
Author(s): Enrique Desmond Arias and Corinne Davis Rodrigues
Reviewed work(s):
Source: Latin American Politics and Society, Vol. 48, No. 4 (Winter, 2006), pp. 53-81
Published by: Distributed by Blackwell Publishing on behalf of the Center for Latin American Studies
at the University of Miami
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/4490492 .
Accessed: 18/05/2012 07:46

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Blackwell Publishing and Center for Latin American Studies at the University of Miami are collaborating with
JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Latin American Politics and Society.

http://www.jstor.org

The Myth of Personal Security: 
Criminal Gangs, Dispute Resolution, 
and Identity in Rio deJaneiro's Favelas 
Enrique Desmond Arias 
Corinne Davis  Rodrigues 

ABSTRACT 

This article examines the politics of how drug traffickers resolve dis- 
putes and maintain order in the favelas of Rio de Janeiro. Much 
popular discourse and some scholarly studies argue that drug traf- 
fickers play a major role in controlling crime and minimizing con- 
flicts there. This article shows that traffickers enforce community 
norms under a variable political calculus in which well-connected 
and respected residents are less likely to be punished for rule vio- 
lations than are individuals who are marginal to the life of the com- 
munity. This allows many favela residents who conform to local 
norms to feel a degree of control over their own safety, a "myth of 
personal security" in otherwise violent neighborhoods. 

n the film Orfeu negro (Black Orpheus, 1959), a retelling of the Greek 
myth of Orpheus and Eurydice set in a fictional Rio de Janeiro favela 
(slum),  a disturbing scene  occurs. A man accused  of raping a young  girl 
is forced to leap to his death by Lucinho, the leader of the favela's drug 
gang, while  members of the community watch and voice  their approval. 
This fictional portrayal of favela dispute resolution reinforces the widely 
held  belief  that traffickers are the de  facto administrators of  "justice" in 
Rio's favelas. But even  in this fictional portrayal, trafficker justice is noth- 
ing more than a myth. As the story progresses, the violence  in the hands 
of the traffickers gradually turns against residents and ultimately, as the 
trafficker pursues  his  passions,  results in  Eurydice's death.  Lucinho is 
transformed into the character of Death and eventually  is himself killed. 
This story, part of  an ongoing  discourse  about  the  role  of traffick- 
ers in Rio's favelas,  illustrates an essential  dilemma in the life of territo- 
rial criminals. As long  as the residents of these  tightly knit communities 
offer traffickers silence  and protection, it is very difficult for state agents 
to penetrate the community and bring the criminals to justice.1 Unfortu- 
nately,  the  business  of  narcotics  dealing  (and,  the  makers  of  Orfeu 
would  argue,  the  human  and  divine  passions  of  the  criminal)  bring 
misery and suffering to residents not involved  in the drug business.  Reg- 
ular shoot-outs  between  traffickers and  police  and  other  criminals, as 
well  as assorted illegal activities, lead to murder rates in excess  of 40 per 

53 

