AELP Writing: Theme & Rheme 

 

 

 

 

Theme & Rheme: Giving your Text Cohesion 

 
Over  the  course  of  this  term,  your  Lektor  will  be  providing  you  with  advice  on  how  to  construct 
introductions  and  conclusions,  and  how  to  package  information  and  argument  into  paragraphs 
(including  the  use  of  topic  sentences).  A  further  crucial  element  on  our  journey  through  the 
technicalities of writing is how to package information at the clause level. This topic is important to 
you because English clause structures are less flexible than German ones. The following explanations 
and examples are taken from Mona Baker In Other Words (2011) pp133 ff. and Bloor & Bloor The 
Functional Analysis of English (2013) pp 74 ff. 
 
 
Theme & Rheme: A clause is made up of two “segments”: theme and rheme. 
 

 
I. Theme is basically “what the sentence is all about” and serves two main purposes: 
 
• 
 
 
• 
 

it tells you where the sentence is heading, referring forwards to the addition of new 
information which has yet to be stated. 

It  acts  as  a  point  of  orientation,  referring  backwards  to  what  has  been  stated  in 
previous sentences, and 

heavenly bodies in the sky. 

 
 
E.g.   Ptolemy’s model provided a reasonably accurate system for predicting the positions of 
 
 
In this sentence, Ptolemy’s model is the theme because it is what the sentence is all about. It is (in this 
case) also at the front of the sentence as is common in the S + V structure of English sentences. 
 
 
See  how  the  positioning  of  theme  works  in  the  following  extract  (Bloor  74).  Here,  the  themes  are 
highlighted in bold type for ease of identification: 
 

Madrid underwent significant  social changes in  the late 19th century. The city  began to expand 
north,  with  the  construction  of  Chamberi  and  Salamanca,  and  the  railway  came  along  with 
electricity, trams and a new canal. 

 

 
 
II. Rheme is basically what the writer wants to say about the theme. It is the most important 
part of a clause/sentence because it is actually what the writer or speaker wants to say about the topic 
(theme)  they  have  introduced.  So  the  rheme  in  the  first  example  above  is:  provided  a  reasonably 
accurate system for predicting the positions of heavenly bodies in the sky. 
 

AELP Writing: Theme & Rheme 

 

 

 

 

Two Types of Theme -  But this is not the whole story. Two main types of theme/rheme patterning 
have been identified by linguists interested in the structure of language. These are as follows: 
 

a)  Constant theme 

Please read the following text from Lott (1986) quoted in Bloor (2013): 
 

Wole Soyinka, dramatist and scholar, is a Nigerian. He was born in 1934, and [elliptical “he”] has 
devoted his life to drama for the theatre, both as a dramatist and as a university teacher of drama 
and English in his own country. He is also an accomplished writer of stories, novels and poetry. 
His  background and  his professional life have made him uniquely  able to write plays with an 
African setting which can absorb the conflict between past and present, tradition and novelty, tribal 
beliefs and the ideologies of the Western world today. 

 
Pattern: Theme A + rheme A. Theme A + rheme B. Theme A + rheme C. etc.  
Beginning  each  sentence  with  the  same  theme  (“Wole  Soyinka”  or  a  pronoun  or  linked  reference) 
keeps the reader’s attention and is commonly used in factual writing such as encyclopedia entries or 
instruction manuals. It also appears in academic writing in the methods/results sections which lay out 
step-by-step explanations.  
 
Task: Look at the following text from a Ministry of Defence pamphlet Jungle Survival (1967) quoted 
by Bloor (2013, 90) and highlight or underline the theme: 
 

The saw-scaled viper is found in dry sandy areas where there is little vegetation. Its length is about 
two feet, and it is sandy in colour with darker spots. It is aggressive and very poisonous. It may be 
found in the full blaze of the sun or beneath hot stones and in crannies heated by the sun. 

 

b)  Linear Theme 

 
Here, in the first sentence of a text, the writer will state a theme and elaborate on it with a rheme. 
This is the case in the sentence about Ptolemy quoted above. The next sentence will start with a new 
theme which refers back to the rheme in the previous sentence, before adding new information in a 
new rheme. So we have text which looks something like this: 
 
Theme A + rheme B. Theme B + rheme C. Theme C + rheme D. etc. 
This creates an interlocking continuity from one sentence to the next. Take a look at the following 
text  taken  from  Martin  et  al.  The  Penguin  Book  of  the  Natural  World  (1976)  and  quoted  in  Bloor 
(2013, 91): 
 

The stomach produces gastric juice, which contains dilute hydrochloric acid. The acid kills most of 
the bacteria in the food. The partly digested food passes next into the duodenum, the first part of 
the  small  intestine.  This  is  a  coiled  tube  about  eight  metres  long,  which  is  as  wide  as  a  man’s 
thumb.  

 
As you can clearly observe, the rheme in sentence one (“hydrochloric acid”) becomes the theme of 
sentence 2 (“acid”). Similarly, the rheme of sentence 2 (“food”) becomes the theme of sentence three 
(“the  partly  digested  food”),  and  finally  the  last  pairing  is  the  rheme  in  sentence  three  (“the  small 
intestine”) which becomes the theme (“this”) in the final sentence. Linear theme is most often used in 
explanatory and chronologically ordered tests to form linear explanations or narratives.  

