Olson, Mancur (1965): I. A Theory of Groups and Organizations. II. Group 
Size and Group Behavior. In: Olson, Mancur (ed.): The Logic of Collective 
Action. Public Goods and the Theory of Groups. Cambridge: Harvard Uni-
versity Press, pp. 5-52, pp. 53-65. 

I 

A  Theory  of  Groups  and  Organizations 

A.  THE  PURPOSE  OF  ORGANIZATION 

Since most  (though by  no means all)  of the action taken  by  or on 
behalf of groups of individuals is  taken through organizations, it will 
be helpful to consider organizations in a general or  theoretical  way.1 
The logical  place  to  begin  any  systematic  study  of  organizations  is 
with  their  purpose.  But  there  are  all  types  and  shapes  and  sizes  of 
organizations,  even  of  economic  organizations,  and  there  is  then 
some  question  whether  there  is  any  single  purpose  that  would  be 
characteristic  of  organizations  generally.  One  purpose  that  is  none(cid:173)
theless  characteristic of  most  organizations,  and  surely  of  practically 
all organizations with  an  important economic  aspect,  is  the  further(cid:173)
ance of the interests of their members. That would seem  obvious,  at 
least from the economist's perspective. To be sure, some organizations 
may  out  of  ignorance  fail  to  further  their  members'  interests,  and 
others  may  be  enticed into serving only  the  ends  of  the  leadership.2 

1.  Economists  have  for  the  most  part  neglected  to  develop  theories  of  organiza(cid:173)
tions,  but  there  are a  few  works  from  an  economic  point  of  view  on  the  subject.  See, 
for  example,  three  papers  by  Jacob  Marschak,  "Elements  for  a  Theory  of  Teams," 
Management  Science,  I  (January  1955),  127-137,  "Towards  an  Economic  Theory  of 
Organization  and  Information,"  in  Decision  Procesus,  ed.  R.  M.  Thrall,  C.  H.  Combs, 
and  R.  L.  Davis  (New  York:  John  Wiley,  1954),  pp.  187-220,  and  "Efficient  and 
Viable  Organization  Forms,"  in  Modern  Organization  Theory, ed.  Mason  Haire  (New 
York:  John  Wiley,  1959),  pp.  307-320;  two  papers  by  R.  Radner,  "Application  of 
Linear  Programming  to  Team  Decision  Problems,"  Management  Science,  V  (January 
1959),  143-150,  and  "Team  Decision  Problems,"  Annals  of  Mathematical  Statistics, 
XXXIII  (September  1962),  857-881;  C.  B.  McGuire,  "Some  Team  Models  of  a  Sales 
Organization,"  Management  Science,  VII  (January  1961),  101-130;  Oskar  Morgen(cid:173)
stern,  Prolegomena  to  a  Theory  of  Organization  (Santa  Monica,  Cali£.:  RAND 
Research  Memorandum  734,1951); James  G.  March  and  Herbert A.  Simon,  Organiza(cid:173)
tions  (New  York:  John  Wiley,  1958);  Kenneth  Boulding,  The  Organizational 
Revolution  (New  York:  Harper,  1953). 

2.  Max  Weber called  attention  to  the  case  where  an  organization  continues  to  exist 
for  some  time  after  it  has  become  meaningless  because  some  official  is  making  a 
living  out  of  it.  See  his  Theory  of  Social  and  Economic  Organization,  trans.  Talcott 
Parsons  and  A.  M.  Henderson  (New  York:  Oxford  University  Press,  1947),  p.  318. 

The Logic  of  Collective  Action 

6 
But  organizations  often  perish  if  they  do  nothing  to  further  the 
interests  of  their  members,  and  this  factor  must  severely  limit  the 
number of organizations  that fail  to  serve  their  members. 

The  idea  that  organizations  or  associations  exist  to  further  the 
interests of their members is hardly novel,  nor peculiar to economics; 
it goes  back  at least to Aristotle,  who wrote, "Men journey  together 
with a view to  particular advantage,  and by  way  of providing some 
particular  thing  needed  for  the  purposes  of  life,  and  similarly  the 
political  association  seems  to  have  come  together  originally,  and  to 
continue  in  existence,  for  the  sake  of  the  general  advantages  it 
brings." S  More  recently  Professor Leon  Festinger, a social  psycholo(cid:173)
gist, pointed out that "the  attraction of group membership  is  not  so 
much in sheer belonging, but rather in attaining something by  means 
of  this  membership." f  The late  Harold  Laski,  a  political  scientist, 
took  it  for  granted that "associations exist  to  fulfill  purposes  which 
a group of men  have  in common." 11 

The  kinds  of  organizations  that  are  the  focus  of  this  study  are 
expected to further the interests of their members.6  Labor unions  are 
expected  to  strive  for  higher  wages  and  better  working  conditions 
for  their  members;  farm  organizations  are  expected  to  strive  for 
favorable.legislation for  their members;  cartels are expected to strive 
for higher prices  for  participating firms;  the  corporation  is  expected 
to further the interests  of its  stockholders; 7  and  the state  is  expected 

3.  EthiC's  viii.9.1160a. 
4.  Leon  Festinger,  "Group  Attraction  and  Membership,"  in  Group  Dynamics,  ed. 
Dorwin  Cartwright  and  Alvin  Zander  (Evanston,  Ill.:  Row,  Peterson,  1953),  p.  93. 
5.  A.  Grammar  of Politics,  4th  ed.  (London:  George  Alien  &.  Unwin,  1939), p.  67. 
6.  Philanthropic  and  religious  organizations  are  not  necessarily  expected  to  serve 
only  the  interests  of  their  members;  such  organizations  have  other  purposes  that  are 
considered  more  important.  however  much  their  members  "need"  to  belong,  or  are 
improved  or  helped  by  belonging.  But  the  complexity  of such  organizations  need  not 
be  debated  at  length  here,  because  this  study  will  focus  on  organizations  with  a 
significant  economic  aspect.  The emphasis  here  will  have  something  in  common  with 
what  Max  Weber  called  the  "associative  group";  he  called  a  group  associative  if  "the 
orientation  of social  action  with  it  rests  on  a  rationally  motivated  agreement."  Weber 
contrasted  his  "associative  group"  with  the  "communal  group"  which  was  centered 
on personal  affection,  erotic  relationships,  etc.,  like  the  family.  (See  Weber,  pp.  136-
139, and  Grace  Coyle.  Sodal Process in  Organiud Groups,  New  York:  Richard  Smith, 
Inc.,  1930, pp.  7-9.)  The logic  of  the  theory  developed  here  can  be  extended  to  cover 
communal, religious, and  philanthropic organizations,  but  the theory  is  not particularly 
useful  in  studying  such  groups.  See  my  pp.  61n17.  159-162. 

7.  That  is,  its  members.  This  study  does  not  follow  the  terminological  usage  of 
those  organization  theorists  who describe employees  as  "members" of  the  organization 
for  which  they  work.  Here  it  is  more  convenient  to  follow  the  language  of  everyday 

