5

Emotions, Thoughts, and Feelings

Emotions as Engagements with the World

robert c. solomon

I have been arguing, for thirty years now, that emotions are a kind of

judgment—or rather, a complex of interlocking judgments, desires, and
intentions. Back in the seventies, it was an argument that attracted some
attention but little sympathy. What provoked me then—and still provokes
me now—is what I call the primitivist conception of emotions, the idea
that emotions are basically physiological or (now) neurological syndromes
conjoined with feelings that have only marginally to do with cognition or
our engagements in the world. William James’s well-known theory, or at
least that aspect of it he famously italicized, stated this view concisely: “Our
feeling of [bodily changes] as they occur IS the emotion.” An emotion might
be “triggered” by a disturbing perception, but its essence was physiology
plus feeling. Thus my own analysis of emotion challenged this primitivism
and maintained that emotions were, to employ a precocious word, intelli-
gent. This meant also challenging the sharp divide between emotions and
rationality, and I further insisted (inspired by Jean-Paul Sartre) that we
question the established notion that the emotions happen to us, render us
passive, and are essentially involuntary. Some aspects of this theory, notably
the idea that emotions are in some sense “cognitive” and consist (at least
in part) of evaluative judgments and thus display a kind of
intelligence
have become mainstream, even popular.1 Other aspects of the theory, my
voluntarist thesis in particular, continue to attract incredulousness.2 But it
is the “cognitivist” thesis that I would like to pursue here.

My bumper-sticker

slogan, my walk-away-from-the-lecture catch
phrase, has always been “Emotions are judgments.” The abbreviated slogan
has too often been mistaken for a full-blown theory in itself, as if the emo-
tions are nothing but judgments, and the particular term judgment has often

76

been misunderstood as overly detached and intellectual. But I have long
argued that emotions as judgments should not be confused with singular
summary judgments (such as might be used to brieﬂy deﬁne them or dis-
tinguish one emotion from another), nor should a judgment be thought to
be something deliberative, articulate, or fully conscious (Solomon 1988). To
say that emotions are intelligent is not to say that an emotion is an aspect
of
intellect, and to insist that emotions are judgments is not to say that
emotions are what some philosophers call “propositional attitudes.” Thus
when Paul Grifﬁths took on what he misleadingly characterized as “prop-
ositional attitude” theories of emotion as the enemy of all that was true
and scientiﬁc, I was both ﬂattered and appalled—appalled as several of us
had long insisted that propositions (or propositional contents) were not what
emotions are essentially about, ﬂattered because Grifﬁth’s abuse was surely
a sign that our collective view of emotions had shifted, in Kuhnian terms,
from being revolutionary to becoming the “normal” paradigm.3 The current
counterrevolution of affect programs and neuroreductionism says a lot
about who we are and how far we have come. The cognitive theory is now
the target—high praise for research that was once considered marginal.
Progress in philosophy, I hesitate to say, is furthered more by the “dialectic”
of one outrageous thesis after another than by cautious, careful, “normal”
argument.

Emotions, I have always insisted, are about the world. With my concept
of
judgment I had tried to make clear that this was not a marginal fact
about (some) emotions but the essence of all of them (including oneself, of
course, as part of the world). Jamesian perceptions of the world are not
mere triggers for emotion but are already shot through with the concepts
and perspectives that constitute the emotion itself. The scholastic concept
of “intentionality” was also an attempt to make this explicit, to insist that
the emotions are always “about” something (their intentional object). Thus,
judgments have intentionality, but I think that the traditional notion of
intentionality—and, I now suspect, the concept of
judgment, too—still
lacks the keen sense of engagement that I see as essential to emotions, keep-
ing in mind that thwarted or frustrated engagements characterize many
emotions. Emotions are not just about (or “directed to”) the world but ac-
tively entangled in it. So I now want to improve my analysis by making
this point central, that emotions are subjective engagements in the world. I still
favor the use of “judgment” to make this point, but I now want to stress
even more than I have before the idea that a judgment is not a detached
intellectual act but a way of cognitively grappling with the world. It has at
its very basis and as background a complex set of aspirations, expectations,
evaluations (“appraisals”), needs, demands, and desires (which says some-
thing about why the reigning “belief-desire” analysis of emotions and in-
tentions is so hopelessly impoverished).

The emotions-as-judgments view that I have defended is too often re-

emotions as engagements with the world

77

