pates the Holocaust; Wallace Stevens’s short
poem of 1942, “The man on the dump,”
preﬁgures our present situation in which the
whole earth is becoming a garbage dump.
Miller has inﬂuenced several generations
of critics. He describes his vocation as the
responsibility to account for literary works
by teaching them or by writing essays about
them that are attentive to their linguistic
complexities, to what might be called their
“rhetoric.”

SEE ALSO: Bloom, Harold; Deconstruction;
Derrida, Jacques; Ethical Criticism;
de Man, Paul; Yale School

REFERENCES AND SUGGESTED
READINGS

Bloom, H., Derrida, J., Miller, J. H., de Man, P., &
Hartman, G. (1979). Deconstruction and Criti-
cism. New York: Continuum.

Miller, J. H. (1958). Charles Dickens: The World of
His Novels. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.

Miller, J. H. (1963). The Disappearance of God: Five
Nineteenth-Century Writers. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.

Miller, J. H. (1965). Poets of Reality: Six Twentieth-
Century Writers. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.

Miller, J. H. (1970). Thomas Hardy: Distance and
Desire.Cambridge,MA:HarvardUniversityPress.
Miller, J. H. (1977). The critic as host. Critical

Inquiry, 3(3), 439–447.

Miller, J. H. (1982). Fiction and Repetition: Seven
English Novels. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.

Miller, J. H. (1985). The Linguistic Moment: From
Wordsworth to Stevens. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.

Miller, J. H. (1986). The Ethics of Reading: Kant, de
James, and Benjamin.

Man, Eliot, Trollope,
New York: Columbia University Press.

Miller, J. H. (1987). Presidential Address 1986:
The triumph of theory, the resistance to reading
and the question of the material base. PMLA,
102(3), 281–291.

M I M I C R Y 709

Miller,

J. H.

(1990). Versions of Pygmalion.

Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Miller, J. H. (1991). Hawthorne and History: Defa-
cing It. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.

Miller, J. H. (1992a). Ariadne’s Thread: Story Lines.

New Haven: Yale University Press.

Miller, J. H. (1992b). Illustration. Cambridge, MA:

Harvard University Press.

Miller, J. H. (1994). Topographies. Stanford: Stan-

ford University Press.

Miller, J. H. (1998). Reading Narrative. Norman:

Oklahoma University Press.

Miller, J. H. (2001a). Others. Princeton: Princeton

University Press.

Miller, J. H. (2001b). Speech Acts in Literature.

Stanford: Stanford University Press.

Miller,

J. H.
Routledge.

(2002). On Literature. London:

Miller, J. H. (2005). Literature as Conduct: Speech
in Henry James. New York: Fordham

Acts
University Press.

Miller, J. H. (2009a). For Derrida. New York: Ford-

ham University Press.

Miller, J. H. (2009b). The Medium is the Maker:
Browning, Freud, Derrida and the New Telepathic
Ecotechnologies. Brighton: Sussex Academic.

Miller, J. H., & Asensi, M. (1999). Black Holes.

Stanford: Stanford University Press.

Norris, C. (1988). Deconstruction and the Interests

of Theory. London: Pinter.

Mimicry
STEPHEN MORTON

Mimicry in its conventional sense is the
action, practice, or art of copying or closely
imitating, or reproducing through mime
(OED). In this deﬁnition, mimicry is closely
related to mimesis or the practice of repre-
sentation in literature, performance, and
the visual arts. Yet in contrast to mimesis,
which often seeks to reproduce an image of
the object that is being copied, mimicry can
have a humorous and even subversive po-
tential that deliberately sets out to challenge
the meaning of the object that is being
copied or represented. This is not to say

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

710 M I M I C R Y

and the
the

that the act or practice of imitation is re-
stricted to literature
visual
arts, however,
imitation of
since
other human beings is also one of the for-
mative processes through which children
learn to speak, act, and perform as socialized
human subjects. Furthermore, in biology,
the practice of mimicry denotes the close
external resemblance of an animal or plant
to another, or to an inanimate object
(OED), in some instances as a tactic of
self-defense.

The

French

psychoanalyst

Jacques
Lacan has provided a signiﬁcant account
of mimicry, which has inﬂuenced some of
the most well-known theories of mimicry,
especially that of the postcolonial theorist
Homi K. Bhabha, the feminist philosopher
Luce Irigaray, and the social
theorist
Judith Butler. In his Seminar XI, pub-
lished in English as The Four Fundamental
Concepts of Psychoanalysis (1998[1973]),
Lacan invoked the concept of mimicry
to formulate his theory of the gaze. In
his deﬁnition, the gaze is synonymous
with the object of looking or the scopic
drive. For Lacan, the gaze refers to the gaze
of another who looks at a subject and the
subject who gazes at the other person in
the act of gazing at them. As he puts it:
“You never look at me from the place from
which I see you” (103). Lacan develops
this idea in a chapter from his Seminar XI
titled “The line and light,” in which he
argues that “the facts of mimicry” provide
the subject with a “phenomenal domain”
that “enables us to view the subject in
absolute overview” (98). He does not elab-
orate on what he means by the “facts of
mimicry” in this chapter; instead, he con-
ﬁnes himself to the question of how im-
portant “the function of adaptation” is in
mimicry (98). To address this question,
Lacan begins by invoking an example from
biological science, in which “an animal-
cule” adapts to the colour of the natural

environment
against the light. As he puts it:

in order to defend itself

In an environment in which, because of
what is immediately around, the colour green
predominates, as at the bottom of a pool
containing green plants, an animalcule – there
are numerous ones that might serve as exam-
ples – becomes green for as long as the light
may do it harm. It becomes green, therefore,
in order to reﬂect the light qua green, thus
protecting itself, by adaptation,
from its
effects. (98)

For

Lacan,

however, mimicry

is
something “quite different” (99) from ad-
aptation. Citing the example of a small
crustacean that imitates the particular phase
of a quasi-plant animal known as brio-
zoaires, which resembles the shape of a stain,
Lacan asserts that this crustacean demon-
strates the “origin of mimicry” because “[i]t
becomes a stain, it becomes a picture, it is
inscribed in the function of the picture”
(99). In so doing, Lacan draws a parallel
between the function of mimicry in the
natural world and the function of mimicry
or imitation in the visual arts. Furthermore,
drawing on Roger Callois’s theory of mim-
icry in The Mask of Medusa, Lacan argues
that mimicry “reveals something in so far as
it is distinct from what might be called an
itself that is behind” and that “the effect of
mimicry is camouﬂage, in the strictly tech-
nical sense.” In other words, “It is not a
question of harmonizing with the back-
ground but, of becoming mottled – exactly
like the technique of camouﬂage practiced
in human warfare” (99).

Lacan’s account of mimicry as a form of
camouﬂage is particularly crucial to the
postcolonial
theorist Homi K. Bhabha,
who applies this idea to colonial discourse.
In Bhabha’s argument, “colonial mimicry is
the desire for a reformed, recognizable Oth-
er, that is almost the same, but not quite”
(1994:
is

86). Mimicry

for Bhabha

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

