02 Chapter 6.qxd  10/27/2008  1:54 PM  Page 77

SIX

social acceleration:
ethical and political consequences
of a desynchronized high-speed society

Hartmut Rosa

I. Social Acceleration in the Process of Modernization

In 1999, James Gleick, exploring everyday life in contemporary American
society, noted the “acceleration of just about everything”: love, life, speech,
politics, work, TV, leisure, etc.1 In this observation he certainly is not alone.
In popular as well as scientiWc discourse about the current evolution of West-
ern societies, acceleration Wgures as the single most striking and impor-
tant  feature.2 But  despite  the  noticeable  increase  in  the  discourse  about
acceleration and the shortage of time in recent years, the feeling that history,
culture, society, or even “time itself” in some strange way accelerates is not
new at all; it seems to be a constitutive trait of modernity as such. As his-
torians such as Reinhart Koselleck have persuasively argued, the general
sense of a speedup has accompanied modern society since at least the mid-
dle  of  the  eighteenth  century.3 And  indeed,  as  many  have  observed  and

1. James Gleick, Faster: The Acceleration of Just About Everything (New York: Pantheon Books,

1999).

2. William E. Scheuerman, “Liberal Democracy and the Empire of Speed,” Polity 34, no.
1 (2001): 41: “Any attempt to make sense of the human condition at the start of the new cen-
tury must begin with an analysis of time and space compression.” “Time-and-space compres-
sion” is David Harvey’s term for acceleration; see The Condition of Postmodernity: An Enquiry
into the Origins of Cultural Change (Cambridge, Mass.: Blackwell, 1989).

3. Cf. Reinhart Koselleck, Futures Past: On the Semantics of Historical Time (Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press, 1985). Koselleck demonstrates that complaints about the overwhelming
speed of modern history start well before the French Revolution and long before there is a
noticeable development of technological speed. The discourse on acceleration then periodically
peaks again and again during the following centuries. For example, in 1877 W. G. Greg observed

02 Chapter 6.qxd  10/27/2008  1:54 PM  Page 78

78

theoretical foundations

empirical evidence clearly suggests, the history of modernity seems to be
characterized by a wide-ranging speedup of all kinds of technological, eco-
nomic, social, and cultural processes and by a picking up of the general
pace of life. In terms of its structural and cultural impact on modern soci-
ety, this change in the temporal structures and patterns of modernity appears
to  be  just  as  pervasive  as  comparable  processes  of  individualization  or
rationalization. Like them, it seems, social acceleration is not a steady pro-
cess but evolves in waves (most often brought about by new technologies
or forms of socioeconomic organization), with each new wave meeting con-
siderable resistance as well as partial reversals. Most often, a wave of accel-
eration is followed by a rise in the “discourse of acceleration,” in which cries
for deceleration in the name of human needs and values are voiced but
eventually die down.4

However, contrary to the other constitutive features of the modernization
process, which have all been the object of extensive analysis—individual-
ization, rationalization, di¤erentiation (both functional and structural), and
the instrumental domestication of nature—the concept of acceleration still
lacks a clear and workable deWnition and a systematic sociological analysis.
Within systematic theories of modernity or modernization, acceleration is
virtually absent, with the notable exception of Paul Virilio’s “dromological”
approach to history, which, alas, hardly amounts to a theory. This surpris-
ing absence in the face of the empirical and discursive omnipresence of
processes of acceleration is arguably a reXection of the neglect of the tem-
poral  dimension  and  processual  nature  of  society  in  twentieth-century
sociological theory—a neglect noted by many authors, most famously per-
haps by Anthony Giddens and Niklas Luhmann.5 In the history of sociology,
modernization has mainly been analyzed from four di¤erent perspectives,

that the most signiWcant feature of his age was its high speed and the pressure it put on life,
and he voiced severe doubts whether this gain in speed was a good that was worth its price.
In 1907, Henry Adams formulated his famous “law of acceleration” (of history; reprinted in
this volume); cf. Robert Levine, A Geography of Time (New York: Basic Books, 1997) for fur-
ther historical observations of social acceleration. The subtitle of Douglas Coupland’s cele-
brated  novel  Generation  X Wts  perfectly  with  this  long  tradition.  Generation  X:  Tales  for  an
Accelerated Culture (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1991).

4. Thus, the protests and anxieties relating to the introduction of the steam engine, the
railway, the telephone, or the personal computer mirror in many respects the various “com-
munitarian” anxieties and protests against manifestations of individualization, or traditionalist
opposition against ensuing waves of rationalization—with rationalization generally being vic-
torious in the process of modernization.

5. See  Barbara  Adam,  Time  and  Social  Theory  (Cambridge:  Polity  Press,  1990),  for  an
attempt to systematically and comprehensively introduce the temporal dimension into social
theory.

