E
C
N
E
I
C
S
O
R
U
E
N

Processing of hierarchical syntactic structure in music

Stefan Koelscha,1, Martin Rohrmeiera,b, Renzo Torrecusoa,c, and Sebastian Jentschkea

aCluster: Languages of Emotion, Freie Universität, 14195 Berlin, Germany; bMIT Intelligence Initiative, Department of Linguistics and Philosophy,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139; and cBrain Institute, Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte, 59056-450, Natal, Brazil

Edited* by Dale Purves, Duke-National University of Singapore Graduate Medical School, Singapore, Singapore, and approved July 30, 2013 (received for
review January 8, 2013)

information on different

Hierarchical structure with nested nonlocal dependencies is a key
feature of human language and can be identiﬁed theoretically in
most pieces of tonal music. However, previous studies have argued
against the perception of such structures in music. Here, we show
processing of nonlocal dependencies in music. We presented
chorales by J. S. Bach and modiﬁed versions in which the hierarchical
structure was rendered irregular whereas the local structure was
kept intact. Brain electric responses differed between regular and
irregular hierarchical structures, in both musicians and nonmusi-
cians. This ﬁnding indicates that, when listening to music, humans
apply cognitive processes that are capable of dealing with long-
distance dependencies resulting from hierarchically organized syn-
tactic structures. Our results reveal that a brain mechanism funda-
mental for syntactic processing is engaged during the perception of
music, indicating that processing of hierarchical structure with
nested nonlocal dependencies is not just a key component of hu-
man language, but a multidomain capacity of human cognition.
syntax | context-free grammar | parsing | electroencephalography | EEG
To process sequential information featuring both local and

nonlocal dependencies between elements, nervous systems
need to represent
time scales, as
reﬂected in different frequencies of oscillatory processes (1, 2)
and different types of memory (3, 4). Tonal music has evolved to
an extent that composers could make the fullest use of such
representations. On the one hand, tonal music involves repre-
sentations of single events and local relationships on short time
scales. On the other hand, many composers designed nested hi-
erarchical syntactic structures spanning longer time scales, poten-
tially up to entire movements of symphonies and sonatas (5, 6).
Hierarchical syntactic structure (involving the potential for nested
nonlocal dependencies) is a key component of the human lan-
guage capacity (7–11) and is frequently produced and perceived
in everyday life. For example, in the sentence “the boy who helped
Peter kissed Mary,” the subject relative clause ”who helped Peter”
is nested into the main clause ”the boy kissed Mary,” creating a
nonlocal hierarchical dependency between ”the boy” and ”kissed
Mary.” Music theorists have described analogous hierarchical
structures for music. Schenker (5) was the ﬁrst to describe musical
structures as organized hierarchically, in a way that musical events
are elaborated (or prolonged) by other events in a recursive
fashion. According to this principle, e.g., a phrase (or set of phrases)
can be conceived of as an elaboration of a basic underlying tonic–
dominant–tonic progression. Schenker further argued that this
principle can be expanded to even larger musical sequences, up
to entire musical movements. In addition, Hofstadter (12) was
one of the ﬁrst to argue that a change of key embedded in a
superordinate key (such as a tonal modulation away from, and
returning to, an initial key) constitutes a prime example of re-
cursion in music. Based on similar ideas, several theorists have
developed formal descriptions of the analysis of hierarchical
structures in music (13–15). One of these approaches, the Gener-
ative Theory of Tonal Music (GTTM) by Lerdahl and Jackendoff
(13), has become one of the most inﬂuential current theories
in music theory and music psychology. Another approach is
the Generative Syntax Model (GSM), which provides explicit
generative rules modeled in analogy with linguistic syntax (15).

However, it has remained unknown whether hierarchical musi-
cal structure is perceived by human listeners, or whether hier-
archical musical structure is merely a historical convention driven
by factors such as notation (where relationships between keys
can be surveyed and constructed on paper). The perception
of hierarchical structure of music would indicate that this
structural property reﬂects, and is driven by, our capacity to
perceive and produce hierarchical, potentially recursive struc-
tures (7, 8, 16).

More critically, the theoretical accounts on hierarchical struc-
tures in music have been challenged by scholars who argued that
the traditional theory of harmony is local and that syntax of tonal
music can be captured, e.g., by Markov models (17, 18). Likewise,
it has been argued that musical understanding does not centrally
involve grasp of large-scale musical dependencies (19). This view
assumes that hierarchical accounts are not reﬂected in the cog-
nitive processing of musical structure and that local models yield
the best account of elementary tonal harmony (18).

Empirical evidence on this topic is sparse, but, if anything,
then empirical data rather support local accounts, showing that
even musically trained listeners are perceptually surprisingly in-
sensitive to drastic manipulations of large-scale musical structure
(20), including scrambling the order of the phrases within a sin-
gle piece (21) or rewriting sections of large tonal pieces so that
they end in keys that do not provide tonal closure (22). Notably,
all previous studies reporting behavioral or neurophysiological
effects of music–syntactic manipulations have tapped into pro-
cessing of local dependencies, either with frank local violations
(such as chords with out-of-key tones or harmonic sequences not
ending with an authentic cadence) (23–25), or by manipulating
the local transition probability of occurrence of syntactically legal
events (26). This was the case even in those studies that used tree
models to describe music–syntactic irregularities (27, 28). Thus,
behavioral and neurophysiological effects reported in previous
studies on music–syntactic processing could have been driven
only by the processing of local dependencies (21, 28). Other
studies showed recognition of harmonic and melodic reductions,
which are predicted by syntactic theories of music like the
GTTM or GSM (29, 30) or correlations between hierarchical
structure and ratings of tension and relaxation (31), but those
studies did not provide evidence for processing of long-distance
dependencies (which are also predicted by GTTM and GSM).
Thus, although hierarchical musical structures can be described
theoretically, there is a striking absence of evidence for the
processing of hierarchical syntactic structures involving long-
distance dependencies in music.

To investigate this issue, we used two original chorales by J. S.
Bach (BWV 302 and 373, Fig. 1, Fig. S1, and Audio File S1),
both with a long-distance dependency of the basic form ABA. In
addition, we used modiﬁed versions of the form A′BA in which

Author contributions: S.K. and M.R. designed research; R.T. performed research; S.K.
contributed new reagents/analytic tools; S.J. analyzed data; and S.K., M.R., and S.J. wrote
the paper.

The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

*This Direct Submission article had a prearranged editor.
1To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: stefan.koelsch@fu-berlin.de.

This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1300272110/-/DCSupplemental.

www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1300272110

PNAS Early Edition | 1 of 6

A

B

Fig. 1.
Illustration of stimuli. (A) Original version of J. S. Bach’s chorale
Liebster Jesu, wir sind hier (BWV 373). The ﬁrst phrase ends on an open
dominant (see chord with fermata below orange rectangle), and the second
phrase ends on a tonic (dotted rectangle). The tree structure above the scores
represents a schematic diagram of the harmonic dependencies (for full tree
graphs, see Figs. S2 and S3). The two thick vertical lines (separating the ﬁrst
and the second phrase) visualize that the local dominant (V in orange rect-
angle) is not immediately followed by a resolving tonic chord but implies its
resolution with the ﬁnal tonic (indicated by the dotted arrow). The same
dependency exists between initial and ﬁnal tonic (indicated by the solid ar-
row). The tree thus illustrates the nonlocal (long-distance) dependency be-
tween the initial and ﬁnal tonic regions and tonic chords, respectively (also
illustrated by the blue rectangles). The chords belonging to a key other than
the initial key (yellow rectangle) represent one level of embedding. (B)
Modiﬁed version (the ﬁrst phrase was transposed downward by the pitch
interval of one fourth, red color). The tree structure above the scores illus-
trates that the second phrase is not compatible with an expected tonic region
(indicated by the red dotted line with the red question mark) and that the last
chord (a tonic of a local cadence, dotted rectangle) neither prolongs the initial
tonic nor closes the open dominant (see solid and dotted lines followed by red
question mark). In both A and B, Roman numerals indicate scale degrees. T, S,
and D indicate the main tonal functions (tonic, subdominant, dominant) of
the respective part of the sequence (such as functional regions in the GSM).
Squared brackets indicate scale degrees relative to the local key (in the
original version, the yellow rectangle indicates that the local key of C major is
a subdominant region of the initial key G major).

the long-distance dependency between A and A was not fulﬁlled.
Each of the stimuli consisted of two phrases. In the original
chorales, the ﬁrst phrase ended on a half cadence (i.e., on an
open dominant) (Fig. 1 and Fig. S1). The second phrase began
with a chord other than the tonic (thus not immediately fulﬁlling
the implication of the dominant at the end of the ﬁrst phrase)
and featured a sequence of chords that did not belong to the
initial key of the chorale (representing one level of embedding).
Then, the second phrase returned to the initial key and ended on
an authentic cadence (in analogy with the recursive schema de-
scribed by Hofstadter) (12). Thus, according to the GTTM and
GSM, the ﬁnal chord of original chorales hierarchically pro-
longed the ﬁrst chord of the chorale and closed the established
dominant that remained open at the end of the half cadence.
Note that the parse trees of the syntactic structures of the two
chorales according to the GSM and GTTM (Fig. 1 and Figs. S1–S5)
represent recursive hierarchical organization that creates non-
local dependencies in a way that embedded parts are (recursively)

This manipulation led to a hierarchical

generated by the same set of rules as superordinated parts. As
illustrated by the red scores in Fig. 1, we also created modiﬁed
versions of these chorales by transposing the ﬁrst phrase either
down a forth (BWV 373) (Fig. 1 and Audio File S2), or up a major
second (BWV 302) (Fig. S1). By doing so, the second phrase of
each modiﬁed chorale did not prolong the ﬁrst chord of the
chorale anymore and did not close the open dominant established
by the ﬁrst phrase (see red question marks in Fig. 1 and Fig. S1).
irregularity, while
keeping the local structure of the second phrase intact. Several
measures guarantee that the hierarchical irregularity does not
confound local irregularity. First, despite the transposition of the
ﬁrst phrase of the modiﬁed chorales (red scores in Fig. 1 and Fig.
S1), the second phrase remained unchanged and did thus not
differ acoustically between original and modiﬁed chorales (that
is, the last nine chords of BWV 373, and the last eight chords of
BWV 302, were acoustically identical). Second,
it has been
shown that local n-gram models of harmony are optimal for
a context length of two or three items (32, 33), and that pre-
dictions based on such models change only marginally (and to
the worse) for longer local context models. Therefore, the local
transition probabilities for the ﬁnal chords were equal in both
original and modiﬁed versions, and only the long-distance de-
pendency between last and ﬁrst chord was manipulated (as well
as between last chord and open dominant of the half cadence).
Consequently, any differences in behavioral or neurophysiolog-
ical responses to the ﬁnal chords of the two versions of the Bach
chorales can only be due to the processing of the nonlocal, hi-
erarchical structure of the chorale, but not due to local pro-
cessing. Notably, in contrast to similar experimental designs used
in previous research (23), stimuli of the present study contain
a center-embedded dependency and end on a locally correct
cadence, both of which are required to investigate hierarchical
processing without contribution of local processing.

Note that we use the term “hierarchical” here to refer to
a syntactic organizational principle of musical sequences by
which elements are organized in terms of subordination and
dominance relationships (13–15). Such hierarchical structures
can be established through the recursive application of rules,
analogous to the establishment of hierarchical structures in
language (8). In both linguistics and music theory, such hierar-
chical dependency structures are commonly represented using
tree graphs. The term “hierarchical” is sometimes also used in
a different sense, namely to indicate that certain pitches, chords,
or keys within pieces occur more frequently than others and thus
establish a frequency-based ranking of structural
importance
(34). That is not the sense intended here.

Using electroencephalography (EEG), it has previously been
observed that processing of music–syntactical
irregularities is
reﬂected electrically in an early right anterior negativity (ERAN)
(reﬂecting music–syntactic processing) (25) and a subsequent
late negativity (the so-called N5, reﬂecting harmonic integration)
(28). Whether ERAN and N5 reﬂect local, hierarchical, or both
local and hierarchical processing is not known. In the present
study, we tested whether ﬁnal chords of hierarchically irregular
versions (in the absence of any local violation) would evoke
ERAN and N5 potentials compared with the hierarchically
regular versions. After the EEG session, conclusiveness and
emotion ratings of our stimuli were obtained to test the hy-
pothesis that conclusiveness ratings would be higher for original
than for modiﬁed versions.
Results
Fig. 2A shows that, compared with the original versions, ﬁnal
chords of modiﬁed versions evoked an early negative brain-
electric response that emerged in the N1 range (around 150 ms
after chord onset) and was maximal at around 220 ms. This effect
had a frontal scalp distribution and a slight (nonsigniﬁcant) left-
hemispheric weighting. The early effect was followed by a later
negativity that emerged at around 500 ms and lasted until about
850 ms after stimulus onset. A global ANOVA (Materials and

2 of 6 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1300272110

Koelsch et al.

