Patterns of Walkability, Transit, and

Recreation Environment for

Physical Activity

Marc A. Adams, PhD, MPH,1 Michael Todd, PhD,2 Jonathan Kurka, MS,1 Terry L. Conway, PhD,3

Kelli L. Cain, MA,3 Lawrence D. Frank, PhD,4 James F. Sallis, PhD3

Introduction: Diverse combinations of built environment (BE) features for physical activity (PA)
are understudied. This study explored whether patterns of GIS-derived BE features explained
objective and self-reported PA, sedentary behavior, and BMI.
Methods: Neighborhood Quality of Life Study participants (N¼2,199, aged 20–65 years, 48.2%
female, 26% ethnic minority) were sampled in 2001–2005 from Seattle / King County WA and
Baltimore MD / Washington DC regions. Their addresses were geocoded to compute net residential
density, land use mix, retail ﬂoor area ratio, intersection density, public transit, and public park and
private recreation facility densities using a 1-km network buffer. Latent proﬁle analyses (LPAs) were
estimated from these variables. Multilevel regression models compared proﬁles on accelerometer-
measured moderate to vigorous PA (MVPA) and self-reported PA, adjusting for covariates and
clustering. Analyses were conducted in 2013–2014.

Results: Seattle region LPAs yielded four proﬁles, including low walkability/transit/recreation
(L-L-L); mean walkability/transit/recreation (M-M-M); moderately high walkability/transit/
recreation (MH-MH-MH); and high walkability/transit/recreation (H-HH). All measures were
higher in the HHH than the LLL proﬁle (difference of 17.1 minutes/day for MVPA, 146.5
minutes/week for walking for transportation, 58.2 minutes/week for leisure-time PA, and 2.2
BMI points; all po0.05). Baltimore region LPAs yielded four proﬁles, including L-L-L; M-M-M;
high land use mix, transit, and recreation (HLU-HT-HRA); and high intersection density, high
retail ﬂoor area ratio (HID-HRFAR). HLU-HT-HRA and L-L-L differed by 12.3 MVPA
minutes/day; HID-HRFAR and L-L-L differed by 157.4 minutes/week for walking for trans-
portation (all po0.05).
Conclusions: Patterns of environmental features explain greater differences in adults’ PA than the
four-component walkability index.
(Am J Prev Med 2015;49(6):878–887) & 2015 American Journal of Preventive Medicine

From the 1Exercise Science and Health Promotion, School of Nutrition and
Health Promotion, Arizona State University, Phoenix, Arizona; 2College of
Nursing and Health Innovation, Arizona State University, Phoenix,
Arizona; 3Department of Family and Preventive Medicine, School of
Medicine, University of California, San Diego, California; and 4Schools
of Population and Public Health and Community and Regional Planning,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada

Address correspondence to: Marc A. Adams, PhD, MPH, Exercise
Science and Health Promotion, School of Nutrition and Health Promotion,
Arizona State University, 500 N. Third Street (Mail Code 3020), Phoenix
AZ 85004. E-mail: marc.adams@asu.edu.

0749-3797/$36.00
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2015.05.024

Introduction

M ost Americans do not meet physical activity

(PA) guidelines.1 People live in neighbor-
hoods that are mosaics of modiﬁable2,3 built
environment (BE) features (e.g., walkability, access to
public transportation, public park, private recreation
facilities).4–7 Such features have been individually and
consistently linked to PA among adults8–13 and have
shown behavior-speciﬁc associations with different
domains of PA (e.g., recreation, transportation).8,13–17
Mixed evidence exists for relations of BEs with sedentary
behaviors and obesity.18–22

878 Am J Prev Med 2015;49(6):878–887

& 2015 American Journal of Preventive Medicine  Published by Elsevier Inc.

Adams et al / Am J Prev Med 2015;49(6):878–887

879
design of NQLS has been described previously.4,37 First, Census
block groups in each region were screened based on the BE
construct of walkability—deﬁned by GIS-derived measures of net
residential density, land use mix, street connectivity, and retail
ﬂoor area ratio (RFAR). Block groups were classiﬁed according to
deciles of walkability scores and Census-derived median house-
hold income, which were used to form a 2 (high versus low
walkability) X 2 (high income versus low income) matrix, with
eight neighborhoods per cell in each region.4 Second, participants
(N¼2,199, aged 20–65 years, 48.2% female, 26% racial/ethnic
minority) were systematically sampled and recruited across all four
cells simultaneously over 12 months in each region to prevent
seasonal bias. IRBs from participating institutions approved the
study. Participants provided written informed consent.

Emerging evidence suggests greater diversity of BE
features23,24 and unique combinations of features25 may
explain differences in PA and obesity better than
individual features. Combinations of diverse neighbor-
hood features have not been studied as often as single
features in relation to PA domains.26 Capturing complex
patterns of diverse features that include walkability,
transportation, and recreation features is a challenge.

Modern geodemographic methods23 for characterizing
patterns of BE features in neighborhoods include factor
analysis,27–29 modeling statistical interactions,30 or clas-
sifying individuals into subgroups based on multidimen-
sional patterns with techniques such as latent proﬁle
analysis (LPA).25,31 LPA is a probability-based approach
for grouping individuals based on patterns of responses
across variables. LPA can help identify patterns of
features that show functionally different relationships
with PA and other health outcomes.

Few studies have explored patterns of BE features. Two
studies of adults found that patterns of perceived BE
features supportive of PA had the highest moderate to
vigorous PA (MVPA) and walking for transportation and
recreation levels compared with unsupportive pat-
terns.25,32 Studies suggest that certain combinations of
self-reported BE features were more strongly related to
meeting PA guidelines in adults than any single fac-
tor.33,34 Three studies examined objectively measured BE
features for adolescents’ PA,31,35,36 but none examined
objectively measured features for adults’ PA.

The current study examined whether unique patterns
of BE features could be derived from a combination of
seven GIS-measured indicators using LPA among adult
residents in two metropolitan regions. Based on previous
research,25,32 we hypothesized that multiple proﬁles
would emerge, with at least one in each region reﬂecting
an overall PA-supportive pattern. Our second aim was to
examine how proﬁles related to accelerometer-measured
PA and sedentary time, as well as self-reported PA,
sedentary time, and BMI, after adjusting for covariates.
We hypothesized that participants in neighborhoods
characterized by an overall activity-supportive proﬁle,
compared with the other proﬁles, would have the highest
PA and lowest sedentary time and BMI.

Methods
Study Sample

This analysis used data collected between 2001 and 2005 from the
Neighborhood Quality of Life Study (NQLS),37 an observational
study of BEs and health-related outcomes (e.g., PA, BMI)
conducted in 32 neighborhoods from metropolitan Seattle / King
County WA and Baltimore MD / Washington DC regions (here-
after referred to as “Seattle” and “Baltimore,” respectively). The

December 2015

Neighborhood Environment Measures
Because proximal environments around participants’ homes may
be more important than the overall block group environment,18
ESRI’s ArcGIS, version 10.0, was used to geocode participants’
residences and measure seven features within 1-km street–network
buffers uniquely for each residence.

Neighborhood walkability4 represents an indicator of

local

accessibility and destinations near home, composed of

1. net residential density—ratio of residential dwelling units to

land area devoted to residential land use;

2. street connectivity—number of intersections with three or
land area—higher intersection
more legs divided by total
density corresponds to more direct paths between destinations;
3. land use mix—diversity and evenness of accessible destinations
based on ﬁve land use types (residential, retail/commercial,
entertainment, food-related, and civic/institutional—including
medical and government); values ranged from 0 (single land
use) to 1 (even distribution across all ﬁve types); and

4. RFAR—ratio of retail building ﬂoor areas divided by retail
parcel land areas—low RFAR is a marker for areas with retail
development likely accompanied by substantial parking space,
whereas high RFAR is a marker for buildings with smaller set-
backs from the street, indicating pedestrian-oriented design.

Individual walkability components were included as four

separate indicators in LPAs.

Access to public transportation has differed strongly between
neighborhoods and is predictive of PA,32,38,39 suggesting its impor-
tance for characterizing neighborhoods. Transit and bus stop
locations were obtained from transit providers and regional planning
agencies. Transit density (combined bus and rail) was deﬁned as the
number of stops/stations in a buffer divided by its land area.

A comprehensive enumeration of parks, ﬁtness centers, com-
munity recreation centers, swimming pools, and yoga and ball-
room dance studios was conducted using information from park
departments, parcel databases, and online and print business
listings. Parks were deﬁned as freely accessible, improved, and
unimproved green spaces based on these sources. Private recre-
ation facilities included places where PA could occur and required
payment (e.g., golf courses, ﬁtness facilities, dance studios).
Separate park density and private recreation density variables
were calculated as the number of locations divided by the buffer’s
land area.

