 

 

 

 

 

THE  THREE  WORLDS  OF  GOVERN-
ANCE 

 

Arguments for a Parsimonious Theory of Quality of Government 

 

BO ROTHSTEIN 

 

 

 

 

 
WORKING PAPER SERIES 2013:12 
 
QOG THE QUALITY OF GOVERNMENT INSTITUTE 
Department of Political Science 
University of Gothenburg 
Box 711, SE 405 30 GÖTEBORG 
August 2013 
ISSN 1653-8919 
© 2013 by Bo Rothstein. All rights reserved. 
 

The Three Worlds of  Governance: Arguments for a Parsimonious Theory of Quality of Govern-
ment 
Bo Rothstein 
QoG Working Paper Series 2013:12 
August 2013 
ISSN 1653-8919 
 

 

ABSTRACT 

 
It is necessary to conceptualize and provide better measures of good governance because in con-
trast to democratization, empirical studies show that it has strong positive effects on measures of 
human well-being, social trust, life satisfaction, peace and political legitimacy. A central problem is 
that  the  term  “governance”  is  conceptualized  differently  in  three  main  approaches to  governance 
which  has  led  to  much  confusion. To  avoid  this, the  term  quality of government  (QoG)  is  preferred. 
This paper argues for a parsimonious conceptualization of QoG built the “Rawls-Machiavelli pro-
gramme”.  This  is  a  combination  of  the  Rawlsian  understanding  of  what  should  be  seen  as  a  just 
political order and the empirical strategy used by Machiavelli stating what is possible to implement. 
It is argued that complex definitions are impossible to operationalize and that such a strategy would 
leave  political  science  without  a  proper  conceptualization  as  well  as  measures  of  the  part  of  the 
state that is most important for humans’ well-being and political legitimacy.  The theory proposed is 
that impartiality in the exercise of public power should be the basic norm for how QoG should be 
defined. The advantage with this strategy is that it does not include in the definition of QoG what 
we want to explain (efficiency, prosperity, administrative capacity and other “good outcomes”) and 
that  recent  empirical research  shows that  this theory  can  be  operationalized  and  used  to  measure 
QoG in ways that have the predicted outcomes.    
 
 
 
 

Bo Rothstein 
The Quality of Government Institute 
Department of Political Science 
University of Gothenburg 
Bo.Rothstein@pol.gu.se 
 

 

 

 

 

 

2 

