The Definite Determiner and the Inalienable Constructions in French and in English
Author(s): Jean-Roger Vergnaud and Maria Luisa Zubizarreta
Source: Linguistic Inquiry, Vol. 23, No. 4 (Autumn, 1992), pp. 595-652
Published by: The MIT Press
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/4178791
Accessed: 09/12/2008 12:13

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.

Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=mitpress.

Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.

JSTOR is a not-for-profit organization founded in 1995 to build trusted digital archives for scholarship. We work with the
scholarly community to preserve their work and the materials they rely upon, and to build a common research platform that
promotes the discovery and use of these resources. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

The MIT Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Linguistic Inquiry.

http://www.jstor.org

Jean-Roger Vergnaud 
Maria Luisa Zubizarreta 

Iis 

The Definite Determiner and 
te  Ina ienable Constructions 
in French and in English 

In this article we examine some central aspects of the inalienable constructions in French 
and in English and argue that an adequate account of these constructions requires making 
a distinction between definite referential expressions that give rise to a type interpretation 
and those that give rise to a token interpretation. This constitutes our flrst basic hy- 
pothesis. The distinction between types and tokens is  defined at a level of  sentence 
grammar that we call L-Structure and that we identify with domain D in the sense of 
Chomsky (1981, 324). Given domain D, it is possible to define a notion of expletive with 
respect to that level: an expletive in that sense is a category that has no representation 
in domain D. We then use this notion of expletive to characterize the syntactic categories 
that are not opaque for a certain relation central to the account of inalienable structures. 
Our second basic hypothesis is that the relation between domain D so defined and syn- 
tactic structure is governed by a Correspondence Law: a token in domain D corresponds 
to a DP headed by a nonexpletive determiner, whereas a type corresponds either to a 
bare NP or to a DP headed by an expletive determiner. An important topic discussed 
in this article is the existence of systematic differences between French and English in 
the realm of inalienable constructions. We locate these differences in the status of the 
definite determiner: in French, but not in English, the definite determiner may function 
as an expletive from the point of view of domain D.  We offer independent evidence 
based on the behavior of generics in support of this hypothesis. Our analysis is developed 
within the general framework of Government-Binding Theory. To the extent that it is 
successful, it can then be viewed as a defense and illustration of the fundamental concepts 
and principles of that theory. 

[Editor's note: The authors' names are alphabetical, but this in no way reflects the primacy of authorship.] 
Preliminary versions of this article were presented at the syntax seminar at the University of Southern 
California (Fall 1989), at Cornell University (Fall 1989), at the Laax Workshop on Phrase Structure (June 1990), 
at Trondheim University (February 1991), at the Ier Coloquio de Gramatica Generativa at Miraflores/Madrid 
(March 1991), and at Universite de Geneve (May 1991). We thank all of the participants for their reactions 
and comments. Special thanks are due to J. Aoun, A. Belletti, R. Huybregts, the late 0.  Jaeggli, L. Johnsen, 
M. Prinzhorn, H. van Riemsdijk, L. Rizzi, A. Rouveret, B. Schein, T. Stowell, and A. Szabolsci, for useful 
discussions, as well as to G. Carlson for written comments on an earlier draft. Our gratitude to B. Schein and 
T. Stowell for discussion of some of the English data and to F. Dell, Y. Mathieu, and A. Rouveret for discussion 
of some of the French data. 

Linguistic  Inquiry, Volume  23,  Number 4,  Fall  1992 
595-652 
(D 1992 by The  Massachusetts  Institute  of Technology 

595 

