Trends in Food Science & Technology 22 (2011) 99e111

Consumers and new
food technologies

Fanny Rollin, Jean Kennedy and
Josephine Wills*
European Food Information Council (EUFIC),
Tassel House, Rue Paul-Emile Janson 6, 1000, Brussels,
Belgium (Tel.: D32 2 506 89 89; fax: D32 2 506 89 80;
e-mail: jo.wills@euﬁc.org)

This paper aims to describe the current landscape in Europe
within which emerging food technologies are developed and
applied, and to give insights from other parts of the world. Con-
sumers’ attitudes towards emerging food technologies are de-
scribed, with a focus on ﬁve case-studies; nanotechnology,
genetic modiﬁcation, nutrigenomics, food irradiation and animal
cloning. Stakeholders’ opinions speciﬁcally on nanotechnology
are also discussed taking into account a recent European consul-
tation. The factors that shape consumers’ views such as percep-
tions, knowledge and information, trust and socio-demographic
attributes that inﬂuence consumers’ views, are also included.

Introduction

The last two decades have seen considerable research
and development efforts dedicated to new food technolo-
gies. The “Flavr Savr” tomato (the ﬁrst genetically modi-
ﬁed (GM) food developed in 1994) and the birth of Dolly
the sheep (the ﬁrst mammal to be cloned from an adult so-
matic cell developed in 1996) are some of the well-known
examples that gave rise to much debate and controversy in
the media when they were ﬁrst developed. Nowadays, con-
sumers are exposed to several applications of emerging
technologies such as GM maize in Spain and irradiated
poultry meat in the Netherlands. However, even if a variety
of food ingredients and food contact materials derived from
new food technologies are already available in some Euro-
pean countries, the application is at an early stage and is
widely expected to grow.

One of the reasons for such interest in new food technol-
ogies is the anticipated range of beneﬁts they can bring to

* Corresponding author.
0924-2244/$ - see front matter Ó 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.tifs.2010.09.001

Review

the consumer and the food sector. The reported advantages
include safer, healthier more nutritious foods using less en-
ergy, water and chemicals and producing less waste. How-
ever,
likelihood of
exposure and risk to consumers from some new food tech-
nologies are largely unknown (Chaudhry et al., 2008).

the toxicological nature of hazard,

The ﬁrst part of this paper is concerned with consumers’
awareness and attitudes towards new food technologies in
general. Since consumers’ reactions to new food technolo-
gies are not a one-dimensional relationship, several aspects
of this relationship are also explored such as risk-beneﬁt
perceptions, knowledge and information, trust and socio-
demographic attributes. The second part will focus on
ﬁve case studies, namely nanotechnology, genetic modiﬁca-
tion, nutrigenomics, food irradiation and animal cloning.
There is a particular emphasis on nanotechnology, and
European stakeholders’ opinions from a recent open con-
sultation on nanotechnology are presented. This paper con-
cludes with a discussion about
the opportunity for
stakeholders and policy-makers to involve the public in
the new food technology debate and the potential for effec-
tive food risk/beneﬁt communication. This paper should be
considered as a general overview of the current research on
this topic and not as an exhaustive literature review.

Emerging food technologies

In Europe, the use of novel foods or novel food ingredi-
ents and their placing on the market within the Community
was ﬁrst deﬁned by the Regulation (EC) No 258/97. In this
legislation, novel foods or food ingredients are deﬁned as
foods or ingredients containing or produced from geneti-
cally modiﬁed organisms (GMOs); with a new or intention-
ally modiﬁed primary molecular structure; consisting of or
isolated from micro-organisms, fungi or algae, plants or an-
imals not obtained by traditional propagating or breeding
practices and having a history of safe food use; and foods
and food ingredients to which has been applied a production
process not currently used, where that process gives rise to
signiﬁcant changes in their composition or structure. A se-
ries of additional legislations completed the Regulation
(EC) No 258/97; among them Regulation (EC) No 1852/
2001 determines how certain information will be made ac-
cessible to the public. Since 2003, the authorisation and
marketing of GMOs or products derived from GMOs
doesn’t fall under the Regulation (EC) No 258/97 anymore,
but must be approved under Regulation EC No 1829/2003

100

F. Rollin et al. / Trends in Food Science & Technology 22 (2011) 99e111

concerning traceability and labelling. In January 2008, the
European Commission published a proposal (COM(2007)
872) for a new Regulation to harmonise rules on novel
foods and food ingredients (Aprea, 2009).

Consumers’ attitudes

to

be

tend

European

consumers

risk-adverse
(Eurobarometer, 2006a; Nelson, 2001). In 1988, consumers
were sensitised by the initial mismanagement of the BSE
crisis, where they were wrongly reassured that beef was
safe when it was not, and the subsequent mismanagement
of the Belgian dioxin crisis in the same year further focused
their attention food safety issues. It has been reported that
past episodes of food safety incidents such as these have
led to low public conﬁdence in food safety systems
(Curtis, McCluskey, & Wahl, 2004; Frewer & Salter,
2002; Verbeke, Viaene, & Guiot, 1999). However, since
1999, many measures have been taken to ensure food safety
across EU Member States. For example, the European Food
Safety Authority (EFSA) was set up in 2002 and an entire
new raft of legislation known as the “hygiene package” was
created to merge, harmonise and simplify the very detailed
and complex hygiene requirements which were previously
scattered over 17 EU Directives.

Despite efforts to ensure public conﬁdence in food
safety, some new technologies, regardless of their potential
beneﬁts, can have difﬁculty in diffusing successfully into
society (Ronteltap & van Trijp, 2007). In the past, several
new food technologies faced unsupportive attitudes when
they ﬁrst appeared, such as canned food, pasteurised
milk, artiﬁcial insemination of farm animals, microwave
cooking (IFT, 2000). A recent review commissioned by
the Food Standards Agency (FSA)
in the UK (Fell,
Wilkins, Kivinen, Austin, & Fernandez, 2009) conﬁrmed
that nowadays European consumers still tend to associate
more negative than positive attributes to agro-biotechnol-
ogy in general, such as wariness, unease and uncertainty.
However, there are minorities with strongly positive or neg-
ative opinions, and a majority who are undecided or feel
that they don’t know enough to form a view.

Given the intimate relationship people have with food, ed-
ucation about the technical and rational aspects of emerging
food technologies alone will not lead to consumer accep-
tance (Bruhn, 2008; Bruhn & Mason, 2002). Many factors
can inﬂuence consumers’ acceptance of food innovations.
Understanding consumers’ risk-beneﬁt perceptions, socio-
demographic attributes, knowledge and information, as
well as trust in the source of information will be crucial to
the realisation and success of technological advances.

Inﬂuencing factors
Risk-beneﬁt perceptions

Consumer acceptance is driven by risk perception rather
than the technical
risk estimates provided by experts
(Frewer, Howard, & Aaron, 1998) and food technologies
typically possess many of the risk characteristics that

engender greatest concern among consumers (Ronteltap,
van Trijp, Renes, & Frewer, 2007). Research demonstrated
that factors such as whether the risk is perceived to be in-
voluntary, unnatural or potentially catastrophic,
and
whether the risk may affect health rather than the environ-
ment, drive public risk perception (Gaskell, 2000; Siegrist,
Stampﬂi, Kastenholz, & Keller, 2008). Consumers also per-
ceive a hazard as riskier when they believe that the conse-
quences of the hazard are largely unknown to scientiﬁc
experts (e.g. Slovic, 1987), particularly when the public
perceives that the uncertainty is being ‘‘hidden’’ by regula-
tory institutions (van Kleef et al., 2006).

Acceptance of a technology is also partly driven by the
perception of the potential beneﬁts (Ronteltap et al., 2007).
A lack of perceived beneﬁts leads the majority of people to
question the need for, and usefulness of, novel food tech-
nologies, and may even accentuate perceived risks and
moral concerns (Gaskell, 2000).

Socio-demographic and economic factors

Women are more concerned, less positive, and likely to
perceive fewer beneﬁts of novel food technologies than
men (Eurobarometer, 2005; Fell et al., 2009). In general,
students and young people have positive perceptions to bio-
technologies (Eurobarometer, 2005).

According to two recent reviews, general attitudes may
also be one of the key drivers of attitudes towards novel
food technologies, which is pertinent in cases of uncer-
tainty and low understanding (Fell et al., 2009; Ronteltap
et al., 2007).

Moral and ethical worries can also affect the level of
acceptance of new technologies. In relation to biotechnol-
ogies,
they refer principally to technology “tampering
with nature”, making irreversible changes to nature and
‘playing god’ (Hallman & Condry, 2006). For one in three
EU citizens, moral and ethical issues should be prioritised
in
technologies
(Eurobarometer, 2005, 2006a). Europeans are likely to dis-
count risk, if they perceive the technology to be both useful
and morally acceptable.

decision-making

regarding

food

Price, good taste and convenience are suggested to be
key consumer beneﬁts in today’s marketplace (Bruhn,
2008; Fell et al., 2009). A British study highlighted that
a majority of UK consumers (74.5%) seems to be willing
to purchase GM foods if they are cheaper than traditional
foods (Spence & Townsend, 2006). A recent survey showed
that almost two-thirds of US consumers (67%) indicated
they would be likely to purchase a biotechnology modiﬁed
product with improved ﬂavour (Bruhn, 2008). Another
American study underlined that over 80% of consumers in-
dicate convenience is an important consideration in pur-
chases (Food Marketing Institute, 2005).

Knowledge

New technologies often encounter a stumbling block in
the consumers’ acceptance

consumer acceptance. Will

