Journal of Banking & Finance 30 (2006) 3331–3348

www.elsevier.com/locate/jbf

Decomposing the eﬀects of ﬁnancial
liberalization: Crises vs. growth q

Romain Ranciere a,*, Aaron Tornell b, Frank Westermann c

a International Monetary Fund Research Department, Washington, DC 20431, USA

b University of California, Los Angeles and National Bureau of Economic Research, USA

c Universita¨ t Osnabru¨ ck and CESifo, Germany

Available online 17 August 2006

Abstract

We present a new empirical decomposition of the eﬀects of ﬁnancial liberalization on economic
growth and on the incidence of crises. Our empirical estimates show that the direct eﬀect of ﬁnancial
liberalization on growth by far outweighs the indirect eﬀect via a higher propensity to crisis. We also
discuss several models of ﬁnancial liberalization and growth whose predictions are consistent with
our empirical ﬁndings.
Ó 2006 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

JEL classiﬁcation: F34; F36; F43; O41

Keywords: Financial crises; Growth; Financial liberalization; Treatment eﬀects models

1. Introduction

There are two contrasting views of ﬁnancial liberalization. In one view, ﬁnancial liber-
alization strengthens ﬁnancial development and contributes to higher long-run growth. In

q We thank Alessandra Bonﬁglioli, Randy Filer, Asaf Razin, Yonna Rubinstein, James Stock, Tijs Van Ren,
Paul Wachtel, Giorgio Szego and seminar participants at the Dubrovnik Economic Conference and the IMF for
helpful comments.

* Corresponding author.

E-mail address: rranciere@imf.org (R. Ranciere).

0378-4266/$ - see front matter Ó 2006 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jbankﬁn.2006.05.019

3332

R. Ranciere et al. / Journal of Banking & Finance 30 (2006) 3331–3348

another view, liberalization induces excessive risk-taking, increases macroeconomic vola-
tility and leads to more frequent crises.

In this paper we propose an empirical framework that brings these two views together.
We decompose the impact of international ﬁnancial liberalization on growth into two
eﬀects: a positive direct eﬀect and a negative indirect eﬀect through a higher propensity
to crisis. We ﬁnd that the direct growth gain of ﬁnancial liberalization signiﬁcantly out-
weighs the growth loss associated with more frequent ﬁnancial crises. On net, the eﬀect
of ﬁnancial liberalization on growth is economically sizeable: around 1% increase in
per-capita annual growth rate.

The eﬀect of ﬁnancial liberalization on growth and its impact on ﬁnancial fragility and
the propensity to crises have been largely studied in separate strands of the empirical lit-
erature. The ﬁnancial crisis literature tests whether ﬁnancial liberalization increase the risk
of ﬁnancial crises. Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999), Demirguc-Kunt and Detragiache
(1998), Glick and Hutchinson (2001) ﬁnd that the propensity to banking and currency cri-
ses increases in the aftermath of ﬁnancial liberalization. In contrast, the literature on lib-
eralization and growth focuses on identifying the eﬀects of liberalization on average long-
run growth. For instance, Bekaert et al. (2005) ﬁnd that stock market liberalization leads
to an increase of one percentage point in average GDP growth.1 Henry (2000) conﬁrms
this result at the ﬁrm level by showing that ﬁnancial liberalization leads to an investment
boom associated with a decline in the cost of capital.

The goal of this paper is not to perform another test of the eﬀect of ﬁnancial liberaliza-
tion on growth. Instead, its main contribution is to develop an integrated framework to
empirically quantify and contrast the dual eﬀects of ﬁnancial liberalization: on the one
hand, ﬁnancial liberalization tends to relax borrowing constraints, leading to higher
investment and higher average growth; on the other hand, it encourages risk-taking, gen-
erates ﬁnancial fragility and increases the probability of ﬁnancial crises, which often have
severe recessionary consequences.

The contrasting experiences of Thailand and India illustrate the dual eﬀects of ﬁnancial
liberalization. Thailand, a ﬁnancially liberalized economy, has experienced lending booms
and crises, while India, a non-liberalized economy, has followed a slow but safe growth
path (see Fig. 1). In India GDP per capita grew by only 99% between 1980 and 2001,
whereas Thailand’s GDP per capita grew by 148%, despite having experienced a major
crisis.

We believe that analyzing the eﬀects of ﬁnancial liberalization in a uniﬁed way is impor-
tant. The division of the empirical literature on ﬁnancial liberalization between the anal-
ysis of the crises and the growth eﬀects has several disadvantages. First, each strand
provides only a partial account on the eﬀect of ﬁnancial liberalization. The crisis view
stresses the severity of the output costs of ﬁnancial crises, but largely ignores its growth
beneﬁts during tranquil times. The growth view relies on the estimation of linear
growth eﬀects of ﬁnancial liberalization. This linear approach captures only the average
growth eﬀect across the booms and busts generated by ﬁnancial liberalization. The second
disadvantage is that each strand has produced its own set of policy implications. Research-

1 They also identify a similar growth eﬀect of capital account liberalization using a measure of the intensity of

capital account openness proposed by Quinn (1997).

