	  

	  

Vila	  Autódromo's	  Plan	  (Community	  
Development	  and	  Urbanization)	  
Community-­‐centered	  planning:	  Vila	  Autódromo's	  plan	  is	  the	  
result	  of	  the	  community's	  mobilization	  and	  organization,	  along	  
with	  the	  technical	  expertise	  and	  assistance	  from	  two	  federal	  
universities	  in	  Rio.	  	  There	  were	  several	  meetings	  to	  develop	  Vila	  
Autódromo's	  Plan,	  including	  3	  workshops,	  6	  community	  
assemblies	  with	  broad	  participation	  of	  residents,	  and	  several	  
meetings	  with	  smaller	  groups	  of	  residents.	  	  A	  Community	  Council	  
for	  the	  Vila	  Autódromo	  Plan	  was	  set	  up	  in	  January	  2012.	  

Cost	  of	  the	  land:	  Zero	  
Vila	  Autódromo	  residents	  already	  have	  legal	  tenure	  to	  the	  land	  -­‐a	  
Concession	  for	  the	  Right	  to	  Use	  for	  Housing-­‐	  which	  was	  issued	  to	  
them	  by	  the	  Rio	  State	  Government	  in	  the	  90s.	  

Estimated	  cost	  of	  urbanization	  (keeping	  the	  community	  where	  it	  
is	  and	  bringing	  basic	  improvements	  in	  sanitation,	  paving	  roads,	  
etc)	  +	  resettlement	  costs	  (for	  resident	  families	  that	  need	  to	  be	  
moved	  to	  more	  adequate	  areas	  within	  the	  community	  itself):	  
R$13.5million	  (roughly	  $6.7million	  USD)	  
In	  addition	  to	  the	  urbanization	  costs,	  this	  includes	  the	  
construction	  of	  82	  new	  units,	  environmental	  restoration	  along	  the	  
edges	  of	  the	  Jacarepaguá	  Lake,	  construction	  of	  community	  spaces	  
for	  sports	  and	  leisure.	  
Residents	  that	  are	  able	  to	  stay	  in	  their	  homes:	  368	  
Families	  that	  will	  be	  resettled	  in	  the	  community	  itself:	  82	  
Number	  of	  new	  housing	  units:	  82	  
Average	  size:	  76	  square	  meters	  	  
Units	  range	  from	  58m2	  to	  95m2,	  with	  1-­‐3	  bedrooms	  and	  specific	  
layouts	  according	  to	  the	  characteristics	  of	  each	  family.	  	  The	  58m2	  
units	  are	  single-­‐family	  homes,	  and	  can	  be	  expanded	  to	  72m2	  and	  
93m2.	  	  The	  smallest	  unit	  is	  a	  1-­‐bedroom	  apartment	  that	  measures	  
66m2.	  
Total	  area	  to	  be	  restructured	  for	  new	  housing	  units:	  5,710m2	  
Infrastructure	  for	  community	  and	  social	  well-­‐being,	  including	  
recreational	  areas,	  childcare	  center,	  community	  plazas,	  
communal	  barbeque	  area,	  parks,	  center	  for	  senior	  citizens,	  nature	  
trails,	  soccer	  field.	  
Environmental	  Restoration:	  
Foresees	  the	  environmental	  restoration	  of	  23,0000m2	  along	  the	  
community's	  Lake	  and	  Stream.	  
Adheres	  to	  resolution	  369/2006	  from	  CONAMA	  (National	  
Environmental	  Regulators),	  that	  establishes	  parameters	  for	  
sustainable	  land	  regularization	  in	  urban	  areas	  in	  cases	  of	  social	  
interest	  housing	  and	  Permanent	  Preservation	  Areas	  (as	  defined	  
by	  the	  Brazilian	  Forest	  Code)	  

Rio	  Government's	  Plan	  (Eviction	  and	  
Resettlement)	  
Lack	  of	  information,	  consultation	  and	  due	  process:	  The	  first	  news	  of	  
eviction	  reached	  the	  community	  through	  media	  reports,	  without	  any	  
prior	  contact	  from	  local	  authorities	  or	  official	  information	  from	  the	  
mayor's	  office	  to	  affected	  residents.	  	  In	  later	  meetings	  with	  
residents,	  local	  officials	  continuously	  asserted	  that	  the	  eviction	  of	  
the	  community	  was	  certain,	  and	  that	  there	  was	  no	  chance	  for	  
dialogue	  or	  for	  the	  presentation	  of	  alternative	  solutions.	  	  The	  
government's	  resettlement	  proposal	  was	  first	  presented	  to	  the	  
community	  months	  later,	  and	  was	  challenged	  by	  most	  residents	  who	  
attended	  (video	  here).	  	  There	  was	  no	  public	  hearing	  on	  the	  project	  
being	  proposed	  for	  the	  resettlement	  of	  the	  families.	  
Cost	  of	  the	  land:	  R$19.9million	  (roughly	  $9.8million	  USD)	  
The	  government's	  plan	  foresees	  the	  construction	  of	  920	  housing	  
units	  on	  new	  land;	  only	  part	  of	  that	  would	  be	  made	  available	  to	  the	  
450	  Vila	  Autódromo	  families,	  the	  other	  units	  would	  be	  destined	  to	  
families	  from	  other	  evicted	  communities.	  	  The	  amount	  
corresponding	  only	  to	  the	  Vila	  Autódromo	  portion	  is	  R$	  
9.733.695,60	  (roughly	  $4.8millionUSD).	  
The	  land,	  which	  is	  being	  acquired	  by	  the	  municipal	  government,	  
belongs	  to	  two	  companies	  that	  donated	  to	  Rio	  Mayor	  Eduardo	  Paes'	  
campaign	  with	  contributions	  of	  at	  least	  R$245,000	  ($121,000USD).	  	  
These	  companies	  would	  also	  benefit	  from	  the	  eviction	  of	  the	  
community	  because	  of	  new	  real	  estate	  development	  projects	  in	  the	  
surrounding	  areas.*	  
Estimated	  costs	  of	  the	  construction	  of	  new	  housing	  units	  for	  
resettlement	  on	  new	  land:	  R$28.4million	  (roughly	  $14million	  USD)	  
Used	  the	  reference	  cost	  of	  R$63,000	  per	  each	  of	  the	  450	  housing	  
units	  (roughly	  $31,000USD/each),	  which	  is	  the	  current	  limit	  for	  the	  
public	  housing	  program	  "Minha	  Casa,	  Minha	  Vida"	  (My	  House,	  My	  
Life).	  	  This	  does	  not	  take	  into	  account	  the	  high	  price	  of	  the	  land	  
being	  acquired	  by	  the	  local	  government.	  

Residents	  that	  are	  able	  to	  stay	  in	  their	  homes:	  0	  
Families	  that	  will	  be	  resettled	  on	  new	  land:	  450	  
Number	  of	  new	  housing	  units:	  920	  
Average	  size:	  49	  square	  meters	  	  
50	  apartment	  5-­‐story	  apartment	  blocks	  with	  720	  2-­‐bedroom	  
apartments	  and	  200	  3-­‐bedroom	  apartments.	  	  (It	  is	  not	  possible	  to	  
identify	  which	  units	  would	  be	  destined	  to	  Vila	  Autódromo	  residents).	  	  

Social	  infrastructure	  and	  recreational	  areas	  like	  sports	  area,	  school,	  
nature	  trials.	  	  

Environmental	  Vulnerability:	  
The	  land	  being	  acquired	  used	  to	  serve	  as	  a	  site	  for	  mining	  and	  most	  
of	  the	  area	  is	  qualified	  as	  presenting	  high	  or	  medium	  risk	  according	  
to	  the	  Map	  of	  Susceptibility	  for	  Landslides,	  created	  by	  GeoRio	  (Rio's	  
Geotechnical	  Institute).	  
The	  construction	  of	  new	  units,	  proposed	  by	  the	  government's	  
resettlement	  plan,	  does	  not	  take	  these	  environmental	  vulnerabilities	  
into	  account	  and	  was	  not	  presented	  for	  proper	  environmental	  
licensing	  and	  assessment.	  

*Source:	  Brazilian	  Newspaper	  O	  Estado	  de	  S.Paulo,	  6	  October	  2011:	  "Rio	  paga	  R$19,9mi	  por	  área	  de	  doador	  de	  Paes"	  (Rio	  pays	  R$19.9million	  for	  land	  from	  Paes	  donor)	  

