REVIEW ARTICLE
published: 11 February 2014
doi: 10.3389/ﬁmmu.2014.00049

CTCF and ncRNA regulate the three-dimensional structure
of antigen receptor loci to facilitate V(D)J recombination

Nancy M. Choi and Ann J. Feeney *

Department of Immunology and Microbial Science, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA, USA

Edited by:
Ananda L. Roy, Tufts University School
of Medicine, USA

Reviewed by:
Amy L. Kenter, University of Illinois
College of Medicine, USA
Kay L. Medina, Mayo Clinic, USA

*Correspondence:
Ann J. Feeney , Department of
Immunology and Microbial Science,
The Scripps Research Institute, 10550
North Torrey Pines Road, IMM-22, La
Jolla, CA 92037, USA
e-mail: feeney@scripps.edu

At both the immunoglobulin heavy and kappa light chain loci, there are >100 functional
variable (V) genes spread over >2 Mb that must move into close proximity in 3D space
to the (D)J genes to create a diverse repertoire of antibodies. Similar events take place at
the T cell receptor (TCR) loci to create a wide repertoire of TCRs. In this review, we will
discuss the role of CTCF in forming rosette-like structures at the antigen receptor (AgR)
loci, and the varied roles it plays in alternately facilitating and repressing V(D)J rearrange-
ments. In addition, non-coding RNAs, also known as germline transcription, can shape
the 3D conﬁguration of the Igh locus, and presumably that of the other AgR loci. At the
Igh locus, this could occur by gathering the regions being transcribed in the VH locus into
the same transcription factory where Iµ is being transcribed. Since the Iµ promoter, Eµ,
is adjacent to the DJH rearrangement to which one V gene will ultimately rearrange, the
process of germline transcription itself, prominent in the distal half of the VH locus, may
play an important and direct role in locus compaction. Finally, we will discuss the impact
of the transcriptional and epigenetic landscape of the Igh locus on VH gene rearrangement
frequencies.

Keywords: V(D)J recombination, antigen receptor, chromatin, non-coding RNA, CTCF, histone modiﬁcation,
chromatin loop

INTRODUCTION
Antigen receptor (AgR) loci are facing a uniquely difﬁcult task to
produce a great diversity of receptors in order to recognize the
limitless possibility of antigens present in the environment of an
organism. With the advent of next generation sequencing, we can
now determine the actual diversity of AgRs by sequencing all of
the rearrangements from developing B and T cells. This diversity
is created through the combinatorial recombination of multiple
variable (V), diversity (D), and joining (J) gene segments at AgR
loci by the RAG1/2 recombinase complex, along with the extensive
junctional diversity at the V–D, D–J, and V–J junctions.

One of the most extensively studied AgR loci is the mouse Igh
locus where the VH, DH, and JH gene segments span a region of
~2.8 Mb (Figure 1). The 8–13 DH genes, the four JH genes, and
all of the constant region genes and enhancers are located within
a relatively small 300 kb region. In contrast, the 195 VH genes, of
which ~100 were deemed to be functional, are spread out over
~2.5 Mb. To create the greatest combinatorial diversity, all V genes
would have to be able to access the DH and JH genes relatively
equally regardless of their genomic distance. The question is then,
how is this equality achieved?

With growing appreciation for how three-dimensional struc-
tural changes at the locus may bring V genes into proximity of the
(D)J rearrangement to which one V gene will ultimately rearrange,
current studies are employing cutting edge technologies to fur-
ther understand this process. Chromatin conformation capture
(3C) and its more recent modiﬁcations, 4C, 5C, and Hi-C (1–3),
have allowed the identiﬁcation of long-range chromosomal inter-
actions, which facilitate the rearrangement of distant V genes by

making critical connections between the V genes and enhancers
downstream (4). Next generation sequencing technologies cou-
pled with chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) (ChIP-seq)
have allowed us to determine the binding sites of transcription
factors throughout the genome as well as the genome-wide epi-
genetic landscape. Deep sequencing of RNA reveals the entire
transcriptional proﬁle of cells for both coding and non-coding
RNA (ncRNA). Together, these techniques supply us with a bounty
of information regarding the transcriptional and epigenetic proﬁle
of AgR loci at varying stages of differentiation. In this review, we
will summarize and discuss how these recent studies have advanced
our understanding of how long-range chromatin interactions and
epigenetic changes may regulate V(D)J recombination at mouse
AgR loci.

AgR LOCI UNDERGO LARGE SCALE THREE-DIMENSIONAL
CONFORMATIONAL CHANGES DURING V(D)J
REARRANGEMENT
All B cell and T cell receptor (BCR, TCR) subunits are formed
through the process of V(D)J recombination. The BCR consists of
two immunoglobulin heavy chains (Igh) and two identical light
chains encoded by either the kappa (Igκ) or lambda (Igλ) loci. The
TCR alpha (Tcrα) and beta (Tcrβ), or delta (Tcrδ) and gamma
(Tcrγ) chains constitute the TCR complex of the two major T cell
subsets. The Igh and Igκ are of similarly large sizes of approxi-
mately 2.8 and 3.2 Mb, while the Tcrα/δ and Tcrβ loci are smaller
at 1.7 and 0.66 Mb. In comparison, the Igλ and Tcrγ loci are much
smaller, each only being about 200 kb. The challenge, which is
particularly great for the large receptor loci, is to give all V genes

www.frontiersin.org

February 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 49 | 1

Choi and Feeney

3D structure of AgR loci

FIGURE 1 | CTCF binds at regulatory elements within AgR loci. CTCF
binding sites at all regions except for the V gene segment part of the loci for
the three larger AgR loci; Igh, Igκ, and Tcrα/δ. Pink ovals represent the non-V
region CTCF sites. The V gene portions of these three AgR loci have

numerous CTCF sites scattered throughout the loci, hence too many to be
represented. The two most prominent promoters of non-coding RNA
transcribing regions of the Igh locus, PAIR4 and PAIR6, are also depicted as
blue rectangles within the distal J558/3609 region.

a chance to undergo rearrangement in order to create a diverse
repertoire. How an AgR locus brings the V genes into proximity
to the (D)J genes to create this diversity is still an unanswered
question.

The original observations that showed three-dimensional
structural changes at the Igh locus, presumably facilitating the
creation of a diverse AgR repertoire, came from ﬂuorescent in situ
hybridization (FISH) studies (5). It was found that the Igh and Igκ
loci were predominantly located at the periphery of the nucleus in
non-recombining cell types, but were found in more centralized
locations in B cells. The nuclear periphery is generally considered a
transcriptionally silent environment and is associated with repres-
sive chromatin modiﬁcations, whereas gene dense active regions
of the genome are more centrally located (6). Using two colors
of probes at proximal and distal ends of the VH locus, it was also
shown for the ﬁrst time that the Igh locus was in a more compacted
conformation in recombining B cells. Subsequently, lineage- and
developmental stage-speciﬁc locus contraction was observed for
all of the large AgR loci: Igκ, Tcrα/δ, and Tcrβ (7–10). This process
of locus contraction is reversible, as demonstrated by the extension
of the Igh locus in pre-B cells, when Igh rearrangement is complete
(7). Contraction and re-extension of the distal end of the Tcrα/δ
locus was also observed in double positive (DP) T cells (8). At this
locus, contraction is necessary in double negative (DN) T cells for
the accessibility of V genes used in TCRδ rearrangements, but in
DP thymocytes, rearrangement of the more J-proximal Vα genes
occurs before the rearrangement of distal Vα genes, so extension
of the distal Vα genes would facilitate the ordered rearrangement
of TCR Vα genes.

Greater insight to how such large-scale locus contraction may
occur came from a 3D-FISH study by Jhunjhunwala et al. that used
multiple 10 kb probes spanning the entire Igh locus followed by 3D
computational reconstruction of the location of all the probe bind-
ing sites (11). The results showed that the locus could be divided

into three ~1 Mb compartments in pre–pro-B cells in which mul-
tiple chromatin loops formed rosette-like structures (Figure 2).
These compartments then collapsed into a single globule as cells
developed into pro-B cells. This brought the distal VH region into
closer proximity within 3D space to the DJH genes and regulatory
elements, and in fact the distal VH genes were found to be a similar
distance away from the DJH region as the proximal VH genes (11).
It has been demonstrated that locus contraction of the Igh locus
is regulated, directly or indirectly, by several key transcription fac-
tors. Mice deﬁcient in YY1, Pax5, or the histone methyltransferase
Ezh2 were impaired in locus contraction and in the rearrange-
ment of distal VH genes (12–15). Ikaros has also been implicated
in Igh locus contraction (16), but Rag1/2 is not required for this
process (5). Together, these studies suggest that contraction is a
pre-requisite state for efﬁcient recombination of distal VH genes.
Nonetheless, while AgR locus contraction is well established as a
shared process among the large AgR loci that brings distal regions
into closer 3D proximity to J genes prior to recombination, it has
not been ﬁrmly determined what factors may be executing this
task in the different lineages.

CTCF AND COHESIN BIND EXTENSIVELY WITHIN AgR LOCI
CTCF is an 11 zinc-ﬁnger protein that is the only known insula-
tor binding protein in vertebrates (17, 18). Insulators are genetic
regions that prevent heterochromatin on one side of the insulator
from spreading into the other side. They can also prevent against
positional effect variegation, or varied expression of transgenes,
depending upon the site of integration in relation to where the
insulator is located. Some insulators also have enhancer-blocking
activity, where an enhancer cannot activate a promoter when sep-
arated by an insulator. It is now known that insulators function
through CTCF that creates long-range chromatin interactions by
binding to other CTCF bound sites (19). In this way, a domain
is created by these chromatin loops, and activity or inactivity of

Frontiers in Immunology | B Cell Biology

February 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 49 | 2

