PLoS BIOLOGY

A Model of the Ventral Visual System Based
on Temporal Stability and Local Memory

Reto Wyss1,3, Peter Ko¨ nig1,2*, Paul F. M. J. Verschure1,4
1 Institute of Neuroinformatics, University/ETH Zu¨ rich, Zu¨ rich, Switzerland, 2 Institute of Cognitive Science, University Osnabru¨ ck, Neurobiopsychologie, Osnabru¨ ck,
Germany, 3 Computation and Neural Systems, California Institute of Technology, Division of Biology, Pasadena, California, United States of America, 4 ICREA and Technology
Department, University Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain

The cerebral cortex is a remarkably homogeneous structure suggesting a rather generic computational machinery.
Indeed, under a variety of conditions, functions attributed to specialized areas can be supported by other regions.
However, a host of studies have laid out an ever more detailed map of functional cortical areas. This leaves us with the
puzzle of whether different cortical areas are intrinsically specialized, or whether they differ mostly by their position in
the processing hierarchy and their inputs but apply the same computational principles. Here we show that the
computational principle of optimal stability of sensory representations combined with local memory gives rise to a
hierarchy of processing stages resembling the ventral visual pathway when it is exposed to continuous natural stimuli.
Early processing stages show receptive fields similar to those observed in the primary visual cortex. Subsequent stages
are selective for increasingly complex configurations of local features, as observed in higher visual areas. The last stage
of the model displays place fields as observed in entorhinal cortex and hippocampus. The results suggest that
functionally heterogeneous cortical areas can be generated by only a few computational principles and highlight the
importance of the variability of the input signals in forming functional specialization.

Citation: Wyss R, Ko¨ nig P, Verschure PFMJ (2006) A model of the ventral visual system based on temporal stability and local memory. PLoS Biol 4(5): e120. DOI: 10.1371/
journal.pbio.0040120

Introduction

The processing of visual information is a fundamental
computational task for the brain involving various cortical
and subcortical regions. Starting at the retina and thalamus,
visual information passes through a series of hierarchically
organized cortical regions eventually reaching higher cogni-
tive structures such as the hippocampus [1]. Experimental
studies have shown that the different levels of the ventral
visual hierarchy form increasingly complex and speciﬁc
representations of the visual input such as three-dimensional
objects and faces in the inferotemporal cortex (IT) [2–5] and
an allocentric representation of space in entorhinal cortex [6]
and hippocampus [7]. This process is accompanied by an
increasing degree of invariance to various stimulus properties
[8]. Thus, the ventral visual stream presents itself as a
hierarchical system with widely varying properties at differ-
ent processing levels.

In recent years, different models of the ventral visual
system have been proposed that aim to account for these
properties [9–13]. Although most of these theoretical studies
emphasize the important role of learning for the adaptation
of a visual system, it is often limited to certain stages of
processing only or performed on artiﬁcial stimuli, both with
respect to their temporal and spatial properties. Further-
more, none of these models considers levels of the visual
hierarchy as high as the entorhinal cortex or hippocampus. In
a complementary line of research, theoretical studies have
shown that prominent computational properties of the
primary visual cortex can be described by means of so-called
objective functions. Important examples are optimally sparse
representations resembling simple cells [14–16] and optimally
stable representations giving rise to complex cells [11,17–19].
It remains unresolved, however, whether objective functions

can describe general principles underlying cortical organ-
ization. Here we show that the objective of optimal stability of
sensory representations combined with local memory can
generate a hierarchy of cortical-like processing stages
resembling the ventral visual pathway. This model visual
hierarchy is generated on the basis of visual stimuli
encountered by a mobile robot exploring a complex real-
world environment. We show that the receptive ﬁelds at the
lowest level of the hierarchy share properties with those
observed in the primary visual cortex, that higher levels are
selective for complex conﬁgurations, as observed in the IT,
and that the last stage of the model ventral visual system
displays place ﬁelds as observed in entorhinal cortex and
hippocampus [7]. These results suggest that a substantial part
of the visual system can be understood based on a small
number of principles.

Results

We investigate the adaptation and specialization of areas in
a hierarchically organized visual processing stream using both
a real-world robot, as well as a simulated virtual approx-
imation (see Materials and Methods). The agents are

Academic Editor: Larry Abbott, Columbia University, United States of America

Received April 13, 2005; Accepted February 14, 2006; Published April 18, 2006

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0040120

Copyright: Ó 2006 Wyss et al. This is an open-access article distributed under the
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted
use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author
and source are credited.

Abbreviations: IT, inferotemporal cortex; RF, receptive field

* To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: pkoenig@uos.de

PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org

0001

May 2006 | Volume 4 | Issue 5 | e120

embedded in a complex environment, and a camera mounted
on the robot provides continuous input to the neural
network (Figure 1A). The model of the visual system consists
of ﬁve areas each comprising units with both intra-area and
feed-forward inter-area connections (Figure 1B). The con-
vergence of the feed-forward connectivity increases while
moving up the hierarchy, similar to that observed in the
visual pathway [1]. These feed-forward connections are
subject to online unsupervised learning optimizing a tempo-
ral stability objective while the intra-area connections serve
the decorrelation of the states of one area. In addition, all
units are leaky integrators providing them with a local
transient memory trace. The data analysis focuses on the
learning and network dynamics and a comparison of the
response properties of neurons at different levels of the
hierarchy with their respective counterparts in the real brain.

A Model of the Ventral Visual System

Exposing the network to the visual input provided by the
mobile robot, we observe that after approximately 6 106 time
steps (66 h of real-time, with a frame rate of 25 Hz) the
stability of all levels has converged (Figure 2). In addition, the
model shows that the reorganization of the levels, in terms of
their stability, follows the hierarchical order of the system,
i.e., higher levels enhance their stability only after their
afferent
levels have reached a certain level of stable
representations. After convergence, units at different pro-
cessing levels show characteristic differences in their
response properties. In particular, cells at the ﬁrst level show
orientation selectivity conﬁrming previous results [19,20]
(unpublished data). In the following, we analyze the response
properties of the cells at different levels with respect to the
orientation and position of the robot within the environment
(Figure 3A). Both the view dependence and the size of the
region where activity can be elicited varies signiﬁcantly with
respect to the hierarchical level (one-way ANOVA, F(4,491) ¼
30.6, 128.3, respectively, p  .001). The view dependence of
the units increases from the ﬁrst to the third level on average
by 16% and subsequently decreases and reaches its minimum
at the last level, 32% below the ﬁrst level (Figure 3B). In
contrast, the size of the regions in which individual units are
activated decreases monotonically (Figure 3C). On average,
units at the ﬁrst level are responsive within 52% of the
environment. In contrast, units at the highest level only cover
24% of the environment. In order to control
for an
increasing fragmentation of the representations, we also
measure the compactness of the responsive region, which
does not change signiﬁcantly across the hierarchical levels
(Figure 3D, F(4,491)¼ 1.28, p . 0.2). In summary, these results
show that our model captures pertinent properties of the
ventral visual stream. The response properties of units at
early stages are selective to low-level features. Such features
are visible from many different positions within the environ-
ment and the responsive regions tend to be large and
selective for the orientation of the robot. At intermediate
stages, each unit responds speciﬁcally to a particular view
from a region of limited size, similar to landmarks, leading to
a high orientation selectivity. Higher levels learn to associate
neighboring ‘‘landmark’’ views, rendering small, compact

Figure 1. The Micro-Robot Khepera and the Neural Network Structure
Used for Sensory Processing
(A) A camera mounted on top of the cylindrical body provides the visual
input that is processed by our model of the ventral visual system. The
infra-red (IR) sensors are used for obstacle avoidance during exploration
of a real-world office environment within an arena of approximately 31 3
22 cm2.
(B) Diagram showing the hierarchical network comprising five levels of
identical computational units. Units are arranged uniformly within a two-
dimensional square lattice, and their number per level decreases with a
constant factor of 0.5 moving up the hierarchy. Each efferent unit
receives input from a topographically aligned square region within the
afferent level (red connectivity) and connects laterally to all the units in
the same level with which it shares feed-forward input
(blue
connectivity). The average relative size of a unit’s feed-forward arbor
within the afferent level (as given in percentages), and consequently also
the lateral degree of connectivity, increases with the hierarchical level
and reaches 100% for the units at the highest level. The input to the
network has a resolution of 16 3 16 pixels.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0040120.g001

Figure 2. The Stability Objective as a Function of Time for the Five
Different Cortical Levels
After an initial phase, within which the transients due to initial conditions
have decayed, learning is initiated after 10,000 time steps.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0040120.g002

PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org

0002

May 2006 | Volume 4 | Issue 5 | e120

