Decision Biases, Cogniti!e Psychology of

Random Utility Models of Choice and Response
Time; Decision Making (Naturalistic), Psychology of;
Decision Making: Nonrational Theories; Decision
Making, Psychology of; Decision Research: Behavi-
oral; Decision Theory: Classical; Group Decision
Making, Cognitive Psychology of; Heuristics for
Decision and Choice; Luce’s Choice Axiom; Risk:
Empirical Studies on Decision and Choice; Utility and
Subjective Probability: Contemporary Theories; Util-
ity and Subjective Probability: Empirical Studies

Bibliography

Arkes H R, Blumer C 1985 The psychology of sunk cost.
Organizational Beha!ior and Human Performance 35: 129–40
Bell D E 1982 Regret in decision making under uncertainty.

Operations Research 30: 961–81

Benartzi S, Thaler R 1995 Myopic loss aversion and the equity
premium puzzle. Quarterly Journal of Economics 110(1): 73–92
Camerer C F 1995 Individual decision making. In: Kagel J H,
Roth A E (eds.) Handbook of Experimental Economics.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, pp. 587–703

Camerer C, Babcock L, Loewenstein G, Thaler R 1997 Labor
supply of New York City cab drivers. One day at a time.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(2): 407–42

Hsee C K 1996 The evaluability hypothesis: An explanation of
preference reversals between joint and separate evaluations of
alternatives. Organizational Beha!ior and Human Decision
Processes 67: 247–57

Johnson E J, Hershey J, Meszaros J, Kunreuther H 1993
Framing, probability distortions, and insurance decisions.
Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 7: 35–51

Kachelmeier S J, Shehata M 1992 Examining risk preferences
under high monetary incentives: Experimental evidence from
the People’s Republic of China. American Economic Re!iew
82: 1120–41

Kahneman D 1994 New challenges to the rationality assump-
tion. Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics 150(1):
18–36

Kahneman D, Knetsch J L, Thaler R 1990 Experimental tests of
the endowment eﬀect and the Coase theorem. Journal of
Political Economy 98(6): 1325–48

Kahneman D, Ritov I 1994 Determinants of stated willingness
to pay for public goods: A study in the headline method.
Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 9: 5–38

Kahneman D, Tversky A 1979 Prospect theory: An analysis of

decision under risk. Econometrica 47: 263–91

Knetsch J L 1989 The endowment eﬀect and evidence of
nonreversible indiﬀerence curves. American Economic Re!iew
79: 1277–84

Lichtenstein S, Slovic P 1973 Response-induced reversals of
preference in gambling: An extended replication in Las Vegas.
Journal of Experimental Psychology 101: 16–20

Loewenstein G, Elster J (eds.) 1992 Choice O!er Time. Russell

Sage Foundation, New York

McNeil B J, Pauker S G, Sox H C, Tversky A 1982 On the
elicitation of preferences for alternative therapies. New Eng-
land Journal of Medicine 306: 1259–62

Redelmeier D, Shaﬁr E 1995 Medical decision making in
situations that oﬀer multiple alternatives. Journal of the
American Medical Association 273(4): 302–5

3300

Samuelson W, Zeckhauser R 1988 Status quo bias in decision

making. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 1: 7–59

Shaﬁr E 1993 Choosing versus rejecting: Why some options are
both better and worse than others. Memory and Cognition
21(4): 546–56

Shaﬁr E, Simonson I, Tversky A 1993 Reason-based choice.

Cognition 49(2): 11–36

Slovic P, Lichtenstein S 1983 Preference reversals: A broader

perspective. American Economic Re!iew 73: 596–605

Tetlock P E 1992 The impact of accountability on judgment and
choice: Toward a social contingency model. Ad!ances in
Experimental Social Psychology 25: 331–76

Tversky A, Kahneman D 1986 Rational choice and the framing

of decisions. Journal of Business 59(4): 251–78

Tversky A, Kahneman D 1991 Loss aversion in riskless choice:
A reference dependent model. Quarterly Journal of Economics
106: 1039–61

Tversky A, Sattath S, Slovic P 1988 Contingent weighting in

judgment and choice. Psychological Re!iew 95(3): 371–84

Tversky A, Shaﬁr E 1992 Choice under conﬂict: The dynamics of

deferred decision. Psychological Science 3(6): 358–61

von Neumann J, Morgenstern O 1947 Theory of Games and
Economic Beha!ior, 2nd edn. Princeton University Press,
Princeton, NJ

E. Shaﬁr

Decision Making (Naturalistic),
Psychology of

Naturalistic decision-making (NDM) is the process by
which people use their experience to make decisions in
complex real-world environments. Many of these
environments involve high levels of risk and time
pressure, are dynamically changing, and have signiﬁ-
cant consequences for both the decision maker and
others. They include domains such as ﬁreﬁghting,
aviation, medicine, and nuclear power operations.
Knowledge gained from experience on the part of the
decision maker plays a key role in the decision process,
because that knowledge is the basis for recognizing
in
situations that require decisions to be made,
determining what
to the
decision, and in deciding what would be an appro-
priate course of action.

information is relevant

Naturalistic decision-making is a new ﬁeld. The ﬁrst
studies were conducted in 1985 by Klein (1998), who
examined decision-making by urban ﬁreﬁghters. This
work was part of a new program initiated by the Army
Research Institute because of the Army’s dissatis-
faction with decision aids that had been developed on
the basis of traditional decision theories. The domi-
nant decision theories at that point grew out of
economic models and emphasized rational choice to
select the optimal decision option. Decision aids based
on these models were laborious, requiring military

commanders to make judgments of probability and
value associated with a set of options. This process was
incompatible with the thought processes typically used
by experienced commanders and so was rejected. The
Army decided that there must be a better way.

The ‘better way’ was to examine what experts do
naturally when they make eﬀective decisions under
challenging conditions and to determine the basis for
the quality of their decisions. Traditional research has
sought to determine why human decision makers
typically fall short of optimality and fail to use fully
rational strategies. In contrast, NDM researchers
recognized that experts in many ﬁelds, such as nurses,
pilots, and military commanders, usually make deci-
sions that achieve their goals, even if they are not
optimal from a traditional perspective. The focus of
NDM research is on understanding how experts make
good decisions under diﬃcult conditions, an under-
standing that can then serve as the basis for training
and aiding novices.

1. How is Naturalistic Decision-making Research
Conducted?

Because of the NDM investigators’ interest in experts’
performance in real settings, the nature of the research
settings and methods typically diﬀer from those used
in traditional decision research.

1.1 Research Settings

Harking back to its origins in military concerns, NDM
research has been conducted in environments that
share some common features that are quite distinct
from the laboratory environment. They include:

1.1.1 Ambiguous cues. The need to make a decision
is prompted by cues that signal that a problem exists,
such as a ﬁre, a malfunction in an aircraft system, or
a deterioration of a patient’s medical condition.
These cues are sometimes ambiguous or subtle, or con-
ﬂict with other cues, suggesting opposing courses of
action. Thus, the nature of the problem may be diﬃ-
cult to determine, and expertise is needed to ‘read’
the cues and ‘size up’ the situation.

1.1.2 Dynamic conditions. Conditions faced by de-
cision makers in natural environments often change
over time, and the human operator must update his
or her understanding of the situation in order to re-
spond appropriately. As conditions shift, goals also
may shift, sometimes from maintaining the status

Decision Making (Naturalistic), Psychology of

quo to coping with an emergency. For example,
when an urban ﬁre commander arrives at a ﬁre, his
initial goal may be to extinguish the ﬁre. However,
when it appears that the roof is about to collapse, his
goal shifts to evacuating all the ﬁreﬁghters.

1.1.3 High risk. In most domains of concern to
NDM researchers, the consequences of making a
poor decision involve high costs, including possible
loss of life or property. If an emergency room doctor
misdiagnoses the presenting symptoms of an uncon-
scious patient, the patient may die. Pilots’ misjudg-
ments about the severity of weather in the vicinity of
their destination airport can result in a crash. Fire-
ﬁghters’ failure to assess correctly the source and na-
ture of a ﬁre can result in application of the wrong
ﬁre suppressor, exacerbating rather than quelling a
ﬁre.

1.1.4 Time pressure. Many decisions in NDM set-
tings must be made quickly before a negative conse-
quence occurs. Fires rage, patient conditions deterio-
rate, enemy aircraft or missiles approach swiftly.
From the initial appearance of cues that signal a prob-
lem to the onset of serious consequences may be a
matter of minutes. Often there is no time to conduct
a full rational analysis of all possible response op-
tions, their probabilities, and their outcomes, which
can take
time and computational
power.

considerable

1.1.5 Team and organizational contexts. Teams,
rather than solo decision makers, are frequently the
rule in NDM settings. While a single individual may
have primary responsibility for the decision, other
players provide critical information, alternative per-
spectives, and critiques of
the decision. Teams
usually function within an organizational context
that establishes goals, norms, and procedures for oper-
ations, sets constraints on what is possible, and deter-
mines what counts as a good decision.

Because NDM researchers are concerned with real-
world settings that embody many of
the above
features, the methods they use also diﬀer considerably
from those employed by traditional decision research-
ers working in the lab.

1.2 Methods

Naturalistic decision-making research tends to be
conducted in the ﬁeld rather than in the laboratory.
Thus, the predominant methods involve observations

3301

