606

the journal of philosophy

EXPLANATORY GAMES*

A philosophical theory of explanation must solve many prob-

lems. It must provide a descriptive account of the explana-
tory activity of scientists in the different domains of science.
It must show how this activity differs from the provision of common-
sensical explanations permanently offered in everyday life by ordinary
people and how the explanatory practices evolve over time in dif-
ferent social arenas. It must also account for the fact that explana-
tory activities very often, if not always, take place under conditions
of a cognitive division of labor in which different participants in
the explanatory enterprise undertake different tasks and assume
different roles. In a nutshell, a philosophical theory of explanation
must be able to provide an adequate descriptive account of the dif-
ferent facets of the explanatory activity, a task which is much harder
than it prima facie appears.

Such a theory must also provide standards for judging the quality of
the outcomes of the explanatory activity. Some explanations are better
in certain respects than others, and a set of norms is necessary for pro-
viding judgments of their quality. Some explanations provided in every-
day life and in science can be more accurate, simpler, or closer to truth
than alternatives that are on offer. They might be able to provide a
better understanding of the subject matter that they are supposed to
deal with, and they might be much easier to use when one wants to
intervene in the world on the basis of them. In short, normative rules
for adjudicating among the explanations offered in different social
contexts are needed and must be worked out and debated critically.

These diverse aims that a philosophical theory of explanation must
accomplish are of both a descriptive and a normative nature. Stated dif-
ferently, a philosophical theory of explanation is to provide solutions

* I would like to thank Hans Albert, Theodore Arabatzis, Martin Carrier, Volker
Gadenne, Jens Harbecke, Carl-David Mildenberger, Stathis Psillos, and two anony-
mous reviewers for many helpful comments on earlier versions of this article. Talks
based upon this paper were presented at the 14th International Congress of Logic,
Methodology and Philosophy of Science in July 2011 in Nancy, at the University of
Bielefeld in November 2011, at the University of Athens in March 2012, at the Tech-
nical University of Munich in June 2012, at the 86th Joint Session of the Aristotelian
Society and the Mind Association in Stirling in July 2012, at the 8th Congress of the
Gesellschaft für Analytische Philosophie (GAP) in Constance in September 2012, at the
1st Congress of the Gesellschaft für Wissenschaftsphilosophie (GWP) in Hanover in
March 2013, and at the 23rd World Congress of Philosophy in Athens in August 2013.
I thank all participants of the above events for their comments and suggestions.

0022-362X/13/1011/606–632

ã 2013 The Journal of Philosophy, Inc.

explanatory games

607

to a series of problems, both descriptive and normative, using not only
philosophical resources but also whatever resources are available from
other disciplines. The aim of this essay is to establish the claim that
this can be best done if one theorizes in terms of explanatory games
rather than focusing on the explication of the concept of explanation.

i. the wrong question: what is an explanation?

Though most of the thoughts and arguments that gained currency
in the theory of explanation of the twentieth century can be found
one way or another in the works of some past philosopher, from
Aristotle to John Stuart Mill, the great advancements in logic and
the explosion in the technical sophistication of the philosophers of
the twentieth century have led to a more systematic treatment of
scientific explanation, giving birth to a whole subdiscipline in the
philosophy of science that deals with this issue.1 Since the classic con-
tribution of Hempel and Oppenheim,2 the modern theory of expla-
nation has largely come to reflect the virtues and vices of the analytic
tradition: precise formulations and carefully exposed arguments on
the one hand, but also a passionate insistence on logical aspects at
the cost of more substantial aspects on the other. The primary ques-
tion that the philosophical theory of explanation has tried to answer
has been what does an explanation consist in? As an answer to this ques-
tion, Hempel famously maintained that to explain a singular event
is to show how this event can be expected to happen if one takes into
account the laws that govern its occurrence together with its initial
conditions. One set of reactions to this so-called “received view” of
scientific explanation3 has centered around the provision of counter-
examples to Hempel’s model, ranging from shadows explaining the
height of poles4 to magicians hexing salt5 and much more. The more

1 For a competent and precise review starting with Aristotle and including the
main models of explanation prevailing in the present discussion, see Stathis Psillos,
“Past and Contemporary Perspectives on Explanation,” in Theo Kuipers, ed., General
Philosophy of Science: Focal Issues (Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2007), pp. 97–174.

2 See Carl G. Hempel and Paul Oppenheim, “Studies in the Logic of Explanation,”
Philosophy of Science, xv, 2 (April 1948): 135–75, reprinted in Hempel, Aspects of Scientific
Explanation, and Other Essays in the Philosophy of Science (New York: Free Press, 1965).

3 See Wesley C. Salmon, Four Decades of Scientific Explanation (Minneapolis: Minnesota

UP, 1989) p. 8, who coined this term.

4 In the literature the vertical flagpole example is usually referred to, but in his
seminal paper Bromberger refers to the height of a telephone post to which a taut
wire is connected—exemplifying, of course, the same point. See Sylvain Bromberger,
“Why-Questions,” in Robert Colodny, ed., Mind and Cosmos (Pittsburgh: University
Press, 1966), pp. 87–111, at p. 105.

5 See Henry E. Kyburg, Jr., “Salmon’s Paper,” Philosophy of Science, xxxii, 2 (April 1965):
147–51; and Salmon, “Statistical Explanation,” in Colodny, ed., The Nature and Function

