J Happiness Stud (2011) 12:1007–1022
DOI 10.1007/s10902-010-9241-7

R E S E A R C H P A P E R

Relations Among Mindfulness, Achievement-Related
Self-Regulation, and Achievement Emotions

Andrew J. Howell • Karen Buro

Published online: 14 December 2010
Ó Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2010

Abstract Mindfulness has been hypothesized to directly facilitate well-being, and to
indirectly do so by enhancing self-regulated functioning. No prior research has examined
these relationships in the domain of academic achievement. The current study tested
relationships among mindfulness, achievement-related self-regulation (e.g., delay-of-
gratiﬁcation, help-seeking, and self-control) and achievement emotions among a sample of
290 undergraduate students. Results revealed that indices of mindfulness, achievement-
related self-regulation, and achievement emotions were signiﬁcantly inter-correlated. And,
results supported the hypothesis that the prediction of achievement emotions by mind-
fulness was mediated by greater self-regulation over achievement. Results are considered
in light of recent evidence for associations among mindfulness, self-regulation, and well-
being in other domains of functioning; with respect to theoretical and practical implica-
tions; and with respect to the possible fruitfulness of research bridging self-regulation as a
character strength and achievement-related functioning.
Keywords Mindfulness  Achievement  Self-regulation  Emotions  Well-being

Self-regulated learning is associated with greater academic performance (e.g., Zimmerman
2008), but also with a host of additional adaptive outcomes, including well-being (Howell
2009). As deﬁned by Pintrich (2000), self-regulated learning refers to the ‘‘active, con-
structive process whereby learners set goals for their learning and then attempt to monitor,
regulate, and control their cognition, motivation, and behaviour, guided and constrained by
their goals and the contextual features in the environment’’ (p. 453). Achievement-related
variables related to goal adoption (e.g., implicit theories of ability, achievement goal
orientations) as well as variables related to the extent to which goals are effectively
pursued and attained (e.g., help-seeking, delay-of-gratiﬁcation; learning strategies usage;
self-control; and procrastination) form a portion of the nomological network of self-reg-
ulated learning (Zeidner et al. 2000; Zimmerman 2008).

A. J. Howell (&)  K. Buro
Grant MacEwan University, Edmonton, AB, Canada
e-mail: howella@macewan.ca

123

1008

A. J. Howell, K. Buro

1 Self-Regulated Learning and Achievement Functioning

With respect to implicit theories of ability, incremental beliefs (i.e., viewing ability as
malleable and open to learning and development; Dweck 1999) are associated to a greater
extent than are entity beliefs (i.e., viewing ability as ﬁxed and stable) with adaptive
cognitive and behavioural consequences for students, such as greater persistence when
confronted with adversity (Dweck and Leggett 1988). Adaptive consequences are also
associated with students’ endorsement of approach forms of achievement goal orientation,
especially in the form of mastery-approach goals (Moller and Elliot 2006). Students’
academic help-seeking, which involves the willingness to seek a minimal amount of
assistance in order to achieve independently (Karabenick and Knapp 1991), is associated
with high achievement striving and self-esteem (Karabenick and Knapp 1991). Academic
delay-of-gratiﬁcation, or students’ foregoing of currently available sources of reward in
favour of the pursuit of longer-term academic goals (Bembenutty and Karabanick 2004), is
related to both the expectancy and value of delayed outcomes, suggesting its adaptive
advantage (Bembenutty 2009). Students’ use of learning strategies, such as cognitive (e.g.,
rehearsal and elaboration) and meta-cognitive (e.g., planning and regulating) strategies
(Pintrich et al. 1993), is associated with greater achievement (e.g., Pressley et al. 1987).
Self-control among students, which involves optimizing one’s ﬁt with the external world
(Tangney et al. 2004), correlates positively with adaptive personality traits, secure
attachment, perspective taking, and academic performance (Tangney et al.). Finally, stu-
dents’ procrastination, or the tendency to delay initiation or completion of important tasks
to the point of discomfort (Solomon and Rothblum 1984), is commonly conceptualized as
involving a failure of self-regulation and is associated with negative outcomes such as
lower achievement (e.g., Steel 2007).

As a further index of their adaptability,

these achievement-related self-regulatory
behaviours are associated with indices of well-being. For example, Howell (2009) showed,
among a large group of undergraduate students, that implicit theories, goal orientations,
procrastination, and self-control were reliably associated with emotional, psychological,
and social well-being. Speciﬁcally, greater well-being was associated with endorsement of
an incremental (as opposed to entity) theory of ability and a mastery-approach goal ori-
entation (as opposed to the three remaining goal orientations), and with a high degree of
self-control and low propensity to procrastinate.

2 Mindfulness and Achievement Functioning

If achievement-related self-regulation is adaptive, what factors might promote its occur-
rence? It is possible that mindfulness is associated with a greater degree of achievement-
related self-regulation. Mindfulness, as deﬁned by Brown and Ryan (2003), is ‘‘being
attentive to and aware of what is taking place in the present’’ (p. 822). Characteristics of
mindfulness include a pre-conceptual awareness and acceptance of experiences; ﬂexible
regulation of attention; an objective receptivity to experience; and an orientation to the
here-and-now (Brown et al. 2007). Mindfulness is conceptualized as promoting high levels
of well-being; speciﬁcally, mindfulness may directly foster well-being by providing
additional fullness and richness to experience, and mindfulness may indirectly enhance
well-being by facilitating healthy self-regulatory behaviour,
including an enhanced
attentiveness to one’s goals and an enhanced capacity to act in accordance with them
(Brown and Ryan 2003; Brown et al. 2007; Shapiro and Schwartz 1999, 2000). It is

123

