JCMS 2002 Volume 40. Number 2.  pp. 235–58

Normative Power Europe: A Contradiction in
Terms?*

IAN MANNERS
University of Kent at Canterbury

Abstract

Twenty years ago, in the pages of the Journal of Common Market Studies, Hedley
Bull launched a searing critique of the European Community’s ‘civilian power’ in
international affairs. Since that time the increasing role of the European Union (EU)
in areas of security and defence policy has led to a seductiveness in adopting the
notion of ‘military power Europe’. In contrast, I will attempt to argue that by think-
ing beyond traditional conceptions of the EU’s international role and examining the
case study of its international pursuit of the abolition of the death penalty, we may
best conceive of the EU as a ‘normative power Europe’.

Introduction

‘Europe’ is not an actor in international affairs,
and does not seem likely to become one … (Bull, 1982, p. 151)

With these now renowned words Hedley Bull, the pre-eminent writer of the
‘English School’ of international relations theory, dismissed the suggestion
that the European Community (EC) represented a ‘civilian power’ in interna-
tional relations and endeared himself to a generation of European studies schol-
ars. Bull was responding to the suggestions of writers such as François Duchêne
who claimed that traditional military power had given way to progressive
civilian  power  as  the  means  to  exert  influence  in  international  relations
(Duchêne, 1972, 1973). Bull’s argument forms the starting point for my dis-

* I am very grateful to Ruth Abbey, Mathias Albert, Barry Buzan, Thomas Diez, Mervyn Frost, Stefano
Guzzini, Ulf Hedetoft, Anna Home, Knud Erik Jørgensen, Catarina Kinnvall, Dora Kostakopoulou, Anna
Leander,  Marika  Lerch,  Ben  Rosamond,  Thomas  Saalfeld,  Justus  Schonlau,  Karen  Smith,  Hidemi
Suganami, Richard Whitman, and two anonymous referees for their helpful comments.

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd 2002, 108 Cowley Road, Oxford OX4 1JF, UK and 350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA

236

IAN MANNERS

cussion of the international role of the European Union (EU) as a promoter of
norms which displace the state as the centre of concern. It may be the case
that  Bull  was  correct  to  argue  that  ‘from  the  perspective  of  “the  return  to
power politics” of the 1980s’ the civilian power of the EC was conditional
upon the military power of states. However, I will further claim that the de-
velopments of the 1990s in international relations lead us to rethink both no-
tions of military power and civilian power in order to consider the EU’s nor-
mative power in world politics.

My argument begins by briefly surveying the conceptual history of civil-
ian power and military power Europe over the past 20 years in order to locate
these traditional conceptions of the EU’s international role. I will then intro-
duce the idea of normative power Europe, including the EU’s normative dif-
ference, the EU’s normative basis, and an explanation of how EU norms are
diffused. In order to demonstrate the value of considering the normative power
of the EU, I will then look at the case of its international pursuit of the aboli-
tion of the death penalty. Finally, I will conclude by arguing that the concept
of normative power represents a valuable addition to our understanding of the
EU’s civilian and military power in world politics. Thus, the notion of ‘nor-
mative power’ when applied to the EU is not a contradiction in terms, as the
ability to define what passes for ‘normal’ in world politics is extremely rich.

I. Civilian or Military Power Europe
On 9 May 2000, to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the Schuman Declara-
tion on ‘Europe Day’, the EU issued publicity material declaring ‘50 Years of
Solidarity, Prosperity and Peace’. Although the claim to being solely respon-
sible for the achievement of peace is questionable, the slogans do reflect the
fact that since the creation of the European Coal and Steel Community, the
EU has increasingly ‘domesticated’ relations between Member States (Man-
ners and Whitman, 2000, p. 257). As Duchêne was to suggest in the early
1970s, Europe at age 20 represented a ‘civilian power’ which was ‘long on
economic power and relatively short on armed force’. As Romano Prodi pro-
nounced at the start of his presidency, the status of the EU as a global civilian
power is one which is still central to a discussion of its role in international
relations: ‘We must aim to become a global civil power at the service of sus-
tainable global development. After all, only by ensuring sustainable global
development can Europe guarantee its own strategic security’ (Prodi, 2000, p.
3).

Twitchett and Maull have both defined civilian power as involving three
key features which I interpret as being the centrality of economic power to
achieve national goals; the primacy of diplomatic co-operation to solve inter-

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd 2002

