 
 
 
 
 
 

ONE YEAR AFTER 

THE KOSOVO EXODUS 

 

1 

 

 

BACKGROUND 

Between December 2014 and February 2015 Kosovo experienced a sudden and unexpected mass out-

migration  of  Kosovo  nationals  to  Western  Europe.  During  these  few  months  an  estimated  100,000 

Kosovars  left  the  country  in  what  was  later  referred  to  as  the  Kosovo  exodus.  This  sudden  exodus  of 

Kosovars was believed to been spurred by a combination of influencing factors. Firstly, the relaxation of 

travel regulation for Kosovars to Serbia, as part of the Brussels agreement, allowed Kosovo nationals to 

reach  the  EU  via  (irregular)  crossing  of  the  Serbian-Hungarian  border.  Secondly,  rumors  and 

misinformation spread about EU Member States’ Safe Country of Origin-lists led to a general misbelief 

that  Kosovars  were  able  to  access  asylum  or  other  legal  statuses  in  specific  EU  Member  States.  And 

indeed, the mass-migration outflow of Kosovars were directly reflected in the sharp increase of asylum 

applications  of  Kosovo  nationals  to  the  EU  (in  particular  to  Germany)  with  a  total  of  37,905  asylum 

applications  of  Kosovo  nationals  in  2014,  72,710  in  2015,  compared  to  the  corresponding  number  of 

20,2015  applications in 2013.  As a direct consequence, returns to Kosovo from the EU  have increased 

significantly with a total of 18,789 returns in 2015 (9,040 forced and 9,749 voluntary) compared to the 

4,610 return 2014.  

 

However,  migration  from the  Western  Balkans  to  Europe  is  not  a  new  phenomenon.  With  its  conflict 

history Kosovo1, like other Western Balkan countries, has a large diaspora residing in Europe. Moreover, 

despite processes of peace and stabilisation and a solid economic growth over the last decade, Kosovo 

remains the poorest country in the region with about 30 percent of its population living in poverty and 10 

percent  in  extreme  poverty2.  Unemployment  rates  are  also  the  highest  in  the  region  with  total 

unemployment rates above 30 percent and youth unemployment (15-24 years) above 55 percent. These 

poor conditions and lack of economic opportunities in combination with a large Kosovar diaspora well 

integrated in Western European societies, have contributed to a steady but ‘silent’ flow of out-migration 

of Kosovars to Europe. A year has now passed since the end of the Kosovo exodus, yet, what is known 

about this extraordinary mass-migration is still limited and largely based media reporting, a few smaller 

studies and anecdotal evidence. This study aims to firstly confirm or dismiss general assumptions about 

                                                           
1 IOM refers to the UNSC resolution 1244-administered Kosovo in an abbreviated manner as “Kosovo/UNSCR 
1244”.  For the purpose of this document, this shall be shortened to “Kosovo*” - this designation being without 
prejudice to positions on status and in line with UNSCR 1244 and the ICJ Opinion on the Kosovo declaration of 
independence. 
2 Extreme poverty defined here as living off less than one dollar a day.  

 

2 

