Field Methods
2014, Vol 26(1) 21-39
ª The Author(s) 2013
Reprints and permission:
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/1525822X13508270
fm.sagepub.com

Article

How Do
Respondents
Attend to Verbal
Labels in Rating
Scales?

Natalja Menold1, Lars Kaczmirek1,
Timo Lenzner1, and Alesˇ Neusar2

Abstract
Two formats of labeling in rating scales are commonly used in questionnaires:
verbal labels for end categories only (END form) and verbal labels for each of
the categories (ALL form). We examine attention processes and respon-
dents’ burden in using verbal labels in rating scales. Attention was tracked
in a laboratory setting employing eye-tracking technology. The results of the
two experiments are presented: One applied seven and the other applied five
categories in rating scales comparing END and ALL forms (n ¼ 47 in each
experiment). The results show that the ALL form provides higher reliability,
although the probability that respondents attend to a verbal label seems to
decrease as the number of verbally labeled categories increases.

Keywords
cognitive response process, rating scales, labeling, eye tracking

1 GESIS – Leibniz Institute for the Social Sciences, Mannheim, Germany
2 Palacky´ University, Olomouc, Czech Republic

Corresponding Author:
Natalja Menold, GESIS – Leibniz Institute for the Social Sciences, P.O. Box 12 21 55, D-68072
Mannheim, Germany.
Email: natalja.menold@gesis.org

Downloaded from 

fmx.sagepub.com

 at Universitaet Osnabrueck on April 1, 2016

22

Field Methods 26(1)

This article is concerned with the labeling of rating scales in web surveys.
Rating scales present a continuum, going from one extreme to the other.
When giving their answers, respondents have to graduate them, for
example, on an agree–disagree continuum. In our research, we focus on rat-
ing scales and their use in multiple item sets that are expected to measure a
single construct (Likert-type scales). With regard to labeling, two different
rating scale formats are commonly used in questionnaires: verbal labels for
end categories only, often combined with numerical labels (END form); and
verbal labels for each of the categories (ALL form). A great deal of research
shows that the ALL form is associated with higher measurement quality.
Other results show that numerous verbal labels may increase the difficulty
of the cognitive task of respondents.

This article addresses the question of how thoroughly respondents attend
to rating scale labels in web surveys and how this affects data quality (relia-
bility of measurements). Response behavior and attention to different parts
of the rating scales are measured by means of eye tracking. The next section
describes the theoretical background of the response behavior. Specifically,
we compare two models developed by Parducci (1983) and Krosnick and
Alwin (1987).

Theoretical Background

According to Parducci (1983), characteristics of rating scales impact the
cognitive representation of the measurement dimensions by respondents.
The crucial characteristics are scale range and frequency. Scale range is
determined by the meaning of the end categories, while frequency is deter-
mined by the number of categories between the end categories. When
respondents answer a question with a rating scale, they match the end
anchors of their internal subjective range to the end categories of the rating
scale, whereby scale categories between the end points divide the internal
representation of the dimension into equal subranges. Consequently, verbal
labels should affect the understanding of range and subranges in rating
scales (Tourangeau et al. 2000). If so, respondents should attend to the
verbal labels to understand the range and frequency of the dimension, which
is presented by a rating scale.

However, this attention can be limited if the mapping process becomes
more complicated and burdensome with an increasing amount of informa-
tion that respondents have to comprehend and to distinguish. According to
satisficing theory (Krosnick and Alwin 1987), difficulties in the mapping
process are likely to increase the chance of superficial information processing

Downloaded from 

fmx.sagepub.com

 at Universitaet Osnabrueck on April 1, 2016

