 

Functionalism 

The objection that made the identity theory in its original version disappear as quickly as it had 

risen to prominence in the 1950s was, as we saw last week, the multiple realizability argument, 

either in Putnam’s “empirical likelihood version” or in Kripke’s “imaginability version.” One 

response to this argument was to modify the identity theory in such a way as to relativize it to 

species (or subsets thereof) and to bet one’s philosophical money on something like “species-

specific identities.” The major problem with this move, however, was that if we restrict mental 

properties and their physical “correlates” to, say, species, then we can no longer hold that 

members of different species who are, say, in pain, literally share the same property. They don’t. 

One of them has S1-pain, the other S2-pain etc. But since the general property being in pain 

doesn’t correspond to a single physical property across all species, it does not occur in our list 

of physicalistically acceptable or “kosher” properties. There are then only three options: (1) 

accept being in pain as a non-physical addition to the ontology of our world (property dualism), 

(2) explain how being in pain can be a fundamentally physical property even though it is not 

straightforwardly reducible to physical properties (anti-reductionism), (3) give up the general 

property of being in pain as a property in its own right (eliminativism). Note that what is at issue 

is that the advocate of the species-specific identity theory can do to respond to the objection at 

hand. If you are an advocate of the species-specific identity theory, (1) and (2) are obviously 

not really an option. For you became an advocate of the species-specific identity theory in the 

first place because you were convinced of a reductive version of physicalism. (1) would mean giving 

up physicalism; (2) would mean giving up reductionism. Hence, only (3) is left. 

Some advocates of the species-specific identity theory (Kim, for instance) have indeed 

bitten the bullet and have denied that there is such a general property like being in pain. They 

argue that not every predicate that we use in our everyday language corresponds to a property. 

We use the predicate “is in pain” for pragmatic reasons to pick out a group of individuals, viz., 

those who are in some form of pain or other, although there is no single pain property that 

they and only they share—this property has been eliminated. For those who don’t find that 

attractive, and who find property dualism equally attractive, the only way out seems to be (2), 

i.e., to hold that, to stick to the example, being in pain is a fundamentally physical property that 

is, however, not straightforwardly reducible to physical properties. It is an irreducible physical 

property. One of the most important way to spell out this position is, of course, functionalism. 

According to Putnam, his multiple realizability argument shows that being in pain is not a 

physical property of the brain (or even the whole nervous system), but another kind of 

property entirely. As he puts it: “I propose the hypothesis that pain, or the state of being in 

pain, is a functional state of a whole organism” (Putnam 1967, 433). But what does it mean to 

say that being in pain is a functional property, or that pain is a functional state? This is what we 

are going to start with in section 1, before briefly considering the most important arguments 

for and against functionalism in sections 2 and 3. 

 

1. Functionalism 

Let us start with the notion of a functional analysis or functional decomposition. A functional analysis 

is a type of explanation that relies on a decomposition of a system into its component parts 

and in effect explains the working of the system in terms of the capacities of the parts and the 

way the parts are integrated with one another. For the sake of illustration, you could provide a 

functional analysis of an ordinary digital computer by decomposing it into its parts (the CPU, 

RAM etc.) and explaining how they interact with each other. In cognitive science, the core 

idea behind something that could be called “computational functionalism” (or, more to the 

point, perhaps: the computer model of the mind) is that our mind, our mental life, can be 

decomposed by a functional analysis of mental processes to the point where they are seen to 

be composed of computations as mechanical as the primitive operations of a digital computer. 

The key notions of functionalism in this sense are representation and computation. Mental states 

are seen as systematically representing the outside world, and mental processes are seen as 

algorithmically specifiable computations over these representations. This, however, is a 

decidedly cognitive science perspective. It is related to, but not exactly identical to what is 

meant by “functionalism” in the philosophy of mind. 

Functionalism in the philosophy of mind, you may also call it “metaphysical 

functionalism,” is a theory of the nature of the mind, rather than a theory of the best kind of 

psychological explanation to be given of the mind. It is not concerned with how mental states 

or properties account for behavior, but rather with what they are. Like the identity theory, 

which was also decidedly a theory about what mental states or properties are (viz., brain states 

or neurophysiological properties), functionalism makes a claim about what mental states or 

properties are: What is it that all and only those who have a certain mental property M, say 

pain, have in common in virtue of which they count as having M? The identity theory would 

have said: a certain neurophysiological property. That answer, however, seems no longer 

viable. But what else could it be, then, that all and only those who have a certain mental 

property M have in common in virtue of which they count as having M?  

