Chapter V

THE HEART HAS ITS REASONS

THAT REASON and passion are antithetical has long been an article of
philosophical faith, less often argued than assumed. Emotive theories of
ethics automatically construe themselves as noncognitive, and aesthetic
theories that assign emotion a role in appreciation typically take them-
selves thereby to exclude art and its objects from the cognitive realm.
Opposing stereotypes may account for complacency about the dichot-
omy. Stereotypical beliefs are cool, calm, settled convictions; stereotypical
emotions are visceral, volatile, violent agitations. We would hardly put
belief in the inverse square law in the same class as Othello’s obsessive
jealousy. Nor would we feel remiss about failing to justify the decision to
assign them to disjoint classes. But actual beliefs and emotions diverge
considerably from such simplistic stereotypes. Unwavering affection for a
lifelong friend may be as stable, justiﬁable, and unperturbing as the belief
that buffaloes once roamed the West; the momentary conviction that
the home team is about to squander its commanding lead, as transient,
unreasonable, and distressing as a stab of envy at a friend’s good fortune.
Emotions and beliefs can be enduring or ephemeral, calm or agitating,
rational or irrational. Neither class of attitudes seems to possess any
qualiﬁcation for epistemic standing that the other lacks. That activation of
passion involves abdication of reason is thus far from obvious. Even if
Lear’s rage is cognitively incapacitating, Huckleberry Finn’s trepidation
over Aunt Sally’s plans to civilize him is not. If a response like Huck’s can
be at once cognitive and affective, epistemology’s alienation of affections
is unjustiﬁed.

Relatively recently, cognitivist theories of emotion have emerged to
counter the traditional view.1 They are ineffective though, because they
construe the realm of the cognitive too narrowly. Typically they take an
emotion to embed a belief, a belief to be an attitude toward a proposition,
and the cognitive status of the emotion to derive from that of the belief it
embeds.2 Thus Fiona’s fear of frogs is cognitive because it embeds her
belief that frogs are dangerous. She would not—indeed could not—fear
frogs, it is said, unless she harbored such a belief. This is just false. The

1 See John Deigh, “Cognitivism in the Theory of Emotions,” Ethics 104 (1994):

824–854.

2 See, for example, Anthony Kenny, Action, Emotion, and Will (London: Routledge and

Kegan Paul, 1963), 187–194.

THE HEART HAS ITS REASONS

147
shower scene in the movie Psycho regularly terriﬁes audiences who, well
aware that the ﬁlm is a work of ﬁction, do not believe that anyone is actu-
ally in danger. Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony arouses in receptive listeners
an objectless joy. Nor are the arts the sole sources of counterexamples
to this position. Fiona might fear frogs even though careful study has
convinced her that they pose no threat. Even if she cannot rid herself of
the notion that frogs are dangerous, she does not for a moment believe
it. A glorious sunrise, like a great symphony, can occasion objectless joy.
And a baby can revel in his mother’s love long before he develops the
conceptual resources to entertain any attitude toward the proposition that
she loves him.

These objections seem to tell decisively against the thesis that beliefs are
essential to emotions. Still, one might urge that only such emotions as
embed beliefs function cognitively. Thus objectless emotions, irrational
emotions, and the emotions of infants and nonhuman animals are cogni-
tively inert. I suggest, however, that emotions play a variety of cognitive
roles, not all of them derived from or dependent on beliefs or propositions
they embed. This is not to say that all emotions are epistemically estima-
ble. Neither are all beliefs. But if the occurrence of wayward convictions
does not justify banishing all beliefs from the epistemic realm, the occur-
rence of unruly passions ought not constitute grounds for the wholesale
exclusion of emotions. Instead, I suggest, we should investigate the cog-
nitive functions that emotions perform to see how they affect epistemic
tenability. In this chapter, that is what I propose to do. I do not purport
to provide anything remotely like a general theory of emotion, but only to
identify some of the ways emotions advance understanding. My aim is not
to anesthetize emotion but to sensitize cognition—to show that the un-
derstanding we achieve is not indifferent to emotion but that understand-
ing is none the less objective for that.

FEELINGS

Emotions are often called feelings, but feeling alone does not emotion
make. No matter how she feels, a toddler neither suffers from math anxi-
ety nor hopes for eternal salvation, for she lacks the conceptual resources
such emotions require. Queasiness does not qualify as fear unaccompa-
nied by an intimation of danger nor does a twinge amount to remorse
absent a sense of having transgressed. Neither does a feeling’s mere occur-
rence in an appropriate context convert it into an emotion. Despite your
awareness of impending danger, your queasiness could just be something
you ate—particularly if you are inured to the threat or consider yourself
suitably armed against it. But queasiness that registers an intimation of
danger qualiﬁes as a feeling of fear. Whether this is so is not always obvi-

