Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México
 
The Justification of Equality
Author(s): Thomas Nagel
Source: Crítica: Revista Hispanoamericana de Filosofía, Vol. 10, No. 28 (Apr., 1978), pp. 3-31
Published by: Instituto de Investigaciones Filosóficas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de
México
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/40104073
Accessed: 12-05-2016 06:11 UTC
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

http://about.jstor.org/terms

 

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted

digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about

JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Instituto de Investigaciones Filosóficas are
collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Crítica: Revista Hispanoamericana de
Filosofía

This content downloaded from 131.173.41.233 on Thu, 12 May 2016 06:11:40 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 THE JUSTIFICATION OF EQUALITY*

 THOMAS NAGEL
 Princeton University

 I

 It is difficult to argue for the intrinsic social value of equa-
 lity without begging the question. Equality can be defended
 up to a point in terms of other values like utility and liberty.
 But some of the most difficult questions are posed when it
 conflicts with these.

 Contemporary political debate recognizes four types of

 equality: political, legal, social, and economic. The first three
 cannot be defined in formal terms. Political equality is not
 guaranteed by granting each adult one vote and the right
 to hold public office. Legal equality is not guaranteed by
 granting everyone the right to a jury trial, the right to bring
 suit for injuries, and the right to counsel. Social equality is
 not produced by the abolition of titles and official barriers
 to class mobility. Great substantive inequalities in political
 power, legal protection, social esteem and self-respect are
 compatible with these formal conditions. It is a common-
 place that real equality of every kind is sensitive to economic
 factors. While formal institutions may guarantee a minimum
 social status to everyone, big differences in wealth and in-
 come will produce big distinctions above that - distinctions
 that may be inherited as well.

 So the question of economic equality cannot be detached
 from the others, and this complicates die issue, because the
 value of the other types of equality may be of a very diffe-

 * The 1977 Tanner Lecture at Standford University, published by permission

 of the Tanner Lecture Trust.

 3

This content downloaded from 131.173.41.233 on Thu, 12 May 2016 06:11:40 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

