500

J. Physiol. (I952) I I7, 500-544

A QUANTITATIVE DESCRIPTION OF MEMBRANE
CURRENT AND ITS APPLICATION TO CONDUCTION

AND EXCITATION IN NERVE

BY A. L. HODGKIN AND A. F. HUXLEY

From the Physiological Laboratory, University of Cambridge

(Received 10 March 1952)

This article concludes a series of papers concerned with the flow of electric
current through the surface membrane of a giant nerve fibre (Hodgkin,
Huxley & Katz, 1952; Hodgkin & Huxley, 1952 a-c). Its general object is to
the results of the preceding papers (Part I), to put them into
discu
mathematical form (Part II) and to show that they will account for con-
duction and excitation in quantitative terms (Part III).

PART I. DISCUSSION OF EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

The results described in the preceding papers suggest that the electrical
behaviour of the membrane may be represented by the network shown in
Fig. 1. Current can be carried through the membrane either by charging the
membrane capacity or by movement of ion-s through the resistances in parallel
with the capacity. The ionic current is divided into components carried by
sodium and potassium ions (INa and IK), and a small 'leakage current' (I,)
made up by chloride and other ions. Each component of the ionic current is
determined by a driving force which may conveniently be measured as an
electrical potential difference and a permeability coefficient which has the
dimensions of a conductance. Thus the sodium current (INa) is equal to the
sodium conductance (9Na) multiplied by the difference between the membrane
potential (E) and the equilibrium potential for the sodium ion (ENa). Similar
equations apply to 'K and I, and are collected on p. 505.
Our experiments suggest that gNa and 9E are functions of time and
membrane potential, but that ENa, EK, El, CM and g, may be taken as
constant. The influence of membrane potential on permeability can be sum-
marized by stating: first, that depolarization causes a transient increase in
sodium conductance and a slower but maintained increase in potassium con-
ductance; secondly, that these changes are graded and that they can be
reversed by repolarizing the membrane. In order to decide whether these
effects are sufficient to account for complicated phenomena such as the action
potential and refractory period, it is necessary to obtain expressions relating

MEMBRANE CURRENT IN NERVE

501
the sodium and potassium conductances to time and membrane potential.
Before attempting this we shall consider briefly what types of physical system
are likely to be consistent with the observed changes in permeability.

Outside

T

INT TK

CM~~~~~~+

ItE

+

Fig. 1.

Electrical circuit representing membrane. RB
RK vary with time and membrane potential; the other components are constant.

=l/gNa; RK= l/9K; RI= 1/#1. RNw and

Inside

)

The nature of the permewablity change8

At present the thickness and composition of the excitable membrane are
unknown. Our experiments are therefore unlikely to give any certain informa-
tion about the nature of the molecular events underlying changes in perme-
ability. The object of this section is to show that certain types of theory are
excluded by our experiments and that others are consistent with them.

The first point which emerges is that the changes in permeability appear to
depend on membrane potential and not on membrane current. At a fixed
depolarization the sodium current follows a time course whose form is inde-
pendent of the current through the membrane. If the sodium concentration
is such that ENaB<E, the sodium current is inward; if it is reduced until
ENa > E the current changes in sign but still appears to follow the same time
course. Further support for the view that membrane potential is the variable
controlling permeability is provided by the observation that restoration of the
normal membrane potential causes the sodium or potassium conductance to
decline to a low value at any stage of the response.

The dependence of 9Na and g9

on membrane potential suggests that the
permeability changes arise from the effect of the electric field on the distribu-
tion or orientation of molecules with a charge or dipole moment. By this we
do not mean to exclude chemical reactions, for the rate at which these occur
might depend on the position of a charged substrate or catalyst. All that is
intended is that small changes in membrane potential Would be most unlikely

