Psychology Research and Behavior Management

Open Access Full Text Article

Dovepress

open access to scientiﬁc and medical research

R E V I E W

Behavioral treatments for children and adults  
who stutter: a review

Michael Blomgren
Department of Communication 
Sciences and Disorders, University 
of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA

Correspondence: Michael Blomgren 
Department of Communication 
Sciences and Disorders, University 
of Utah, 390 S. 1530 E., Rm 1210, 
Salt Lake City, UT 84112-0252, USA 
Email michael.blomgren@health.utah.edu

Abstract: This  paper  provides  a  brief  overview  of  stuttering  followed  by  a  synopsis  of 
current approaches to treat stuttering in children and adults. Treatment is discussed in terms 
of multifactorial, operant, speech restructuring, and anxiolytic approaches. Multifactorial and 
operant  treatments  are  designed  for  young  children  who  stutter.  Both  of  these  approaches 
involve parent training and differ primarily in their focus on reducing demands on the child 
(multifactorial) or in their use of response contingent stimulation (operant conditioning). Speech 
restructuring and anxiolytic approaches are used with adults who stutter. Speech restructuring 
approaches focus on the mechanics of speech production, and anxiolytic treatments tend to 
focus on the symptoms and social and vocational challenges of stuttering. The evidence base for 
these different approaches is outlined. Response contingent therapy (for children) and speech 
restructuring therapy (for adults) have the most robust empirical evidence base. Multifactorial 
treatments for children and stuttering management approaches for adults are popular but are based 
on theoretical models of stuttering; the evidence base is not robust and tends to be inferred from 
work in areas such as cognitive behavior therapy and desensitization. Comprehensive, or holistic, 
approaches to treating stuttering are also discussed. Comprehensive approaches for treating 
stuttering in adults address both improved speech ﬂuency and stuttering management.
Keywords:  stuttering,  treatment,  stuttering  management,  speech  restructuring,  cognitive 
restructuring

Introduction
Stuttering is a developmental speech disorder in which the forward ﬂow of speech 
is  interrupted  by  repetitions  of  sounds,  words,  and/or  the  prolongation  of  sounds. 
Developmental stuttering appears during the preschool years, typically between the ages 
of 2 and 4. Stuttering can be quite variable, especially in childhood. It is not uncommon 
for stuttering to appear and disappear in cycles during the preschool years. Stuttering 
in children and adults may also vary depending on the speaking context. Stuttering is 
also more pronounced when an individual is rushed or in a stressful speaking situation. 
In fact, one of the few invariant aspects of stuttering is that it is highly variable.

The reported incidence numbers for stuttering vary, but stuttering is most common 
in young children (approximately 5%). Approximately 0.5% to 1% of adults stutter.1 
These  numbers  indicate  that  most  children  (about  75%)  recover  from  stuttering 
naturally, although obviously not all do. Currently, no foolproof indicators exist to 
determine if an individual child will naturally stop stuttering or not; however, gender 
and family history of natural recovery appear to be predictors of natural recovery. 
Girls are more likely to stop stuttering than boys and children with a family history 

submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress 
http://dx.doi.org./10.2147/PRBM.S31450

Psychology Research and Behavior Management 2013:6 9–19
© 2013 Blomgren, publisher and licensee Dove Medical Press Ltd. This is an Open Access article  
which permits unrestricted noncommercial use, provided the original work is properly cited.

9

Blomgren

Dovepress

of natural recovery from stuttering are more likely to stop 
stuttering.2

On  the  surface,  stuttering  is  a  disorder  of  speech 
production. It is not a language disorder or a communication 
disorder secondary to other emotional or mental conditions. 
Speciﬁcally, surface elements of stuttering include the speech 
motor  behaviors  of  repeated  articulatory  movements  (eg, 
t-t-t-talk) and/or ﬁxed articulatory postures (eg, mmmine).3 
These  two  broad  categories  account  for  the  majority  of 
stuttering  moments. These  stuttering  moments  may  also 
be accompanied by muscle tension and signs of struggle to 
speak. Other nonverbal gestures include behaviors such as 
facial grimaces, eye blinking, and loss of eye contact. These 
nonverbal gestures are reactive responses at the moment of 
stuttering and are not considered “core” stuttering behavior. 
Verbal  interjections  (eg,  “uh,”  “like,”  “um,”  etc)  and 
circumlocutions are also common secondary behaviors.

The surface features of stuttering are those most readily 
visible to an observer. However, stuttering is more than its 
surface manifestations. Stuttering is also a multidimensional 
disorder.4,5 Aspects of stuttering that exist “below the surface” 
include private and affective aspects of stuttering.6 It should 
be obvious that people who stutter do not enjoy stuttering. 
Therefore,  stuttering  speakers  often  develop  numerous 
avoidance  strategies. These  strategies  include  avoiding 
problematic words, avoiding stressful speaking situations, 
or avoiding talking with people where a history of excessive 
stuttering exists. Examples of particularly stressful speaking 
situations  include  talking  on  the  telephone,  introducing 
themselves or others, or talking with authority ﬁgures. For 
many  who  stutter,  avoidance  behaviors  can  be  the  most 
handicapping  aspect  of  the  disorder. Avoidance  behaviors 
may lead to reduced social and occupational participation. 
Over time, avoidance behaviors may also lead to negative 
affective  functioning  such  as  feelings  of  loss  of  control, 
decreased mood, and increased anxiety.7

Stuttering impacts many facets of daily life. Most people 
project their identities, their knowledge, and their thoughts 
and  beliefs  through  verbal  communication. When  verbal 
communication is a challenge, the ability to present oneself 
as  a  “whole”  person  also  becomes  difﬁcult.  Many  people 
who stutter feel frustration, anger, embarrassment, self-doubt, 
and sometimes even shame related to their stuttering. School 
age children in particular may feel anger and embarrassment 
when called upon in class to read aloud or provide answers 
to  questions. Adults  who  rely  on  clear  and  effective 
communication in their jobs often ﬁnd their stuttering becomes 
an impediment to attaining their vocational potential.8

In addition to the observable communication challenges, 
for some, stuttering may also lead to social anxiety or social 
phobia.7 Social phobia involves an extreme and debilitating 
fear of humiliation, embarrassment, and negative evaluation 
by  others.  Stuttering,  combined  with  the  effects  of  social 
phobia, may lead to problems in maximizing one’s potential 
in social, interpersonal, and professional relationships.

The exact cause of stuttering is unknown; however, it is 
widely accepted that stuttering is primarily due to a problem 
with the neural functioning that underlies speech production. 
In that respect, stuttering is a physical disorder and is not 
considered a mental disorder per se. Stuttering is not caused 
by  nervousness,  stress,  or  parenting  styles.9  Numerous 
neuroimaging studies have reported different brain activation 
patterns between stuttering and non-stuttering speakers.10,11 
Many  of  these  differences  are  identiﬁed  during  silent,  or 
inner, speech tasks indicating that differences may exist in 
the linguistic or motor planning stages of speech production. 
There may also be timing issues in speech and language areas 
of the brain that result in stuttering.12 About 60%–70% of 
stuttering speakers also have relatives who stutter, indicating 
that there is a heritability link. However, the exact form of 
genetic transmission is unclear. While stuttering is primarily 
a neurophysiological problem, complex interactions between 
speech motor, cognitive, social, and emotional needs likely 
mediate the disorder.

Speech-language pathologists (SLPs) are the appropriate 
providers of stuttering treatment. SLPs (also known as speech 
therapists)  receive  extensive  training  in  the  identiﬁcation 
and  remediation  of  communication  disorders,  including 
stuttering. Many countries require SLPs be licensed and/or 
certiﬁed by national accrediting bodies. Stuttering assessment 
includes interviewing patients to assess their levels of speech 
difﬁculty and ascertain their levels of concern. The SLP then 
administers a series of formal and informal tests to determine 
the severity of the disorder. Treatment begins with identifying 
treatment options for the client and working collaboratively 
to develop the best individualized treatment plan.

There are currently two basic approaches to treatment 
for both children and adults who stutter. The methods for 
children and adults are understandably different, but for both 
age groups there exists a historical dichotomy in approaches. 
For children, the dichotomy involves indirect versus direct 
treatment;  that  is  whether  the  emphasis  of  treatment  is 
manipulating  environmental  factors  (indirect)  or  whether 
the emphasis is working exclusively on the speech of the 
child (direct). For adults, the differences exist primarily in 
the relative emphasis placed on changing either core speech 

10

submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress 

Psychology Research and Behavior Management 2013:6

