An unconventional
but essential marriage:
pro-poor tourism
and the mainstream industry

Pro-poor tourism has had a signiﬁcant impact on the ‘tourism and development’ 
agenda, but is unlikely to become hegemonic. Its impact on broader development 
debates, the mainstream tourism industry, and the public has been more limited. 
(cid:127)ere is an emerging conceptual framework, methodology and empirical evidence base 
to support the original claims of pro-poor tourism (PPT), that it can be pro-poor and 
can be made more so, that any type of tourism can be pro-poor, and that there are 
signiﬁcant beneﬁts for both the development sector and mainstream tourism industry 
of stronger links between the two.

By Jonathan Mitchell, Overseas Development Institute

T ourist  markets  offer  opportunities  for 

poverty  reduction.  While  most  popu-
lar  tourist  destinations  are  in  affluent 
countries,  these  opportunities  are  evident 
in  the  large  and  increasing  tourism  flows  to 
the  developing  world.  In  2008,  40%  of  in-
ternational  tourist  trips  were  to  developing 
countries  (World  Bank,  2010).  In  Figure  1, 
the  large  scale  of  tourism  in  countries  like 
Mexico,  Thailand  and  Malaysia  compared 
with  the  powerhouses  of  the  world  economy, 
like the United States, Japan and Germany, is 
clear. The emerging role of China, as a devel-
oping country tourist destination and an eco-
nomic giant, is striking.

Developing  country  tourism  is  not  the  preserve 
of  middle-income  countries.  Some  of  the  lowest 

Figure 1: Tourist-eye view of the world

income  countries,  such  as  Ethiopia,  !e  Gambia 
and Tanzania, have small tourist ﬂows by interna-
tional standards yet depend on international tour-
ism for a quarter to a third of their exports (World 
Bank, 2010). Mounting empirical evidence shows 
that  tourism  can  transfer  signiﬁcant  beneﬁts  to 
local economies and communities around tourist 
destinations,  making  a  case  for  identifying  tour-
ism as a mechanism for poverty reduction in some 
low-income countries.

Despite the potential for tourism to reduce pov-
erty,  the  impact  of  pro-poor  tourism  on  the  de-
velopment agenda is still weak. !ough impacts 
vary,  evidence  shows  the  eﬀect  of  tourism  on 
the lives of the poor. It is important for develop-
ment agencies and private operators to consider 
the beneﬁts of closer links between pro-poor and 
mainstream tourism. ...

SHOULD TOURISM 
BE PROMOTED 
IN DEVELOPING 
COUNTRIES?

Jonathan Mitchell 
is an economist and 
leads several of the 
research programs 
of the Overseas 
Development 
Institute (ODI), a 
think tank located 
in London that 
provides public 
policymakers with 
information and 
advice on poverty 
reduction. The 
author takes a 
speciﬁc interest 
in the impacts 
tourism has on 
poor households 
in developing 
countries. In 
this article, the 
author counters 
preconceived 
ideas by defending 
mainstream tourism, 
notably as a lever 
for poverty reduction.

Jonathan Mitchell 

Overseas 
Development Institute

Jonathan Mitchell is a local 
and regional economic 
development specialist with 
long-term experience in Sub-
Saharan Africa and increasing 
exposure in South-East Asia. 
His focus is value-chain 
development, local economic 
development, economic 
and ﬁnancial analyses, and 
tourism and agriculture. 
He has worked for a range 
of multilateral and bilateral 
donor organisations and 
currently heads the Protected 
Livelihoods and Agricultural 
Growth Programme at the 
London-based development 
policy ‘think tank’, the 
Overseas Development 
Institute.

The area of each country is proportional to the number of international tourist arrivals. 
Source: Worldmapper, 2006

ISSUE 7 - SEPTEMBER 2010 - SHOULD TOURISM BE PROMOTED IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES? 3

1 ODI, the International 
Institute for Environment 
and Development and the 
International Centre for 
Responsible Tourism. 
2 PPT is tourism that results 
in increased net beneﬁts for 
poor people. PPT is not a 
speciﬁc product or niche sector 
but an approach to tourism 
development and management. 
3 On this subject, see Denis 
Sireyjol’s article in this 
issue of Private Sector and 
Development.
4 Community-based projects 
involve communities fully 
owning and operating tourism 
facilities to generate collective 
income.
5 TUI Travel is a good example 
of this trend. In 2007 the UK-
based First Choice merged with 
German group TUI to create 
one of Europe’s leading travel 
ﬁrms and tour operators with 
a market capitalisation of GBP 
2.1 billion.

An unconventional but essential marriage:
pro-poor tourism and the mainstream industry
By Jonathan Mitchell, Overseas Development Institute

... PPT and the development agenda 
A  small  group  of  researchers1  around  the  time  of 
the  Millennium  Development  Summit  coined  the 
term ‘pro-poor tourism’ (PPT).2 PPT was based on 
three assertions: tourism can be pro-poor, it can be 
made more pro-poor, and any type of tourism can 
be pro-poor. 

!ese simple assertions were a revelation a decade 
ago.  At  the  time,  the  development  sector  tended 
to see tourism as a private sector activity that had 
little  relationship  with  poverty  reduction,  while 
the  commercial  tourist  sector  saw  poverty  reduc-
tion at destinations as the responsibility of others. 
Ultimately,  PPT  aimed  at  putting  tourism  on  the 
development agenda and development on the tour-
ism agenda. Has this worked? 

In  some  senses,  PPT  has  been  successful.  An  as-
sessment  would  include  its  impact  on  the  donor 
community.  Several  multilateral  donors  (notably 
the  World  Bank,  IFC,  Asian  Development  Bank 
and  UN),  some  bilateral  ones  (GTZ,  USAID  and 
NZAID), and a number of NGOs have provided sig-
niﬁcant support for PPT projects over recent years. 
One of the more successful examples has been the 
partnership between the private sector and NGOs 
in !e Gambia through its International Centre for 
Responsible  Tourism.  !is  initiative  linked  low-
income  communities  with  tourism,  and  improved 
the  pro-poor  impact  of  tourism  in  one  of  Africa’s 
smallest,  and  poorest,  destinations  (Mitchell  and 
Faal, 2008)

Some  key  mainstream  commercial  tourist  opera-
tors have recognised their responsibility for desti-
nation  impacts  and  are  seeking  to  enhance  these. 
!e  emergence  of  sustainability  initiatives  at  the 
major European tourism fairs is evidence of this; for 
example, the Federation of Tour Operators (FTO) – 
umbrella organisation for the largest tour operators 
in the UK – encourages suppliers to respect mini-
mum wage legislation (FTO, 2006), to create corpo-
rate  social  responsibility  and  sustainable  develop-
ment  structures  in  mainstream  corporations,  and 
to establish sustainability accreditation and award 
systems for suppliers (Mitchell and Ashley, 2010). 

However, there is still a great deal to do before there 
is consensus among the development, commercial, 
public and research domains concerning PPT. In the 
development sector, some agencies remain scepti-
cal about including tourism projects in their port-
folios for a variety of reasons.3 Among the enthusi-

astic supporters of tourism projects, like NGOs and 
external donors, many are still seeking an ‘alterna-
tive’ to mainstream tourism. Developing countries 
are  littered  with  well-intentioned  community-
based  tourism  and  eco-tourism  projects4  which, 
with notable exceptions, are delivering limited ben-
eﬁts to few people. Developed in isolation from pri-
vate sector and commercial distribution channels, 
they lack the client volumes needed for commercial 
sustainability, and generally fail soon after the sup-
ply of concessionary funding dries up (Dixey, 2005; 
Harrison and Schipani, 2007). !e view that main-
stream  tourism  should  have  a  prominent  place  in 
poverty  reduction  programmes  for  low-income 
countries with a competitive tourist sector is prob-
ably not even held by the majority in the develop-
ment sector – let alone a consensus view. 

Mainstream  tourism  has  been  timid  in  adopting 
PPT principles, and its embracing of social and en-
vironmental sustainability has been late and piece-
meal.  With  the  majority  of  European  mainstream 
customers being unwilling to pay for more pro-poor 
holidays  (Schwartz  and  Font,  2009),  mainstream 
operators  have  understandably  taken  destination 
impacts  into  account.  An  important  driver  for 
change  has  been  the  ﬂurry  of  recent  mergers  and 
acquisitions  that  has  resulted  in  some  organisa-
tions becoming listed on Western stock exchanges.5 
Several outbound tour operators and hotel chains 
have  a  market  capitalisation  of  EUR  2-4  billion, 
subjecting  them  to  onerous  review  and  reporting 
responsibilities.  Corporate  management  is  aware 
of the impact of negative stories emerging from de-
veloping country destinations. In this context, PPT 
initiatives can play a strategic role in reducing repu-
tational risk. As tourist companies work in complex 
environments, they appreciate that positive socio-
economic beneﬁts can increase their ‘social license 
to operate’. 

In  the  research  community  too,  PPT  does  not 
play a predominant role. While there have been 
many academic articles and several special edi-
tions  of  tourism  journals  focusing  on  PPT,  re-
searchers  concerned  with  the  destination  im-
pacts of tourism operate in contested territory. 
In addition to PPT, many use alternative terms 
–  such  as  ‘responsible’,  ‘inclusive’  and  ‘sustain-
able’  tourism.  In  the  view  of  the  author  there 
is  no  harm,  and  probably  merit,  in  research-
ers  with  similar  principles  and  goals  operating 
under different labels. Some researchers still be-
lieve – despite the mounting evidence - that ...

ISSUE 7 - SEPTEMBER 2010 - SHOULD TOURISM BE PROMOTED IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES? 4

