ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 26 May 2016
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00329

Retrieval Interference in
Syntactic Processing: The Case
of Reﬂexive Binding in English

Umesh Patil 1, 2*, Shravan Vasishth 1 and Richard L. Lewis 3

1 Department of Linguistics, University of Potsdam, Potsdam, Germany, 2 Computational Linguistics, Institute of Cognitive
Science, University of Osnabrück, Osnabrück, Germany, 3 Department of Psychology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI,

USA

It has been proposed that in online sentence comprehension the dependency between a
reﬂexive pronoun such as himself/herself and its antecedent is resolved using exclusively
syntactic constraints. Under this strictly syntactic search account, Principle A of the
binding theory—which requires that the antecedent c-command the reﬂexive within
the same clause that the reﬂexive occurs in—constrains the parser’s search for an
antecedent. The parser thus ignores candidate antecedents that might match agreement
features of the reﬂexive (e.g., gender) but are ineligible as potential antecedents because
they are in structurally illicit positions. An alternative possibility accords no special
status to structural constraints: in addition to using Principle A, the parser also uses
non-structural cues such as gender to access the antecedent. According to cue-based
retrieval theories of memory (e.g., Lewis and Vasishth, 2005), the use of non-structural
cues should result in increased retrieval times and occasional errors when candidates
partially match the cues, even if the candidates are in structurally illicit positions. In this
paper, we ﬁrst show how the retrieval processes that underlie the reﬂexive binding are
naturally realized in the Lewis and Vasishth (2005) model. We present the predictions of
the model under the assumption that both structural and non-structural cues are used
during retrieval, and provide a critical analysis of previous empirical studies that failed
to ﬁnd evidence for the use of non-structural cues, suggesting that these failures may
be Type II errors. We use this analysis and the results of further modeling to motivate
a new empirical design that we use in an eye tracking study. The results of this study
conﬁrm the key predictions of the model concerning the use of non-structural cues,
and are inconsistent with the strictly syntactic search account. These results present
a challenge for theories advocating the infallibility of the human parser in the case of
reﬂexive resolution, and provide support for the inclusion of agreement features such as
gender in the set of retrieval cues.

Keywords: sentence processing, anaphor resolution, memory retrieval, interference, computational modeling, eye
tracking

1. INTRODUCTION

Sentence comprehension involves, among other things, recovering hierarchical structure from
an input string of words (e.g., Frazier, 1979). Such recovery requires the online application of
grammatical constraints that delimit the possible relationships between various elements of the
sentence. For example, to understand a sentence like (1), the pronoun himself has to be resolved

Edited by:

Colin Phillips,

University of Maryland, College Park,

USA

Reviewed by:

Dan Parker,

College of William & Mary, USA

Jeffrey Thomas Runner,

University of Rochester, USA

*Correspondence:

Umesh Patil

umesh.patil@gmail.com

Specialty section:

This article was submitted to

Language Sciences,

a section of the journal

Frontiers in Psychology

Received: 05 September 2015

Accepted: 22 February 2016

Published: 26 May 2016

Citation:

Patil U, Vasishth S and Lewis RL

(2016) Retrieval Interference in

Syntactic Processing: The Case

of Reﬂexive Binding in English.

Front. Psychol. 7:329.

doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00329

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

1

May 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 329

Patil et al.

Retrieval Interference in Reﬂexive Binding

to a referent of an earlier noun surgeon; the reﬂexive cannot be
associated with Jonathan due to Principle A of the binding theory
(Chomsky, 1981)1.

(1)

The surgeon who treated Jonathan had pricked himself.

Establishing a relationship between two non-adjacent elements in
a sentence requires maintaining some memory of the immediate
past. The question we are concerned with here is: what role do
grammatical and non-grammatical constraints play in the access
to the immediate past? The binding of English reﬂexive pronouns
is a particularly informative case, because the conﬁgurational
and agreement constraints are relatively clear, and the structure
admits manipulations of distance and distracting candidate
antecedents (Sturt, 2003).

One proposal for how structural constraints are implicated in
dependency resolution is motivated by the experiments reported
in Nicol and Swinney (1989), Sturt (2003), and Xiang et al. (2009).
Using diﬀerent experimental methodologies, these studies found
that a grammatically incorrect antecedent [e.g., Jonathan in (1)]
does not interfere in the process of binding a reﬂexive pronoun by
a grammatically correct antecedent [e.g., surgeon in (1)], at least
in the early stages of processing a reﬂexive.

Nicol and Swinney (1989) presented evidence from a
series of experiments that employed the cross modal lexical
priming paradigm. Participants listened to sentences similar
to those shown in (2) and responded to visually presented
probe words that was presented immediately following the
reﬂexive himself. The probe word was either semantically
related or unrelated to one of the three previously occurring
nouns in the sentence (boxer, skier, or doctor). Participants
judged whether the probe word was a word or non-word.
A signiﬁcant priming eﬀect was observed when probe words
were related to grammatically accessible as antecedents [e.g.,
doctor in (2)], but not when they were related to grammatically
inaccessible antecedents [e.g., boxer and skier in (2)]. Nicol
and Swinney (1989) concluded that no priming was observed
for words related to grammatically inaccessible antecedents
because they had not been considered during co-reference
resolution.

(2)

The boxer told the skier that the doctor for the team
would blame himself for the recent injury.

Sturt (2003) reported eye tracking studies using materials such as
(3). He found that ﬁrst ﬁxation duration and ﬁrst pass reading
time on the region containing the reﬂexive were longer when
the gender of the reﬂexive did not match the stereotypical
gender of the grammatically accessible antecedent than when
it matched (e.g., herself and surgeon vs. himself and surgeon).
Early reading times were not aﬀected by gender match between

1Principle A speciﬁes a structural constraint on the interpretation of reﬂexives
in English: a reﬂexive must be bound by an antecedent in the local domain (the
current clause). An antecedent X can bind a reﬂexive Y, if X and Y are coindexed,
and X c-commands Y. The term c-command deﬁnes a hierarchical relationship
between two constituents in a syntax tree. A constituent c-commands its sister
constituent and every constituent below the sister constituent in the syntax tree.
In (1), the reﬂexive himself is bound by surgeon; the noun Jonathan cannot bind
the reﬂexive because it does not c-command it.

the reﬂexive and the grammatically inaccessible antecedent
(Jonathan or Jennifer). Second pass reading time at the reﬂexives
showed an interaction for gender match between the reﬂexive
and the two antecedents suggesting that in later interpretation
stages (but, crucially, not in earlier processing stages)2 the
inaccessible antecedent is part of the candidates being considered
as antecedents. There was also an eﬀect of the inaccessible
antecedent in second pass reading time in the pre-ﬁnal region,
but this eﬀect was observed only when the accessible antecedent
matched the gender of the reﬂexive. However, these late eﬀects
of the inaccessible antecedent were not observed in the second
experiment [with design as in (4)], but he pointed out that the
absence of any eﬀect of the inaccessible antecedent in Experiment
2 could have been due to the fact that the inaccessible antecedent
did not c-command the reﬂexive and it was also not as prominent
as in Experiment 1.

To gain further insight into this late-stage interpretation of
the sentences, Sturt (2003) also ran a follow-up study, where
a sentence-by-sentence self-paced reading task was followed
by a question that directly probed for the antecedent of the
reﬂexive. This study showed a signiﬁcant interference eﬀect, with
more ungrammatical interpretations when the grammatically
inaccessible antecedent matched the gender of the reﬂexive;
the eﬀect was bigger when the accessible antecedent did not
match the gender of the reﬂexive. Sturt (2003) concluded that
grammatical constraints are applied very early in processing,
but interference from the grammatically inaccessible antecedent
occurs during later processes that are related to recovery
strategies, rather than during processes related to the initial
interpretation of the reﬂexive.

(3)

(4)

the City
{Jonathan/Jennifer} was pretty worried at
Hospital. {He/She} remembered that the surgeon had
pricked {himself/herself} with a used syringe needle.
There should be an investigation soon.

the City
{Jonathan/Jennifer} was pretty worried at
Hospital. The surgeon who treated {Jonathan/Jennifer}
had pricked {himself/herself} with a used syringe needle.
There should be an investigation soon.

Dillon et al. (2013) reported two eye tracking studies with English
reﬂexives using material with syntactic structure similar to
Experiment 2 in Sturt (2003). They also did not ﬁnd any eﬀect of
the inaccessible antecedent, but reported eﬀects of the accessible
antecedent. Xiang et al. (2009) reported similar results in an ERP
study, where they found that a P600 is elicited by a reﬂexive
that mismatches the stereotypical gender of the grammatically
accessible antecedent, and is not attenuated by the presence of
a matching antecedent in a grammatically inaccessible position.
Based on results from these studies, Phillips et al. (2011)

suggests that:

“. . . argument
from
structurally inaccessible antecedents because antecedents are

to interference

reﬂexives are

immune

2In this paper, we follow the literature (see e.g., Sturt, 2003) in assuming that so-
called early and late measures in eye tracking data map onto processes that occur
(respectively) in early and late stages of parsing.

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

2

May 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 329

