The EMBO Journal Vol.18 No.14 pp.4023–4034, 1999

PLENA and FARINELLI: redundancy and regulatory
interactions between two Antirrhinum MADS-box
factors controlling ﬂower development

Brendan Davies1, Patrick Motte2,3,
Emma Keck4, Heinz Saedler2,
Hans Sommer2 and
Zsuzsanna Schwarz-Sommer2

Leeds Institute for Plant Biotechnology and Agriculture,
University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, 4Department of Genetics,
John Innes Centre, Norwich NR4 7UH, UK and 2Max Planck Institut
fu¨r Zu¨chtungsforschung, Carl-von-Linne´ Weg 10, 50829 Ko¨ln,
Germany
3Present address: Department of Plant Biology, University of Lie`ge,
B-4000 Lie`ge, Belgium
1Corresponding author

We report the discovery of an Antirrhinum MADS-box
gene, FARINELLI (FAR), and the isolation of far
mutants by a reverse genetic screen. Despite striking
similarities between FAR and the class C MADS-box
gene PLENA (PLE), the phenotypes of their respective
mutants are dramatically different. Unlike ple mutants,
which show homeotic conversion of reproductive
organs
to perianth organs and a loss of ﬂoral
determinacy, far mutants have normal ﬂowers which
are partially male-sterile. Expression studies of PLE
and FAR, in wild-type and mutant backgrounds, show
complex interactions between the two genes. Double
mutant analysis reveals an unexpected, redundant
negative control over the B-function MADS-box genes.
This feature of the two Antirrhinum C-function-like
genes is markedly different from the control of the
inner boundary of the B-function expression domain
in Arabidopsis, and we propose and discuss a model
to account for these differences. The difference in
phenotypes of mutants in two highly related genes
illustrates the importance of the position within the
regulatory network in determining gene function.
Keywords: ﬂoral determinacy/homeotic mutants/MADS-
box/male sterility/regulatory network

Introduction
The study of Antirrhinum and Arabidopsis ﬂoral homeotic
mutants produced a simple combinatorial model to explain
how the regulated expression of a few genes could
determine the organ composition of the ﬂower (Coen
and Meyerowitz, 1991). The model proposes that three
functions are expressed in adjacent, overlapping whorls
such that the A-function is expressed in whorls 1 and 2,
the B-function in whorls 2 and 3, and the C-function in
whorls 3 and 4. Expression of the A-function alone
determines sepal development, co-expression of the A-
and B-functions or the B- and C-functions speciﬁes petals
or stamens, respectively, and expression of the C-function
alone results in carpel development. In B-function mutants,

reproductive organs.

petals and stamens are replaced by sepals and carpels,
In C-function mutants, perianth organs
respectively.
develop in place of
In both
Antirrhinum and Arabidopsis, a single C-function and two
B-function genes have been identiﬁed and shown to encode
MADS-box transcription factors (Sommer et al., 1990;
Yanofsky et al., 1990; Jack et al., 1992; Tro¨bner et al.,
1992; Bradley et al., 1993; Goto and Meyerowitz, 1994).
The MADS-box family is deﬁned by the presence of a
58 amino acid domain which is conserved between the
founding members; MCM1 (yeast), AGAMOUS and
DEFICIENS (plants) and SRF (animals) (Schwarz-Sommer
et al., 1990). Although MADS-box genes have been identi-
ﬁed and characterized in animals and yeasts (Shore and
Sharrocks, 1995), they are found most extensively in plants
(Theissen et al., 1996, Liljegren et al., 1998). The ⬎200
known plant MADS-factors, from many different species,
have been divided into sub-families based mainly on their
predicted amino acid sequences (Doyle, 1994; Purugganan
et al., 1995; Theissen et al., 1996). Often, genes from
different species which fall into one of these sub-families
have similar expression patterns and similar roles in
development. For example,
the B-function genes of
Antirrhinum [DEFICIENS (DEF) and GLOBOSA (GLO)]
and Arabidopsis [APETALA3 (AP3) and PISTILLATA (PI)]
are expressed mainly in the second and third whorls and
show similar mutant phenotypes. Similarly, the C-function
genes of Antirrhinum [PLENA (PLE)] and Arabidopsis
[AGAMOUS (AG)] are expressed in the third and fourth
whorls and show similar mutant phenotypes. Currently
identiﬁed functions of the MADS-box gene family include
the control of organ identity (see above), ﬂowering time
(Sheldon et al., 1999), meristem identity (Huijser et al.,
1992; Mandel et al., 1992; Kempin et al., 1995), regulation
of ovule development (Angenent et al., 1995), regulation
of fruit development (Gu et al., 1998) and control of root
architecture (Zhang and Forde, 1998).

Here we report the isolation of a novel Antirrhinum
MADS-box gene, FARINELLI (FAR), and a recessive far
mutant. We show that all our current criteria identify FAR
as a second C-function gene. However, far mutants display
none of the typical features of C-function mutants and
instead show reduced male fertility. Furthermore, the ple/
far double mutant reveals that PLE and FAR act redundantly
to prevent expression of the B-function genes, DEF and
GLO, in the fourth whorl. We propose a model for the
interactions of PLE and FAR and show that two crucial
differences could account for the variation in single and
double
in
Antirrhinum and Arabidopsis.

homeotic mutant

phenotypes

observed

Results
IsolationofasecondAntirrhinumC-functiongene
To identify further members of the MADS-box gene
family, an Antirrhinum ﬂoral cDNA library was screened

© European Molecular Biology Organization

4023

B.Davies etal.

Fig. 1. Sequence analysis of FAR. (A) The predicted amino acid sequences of AG, PLE and FAR were aligned using MacVector. For the purposes of
this alignment, AG was truncated at its N-terminal end. Identical residues are shown boxed and shaded. Gaps have been introduced to maximize
alignment. The MADS-box is underlined. MADS-box factors which are known to control similar processes in different species have been noted to
share a short stretch of amino acid identity at their C-terminal ends (Hansen et al., 1993). AG, PLE and FAR share the sequence LQLV in this
position. (B) Schematic diagram of the exons (boxes) and introns (lines) of the PLE and FAR genes. Shading within the boxes signiﬁes coding
regions. The information concerning PLE was compiled from Bradley et al. (1993) and from our sequence data (B.Davies and H.Sommer,
unpublished). The small shaded boxes in the second introns signify the position of the conserved sequence referred to in the text. (C) C-function
factor sequences from Antirrhinum (Bradley et al., 1993), Arabidopsis (Yanofsky et al., 1990), petunia (Tsuchimoto et al., 1993; Angenent et al.,
1994), tobacco (Kempin et al., 1993), cucumber (Kater et al., 1998) and maize (Mena et al., 1996) were collected and analysed by the GCG pileup
program (Devereux et al., 1984).

using the Arabidopsis C-function gene AG (Yanofsky
et al., 1990) as a probe. Sixteen strongly hybridizing
clones which did not correspond to PLE were identiﬁed,
and DNA sequence analysis showed that they were derived
from the MADS-box gene, FAR, which is closely related to,
but distinct from, PLE (Bradley et al., 1993) (Figure 1A). A
FAR probe was used to screen an Antirrhinum genomic
library and the DNA sequence of 7 kb spanning the FAR
coding region was determined. The FAR gene, like PLE,
comprises nine exons, the ﬁrst of which is non-coding
(Figure 1B). In both cases, the MADS-box is encoded by

the second exon and is preceded by 16 or 17 amino acids
(Figure 1A). This N-terminal extension is a characteristic
of C-function homeotic MADS-box factors, such as PLE
and AG, and related proteins such as AGL1 and AGL5
(Ma et al., 1991). Within the MADS-box, each pair of
factors is 95% identical and, over the entire protein
sequence there is 64–67% identity (Figure 1A). Thus,
based on the functions of the most closely related genes,
it appeared likely that FAR is a C-function factor involved
in determining the identity of the ﬂoral reproductive
organs. Another feature of the C-function genes, which is

4024

