Article

More than just money: Patterns of disaggregated welfare 

expenditure in the enlarged Europe

Kati Kuitto*

Department of Political Science, University of Greifswald, Greifswald, 

Germany

Summary  This article demonstrates the potential of the disaggregated expenditure approach in com-
parative welfare state analysis by applying it for comparing patterns of welfare spending across 28 
European countries. An initial factor analysis shows that welfare states differ primarily along their 
emphasis  either  on  cash  transfers  for  the  elderly  or  on  social  services  and  cash  transfers  for  the 
working-age population. European welfare states cluster along these two spending dimensions in a 
way that to a great extent coincides with the well-known delineation of welfare regimes based on 
institutional characteristics. Furthermore, the results attest to the emergence of a variety of welfare 
arrangements in the post-communist region, yet with a general orientation toward a Bismarckian or 
conservative model. The results of this analysis demonstrate that disaggregated welfare expenditure 
measures retain considerable importance in elucidating the realities of contemporary welfare policy. 

Keywords  cluster analysis, disaggregated social expenditure, welfare regimes

Comparing national patterns of welfare policies and 
classifying divergent types of welfare states consti-
tutes  an  important  field  of  comparative  welfare 
state  research  (for  an  overview,  see,  for  example, 
Abrahamson,  2000;  Arts  and  Gelissen,  2002; 
Bambra, 2007; for the genesis of the regime analy-
sis,  see  Castles  and  Obinger,  2008).  Typology-
building is thereby not just an intellectual endeavour 
or  an  end  in  itself,  but  an  important  analytical 
means to an end. Typologies serve as a tool for cog-
nitive  simplification.  In  Richard  Titmuss’  words: 
‘The purpose of model-building is not to admire the 
architecture of the building, but to help us see some 
order  in  all  the  disorder  and  confusion  of  facts, 
systems and choices’ (Titmuss, 1974: 30). Welfare 
state classifications and typologies offer a meaningful 
point of origin for theory-building and causal analysis, 
when  not  only  single  programmes  or  institutions, 

but also the entirety of welfare state arrangements is 
the focus of the research interest. This is often the 
case in macro-quantitative comparisons. 

Classification systems have long been dominated 
by  indicators  of  welfare  institutions  and  social 
rights.  In  contrast  to  simple  measures  of  social 
expenditure,  the  superiority  of  institution  and 
rights-based typologies has been repeatedly stressed 
in the past. Yet the lack of comparable and concep-
tually substantiated time series data on welfare pol-
icies  and  institutions  is  still  an  Achilles’  heel  in 
comparative analysis (Clasen and Siegel, 2007).1 As 
a consequence, cross-country comparisons of welfare 
policy  patterns  and  their  causes  and  effects  have 
either  been  limited  to  countries  for  which  more 
sophisticated  data  like  welfare  state  generosity  is 
available,  (that  is,  the  Organisation  of  Economic 
Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries) 

*Author to whom correspondence should be sent: Kati Kuitto, Department of Political Science, University of Greifswald, 
Baderstrasse 6/7, D-17489 Greifswald, Germany. [email: kuitto@uni-greifswald.de]

© The Author(s), 2009. Reprints and permissions: http://www.sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav Journal of European Social Policy, 
© The Author(s), 2011. Reprints and permissions: http://www.sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav Journal of European Social Policy, 
0958-9287; Vol. 19(5): 348–14; 344247; DOI:10.1177/0958928709XXXXXX http://esp.sagepub.com
0958-9287; Vol. 21(4): 348–364; 412223; DOI:10.1177/0958928711412223 http://esp.sagepub.com

Downloaded from 

esp.sagepub.com

 at Max Planck Society on May 13, 2014

 

More than just money 

349

or  aggregate  social  expenditure  is  still  taken  as  a 
proxy  measure  for  welfare  stateness  especially  in 
analyses with pooled designs. The latter is especially 
unsatisfying,  since  total  social  expenditure  reveals 
barely anything of the contents of welfare policies 
and is often misleadingly interpreted as a measure of 
welfare generosity. 

As  increasingly  more  attention  is  paid  to  the 
dynamics  of  welfare  arrangements  on  the  one 
hand,  and  to  the  configuration  of  welfare  state 
arrangements  in  developing  and  middle-income 
countries  on  the  other,  the  question  of  feasible 
measures for welfare policies and the demand for 
appropriate  and  comparable  data  gains  added 
importance. One way of addressing this problem 
consists of refining the conception and utility of 
expenditure measures by relying on disaggregated 
social expenditure data and thus on the functional 
differentiation  of  welfare  spending.  These  kinds 
of data illuminate the contents of welfare policy 
effort,  namely,  which  programmes  and  purposes 
governments  emphasize  in  the  realm  of  welfare. 
Two  sources,  the  Social  Expenditure  Database 
(SOCX) by the OECD and the European System 
of 
Statistics 
(ESSPROS) by the Eurostat, now provide scholars 
with annual, time series data for a large number 
of countries. 

Social  Protection 

Integrated 

This article argues that the potential of disaggre-
gated  expenditure  data  is  far  from  being  fully 
exhausted  in  comparative  welfare  policy  analysis. 
Building upon earlier approaches (see for example 
Castles,  2004,  2008;  Flora,  1986;  Kautto,  2002; 
Klau, 1985; Saunders and Jensen, 2008; Tepe and 
Vanhuysse, 2010), I demonstrate that disaggregated 
expenditure  data  is  well  suited  for  comparative 
endeavours and, even though telling less about the 
quality  or  effectiveness  of  welfare  policies  for  the 
recipients, it reveals important parameters of welfare 
policy  arrangements  especially  from  the  public 
policy perspective. This article seeks to extend the 
disaggregated  expenditure  approach  for  compara-
tive analysis of welfare policy patterns by addressing 
the  following  question:  Do  disaggregated  welfare 
spending  patterns  reveal  significant  cross-country 
variation  among  European  welfare  states  in  line 
with a theoretically meaningful distinction between 
welfare regimes? In order to test this empirically, I 
take on Castles’ (2008) framework of four distinct 
spending  categories.  While  Castles’  approach  was 

primarily  descriptive,  derived  from  observing  the 
distinct  spending  patterns  among  Western  OECD 
countries, I apply a more robust method by utilizing 
factor  and  cluster  analysis  for  28  European  coun-
tries and use the ESSPROS data. This approach inte-
grates the Central and Eastern European (CEE) new 
member states of the European Union (EU) in the 
quantitative comparative analysis of welfare policy 
patterns – an attempt that has gained little methodo-
logically substantiated attention thus far. Applying 
the newly available disaggregated data will facilitate 
exploring  which  ways  the  emerging  patterns  of 
welfare policy arrangements in these countries cor-
respond  to  those  prevalent  in  Western  Europe.  In 
contrast to most previous analyses, I also account 
for social needs pressure factors potentially affecting 
welfare spending levels by adjusting the data with 
adequate weights. The results show that European 
countries cluster in a theoretically meaningful way 
along their functional welfare spending. These clus-
ters coincide to a high extent with different regimes 
or worlds of welfare.

The study is structured as follows: the next section 
discusses advantages, possibilities and limits of dis-
aggregated expenditure approaches and introduces 
three contemporary classifications of welfare states 
based  on  their  functional  spending  structure.  The 
third section outlines the data and method used in 
this  study  and  discusses  the  data  treatment  for 
adjusting  welfare  expenditure  for  needs  pressures. 
In the fourth section, the dimensionality of welfare 
spending is first depicted through a factor analysis 
before  testing  how  28  European  welfare  states 
cluster with respect to distinct categories of welfare 
policy expenditure. The characteristics of the clus-
ters  revealed  by  the  analysis  are  subsequently  dis-
cussed. The final section concludes by discussing the 
advantages and caveats of this approach for future 
research. 

Disaggregated social expenditure as a 
measure for welfare policy patterns
Advantages and limits of expenditure 
approaches in welfare state comparisons

As has been noted repeatedly by scholars of compar-
ative welfare state research, total social expenditure 
gives little information about the substantive content 
or  generosity  of  welfare  policies.  Esping-Andersen 

Downloaded from 

esp.sagepub.com

 at Max Planck Society on May 13, 2014

Journal of European Social Policy 2011 21 (4)