 
James Freeman 
Geography, Planning and Environment 
Concordia University 
Montreal, QC H3G 1M8 
Canada  
 
jfreeman@alcor.concordia.ca 
 
Abstract:  
The state government of Rio de Janeiro has embarked on an ambitious policy of favela 
pacification in an attempt to gain control of territories long controlled by drug gangs. 
While I recognize the potential as well as the flaws of the Police Pacification Unit (UPP) 
program in terms of providing security for a city with a history of crime and violence, I 
argue that the UPP policy is an integral part of Rio’s entrepreneurial city strategy 
centered around the 2014 World Cup and the 2016 Olympics. I see this as a case of what 
David Harvey calls accumulation by dispossession, where the state engineers the military 
conquest and control of territories, and the capture of assets by force, to create outlets for 
the expansion of private capital. Through a series of interviews with residents of 
“pacified” or soon to be pacified favelas, with police, community organizations, policy 
makers and researchers, and an analysis of the published sources, I identify four levels of 
capital accumulation that are facilitated by the UPP program. 
 

 
keywords: Police Pacification Units, Accumulation by Dispossession, Mega-events 

Neoliberal accumulation strategies and the visible hand of police pacification in Rio de Janeiro 
 

 

  

 

 

Early one Sunday morning this past November Rio’s men in black, the Special Police Operations 

Battalion (BOPE), rolled into Rocinha in black-washed armored vehicles emblazoned with the special 

battalion's iconic skull and dagger logo to establish yet another Police Pacification Unit (UPP), this time 

in Rio’s largest favela. Tight on the heels of the made-for-television spectacle1 came another invasion. By 

Monday access to the ubiquitous pirated cable television system was disconnected, and the community 

soon filled with representatives of various cable companies, seated at tables every few meters on 

commercial streets and wandering the narrow alleys passing out pamphlets and signing up residents for 

new services (Mendes, Magalhães, & Damasceno, 2011).  As in other “pacified” favelas, television 

providers have been followed by the electric company, the water company, bank branches, chain stores 

and tourism. Housing prices in and around occupied favelas have risen anywhere from 50 to 400%, 

sometimes even before the police arrive. One commentator for MoneyWeek, in advising UK readers on 

investment in Brazil, wrote recently: “[I]f you were to ask me where I think the most money is going to 

be made in the coming years, I would say it's from the emergence and development of the favelas (Frisby, 

2012).” 

 

Rio’s 763 favelas house 22% of the city’s population (2010 census), but they have long been 

ignored by the state. They have always been a de facto housing solution for the poor where the formal 

market and governments have failed. Leftover land, often hills that were once of little value, were 

occupied first by returning soldiers from the Canudos military campaign in late 19th century, then by the 

urban poor displaced by turn of the century slum clearance programs, then by waves of rural migrants 

who came to Rio to build the high-rises, roads and bridges of Rio’s 20th century modernization. The state 

has never taken full responsibility for these territories, except through sporadic interventions often 

motivated by populist electoral politics. Since the early 1980s, with the phasing out of the military 

dictatorship, armed drug gangs have filled the vacuum left by the state, exercising a mafia-like authority 

                                                 
1 Carta Capital reported that the police held off raising the Brazilian flag in Rocinha until after the Globo television 
network finished broadcasting the Formula One auto race. A gente se vê por aqui, 14 Nov 2011. See also 
(Tardáguila, 2010). 

  

