Sustainability 2013, 5, 3926-3940; doi:10.3390/su5093926 

OPEN ACCESS 

 

sustainability 

ISSN 2071-1050 
www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability 

Article 

Between Discourse and Reality: The Un-Sustainability of  
Mega-Event Planning 

Christopher Gaffney 

Escola de Pós-Graduação em Arquitetura e Urbanismo, Universidade Federal Fluminense,  

Passo da Pátria 156, Bloco D, Sala 541, São Domingos, Niterói, Rio de Janeiro 24201-240, Brasil;  

E-Mail: ctgaffney@id.uff.br; Tel.: +55-21-2629-5490; Fax: +55-21-2629-5491 

Received: 22 July 2013; in revised form: 28 August 2013 / Accepted: 5 September 2013 / 

Published: 16 September 2013 

 

 

Abstract:  The  zero-sum  nature  of  mega-event  hosting  encourages  cities  to  escalate 

investment  with  an  eye  towards  convincing  event  rights  holders  that  a  positive  outcome 

will  result.  The  discursive  frameworks  of  ―legacy‖  and  ―sustainability‖,  the  global 

competition  to  attract  events  and  the  compressed  event  horizon  make  for  mega-event 

preparation regimes  that  may  seriously  compromise  long-term  urban  planning  agendas  in 

mega-event  hosts.  By  examining  the  sustainable  urban  planning  literature,  the  discursive 

frameworks  of  sustainability  in  the  International  Olympic  Committee  (IOC)  and  the 

discursive framing of the Rio 2016 bid, this paper will examine the  Olympic Golf project 

being implemented in Rio de Janeiro. Through this case study the paper argues that unless  

mega-event rights holders change their candidacy and selection processes, these events will 

inevitably be detrimental to their hosts. 

Keywords: sustainability; discourse; sports-mega events; urban planning; Rio de Janeiro 

1. Introduction  

―Matters of social justice, of economic development, of international relations, of democracy, 

of  democratic  control  over  technological  change  and  globalization  also  have  both  short  and  

long-term  implications.  For  a  given  policy  to  be  desirable,  it  must  meet  the  constraints  of 

sustainability  in  each  of  these  dimensions;  failure  in  any  one  is,  in  theory,  sufficient  cause  

for rejection‖ [1]. 

According to the United Nations, sustainable development, ―meets the needs of the present without 

compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs‖ [2]. The Report of the World 

Sustainability 2013, 5 

 

3927 

Commission on Environment and Development marked the expansion of a discursive framework that 

sought  to  direct,  encapsulate  and  justify  models  of  development  that  would  permit  economic  growth 

within  the  dominant  mode  of  production  while  encouraging  environmental  protection  and  social 

equality [3]. Despite its cooptation by public relations firms and marketing agencies into a process of 

―green  washing‖,  the  progressively  wide  usage  of  the  term  sustainability  during  the  1990s  can  be 

considered  an  important  victory  for  the  environmental  movement.  It  may  be  no  accident  that  the  term 

―sustainable development‖ gained significance in public policy debates at the same time as ―globalization‖. 

The relative ease with which the term sustainability was applied to environmental issues was partly 

due  to  the  universalizing  characteristics  of  the  ―environment‖.  All  humans  are  dependent  upon  the 

natural environment and the preservation of the world’s natural resources was easily understood as a 

goal that could unite individuals  across political,  economic  and social spheres.  Thus, what was good 

for globalization (read as the expansion of markets) could also be either marketed or misunderstood as 

sustainable practice [4]. Many  of the political economy critiques of sustainability discourse focus on 

the use of the term to promote new forms of consumption that mask the realities hidden in the global 

consumption  chains  [5].  As  the  concept  of  sustainability  became  increasingly  distanced  from 

environmental  matters  and  extended  to  the  realms  of  production  and  consumption  the  term  began  to 

lose  much  of  its  early  coherence.  Transnational  actors  and  capitalist  interests  widely  incorporated 

―sustainability‖ as a benchmark requirement for their corporate social responsibility programs. A result 

of  this  process  was  that,  ―the  capture  of  the  discourse  of  sustainable  development  from  the 

environmental  movement  by  the  transnational  capitalist  class  [has]  made  it  even  more  difficult  to 

mount a radical critique of capitalist consumerism than would otherwise have been the case‖ [6]. 

Government  and  corporate  organizations  have  been  cited  as  notable  proponents  of  the  use  and 

misuse  of  the  term,  claiming  everything  from  coffee  cups  to  foreign  policy  strategies  ―sustainable‖. 

The emptying of a once powerful discursive element has forced companies, governments and planning 

agencies  to  disaggregate  the  concepts  that  formerly  fell  under  this  umbrella.  In  the  context  of  urban 

planning, words such as resilience, robustness and durability have replaced sustainability. It could be 

that  the  discursive  shifts  in  the  sustainability  debate  work  their  way  up  from  levels  of  collective 

consciousness, become incorporated into top-down frameworks, lose their original signifiers and then 

are reworked at local scales before filtering up again. 

The  implementation  of  sustainable  practice  ran  into  difficulty  in  the  urban  arena,  where  disputes 

and  conflicts  of  interest  are  infrequently  resolved  through consensual  frameworks.  The  sustainability 

consensus  was  built  upon  the  idea  that  the  natural  environment  should  be  preserved  as  an 

anthropomorphic  universal.  However,  consensus  cannot  extend  to  the  realms  of  housing,  mobility, 

labor and social justice because one group or coalition always benefits at the cost of another. As Hayes 

and Horne identify, ―most definitions [of sustainable development] emphasize the relationship between 

social  organization,  economic  development  and  resource  preservation  in  at  least  some  form‖  [7].  

The  Brundtland  Report implies  that  sustainability  is  a concept  that  focuses  on long-term  planning  or 

the  development  of  public  policies  that  measure  today’s  actions  in  terms  of  future  needs.  The 

suggestion that there are sustainable public policies, especially in cities, that will be of mutual benefit 

for everyone is a trap that ignores the disputed and non-consensual nature of urban life. 

The urban impacts of global sports events increased with the expansion of global markets in the late 

1980s  and  1990s  [8–10].  The  conceptual  shift  of  urban  managers  towards  ideologies  of  urban 

