C H A P T E R   4

Emotional Liberty

The  concept  of  emotives  elaborated  in  Chapter  3,  developed  in
response to a range of problems encountered by researchers on emo-
tions, has broad implications for the understanding of social life and
politics. The present chapter offers a preliminary exploration of these
implications. They will be spelled out in greater detail in Part II, which
examines a speciﬁc period of political and social change.

the  political 

implications  of 

Researchers  on  emotions  in  ﬁelds  other  than  anthropology  have 
frequently  neglected 
their  work. 
Psychologists  have  had  very  little  to  say  on  this  issue.  Philosophers 
and  historians  who  have  written  on  emotions  in  recent  years  have 
often  expressed  only  tangential  interest  in  the  political  dimension  of
their  ideas  (e.g.,  Solomon  1984,  1992;  De  Sousa  1987).  Speech  act 
theorists  have,  for  the  most  part,  treated  their  subﬁeld  as  a  highly 
technical one, concerning language and intention, requiring no explo-
ration  of  political  issues.  A number  of  philosophers,  historians,  and 
literary  critics  concerned  with  gender  have  recognized  the  political
implications  of  the  West’s  gendered  conception  of  emotions  (e.g.,
Greenspan  1988;  Jaggar  1989;  DeJean  1991;  Schiesari  1992;  Burack 
1994;  Roper  1994;  Pinch  1996  –  in  addition  to  the  anthropologists 
mentioned in Chapter 2). But these observers have focused their atten-
tion too much on redressing this imbalance and too little on the larger
implications  of  the  whole  mental  ontology  their  work  has  put  into
question.

Anthropologists  represent  an  important  exception  to  the  general
aversion  to  politics  displayed  by  researchers  on  emotions.  But  their
work  has  been  hampered  by  fear  of  ethnocentrism  and  the  ongoing 
critique  of  the  culture  concept;  and,  as  a  result,  those  working  on 
emotions tend to split according to whether they wish to offer politi-

112

Emotional Liberty

113

cal critiques of the West or political critiques of the social orders they
study. Anthropologists working on emotions, in addition, have lagged
far  behind  others  in  their  discipline  in  conceptualizing  historical
change. In this chapter I will show how the concept of emotives can
provide a foundation for a politically useful reconception of the rela-
tion  between  individual  and  collectivity,  that  is,  a  reconception  of
liberty. This idea of liberty will make possible, in turn, political analy-
sis of cultural variation and explanation of historical change, and it will
point toward a form of political engagement that is not reductionist,
condescending, or ethnocentric.

LIBERTY AND HISTORY IN THE ANTHROPOLOGY
OF EMOTIONS

As we saw in Chapter 2, anthropologists working on emotions have
confronted  a  severe  difﬁculty  in  attempting  to  make  political  judg-
ments of emotional regimes. Some have chosen to formulate a harsh
political critique of Western ideas about emotions, based on their ﬁnd-
ings in the ﬁeld. In non-Western contexts, they have found, emotions
are rarely regarded as private, quasi-biological responses that endan-
ger our reason; much more often they are valued as collective perfor-
mances. In addition, they have insisted that the wide range of variation
in  emotional  practices  undercuts  the  Western  biological  view.  Other
anthropologists  have  emphasized  the  emotional  impact  of  political
repression and exile in states such as Iran, China, or El Salvador, where
the local governments have engaged in policies of systematic violence
and disciplinary coercion that no Westerner would attempt to excuse.
But no anthropologist of emotions has offered a conceptual basis for
making  political  judgments  about  both  Western  and  non-Western 
practices  at  the  same  time,  including  communities  undergoing 
political  crisis  and  communities  whose  way  of  life  is  not  currently
subject to severe pressure from outside.

This difﬁculty has been compounded by an inability on the part of
anthropologists of emotion to talk about historical change in emotions
or  the  performances  associated  with  emotions.  While  most  practi-
tioners in the discipline have been won over to a strong awareness of
historical change, anthropologists of emotions have continued to use
the  “ethnographic  present”  in  describing  their  ﬁndings.  There  is  a
direct relation between this presentism and the roadblock to political

