 

 

Poloni-Staudinger, Lori M. 2008: The Domestic Opportunity Structure and Supranational 
Activity: An Explanation of Environmental Group Activity at the European Union 
Level, in: EUP, 4; 531-558. 

 
Subject of the text 
Political interest intermediation within the European Union (EU) 
 
General problem/question 
Environmental group activity at the EU level  
 
Central research question 
When and why do environmental non-governmental organizations bypass national-level activity 
to act at supranational level? Will groups access opportunities at the European Union when the 
domestic political opportunity structure (POS) is relatively closed? (p.532)  
 
Hypotheses  
Central  hypothesis:  The  domestic  opportunity  structure  influences  the  probability  of  group 
activity at the EU level (p.532)  
Further hypotheses:  
(H1a): When the left party is in power and/or green parties are more strongly represented in the 
national  parliament,  supranational  activity  decreases  and  national-level  activity  increases. 
(p.537)   
(H1b): When the left’s platform contains environmental issues, supranational activity decreases. 
On  the  other  hand,  weak  domestic  environmental  platforms  and  unresponsive  elites  at  home 
lead to increases in supranational activity. (p.537)  
(H2): When de-alignment1 is relatively higher, supranational level activities weaken, as interest 
groups concentrate on domestic activity. (p.538) 
(H3):  When  the  domestic  opportunity  structure  is  relatively  closed  or  volatility  is  higher, 
environmental  non-governmental  organizations  strengthen  their  activity  at  supranational  level. 
(p.538 f.)    
 
Methodological approach (p.532) 
Statistical analysis (logistic regression)  
Dependent variable: arena choice of interests groups (domestic or supranational)  
Independent variable: different aspects of the domestic opportunity structure  
Data: news wires over a period of nearly 25 years.  
The study restricted to environmental groups from the United Kingdom, France and Germany.  
 
Analysis 
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK (p.533-536)   

-  The theoretical framework relies on the multidimensional framework for analyzing social 
movement  activity  by  McAdam  et  al.  (1996),  including  aspects  of  three  research 
traditions – structuralist, rationalist and constructivist. (p.533)  

 

                                                            
1 According to Dalton et al. (1984), de-alignment designates an electoral period in which a political party loses part of his affiliated 
electorate. Therefore traditional party coalitions dissolve. 

According to McAdam et al., the operationalization of the political opportunity structure 
(POS)  should  incorporate  four  variables:  the  relative  openness  or  closure  of  the 
institutionalized political system; the stability or instability of the elite arrangements that 
typically  undergird  a  polity;  the  presence  or  absence  of  elite  allies;  and  the  state’s 
capacity and propensity for repression. (p.533) 

-  Nevertheless,  as  the  groups  examined  in  the  study  come  from  three  democratic  and 
relatively similar countries, Poloni-Staudinger chooses to focus only on the elite alliances 
and the electoral cleavages. (p. 533)   

ELITE ALLIANCES AND ARENA CHOICE (p. 536-537) 
Assumption: In Western Europe elite support for environmental groups come from traditional left 
and green parties. (p.537) 
 Hypothesis H1a  
Assumption: The likelihood of protest activity increases when the platform of the party in power 
does  not  contain  environmental  issues  or  when  the  environmental  movement  receives  less 
support from the party in power because the opportunity structure is relatively closed. (p.537)  
 Hypothesis H1b  
ELECTORAL CLEAVAGES AND ARENA CHOICE (p.538-539)  
Assumption:  Increasing  de-alignment  influences  the  type  of  activity  in  which  interest  groups  
engage (p. 538) 
 Changes in de-alignment might influence where groups act as well. (p.538)  
 Hypothesis H2  
Assumption: At national level, conventional group activities increase with electoral volatility, as 
the electoral instability opens the political opportunity structures for action. (p.538)  
 Hypothesis H3  
 
Results 
The four hypotheses of the study (H1a, H1b, H2 and H3) could be confirmed.  
  Support  exists  for  the  influence  of  the  domestic  opportunity  structure  (elite  alliances  and 
electoral cleavages) on arena choice. (p. 542)   
 Evidence exists for the multi-level governance approach, in which subnational interest groups 
use the European Union to out-maneuver states. (p. 546)  
Further findings:  

-  The domestic electoral calendar year has a significant influence on arena choice. During 
election  years,  the  probability  that  groups  will  act  at  supranational  level  increases, 
perhaps because environmental groups try to put more pressure on parties competing 
for the environmental vote. (p. 547)  

-  Groups from unitary states are more likely to act at the supranational level than groups 

from federal states. (p. 548)    
 

Critique  
Poloni-Staudinger  only  uses  domestic  factors  to  explain  the  arena  choice  of  environmental 
interest  groups.  The  influence  of  the  European  opportunity  structure  (number  of  green 
parliament  members  for  instance)  or  of  environmental  issues  (Tschernobyl,  the  increasing 
awareness of climate change etc.) are not examined.  

 

 

1 

2 

