|

|

䡬

Articles

Structure and Example in Modular
Political Phenomena: The Diffusion of
Bulldozer/Rose/Orange/Tulip Revolutions

Mark R. Beissinger

The article develops an approach to the study of modular political phenomena (action based in signiﬁcant part on emulation of the
prior successful example of others), focusing on the trade-offs between the inﬂuence of example, structural facilitation, and insti-
tutional constraints. The approach is illustrated through the example of the spread of democratic revolution in the post-communist
region during the 2000–2006 period, with signiﬁcant comparisons to the diffusion of separatist nationalism in the Soviet Union
during the glasnost’ era. Two models by which modular processes unfold are speciﬁed: an elite defection model and an elite learning
model. In both models the power of example is shown to exert an independent effect on outcomes, although the effect is consider-
ably deeper in the former than in the latter case. The elite defection model corresponds to the institutional responses to separatist
nationalism under glasnost’, while the elite learning model describes well the processes involved in the spread modular democratic
revolution among later risers in the post-communist region, limiting the likelihood of further revolutionary successes. The article
concludes with some thoughts about the implications of the power of example for the study of modular phenomena such as democ-
ratization, nationalism, and revolution.

S ince 2000, four successful revolutions have occurred

in the post-communist region, each overthrowing
regimes practicing fraudulent elections and bring-
ing to power new coalitions in the name of democratiza-
tion. These successful revolutions have inspired democratic
oppositions throughout the post-Soviet states toward emu-
lation, and democratic revolution has come to the center
of attention within the American government and
democracy-promoting NGOs as a strategy for democra-
tization. Like European monarchs after 1848, post-
Soviet strongmen have grown tremendously concerned
about the transnational spread of revolution. Most have
already taken countermeasures to stave off such a possi-
bility. Thus, post-Soviet Eurasia has become a region con-
sumed by the hope, fear, and aftermath of modular
revolutionary change.

Mark R. Beissinger is Professor of Politics, Princeton Uni-
versity (mbeissin@princeton.edu). The author is grateful to
the School of Social Science at the Institute for Advanced
Study at Princeton, the Wissenschaftskolleg zu Berlin, and
the University of Wisconsin-Madison for the opportunity to
pursue research for this essay. He would also like to thank
Nancy Bermeo, Valerie Bunce, Atul Kohli, Jon Pevehouse,
Grigore Pop-Eleches, Edward Schatz, Jack Snyder, Al
Stepan, Joshua Tucker, and two anonymous reviewers for
their feedback on an earlier version of this article.

I use the term “modular” in the way in which Tarrow
used the term to describe the spread of collective action
across groups.1 Modular action is action that is based in
signiﬁcant part on the prior successful example of
others—a model being, in one of Webster’s deﬁnitions,
“an example for imitation or emulation.” Modular phe-
nomena like the democratic revolutions that have occurred
among the post-communist states present a challenge for
social science theorizing, because the cross-case inﬂu-
ences that in part drive their spread violate the assump-
tion of the independence of cases that lies at the basis of
much social scientiﬁc analysis—both analyses based on
the Millian method, as well as those statistical analyses
that rely on the assumption that the result of each throw
of the political dice is independent of the results of prior
throws. In social science the problem of cross-case inﬂu-
ences is sometimes known as “Galton’s problem,” named
after Sir Francis Galton, who in 1889 criticized an analy-
sis of Edward Tylor that claimed to show correlations
between economic and familial institutions in a wide
variety of societies and explained them from a function-
alist standpoint. Galton questioned whether these cus-
toms were independent of one another, speculating that
they may have ultimately derived from an earlier com-
mon source. Modular phenomena based in the conscious
emulation of prior successful example constitute only one
form of cross-case inﬂuence; spillover effects, herding
behavior, path-dependence, and reputational effects are

DOI: 10.1017/S1537592707070776

June 2007 | Vol. 5/No. 2 259

䡬

䡬

|

|

䡬

䡬

Articles | Structure and Example in Modular Political Phenomena

other ways in which cases may be connected with one
another. Not all social phenomena are modular, and Gal-
ton’s problem is not a universal one. But in a globalizing,
electronic world in which local events are often moni-
tored on a daily basis on the other side of the planet, the
challenges posed to social scientiﬁc analysis by Galton’s
problem (and by modular behavior in particular) are grow-
ing in many spheres of activity.

Galton’s problem is a signiﬁcant issue within the study
of democratization and revolution. Since the 1980s it has
generally been recognized that democratization has come
in waves affecting particular world regions or groups of
countries within relatively compact periods of time, and
scholars ranging from Huntington to Whitehead have writ-
ten of the demonstration effects of one case on another.2
There is indeed considerable cross-national statistical evi-
dence, much of it coming from the international relations
ﬁeld, that demonstrates that cross-case inﬂuence has played
an important role in fostering democratization. Dividing
the world into seven regions, Pevehouse has shown in a
cross-national time-series study that, controlling for other
factors, an authoritarian regime’s odds of a democratic
transition are increased anywhere from 6 to 10 percent for
each country in its world region that is democratic.3 Yet,
much of the comparative politics literature on democrati-
zation continues to treat cases as if they were entirely inde-
pendent of one another and has failed to probe the
consequences that might ﬂow speciﬁcally from change
through example. A review article concerning what the
past two decades in the study of democratic transitions
have taught us, for instance, does not even raise the issue.4
This neglect of the implications of cross-case inﬂuence is
true to a large degree across the various schools of thought
within the democratization literature—both among those
focusing on the social structural pre-requisites for democ-
ratization, as well as those focusing on the speciﬁc context
of transition. The situation within the study of revolu-
tions is equally unsatisfactory. Revolutions have long been
known to be modular in nature; one need merely recall
late eighteenth- and early nineteenth-century revolutions
in the Americas and Europe, the revolutions of 1848, and
the revolutions of 1989. An older generation of historians
treated revolutions as inter-related phenomena, not as a
collection of unrelated cases.5 But while a few scholars
continue to place the cross-case aspects of revolution cen-
trally in their work, most social science theories of revo-
lutions treat cases as if they were entirely independent of
one another.6

My purposes in this article are two-fold: to lay out an
approach to the study of modular political phenomena
in general, and to analyze the modular democratic revo-
lutions currently taking place in the post-communist region
in accordance with this approach. The spread of demo-
cratic revolution to the post-Soviet states was not pre-
dicted by most analysts. Scholars who write about

260 Perspectives on Politics

democratic revolutions had argued that the most likely
regimes to experience democratic revolutions were sul-
tanistic regimes or frozen post-totalitarianisms ( Juan Linz’s
term for ossiﬁed communist regimes).7 None of the
regimes that have so far experienced modular democratic
revolution could be characterized in such terms. More-
over, prior to these revolutions most analysts believed
that the structural conditions for successful revolution in
the region were weak, and that governments would
undoubtedly repress any such attempt. Post-Soviet states
were believed to have reached some type of dismal equi-
librium of pseudo-democracy and corruption, and that
some version of authoritarianism was an inescapable part
of the post-Soviet legacy (the Baltic being the only excep-
tions). Even most Serbs, Georgians, Ukrainians, and Kyr-
gyz did not believe that such events were possible prior
to their occurrence.8 The rise of modular democratic rev-
olution in the post-communist states thus confounded
expert predictions and public expectations alike—not the
ﬁrst time this has happened in this part of the world.

Those analysts who were skeptical about the possibili-
ties for revolution in the post-communist region were per-
haps not so far off the mark. Taken individually, the
structural conditions for revolutionary success in each of
these countries could be seen as lacking in certain respects.
But analysts failed to take into consideration the power of
example. My argument is that within modular phenom-
ena the inﬂuence of example can substitute to some extent
for structural disadvantage, allowing some groups that
might be less structurally advantaged to engage in success-
ful action by riding the inﬂuence of the prior example of
others. Herzen called this history’s “chronological unfair-
ness,” for by taking advantage of the actions of one’s pre-
decessors, one does not have to pay the same price.9 I will
argue that, in the case of the democratic revolutions of the
post-communist region, without these cross-case effects,
failed revolution or even the absence of attempted revolu-
tion would have been much more widespread phenomena
than they have been, and groups that are less structurally
advantaged in terms of the factors facilitating revolution
or democratic transition have come to succeed due to the
ability to take advantage of the example of others.

After introducing the subject of modular democratic
revolution, I will lay out an approach to the study of
modular phenomena in general, focusing on the tradeoffs
between structural facilitation, the power of example, and
institutional constraints. I will illustrate this approach
through the example of the spread of modular democratic
revolution in the post-communist region, with compari-
sons to the diffusion of separatist nationalism in the Soviet
Union during the glasnost era—a modular process that I
have studied in depth elsewhere.10 In particular, I will
specify two models by which modular processes unfold:
an elite defection model and an elite learning model. As I
will show, in both models the power of example exerts an

䡬

