Cocaine and Parallel Polities in the Brazilian Urban Periphery: Constraints on Local-Level
Democratization
Author(s): Elizabeth Leeds
Reviewed work(s):
Source: Latin American Research Review, Vol. 31, No. 3 (1996), pp. 47-83
Published by: The Latin American Studies Association
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2503884 .
Accessed: 15/05/2012 12:17

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

The Latin American Studies Association is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to
Latin American Research Review.

http://www.jstor.org

COCAINE 

AND 

PARALLEL 

POLITIES 

IN  THE  BRAZILIAN 

URBAN 

PERIPHERY: 

Constraints  on  Local-Level  Democratization* 

Elizabeth Leeds 

Massachusetts Institute of Technology 

The observation  that redemocratization  in Latin America  is a frag- 
ile  process  has  become  a commonplace  in the  social  science  literature of 
the  past  few  years.  The  social  movements  crucial  to  the  return  of  pro- 
cedural  democracy  have,  we  are told,  lost  their  momentum  to  the  very 
forces they  helped  to restore. Electoral democracy  has  returned  in many 
places  with  neoclientelistic  overtones  that  are eroding  the  gains  in  con- 
sciousness  achieved  in  the  nonelectoral  years  (Hagopian  1993). The  ab- 
sence  of  a common  enemy,  most  often  an  authoritarian  military  regime, 
has  tended  to  mask  less  visible  but  often  equally  pernicious  enemies  in 
the form of violence  that is nonofficial  but tolerated nonetheless  (Pinheiro 
1992). And  although  procedural  democratic  practices  may  have returned 
for  the  middle  classes,  nothing  inherent  in  the  transition  to  democracy 
guarantees  either  procedural  or  substantive  democracy  for  the  lower 
classes  (Huggins,  ed.,  1991; O'Donnell  1992; Fox 1994a).1 

*This article is part of a larger study  on the relationship  between  squatters and the state in 
Brazil. Research has been supported  by the Social Science Research Council  in an Advanced 
Grant on  Latin America  and  the Caribbean,  the  Bunting  Institute  of Radcliffe  College,  the 
John D. and  Catherine  T. MacArthur Foundation  in an institutional  grant to the Center for 
International Studies  at Massachusetts  Institute  of Technology, and the office  of the Dean  of 
the  School  of  Humanities  and  Social  Sciences  at  MIT. Interviews  were  carried  out  with 
leaders  in  twenty-five  favelas,  and  inmates  in  three 
government  officials,  community 
prisons  in  Rio  in  1987-1988, 1989, 1991, 1994, and  1995. I would  like  to  thank  my  research 
assistant  Maria Severa  da  Silva,  community  leaders,  and  especially  those  associated  with 
the Centro de Direitos  Humanos  Bento Rubiao for their many  hours of sharing  experiences 
and insights.  For obvious  reasons,  they  must  remain anonymous.  I would  also like to thank 
Martha  Huggins,  Susan  Eckstein,  and  Mick  Moore  as  well  as  the  anonymous  LARR 
reviewers  for perceptive  comments  on  earlier drafts  of  this  article. 

1. Procedural  democratic  practices  are  defined  here  as  those  that  support  free  speech, 
open  elections,  freedom  of  association,  and  the  unhindered  operation  of  political  parties. 
These  practices  are  employed  as  criteria  distinct  from  the  notion  of  substantive  democ- 
racy  suggesting  that  equal  opportunity  for  all  segments  of  the  population  through  such 
rights as adequate  education,  health,  and housing  should  be considered  an essential  part of 
democratization.  Whether  social  and  economic  variables  should  be  considered  part of  the 
definition  of democracy  is a major issue  in current discussions  of democratic  transition.  See, 

Latin American  Research Review  volume  31,  number  3  ?  1996 

47 

