PLoS ONE 7(11): e49360. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0049360 
Neuroimaging during Trance State: A Contribution to the 
Study of Dissociation 

Julio Fernando Peres, Alexander Moreira-Almeida, Leonardo Caixeta, Frederico Leao, 
Andrew Newberg 

Despite increasing interest in pathological and non-pathological dissociation, few researchers have 
focused on the spiritual experiences involving dissociative states such as mediumship, in which an 
individual (the medium) claims to be in communication with, or under the control of, the mind of a 
deceased person. Our preliminary study investigated psychography – in which allegedly ‘‘the spirit 
writes through the medium’s hand’’ – for potential associations with specific alterations in cerebral 
activity. We examined ten healthy psychographers – five less expert mediums and five with 
substantial experience, ranging from 15 to 47 years of automatic writing and 2 to 18 psychographies 
per month – using single photon emission computed tomography to scan activity as subjects were 
writing, in both dissociative trance and non-trance states. The complexity of the original written 
content they produced was analyzed for each individual and for the sample as a whole. The 
experienced psychographers showed lower levels of activity in the left culmen, left hippocampus, left 
inferior occipital gyrus, left anterior cingulate, right superior temporal gyrus and right precentral gyrus 
during psychography compared to their normal (non-trance) writing. The average complexity scores 
for psychographed content were higher than those for control writing, for both the whole sample and 
for experienced mediums. The fact that subjects produced complex content in a trance dissociative 
state suggests they were not merely relaxed, and relaxation seems an unlikely explanation for the 
underactivation of brain areas specifically related to the cognitive processing being carried out. This 
finding deserves further investigation both in terms of replication and explanatory hypotheses. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Different lines of research are coming together 
in a promising development pointing toward 
more profound comprehension of 
consciousness and dissociation Although the 
study of spiritual experiences such as 
mediumship is seminal to the 
development of our current understanding of 
the mind, their relevance was neglected by 
researchers in the past century. 
The present study provides useful preliminary 
data and points to the potential utility of 
epistemologically informed in-depth studies 
of dissociative states of consciousness and 
spiritual experiences to improve our 
understanding of the mind and its relationship 
with the brain. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

