493373 EJD19310.1177/0959680113493373European Journal of Industrial RelationsSchnabel

2013

Article

Union membership and 
density: Some (not so)  
stylized facts and challenges

European Journal of  
Industrial Relations
19(3) 255 –272
© The Author(s) 2013
Reprints and permissions: 
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/0959680113493373
ejd.sagepub.com

Claus Schnabel
Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Germany

Abstract
This  article  surveys  recent  data  and  empirical  literature  on  (trends  in)  unionization  and  its 
determinants  in  advanced  countries.  There  are  some  robust  stylized  facts,  for  instance  that 
unionization is positively related to public sector employment, establishment size, and the business 
cycle. Union-administered unemployment insurance and union presence at the workplace also 
play a positive role. However, some seemingly obvious explanations for union decline – such as 
economic globalization and changes in economic structure and workforce composition – do not 
seem to have impeded union membership everywhere; nor has the decentralization of collective 
bargaining.  It  also  remains  an  open  question  whether  changes  in  social  values  and  employee 
attitudes towards unions have affected unionization negatively.

Keywords
trade unions, union density, union membership, unionization

Introduction
In the 20th century, trade unions became important labour market and political actors in 
most industrialized countries. In the 21st century, however, some observers argue that 
‘organised labour seems heading for extinction’ (The Economist, 21 September 2006). 
Since  unions’  existence  and  influence  depend  on  their  ability  to  attract  and  nurture  a 
loyal  membership,  it  is  important  to  know  which  factors  determine  the  extent  and 
stability of unionization.

Although the economic, sociological and political science literature contains a rea-
sonable amount of theoretical and empirical work on unions and their membership, rela-
tively few stylized facts have emerged and some of these are not so stylized and robust 
at all. In particular, some popular perceptions – for example, that union decline is ubiq-
uitous, that unions cannot adjust to structural changes in the economy, that some groups 

Corresponding author:
Claus Schnabel, Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Lange Gasse 20, 90403 Nürnberg, Germany.  
Email: claus.schnabel@wiso.uni-erlangen.de

Downloaded from 

ejd.sagepub.com

 at UNIVERSITAET OSNABRUECK on April 3, 2016

256 

European Journal of Industrial Relations 19(3)

in the workforce simply do not unionize, and that unions are victims of globalization – 
are highly questionable. By surveying recent empirical studies from various disciplines 
on unionization in (mostly) Western countries, this article attempts to provide a clearer 
picture of what we know (and do not know) about union membership and density.

The focus is on empirical regularities and stylized facts. These can often be related to 
theoretical considerations from various disciplines, though usually not unambiguously 
(Ebbinghaus et al., 2011; Schnabel, 2003). Tests of theoretical explanations have proved 
difficult, and empirical studies usually take an eclectic approach combining economic as 
well as socio-political considerations. Most empirical analyses of unionization use one 
(or  more)  of  three  approaches  (Ebbinghaus  and  Visser,  1999;  Schnabel,  2003).  They 
either  stress  cyclical  explanations  and  attempt  to  identify  the  macro-determinants  of 
union  growth  and  decline  by  means  of  time-series  studies,  or  they  provide  structural 
explanations and focus on individual characteristics of union (and non-union) members 
as well as on sectoral and occupational factors, using cross-sectional or panel studies, or 
they  favour  institutional  explanations  and  analyse  cross-national  variations  in  institu-
tional settings assumed to influence unionization. This distinction will be followed below 
when discussing the relationships between unionization and the business cycle, struc-
tural change, workforce composition and institutional settings.1 Since the availability of 
international (panel) datasets has recently enabled researchers to combine some of these 
approaches,  considerable  attention  will  be  given  to  such  international  analyses.  First, 
however, an update on the extent and development of unionization in advanced capitalist 
countries is in order.

Union density: Some data and developments
Comprehensive  data  on  union  membership  and  density  are  provided  by  the  ICTWSS 
Database (Visser, 2011). While these stem from different sources and comparisons across 
countries should thus be made only cautiously, this is a minor problem when making 
comparisons over time. Table 1 presents trends in union density (union membership net 
of those outside the active, dependent and employed labour force as a proportion of wage 
and salary owners in employment) in countries for which consistent data are available for 
long time periods. Density has fallen in 24 of 25 countries over the last 20 years and in 
23  of  24  countries  over  the  last  30  years  (with  the  notable  exceptions  of  Spain  and 
Finland, respectively). Over the longest possible observation period, 1960 to 2010, den-
sity has fallen in 13 out of 18 countries but increased in five countries.

Although a cross-sectional comparison of data that stem from various sources should 
not be over-interpreted, it is also apparent that density varies substantially across coun-
tries.  The  most  recent  data  for  2009–2010  range  from  around  70  percent  in  Finland, 
Sweden  and  Denmark  to  under  12  percent  in  France,  South  Korea  and  the  USA. 
Substantial variation can also be observed in previous years, and the coefficients of vari-
ation across countries calculated for these years have tended to increase over time, indi-
cating divergence rather than convergence.

Two stylized facts emerge from this brief analysis. First, density has indeed fallen 
over the last decades in almost all affluent countries. Second, density and its trends vary 
considerably  across  Western  countries,  with  no  signs  of  convergence  towards  union 

Downloaded from 

ejd.sagepub.com

 at UNIVERSITAET OSNABRUECK on April 3, 2016

