Frequently Asked Questions for Language Skills Classes (Jones) 

Consultation 

Can I talk to you before or after class? I will try to answer quick questions before or after class. It is often not 
possible to deal with multiple or more complex questions, though, because I frequently have to teach another 
class directly before or after our session together. This involves picking up materials, making copies at a time 
when  the  copier  is  free,  and  setting  up  technical  equipment,  so  I  often  have  to  rush.  Please  don’t 
misunderstand this as unwillingness to speak to you.  

Does it really have to be your office hour? Since students sometimes come to my classes late or leave early in 
order to visit the office hours of other teachers, I consider it equally realistic to ask you do the same to visit 
mine. If, however, you have a valid reason for not being able to see me during my office hour, I will endeavour 
to  make  an  alternative  appointment.  This  does  not  always  work  out  due  to  the  classes  I  teach,  faculty 
meetings, etc, so wherever possible, please use the office hour.   

If there is a queue, will you still see me after the official end of the office hour? As long as I don’t have an 
urgent appointment after my office hour finishes, yes. 

Will  there  be  office  hours  during  the  semester  break?  Yes,  but  not  every  week  and  not  necessarily  at  the 
same times. Check the announcements on the IfAA Stud-IP for my office hours during the semester break. Also 
see my email signature. 

Recognition of Courses 

Can  I  have  the  course  that  I  am  registered  in  recognised  for  [insert  course  of  study  /  module  here]?  Any 
questions about this should be directed to our coordinator of studies, Mr Brinkmann (rbrinkmann@uos.de). 

 

Moodle 

Do we need to do the tasks on Moodle? You need to do an absolute minimum of 80% of all online tasks on Moodle 
in  IELP  I  and  II  and  AELP  Speaking.  This  counts  as  basic  course  participation  and  you  cannot  pass  the  course  without 
having done at least 80% of them. 

What is the access password for my course on Moodle? Your teacher gave you this password in the first class 
session. It is also in the course plan document for IELP and AELP courses, which you will find on the courses’ 
Stud-IP pages. 

Whom should I contact with questions about or problems with Moodle? During the semester: Juliane Busch 
(julbusch@uos.de).  During  the  semester  break:  Mr.  Bonk  (jbonk@uos.de).  You  can  also  write  to  the  “IFAA 
Support" account on Moodle. 

I have a technical problem with Moodle. What should I do? Contact the email addresses above. Do not ignore the 
problem and hope for the best. 

I didn't do the tasks on Moodle in time. Can you put the quiz online again? By re-activating the quizzes, your 
fellow students will no longer be able to see the solutions and check their work Therefore, we will not be able to do that 
as it would deprive your classmates who completed the tasks on time of the chance to learn from them. Plan ahead using 
reminders on your mobile / email program. 

 

Exams 

When  is  my  IELP  I  /  II  final  test?  This  takes  place  during  the  penultimate  course  session,  in  your  course’s 
classroom. 

When  is  my  AELP  Writing  final  test?  This  takes  place  during  the  final  course  session,  in  your  course’s 
classroom. 

I have another exam at the time of my IELP I / II / AELP Writing final test. What can I do? Contact your class 
teacher to arrange to write your test during the session of one of the other classes. 

What do I need to be able to do in the IELP I / II test? There will be questions on grammar, productive and 
receptive vocabulary and mistakes identification and correction 

When is my IELP II oral exam? Sign up for an appointment using the online form that we send around by email 
at the appropriate time. 

What happens if I am  ill on the day of  my  exam?  Contact  your course teacher and let  them know  straight 
away. You will be able to come and take the exam on the second examination date. Make sure that you go to 
the doctor and get written confirmation that you are ill; hand in a copy of this on the second examination date.  

What happens if I fail the  oral exam? You will be offered the chance to re-take it on a second examination 
date.  

What do I need to be able to do in the Achievement Test? You will be tested on grammar, productive and 
receptive vocabulary and mistakes identification and correction. 

When is the next Achievement Test? The AT takes place every April and October in the week shortly before 
the start of each teaching semester. 

Submission of Course Tasks 

When  do  I  need  to  hand  in  my  paper  /  recorded  monologue?  In  AELP  Speaking,  you  need  to  submit  the 
recorded monologue  on the  day of your final class session.  In the AELP  Writing  course, your essay is due  in 
week 11 of the semester. In ALS / L2 / F4 courses, papers are due during the final class session. 

Why  is  the  deadline  not  during  the  semester  break?  We  Language  Skills  lecturers  teach  nine  classes  each 
semester. With 25-30 students per class, this amounts to an average of 250 papers and exams to mark at the 
end of each teaching semester, as well as recorded monologues for AELP Speaking courses. This means around 
350,000  words  to  read,  accompanying  grading  /  comments  forms  to  fill  out  as  well  as  70-90  exams!  These 
grades then also have to be entered into OPIUM. These administrative tasks have to be done under quite a bit 
of time pressure so that we can turn our attention to preparing the classes for the subsequent semester. We 
cannot have a backlog of papers moving into the subsequent semester alongside our teaching load so you will 
need to plan to hand in your assessed tasks at the end of the teaching semester.  

How can I hand in my paper? You need to hand in your paper in printed form. You can do this either in the 
class on the day or the deadline, or in any office hour on or before that date. You can also hand it in at the 
secretaries’ office on or before the  deadline. Your final option is by post,  making sure  that it arrives on the 
date of the deadline. Please make sure that your paper is in a folder, that you have gone through the Checklist 
for  Term  Papers  and  that  you  have  printed  and  signed  the  Grading  Form  with  Student’s  Declaration  and 
added it after the cover sheet. 

Can I send you my paper by email? No. It needs to be printed. 

