Review

TRENDS in Microbiology Vol.11 No.8 August 2003

359

Making informed decisions: regulatory
interactions between two-component
systems

Jetta J.E. Bijlsma and Eduardo A. Groisman

Department of Molecular Microbiology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Washington University School of Medicine,
Campus Box 8230, 660 S. Euclid Avenue, St Louis, MO 63110, USA

Bacteria experience a multitude of stresses in the com-
plex niches they inhabit. These stresses are denoted by
speciﬁc signals that typically alter the activity of individ-
ual two-component regulatory systems. Processing of
multiple signals by different two-component systems
occurs when multiple sensors interact with a single
response regulator, by phosphatases interrupting phos-
phoryl transfer in phosphorelays and through transcrip-
tional and post-transcriptional mechanisms. Gaining
insight into these mechanisms provides an understand-
ing at the molecular level of bacterial adaptation to ever
changing multifaceted environments.

phosphorylate from small molecular weight phosphoryl
donors, such as acetyl phosphate and carbamoyl phos-
phate [3,4]. In addition, the vast majority of sensor kinases
exhibit phosphatase activity towards their
cognate
response regulators. Although most two-component sys-
tems entail a single His-to-Asp phosphotransfer event
between a histidine kinase and a response regulator, there
is a subset that consists of a three-step His-Asp-His-Asp
phosphorelay (Fig. 1b) [1,2]. The extra phosphorylatable
domains in a phosphorelay can be present in separate
proteins or be part of multi-domain (i.e. hybrid) sensor
proteins, which, in either case, will ultimately donate the

A crucial question in signal transduction is: how does an
organism integrate multiple inputs into the most appro-
priate action? Most of the present knowledge on bacterial
gene regulation is based on studies conducted in labora-
tory settings, where conditions are carefully controlled
and, typically, only one stress is applied at a time.
Although this reductionist approach has been successful
in elucidating several regulatory mechanisms, it does not
take into consideration the multitude of simultaneous
stresses that bacteria experience in the niches they
occupy. We are now beginning to uncover how bacteria
adjust their behavior in response to multiple cues from
complex environments.

Bacteria sense environmental conditions using a
variety of systems, which include secondary metabolites
and ions, such as cyclic adenosine monophosphate and
Fe2þ
, and regulatory proteins, such as catabolite regulat-
ory protein (CRP) and ferric uptake regulator (Fur), whose
afﬁnity for DNA changes on ligand binding. However, two-
component systems are the predominant form of signal
transduction used by bacteria to respond to environmental
stresses [1,2]. Two-component systems usually consist of a
sensor protein (or histidine kinase) and a cognate response
regulator. Sensor proteins use adenosine triphosphate
(ATP) to autophosphorylate at a conserved histidine
residue, often in response to a speciﬁc signal. The high-
energy phosphoryl group is then transferred to a con-
served aspartate residue in the response regulator, often
altering its ability to bind target DNA sequences (Fig. 1a)
[1,2]. Certain response regulators have the ability to

Corresponding author: Eduardo A. Groisman (groisman@borcim.wustl.edu).

(a)

Sensor

Sensing
domain

Kinase
domain

P+

Response regulator

Receiver
domain

Regulatory

domain

ATP

ADP

(b)

ATP

ADP

H

H

D

P+

P+

D

D

P+

H

TRENDS in Microbiology 

Fig. 1. Two-component systems consist of a sensor protein (histidine kinase) that
transfers a high-energy phosphoryl group to the response regulator, which is
often a transcription factor. (a) The sensor protein autophosphorylates on a con-
served histidine residue (H) in the kinases domain (blue), often in response to sig-
nal sensing in the sensing domain (purple). The high-energy phosphoryl group (P)
is then transferred to a conserved aspartate (D) residue in the receiver domain
(green) of the response regulator, often changing the ability of its regulatory
domain (grey) to bind DNA. (b) The His-Asp-His-Asp three-step phosphorelay con-
sists of the transfer of the phosphoryl group from the conserved histidine in the
sensor to additional phosphorylatable aspartate and histidine residues in auxiliary
domains before transfer
the
response regulator. Many different arrangements of these extra phosphorylatable
domains exist within proteins and pathways. They are either present in separate
proteins, a representative example of which is depicted here, or part of multi-
domain (hybrid) sensors.

to the aspartate in the receiver domain of

http://timi.trends.com 0966-842X/03/$ - see front matter q 2003 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/S0966-842X(03)00176-8

360

Review

TRENDS in Microbiology Vol.11 No.8 August 2003

phosphoryl group to the response regulator controlling
gene transcription (Fig. 1b).

How is speciﬁcity between cognate sensor/regulator
pairs maintained in organisms harboring multiple two-
component systems? Based on conserved residues around
the phosphorylatable histidine, sensor proteins have been
divided into two major families and several minor ones [5].
The conserved residues of sensor proteins are proposed to
function as ‘anchors’ that mediate the interaction with
conserved residues around the phosphorylatable aspar-
tate in the response regulator, bringing the catalytic
residues of both molecules in close proximity [6,7].
Speciﬁcity between a cognate sensor/regulator pair is
then mediated by hypervariable residues around the
phosphorylatable aspartate in the response regulators
[6,8]. This notion is strengthened by the observation that
mutations in the hypervariable region of the response
regulator PhoB increase its afﬁnity for the non-cognate
sensor VanS [9].

Two-component systems are ideally suited to function in
the integration of multiple signals because the membrane
location of the sensor protein allows transduction of
environmental cues, and the high degree of speciﬁcity
of each sensor/regulator pair ensures a physiological
response. Different two-component systems can process
multiple signals into a particular response by interacting
with one another and/or by phosphorylating from small
molecular weight phosphodonors [10,11]. This article
will discuss: (1) how multiple sensors interact with a
single response regulator (Fig. 2a); (2) the phosphorylation
of response regulators by non-cognate sensors (Fig. 2b);
(3) the ability of phosphatases to interrupt the phosphoryl
ﬂow in His-Asp-His-Asp phosphorelays (Fig. 2a) and
(4) transcriptional and post-transcriptional control mech-
anisms (Fig. 2c, Fig. 2d).

Multiple sensors acting on a single response regulator
Different signals can be fed into the same regulatory
pathway if the phosphorylated state of a single response
regulator is modiﬁed by several cognate sensors, each
responding to a different signal. The best-studied example
of signal
integration is bacterial chemotaxis, where
swimming behavior is modiﬁed in response to changes in
the concentration of different substrates. These changes
are sensed by distinct chemoreceptors that, through the
coupling protein CheW, alter the phosphorylated state of
the histidine kinase CheA, resulting in phosphorylation of
the response regulators CheY and CheB [12]. Phosphoryl-
ation of CheY promotes a conformational change that
affects its ability to interact with the ﬂagellar motor,
altering ﬂagellar rotation from smooth to tumble. A
dedicated aspartyl phosphatase, termed CheZ, accelerates
the dephosphorylation of phospho-CheY. Phosphorylation
of CheB stimulates the methylesterase activity of CheB
towards the chemoreceptors, which leads to downregulation
of CheA autokinase activity, thereby providing a negative
feedback [12].

Escherichia coli has ﬁve chemoreceptors, which
respond to speciﬁc ligands [12] and are clustered at the
bacterial poles; these chemoreceptors form signaling
teams consisting of trimers of the same or different dimeric

http://timi.trends.com

chemoreceptors [13,14]. The chemoreceptor clusters form
a complex with CheA and CheW [14,15], thus enabling
simultaneous processing of multiple signals. Furthermore,
ligand binding by one chemoreceptor inﬂuences the
surrounding chemoreceptors, leading to increased stimu-
lation of CheA kinase activity [14,16,17].

A similar convergence of sensor proteins controls
sporulation in the Gram-positive bacterium Bacillus
subtilis. Here, ﬁve related histidine kinases – KinA,
KinB, KinC, KinD and KinE – phosphorylate the response
regulator Spo0F (Fig. 2a) [18]. The Kin proteins exhibit
sequence similarity in the residues surrounding the
phosphorylatable histidine residue that will donate the
phosphoryl group to the conserved aspartatyl residue in
Spo0F but differ in their putative sensing domains,
indicating that they respond to different ligands or
conditions. Consistent with this notion, the severity of
the sporulation defect displayed by mutants in KinA, KinB
or KinC depends on the growth conditions [19].

Quorum sensing governs bioluminescence in the mar-
ine bacterium Vibrio harveyi in response to two different
autoinducers: AI-1, speciﬁcally produced and detected by
V. harveyi, and AI-2, a product of the metabolism of a wide
variety of microorganisms [20]. These autoinducers are
sensed by two different hybrid histidine kinases: LuxN,
which senses AI-1, and LuxQ, which responds to AI-2 via
the periplasmic protein LuxP. These sensors converge onto
a histidine-containing phosphotransfer protein termed
LuxU, which will ultimately donate the phosphate to the
response regulator LuxO [21]. Phosphorylated LuxO
activates a repressor that turns off transcription of the
bioluminescence genes. The potential for AI-1 and AI-2 to
control independently the phosphorylated state of LuxO
could allow V. harveyi to respond not only to its own cell
density but also to that of other microbes. However, when
both autoinducers are present, expression of the LuxO-
controlled genes changes 10- to 100-fold more than when
only one of them is present, suggesting that the quorum-
sensing circuit of V. harveyi functions as a ‘coincidence
detector’ that discriminates between the presence of both
autoinducers and all other conditions (i.e. the presence of
either autoinducer or no autoinducer at all) [21].

E. coli harbors a pair of two-component systems –
NarQ/NarP and NarX/NarL – that exhibit sequence
similarity, most strikingly around the phosphorylatable
histidine for the sensors NarX and NarQ, and around the
phosphorylatable aspartate residue for the regulators
NarL and NarP [22,23]. Both NarX and NarQ respond to
nitrate and nitrite and can phosphorylate both NarP and
NarL. Nitrate is detected at lower concentrations than
nitrite by NarX [24], which mainly dephosphorylates NarL
when nitrite is the signal. Phosphorylation of the NarL
and NarP proteins results in non-equivalent responses
because these regulators recognize slightly different
target sequences [25]. Thus, small differences in signal
preference by the NarX and NarQ sensors, coupled to
distinct promoter recognition by the NarL and NarP
regulators, allows the integration of a range of signals
(i.e. the concentrations of both nitrate and nitrite) into
distinct responses.

