Developmental Cell

Article

Differential Expression of WOX Genes
Mediates Apical-Basal Axis Formation
in the Arabidopsis Embryo

Holger Breuninger,1,2,3 Enno Rikirsch,1,2 Marita Hermann,1 Minako Ueda,1 and Thomas Laux1,*
1Faculty of Biology, University of Freiburg, Schaenzlestraße 1, 79104 Freiburg, Germany
2These authors contributed equally to this work
3Present address: John Innes Centre, Colney Lane, Norwich, NR4 7UH, UK
*Correspondence: laux@biologie.uni-freiburg.de
DOI 10.1016/j.devcel.2008.03.008

SUMMARY

Axis formation is one of the earliest patterning events
in plant and animal embryogenesis. In Arabidopsis,
the main axis of the embryo is evident at the asym-
metric division of the zygote into a small, embryonic
apical cell and a large extraembryonic basal cell.
Here we show that the homeobox genes WOX2 and
WOX8, which are initially coexpressed in the zygote,
act as complementary cell fate regulators in the apical
and basal lineage, respectively. Furthermore, WOX8
expression in the basal cell lineage is required for
WOX2 expression and normal development of the
proembryo, suggesting an inductive mechanism.
The identiﬁed WOX cascade is required for normal ex-
pression of a reporter gene of the auxin efﬂux carrier
PIN1 and for the formation of auxin response maxima
in the proembryo. Thus, our results link the spatial
separation of WOX transcription factors to localized
auxin response and the formation of the main body
axis in the embryo.

INTRODUCTION

Development of a speciﬁc body plan during embryogenesis re-
quires the coordination of cell fates according to their positions
along the embryo axes. In animal model organisms, the accessi-
bility of egg cells has greatly enhanced analysis of early pattern-
ing. In higher plants, however, the zygote is relatively inaccessible
to experimental analysis due to the surrounding maternal tissue,
and the high degree of genetic redundancy has complicated
analysis of regulatory mechanisms. An invariant cell division
pattern during early embryogenesis in Arabidopsis facilitates
the following of the apical and basal lineages derived from each
daughter cell (Figure 1A; Dolan et al., 1993; Mansﬁeld and Briarty,
1991). First, the zygote divides asymmetrically and generates
two daughter cells with different properties and developmental
programs. The small and densely cytoplasmic apical daughter
divides perpendicular to the orientation of the division of the zy-
gote, and subsequent divisions generate the isodiametric cells
of the apical cell lineage, termed proembryo. At the 8-cell stage,
the proembryo is already divided into an upper tier of cells giving

rise to the shoot and a lower tier of cells giving rise to the hypo-
cotyl and embryonic root. Subsequent tangential cell walls estab-
lish the radial axis, separating protoderm and inner cells before
shoot meristem, cotyledon, hypocotyl, and embryonic root pri-
mordia are formed. By contrast, the larger and more vacuolated
basal daughter cell of the zygote continues to divide horizontally,
producing a ﬁle of elongated cells, termed the suspensor, which
pushes the embryo into the lumen of the developing seed
(Ju¨ rgens and Mayer, 1994; Mansﬁeld and Briarty, 1991). Only
the uppermost cell of the basal lineage, the hypophysis, becomes
incorporated into the embryo where it gives rise to the quiescent
center and the columella stem cells of the root meristem (for
review see Jenik et al., 2007; Ju¨ rgens, 2001; Laux et al., 2004).
Similar to animals with invariant cell division patterns, speciﬁca-
tion of cell
identities in the Arabidopsis embryo relies on
cell-cell communication.

Recent studies have revealed a crucial role for the directional
transport of the plant growth factor auxin in apical-basal axis for-
mation. After the asymmetric division of the zygote, the auxin ef-
ﬂux factor PIN-FORMED7 (PIN7) is expressed only in the basal
daughter cell and becomes localized to the membrane facing
the apical daughter (Friml et al., 2003). Presumably, auxin is
transported into the apical daughter cell where it accumulates,
as evidenced by weak expression of the synthetic auxin re-
sponse reporter gene DR5rev:GFP. Auxin ﬂux is then thought
to be reversed in the globular stage embryo, involving the com-
bined activity of several PIN proteins, which results in the forma-
tion of an auxin response maximum at the developing root pole.
Later in embryogenesis, additional auxin response maxima are
formed at the tips of the emerging cotyledons mediated by polar
cellular localization of PIN1 protein, which is thought to play an
important role in auxin ﬂux from the globular embryo stage on-
ward (Benkova et al., 2003). Loss of multiple members of the
PIN family; mutations in the Auxin Response Factor (ARF)
GTPase exchange factor GNOM (GN), which is required for di-
rectional trafﬁcking of PIN1 protein; and chemical inhibition of
polar auxin transport all cause striking defects in apical-basal
embryo patterning, demonstrating the crucial role of polar auxin
distribution in axis formation (Blilou et al., 2005; Friml et al., 2003;
Geldner et al., 2003; Mayer et al., 1993; Steinmann et al., 1999).
Similarly, embryos that have lost the ARF MONOPTEROS (MP)
or harbor auxin nondegradable variants of its antagonist BOD-
ENLOS (BDL) fail to initiate the hypophysis, indicating that tran-
scriptional responses to auxin are required for root initiation

Developmental Cell 14, 867–876, June 2008 ª2008 Elsevier Inc. 867

WOX Genes Mediate Apical-Basal Axis in Arabidopsis

Developmental Cell

Figure 1. wox2 and Multiple wox Mutant Phenotypes
(A) Schematic drawing of WOX2, WOX8, and WOX9 expression domains (Haecker et al., 2004).
(B) Phylogenetic tree of the WOX protein family. Modiﬁed after Haecker et al. (2004).
(C–F) Nomarski images of cleared ovules. Periclinal divisions have set up the protoderm (pd) in wild-type at the 16-cell stage (C). wox2-1 embryos show abnormal
anticlinal divisions in the prospective shoot domain (arrows in [D] and [E]) and subsequently form only single cotyledon primordia (cp) ([F]; compare with wild-type,
inset in [F]).
(G–K) Live images of 8-day-old seedlings (prs is indicated as w3 [wox3], asterisk marks putative position of missing shoot meristem).
(L–N) Dark-ﬁeld images showing venation patterns of seedling cotyledons. The number of main veins (mv) indicates that wox2-1 seedling organs represent two
fused cotyledons (M) or one cotyledon (N).
(O) Phenotype penetrance of multiple wox combinations at the 16-cell embryo stage (red) and at the seedling stage (blue).
E, egg cell; Z, zygote; 1-c, 2-4-c, 8-c: 1-cell, 2-4-cell, 8-cell embryo stage, respectively; wt, wild-type; hy, hypocotyl; c, cotyledon; SAM, shoot apical meristem.
Scale bars: 10 mm in (C–F), 2.5 mm in (G–K), and 2 mm in (L–N).

(Berleth and Ju¨ rgens, 1993; Hamann et al., 1999, 2002). At the
same time, MP activity is also required for the expression of
PIN genes, consistent with a feedback mechanism wherein
high auxin concentration promotes increased directional auxin
efﬂux (Paciorek et al., 2005; Weijers et al., 2006).

A fundamental question is how the differences between apical
and basal programs are established. Mutations in the MAPKK ki-
nase YODA (YDA) suppress the elongation of the zygote and de-
velopment of the extraembryonic suspensor, suggesting that
a MAP kinase signaling pathway promotes extraembryonic fate
in the basal lineage (Lukowitz et al., 2004). However, the targets
of presumed YDA signaling remain to be determined. In animals,
localized expression of transcription factors is instrumental for
early cell fate decisions in the embryo (Akam, 1998; Krumlauf,
1994). For example, homeobox (HOX) genes confer region-spe-
ciﬁc identities along the anterior-posterior axis in Drosophila and
mammals. Recent studies in Arabidopsis have identiﬁed a group

of homeobox genes related to the stem cell regulator WUSCHEL
(WUS) that are expressed in a lineage-speciﬁc manner during
early embryogenesis (Figures 1A and 1B; Haecker et al., 2004).
WUSCHEL RELATED HOMEOBOX2 (WOX2) and WOX8 are
initially coexpressed in the egg cell and the zygote, but become
restricted to the apical (WOX2) and basal (WOX8) lineages after
the zygotic division, raising the intriguing question of whether
distinct transcriptional programs are established with the divi-
sion of the zygote. WOX9, the closest homolog of WOX8, is
also expressed in the basal cell lineage, and several members
of the WUS/WOX2 subclade become expressed in the develop-
ing proembryo (Figure 1B; Haecker et al., 2004). Once the apical-
basal axis of the embryo is established, expression of two WOX
genes, WUS and WOX5, is initiated in lineages that give rise to
the signaling centers of the shoot and root stem cell niches, re-
spectively (Mayer et al., 1998; Sarkar et al., 2007). Apart from
Arabidopsis, complementary expression of WOX2 and WOX9

868 Developmental Cell 14, 867–876, June 2008 ª2008 Elsevier Inc.

