European Child & Adolescent Psychiatry
10:240–247 (2001) © Steinkopff Verlag 2001

ORIGINAL CONTRIBUTION

K. Schmeck
F. Poustka
M. Döpfner
J. Plück
W. Berner
G. Lehmkuhl
J. M. Fegert
K. Lenz
M. Huss
U. Lehmkuhl

Accepted: 17 May 2001

K. Schmeck (쾷) · F. Poustka
Klinik für Psychiatrie und Psychotherapie
des Kindes- und Jugendalters am Zentrum
der Psychiatrie der Johann Wolfgang
Goethe-Universität
Deutschordenstr. 50
60590 Frankfurt a. M., Germany
E-Mail: Schmeck@em.uni-frankfurt.de
M. Döpfner · J. Plück · W. Berner · 
G. Lehmkuhl
Klinik und Poliklinik für Psychiatrie und
Psychotherapie des Kindes- und Jugendal-
ters der Universität zu Köln
Robert-Koch-Str. 10
50931 Köln, Germany
J. M. Fegert
Klinik für Kinder- und Jugend-
neuropsychiatrie/Psychotherapie 
der Universität Rostock
Gelsheimer Str. 20
18147 Rostock, Germany

Introduction

Discriminant validity of the Child Behaviour
Checklist CBCL-4/18 in German samples

K. Lenz · M. Huss · U. Lehmkuhl
Klinik für Psychiatrie, Psychosomatik 
und Psychotherapie des Kindes- und 
Jugendalters, Charité, Humboldt Universität
zu Berlin,
Augustenburger Platz 1
13353 Berlin, Germany

I Abstract This study examined
the discriminant validity of the
German version of CBCL in two
large samples of referred and non-
referred children and adolescents
which were matched for age, sex
and socio-economic status. The
combined sample that was used for
statistical analysis consists of 2,058
referred and 2,058 non-referred
boys and girls between 4 and 18
years of age (mean age: referred
boys=10.9 years, non-referred
boys=10.9 years, referred
girls=11.3 years, non-referred
girls=11.1 years). Referral status

was used as validity criterion. Sta-
tistical procedures included Odds
Ratios, Total Predictive Values,
ROC analyses and discriminant
analyses. Results indicated that the
discriminant validity of the Ger-
man version of CBCL is compara-
ble to the original English version.
With the use of CBCL Total Prob-
lem Score as predictor (cut-off T≥
60) 83.8 % of children and adoles-
cents could correctly be classified
(sensitivity 83.6 %, specificity
83.9 %). Symptoms of the “Atten-
tion Problems Scale” show the
highest discriminative power to
distinguish between disturbed and
undisturbed children and adoles-
cents.

I Key words CBCL – Discrimi-
nant validity – Total Predictive
Value – ROC analysis – Attention
problems

To  assess  child  psychiatric  disorders  two  major  ap-
proaches  are  used: on  the  one  hand, categorical  diag-
noses that describe psychopathological states as distinct
syndromes; on the other hand, dimensional approaches
that view psychopathology as a deviance from normal
with no clear threshold between subjects with or with-
out a disorder.

The  Child  Behaviour  Checklist  (CBCL)  was  devel-
oped by T. Achenbach (1, 2) for the use of dimensional
assessment  of childhood  competencies  and  psy-

 

1
4
2
P
A
C
E

chopathological problems. In the last two decades this
checklist  approach  has  had  significant  influence  in
many  countries. CBCL  has  been  translated  into  more
than 60 languages and has been used in numerous stud-
ies. The cross-cultural generalisability of CBCL was con-
firmed  in  studies  that  compared  samples  of several
countries with different cultural backgrounds (6, 7, 27).
In Germany CBCL was first used in epidemiological
studies  by  Poustka  and  Schmeck  (21, 22)  and  Rem-
schmidt and Walter (23). In 1993 a German consensus
version (3, 9) was published that has been widely used in
German-speaking countries since then. Reliability and
factorial validity of this German version has been suc-

K. Schmeck et al.
Discriminant validity of CBCL-4/18

241

cessfully checked (10, 11). To establish German norms a
nationwide representative field sample was drawn (12,
13). In a random-route procedure a professional mar-
keting  company  administered  the  questionnaire  to  a
representative  sample  of 3,663  families  with  children
aged  4–18  years. The  response  rate  was  82.2 %, 2,856
parent  ratings  (78.0 %)  could  finally  be  used  for  data
analysis.

One of the most common ways of employing CBCL in
child  psychiatric  diagnostic  procedures  is  its  use  as  a
screening instrument either in epidemiological studies
or  in  out-patient  settings. With  scores  on  eight  syn-
drome scales and a Total Problem Score, the extent and
severity of childhood psychological problems can be de-
scribed. As a result, evidence is given if a child or ado-
lescent needs professional help for his problem.

A common way of assessing the quality of a screening
instrument is to check criterion related validity, i. e. the
ability of the instrument to predict an external criterion
that is relevant to the constructs that are assessed.In child
and adolescent psychiatry referral status is often used as
“gold standard” to answer the question if a certain in-
strument yields enough power to discriminate and pre-
dict the clinical status of two different samples of clinical
and field populations.As Achenbach (1) points out,refer-
ral status is not an infallible criterion of children’s need
for help since there could be children in the non-referred
group that might need help but still have not received any,
and other children in the referred groups without severe
psychological problems. An alternative could be the use
of a  diagnostic  interview  to  assess  children’s  psy-
chopathology independent of the screening instrument.
However, a well-established and widely accepted diag-
nostic interview has not been available in Germany until
now.So we decided to use referral status as a validity cri-
terion.Inaccuracy of referral status could only lead to an
underestimation of the association between screening
instrument and psychopathology.

The  original  English  version  of CBCL  has  already
proven  good  discriminant  validity  (1)  which  is  con-
firmed  by  other  studies  using  the  CBCL  in  different
countries. For example, in a recent study Novik (20) de-
scribed the predictive validity of the Norwegian version
of CBCL that significantly distinguished between chil-
dren  with  psychiatric  disorders  and  non-disordered
children. In a Dutch longitudinal study Koot & Verhulst
(17) demonstrated the predictive validity of problem be-
haviours assessed with CBCL with regard to poor out-
come four years later.

McGuire et al. (19) could demonstrate that the CBCL
cross-informant syndromes “Aggressive Behaviour”and
“Delinquent  Behaviour” significantly  separate  disrup-
tive behaviour disorders from all other clinical disorders
but that this was not equally true for the prediction of
emotional  disorders  using  the  cross-informant  syn-
drome “Anxious/Depressed”.

The aims of the present study were: 1) to investigate
the ability of the German version of CBCL to discrimi-
nate between referred and non-referred children in dif-
ferent age and sex groups; 2) to examine sensitivity and
specificity  using  different  cut-offs  (based  on  German
norms); and 3) to study the predictive power of CBCL
syndromes and items.

Methods

I Subjects

The clinical sample consisted of 4,236 unselected in- and
out-patients aged 4–18 years who had been referred to
the  child  and  adolescent  psychiatric  university  clinics 
of Frankfurt, Cologne  and  Berlin  during  the  years
1987–1995. Only those parents with good knowledge of
the  German  language  completed  the  CBCL  question-
naire. All patients were clinically diagnosed using ICD-
10  criteria  (8)  or  MAS  criteria  (24)  in  a  classification
conference of two or more clinically experienced child
psychiatrists. The  following  subjects  were  excluded
from the analysis: 1) all subjects with missing data for
sociodemographic variables or diagnosis (N=961); 2) all
referred subjects who were classified as non-disturbed
(no ICD-10 diagnosis) (N=252).

The  general  population  sample  consisted  of 2,856
children and adolescents aged 4–18 years who had been
collected in the year 1995 all over Germany (12). This
sample is representative for Germany according to so-
cio-economic and urban/rural status (12, 18). Excluded
from the analysis were: 1) all subjects with missing data
for  sociodemographic  variables  (N=223); 2)  children
and adolescents of the normative sample who had been
referred for treatment in the last 12 months (N=102).

Families’ socio-economic status (SES) was classified
according  to  a  scheme  (adapted  from  Kleining  and
Moore’s (16) 9-step classification system of SES) that is
based  on  parents’ education, occupation  and  income.
For further analysis SES was summarised in three cate-
gories: high, medium and low socio-economic status.

To prevent biases in the analysis due to differences in
basic demographic variables between our two samples
we  matched  subjects  of the  referred  and  non-referred
sample for three criteria: sex (male/female), age-group
(4–11years/12–18years) and SES (high,medium,low).In
this  matching  procedure  subjects  were  excluded  (by
chance) from both samples.In our referred sample there
were more younger boys of all SES and more older boys
and younger girls of low SES than in our normative non-
referred sample. So we excluded by chance as many of
these  subjects  as  necessary  until  the  numbers  in  both
samples were the same. In the other groups (older girls
of all SES, younger girls and older boys of medium and
high  SES)  there  were  more  subjects  in  the  normative

