Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 10 (2014) 93–103

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : h t t p : / / w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / d c n

Choosing not to act: Neural bases of the development of
intentional inhibition
Margot A. Schel a,b,∗, K. Richard Ridderinkhof c,d, Eveline A. Crone a,b

a Institute of Psychology, Leiden University, Leiden, the Netherlands
b Leiden Institute for Brain and Cognition (LIBC), Leiden, the Netherlands
c Department of Psychology, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands
d Amsterdam Brain & Cognition (ABC), University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 19 March 2014
Received in revised form 21 July 2014
Accepted 12 August 2014
Available online 20 August 2014

Keywords:
Development
Response inhibition
Self-control
Volition
fMRI
Fronto-basal ganglia network

Choosing not to act, or the ability to intentionally inhibit your actions lies at the core of
self-control. Even though most research has focused on externally primed inhibition, an
important question concerns how intentional inhibition develops. Therefore, in the present
study children (aged 10–12) and adults (aged 18–26) performed the marble task, in which
they had to choose between acting on and inhibiting a prepotent response, while fMRI data
were collected. Intentional inhibition was associated with activation of the fronto-basal
ganglia network. Activation in the subthalamic nucleus and dorsal fronto-median cortex,
regions which have previously been associated with intentional inhibition, did not dif-
fer between intentional inhibition and intentional action. Even though both children and
adults intentionally inhibited their actions to a similar extent, children showed more acti-
vation in the fronto-basal ganglia network during intentional inhibition, but not in the
subthalamic nucleus and dorsal fronto-median cortex. Furthermore, a positive relation
between self-reported impulsivity and intentional inhibition was observed. These ﬁnd-
ings have important implications for our understanding of disorders of impulsivity, such as
ADHD, which are associated with poor self-control abilities.
© 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC
BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/).

1. Introduction

Self-control abilities are of critical

importance for
successful functioning across the life span. A classical
experiment to test self-control is the marshmallow exper-
iment, a delay of gratiﬁcation test for preschool children
in which children can choose between one marshmallow
now or two marshmallows later (Mischel et al., 1989).

∗ Corresponding author at: Institute of Psychology, Leiden University,
Wassenaarseweg 52, 2333 AK Leiden, the Netherlands.
Tel.: +31 71 5276692.

E-mail address: mschel@fsw.leidenuniv.nl (M.A. Schel).

Studies with the marshmallow experiment have shown
that during the preschool ages there are large individual
differences in the ability to control the immediate impulse
to eat the ﬁrst marshmallow and wait for the second
marshmallow (Mischel et al., 1989) and experimental vari-
ations of this task have shown a developmental increase
in controlling immediate impulses between childhood
and adulthood (Christakou et al., 2011; Lee et al., 2013;
Scheres et al., 2006). These changes are accompanied by
neurodevelopmental changes. Recently, it has been shown
that individuals who were less able to delay gratiﬁcation
when they were preschoolers, showed poorer self-control
and reduced recruitment of the fronto-basal ganglia
network during a response inhibition task in adulthood
(Casey et al., 2011).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.dcn.2014.08.006
1878-9293/© 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/3.0/).

94

M.A. Schel et al. / Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 10 (2014) 93–103

An important distinction which has been made in tasks
that involve self-control, is whether the inhibitory pro-
cess is externally or internally driven. Externally driven
response inhibition involves the ability to interrupt an
action when signaled by a cue in the environment, for
example, a trafﬁc light which turns red. Neuroscientiﬁc
studies have shown that the fronto-basal ganglia network,
with main nodes in right inferior frontal gyrus (rIFG), stri-
atum, globus pallidus, and subthalamic nucleus (STN), is
consistently involved during externally driven response
inhibition (e.g. Aron et al., 2007; Aron and Poldrack, 2006;
Forstmann et al., 2012; Jahfari et al., 2011; King et al., 2012).
Developmental studies have also found evidence for the
involvement of the fronto-basal ganglia network in exter-
nally driven response inhibition in children (Cohen et al.,
2010; Ordaz et al., 2013). So far, most developmental neu-
roimaging studies have focused on the frontal component
of the fronto-basal ganglia network, namely the rIFG (Luna
et al., 2010). These studies have reported both increases
(e.g. Ordaz et al., 2013; Rubia et al., 2007) and decreases
(e.g. Booth et al., 2003; Durston et al., 2002) in inhibi-
tion related rIFG activation with age, but an age-related
increase in rIFG activation and a decrease in activation in
task-unspeciﬁc frontal regions appears to be the most com-
mon pattern (Crone & Dahl, 2012; Durston et al., 2006; Luna
et al., 2010). Overall, these studies show a stabilization of
response inhibition performance and its underlying neural
correlates during adolescence (Luna et al., 2010).

A second, but understudied component of self-control
is intentional inhibition. In daily life often both external
cues and internal processes play a role in the decision to
inhibit, although sometimes external cues are more impor-
tant (such as when stopping at a trafﬁc light) and other
times internal processes are more prominent (such as when
inhibiting yourself from taking another piece of chocolate).
However, in contrast to externally driven inhibition, inten-
tional inhibition is not triggered by an external cue. Instead,
intentional inhibition has been deﬁned as a late internally
driven veto process, a ﬁnal opportunity to inhibit before
action execution (Brass and Haggard, 2008; Filevich et al.,
2012; Haggard, 2008). Since intentional inhibition is not
preceded by any external stimulus, and does not result in
any overt behavior, intentional inhibition has proven difﬁ-
cult to investigate. Yet, this type of inhibition is involved in
many of our day to day activities such as inhibiting yourself
from taking another piece of chocolate, inhibiting press-
ing the send button when being on the verge of sending
an angry email, or inhibiting scratching itchy skin caused
by eczema. Delay of gratiﬁcation studies have reported
developmental improvements in the ability to intention-
ally inhibit the impulse to choose an immediate reward
(Christakou et al., 2011; Lee et al., 2013; Scheres et al.,
2006), but these tasks involve many different processes
besides intentional inhibition, such as reward sensitiv-
ity and reward discounting. A neuroscience perspective
can provide important insights into the development of
intentional inhibition, as this provides a covert measure
of a process, which occurs without a speciﬁc stimulus and
without any behavioral outcomes. An important question
concerns whether intentional inhibition is guided by the
same neural network as externally driven inhibition, or

whether intentional inhibition is associated with differ-
ent underlying neural circuitry, which may develop during
child and adolescent development.

In the present study, we used the child-friendly marble
paradigm to examine the neural correlates of intentional
action and inhibition in children. In this paradigm partic-
ipants are instructed to freely decide between responding
and inhibiting responding to a rolling marble. Children
between 10 and 12 years of age were included to allow for
comparison of the results to the externally driven response
inhibition literature (Booth et al., 2003; Bunge et al., 2002;
Durston et al., 2002; Rubia et al., 2007). Based on these prior
ﬁndings, we expect to observe activation in the main nodes
of the fronto-basal ganglia network (i.e. rIFG, striatum,
globus pallidus, and STN) during intentional inhibition,
comparable to what we have observed in adults (Schel
et al., 2014). If developmental differences in internally
driven inhibition share mechanisms with externally driven
response inhibition (Bunge et al., 2002; Durston et al., 2002;
Luna et al., 2010), then we may expect inhibition-related
activation in the rIFG to be stronger for adults compared to
children.

Recently, several studies have suggested that inten-
tional inhibition is associated with increased activation in
the dorsal fronto-median cortex (dFMC) (Brass & Haggard,
2007; Kühn et al., 2009), a region which was previously
found to be more active in early adolescents when inhibi-
ting a selﬁsh impulse in a sharing task (van den Bos et al.,
2011). Therefore, we examined whether more activity in
the dFMC during intentional inhibition was observed in
children compared to adults based on prior studies show-
ing that this region is more active in 10–12-year-olds
(Blakemore, 2008; Gunther Moor et al., 2012; van den Bos
et al., 2011).

In order to validate our experimental measure of inten-
tional inhibition, participants also completed the Barratt
Impulsiveness Scale (Patton et al., 1995) outside of the
scanner to obtain an estimate of impulsivity and self-
control in daily life. We expect daily life impulsivity to be
predictive of intentional action control performance.

2. Methods

2.1. Participants

Nineteen healthy right-handed children between 10
and 12 years of age (10 females, M = 11.56, SD = .83) and
twenty-four healthy right-handed adults between 18 and
26 years of age (13 females, M = 21.49, SD = 2.36) par-
ticipated in the experiment. The results from the adults
have previously been published in a larger report on
response inhibition (Schel et al., 2014). A chi-square test
revealed no signiﬁcant differences in gender distributions
between age groups (p = .92). All participants had normal
or corrected-to-normal vision, and no neurological or psy-
chiatric impairments according to self- or parent-report.
Informed consent was obtained for all participants and
the study was approved by the Internal Review Board
at Leiden University Medical Center. In accordance with
the guidelines of the Leiden University Medical Center,

