Narrative Exposure Therapy 

for the Treatment of Traumatized 

Children and Adolescents (KidNET): 

From Neurocognitive Theory 

to  Field Intervention 

Frank Neuner, PhD*, Claudia Catani, PhD, 
Martina Ruf,  MA,  Elisabeth Schauer, PhD, 
Maggie  Schauer, PhD, Thomas Elbert, PhD 

Department of Psychology,  University  of Konstanz,  Box D25,  D-78457 Konstanz,  Germany 

Current evidence  and  practice 

Violence against children, including maltreatment at home, sexual abuse, 
and  child  labor,  are  common  phenomena  worldwide.  In  addition,  many 
children  are  affected  by  violence  caused  by  political  conflicts,  unrest,  and 
war. Current wars are characterized by high levels of deliberate and system(cid:173)
atic  violence  against  the  civilian  population  [1],  including  victimization  of 
women and children.  More than 30  countries are affected  by current wars, 
and the populations of many now peaceful countries suffer from the after(cid:173)
maths of a  recent armed conflict.  In addition,  the number and intensity  of 
environmental disasters is increasing. Environmental disasters mainly affect 
low-income  countries  with  poor  facilities  for  an  adequate  emergency 
response  [2].  In  some  regions,  war  and  environmental  disaster  co-occur 
[3],  causing  severe  acute  emergencies  and  a  long-lasting  mental  health 
impairment in the population. 

Although  children  can  be  astonishingly  resilient  even  in  face  of severe 
disasters  and atrocities,  high levels  of traumatic events increase the risk  of 
developmental  difficulties  and  psychologic  disorders.  Many  studies  have 
shown  increased  rates  of mental  disorders  in  children  affected  by war  [4]. 

This  work  was  supported  by  the  Ministry  of Science,  Research  and  the  Arts  of Baden(cid:173)

Wiirttemberg, the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, and the European Refugee Fund. 

*  Corresponding author. 
E-mail address:frank.neuner@uni-konstanz.de (F.  Neuner). 

642 

The most prevalent disorder is posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), which 
consists predominantly of intrusive thoughts, flashbacks, nightmares, avoid(cid:173)
ance behavior, and increased  levels  of arousal.  The prevalence of PTSD in 
children  in  war-affected  populations  ranges  from  20%  among  Lebanese 
children who were exposed to bombings and terror attacks [5] to 44% in sur(cid:173)
viving  orphans  10  years  after  the  Rwandan  genocide  [6].  A  survey  in  the 
war-affected  northeastern  region  of Sri  Lanka  showed  that  19%  to  25% 
of the Tamil children already were suffering from  PTSD before the region 
was hit by the devastating tsunami flood wave in 2004 [7]. After the tsunami, 
PTSD  rates  of 40%  were  found  in communities affected  by  both war and 
disaster  [8].  In addition,  Catani  and co-workers  [3]  found  a  high  level  of 
family  violence  in  these  communities.  Confirming  a  general  dose-effect 
model  [9],  PTSD  in  children  was  predicted  mainly  by  the  cumulative 
exposure  to  trauma  including  war,  disaster,  and  family  violence  in  this 
population. 

Longitudinal  studies  show  that trauma symptoms in children  are  more 
than  simply  a  behavioral  problem  that  dissipates  over  time  as  the  child 
matures.  Rates  of  spontaneous  remission  in  traumatized  children  are 
remarkably low [10].  In a large proportion of severely war-traumatizedchil(cid:173)
dren, PTSD can persist for more than  10  years even when the children are 
living in a  safe environment [11].  As  a consequence, intervention strategies 
for severely traumatized children in war-affected populations are necessary 
to prevent a downward spiral in development.  Intervention research in this 
area is still in its infancy, however, and common practice rarely is informed 
by scientific  knowledge.  Even  though  regions  in  crisis  and  refugee  camps 
often attract humanitarian workers from many different countries, psycho(cid:173)
social  activities  are restricted mostly to interventions such as  creative play 
therapy,  the  indiscriminate  distribution  of  psychoeducational  material, 
and  supportive  counseling.  Most  often,  the  interventions  provided  by 
humanitarian  workers  and  health  professionals  have  been  developed  ad 
hoc without a solid theoretic background, and the efficacy of these methods, 
including play activities, is doubtful [12]. 

In  recent  years,  knowledge  about  the  treatment  of PTSD  in  children 

living in high-resource countries has increased rapidly. There now is consid(cid:173)
erable evidence supporting different variants of cognitive behavioral therapy 
(CBT) for the treatment of school children who  have PTSD resulting from 
multiple  traumatic  events,  including sexual  abuse  [13]  and  other forms  of 
violence [14].  In general, CBT programs include psychoeducation, cognitive 
interventions,  training  of affective  coping  skills,  and  exposure  therapy. 
Several  randomized  trials  have  shown  that  in  treating  PTSD  symptoms 
CBT is  more effective  than standard care,  unspecific  therapy,  or no treat(cid:173)
ment  [15].  Follow-up  studies  have  demonstrated  that treatment  gains  are 
maintained for up to 2 years [16]. 

Unfortunately,  no  randomized  controlled  study  has  included  child  war 
victims  or  traumatized  refugees.  Some  pragmatic  treatment  programs 

643 

have been developed for use in crises in low-resource countries or in refugee 
communities.  For  example  the  "Children  and  War:  Teaching  Recovery 
Techniques" approach [17] was developed as a trauma-focused group inter(cid:173)
vention for  the context of disaster,  war,  and refugee  populations and was 
tested  in  several  uncontrolled  and  nonrandomized  controlled  studies.  In 
general, trauma-focused group programs showed promising effects with sig(cid:173)
nificant  reductions of PTSD symptoms [18].  Although clinically significant 
treatment effects could be demonstrated for disaster victims in uncontrolled 
studies  [19,20]  and  even  in  a  randomized  trial  [21],  treatment  gains  were 
modest  and did  not  seem  to  be  stable  over  time  when  applied  to  refugee 
children  in  the  United  Kingdom [22],  and  no  significant  effect  was  found 
for refugee children in  Ga~a [23]. 

The authors have developed narrative exposure therapy (NET) as a prag(cid:173)

matic,  short-term intervention for traumatized victims  of war and torture. 
NET  is  an  individual-level,  trauma-focused  treatment  that,  on  the  one 
hand,  builds  on the tradition  of testimony therapy developed  by  Lira and 
Weinstein  to  treat  the  victims  of the  Pinochet  regime  in  Chile  [24].  The 
key  aspect  of testimony  therapy  is  the  detailed  documentation  of human 
rights  violations  experienced  by  the  survivor  of political  violence  and  the 
use of this testimony for political purposes. On the other hand, NET builds 
on the principles of current neurocognitive theories of PTSD and cognitive 
behavioral  therapy  by  adapting  the classical  form  of exposure  therapy  to 
meet  the  needs  of traumatized  survivors  of war  and  torture.  In exposure 
therapy  for  PTSD  [25],  the  patient is  asked  to  talk  repeatedly  about  the 
worst traumatic event in detail while re-experiencing all emotions associated 
with  the  event.  In the  process,  most  patients  undergo  habituation  of the 
emotional  response  to  the  traumatic  memory.  This  habituation  conse(cid:173)
quently leads to a remission ofPTSD symptoms. Typically, victims of orga(cid:173)
nized  violence  have  experienced  multiple  traumatic  events;  the  authors 
encountered  a  child  who  had  seen  her brother die  from  shrapnel wounds 
and who later was raped. As outlined later in this article, mUltiple traumatic 
events can cause a substantial distortion in auto biographic memory with an 
excessive emotional representation that includes an unsorted batch of stim(cid:173)
uli from different memories. It therefore is  difficult to differentiate different 
episodes or to identify a single worst event before treatment. Consequently, 
in NET, the patient constructs a narration of his or her whole life from early 
childhood to the present date while focusing on the detailed report of trau(cid:173)
matic experiences [26]. 

Theoretical background:  neurocognitive memory theory 

The  most  prominent  neurobiologic  and  cognitive  theories  of  PTSD 
explain  the  development  of PTSD  on the  basis  of a  pathologic  distortion 
of the  memory  representations  of the  traumatic event  [27-30].  According 
to Tulving [31], there is a specific store of memories about past events called 

644 

"episodic  memory."  Episodic  memory  involves  happenings  in  particular 
places  at  particular  times  and  covers  context  information  about  "what," 
"where," and "when." A unique feature that distinguishes episodic memory 
from other memory systems is the possibility of consciously re-experiencing 
previous events in the form of recollective experiences.  Most theories of ep(cid:173)
isodic memory separate at least two different bases of episodic knowledge: 
nondeclarative  memory  and  declarative  memory  (for  a  different  view  see 
[32]).  These memory systems differ in the retrieval of information: declara(cid:173)
tive  (explicit)  memory  can  be  retrieved  deliberately  and accessed  verbally, 
whereas nondeclarative (implicit) memory is activated automatically by en(cid:173)
vironmental or internal cues and affects a person's behavior and experience 
[33].  Therefore one must distinguish between a declarative episodic memory 
system (later called "autobiographical representation") and a nondeclarative 
episodic memory system (later called "sensory-perceptual representation"). 
In  addition,  there  is  good  reason  to  assume  that  a  supervisory  structure 
controls the activity of the memory representations. 

Autobiographical representation 

The declarative part of episodic memory has been called "autobiograph(cid:173)

ical  memory"  [34];  other authors have used the  terms  "verbally accessible 
memory" [35]  or "cold memory" [36]. Autobiographical memory is a highly 
developed and structured memory system that allows the abundant knowl(cid:173)
edge about past events to be filed in a highly efficient way. Autobiographical 
memory is the principal resource for the retrieval of information about one's 
life and is  the main base for the narration of events and life periods. To al(cid:173)
Iowa rapid and organized access of information, this memory is structured 
in a hierarchical way. At the top of the organization are the lifetime periods 
that  have  identifiable  beginnings  and  endings.  They  represent  general 
knowledge  of important other persons,  locations,  actions,  activities,  plans, 
and  goals.  An  example  of a  lifetime  period  is  "when  I  was  living  with 
Maria" or "when I was working at the farm."  One level below the lifetime 
periods is the memory for general events. General events can be divided into 
repeated events (eg,  "having lunch at the canteen") and specific events (eg, 
"my first day in school"). These knowledge bases organize the chronologic 
sequence of single events. 

The  neurobiologic  correlate  of  autobiographical  memory  cannot  be 

identified as  a  single brain structure.  Rather, long-term storage of autobio(cid:173)
graphic and other declarative knowledge depends on widespread neocortical 
neuronal activity.  This complex neuronal network underlies a special orga(cid:173)
nization including specific rules and consistencies. This organization allows 
the effective  storage  of the vast  amount  of knowledge  a  human being can 
acquire.  At the  same  time,  this  complex  organization makes  this  network 
slow  to  integrate  new  incoming  information,  especially  new  events  that 
are incompatible with previous knowledge. 

645 

The key brain structure related to auto biographic memories is the hippo(cid:173)

campus.  The hippocampus itself is  not the permanent store  of declarative 
memory, but it has a central function in the consolidation of memory within 
the first  4 weeks  of the event.  In this period,  the information is  located to 
a  wide  neocortical  network  [37].  Several  neuroscientists  assume  that  the 
function of the hippocampus is to construct a meaningful episodic represen(cid:173)
tation  of the  dynamics  of the  situation  in  a  spatiotemporal  context  [38]. 
McClelland and coworkers [39]  suggested that the hippocampus is especially 
important for the coding of information that contradicts previously learned 
knowledge.  They  assume  that  the  neocortical  system  is  slow  to  integrate 
contradictory information, because that information undermines strict rules 
and consistencies. In this context, the hippocampus may permit the forma(cid:173)
tion  of  a  rapid  representation  of  the  event  and  gradually  expose  the 
neocortical  system  to  the  new  information.  In  this  way  the  network  can 
be reorganized slowly to integrate the new information. 

Sensory-perceptual representation 

When a person thinks about a past life event, it is be possible that he or 
she  both retrieves  abstract knowledge  about what has  happened  and also 
can imagine  the  event in the form  of a  recollective  experience  [31].  Thus, 
in  addition  to  declarative  auto biographic  facts,  people can access  directly 
the  sensory  and  emotional  information about  past  events  stored  in  their 
minds,  including  an awareness  of the  subjective  time  when  the event hap(cid:173)
pened.  The retrieval  of this  sensory information is  fundamentally  different 
from  the  retrieval  of autobiographic information.  Whereas  the contextual 
facts  stored in  auto biographic memory are  retrieved  as  verbally  accessible 
knowledge, the retrieval of sensory information is perceived as an experience 
of the information itself.  For example, a person who has a vivid memory of 
his first day at a beach actually might see the water in front of his eyes and 
re-experience  the  excitement  of that  moment  when  thinking  back  on  the 
event.  This type  of information is  provided by a  sensory-perceptual  repre(cid:173)
sentation of the event (other authors have used such terms as "hot memory" 
[36],  "situationally accessible memory," [35]  or "event-specific knowledge" 
[34]).  The  sensory-perceptual  representation  itself  does  not  contain  any 
context information about single events, but a close tie to the corresponding 
autobiographical  representations  offers  a  spatial  and temporal context for 
this  memory.  As  a  consequence,  the  activation  of the  sensory-perceptual 
details  of an  event  usually  is  accompanied  by  the  activation  of autobio(cid:173)
graphical  knowledge  about  the  sequence  of the  event  and  the  location  of 
the event in lifetime periods. 

Obviously, a vivid and detailed recollection is not possible for all events 
experienced in a life. For everyday events that have a minor meaning for the 
person  involved,  the  sensory-perceptual  representations  usually  only  last 
minutes  or  hours  [40].  The  enduring  storage  of  sensory-perceptual 

647 

Like  auto biographic representations,  the sensory-perceptual representa(cid:173)
tions of past events probably are not stored in a single brain structure. Neu(cid:173)
roimaging studies suggest the complex involvement of the areas considered 
responsible  for visuospatial processing and emotion (the limbic structures, 
especially  the  posterior  cingulated,  including  the  surrounding  cortex  and 
the  occipital  and  parietal  cortex)  and  for  preparation  for  action  (motor 
cortex) in the storage of sensory-perceptual representations [42]. 

There is good evidence that the amygdala plays a key role in the encoding 

and retrieval of highly arousing events, whether positive (exciting) or nega(cid:173)
tive  (frightening)  [43,44].  Research  on "flashbulb  memories"  [45]  contrib(cid:173)
uted  to  the  knowledge  about  sensory-perceptual  memory  representations. 
Flashbulb memories  are  vivid  and  long-lasting memories  of photographic 
quality about the environmental conditions of a person learning of a signif(cid:173)
icant public event such as  the terrorist attacks of September 11,  2001.  The 
elevated arousal in this situation seems to support the encoding of a lasting 
sensory-perceptual  representation  of the  situation.  Recently  it was  shown 
that the  amygdala is  a  key  structure  for  the  recall  of flashbulb  memories 
related to the September 11,  2001  terrorist attacks, at least for the persons 
who had been close to the event itself [46]. These findings fitwell with animal 
research on fear conditioning,  showing that the amygdala is  the key struc(cid:173)
ture for the learning associations between sensory stimuli and fear responses 
[47,48]. The effects of fear conditioning may be based on sensory-perceptual 
representations of the learning situation. Because the sensory and cognitive 
outputs  of  these  memories  cannot  be  studied  with  animal  research, 
researchers have concentrated on the physiologic and behavioral responses 
to conditioned fear cues. 

The  effects of trauma  on  memory 

Traumatic  events  are  characterized  by  a  massive  threat  to  the  victim 

requiring the immediate activation of the body in the form of an alarm re(cid:173)
sponse. Within seconds, the brain triggers the secretion of stress hormones, 
including the catecholamines norepinephrine and epinephrine.  In combina(cid:173)
tion  with  other  immediate  effects  of sympathetic  nervous  activation,  this 
response  prepares  the  body  system  for  a  rapid  fight-or-flight  response. 
More slowly,  peaking around 20 minutes after this rapid reaction, the hor(cid:173)
monal messenger corticotropin, secreted by the pituitary gland, has traveled 
to  the  adrenal  cortex,  which  releases  the  stress  hormone  cortisol  that 
modulates  a  series  of additional functions,  including  an increase  in blood 
sugar level.  The stress hormones travel back to the brain where they dock 
on receptors  that are  particularly dense  in  the  hippocampus and dramati(cid:173)
cally modulate memory formation and consolidation [49].  In general, expo(cid:173)
sure  to  glucocorticoids  (the  stress  hormone  in  rodents  corresponding  to 
human cortisol) increases the activity of the hippocampus,  but the activity 
declines  dramatically  as  soon  as  a  certain  threshold  is  exceeded.  Under 

648 

very  high  levels  of stress  and  under chronic  stress,  the  functioning  of the 
hippocampus is impaired severely. At least in rodents [50,51],  but probably 
also in primates [52],  very high doses  of adrenal steroids can cause perma(cid:173)
nent atrophy of the hippocampus. 

Unlike the hippocampus, which shows decreased functioning under high 
levels  of stress,  the activity of the amygdala is  enhanced as stress increases 
[53].  This enhanced activity also is caused by stress hormones [54,55].  A re(cid:173)
cent study with rats showed  that whereas  chronic  stress  induced  dendritic 
atrophy in  the  hippocampus,  the dendritic  arborization  of neurons  in  the 
amygdala  was  enhanced  in  the  same  condition  [56].  The  dissociation  of 
amygdala and hippocampal functions  during high levels  of stress could be 
confirmed in humans. Using functional MRI and simultaneous skin conduc(cid:173)
tance  response  measures,  Williams  and colleagues  [57]  demonstrated  that 
amygdala  networks  were  active  only  during  the  elaboration  of arousing 
stimuli,  whereas  hippocampus  activity  occurred  only  in  the  absence  of 
arousing stimuli. 

The stress effects on amygdala and hippocampus affect the memory rep(cid:173)

resentations of the traumatic events.  On one hand; the increased amygdala 
activity leads to an excessive sensory-perceptual representation of the event 
that has  also  been called "fear structure"  [58].  As a  result of the excessive 
amygdala activity during extreme stress, a fear structure differs from repre(cid:173)
sentations  of  normal  events  in  several  ways.  First,  the  fear  structures 
encoded  during  a  traumatic  event  are  unusually  large  and  cover  a  wide 
variety  of single  items.  As  a  consequence,  they  can  be  activated  easily, 
because many environmental cues  resemble  the items in the fear  structure. 
Second, interconnections between the single elements are unusually strong. 
Fig.  2 shows an example of a fear structure of a  Sri  Lankan child who  has 
experienced  both war and tsunami.  As  shown in  the figure,  multiple trau(cid:173)
matic events can become part of a  single  fear  structure because they share 
common elements like fear and physiologic arousal. 

Because  of the  strong  interconnection  of items,  the  activation  of only 

a few  elements is  sufficient to activate the whole structure, and this activa(cid:173)
tion is difficult to control. The activation of the fear structure is experienced 
as  an intrusive  sensory,  emotional,  and physiologic  re-experiencing  of the 
traumatic event, the key symptom of PTSD. As a consequence, traumatized 
persons learn to prevent the activation of the structure by avoiding cues that 
remind them of the traumatic event. They must avoid both internal and ex(cid:173)
ternal cues, so they try not to think about the even, try not to talk about it, 
and try to keep away from persons and places that remind them of the event. 
Eventually,  the  person  acquires  a  pattern  of avoidance  behavior,  another 
characteristic of PTSD. 

Whereas extreme stress causes an excessive sensory-perceptual represen(cid:173)
tation  of the  traumatic  event,  stress  impairs  the  functioning  of the  hippo(cid:173)
campus  and  the  elaboration  of  an  autobiographical  representation.  As 
a  result,  the  traumatic  event  does  not  seem  to  be  clearly  represented  as 

650 

that tie ordinary experience to reality.  Traumatic memories are disturbing, 
because of the direct fear they evoke and also  because of their strangeness 
[36].  Lacking the  autobiographical context,  the intrusive memories  are ac(cid:173)
companied by the sensation of current threat, even though the event might 
have happened several years ago at a  place very far away  [30]. 

Taken  together,  the  characteristic  of traumatic memory is  twofold.  On 
the one hand, a person has very vivid recollections, including many sensory 
details.  Despite  the  detailed  representation  of the  memory,  however,  it is 
very  difficult  for  the  victim  to  narrate  the  event.  Consistent  with  this  as(cid:173)
sumption, several studies have shown that traumatic memory is qualitatively 
different from everyday memory [59]. Traumatic memory is more dominated 
by  sensory  elements  and  is  highly  distressing  and  repetitive,  whereas  the 
narrations  are  more  fragmented  [60].  In  addition,  Jones  and  co-workers 
[61]  showed that disorganization of the narration and a dominance of sen(cid:173)
sory elements in the trauma memory immediately after the event predict the 
development of chronic PTSD. 

Recovery from . trauma:  role  of the supervising structure 

Although  most  people  react  with  an intensive  emotional  upheaval,  in(cid:173)
cluding intrusive symptoms, immediately after a traumatic event, only a mi(cid:173)
nority develops chronic PTSD. The recovery from acute stress symptoms is 
a  normal  process.  In an influential  account  of emotional  processing,  Foa 
and Kozak [58]  suggested  that emotional processing involves the modifica(cid:173)
tion of the original fear structure. Research into fear conditioning has chal(cid:173)
lenged  this  view.  Several  investigators  have  shown  that extinction  of fear 
responses  usually  does  not change  the  original  stimulus-fear  associations, 
because the original fear response can be reinstated easily in a  context dif(cid:173)
ferent from the context of extinction learning.  Instead, extinction probably 
occurs  through the inhibition  of the fear  response  by cortical  areas,  espe(cid:173)
cially the medial prefrontal cortex [48].  Pathways from the prefrontal cortex 
to the amygdala allow the modification of a fear response, depending on the 
evaluation of the stimulus  in the current environmental context.  Recently, 
Shin  and  colleagues  [62,63]  showed  that  during  symptom  provocation 
(script-driven imagery),  as  well  as during unspecific emotional stimulation, 
patients who had PTSD showed decreased activity in the medial prefrontal 
region but increased amygdala activity.  In addition, amygdala activity cor(cid:173)
related negatively with medial  prefrontal activity  and correlated  positively 
with symptom severity. These findings  indicate that persons who recovered 
from trauma symptoms can rely on an effective prefrontal mechanism to in(cid:173)
hibit  the  activity  of the  amygdala-related  fear  structure.  Animal  research 
supports this view, because fear extinction depends on the activity of medial 
prefrontal areas rather than on changing amygdala-dependent associations 
[64-66], and sustained fear extinction requires memory consolidation in pre(cid:173)
frontal areas involving protein synthesis [67]. 

651 

Brewin [27]  suggested that recovery from trauma symptoms depends  on 
the  availability  of declarative  autobiographical  memory  of the  stimulus. 
This  contextual  knowledge  is  necessary  to  identify  the  intrusive  flash  of 
a  fear  structure  after a  trauma  reminder  as  a  memory  process  relating  to 
past event  rather  than  an  indication  of current  threat.  After  a  traumatic 
event,  however,  declarative knowledge,  especially autobiographical knowl(cid:173)
edge that could offer information about the context of the feared stimulus, 
is fragmented or even absent. In this conceptualization, recovery from initial 
intrusive symptoms  after a  stressful event is  the  result  of active emotional 
regulation  rather  than  automatic  extinction  of  fear  responses.  Recent 
imaging studies have shown that activity of the prefrontal brain structures 
correlate with  active  emotion  regulation  (eg,  cognitive  re-evaluation)  [68-
70]  and  with  the  inhibition  of amygdala  activity  [69].  Furthermore,  these 
structures  overlap with  areas  responsible  for  extinction  of conditioned  re(cid:173)
sponses [71].  These structures are key candidates for a supervisory structure 
that can control the activity of a fear structure, depending on the evaluation 
of the current situation and the memory content. 

Traumatic memory in  children 

Episodic memory begins at the age of about 2 years, as soon as the chil(cid:173)
dren  acquire  a  cognitive  sense  of self [72].  Theories  of cognitive  develop(cid:173)
ment  suggest  that early  episodic  memory  is  dominated  by  nondeclarative 
knowledge  and  contains  little  elaborate  information  about  context  and 
meaning [73].  Whereas sensory-perceptual representation can be established 
very early in life,  fully functioning autobiographic memory depends on the 
development of a variety of cognitive functions,  including mental concepts, 
temporal concepts,  self-representations, language representations, and nar(cid:173)
rative  structure  [74].  In  healthy  children  most  of  these  structures  have 
evolved  sufficiently  at the  age  of 5 years  [32,74].  Because  traumatic stress 
can affect a variety of brain structures during development [75], it is reason(cid:173)
able  to  assume  that development  of episodic  memory  may  be  delayed  in 
children who grow up in stressful conditions. As a consequence,  the mem(cid:173)
ory theory outlined  previously cannot be  adapted unconditionally  to  chil(cid:173)
dren  below  the  age  of  5  years.  In  addition,  the  phenomenology  of 
symptoms  in  traumatized  preschool  children  differs  to  some  extent  from 
that in  older  children  [76],  and  approaches  to  treatment must  be  adapted 
for  these children [77]. 

Because of ethical concerns, there is a lack of research on the neurophys(cid:173)

iology of trauma in children. In particular, there is no symptom-provocation 
study involving children.  Some findings  on traumatic memories  do corre(cid:173)
spond  with  the  neurocognitive  theory,  however.  Recently,  Kenardy  and 
co-workers  [78]  examined children's  trauma narratives in  the  aftermath of 
a traumatic event (4-7 weeks) and the presence ofPTSD symptoms 6 months 
later.  The authors found that temporal disorganization, but not absence of 

652 

emotion,  was  associated  with  the  presence  of PTSD  symptoms  at a  later 
stage.  On  the  other  hand,  dissociative  themes  in  the  trauma  narratives 
showed a weak link with the development of subsequent PTSD. These out(cid:173)
comes  support the  notion  that in  children,  as  well  as  in  adults,  traumatic 
memories  might  be  characterized  bya  lack  of coherent  auto biographic 
information an,d,  at the same time,  by a dominant network of sensory and 
emotional elements. 

In a  recent longitudinal  study  [79],  children who  had a  history  of mal(cid:173)

treatment  underwent  a  variety  of  clinical  evaluations  at  different  time 
points over a period of 12 to 18 months. The study showed that the severity 
of PTSD  symptoms  as  well  as  cortisol  levels  at baseline  predicted  hippo(cid:173)
campal reduction. Even though additional studies are warranted to confirm 
these  pilot  data,  the  results  of this  study  suggest  an  association  among 
hippocampal changes, PTSD symptoms,  and cortisol levels  in traumatized 
children. 

Consequences for  treatment 

In accordance with the neurocognitive theory of PTSD, the main goal of 

therapy  could  be  the  construction  of  a  consistent  declarative  (autobio(cid:173)
graphic)  representation  of the  traumatic  event.  Immediately after  the fear 
structure has been activated by a reminder of a traumatic event, this declar(cid:173)
ative representation can provide the supervisory structure with the informa(cid:173)
tion that the activity of the fear structure is only a memory recollection and 
does  not  indicate  a  current  threat.  In  turn,  the  supervisory  structure  can 
inhibit  the  activity  of the  fear  structure.  Consistent with  this  assumption, 
research on trauma treatment indicates that the construction of declarative 
trauma memory seems to be important for successful treatment.  The expo(cid:173)
sure therapy developed by F oa and colleagues [25]  has proven to be one of 
the  most  successful  treatment  approaches  for  PTSD.  In exposure  therapy 
for PTSD, the patient is  instructed  to talk about the traumatic experience 
repeatedly.  Initial  formulations  of the  theory  of exposure  therapy  were 
based  on  fear  extinction,  but  recent  analyses  of  the  treatment  process 
support the importance of constructing auto biographic knowledge.  In par(cid:173)
ticular,  it  has  been  demonstrated  that  patients  who  manage  to  construct 
a  coherent  narration  of the  event  during  exposure  therapy  profit  most 
from treatment [80]. 

The main focus  of therapy should be  on the part of the memory that is 
most  fragmented  in  autobiography  and  is  represented  most  intensively 
within  the  sensory-perceptual  representations.  To  form  a  consistent  auto(cid:173)
biographic  narration  of this  moment,  the  sensory-perceptual  representa(cid:173)
tion  inevitably  is  activated,  because  it  provides  detailed  knowledge 
about  the  event  that  is  not  yet  available  in  declarative  structures.  The 
auto biographic  representation  should  cover  the  most  salient  stimuli 
of  the  sensory-perceptual  representation  with  the  highest  probability  of 

653 

eliciting intrusive symptoms.  Because the activation of the sensory-percep(cid:173)
tual  representation  always  is  accompanied  by  the  emotional  reactions 
coded  in  this  structure,  a  high  emotional  involvement  is  necessary  for 
therapy  [81].  The  task  of  a  therapist  is  to  encourage  the  activation  of 
painful  memories  and  to  prevent  the  use  of the  patient's  habitual  strate(cid:173)
gies  to  avoid  or terminate  the  activation.  At the  same  time,  the  therapist 
should support the patient in organizing the declarative memory related to 
the  traumatic  event  by  assisting  the  narration  of  the  event  within  the 
patient's  biography.  Although  the  activation  of  the  sensory-perceptual 
representation  leads  to  a  high  emotional  response,  the  increasing  forma(cid:173)
tion  of autobiographical  knowledge  should  lead  to  an increasing  capabil(cid:173)
ity  by  the  supervisory  structure  to  inhibit  the  fear  reactions.  This  effect 
can  be  observed  as  habituation  of the  emotional  response.  This  principle 
guides  the  procedure  of NET. 

The procedure of narrative  exposure therapy 

NET has been developed for application in crisis and postconfiict regions. 
This context poses several challenges for a treatment approach.  Because in 
these countries relatively few  professionals are available for a high number 
of affected people, the treatment must be short and pragmatic. It should be 
easy to learn and be effective even when  provided by trained laypersons or 
paraprofessionals with no or minimal medical or psychologic backgrounds. 
It should be applicable  across cultures and fit  into the social  and political 
background of the setting. 

Most  researchers  who  are  working  with  refugees  or  under  field  condi(cid:173)
tions in disaster and war regions are aware that any psychologic interven(cid:173)
tion  needs  a  firm  context.  Although  PTSD  may  be  the  most  prevailing 
mental  health  disorder  in  most populations  affected  by war  and  disaster, 
a  specific  treatment  module  should  be  integrated  into  a  sustainable  and 
comprehensive  psychosocial  or  mental  health  program  that  includes 
a  variety  of interventions  and  a  referral  structure  for  medical  conditions. 
NET  can  be  a  key  treatment  program  within  such  a  structure;  however, 
the  therapist  should  be  prepared  to  encounter  common  conditions,  such 
as  ongoing  child  abuse,  substance  dependence,  grief,  and  depression.  In 
addition  to  trauma  therapy,  therapists  should  have  learned  to  identify 
and  understand  these  problems  so  as  to  provide  assistance  or  referral  to 
other sources  of help. 

For the treatment of PTSD,  the authors have developed NET, which is 
based  on  principles  of  the  theory  outlined  in  the  previous  sections 
[9,26,82].  For  NET,  the  classical  form  of trauma  exposure  therapy  was 
adapted  to  meet  the  needs  of clinically  traumatized  survivors  of war  and 
torture. The different variants of exposure therapy for PTSD usually target 
the worst traumatic event, assuming that this approach will lead to the best 

654 

treatment  outcome.  Most victims  of organized  violence,  war,  and  torture 
have experienced several traumatic events, however, and often it is impossi(cid:173)
ble  to identify the worst event before  treatment.  In addition,  the fear  net(cid:173)
works  of different  traumatic events  overlap,  and it can be  difficult  to  sort 
out  the  origin  of  different  network  items.  To  overcome  this  challenge, 
NET uses  the chronicity of testimony therapy.  Instead of defining a  single 
event  as  a  target  for  therapy,  the patient constructs  a  narrative  of his  or 
her whole life,  from birth to the present, while focusing on the detailed re(cid:173)
port of the traumatic experiences.  NET has been adapted for the use with 
traumatized children and adolescents in a version called "KidNET" [83]. 

KidNET should not be applied without a formal assessment of the child 
or adolescent.  The typical inclusion criterion for  therapy  is  a  diagnosis  of 
PTSD. KidNET has not been studied sufficiently in patients who have cur(cid:173)
rent substance addiction and psychosis,  so at present these patients should 
be excluded. KidNET is a short-term treatment approach that usually takes 
between  4  and  10  sessions  of 90  to  120  minutes.  Box  1 presents  the  key 

Box 1.  Interventions of KidNET in  an  eight-session format 

Prerequisite 
Structured psychologic assessment including diagnosis of PTSD, 

comprehensive list of traumatic events, context condition 
(family background, current threats and violence), and 
exclusion criteria  (substance addiction, psychosis) 

First session 
Psychoeducation with child and caretaker 
Informed consent by caretaker and child 
Lifeline 

Second session 
Revisit lifeline 
Start narration at birth 

Third through seventh sessions 
Revisit lifeline 
Reread  and correct the narration of the previous session 
Continue narration with focus on traumatic events 

Eighth session 
Revisit lifeline and add symbols for hopes in the future 
Reread whole narration and  include hopes for the future 
Sign and  hand over the narration 

After treatment 
Follow-up examination about 3  months after treatment 

655 

interventions  in  KidNET  as  applied  in  an  eight-session  treatment.  The 
procedure for KidNET is described in the NET manual [26]. 

First session: psychoeducation and lifeline 

Any  trauma-focused  treatment  including  an  exposure  element  requires 
high motivation in the child and a  good and trustful relationship  between 
the  child  and  the  therapist.  Consequently,  treatment  never  should  be 
started  without  detailed  psychoeducation  of the  child.  Parental  consent 
should be obtained, if possible,  and parents should be included in the psy(cid:173)
choeducational  part  of  treatment.  The  education  includes  information 
about trauma symptoms, a simplified model of the memory theory, the im(cid:173)
plications  for  treatment,  and  a  detailed  explanation  of the  treatment  pro(cid:173)
cedure.  The child  and the caretaker should  be  prepared for  the activation 
of memories from the past that might be painful and that they might want 
to  avoid;  they  should  know  that  the  therapist  will  counteract  this 
tendency.  Depending  on  the  child's  age,  different  metaphors  can  be  used 
to explain the memory theory.  (One  example is the metaphor of a  cabinet 
that is so  full  and messy  that items  fall  out of it.  Constantly holding  the 
doors  and  occasionally  putting  the  items  back  might  be  one  solution, 
but it would be better to open  doors  once and to sort the items  systemat(cid:173)
ically.)  In  KidNET,  parents  or caretakers are present only during the psy(cid:173)
choeducational  part  of treatment.  The  rest  of the  treatment  is  conducted 
with the child alone (or with an interpreter if necessary),  to allow the child 
to  make  his  or  her  own  report  free  of the  influences  of the  parents  or 
caretakers. 

The next step in treatment is the lifeline procedure. The therapist presents 
a  rope  and  explains  to  the  child  that  it  symbolizes  his  or  her  life,  with 
the beginning of the rope marking the birth.  The child  is  asked to  lay  the 
rope out on the floor,  leaving a  part of the rope unfolded to represent the 
future.  The  therapist  then  presents  flowers  and  stones  of different  sizes 
and  colors  to  the  child  and  explains  that  the  flowers  represent  happy 
moments in life,  and the stones stand for bad experiences  (eg,  sad,  fearful, 
or  painful  events).  The  therapist  asks  the  child  to  place  the  flowers  and 
stones along the lifeline to mark significant life events. The therapist assists 
the child in finding  the right chronology of events.  Because the aim of the 
procedure is  to obtain a rough overview of the child's life rather than emo(cid:173)
tional disclosure, the child gives only a very short description-a headline(cid:173)
of each event. After all major events are represented on the lifeline, the child 
makes a drawing of this lifeline and writes the headline next to each symbol. 
Older children might prefer to take a  photograph of the lifeline instead of 
drawing. The picture of the lifeline serves as an important tool for knowing 
where  the  key  moments  in  the  child's  life  are  located.  During  treatment, 
more events  (more  stones and flowers)  might be  revealed,  and  the  picture 
can be corrected accordingly. 

656 

. The second session 

At the start of each session,  the child revisits  the picture of the lifeline. 
Then the child  starts to narrate his  or her life.  The therapist takes care of 
the  chronology  of events  and  starts  the  procedure  with  direct  questions 
like "Where were you born?" and "Who are your parents?" The narration 
should  focus  both  on  factual  background  information  and  on vividly  re(cid:173)
corded emotional events.  In fortunate  cases,  the first  emotional event can 
be a  positive event that should be explored in much detail,  using  the same 
techniques  used  for  traumatic  events  to  teach  the  child  the  procedure  of 
chronologic and emotional narration. The therapist writes down the narra(cid:173)
tion as  a first-person  account in the  past tense.  The start of a narration of 
a  12-year-old Sudanese boy could look like this: 

I grew up in Yei. We were a large family. My father had four wives by then. 
And he had  11  children,  four girls  and seven  boys.  My father was a  rich 
man. He had goats and cattle. So there was a competition among the chil(cid:173)
dren.  My father  preferred  the  children  of another  wife.  Me,  my  brother 
Nicolas, and my sister Sylvia were among the neglected ones. But I remem(cid:173)
ber well,  when we  were children, we  enjoyed playing in the field  while the 
parents were uprooting cassava. 

The following sessions 

At the start of the following sessions the therapist takes some time to ex(cid:173)
plore how the child has been faring between the sessions.  This understand(cid:173)
ing  is  particularly  important,  because  some  children  have  more  intrusive 
symptoms and nightmares following the initial NET sessions.  The therapist 
explains  to  the  child  that this  phenomenon  is  an indication  of emotional 
processing and that the child should not be afraid of this occurrence. After 
the therapist and the child have indicated the current state of therapy at the 
lifeline,  the  therapist  asks  the  child  whether  he  or  she  wants  to  modify 
the  lifeline:  perhaps  the  child  has  remembered  additional  major  events. 
The  therapist  then  rereads  the  narration  that  was  written  down  in  the 
previous  session.  The  therapist instructs  the  child  to  be  very  attentive,  to 
imagine the events again,  and to correct the story.  Usually,  the child adds 
some information or even new events. The therapist is aware of uncertainties 
in chronology and resolves  these issues  with the child.  The narration then 
continues until the current situation. 

The  last session 

In the  last  treatment  session,  the  child  is  asked  to lay  down  his  or her 
lifeline  again.  This  time,  the  lifeline  is  extended  with flowers  to represent 
the  hopes  and  wishes  for  the  future.  The  therapist  reads  the  narration 
to  the  child· one  last  time  and  adds  the  hopes  and  wishes  for  the  future. 
At the  end,  all  persons  who  were  involved  in the  treatment  (ie,  the child, 

657 

the therapist, and the interpreter) sign the final document. The therapist dis(cid:173)
cusses with the child the further use of the testimony and hands one copy to 
the child, who is free to do with it whatever he or she wants. The therapist, 
however,  explains  the  potential  dangers  involved  in  politically  sensitive 
cases. 

Narrating  traumatic events 

The most important and most sensitive element of KidNET is the narra(cid:173)

tion of the traumatic events.  Within KidNET, a traumatic event should be 
narrated only using a very directive approach that requires some skills and 
a clear understanding of the neurocognitive theory outlined earlier. 

Even though most traumatic events  should be predictable in the narra(cid:173)

tion,  because  they  are  represented  as  stones  on  the  lifeline,  the  therapist 
should be aware of events that turn out to be very dramatic during the nar(cid:173)
ration  or events  that  have  been  left  out on the  lifeline.  Several  indicators 
show  that the  child  might  be  approaching  a  traumatic event in his  or her 
story. The child might show some observable activation of the fear structure 
(ie,  become nervous,tense, and fearful).  At the same time,  the child might 
want  to  avoid  the  narration  by  getting  impatient  and  rushing  through 
a period of life or by presenting an urgent need for a break. At this moment 
the therapist must make a clear decision whether to go explore the event in 
detail  or  to  postpone  the  continuation  to  the  next  session,  because  the 
narration  of a  traumatic  event  usually  requires  about  I  hour  and  must 
not be interrupted.  As  soon  as  the  therapist decides  to explore  the  event, 
he or she must be very directive in the exploration to keep a clear chronol(cid:173)
ogy.  Usually,  the story is  fragmented  and dominated by single perceptions 
of the  worst moment of the  event.  The  therapist directs  the child  to  start 
the  event  at  the  beginning,  including  background  information  about  the 
temporal  and  spatial  context  of the  event.  The  event  is  then  explored  in 
slow  motion,  in much detail,  always  keeping  the  chronology  of the  event 
clear.  By asking the child direct questions ("What did you see?") and mak(cid:173)
ing probing observations ("I can see  that you are trembling now.  Did you 
feel  like trembling then?"),  the therapist makes sure that all  aspects of the 
memory-including  "cold"  facts  as  well  as  "hot"  elements  from  the  fear 
structure-are  present  at  each  step  of  the  story.  In  this  way,elements 
from  the  fear  structure  (sensory  perceptions,  cognitions,  emotions,  and 
physiologic  responses)  are  anchored  in  the  framework  of a  chronologic 
life event that is based in auto biographic memory. As a consequence, a ha(cid:173)
bituation of emotional responses can be observed during the narration. The 
child will notice a decrease in fear and perhaps even some feelings  of relief. 
The therapist always should be aware of the increasing and decreasing states 
of arousal  and fear  in  the child  and never  should  end  a  session while  the 
child  is  still  highly  aroused  and  occupied  by  memories  of the  traumatic 
event.  After  the  narration  of a  traumatic  event,  the  child  might  want  to 

658 

discuss  some  aspects  of the  meaning  of this  event.  The  therapist  can  use 
methods  from  cognitive  therapy  to  modify  maladaptive  assumptions  and 
conclusions, especially when the child feels  high levels  of shame and guilt. 

The  use  of illustrative media 

The main tool of narrative exposure is  language.  Even though autobio(cid:173)

graphical memory  processes,  including  narrative language,  are  reasonably 
well  established  at the  age  of 5  years  [74],  children  need  more  assistance 
than adults in creating their auto biographic memory, especially for memo(cid:173)
ries  that happened before the age  of 5 years.  Although the child's level  of 
language development at the time of encoding influences the extent to which 
events can be reported verbally, children at the age of 5 years can provide 
a  brief verbal report of a  stressful experience that happened already at the 
age of 3 years [84].  However, Children, including very young ones, can pro(cid:173)
vide additional information to their verbal report if they are given  the  op(cid:173)
portunity to illustrate their memories [85]. 

In addition to language development, the child's emotional and cognitive 
capabilities  must  be  taken  into  account  in  trauma  treatment  [86].  Unlike 
other  treatment  approaches  for  traumatized  children,  KidNET  does  not 
contain  a  module  of training  in  emotion  regulation  or  affective  coping. 
Nevertheless,  the therapist must be aware of the individual child's state of 
emotional  and cognitive  development.  Most school-aged  children can un(cid:173)
derstand at least the basic emotions of fear,  anger,  sadness,  and happiness 
and can infer the causes  of the emotional states [87].  Children's narrations 
of emotional  events  usually  contain  few  references  to  emotions,  however 
[88].  The  child-parent  communication  is  the  main  medium  of emotional 
development.  Because  child-parent  interactions  can  be  severely  impaired 
in  traumatized  children,  many  of them  present  with  a  marked  delay  in 
emotional development. 

Because  of these  developmental factors,  the  therapist must be  aware  of 
the emotional  and cognitive capabilities  of the individual child.  Often the 
therapist must assist directly in creating an understandable narration.  For 
example,  the  therapist must be  aware  of a  child's difficulties  in classifying 
and verbalizing emotions and teach the child  about basic emotions.  Many 
children have difficulties judging the event that have happened to them, es(cid:173)
pecially in cases of taboo and shameful events such as sexual victimization. 
A lack of knowledge about children's rights and the context of violence can 
leave them with a  lack of understanding of their own biography. The ther(cid:173)
apist can educate the child directly about the context of the particular form 
of violence and can acknowledge the injustice that has happened to him or 
her. 

The use  of creative media can compensate for children's difficulties with 
memory and reporting by providing a chain of retrieval cues, a structure for 
the child's  narrative  [89],  and assistance  in  understanding and verbalizing 

659 

emotions [90]. Therapists, however, must be be very cautious not to be sug(cid:173)
gestive  when  using  illustrative  material  to  avoid  the  installation  of false 
memories [91]. 

KidNET involves the use of specific creative media that aid in retrieval of 
memory and help  the narration of a  past event.  Such tools are the lifeline, 
drawing, and re-enactment using body positioning or playing out (eg, using 
little  figures  or toys)  of key  moments  of the  traumatic event.  The  use  of 
illustrative material always is accompanied by verbal narration. While draw(cid:173)
ing  or  playing,  the  child  is  encouraged  to  explain  his  or  her  drawing  or 
activity,  and  the  therapist  verbalizes  along  empathically.  The  dialogue  is 
guided by the rationale of NET treatment: cognitions, emotions, and phys(cid:173)
iologic and sensory memory within the flow of chronology. For example, the 
drawing  of a  scene might be  accompanied like  this:  "I can see  a  little  boy 
with a  red T-shirt by the side of the road here.  Is  this you? Ah sure,  I  can 
recognize  your  dark  hair.  Do  you  remember  what  you  were  thinking  in 
that moment  as  you  stood  there?  How do  you  feel  now  you  are  drawing 
this?"  Body  positioning  is  a  different  technique  that requires  the  child  to 
assume the position he or she had during the traumatic event.  Because the 
kinesthetic  perception  is  part  of the  sensory-perceptual  representation  of 
the event, this technique might help trigger other hot memories of the event. 
Because this method can be very powerful in triggering emotions, the ther(cid:173)
apist should be careful to stay in close  contact with the child  and to  keep 
assisting in narrating the event. 

Basic rules 

The treatment of traumatized children requires  several ground rules  for 
the basic behavior and attitude of the therapist. The ground rules (security, 
control, predictability, physical integrity, acceptance, empathy, congruence, 
and  confidentiality)  are  explained  in  more  detail  in  the  manual  [26].  The 
main challenge  for  the  therapist is  to  overcome  his  or her  own  avoidance 
of strong emotions.  As  a consequence, especially in conflict regions,  a  pro(cid:173)
cessing of the practitioner's traumatic experiences is a  key element of NET 
training. 

Outcome of narrative exposure therapy in children 

So far, one case report and two randomized, controlled trials using NET 
with  adults  have  been  published  [9,82,92].  In  general,  these  studies  with 
Sudanese  refugees  in  Uganda  and  with'survivors  of political  violence  in 
Romania showed a clinically significant reduction in PTSD symptoms and 
greater  effectiveness  than  supportive  counseling  and  psychoeducation 
only.  Treatment  effects  have  been  maintained  for  up  to  I  year,  and  the 
data show that within the first year after treatment the symptoms continue 
to decline in comparison with the post-test administered immediately after 

660 

therapy. Three case reports and a small case series on KidNET used to treat 
war-traumatized children living in a  Ugandan refugee camp have appeared 
in  print [83,93].  In  meantime,  controlled  studies  have  been  completed.  A 
randomized,controlled trial with traumatized refugee children in Germany 
showed that children who received KidNET had a large decrease in PTSD in 
comparison with children on the waiting list.  A  controlled study with chil(cid:173)
dren and adolescents orphaned in the Rwandan genocide demonstrated last(cid:173)
ing and rather strong effects.  Trials in Sri Lanka proved that KidNET can 
be disseminated effectively to teachers who then could treat war-traumatized 
children successfully. Thus there is increasing evidence that KidNET signif(cid:173)
icantly reduces  symptoms  of PTSD even in  severely war-traumatized chil(cid:173)
dren.  KidNET also  seems  to  have  a  significant effect  on the  symptoms  of 
depression  and  on suicidal  ideation.  These  findings  show  that KidNET is 
a feasible, pragmatic, and effective tool for the short-term treatment of child 
and adolescent victims of war and violence. 

References 

[1]  Kaldor M. New and old wars: organized violence in a global era. London: Blackwell; 1999. 
[2]  International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies. W orId disasters report 

2004. Geneva: International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies. 

[3]  Catani C, Jacob N, Schauer E, et al. When family violence adds to war and natural disaster: 
mental health of children living unoer extreme stress in Sri-Lanka BMC Psychiatry, in press. 
[4]  Ehntholt KA, Yule W. Practitioner review: assessment and treatment of refugee children and 
adolescents who have experienced war-related trauma. J Child Psychol Psychiatry 2006;47: 
1197-210. 

[5]  Saigh PA. The development of posttniumatic stress disorder following four different types of 

traumatization. Behav Res Ther 1991;29:213-6. 

[6]  Schaal S,  Elbert T. Ten years after the genocide: trauma confrontation and posttraumatic 

stress in Rwandan adolescents. J Trauma Stress 2006;19:95-105. 

[7]  Elbert T, Huschka B, Schauer E, et al. Trauma-related impairment in children-an epidemi(cid:173)

ological survey in Sri Lankan provinces affected by two decades of civil war and unrest. Child 
Abuse Negl, in press. 

[8]  Neuner F, Schauer E, Catani C, et al.  Post tsunami stress: a study of posttraumatic stress 
disorder in children living in three severely affected regions in Sri Lanka. J Trauma Stress 
2006; 19:339-47 

[9]  Neuner F,  Schauer  M,  Klaschik C,  et al.  A  comparison  of narrative exposure  therapy, 
supportive counseling,  and psychoeducation for  treating posttraumatic stress  disorder in 
an Mrican refugee settlement. J Consult Clin PsychoI2004;72:579-87. 

[10]  Meiser-Stedman R, Yule W, Smith P, et al. Acute stress disorder and posttraumatic stress 
disorder  in  children  and  adolescents  involved  in  assaults  or  motor  vehicle  accidents. 
Am J Psychiatry 2005;162:1381-3. 

[11]  Sack WH, Him C, Dickason D. Twelve-year follow-up  study of Khmer youths who suf(cid:173)

fered  massive  war  trauma  as  children.  J  Am  Acad  Child  Adolesc  Psychiatry  1999;38: 
1173-9. 

[12]  Bolton P, Bass J, Betancourt T, et al. Interventions for depression symptoms among adoles(cid:173)
cent survivors of war and displacement in northern Uganda: a randomized controlled trial. 
JAMA 2007;298:519-27. 

661 

[13]  Cohen JA, Deblinger E, Mannarino AP, et al. A multisite, randomized controlled trial for 
children with sexual abuse-related PTSD symptoms. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 
2004;43:393-402. 

[14]  Stein BD, Jaycox LH, Kataoka SH, et al. A mental health intervention for schooIchildI:~n 

exposed to violence: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2003;290:603-11. 

[15]  Stallard  P.  Psychological  interventions  for  post-traumatic  reactions  in  children  and 
young  people:  a  review  of  randomised  controlled  trials.  CIin  Psychol  Rev  2006;26: 
895-911. 

[16]  Deblinger  E,  Steer  RA,  Lippmann  J.  Two-year follow-up  study  of cognitive  behavioral 
therapy for sexually abused children suffering post-traumatic stress symptoms. Child Abuse 
NegI1999;23:1371-8. 

[17]  SmithP, Dyregrov A, Yule W, etal. Children and war: teaching recovery techniques. Bergen, 

Nor:way: Children and War Foundation; 2000. 

[18]  Saltzman WR, Layne CM, Steinberg AM, et al.  Developing a culturally and ecologically 
sound  intervention  program  for  youth  exposed  to  war  and  terrorism.  Child  Adolesc 
Psychiatr Clin N Am 2003;12:319-42, x. 

[19]  Giannopoulou  I,  Dikaiakou  A,  Yule  W.  Cognitive-behavioural  group  intervention  for 
PTSD symptoms in children following the Athens 1999 earthquake: a pilot study. Clin Child 
Psychol Psychiatry 2006;11:543-53. 

[20]  Goenjian AK, Karayan I, Pynoos RS, et al. Outcome of psychotherapy among early adoles(cid:173)

cents after trauma. Am J Psychiatry 1997;154:536-42. 

[21]  Chemtob  CM,  Nakashima  JP,  Hamada  RS.  Psychosocial  intervention  for  postdisaster 
trauma  symptoms  in  elementary  school  children:  a  controlled  community  field  study. 
Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 2002;156:211-6. 

[22]  Ehntholt KA,  Smith P, Yule W.  School-based cognitive-behavioural therapy group inter(cid:173)

vention for refugee children who have experienced war-related trauma. Clin Child Psychol 
Psychiatry 2005;10:235-50. 

[23]  Thabet AA, Vostanis P, Karim K. Group crisis intervention for children during ongoing war 

conflict. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2005;14:262-9. 

[24]  Cienfuegos J, MonelIi C. The testimony of political repression as a therapeutic instrument. 

Am J Orthopsychiatry 1983;53:43-5l. 

[25]  Foa EB,  Rothbaum  BO.  Treating  the  trauma  of rape:  cognitive-behavioral  therapy  for 

PTSD. Treatment manuals for practitioners. New York; Guilford Press:  1998. 

[26]  Schauer M, Neuner F, Elbert T. Narrative exposure therapy-a short ter:m intervention for 

traumatic stress disorders after war, terror or torture. Seattle; Hogrefe: 2005. 

[27]  Brewin CR. A cognitive neuroscience account of posttraumatic stress disorder and its treat(cid:173)

ment. Behav Res Ther 2001;39:373-93. 

[28]  Brewin  CR,  Holmes  EA.  Psychological  theories  of posttraumatic  stress  disorder.  Clin 

Psychol Rev 2003;23:339-76. 

[29]  Dalgleish T. Cognitive approaches to posttraumatic stress disorder: the evolution of multi(cid:173)

representational theorizing. Psychol Bull 2004;130:228-60. 

[30]  Ehlers A, Clark DM. A cognitive model of posttraumatic stress disorder. Behav Res Ther 

2000;38:319-45. 

[31]  Tulving E. Episodic memory and common sense: how far apart? Philos Trans R Soc Lond B 

BioI Sci 2001;356:1505-15. 

[32]  Howe ML, Toth S, Cicchetti D. Memory and developmental psychopathology. In: Cicchetti 
D, Cohen D, editors. Developmental psychopathology. Developmental neuroscience, vol. 2. 
2nd edition. New York: Wiley; 2006. p.  106-25. 

[33]  Squire  LR.  Declarative  and  nondeclarative  memory:  multiple  brain  systems  supporting 

learning and memory.  In:  Schacter DL, Tulving E, editors.  Memory systems  1994.  Cam(cid:173)
bridge (MA): MIT Press;  1994. p.  207-28. 

[34]  Conway MA, Pleydell-Pearce CW. The construction of autobiographical memories in the 

self-memory system. Psychol Rev 2000;107:261-88. 

662 

[35]  Brewin  CR,  Dalgleish T, Joseph S.  A  dual representation theory of posttraumatic stress 

disorder. Psychol Rev 1996;103:670-86. 

[36]  Metcalve J, Jacobs W.  A  "hot-systemfcool-system" view  of memory under stress. PTSD 

Research Quarterly 1996;7:1-3. 

[37]  Dudai Y.  The neurobiology  of consolidations, or, how stable is  the engram? Annu Rev 

PsychoI2004;55:51-86. 

[38]  Shastri L. Episodic memory and cortico-hippocampal interactions. Trends Cogn Sci 2002;6: 

162-8. 

[39]  McClelland JL,  McNaughton  BL,  O'Reilly RC.  Why there are complementary learning 
systems  in  the  hippocampus  and  neocortex:  insights  from  the  successes  and failures  of 
connectionist models oflearning and memory. Psychol Rev 1995;102:419-57. 

[40]  Conway  MA.  Sensory-perceptual  episodic  memory  and  its  context:  autobiographical 

memory. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B BioI Sci 2001;356:1375-84. 

[41]  Lang  P.  A  bio-informational  theory  of emotional  imagery.  Psychophysiology  1979;16: 

495-512. 

[42]  Bremner JD. Neuroimaging studies in post-traumatic stress disorder. Curr Psychiatry Rep 

2002;4:254-63. 

[43]  Kensinger  EA.  Remembering  emotional  experiences:  the  contribution  of valence  and 

arousal. Rev Neurosci 2004;15:241-51. 

[44]  Canli T, Zhao Z,Brewer J, et al. Event-related activation in the human amygdala associates 

with later memory for individual emotional experience. J Neurosci 2000;20:RC99. 

[45]  Brown R, Kulik J. Flashbulb memories. Cognition 1977;5:73-99. 
[46]  Sharot T, MartoreIla EA, Delgado MR, et al. How personal experience modulates the neural 

circuitry of memories of September 11. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007;104:389-94. 

[47]  LeDoux JE. Emotion: clues from the brain. Annu Rev PsychoI1995;46:209-35. 
[48]  LeDoux JE. Emotion circuits in the brain. Annu Rev Neurosci 2000;23:155-84. 
[49]  Miller MM, McEwen BS. Establishing an agenda for translational research on PTSD. Ann 

N Y Acad Sci 2006;1071:294-312. 

[50]  Kim JJ, Y oon KS. Stress: metaplastic effects in the hippocampus. Trends Neurosci 1998;21: 

505-9. 

[51]  McEwen BS.  Stress and hippocampal plasticity. Annu Rev Neurosci 1999;22:105-22. 
[52]  Sapolsky RM, Uno H, Rebert CS, et al.  Hippocampal damage associated with prolonged 

glucocorticoid exposure in primates. J Neurosci 1990;10:2897-902. 

[53]  Pitman RK, ShaIev AY, Orr SP. Posttraumatic stress disorder: emotion, conditioning and 
memory.  In:  Gazzaniga MS, editor. The new cognitive neurosciences.  Cambridge (MA): 
MIT Press; 2000. p. 72-96. 

[54]  Duvarci S, Pare D. Glucocorticoids enhance the excitability of principal basolateral amyg(cid:173)

dala neurons. J Neurosci 2007;27:4482-91. 

[55]  Debiec J, LeDoux JE. Noradrenergic signaling in the amygdala contributes to the reconso(cid:173)

lidation off ear memory: treatment implications for PTSD. AnnN Y Acad Sci 2006;1071: 
521-4. 

[56]  Vyas  A,  Mitra  R,  Shankaranarayana  Rao  BS,  et al.  Chronic stress  induces contrasting 
patterns  of dendritic  remodeling  in  hippocampal  and  amygdaloid  neurons.  J  Neurosci 
2002;22:6810-8. 

[57]  Williams LM, Phillips ML, Brammer MJ, et al.  Arousal dissociates amygdala and hippo(cid:173)

. campal fear responses: evidence from simultaneous fMRI and skin conductance recording. 
Neuroimage 2001;14:1070-9. 

[58]  Foa EB,  Kozak  MJ.  Emotional  processing  of fear:  exposure  to  corrective  information. 

Psychol Bull 1986;99:20-35. 

[59]  Brewin CR. Autobiographical memory for trauma: update on four controversies. Memory 

2007;15:227-48. 

[60]  Harvey  AG,  Bryant  RA.  A  qualitative  investigation  of the  organization  of traumatic 

memories. Br J Clin PsychoI1999;38:401-5. 

663 

[61]  Jones C, Harvey AG, Brewin CR. The organisation and content of trauma memories in 

survivors of road traffic accidents. Behav Res Ther 2007;45:151-62. 

[62]  Shin  LM, Orr SP,  Carson MA, et al.  Regional cerebral blood flow  in the amygdala and 
medial prefrontal cortex during traumatic imagery in male and female Vietnam veterans 
with PTSD. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2004;61:168-76. 

[63]  Shin LM, W right Cl, Cannistraro PA, et al. A functional magnetic resonance imaging study 

of amygdala and medial prefrontal cortex responses to overtly presented fearful faces in post(cid:173)
traumatic stress disorder. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2005;62:273-81. 

[64]  Milad MR, Quirk GJ. Neurons in medial prefrontal cortex signal memory for fear extinc(cid:173)

tion. Nature 2002;420:70-4. 

[65]  Quirk GJ, Gehlert DR. Inhibition of the amygdala: key to pathological states? Ann N  Y 

Acad Sci 2003;985:263-72. 

[66]  Quirk GJ, Likhtik E, Pelletier JG, ~t al. Stimulation of medial prefrontal cortex decreases the 

responsiveness of central amygdala output neurons. J Neurosci 2003;23:8800-7. 

[67]  Santini E, Ge H, Ren K, et al. Consolidation of fear extinction requires protein synthesis in 

the medial prefrontal cortex. J Neurosci 2004;24:5704-10. 

[68]  Hariri AR, Mattay VS, Tessitore A, et al. Neocortical modulation of the amygdala response 

to fearful stimuli. BioI Psychiatry 2003;53:494-501. 

[69]  Ochsner KN, Bunge SA, Gross JJ, et al. Rethinking feelings: an FMRI study of the cognitive 

regulation of emotion. J Cogn Neurosci 2002;14:1215-29. 

[70]  Phan KL, Fitzgerald DA, Nathan PJ, et al. Neural substrates for voluntary suppression of neg(cid:173)
ative affect: a functional magnetic resonance imaging study. BioI Psychiatry 2005;57:210-9. 
[71]  Phelps EA. Emotion and cognition: insights from studies of the human amygdala. Annu Rev 

PsychoI2006;57:27-53. 

[72]  Howe ML. The fate of early memories: developmental science and the retention of childhood 

experiences. Washington; American Psychological Association. 

[73]  Brainerd  CJ,  Reyna  VF.  Fuzzy-trace  theory:  dual  processes  in  memory,  reasoning,  and 

cognitive neuroscience. Adv Child Dev Behav 2001;28:41-100. 

[74]  Nelson K, Fivush R. The emergence of autobiographical memory: a social cultural develop(cid:173)

mental theory. Psychol Rev 2004;111:486-511. 

[75]  Teicher MH, Andersen SL, PolcariA, et al. Developmental neurobiology of childhood stress 

and trauma. Psychiatr Clin North Am 2002;25:397-426, vii-viii. 

[76]  Scheeringa MS, Zeanah CH, Myers L, et al. New findings on alternative criteria for PTSD in 

preschool children. JAm Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2003;42:561-70. 

[77]  Scheeringa MS, Salloum A, Arnberger RA, et al.  Feasibility and effectiveness of cognitive(cid:173)
behavioral therapy for posttraumatic stress disorder in preschool children: two case reports. 
J Trauma Stress 2007;20:631-6. 

[78]  Kenardy J,  Smith  A,  Spence  SH,  et al.  Dissociation in children's  trauma narratives:  an 

exploratory investigation. J Anxiety Disord 2007;21:456-66. 

[79]  Carrion VG, Weems CF, Reiss AL. Stress predicts brain changes in children: a pilot longi(cid:173)

tudinal study on youth stress, posttraumatic stress disorder, and the hippocampus. Pediatrics 
2007;119:509-16. 

[80]  Foa EB,  Molnar C,  Cashman L.  Change in rape narratives during exposure therapy for 

posttraumatic stress disorder. J Trauma Stress 1995;4:675-90. 

[81]  Jaycox LH, Foa EB,  Morral AR. Influence of emotional engagement and habituation on 

exposure therapy for PTSD. J Consult Clin PsychoI1998;66:185-92. 

[82]  Neuner F, Schauer M, Elbert T, et al.  A  narrative exposure treatment as intervention in 

a Macedonia's refugee camp: a case report. J Behav Cogn Psychother 2002;30:205-9. 

[83]  Onyut LP, Neuner F, Schauer E, et al. Narrative exposure therapy as a treatment for child 
war survivors with posttraumatic stress disorder:  two case reports and a pilot study in an 
Mrican refugee settlement. BMC Psychiatry 2005;5. 

[84]  Peterson C, Rideout R. Memory for medical emergencies experienced by 1- and 2-year-olds. 

Dev PsychoI1998;34:1059-72. 

664 

[85]  Driessnack  M.  Children's  drawings  as  facilitators  of communication:  a  meta-analysis. 

J Pediatr Nurs 2005;20:415-23. 

[86]  Salmon K, Bryant B.  Posttraumatic stress disorder in children-the influence of develop(cid:173)

mental factors. Clin Psychol Rev 2002;22:163-88. 

[87]  Ashiabi  GS.  Promoting the emotional development  of preschoolers.  Early  Child  Educ J 

2000;28:79-84. 

[88]  Fivush R. Children's memories of emotional events. In: Reisberg D, Hertel P, editors. Mem(cid:173)

ory and emotion. Oxford (UK): Oxford University Press; 2003. p. 242-71. 

[89]  Gross J, Hayne H. Drawing facilitates children's verbal reports of emotionally laden events. 

J Exp Psychol Appl 1998;4:163-79. 

[90]  Wesson M, Salmon K.  Drawin and showing: helping children to report emotionally laden 

events. Appl Cogn PsychoI2001;15:301-20. 

[91]  Brown DA, Pipe ME, Lewis C, et al.  Supportive or suggestive: do human figure drawings 

help 5- to 7-year-old children to report touch? J Consult Clin PsychoI2007;75:33-42. 

[92]  Bichescu D, Neuner F, Schauer M, et al. Narrative exposure therapy for political imprison(cid:173)

ment-related chronic posttraumatic stress disorder and depression. Behav Res Ther 2007;45: 
2212-20. 

[93]  Schauer E, Neuner F, Elbert T, et al. Narrative exposure therapy in children: a case study. 

Intervention 2004;2:18-38. 

