and form the base conditions governing
representation in the various genres. The
phenomenology of the chronotope thus
constitutes a kind of formal horizon, in
which narrative temporality and spatial rela-
tions are mutually involved with chance
rather than logical consequence. In chron-
otopic analysis, according to Bakhtin, nei-
ther time nor space is privileged, as one or the
other often is in literary criticism; for him,
the two are always seen as interdependent.
An unusual aspect of Bakhtin’s view of
literary history is that he projects the novel
genre backward in time, ﬁnding novelistic
roots in both classical Greek and Roman
precursors. Bakhtin’s discussions of
the
interworkings of time, space, and funda-
mental principles such as causality in these
early literary narratives are fascinating and
suggestive. It is unfortunate, however, that
his exploration of the chronotope is illus-
trated by a number of obscure narratives for
which he is attempting, at the same time, to
establish an original generic status. On the
other hand, his innovations as a classicist,
bringing new attention to genres such as the
symposium and the Menippean satire, as
precursors of the novel, no doubt inﬂuenced
his development of the concepts of hetero-
glossia, dialogism, and polyphony in the
novel. But the idea of the chronotope, linked
as it is to ﬁctional genres, has provided
contemporary critics with a useful tool of
analysis that was not previously available.

SEE ALSO: Bakhtin, M. M.; Blanchot,
Maurice; Carnival/Carnivalesque;
Deconstruction; Derrida, Jacques; Marxism;
Other/Alterity; Phenomenology; Poulet,
Georges

REFERENCES AND SUGGESTED
READINGS

Bakhtin, M. M. (1981). The Dialogic Imagination:
Four Essays (ed. M. Holquist; trans. C. Emerson

D I S C O U R S E 159

& M. Holquist). Austin: University of Texas
Press. (Original work published 1975.)

Bakhtin, M. M. (1984). Problems of Dostoevsky’s
Poetics (ed. and trans. C. Emerson). Minne-
apolis: University of Minnesota Press. (Original
work published 1929.)

Clark, K., & Holquist, M. (1984). Mikhail Bakhtin.

Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Holquist, M. (1990). Dialogism: Bakhtin and His

World. London: Routledge.

Morson, G. S., & Emerson, C. (1990). Mikhail
Bakhtin: Creation of a Prosaics. Stanford: Stan-
ford University Press.

Todorov, T. (1984). Mikhail Bakhtin: The Dialogical
Principle (trans. W. Godzich). Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press.

Discourse
YASSER MUNIF

The term “discourse” refers to a systematic
and relational sequence of meaningful state-
ments (speech and text) and semiotic ele-
ments (signs and symbols) that inﬂuence
practices and give expression to the values,
behaviors, and worldviews of social groups.
Historically, the concept was in use in the
sixteenth century to describe the practice
of speaking or writing at length about
a particular theme. In everyday language,
the term is often used casually to imply
a structured argument about a particular
theme. The modern genealogy of the con-
cept, however, goes back to the work of
Swiss linguist Ferdinand de Saussure and
includes pre-eminent poststructuralist the-
orists like Michel Foucault. For mainstream
linguistics, highly indebted to Saussure, the
focus is on the analysis of the internal
mechanisms of language in use. In contrast,
according to the Foucauldian perspective,
which tends to be more inﬂuential in cul-
tural studies and literary theory, the empha-
sis is on examining the impact of discourse
on the social sphere.

In the 1900s, Ferdinand de Saussure
developed a linguistic theory that differed

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

160 D I S C O U R S E

signiﬁcantly from its predecessors. Al-
though the term “discourse” was not used
extensively in Saussure’s work, his theory
of language has had a signiﬁcant inﬂuence
on theories of discourse. Unlike his prede-
cessors, Saussure was not particularly inter-
ested in the diachronic approach to speciﬁc,
individual languages, that is, their historical
evolution; rather, he favored a synchronic or
structural analysis of linguistic systems. By
emphasizing structural (and thus universal)
aspects of language, Saussure does not deny
the importance of social norms and rules in
linguistic systems. Instead, his aim is to
examine the structure of language as a ﬁxed
system. He aspires to explain the rules that
connect
the different elements to each
other and give coherence to the system.
For Saussure, a language is a “series of
differences of sound combined with a series
of differences of
ideas” (Saussure 1981
[1916]: 120). According to this framework,
meaning emerges because there is a closed
taxonomy of signs that depends on a rela-
tional system of differentiation. Signs do not
have meaning by themselves; they acquire it
within a differential and relational system.
The idea of language as a system provided
the foundation for a conception of discourse
as systematic and relational.

as poststructuralist

The notion of discourse acquired new
meaning
theorists
attempted to solve some of the problems
that Saussure’s ideas raised. Julia Kristeva,
Roland Barthes, and the linguist Emile
Benveniste built on Saussurean linguistics
to show the importance of sociocultural
and intertextual dimensions of discourse.
Barthes’s contributions to a post-Saussur-
ean understanding of signiﬁcation includes
his innovative theory of mythic discourse
that focuses on the semiotic dimension of
cultural practices and reworks the Saussur-
ean framework (sign/signiﬁer/signiﬁed) to
show that there are two levels of signiﬁca-
tion: denotation and connotation. On the

signs

level of denotation, signiﬁcation is largely
descriptive and objective; a signiﬁer refers to
a signiﬁed. Denotative meaning tends to be
stable and referential and requires little in-
terpretive analysis; it is “commonsensical,”
as Barthes once thought, though he would
later distance himself from this position. On
the level of connotation, on the other hand,
signiﬁcation is largely suggestive and sub-
jective; meaning is variable, tending toward
abstraction or metaphoric displacements;
interpreting connotative
requires
greater
sensitivity to linguistic features
and to the social and cultural contexts of
their articulation. According to Barthes,
connotation occurs in the second order of
signiﬁcation, where the denotative, or ﬁrst
order, of
speciﬁc
cultural meanings through use. The second
order has obvious ideological implications,
for a dominant group can present a conno-
tative sign in the guise of a simple denotative
one. Cultural practice becomes hegemonic
when this process succeeds in the formation
of a myth, which is presented as truthful
to those inﬂuenced or governed by that
practice. Barthes’s Mythologies
(1972
[1957]) explores
the kinds of cultural
practices open to “mythic” transformation
and offers a theoretical explanation for the
process by which myth becomes a meta-
language with its own signifying system.

signiﬁcation acquires

Like Barthes, Benveniste believed that
accounting for context in the construction
of meaning was vital, especially with respect
to the social positions of the speaker (locu-
taire) and the hearer (allocutaire) as well as
the context in which conversations take
place. Discourse, in this view, is contrasted
to history: the latter represents a ﬁxed and
objective repository of past events where no
speaker is involved, while the former implies
a dialogue in the present tense between
a speaker and a hearer. Discursive utter-
ances, as opposed to historical utterances,
are the product of intersubjective social acts.

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

Within this relational model, the speaker
attempts to produce statements to inﬂuence
the worldview of the hearer.

In a similar vein, Bakhtin proposes
a theory of language that stresses “the pri-
macy of context over text” (1981[1975]:
263). He uses “discourse” to refer to the
way in which the voices of speakers are
structured in social contexts. Bakhtin shows
that texts are dialogical; several voices com-
pete within a single text. What privileges one
voice over another depends on the role that
institutions and dominant social groups
play within a culture. Therefore, the goal
of
the critic is to stress the dialogical
conversation which occurs among various
voices within and without text.

the most

inﬂuential

In the 1960s and early 1970s, Michel
Foucault’s work on discourse emerged as
one of
theoretical
projects of the era. Though he learned
a great deal from thinkers like Saussure
and Barthes, he was less interested in
semiotics as such than in the conditions
of existence and historical speciﬁcities of
signifying structures understood as dis-
course, or “discursive formations” (1972).
Though he did not ignore the importance of
signiﬁcation, his main interests lay in what
discourses do, and this complex engagement
of signiﬁcation and context challenged both
abstract theories of the sign and materialist
theories of society. One of the innovations
of Foucault’s conception of discourse is the
idea that webs of signiﬁcation are in fact
relations of material force, power realized
within discourse systems. The reconﬁgura-
tion of the relation between discourse and
context led, necessarily, to a revised view of
the traditional relation between theory and
practice, according to which theory was
removed from and governed, as if from
afar, the various forms of practice.

Foucault’s early studies of institutions –
The Birth of the Clinic 2003[1963]), Madness
and Civilization (1992[1961]), and the

D I S C O U R S E 161

Order of Things (1973[1966]) employ an
archaeological method to analyze what he
terms historical “epistemes” – discursive
systems of thought and knowledge – and
the rules of enunciation they generate. In
The Order of Things, Foucault shows that
each historic epoch has an episteme or
a system of knowledge that orders it. An
episteme makes certain discourses accept-
able and others unthinkable. Two consecu-
tive eras are separated by an epistemic break
which transforms systems of knowledge and
alters radically the conditions of existence of
a discourse. Therefore, a discourse that may
be legitimate within one episteme (an era
characterized by a unique way of knowing)
might become inconceivable in another.
One of his most inﬂuential archaeological
studies of epistemes was Madness and Civi-
lization (1961), in which Foucault describes
the emergence of asylums and mental health
practices that establish coherence in a dis-
cursive system that both creates norms for
“sanity” and excludes from society those
individuals determined as “insane.” To
some
extent, Foucauldian archaeology
provides the foundation for subsequent
“genealogical” analysis, a mode of histori-
ography that eschews the search for origins
and instead seeks to understand local emer-
gences and resistances. Genealogy does not
concern itself with “the anticipatory power
of meaning” but rather with “the hazardous
play of dominations” (Foucault 1977: 148).
In The Archaeology of Knowledge (1972
[1969]), Foucault provides a systematic
description of the archaeological method.
He contends that discourse is formed of
“practices
systematically form the
objects of which they speak” (1972[1969]:
49); it imposes certain taxonomies that have
the power to produce knowledge and shape
practice. This led Foucault to challenge two
key theoretical trends in the 1960s: Marxian
dialectical materialism and poststructuralist
textualism. Unlike traditional
linguistics,

that

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

162 D I S C O U R S E

Foucault’s theory makes clear that discourse
acts on and in the world; it does not merely
represent it. Discourse is, in effect, a con-
stitutive part of reality. His insistence on
the “relative autonomy” of discourse from
the economic base came as a response to
orthodox Marxism dominant in French
intellectual circles in the 1960s. For ortho-
dox Marxism,
ideology and culture are
mostly determined by economic processes,
and they represent a reﬂection of dominant
socioeconomic
Foucault
was not concerned with such concepts,
conventionally understood,
as “truth,”
“representation,” or “totality,” which were
operative concepts for many Marxists at the
time. Nevertheless, he was sympathetic to
the Marxian analysis of material conditions
and looked with skepticism at theories of
textuality
ignored,
obscured, or denied the material and
formal dimensions of discourse
and
“discursive practices.”

and language

relationships.

that

as

Discursive

formations,

Foucault
describes them in The Archaeology of Knowl-
edge, are systems of knowledge that contain
traditional “disciplines” as well as new dis-
ciplines and interdisciplinary conjunctions
that represent new possibilities between dis-
ciplines. At one end of the spectrum is the
“statement,” which functions as a basic unit
of analysis, and can be meaningfully uttered
only if it conforms to the rules of enunci-
ation generated by the discursive formation
itself. Statements constitute the building
blocks of discursive formations; they are
performative acts that acquire meaning
only as events within a speciﬁc discourse,
which is in turn grounded in a particular
sociohistorical moment. It is crucial to view
the statement as an act of enunciation as well
as a piece of text. Finally, what matters in the
enunciation of a statement is not the psy-
chology of the subject who enunciates it but
the institutional and discursive position
from which a statement is uttered. At the

other end of the spectrum is the “archive,”
the conceptual space in which all discourses
circulate, where they are accessible. The
archive is not ordered from without,
according to an abstract system of reference.
It is governed by an internal principle of
dispersion. Foucault deﬁnes discourse as
a “dispersion of statements” that follows
certain regularities and abides by a set of
rules of enunciation. There are a number
of conditions (material, ideological, disci-
plinary) that maintain the uniformity of
discourse and make it appear ﬁxed. In
other words, heterogeneous
statements
form a complex discursive unity because
they operate according to discursive regu-
larities. The role of the theorist is to explain
the rules that lie behind what appears to
be a logical sequence of statements or
a coherent discursive formation. To analyze
a discourse, one ought to pay particular
attention to regularities that emerge in the
formation of objects and concepts. These
various formations become visible through
the enunciative position of the speaking
subject. A discursive formation, Foucault
writes, is deﬁned by a “delimitation of a
ﬁeld of objects, the deﬁnition of a legitimate
perspective for the agent of knowledge, and
the ﬁxing of norms for the elaboration of
concepts or theories” (1977: 199).

Starting in the 1970s, discourse theory
became increasingly inﬂuential in literary
and cultural
theory. The inﬂuence of
feminist and critical race theories, many
developed outside traditional academic dis-
ciplines, led to new challenges for discourse
analysis. Nowhere is this more evident than
in postcolonial studies. Edward Said was
the ﬁrst to use Foucault’s theories of dis-
course to analyze the speciﬁcities of imperial
and colonial cultures. In Orientalism (1978),
Said examines the strategies used by colonial
powers to represent “the Orient.” These
representations, he argues, are necessary
to sustain and reproduce the idea of “the

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

not

that

constitutes

West.” He notes that Orientalism is a colonial
discourse
only
a simplistic and, for the most part, ﬁctive
representation of “the Orient” but more im-
portantly, the discursive conditions of pos-
sibility for the emergence of a colonial sub-
ject. Discourse theory has had a wide-ranging
inﬂuence on feminist theory as well. Feminist
scholars, after Foucault, however much they
may decry his avoidance of questions of
gender, nevertheless learned from his work
strategies for challenging those aspects of
feminist thought bound to or reliant upon
essentialist identity politics and foundation-
alist philosophies. Postcolonial and feminist
approaches to discourse provided new and
inﬂuential conceptual tools that have altered
in a fundamental way the methodologies of
literary and cultural theory.

SEE ALSO: Bakhtin, M. M.; Barthes, Roland;
Carnival/Carnivalesque; Colonialism/
Imperialism; Dialogism and Heteroglossia;
Foucault, Michel; Kristeva, Julia; Said,
Edward; Saussure, Ferdinand de; Marxism;
Postcolonial Studies; Poststructuralism;
Semiotics/Semiology; Totality

REFERENCES AND SUGGESTED
READINGS

Bakhtin, M. M. (1981). The Dialogical Imagination:
Four Essays (trans. C. Emerson & M. Holquist;

D I S C O U R S E 163

ed. M. Holquist). Austin: University of Texas
Press. (Original work published 1975.)

Barthes, R. (1972). Mythologies (trans. A. Lavers).
(Original work published

London: Cape.
1957.)

Benveniste, E.

(1971). Problems

in General
Linguistics (trans. M. E. Meek). Coral Gables,
FL: University of Miami Press. (Original work
published 1966.)

Fairclough, N. (2003). Analysing Discourse: Textual
London:

Research.

Social

for

Analysis
Routledge.

Foucault, M. (1972). The Archaeology of Knowledge
(trans. A. M. S. Smith). London: Tavistock.
(Original work published 1969.)

Foucault, M. (1973). The Order of Things: An
the Human Sciences. New
(Original work published

Archeology of
York: Vintage.
1966.)

Foucault, M.

(1977). Language, Counter-
Memory, Practice:
and
Interviews (ed. D. F. Bouchard; trans. D. F.
Bouchard & S. Sherry).
Ithaca: Cornell
University Press.

Selected

Essays

Foucault, M. (1992). Madness and Civilization: A
History of Insanity in the Age of Reason (trans. R.
Howard). London: Routledge. (Original work
published 1961.)

Foucault, M. (2003). The Birth of the Clinic: An
Archaeology of Medical Perception (trans. A. M.
Sheridan Smith). London: Routledge. (Original
work published 1963.)

Mills, S. (1997). Discourse. London: Routledge.
Said, E. (1978). Orientalism. London: Routledge &

Kegan Paul.

Saussure, F. (1981). Course in General Linguistics
(trans. R. Harris). New York: McGraw-Hill.
(Original work published 1916.)

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

