APPLIED AND ENVIRONMENTAL MICROBIOLOGY, Mar. 2009, p. 1575–1580
0099-2240/09/$08.00⫹0 doi:10.1128/AEM.02509-08
Copyright © 2009, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

Vol. 75, No. 6

Rapid Oligonucleotide-Based Recombineering of the Chromosome

of Salmonella enterica䌤†

Roman G. Gerlach,‡ Daniela Ja¨ckel, Stefanie U. Ho¨lzer, and Michael Hensel*

Infektionsbiologische Abteilung, Universita¨tsklinikum Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany

Received 2 November 2008/Accepted 6 January 2009

Recombinant engineering using Red recombinase-based approaches offers efﬁcient and rapid approaches to
deletion and modiﬁcation of genes. Here we describe a novel application of Red recombinant engineering that
enables direct manipulation of chromosomal loci by electroporation with short synthetic DNA molecules. We
demonstrate the use of this approach for the generation of scarless in-frame deletions in chromosomal genes
of Salmonella enterica. Furthermore, we describe rapid site-directed mutagenesis within bacterial chromosomes
without any requirement for cloning and mutating genes in vitro or for reintroducing mutant alleles into the
chromosome. This approach can be expected to facilitate mutational analysis in S. enterica and in other
bacterial species able to support Red-mediated recombination.

Functional genomics of bacteria frequently requires gene
manipulations, such as in-frame deletion, site-directed mu-
tagenesis, or insertion of foreign sequences. Various ap-
proaches are available to perform such manipulations with
cloned genes in vitro. However, the generation of strains with
mutations in chromosomal genes remains the “gold standard”
for functional analyses. Current approaches are tedious and
time-consuming since construction of mutant alleles in vitro
and replacement of wild-type alleles by mutant alleles are
required. Recent advances in molecular genetics of enterobac-
teria allow rapid and high-throughput approaches for the gen-
eration of chromosomal in-frame deletions (1). Expression of
the phage ␭ recombinase Red allows homologous recombina-
tion of short (40-nucleotide) homologous sequences into the
chromosome of Salmonella (3, 19). This has enabled rapid
gene deletions and fusions using linear DNA constructs gen-
erated by PCR (3, 6). It has also been shown that Red recom-
binase can mediate recombination of synthetic oligonucleo-
tides (4), and this approach has been utilized for recombinant
engineering of bacterial artiﬁcial chromosomes (18) or viral
genomes (14).

Allelic exchange in wild-type bacteria requires the use of
positively selectable markers. Usually, antibiotic resistance cas-
settes are used for gene disruption. However, insertion of such
cassettes is not compatible with in-frame deletions. For the
generation of scarless chromosomal mutations, two systems of
interest are (i) positive selection of tetracycline sensitivity (9)
and (ii) use of homing endonuclease digestion for positive
selection (16).

Here we report a novel approach that allows direct mutagen-

* Corresponding author. Mailing address: Infektionsbiologische
Abteilung im Mikrobiologischen Institut, Universita¨tsklinikum Erlan-
gen, Wasserturmstr. 3-5, D-91054 Erlangen, Germany. Phone: 49
(0)9131 85 23640. Fax: 49 (0)9131 85 22531. E-mail: Michael.Hensel
@uk-erlangen.de.

‡ Present address: Robert Koch-Institut, Wernigerode Branch,

Burgstr. 37, D-38855 Wernigerode, Germany.

† Supplemental material for this article may be found at http://aem

.asm.org/.

䌤 Published ahead of print on 16 January 2009.

esis of chromosomal genes by electroporation with short syn-
thetic DNA fragments and Red recombinase-mediated recom-
bination.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Construction of tetAR insertions. Strains and plasmids used in this study are
listed in Table 1. Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium NCTC12023 was used
as the target strain for mutagenesis. To insert a gene cassette consisting of tetA
and tetR into the target gene for mutagenesis, the tetAR fragment was ampliﬁed
from genomic DNA of a strain harboring a Tn10dTc insertion using a high-
ﬁdelity polymerase mixture (MBI Fermentas) and 60-mer oligonucleotides com-
plementary to tetAR and the target gene.

The PCR product was puriﬁed and used for electroporation of S. enterica
serovar Typhimurium harboring pKD46 that was made competent and induced
for expression of Red recombinase as described previously (6). After electropo-
ration the cell suspension was plated onto LB plates containing tetracycline (20
␮g ml⫺1) and incubated overnight at 37°C. Clones resistant to tetracycline
were selected, and proper insertion of the tetAR cassette was conﬁrmed by
colony PCR with oligonucleotides speciﬁc for tetA and the target gene for the
mutagenesis (Fig. 1 and Table 2). The resulting Tetr clones were also tested
for growth inhibition on Bochner-Maloy plates (11) for 24 h at 42°C. This
selection procedure is not as effective as conventional selection by antibiotics.
We observed different degrees of growth inhibition by tetracycline for clones
obtained using a mutagenesis approach. Clones with the highest sensitivity on
Bochner-Maloy plates were selected for further mutagenesis. The medium
composition, detailed step-by-step protocols, and notes are provided in the
supplemental material.

Generation of double-stranded DNA for electroporation. Oligonucleotides
were synthesized and puriﬁed using high-performance liquid chromatography by
Thermo Scientiﬁc (Ulm, Germany). Lyophilized oligonucleotides were resus-
pended in distilled H2O at a concentration of 500 pmol ml⫺1. A mixture (total
volume, 20 ␮l) containing equal amounts of the forward and reverse oligonu-
cleotides was prepared in a “Safelock” Eppendorf tube. The tube was incubated
in a water bath at 95°C for 15 min, and the water bath was allowed to slowly cool
to room temperature overnight. Proper annealing was veriﬁed by gel electro-
phoresis of diluted samples of the mixture on 2% agarose gels.

For electroporation, 2 to 3 ␮l of the annealed oligonucleotides or various
dilutions of the mixture were used to transform pKD46-containing Tetr target
strains to a Tets phenotype. After electroporation, various dilutions of the cell
suspension were plated onto freshly prepared Bochner-Maloy plates and incu-
bated for 24 h at 42°C. Tets clones were selected and streak puriﬁed on Bochner-
Maloy plates with incubation for 24 h at 42°C. Selection at 42°C was necessary to
obtain the strongest possible growth inhibition of Tetr clones. Puriﬁed clones
were streaked in parallel onto LB plates without an antibiotic or containing
tetracycline (20 ␮g ml⫺1). Clones were further conﬁrmed by colony PCR of the
mutated loci. A detailed step-by-step protocol and further practical notes are
provided in the supplemental material.

1575

1576

GERLACH ET AL.

APPL. ENVIRON. MICROBIOL.

TABLE 1. Bacterial strains and plasmids used in this study

Strain or plasmid

Relevant characteristic(s)

Reference or source

S. enterica serovar

Typhimurium strains

NCTC121023

EB231

MvP599
MvP812
MvP781
MvP990
MvP991

Wild type

phsA::Tn10dTc

⌬siiE::FRT
⌬siiF::FRT
⌬siiE6540-12493::FRT (⌬Ig21-40)
⌬siiE6540-9541::FRT (⌬Ig21-30)
⌬siiE6540-8038::FRT (⌬Ig21-25)

NCTC, Colindale,
United Kingdom
B. C. Berks, Oxford,
United Kingdom

8
8
5
5
5

tetAR insertion strains

MvP1220
MvP1287

siiE deletion strains

MvP1222
MvP1226
MvP1227

siiE6540::tetAR
siiF1506::tetAR

⌬siiE6541-12492 (⌬Ig21-40)
⌬siiE6541-9540 (⌬Ig21-30)
⌬siiE6541-8037 (⌬Ig21-25)

Site-directed mutagenesis

strains
MvP1311
MvP1312
MvP1313

siiF(G500E)
siiF(K506L)
siiF SacI

This study
This study

This study
This study
This study

This study
This study
This study

Plasmids
pKD46

pWSK29
p3223

Red-expressing plasmid,
temperature sensitive

Low-copy-number vector, Ampr
Complementation of siiF

3

17
5

Sequence analyses. DNA sequencing and restriction analyses were performed

with PCR products obtained by colony PCR of selected clones.

Analyses of SiiE synthesis and secretion. SiiE was detected in cell lysates of
various S. enterica serovar Typhimurium strains (5) and quantiﬁcation of SiiE
secretion into the culture supernatant by various strains by an enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) (7) was performed as previously described.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Rationale for oligonucleotide-based recombineering. Ho-
mologous recombination mediated by the Red recombinase is
a highly efﬁcient process that has allowed generation of dele-
tions and gene fusions in various microbial organisms. Flank-
ing regions as short as 40 bp are sufﬁcient to enable Red-
mediated homologous recombination in Escherichia coli, S.
enterica, and various other bacteria. We speculated that this
speciﬁc feature might allow the use of short synthetic DNA for
recombinant engineering of target genes directly in their
genomic context.

We devised a two-step procedure for construction of in-
frame deletions and site-directed mutagenesis (Fig. 1). In the
ﬁrst step, a cassette consisting of the tetAR genes was intro-
duced into the target locus for mutagenesis by Red-mediated
recombination (Fig. 1A). The resulting clones were selected by
virtue of their resistance to tetracycline, and the proper posi-
tion of the tetAR cassette was conﬁrmed by colony PCR. In the
second step, conﬁrmed clones were electroporated with

FIG. 1. Rationale of the oligonucleotide-based recombinant engineering approach. In the ﬁrst step, the tetAR cassette is inserted using Red
recombinase-mediated recombination into the target locus, and Tetr strains are selected (A). Proper insertion of the tetAR cassette is conﬁrmed
by colony PCR using primer TetAR-Del-Check-For (Check-For) and a target gene-speciﬁc primer (orfX-Rev) or primer TetAR-Del-Check-Rev
(Check-Rev) and a target gene-speciﬁc primer (orfX-For). In the second step, conﬁrmed clones are transformed with the Red recombinase-
expressing plasmid pKD46, and subsequently 80- to 88-bp DNA fragments are introduced by electroporation to generate in-frame deletions (B) or
site-directed mutation or insertion of codons (C). Tets clones are selected on Bochner-Maloy plates. Finally, the mutations introduced by
recombination are conﬁrmed by colony PCR using primers ﬂanking the deletion or by restriction analysis, as described in the legend to Fig. 3. RBS,
ribosome binding site.

VOL. 75, 2009

Oligonucleotide

CHROMOSOMAL RECOMBINEERING

1577

TABLE 2. Oligonucleotides used in this study
Sequence

Deletions in siiE

SiiE-Del-Ig21-Tet-For......................5⬘-CGGCACGAAAGAGGTGCTGACGGCCACCAAAGACGCGACCTTAAGACCCACTTTCACA-3⬘
SiiE-Del-Ig21-Tet-Rev .....................5⬘-CATCTGCCCATGTGCCGGTCGGTGTCACGCTCCAGTTGCCCTAAGCACTTGTCTCCTG-3⬘
SiiE-Del6541-12492-For...................5⬘-CGGCACGAAAGAGGTGCTGCTGACGGCCACCAAAGACGCGACCGGCGAATGGAGTTGGA

SiiE-Del6541-12492-Rev..................5⬘-CTGGCGCTAATACTGATGGCGGCGTCCAACTCCATTCGCCGGTCGCGTCTTTGGTGGCCGT

SiiE-Del6541–9540-For....................5⬘-CGGCACGAAAGAGGTGCTGACGGCCACCAAAGACGCGACCGACGGCTGGCGCTATCGAC

SiiE-Del6541–9540-Rev ...................5⬘-CGTCCGCCAAAGCAGAATCCGGTCGATAGCGCCAGCCGTCGGTCGCGTCTTTGGTGGCCG

SiiE-Del6541-8037-For.....................5⬘-CGGCACGAAAGAGGTGCTGACGGCCACCAAAGACGCGACCGGGATCTGGGATTACACCT

SiiE-Del6541-8037-Rev....................5⬘-CGTCGGTCACATCTTTCGGCCAGGTGTAATCCCAGATCCCGGTCGCGTCTTTGGTGGCCGT

CGCCGCCATCAGTATTAGCGCCAG-3⬘

CAGCACCTCTTTCGTGCCG-3⬘

CGGATTCTGCTTTGGCGGACG-3⬘

TCAGCACCTCTTTCGTGCCG-3⬘

GGCCGAAAGATGTGACCGACG-3⬘

CAGCACCTCTTTCGTGCCG-3⬘

Site-directed mutagenesis

of siiF

SiiF502-503-TetAR-For ...................5⬘-CATACCTGCGGGGCAACGTGTCGCGGTGGTAGGCGAATGCTTAAGACCCACTTTCACAtt-3⬘
SiiF502-503-TetAR-Rev ..................5⬘-GTAGCCAGATAGCATTCCCAGTAATGAGCTTTTTCCTGCTCCCTAAGCACTTGTCTCCTG-3⬘
SiiF-TetSwap-G500E-For ................5⬘-GACATACCTGCGGGGCAACGTGTCGCGGTGGTAGaaGAATGCGGAGCCGGAAAAAGCTCA

SiiF-TetSwap-G500E-Rev................5⬘-GTAGCCAGATAGCATTCCCAGTAATGAGCTTTTTCCGGCTCCGCATTCTTCTACCACCGCG

SiiF-TetSwap-K506L-For.................5⬘-CATACCTGCGGGGCAACGTGTCGCGGTGGTAGGCGAATGCGGAGCCGGATTAAGCTCATT

SiiF-TetSwap-K506L-Rev ................5⬘-AAAGGTAGCCAGATAGCATTCCCAGTAATGAGCTTAATCCGGCTCCGCATTCGCCTACCAC

SiiF-TetSwap-SacI-For.....................5⬘-CATACCTGCGGGGCAACGTGTCGCGGTGGTAGGCGAATGCGGAGCCGGAAAGAGCTCAT

SiiF-TetSwap-SacI-Rev ....................5⬘-AGGTAGCCAGATAGCATTCCCAGTAATGAGCTCTTTCCGGCTCCGCATTCGCCTACCACCG

TTACTGGGAATGCTATCTGGCTAC-3⬘

ACACGTTGCCCCGCAGGTATGTC-3⬘

ACTGGGAATGCTATCTGGCTACCTTT-3⬘

CGCGACACGTTGCCCCGCAGGTATG-3⬘

TACTGGGAATGCTATCTGGCTACCT-3⬘

CGACACGTTGCCCCGCAGGTATG-3⬘

Control primers

TetAR-Red-Check-For....................5⬘-GATCAAGAGCATCAAGTCGC-3⬘
TetAR-Red-Check-Rev ...................5⬘-TCAGCAAGGTGCTTTACAGG-3⬘

pKD46 and made competent for electroporation again. For
electroporation, we used short synthetic DNA fragments that
consisted of two complementary oligonucleotides (80 to 88
nucleotides) that were allowed to form double strands prior to
transformation. The design of these oligonucleotides allowed
generation of scarless in-frame deletions (Fig. 1B) and site-
directed mutagenesis (Fig. 1C), as well as insertion of foreign
sequences (not shown).

Generation of scarless in-frame deletions in the Salmonella
chromosome. To test this approach for the generation of scar-
less in-frame chromosomal deletions, we selected target genes
within Salmonella pathogenicity island 4 (SPI4), a virulence
locus of S. enterica that is essential for the adhesion to and
invasion of polarized cells by S. enterica serovar Typhimurium
(5). SPI4 contains a 17-kb gene encoding the giant adhesin SiiE
and genes for a cognate type I secretion system consisting of
SiiC, SiiD, and SiiF (8). The large size and repetitive nature of
siiE make expression from episomal elements and genetic ma-
nipulation extremely difﬁcult. We have previously performed
Red-mediated mutagenesis to generate in-frame deletions in
siiE of 200 to 1,984 codons and demonstrated that there is a
correlation between the length of SiiE and its function as an
adhesin (5). However, generation of in-frame deletions as de-
scribed by Datsenko and Wanner (3) results in insertion of a
27-codon “scar” sequence that may interfere with the function

of the target in an unpredictable manner. In the work de-
scribed here, we generated a set of in-frame deletion alleles of
siiE by replacing the tetAR cassette by oligonucleotides (Fig.
2A). For this purpose, a strain harboring a tetAR cassette in
siiE was electroporated with short synthetic double-stranded
DNA fragments (80 to 88 bp) with ﬂanks complementary to
the ﬂanks of the deletion in the chromosomal gene (Fig. 1B).
Red-mediated homologous recombination was induced and
led to replacement of the tetAR cassette by the synthetic DNA
fragment. Recombinant clones were selected by inhibition of
Tetr clones by fusaric acid on Bochner-Maloy plates as previ-
ously described (9). The transformation usually resulted in a
large number (range, 101 to ⬎102) of colonies on selection
plates. In contrast to other published approaches (4), the trans-
formation with single-stranded oligonucleotides did not yield
recombinants in our setting. Tets clones were further charac-
terized by colony PCR to scan for the deletions introduced.
About 33% of the Tets clones yielded PCR products of the
predicted size and were further conﬁrmed by DNA sequenc-
ing. Positive clones were analyzed for the expression of mutant
alleles of siiE, and all clones conﬁrmed by PCR synthesized
SiiE, as detected by ELISA and Western blotting (data not
shown). The molecular weights of scarless SiiE variants in
strains generated by oligonucleotide-mediated recombinant
engineering were comparable to those of molecules in previ-

1578

GERLACH ET AL.

APPL. ENVIRON. MICROBIOL.

system for hemolysin secretion in E. coli showed that single
amino acid exchanges in “Walker box A” of the ABC are
sufﬁcient to eliminate the function of the transport ATPase
and to prevent secretion (10).

For mutagenesis of siiF, we inserted the tetAR cassette be-
tween codons 502 and 503 of siiF. Oligonucleotides were de-
signed that introduced a silent mutation resulting in a new
restriction site for NlaIV, as well as G500E or K506L exchange
(Fig. 3A). For control mutagenesis, we designed oligonucleo-
tides that introduced the NlaIV site, and a new SacI site within
the ABC motif was used as an additional silent mutation (Fig.
3A). Since no change in the amino acid sequence was intro-
duced, we expected that the resulting mutant strain would have
a wild-type phenotype with respect to secretion of SiiE.

Clones harboring the mutant alleles were screened by colony
PCR, followed by digestion with NlaIV or SacI. We observed
that 80 to 90% of the clones selected on the basis of sensitivity
to tetracycline contained the newly introduced NlaIV site, as
well as the additional SacI site in the case of the siiF SacI
mutation (Fig. 3B and C). For each mutation selected clones
were analyzed by DNA sequencing of the target region in
siiF, which revealed that of the ﬁve clones analyzed, three
siiE(G500E), two siiF(K506L), and all siiF SacI clones had
error-free sequences with the desired mutations. Clones whose
sequences were conﬁrmed were subjected to functional anal-
yses by quantiﬁcation of the amount of secreted SiiE by ELISA
(Fig. 3D). We observed that the G500E and K506L point
mutations did not affect the synthesis of SiiE but eliminated
secretion of the protein into the culture supernatant (Fig. 3D).
The amounts of SiiE secreted by the strains with a point mu-
tation in siiF were similar to those secreted by strain MvP812
with the entire siiF gene deleted. Introduction of the SacI site
affected neither the synthesis nor the secretion of SiiE. As
expected from these results, we observed that adhesion to and
invasion of polarized epithelial cells were highly reduced for
strains MvP1311 [siiF(G500E)] and MvP1312 [siiF(K506L)]
but not for strain MvP1313 (siiF SacI) (data not shown). These
virulence defects could be restored by complementation with a
plasmid-borne copy of siiF. These results demonstrate that
oligonucleotide-based recombinant engineering allows direct
site-directed mutagenesis of chromosomal target sequences.

Concluding remarks. The method described here allows
rapid mutagenesis of genes in bacterial chromosomes by
means of Red-mediated recombination. Although the method
was used for manipulation of virulence genes in S. enterica, it
should basically be applicable to a larger number of bacteria,
provided that Red-mediated recombination can be used in the
strains or species and that selectable as well as counterselect-
able markers are available. Our approach entirely eliminates
the need for cloning target genes and for reintroduction of
mutated genes into the chromosome of the target organism.
Since no ampliﬁcation and cloning of target genes are re-
quired, the overall error rate of this method is very low and
depends mainly on the accuracy of the oligonucleotide syn-
thesis.

Although the two-step approach makes it necessary to in-
troduce a Red recombinase-expressing plasmid twice, the
tetAR-containing strains generated in the ﬁrst step can be uti-
lized for different mutagenesis procedures at the same locus.
We applied this approach to the mutagenesis of various

FIG. 2. Oligonucleotide-based recombineering of SPI4-encoded
SiiE. (A) Schematic representation of the domain organization of siiE
encoding a giant nonﬁmbrial adhesin in S. enterica serovar Typhi-
murium. Oligonucleotide-mediated recombinant engineering was per-
formed to delete regions encoding the 5, 10, or 20 immunoglobulin (Ig)
domain as indicated. Deletions between the Ig repeats were in frame
without introduction of a scar or additional alterations. WT, wild type;
sec., secretion. (B) Synthesis of SiiE and derivatives by Salmonella
wild-type and various mutant strains harboring deletions of the entire
siiE gene or in-frame deletions of the 5, 10, or 20 Ig domains. Bacterial
cultures were subcultured in LB for 3.5 h. Equal amounts of cells,
adjusted by using optical density at 600 nm, were harvested, and pro-
teins were separated by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis on gradient gels. Proteins were transferred onto nitro-
cellulose membranes, and SiiE was detected by incubation with anti-
serum against SiiE (␣ SiiE). As loading controls, Western blots were
probed with antiserum against DnaK (StressGen) (␣ DnaK). The sizes
of SiiE variants from mutant strains (o) were described previously (5)
and strains generated in this study (n) were compared. Lane M con-
tained high-molecular-weight protein standards.

ously generated mutant strains containing the “Red scar” (Fig.
2B). It should be noted that the small difference in molecular
mass (about 2.9 kDa) due to the presence or absence of the
“Red scar” could not be resolved by the sodium dodecyl sul-
fate- polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis analysis used here.
The characteristics of the strains with scarless in-frame dele-
tions in siiE with respect to adhesion to and invasion of polar-
ized cells were in line with our previous observations (data not
shown).

Rapid site-directed mutagenesis of chromosomal genes. We
next investigated if Red-mediated replacement of the tetAR
cassette by oligonucleotides can be used for site-directed mu-
tagenesis directly in the chromosome of the target strain. Here,
the tetAR cassette was replaced by recombination with a short
synthetic DNA fragment that introduced silent mutations and
changes in the amino acid sequence (Fig. 1C). siiF was selected
as a target gene that encodes the putative ATPase and ener-
gizer of the type I secretion system for secretion of SiiE (5, 12).
SiiF contains an ATP-binding cassette (ABC) motif, and pre-
vious work on the putative homologue in the type I secretion

VOL. 75, 2009

CHROMOSOMAL RECOMBINEERING

1579

FIG. 3. Site-directed mutagenesis of chromosomal siiF in S. enterica serovar Typhimurium. (A) Sequence of the target region in siiF encoding
the putative ABC and design of site-directed mutations and silent mutations. All manipulations resulted in a silent mutation that generated a novel
NlaIV site at codons 503 and 504. In addition, mutations G500E and K506L resulted in amino acid changes in the ABC of SiiF. Mutation siiF SacI
introduced an additional SacI site without altering the amino acid sequence of the ABC. Newly introduced restriction sites are underlined, and
mutations resulting in amino acid changes are indicated by capital letters. WT, wild type. (B) Predicted restriction map for a 500-bp PCR product
of siiF obtained for wild-type and various mutant strains. The gray box indicates the mutagenesis target region. (C) The PCR products for
fragments of siiF from wild-type and representative clones of various mutant strains were subjected to restriction analyses with NlaIV or SacI as
indicated. Lane M contained a DNA size marker. (D) The secretion of SiiE by Salmonella wild-type and various mutant strains was analyzed by
an ELISA for SiiE. The Salmonella wild-type strain (black bar), mutant strains with deletions of the entire siiE or siiF gene, selected clones
(indicated by number signs) with site-directed mutations in siiF (open bars), and mutant strains harboring the plasmid vector pWSK29 (vector)
(gray bars) or plasmid p3223 for expression of wild-type siiF (comp.) (hatched bars) were grown in LB medium, and culture supernatants were
collected for quantiﬁcation of SiiE by ELISA. The values for SiiE (optical density at 450 nm [OD450]) were normalized by using the culture density
(optical density at 600 nm [OD600]).

1580

GERLACH ET AL.

APPL. ENVIRON. MICROBIOL.

chromosomal genes in S. enterica. One critical parameter was
the efﬁciency of the selection of Tets clones on Bochner-Maloy
plates, which was variable between clones with insertions in
various loci. An interesting alternative could be selection of
Tets clones based on the increased sensitivity of Tetr clones to
nickel salts (15). Furthermore, the efﬁciency might be im-
proved by the use of other positive selection strategies, such as
the introduction of meganuclease restriction sites and selection
by induction of double-strand breaks in the chromosome (2,
16). An approach described by Olson et al. (13) may also be of
interest, since a circular targeting construct is generated by
PCR and integrated into the chromosome without Red-medi-
ated recombination.

Our novel approach should accelerate functional analyses of
bacterial genes and enable new approaches for manipulation
of bacterial genomes for research in bacterial pathogenesis, as
well as for strain construction for vaccine development and
industrial microbiology.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by grant HE1964 from the Deutsche For-

schungsgemeinschaft and by a grant from Elitenetzwerk Bayern.

We thank Joyce Karlinsey for providing crucial support for the

Bochner-Maloy selection procedure.

REFERENCES

1. Baba, T., T. Ara, M. Hasegawa, Y. Takai, Y. Okumura, M. Baba, K. A.
Datsenko, M. Tomita, B. L. Wanner, and H. Mori. 2006. Construction of
Escherichia coli K-12 in-frame, single-gene knockout mutants: the Keio col-
lection. Mol. Syst. Biol. 2:2006.0008.

2. Cox, M. M., S. L. Layton, T. Jiang, K. Cole, B. M. Hargis, L. R. Berghman,
W. G. Bottje, and Y. M. Kwon. 2007. Scarless and site-directed mutagenesis
in Salmonella enteritidis chromosome. BMC Biotechnol. 7:59.

3. Datsenko, K. A., and B. L. Wanner. 2000. One-step inactivation of chromo-
somal genes in Escherichia coli K-12 using PCR products. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 97:6640–6645.

4. Ellis, H. M., D. Yu, T. DiTizio, and D. L. Court. 2001. High efﬁciency
mutagenesis, repair, and engineering of chromosomal DNA using single-
stranded oligonucleotides. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98:6742–6746.

5. Gerlach, R. G., N. Claudio, M. Rohde, D. Ja¨ckel, C. Wagner, and M. Hensel.
2008. Cooperation of Salmonella pathogenicity islands 1 and 4 is required to
breach epithelial barriers. Cell. Microbiol. 10:2364–2376.

6. Gerlach, R. G., S. U. Ho¨lzer, D. Ja¨ckel, and M. Hensel. 2007. Rapid engi-
neering of bacterial reporter gene fusions by using Red recombination. Appl.
Environ. Microbiol. 73:4234–4242.

7. Gerlach, R. G., D. Ja¨ckel, N. Geymeier, and M. Hensel. 2007. Salmonella
pathogenicity island 4-mediated adhesion is coregulated with invasion genes
in Salmonella enterica. Infect. Immun. 75:4697–4709.

8. Gerlach, R. G., D. Ja¨ckel, B. Stecher, C. Wagner, L. Lupas, W. D. Hardt, and
M. Hensel. 2007. Salmonella pathogenicity island 4 encodes a giant non-
ﬁmbrial adhesin and the cognate type 1 secretion system. Cell. Microbiol.
9:1834–1850.

9. Karlinsey, J. E., and K. T. Hughes. 2006. Genetic transplantation: Salmo-
nella enterica serovar Typhimurium as a host to study sigma factor and
anti-sigma factor interactions in genetically intractable systems. J. Bacteriol.
188:103–114.

16. Posfai, G., V. Kolisnychenko, Z. Bereczki, and F. R. Blattner. 1999. Mark-
erless gene replacement in Escherichia coli stimulated by a double-strand
break in the chromosome. Nucleic Acids Res. 27:4409–4415.

17. Wang, R. F., and S. R. Kushner. 1991. Construction of versatile low-copy-
number vectors for cloning, sequencing and gene expression in Escherichia
coli. Gene 100:195–199.

18. Warming, S., N. Costantino, D. L. Court, N. A. Jenkins, and N. G. Copeland.
2005. Simple and highly efﬁcient BAC recombineering using galK selection.
Nucleic Acids Res. 33:e36.

19. Yu, D., H. M. Ellis, E. C. Lee, N. A. Jenkins, N. G. Copeland, and D. L.
Court. 2000. An efﬁcient recombination system for chromosome engineering
in Escherichia coli. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97:5978–5983.

10. Koronakis, E., C. Hughes, I. Milisav, and V. Koronakis. 1995. Protein
exporter function and in vitro ATPase activity are correlated in ABC-domain
mutants of HlyB. Mol. Microbiol. 16:87–96.

11. Maloy, S. R., V. L. Stewart, and R. K. Taylor. 1996. Genetic analysis of
pathogenic bacteria. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring
Harbor, NY.

12. Morgan, E., A. J. Bowen, S. C. Carnell, T. S. Wallis, and M. P. Stevens. 2007.
SiiE is secreted by the Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium pathoge-
nicity island 4-encoded secretion system and contributes to intestinal colo-
nization in cattle. Infect. Immun. 75:1524–1533.

13. Olson, M. M., L. J. Templeton, W. Suh, P. Youderian, F. S. Sariaslani, A. A.
Gatenby, and T. K. Van Dyk. 2007. Production of tyrosine from sucrose or
glucose achieved by rapid genetic changes to phenylalanine-producing Esch-
erichia coli strains. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 74:1031–1040.

14. Oppenheim, A. B., A. J. Rattray, M. Bubunenko, L. C. Thomason, and D. L.
Court. 2004. In vivo recombineering of bacteriophage lambda by PCR frag-
ments and single-strand oligonucleotides. Virology 319:185–189.

15. Podolsky, T., S. T. Fong, and B. T. Lee. 1996. Direct selection of tetracycline-

sensitive Escherichia coli cells using nickel salts. Plasmid 36:112–115.

