ARG_A01.qxd  9/20/07  10:44 AM  Page iii

.

A Reader’s Guide
to Contemporary
Literary Theory

F I F T H   E D I T I O N

Raman Selden
Peter Widdowson
Peter Brooker

ARG_A01.qxd  9/20/07  10:44 AM  Page iv

.

PEARSON EDUCATION LIMITED

Edinburgh Gate
Harlow CM20 2JE
United Kingdom
Tel: +44 (0)1279 623623
Fax: +44 (0)1279 431059
Website: www.pearsoned.co.uk

Fifth edition published in Great Britain in 2005

© Prentice Hall Europe 1985, 1997
© Pearson Education Limited 2005

The rights of Raman Selden, Peter Widdowson and 
Peter Brooker to be identiﬁed as authors
of this work has been asserted in accordance
with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.

ISBN: 978-0-582-89410-5

British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A CIP catalogue record for this book can be obtained from the British Library

Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Selden, Raman.

A reader’s guide to contemporary literary theory / Raman Selden, Peter Widdowson,
Peter Brooker.— 5th ed.

p. cm.

Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-582-89410-7 (pbk.)
1. Criticism—History—20th century.

I. Widdowson, Peter.

PN94.S45 2005
801'.95'0904—dc22

II. Brooker, Peter. III. Title.

2004063377

All rights reserved; no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored
in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise without either the prior
written permission of the Publishers or a licence permitting restricted copying
in the United Kingdom issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency Ltd,
Saffron House, 6-10 Kirby Street, London EC1N 8TS. This book may not be lent,
resold, hired out or otherwise disposed of by way of trade in any form
of binding or cover other than that in which it is published, without the
prior consent of the Publishers.

10 9 8 7 6 5 4
09 08 07

Set in 9/13.5pt Stone Serif by 35
Printed and bound in Malaysia, PJB

The Publishers’ policy is to use paper manufactured from sustainable forests.

ARG_C05.qxd  07/02/2005  14:40  Page 82

.

C H A P T E R   5

Marxist theories

O

f  the  kinds  of  criticism  represented  in  this  guide,  Marxist 
criticism  has  the  longest  history.  Karl  Marx  himself  made
important general statements about culture and society in the 1850s. Even
so,  it  is  correct  to  think  of  Marxist  criticism as  a  twentieth-century 
phenomenon.

The basic tenets of Marxism are no easier to summarize than the essen-
tial doctrines of Christianity, but two well-known statements by Marx pro-
vide a sufﬁcient point of departure:

It is not the consciousness of men that determines their being, but, on the
contrary, their social being that determines their consciousness.

The philosophers have only interpreted the world in various ways; the point is
to change it.

Both  statements  were  intentionally  provocative.  By  contradicting  widely
accepted  doctrines,  Marx  was  trying  to  put  people’s  thought  into  reverse
gear. First, philosophy has been merely airy contemplation; it is time that
it engaged with the real world. Secondly, Hegel and his followers in German
philosophy have persuaded us that the world is governed by thought, that
the process of history is the gradual dialectical unfolding of the laws of Reason,
and that material existence is the expression of an immaterial spiritual essence.
People  have  been  led  to  believe  that  their  ideas,  their  cultural  life,  their 
legal systems, and their religions were the creations of human and divine
reason,  which  should  be  regarded  as  the  unquestioned  guides  to  human 
life. Marx reverses this formulation and argues that all mental (ideological)
systems are the products of real social and economic existence. The mater-
ial interests of the dominant social class determine how people see human
existence, individual and collective. Legal systems, for example, are not the

ARG_C05.qxd  07/02/2005  14:40  Page 83

.

M A R X I S T   T H E O R I E S

8 3

pure manifestations of human or divine reason, but ultimately reﬂect the
interests of the dominant class in particular historical periods.

In  one  account,  Marx  described  this  view  in  terms  of  an  architectural
metaphor:  the  ‘superstructure’  (ideology,  politics)  rests  upon  the  ‘base’
(socio-economic relations). To say ‘rests upon’ is not quite the same as say-
ing  ‘is  caused  by’.  Marx  was  arguing  that  what  we  call  ‘culture’  is  not  an
independent reality but is inseparable from the historical conditions in which
human beings create their material lives; the relations of exploitation and
domination which govern the social and economic order of a particular phase
of human history will in some sense ‘determine’ the whole cultural life of
the society.

In its crudest formulations, the theory is evidently far too mechanical.
For  example,  in  The  German  Ideology (1846)  Marx  and  Engels  talk  about 
morality, religion and philosophy as ‘phantoms formed in the brains of men’,
which are the ‘reﬂexes and echoes’ of ‘real life-processes’. On the other hand,
in a famous series of letters written in the 1890s Engels insists that, while
he and Marx always regarded the economic aspect of society as the ultimate
determinant  of  other  aspects,  they  also  recognized  that  art,  philosophy 
and other forms of consciousness are ‘relatively autonomous’ and possess
an independent ability to alter men’s existence. After all, how else do Marxists
expect  to  alter  people’s  awareness  except  by  political  discourse?  Were  we
to examine the novels of the eighteenth century or the philosophy of the
seventeenth  century  in  Europe,  we  would  recognize,  if  we  were  Marxists,
that  these  writings  arose  at  particular  phases  in  the  development  of 
early capitalist society. The conﬂict of social classes establishes the ground
upon  which  ideological  conﬂicts  arise.  Literature  and  art  belong  to  the 
ideological sphere, but possess a relationship to ideology which is often less
direct even than is found in the case of religious, legal and philosophical
systems.

The  special  status  of  literature  is  recognized  by  Marx  in  a  celebrated 
passage in his Grundrisse, in which the problem of an apparent discrepancy
between economic and artistic development is discussed. Greek tragedy is
considered a peak of literary development and yet it coincides with a social
system  and  a  form  of  ideology  (Greek  myth)  which  are  no  longer  valid 
for modern society. The problem for Marx was to explain how an art and
literature produced in a long-obsolete social organization can still give us
aesthetic  pleasure  and  be  regarded  as  ‘a  standard  and  unattainable  ideal’.
He  seems  to  be  accepting  reluctantly  a  certain  ‘timelessness’  and  ‘univer-
sality’ in literature and art; reluctantly, because this would be a major con-
cession to one of bourgeois ideology’s premises. However, it is now possible

ARG_C05.qxd  07/02/2005  14:40  Page 84

8 4

A   R E A D E R ’ S   G U I D E   T O   C O N T E M P O R A R Y   L I T E R A R Y   T H E O R Y

.

to see that Marx was simply falling back on received (Hegelian) ways of think-
ing  about  literature  and  art.  Our  discussion  of  Mukarˇovsky´  in  Chapter  2
established  what  can  now  be  regarded  as  a  Marxist  view:  that  canons  of
great literature are socially generated. The ‘greatness’ of Greek tragedy is not
a  universal  and  unchanging  fact  of  existence,  but  a  value  which  must  be
reproduced from generation to generation.

Even  if  we  reject  a  privileged  status  for  literature,  there  remains  the 
question  of  how  far  literature’s  historical  development  is  independent  of
historical development in general. In his attack on the Russian Formalists
in  Literature  and  Revolution,  Trotsky  conceded  that  literature  had  its  own 
principles  and  rules.  ‘Artistic  creation’,  he  admits,  is  ‘a  changing  and  a 
transformation  of  reality  in  accordance  with  the  peculiar  laws  of  art.’  He
still insists that the ‘reality’ remains the crucial factor and not the formal
games  which  writers  play.  Nevertheless,  his  remarks  point  forward  to  a 
continuing  debate  in  Marxist  criticism  about  the  relative  importance  of 
literary form and ideological content in literary works.

Soviet Socialist Realism

Marxist criticism written in the West has often been adventurous and exhil-
arating, but Socialist Realism, as the ofﬁcial Communist ‘artistic method’,
seemed  drab  and  blinkered  to  Western  readers.  The  doctrines  expounded
by  the  Union  of  Soviet  Writers  (1932–4)  appealed  to  certain  of  Lenin’s 
pre-Revolutionary  statements  as  these  were  interpreted  during  the  1920s.
The  theory  addressed  certain  major  questions  about  the  evolution  of 
literature, its reﬂection of class relations and its function in society.

As we have seen, when the Revolution of 1917 encouraged the Formal-
ists  to  continue  developing  a  revolutionary  theory  of  art,  there  emerged 
at  the  same  time  an  orthodox  Communist  view,  which  frowned  upon 
formalism  and  regarded  the  nineteenth-century  tradition  of  Russian 
realism  as  the  only  suitable  foundation  for  the  aesthetics  of  the  new
Communist society. The ‘modernist’ revolutions in European art, music and
literature  which  occurred  around  1910  (Picasso,  Stravinsky,  Schoenberg, 
Joyce, Woolf, T. S. Eliot) were to be regarded by Soviet critics as the decad-
ent products of late capitalist society. The modernist rejection of traditional
realism paradoxically left Socialist Realism as the leading custodian of bour-
geois aesthetics. In Tom Stoppard’s play Travesties (1975), the Dadaist poet
Tzara is made to complain that ‘the odd thing about revolution is that the
further left you go politically, the more bourgeois they like their art’. The

ARG_C05.qxd  07/02/2005  14:40  Page 85

.

M A R X I S T   T H E O R I E S

8 5

combination  of  nineteenth-century  aesthetics  and  revolutionary  politics
remained the essential recipe of Soviet theory.

The  principle  of  partinost’ (commitment  to  the  working-class  cause  of
the  Party)  is  derived  almost  exclusively  from  Lenin’s  essay  ‘Party  Organ-
isation  and  Party  Literature’  (1905),  and  there  remains  some  doubt  about
Lenin’s intentions in arguing that, while all writers were free to write what
they liked, they could not expect to be published in Party journals unless
they were committed to the Party’s political line. While this was a reason-
able  demand  to  make  in  the  precarious  circumstances  of  1905,  it  took 
on a much more despotic signiﬁcance after the Revolution, when the Party
controlled publishing.

The quality of narodnost’ (‘popularity’) is central to both the aesthetics
and the politics. A work of art of any period achieves this quality by express-
ing a high level of social awareness, revealing a sense of the true social con-
ditions and feelings of a particular epoch. It will also possess a ‘progressive’
outlook, glimpsing the developments of the future in the lineaments of the
present, and giving a sense of the ideal possibilities of social development
from the point of view of the mass of working people. In the 1844 ‘Paris
Manuscripts’,  Marx  argues  that  the  capitalist  division  of  labour  destroyed
an earlier phase of human history in which artistic and spiritual life were
inseparable  from  the  processes  of  material  existence,  and  craftsmen  still
worked with a sense of beauty. The separation of mental and manual work
dissolved the organic unity of spiritual and material activities, with the result
that  the  masses  were  forced  to  produce  commodities  without  the  joy  of 
creative  engagement  in  their  work.  Only  folk  art  survived  as  the  people’s
art.  The  appreciation  of  high  art  was  professionalized,  dominated  by  the
market economy and limited to a privileged section of the ruling class. The
truly ‘popular’ art of socialist societies, argued Soviet critics, will be access-
ible to the masses and will restore their lost wholeness of being.

The theory of the class nature of art (klassovost’) is a complex one. In the
writings of Marx, Engels and the Soviet tradition, there is a double emphasis
– on the writer’s commitment or class interests on the one hand, and the
social realism of the writer’s work on the other. Only the crudest forms of
Socialist Realism treat the class nature of art as a simple matter of the writer’s
explicit  class  allegiance.  In  his  letter  (1888)  to  Margaret  Harkness  on  her
novel City Girl, Engels praises her for not writing an explicitly socialist novel.
He argues that Balzac, a reactionary supporter of the Bourbon dynasty, pro-
vides a more penetrating account of French society in all its economic details
than ‘all the professed historians, economists and statisticians of the period
together’. Balzac’s insights into the downfall of the nobility and the rise of

ARG_C05.qxd  07/02/2005  14:40  Page 86

8 6

A   R E A D E R ’ S   G U I D E   T O   C O N T E M P O R A R Y   L I T E R A R Y   T H E O R Y

.

the bourgeoisie compelled him to ‘go against his own class sympathies and
political prejudices’. Realism transcends class sympathies. This argument was
to  have  a  powerful  inﬂuence  not  only  on  the  theory  of  Socialist  Realism
but on later Marxist criticism.

Socialist Realism was considered to be a continuation and development
of bourgeois realism at a higher level. Bourgeois writers are judged not accord-
ing to their class origins or explicit political commitment, but by the extent
to which their writings reveal insights into the social developments of their
time.  The  Soviet  hostility  to  modernist  novels  can  best  be  understood  in
this  context.  Karl  Radek’s  contribution  to  the  Soviet  Writers’  Congress  in
1934 posed the choice ‘James Joyce or Socialist Realism?’ During a discus-
sion Radek directed a vitriolic attack against another Communist delegate,
Herzfelde, who had defended Joyce as a great writer. Radek regards Joyce’s
experimental technique and his ‘petty bourgeois’ content as all of a piece.
Joyce’s preoccupation with the sordid inner life of a trivial individual indic-
ates  his  profound  unawareness  of  the  larger  historical  forces  at  work  in 
modern times. For Joyce ‘the whole world lies between a cupboard of medieval
books, a brothel and a pot house’. He concludes, ‘if I were to write novels,
I would learn how to write them from Tolstoy and Balzac, not from Joyce.’
This  admiration  for  nineteenth-century  realism  was  understandable.
Balzac, Dickens, George Eliot, Stendhal and others developed a sophisticated
literary form which explores the individual’s involvement in the complex
network of social relations. Modernist writers abandoned this project and
began  to  reﬂect  a  more  fragmented  image  of  the  world,  which  was  often
pessimistic  and  introverted,  exploring  the  alienated  individual  conscious-
ness  in  retreat  from  the  ‘nightmare  of  history’  which  is  modern  society.
Nothing  could  be  further  from  the  ‘revolutionary  romanticism’  of  the
Soviet  school,  which  wanted  to  project  a  heroic  image.  Andrey  Zhdanov,
who gave the keynote speech at the 1934 Congress, reminded writers that
Stalin  had  called  upon  them  to  be  the  ‘engineers  of  the  human  soul’.  At
this stage, the political demands upon writers became brutally insistent. Engels
was clearly doubtful of the value of overly committed writing, but Zhdanov
dismissed  all  such  doubts:  ‘Yes,  Soviet  literature  is  tendentious,  for  in
epochs of class struggle there is not and cannot be a literature which is not
class literature, not tendentious, allegedly non-political.’

Lukács and Brecht
It is appropriate to consider next the ﬁrst major Marxist critic, Georg Lukács,
since  his  work  is  inseparable  from  orthodox  Socialist  Realism,  and  then 

ARG_C05.qxd  07/02/2005  14:40  Page 87

.

M A R X I S T   T H E O R I E S

8 7

the  views  of  his  ‘opponent’  in  their  debate  about  realism,  the  dramatist/
theorist Bertolt Brecht. It can be argued that Lukács anticipated some of the
Soviet  doctrines,  but,  at  any  rate,  he  developed  the  realist  approach  with
great  subtlety.  He  inaugurated  a  distinctively  Hegelian  style  of  Marxist
thought,  treating  literary  works  as  reﬂections  of  an  unfolding  system.  A 
realist work must reveal the underlying pattern of contradictions in a social
order.  His  view  is  Marxist  in  its  insistence  on  the  material  and  historical
nature of the structure of society.

Lukács’ use of the term ‘reﬂection’ is characteristic of his work as a whole.
Rejecting the ‘naturalism’ of the then recent European novel, he returns to
the old realist view that the novel reﬂects reality, not by rendering its mere
surface  appearance,  but  by  giving  us  ‘a  truer,  more  complete,  more  vivid
and  more  dynamic  reﬂection  of  reality’.  To  ‘reﬂect’  is  ‘to  frame  a  mental
structure’  transposed  into  words.  People  ordinarily  possess  a  reﬂection  of
reality, a consciousness not merely of objects but of human nature and social
relationships. Lukács would say that a reﬂection may be more or less con-
crete. A novel may conduct a reader ‘towards a more concrete insight into
reality’, which transcends a merely common-sense apprehension of things.
A literary work reﬂects not individual phenomena in isolation, but ‘the full
process  of  life’.  However,  the  reader  is  always  aware  that  the  work  is  not
itself reality but rather ‘a special form of reﬂecting reality’.

A ‘correct’ reﬂection of reality, therefore, according to Lukács, involves
more  than  the  mere  rendering  of  external  appearances.  Interestingly, 
his  view  of  reﬂection  undermines  at  the  same  time  both  naturalism  and
modernism. A randomly presented sequence of images may be interpreted
either as an objective and impartial reﬂection of reality (as Zola and the other
exponents of ‘naturalism’ might be taken as saying) or as a purely subject-
ive impression of reality (as Joyce and Virginia Woolf seem to show). The
randomness  can  be  seen  as  a  property  either  of  reality  or  of  perception. 
Either  way,  Lukács  rejects  such  merely  ‘photographic’  representation.
Instead, he describes the truly realistic work which gives us a sense of the
‘artistic necessity’ of the images presented; they possess an ‘intensive total-
ity’ which corresponds to the ‘extensive totality’ of the world itself. Reality
is  not  a  mere  ﬂux,  a  mechanical  collision  of  fragments,  but  possesses  an
‘order’, which the novelist renders in an ‘intensive’ form. The writer does
not impose an abstract order upon the world, but rather presents the reader
with an image of the richness and complexity of life from which emerges
a sense of the order within the complexity and subtlety of lived experience.
This  will  be  achieved  if  all  the  contradictions  and  tensions  of  social 
existence are realized in a formal whole.

ARG_C05.qxd  07/02/2005  14:40  Page 88

8 8

A   R E A D E R ’ S   G U I D E   T O   C O N T E M P O R A R Y   L I T E R A R Y   T H E O R Y

.

Lukács is able to insist on the principle of underlying order and struc-
ture because the Marxist tradition borrowed from Hegel the ‘dialectical’ view
of  history.  Development  in  history  is  not  random  or  chaotic,  nor  is  it 
a straightforward linear progression, but rather a dialectical development.
In every social organization, the prevailing mode of production gives rise
to  inner  contradictions  which  are  expressed  in  class  struggle.  Capitalism 
developed  by  destroying  the  feudal  mode  of  production  and  replacing 
it  with  one  based  on  absolute  private  property  and  the  market,  which 
made  possible  far  higher  levels  of  productivity  (commodity  production).
However, while the process of production was increasingly socialized, the
ownership of the means of production became concentrated in private hands.
Workers  who  had  owned  their  looms  or  tools  eventually  had  nothing  to
sell but their labour. The inherent contradiction is expressed in the conﬂict
of  interest  between  capitalist  and  worker.  The  private  accumulation  of 
capital was the foundation of factory working, and thus the contradiction 
(privatization/socialization)  is  a  necessary  unity,  which  is  central  to  the 
nature  of  the  capitalist  mode  of  production.  The  ‘dialectical’  resolution 
of the contradiction is always already implied in the contradiction itself: if
people  are  to  re-establish  control  over  their  labour  power,  the  ownership
of  the  means  of  production  must  also  be  socialized.  This  brief  excursus 
is  intended  to  show  how  Lukács’  whole  view  of  realism  is  shaped  by  the
nineteenth-century inheritance of Marxism.

In a series of brilliant works, especially The Historical Novel (1937) and
Studies  in  European  Realism  (1950),  Lukács  reﬁnes  and  extends  his  theory,
and  in  The  Meaning  of  Contemporary  Realism (1957)  he  advances  the
Communist attack on modernism. He refuses to deny Joyce the status of a
true artist, but asks us to reject his view of history, and especially the way
in which Joyce’s ‘static’ view of events is reﬂected in an epic structure which
is itself essentially static. For Lukács, this failure to perceive human exist-
ence as part of a dynamic historical environment infects the whole of con-
temporary  modernism,  as  reﬂected  in  the  works  of  writers  such  as  Kafka,
Beckett and Faulkner. These writers, he argues, are preoccupied with formal
experiment  –  with  montage,  inner  monologues,  the  technique  of  ‘stream
of  consciousness’,  the  use  of  reportage,  diaries,  etc.  All  this  formalistic 
virtuosity  is  the  result  of  a  narrow  concern  for  subjective  impressions,  a 
concern  which  itself  stems  from  the  advanced  individualism  of  late  cap-
italism.  Instead  of  an  objective  realism  we  have  an  angst-ridden  vision 
of the world. The fullness of history and its social processes are narrowed
down to the bleak inner history of absurd existences. This ‘attenuation of
actuality’ is contrasted to the dynamic and developmental view of society

ARG_C05.qxd  07/02/2005  14:40  Page 89

.

M A R X I S T   T H E O R I E S

8 9

to be found in the great nineteenth-century novelists and in their latter-day
heirs like Thomas Mann, who, though not ‘socialist’, achieve a genuinely
‘Critical Realism’.

By  divorcing  the  individual  from  the  outer  world  of  objective  reality,
the modernist writer, in Lukács’ view, is compelled to see the inner life of
characters  as  ‘a  sinister,  inexplicable  ﬂux’,  which  ultimately  also  takes  on 
a  timeless  static  quality.  Lukács  seems  unable  to  perceive  that  in  render-
ing  the  impoverished  and  alienated  existence  of  modern  subjects  some 
modern writers achieve a kind of realism, or at any rate develop new liter-
ary  forms  and  techniques  which  articulate  modern  reality.  Insisting  on 
the  reactionary  nature  of  modernist  ideology, he  refused  to  recognize  the 
literary  possibilities  of  modernist  writings.  Because  he  thought  the  content
of modernism was reactionary, he treated modernist form as equally unac-
ceptable. During his brief stay in Berlin during the early 1930s, he found
himself  attacking  the  use  of  modernist  techniques  of  montage  and
reportage in the work of fellow radicals, including the outstanding dramat-
ist Bertolt Brecht.

Bertolt Brecht’s early plays were radical, anarchistic and anti-bourgeois,
but not anti-capitalist. After reading Marx in about 1926, his youthful icon-
oclasm was converted to conscious political commitment, although he always
remained a maverick and never a Party man. Around 1930 he was writing
the  so-called  Lehrstücke, didactic  plays  intended  for  working-class  audi-
ences, but he was forced to leave Germany when the Nazis took power in
1933. He wrote his major plays in exile, mainly in Scandinavian countries.
Later, in America, he was brought before the McCarthy Committee for un-
American  Activities  and  ﬁnally  settled  in  East  Germany  in  1949.  He  had
trouble too with the Stalinist authorities of the GDR, who regarded him as
both an asset and a liability.

His opposition to Socialist Realism certainly offended the East German
authorities.  His  best-known  theatrical  device,  the  alienation  effect
(Verfremdungseffekt),  recalls  the  Russian  Formalists’  concept  of  ‘defamiliar-
ization’ (see Chapter 2, pp. 32–4). Socialist Realism favoured realistic illusion,
formal  unity  and  ‘positive’  heroes.  He  called  his  theory  of  realism  ‘anti-
Aristotelian’,  a  covert  way  of  attacking  the  theory  of  his  opponents.
Aristotle  emphasized  the  universality  and  unity  of  the  tragic  action,  and
the  identiﬁcation  of  audience  and  hero  in  empathy  which  produces  a
‘catharsis’ of emotions. Brecht rejected the entire tradition of ‘Aristotelian’
theatre. The dramatist should avoid a smoothly interconnected plot and any
sense  of  inevitability  or  universality.  The  facts  of  social  injustice  needed 
to be presented as if they were shockingly unnatural and totally surprising.

ARG_C05.qxd  07/02/2005  14:40  Page 90

9 0

A   R E A D E R ’ S   G U I D E   T O   C O N T E M P O R A R Y   L I T E R A R Y   T H E O R Y

.

It is all too easy to regard ‘the price of bread, the lack of work, the declara-
tion  of  war  as  if  they  were  phenomena  of  nature:  earthquakes  or  ﬂoods’,
rather than as the results of exploitative human agency.

To  avoid  lulling  the  audience  into  a  state  of  passive  acceptance,  the 
illusion of reality must be shattered by the use of the alienation effect. The
actors must not lose themselves in their roles or seek to promote a purely
empathic audience identiﬁcation. They must present a role to the audience
as both recognizable and unfamiliar, so that a process of critical assessment
can be set in motion. The situation, emotions and dilemmas of the char-
acters must be understood from the outside and presented as strange and
problematic. This is not to say that actors should avoid the use of emotion,
but only the resort to empathy. This is achieved by ‘baring the device’, to
use the Formalist term (see Chapter 2, pp. 33–4). The use of gesture is an
important way of externalizing a character’s emotions. Gesture or action is
studied and rehearsed as a device for conveying in a striking way the speciﬁc
social meaning of a role. One might contrast this with the Stanislavskian
‘method  acting’,  which  encourages  total  identiﬁcation  of  actor  and  role.
Improvisation  rather  than  calculation  is  encouraged  in  order  to  create  a 
sense of ‘spontaneity’ and individuality. This foregrounding of a character’s
inner life allows its social meaning to evaporate. The gestures of a Marlon
Brando or a James Dean are personal and idiosyncratic, while a ‘Brechtian’
actor (for example Peter Lorre or Jack Nicholson) performs rather like a clown
or  mimic,  using  diagrammatic  gestures  which  indicate  rather  than  reveal. 
In  any  case,  Brecht’s  plays,  in  which  the  ‘heroes’  are  so  often  ordinary, 
tough and unscrupulous, do not encourage the cult of personality. Mother
Courage, Asdak and Sweik are boldly outlined on an ‘epic’ canvas: they are
remarkably dynamic social beings, but have no focused ‘inner’ life.

Brecht  rejected  the  kind  of  formal  unity  admired  by  Lukács.  First,
Brecht’s  ‘epic’  theatre,  unlike  Aristotle’s  tragic  theatre,  is  composed  of
loosely  linked  episodes  of  the  kind  to  be  found  in  Shakespeare’s  history 
plays  and  eighteenth-century  picaresque  novels.  There  are  no  artiﬁcial 
constraints of time and place, and no ‘well-made’ plots. Contemporary in-
spiration came from the cinema (Charlie Chaplin, Buster Keaton, Eisenstein)
and  modernist  ﬁction  ( Joyce  and  Dos  Passos).  Second,  Brecht  believed 
that  no  model  of  good  form  could  remain  in  force  indeﬁnitely;  there  are
no ‘eternal aesthetic laws’. To capture the living force of reality the writer
must  be  willing  to  make  use  of  every  conceivable  formal  device,  old  and
new: ‘We shall take care not to ascribe realism to a particular historical form
of novel belonging to a particular period, Balzac’s or Tolstoy’s, for instance,
so as to set up purely formal and literary criteria of realism.’ He considered

ARG_C05.qxd  07/02/2005  14:40  Page 91

.

M A R X I S T   T H E O R I E S

9 1

Lukács’ desire to enshrine a particular literary form as the only true model
for realism to be a dangerous kind of formalism. Brecht would have been
the ﬁrst to admit that, if his own ‘alienation effect’ were to become a for-
mula  for  realism,  it  would  cease  to  be  effective.  If  we  copy  other  realists’
methods, we cease to be realists ourselves: ‘Methods wear out, stimuli fail.
New problems loom up and demand new techniques. Reality alters; to rep-
resent it the means of representation must alter too.’ These remarks express
clearly Brecht’s undogmatic and experimental view of aesthetics. However,
there  is  nothing  in  the  least  ‘liberal’  in  his  rejection  of  orthodoxy;  his 
restless search for new ways of shaking audiences out of their complacent
passivity  into  active  engagement  was  motivated  by  a  dedicated  political 
commitment to unmasking every new disguise used by the deviously pro-
tean capitalist system.

The Frankfurt School and After: 
Adorno and Benjamin

While  Brecht  and  Lukács  held  conﬂicting  views  of  realism,  the  Frankfurt
School of Marxist aesthetics rejected realism altogether. The Institute for Social
Research at Frankfurt practised what it called ‘Critical Theory’, which was
a wide-ranging form of social analysis grounded in Hegelian Marxism and
including Freudian elements. The leading ﬁgures in philosophy and aesthetics
were Max Horkheimer, Theodor Adorno and Herbert Marcuse. Exiled in 1933,
the Institute was relocated in New York, but ﬁnally returned to Frankfurt
in  1950  under  Adorno  and  Horkheimer.  They  regarded  the  social  system,
in Hegelian fashion, as a totality in which all the aspects reﬂected the same
essence. Their analysis of modern culture was inﬂuenced by the experience
of fascism which had achieved hegemonic dominance at every level of social
existence  in  Germany.  In  America  they  saw  a  similar  ‘one-dimensional’ 
quality  in  the  mass  culture  and  the  permeation  of  every  aspect  of  life  by
commercialism.

Art  and  literature  have  a  privileged  place  in  Frankfurt  thinking.  In  an
early initiative in critical theory, Marcuse proposed the notion of ‘afﬁrmat-
ive culture’, by which he sought to register the dialectical nature of culture
as conformist (in its quietist cultivation of inner fulﬁlment) but also critical
(in so far as it bore in its very form the image of an undamaged existence).
Marcuse, while always insisting on the negative, transcendent power of ‘the
aesthetic dimension’, adapted the revolutionary commitment of his youth
to changed social and cultural circumstances. For the outstanding exponent

ARG_C05.qxd  07/02/2005  14:40  Page 92

9 2

A   R E A D E R ’ S   G U I D E   T O   C O N T E M P O R A R Y   L I T E R A R Y   T H E O R Y

.

of Critical Theory, Adorno, art – with philosophy – was the only theatre of
resistance to ‘the administered universe’ of the twentieth century. Adorno
criticized Lukács’ view of realism, arguing that great literature does not, nor
needs  to,  directly  address  social  reality.  In  Adorno’s  view,  art’s  detach-
ment  from  dominant  reality  gives  it  its  special  signiﬁcance  and  power.
Modernist writings are particularly distanced from the reality to which they
allude and this allows them the space to critique conformist trends in their
world.  While  popular  art  forms  are  forced  to  collude  with  the  economic
system which shapes them, ‘autonomous’ works have the power to ‘negate’
the reality to which they relate. Because modernist texts reﬂect the alien-
ated inner lives of individuals, Lukács attacked them as ‘decadent’ embodi-
ments  of  late  capitalist  society  and  evidence  of  the  writers’  inability  to 
transcend  the  atomistic  and  fragmented  worlds  in  which  they  were  com-
pelled to live. Adorno argues that art cannot simply reﬂect the social sys-
tem, but acts within that reality as an irritant which produces an indirect
sort  of  knowledge:  ‘Art  is  the  negative  knowledge  of  the  actual  world.’ 
This can be achieved, he believed, by writing ‘difﬁcult’ experimental texts
and  not  directly  polemical  or  critical  works  –  a  position  which  not  only
separated him from Lukács but governed his view of the limitations of Brecht’s
art and ideas.

In Frankfurt School thinking, literary works did not aspire to the formal
coherence and progressive content valued by Lukács, but sought rather, by
distancing  and  estranging  reality,  to  prevent  the  easy  absorption  of  new
insights or the co-option of the art work by consumer society. Modernists
try to disrupt and fragment the picture of modern life rather than master
its dehumanizing mechanisms. Lukács could see only symptoms of decay
in  this  kind  of  art  and  could  not  recognize  its  power  to  reveal and  ‘defa-
miliarize’ from its own antagonistic, non-conformist position. Proust’s use
of monologue intérieur does not just reﬂect an alienated individualism, but
both grasps a ‘truth’ about modern society (the alienation of the individual)
and  enables  us  to  see  that  the  alienation  is  part  of  an  objective  social 
reality. In a complex essay on Samuel Beckett’s Endgame Adorno meditates
on the ways in which Beckett uses form to evoke the emptiness of modern
culture. Despite the catastrophes and degradations of twentieth-century his-
tory, the play suggests, we persist in behaving as if nothing has changed.
We  persist  in  our  foolish  belief  in  the  old  truths  of  the  unity  and  sub-
stantiality  of  the  individual  or  the  meaningfulness  of  language.  The  play
presents characters who possess only the hollow shells of individuality and
the fragmented clichés of a language. The absurd discontinuities of discourse,
the  pared-down  characterization,  and  plotlessness,  all  contribute  to  the 

ARG_C05.qxd  07/02/2005  14:40  Page 93

.

M A R X I S T   T H E O R I E S

9 3

aesthetic effect of distancing the reality to which the play alludes, thereby
giving us a ‘negative’ knowledge of modern society.

Marx believed that he had extracted the ‘rational kernel’ from the ‘mys-
tical  shell’  of  Hegel’s  dialectic.  What  survives  is  the  dialectical  method  of
understanding the real processes of human history. The Frankfurt School’s
work  has  much  of  the  authentic  Hegelian  subtlety  in  dialectical  thought.
The  meaning  of  dialectic  in  the  tradition  of  Hegel  can  be  summed  up  as
‘the development which arises from the resolution of contradictions inher-
ent  in  a  particular  aspect  of  reality’.  Adorno’s  Philosophy  of  Modern  Music,
for  example,  develops  a  dialectical  account  of  the  composer  Schoenberg.
The  composer’s  ‘atonal’  revolution  arose  in  a  historical  context  in  which
the  extreme  commercialization  of  culture  destroys  the  listener’s  ability  to
appreciate  the  formal  unity  of  a  classical  work.  The  commercial  exploita-
tion of artistic techniques in cinema, advertising, popular music and so on
forces the composer to respond by producing a shattered and fragmented
music, in which the very grammar of musical language (tonality) is denied.
Each individual note is cut off and cannot be resolved into meaning by the
surrounding context. Adorno describes the content of this ‘atonal’ music in
the language of psychoanalysis: the painfully isolated notes express bodily
impulses from the unconscious. The new form is related to the individual’s
loss of conscious control in modern society. By allowing the expression of
violent unconscious impulses, Schoenberg’s music evades the censor, reason.
The  dialectic  is  completed  when  this  new  system  is  related  to  the  new 
totalitarian  organization  of  late  capitalist  imperialism,  in  which  the  auto-
nomy of the individual is lost in the massive and monolithic market-system.
That is to say, the music is at once a rebellion against a one-dimensional
society and also a symptom of an inescapable loss of freedom. Adorno’s dia-
lectical  view  of  the  position  of  the  arts  under  late  capitalism  has  made 
his  work  a  compelling  inﬂuence  in  later  debates  on  postmodern  arts  and
society  ( Jameson,  1991)  as  well  as  on  a  movement  such  as  the  ‘New
Aestheticism’ (see ‘Conclusion’ here), which sees itself as advancing beyond
the commonplaces of postmodernism. Adorno continues in these contexts
to  inspire a  belief  in  an  uncompromising,  critical  and  semi-autonomous 
literature and culture.

Walter Benjamin – a friend of Adorno but also of Brecht (to whom Adorno
was  antipathetic  by  temperament  and  outlook)  and  of  Gershom  Sholem 
(the  great  student  of  Judaic  mysticism,  who  looked  askance  upon  his  old
companion’s conversion to materialist thought) – was the most idiosyncratic
Marxist thinker of his generation. His association with the Frankfurt School
was ﬂeeting. He depended on its journal for a small income but had also

ARG_C05.qxd  07/02/2005  14:40  Page 94

9 4

A   R E A D E R ’ S   G U I D E   T O   C O N T E M P O R A R Y   L I T E R A R Y   T H E O R Y

.

to  contend  with  Adorno’s  editorial  strictures  upon  his  ideas  and  writing.
His early ‘academic’ criticism, devoted to Goethe and to German Baroque
drama,  is  legendarily  obscure,  and  much  of  his  cultural  journalism  is 
tantalizingly  enigmatic.  His  life’s  work  and  major  achievement  was  the
‘Arcades  Project’,  a  fascinating  exploration  of  the  emerging  commercial 
culture  of  Paris,  ‘capital  of  the  nineteenth  century’,  which  remained
unﬁnished at his death (but was published in translation in the late 1990s).
He  was  among  the  earliest  and  best  interpreters  of  Brecht’s  theatre  and 
a  bold,  intransigently  materialist  theorist  of  the  new  means  of  artistic 
production,  yet  his  last  essay,  the  ‘Theses  on  the  Philosophy  of  History’,
combined  its  Marxist  dialectical  materialism  with  the  idiom  of  messianic
theology.  Benjamin’s  best-known  essay,  ‘The  Work  of  Art  in  the  Age  of
Mechanical  Reproduction’,  argues  that  modern  technical  innovations
(above  all,  photography  and  cinema)  have  profoundly  altered  the  status 
of the ‘work of art’. Once, artistic works had an ‘aura’ deriving from their
uniqueness. This was especially true of the visual arts, but was true also of
literature. The new media shatter the quasi-religious ethos of the supposed
uniquely original (as if ‘sacred’) work of art. To a greater and greater extent
the reproduction of art objects (by means of photography or radio transmission)
means that they are actually designed for reproducibility; and in the emer-
gence of cinema we discover ‘copies’ without an ‘original’. Here, Benjamin
argued,  was  the  technical  basis  of  a  new  ethos  of  artistic  production  and
consumption, one in which awe and deference would give way to a posture
of analysis and relaxed expertise, in which art, no longer steeped in ‘ritual’,
would be opened to politics. Arguments such as these on reproduction and
the  loss  of  originality  have  been  taken  up  in  debates  on  postmodernism
and provide a materialist gloss on its themes of imitation and simulation.
Adorno commented on the element of wishful thinking in Benjamin’s essay,
yet  the  latter  remains  exemplary  in  its  attention  to  the  speciﬁc  historical
and cultural effect of new technologies.

Benjamin’s companion essay, ‘The Author as Producer’, on the politics
of artistic practice, was written principally with Bertolt Brecht’s theatre in
mind,  and  has  made  its  own  distinctive,  but  probably  now  less  regarded,
contribution.  Here  Benjamin  argued  that  while  new  technology  might
have  revolutionary  potential,  there  was  no  guarantee  of  its  revolutionary
effect. It was necessary for socialist writers and artists to realize this poten-
tial  in  their  work.  Benjamin  rejects  here  too  the  idea  that  revolutionary 
art is achieved by attending to the correct subject-matter. (In this respect,
his  views  are  pitched  against  the  realist  orthodoxy  of  the  day.)  Instead 
of  being  concerned  with  a  work  of  art’s  position  within  the  social  and 

ARG_C05.qxd  07/02/2005  14:40  Page 95

.

M A R X I S T   T H E O R I E S

9 5

economic relations of its time, he asks the question: what is ‘the function
of  a  work  within  the  literary  production  relations  of  its  time’?  The  artist
needs to revolutionize the artistic forces of production of his or her time.
And this is a matter of technique, although the correct technique will arise in
response to  a  complex  historical  combination  of  social  and  technical
changes.

A further, important, and highly inﬂuential concept – that of the urban
ﬂaneur (the stroller or window-shopper) – is derived from Benjamin’s studies
of  the  nineteenth-century  poet  Charles  Baudelaire,  which  had  formed 
part  of  the  Arcades  Project.  Later  commentary,  by  Janet  Wolff,  Elizabeth
Wilson and others, has introduced the vital aspect of gender (in the ﬁgure
of the female ‘ﬂaneuse’) into considerations of urban life and identity under
modernity.  In  Literary  Studies,  Virginia  Woolf  has  been  a  case  in  point.
Subsequent  criticism  has  also  combined  this  with  an  interest  in  new 
technologies  once  more  (the  cinema  and  Internet,  see  Friedberg,  1994, 
and Donald, 2005) and with insights on urban ‘psychogeography’ derived
from the French Situationist movement of the 1960s. A writer such as the
London-based  novelist-journalist  Iain  Sinclair  draws  eclectically  on  these
sources.  Critical  trends  in  ‘cultural’  or  ‘literary  geography’  (Soja,  1996;
Donald,  1999;  Thacker,  2003)  have  also  taken  up  and  developed
Benjamin’s  earlier  insights  on  the  modern  city,  often  along  with  those 
of  Michel  Foucault  (see  Chapter  7)  on  space  and  place.  Elsewhere,  the 
publication  through  the  1990s  of  Benjamin’s  correspondence  and  other 
writings testiﬁes to the continuing interest of his work across a wide ﬁeld
in the Humanities and Social Sciences.

‘Structuralist’ Marxism: Goldmann, Althusser,
Macherey

The  intellectual  life  of  Europe  during  the  1960s  was  dominated  by  struc-
turalism (see Chapter 4). Marxist criticism was not unaffected by this intel-
lectual  environment.  Both  traditions  believe  that  individuals  cannot  be
understood  apart  from  their  social  existence.  Marxists  believe  that  indi-
viduals are ‘bearers’ of positions in the social system and not free agents.
Structuralists  consider  that  individual  actions  and  utterances  have  no
meaning apart from the signifying systems which generate them. However,
structuralists tend to regard these underlying structures as timeless and self-
regulating systems, but Marxists see them as historical, changeable and fraught
with contradictions.

ARG_C05.qxd  07/02/2005  14:40  Page 96

9 6

A   R E A D E R ’ S   G U I D E   T O   C O N T E M P O R A R Y   L I T E R A R Y   T H E O R Y

.

Lucien Goldmann, a Romanian theorist based in France, rejected the idea
that texts are creations of individual genius and argued that they are based
upon  ‘trans-individual  mental  structures’  belonging  to  particular  groups 
(or classes). These ‘world-views’ are perpetually being constructed and dis-
solved by social groups as they adjust their mental image of the world in
response to the changing reality before them. Such mental images usually
remain  ill-deﬁned  and  half-realized  in  the  consciousness  of  social  agents,
but great writers are able to crystallize world-views in a lucid and coherent
form.

Goldmann’s celebrated Le Dieu Caché (The Hidden God) establishes con-
nections between Racine’s tragedies, Pascal’s philosophy, a French religious
movement  ( Jansenism)  and  a  social  group  (the  noblesse  de  la  robe).  The
Jansenist  world-view  is  tragic:  it  sees  the  individual  as  divided  between 
a  hopelessly  sinful  world  and  a  God  who  is  absent.  God  has  abandoned 
the  world  but  still  imposes  an  absolute  authority  upon  the  believer.  The
individual  is  driven  into  an  extreme  and  tragic  solitude.  The  underlying 
structure  of  relationships  in  Racine’s  tragedies  expresses  the  Jansenist
predicament, which in turn can be related to the decline of the noblesse de
la  robe, a  class  of  court  ofﬁcials  who  were  becoming  increasingly  isolated
and  powerless  as  the  absolute  monarchy  withdrew  its  ﬁnancial  support. 
The ‘manifest’ content of the tragedies appears to have no connection with
Jansenism, but at a deeper structural level they share the same form: ‘the
tragic  hero,  equidistant  from  God  and  from  the  world,  is  radically  alone’. 
In  other  words,  the  expressive  relationship  between  social  class  and  liter-
ary text was registered not in ‘reﬂected’ content but in a parallelism of form,
or ‘homology’. By means of the concept of homology, Goldmann was able
to think beyond the conﬁnes of the dogmatic realist tradition (though he
retained his admiration for Lukács’ earlier work) and to develop a distinct-
ive  variety  of  Marxist  literary  and  cultural  analysis  to  which  he  gave  the
name ‘genetic structuralism’.

His later work, especially Pour une sociologie du roman (1964), appears to
resemble  that  of  the  Frankfurt  School  by  focusing  on  the  ‘homology’  be-
tween the structure of the modern novel and the structure of the market
economy.  He  argues  that  by  about  1910  the  transition  from  the  ‘heroic’ 
age of liberal capitalism to its imperialist phase was well under way. As a
consequence  the  importance  of  the  individual  within  economic  life  was 
drastically  reduced.  Finally,  in  the  post-1945  period  the  regulation  and 
management of economic systems by the state and by corporations brought
to  its  fullest  development  that  tendency  which  Lukács  called  ‘reiﬁcation’
(this refers to the reduction of value to exchange value and the domination

ARG_C05.qxd  07/02/2005  14:40  Page 97

.

M A R X I S T   T H E O R I E S

9 7

of  the  human  world  by  objects).  In  the  classic  novel,  objects  only  had
signiﬁcance in relation to individuals, but in the novels of Sartre, Kafka and
Robbe-Grillet,  the  world  of  objects  begins  to  displace  the  individual.  This
ﬁnal stage of Goldmann’s writing depended upon a rather crude model of
‘superstructure’  and  ‘base’,  according  to  which  literary  structures  simply 
correspond to economic structures. It avoids the pessimism of the Frankfurt
School, but lacks their rich dialectical insights.

Louis  Althusser,  the  French  Marxist  philosopher,  has  had  a  major
inﬂuence  on  Marxist  literary  theory  especially  in  France  and  Britain.  His
work is clearly related to structuralism and has been claimed for poststruc-
turalism (see also Chapter 7, p. 148). He rejects the Hegelian revival within
Marxist philosophy, and argues that Marx’s real contribution to knowledge
stems  from  his  ‘break’  with  Hegel.  He  criticizes  Hegel’s  account  of  ‘total-
ity’, according to which the essence of the whole is expressed in all its parts.
Althusser  avoids  terms  such  as  ‘social  system’  and  ‘order’,  because  they 
suggest  a  structure  with  a  centre  which  determines  the  form  of  all  its 
emanations.  Instead  he  talks  of  the  ‘social  formation’,  which  he  regards 
as  a  ‘decentred’  structure.  Unlike  a  living  organism  this  structure  has  no 
governing principle, no originating seed, no overall unity. The implications
of this view are arresting. The various elements (or ‘levels’) within the social
formation are not treated as reﬂections of one essential level (the economic
level for Marxists): the levels possess a ‘relative autonomy’, and are ultimately
determined by the economic level only ‘in the last instance’ (this complex
formulation derives from Engels). The social formation is a structure in which
the various levels exist in complex relations of inner contradiction and mutual
conﬂict;  its  contradictions  are  never  ‘simple’  but  ‘overdetermined’  in
nature. This structure of contradictions may be dominated at any given stage
by one or other of the levels, but which level it is to be is itself ‘determined’
ultimately by the economic level. For example, as Marx himself observed,
in feudal social formations religion is structurally dominant, but this does
not mean that religion is the essence or centre of the structure. Its leading
role is itself determined by the economic level, though not directly.

Althusser refuses to treat art as simply a form of ideology. In ‘A Letter
on Art’, he locates it somewhere between ideology and scientiﬁc knowledge.
A great work of literature does not give us a properly conceptual understanding
of  reality  but  neither  does  it  merely  express  the  ideology  of  a  particular 
class. He draws upon Engels’ arguments about Balzac (see above, pp. 85–6)
and declares that art ‘makes us see’, in a distanced way, ‘the ideology from
which  it  is  born,  in  which  it  bathes,  from  which  it  detaches  itself  as  art,
and to which it alludes’. Althusser deﬁnes ideology as ‘a representation of

ARG_C05.qxd  07/02/2005  14:40  Page 98

9 8

A   R E A D E R ’ S   G U I D E   T O   C O N T E M P O R A R Y   L I T E R A R Y   T H E O R Y

.

the  imaginary  relationship  of  individuals  to  their  real  conditions  of  exis-
tence’.  The  imaginary  consciousness  helps  us  to  make  sense  of  the  world
but  also  masks  or  represses  our  real  relationship  to  it.  For  example,  the 
ideology of ‘freedom’ promotes the belief in the freedom of all, including
labourers,  but  it  masks  the  real  relations  of  liberal  capitalist  economy.  A 
dominant system of ideology is accepted as a common-sense view of things
by the dominated classes and thus the interests of the dominant class are
secured. Art, however, achieves ‘a retreat’ (a ﬁctional distance deriving from
its formal composition) from the very ideology which feeds it. In this way
a major literary work can transcend and critique the ideology in which it
is nevertheless ‘bathed’.

Pierre  Macherey’s  A  Theory  of  Literary  Production  (1966)  was  the  ﬁrst
extended Althusserian discussion of art and ideology. Rather than treat the
text  as  a  ‘creation’  or  a  self-contained  artefact,  he  regards  it  as  a  ‘produc-
tion’ in which disparate materials are worked over and changed in the pro-
cess.  These  materials  are  not  ‘free  implements’  to  be  used  consciously  to
create  a  controlled  and  uniﬁed  work  of  art.  Irrespective  of  prevailing  aes-
thetic  norms  and  authorial  intentions,  the  text,  in  working  the  pre-given
materials, is never fully ‘aware of what it is doing’. It has, so to speak, an
‘unconscious’ – a notion explored in terms of a text’s repressed historical
narrative  in  Fredric  Jameson’s  The  Political  Unconscious (1981;  see  below, 
pp. 106–7). In effect, this is an account of the way ideology enters and deforms
a  would-be  uniﬁed  text.  Ideology  is  normally  lived  as  if  it  were  totally 
natural,  as  if  its  imaginary  and  ﬂuid  discourse  gives  a  perfect  and  uniﬁed
explanation of reality. Once it is worked into a text, all its contradictions
and gaps are exposed. The realist writer intends to unify all the elements
in the text, but the work that goes on in the textual process inevitably pro-
duces certain lapses and omissions which correspond to the incoherence of
the ideological discourse it uses: ‘for in order to say anything, there are other
things which must not be said’. The literary critic is not concerned to show
how all the parts of the work ﬁt together, or to harmonize and smooth over
any apparent contradictions. Like a psychoanalyst, the critic attends to the
text’s unconscious – to what is unspoken and inevitably repressed.

How would this approach work? Consider Defoe’s novel, Moll Flanders.
In the early eighteenth century, bourgeois ideology smoothed over the con-
tradictions between moral and economic requirements; that is, between on
the one hand a providential view of human life which requires the defer-
ment of immediate gratiﬁcation for a long-term gain, and on the other an
economic individualism which drains all value from human relations and
ﬁxes it solely in commodities. Set to work in Moll Flanders this ideological

ARG_C05.qxd  07/02/2005  14:40  Page 99

.

M A R X I S T   T H E O R I E S

9 9

discourse is represented so that its contradictions are exposed. The opera-
tion of literary form on ideology produces this effect of incoherence. The
literary use of Moll as narrator itself involves a double perspective. She tells
her  story  prospectively  and  retrospectively:  she  is  both  a  participant  who
relishes her selﬁsh life as prostitute and thief, and a moralizer who relates
her sinful life as a warning to others. The two perspectives are symbolically
merged in the episode of Moll’s successful business speculation in Virginia
where she founds her enterprise upon the ill-gotten gains which were kept
secured  during  her  Newgate  imprisonment.  This  economic  success  is  also
her reward for repenting of her evil life. In this way literary form ‘congeals’
the ﬂuid discourse of ideology: by giving it formal substance the text shows
up the ﬂaws and contradictions in the ideology it uses. The writer does not
intend this effect since it is produced so to speak ‘unconsciously’ by the text.
The critic will therefore seek to disclose the rifts and silences (the ‘not-said’
of  the  text)  in  what  Althusser  termed  a  ‘symptomatic’  reading  which
reveals the limits of its determining ideology.

In  a  later,  short  –  but,  in  its  period,  highly  inﬂuential  –  study,  ‘On
Literature  as  an  Ideological  Form’  (1978),  written  with  Etienne  Balibar,
Macherey departed more radically from the traditional notion of literature
which the Frankfurt School defended and Althusser in part still entertained.
The culture of ‘the literary’ was now rethought as a key practice within the
education system, where it served to reproduce class-domination in language.
This  lent  an  expanded  and  more  fully  materialist  notion  of  ideology  to 
literary  studies,  understood  as  itself  located  within  the  education  system 
which Althusser (1971) had named as one of the so-called ‘Ideological State
Apparatuses’.

‘New Left’ Marxism: Williams, Eagleton, Jameson

Marxist  theory  in  the  United  States  has  been  dominated  by  the  Hegelian
inheritance of the Frankfurt School (the journal Telos was the standard-bearer
of  this  tradition).  The  revival  of  Marxist  criticism  in  Britain  (in  decline 
since the 1930s) was fuelled by the 1968 ‘troubles’ and by the ensuing inﬂux 
of continental ideas (New Left Review was an important channel). A major
theorist  emerged  in  response  to  the  speciﬁc  conditions  at  work  in  each 
country. Fredric Jameson’s Marxism and Form (1971) and The Prison-House
of Language (1972) displayed dialectical skills worthy of a Marxist-Hegelian
philosopher.  Terry  Eagleton’s  Criticism  and  Ideology  (1976)  built  upon 
the  anti-Hegelian  Marxism  of  Althusser  and  Macherey,  and  produced  an

ARG_C05.qxd  07/02/2005  14:40  Page 100

1 0 0

A   R E A D E R ’ S   G U I D E   T O   C O N T E M P O R A R Y   L I T E R A R Y   T H E O R Y

.

impressive critique of the British critical tradition and a radical revaluation
of the development of the English novel. Later, Jameson and Eagleton were
to respond inventively to the challenge of poststructuralism and postmod-
ernism (see the section on ‘Postmodernism and Marxism’ in Chapter 8. For
discussion of other subsequent inﬂections of Marxist critical theory, see the
section  on  Marxist  Feminism  in  Chapter  6  and  that  on  New  Historicism
and Cultural Materialism in Chapter 7).

There  was,  of  course,  an  outstanding  presence  already  at  work  in  the
ﬁeld: Raymond Williams. Beginning with a critical reassessment of the main
English tradition of critical cultural thought (Culture and Society 1780–1950,
1958),  Williams  embarked  on  a  radical  theoretical  construction  of  the
whole  domain  of  social  meaning  –  ‘culture’  as  ‘a  whole  way  of  life’.  This
general perspective was developed in particular studies of drama, the novel,
television,  and  historical  semantics  as  well  as  further  theoretical  work.
Williams’s general project – the study of all forms of signiﬁcation in their
actual  conditions  of  production  –  was  always  emphatically  historical  and
materialist.  Yet  it  was  only  in  1977,  with  the  publication  of  a  developed
statement of his theoretical position, that he began to characterize his work
as ‘Marxist’ (Marxism and Literature, 1977). What most importantly deﬁned
this position was the use of the concept of ‘hegemony’ developed by the
Italian  philosopher  and  political  activist  Antonio  Gramsci  (1891–1937).
Hegemony, Williams explained, related the ‘whole social process’ to struc-
tures  of  power  and  inﬂuence  and  thus  to  patterns  of  domination,  subor-
dination and opposition. It went beyond the formal operation of ideology
and beyond the idea of social control as manipulation or indoctrination to
see  relations  of  power  as  ‘in  effect  a  saturation  of  the  whole  procees  of 
living’, as operating by ‘consent’ and at such a depth that the hegemonic
order of a class society passes as ‘common sense’ and ‘the way things are’.
As Williams puts it, hegemony ‘constitutes a sense of reality for most people
in  the  society . . . a  “culture”,  but  a  culture  which  has  to  be  seen  as  the 
lived dominance and subordination of particular classes’. This thinking placed
Williams decisively in a Marxist tradition, if in one which rejected abstract,
delimiting notions of ideology and materialism. In fact he had long since
rejected the Communist orthodoxy of his student days. The powerful but
idiosyncratic formulations he subsequently developed at a distance from avail-
able  Marxist  tenets  in  his  earlier  writings  were  sometimes  construed  by  a
younger generation of Marxists as a sign of theoretical and political weak-
ness, and this partly accounts for the fact that Terry Eagleton launched his
own  theoretical  intervention  not  merely  as  a  rejection  of  the  dominant
Leavisian tradition but also as a revolutionary critique of his former mentor,

ARG_C05.qxd  07/02/2005  14:40  Page 101

.

M A R X I S T   T H E O R I E S

1 0 1

Williams. Eagleton was to revise this view later, most evidently at the time
of  Williams’s  death  in  1988  (Eagleton,  1989).  At  this  point  Williams’s
unique status as a left public intellectual in British culture and his inﬂuence
upon literary and cultual studies were clear – effectively summed up in the
title of a posthumous collection of essays, Resources of Hope (1989). His major
academic  contribution  was  perhaps  to  help  found  the  politicized  histor-
icist mode of analysis termed ‘cultural materialism’ (see Chapter 7, pp. 182,
184–5)  which  in  the  forms  adopted  in  British  cultural  studies  especially,
pre-eminently in the work of Stuart Hall (see Hall, 1996) and in studies of
popular  culture,  developed  the  Gramscian  notion  of  hegemony,  sketched
above, and Williams’s related distinction between ‘dominant’ ‘residual’ and
‘emergent’ aspects of culture (Williams, 1977).

In Criticism and Ideology, Eagleton, like Althusser, argued that criticism
must break with its ‘ideological prehistory’ and become a ‘science’. The cen-
tral problem is to deﬁne the relationship between literature and ideology,
because  in  his  view  texts  do  not  reﬂect  historical  reality  but  rather  work
upon  ideology  to  produce  an  effect  of  the  ‘real’.  The  text  may  appear  to 
be free in its relation to reality (it can invent characters and situations at
will), but it is not free in its use of ideology. ‘Ideology’ here refers not to
formulated doctrines but to all those systems of representation (aesthetic,
religious, judicial and others) which shape the individual’s mental picture
of lived experience. The meanings and perceptions produced in the text are
a reworking of ideology’s own working of reality. This means that the text
works  on  reality  at  two  removes.  Eagleton  goes  on  to  deepen  the  theory 
by examining the complex layering of ideology from its most general pre-
textual forms to the ideology of the text itself. He rejects Althusser’s view
that literature can distance itself from ideology; it is a complex reworking
of  already  existing  ideological  discourses.  However,  following  Macherey 
(see above, pp. 98–99), the literary result is not merely a reﬂection of other
ideological  discourses  but  a  special  production  of  ideology.  For  this  reason
criticism is concerned not with just the laws of literary form or the theory
of  ideology  but  rather  with  ‘the  laws  of  the  production  of  ideological 
discourses as literature’.

Eagleton  surveys  a  sequence  of  novels  from  George  Eliot  to  D.  H.
Lawrence in order to demonstrate the interrelations between ideology and
literary  form.  He  argues  that  nineteenth-century  bourgeois  ideology
blended a sterile utilitarianism with a series of organicist concepts of soci-
ety (mainly deriving from the Romantic humanist tradition). As Victorian
capitalism  became  more  ‘corporatist’  it  needed  bolstering  up  by  the 
sympathetic  social  and  aesthetic  organicism  of  the  Romantic  tradition.

ARG_C05.qxd  07/02/2005  14:40  Page 102

1 0 2

A   R E A D E R ’ S   G U I D E   T O   C O N T E M P O R A R Y   L I T E R A R Y   T H E O R Y

.

Eagleton  examines  each  writer’s  ideological  situation  and  analyses  the 
contradictions which develop in their thinking and the attempted resolu-
tions  of  the  contradictions  in  their  writings.  For  example,  he  argues  that
Lawrence was inﬂuenced by Romantic humanism in his belief that the novel
reﬂects the ﬂuidity of life undogmatically, and that society too is ideally an
organic order as against the alien capitalist society of modern England. After
the destruction of liberal humanism in the First World War, Lawrence devel-
oped a dualistic pattern of ‘female’ and ‘male’ principles. This antithesis is
developed and reshufﬂed in the various stages of his work, and ﬁnally resolved
in  the  characterization  of  Mellors  (Lady  Chatterley’s  Lover),  who  combines
impersonal ‘male’ power and ‘female’ tenderness. This contradictory com-
bination, which takes various forms in the novels, can be related to a ‘deep-
seated ideological crisis’ within contemporary society.

The  impact  of  poststructuralist  thought  produced  a  radical  change  in
Eagleton’s work in the late 1970s. His attention shifted from the ‘scientiﬁc’
attitude  of  Althusser  towards  the  revolutionary  thought  of  Brecht  and
Benjamin. This shift had the effect of throwing Eagleton back towards the
classic Marxist revolutionary theory of the Theses on Feuerbach (1845): ‘The
question  whether  objective  truth  can  be  attributed  to  human  thinking  is
not  a  question  of  theory  but  is  a  practical  question. . . . The  philosophers
have only interpreted the world in various ways; the point is to change it.’
Eagleton  believes  that  ‘deconstructive’  theories,  as  developed  by  Derrida, 
Paul de Man and others (see Chapter 7), can be used to undermine all cer-
tainties, all ﬁxed and absolute forms of knowledge. On the other hand, he
criticizes deconstruction for its petit-bourgeois denial of ‘objectivity’ and mater-
ial ‘interests’ (especially class interests). This apparently contradictory view
can be understood if we note that Eagleton was now espousing Lenin’s and
not  Althusser’s  view  of  theory:  correct  theory  ‘assumes  ﬁnal  shape  only 
in  close  connection  with  the  practical  activity  of  a  truly  mass  and  truly 
revolutionary movement’. The tasks of Marxist criticism are now set up by
politics and not by philosophy: the critic must dismantle received notions
of  ‘literature’  and  reveal  their  ideological  role  in  shaping  the  subjectivity 
of readers. As a socialist the critic must ‘expose the rhetorical structures by
which non-socialist works produce politically undesirable effects’ and also
‘interpret such works where possible “against the grain” ’, so that they work
for socialism.

Eagleton’s  major  book  of  this  phase  was  Walter  Benjamin  or  Towards  a
Revolutionary  Criticism  (1981).  The  odd  materialist  mysticism  of  Benjamin
is read ‘against the grain’ to produce a revolutionary criticism. His view of
history involves a violent grasping of historical meaning from a past which

ARG_C05.qxd  07/02/2005  14:40  Page 103

.

M A R X I S T   T H E O R I E S

1 0 3

is always threatened and obscured by reactionary and repressive memory.
When the right (political) moment comes, a voice from the past can be seized
and appropriated to its ‘true’ purpose. Brecht’s plays, admired by Benjamin,
often  reread  history  ‘against  the  grain’,  breaking  down  the  relentless  nar-
ratives  of  history  and  opening  the  past  to  reinscription.  For  example,
Shakespeare’s Coriolanus and Gay’s Beggar’s Opera are ‘rewritten’ in order to
expose their potential socialist meanings. (Brecht characteristically insisted
that  we  must  go  beyond  mere  empathy  with  Shakespeare’s  self-regarding
‘hero’  and  must  be  able  to  appreciate  the  tragedy  not  only  of  Coriolanus
but also ‘speciﬁcally of the plebs’.) Eagleton applauds Brecht’s radical and
opportunistic approach to meaning: ‘a work may be realist in June and anti-
realist  in  December’.  Eagleton  frequently  alludes  to  Perry  Anderson’s
Considerations  on  Western  Marxism  (1976),  which  shows  how  the  develop-
ment of Marxist theory always reﬂects the state of the working-class strug-
gle.  Eagleton  believes,  for  example,  that  the  Frankfurt  School’s  highly
‘negative’  critique  of  modern  culture  was  a  response  ﬁrst  to  fascist  dom-
ination in Europe, and then to the pervasive capitalist domination in the
United States, but that it was also the result of the School’s theoretical and
practical divorce from the working-class movement. However, what makes
Eagleton’s revolutionary criticism distinctively modern is his tactical deploy-
ment  of  the  Freudian  theories  of  Lacan  and  the  powerful  deconstructive 
philosophy  of  Jacques  Derrida  (see  Chapter  7);  his  The  Rape  of  Clarissa 
(1982), a rereading of Richardson’s novel inspired politically by both social-
ism  and  feminism,  exempliﬁes  the  force  of  this  revised  critical  strategy.
Eagleton’s  work  continues  to  develop  and  change.  The  Ideology  of  the
Aesthetic (1990) recalls Frankfurtian rather than ‘Parisian’ antecedents: the
culture of ‘the aesthetic’ in post-Enlightenment Europe is reviewed dialect-
ically, seen both as a binding agent in the formation of ‘normal’ bourgeois
subjectivity, and as the carrier of irrepressible, disruptive desire. One major
work of recent years, inaugurating a trilogy of works on the literature and
associated intellectual and political culture of Ireland, was Heathcliff and the
Great Hunger (1995). Among other themes, Eagleton returns here to Emily
Brontë’s Wuthering Heights, which he sets now in the context of the Irish
famine, and, again refocusing an earlier concern, considers the situation of
Irish exiles, noticeably Oscar Wilde and George Bernard Shaw. Heathcliff and
the Great Hunger was followed by Crazy John and the Bishop and Other Essays
on  Irish  Culture  (1998)  and  Scholars  and  Rebels:  Irish  Cultural  Thought  from
Burke to Yeats (1999), both of which combine a broad cultural and historical
sweep with the rediscovery of neglected writers and thinkers, amongst them,
in  Scholars  and  Rebels,  the  community  of  professional  men  (including

ARG_C05.qxd  07/02/2005  14:40  Page 104

1 0 4

A   R E A D E R ’ S   G U I D E   T O   C O N T E M P O R A R Y   L I T E R A R Y   T H E O R Y

.

William  Wilde,  Charles  Lever  and  Sheridan  Le  Fanu)  centred  upon  the 
Dublin University Magazine and related to the Young Ireland movement. The
trilogy might be described as a sustained example of ‘cultural materialism’.
As  such,  along  with  other  work  –  for  example,  The  Idea  of  Culture (2000)
and  Sweet  Violence:  The  Idea  of  the  Tragic (2002)  –  it  expresses  Eagleton’s 
avowed  debt  since  the  late  1980s  to  Raymond  Williams  and  to  traditions
of Western Marxism while conﬁrming his new-found political afﬁliation with
the cause of Irish anti-colonial dissent. Both tendencies have dovetailed in
a ‘return home’ to a life lived between Derry, Dublin and Manchester, where
Eagleton has, since 2001, been Professor of Cultural Theory. A further related
strand of writing appeared in the novel, Saints and Scholars (1987), in the
script to Derek Jarman’s ﬁlm, Wittgenstein (1993), and in the TV and radio
plays, St Oscar and The White, The Gold and The Gangrene (1997). In them-
selves, these artistic works brought a new breadth and dexterity, as well as
a  biting  humour,  to  Eagleton’s  cultural  project  in  an  age  when  academic
work and art are commonly divorced and satire is thought to be at an end.
If writing in this mode is temporarily on hold – although the unexpected
autobiographical The Gatekeeper (2003) certainly keeps up the comedy – one
common aim around which the works increasingly cohere is a direct con-
cern with the political role of the intellectual and the lasting value of dis-
senting traditions in the Western philosophical and literary tradition. This
had  led  Eagleton  to  speak  out  himself  publicly  and  regularly  against  the
vapid claims of postmodernism (see Chapter 8, pp. 206–7) and, in one notable
instance, against the compromised obscurantism of Gayatri Spivak’s post-
colonialism (in a 1999 review, ‘The Gaudy Supermarket’, of her A Critique
of Postcolonial Reason. See Chapter 9, pp. 224–5). His After Theory (2003, and
see ‘Conclusion’ to The Reader’s Guide) continues in this same provocative,
original and deeply committed vein.

In  America,  where  the  labour  movement  has  been  partially  corrupted
and  totally  excluded  from  political  power,  the  appearance  of  a  major
Marxist  theorist  is  an  important  event.  On  the  other  hand,  if  we  keep  in
mind Eagleton’s point about the Frankfurt School and American society, it
is  not  without  signiﬁcance  that  Fredric  Jameson’s  work  has  been  deeply
inﬂuenced by that School. In Marxism and Form (1971) he explores the dialect-
ical aspect of Marxist theories of literature. After a ﬁne sequence of studies
(Adorno, Benjamin, Marcuse, Bloch, Lukács and Sartre) he presents the out-
line of a ‘dialectical criticism’. Jameson believes that in the post-industrial
world  of  monopoly  capitalism  the  only  kind  of  Marxism  which  has  any
purchase  on  the  situation  is  a  Marxism  which  explores  the  ‘great  themes
of  Hegel’s  philosophy  –  the  relationship  of  part  to  whole,  the  opposition

ARG_C05.qxd  07/02/2005  14:40  Page 105

.

M A R X I S T   T H E O R I E S

1 0 5

between concrete and abstract, the concept of totality, the dialectic of appear-
ance and essence, the interaction between subject and object’. For dialect-
ical  thought  there  are  no  ﬁxed  and  unchanging  ‘objects’;  an  ‘object’  is 
inextricably bound up with a larger whole, and is also related to a think-
ing mind which is itself part of a historical situation. Dialectical criticism
does  not  isolate  individual  literary  works  for  analysis;  an  individual  is
always  part  of  a  larger  structure  (a  tradition  or  a  movement)  or  part  of  a
historical situation. The dialectical critic has no pre-set categories to apply
to literature and will always be aware that his or her chosen categories (style,
character,  image,  etc.)  must  be  understood  ultimately  as  an  aspect  of  the
critic’s  own  historical  situation.  Jameson  shows  that  Wayne  Booth’s
Rhetoric of Fiction (1961: see Chapter 1, pp. 22–3) is lacking in a proper dialect-
ical self-awareness. Booth adopts the concept of ‘point of view’ in the novel,
a concept which is profoundly modern in its implied relativism and rejec-
tion of any ﬁxed or absolute viewpoint or standard of judgement. However,
by defending the speciﬁc point of view represented by the ‘implied author’,
Booth tries to restore the certainties of the nineteenth-century novel, a move
which reﬂects a nostalgia for a time of greater middle-class stability in an
orderly class system. A Marxist dialectical criticism will always recognize the
historical origins of its own concepts and will never allow the concepts to
ossify and become insensitive to the pressure of reality. We can never get
outside  our  subjective  existence  in  time,  but  we  can  try  to  break  through
the hardening shell of our ideas ‘into a more vivid apprehension of reality
itself’.

A dialectical criticism will seek to unmask the inner form of a genre or
body of texts and will work from the surface of a work inward to the level
where literary form is deeply related to the concrete. Taking Hemingway as
his example, Jameson contends that the ‘dominant category of experience’
in the novels is the process of writing itself. Hemingway discovered that he
could produce a certain kind of bare sentence which could do two things
well:  denote  the  physical  environment  and  suggest  the  tension  of  resent-
ments  between  people  (for  example:  ‘They  sat  down  at  a  table  and  the 
girl  looked  across  at  the  hills  on  the  dry  side  of  the  valley  and  the  man
looked at her and at the table’, from ‘Hills Like White Elephants’, in Men
Without  Women,  1928).  The  achieved  writing  skill  is  linked  conceptually 
with other human skills which are expressed in relation to the natural world
(especially  blood  sports).  The  Hemingway  cult  of  machismo reﬂects  the
American  ideal  of  technical  skill  but  rejects  the  alienating  conditions  of 
industrial  society  by  transposing  human  skill  into  the  sphere  of  leisure.
Hemingway’s laid-bare sentences cannot gain access to the complex fabric

ARG_C05.qxd  07/02/2005  14:40  Page 106

1 0 6

A   R E A D E R ’ S   G U I D E   T O   C O N T E M P O R A R Y   L I T E R A R Y   T H E O R Y

.

of  American  society  and  so  his  novels  are  directed  to  the  thinned-down 
reality of foreign cultures in which individuals stand out with the ‘clean-
ness of objects’ and can therefore be contained in Hemingway’s sentences.
In  this  way  Jameson  shows  how  literary  form  is  deeply  engaged  with  a 
concrete reality.

His The Political Unconscious (1981) retains the earlier dialectical concep-
tion of theory but also assimilates various conﬂicting traditions of thought
(structuralism, poststructuralism, Freud, Althusser, Adorno) in an impress-
ive  and  still  recognizably  Marxist  synthesis.  Jameson  argues  that  the 
fragmented and alienated condition of human society implies an original
state  of  Primitive  Communism  in  which  both  life  and  perception  were 
‘collective’. When humanity suffered a sort of Blakean Fall, the very human
senses  themselves  established  separate  spheres  of  specialization.  A  painter
treats  sight  as  a  specialized  sense;  his  or  her  paintings  are  a  symptom  of
alienation. However, they are also a compensation for the loss of a world
of original fullness: they provide colour in a colourless world.

All ideologies are ‘strategies of containment’ which allow society to pro-
vide an explanation of itself which suppresses the underlying contradictions
of History; it is History itself (the brute reality of economic Necessity) which
imposes this strategy of repression. Literary texts work in the same way: the
solutions which they offer are merely symptoms of the suppression of History.
Jameson  cleverly  uses  A.  J.  Greimas’  structuralist  theory  (the  ‘semiotic 
rectangle’)  as  an  analytic  tool  for  his  own  purposes.  Textual  strategies  of
containment  present  themselves  as  formal  patterns.  Greimas’  structuralist
system provides a complete inventory of possible human relations (sexual,
legal,  etc.)  which  allows  the  critic  to  disclose  those  possibilities  in  a  text
that – in an echo of Pierre Macherey (1978; see above, pp. 98–9) – are not
said. This ‘not said’ is, for Jameson, the repressed History.

Jameson also develops a powerful argument about narrative and inter-
pretation. He believes that narrative is not just a literary form or mode but
an essential ‘epistemological category’; reality presents itself to the human
mind only in the form of stories. Even a scientiﬁc theory is a form of story.
Further, all narratives require interpretation. Here Jameson is answering the
common poststructuralist argument against ‘strong’ interpretation. Deleuze
and Guattari (in Anti-Oedipus; see Chapter 7, pp. 162–4) attack all ‘transcend-
ent’ interpretation, allowing only ‘immanent’ interpretation which avoids
imposing a strong ‘meaning’ on a text. Transcendent interpretation tries to
master the text and in so doing impoverishes its true complexity. Jameson
cunningly takes the example of New Criticism (a self-declared immanentist
approach), and shows that it is in fact transcendent, its master code being

ARG_C05.qxd  07/02/2005  14:40  Page 107

.

M A R X I S T   T H E O R I E S

1 0 7

‘humanism’. He concludes that all interpretations are necessarily transcend-
ent and ideological. In the end, all we can do is to use ideological concepts
as a means of transcending ideology.

Jameson’s ‘political unconscious’ takes from Freud the essential concept
of ‘repression’, but raises it from the individual to the collective level. The
function of ideology is to repress ‘revolution’. Not only do the oppressors
need  this  political  unconscious  but  so  do  the  oppressed,  who  would  ﬁnd
their existence unbearable if ‘revolution’ were not repressed. To analyse a
novel we need to establish an absent cause (the ‘not-revolution’). Jameson
proposes  a  critical  method  which  includes  three  ‘horizons’  (a  level  of
immanent analysis, using Greimas for example; a level of social-discourse
analysis; and an epochal level of Historical reading). The third horizon of
reading is based upon Jameson’s complex rethinking of Marxist models of
society.  Broadly,  he  accepts  Althusser’s  view  of  the  social  totality  as  a
‘decentred structure’ in which various levels develop in ‘relative autonomy’
and work on different time-scales (the coexistence of feudal and capitalist
time-scales, for example). This complex structure of antagonistic and out-
of-key modes of production is the heterogeneous History which is mirrored
in the heterogeneity of texts. Jameson is here answering the poststructuralists
who would abolish the distinction between text and reality by treating real-
ity itself as just more text. He shows that the textual heterogeneity can be
understood only as it relates to social and cultural heterogeneity outside the
text. In this he preserves a space for a Marxist analysis.

His reading of Joseph Conrad’s Lord Jim shows that each of the various
types of interpretation (impressionistic, Freudian, existential, and so on) which
have  been  applied  to  the  text  actually  expresses  something  in  the  text. 
Each mode of interpretation in turn reﬂects a development within modern
society  which  serves  the  needs  of  capital.  For  example,  impressionism 
is  typiﬁed  in  the  character  Stein,  the  capitalist  aesthete,  whose  passion 
for  butterﬂy  collecting  Jameson  regards  as  an  allegory  of  Conrad’s  own 
‘passionate choice of impressionism – the vocation to arrest the living raw
material  of  life,  and  by  wrenching  it  from  the  historical  situation . . . to 
preserve  it  beyond  time  in  the  imaginary’.  This  narrative  response  to
History is both ideologically conditioned and utopian; it both represses History
and envisages an ideal future.

Jameson’s strong ‘epistemological’ understanding of narrative illuminates
the political motivation of what remains his most important work to date,
Postmodernism, or the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism (1991). He maintains
that postmodernism is not merely a style but rather the ‘cultural dominant’
of our time: a totalizing system which, in league with the operations of the

ARG_C05.qxd  07/02/2005  14:40  Page 108

1 0 8

A   R E A D E R ’ S   G U I D E   T O   C O N T E M P O R A R Y   L I T E R A R Y   T H E O R Y

.

global market under ‘late capitalism’, saturates all aspects of social, cultural
and economic life, and so conditions, at the deepest levels, what we can know
of the contemporary world (see Chapter 8, pp. 206–7 especially). He looks
in particular to the strategy he terms ‘cognitive mapping’ (derived in part
from  critical  urban  geography  and  introduced  in  a  celebrated  discussion 
of the Bonaventure Hotel in Los Angeles) for the necessary understanding,
critique and transcendence of the world capitalist system. Thus ‘a pedagogical
political  culture’,  which  would  endow  the  individual  subject  with  ‘some
heightened sense of place in the global system’ and renew our capacity ‘to
act  and  struggle’,  will  depend  upon  a  ‘new  political  art’  committed  to  ‘a
global cognitive mapping’. At the same time, however, in a tension which
has  become  characteristic  of  his  thinking,  Jameson  muses  gloomily  some
ten  pages  later  ‘on  the  impossible  matter  of  the  nature  of  a  political  art’.
There  is  no  progress  or  movement  forward,  only  the  consolation  that
reﬂection on this impossiblity ‘may not be the worst way of marking time’.
The implication is that the world space of multinational capital is in truth
unmappable.

The bravura sweep of Jameson’s work in this volume and other studies
across the realms of theory, literature, art, ﬁlm, architecture and the media
remains  an  inspiration,  but  politically  the  outcome  is  a  resilient  but  pes-
simistic ‘late Marxism’ indebted to Hegel and to Theodor Adorno ( Jameson,
1991)  which  is  bereft  of  a  convincing  social  agency  for  change.  Thus  the
political  utopianism  and  faith  in  dialectical  thinking  apparent  in  earlier 
writings is diminished to the view that at present we can at best know what
is impossible, becalmed as we are inside global capitalism. As he puts it more
recently,  in  replying  to  the  contemporary  resurgence  of  the  concept  of 
‘modernity’ and of ‘alternative modernities’ which aim to recognize cultural
difference, the ‘fundamental meaning of modernity is that of a world-wide
capitalism itself. The standardisation projected by capitalist globalization in
this third or late stage of the system casts considerable doubt on all these
pious hopes for cultural variety in a future world colonised by a universal
market order’ (2002).

In the course of this chapter we have referred to ‘structuralist’ Marxism,
and  the  economic  writings  of  Karl  Marx  themselves  have  been  regarded 
as  essentially  structuralist.  However,  it  is  worth  emphasizing  that  the  dif-
ferences  between  Marxist  and  structuralist  theories  (see  Chapter  4)  are
much  greater  than  the  similarities.  For  Marxism  the  ultimate  ground  of 
its theories is the material and historical existence of human societies; whereas
for structuralists, the ﬁnal bedrock is the nature of language. While Marxist
theories are about the historical changes and conﬂicts which arise in society

ARG_C05.qxd  07/02/2005  14:40  Page 109

.

M A R X I S T   T H E O R I E S

1 0 9

and  appear  indirectly  in  literary  form,  structuralism  studies  the  internal 
working  of  systems  in  a  textual  emphasis  which  suspends  their  historical
context and conditions.

Selected reading

Key texts

Adorno, Theodor W., Prisms [1955], trans. by Samuel and Shierry Weber

(Neville Spearman, London, 1967).

Adorno, Theodor W. and Horkheimer, Max, Dialectic of Enlightenment

[1944], trans. by John Cumming (Allen Lane, London, 1972).

Adorno, Theodor W., Benjamin, Walter, Bloch, Ernst, Brecht, Bertolt and
Lukács, Georg, Aesthetics and Politics, trans. and ed. by Ronald Taylor;
afterword by Fredric Jameson (New Left Books, London, 1977).

Althusser, Louis, For Marx [1965], trans. by Ben Brewster (Allen Lane,

London, 1969).

Althusser, Louis, Lenin and Philosophy and Other Essays [1969], trans. by

Ben Brewster (Verso, London, 1971). Includes ‘Ideology and
Ideological State Apparatuses’ and ‘A Letter on Art’.

Anderson, Perry, Considerations on Western Marxism (Verso, London, 1976).
Baxandall, Lee and Morawski, Stefan, Marx and Engels on Literature and Art

(International General, New York, 1973).

Benjamin, Walter, Illuminations [1955; trans. by Harry Zohn, 1968], ed.

and intro. by Hannah Arendt ( Jonathan Cape, London, 1970).
Benjamin, Walter, Charles Baudelaire: A Lyric Poet in the Era of High

Capitalism [1955], trans. by Harry Zohn (New Left Books, London,
1973).

Benjamin, Walter, Understanding Brecht [1966], trans. by Anna Bostock

(New Left Books, London, 1973).

Benjamin, Walter, Correspondence of Walter Benjamin, 1910–1940, trans.

by Manfred and Evelyn Jacobson; ed. by Gershom Schloem and
Theodor Adorno (Chicago University Press, Chicago, 1994).

Benjamin, Walter, Selected Writings [original trans. by Edmund Jephcott 

et al., 1972], 4 vols, ed. by Michael W. Jennings, Howard Eiland 
et al., (Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1996–2003).
Especially vol. 2, 1927–34 (1999).

ARG_C05.qxd  07/02/2005  14:40  Page 110

1 1 0

A   R E A D E R ’ S   G U I D E   T O   C O N T E M P O R A R Y   L I T E R A R Y   T H E O R Y

.

Benjamin, Walter, The Arcades Project [unﬁnished, posthumous: 1972],

trans. by Howard Eiland and Kevin McLaughlin (Harvard University
Press, Cambridge, Mass. and London, 1999).

Eagleton, Terry, Criticism and Ideology (New Left Books, London, 1976).

Eagleton, Terry, Marxism and Literary Criticism [1976] (2nd edn,

Routledge, London, 2002).

Eagleton, Terry, Walter Benjamin or Towards a Revolutionary Criticism (New

Left Books, London, 1981).

Eagleton, Terry, The Rape of Clarissa (Basil Blackwell, Oxford, 1982).

Eagleton, Terry, Literary Theory: An Introduction [1983] (2nd edn,

Blackwell, Oxford, 1996).

Eagleton, Terry, Against the Grain: Essays 1975–1985 (Verso, London, 1986).

Eagleton, Terry, The Ideology of the Aesthetic (Basil Blackwell, Oxford, 1990).

Eagleton, Terry, Ideology: An Introduction (Verso, London, 1991).

Eagleton, Terry, Wittgenstein: The Terry Eagleton Script, The Derek Jarman

Film (BFI, London, 1993).

Eagleton, Terry, Heathcliff and the Great Hunger (Verso, London, 1995).

Eagleton, Terry, The Illusions of Postmodernism (Blackwell, Oxford, 1996).

Eagleton, Terry, St Oscar and Other Plays (Blackwell, Oxford, 1997).

Eagleton, Terry, Crazy John and the Bishop and Other Essays on Irish Culture

(University of Notre Dame Press, Notre Dame, 1998).

Eagleton, Terry, Scholars and Rebels: Irish Cultural Thought from Burke to

Yeats (Blackwell, Oxford, 1999).

Eagleton, Terry, ‘The Gaudy Supermarket’, London Review of Books, 21, 10

(1999), 3–6.

Eagleton, Terry, The Idea of Culture (Blackwell, Oxford, 2000).

Eagleton, Terry, The English Novel: An Introduction (Blackwell, Oxford,

2004).

Eagleton, Terry and Milne, Drew (eds), Marxist Literary Theory: A Reader

(Basil Blackwell, Oxford, 1995).

Goldmann, Lucien, The Hidden God [1955], trans. by Philip Thody

(Routledge & Kegan Paul, London, 1964).

Jameson, Fredric, Marxism and Form: Twentieth-Century Dialectical Theories

of Literature (Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1971).

ARG_C05.qxd  07/02/2005  14:40  Page 111

.

M A R X I S T   T H E O R I E S

1 1 1

Jameson, Fredric, The Prison-House of Language: A Critical Account of
Structuralism and Russian Formalism (Princeton University Press,
Princeton, NJ, and London, 1972).

Jameson, Fredric, The Political Unconscious: Narrative as a Socially Symbolic

Act [1981] (Routledge, London, 2002).

Jameson, Fredric, The Ideologies of Theory. Vol. 1 Situations of Theory, Vol. 2

The Syntax of History (Routledge & Kegan Paul, London, 1988).

Jameson, Fredric, Postmodernism, or the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism

(Verso, London, 1991).

Jameson, Fredric, The Seeds of Time (Columbia University Press, New

York, 1994).

Jameson, Fredric, The Cultural Turn: Selected Writings on the Postmodern

(Verso, London, 1998).

Jameson, Fredric, The Jameson Reader, ed. by Michael Hardt and Kathi

Weeks (Blackwell, Oxford, 2000).

Jameson, Fredric, A Singular Modernity (Verso, London, 2002).

Lukács, Georg, The Historical Novel [1937], trans. by Hannah and Stanley

Mitchell (Merlin Press, London, 1962).

Lukács, Georg, Studies in European Realism [1950], trans. by Edith Bone

(Merlin Press, London, 1972).

Lukács Georg, The Meaning of Contemporary Realism [1957], trans. by John

and Necke Mander (Merlin Press, London, 1963).

Macherey, Pierre, A Theory of Literary Production [1966], trans. by Geoffrey

Wall (Routledge & Kegan Paul, London and Boston, 1978).

Macherey, Pierre and Balibar, Etienne, ‘On Literature as an Ideological

Form’, in Robert Young (ed.), Untying the Text: A Poststructuralist
Reader (Routledge & Kegan Paul, London and Boston, 1981) and
Francis Mulhern (ed.) Contemporary Marxist Literary Criticism
(Longman, London and New York, 1992).

Marcuse, Herbert, One-Dimensional Man (Beacon, Boston; Sphere, London,

1964).

Marcuse, Herbert, Negations (Allen Lane, London, 1968).

Marcuse, Herbert, The Aesthetic Dimension (Macmillan, London, 1979).

Pêcheux, Michel, Language, Semantics and Ideology [1975], trans. by

Harbans Nagpal (Macmillan, Basingstoke, 1982).

ARG_C05.qxd  07/02/2005  14:40  Page 112

1 1 2

A   R E A D E R ’ S   G U I D E   T O   C O N T E M P O R A R Y   L I T E R A R Y   T H E O R Y

.

Sartre, Jean-Paul, What is Literature? [1948; 1st trans. 1949; trans. by

Bernard Frechtman; intro. by David Caute, 1967] (Routledge,
London, 2001).

Willett, John (ed.), Brecht on Theatre (Methuen, London, 1964).

Williams, Raymond, Culture and Society 1780–1950 (Chatto & Windus,

London, 1958).

Williams, Raymond, The Long Revolution (Chatto & Windus, London, 1961).

Williams, Raymond, Television: Technology and Cultural Form

(Fontana/Collins, London, 1974).

Williams, Raymond, Marxism and Literature (Oxford University Press,

Oxford, 1977).

Williams, Raymond, Politics and Letters: Interviews with New Left Review

(Verso, London, 1979).

Williams, Raymond, Problems in Materialism and Culture (New Left Books,

London, 1980).

Williams, Raymond, Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society

(Fontana/Collins, London, 1983).

Williams, Raymond, Towards 2000 (Chatto & Windus, London, 1983).

Williams, Raymond, Writing in Society (Verso, London, 1984).

Williams, Raymond, Resources of Hope (Verso, London, 1988).

Williams, Raymond, What I Came to Say (Hutchinson Radius, London,

1989).

Williams, Raymond, The Politics of Modernism: Against the New
Conformists, ed. by Tony Pinkney (Verso, London, 1989).

Williams, Raymond, The Raymond Williams Reader, ed. by John Higgins

(Blackwell, Oxford, 2000).

Further reading

Belsey, Catherine, Critical Practice [1980] (2nd edn, Routledge, London,

2002).

Bennett, Tony, Formalism and Marxism [1979] (2nd edn, Routledge,

London, 2003).

Brooker, Peter, Bertolt Brecht: Dialectics, Poetry, Politics (Croom Helm,

London and New York, 1988).

ARG_C05.qxd  07/02/2005  14:40  Page 113

.

M A R X I S T   T H E O R I E S

1 1 3

Brooker, Peter and Thacker, Andrew (eds), Geographies of Modernism:

Cultures, Spaces (Routledge, London and New York, 2005).

Donald, James, Imagining the Modern City (Athlone Press, London, 1999).

Donald, James, ‘Flannery’, in Peter Brooker and Andrew Thacker (eds,

2005), above.

Eagleton, Terry (ed.), Raymond Williams: Critical Perspectives (Polity Press,

Oxford, 1989).

Friedberg, Anne, Window Shopping. Cinema and the Postmodern (California

University Press, Berkeley, 1994).

Gibson, Nigel and Rubin, Andrew (eds), Adorno: A Critical Reader

(Blackwell, Oxford, 2001).

Gilloch, Graeme, Walter Benjamin: Critical Constellations (Polity Press,

Cambridge, 2001).

Hall, Stuart, Critical Dialogues in Cultural Studies, ed. by Dave Morley and

Kuan-Hsing Chen (Routledge, London, 1996).

Haslett, Moyra, Marxist Literary and Cultural Theories (Palgrave Macmillan,

Basingstoke, 1999).

Hawkes, David, Ideology (2nd edn, Routledge, 2003).

Higgins, John, Raymond Williams: Literature, Marxism and Cultural

Materialism (Routledge, London, 1999).

Homer, Sean, Fredric Jameson: Marxism, Hermeneutics, Postmodernism

(Polity Press, Cambridge, 1998).

James, C. Vaughan, Soviet Socialist Realism: Origins and Theory (Macmillan,

London and Basingstoke, 1973).

Jameson, Fredric, Late Marxism: Adorno or the Persistence of the Dialectic

(Verso, London, 1990).

Jarvis, Simon, Adorno: A Critical Introduction (Polity Press, Cambridge,

1998).

Jay, Martin, The Dialectical Imagination: A History of the Frankfurt School

(Heinemann, London, 1973).

Kuhn, Tom and Giles, Steve (eds and trans.), Brecht on Art and Politics

(London, Methuen, 2003).

Lunn, Eugene, Marxism and Modernism (Verso, London, 1985).

Montag, Warren, Louis Althusser (Palgrave Macmillan, Basingstoke, 2002).

ARG_C05.qxd  07/02/2005  14:40  Page 114

1 1 4

A   R E A D E R ’ S   G U I D E   T O   C O N T E M P O R A R Y   L I T E R A R Y   T H E O R Y

.

Mulhern, Francis (ed.), Contemporary Marxist Literary Criticism (Longman,

London and New York, 1992).

Nelson, Cary and Grossberg, Lawrence (eds), Marxism and the

Interpretation of Culture (Macmillan, London, 1988).

Roberts, Adam, Fredric Jameson (Routledge, London, 2000).

Sinclair, Iain, Lights Out For the Territory (London, Granta 1997).

Soja, Edward W., Thirdspace (Blackwell, Oxford, 1996).

Thacker, Andrew, Moving Through Modernity: Space and Geography in

Modernism (Manchester University Press, Manchester, 2003).

Wilson, Elizabeth, ‘The Invisible Flaneuse’, in Sophie Watson and

Katherine Gibson (eds), Postmodern Cities and Spaces (Blackwell,
Oxford, 1995), pp. 58–79.

Wolff, Janet, ‘The Invisible Flaneuse: Women and the Literature of

Modernity’, Theory, Culture and Society, 2, 3 (1985), 37–46.

Wright, Elizabeth, Postmodern Brecht: A Re-Presentation (Routledge,

London, 1988).

