chapter three

Who Engages in Proxy War?

This book holds that proxy wars are constitutive of a relation-
ship between a benefactor, who is a state or non- state actor 
external  to  the  dynamic  of  an  existing  conﬂ ict,  and  their 
chosen proxies who are the conduit for weapons, training and 
funding from the benefactor. Therefore, the question of who 
engages in proxy wars involves a detailed look at the mecha-
nisms  of  indirect  assistance  that  are  built  between  two  or 
more states, between states and non- state actors, and between 
groups of non- state actors. Arguably, there are four identiﬁ -
able types of relations between these actors that have shaped 
the dynamics of proxy wars in the past and present. These are 
when:

•  a state uses another state (as a surrogate force);
•  a state uses a non- state actor (such as a terrorist organiza-

tion, militia group or private military company);

•  a non- state actor uses a state;
•  a non- state actor uses another non- state actor (as a surro-

gate force).

  This  chapter  is  dedicated  to  deconstructing  these  rela-
tionships  and  exploring  how  recent  examples  of  indirect 
interventions  reveal  a  broad  spectrum  of  proxy  war- wagers. 
It will begin by exploring how states, particularly superpow-
ers,  have  come  to  adopt  proxy  war  strategies  as  a  mainstay 
of  their  interest  and  ideological  projection  capabilities.  But 
before that discussion begins, it is worth explaining why some 

45

46 

Who Engages in Proxy War?

actors in the international system should not be classiﬁ ed as 
proxy  war- wagers.  Two  groups  in  particular  come  to  mind: 
non- governmental  organizations  (NGOs)  and  international 
organizations (IOs). Both of these actors arguably do not con-
form  to  standards  constitutive  of  who  ﬁ ghts  in  a  proxy  war 
because their aims and objectives do not fall within the wider 
boundaries  of  what  constitutes  a  proxy  war.  NGOs,  mainly 
humanitarian aid organizations, and IOs, namely the United 
Nations and its ad hoc peacekeeping missions, are fundamen-
tally dedicated to the alleviation of suffering within war- torn 
communities and to bringing about swift and peaceful resolu-
tions to ongoing violence. Their goals are not to bring about 
the victory of one side over another. Simply, their presence in 
a war zone does not meet the threshold of what a proxy inter-
vention inherently is: the benefactor must want to further a 
war  aim.  Humanitarian  aid  delivery  does  not  constitute  the 
furtherance  of  a  war  aim;  neither  do  multilateral  efforts  to 
keep warring factions apart. As such, it is not appropriate to 
classify NGOs or IOs as actors who ﬁ ght proxy wars. This has 
mainly been the preserve of states and violent non- state actors 
(VNSAs).

The State and Proxy Wars

The very concept of proxy war itself, although historically ubiq-
uitous, became indelibly associated with the machinations of 
Cold War superpower politics in the mid- twentieth century. 
It was during this period that proxy wars became a frequently 
used  vehicle  by  strong  states  for  achieving  strategic  goals 
within,  and  beyond,  their  self- styled  ‘spheres  of  inﬂ uence’. 
The statist foundation of proxy wars was manifest by the way 
in which well- deﬁ ned ideological principles came to encapsu-
late the raison d’état of the two superpowers of the Cold War 
era,  and  thus  help  shape  the  dynamics  of  the  wider  world 

 

Who Engages in Proxy War? 

47

order. Take by way of example the ‘foreign internal assistance’ 
programme  devised  by  the  Kennedy  administration  in  the 
early 1960s, which was driven, in William Rosenau’s words, 
by a desire to ‘expand the presence of the state and to shield 
fragile institutions from communist subversion’.1
  Superpower states took it as their ideological and interest- 
bound duty to intervene in the internal affairs of other states 
in order to protect them from the inﬂ uence of rival powers. 
Indeed, this compelling urge to undertake this perceived duty 
became  enshrined  in  doctrine.  We  saw  in  the  last  chapter 
how  Nikita  Khrushchev’s  promise  to  back  ‘wars  of  national 
liberation’ committed the Soviet Union to a proxy war strat-
egy in Africa and Asia. Conversely, we must also look at how 
the adoption of National Security Council Report #68 (com-
monly  known  as  NSC- 68)  by  President  Harry  Truman  in 
April 1950 ensured that American foreign and defence policy 
now rested upon the assumption that, as John Lewis Gaddis 
has  put  it,  ‘no  part  of  the  world  was  now  peripheral  [and] 
that no means of protecting them could now be ruled out’.2 
NSC- 68, and the so- called ‘Truman Doctrine’ that it spawned, 
therefore increased the inclination of American policymakers 
to perceive proxy intervention in distant conﬂ icts as intrinsic 
to  protecting  vital  national  interests.  As  the  temperature  of 
Cold War geopolitics ﬂ uctuated, the very process of engender-
ing a peaceable detente between the US and the USSR in the 
mid- 1970s rested, in Janice Gross Stein’s words, upon their 
willingness to ensure ‘a reduction in the intensity and scope 
of involvement in proxy wars’.3 Such interventions were thus 
central to the very shape of international relations itself during 
this period.
  It is largely incontrovertible to assert that during the Cold 
War it was the United States and the Soviet Union who retained 
the  most  capacity  for  regular  interventions  (given  both  their 
huge defence budgets and acute sense of  ideological obligation 

48 

Who Engages in Proxy War?

to intervene), mainly using other states or non- state actors in 
the Third World as their chosen proxies to prop up or unsettle 
other states or groups. John Lewis Gaddis again has weighed in 
on this issue by suggesting that modes of intervention, includ-
ing those by proxy, undertaken by the two superpowers in the 
Third World, ‘were problematic because none of these meas-
ures could prevent future defections, whether as the result of 
revolutions, coups, dissatisfaction, neglect or simply the other 
side’s offer of a higher price. The Third World, then, was both 
victim and manipulator of the “ﬁ rst” and “second”.’4 Despite 
rightly acknowledging the impermanence of proxy war solu-
tions,  Gaddis  underestimates  the  way  in  which  superpower 
states were exploiting Third World states as agents of conﬂ ict. 
Proxy  wars  are  wars  of  choice,  not  necessity.  Yet  the  obliga-
tions that the bipolar nature of world politics placed upon the 
superpowers during the Cold War ensured that even localized 
civil wars were seen through the lens of pan- national ideologi-
cal struggle. Such conﬂ icts gave rise to superpowers exercising 
their patronage on warring factions, which often resulted in the 
utilization of a ‘surrogate’ force to undertake a direct interven-
tion on their behalf. These surrogates would become the focus 
of  condemnation,  would  take  the  responsibility  for  paying 
the  blood  price  for  achieving  the  strategic  goal,  but  crucially 
would take orders from their benefactor. The most prominent 
example of this ﬁ rst type of proxy relationship between a state 
benefactor and another state proxy is the Soviet utilization of a 
Cuban surrogate force to intervene in the Angolan Civil War in 
the 1970s.

Case Study: Cuban Surrogates and the Angolan 
Civil War

This  most  bloody  of  African  civil  wars,  which  lasted  from 
Angola’s independence from Portugal in 1974 until a peace 

 

Who Engages in Proxy War? 

49

deal signed only in 2002, provided a tragic footnote to Cold 
War superpower proxy intervention in the Third World that 
cost the lives of half a million people.
  Three  main  groups  vied  for  the  control  of  postcolo-
nial  Angola  and  each  attracted  external  support  as  a  means 
of  achieving  their  goals.  The  Popular  Movement  for  the 
Liberation  of  Angola  (MPLA)  received  signiﬁ cant  backing 
from the Soviet Union and Castro’s regime in Cuba, as well 
as  from  like- minded  socialist  parties  in  Europe.  The  Front 
for the National Liberation of Angola (FNLA) was backed by 
neighbouring Zaire and had been receiving money from the 
US Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) for a number of years 
prior  to  decolonization.  Finally,  the  National  Union  for  the 
Total  Independence  of  Angola  (UNITA)  was  a  breakaway 
group of the FNLA whose strident anti- Western agenda was 
aided by allies in China.5
  Once the Portuguese withdrawal had been fully undertaken 
by late 1974, the three major factions began scrambling for 
power.  Holden  Roberto’s  FNLA  received  a  massive  rise  in 
covert CIA funding, a move that was mirrored by the Soviets 
in favour of Agostinho Neto’s MPLA. Emboldened by superior 
numbers  (the  FNLA  containing  around  10–20,000  ﬁ ghters 
compared  to  the  MPLAs  6–8,000)  and  a  $300,000  dona-
tion in January 1975 from the 40 Committee (an American 
government  secret  intelligence  unit  that  sponsored  covert 
operations), the FNLA stepped up attacks on rival factions in 
an effort to cement power.6 Not wishing to be outﬂ anked in 
a  proxy  war,  the  Soviet  Union  responded  by  expanding  the 
amount  of  arms  it  was  distributing  to  the  MPLA.  The  ﬁ rst 
Soviet arms shipments arrived in Angola shortly after the visit 
to the country by the chair of the Soviet Committee on Afro- 
Asian Solidarity in February 1975. Between April and June of 
that year the port of Luanda had received arms deliveries from 
at least twelve Soviet, East German, Yugoslav and Bulgarian 

50 

Who Engages in Proxy War?

ﬂ agged ships. In April 1975 alone, around 100,000 tonnes of 
arms were airlifted into Angola by the Soviets in an effort to 
bolster the MPLA war effort.7
  The following month was an important one for the dynamic 
of this particular proxy war. In May 1975, Fidel Castro deployed 
the ﬁ rst batch of Cuban military advisers to Angola. Totalling 
230,  these  advisers  were  to  work  alongside  the  MRLA  –  a 
task that Neto had requested from Moscow but that had been 
ﬂ atly declined. What emerged here was a clear demonstration 
from the Kremlin that their Angolan proxy war strategy would 
be  compromised  by  any  more  visible  signs  of  intervention. 
Yet the Soviets retained a desire to maximize their inﬂ uence 
over  the  conﬂ ict  in  line  with  a  perceived  strategic  interest; 
hence the permission for the MRLA to utilize Cuban advisers 
who could then be directed from Moscow as a surrogate force. 
Throughout 1975, the number of Cuban advisers proliferated 
in Angola to such an extent that by January 1976 there was a 
force of approximately 12,000.8
  Capitalizing  upon  this  proxy  assistance,  the  MPLA  made 
the  most  of  its  manpower  advantage  over  the  FNLA,  who 
had  received  no  advisers,  but  instead  accepted  CIA- sourced 
money  to  the  tune  of  $32  million  and  weaponry  worth  $16 
million.9  By  early  1976,  the  MPLA  had  made  signiﬁ cant 
gains  in  the  civil  war  to  such  an  extent  that  by  March  that 
year they were in control of sufﬁ cient amounts of the coun-
try to declare themselves the government of a new People’s 
Republic of Angola. The Soviet’s proxy war strategy had seem-
ingly paid off. When asked why the Americans were backing 
the FNLA, CIA Director William Colby replied in realpolitik 
terms: ‘Because the Soviets are backing the MPLA is the sim-
plest answer.’10 Such an understanding reveals just how the 
adoption of proxy war strategies can create ﬂ ash points, which 
in this context affected the wider geopolitics of the Cold War. 
Henry Kissinger himself was compelled to admit at the time 

 

Who Engages in Proxy War? 

51

that the process of detente between the superpowers could not 
‘survive  any  more  Angolas’.11  Proxy  wars  were  draining  the 
superpowers’ resolve for maintaining cooperative relations.
  Yet  an  understanding  of  proxy  wars  need  not  rest  on  a 
Waltzean conception of great power politics. Granted, super-
powers  have  certainly  utilized  the  strategy  of  war  by  proxy, 
but  smaller  powers  have  also  attempted  to  indirectly  inter-
vene  in  conﬂ icts  outside  their  own  borders.  An  explanation 
of  who  engages  in  proxy  wars  does  not  ultimately  correlate 
with a state’s power status in the broader scheme of interna-
tional  relations.  This,  in  large  part,  is  arguably  down  to  the 
fact that to wage a proxy war a state does not need a sizeable 
military or a formidable arsenal of high- tech weaponry. It is 
a strategy that need not be reliant upon economic or political 
grandeur – merely a sense of interest or ideological maximi-
zation, achievable through ostensibly deniable and lower- cost 
means when compared to waging an outright intervention. It 
is smaller states’ engagement in proxy wars that has revealed 
a  predominant  trend  towards  the  second  form  of  relation-
ship mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, namely the 
sponsorship of a non- state actor to act as their chosen proxy. 
The proxy war waged by Iran during the recent American- led 
 occupation of Iraq articulates this point clearly.

Case Study: Iranian Proxy War in Iraq since 
2003

Iranian  inﬂ uence  over  politics  in  Iraq  long  pre- dates  the 
2003 American- led effort to topple Saddam Hussein. During 
the  bloody  and  protracted  Iran–Iraq  War  (1980–88)  dis-
tinct  links  were  forged  between  the  government  in  Tehran 
and the Supreme Council for the Islamic Revolution in Iraq 
(SCIRI), a Shia group who fought on behalf of the Iranians 
against  Saddam’s  regime.  SCIRI,  and  its  armed  wing  the 

52 

Who Engages in Proxy War?

Badr Brigade, remained crucial allies of the Iranians after the 
launching of Operation Iraqi Freedom in March 2003. Tehran 
immediately began to build links inside Iraq to ensure that, by 
proxy, Iran could simultaneously posit itself as a key player in 
the rebuilding of Iraq by enhancing the strength of key Shia 
allies, while also, in Doran Zimmermann’s words, ‘calibrating 
disorder’ within its rival neighbour in order to ‘make itself an 
indispensable interlocutor in post- war Iraq’.12 This dual- track 
strategy  manifested  itself  through  the  Iranians  encouraging 
Shia political parties, including SCIRI, to actively participate 
in  new  democratic  elections,  at  the  same  time  as  they  were 
nurturing  Shia  militia  groups  to  intensify  their  insurgency 
against Sunni opponents and the coalition forces.
  The  incremental  increases  in  Iran’s  proxy  war  efforts  in 
Iraq are noticeable. By 2004, Tehran had located units of its 
clandestine paramilitary group, the Qods Force, and units of 
its  intelligence  service  VEVAK,  inside  Iraq.13  By  mid- 2006, 
circumstantial evidence had engendered a widespread belief 
amongst British military commanders in the predominantly 
Shia southern city of Basra that ‘specialist weaponry and IED 
technology was being smuggled into the region from Iran’.14 
As a consequence, border security became an integral part of 
British security provision – crucial considering that the two 
British- controlled provinces of Basra and Maysan shared over 
300  miles  of  border  with  Iran.  Suspicions  were  heightened 
in December 2006 when US forces arrested two senior Qods 
Force ofﬁ cers at a meeting with a known Badr Brigade leader.15 
In  February  2007,  the  Bush  administration  published  an 
intelligence  report  which  went  even  further  than  previous 
assessments by citing Iranian complicity ‘at the highest levels’ 
in supplying Shia militias across Iraq with IEDs, perpetuating 
Anglo- American  diplomatic  concerns  at  Iranian  attempts  to 
politically permeate Iraq and attain regional dominance.16 By 
mid- 2007, US diplomats in Iraq were so assured of Iranian 

 

Who Engages in Proxy War? 

53

inﬂ uence  over  insurgent  violence  in  southern  Iraq  that  one 
ofﬁ cial bluntly stated that: ‘Iran is ﬁ ghting a proxy war in Iraq 
. . . They are already committing daily acts of violence against 
US  and  British  forces  . . .  The  attacks  are  directed  by  the 
Revolutionary  Guard  who  are  connected  right  to  the  top  [of 
the Iranian government].’17 Even the then commander of US 
forces in Iraq, General David Petraeus, went out of his way to 
publicly accuse the Iranians of training, arming and advising 
militias so that they could ‘ﬁ ght a proxy war against the Iraqi 
state and coalition forces’.18 This was informed by intelligence 
showing  that  during  the  US  ‘surge’  in  Iraq  in  2007,  which 
was  commanded  by  Petraeus,  the  leader  of  the  inﬂ uential 
Mahdi Army militia group, the prominent cleric Muqtada al- 
Sadr, had sought sanctuary in Iran at various points in order 
to avoid arrest.19
  However, it is not just arms and sanctuary that the Iranians 
stand accused of providing in order to encourage Shia violence 
in  southern  Iraq,  but  other  logistical  means  through  which 
they could perpetuate an insurgency by proxy. A Washington 
Institute  for  Near  East  Policy  report  concluded  that  Iranian 
support ‘often arrived in the form of commodities – money, 
hashish, and prescription medications – that could be used to 
recruit young, poor foot soldiers’.20 Conscious of the potency 
of outside support upon the efﬁ cacy of the British campaign in 
southern Iraq, even Tony Blair felt compelled to admit to the 
Iraq War (Chilcot) Inquiry that: ‘It was the introduction of the 
external elements of Al- Qaeda and Iran that really caused this 
mission very nearly to fail.’21 Such an admission reveals how 
the adoption of a proxy war strategy even by non- superpower 
states such as Iran can be effectively utilized as a mechanism 
of  maximizing  interest  and  circumventing  the  risks  associ-
ated with direct intervention.

54 

Who Engages in Proxy War?

Non- State Actors and Proxy Wars

As the Iranian case highlights, although states may be the pri-
mary instigators of proxy wars, the entire phenomenon rests 
in  large  part  upon  the  co- opting  of  non- state  actors  into  the 
process  of  undertaking  indirect  modes  of  intervention.  An 
understanding  of  proxy  war  based  on  an  assumption  of  an 
exclusively  state- based  benefactor  and  a  perpetually  non- state 
proxy is too static.22 This overlooks the ﬂ uidity between the two 
roles that states and non- state actors have developed, especially 
over the last decade. Contemporary history is replete with exam-
ples of non- state actors fulﬁ lling the roles of proxy war actors. 
Foremost amongst these have been actors in the Middle East, 
namely Hizballah through its relationship with Syria and Iran.
  Hizballah emerged from the crucible of the Lebanese Civil 
War to become one of the most prominent paramilitary Shia 
groups  in  the  predominantly  Sunni  Arab  world.  With  the 
1982  Israeli  invasion  of  Lebanon  as  its  catalyst,  Hizballah 
became  a  crucial  proxy  for  neighbouring  states,  especially 
Syria, who sought to defend their interests within Lebanon. 
In 1989, Syria and Lebanon signed the Taif Agreement which 
consolidated  the  secular  nature  of  the  Lebanese  state,  legis-
lated  for  Syria’s  role  within  it,  and  called  for  the  disarming 
of  paramilitary  groups.  This  last  protocol  forced  Hizballah 
to seek some arrangement from Syria to preserve its status. 
Mindful  of  the  realpolitik  of  the  region,  Syria  came  to  an 
agreement  with  Hizballah  that  allowed  it  to  maintain  its 
weapons, in large part so it could preserve an armed non- state 
ally as leverage against Israel in the ongoing dispute over the 
Golan Heights. Eventually, by the mid- 1990s, Hizballah had 
become an autonomous actor within Lebanese politics, with 
Syrian acquiescence. After he came to power in 2000, Syrian 
President Bashar al- Asad forged a close personal bond with 
Hizballah  leader  Hassan  Nasrallah,  cementing  a  seeming 

 

Who Engages in Proxy War? 

55

symbiosis between the state and its non- state proxy. So close 
had  they  become  that,  in  Emile  El- Hokayem’s  words,  their 
‘vital  resources  and  an  indispensable  political  sponsorship 
elevated Hizballah’.23
  But  it  was  not  only  with  Syria  that  Hizballah  built  links. 
Their  ties  with  Iran  led  to  much  international  speculation 
that the Israeli invasion of Lebanon in the summer of 2006 
was  masking  a  wider  proxy  war  between  the  United  States 
and Iran, with the Israeli Defence Force (IDF) and Hizballah 
as convenient surrogate proxies in the wider struggle for the 
control of the direction of Middle Eastern politics.24 Ever since 
Hizballah’s creation in 1982, its ﬁ ghters had received train-
ing in both Lebanon and Iran from the Iranian Revolutionary 
Guard (IRG). The IRG had also been a primary conduit for 
weapons  supplies.  Furthermore,  Iran  supplied  a  signiﬁ -
cant  amount  of  money  in  order  to  allow  Hizballah  to  fulﬁ l 
both its paramilitary activities and its social provision tasks, 
estimated to be to the tune of tens of millions of US dollars 
per  year.25  The  US- led  invasion  of  Iraq  in  March  2003  pro-
vided further opportunities for Iran, as already discussed, to 
expand its proxy war strategy. Yet what remains signiﬁ cant is 
that Hizballah was utilized as a key proxy inside Iraq too. By 
November 2003, US and Israeli intelligence reports indicated 
that  Iran  was  orchestrating  the  import  of  Hizballah  ﬁ ght-
ers  from  Lebanon  into  Iraq  as  a  mode  of  undermining  the 
American occupation.26
  It  was  not  just  with  Hizballah  that  Iran  and  Syria  were 
attempting  to  cement  state/non- state  relations  in  the  cruci-
ble of Middle Eastern political violence. Attempts to inﬂ uence 
the  Israel–Palestine  conﬂ ict  by  proxy  resulted  in  mutual 
assistance  to  Hamas,  the  most  powerful  militia  group  in 
the occupied territories. Hamas conﬁ rmed in 2008 that the 
Iranian Revolutionary Guard had trained 300 of its  ﬁ ghters 
and  had  been  doing  so  since  the  Israelis  had  pulled  out  of 

56 

Who Engages in Proxy War?

the  Gaza  Strip  in  2005.  In  addition,  Syria  had  also  report-
edly trained over 700 Hamas ﬁ ghters over the same period in 
an effort to harness the group as a proxy ally against Israel.27 
One Hamas commander commented on the level of training 
disseminated  by  the  Iranians:  ‘They  [Hamas  ﬁ ghters]  come 
home with more abilities than we need . . . such as high- tech 
capabilities,  knowledge  about  rockets,  sniping  and  ﬁ ghting 
tactics like the ones used by Hizballah.’28 In short, Iran had 
been using both Hamas and Hizballah as proxies to foment 
a two- front war for Israel, from Lebanon and from within the 
occupied Palestinian territories.
  Yet the proxy–benefactor relationships that Hizballah forged 
with Syria and Iran were uneasy ones, largely due to divergent 
political agendas and a growing sense of autonomy. Although 
by  the  end  of  the  1990s  Syria  had  accrued  distinct  regional 
leverage and gained an upper hand in dealing with Hizballah, 
by  the  mid- 2000s  the  relationship  broke  down  as  Hizballah 
asserted more independence. It was from their power bases in 
southern Lebanon that they provoked Israel into invading in the 
summer  of  2006.  The  resultant  stalemate  raised  Hizballah’s 
standing in the Arab world, shrugging off its non- state proxy 
label as it forged a greater level of self- sufﬁ ciency. Furthermore, 
despite  long- standing  Iranian  assistance,  Hizballah  over  the 
last decade has ﬁ ercely protected its political and paramilitary 
autonomy from Tehran and has assiduously prevented a pic-
ture of subservience from being painted.
  Another  key  illustration  of  how  non- state  proxies  can 
develop autonomous sources of funding or weapons in order 
to outgrow the relationship with their original state benefac-
tor is the Lashkae- i- Taiba (LeT) terrorist group. They achieved 
sporadic success in striking targets inside India and Kashmir 
with  the  tacit  assistance  of  the  Pakistani  Inter- Services 
Intelligence agency (ISI). The LeT became, as Ryan Clarke has 
argued, ‘a vital component of Islamabad’s regional strategy’.29 

 

Who Engages in Proxy War? 

57

Yet, in the early part of this decade, the LeT began to develop 
a  more  nuanced  pan- Islamic  political  programme  that  tran-
scended  the  Kashmir- oriented  scope  of  Pakistan’s  original 
proxy deal. By transferring its cooperation away from the ISI 
to  other  sub- state  Islamist  groups,  including  al- Qaeda,  the 
LeT no longer remains a surrogate force of Pakistan, but has 
perhaps become a surrogate force for the wider Islamist terror 
network spearheaded by al- Qaeda – an example of how one 
non- state actor can be utilized as a proxy surrogate by another 
non- state actor. It also serves as a showcase for how proxy rela-
tionships are not inﬁ nite and, tellingly, can be brought to an 
end by proxy group maturity and autonomy, not just by ben-
efactors terminating funding or provisions.
  Ariel Ahram has reminded us how ‘late- developing states’ 
in the global south have willingly co- opted militias into their 
security apparatus in order to ‘organize institutions of coer-
cion’  instead  of  reverting  to  traditional  bureaucracies  of 
violence.30 The prevalence of state- sponsored militias, such as 
the Janjaweed in Sudan, the Autodefensas in Columbia, and 
the Interahamwe in Rwanda, has opened up new avenues for 
states wishing to ﬁ ght proxy wars even on their own soil, be it 
for interest or ideology- motivated reasons of ethnic repression, 
anti- terrorism or the suppression of irredentist movements. 
Seeing  state- sponsored  militias  as  surrogate  forces  helps  us 
place proxy wars in an intra- state context alongside its more 
frequent  inter- state  mode.  This  is  amply  demonstrated  by 
the dynamics of proxy involvement in the protracted conﬂ icts 
across East Africa over the past few decades.

Case Study: East African Wars and Non- State 
Proxies

Between 1986 and 1999, Sudan and Uganda were engaging 
non- state proxies to ﬁ ght an undeclared war in each other’s 

58 

Who Engages in Proxy War?

territory. Sudan harnessed the millenarian Lord’s Resistance 
Army  (LRA)  that  had  been  ﬁ ghting  the  regime  of  Yoweri 
Museveni  across  northern  Uganda.  Concomitantly,  the 
Ugandan  government  was  backing  the  Sudanese  People’s 
Liberation  Army  (SPLA)  as  a  mode  of  undermining  the 
Sudanese government’s control over the south of their coun-
try.  Yet,  as  Gerard  Prunier  has  emphasized,  this  proxy  war 
has actually been fought in large part on the territory of the 
neighbouring  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo  (DRC),  for-
merly Zaire.31 Within the DRC, Sudan helped foster the Allied 
Democratic  Force  (ADF)  as  an  umbrella  grouping  of  anti- 
Museveni forces. This set the scene for a protracted conﬂ ict 
and provides a crucial example of how non- state proxies can 
be utilized to fulﬁ l a state’s strategic goals.
  Sudan  itself  had  been  the  scene  of  multiple  proxy  inter-
ventions  in  the  1960s  when  Israel  armed  anti- Islamist 
movements,  while  Khartoum  was  receiving  backing  from 
Moscow in the face of American support for the neighbouring 
regime of Ethiopia’s Haile Selassi. This arrangement ended 
in  1974  when  Selassi  was  overthrown  and  replaced  by  the 
communist Dergue regime, which soon received Soviet back-
ing. The US switched its support to Sudan whom it furnished 
with over $2 billion in arms to ﬁ ght Islamist and communist 
rebels.32 Yet, as the Cold War progressed, Sudan and Uganda 
became  embroiled  in  a  covert  proxy  war  against  each  other 
that is noteworthy in part because of the use not of another 
state’s military as their chosen proxies but of non- state actors.
  The  origins  of  the  Sudanese–Ugandan  conﬂ ict  were 
politico- religious. The coming to power in Uganda of the pro- 
American Yoweri Museveni had prompted fears in Khartoum 
that the SPLA would have a new ally based on a misguided 
assumption  as  to  the  closeness  of  the  personal  relationship 
between  Museveni  and  the  SPLA  leader  John  Garang.  The 
conﬂ ict intensiﬁ ed in 1989 when the National Islamic Front 

 

Who Engages in Proxy War? 

59

(NIF), led by Dr Hassan al- Turabi, backed a military coup in 
Sudan. The new Islamist junta aimed to Islamize the Great 
Lakes region, including the predominantly Christian parts of 
Uganda and southern Sudan.
  Ethiopian support for the SPLA, which had proved one of 
its  most  fruitful  benefactors,  ended  in  autumn  1991  when 
Colonel  Mengistu’s  regime  fell.  Soon  afterwards,  the  SPLA 
degenerated  into  internecine  violence.  This  was  a  blow  to 
Ugandan  designs  on  disrupting  the  Sudanese  government. 
By 1994, it appeared that Sudan was having more success in 
assisting its main proxy force inside Uganda, the LRA. Within 
a year, Sudan had recruited nearly 2,000 additional guerril-
las to the ranks of the LRA and armed them to such an extent 
that they posed a distinct threat to the Ugandan government.33 
Also by 1994, the Sudanese government had gained permis-
sion from President Mobutu of Zaire to run supply convoys 
to  the  LRA  in  western  Uganda  through  his  country.  It  also 
allowed the Sudanese to adopt other anti- Museveni proxies in 
western Uganda, namely, the Western Nile Bank Liberation 
Front  (WNBLF)  and  the  Uganda  Muslim  Liberation  Army 
(UMLA).
  The  second  half  of  1995  saw  both  Sudan  and  Uganda 
take  greater  control  of  their  non- state  proxies.  In  coalition 
with  the  WNBLF,  the  Sudanese  army  wrestled  control  of 
two  towns  close  to  the  Ugandan  border  in  August  of  that 
year.  In  retaliation,  the  Ugandans  launched  a  joint  opera-
tion in conjunction with the SPLA against LRA strongholds 
actually  inside  Sudanese  territory  that  September.  A  major 
escalation of the conﬂ ict ensued in 1996 as the defeat of each 
other’s respective proxy forces became major defence priori-
ties.  Ugandan  President  Museveni  authorized  his  troops  to 
cross into Zaire in order to intercept ADF ﬁ ghters, while the 
Sudanese were simultaneously conducting air resupply mis-
sions to the LRA inside Uganda.34

60 

Who Engages in Proxy War?

  Ultimately,  this  escalated  conﬂ ict,  facilitated  primarily  by 
the utilization of non- state proxy forces, resulted in a seem-
ing defeat for the Sudanese proxies, who retreated from their 
Zaire  sanctuary  by  early  1997.  This,  however,  did  not  mark 
the ending of hostilities or the abandonment of a proxy war 
strategy. In 1998, the Sudanese government began building 
a  coalition  of  other  non- state  forces,  including  those  from 
Chad, to act as a proxy force inside the Zaire (which after May 
1997 was called the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC)). A 
‘peace agreement’ between Sudan, Uganda and the DRC was 
signed  in  April  1999,  which  in  essence  removed  the  proxy 
component of the conﬂ ict.35 Despite simmering tensions after 
this accord was signed, this complex regional conﬂ ict displays 
the prevalence non- state proxies can play in shaping national 
and indeed regional wars if co- opted by states to act on their 
behalf within the borders of a neighbouring state. Indeed, this 
protracted series of East African proxy wars harnessed a wide 
variety of methods by which to wage such a conﬂ ict. The next 
chapter looks in detail at exactly how proxy wars are fought 
and by what means.

