R E V I E W S

MAKING SENSE OF IT ALL:
BACTERIAL CHEMOTAXIS

George H. Wadhams and Judith P. Armitage

Abstract | Bacteria must be able to respond to a changing environment, and one way to respond
is to move. The transduction of sensory signals alters the concentration of small phosphorylated
response regulators that bind to the rotary flagellar motor and cause switching. This simple
pathway has provided a paradigm for sensory systems in general. However, the increasing
number of sequenced bacterial genomes shows that although the central sensory mechanism
seems to be common to all bacteria, there is added complexity in a wide range of species.

In an ever-changing environment, it is essential that
organisms  are  able  to  sense  these  changes  and  to
respond appropriately. Possible responses include alter-
ations in gene expression and/or active movement
towards or away from an environment. Most sensory
pathways in eukaryotic organisms rely on serine, threo-
nine or tyrosine protein kinases, whereas the most com-
mon  sensory  pathways 
in  prokaryotes  use  a
histidine–aspartate phosphorelay (HAP) system. HAP
systems have at least two components — a dimeric
histidine protein kinase (HPK) and a response regula-
tor (RR)1. HAP systems are also found in many lower
eukaryotes, in which they control processes such as
osmoregulation in, for example, Saccharomyces cere-
visiae 2, Candida  albicans3
and  Dictyostelium
discoideum4. They are also found in plants, in which
they control, for example, ethylene-mediated fruit
ripening5 and blue-light responses. The Arabidopsis
thaliana genome has genes for 16 HPK and 24 RR
homologues.

Bacteria can sense a vast range of environmental
signals, from the concentrations of nutrients and toxins
to oxygen levels, pH, osmolarity and the intensity and
wavelength of light. Genome sequencing has identified
over 600 HAP systems and some individual bacterial
species contain more than 130 (REF. 6) — for example,
Myxococcus xanthus has about 140 HAP systems (J. R.
Kirby, personal communication). Despite the extremely
high homology between the components of HAP sys-
tems, numerous pathways operate in individual bacteria

without significant crosstalk. Although most of these
HAP systems are involved in the regulation of gene
expression, one of the most well-understood pathways
regulates motile behaviour. Chemotaxis operates as part
of a complex network of signals that balance to produce
a physiological response that is suited to a specific envi-
ronment (BOX 1). Here, we describe the basic bacterial
chemosensory pathway, as well as some of the varia-
tions of this system. However, first we provide a general
overview of HAP systems.

Histidine–aspartate-phosphorelay systems
HAP systems rely on the trans-autophosphorylation of a
His residue that resides in one monomer of the HPK
dimer by the γ-phosphoryl group of an ATP molecule
that  is  bound  to  the  kinase  domain  of the  other
monomer. This phosphoryl group is then transferred to
an Asp residue on a separate RR protein to alter its activ-
ity and generate a response. Some systems incorporate
several His–Asp phosphorylation steps, which possibly
allows  for  complex  regulatory  control  as  discussed
below7,8.

Numerous HAP systems have been identified in
different bacteria (FIG. 1). Most of the HPKs involved
(for example, EnvZ; FIG. 1a) have an N-terminal region
that spans the membrane twice, which results in an
intervening periplasmic domain that can sense an
extracellular  signal. The  C-terminal  cytoplasmic
region comprises a linker or HAMP DOMAIN (‘histidine
kinases, adenylyl cyclases, methyl-binding proteins

HAMP DOMAIN
(‘Histidine kinases, adenylyl
cyclases, methyl-binding
proteins and phosphatases’
domain). A domain that is
broadly conserved in histidine
protein kinases, chemoreceptors
and phosphatases. It contains
two amphipathic helices, and is
presumed to have a role in signal
transduction.

Department of
Biochemistry,
University of Oxford,
Oxford OX1 3QU, UK.
Correspondence to J.P.A.
e-mail: judith.armitage@
bioch.ox.ac.uk
doi:10.1038/nrm1524

1024 | DECEMBER 2004 | VOLUME 5

www.nature.com/reviews/molcellbio

©  2004 Nature  Publishing Group

R E V I E W S

Box 1 | Chemotaxis as part of a complex network of signalling pathways

Pathogenicity
Motility and chemotaxis are required for many pathogenic species to colonize and invade a host. Bacteria sense a wide
range of signals — including temperature and pH changes, nutrient concentrations, osmolarity and oxygen — and
they integrate this information to generate the pathogenic response. Chemotaxis can, for example, guide Helicobacter
pylori to the mucus lining of the stomach97, free-living Vibrio anguillarium to the surface of fish121, and Agrobacterium
tumefaciens to wounded plants122. Each species responds to specific, relevant chemoattractants and other sensory
signals then control the expression of virulence genes. Interestingly, it is not clear whether Vibrio cholera — which can
live in biofilms in aquatic environments or in the human small intestine123, and has a spectacular range of
histidine–aspartate-phosphorelay systems (~ 30), methyl-accepting chemotaxis proteins (~40) and chemotaxis
protein (Che) homologues (3 CheW, CheA, CheB, CheR and CheV proteins, 4 CheY proteins and 1 CheZ protein) —
uses chemotaxis to swim to the villi of the small intestine. However, motility is known to be essential for
pathogenicity124.

Symbiotic associations
Chemotaxis probably guides free-living rhizobia to the environment around legume root hairs, which contains a higher
concentration  of nutrients. The correct host–symbiont contact then triggers the formation of NODULES and the
subsequent nitrogen fixation by bacteria125. In a different type of symbiotic association, the squid Euprymna scolopes
uses bioluminescence to confuse preditors. The marine bacterium Vibrio fischeri is only bioluminescent at high cell
densities (~1010 ml–1), and chemotaxis guides free-living bacteria to the squid light organs, in which the colony size
increases. Eventually, the concentration of a diffusible autoinducer (N-acyl homoserine lactone) reaches the level that is
required to induce the expression of bioluminescence genes126.

Biofilms 
Many bacterial species are not normally free living, but are associated with surfaces in complex polysaccharide
biofilms, in which microcolonies of different species coexist and compete for diffusing nutrients127. Biofilms are
involved in fouling — for example, on oil rigs, teeth and medical implants, and in the lungs of cystic-fibrosis
patients128 — and they protect bacterial colonies from antimicrobial agents. Biofilm formation and development
results from large numbers of interacting sensory signals — for example, QUORUM SENSING129, osmolarity and charge
sensing, and also chemotaxis. In biofilms, many species lose flagella, but induce the expression of type-IV PILI, which
allow them to ‘twitch’ along surfaces (BOX 2). Biofilms are far from static entities and they mature, develop and shed
bacteria, which swim to new locations.

and phosphatases’domain), a dimerization domain and a
kinase domain that interacts with its cognate RR. Some
HPKs lack the periplasmic and transmembrane domains,
for example, CheA (chemotaxis protein A; FIG. 1c) and
NtrB. CheA interacts with transmembrane receptors (see
below), whereas NtrB interacts with cytoplasmic sensors.
Some transmembrane HPKs have several transmem-
brane regions, for example, PrrB (also known as RegB)
has four transmembrane helices and KinB has six8,9
(FIG. 1d). Other HPKs have further cytoplasmic domains
— for example, aerobic-respiration-control sensor pro-
tein-B (ArcB) has a cytoplasmic PAS (PER,ARNT, SIM) DOMAIN, a
fused RR domain and an extra histidine-containing
phosphotransfer (HPt) DOMAIN (FIG. 1b).

HAP-system signalling is initiated by trans-autophos-
phorylation within the HPK dimer. As mentioned above,
the γ-phosphoryl group of an ATP molecule that is
bound to the kinase domain of one monomer is trans-
ferred to a His residue in the other monomer. The phos-
phoryl group is then transferred to the conserved Asp
residue of the relevant RR, which results in the activation
of the output domain of the RR (FIG. 1). RRs can undergo
spontaneous dephosphorylation by transferring the
phosphoryl group to water, and the half-lives of the dif-
ferent phosphoryl–Asp RRs vary from a few seconds to
hours. However, in many cases, the half-life is reduced
by the presence or activation of a phosphatase, which
might be the HPK itself. More complex versions of
HAP  systems  with  numerous  His–Asp–His–Asp

phosphotransfer steps are widespread, particularly in
eukaryotes, and such systems have been characterized
in detail in relation to osmoregulation in S. cerevisiae, as
well as sporulation in Bacillus subtilis 8 (FIG. 1d). HPt
domains, which can add extra phosphotransfer steps,
have no catalytic activity and the cognate RR functions to
take or transfer the phosphoryl group from the HPt
domain. The reason for numerous steps is unclear, but
studies on the oxygen-sensing Arc pathway (FIG. 1b) indi-
cate that it might assist in complex regulatory control8.

Bacterial chemotaxis as a model system
Bacterial chemotaxis is the biasing of movement
towards regions that contain higher concentrations of
beneficial, or lower concentrations of toxic, chemi-
cals. The signalling pathway that is involved has been
most  extensively  studied  in  the  enteric  bacteria
Escherichia  coli and  Salmonella  enterica  serovar
Typhimurium10,11. Structural and biochemical details
are now available for every step of the pathway, which
makes it one of the most well-understood of all sen-
sory pathways.

Most sequenced bacterial genomes include homo-
logues of genes that are known to encode components
of flagella and chemosensory pathways, which indicates
that motility is widespread (BOX 2) and probably pro-
vides a selective advantage, especially in non-homoge-
neous, nutrient-limiting environments. However, all
bacteria in which motility has been studied seem to be

NODULE
A swelling on the roots of
nitrogen-fixing plants that
contains symbiotic nitrogen-
fixing bacteria.

QUORUM SENSING
The ability of bacteria to sense
their own cell density by
detecting the concentration of
signalling molecules that have
been released in their
environment.

PILI
Short, polymerized-protein
projections that protrude from
the bacterial cell and are used for
surface attachment and
twitching motility.

PAS DOMAIN
(PER, ARNT, SIM domain).
A domain that is involved in
recognizing stimuli such as light,
oxygen, redox potential, energy
status and small ligands.

HPt DOMAIN
(Histidine-containing
phosphotransfer domain). These
domains are ~120 amino acids
long and contain a histidine
residue that can participate in
phosphoryl-transfer reactions.
They function as
phosphoreceivers and
phosphodonors, and can
therefore be used to create
multistep phosphorelay systems.

NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY

VOLUME 5 | DECEMBER 2004 | 1 0 2 5

©  2004 Nature  Publishing Group

R E V I E W S

a Osmolarity 

sensing 

b Oxygen sensing

c Chemosensory

d Sporulation

regulation

P

HAMP

H

NGFG

EnvZ

P

PAS

H

NGFG

ArcB

P

D

P

H

P

H

P

H

NGFG

KinB

P2 P3

NGFG

P5

CheA

P

D

Spo0F

P

PAS

PAS

PAS

H

NGFG

Periplasm

Inner 
membrane

KinA

Cytoplasm

OmpR

ArcA

P

D

P

D

P

D

CheY

P

D

P

D

CheB

Spo0A

P

H

Spo0B

Transcription

Transcription

Motility

Receptor
adaptation

Transcription

Figure 1 | The domain organization of selected histidine–aspartate-phosphorelay systems. Some of the different
combinations of histidine protein kinase (HPK) and aspartate response regulator (RR) domains in histidine–aspartate phosphorelay
(HAP) systems. a | The EnvZ/OmpR pathway of Escherichia coli, which is involved in regulating the expression of the two outer-
membrane porins OmpF and OmpC. A membrane-bound HPK (EnvZ) controls the activity of the RR OmpR in response to changes
in osmolarity. b | The complex ArcB–ArcA HAP system of E. coli. The membrane-bound HPK ArcB senses changes in the redox
state of components of the respiratory electron-transport chain through its PAS (PER, ARNT, SIM) domain. The phosphoryl group is
then passed from the conserved His in the ArcB kinase domain to a fused RR domain, then to a fused histidine-containing
phosphotransfer (HPt) domain and finally to a DNA-binding RR ArcA. ArcA regulates microaerophilic gene expression. c | The
chemosensory pathway of E. coli. The soluble HPK chemotaxis protein (Che)A has five domains per monomer that are designated
P1–P5 from the N terminus to the C terminus. CheA senses changes through transmembrane chemoreceptors, which induce the
trans-autophosphorylation of dimeric CheA on a His residue of the HPt domain. Two RRs compete for this phosphoryl group: CheY,
a single-domain, motor-binding protein, which controls flagellar motor switching, and CheB, which controls the adaptation of the
chemoreceptors. d | Part of the complex system that regulates sporulation in Bacillus subtilis. A single-domain RR, Spo0F, is
regulated by two HPKs, one of which has numerous transmembrane domains (KinB), the other of which is soluble with numerous
PAS domains (KinA). Spo0F indirectly phosphorylates a DNA-binding RR, Spo0A, by way of a His residue in Spo0B. Throughout
this figure, light-green rectangles highlight conserved, phosphorylatable His residues, light-blue rectangles highlight conserved,
phosphorylatable Asp residues, and orange circles highlight phosphoryl (P) groups. NGFG represents the kinase domain and, with
the exception of CheA, the conserved His residue that precedes the kinase domain is contained within the dimerization domain.
Despite being dimeric in nature, HPKs are shown here as monomers for simplicity, and the HAMP domain (‘histidine kinases,
adenylyl cyclases, methyl-binding proteins and phosphatases’ domain) is a linker domain. 

chemotactic (although two sequenced Archaea with
putative flagellar genes have no obvious chemosensory
genes12). So, the ability to move is not, in itself, beneficial
— it must be biased to result in the accumulation of
bacteria  in  particular  environments. Bacteria  are
thought to be too small to sense a concentration gradi-
ent along their length and therefore use temporal sens-
ing  to  bias  their  overall  direction  of movement13
(although for a contrasting view, see REF. 14).

E. coli swim by rotating their five to eight helical
flagella anticlockwise, which causes them to come
together into a bundle that propels the cell forwards.
Switching the rotational direction of some flagellar
motors to clockwise disrupts this bundle and causes the
cell to tumble. When the motors return to anticlockwise

rotation, the cell is reorientated and swims off in a new
direction15 (BOX 3). In homogeneous environments,
swimming bacteria change direction about once a sec-
ond, which  produces  random  movement. In  non-
homogeneous environments, the frequency of direction
changing is controlled by positive or negative stimuli
to bias the overall direction of movement. Although
the number and location of flagella vary between bac-
terial species, the biasing of swimming always relies
on chemosensory regulation of the rotary activity of
the flagella motor (switching, stopping or slowing
down)16.

Although it is slightly modified compared to the
HAP systems that regulate transcription, the chemo-
taxis pathway has long been viewed as a paradigm of

1026 | DECEMBER 2004 | VOLUME 5

www.nature.com/reviews/molcellbio

©  2004 Nature  Publishing Group

Box 2 | Bacterial motility

a

Most bacterial species are motile and move either by
swimming through liquid environments or by moving
across surfaces. Free-swimming bacteria use the
electrochemical H+ (or Na+) gradient to power the rotation
of transmembrane motors at speeds of up to 300 Hz (for H+)
or 1300 Hz (for Na+)130,131. These motors drive the rotation
of semi-rigid, helical flagella that move bacteria at speeds of
15–100 µm s–1 (REF. 130) — that is, up to 100 body lengths per
second (see figure, part a, which shows a micrograph of a
swimming Rhodobacter sphaeroides cell). The number and
position of flagella varies between species. The Reynold’s
number — R = lvρ/η (where l = length, v = velocity,
ρ = density and η = viscosity) — is ~100 for man but is 
10–6 for microorganisms, which means that bacteria
experience a high viscosity and almost no inertia. So, when
bacteria stop, they stop immediately. They do not coast or
displace liquid.

R E V I E W S

Helical
flagella

Cell body

b

Pili pull by
disassembly

Direction of cell gliding

On surfaces, some species become HYPERFLAGELLATE, which
allows movement as the flagella rotate together as numerous
bundles. Other species use gliding or twitching to move over
surfaces. This can involve type-IV pili, which extend from
the poles (sometimes for several body lengths), bind to the
surface and then retract, pulling the cell forward132. Other
gliding bacteria seem to extrude slime through special pores
at their poles, with only the rear pores being used at any one
time to push the cells forward. The mechanisms behind this
type of movement are less clear. Some species, for example,
Myxococcus xanthus might use both pili and slime133 (see
figure, part b). Unlike free-swimming cells, gliding cells
move slowly (~1 µm min–1), and the fastest movement is the
end-over-end movement of Flavobacterium johnsoniae134. Species of the Spiroplasma wall-less bacteria can move through
viscous environments, using a dynamic internal cytoskeleton to induce movement through deformations in cell shape.
This cytoskeleton is attached to the cytoplasmic membrane and is composed of a flat, monolayered ribbon, which is
constructed from seven contractile fibrils that can change their length in a coordinated manner135. Part a of the figure 
was modified with permission from REF. 136 © (1999) the American Society for Microbiology. Part b of the figure was
modified with permission from Nature Reviews Microbiology REF. 133 © (2003) Macmillan Magazines Ltd.

Slime 
ribbons
push by
secretion

HYPERFLAGELLATE
An increased number of flagella.

GAIN
A parameter of chemotactic
behaviour that describes the
relationship between the
stimulus and the response. It is
defined as the fractional increase
in anticlockwise motor bias
divided by the fractional change
in receptor occupancy.

CHEMORECEPTOR
A sensory receptor that responds
to chemical stimuli. The term
covers transmembrane receptors
(such as the methyl-accepting
chemotaxis proteins) and
cytoplasmic receptors (such as
transducer-like proteins).

METHYL-ACCEPTING
CHEMOTAXIS PROTEIN
(MCP). A transmembrane
chemoreceptor that shows
methylation-dependent
adaptation.

HAP signalling and it is one of the most well-under-
stood physiological processes in biology. This is proba-
bly because it has been easy to isolate a wide range of
behavioural mutants as they spread differently through
soft nutrient agar17. The wealth of experimental data
that has been obtained for the chemotaxis pathway pro-
vides  details  of the  number  of molecules  of each
chemosensory protein within the cell, the localization of
each protein and their binding kinetics. From these data,
cells can be mathematically or computationally simu-
lated and concentrations of attractants or repellents var-
ied. It is then possible to compare the behaviour of the
model cell with experimental data and determine how
well the model performs18. These models have led to the
reinterpretation of data that were obtained using certain
mutants, and have provided a basis for making other
mutants. However, even though so much is understood,
many aspects are still unclear, including details of how
the  amazing  sensitivity, GAIN and  adaptation  are
achieved. Testable models have been, and are being,
developed to identify whether these aspects depend on,
for example, receptor clustering, robust adaptation or
motor kinetics19–21.

The chemosensory system
The E. coli chemotaxis pathway is so sensitive that it is
able to sense a change in a few molecules — perhaps just
a change in ligand binding to a single receptor — in the
presence of background concentrations that can vary
over at least five orders of magnitude22,23.

Chemotactic signals are detected by dedicated trans-
membrane  CHEMORECEPTORS —  the  METHYL-ACCEPTING
CHEMOTAXIS PROTEINS (MCPs) and an MCP-like protein —
rather than by a fused sensory domain of an HPK as is
found for most HAP systems that regulate transcription.
An adaptor protein, CheW, helps to link the MCPs to the
cytoplasmic HPK, CheA, and two RRs compete for bind-
ing to CheA (FIGS 1,2). One RR is a single-domain, flagel-
lar-motor-binding protein, CheY (although see BOX 4),
whereas the other, CheB, has two domains, one of which
functions as a methylesterase and controls the adaptation
of the MCPs24,25. Phosphorylated CheY (CheY–P) binds
the switch protein FliM (see BOX 3 figure) on the flagellar
motor and causes a reversal in the direction of motor
rotation26,27. In E. coli, the phosphatase CheZ is required
to increase the spontaneous dephosphorylation rate of
CheY–P and allow rapid signal termination28 (FIG. 2).

NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY

VOLUME 5 | DECEMBER 2004 | 1 0 2 7

©  2004 Nature  Publishing Group

R E V I E W S

Box 3 | The bacterial flagellar motor

The bacterial flagellar motor is the most complex structure
in a bacterial cell, with protein components in 
the cytoplasm, across the cytoplasmic membrane, the
periplasmic space, the outer membrane and in the external
environment (see figure for the Escherichia coli structure). It
is the product of the controlled expression of about 50
genes137. Expression of the genes is tightly regulated to
assure ordered protein assembly and whereas the early
transmembrane proteins are transported through the
classic Sec pathway, the later proteins, including those of the
hook and filament, use a flagellar-specific export pathway
that is closely related to that used for the type-III secretion
of toxins by pathogenic species138.

The filament assembles from the end that is distal to the

Flagellar
filament

Hook-associated
proteins

Flagellar
hook

L-ring

P-ring

Outer membrane

Peptidoglycan layer

MotB
(stator)
MotA
(stator)

FliG
(rotor)

C-ring

Periplasm

Cytoplasm

Inner membrane

bacterium and forms a semi-rigid helix, the wavelength
and handedness of which alters with changes in the
direction of motor rotation. Protons move through
roughly eight independent force-generating units (Mot
complexes), which are anchored to the peptidoglycan
layer to form the stator (the stationary part) of the motor.
The protons interact with the ring of ~32 FliG proteins
that are associated with the cytoplasmic component of the
rotor, and this drives rotation. The mechanism by which
the electrochemical gradient is coupled to mechanical
rotation is unclear, but it probably involves electrostatic interactions between the stator and the rotor proteins130.
Phosphorylated CheY, a chemotaxis response regulator, binds FliM proteins that are associated with the FliG rotor to
bring about a switch in direction of motor rotation. The figure was modified with permission from REF. 139 © (2003)
Elsevier.

FliM
(switch)

MS-ring

Recent in vivo imaging and fluorescence resonance
energy transfer studies have started to identify the inter-
action of the proteins in this sensory pathway inside liv-
ing cells21,29. Combining in vivo data with mutational
and in vitro data from the past 40 years indicates a spe-
cific sequence of events (FIG. 2). A decreased concentra-
tion of attractant results in decreased attractant binding
to the MCPs, which stimulates CheA trans-autophos-
phorylation. This results in an increase in the concentra-
tion of CheY–P. CheY–P then binds to the flagellar
motor and causes it to switch to clockwise rotation,
which results in cell tumbling and direction change. The
CheY–P signal is terminated by the phosphatase CheZ.
CheB is also phosphorylated by CheA–P, which results
in an increased methylesterase activity and an increased
demethylation of the MCPs. Demethylated MCPs have
a reduced ability to induce CheA autophosphorylation
(even in the presence of a low concentration of attrac-
tant), so the rate of CheA autophosphorylation and
therefore the rate of direction changing returns to the
pre-stimulus level. The system has now adapted and is
primed to sense any subsequent increases or decreases
in ligand binding.

An increased concentration of attractant inhibits the
autophosphorylation of CheA, which reduces the con-
centration of CheY–P and therefore the frequency of
motor switching. This causes the bacterium to swim in
this positive direction for longer. CheB phosphorylation
and therefore activity is also reduced, which allows
the constitutive methyltransferase CheR to increase the

methylation of the MCPs. Highly methylated MCPs are
better able to stimulate CheA autophosphorylation,
even in the continued presence of a chemoattractant, so
this returns CheA autophosphorylation to the pre-stim-
ulus level and the bacterium to a normal frequency of
direction changing.

The chemoreceptors
The  number  of putative  chemoreceptor genes  in
sequenced genomes ranges from 1 in Mezorhizobium
loti, to 5 in E. coli, to more than 60 in Magnetospirillum
magnetotacticum. So far, the data indicate that most
species have more than 10 chemoreceptor genes and
that many have more than 20. Whereas the sequences of
the cytoplasmic domains of all these receptors are
highly conserved (and are, in fact, used to identify these
genes)30, the  sequences  of the  periplasmic  sensing
domains vary significantly from species to species and
from receptor to receptor. This is unsurprising, as each
receptor  must  bind  different ligands and different
species have different optimum niches.Why some species
require over 50 different receptors is unclear, although
different receptors might be expressed under different
growth conditions and might tune behaviour to partic-
ular environments.

Escherichia coli methyl-accepting chemotaxis proteins.
E. coli has four MCPs (the fifth E. coli chemoreceptor
is  an  MCP-like  protein; see  below), which  form
homodimers that span the bacterial cell membrane31

1028 | DECEMBER 2004 | VOLUME 5

www.nature.com/reviews/molcellbio

©  2004 Nature  Publishing Group

PBP

Periplasm

Inner membrane

Cytoplasm

P
C
M

P
P
C
C
M
M

P
C
M

P
C
M

– CH3

+ CH3
CheR

CheW

CheA

CheZ

P

CheB

CheY

P

P

Flagellar motor

Peptidoglycan layer

Inner membrane
Periplasm

Outer membrane

Figure 2 | Schematic diagram of the chemosensory
system of Escherichia coli. Two dimeric chemoreceptors —
methyl-accepting chemotaxis proteins (MCPs) — are shown,
one of which is interacting with a periplasmic binding protein
(PBP). In addition, two chemotaxis protein (Che)W monomers
and a CheA dimer are shown interacting with the highly
conserved signalling domain of the MCPs in the cytoplasm. It
should be noted that, given the packing within MCP clusters
and the calculations of the number of chemosensory proteins,
the actual arrangement will be different. One CheA monomer
will probably not interact with one MCP dimer, and instead a
CheA dimer might span several receptors. A decrease in
attractant concentration induces trans-autophosphorylation of
the CheA dimer, which phosphorylates the response regulator
CheY. Phosphorylated CheY then binds to the flagellar motor to
bring about a change in direction. Phosphorylated CheA also
phosphorylates another response regulator — the
methylesterase CheB. Phosphorylated CheB competes with a
constitutive methyltransferase, CheR, to control the degree of
methylation of specific glutamates in the MCPs. This resets the
signalling state of the receptors and allows them to adapt to the
present concentration of attractant and to sense subsequent
changes. The dephosphorylation of phosphorylated CheY is
accelerated by the phosphatase CheZ. P, phosphoryl group.

R E V I E W S

(FIG. 2). X-ray crystallography of isolated periplasmic
and cytoplasmic domains of MCPs shows that they are
formed almost completely from α-helical coiled-coil
structures32,33 (FIG. 3). An entire E. coli MCP is ~380-Å
long, with an 80-Å periplasmic domain, a 40-Å trans-
membrane domain and a 260-Å cytoplasmic domain.
The periplasmic domains of the E. coli MCPs each con-
sist of a four-helix bundle. However, the fold of the
periplasmic domains of MCPs from other species tends
to be highly diverse, which reflects the wide range of lig-
ands that are sensed by these receptors.

Ligands bind to the periplasmic domain of MCPs at
the interface between the two monomers of the dimer34,
and residues from both monomers are involved in
ligand binding. Some MCPs, for example E. coli Tar, can
bind to two different ligands — to one directly, and to
the other through a periplasmic binding protein that
can also interact with the appropriate transporters35.
Ligand binding alters the interactions between the
periplasmic domains of the MCPs, and also changes
the interactions between the transmembrane four-helix
bundle of the MCP dimer. Mutational analyses, trypto-
phan-fluorescence and cysteine-crosslinking studies of
the transmembrane domains, together with NMR mea-
surements, indicated that a 1.4-Å ‘piston-like move-
ment’ of one transmembrane helix against another in
the MCP dimer occurs on ligand binding, which might
be important for signal propagation across the bacterial
membrane31,36–40. However, the propagation of such a
small shift through such a large coiled-coil protein and
the difference in the rapid kinetics of attractant binding
and the slow kinetics of CheA autophosphorylation
indicate that this might only be part of the signal.
Isolated MCP cytoplasmic domains from E. coli can still
activate CheA, which indicates that a change in the
interactions of the periplasmic domains on ligand bind-
ing probably also alters the packing of the highly con-
served cytoplasmic domains to cause signalling41. In
addition, many bacterial species seem to contain cyto-
plasmic chemoreceptors, which lack transmembrane
domains and are active in clusters42,43 (the role of recep-
tor packing is discussed below). E. coli also responds to a
range of repellents and will swim towards its optimum
growth temperature. Although the mechanisms that are
involved in these responses are unclear, data indicate
that some signals might be sensed directly through the
cytoplasmic signalling domain, rather than the periplas-
mic domain, of the MCPs44.

In MCPs, a structurally conserved HAMP domain
links the transmembrane helices to the cytoplasmic
signalling domain. This region is lacking in crystal
structures and its relationship to the rest of the pro-
tein structure remains unclear. However, disruption of
this region results in a loss of signalling and the main-
tenance of this structure is crucial in the production of
chimeric signalling proteins45. The HAMP domain
might therefore be important in regulating the coiled-
coil interactions that seem to be involved in signal
propagation46.

The signalling domain contains two adaptation
regions, each with four to six glutamate residues that can

NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY

VOLUME 5 | DECEMBER 2004 | 1 0 2 9

©  2004 Nature  Publishing Group

R E V I E W S

FLAVIN ADENINE
DINUCLEOTIDE
(FAD). FAD functions as a redox
centre in many proteins.

SRC-HOMOLOGY-3 DOMAIN
(SH3 domain). A 60-amino-acid
domain that mediates the
assembly of specific protein
complexes through binding to
proline-rich peptides. It is found
in many proteins that are
involved in signal transduction
and membrane–cytoskeleton
interactions.

Box 4 | Do all putative chemosensory components control motility?

Myxococcus xanthus is a social, gliding bacterium that displays two types of motility — social and adventurous. In
addition, in response to starvation, M. xanthus cells aggregate to form multicellular fruiting bodies. Motility and
chemotaxis are essential for these responses140, and require two chemotaxis operons — frz and dif 141. A third operon, che3,
has been shown to be required for differentiation142. The latter apparent chemosensory pathway senses an environmental
signal through a classic methyl-accepting chemotaxis protein (MCP)-like receptor that controls the phosphorylation of
the chemotaxis protein (Che)A. Phosphorylated CheA phosphorylates either a CheB homologue or, rather than CheY,
a transcriptional regulator, which drives the expression of genes that are required to switch the cells from a vegetative to a
sporulation state. Similarly, one of the four Pseudomonas aeruginosa che operons seems to be essential for the expression
of pathogenicity genes, and one operon in Pseudomonas fluorescens has been proposed to be involved in cellulose
biosynthesis. Recent sequencing of the M. xanthus genome indicates that it might have as many as eight chemosensory
operons in total. The role of these other operons remains to be elucidated (J. R. Kirby, personal communication).

This indicates that analysing genome sequences without the use of supporting physiological data could lead to the
misannotation of genes and to their subsequent misinterpretation. Do all species with four or five CheA proteins and
numerous MCPs use all of them for chemotaxis? The roles of the numerous homologues of the other chemotaxis
proteins that are found in many non-enteric bacteria remain an enigma. Many bacterial species live in diverse
environments and it is possible that, under different conditions, different chemotaxis operons might be expressed to
allow the bacteria to tune their chemotactic responses to their existing environment.

be reversibly methylated47. Some of these glutamates
are actually encoded as glutamines, which mimic
methylated glutamates and probably ensure that newly
translated MCPs are inserted into the membrane in a
neutral signalling state. CheB is actually a dual-func-
tion enzyme, as it can deamidate as well as demethylate
MCPs. Deamidation of the glutamine residues to gluta-
mates means that all of these residues become potential
targets for methylation by CheR and, therefore, for
adaptation48. A pentapeptide motif (NWETF) at the
C terminus of the two most abundant E. coli MCPs, Tsr
and Tar, recruits the methyltransferase CheR to the
MCP to bring about methylation49. The two low-abun-
dance E. coli MCPs, Trg and Tap, lack the NWETF
motif and therefore require the presence of Tsr or Tar
for adaptation to their ligands50. This indicates that the
different receptors must be close enough to interact
in vivo. Indeed, there is direct evidence for inter-dimer
methylation51.

Localization of methyl-accepting chemotaxis proteins.
Transmembrane MCPs have been shown to cluster in
patches that are thought to be ~200 nm in diameter and
that might form higher-order arrays at the poles of
cells52,53. Similar higher-order arrays of receptors and
channels have been observed in eukaryotic cells, for
example, in lymphocytes and neurons54, and significant
efforts are underway to try to understand the implica-
tions of such arrays for signal generation and processing
in general.

Clustering depends not only on the MCP itself —
which might be targeted, to some extent, to the poles
— but also on the MCP-associated cytoplasmic proteins
CheW and CheA52,55,56. Structural and biochemical
studies indicate that MCPs might pack as trimers of
dimers33,57,58 (FIG. 4a). However, certain cryo-electron-
microscopy studies and quantitative data indicate that
the clusters could be formed from dimers that are
packed into a higher-order array, which involves inter-
actions between periplasmic domains and/or the swap-
ping of anti-parallel strands of the individual MCPs

within the cluster59. This packing pattern would allow
the necessary CheW and CheA interactions at the base
of the MCPs. It has been proposed that the clustering of
MCPs might allow the high signal sensitivity and gain
of receptors that is seen, as well as integration between
receptors60 — the binding of a ligand to one receptor
would influence neighbouring, unbound receptors.
This model also postulates that the number of neigh-
bouring receptors that are affected decreases as the over-
all proportion of ligand-bound receptors increases. The
model elegantly encompasses two of the key features of
chemotaxis — the high degree of sensitivity in the sys-
tem and the wide range of background concentrations
over which differences can be sensed. Unfortunately, at
present, there is little evidence to indicate how such
lateral interactions might be established and altered
within such a receptor cluster, although changing the
charge  of the  receptors  through  methylation  and
demethylation might have a key role.

Using a lattice of interacting chemosensory proteins
allows the integrated control of the output of relatively
few CheA molecules61. The use of multivalent ligands to
physically cluster MCPs in vivo showed that signalling
information is transferred between MCPs in a cluster62.
In vivo crosslinking has also proved that there are direct
physical  interactions  between  different  MCPs  in  a
cell58,63. Taken together, these data indicate that the
receptor clusters are composed of signalling teams, pos-
sibly of mixed trimers of MCP homodimers, with the
different MCPs functioning collaboratively to regulate
the activity of CheA molecules that are bound to the
receptors (FIG. 4a). Interestingly, quantitative western-
blot measurements of the number of the different
chemosensory proteins in different strains of E. coli 64
and of Rhodobacter sphaeroides (M. Gould and J.P.A.,
unpublished data) under different growth conditions
showed that, whereas the absolute concentrations of
the different chemotaxis proteins vary significantly, the
stoichiometries remain almost constant. This finding
has  key  implications  for  our  understanding  of
chemosensory signalling and for the modelling of these

1030 | DECEMBER 2004 | VOLUME 5

www.nature.com/reviews/molcellbio

©  2004 Nature  Publishing Group

Maltose-binding protein

Periplasm
Inner membrane

Cytoplasm

CheR

CheW

CheA dimer

MCP dimer

CheW

CheY

CheZ

CheY

CheB

Figure 3 | The structures of components of the chemosensory system of
Escherichia coli. The figure shows the structures of the components of the chemosensory
system in the same stoichiometry and localization as is shown in FIG. 2 — that is, two
methyl-accepting chemotaxis protein (MCP) dimers are shown interacting with two
chemotaxis protein (Che)W monomers and a CheA dimer, and CheY, CheB and CheR are
all depicted as monomers. The relevant Protein Data Bank accession numbers are:
maltose-binding protein (1ANF); MCP periplasmic domain (1WAT) and cytoplasmic domain
(1QU7); the CheA P1 domain (1I5N), P2 domain (1EAY) and P3–P5 domains (1B3Q); the
CheW averaged NMR structure (1KOS); CheY (1EHC); CheR (1BC5); CheB (1A2O); and
CheZ with phosphorylated CheY bound (1KMI). The figure is a graphical representation and
is not meant to imply that the domains or proteins interact in the manner depicted or that
their orientations are as shown. The dashed lines represent the transmembrane domains
and the HAMP domains (‘histidine kinases, adenylyl cyclases, methyl-binding proteins and
phosphatases’ domains), for which there are, as yet, no structures. This figure was
prepared using the program MOLMOL143.

R E V I E W S

and possibly other biochemical pathways. In vitro, the
maximum kinase activity occurs when there is a ratio of
6 MCPs to 4 CheW molecules to 1 CheA molecule61.
However, modelling predicts maximum activity when
there is 1 trimer of MCP dimers (6 MCPs) to 3 CheW
molecules to 1.5 CheA molecules65, and western-blot
analysis indicates 3.4 MCP dimers (6.8 MCPs) to 1.6
CheW  molecules  to  1  CheA  dimer64 (2  CheAs).
Something  close  to  these  ratios  probably  exists  in
extended arrays, possibly with non-integral stoichiome-
tries and with CheW and CheA both interacting with
the receptor tips. The formation of targeted local com-
plexes that are composed of particular ratios of these
proteins might turn out to be central to signalling regu-
lation in this and other biochemical pathways.

Variations within Escherichia coli. The fifth E. coli
chemoreceptor is the MCP-like transmembrane protein
Aer, which mediates aerotactic responses (that is, move-
ment in response to changes in oxygen levels). This pro-
tein has the conserved cytoplasmic signalling domain
that is found in all MCPs, but it is fused to a cytoplasmic
FLAVIN ADENINE DINUCLEOTIDE (FAD)-binding domain and a
PAS domain and it lacks methylation sites66,67. This pro-
tein seems to sense the rate of respiratory electron
transport, which allows E. coli to respond to changes in
oxygen concentrations. Oxygen was probably absent
from the atmosphere when MCPs evolved, and the
responses of different species to oxygen varies depend-
ing  whether  they  are  aerobes, microaerophiles  or
anaerobes. Different species have used different input
modules to control the activity of the conserved cyto-
plasmic signalling domain, including FAD (as men-
tioned above), haem and cytochrome oxidase, which
can either directly or indirectly detect oxygen levels68,69.

Not all chemotactic responses in E. coli are mediated
by chemoreceptors. E. coli also shows a chemotactic
response towards carbohydrates that are transported
by the phosphoenolpyruvate-dependent phospho-
transferase  system. A  cytoplasmic  component, EI
(enzyme I), which is common to all of the transporters
of this system, transfers phosphate from phospho-
enolpyruvate, by way of an E1–P intermediate, to the
carbohydrate-specific EII and EIII transporters. This
phosphate is then transferred to the carbohydrate dur-
ing its transport into the cell. An increasing concentra-
tion of carbohydrates outside the cell increases the rate
of carbohydrate transport into the cell and therefore
lowers  the  concentration  of EI–P  in  the  cell.
Unphosphorylated EI interacts with CheA and pre-
vents its autophosphorylation, which, in turn, reduces
the amount of CheY–P and prolongs swimming in this
positive direction70.

Other chemotaxis proteins
CheW. CheW is composed of two SRC-HOMOLOGY 3 (SH3)-
like subdomains and is an 18-kDa protein that interacts
with both the signalling domain of the MCP and the
HPK CheA71 (FIGS 2,3). It is required for the formation of
the quaternary MCP–CheW–CheA complex at the
poles of cells52,56, and is essential for signal transduction.

NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY

VOLUME 5 | DECEMBER 2004 | 1 0 3 1

©  2004 Nature  Publishing Group

R E V I E W S

a

Periplasm

Inner 
membrane

Methylation 
sites

Cytoplasm

b

MCP 
dimer

CheW

CheA

Figure 4 | Chemotaxis-protein localization. a | The possible pattern of interaction between
different components of the chemosensory pathway at the poles of bacterial cells, which
produces signalling clusters. The clusters are shown as being formed of mixed trimers of methyl-
accepting chemotaxis protein (MCP) homodimers. These trimers might interact laterally through
changes in their packing, as well as through alterations in their interactions with, and between, the
chemotaxis protein (Che)W and CheA. The stoichiometry could be ~three MCP dimers to two
CheW monomers to one CheA dimer, as is shown in the figure, but the exact stoichiometry is still
unclear. The rough positions of the methylation sites are highlighted in yellow. b | The localization
of chemotaxis proteins in vivo. Rhodobacter sphaeroides has two chemosensory pathways.
Components of one pathway, which includes CheW3, localize to a polar cluster (green labelling in
the first and third panels) that contains the transmembrane MCPs, whereas components of the
other pathway, which includes CheW4, localize to a cytoplasmic cluster (purple labelling in the
second and third panels) that contains the transducer-like proteins. The physical and biochemical
separation of the components of these two signalling pathways (see the third, merged panel)
might be important for preventing crosstalk between closely related proteins 
in vivo. Part a was modified with permission from REF. 144 © the American Association 
for the Advancement of Science. Part b was reproduced with permission from REF. 119 ©
Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 

CheW has no known catalytic activity and is therefore
thought to be a scaffold protein that transduces the signals
that are generated by the MCP to CheA. The structure of
CheW from Thermotoga maritima has been solved by
solution NMR and it has two five-stranded β-barrel
domains with an extensive hydrophobic core72 (FIG. 3).
This structure is very similar to that of the P5 domain
of CheA, with  which  it  interacts  (CheA  has  five
domains per monomer that are designated P1–P5 from
the N terminus to the C terminus; FIGS 1,3; see below).

Despite its supposedly simple scaffold role, the pri-
mary sequence of CheW is highly conserved between
species, and in many species there are several homo-
logues that are involved in chemotaxis. Interestingly,
there  does  not  seem  to  be  a  direct  relationship
between the number of CheW homologues and the
number of CheA homologues, which indicates that
there is not just one specific CheW for each CheA.
Some CheW proteins from the α-subgroup bacterium
R. sphaeroides (Proteobacteria can be divided into five
main subgroups) are capable of restoring switching in

an E. coli cheW mutant73,74. So, as E. coli is a γ-subgroup
bacterium, this indicates that the structure and function
of CheW is conserved between different species. CheW
might therefore have a more significant role in the
process of signal transduction than just providing a
static link between the MCPs and CheA.

The histidine protein kinase CheA. CheA is an HPK
that functions as a dimer, which comprises two 71-kDa
monomers and, as mentioned above, it interacts with
~three MCP dimers and ~two CheW monomers to
form  oligomeric  complexes  at  the  poles  of cells.
Although CheA is known to interact with CheW, and
CheW is known to interact with the MCPs, there is also
evidence for a direct CheA–MCP interaction75. The X-
ray structures of the various domains of CheA have
been determined76,77 (FIG. 3). Each CheA monomer has
five domains that are separated by linker regions and
hinges (FIG. 1c). Studies have shown that the P1 domain
is structurally and functionally homologous to the HPt
domains of hybrid kinases such as ArcB (FIG. 1). In the
presence of ATP and Mg2+, the CheA dimer shows a
basal  level  of trans-autophosphorylation, which
increases significantly in the presence of receptors.
MCPs and CheW bind to the P5 regulatory domain of
CheA78,79, and can both inhibit and activate phosphory-
lation relative to the basal level by controlling the access
of the  P1  domain  of one  monomer  to  the  kinase
the  other77. CheA  shows  increased
domain  of
autophosphorylation  in  response  to  a  decrease  in
attractant binding or an increase in repellent binding to
MCPs. Such stimulation results in the γ-phosphoryl
group of ATP that is bound to the P4 kinase domain of
one monomer being transferred to His48 of the HPt
domain of the other monomer in a trans-autophos-
phorylation reaction.

CheY and CheB compete for binding to the P2
domain of CheA, and the phosphoryl group is trans-
ferred from His48 of CheA to Asp57 of CheY, or to
Asp56 of CheB80,81. Interestingly, CheA that lacks a P2
domain can still phosphorylate CheY, although this
occurs  at  a  much  slower  rate  than  for  full-length
CheA82. This indicates that the P1 domain of CheA
might also contribute to the rate of phosphotransfer.
Phosphotransfer to CheY is faster than to CheB, which
ensures that a response is generated before adaptation
occurs83. Deletion of either cheW or cheA in E. coli
results in a smooth-swimming phenotype, because
CheY remains unphosphorylated.

The response regulator CheY. CheY is a single-domain,
14-kDa RR protein. Several high-resolution crystal
and NMR structures of CheY are now available84,85. In
addition, there is a structure of CheY bound to the
CheA P2 domain81 and a structure of the active con-
formation of CheY, in which BeF3 was used to mimic
the bound phosphoryl group86. CheY has the classic
RR five-α-helix, five-stranded-β-sheet structure (FIG. 3).
Phosphorylation  occurs  on  the  conserved  Asp57
residue, which is in an acidic binding pocket that com-
prises Asp12, Asp13 and Lys109. Phosphorylation of

1032 | DECEMBER 2004 | VOLUME 5

www.nature.com/reviews/molcellbio

©  2004 Nature  Publishing Group

this residue allows CheY to interact with FliM in the
switch complex of the flagellar motor87–89 (BOX 3). The
backbone structure of the protein does not change
significantly on phosphorylation, but the exposed mole-
cular surface can alter substantially. The binding of
CheY–P to FliM promotes clockwise flagellar rotation,
which causes the cell to tumble and change direction26,88.
In vitro, CheY can be phosphorylated by small inorganic
phosphodonors, such as acetyl phosphate90, and it is also
subject to acetylation at numerous sites91. The potential
biological relevance of acetylation and phosphorylation
by such inorganic phosphodonors is not known, but
mutants  in  acetyl-CoA  synthetase  show  abnormal
behaviour91, which  indicates  that  some  aspects  of
chemotactic behaviour might be modulated by meta-
bolic activity.

The phosphatase CheZ and signal termination. Signal
termination is essential for chemotaxis. In the γ-sub-
group of proteobacteria, CheZ is an allosteric activator
of CheY dephosphorylation, which decreases the half-
life of CheY–P from ~20 seconds to ~200 milliseconds
— a rate that is required to allow temporal sensing. CheZ
is probably a dimer, although large multimeric com-
plexes might form in the presence of CheY–P (REF. 92).
The activity of CheZ seems, at least in part, to be con-
trolled by the concentration of its substrate, CheY–P
(REF. 93). Co-crystals of CheZ and CheY bound to a
phosphate analogue indicate that the Gln147 side
chain of CheZ inserts into the CheY active site and
might orientate a water molecule for nucleophilic
attack94. E. coli mutants that lack CheZ have a ‘tum-
bling’ phenotype, because they accumulate high con-
centrations of CheY–P.

Interestingly, CheZ seems to be restricted to the γ-
subgroup of proteobacteria, so most species must use
different mechanisms for signal termination. Several
CheY homologues have been found in many species
that lack CheZ, so they might function as phosphate
sinks, as was shown for the two CheY proteins of
Sinorhizobium meliloti. However, there are species that
have both several CheY proteins and a CheZ homo-
logue, so the story might be more complex. In S. meliloti,
both  CheY  proteins  can  be  phosphorylated  by
CheA–P, but only one of them binds to the flagellar
motor. Reverse phosphotransfer from the motor-bind-
ing CheY2–P, through CheA, to the second, non-motor
binding CheY1 increases the rate of signal termina-
tion95. Yet other species have CheY domains that are
fused to other chemosensory proteins. For example,
CheV is  a  CheW–CheY  fusion  that  is  found  in
subtilis96,97, and  a
Helicobacter  pylori and  B.
CheA–CheY fusion protein has been identified in a
number  of
including  Rhodospirillum
centenum98. Although the precise role of these fusion
proteins is not known, the CheY domain cannot dif-
fuse to the flagellar motor and might therefore func-
tion as a phosphate sink. R. sphaeroides has six CheY
homologues and, interestingly, these all have rapid
dephosphorylation rates99, which might eliminate the
need for CheZ.

species,

R E V I E W S

Receptor adaptation. As mentioned above, bacteria
must adapt to a background level of attractants and/or
repellents by both rapid signal termination and by reset-
ting the receptor proteins to a non-signalling state.
Adaptation depends on the degree of methylation of
specific, conserved glutamate residues in the cytoplas-
mic signalling domain of an MCP. Methyl groups are
transferred from a cytoplasmic pool of S-adenosyl
methionine to an MCP by the constitutively active
methyltransferase CheR100, and they are removed and
released as methanol by the methylesterase CheB101,102.
The crystal structure of CheR bound to S-adenosyl
homocysteine (the methylation reaction product) has
been determined in the presence103 and absence104 of the
C-terminal NWETF motif from the E. coli MCP Tar.
CheR has a small N-terminal domain that is linked to a
large C-terminal domain (FIG. 3). The latter forms most
of the interactions with S-adenosyl homocysteine. CheR
is localized to MCP clusters mainly through hydropho-
bic interactions between the β-subdomain of CheR and
the CheR-docking NWETF motif in the E. coli MCPs
Tar and Tsr. These interactions position CheR close to
the sites that are to be methylated105. As the CheR:MCP
ratio is thought to be about 1:100 (REF. 64), these interac-
tions must be dynamic.

The crystal structure of CheB has also been deter-
mined  (FIG. 3). It  has  an  N-terminal  regulatory
domain linked to a C-terminal catalytic domain106.
Phosphorylation of the N-terminal domain causes a
conformational change that exposes the active site in the
catalytic  domain  to  its  substrate  and  stimulates
methylesterase activity 100-fold106,107. The changes in the
methylation level of the conserved glutamates of an
MCP — which are brought about by changes in the
level of phosphorylation and, therefore, the activity of
CheB — reset the signalling state of an MCP and return
CheA activity to the pre-stimulus level. The bacterium
resumes its original pattern of swimming and the MCP
can  now  respond  to  any  subsequent  increases  or
decreases in chemoeffector concentration. The mecha-
nism by which methylation exerts its effect on CheA
activity remains unclear. However, the neutralization of
the negative charges of the glutamate residues that
occurs on methylation, and the subsequent return of
these charges on demethylation, might affect helix pack-
ing, and might therefore affect interactions within the
oligomeric MCP clusters108.

Other bacterial species: variations on a theme
The E. coli chemosensory pathway forms the basis of
our understanding of bacterial chemotaxis. However, it
is becoming increasingly apparent that chemotaxis in
other bacteria, although based on similar principles,
might be far more complex. In particular, many species
have far more putative chemoreceptors than the five that
are present in E. coli. Some of these receptors lack obvi-
ous transmembrane domains and have been shown to
be cytoplasmic43. Other species also have further chemo-
taxis proteins109. Although we have data on a wide range
of species, two of the most well-studied will be used here
to illustrate some aspects of this diversity — B. subtilis,

NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY

VOLUME 5 | DECEMBER 2004 | 1 0 3 3

©  2004 Nature  Publishing Group

R E V I E W S

TRANSDUCER-LIKE PROTEIN
(Tlp). Tlp proteins are
cytoplasmic chemoreceptors
that have the cytoplasmic
domain of methyl-accepting
chemotaxis proteins and lack
transmembrane domains.

because it has a single chemosensory pathway that con-
tains the largest number of different types of chemosen-
sory protein, and R. sphaeroides, because it has several
chemosensory pathways.

Chemotaxis in Bacillus subtilis. B. subtilis is one of the
most well-studied Gram-positive bacteria and it seems
to have more types of chemosensory protein than any
other species that has been studied so far. This indicates
either that the E. coli system represents a ‘streamlined’
pathway, or that more proteins arose to refine the B. sub-
tilis system during evolution. The B. subtilis pathway has
a great deal in common with that of Archaea and might
represent an alternative paradigm109. The chemorecep-
tors are larger than those of E. coli and have a more
complex cytoplasmic α-helical structure that is also
conserved in Archaea. The phosphorylation reactions
are reversed with respect to those in E. coli, with an
increasing concentration of attractant resulting in an
increased (rather than decreased) activity of CheA and
therefore an increase (rather than a decrease) in CheY–P
concentration. However, in B. subtilis, the binding of
CheY–P to the flagellar motor decreases (rather than
increases) the tumbling frequency and therefore pro-
longs smooth swimming110.

Unlike in E. coli, in which methylation simply com-
pensates for a decreased CheA activity, methylation in
B. subtilis is  more  subtle, with  different  glutamate
residues carrying out specific roles. In McpB, Glu637
methylation helps to bring about adaptation to the pres-
ence of an attractant, whereas Glu630 methylation (with
the accompanying demethylation of the nearby Glu637
site) helps to bring about adaptation to the removal of an
attractant111. So, although there is no change in the over-
all level of methylation, methylation at each site has
different consequences111. Methanol is released on both
attractant addition and removal, which is unlike E. coli
but is the same as in Archaea112–114. However, this only
occurs when the attractant concentration is high, which
reflects a nutrient-rich environment115. When attractant
levels are low and the loss of methanol might be energet-
ically costly, another relatively common system (in terms
of genome sequences) can be used for adaptation96. In
this system, CheV (a CheW–CheY fusion protein) can be
phosphorylated by CheA–P. Furthermore, two other
proteins — CheC and CheD — are present in B. subtilis,
many other bacterial species and all Archaeal chemotaxis
pathways116,117. CheC and CheD might interact to regu-
late the adaptation pathway and CheC is also involved in
the dephosphorylation of CheY–P, and therefore repre-
sents yet-another signal-termination pathway.

Chemotaxis in Rhodobacter sphaeroides. R. sphaeroides
is  a  purple, non-sulphur, photoheterotrophic  bac-
terium. It has three operons that potentially encode
complete chemosensory pathways. Two of these oper-
ons are essential for chemotaxis under laboratory con-
ditions118, and DNA arrays and proteomic analysis have
shown that both operons are expressed, but at different
levels in aerobic versus anaerobic conditions (S. Kaplan,
personal communication).

R. sphaeroides has nine transmembrane chemore-
ceptors  (MCPs)  and  four  putative  cytoplasmic
chemoreceptors  (TRANSDUCER-LIKE  PROTEINS (Tlps)).
These chemoreceptors localize to discrete regions of
the bacterial cell — MCPs localize to the poles of the
cell, whereas Tlps are found in a defined cluster in the
bacterial cytoplasm43,53,119 (FIG. 4b). This indicates that
clustering might be an essential part of chemoreceptor
signalling for both membrane-localized and cytoplas-
mic receptors. It also indicates that some bacteria might
respond chemotactically to changes in the concentra-
tion of internal compounds — which might reflect the
general metabolic state of the cell — as well as to exter-
nal compounds.

R. sphaeroides has four CheA proteins — three of
which are essential for chemotaxis — together with six
CheY proteins and two CheB proteins118. In vitro phos-
photransfer experiments have shown that the different
CheA proteins can phosphotransfer to different sub-
groups of RRs99. CheA2 phosphorylates all of the RRs,
whereas CheA3 and CheA4 phosphorylate CheY6 and
CheB2, which are all encoded by the same operon, as well
as CheY1 from operon 1. CheA3 and CheA4 are highly
unusual, as CheA3 contains P1 and P5 domains, whereas
CheA4 contains P3, P4 and P5 domains, but no P1
domain. Neither  CheA3 nor  CheA4 has  the  P2
CheY/CheB-binding domain, and a CheA4 homodimer
can phosphorylate the P1 domain of CheA3 (REF. 120).

Although CheA2 can phosphotransfer to all of the
RRs in vitro, it does not compensate for CheA3/CheA4
deletions in vivo118. This might be because the proteins
that  are  encoded  by  one  chemosensory  pathway
(CheW2, CheW3, CheA2 and CheR2) localize with MCPs
at  the  poles  of cells, whereas  the  proteins  that  are
encoded by the other operon (CheW4, CheA3, CheA4
and CheR3) localize with the cytoplasmic receptors in a
discrete cluster in the cytoplasm119 (FIG. 4b). The cyto-
plasmic cluster is actively segregated on cell division,
and this process requires a protein homologue of a ParA
type-1  DNA-partitioning  protein, PpfA, which  is
encoded in the centre of the related chemosensory
operon (S. R. Thompson, G.H.W. and J.P.A., unpub-
lished data). This physical separation of the components
of the two pathways might prevent crosstalk in vivo. It
also provides intriguing evidence that proteins are tar-
geted and segregated within the bacterial cytoplasm,
which perhaps indicates a more complex bacterial
cytoskeleton than was previously thought. Unlike in
E. coli, the two CheB proteins do not seem to be specifi-
cally localized in R. sphaeroides, whereas the CheR
proteins are partially localized119. The physiological
advantage  of physically  segregating  these  two
chemosensory pathways and the structural basis for the
kinase discrimination is unclear, but genome sequences
indicate that this segregation of different pathways will
not be uncommon in bacteria.

Summary
The numerous studies that have been carried out on
the chemotaxis pathways of bacteria have provided us
with invaluable data concerning the structure, kinetics

1034 | DECEMBER 2004 | VOLUME 5

www.nature.com/reviews/molcellbio

©  2004 Nature  Publishing Group

R E V I E W S

and regulation of signalling systems in biology. The vast
array of physiological data that has been collected from
assaying this system is now being combined with the
biochemical data to allow mathematical models of
chemotaxis and signal kinetics to be generated and
evaluated. From these models, general principles are
emerging that might be applicable to many other

signalling pathways both in prokaryotes and in higher
eukaryotes. Chemotaxis is just one of the sensing sys-
tems that bacteria possess to monitor and respond to
changes in their environment. The correct interplay
between this system and other sensing systems is
essential for numerous sensory signals to result in a
balanced behavioural response.

1.  West, A. H. & Stock, A. M. Histidine kinases and response

regulator proteins in two-component signaling systems.
Trends Biochem. Sci. 26, 369–376 (2001).
A good review of the biochemical and structural
aspects of chemotaxis and other two-component
signalling systems.

2.  Maeda, T., Wurglermurphy, S. M. & Saito, H. 

A two-component system that regulates an osmosensing
MAP kinase cascade in yeast. Nature 369, 242–245 (1994).

3.  Nagahashi, S. et al. Isolation of CaSLN1 and CaNIK1, the
genes for osmosensing histidine kinase homologues, from
the pathogenic fungus Candida albicans. Microbiology 144,
425–432 (1998).

4.  Schuster, S. C., Noegel, A. A., Oehme, F., Gerisch, G. &

Simon, M. I. The hybrid histidine kinase DokA is part of the
osmotic response system of Dictyostelium. EMBO J. 15,
3880–3889 (1996).

5.  Wilkinson, J. Q., Lanahan, M. B., Yen, H. C., 

Giovannoni, J. J. & Klee, H. J. An ethylene-inducible
component of signal transduction encoded by never-ripe.
Science 270, 1807–1809 (1995).

References 21 and 22 use fluorescence resonance
energy transfer to assay the interactions between
chemoreceptors in E. coli and between CheY–P and
CheZ to explain sensitivity and gain in the chemotaxis
pathway.

23. Kim, C., Jackson, M., Lux, R. & Khan, S. Determinants of
chemotactic signal amplification in Escherichia coli. J. Mol.
Biol. 307, 119–135 (2001).

24. Hess, J. F., Oosawa, K., Kaplan, N. & Simon, M. I.

Phosphorylation of three proteins in the signalling pathway
of bacterial chemotaxis. Cell 53, 79–87 (1988).
An early report showing that the phosphorylation of
chemotaxis proteins is a mechanism for signal
transduction.

25.  Anand, G. S., Goudreau, P. N. & Stock, A. M. Activation of

methylesterase CheB: evidence of a dual role for the
regulatory domain. Biochemistry 37, 14038–14047 (1998).

26.  Welch, M., Oosawa, K., Aizawa, S.-I. & Eisenbach, M.

Phosphorylation-dependent binding of a signal molecule to
the flagellar switch of bacteria. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA
90, 8787–8791 (1993).

6.  Ashby, M. K. Survey of the number of two-component

27.  Toker, A. S. & Macnab, R. M. Distinct regions of bacterial

28.  McEvoy, M. M., Bren, A., Eisenbach, M. & Dahlquist, F. W.

47.  Weis, R. M. & Koshland, D. E. Jr. Reversible receptor

41.  Surette, M. G. & Stock, J. B. Role of α-helical coiled-coil

interactions in receptor dimerization, signaling, and
adaptation during bacterial chemotaxis. J. Biol. Chem. 271,
17966–17973 (1996).

42.  Storch, K. F., Rudolph, J. & Oesterhelt, D. Car: a

cytoplasmic sensor responsible for arginine chemotaxis in
the archaeon Halobacterium salinarum. EMBO J. 18,
1146–1158 (1999).

43.  Wadhams, G. H. et al. TlpC, a novel chemotaxis protein 

in Rhodobacter sphaeroides, localizes to a discrete 
region in the cytoplasm. Mol. Microbiol. 46, 1211–1221
(2002).

44.  Nishiyama, S., Maruyama, I. N., Homma, M. & Kawagishi, I.
Inversion of thermosensing property of the bacterial receptor
Tar by mutations in the second transmembrane region. 
J. Mol. Biol. 286, 1275–1284 (1999).

45.  Appleman, J. A., Chen, L. L. & Stewart, V. Probing
conservation of HAMP linker structure and signal
transduction mechanism through analysis of hybrid sensor
kinases. J. Bacteriol. 185, 4872–4882 (2003).

46.  Aravind, L. & Ponting, C. P. The cytoplasmic helical linker
domain of receptor histidine kinase and methyl-accepting
proteins is common to many prokaryotic signalling proteins.
FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 176, 111–116 (1999).

methylation is essential for normal chemotaxis of Escherichia
coli in gradients of aspartic acid. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA
85, 83–87 (1988).

48.  Kehry, M. R., Bond, M. W., Hunkapiller, M. W. & 

Dahlquist, F. W. Enzymatic deamidation of methyl-accepting
chemotaxis proteins in Escherichia coli catalyzed by the
cheB gene product. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 80,
3599–3603 (1983).

49.  Wu, J. G., Li, J. Y., Li, G. Y., Long, D. G. & Weis, R. M. The
receptor binding site for the methyltransferase of bacterial
chemotaxis is distinct from the sites of methylation.
Biochemistry 35, 4984–4993 (1996).

50.  Barnakov, A. N., Barnakova, L. A. & Hazelbauer, G. L.

Comparison in vitro of a high- and a low-abundance
chemoreceptor of Escherichia coli: similar kinase activation
but different methyl-accepting activities. J. Bacteriol. 180,
6713–6718 (1998).

51.  Le Moual, H., Quang, T. & Koshland, D. E. Jr. Methylation of

the Escherichia coli chemotaxis receptors: intra- and
interdimer mechanisms. Biochemistry 36, 13441–13448
(1997).

52.  Maddock, J. R. & Shapiro, L. Polar location of the

chemoreceptor complex in the Escherichia coli cell. Science
259, 1717–1723 (1993).
The use of immunogold electron microscopy to show
for the first time that chemoreceptors cluster at the
poles of bacterial cells.

53.  Wadhams, G. H., Martin, A. C. & Armitage, J. P.

Identification and localization of a methyl-accepting
chemotaxis protein in Rhodobacter sphaeroides. 
Mol. Microbiol. 36, 1222–1233 (2000).

54. Thomason, P. A., Wolanin, P. M. & Stock, J. B. Signal

transduction: receptor clusters as information processing
arrays. Curr. Biol. 12, R399–R401 (2002).

55.  Sourjik, V. & Berg, H. C. Localization of components of the
chemotaxis machinery of Escherichia coli using fluorescent
protein fusions. Mol. Microbiol. 37, 740–751 (2000).

56.  Martin, A. C., Wadhams, G. H. & Armitage, J. P. The roles of

the multiple CheW and CheA homologues in chemotaxis
and in chemoreceptor localization in Rhodobacter
sphaeroides. Mol. Microbiol. 40, 1261–1272 (2001).
57.  Homma, M., Shiomi, D., Homma, M. & Kawagishi, I.

Attractant binding alters arrangement of chemoreceptor
dimers within its cluster at a cell pole. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci.
USA 101, 3462–3467 (2004).

58.  Studdert, C. A. & Parkinson, J. S. Crosslinking snapshots of
bacterial chemoreceptor squads. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA
101, 2117–2122 (2004).

59.  Wolanin, P. M. & Stock, J. B. Bacterial chemosensing:
cooperative molecular logic. Curr. Biol. 14, R486–R487
(2004).

flagellar switch protein FliM interact with FliG, FliN and CheY.
J. Mol. Biol. 273, 623–634 (1997).

Identification of the binding interfaces on CheY for 
two of its targets, the phosphatase CheZ and the flagellar
switch protein FliM. J. Mol. Biol. 289, 1423–1433 
(1999).

29.  Sourjik, V. & Berg, H. C. Binding of the Escherichia coli

response regulator CheY to its target measured in vivo by
fluorescence resonance energy transfer. Proc. Natl Acad.
Sci. USA 99, 12669–12674 (2002).

30.  Morgan, D. G., Baumgartner, J. B. & Hazelbauer, G. L.

Proteins antigenically related to methyl-accepting
chemotaxis proteins of Escherichia coli detected in a wide
range of bacterial species. J. Bacteriol. 175, 133–140
(1993).

31.  Falke, J. J. & Hazelbauer, G. L. Transmembrane signaling in

bacterial chemoreceptors. Trends Biochem. Sci. 26,
257–265 (2001).

32.  Yeh, J. I. et al. High resolution structures of the ligand
binding domain of the wild type aspartate receptor. 
J. Mol. Biol. 262, 186–201 (1996).

33.  Kim, K. K., Yokota, H. & Kim, S. H. Four-helical-bundle

structure of the cytoplasmic domain of a serine chemotaxis
receptor. Nature 400, 787–792 (1999).

receptor — crystal structures of the ligand domain of
aspartate chemotaxis receptor with and without aspartate.
Biochemistry 31, 2192 (1992).

35.  Mowbray, S. L. & Koshland, D. E. Jr. Additive and

independent responses to a single receptor: aspartate 
and maltose stimuli on the Tar protein. Cell 50, 171–180
(1987).

36.  Beel, B. D. & Hazelbauer, G. L. Substitutions in the

periplasmic domain of low-abundance chemoreceptor Trg
that induce or reduce transmembrane signaling: kinase
activation and context effects. J. Bacteriol. 183, 671–679
(2001).
Isaac, B., Gallagher, G. J., Balazs, Y. S. & Thompson, L. K.
Site-directed rotational resonance solid-state NMR 
distance measurements probe structure and 
mechanism in the transmembrane domain of the serine
bacterial chemoreceptor. Biochemistry 41, 3025–3036 
(2002).

38.  Murphy, O. J., Kovacs, F. A., Sicard, E. L. & Thompson, L. K.

Site-directed solid-state NMR measurement of a ligand-
induced conformational change in the serine bacterial
chemoreceptor. Biochemistry 40, 1358–1366 (2001).

39.  Ottemann, K. M., Xiao, W., Shin, Y. K. & Koshland, D. E. Jr.

A piston model for transmembrane signaling of the
aspartate receptor. Science 285, 1751–1754 (1999).

40.  Ames, P. & Parkinson, J. S. Transmembrane signaling by
bacterial chemoreceptors: E. coli transducers with locked
signal output. Cell 55, 817–826 (1988).

response regulator genes in the complete and annotated
genome sequences of prokaryotes. FEMS Microbiol. Lett.
231, 277–281 (2004).

7.  Stock, A. M., Robinson, V. L. & Goudreau, P. N. 

Two-component signal transduction. Annu. Rev. Biochem.
69, 183–215 (2000).
Inouye, M. & Dutta, R. Histidine Kinases in Signal
Transduction (Academic Press, London, UK, 2003).

8. 

9.  Potter, C. A. et al. Expression, purification and

characterisation of full-length histidine protein kinase RegB
from Rhodobacter sphaeroides. J. Mol. Biol. 320, 201–213
(2002).

10.  Armitage, J. P. Bacterial tactic responses. Adv. Microb.

Physiol. 41, 229–289 (1999).

11.  Bren, A. & Eisenbach, M. How signals are heard during

bacterial chemotaxis: protein–protein interactions in 
sensory signal propagation. J. Bacteriol. 182, 6865–6873
(2000).

12.  Faguy, D. M. & Jarrell, K. F. A twisted tale: the origin and

evolution of motility and chemotaxis in prokaryotes.
Microbiology 145, 279–281 (1999).

13.  Schnitzer, M. J., Block, S. M., Berg, H. C. & Purcell, E. M.

Biology of the Chemotactic Response (Armitage, J. P. &
Lackie, J. M. eds) 15–34 (Cambridge Univ. Press, UK,
1990).

sensing of chemical gradients: an experimental evidence.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 100, 5748–5753 (2003).

15.  Turner, L., Ryu, W. S. & Berg, H. C. Real-time imaging of

fluorescent flagellar filaments. J. Bacteriol. 182, 2793–2801
(2000).

16.  Armitage, J. P. & Schmitt, R. Bacterial chemotaxis:

Rhodobacter sphaeroides and Sinorhizobium meliloti —
variations on a theme? Microbiology 143, 3671–3682
(1997).

17.  Adler, J. Chemoreceptors in bacteria. Science 166,

1588–1597 (1969).

18.  Levin, M. D., Morton, F. C., Abouhamad, W. N., Bourret, R. B.

& Bray, D. Origins of individual swimming behavior in
bacteria. Biophys. J. 74, 175–181 (1998).

19. Alon, U., Surette, M. G., Barkai, N. & Leibler, S. Robustness

37. 

in bacterial chemotaxis. Nature 397, 168–171 (1999).
A mathematical consideration of the processes of
adaptation and robustness in the bacterial
chemotaxis pathway.

20.  Kim, S. H., Wang, W. R. & Kim, K. K. Dynamic and
clustering model of bacterial chemotaxis receptors:
structural basis for signaling and high sensitivity. Proc. Natl
Acad. Sci. USA 99, 11611–11615 (2002).

21.  Sourjik, V. & Berg, H. C. Functional interactions between
receptors in bacterial chemotaxis. Nature 428, 437–441
(2004).

22. Sourjik, V. & Berg, H. C. Receptor sensitivity in bacterial

chemotaxis. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 99, 123–127 (2002).

14.  Thar, R. & Kühl, M. Bacteria are not too small for spatial

34.  Milburn, M. V. et al. Structural changes in a transmembrane

NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY

VOLUME 5 | DECEMBER 2004 | 1 0 3 5

©  2004 Nature  Publishing Group

R E V I E W S

60. Bray, D., Levin, M. D. & Morton, F. C. Receptor clustering as

82.  Stewart, R. C., Jahreis, K. & Parkinson, J. S. Rapid

105. Shiomi, D., Zhulin, I. B., Homma, M. & Kawagishi, I. Dual

a cellular mechanism to control sensitivity. Nature 393,
85–88 (1998).
One of the first papers to propose that
chemoreceptor clustering could explain the sensitivity
and gain in the chemotaxis pathway.

phosphotransfer to CheY from a CheA protein lacking the
CheY-binding domain. Biochemistry 39, 13157–13165 (2000).

83.  Hess, J. F., Bourret, R. B. & Simon, M. I. Histidine

phosphorylation and phosphoryl group transfer in bacterial
chemotaxis. Nature 336, 139–143 (1988).

61.  Levit, M. N., Grebe, T. W. & Stock, J. B. Organization of the

84.  Halkides, C. J. et al. The 1.9 Å resolution crystal structure of

receptor-kinase signaling array that regulates Escherichia
coli chemotaxis. J. Biol. Chem. 277, 36748–36754 (2002).

62.  Lamanna, A. C. et al. Conserved amplification of
chemotactic responses through chemoreceptor
interactions. J. Bacteriol. 184, 4981–4987 (2002).

63.  Ames, P., Studdert, C. A., Reiser, R. H. & Parkinson, J. S.
Collaborative signaling by mixed chemoreceptor teams in
Escherichia coli. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 99, 7060–7065
(2002).

64. Li, M. & Hazelbauer, G. L. Cellular stoichiometries of the

components of the chemotaxis signaling complex. 
J. Bacteriol. 186, 3687–3694 (2004).
A quantitative western-blot analysis of chemotaxis
proteins in cells that were grown under different
growth conditions, which showed that although the
absolute numbers of the signalling components vary,
the stoichiometry between them remains relatively
constant.

65.  Shimizu, T. S. et al. Molecular model of a lattice of signalling
proteins involved in bacterial chemotaxis. Nature Cell Biol. 2,
792–796 (2000).

66.  Rebbapragada, A. et al. The Aer protein and the serine

chemoreceptor Tsr independently sense intracellular energy
levels and transduce oxygen, redox, and energy signals for
Escherichia coli behavior. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 94,
10541–10546 (1997).

phosphono-CheY, an analogue of the active form of the
response regulator, CheY. Biochemistry 39, 5280–5286
(2000).

85.  Lee, S. Y. et al. Crystal structure of activated CheY —

comparison with other activated receiver domains. 
J. Biol. Chem. 276, 16425–16431 (2001).

86.  Cho, H. S. et al. NMR structure of activated CheY. 

J. Mol. Biol. 297, 543–551 (2000).

87.  Bren, A. & Eisenbach, M. The N terminus of the flagellar

switch protein, FliM, is the binding domain for the
chemotactic response regulator, CheY. J. Mol. Biol. 278,
507–514 (1998).

88. Sagi, Y., Khan, S. & Eisenbach, M. Binding of the

chemotaxis response regulator CheY to the isolated, intact
switch complex of the bacterial flagellar motor — lack of
cooperativity. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 25867–25871 (2003).
Showed that CheY–P binds to the switch component
of the bacterial flagellar motor in a non-cooperative
manner, which indicates that any amplification that
occurs at the motor occurs after CheY–P binding.

89.  Lee, S. Y. et al. Crystal structure of an activated response
regulator bound to its target. Nature Struct. Biol. 8, 52–56
(2001).

90.  Da Re, S. S., Deville-Bonne, D., Tolstykh, T., Veron, M. &

Stock, J. B. Kinetics of CheY phosphorylation by small
molecule phosphodonors. FEBS Lett. 457, 323–326 (1999).

recognition of the bacterial chemoreceptor by chemotaxis-
specific domains of the CheR methyltransferase. J. Biol.
Chem. 277, 42325–42333 (2002).

106. Djordjevic, S., Goudreau, P. N., Xu, Q., Stock, A. M. & 
West, A. H. Structural basis for methylesterase CheB
regulation by a phosphorylation-activated domain. Proc.
Natl Acad. Sci. USA 95, 1381–1386 (1998).

107. Anand, G. S. & Stock, A. M. Kinetic basis for the stimulatory

effect of phosphorylation on the methylesterase activity of
CheB. Biochemistry 41, 6752–6760 (2002).

108. Levit, M. N., Liu, Y. & Stock, J. B. Stimulus response
coupling in bacterial chemotaxis: receptor dimers in
signalling arrays. Mol. Microbiol. 30, 459–466 (1998).
109. Szurmant, H. & Ordal, G. W. Diversity in chemotaxis

mechanisms among the bacteria and Archaea. Microbiol.
Mol. Biol. Rev. 68, 301–319 (2004).

110. Bischoff, D. S., Bourret, R. B., Kirsch, M. L. & Ordal, G. W.
Purification and characterization of Bacillus subtilis CheY.
Biochemistry 32, 9256–9261 (1993).

111. Zimmer, M. A., Tiu, J., Collins, M. A. & Ordal, G. W. Selective

methylation changes on the Bacillus subtilis chemotaxis
receptor McpB promote adaptation. J. Biol. Chemistry 275,
24264–24272 (2000).

112. Nordmann, B. et al. Identification of volatile forms of methyl

groups released by Halobacterium salinarium. J. Biol.
Chem. 269, 16449–16454 (1994).

113. Thoelke, M. S., Kirby, J. R. & Ordal, G. W. Novel methyl

transfer during chemotaxis in Bacillus subtilis. Biochemistry
28, 5585–5589 (1989).

114. Kirby, J. R., Kristich, C. J., Feinberg, S. L. & Ordal, G. W.

Methanol production during chemotaxis to amino acids in
Bacillus subtilis. Mol. Microbiol. 24, 869–878 (1997).

67.  Bibikov, S. I., Barnes, L. A., Gitin, Y. & Parkinson, J. S.

91.  Barak, R. & Eisenbach, M. Acetylation of the response

115. Kirsch, M. L., Peters, P. D., Hanlon, D. W., Kirby, J. R. &

Domain organization and flavin adenine dinucleotide-binding
determinants in the aerotaxis signal transducer Aer of
Escherichia coli. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 97, 5830–5835
(2000).

68.  Fu, R., Wall, J. D. & Voordouw, G. DcrA, a c-type heme-

containing methyl-accepting chemotaxis protein from
Desulfovibrio vulgaris Hildenborough, senses the oxygen
concentration or redox potential of the environment. 
J. Bacteriol. 176, 344–350 (1994).

69.  Hou, S. et al. Myoglobin-like aerotaxis transducers in
Archaea and bacteria. Nature 403, 540–544 (2000).

70.  Lux, R. et al. Elucidation of a PTS-carbohydrate

chemotactic signal pathway in Escherichia coli using a 
time-resolved behavioral assay. Mol. Biol. Cell 10,
1133–1146 (1999).

71.  Boukhvalova, M., VanBruggen, R. & Stewart, R. C. CheA
kinase and chemoreceptor interaction surfaces on CheW. 
J. Biol. Chem. 277, 23596–23603 (2002).

72.  Griswold, I. J. et al. The solution structure and interactions of

CheW from Thermotoga maritima. Nature Struct. Biol. 9,
121–125 (2002).

73.  Shah, D. S. et al. Identification of a fourth cheY gene in
Rhodobacter sphaeroides and interspecies interaction
within the bacterial chemotaxis signal transduction pathway.
Mol. Microbiol. 35, 101–112 (2000).

74.  Hamblin, P. A., Bourne, N. A. & Armitage, J. P.

Characterization of the chemotaxis protein CheW 
from Rhodobacter sphaeroides and its effect on the
behaviour of Escherichia coli. Mol. Microbiol. 24, 41–51
(1997).

75.  Morrison, T. B. & Parkinson, J. S. A fragment liberated from
the Escherichia coli CheA kinase that blocks stimulatory, but
not inhibitory, chemoreceptor signaling. J. Bacteriol. 179,
5543–5550 (1997).

76.  Mourey, L. et al. Crystal structure of the CheA histidine

phosphotransfer domain that mediates response regulator
phosphorylation in bacterial chemotaxis. J. Biol. Chem. 276,
31074–31082 (2001).

regulator, CheY, is involved in bacterial chemotaxis. 
Mol. Microbiol. 40, 731–743 (2001).

92.  Blat, Y. & Eisenbach, M. Oligomerization of the phosphatase

CheZ upon interaction with the phosphorylated form of
CheY — the signal protein of bacterial chemotaxis. 
J. Biol. Chem. 271, 1226–1231 (1996).

93.  Blat, Y. & Eisenbach, M. Mutants with defective

phosphatase activity show no phosphorylation-dependent
oligomerization of CheZ. The phosphatase of bacterial
chemotaxis. J. Biol. Chem. 271, 1232–1236 (1996).

94.  Zhao, R., Collins, E. J., Bourret, R. B. & Silversmith, R. E.

Structure and catalytic mechanism of the E. coli chemotaxis
phosphatase CheZ. Nature Struct. Biol. 9, 570–575 (2002).

95. Sourjik, V. & Schmitt, R. Phosphotransfer between CheA,
CheY1, and CheY2 in the chemotaxis signal transduction
chain of Rhizobium meliloti. Biochemistry 37, 2327–2335
(1998).
Identified an alternative signal-termination
mechanism, which uses a phosphate sink in a
bacterial species that lacks CheZ.

96.  Karatan, E., Saulmon, M. M., Bunn, M. W. & Ordal, G. W.

Phosphorylation of the response regulator CheV is required
for adaptation to attractants during Bacillus subtilis
chemotaxis. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 43618–43626 (2001).

97.  Pittman, M. S., Goodwin, M. & Kelly, D. J. Chemotaxis in the

human gastric pathogen Helicobacter pylori: different roles
for CheW and the three CheV paralogues, and evidence for
CheV2 phosphorylation. Microbiology 147, 2493–2504
(2001).

98.  Jiang, Z. Y. & Bauer, C. E. Analysis of a chemotaxis operon

from Rhodospirillum centenum. J. Bacteriol. 179,
5712–5719 (1997).

99. Porter, S. L. & Armitage, J. P. Phosphotransfer in

Rhodobacter sphaeroides chemotaxis. J. Mol. Biol. 324,
35–45 (2002).
Showed that different CheA proteins from 
R. sphaeroides differentially phosphorylate specific
RRs.

77.  Bilwes, A. M., Alex, L. A., Crane, B. R. & Simon, M. I.

100. Springer, W. R. & Koshland, D. E. Jr. Identification of a

Structure of CheA, a signal-transducing histidine kinase. 
Cell 96, 131–141 (1999).

78.  Bourret, R. B., Davagnino, J. & Simon, M. I. The carboxy-
terminal portion of the CheA kinase mediates regulation of
autophosphorylation by transducer and CheW. J. Bacteriol.
175, 2097–2101 (1993).

79.  Levit, M. N., Liu, Y. & Stock, J. B. Mechanism of CheA

protein kinase activation in receptor signaling complexes.
Biochemistry 38, 6651–6658 (1999).

80.  Li, J. Y., Swanson, R. V., Simon, M. I. & Weis, R. M. The
response regulators CheB and CheY exhibit competitive
binding to the kinase CheA. Biochemistry 34, 14626–14636
(1995).

81.  Welch, M., Chinardet, N., Mourey, L., Birck, C. & 

Samama, J. P. Structure of the CheY-binding domain of
histidine kinase CheA in complex with CheY. Nature Struct.
Biol. 5, 25–29 (1998).

protein methyltransferase as the cheR gene product in the
bacterial sensing system. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 74,
533–537 (1977).

101. Kehry, M. R. & Dahlquist, F. W. Adaptation in bacterial

chemotaxis: CheB-dependent modification permits
additional methylations of sensory transducing proteins. 
Cell 29, 761–772 (1982).

102. Kehry, M. R., Doak, T. G. & Dahlquist, F. W. Sensory
adaptation in bacterial chemotaxis — regulation of
demethylation. J. Bacteriol. 163, 983–990 (1985).
103. Djordjevic, S. & Stock, A. M. Chemotaxis receptor

recognition by protein methyltransferase CheR. Nature
Struct. Biol. 5, 446–450 (1998).

104. Djordjevic, S. & Stock, A. M. Crystal structure of the

chemotaxis receptor methyltransferase CheR suggests a
conserved structural motif for binding 
S-adenosylmethionine. Structure 5, 545–558 (1997).

Ordal, G. W. Chemotactic methylesterase promotes
adaptation to high concentrations of attractant in Bacillus
subtilis. J. Biol. Chem. 268, 18610–18616 (1993).

116. Rosario, M. M. & Ordal, G. W. CheC and CheD interact to
regulate methylation of Bacillus subtilis methyl-accepting
chemotaxis proteins. Mol. Microbiol. 21, 511–518 (1996).

117. Szurmant, H., Muff, T. J. & Ordal, G. W. Bacillus subtilis

CheC and FliY are members of a novel class of CheY–P-
hydrolyzing proteins in the chemotactic signal transduction
cascade. J. Biol. Chem. 279, 21787–21792 (2004).
Identified roles for extra chemotaxis proteins in 
B. subtilis.

118. Porter, S. L., Warren, A. V., Martin, A. C. & Armitage, J. P.

The third chemotaxis locus of Rhodobacter sphaeroides is
essential for chemotaxis. Mol. Microbiol. 46, 1081–1094
(2002).

119. Wadhams, G. H., Warren, A. V., Martin, A. C. & Armitage, J. P.

Targeting of two signal transduction pathways to different
regions of the bacterial cell. Mol. Microbiol. 50, 763–770
(2003).
Showed for the first time that the components of two
chemotaxis pathways are physically separated within
a bacterial cell.

120. Porter, S. L. & Armitage, J. P. Chemotaxis in Rhodobacter
sphaeroides requires an atypical histidine protein kinase. 
J. Biol. Chem. 12 Oct 2004 (doi:10.1074/jbc.M408855200).

121. O’Toole, R. et al. The chemotactic response of Vibrio
anguillarum to fish intestinal mucus is mediated by a
combination of multiple mucus components. J. Bacteriol.
181, 4308–4317 (1999).

122. Kim, H. & Farrand, S. K. Opine catabolic loci from

Agrobacterium plasmids confer chemotaxis to their cognate
substrates. Mol. Plant Microbe Interact. 11, 131–143
(1998).

123. Zhu, J. & Mekalanos, J. J. Quorum sensing-dependent

biofilms enhance colonization in Vibrio cholerae. Dev. Cell 5,
647–656 (2003).

124. Butler, S. M. & Camilli, A. Both chemotaxis and net motility
greatly influence the infectivity of Vibrio cholerae. Proc. Natl
Acad. Sci. USA 101, 5018–5023 (2004).

125. Pandya, S., Iyer, P., Gaitonde, V., Parekh, T. & Desai, A.

Chemotaxis of Rhizobium SP.S2 towards Cajanus cajan root
exudate and its major components. Curr. Microbiol. 38,
205–209 (1999).

126. Millikan, D. S. & Ruby, E. G. FlrA, a σ54-dependent

transcriptional activator in Vibrio fischeri, is required for
motility and symbiotic light-organ colonization. J. Bacteriol.
185, 3547–3557 (2003).

127. Stoodley, P., Sauer, K., Davies, D. G. & Costerton, J. W.

Biofilms as complex differentiated communities. Annu. Rev.
Microbiol. 56, 187–209 (2002).

128. Costerton, J. W. Anaerobic biofilm infections in cystic

fibrosis. Mol. Cell 10, 699–700 (2002).

129. Taga, M. E. & Bassler, B. L. Chemical communication

among bacteria. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 100,
14549–14554 (2003).

1036 | DECEMBER 2004 | VOLUME 5

www.nature.com/reviews/molcellbio

©  2004 Nature  Publishing Group

R E V I E W S

130. Berg, H. C. The rotary motor of bacterial flagella. 

Annu. Rev. Biochem. 72, 19–54 (2003).
A comprehensive review of the mechanism 
of rotation of the bacterial flagellar motor.

131. Atsumi, T., McCarter, L. & Imae, Y. Polar and lateral 

flagellar motors of marine Vibrio are driven by 
different ion-motive forces. Nature 355, 182–184 
(1992).

138. Hueck, C. J. Type III protein secretion systems in bacterial
pathogens of animals and plants. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev.
62, 379–433 (1998).

139. Oster, G. & Wang, H. Rotary protein motors. Trends Cell

Biol. 13, 114–121 (2003).

140. Shi, W., Kohler, T. & Zusman, D. R. Chemotaxis plays a role

in the social behaviour of Myxococcus xanthus. 
Mol. Microbiol. 9, 601–611 (1993).

132. Mattick, J. S. Type IV pili and twitching motility. Annu. Rev.

141. Shi, W. Y., Yang, Z. M., Sun, H., Lancero, H. & Tong, L. M.

Microbiol. 56, 289–314 (2002).

133. Kaiser, D. Coupling cell movement to multicellular

development in Myxobacteria. Nature Rev. Microbiol. 1,
45–54 (2003).

134. McBride, M. J. Bacterial gliding motility: multiple

mechanisms for cell movement over surfaces. Annu. Rev.
Microbiol. 55, 49–75 (2001).

135. Wolgemuth, C. W., Igoshin, O. & Oster, G. The motility of

mollicutes. Biophys. J. 85, 828–842 (2003).

136. Armitage, J. P., Pitta, T. P., Vigeant, M. A., Packer, H. L. &

Ford, R. M. Transformations in flagellar structure of
Rhodobacter sphaeroides and possible relationship to
changes in swimming speed. J. Bacteriol. 181, 4825–4833
(1999).

137. Macnab, R. M. How bacteria assemble flagella. 

Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 57, 77–100 (2003).
A review of the process of bacterial flagella 
assembly.

Phenotypic analyses of frz and dif double mutants of
Myxococcus xanthus. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 192, 211–215
(2000).

142. Kirby, J. R. & Zusman, D. R. Chemosensory regulation of
developmental gene expression in Myxococcus xanthus.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 100, 2008–2013 (2003).
Provides an example of an operon that encodes
chemotaxis-protein homologues that are not involved
in the regulation of bacterial motility.

143. Koradi, R., Billeter, M. & Wuthrich, K. MOLMOL: a program

for display and analysis of macromolecular structures. 
J. Mol. Graph. 14, 51–61 (1996).

144. Bray, D. Genomics: molecular prodigality. Science 299,

1189–1190 (2003).

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences
Research Council for funding the research on R. sphaeroides

behaviour that has been carried out in our laboratory, and we apol-
ogise to the many authors whose work we have not been able to
include because of space restraints.

Competing interests staement
The authors declare no competing financial interests.

Online links

DATABASES
The following terms in this article are linked online to:
Entrez: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez
ArcB | CheA | CheB | CheC | CheD | CheR | CheV | CheW | CheY |
CheZ | FliM | KinB | McpB | NtrB | PrrB | Tap | Tar | Trg | Tsr
Interpro: http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/
FAD-binding domain  | HAMP domain | HPt domain | PAS domain |
SH3
Protein Data Bank: http://www.rcsb.org/pdb/
1A2O | 1ANF | 1B3Q | 1BC5 | 1EAY | 1EHC | 1I5N | 1KMI | 1KOS |
1QU7 | 1WAT

FURTHER INFORMATION
Department of Energy Joint Genome Institute:
http://www.jgi.doe.gov
The Institute for Genomic Research: http://www.tigr.org
Access to this links box is available online.

NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY

VOLUME 5 | DECEMBER 2004 | 1 0 3 7

©  2004 Nature  Publishing Group

