I J o

D

R

The future of lucid dreaming treatment
Commentary on “The neurobiology of consciousness:  
Lucid dreaming wakes up” by J. Allan Hobson
Josefin Gavie1 & Antti Revonsuo1, 2
1School of Humanities and Informatics, University of Skövde, Sweden 
2Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, University of Turku, Finland

Introduction

1. 
Hobson (2009) provides us with a timely and useful review 
of the history and the latest developments in lucid dreaming 
research.  It  seems  that  lucid  dreaming  is,  although  meth-
odologically a challenging phenomenon to study, neverthe-
less  becoming  a  part  of  the  mainstream  cognitive  neuro-
sciences. As Hobson’s review shows, our understanding of 
what kinds of states of consciousness and brain areas are 
involved  in  the  production  of  lucid  dreams  has  improved 
considerably. 

Hobson  (2009)  does  not  discuss  the  potential  practical 
applications  of  lucid  dreaming.  In  particular,  it  has  been 
argued that lucid dreaming may have potential as a thera-
peutic tool against recurrent nightmares (Green & McCreery, 
1994; Halliday, 1988; LaBerge, 1985; LaBerge & Rheingold, 
1990; Tholey, 1988). Therefore, the aim of the present com-
mentary is to draw attention to the potentially important ap-
plication that connects lucid dreams with nightmares: Lucid 
Dreaming Treatment (LDT). 

Nightmares  and  lucidity  are  closely  related  phenomena 
also because, in some dreamers, highly unpleasant dreams 
may  evoke  unprompted  lucidity.  For  people  who  suffer 
from recurrent nightmares that lead to sleep problems and 
increased  anxiety,  lucidity  might  prove  to  be  a  potentially 
useful  tool  that  offers  a  way  to  control  the  content  of  the 
dream and thereby master the threatening situation within 
the dream. This could lead to a reduced frequency of night-
mares,  to  less  frightening  nightmares,  and  thus  alleviate 
some of the suffering related to recurrent nightmares.

Lucid Dreaming Treatment

2. 
A nightmare is defined by DSM–IV as an extremely fright-
ening dream resulting in direct awakening and as having a 
negative impact on different aspects of waking life (Ameri-
can Psychiatric Association, 2000). Research studies have 
investigated  the  effects  of  LDT  to  reduce  nightmare  fre-
quency. The two key components of the treatment are, first, 
learning to use cues that help the dreamer to become lucid 
during nightmares and, second, learning what one can do 

Corresponding address: 
Josefin Gavie, School of Humanities and Informatics, Univer-
sity of Skövde, Sweden. 
Email: j_gavie@hotmail.com

there after lucidity is reached. The participants in LDT are 
taught different lucid dreaming induction techniques, such 
as questioning the nature of the environment ‘Is this real or 
am  I  dreaming?’  and  to  intentionally  recognize  the  fright-
ening  scenery  of  their  nightmare  to  be  a  dream.  The  par-
ticipants then choose some feature or content of the dream 
that they will attempt to change when lucid, so that the dis-
tressing nightmare will be redirected to a different track with 
an alternative (and less fearsome) ending. 

Converging  results  from  LDT  studies  suggest  that  lucid 
dreaming  treatment  is  in  fact  effective  for  reducing  night-
mares.  Several  of  the  participants  in  such  studies  have 
shown a decreased frequency of nightmares (Spoormaker 
& van den Bout, 2006; Spoormaker, van den Bout & Meijer, 
2003; Zadra & Pihl, 1997) and for some the treatment also 
contributed to a slightly improved subjective sleep quality 
(Spoormaker et al., 2003). However, some participants did 
experience  fewer  nightmares  after  engaging  in  LDT  even 
though they had not become lucid at all and consequently 
could not have lucidly altered the content of their dreams. 
This  suggests  that  the  mere  idea  or  feeling,  necessarily 
included  in  LDT,  of  being  potentially  able  to  control  and 
master one’s nightmares might play an equally vital role for 
reducing  nightmares  (Spoormaker  &  van  den  Bout,  2006; 
Spoormaker et al., 2003; Zadra & Pihl, 1997). Perhaps the 
feeling of potential control reduces anxiety as such, and the 
reduced levels of anxiety lead to a lesser frequency of night-
mares.

Nightmares in Posttraumatic Stress Disorder

3. 
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) is an anxiety disorder 
which  may  develop  from  exposure  to  a  life-threatening  or 
otherwise traumatizing event. The symptoms of PTSD are 
collected under three clusters, where one cluster consists of 
intrusion and persistent recollection of the traumatic event, 
including  nightmares.  Posttraumatic  nightmares  are  de-
fined by the cluster of symptoms related to the traumatizing 
event and are thus defined as recurring nightmares of the 
event  (American  Psychiatric  Association,  2000).  Research 
has  shown  that  posttraumatic  nightmares  are  among  the 
most common symptoms in PTSD patients: up to 60-80% 
of PTSD patients suffer from them.

Treating PTSD as such does not necessarily reduce the 
frequency  of  nightmares  (Spoormaker,  2008).  PTSD  and 
nightmares may in fact become intertwined in such a man-
ner that nightmares strengthen PTSD symptoms and PTSD 
in turn causes nightmares. Disturbed sleep and nightmares 

International Journal of Dream Research   Volume 3, No. 1 (2010)

13

I J o

D

R

may in fact be a risk factor for developing and maintaining 
PTSD (Mellman & Hipolito, 2006). Spoormaker (2008) sug-
gests that more attention should be paid to the PTSD night-
mares as such, independently of the other PTSD symptoms, 
because the nightmares are not just a secondary symptom 
of PTSD but instead could play a central part of the prog-
ress of PTSD. Furthermore, posttraumatic nightmares may 
develop into a disorder of its own. 

LDT could turn out to be an effective supplement to the 
treatment  of  PTSD,  but  so  far  there  are  very  few  studies 
directly exploring this possibility. If the posttraumatic night-
mares  increase  the  patient’s  general  levels  of  anxiety  and 
fear, and remind him or her vividly of the original traumatic 
event every night, then the nightmares might prove to play 
an  important  role  in  enhancing  and  prolonging  the  other 
PTSD  symptoms  during  wakefulness.  Conversely,  treating 
the PTSD nightmares successfully (with e.g. LDT) might re-
duce the other PTSD symptoms considerably.

A study by Spoormaker and van den Bout (2006) made 
an attempt to treat PTSD patients and other chronic night-
mare sufferes with LDT. However, in this study no significant 
changes of PTSD severity or the subjective quality of sleep 
were found. This failure may have been due to the low base-
line  for  PTSD  symptom  severity  (Spoormaker  &  van  den 
Bout, 2006) and to the relatively brief intervention that failed 
to lead to a high frequency of lucidity within the participants. 
Furthermore,  only  a  few  of  the  participants  suffered  from 
posttraumatic nightmares, and only one participant was ac-
tually diagnosed with PTSD. Therefore, on the basis of this 
single study it is premature to draw any final conclusions on 
the effectiveness of LDT on PTSD. Rather it is an encour-
agement for future research to investigate the effect of LDT 
on  PTSD  with  larger  groups  of  diagnosed  PTSD  patients 
and by using more intense lucidity interventions and longer 
follow-up of the effects of LDT on the participants.

Fear: A Key Component

4. 
According  to  DSM-IV,  fear  is  a  key  component  of  night-
mares.  DSM–IV  (American  Psychiatric  Association,  2000), 
describes fear as one of the leading features of PTSD, too. 
In  this  case  fear  refers  both  to  the  feeling  of  fear  during 
the original traumatic event and in relation to symptoms of 
avoidance as everything associable with the actual events 
evokes the immense feeling of fear. For PTSD patients the 
content of their nightmares are typically reflecting the origi-
nal traumatic events quite directly. At the emotional level this 
means that the intense feelings of fear that were originally 
experienced will be re-experienced every time the PTSD re-
lated nightmares occur.

Incidentally,  recent  research  has  shown  that  REM  sleep 
strengthens especially negative emotional memories even in 
normal subjects (Payne, Stickgold, Swanberg & Kensinger, 
2008) and that threatening events are very common in the 
dreams of nontraumatized subjects, too (Valli & Revonsuo, 
2009).  Thus,  PTSD  nightmares  may  be  interpreted  as  the 
over-activation  of  a  dream  generation  mechanism  whose 
biological function is to preserve, strengthen, and rehearse 
survival-related  memories  and  thereby  enhance  the  prob-
ability of survival of the organism (Revonsuo, 2000).

The fear experienced by the PTSD nightmare sufferer may 
thus have its origin in over-activated emotional mechanisms 
that merely try to carry out their biological function. Lucid 
dreaming allows the dreamer to take control of the dream. 
Knowing that it is possible to master one’s nightmares in-

stead of being a helpless victim possibly contributes to the 
reduction of nightmares with LDT. 

More  and  better  studies  would  be  needed  to  establish 
whether utilizing LDT as a treatment for posttraumatic night-
mares can actually reduce nightmare frequency and aid the 
patient to master their fear in the nightmares. If LDT is found 
effective against nightmares, it might also be effective in re-
ducing the fear associated with the original traumatic event 
in waking life. This would make LDT a useful supplement in 
the treatment of PTSD in general.

Conclusion

5. 
Although only little published research has been dedicated to 
the investigation of Lucid Dreaming Treatment, this research 
has presented preliminary and promising results, suggest-
ing that LDT is effective in reducing nightmares. The reduc-
tion of nightmare frequency may consequently lead to bet-
ter life quality during wakefulness. Earlier studies show that 
nightmares  are  not  only  a  significant  component  of  PTSD 
symptoms but that they also can develop into a disorder of 
their own. This further underscores the need to find effective 
treatments  for  chronic  nightmares.  LDT  shows  promising 
potential  for  the  reduction  of  nightmare  frequency,  but  its 
effectiveness is in need of substantial future exploration and 
validation before LDT might become more widely applied in 
the  appropriate  patient  populations.  In  future  studies,  the 
effectiveness  of  LDT  should  be  compared  to  other  cogni-
tive-restructuring techniques: larger sample sizes should be 
used and the intensity and length of the lucidity intervention 
should be substantially increased. 

References
American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and Sta-
tistic Manual of Mental Disorders (4th ed.). Washington 
DC: American Psychiatric Press.

Green, C., & McCreery, C. (1994). Lucid Dreaming: The Paradox 

of Consciousness During Sleep. London: Routledge.

Halliday,  G.  (1988).  Lucid  dreaming:  Using  nightmares  and 
sleep-wake confusion. In J. Gackenbach, & S. LaBerge 
(Eds.),  Conscious  Mind,  Sleeping  Brain  (pp.  305-307). 
New York: Plenum.

Hobson, A. (2009). The Neurobiology of Consciousness: Lucid 
Dreaming  Wakes  Up.  International  Journal  of  Dream 
Research , 2, 41-44.

LaBerge, S. (1985). Lucid Dreaming: The power of Being Awake 

& Aware in Your Dreams. New York: Ballantine Books.

LaBerge, S., & Rheingold, H. (1990). Exploring the World of Lu-

cid Dreaming. New York: Ballantine Books.

Mellman, T. A., & Hipolito, M. M. (2006). Sleep disturbances in 
the aftermath of trauma and posttraumatic stress disor-
der. CNS Spectrums , 11, 611-615.

Payne,  J.D.,  Stickgold,  R.,  Swanberg,  K.  &  Kensinger,  E.A. 
(2008) Sleep preferentially enhances memory for emo-
tional  components  of  scenes.  Psychological  Science 
19, 781-788.

Revonsuo, A. (2000). The Reinterpretation of Dreams: An Evo-
lutionary Hypothesis of the Function of Dreaming. The 
Behavioral and brain sciences , 23, 793-1121.

Spoormaker, V. I. (2008). A Cognitive Model of Recurrent Night-
mares. International Journal of Dream Research , 1, 15-
22.

Spoormaker,  V.  I.,  &  van  den  Bout,  J.  (2006).  Lucid  dreaming 
treatment for nightmares: a pilot-study. Psychotherapy 
and Psychosomatics , 75, 389-394.

Spoormaker, V. I., van den Bout, J., & Meijer, E. J. (2003). Lucid 

14

International Journal of Dream Research   Volume 3, No. 1 (2010)

I J o

D

R

dreaming  treatment  for  nightmares:  a  series  of  cases. 
Dreaming , 13, 181-186.

Tholey,  P.  (1988).  A  model  for  lucidity  training  as  a  means  of 
self-healing  and  psychological  growth.  In  J.  Gacken-
bach,  &  S.  LaBerge  (Eds.),  Conscious  Mind,  Sleeping 
Brain (pp. 263-287). New York: Plenum.

Valli, K., & Revonsuo, A. (2009). The threat simulation theory in 
light of recent empirical evidence: a review. The Ameri-
can Journal of Psychology , 122, 17-38.

Zadra, A. L., & Pihl, R. O. (1997). Lucid dreaming as a treatment 
for  recurrent  nightmares.  Psychotherapy  and  Psycho-
somatics , 66, 50-55.

International Journal of Dream Research   Volume 3, No. 1 (2010)

15

