This article was downloaded by: [Universität Osnabrueck]
On: 12 November 2014, At: 08:14
Publisher: Routledge
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number:
1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer
Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

Economy and Society
Publication details, including
instructions for authors and subscription
information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/reso20
Maximizing shareholder
value: a new ideology
for corporate
governance
William Lazonick & Mary O'Sullivan
Published online: 02 Dec 2010.

To cite this article: William Lazonick & Mary O'Sullivan (2000) Maximizing
shareholder value: a new ideology for corporate governance, Economy
and Society, 29:1, 13-35

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/030851400360541

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of
all the information (the “Content”) contained in the publications
on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our
licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as
to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of
the Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication
are the opinions and views of the authors, and are not the views
of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content
should not be relied upon and should be independently verified
with primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall not
be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands,
costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or

howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with,
in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private
study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction,
redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply,
or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden.
Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://
www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 08:14 12 November 2014 Economy and Society Volume 29 Number 1 February 2000: 13–35

Maximizing shareholder
value: a new ideology for
corporate governance

William Lazonick and Mary O’Sullivan

Abstract

The decade-long boom in the US stock market and the more recent boom in the US
economy have fostered widespread belief in the economic bene ts of the maximiz-
ation of shareholder value as  a principle of corporate governance. In this  paper, we
provide an historical analysis of the rise of shareholder value as a principle of corpor-
ate governance in the United States, tracing the transformation of US corporate strat-
egy from an orientation towards retention of corporate earnings and reinvestment in
corporate growth through the 1970s to one of downsizing of corporate labour forces
and distribution of corporate earnings to shareholders over the past two decades. We
then consider the recent performance of the US economy, and raise questions about
the relation between the maximization of shareholder value and the sustainability  of
economic prosperity.

Keywords: shareholder value; corporate governance; corporate strategy; US economy.

Introduction

Over  the  past  two  decades  the  ideology  of shareholder  value  has  become
entrenched as  a principle of corporate governance among companies based in
the United States and Britain. Over the past two or three years, the rhetoric of
shareholder value has become prominent in the corporate governance debates in
European nations such as Germany, France and Sweden. Within the past year,

William  Lazonick  and  Mary  O’Sullivan,  INSEAD,  Boulevard  de  Constance,  77305
Fontainebleau Cedex, France. E-mail: William.Lazonick@insead.fr;
Mary.O.Sullivan@insead.fr

Copyright © 2000 Taylor & Francis Ltd 0308-5147

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 08:14 12 November 2014 14

Economy and Society

the  arguments for  ‘maximizing shareholder value’ have even achieved promi-
nence in Japan. In 1999 the OECD issued a document, The OECD Principles of
Corporate Governance, that emphasizes that corporations should be run,  rst and
foremost, in the interests of shareholders (OECD 1999).

But what does ‘maximizing shareholder value’ mean? Is it an appropriate prin-
ciple  for  the  governance  of corporations  in  the  advanced  economies  in  the
twenty- rst  century? Does  the  implementation  of this  principle  improve  the
competitive  performance  of corporate  enterprises?  Would  the  reform  of the
continental European and Japanese systems of corporate governance based on
the principle of maximizing shareholder value bring  sustainable  prosperity to
these economies?

In the so-called Anglo-Saxon economies of the United States and Britain, the
exclusive  focus  of corporations  on  shareholder  value  is  a  relatively  recent
phenomenon, having risen to prominence in the 1980s as part and parcel of the
Reaganite and Thatcherite revolutions. The decade-long boom in the US stock
market and the more recent boom in the US economy have impressed European
and Japanese corporate executives with the potential of shareholder value as a
principle  of corporate  governance,  while  American  institutional  investors,
investment bankers and management consultants have incessantly promoted the
virtues of the approach in Europe and Japan.

There is,  however, in both  Europe and Japan, considerable misinformation
about why shareholder value has become so prominent in the governance of US
corporations over the past two decades and the actual impact of its implemen-
tation on the performance of US corporations and the US economy. Therefore,
as  a precondition for  considering the  arguments for ‘maximizing shareholder
value’ in those nations in which it is not yet an entrenched principle of corpor-
ate governance, it is imperative that we understand the evolution and impact of
the quest for shareholder value in the United States over the past two decades.
Such is the purpose of this paper.

The origins of `shareholder value’

The arguments in support of governing corporations to create shareholder value
came  into  their  own  in  the  United  States  in  the  1980s. As  has  been  the  case
throughout the twentieth century, in the 1980s a relatively small number of giant
corporations, employing tens or even hundreds of thousands of people domi-
nated the economy of the United States.  On the basis  of capabilities  that had
been  accumulated  over  decades,  these  corporations  generated huge revenues.
They allocated these revenues according to a corporate governance principle that
we call ‘retain and reinvest’. These corporations tended to retain both the money
that they earned and the people whom they employed, and they reinvested in
physical capital and complementary human resources. Retentions in the forms
of earnings  and  capital  consumption  allowances  provided  the   nancial  foun-
dations for corporate growth, while the building of managerial organizations to

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 08:14 12 November 2014 William Lazonick and Mary O’Sullivan: Maximizing shareholder value

15

develop and utilize productive resources enabled investments in plant, equip-
ment and personnel to succeed (Ciccolo and Baum 1985; Hall 1994; Corbett and
Jenkinson 1996).

In the 1960s and 1970s, however, the principle of retain and reinvest began
running into problems for two reasons, one having to do with the growth of the
corporation  and  the  other  having  to  do  with  the  rise  of new  competitors.
Through  internal  growth  and  through  merger  and  acquisition,  corporations
grew too big with too many divisions in too many different types of businesses.
The central offices of these corporations were too far from the actual processes
that developed and utilized productive resources to make informed investment
decisions  about  how  corporate  resources  and  returns  should  be  allocated  to
enable strategies based on ‘retain and reinvest’ to succeed. The massive expan-
sion of corporations that had occurred during the 1960s resulted in poor per-
formance  in  the  1970s,  an  outcome  that  was  exacerbated  by  an  unstable
macroeconomic environment and by the rise of new international competition,
especially from Japan (Lazonick and O’Sullivan 1997; O’Sullivan 2000: ch. 4).
Japanese  competition  was,  of course,  particularly  formidable  in  the  mass-
production industries of automobiles, consumer electronics and in the machin-
ery and electronic sectors that supplied capital goods to these consumer durable
industries. Yet these had been industries and sectors in which US companies had
previously been the world leaders and that had been central to the prosperity of
the US economy since the 1920s.1 Japan was able to challenge the United States
in these industries because its  manufacturing corporations innovated through
the development and utilization of integrated skill bases that were broader and
deeper than those in which their American competitors had invested (Lazonick
1998).  Compared  with American  practice,  Japanese  skill  bases  integrated  the
capabilities of people with a broader array of functional specialties and a deeper
array of hierarchical responsibilities into processes of organizational learning. In
particular, the hierarchical integration of Japanese skill bases extended from the
managerial organization to shop- oor production workers and subsidiary  rms
that served as suppliers and distributors. In contrast, US companies tended to
use their managerial organizations to develop and utilize technologies that would
enable  them  to  dispense  with  shop- oor  skills  so  that  ‘hourly’  production
workers could not exercise control over the conditions of work and pay. US com-
panies also tended to favour suppliers and distributors who would provide goods
and services at the lowest price today, even if it meant that they were not engaged
in innovation for tomorrow (Lazonick and O’Sullivan 1997).

As, during the 1970s, major US manufacturing corporations struggled with
these very real problems of excessive centralization and innovative competition,
a group of American  nancial economists developed an approach to corporate
governance known as agency theory. Trained, as virtually all American econom-
ists  are,  to  believe  that  the  market  is  always  superior  to  organizations  in  the
efficient allocation of resources, these economists were ideologically predisposed
against corporate – that is, managerial – control over the allocation of resources
and returns in the economy. Agency theorists posited that, in the governance of

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 08:14 12 November 2014 16

Economy and Society

corporations, shareholders were the principals and managers were their agents.
Agency theorists argued that, because corporate managers were undisciplined
by the market mechanism, they would opportunistically use their control over
the allocation of corporate resources and returns to line their own pockets, or at
least  to  pursue objectives  that  were  contrary to  the  interests  of shareholders.
Given  the  entrenchment of incumbent  corporate managers  and  the  relatively
poor performance of their companies in the 1970s, agency theorists argued that
there was a need for a takeover market that, functioning as a market for corpor-
ate control, could discipline managers whose companies performed poorly. The
rate of return on corporate stock was their measure of superior performance, and
the maximization of shareholder value became their creed (see, for example, Ross
1973; Jensen and Meckling 1976; Fama and Jensen 1983; Jensen 1986; Scharf-
stein 1988; Baker et al. 1988).

In  addition,  during  the  1970s,  the  quest  for  shareholder  value  in  the  US
economy found support from  a  new  source –  the  institutional  investor.2 The
transfer  of stockholding  from  individual  households  to  institutions  such  as
mutual funds, pension funds and life  insurance companies made possible  the
takeovers  advocated  by  agency  theorists  and  gave  shareholders  much  more
collective power to in uence the yields and market values of the corporate stocks
they held. During the 1950s and 1960s, there were legal restrictions on the extent
to which life  insurance companies and pension funds could include corporate
equities in their investment portfolios, while mutual funds played only a limited,
although growing, role in the mobilization of household savings. In the 1970s,
however, a number of changes occurred in the  nancial sector that promoted the
growth of equity-based institutional investing. Partly as a consequence of Wall
Street’s role in the buying and selling of companies during the conglomeration
mania of the 1960s, from the early 1970s there was  a shift in the focus of Wall
Street  nancial   rms from supporting long-term investment  activities  of cor-
porations  (mainly  through  bond  issues)  to  generating  fees  and  capital  gains
through trading in corporate and government securities. To expand the market
for securities trading, Wall Street  rms convinced the Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC) to put an end to  xed commissions on stock exchange trans-
actions. At the same time, developments in computer technology made it poss-
ible for these  rms to handle much higher volumes of trade than had previously
been the case.

Meanwhile, the oil-induced in ation of the 1970s created a problem for US
 nancial  institutions  in  managing  their   nancial  assets  to  generate  adequate
returns, thus leading to the  nancial deregulation of the American economy. As
investors  in  stocks  and bonds,  mutual funds had  advantages  over other insti-
tutional investors such as life insurance companies and pension funds in gener-
ating higher returns on household savings because they were not subject to the
same stringent regulations concerning the types of investments that they could
make. Moreover, even without the mutual funds as competitors, the in ation-
ary  conditions  of the  1970s  meant  that,  under  current  regulations,  pension
funds and insurance companies could no longer offer households positive real

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 08:14 12 November 2014 William Lazonick and Mary O’Sullivan: Maximizing shareholder value

17

rates of return. The regulatory response was ERISA – the Employee Retirement
Income Security Act (1974) – which, when amended in 1978, permitted pension
funds and insurance companies to invest substantial proportions of their port-
folios in corporate equities and other risky securities such as ‘junk bonds’ and
venture funds rather than just in high-grade corporate and government securi-
ties.

During the 1970s the US banking sector also experienced signi cant deregu-
lation. With the in ationary conditions boosting the nominal rates of interest on
money-market instruments, through a process that became known as ‘disinter-
mediation’, money-market funds emerged to offer savers much higher rates of
returns  than  the  regulated  banks  could  offer  them.  Beginning  in  1978,  the
government sought to help the banks compete for depositors by deregulating the
interest rates that commercial banks and savings banks could pay to depositors
and  charge  on  loans.  In  this  deregulated  environment,  however,  savings  and
loans institutions (S&Ls), a type of savings bank whose assets were long-lived,
low-yield mortgages, found that, unless they could invest in higher-yield assets,
they could not compete for household deposits. The regulatory response was the
Garn-St. Germain Act of 1982 that permitted the S&Ls to hold junk bonds and
to lend to inherently risky new ventures, even while the government continued
to guarantee the accounts of S&L depositors.

From `retain and reinvest’ to `downsize and distribute’

The stage was now set for institutional investors and S&Ls to become central
participants in the hostile takeover movement of the 1980s. An important instru-
ment of the takeover movement was the junk bond – a corporate or government
bond that the bond-rating agencies considered to be below ‘investment grade’.
In the early 1970s, the main sources of junk bonds were ‘fallen angels’ – previ-
ously investment-grade bonds the ratings of which had been downgraded – or
‘Chinese  paper’  –  low-grade  bonds  that  had  been  issued  as  part  of the  con-
glomerate mania of the 1960s – as distinct from newly issued bonds (see Taggart
1988;  Bruck  1989:  27,  37–38,  44).  The  innovation  of Michael  Milken,  an
employee at the Wall Street investment bank of Drexel, Burnham, and Lambert,
was to create a liquid market in junk bonds by convincing  nancial institutions
to buy and sell them (Bruck 1989: ch. 1). In the early 1970s, when Milken initi-
ated this new  nancial market, it was mainly the mutual funds, faced by a slump-
ing stock market, which were willing and able to become players. But, over the
next decade,  nancial deregulation brought,  rst, pension funds and insurance
companies and, then, S&Ls into the junk-bond market. From the late 1970s, it
became possible  to issue new junk bonds, most of which were used at   rst to
 nance management buyouts of divisions of corporations,  a mode of undoing
the errors of the conglomerate movement of the 1960s that left the new inde-
pendent companies with huge debt burdens. By the early 1980s, and especially
after the Garn-St. Germain Act of 1982 enabled S&Ls to enter the market, it

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 08:14 12 November 2014 18

Economy and Society

became possible to use junk bonds to launch hostile takeovers of even the largest
corporations (Gaughan 1996: 302).  Milken orchestrated most of these  hostile
takeovers by gaining commitments from institutional investors and S&Ls to sell
their  shareholdings  in  the  target  company  to  the  corporate  raider,  when  the
target company was taken over, to buy newly issued junk bonds that enabled the
company to buy the raider’s shares.

The result was (until, beginning in late 1986, the arbitrageur Ivan Boesky and
then  Milken  as  well  as  others  were  indicted  and  eventually  imprisoned  for
insider  trading)  the  emergence  of a  powerful  market  for  corporate  control  –
something of which the agency theorists of the 1970s had only dreamed. The
ideology of the market for corporate control lent powerful support to the claim
that such takeover activity was bene cial to the corporations involved and indeed
to the US economy as a whole. Takeovers, it was  argued, were needed to ‘dis-
gorge the free cash  ow’ from companies (Jensen 1989). The exchange of cor-
porate  shares  for  high-yield debt  forced liquidity  on the  acquired  or  merged
companies. These takeovers also  placed managers in control of these corpora-
tions  who  were  predisposed towards  shedding labour  and  selling  off physical
assets if that was what was needed to meet the corporation’s new  nancial obli-
gations and, indeed, to push up the market value of the company’s stock. For
those engaged in the market for corporate control, the sole measure of corpor-
ate performance became the enhanced market capitalization of the company after
the takeover.

If the attempts to engage in corporate governance reform on the principle of
creating shareholder value had been con ned to the takeover movement of the
1980s, the rise of shareholder value as a principle of corporate governance might
have met a rapid demise in the US with the stock-market crash of 1987. Instead
the  US stock  market  made  a  rapid  recovery,  and  since  that  time  has  had  the
longest bull-run in its history. During the 1990s, it would appear US corpora-
tions have been extremely adept at ‘creating shareholder value’.

Increasingly during the 1980s, and even more so in the 1990s, support for cor-
porate governance on the principle of creating shareholder value came from an
even more powerful and enduring source than the takeover market. In the name
of ‘creating shareholder value’, the past two decades have witnessed a marked
shift in the strategic orientation of top corporate managers in the allocation of
corporate  resources  and  returns  away  from  ‘retain  and  reinvest’  and  towards
‘downsize and distribute’. Under the new regime, top managers downsize the
corporations they control, with a particular emphasis on cutting the size of the
labour forces they employ, in an attempt to increase the return on equity.

Since 1980, most major US corporations have been engaged in a process of
restructuring their labour forces in ways that have eroded the quantity of jobs
that offer stable employment and good pay in the US economy.3 Hundreds of
thousands of previously stable and well-paid blue-collar jobs that were lost in the
recession of 1980–2 were never subsequently restored. Between 1979 and 1983,
the number of people employed in the economy as a whole increased by 377,000
or  0.4  per cent,  while  employment  in  durable  goods  manufacturing  –  which

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 08:14 12 November 2014 William Lazonick and Mary O’Sullivan: Maximizing shareholder value

19

supplied  most  of the  well-paid  and  stable  blue-collar  jobs  –  declined  by
2,023,000, or 15.9 per cent (U.S. Congress 1992: 344).

Indeed, the ‘boom’ years of the mid-1980s saw hundreds of major plant clos-
ures. Between 1983 and 1987, 4.6 million workers lost their jobs, of which 40 per
cent were from  the manufacturing  sector  (Herz  1990: 23; more generally, see
Staudohar and Brown 1987; Patch 1995). The elimination of well-paid and stable
blue-collar jobs is re ected in the decline of the proportion of the manufactur-
ing labour force that is unionized from 47.4 per cent in 1970 to 27.8 per cent in
1983 and to 18.2 per cent in 1994 (US Dept of Commerce 1975: 375; 1995: 444;
US Bureau of the Census 1976: 137).

Not only were blue-collar workers affected by the mounting predilection of
US corporate managers towards downsizing during the 1980s and 1990s. The
‘white-collar’ recession of the early 1990s saw the elimination of the positions of
tens  of thousands  of professional,  administrative  and  technical  employees  –
salaried white-collar workers who were considered to be members of ‘manage-
ment’. Even in this recession, however, it was blue-collar workers who bore the
brunt of displacement.

Overall, the incidence of job loss in the  rst half of the 1990s stood at about
14 per cent, even higher than the quite substantial rates of about 10 per cent in
the 1980s. The rate of job loss for 1981–3, a period with a slack labour market,
was about 13 per cent. As the labour market tightened during the mid-1980s, the
rate of job loss fell. As the economy went into recession from 1989, the job-loss
rate increased again to a level similar to that in the recession of the early 1980s,
notwithstanding the fact that the recession of the late 1980s was much milder.
Moreover, even as the economy moved into a recovery from 1991, the job-loss
rate rose to ever higher levels, a trend that continued through 1995, despite an
acceleration of economic growth (see Figure 1).

Leading  the  downsizing  of the  1980s  and  1990s  were  many  of America’s
largest corporations. In the decades after World War II, the foundations of US
economic development were  the  willingness  and  ability  of the nation’s major
industrial  corporations  to  allocate  their  considerable   nancial  resources  to
investment strategies that created the good jobs that many Americans began to
take for granted. In 1969, the  fty largest  US industrial corporations by sales
directly employed 6.4 million people, equivalent to 7.5 per cent of the civilian
labour  force.  In  1991, these  companies directly  employed 5.2  million  people,
equivalent to 4.2 per cent of the labour force (Lazonick and O’Sullivan 1997: 3).
And since 1991 the downsizing of these companies has gone forward at a steady
pace. By the early 1990s even US  rms known for their no-lay-off commitments
– IBM, DEC, Delta – had undergone signi cant downsizing and lay-offs of blue-
and white-collar workers (Weinstein and Kochan 1995: 16).

The American Management Association (AMA) conducts a survey every year
of lay-offs by major US companies.4 A striking  nding of this survey is that job
elimination  has  continued  to  be  pervasive  among  US  corporate  enterprises
leading to substantial reductions in their workforce(s), notwithstanding the con-
siderable  improvement  in  the  business  cycle  during  the  1990s.  Moreover,

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 08:14 12 November 2014 20

Economy and Society

Source: Farber (1997)
Figure 1 Rate of job loss in the US: annual average number of jobs lost as a
proportion of the labour force

notwithstanding the downward trend since 1994–5 in the proportion of com-
panies reporting job elimination, the most recent Challenger, Gray and Christ-
mas estimates of announced staff cuts by major US corporations suggests that
another upsurge in lay-offs by US corporations is in the offing (see Figure 2).
The AMA  survey  shows,  moreover,  that  job  cutting  is  much  more  prevalent
among larger employers than smaller ones. Almost 60 per cent of companies that
employed more than 10,000 people laid off some of their workforce in 1996–7
(American Management Association Surveys various years). In the boom year of
1998 the number of announced staff cuts by major US corporations was greater
than for any other year in the 1990s.

The costs of job loss to displaced workers have been substantial. They have a
large probability – around 35 per cent on average – of not being employed two
years  after  displacement.  On  average,  displaced  workers,  when  re-employed,
receive real weekly earnings that are some 13 per cent less than before they lost
their original jobs  (about 9 per cent for workers displaced from full-time  jobs
who are re-employed on full-time jobs) (Farber 1997). And these are estimates
only of the wage effects of losing a job.

There are, of course, other costs to workers of downsizing. Prominent among
them is growing worker insecurity at the prospect of losing a job, and the anxiety

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 08:14 12 November 2014 William Lazonick and Mary O’Sullivan: Maximizing shareholder value

21

Source: Challenger, Gray, and Christmas
Figure 2 Announced staff cuts by major US corporations 1989–98

that these expectations breed. A commonly used, although imperfect, proxy for
a change in job security is a change in job tenure. From 1983 to 1998 there was
a  slight  decline  in  the  median  years  of tenure  of employed  wage  and  salary
workers with their current employer from 5.0 years to 4.7 years. But the average
for male and female workers masks signi cant differences by gender. For male
workers aged 25 years and over, median tenure fell from 5.9 years to 4.9 years
from 1983 to 1998. A decline in tenure was particularly pronounced for men aged
55 to 64, falling from 15.3 years to 11.2 years between 1983 and 1998. It is especi-
ally striking that these overall declines were registered within the context of a
general trend towards an ageing of the male workforce. Among men, in all age
groups, the fall in tenure was sufficiently great to outweigh the positive impact
of ageing  on  tenure.  In  contrast,  women  aged  25  years  and  over  enjoyed  an
increase in median tenure from 4.2 years to 4.4 years, although some of this effect
was a result of the ageing of the female workforce. Most age groups within the
female working population experienced the increase in median tenure, with the
notable exception of women aged 55 to 64 years, whose median tenure fell from
9.8 years in 1983 to 9.6 years in 1998.

As proxies for job security, job tenure  gures must be used with caution. With
lay-offs occurring on a large scale, the proportion of workers with long tenure
could rise,  not  because  workers  as  a  group  are  enjoying  greater  employment
security, but because workers with lower seniority are being laid off. In the air-
craft and parts industry, for example, a sharp rise in median tenure from 6.3 in

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 08:14 12 November 2014 22

Economy and Society

1991 to 9.6 in 1998 at a time of widespread lay-offs seems to be, at least partly,
attributable to this effect (US Bureau of Labor Statistics various years).

While US corporate managers became focused on downsizing their labour-
forces in the 1980s and 1990s, they also became focused on distributing corpor-
ate revenues in ways that supported the price of their companies’ stocks. During
the 1950s, 1960s and 1970s the pay-out ratio (the ratio of dividends to after-tax
adjusted  corporate pro ts)  varied  from  a  low of 37.2  per  cent  in  1966  (when
increases in dividends lagged increased pro ts) to a high of 53 per cent in 1974
(when pro ts fell by 19 per cent while dividends went up by 8 per cent). But
averaged over any  ve-year period during these three decades, the pay-out ratio
stayed remarkably  stable,  never going above 45.9 per cent  (1970–4)  and never
falling below 38.8 per cent (1975–9). The stability is even greater over ten-year
periods – 47.9 per cent for the 1950s, 42.4 per cent for the 1960s and 42.3 per
cent for the 1970s (see Figure 3). These pay-out ratios were high by international
standards, manifesting the extent to which US corporations returned value to
stockholders even before the rise of the institutional investor.

Compared with the 1960s and 1970s, an upward shift in corporate pay-out
ratios occurred in the 1980s and 1990s. In 1980, when pro ts declined by 17 per
cent (the largest pro ts decline since the 1930s), dividends rose by 13 per cent,
and the pay-out ratio shot up 15 points to 57 per cent. Thereafter, from 1980
through 1998, the pay-out ratio fell below 44 per cent only twice, in 1984 and

Source: US Congress (1992: 403; 1999: 431)
Figure 3 US corporate pay-out ratio (1960–98): corporate dividends as a percentage of
corporate pro ts after tax with inventory valuation and capital consumption
adjustments

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 08:14 12 November 2014 William Lazonick and Mary O’Sullivan: Maximizing shareholder value

23

1985, and even then not because dividends fell but because the increase in divi-
dends did not keep up with the increase in pro ts. There was no  ve-year period
within the period 1980 to 1998 during which the pay-out ratio did not average
at  least  44  per cent,  and  over the  nineteen years it  averaged over  49 per  cent
(O’Sullivan 2000:  g. 6.4; US Congress 1999: 431).

Since  the  mid-1980s,  moreover,  increases  in  corporate  dividends  have  not
been  the  only  way  in  which  corporations have  distributed  earnings  to  stock-
holders. Prior to the 1980s, during a stock-market boom, companies would often
sell shares on the market at in ated prices to pay off debt or to bolster the cor-
porate treasury. In general, although equity issues have never been an import-
ant  source of funds for  investment  in  the  development  and  utilization  of the
productive capabilities of US corporate enterprises, they tended to issue more
equities than they repurchased. But, during the 1980s, the net equity issues for
US  corporations  became  negative  in  many  years,  largely  as  a  result  of stock
repurchases.

In 1985, when total corporate dividends were $84 billion,  stock repurchases
were  $20 billion,  boosting  the  effective  pay-out ratio  from  under 40 per  cent,
based on dividends only, to 50 per cent with the addition of stock repurchases. In
the quarter following the stock market crash of 1987, there were 777 announce-
ments by US corporations of new or increased buybacks (‘The buyback monster’,
Forbes, 17 November 1997). In 1989, when dividends had risen to $134.4 billion,
stock repurchases had increased to over $60 billion, increasing the effective pay-
out ratio to over 81 per cent. With close to $70 billion in stock repurchases in
1994, the effective pay-out ratio was about 66 per cent. In 1996, stock repurchases
were  $116  billion,  for  an  effective  pay-out  ratio  of 72  per  cent  (‘The  hidden
meaning of stock buybacks’, Fortune, September 1997). Although for any one year
the  announced  buyback  plans  tend  to  be  lower  than  actual  repurchases,  the
continuing high levels of announced buyback plans since 1996 suggest that US
corporate enterprises continue to favour buybacks as a respectable use for their
cash; US corporations announced plans to buy back $177 billion of stock in 1996,
$181 billion in 1997, and $207 billion in 1998 (see Figure 4).

For  many  major  US  corporations  stock  repurchases  have  now  become  a
systematic  feature  of the  way  in  which  they  allocate  revenues  and  a  critically
important one in terms of the amount of money involved. General Electric is a
good example. From 1994 to 1998, its cumulative dividend growth was 84 per
cent compared with 29 per cent for the population of S&P 500  rms. Moreover,
during the same period, the cumulative amount of cash that GE spent on share
repurchases at $14.6 billion rivalled the $15.6 billion paid out in cumulative div-
idends. Together these two out ows of cash amounted to an extraordinary 74.4
per cent of GE’s cumulative cash from operations from 1994 to 1998. Notwith-
standing the enormous amounts that the company has already spent on repur-
chases, in December 1997, GE’s Board of Directors increased the authorization
to  repurchase  company  stock  to  a  massive  $17  billion  (GE  10K  1998).  It  is
perhaps not coincidental that since 1981, when the current CEO,  Jack Welch,
took office, GE has set the tone for downsizing among corporations.

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 08:14 12 November 2014 24

Economy and Society

Source: Securities Data Corporation
Figure 4 Buybacks as a share of US corporate pro ts 1978–96

Why and how did this shift in the orientation of top managers from retain and
reinvest to downsize and distribute occur? Corporate governance for most US
corporations from  their emergence in  the late  nineteenth  and  early twentieth
century through the 1970s was based on the strategy of retain and reinvest. Top
managers tended to be integrated with the business organizations that employed
them and governed the corporate enterprises that they controlled accordingly.
One condition that supported this integration of top managers into the organiz-
ation  was  the  separation  of share  ownership  and  managerial  control.  In  the
absence  of hereditary  owners  in top management positions,  career  employees
who worked their way up and  around the managerial hierarchy could realisti-
cally hope to rise to top management positions over the course of their careers.
Into  the  1970s the  salaried  compensation  of top  managers  was  largely  deter-
mined by pay structures within the managerial organization.

Forces were at work from the 1950s that increasingly segmented top managers
of US corporations from the rest of the managerial organization. Top managers
of many US corporations began receiving stock options in 1950, after tax changes
made this form of compensation attractive. During the 1950s and 1960s, with the
stock market generally on the rise, gains from the exercise of these options and
the holding of stock became increasingly important components of the incomes
of top managers. When, in the early 1970s, the stock market turned down, many
corporate boards transformed worthless stock options into increases in salaried
remuneration, on the grounds that these managers could not be blamed for the
general downturn in the stock market.  In effect,  the expectations of gains from

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 08:14 12 November 2014 William Lazonick and Mary O’Sullivan: Maximizing shareholder value

25

stock options that had been formed during the general rise in the stock market in
the 1950s and 1960s came to be considered, along with salaries, as part of the basic
compensation  of top  managers.  Thus  began  a  trend  that  during  the  1970s
favoured the pay of top managers over the pay of everyone else in the corpora-
tion  (see  Figures  5  and  6).  During the  1980s  and  1990s the  explosion  in  top
management pay has continued unabated, with stock-based rewards playing an
ever more important role (Hall  and Liebman 1997). On average, the pay pack-
ages of CEOs of US corporations were forty-four times those of factory workers
in 1965, but 419 times in 1998 (Business Week 20 April 1998, 19 April 1999).

From the 1950s, therefore, US corporate managers developed an ever-growing
personal interest in boosting the market value of their companies’ stock. Yet even
though US companies had relatively high pay-out ratios by international standards
in the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s, during these decades US top managers remained
oriented towards  a strategy of retain  and reinvest rather than simply using cor-
porate revenues to increase dividends or repurchase stock to boost stock prices.
The fact is that, given the dominance that these corporations exercised over many
of their product markets, the pursuit of retain  and reinvest strategies permitted
lots of different stakeholders to gain. Workers could get paid higher wages  and
have better employment stability and working conditions; suppliers and distribu-
tors could make more pro ts, some of which could potentially be passed on to their
workers; consumers could get lower prices on the goods that they purchased; the
dividends to stockholders could be maintained or even increased; and there could
still be substantial funds left over for the corporation to reinvest either within the
United States or, as was increasingly the case in these decades, abroad.

Such was the happy situation facing US corporations in their era of unchal-
lenged dominance in the post-World War II decades. It was this environment of

Source: http://www.a cio.org/paywatch
Figure 5 CEO pay versus factory wages in major US corporations 1980–95

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 08:14 12 November 2014 26

Economy and Society

Sources: http://www.a cio.org/paywatch
Figure 6 CEO pay versus factory wages in major US corporations 1996–8

growth that spawned the belief among many top managers of US corporations
that a good manager could manage anything – a belief that the major business
schools of the time were happy to propound and that provided a rationale for the
conglomeration movement of the 1960s. But in the much more difficult econ-
omic environment of the 1970s and early 1980s, this belief in the omnipotence
of top  management  began  to  be  shattered.  Indeed,  the  over-extension  of the
corporate enterprises into  too  many  different  lines  of business  had  helped to
foster the strategic segmentation of top managers from their organizations. At
the same time, the innovative capabilities  of international competitors made it
harder to sustain  the employment of corporate labour-forces,  unless the pro-
ductive capabilities  of many if not most of these employees could be radically
transformed. Under these conditions, US corporate managers faced a strategic
crossroads: they could  nd new ways to generate productivity gains on the basis
of retain and reinvest or they could capitulate to the new competitive environ-
ment through corporate downsizing.

If the changed competitive environment of the 1970s and 1980s made it more
difficult for top managers of US corporations to be successful through a strat-
egy of retain  and  reinvest,  increased  segmentation  within  their  own  organiz-
ations  made  it  more difficult  for them to understand what type of innovative
strategies  they  should  pursue  and  the  capabilities  of their  organizations  to

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 08:14 12 November 2014 William Lazonick and Mary O’Sullivan: Maximizing shareholder value

27

implement these strategies. In addition, by the 1980s the deregulated  nancial
environment and the rise of the institutional investor  as a holder of corporate
stocks encouraged top managers to align their own interests with external  nan-
cial interests rather than with the interests of the productive organizations over
which they exercised control. Manifesting this alignment was the explosion in
top management pay, while the other side of the same paycheck was the shift in
the strategic orientation of top management from retain and reinvest to down-
size  and  distribute.  With  the  co-operation  of top  corporate managers,  share-
holder  value  had  by  the  1990s  become  a   rmly  entrenched  principle  of US
corporate governance.

Shareholder value and economic performance

Shareholders and top managers have certainly bene ted under the rule of share-
holder value (see Table 1). But how has the US economy as a whole performed?
Again,  as in the case of hostile takeovers and the market for corporate control,
 nancial economists, versed in theories of the inherent economic superiority of
market resource allocation over corporate resource allocation, have provided the
theoretical rationale  for corporate governance in the  interests of shareholders
with  its  emphasis on downsize and distribute.5 Financial  economists contend
that,  when the  corporate enterprise maximizes  shareholder value,  everyone –
workers, consumers, suppliers and distributors – will,  as a result, be better off.
These  nancial economists posit that shareholders are the ‘owners’ or ‘princi-
pals’  in  whose  interests  the  corporations  should  be  run.  They  recognize,
however, that, in the actual running of the corporation, shareholders must rely
on managers to perform certain functions. The proponents of shareholder value
have  argued, often with justi cation,  that the managers  who control  the  allo-
cation of corporate resources and returns are self-serving in the exercise of this
control. As  a  result, such managers do not  adequately ‘create value for share-
holders’.

When  corporations  are  run to  maximize  shareholder  value,  these   nancial
economists  argue,  the  performance  of the  economy  as  a  whole,  not  just  the
interest  of shareholders, can  be enhanced. In making  this  claim,  advocates  of

Table 1 US corporate stock and bond yields 1950–98: per cent, annual averages

Real stock yield

Stock price yield
Dividend yield
Change in CPI

Real bond yield

1950–9

1960–9

1970–9

1980–9

1990–8

17.7
14.8
4.9
2.1
1.3

8.3
7.5
3.2
2.4
2.7

–1.7
1.4
4.1
7.1
1.2

11.7
12.9
4.3
5.6
5.8

14.3
14.8
2.6
3.1
4.9

Sources: US Congress (1992: 366, 378, 397; 1999: 399, 412, 436)

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 08:14 12 November 2014 28

Economy and Society

maximizing shareholder value rely on arguments that portray any residual rev-
enues – pro ts – that the corporation generates as rewards for critical economic
functions that, allegedly, shareholders perform and without which these residu-
als would not be possible. In one version of the argument, shareholder returns
are regarded as incentives for waiting  and risk bearing; in  another version,  as
rewards for shareholder monitoring of managers.

According  to  the  logic  of shareholder  value  theory,  if corporate  managers
cannot allocate resources and returns to maintain the value of the shareholders’
assets, then the ‘free cash  ow’ should be distributed to shareholders who can
then allocate these resources to their most efficient alternative uses. Since in the
modern  corporation,  with  its  publicly  listed  stock,  these  shareholders  have  a
market relation with the corporation, the economic argument for making distri-
butions to shareholders is an argument concerning the efficiency of the replace-
ment  of corporate  control  over  the  allocation  of resources  and  returns  with
market control.

Shareholder  value  advocates,  moreover,  point  to  the  stock-market  boom
throughout the 1990s and the prosperity of the US economy in the late 1990s as
proof positive of the economic bene ts that the pursuit of shareholder value has
delivered. Theory, they argue, has been borne out by practice. Speci cally, pro-
ponents  of ‘creating  shareholder  value’  through  downsizing  and  distributing
argue: 

 US corporations that have engaged in such restructuring have become more
efficient, as re ected in enhanced pro tability  and higher market valuations
of their assets.

 The  release  of labour  and  capital  from  major  corporations  has  provided,
moreover, the basis for the  ourishing of new ventures in industrial districts
such as Silicon Valley based on the highly dynamic and internationally com-
petitive US information technologies sector.

 In effect, the dismantling of corporate control over the allocation of resources
and returns in the economy has enabled labour and capital markets to reallo-
cate those resources to start-up companies that are fast,  exible and innovative
and that are driving the current boom in the US economy.

 In cross-national comparative perspective, such restructuring of existing cor-
porations and the creation of such dynamic new ventures are precisely what
are missing in Japan and the advanced nations of Europe.

 Nothing could do more to jumpstart these economies than to import Ameri-
can-style  institutional  investing  and  corporate  restructuring  so  that  the
mechanisms of the market can redirect the allocation of labour and capital to
their most pro table uses.

The current boom conditions in the US economy, and the undoubted success
of Silicon Valley in the information-technology sector, would seem to provide
powerful support to those who argue that the pursuit of shareholder value is the
path to sustainable prosperity. Besides the booming stock market, it is common
to  cite  the  relatively  low  rates  of unemployment  that  the  United  States  has

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 08:14 12 November 2014 William Lazonick and Mary O’Sullivan: Maximizing shareholder value

29

achieved in the late 1990s, with an emphasis on the fact that, in February 1999,
for the  rst time since the early 1950s, the official US unemployment rate was
lower than the official Japanese unemployment rate.

There are, however, many problems with this rosy view of the power of share-
holder value in reshaping corporate governance and, indeed, the organization of
the economy to deliver sustainable prosperity. In both theory and practice, the
arguments for maximizing shareholder value ignore signi cant problems of US
economic performance in the era of ‘downsize and distribute’ as well as import-
ant historical foundations of the current stock-market and economic booms. A
consideration of these problems of economic performance and foundations of
the current booms raises serious questions about the future sustainability of US
prosperity in a shareholder-value regime. 

Problems of US economic performance

Declining employment security, falling job tenures and the signi cant costs of
job loss that many, if not most, Americans have experienced in the 1990s re ect
a longer-run trend, dating back to the 1970s, towards a persistent worsening of
the distribution  of income in  the  United States. The  exibility  of US labour
markets may have enabled the US economy to achieve reasonable rates of unem-
ployment in the 1990s, but only at the cost of creating an economy based on low
wage rates and incomes for most of the working population. To make ends meet,
moreover, most families need incomes from two adults who have to work long
hours. Indeed, during the 1990s, the yearly working hours of the average Ameri-
can surpassed those of the average Japanese.

The problem  of income inequality  in  the  United States  reflects  not only
significant  differences  in  levels  of wages  and  salaries  but  also  significant
inequalities in the distribution of wealth, among which is the distribution of
stockholdings. The top half of 1 per cent of all US households in terms of the
size  of their  stockholdings owns,  directly  or  through institutional  investors,
almost  37 per cent of all  outstanding corporate equities,  80 per cent of US
households own less than 2 per cent (Poterba  and Samwick 1995: 328). The
high rates of returns on corporate stocks that have been achieved in the era of
shareholder  value  have  served  only  to  exacerbate  income  inequality  in  the
United States.

During the 1980s and 1990s, while US  nancial economists have been con -
dently advocating the creation of shareholder value, US labour economists have
been  unable  to  explain  the  worsening  income  distribution.  In  our  view,  the
impacts of the tendency of US corporations to downsize and distribute are only
part of the story of the worsening income distribution. Even corporations that
favour a strategy of downsizing and distributing must, if they are to persist, also
engage in strategies that require them to retain and reinvest. Another part of the
story of worsening income inequality is what we call the ‘skill-base hypothesis’:
the strategic focus of innovative US corporations on those types of activities in

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 08:14 12 November 2014 30

Economy and Society

which innovation can be generated by investing in ‘narrow  and concentrated’
skill  bases  of highly  educated  personnel.  In  the  post-World  War  II  era  that
extended through the 1970s – decades when US corporate governance favoured
strategies of ‘retain and reinvest’ – US blue-collar or ‘hourly’ workers were well
paid and provided with stable employment, even though by world standards they
were  poorly  educated  and  trained.  During  this  period  there  was  a  general
improvement in the distribution of income that contrasts with the worsening of
the income distribution since that time. The corporations that employed these
workers had achieved market dominance by developing managerial organization
and fostering managerial learning, and shared some of the gains of this domi-
nance with production workers, whose co-operation was required on the shop-
 oor.

But in the 1970s and 1980s, the lack of investment in shop- oor skills proved
to  be  the Achilles  heel  of US corporations  in  international  competition,  and
especially in competition with Japanese companies that had innovated by invest-
ing in broader and deeper skill bases than US companies. In response to the his-
torical legacy of the US economy in neglecting investment in shop- oor skills
in the face of competitive challenge from abroad, the retention and reinvestment
strategies  of US corporations in  the 1980s and  1990s focused on  activities  in
which they could innovate and compete by investing in the capabilities of only
the most highly educated personnel. Indeed, in engaging in these activities and
investing  in  these  employees,  US  corporations  are  able  to  draw  on  an  inter-
national pool of highly educated labour. This labour comes to the United States
in  search  of high-paid  employment,  often  by  way  of one or  more  university
degrees  from  world-class  universities  and  departments  in  the  US  system  of
higher education. The skills-base bias of US corporate investment and the avail-
ability of a well-educated international labour supply have meant, moreover, that
corporate America has had little interest in upgrading the quality of education
available  to most Americans. This is evidenced by the highly unequal and, by
international  standards,  generally  inferior  system  of mass  education  in  the
United States.

Foundations of the current prosperity

It is common in the late 1990s for Americans to tout the innovation and pros-
perity of Silicon Valley as an outcome of the corporate restructuring of the past
two decades that has made both capital  and labour free to move into new ven-
tures. This  view,  however,  ignores  historical  accumulations  of resources  and
capabilities in districts such as Silicon Valley that have made the current pros-
perity possible. In effect, the prosperity of Silicon Valley in the 1990s owes more
to the post-war ‘military industrial complex’, in which ‘retain and reinvest’ cor-
porations  such  as  IBM,  Hewlett  Packard,  Motorola  and  Xerox  were  central,
rather  than  it  does to  a resurgence of entrepreneurship – something that has
always  been  in  abundant  supply  in  the  United  States.  The  success  of these

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 08:14 12 November 2014 William Lazonick and Mary O’Sullivan: Maximizing shareholder value

31

corporations in developing and utilizing technologies was in turn highly depen-
dent on massive government procurement contracts and research initiatives. In
historical perspective, the current re-allocation of labour and capital to new ven-
tures in the United States is, therefore, just the most visible tip of the military-
industrial complex – a developmental iceberg that took the American economy
decades to put in place. Given the focus of US corporations on downsizing and
distributing, as well as the US government’s retreat from investments in basic
research, there are questions about whether the American economy is currently
generating the new technological infrastructure that can provide foundations for
sustainable prosperity in the twenty- rst century.

If there are questions about the foundations and future of productive invest-
ment in the United States, there are also questions about the sources and avail-
ability of American savings. Corporate policies of ‘downsize and distribute’ have
provided the underlying impetus to the stock-market boom of the 1990s, but the
sustained and rapid rate of increase in stock prices is the result of a massive  ow
of funds into the stock market through equity-based mutual funds. Since the
1960s  US  households  have  been  increasing  the  proportion  of their   nancial
assets that are invested in pension and mutual funds. From 1982 to 1994 pension
and mutual funds alone accounted for about 67 per cent of the net growth of the
total  nancial assets of households (Edwards 1996: 16–27).

Re ecting their growing importance in managing the savings of US house-
holds,  pension  and  mutual  funds’  shares  of corporate equities have  increased
dramatically. Pension funds held 24 per cent of US corporate stock in 1997, with
private pensions accounting for 13.8 per cent and public pensions for 10.2 per
cent, compared with 0.3 per cent in 1945. Over the same period, mutual funds
increased their share of US corporate stock from 1.5 per cent to 16.2 per cent.
A substantial proportion of the recent upsurge in the share of mutual funds is
attributable to their growing popularity for pension provision; at the end of 1996,
retirement-plan assets represented 35 per cent of all mutual fund assets. In con-
trast to the growing importance of institutional investors, the share of corporate
stocks held directly by individuals has fallen from 93 per cent in 1945 to 42.7
per  cent  in  1997  (US  Board  of Governors  various  years).  Institutional  share
ownership is even higher in the largest US corporations than in the population
of corporate enterprises as a whole. In 1987, the institutional share of the equity
of the top 1,000 US corporations was 46.6 per cent; by 1995 it had increased to
57.2 per cent (Brancato 1997).

The shift of stockholdings to institutional investors had by no means exhausted
itself by the mid-1990s. During the last half of the 1980s, the net new cash  ow
into equity mutual funds ranged from a high of about $21.9 billion in 1986 to a
low of minus $16.2 billion in 1988. During the early 1990s, however, the  ow of
new money into mutual funds picked up speed, and during 1993–5 net additions
to mutual funds averaged about $125 billion per year. In 1996 and 1997 the net
additions to equity mutual funds rose to the unprecedented levels of $217 billion
and $227 billion respectively. In the  rst seven months of 1998, the pace of in ows
remained vigorous. However, in conjunction with the downturn in the US stock

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 08:14 12 November 2014 32

Economy and Society

market in August 1998, the in ow of cash slowed down sufficiently to bring the
net in ow for the year to $159 billion, which represented a 30 per cent fall com-
pared with 1997. Yet, as the market regained its vigour in late 1998 and especi-
ally in early 1999, in ows revived again (Investment Company Institute).

The  origins  of this  ‘new’  money  are  not  well  documented. What  is  clear,
however, is that the savings rate of US households, already low by international
standards in the 1980s, has plunged further in the 1990s. An older generation of
Americans – the ones who were able to accumulate signi cant savings, pensions
and  other  assets  during  the  era  of ‘retain  and  reinvest’  –  appear  to  be  re-
allocating their  nancial resources to capture the returns of the booming stock
market. But what if, as appears to be the case, the younger generations, living in
an era of ‘downsize and distribute’, will not have the same opportunities as the
older generations for the accumulation of  nancial assets? And, indeed, what if
the returns to the  nancial assets of older generations, who have become increas-
ingly reliant on the stock market for returns on their savings to fund their con-
sumption expenditures, cannot be sustained?

Is the current prosperity sustainable?

We must consider the possibility that the US stock-market boom is encourag-
ing US households to live off the past while corporations have less incentive to
invest for the future. The current consumption-driven boom seems to be closely
tied to the stock-market boom. For the  rst time in US history, the returns to
the savings of American households are directly dependent on the sustainability
of high yields on corporate stock. What will happen to US consumption, and to
the US (and world) economy, if the US stock market should turn down, and stay
down?

Yet the stock-market boom has not made capital available to industry. The per-
sistent and massive  ow of funds into stock-based mutual funds in the 1990s has
bid up stock prices, increasing the market capitalizations  of corporations. But,
as we have seen, net corporate equity issues have been negative over the course
of the 1990s because of corporate stock repurchases, while the main impact of
the stock-market boom on capital markets has been to raise consumption.

No one knows the ‘real’ limits to the current stock-market boom. What we
can say is that, unlike the speculative stock-market booms that occurred in the
late 1920s in the United States, and in the late 1980s in Japan, in which corpo-
rations sold stock at high price–earnings ratios to increase their cash reserves or
pay off debt, the current US boom is being supported by corporate cash distri-
butions. What is the continuing capacity of US corporations to support stock
prices through ‘downsize and distribute’ strategies?

A proponent of shareholder value would argue that vibrant new ventures are
replacing the stodgy old corporations that are being downsized. But even if one
were to accept the claim that the stock-market boom has induced entrepreneurs
to set up new ventures with their eyes on the prospect of not-too-distant  and

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 08:14 12 November 2014 William Lazonick and Mary O’Sullivan: Maximizing shareholder value

33

very lucrative  initial  public offerings,  are new ventures sustainable  if they are
governed by  the  principle  of shareholder value?  One  important  effect  of the
stock-market boom on new ventures has been to make them dependent on the
performance of the stock market even before these enterprises themselves have
gone  public.  Most  new  ventures   nance  themselves  by  the  willingness  of
employees to accept shares in the company in lieu of immediate remuneration.
But should the stock market turn down, and with it the expectations for gains
on the sale of shares in a successful IPO, many new ventures will  nd that the
 nancial  commitment required to secure the personnel to develop and utilize
the enterprise’s productive resources are beyond their  nancial means or those
of the venture capitalists who support them.

Indeed, it is not just new ventures that are looking to stock-market gains to
pay employee compensation. In 1998, for example, the widespread use of stock
options to attract and reward employees meant that Intel spent more than twice
as much on stock repurchases than on R&D (Intel 10K 1999). During the same
year, Microsoft’s stock repurchases were almost equal to its in-house spending
on R&D (Microsoft 10K 1999). We have no precedent for examining how, given
such  remuneration  schemes,  strategically  central  corporations  such  as  these
would be affected by a stock-market collapse. However, it is worthwhile remem-
bering that Intel and Microsoft were once new ventures that transformed them-
selves into going concerns by establishing themselves as key suppliers to IBM.
IBM was a US corporation that epitomized governance according to the prin-
ciples of ‘retain  and reinvest’, while  Intel  and  Microsoft became dominant in
their  sectors  by  governing  themselves  according  to  the  same  principles. The
experience of the United States suggests that the pursuit of shareholder value
may be an appropriate strategy for running down a company – and an economy.
The pursuit of some other kind of value is needed to build up a company and
an economy.

Acknowledgements

Funding for the research in this paper was provided by the Jerome Levy Econ-
omics Institute and by the Targeted Socio-Economic Research Program of the
European Commission (Contract no. SOE1-CT98-1114).

Notes

1 An  important  analysis  of US  loss  of competitive  advantage in  a  number  of major
industries can be found in Dertouzos et al. (1989).
2 The following paragraphs on the transformation of the US  nancial sector are based
on Lazonick and O’Sullivan (1997); see also Lazonick (1992) and O’Sullivan (2000: ch.
5).
3 The following paragraphs on downsizing of labour  and distribution  of earnings are
drawn from O’Sullivan (2000: ch. 5).

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 08:14 12 November 2014 34

Economy and Society

4 The AMA survey is sent to human resources managers in AMA member companies
every year. AMA’s corporate membership consists of 9,500 organizations which together
employ 25 per cent of the American workforce. Over 85 per cent of surveyed  rms gross
more than $10 million annually, which puts them among the top 5 per cent of US cor-
porations.
5 For an elaboration of shareholder theory and a critique, see O’Sullivan (1999).

References

Baker, G., Jensen, M. and Murphy, K.
(1988) ‘Compensation and incentives:
practice vs. theory’, Journal of Finance 43:
593–616.
Brancato, C. (1997) Institutional
Investors and Corporate Governance: Best
Practices for Increasing Corporate Value,
Chicago: Irwin Professional.
Bruck, C. (1989) The Predators’ Ball,
London: Penguin.
Ciccolo, J. Jr. and Baum, C. (1985)
‘Changes in the balance sheet of the U.S.
manufacturing sector, 1926–1977’, in B.
Friedman (ed.) Corporate Capital
Structures in the United States, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Corbett, J. and Jenkinson, T (1996)
‘The  nancing of industry, 1970–1989: an
international comparison’, Journal of the
Japanese and International Economies 10
(1): 71–96.
Dertouzos, M., Lester, R. and Solow,
R. and the MIT Commission on
Industrial Productivity (1989) Made in
America: Regaining the Productive Edge,
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Edwards, F. (1996) The New Finance:
Regulation and Financial Stability,
Washington, DC: AEI Press.
Fama, E. and Jensen, M. (1983)
‘Separation of ownership and control’,
Journal of Law and Economics 26: 301–25.
Farber, H. (1997) ‘The changing face of
job loss in the United States’, Brookings
Papers: Microeconomics, Washington, DC:
Brookings Institution.
Gaughan, P. (1996) Mergers, Acquisitions,
and Corporate Restructurings, New York:
Wiley.
Hall, B. (1994) ‘Corporate restructuring
and investment horizons in the United
States, 1976–1987’, Business History
Review 68(1): 110–43.

—— and Liebman, J. (1997) ‘Are CEOs
really paid like bureaucrats?’, NBER
Working Paper Series no. 6213.
Herz, D. (1990) ‘Worker displacement in
a period of rapid job expansion,
1983–1987’, Monthly Labor Review
May.
Jensen, M. (1986) ‘Agency cost of free
cash  ow, corporate  nance, and
takeovers’, American Economic Review 76:
323–9.
—— (1989) ‘Eclipse of the public
corporation’, Harvard Business Review
67(5): 61–74.
Ð Ð and Meckling, W. (1976) ‘Theory
of the  rm: managerial behavior, agency
costs, and ownership structure’, Journal of
Financial Economics 3: 305–60.
Lazonick, W. (1992) ‘Controlling the
market for corporate control’, Industrial
and Corporate Change 1(3).
—— (1998) ‘Organizational learning and
international competition’, in J. Michie
and J. Smith (eds) Globalization, Growth,
and Governance: Creating an Innovative
Economy, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
—— and O’Sullivan, M. (1997)
‘Investment in innovation, corporate
governance, and corporate employment’,
Jerome Levy Economics Institute Policy
Brief No. 37.
O’Sullivan, M. (1999) ‘The innovative
enterprise and corporate governance’,
Cambridge Journal of Economics,
forthcoming.
—— (2000) Contests for Corporate
Control: Corporate Governance and
Economic Performance in the United States
and Germany, Oxford: Oxford University
Press, forthcoming.
OECD (1999) OECD Principles of
Corporate Governance, Paris: OECD.

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 08:14 12 November 2014 William Lazonick and Mary O’Sullivan: Maximizing shareholder value

35

Patch, E. (1995) Plant Closings and
Employment Loss in Manufacturing: The
Role of Local Conditions, New York:
Garland.
Poterba, J. and Samwick, A. (1995)
‘Stock ownership patterns, stock market
 uctuations, and consumption’, Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity 2: 295–372.
Ross, S. (1973) ‘The economic theory of
agency: the principal’s problem’,
American Economic Review 63: 134–9.
Scharfstein, D. (1988) ‘The disciplinary
role of takeovers’, Review of Economic
Studies 55: 185–99.
Staudohar, P. and Brown, H. (1987)
Deindustrialization and Plant Closure,
Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.
Taggart, R. (1988) ‘The growth of the
“junk” bond market and its role in
 nancing takeovers’, in A. Auerbach (ed.)
Mergers and Acquisitions, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
US Board of Governors, Federal
Reserve (various years) Flow of Funds
Accounts, Flows and Outstandings,

Washington, DC: US Government
Printing Office.
US Bureau of Labor Statistics (various
years) Employment and Earnings,
Washington, DC: US Government
Printing Office.
US Bureau of the Census (1976)
Historical Statistics of the United States
from the Colonial Times to the Present,
Washington, DC: US Government
Printing Office.
US Congress (various years) Economic
Report of the President, Washington, DC:
US Government Printing Office.
US Department of Commerce
(various years) Statistical Abstract of the
United States, Washington, DC: US
Government Printing Office.
Weinstein, M. and Kochan, T. (1995)
‘The limits of diffusion: recent
developments in industrial relations and
human resource practices’, in R. Locke, T.
Kochan and M. Piore (eds) Employment
Relations in a Changing World, Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 08:14 12 November 2014 