MODERN LITERARY THEORY

AN INTRODUCTION 

SS 2016

Jatin Wagle
Tel.: 0541-969-6033               
Email: jatin.wagle@uni-osnabrueck.de 

1

          

 

        Ofﬁce hours: Tuesdays, 11:00-12:00

QUESTIONS: JONATHAN CULLER, “WHAT IS THEORY?” (CONTD.)

• “Power, for Foucault, is not something someone 
wields but ‘power/ knowledge’” (8). Explain the 
juxtaposition of terms “power/knowledge.”

• What is genealogical critique?
• What does Derrida mean by the logic of 

supplementarity? How does he read it from 
Rousseau’s Confessions? What implications 
does it have for our understanding of the 
relationship between reality and appearance 
or an original and its copy?

• What conclusions does Culler draw regarding 

the nature of theory?

2

Michel Foucault 

(1926-84)

Jacques Derrida 

(1930-2004)

PIERRE BOURDIEU AND DISTINCTION

• Pierre Bourdieu (1930-2002)

• French sociologist/social philosopher

• Engaged in developing a theory of 

society, through a critical re-
envisioning of Marx, Weber, and 
phenomenology

• Best known publication: Distinction: A 
Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste 
(1979)

QUESTIONS: PIERRE BOURDIEU, SELECTIONS FROM DISTINCTION (1979)

• What is the traditional understanding of the category 

of “taste”? How and why does Bourdieu wish to 
question it?

• Have you heard of Bourdieu’s conception of ‘the 

habitus’? How would you deﬁne it?

• Explain the statement, “…the social agents whom the 

sociologist classiﬁes are producers not only of 
classiﬁable acts but also of acts of classiﬁcation which 
are themselves classiﬁed” (238).

• What does Bourdieu mean by “embodied social 

structures”?

• Explain the statement, “The sense of limits implies 

forgetting the limits” (241).

4

Pierre Bourdieu 

(1930-2002)

BOURDIEU, FROM “INTRODUCTION,” DISTINCTION

“…through the economic and social conditions which they 
presuppose, the different ways of relating to realities and ﬁctions, 
of believing in ﬁctions and the realities they simulate, with more 
or less distance and detachment, are very closely linked to the 
different possible positions in social space and, consequently, 
bound up with the systems of dispositions (habitus) 
characteristic of the different classes and class fractions”.

“…one cannot fully understand cultural practices unless 
“culture”, in the restricted, normative sense of ordinary usage, is 
brought back into “culture” in the anthropological sense, and the 
elaborated taste for the most reﬁned objects is reconnected 
with the elementary taste for the ﬂavours of food”.

“To the socially recognized hierarchy of the arts, and within each 
of them, of genres, schools or periods, corresponds a social 
hierarchy of the consumers. This predisposes tastes to function 
as markers of “class”. The manner in which culture has been 
acquired lives on in the manner of using it…”.

BOURDIEU, FROM “INTRODUCTION,” DISTINCTION

“…the capacity to see (voir) is a function of the 
knowledge (savoir), or concepts, that is, the 
words, that are available to name visible things, 
and which are, as it were, programmes for 
perception. A work of art has meaning and 
interest only for someone who possesses the 
cultural competence, that is, the code, into which 
it is encoded”.

“…the encounter with a work of art is not “love 
at ﬁrst sight” as is generally supposed, and the act 
of empathy, Einfühlung, which is the art-lover’s 
pleasure, presupposes an act of cognition, a 
decoding operation, which implies the 
implementation of a cognitive acquirement, a 
cultural code”.

