Leitfäden für die Interviews 

 

Ausgangspunkt: Unsere Forschungsfragen 

1. Nach welchen Kriterien empfehlen die Gastgeber ihren Gästen Restaurants, Bars und Cafés 

in ihrem Stadtviertel? Was empfehlen sie nicht? 

2. Sind vermehrt airbnb Gäste in den empfohlenen Gastronomiebetrieben anzutreffen? 

3. Gibt es bereits Kooperationen zwischen Gastgebern und Gästen? 

 

Leitfaden für Gastronomieinterviews 

 

May you introduce yourself in a few words? 

Allgemeine Informationen über Gastronomiebetrieb 

1.  What is special about your bar/restaurant/café? 

2.  When was your bar, restaurant, café established? 

Nähere Umgebung und Kundschaft des Gastronomiebetriebes  

3.  How  do  you  rate  the  neighbourhood  of  your  restaurant?  Are  there  passing  trades  or 

concurring bars, cafés, restaurants? 

4.  Are there more guests in spring and summer than in autumn and winter? 

5.  Do you know if there are a lot of tourists in your café? 

If so, are there more tourists than inhabitants?  

6.  Do you prefer tourists over locals?  

If so, why?  

If not, why not? 

Gastronomie und airbnb 

7.  Do you know the internet platform airbnb?  

If so, do you think that it has positive influences on the neighbourhood? 

8.   Do you know if there are any airbnb tourists visiting your restaurant? 

9.  Do you cooperate with the hosts of holiday flats like airbnb? 

If so, what kind of cooperation is it? 

10. Is there anything left on your mind? / Further comments... 

 

 

 

 

Leitfaden für Gastgeberinterviews 

 

Angaben zur Person 

1.  May you introduce yourself in a few words? 

2.  What is your profession? 

Motivation Gastgeber zu sein 

3.  Since when are you a member of airbnb? 

4.  What was your motivation to join airbnb? 

5.  Have you already used airbnb as a traveller? If so, which aspects are important to you? 

If not, which advantages do you see in booking an airbnb accommodation instead of a 

hostel/hotel? 

6.  Do you cooperate with anybody concerning the key drop/handing over? 

7.  What do you think are the interests of your guests?  

Mögliche Einflüsse von airbnb Gästen auf Södermalm 

8.  Do you use Södermalm in the description of your accommodation on purpose? (Was 

hat Södermalm für Touristen zu bieten?) 

9.  What are the frequently asked questions of your guests concerning the district? 

10. Do you give any advice to your guests where to go for dinner or where to go out? 

11. Have you ever gotten feedback from your guests concerning restaurants, bars or cafes? 

Mögliche Kooperationen 

12. Do you welcome your guests in person to give them the keys?  

13. Do  you  intentionally  recommend  certain  restaurants  in  your  neighbourhood?  If  so, 

why and how? Do you talk to  your guests or do you leave  them several flyers in the 

accommodation? If not why?  

14. Do  you  receive  any  benefits  because  of  the  recommendation?  If  so,  which  kind  of 

benefits do you receive?  

Beweggründe für die Empfehlungen 

15. What leads you to give a several recommendation? 

16. What stops you to give a several recommendation? 

17. Why do(n’t) you have a personal travel guide on your airbnb profile?  

18. Does your recommendation depend on age or gender? 

19. Is there anything left on your mind? / Further comments... 

