UNSW Law Journal 

Volume 35(1) 

ENLIGHTENED SHAREHOLDER VALUE 

IN UK COMPANY LAW 

RICHARD WILLIAMS* 

360 

 

 
 

 

I   INTRODUCTION: ENLIGHTENED SHAREHOLDER VALUE 

AND SECTION 172 OF COMPANIES ACT 2006 

The  economic  difficulties  that  have  beset  Western  economies  since  the 
financial  crisis  of  2008–09  have  prompted  policy-makers  in  many  countries  to 
place  an  increasing  emphasis  on  the  need  to  foster  a  long  term  perspective  in 
business  decisions.1  This  narrative  has  sparked  renewed  interest  in  the 
‘enlightened shareholder value’ provisions in section 172 of the United Kingdom 
(‘UK’) Companies Act 2006 (UK) (‘Companies Act’), which requires directors to 
have  regard  to  a  range  of  interests  in  discharging  their  duty  to  promote  the 
success of their company.2 

Section  172  of  the  Companies  Act  enshrines  the  principle  of  enlightened 
shareholder value (‘ESV’) into UK company law by appending to the directors’ 
duty to ‘promote the success of the company for the benefit of its members as a 
whole’  a  list  of  matters  to  which  directors  are  required  to  ‘have  regard’  in 
discharging the duty. The ESV principles in section 172 are stated with a high 
degree of generality and, as such, read very much like a list of exhortations to 
‘good’  conduct  by  directors  rather  than  specific  instructions  to  undertake,  or 
refrain from undertaking, any particular actions. Nonetheless, section 171(1)(a)–
                                                 
*  

1  

2  

Lecturer in Law, Homerton College, University of Cambridge. I am grateful for the comments of the 
UNSW Law Journal’s anonymous referees in compiling this paper. Responsibility for any errors in the 
paper remains, however, entirely my own.  
In the UK, for example, the current Prime Minister and Leader of the Opposition have promoted, 
respectively ‘moral capitalism’ and ‘responsible capitalism’. See, eg, ‘Cameron's “Moral Capitalism” 
Vision’, The Guardian (online), 19 January 2012 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/feedarticle/10048672>; 
‘Ed Miliband's Speech on Responsible Capitalism’, UK Labour Party, 19 January 2012 
<http://www.labour.org.uk/ed-miliband-on-responsible-capitalism,2012-01-19>. 
See, eg, Jingchen Zhao, ‘Promoting More Socially Responsible Corporations through UK Company Law 
after the 2008 Financial Crisis: The Turning of the Crisis Compass’ (2011) 22 International Company 
and Commercial Law Review 275, 283; Virginia Harper Ho, ‘“Enlightened Shareholder Value”: 
Corporate Governance Beyond the Shareholder-Stakeholder Divide’ (2010) 36 Journal of Corporation 
Law 61. See also Andrew Keay, ‘Risk, Shareholder Pressure and Short-Termism in Financial Institutions: 
Does Enlightened Shareholder Value Offer a Panacea?’ (2011) 5 Law and Financial Markets Review 435, 
though Keay argues that enlightened shareholder value is unlikely to prove useful in combating short-
termism by boards of financial companies.  

Forum: Enlightened Shareholder Value in UK Company Law 

2012 
 
(f)  of  the  Act  requires  directors  to  have  regard  to  following  principles  in 
discharging their core duty: 

361

the likely consequences of any decision in the long term;  
the interests of the company’s employees;  
the  need  to  foster  the  company’s  business  relationships  with  suppliers, 
customers and others;  
the  impact  of  the  company’s  operations  on  the  community  and  the 
environment;  
the desirability of the company maintaining a reputation for high standards of 
business conduct; and  
the need to act fairly as between members of the company.3  

• 
• 
• 

• 

• 

• 

The inclusion of ESV principles in the Companies Act was recommended by 
the Company Law Review Committee which undertook a wide-ranging review of 
UK company law during the late 1990s and early 2000s. The Review Committee 
considered  at  some  length  whether  the  duty  of  loyalty  for  directors  of  UK 
companies should retain the shareholder focus of the common law,4 or should be 
reoriented along ‘pluralist’ lines, with directors obliged to give equal weight to 
the  interests  of  constituencies  such  as  company  employees  and  creditors, 
alongside the interests of shareholders.5 The Committee declared itself to be in 
sympathy with the view that business affairs should be conducted with an eye to 
the long term and in a manner that enhanced the welfare of different groups in 
society,  but  felt  that  it  was  important  the  law  placed  a  clear  obligation  on 
directors  that  ensured  focused  and  competitive  management  and  which did not 
turn  them  ‘from  business  decision  makers  into  moral,  political  or  economic 
arbiters’.6 As such, mandatory pluralism was rejected in favour of ESV,7 which 
was offered as a means of retaining the benefits of focused management fostered 
by the shareholder-orientation of the common law duty, but which captured some 
of the inclusive aspects of pluralist approaches to corporate governance.8  

The inclusion of ESV principles in the UK Companies Act gives the duty of 
loyalty in UK law a different look to the common law duty to act ‘bona fide in 
the best interests of the company’9 and to the equivalent statutory provisions in 
Australia  and  New  Zealand.10  But  it  is  not  clear  to  what  extent  the  statutory 
statement of ESV principles has altered the substance of the duty in UK company 
                                                 
3  
4  

Companies Act s 172(1)(a)–(f). 
See, eg, Re Smith and Fawcett Ltd [1942] Ch 304; Greenhalgh v Arderne Cinemas Ltd [1951] Ch 286 
(‘Greenhalgh’). 
On stakeholder company law, see generally John Edward Parkinson, Corporate Power and 
Responsibility: Issues in the Theory of Company Law (Clarendon Press, 1993). For a summary of the 
shareholder and stakeholder approaches, see Andrew Keay, ‘Moving Towards Stakeholderism? 
Constituency Statutes, Enlightened Shareholder Value and More: Much Ado About Little?’ (2011) 22 
European Business Law Review 1, 3–7. 
Company Law Review Steering Group, Modern Company Law for a Competitive Economy: Developing 
the Framework (London, 2000) [2.21]. 
Ibid ch 2.  
Ibid [3.22]. 
Re Smith and Fawcett Ltd [1942] Ch 304. 

7  
8  
9  
10   See, eg, Corporations Act 2001 (Cth) s 181 (‘Corporations Act’) and Companies Act 1993 (NZ) s 131. 

5  

6  

362 

UNSW Law Journal 

Volume 35(1) 

law.  The  core  duty  in  section  172  remains  to  promote  the  interests  of  the 
members  generally  and  directors  are  required  only  to  ‘have  regard’  to  ESV 
principles in discharging this duty. Further, the duty in section 172 is owed to the 
company11 and outsiders have no ability, at least where a company is solvent, to 
enforce ESV principles.  

Nonetheless,  the  adoption  of  ESV  principles  along  UK  lines  has  been 
advocated  in  other  jurisdictions  as  a  desirable  means  of  combating  failures  in 
corporate governance identified in the wake of the global financial crisis. Harper 
Ho,  for  example,  has  advocated  the  adoption  of  an  ESV  model  in  US 
jurisdictions on the basis that, whilst ESV does not oblige directors to act on the 
basis  of  stakeholder  interests,  it  nonetheless  ‘endorses  a  multi-stakeholder 
decision-making  rule  and  makes  management  at  least  indirectly  accountable  to 
stakeholders’12  which  has  the  effect  of  ‘nudging  companies  in  the  direction  of 
greater social responsibility’.13 Shan Ho has also advocated the adoption of ESV 
in  the  Hong Kong  Companies  code,  though  in  this case  on  the  basis  that  ESV 
reflects ‘modern commercial practices’, rather than as a specific response to the 
events of 2008–09.14  

It is argued here that ESV does not represent any substantive change in the 
approach of UK company law to stakeholders, and as such that the model of the 
UK Companies Act it is of doubtful usefulness to other jurisdictions in seeking to 
enhance social responsibility in their company law. This argument is advanced in 
three  parts.  First,  it  is  noted  that  despite  the  expanded  list  of  ESV  principles 
included in section 172, the provision does little more than state explicitly that 
which has long been implicit in the common law, namely that ‘having regard’ to 
the interests of other constituencies is an integral part of managing companies for 
the benefit of members generally. It is noted that the statutory statement of ESV 
principles  has  the  potential  to  act  as  a  catalyst  for  development  in  stakeholder 
protection  beyond  the  common  law.  However,  the  second  part  of  this  article 
contends that this is unlikely in the face of procedural limitations within section 
172. Insolvency law provisions, particularly actions by creditors for misfeasance 
under  section  212  of  the  UK  Insolvency  Act  provide  a  mechanism  for 
circumventing  these  limitations  in  insolvent  companies,  but  it  is  noted  that  the 
vague nature of ESV principles and uncertainty surrounding the ability to recover 
substantial sums for breach of ESV principles make it unlikely that the statutory 
statement  will  represent  any  substantive  advance  on  the  common  law  position. 
Third,  it  is  argued  that  more  significant  developments  in  the  protection  of 
stakeholder interests have taken place though the application of the standard of 
‘unfitness  to  be  concerned  in  the  management  of  companies’  in  the  UK’s 
Company Directors Disqualification Act 1986 (UK) (‘Disqualification Act’). The 
                                                 
11   Companies Act c 46, s 170(1). 
12   Harper Ho, above n 2, 79. See also Zhao, above n 2. 
13  

John M. Conley, ‘An Emerging Third Way? The Erosion of the Anglo-American Shareholder Value 
Construct’ (2005) 38 Cornell International Law Journal 493, 500, cited in Harper Ho, above n 2. 
John Kong Shan Ho, ‘“Director’s Duty to Promote the Success of the Company”: Should Hong Kong 
Implement a Similar Provision?’ (2010) 10 Journal of Corporate Law Studies 17, 32. 

14  

363

Forum: Enlightened Shareholder Value in UK Company Law 

2012 
 
UK’s disqualification rules allow state agencies to act directly as regulator of a 
director’s conduct, which is assessed against the broad and flexible standard of 
unfit conduct. This article shows that this standard is routinely used to protect the 
interests  of  various  stakeholder  groups  and  highlights  the  many  procedural 
advantages that the disqualification rules have over ESV as a means to enhance 
the importance of stakeholder interests in the regulation of a director’s conduct. 
Analysis  of  disqualification  therefore  further  illustrates  why  ESV  is  not  a 
particularly radical innovation in UK company law, but shows too that neither is 
it  the  most  effective  mechanism  for  enhancing  stakeholder  protection  that  UK 
law provides.  

 

II   THE COMMON LAW AND ESV 

The  established  view  of  UK  company  law,  like  that  of  the  US,  Australia, 
New  Zealand  and  Canada,  is  that  it  gravitates  towards  an  economic  and 
proprietary  analysis  of  the  company  and  therefore  promotes  the  goal  of  profit 
maximisation in the interests of shareholders.15 That directors must act in the best 
interests of the company was set down in Re Smith and Fawcett Ltd, where Lord 
Greene MR declared that the common law required directors to act ‘bona fide in 
what they consider to be the best interests of the company’ and not what the court 
may consider to be so.16 In Greenhalgh,17 it was held that this obliged directors to 
act in a manner that advanced the interests of the ‘corporators as a general body’ 
and  not  for  the  company  as  a  distinct  legal  entity.  In  the  UK  the  duty  is  now 
enshrined in the first limb of section 172(1) of the Companies Act which states 
that directors ‘promote the success of the company for the benefit of its members 
as a whole’, and in Australia in section 181 of the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth).  
The  claim  that  the  duty  of  loyalty  requires  directors  to  pursue  ‘profit 
maximisation’ arises from the association of the ‘interests of the company’ with 
the ‘interests of the members’, as a general body. In identifying one group, that is 
shareholders,  as  the  sole  beneficiaries  of  directors’  efforts,  the  law  appears  to 
impose a narrower duty on directors than could arise, for example, from a duty 
for directors to exercise their powers in the interest of the company as a separate 
legal  entity.18  A  duty  to  members  seems  squarely  focused  on  increasing  the 
financial  value  of  the  company  whereas  a  duty  to  the  company  as  a  separate 
commercial entity could imply much more of a balancing of the interests of the 
different  stakeholders  that  make  up  the  separate  entity,  such  as  shareholders, 
employees,  creditors  etc.19  However,  as  commentators  have  noted,20  the 
                                                 
15   See, eg, Parkinson, above n 5, 76–82. 
16   Re Smith and Fawcett Ltd [1942] Ch 304, 306. In Australia, see also Mills v Mills (1938) 60 CLR 150. 
17  

[1951] Ch 286, 291. See also Fulham Football Club Ltd v Cabra Estates Plc [1992] BCC 863, 876 (Neill 
LJ). In Australia, the same rule was adopted in Ngurli Ltd v McCann (1953) 90 CLR 425. 

18   See Parkinson, above n 5, 76–9. 
19   As is the case in many continental European jurisdictions, see Simon Deakin, ‘The Coming 

Transformation of Shareholder Value’ (2005) 13 Corporate Governance: An Institutional Review 11, 12. 

364 

UNSW Law Journal 

Volume 35(1) 

association of the various common law (and now statutory) duties to promote the 
interests of the company for the benefit of members with ‘profit maximisation’ 
owes  much  more  to  the  normative  case  for  profit  maximisation  advanced  by 
advocates of private and contractual conceptions of the company than it does to 
positive analysis of the case law itself.21   

So far as UK and Australian law is concerned, case law in fact provides little 
guidance on the content of the duty to promote the interests of the company for 
the  collective  benefit  of  members  and  has,22  in  both  jurisdictions,  shown  a 
distinct tendency to limit more detailed exposition of the duty to statements as to 
what it is not, rather than what it is. It has been clear from an early stage that the 
duty cannot, for example, simply be equated with ‘what the members want’. In 
Greenhalgh,  Evershed  MR  stated  that  the  interests  of  ‘members  generally’ 
should be determined by reference to the views of a hypothetical member of the 
company, not the actual  members,23 and in Gaiman v National Association for 
Mental  Health24  (in  the  UK)  and  Provident  International  Corp  v  International 
Leasing Corp Ltd25 (in Australia) it was suggested that in discharging this duty, 
directors could consider the interests of current and future members in deciding 
how to promote the best interests of the company.  

The fact that the interests of the members cannot simply be equated with their 
actual  wishes  and  desires  presents  clear  difficulties  for  the  notion  that  the  law 
mandates strict ‘profit maximisation’. But it also raises a broader question about 
the consequences of identifying the members as the object of directors’ efforts. It 
has  been  contended,  for  example,  that  the  identification  of  the  interests  of  the 
company with the ‘interests of the members’ is at least necessary in order to give 
meaning  to  the  duty  to  promote  the  success  of  the  company.26  Without  such 
clarification it is claimed that the duty would be almost meaningless because of 
the abstract nature of corporate personality.27 However, in truth, attempting to fill 
                                                                                                                         
20   See, eg, Harper Ho, above n 2, 74; Jill E Fisch, ‘Measuring Efficiency in Corporate Law: The Role of 

Shareholder Primacy’ (2006) 31 Journal of Corporation Law 637, 650. See also Deakin,above n 19, 11–
12. Deakin concludes that the maximisation ‘shareholder value’ as the primary corporate objective owes 
its existence to ‘norms and practices surrounding the rise of the hostile takeover movement’ in the 1970s 
and 1980s, rather than to ‘core company law’: at 16. 

23  

21   See generally Parkinson, above n 5, 75; Harper Ho, above n 2. 
22   See, eg, comments of Nourse LJ in Brady v Brady (1987) 3 BCC 535 (‘Brady’), who described the notion 
of ‘the interests of the company’ as ‘one which is often used but rarely defined’: at 522. On the equivocal 
treatment of ‘the interests of the company’ in case law, see further Andrew Keay, ‘Enlightened 
Shareholder Value, The Reform of the Duties of Company Directors and the Corporate Objective’, 
[2006] Lloyd’s Maritime and Commercial Law Quarterly 335, 341–6. 
[1951] Ch 286. In the UK this approach has been extended to the directors’ duty to creditors in companies 
nearing insolvency, see, eg, GHLM Trading Ltd v Maroo [2012] EWHC 61 (Ch), where, discussing the 
principle in West Mercia Safetywear v Dodd [1998] BCLC 250, Newey J commented that where creditors 
interests became relevant the duty in Companies Act s 172 becomes one ‘to have regard to the interests of 
the creditors as a class’ and not individual creditors: at [168]. 
[1971] Ch 317, 330. See also Brady (1987) 3 BCC 535 (Nourse LJ). 
[1969] 1 NSWLR 424, 440. 

24  
25  
26   Paul L Davies, Gower and Davies: The Principles of Modern Company Law (Sweet and Maxwell, 8th ed, 

2008), 16–24. 
Ibid. 

27  

365

Forum: Enlightened Shareholder Value in UK Company Law 

2012 
 
this void by identifying the interests of the members generally as the object of 
corporate power is a strategy that can only have very limited success. For once 
the  actual  wishes  of  the  members  are  divorced  from  the  legal  notion  of  ‘the 
interests of the members’, as they are by both UK and Australian law, then a rule 
requiring the promotion of the interests of the members becomes little less of an 
abstraction than a rule requiring directors to further the interests of the company 
as  an  artificial  entity.  In  practice  both  approaches  require  directors  to  act 
according  to  an  artificial  construct  that  will  be  derived  from  the  director’s 
balancing of whichever social, political and economic factors that they consider 
relevant to determine either (i) what are the interests of the members as a general 
body,  or  (ii)  the  interests  of  the  company  as  a  commercial  entity.  To  be  sure, 
identifying  the  interests  of  the  members  as  the  relevant  test  will  likely  lead  to 
directors attaching particular weight to factors they consider to be important to 
the  members.  However,  the  abstract  nature  of  the  ‘interests  of  the  members’ 
makes it almost inevitable that the interests of other groups will be considered by 
directors in as much they are felt to bear on determining a course of action that is 
in the interests of the members. Indeed, this has been clear since the nineteenth 
century, when it was famously stated in Hutton v West Cork Railway Company, 
that the directors were free to confer benefits on groups other than shareholders, 
provided that the relevant ‘cakes and ale’ were genuinely considered to advance 
the interests of company (and its members).28  

The limited normative implications of the legal duty to promote the interests 
of members29 are further evidenced by its subjective nature.30 For whatever the 
process of reasoning by which directors determine ‘the interests of the members 
generally’, in practice the duty has never required directors to manage the affairs 
of a company for the benefit of its members, in the sense that any conduct that 
failed  to  promote  the  interests  of  members  would  necessarily  be  liable  to 
sanction. Rather, the subjective nature of the duty means that the law has only 
ever required that directors exercise their management powers in a manner that 
they considered will promote the interests of the company for the benefit of its 
members, for it is only conduct that is not believed, in good faith, to promote the 
interests  of  members  that  will  be  sanctioned.31  This  reinforces  the  scope  for 
directors to take account of the interests of non-shareholder groups. 

Stripped  of  overlying  normative  arguments  that  link  the  shareholder-
orientation of UK and Australian law to the notion of profit maximisation, it is 
therefore unsurprising that it has been observed that the ESV principles in section 
172 of the UK Companies Act have in fact made little change to the expectations 
of directors in UK company law.32 In part, this is due to procedural limitations 
                                                 
28  
29   Deakin, above n 19, 11–13; Keay, above n 22, 341–346. 
30   Re Smith and Fawcett Ltd [1942] Ch 304. The subjective nature of the duty to promote the success of the 
company is retained by Companies Act c 46, s 172(1), Corporations Act s 181(1)(a) and Companies Act 
1993 (NZ) s 131(1).  

(1883) LR 23 Ch D 654, 673. 

31   See, eg, Re Smith v Fawcett Ltd [1942] Ch 304. 
32   Shan Ho, above n 14, 23; Harper Ho, above n 2, 79. 

366 

UNSW Law Journal 

Volume 35(1) 

with  the  scheme  of  the  Companies Act  itself.  The  duty  in  section  172  remains 
owed to and, in the main, only enforceable by the company33 and directors are 
required only to ‘have regard’ to ESV principles. However, it is also clear that 
the  traditional  common  law  duty  of  loyalty  was  sufficiently  broad  to 
accommodate the matters now identified in section 172 as ESV principles. 

The  reason,  of  course,  for  this  is  that  the  common  law  recognised  and 
accommodated  the  fact  that  reasonable  people  may  legitimately  disagree  as  to 
which course of action promotes the interests of the company ‘for the benefit of 
members as a whole’. There is rarely a single path to corporate prosperity and in 
practice  directing  the  affairs  of  a  company  inevitably  involves  balancing  the 
interests  of  many  different  groups  before  settling  on  the  preferred  course  of 
action. In this sense, the ESV principles in section 172 of the Companies Act do 
little more than give expression to matters of practical business sense that clarify 
rather than revolutionise the existing law, as, indeed, the UK government was at 
pains  to  emphasise  during  the  passage  of  the  ESV  provision  through  the  UK 
Parliament.34 It would be the poor director indeed who, for example, exercised 
his powers without any regard to the long term impact of his decisions,35 or who 
for whom ‘the need to foster the company’s business relationships with suppliers, 
customers  and  others’36  was  a  matter  of  indifference.  To  be  sure,  it  might  be 
possible  to  claim,  if  one  focuses  solely  on  the  promotion  of  the  interests  of 
members,  as  Parkinson  did,  that  the  legal  model  ‘excluded  all  non-ownership 
interests’ from directors’ minds, but looking at the law in its full context it is hard 
to  contend  that  directors  are  not  free  under  the  traditional  duty  of  loyalty  (for 
example,  as  is  broadly  incorporated  into  the  Australian  and  New  Zealand 
corporations/company  laws)  to  consider  a  whole  range  of  interests  in  their 
management decisions.  

This view is supported by a 2007 study of Australian directors’ attitudes to 
stakeholders.37  The  survey,  which  was  comprised  of  the  responses  of  367 
directors  of  Australian  companies  found  that  whilst  a  plurality  (44  per  cent) 
tended to rank shareholder interests first in their ‘order of priority’ in corporate 
decision  making,38  over  90  per  cent  of  directors  of  Australian  companies 
responding to the survey felt that the existing law on directors duties in Australia 
(which  essentially  reflects  the  common  law  position  in  the  UK  before  the 
Companies Act) was broad enough to allow them to consider the interests of both 
stakeholders and shareholders and, further, that 55 per cent of directors believed 
that the current provisions of the Corporations Act required them to take account 
                                                 
33   Companies Act c 46, s 170(1). See further below. 
34   United Kingdom, Parliamentary Debates, House of Lords, 9 May 2006, vol 681, col 840; United 

Kingdom, Parliamentary Debates, House of Lords, 6 Feb 2006, vol 678, col GC255. 

35   Companies Act c 46, s 172(1)(a). 
36   Companies Act c 46, s 172(1)(c). 
37   See Malcolm Anderson et al, ‘Evaluating the Shareholder Primacy Theory: Evidence from a Survey of 

Australian Directors’ (Research Report, Centre for Corporate Law and Securities Regulation, University 
of Melbourne, 2007) <http://cclsr.law.unimelb.edu.au/files/Evaluating_the_shareholder_primacy 
_theory_-__evidence_from_a_survey_of_Australian_directors__20_11_07_1.pdf>. 
Ibid 6 (table 1). 

 
38  

367

Forum: Enlightened Shareholder Value in UK Company Law 

2012 
 
of  the  interests  of  stakeholders.39  Although  the  sample  size  for  the  survey  is 
small,  it  strongly  suggests  that  the  flexibility  to  take  account  of  a  range  of 
interests  that  is  built  into  the  traditional  duty  to  promote  the  success  of  the 
company is well understood by practitioners in the field.  

Therefore, if the duty to promote the interest of members is understood in its 
proper context then it can be seen that UK’s ESV provisions do little more than 
make explicit that which had always been implicit in the common law, namely 
that promoting the interests of the company requires directors to consider a wide 
range of interests. To be sure, section 172 of the UK Companies Act appears to 
place directors under some form obligation to consider ESV principles, and this 
is  an  innovation.40  However,  ESV  principles  are  vague  and  any  obligation  on 
directors, such as it currently is, is only to ‘have regard’ to them. This, combined 
with  other  procedural  limitations  within  the  section,  severely  restricts  the 
likelihood  that  the  obligation  imposed  on  directors  to  consider  ESV  principles 
will  prove  to  be  a  catalyst  for  changes  in  stakeholder  protection  beyond  the 
position under the common law, and therefore, that it would cause the duty in the 
UK to diverge in substance from the position in common law jurisdictions such 
as Australia and New Zealand.  

 

III   PRIVATE ENFORCEMENT AND INSOLVENCY RULES 

It  is  widely  recognised  that  procedural  limitations  in  section  172  make 
litigation under the provision complex and potentially very costly and that they 
are,  as  such,  likely  to  restrict  the  impact  of  the  statutory  statement  of  ESV 
principles.41  First,  the  language  with  which  the  Companies  Act  seeks  to 
incorporate  ESV  principles  into  a  director’s  decision-making  process  is 
extremely vague. The statute requires  only that directors ‘have  regard’ to ESV 
principles and gives no further indication of the level of engagement with ESV 
principles necessary to comply with the provision.42 As such, sufficient regard to 
ESV  principles  under  the  statute  could  encompass  anything  on  a  scale  from 
‘having  a  think  about  it’  to  giving  the matter  detailed  consideration.  Litigation 
under  section  172  will  accordingly  be  clouded  in  uncertainty  due  to  the  vague 
nature of the standard for liability, except, perhaps, in cases where clear evidence 
of  a  failure  to  have  any  regard  to  the  relevant  principles  is  available.43  Even 
                                                 
39  
40   See Davies, above n 26, 16–28. Davies notes that failure to ‘have regard’ to ESV principles would 

Ibid 10 (table 5). 

constitute a breach of duty and render such a decision challengeable.  

41   See, eg, Keay, above n 5, 24–36. The impact of procedural limitations on likely levels of litigation under 
the provision must be considered against the backdrop of already very low levels of private enforcement 
of corporate law rules against directors. See, eg, John Armour et al, ‘Private Enforcement of Corporate 
Law: An Empirical Comparison of the United Kingdom and United States’ (2009) 6 Journal of Empirical 
Legal Studies 687.  
42   Keay, above n 5, 29. 
43   See, eg, Re M & W Roith Ltd [1967] 1 WLR 432 for an example of the evidential burden under the old 

common law. 

368 

UNSW Law Journal 

Volume 35(1) 

where such evidence is available, however, the general, even nebulous, nature of 
the  ESV  principles  themselves  further  hinders  the  prospects  of  successful 
litigation.  The  Act  provides  no  guidance  of  the  level  of  foresight  and  inquiry 
necessary to have sufficient regard, for example, to ‘the likely consequences of 
any  decision  in  the  long  term’44  and  in  practice  such  uncertainty  would  surely 
deter all but the most bold of litigants. Furthermore, harm from contravention of 
such  broad  principles  would  likely  be  difficult  to  qualify  in  damages,  making 
recovery highly uncertain even in the event of a successful application.45 

Aside from the disincentives to litigation under section 172 that arise from 
the uncertainty of ESV principles, their likely impact is further restricted by the 
fact that ESV duties are owed to and only enforceable by, the company,46 which 
in  the  ordinary  course  of  events  means  the  directors.47  Of  course,  this  is  not 
specific  to  section  172  as directors,  through  their general  management  powers, 
are  responsible  for  the  enforcement  of  all  legal  claims  held  by  the  company. 
Directors’  role  in  the  process  of  instigating  litigation  on  behalf  of  a  company, 
however, gives rise to a clear conflict of interest where litigation against fellow 
directors is concerned. This conflict creates an inevitable drag on the regulatory 
impact of all directors’ duties, but is likely to be particularly acute when it comes 
to the ESV provisions. Directors are likely to have little interest in giving teeth to 
otherwise vague ESV principles through litigation against fellow directors. The 
same is likely to be true for shareholders, who, where they are able to,48 are most 
unlikely  to  instigate  litigation  alleging  breach  of  ESV  principles  that  do  not 
safeguard  their  interests.49  Conflicts  between  directors’  and  shareholders’ 
interests and ESV principles therefore probably all but rule out enforcement of 
ESV principles through traditional directors’ duties litigation.  

In insolvency, however, third parties can acquire rights to request damages 
for the company in respect of breaches of duty by directors and this provides an 
alternative mechanism through which ESV duties may be enforced. Section 212 
of  the  UK  Insolvency  Act  1986  (UK)  (‘Insolvency  Act’)  provides  that  any 
liquidator or creditor of an insolvent company may make an application to the 
court requesting it to review the conduct of any director, or other person involved 
in the management of the company, if it appears that that person has been guilty 
of  any  misfeasance  or  breach  of  duty  in  his  management  of  the  company’s 
affairs.50 Where the court finds that a director or other person has indeed been 
guilty of misfeasance or breach of duty it may order that person to ‘contribute 
                                                 
44   Companies Act c 46, s 172(1)(a). 
45   See generally Keay, above n 5, 33. 
46   Companies Act c 46, 170. See generally ibid. 
47   Under general management powers. In the UK context, see Companies (Model Articles) Regulations 

2008 (UK) SI 2008/3229. 

UK by Companies Act c 46, s 260.  

48   Shareholders may initiate proceedings under s 172 by means of derivative action, now governed in the 

49   See further Keay, above n 5, 33, 35–6. 
50   This includes any officer of the company, a liquidator or administrative receiver of the company’s 

property or any other person who has been concerned, or has taken part, in the promotion, formation or 
management of the company: Insolvency Act c 45, s 212(1)(a)–(c). 

Forum: Enlightened Shareholder Value in UK Company Law 

2012 
 
such  sum  to  the  company’s  assets  by  way  of  compensation  in  respect  of  the 
misfeasance or breach of fiduciary or other duty as the court thinks just’.51  

369

Neither  liquidators  nor  creditors  suffer  from  the  conflicts  of  interest  that 
inhibit enforcement of ESV by directors and shareholders and creditors actually 
have a positive interest in ensuring that ESV principles are respected. However, 
despite  the  potential  for  third  party  litigation  under  section  212  of  the  UK 
Insolvency  Act,  the  likelihood  of  actions  for  breach  of  ESV  principles  in 
insolvency is low. For one thing, litigation would be just as risky and potentially 
expensive for third party creditors and the liquidator as it would for the company 
or shareholders due to the vague nature of ESV principles and the weak duty only 
to  ‘have  regard’  to  them.52  Creditors  in  particular  may  suffer  as  litigants  from 
being  corporate  outsiders  and  not  having  access  to  company  documents 
necessary to make out a claim for breach of ESV principles.53 Unless it was clear 
that  significant  sums  could  be  recovered  from  directors  for  breach  of  ESV 
principles, creditors would consequently be unlikely to take on the financial risk 
of litigation.54 Indeed, the fact that recovery under section 212 is made for the 
company and not simply litigating creditors poses a significant free-rider problem 
that may well discourage creditors from instigating litigation.55  

Liquidators  are  entitled  to  reclaim  the  costs  of  litigation  conducted  on  the 
company’s  behalf  as  sums  legitimately  incurred  in  the  performance  of  their 
duties,56  but  are  similarly  unlikely  to  embark  on  potentially  expensive 
proceedings without the prospect of substantial damages being recovered from a 
director for the company. Indeed, if a liquidator were to launch such proceedings 
without the prospect of recovery he could himself be found liable for the costs of 
the  litigation.57  Given  that  the  quantum  of  damages  that  could  be  awarded  for 
breach of ESV principles is highly uncertain, it would seem that the likelihood of 
their  enforcement  by  liquidators  is  little  higher  than  the  likelihood  of 
enforcement by directors and shareholders. 

However,  UK  policy  makers  could,  if  they  so  chose,  overcome  the 
difficulties of private enforcement of ESV by utilising directors’ disqualification 
legislation.  UK  company  law  has  long  sought  to  raise  standards  of  conduct 
amongst directors through the use of directors’ disqualification rules, particularly 
the  disqualification  for  unfitness  to  be  concerned  in  the  management  of 

Insolvency Act c 45, s 212(3)(b). 

                                                 
51  
52   Keay, above n 5, 33. 
53   Though as Vanessa Finch notes, creditors who wish to bring a claim under s 212 of the Insolvency Act 
will be aided by disclosure rules in insolvency proceedings: see Vanessa Finch, Corporate Insolvency 
Law: Perspectives and Principles (Cambridge, 2nd ed, 2009), 705–06. 

54   See generally Finch, ibid 707–09. Finch notes that secured creditors would have no need for recovery 
under s 212 and so the provision is likely to be of primary relevance to unsecured creditors. Unsecured 
creditors, tend however, to be the least well-off creditors, and so the least able to bring proceedings under 
s 212.  

55   Finch, ibid 708. 
56   See generally Finch ibid 553–5, 708. 
57   See, eg, Walker v Walker [2006] 1 WLR 2194. 

370 

UNSW Law Journal 

Volume 35(1) 

companies.58  In  large  part  disqualification  rules  have  arisen  in  response  to  the 
limitations  of  traditional  mechanisms  in  effectively  disciplining  directors. 
Disqualification  actions  are  brought  in  the  public  interest59  by  state  agencies60 
and  as  such  provide  an  obvious  means  by  which  changed  attitudes  towards 
‘good’  conduct  in  corporate  management  may  be  quickly  realised.  However, 
protecting the interests of stakeholders is already an integral part of the regulation 
of  directors’  conduct  through  disqualification  actions.  And  disqualification 
arguably represents a much more important advance in ensuring that directors do 
not  act  abusively  towards  stakeholders  than  that  which  is  likely  to  arise  from 
ESV. So whilst a number of private law mechanisms exist in principle through 
which ESV principles may be enforced, none are likely to prove effective. 

 

IV   DISQUALIFICATION OF DIRECTORS AND ESV 

Disqualification rules provides the UK State with a means by which it may 
seek to foster desirable, rather than simply ‘lawful’, conduct in the management 
of companies. The current UK disqualification provisions were enacted following 
the report of the Cork Committee61 on insolvency law reform. Cork advocated a 
significant expansion of public interest proceedings in corporate insolvency law 
in order to develop an effective regime for tackling so-called ‘abuses of limited 
liability’ which were perceived as inflicting significant harm on the public.62 A 
key part of this agenda was the expansion of powers to seek the disqualification 
of directors on the ground of ‘unfitness to be concerned in the management of 
companies’. The unfitness provisions are now found in sections 6 and 8 of the 
Disqualification  Act.  The  leading  provision  is  section  6,  which  allows  for  the 
disqualification  of  directors  of  insolvent  companies  on  the  ground  of  unfitness 
and typically over 1000 directors are disqualified under the provision each year.63 
Applications for disqualification under sections 6 or 8 of the Act are brought by 
the State, in the person of the Secretary of State, or in the case of section 6, the 
official  receiver  of  an  insolvent  company  acting  on  his  behalf,64  wherever  he 
feels that an individual is unfit and that it is ‘expedient in the public interest’ to 
bring  disqualification  proceedings.65  As  such,  UK  law  provides  a  broad 
                                                 
58   See Disqualification Act c 46, ss 6(1) and 8(1). 
59   Disqualification Act c 46, ss 6(1) and 8(1). 
60   Applications for a disqualification on the ground that a director is ‘unfit to be concerned in the 

management of a company’ may be made by the Secretary of State, or in the case of an insolvent 
company, by the official receiver acting on his behalf: see Disqualification Act c 46, ss 7(1) and 8(1). 
61   United Kingdom, Insolvency Law and Practice: Report of the Review Committee, Cmnd 8558 (1982) 

62  
63  

(‘Cork Report’).  
Ibid 1741. 
In 2010–11, for example, 1389 directors of insolvent companies were disqualified on the ground of 
unfitness (under s 6 of the Act), whereas only 12 directors of solvent companies were disqualified under s 
8: see Statistical Tables on Companies Registration Activities 2010/11 (Companies House, 2011), table 
D1 <http://www.companieshouse.gov.uk/about/pdf/companiesRegActivities2010_2011.pdf>. 

64   Disqualification Act c 46, s 7(1). 
65   Disqualification Act c 46, s 7(1) and s 8(1). 

371

than 

Forum: Enlightened Shareholder Value in UK Company Law 

2012 
 
administrative  jurisdiction  for  the  State  to  take  an  active  part  in  shaping  the 
conduct of directors through disqualification proceedings and in this respect the 
UK’s  disqualification  provisions  are 
the 
disqualification  provisions  of  Australia’s  Corporations  Act.  Australian 
disqualification  provisions  do  not  contain  any  equivalent  to  the  unfitness 
provision,  with  disqualification  in  the  Corporations  Act  instead  relying  more 
heavily  on  breaches  of  duty  by  directors  or  specific  offences  under  the 
corporations law.66  

significantly  broader 

The  primary  concern  of  the  UK’s  Cork  Committee  in  recommending  an 
expansion of disqualification for unfitness powers was to provide the State with a 
mechanism  by  which  it  may  remove  the  privilege  of  limited  liability  from 
entrepreneurs  who  were  guilty  of  engaging  in  ‘sharp’  business  practices.67 
However, the standard of liability in sections 6 and 8 – that is, unfitness to be 
concerned in the management of companies – is not defined by the Act and so 
provides a broad and flexible standard by which the conduct of directors may be 
regulated.  A  list  of  conduct  that  is  described  as  ‘relevant’  to  determining  unfit 
conduct is included in schedule 1 of the Disqualification Act, but the list is non-
exhaustive and non-binding.68 It is firmly established that a court may disqualify 
an individual on the basis of any conduct that it considers meets the standard of 
unfitness69 and indeed many of the most common matters of unfit conduct cited 
in  disqualification  cases  are  matters  that  are  not  listed  in  schedule  1.70 
Nonetheless,  the  schedule  of  relevant  matters  makes  it  abundantly  clear  that 
disqualification  for  unfitness  is  concerned  with  a  broad  notion  of  undesirable 
conduct  in  the  management  of  companies  and  not  simply  conduct  that  is  in 
breach  of  specific  company  law  rules  or  prejudicial  to  shareholder  interests. 
Indeed, certain matters highlighted as ‘relevant’ to unfit conduct in schedule 1 of 
the  Disqualification  Act  mirror  ESV  principles.  Protecting  the  welfare  of 
creditors and customers, for example, is central to many of the ‘relevant matters’ 
cited in the Disqualification Act,71 and in this sense shares much in common with 
ESV  principles  highlighting  the  need  to  foster  relationships  with  customers, 
suppliers  and  others.72  More  generally,  the  breadth  of  unfit  conduct  in 
disqualification  proceedings  is  highlighted  by  phrases  such  as  ‘breach  of 
                                                 
66   See, eg, Corporations Act s 206C (disqualification for breach of a civil penalty provision); s 206E 

(disqualification for contraventions of the Corporations Act); and s 206F (ASIC’s power of 
disqualification following an adverse report by a liquidator).  

67   See Cork Report, above n 61, [1739], [1744] and [1834]. 
68   Disqualification Act c 46, s 9(1). The matters in the list are described only as ‘relevant’ in determining 

unfit conduct. 

130, 132–133 (Gibson J). 

69   See, eg, Re GSAR Realisations Ltd [1993] BCLC 409, 421 (Ferris J) and Re Bath Glass (1990) 4 BCC 

70   For example, failure to pay Crown debts (taxes) whilst treating the Crown creditor less favourably than 
other creditors or trading whilst insolvent to the detriment of creditors: see generally Adrian Walters and 
Malcolm Davis-White, Directors Disqualification and Insolvency Restrictions (Sweet and Maxwell, 3rd 
ed, 2010) ch 5. 

71   See, eg, Disqualification Act sch 1 para 7: ‘The extent of a director’s responsibility for any failure by the 

company to supply goods or services which have been paid for (in whole or in part)’. 

72   Companies Act c 46, s 172(1)(c). 

372 

UNSW Law Journal 

Volume 35(1) 

commercial  morality’,73  or  a  ‘breach  of  commercial  probity’74  which  have 
variously been used in attempts to identify the essence of unfit acts.75 As such, a 
wide, almost limitless, variety of conduct has been cited in disqualification cases 
to sustain a finding of unfitness. In addition to the core allegations of Crown debt 
misconduct76  and  trading  whilst  insolvent  to  the  detriment  of  creditors,  it  has 
been  accepted 
taking  ‘excessive 
remuneration’ from companies,77 misusing interest gained from money held by 
the company on behalf of clients,78 as well as conduct detrimental to the welfare 
of employees.79 

that  directors  may  be  sanctioned  for 

The  fact  that  the  disqualification  legislation  has  been  used  to  protect  the 
interests of creditors and other constituencies shows that UK company law has, 
for  many  years,  included  a  mechanism  for  enhancing  the  protection  of 
‘stakeholder’ interests. Crucially however, the standard of liability that has been 
used to do this, that is unfit conduct, is not tied to an overriding duty to promote 
the  interests  of  the  members  of  the  company.  As  such  disqualification  for 
unfitness is arguably a conceptually more radical provision for advancing third 
party  interests  than  the  ESV  parts  of  section  172,  which  are  of  course, 
subordinate  to  the  overriding  interests  of  shareholders.  The  public  interest80 
nature of disqualification proceedings is a crucial in this respect, as it allows the 
disqualification  standard  to  be  used  to  sanction  a  broad  range  of  conduct  that 
affects shareholder and stakeholders alike without apparent contradiction. Those 
who view the company as a social enterprise and follow Dahl’s claim that ‘every 
large corporation…[is] an entity whose existence and decisions can be justified 
only  insofar  as  they  serve  public  or  social  purposes’,81  for  example,  would  no 
doubt assert that corporate power should only be exercised for social good and 
any exercise of power that cannot be justified against this goal would be contrary 
to the public interest and so ‘unfit’ and there is nothing in the Disqualification 
Act to prevent such an interpretation. Of course, those who view the company as 
private  and  contractual  in  nature82  would  interpret  the  ‘public  interest’  in 
                                                 
73   Re Dawson Print Group (1987) 3 BCC 322, 324–325 (Hoffmann J):  

There must, I think, be something about the case, some conduct which if not dishonest is at any rate 
in breach of standards of commercial morality, or some really gross incompetence which persuades 
the court that it would be a danger to the public if he were to be allowed to continue to be involved 
in the management of companies, before a disqualification order is made. 
74   Re Lo-Line Electric Motors Ltd [1988] Ch 477, 486 (Browne-Wilkinson V-C). 
75   However, attempts at paraphrasing the standard have been discouraged: see, eg, Re Sevenoaks Stationers 

 

(Retail) Ltd [1991] Ch 164, 176. 
Ibid 183; Disqualification Act 1986 c 46, s 6. 

76  
77   See, eg, Re Keypak Homecare Ltd [1990] BCC 117 (though the allegation was not made out on the facts). 
78   Re CSTC Ltd [1995] 1 BCLC 545. 
79   Re Omaglass Ltd (Unreported, 6 April 1995) (failure to maintain a bonus fund for salesmen to meet 
commission payments), see Amada Hoey, ‘Disqualifying Delinquent Directors’ (1997) 18 Company 
Lawyer 130, and, Walters and Davis-White, above n 70.  

80   Cork Report, above n 61, ch 49; Disqualification Act c 46, s 7(1). 
81   Robert A Dahl, ‘A Prelude to Corporate Reform’ (1972) 1 Business and Society Review 17, quoted in 

82   See, eg, Frank H Easterbrook and Daniel R Fischel The Economic Structure of Corporate Law (Harvard 

Parkinson, above n 5, 23.  

University Press, 1991). 

373

Forum: Enlightened Shareholder Value in UK Company Law 

2012 
 
regulatory proceedings much more narrowly, essentially as allowing the State to 
only enforce private rights in circumstances of market failure and this too could 
be  readily  applied  to  the  Act.  However,  it  is  the  fact  that  the  concept  of  unfit 
conduct is not compelled by the Act in either direction (save the non-exhaustive 
guidance  in  schedule  1  to  the  Act)  that  gives  disqualification  its  inherent 
flexibility.83  Agencies  charged  with  enforcing  the  legislation  are  consequently 
free to fashion their own concept of unfit conduct contrary to the public interest 
by  taking  into  account  a  wide  range  of  political,  economic  and  social  factors. 
Disqualification  rules  consequently  provide  a  ready  mechanism  through  which 
changing  expectations  of  conduct  in  the  management  of  UK  companies  have 
been, and may continue to be, quickly realised.  

This is not to say, however, that the disqualification for unfitness provisions 
have somehow transformed UK company law from a ‘shareholder-orientated’ to 
a ‘stakeholder-orientated’ system; but it is to show that effective protection of the 
interests  of  various  stakeholder  groups  has,  through disqualification,  long  been 
integrated  into  the  UK  approach  to  regulating  the  conduct  of  directors.  Where 
this placed UK law on the shareholder-stakeholder scale though rather depends 
on  understanding  the  conceptual  basis  upon  which  protection  of  third  party 
interests has been undertaken in disqualification cases. In this vein it is clear that 
the concept of unfit conduct in disqualification proceedings has been interpreted 
by  UK  courts  as  seeking  to  combat  agency  problems84  that  arise  in  third-party 
contracts with companies, in the sense that unfit conduct is essentially taken to 
equate to opportunistic conduct by directors that would be eschewed by efficient 
contracts.  As  such,  financial  loss  plays  a  key  role  in  identifying  unfit  conduct, 
though  not  all  conduct  resulting  in  loss  is,  of  course,  deemed  unfit.  In  Re 
Sevenoaks  Stationers  (Retail)  Ltd,85  for  example,  Dillon  LJ  in  the  Court  of 
Appeal stated that  

[i]t is beyond dispute that the purpose of section 6 is to protect the public, and in 
particular potential creditors of companies, from losing money through companies 
becoming insolvent when the directors of those companies are people unfit to be 
concerned in the management of a company.86 

Similarly the UK’s National Audit Office prefaced its study of the efficiency 
of  disqualification  by  stating  that  ‘[t]he  disqualification  arrangements  are 
intended to promote confidence and risk-taking in the market, by assuring those 

                                                 
83   One commentator has noted that the uncertainty surrounding the concept of unfit conduct has led to 

different approaches to the level of blameworthiness necessary to justify disqualification being adopted 
by judges: see Vanessa Finch, ‘Disqualifying Directors: Issues of Rights, Privileges and Employment’ 
(1993) 22 Industrial Law Journal 35; see also Finch, Corporate Insolvency Law, above n 53, 729–32. 

84   Agency problems arise in contractual relationships where the welfare of one party (the principal) is 

dependent upon the actions of another (the agent) and where the agent has incentive to act in a manner 
detrimental to the principal. On agency problems between companies and their creditors, often described 
as financial agency problems, see Reinier H Kraakman et al (eds) The Anatomy of Corporate Law: A 
Comparative and Functional Approach (Oxford University Press, 2nd ed, 2009) ch 2. 
[1991] Ch 164. 
Ibid 176 (emphasis added). 

85  
86  

374 

UNSW Law Journal 

Volume 35(1) 

who do business with limited liability companies that directors who are unfit will 
be disqualified’.87 

In terms of the case law, it is clear too that financial misconduct lies at the 
heart of unfit conduct. This is obvious in high-profile examples of unfit conduct, 
such  insolvent  trading,  and  failure  to  pay  Crown  debts  or  the  ‘misuse  of  a 
company  bank  account’  (by,  for  example,  issuing  cheques  that  cannot  be 
honoured)88.  Financial  misconduct  is  also,  however,  at  the  heart  of  sanctioning 
directors  who  fail  to  supply  goods  ‘paid  for’  to  customers,89  who  misuse 
customer deposits,90 fail to maintain a bonus fund to meet commission payments 
to  employees91  and  even  in  cases  where  directors  are  sanctioned  for  taking 
excessive remuneration from their companies. In the latter case it has been held 
that directors’ remuneration will only be excessive and unfit where it cannot be 
justified by the financial circumstances of the company concerned.92 

The  financial  agency  cost  approach  to  unfit  conduct  is  essentially  market-
based in the sense that it seeks to eschew conduct that would not arise in efficient 
contracts  between  companies  and  those  with  whom  they  deal.  This  approach 
leaves little room for notions of ‘social responsibility’ in unfit conduct, at least in 
the sense of looking beyond financial considerations and associated concepts of 
market  failure.  The  courts’  approach  to  unfit  conduct  in  disqualification  can 
therefore be seen as very much in keeping with a market-orientated, private view 
of the company in the sense that ‘public interest’ regulation is deemed legitimate 
only where there has been a failure of ‘private law’ and ‘market’ mechanisms.93 
The fact though that this does not preclude the law from protecting the interests 
of  stakeholder  groups  further  highlights  the  success  of  disqualification  in 
incorporating  substantive  protection  of  stakeholder  interests  into  UK  company 
law without disturbing the interests of the members, albeit through predominately 
insolvency related regulation. To be sure, paternalistic or pluralist regulation (in 
the sense used by the UK Company Law Steering  Group94)  may be eschewed, 
but it is clear that this does not mean that the rights of non-shareholder groups are 
excluded. 

The  question  remains  though  as  to  whether  the  new  statutory  statement  of 
ESV  principles  might  itself  alter  the  courts’  approach  to  disqualification, 
                                                 
87   National Audit Office, Report by the Comptroller and Auditor General, The Insolvency Service Executive 

Agency: Company Director Disqualification – A Follow Up Report (HMSO, London 1999) 1. 

88   See, eg, Re Admiral Energy Group Ltd (Unreported, 19 August 1996), cited in Walters and Davis-White, 

89   See Disqualification Act sch 1 para 7; Re Western Welsh International System Buildings Ltd (1988) 4 

above n 70, 5–45. 

BCC 449. 

90   See, eg, Re CSTC Ltd [1995] 1 BCLC 545. 
91   Re Omaglass Ltd (Unreported, 6 April 1995). 
92   See, eg, Re Keypak Homecare Ltd [1990] BCC 117, 120. On the financial basis of ‘excessive 

remuneration’ in disqualification cases, see Richard Williams, ‘Disqualifying Directors: A Remedy 
Worse than the Disease?’ (2007) 7 Journal of Corporate Law Studies 213, 222. 

93   On justifications for public interest regulation in predominantly market-orientated systems of economic 

organisation see Anthony Ogus, Regulation: Legal Form and Economic Theory (Clarendon Press, 1994), 
ch 3. 

94   See, eg, Company Law Review Steering Group, above n 6. 

375

Forum: Enlightened Shareholder Value in UK Company Law 

2012 
 
providing  grounds  for  the  introduction  of  such  paternalistic  regulation  of 
directors’  conduct.  The  inherent  flexibility  of  the  unfit  conduct  standard,  for 
certain provides at least the possibility for ESV to provoke a different approach 
to regulation. To date, however, there is no evidence that the new principles have 
had  any  impact  on  the  disqualification  cases,  and  moreover,  no  evidence  that 
state agencies charged with initiating disqualification proceedings have sought to 
use disqualification powers to enforce ESV principles. ESV principles have not 
featured  in  any  reported  disqualification  cases  since  2009,  and  data  on  the 
matters  of  unfit  conduct  alleged  against  directors  across  all  disqualification  for 
unfitness  cases  similarly  show  no  indication  of  ESV  having  an  impact  on  the 
operation  of  the  legislation.95  In  truth,  of  course,  this  is  not  surprising.  ESV 
principles  reflect  common  sense  business  practices  that  were  in  any  case 
accommodated  by  the  existing  disqualification  law,  so  it  could  hardly  be 
expected that the new section 172 would have a dramatic impact. What may be 
more significant in the current context, however, is the fact there is little evidence 
of the State seeking to utilise ESV in disqualification procedures to drive more 
intrusive stakeholder protections, which we might expect if it were to seek to use 
policy  tools  to  force  a  new  settlement  on  directors  in  order  to  combat  ‘short-
termism’ in business behaviour in the wake of concerns arising out of the global 
financial crisis..  

As we have seen, private mechanisms through which ESV may be enforced – 
that  is,  litigation  by  companies,  shareholders,  liquidators  and  creditors  –  are 
inhibited by the risk and cost of litigation and the uncertain nature of recovery for 
breach  of  ESV  provisions.  Disqualification  actions,  by  contrast  are  publicly 
funded proceedings initiated by State agencies that have no objective other than 
to act in public interest. The fact that ESV appears to have had little or no impact 
in  disqualification  cases  is  therefore  significant,  suggesting  either  a  lack  of 
willingness on the part of the State to seek more intrusive regulation of directors’ 
conduct  through  the  use  of  ESV  principles  or  a  reluctance  on  the  part  of  the 
courts to depart from established principles. In respect of the activities of state 
agencies, it would, however, not be surprising if they had in fact shied away from 
the opportunity to utilise ESV principles through the disqualification legislation. 
The government of the day made it clear at the time that the ESV provisions were 
enacted  that  they  were  ‘subordinate  to  the  overriding  duty  [of  directors]  to 
promote  the  success  of  the  company’,96  and  emphasised  that  the  question  of 
whether  sufficient  regard  had  been  had  to  the  factors  was  ‘a  matter  for  the 
director’s good faith judgment’.97 This does not indicate a desire on the part of 
the government that ESV should impose new paternalistic obligations on boards, 
and  hardly  suggests  that  an  activist  approach  to  the  legislation  that  sought  to 
                                                 
95   See, Insolvency Service, Annual Report and Accounts 2010–2011 (London, 2011) table 16 

Company Law Reform Bill, Fifteenth Sitting, col 591.  

<http://www.official-documents.gov.uk/document/hc1012/hc13/1388/1388.pdf>.  

96   United Kingdom, Parliamentary Debates, House of Commons, 11 July 2006, Standing Committee D, 

Company Law Reform Bill, Fifteenth Sitting, col 591. See also Davies, above n 26. 

97   United Kingdom, Parliamentary Debates, House of Commons, 11 July 2006, Standing Committee D, 

376 

UNSW Law Journal 

Volume 35(1) 

advance  such  an  agenda  would  be  taken  by  state  agencies.  Of  course,  as  the 
political environment has changed, such sentiments would be no bar to the state 
using its powers to seek a more robust role for ESV principles in UK company 
law. The fact that they have not however, suggests that recent rhetoric has yet to 
lead  to  firm  measures  to  seek  to  change  the  culture  of  UK  boards  beyond  the 
protections that are already afforded in the disqualification legislation.  

 

V   CONCLUSION 

It  is  very  unlikely  that  the  ESV  principles  in  section  172  of  the  UK 
Companies  Act  will  bring  about  substantive  change  in  the  management  of  UK 
companies and, as such, that it is has advantages to commend it to other common 
law jurisdictions interested in integrating the protection of stakeholder interests 
into  general  norms  of  behaviour  for  directors.  It  is  far  from  clear  that  ESV 
represents  any  significant  change  in  UK  company  law,  for  whilst  the  common 
law  required  directors  to  act  in  the  best  interests  of  their  companies  for  the 
benefit of members, the rule allowed directors a good degree of discretion to take 
account  of  outside  interests,  provided  that  this  was  done  with  the  intention  of 
promoting the welfare of members. The reality of business administration rarely 
allows a single interest to drive corporate decision-making and to the extent that 
profit  maximisation  has  been  pursued  by  UK  boards  it  will  have  been  so  in 
dialogue  with  other  interests.  The  common  law  recognised  and  accommodated 
this reality. To be sure ESV is certainly an innovation in so much as it imposes 
some form of obligation to consider other interests, but the vague nature of ESV 
principles  and  difficulties  enforcing  them  through  directors’  duties,  derivative, 
and insolvency law actions under section 212 of the UK Insolvency Act mean that 
the ESV duty is likely to be a poor agent for change. More significantly though, 
the experience of directors’ disqualification in UK law suggests that regardless of 
ESV, UK company law has long endorsed a ‘multi-stakeholder’98 approach to the 
regulation  of  directors’  conduct  through  the  application  of  the  unfit  conduct 
standard.  Moreover,  disqualification  for  unfitness,  as  a  form  of  public  interest 
regulation  that  is  not  tied  to  an  overriding  concept  of  shareholder  primacy, 
represents a much more radical legal innovation than ESV. The fact that notions 
of  social  responsibility  have  failed  to  gain  ground  in  disqualification  suggests 
little appetite on behalf of the courts or state agencies for a fundamental change 
in the expectation of directors, but nonetheless the experience of disqualification 
shows  that  effective  protection  of  stakeholder  interests  can  exist  within  a  legal 
structure that endorses a broadly private, shareholder focused conception of the 
company  without  reference  to  the  traditional  duty  of  loyalty.  Rather  than 
focusing ESV, therefore, it is submitted that UK disqualification rules provide a 
more  useful  blueprint  for  reformers  in  other  jurisdictions  who  wish  to  seek 

                                                 
98   Harper Ho, above n 2. 

Forum: Enlightened Shareholder Value in UK Company Law 

2012 
 
greater  protection  for  third  party  interests  within  a  shareholder-orientated 
corporate governance framework.  

377

 
 
 

