 

Cognitive Aspects of Public Toilet Design 

 

Jo-Anne Bichard, Julienne Hanson 

Professor of House Form & Culture 

Bartlett Faculty of the Built Environment 
UCL, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT 

{j.bichard, j.hanson@ucl.ac.uk 

 

Clara Greed 

Professor of Inclusive Urban Planning 

Faculty of the Built Environment 

UWE, Coldharbour Lane, Bristol BS16 1QY 

c.greed@uwe.ac.uk 

 

 
 
Abstract 
 
This  paper  reports  ongoing  EPSRC1-  sponsored  research  to  understand  how  ‘away  from  home’  (public)  toilets 
feature  in  disabled  people’s  participation  in  urban  public  life.  After  tracing  the  origins  of  accessible  toilets,  it  will 
examine the technological responses currently in use in many public toilets and evaluate these designs with respect 
to people with cognitive disabilities. The paper  concludes by pinpointing challenges that need to be resolved by 
designers, before the goal of ‘an inclusive public toilet of the future’ can be realized. 
 
 
1  The Origins of Accessible Toilets 
 
At  present,  many  of  the  UK’s  public  toilets  are  not  accessible  to  people  with  physical,  sensory  or  cognitive 
impairments. Kitchen & Law (2001) have argued that this situation severely limits disabled people’s access to the 
city  and  its  resources.  Since  1979  purpose-designed  unisex  public  toilets  have  been  available  under  the  RADAR2 
scheme, in which specifically adapted toilets for people with disabilities are locked and can only be used by those 
who have access to the appropriate key3. This scheme has been considered controversial from the outset because it 
does  not  guarantee that everyone who needs the accessible facility will also have a key. Meanwhile, providing a 
‘disabled  toilet’4 somewhere in the town centre meant that ordinary public toilet facilities need not be universally 
accessible. The approach epitomised the UK attitude to access and social inclusion that was prevalent at the time, 
which  was  to  assume  that  ‘normal’  provision  for  ‘able  bodied’  members  of  the  general  public  should  be 
supplemented by provision to serve the ‘special needs’ of ‘the disabled’.  
 
1.1  Current Toilet Design 
 
The  design  of  the  RADAR  unisex  public  toilet  was  predominately  determined  by  the  requirements  of  wheelchair 
users. The needs of this specific user group have continued to inform further design standards such as the British 
Standard  BS8300  (Figure  1)  and  Approved  Document  M  (ADM)  of  the  Building  Regulations.  More  recently,  the 
Centre of Accessible Environments has produced ‘The Good Loo Design Guide’ which has included specific toilet 
design solutions for people with visual impairments. However, inclusive design implies a broader consultation with 
people  from  a  wide  scope  of  disability  and  other  user  needs.  The  Inclusive  Design  of  Away  From  Home  (Public) 
Toilets in City Centres research looks beyond the issues of access, to areas of universal needs for safety, privacy, 
cleanliness, comfort and dignity whilst using the public toilet. 
 

                                                 
1 We gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC), grant 
number GR/ S183080/01 Vivacity 2020: Urban Sustainability for the Twenty-four Hour City. 
2 Royal Association for Disability and Rehabilitation 
3 Members of the public can purchase their own key or are invited to ‘ask for the key’ when needing to use a RADAR locked 
toilet.  
4 Strictly speaking, toilets for disabled people should always be referred to as ‘accessible’ toilets rather then ‘disabled’ toilets, as 
the latter could be deemed offensive and stigmatising. However, in the 1970’s and 1980’s, the term ‘accessible toilet’ was not in 
common  currency.  Pre  2004  legislation  referred  to  ‘toilets  for  disabled  people’  and  many  disabled  people  still  use  the  term 
‘disabled toilet’ today. 

                    

Figure 1: BS8300 (2001) 

 

1.1.1  BS8300 
 
BS8300 (2001) sets the standard for accessible toilets, updating earlier versions that were based on the RADAR 
unisex facility. Unlike previous standards, BS8300 was based on systematic research into disabled people’s needs 
(Feeney, 2003). This included measuring basic body sizes and capabilities but the bulk of the research, which took 
place  over  a  four  year  period  from  1996-2000, was conducted through a programme of experimental trials. These 
included objective measures, such as using a specially constructed rig to plot the reach of 150 ambulant disabled and 
150 wheelchair users, and subjective measures of comfort in respect of the height of fixtures and fittings such as 
toilet  seats,  wash  basins  and  grab  rails.  The  main  objectives  of  the  laboratory  experiments  were  to  verify  the 
standards for a representative sample of disabled people and to permit the costs and practicality of different design 
solutions to be balanced against the proportions of people accommodated. These studies have been criticised for 
placing  too  much  emphasis  on  restricted  mobility,  whilst paying insufficient attention to the needs of people with 
sensory and cognitive impairments or with hidden disabilities such as diabetes, bladder and bowel problems.  
 
For many disabled people the accessible toilet has become symbolic of their access to the city, and although many 
‘accessible’ away from home toilets can be found in UK cities, there continues to be major discrepancies between 
the  design  of  the  facility  and  the  specific  needs  of  a  large  number  of  users.  The  introduction  of  Part  3  of  the 
Disability Discrimination Act (DDA) in October 2004, ensures through legislation that disabled people should be 
able to physically access services. This will have far reaching ramifications in the current design and management of 
UK  public  toilets.  As  a  result, every design aspect of the toilet facility, from the entrance to the exit, furnishings, 
fixtures  and  fittings  will  have  to  be  rethought.  Due  to  the  inaccessibility  of  many  existing  public  toilets,  many  of 
those  controlled  and  managed  by  local  authorities  are  closing,  creating  a  dearth  of  public  toilets  that  affects 
everyone. 
 

1.2  Users 
 
Figures representing the number of people with disabilities in the United Kingdom vary widely, depending on the 
source, but what can be inferred from the available data is  that a significant percentage of the population may be 
considered  to  have  an  impairment  which,  “has  a  substantial  and  long  term  effect  on  [their]  ability  to  carry  out 
normal  day  to  day  activities”  (Disability  Rights  Commission  (DRC),  2002,  p119).  In  2002,  one  conservative 
estimate reported that 12-13% of the UK population (5 million people) has some form of impairment (Oxley, 2002), 
whilst a current estimate by the Disability Rights Commission suggests that one in five adults in Great Britain is a 
disabled  person  (DRC,  2002).  Additionally,  many  other  groups  report  that  current  public  toilet  provision  is 
inadequate, including women, adults with babies or young children, anyone who needs to be accompanied by a 
carer, all those coping with a relevant medical condition, older people, as well as people with a physical, sensory or 
cognitive impairment. Some people may even be excluded, or further excluded from using current provision because 
of their ethnicity or faith affiliations. 
 
1.3  Cognitive Impairments and the Built Environment 
 
It is currently estimated that over 700,000 people in the UK have some degree of cognitive impairment associated 
with  dementia,  and  this  number  is  projected  to  rise  to  over  1.2  million  by  2040  (Cox,  1999).  Although  physical 
impairment and dementia is following a demographic trend and is rising in aging societies, the emphasis on design 
within  the  built  environment  continues  to  focus  more  on  the  barriers  “between  psychomotor  capacities  and  the 
organisation of space than between psychological capacities and the organisation of space” (Blackman et al, 2003, 
p.359).  It  is  estimated  that  80%  of  people  with  dementia  live  in  their  own  homes,  with  approximately  a  quarter 
living alone. A third of people living in their homes are considered to have a severe form of dementia (Blackman, 
2003). 
 
As a degenerative impairment, the cognitive functions of people with dementia are unlikely to improve. In 
contrast  people  with  learning  disabilities  can,  with  interventions,  learn  to  adapt  to  the  built  environment.  It  is 
currently  estimated  that  there  are  160,000  adults  in  the  UK  with  severe  and  profound  learning  disabilities  and 
between 55,000 and 75,000 children with moderate or severe learning disability (Department of Health, 2004). With 
medical  advances  increasing the survival of older people and infants, the populations of people with degenerative 
and congenital cognitive impairments are likely to increase. 
Imrie  and  Kumar  (1998)  have  found  that  many  disabled  people  associate  their  homes  with  safety  and 
 
security. In contrast, the environment outside of the home is associated with danger and inhospitableness. For many 
people with dementia, feelings of disorientation and loss of way finding ability may keep people indoors, extending 
their  feelings  of  isolation5  and  constraining  their  autonomy  (Blackman,  2003).Nevertheless,  research  with  older 
people  has  highlighted  the  importance  of  wider  access  to  the  built  environment  as  being  instrumental  in  their 
psychological,  social  and  physical  wellbeing  (Robson,  1982).  However, the many barriers older people encounter 
effectively  restrict  their  activities.  Barriers  may  include,  uneven  paving  surfaces,  poor  lighting,  heavy  traffic,  no 
shelter or seating and a lack of public toilet facilities. For older people with dementia these barriers are likely to be 
intensified  (Blackman,  2003).  Restrictions  to  access  of  the  built  environment  for  people  with  learning  disabilities 
have also been noted by Imrie & Kumar (1998). Environments that are not easy to navigate, and without essential 
supporting facilities such as public toilets, may also effectively isolate and confine those with learning disabilities to 
the space of the home, thus, developing a supporting built environment is essential for people with all aspects of 
cognitive dis ability to ensure that their wider spatial scope is not restricted. 
 
1.4  The Second Nature of Toileting 
 
For many people, using the toilet does not require much thought concerning each action they make within the space. 
After the initial conscious cue of the need to use the toilet, the use of  the space, from opening and closing doors, 
using the toilet, flushing after we leave and washing our hands, can be considered almost an unconscious activity 
and ‘second nature’. 
 
Freund (2001) notes that impairments brought about by aging may shift how a person experiences one’s body such 
that  routine  and  everyday  activities  become  increasingly  difficult.  The  changes  in  the  body  may  make  previously 
                                                 
 

  

  

 

unconscious  movements  and  actions  painful,  difficult  and  noticeable.  Equally  movement  and  action  in  previously 
friendly spaces may become more difficult and lead to the space becoming ‘unfriendly, potentially dangerous and 
uncomfortable’ (ibid, 2001, pg 699). Drawing from Radley (1996), Freund suggests that using spaces with ease is 
not a mechanistic ergonomic problem, but one of  an ‘embodied relationship to physical artifacts and environments’ 
(ibid, 2001, pg 699). The unconscious and ‘second nature’ aspect of toileting may become impossible due to a lack 
of  available  or  familiar facilities that are easy to locate and comfortable to use, and thus the public toilet and, by 
extension, the city becomes an unfriendly space and one to be avoided. 
 
Familiarity with the function and form of the toilet space is developed primarily within the home. For people with 
degenerative and congenital impairments, the familiarity with the domestic design of the toilet acts as a signal for 
the  appropriate  behaviour  within  this  space.  The  target-hardened  design  and  appearance  of  toilets  provided  for 
public use may be perceived as confusing or even threatening by people with cognitive impairments. 
 
1.5  The Inclusive Design of Away From Home (Public) Toilets in City Centres 
 
Previous  research  (Goldsmith,  1976,  1997;  Greed,  2003)  has  consistently  pointed to a range of design issues in 
respect of mainstream public toilet provision that differentially adversely affect women and children. The situation 
is  even  worse  in  respect  of  disabled  people.  An  inaccessible  built  environment  may  be  inconvenient  for  disabled 
people but, as Goldsmith (1976) has pointed out “ at public lavatories this could induce a crisis”. He has further 
observed  that  “among  disabled  people,  the  accessibility  of  public  lavatories  is  of  greater  importance  than  for  any 
other building type”, (p.356).  
 
Research currently being undertaken at University College London aims to broaden previous consultation processes 
to include many different groups of public toilet users. The research is consulting a wide verity of community and 
support groups to establish the level of comfort, safety, cleanliness, hygiene and privacy they experience in current 
facilities,  and  to  identify  changes  in  design  that  would  lead  to  a  more  suitably  designed  public  toilet.  Preliminary 
investigations  with  toilet  providers  has  revealed  that  little  is  know  about  certain  ‘able-bodied’  groups  including 
families  with  young  children,  as  well  as  people  from  minority  ethnic  and  faith  communities.  Consultation with 
disabled people is being extended to include those whose disability  is hidden, such as those who have continence 
concerns, and people who have sensory and cognitive impairments. 
 
1.5.1  The Design Matrix: Personas, templates and toilet audit tool 
 
Data gathered from focus groups and individual semi-structured interviews are being collated and constructed into 
design  tools  called  ‘personas’.  Personas  are  narratives  based  on  the  collective  biographies  of  user’s  experiences 
within the built environment. They are fictional accounts that describe what it is like to have a particular disability, 
be a carer, an older person, a parent with young children and/or a member of a minority community. The persona 
tells a story of what people would like to do in the city and how either good or bad provision affects their use of the 
city  without  reducing the user to a stereotype. Each persona will ‘voice’ the design failings of toilet facilities and 
provide suggestions for future toilet designs that meet their requirements. In addition, personas reach beyond the 
ergonomic  considerations  that  restrict  the  use  of  toilets,  by  describing  the  psychological  impacts  many  users 
experience when faced with inappropriate facilities. As well as providing an engaging reference for professionals, 
personas also serve as a communication tool that keeps the relevant user issues at the centre of the design process 
whilst allowing an aura of anonymity. This can be considered a crucial element in communicating, what some may 
consider, ‘embarrassing’ details of their toileting needs.  
 
The  desired  design  solutions  for  each  persona  will  be  translated  into  a  design  template  that  will  specify  an 
appropriate design solution. The templates will highlight the success or failure of current toilet designs and will be 
ranked  in  accordance  of  the  number  of  personas  each  accommodates. Templates will provide information on how 
current  facilities  can  be  modified  to  accommodate  the  largest  proportion  of  users.  Where  users  can  not  be 
accommodated  by  a  mainstream  or  customised  design,  a  new  template  will  be  created  that  is  tailored  to  the 
particular needs of the persona.  
 
In  collaboration  with  access  consultant  Vin  Goodwin,  the  research  team  have  built  a  toilet  audit  tool.  Based  on 
established design recommendations, this tool enables users involved with the research to audit toilets that may, or 

may not, be suitable for their needs. The toilet audit tool will also enable the research to identify common features of 
good  and  bad  design  within  these  facilities,  especially  concerning  the  placement  of  grab  rails,  the  toilet  flush  and 
other aspects of fixtures and fittings. 
 
Together, personas, templates and the toilet audit tool will form the core of a design matrix that highlights specific 
needs within toilet facilities, that a wide spectrum of users may share. In identifying common design considerations 
that  are  shared  between  users,  the  research  will  identify  areas  of  good  and  bad  practice  in  the  design  and 
management  of  public  toilet  facilities.  In  addition,  the  personas  and  templates  will  provide  tools  for  architects, 
planners, designers and providers to consult when planning toilet facilities for all6. 
 
1.6  Toilet Troubles 7 
 
Although a vanishing aspect of the built environment, many of the remaining public toilets in the UK are not well 
designed  for  contemporary  needs.  The  dwindling  numbers  of  available  facilities  are  currently  restricting  many 
people’s lives, especially those who need to use toilets frequently. Users have reported that the lack of provision 
limits  the  amount  of  time  they  can  spend  out  of  the  home.  However  the  sense  of  a  lack  of  provision  may  be 
increased by certain facilities that are ‘unfriendly’ and for people with cognitive impairments ‘too complicated’ to 
use. In addition, a history of an ambivalent attitude towards public toilets in the UK has resulted in facilities that are 
not  located  in  well  used,  accessible  environments.  The  history  of  public  toilets  consists  of  facilities  hidden 
underground or positioned in segregated, ‘out of the way’ locations that are difficult to find and in some instances 
can also feel threatening to users (Greed, 2003). 
 
 
1.6.1  Way Finding & Signage 
 
For  people  with  dementia,  incontinence  is  a  major  problem  (Namazi  &  Johnson,  1991a).  The  maintenance  of 
independent toileting has been an important aspect of design guidelines for indoor environments, such as day centres 
and residential care homes. Essential aspects in maintaining toileting independence include making facilities easy to 
locate and identify through signage. Previous research identified that adequate signage using the word “toilet” “rest-
room” or a graphic of a familiar household toilet increased usage. In the UK the current sign for the accessible toilet 
is a pictogram of a person using a wheelchair, (Figure 3)  8. This symbol may not be easily recognized by a person 
with  dementia  as  an  appropriate facility for them to use. Older people have reported that they would not consider 
using  the  ‘disabled’  facilities,  even  though  the  use  of  grab  rails  and  accessible  hand  washing  facilities  such  as 
levered taps may make toileting more comfortable. 
 

Figure 3: Sign for accessible toilet 

 

 
Although  standard  facilities  may  be  signified  by  signs  representing  the  appropriate  gender,  it  is  increasingly 
common for smaller businesses to provide an ‘accessible toilet’ signified by the wheelchair pictogram as their only 
toilet  facility.  In  addition  many  UK  public  toilets  are  known  and  signposted  by  varied  terms  these  include  “WC” 
“Public  Conveniences”  and  “Lavatories”.  The  lack  of  cohesion  concerning  the  name  of  facilities  could  further 
confuse the person with dementia as well as users who are unfamiliar with the English language. Clear signage of 

                                                 
6  The  proposed  design  matrix  outlined  here  contrasts  with  the  `toilet  lab`  approach  taken  in  Japan.  On  a  recent  visit  to  Toto 
International, Japan’s leading toilet manufacturer, the flexibility of design and testing that was enabled by the lab approach could 
be greatly enhanced by the use of the proposed design matrix.     
7 Unless otherwise referenced, this material has been obtained from primary research undertaken by Vivacity 2020: Inclusive 
Design of Public Toilets in City Centres.  
8 Indeed, in the UK this symbol is also widely used to denote separate entrances, parking spaces and general services for disabled 
people. 

toilet facilities would help all users, but would be significantly helpful for those who need to find toilet facilities 
quickly as well as people with dementia and learning disabilities who may experience difficulties with way finding. 
 
1.6.2  High Stimulation 
 
Carers of children with learning disabilities such as autism have reported that toilet facilities can be, to the autistic 
child, “an adventure playground”. Toilet facilities can be highly stimulating for autistic children with ‘shiny’ buttons 
to push, and taps to turn on. Where the autistic child needs help toileting, the accessible toilet with it’s many fixtures 
and fittings including the red alarm cord can distract the child from the task in hand and result in increased levels of 
agitation.  
 
Research  with  people  with  dementia  also  reveals  agitated  behaviour  in  high  stimulation  environments  such  as 
bathrooms  and  toilets.  Over  stimulation  may  impair  a  person  with  cognitive  impairment’s ability to concentrate 
(Day  et  al,  2000).  Auditory  distractions  such  as  those  from  hand  drying  technologies  may  also  be  a  source  of 
distraction and agitation. 
 
 
1.6.3  Lighting and Visual Contrast 
 
People with dementia share similar visual deficits to people with visual impairments. These include difficulty with 
colour  discrimination,  depth  perception,  sensitivity  to  contrast  and  irritation  from  glare  (Croonin-Golumb,  1995; 
Brawley, 1997). Design guides for dementia environments advise strategies to reduce glare, minimizing confusion 
with depth perception and increasing colour contrast and closely follow guidelines for the design of space for people 
with visual impairments.  
 
Many public toilets have ‘blue’ lights installed as a deterrent against illegal substance use in the facilities. The blue 
lights make it difficult to locate veins for injecting substances (Flemen, 2003). However, this form of lighting also 
makes  distinguishing  colour  contrast  difficult  for  people  with  visual  impairments,  so  that  they  are  less  able  to 
navigate  the  space  of  the  facility.  In  addition,  people  with  colostomies  and  urostomies  have  reported  difficulty 
assessing  if  they  have  adequately  cleaned  their  stoma,  and  people  with  diabetes  have  found  these  environments 
difficult to assess if they have successfully injected themselves with insulin.  
 
For people with cognitive impairments the effect of the blue light may be twofold; firstly by diminishing the colour 
contrast of the facility, and secondly by creating an unfamiliar and over stimulating environment. It may deter some 
users from entering the toilet at all, and a proportion of those who do will be at an increased risk of not being able to 
successfully use the facility. Unsuccessful use could mean that the user soils themselves or their clothes and leaves 
the toilet in a state that is unacceptable to subsequent users. 
 
1.6.4  Door Locks 
 
For the comfort, safety and dignity of most users of public toilets, the first and possibly most important aspect of 
using  the  toilet  will  be  to  close  and  lock  the  cubicle  door.  In  recent  designs  of  cubicles,  especially  those  on 
‘accessible’  trains,  a  three  stage  electronic  door  lock  has  been  introduced,  (Figure  4).  This  mechanism  involves 
pushing the first button to close the door followed by activating a second button to ensure the door is locked. This 
two stage operation effectively separates two closely related operations. To open the door a third button is pushed 
which unlocks  and  opens  the  door.  Although  instructions  for  the  operation  of  the  door  lock are clear (and also 
provided  in  Braille),  the  need  to  pause  and  read  in  order  to  lock  the  door  may  cause  difficulties  for  people  with 
cognitive impairments as well as non-English speakers, and lead to embarrassing and distressing situations. 
 
1.6.5  Toilet Flush 
 
There are a number of designs currently on the market for toilet flushes. In accessible toilets it is recommended that 
the flush can be used by a closed fist or elbow. For some users such as children with autism and people with learning 
disabilities,  the  act  of  flushing  may  be  considered  as  the  ‘reward’  for  successful  toileting,  the  act  involving  the 
action of flushing as much as the consequence of this action. New technologies of sensor-flushes  actively remove 

the need to touch the flush and are operated by waving hands across the sensor (Figure 5). For people with cognitive 
impairments such as dementia, the replacement of the ‘traditional’ flush mechanism with a hands free sensor flush, 
removes a familiar aspect of the toileting act and may cause dis tress to a person who can not understand why they 
can not flush the toilet. 
 

Figure 4: Three stage electronic toilet door lock 

 

 

 

 
 
 

Figure 5: “Hands free” sensor flush. 

 
1.6.6  Hand Washing Facilities. 
 
Recent  developments  in  the  design  of  hand  washing  facilities  (Figure  6)  include  all-in-one systems that dispense 
soap, water and the air for drying. This fixture can be complicated for people with cognitive impairments to use. The 
lack of identifiable fixtures such as a free standing sink and taps, may signal to the user that there is no place to wash 
their hands. In addition inserting hands into a ‘hole in the wall’ may feel unfamiliar and cause agitation.  
 
1.6.7  Automatic Public Conveniences (APC’s). 
 
The  Automatic  Public  Convenience  (APC  or  Superloo)  (Figure  7),  is  replacing  much  of  the  traditional  provision 
around the UK. The APC is fully automated and will often consist of technological innovations such as an automatic 
door and locking system, and ‘all-in-one’ sensor operated hand washing facilities. Many user’s dislike APC’s and 
perceive the facilities as a ‘last resort’ and not ‘a positive choice’. Recent research in Clerkenwell, London (Bichard 
et al, 2004) found that women over 45 would not use these facilities for fear of being locked in or being unable to 
see who might be waiting outside. Respondents reported finding the facilities too complicated to use and were put 
off by “all the instructions”. For people with cognitive impairments all aspects of the APC could be considered a 
cognitive challenge. 
 

Figure 6:  Automatic hand wash unit 

 

 

 

Figure 7:  Automatic Public Convenience (APC) 

 

 

1.7  Conclusion 
 
For  people  with  learning  disabilities  or  dementia  many  aspects  of  the  toilet  may  act  as  a  cue  for  appropriate 
behaviour. The familiarity of a door lock, the handle of a flush, the shape of a tap may all act as objects that focus 
the  user  on  the  use  of  the  toilet.  The  replacement  of  such  familiar  objects  with  hi-tech solutions may effectively 
distract or confuse those with impaired cognition, and lead to an avoidance of perceived unfamiliar and unfriendly 
spaces.  More  importantly,  many  hi-tech toilet solutions would not be suitable for a public space that is often the 
target of vandalism and willful destruction. 
 
There  is  a  need  for  designers  to  understand  precisely  why  each  of  the  fixtures  and  fittings  in  an  accessible  WC 
cubicle has been specified. This is a particular challenge for designers of APC’s, but even in the familiar standard 
toilet  block,  the  numerous  technological  ‘advances’  in  fixtures  and  fittings,  coupled to the ‘technisation’ (Freund, 
2001 pg 699) of the routine of using a public toilet facility may prove too complex for many users, especially those 
with cognitive impairments.  
 
The inclusive design of an ‘away from home’ toilet superficially presents itself as a mere technological affair, where 
successful design can be reduced to a matter of ‘getting the specification right’. In reality, wherever the designer 
attempts  to  intervene  in  the  design  process,  the  inclusive  design  of  public  toilets  unveils  fundamental  social 
processes  that  not  only  regulate  relationships  between  different  user  groups  but  also  cross  the  boundary  between 
acceptable and unacceptable behaviour. As accessible toilets become more commonplace there remains a danger 
that  the  needs  of  the  more  visible  disabilities  will  be  accommodated  but  that  the  requirements  of  people  with  a 
hidden  disability  such  as  impaired  cognition  will  be  overlooked,  thus  denying  them  equality  of  opportunity  in 
accessing public life. 
 
1.8  References 
 
Bichard, J., Hanson, J., & Greed, C. (2004)  ‘Inclusive Design of Away From Home (Public) Toilets in City Centres: 

Pilot Study; Clerkenwell, London. VivaCity 2020, EPSRC Research Report, London, UCL. 

Blackman, T., Mitchell, L., Burton, E., Jenks, M., Parsons, M., Raman, S. & Williams, K. (2003)  ‘The Accessibility 
of Public Spaces for People with De mentia: a new priority for the  ‘open city’ in  Disability & Society , 18 (3),  
357-371. 

Brawley,  E.C.  (1997)  Designing  for  Alzheimer’s  Disease.  Strategies  for  creating  better  care environments. New 

York, Wiley. 

British  Standards  Institution  (BSI)  (2001)  BS8300:  2001  Code  of  Practice  for  the  Design  of  buildings  and  their 

approaches to meet the needs of disabled people. London, BSI. 

Cox, S., (1999). Home Solutions: housing and support for people with dementia. London, HACT. 
Cronin-Golumb, A.(1995) Vision in Alzheimer’s disease in The Gerontologist, 35, 370-376. 
Day, K., Carreon, D., & Stump, C. (2000) The Therapeutic Design of Environments for People With Dementia: A 

Review of the Empiricle Research in The Gerontologist, 40 (4), 397-416. 

Department of Health. (2004) Retrieved December 13th 2004 from http://www. dh.gov.uk/ Home / fs/en 
Disability Rights Commission. (2002) Code of Practice Rights of Access Goods, Facilities, Services and Premises. 

Retrieved December 13th, 2004, from http://www.drc-gb.org/thelaw/practice.asp 

Feeney, R. (2003) BS8300 – The Research Behind the Standard, International Workshop on Space Requirements for 

Wheeled Mobility, New York, 9-11 October. 

Flemen, K. (2003) Blue Light Blues: The Use of Coloured Lights as a Deterrent to Injecting. Retrieved December 

13th 2004 from http://www.ixion.demon.co.uk/Resources.htm 

Freund, P. (2001) ‘Bodies, Disability and Spaces: the social model and disabling spatial organisations’ in Disability 

& Society, 16 (5), 689-706. 

Goldsmith, S. (1976) Designing for the Disabled: Third Edition, London, RIBA Publications Ltd. 
Greed, C. (2003) Inclusive Urban Design: Public Toilets, Oxford, Architectural Press, Elsevier. 
Imrie, R. & Kumar, M. (1998) Focusing on disability and access in the built environment in Disability & Society, 

13, 357-374 

Kitchen, R. & Law, R. (2001) ‘The Socio-spatial Construction of (In)accessible Public Toilets’ in Urban Studies, 38 

(2), 287-298. 

Lacey,  A.(2004)  ‘Good  Loo  Design  Guide’.  London,  Centre  for  Accessible  Environments  and  Royal  Institute  of 

British Architects. 

Namazi, K.H., & Johnson, B.D. (1991) Environmental effects on incontinence problems in Alzheimer’s patients in 

American Journal of Alzheimer’s Care and Related Disorders and Research, 6, 16-21. 

Office of the Deputy Prime Minister (2004)  Building Regulations Approved Document M. Access to and use of 

buildings. Norwich, TSO. 

Oxley, P. (2002). Inclusive Mobility: a guide to best practice on access to pedestrian and transport  infrastructure, 

London., Department for Transport. 

Radley,  A.  (1996)  Displays  and  fragments:  embodiment  and  the  configuration  of  social  worlds,  in  Theory and 

Psychology, 6, 559-576. 

Robson,  P.  (1982)  Patterns  of  Activity  and  mobility  among  the  elderly.  In  A  Warnes  (Ed.)  Geographical 

Perspectives on the Elderly. Chichister, John Wiley & Sons. 

