Freedom and Necessity 
A. J. Ayer 

When I am  said to have done something of my 
own  free  will  it  is  implied  that  I  could  have 
acted  otherwise;  and  it  is  only  when  it  is  be(cid:173)
lieved  that  I could have  acted  otherwise  that  I 
am  held  to  be  morally  responsible  for  what  I 
have done. For a man is not thought to be moral(cid:173)
ly responsible for an action that it was not in his 
power to  avoid.  But if human behaviour is  en(cid:173)
tirely  governed  by  causal  laws,  it  is  not  clear 
how  any  action  that  is  done  could  ever  have 
been avoided. It may be said of the agent that he 
would have acted otherwise if the causes of his 
action had been different,  but they  being  what 
they were, it seems to follow that he was bound 
to act as  he did.  Now  it is  commonly assumed 
both that men are capable of acting freely, in the 
sense that is required to make them morally re(cid:173)
sponsible,  and that human behaviour is entirely 
governed by causal laws:  and it is  the apparent 
conflict  between  these  two  assumptions  that 
gives  rise  to  the  philosophical  problem  of the 
freedom of the will. 

Confronted with  this  problem,  many  people 
will be inclined to agree with Dr. Johnson:  'Sir, 
we  know  our  will  is  free,  and  there's  an  end 
on't.'  But,  while  this  does  very  well  for  those 
who  accept  Dr.  Johnson's  premiss,  it  would 
hardly  convince  anyone  who  denied  the  free(cid:173)
dom of the  will.  Certainly,  if we  do  know  that 
our wills are free, it follows that they are so. But 
the logical reply to this  might be that since our 
wills  are  not  free,  it  follows  that  no  one  can 
know that they are: so that if anyone claims, like 
Dr.  Johnson,  to know  that they are,  he  must be 
mistaken. What is evident, indeed, is that people 
often believe themselves to be acting freely; and 
it  is  to  this  'feeling'  of  freedom  that  some 
philosophers appeal when they wish, in the sup(cid:173)
posed interests of morality, to prove that not all 
human  action  is  causally  determined.  But  if 
these philosophers are right in their assumption 
that a man cannot be acting freely if his action is 
causally determined, then the fact that someone 
feels  free  to  do,  or not  to  do,  a  certain  action 
does not prove that he really is  so. It may prove 
that the  agent does not himself know what it is 
that makes  him act in  one  way rather than  an-

other: but from the fact that a man is unaware of 
the  causes of his  action, it does  not follow  that 
no such causes exist. 

So much may  be  allowed to  the  determinist; 
but  his  belief that  all  human  actions  are  sub(cid:173)
servient to causal laws still remains to be justi(cid:173)
fied.  If,  indeed,  it is  necessary that every event 
should have a cause, then the rule must apply to 
human behaviour as  much  as  to  anything  else. 
But why should it be supposed that every event 
must have a cause? The contrary is not unthink(cid:173)
able. Nor is the law of universal causation a nec(cid:173)
essary presupposition of scientific thought. The 
scientist may try to discover causal laws, and in 
many cases he succeeds; but sometimes he  has 
to  be  content  with  statistical  laws,  and  some(cid:173)
times he comes upon events which, in the pres(cid:173)
ent state of his knowledge, he is not able to sub(cid:173)
sume under any  law  at all.  In  the  case of these 
events  he  assumes  that  if  he  knew  more  he 
would  be  able  to  discover  some  law,  whether 
causal or statistical, which would enable him to 
account  for  them.  And  this  assumption  cannot 
be disproved. For however far he may have car(cid:173)
ried his investigation, it is always open to him to 
carry it further; and it is always conceivable that 
if he  carried  it  further  he  would  discover  the 
connection  which  had  hitherto  escaped  him. 
Nevertheless,  it  is  also  conceivable  that  the 
events  with which he  is  concerned are  not sys(cid:173)
tematically  connected  with  any  others:  so  that 
the reason why he does not discover the sort of 
laws  that he requires is  simply that they do  not 
obtain. 

Now in the case of human conduct the search 
for explanations has  not in  fact been altogether 
fruitless.  Certain  scientific  laws  have  been  es(cid:173)
tablished; and with the help of these laws we do 
make a number of successful predictions about 
the ways in which different people will behave. 
But these predictions do not always cover every 
detail. We may be able to predict that in certain 
circumstances  a  particular  man  will  be  angry, 
without being able to prescribe the precise form 
that  the  expression  of his  anger  will  take.  We 
may  be  reasonably  sure  that he  will  shout,  but 
not  sure how loud his  shout will  be,  or exactly 

From  Philosophical Essays (Macmillan,  1954).  Reprinted with permission of the publisher. 

662 

FREEDOM AND NECESSITY 

663 

what  words  he  will  use.  And it is  only a small 
proportion of human actions that we are able to 
forecast  even  so  precisely  as  this.  But  that,  it 
may be said, is because we have not carried our 
investigations very far.  The science of psychol(cid:173)
ogy is  still in its infancy and, as  it is developed, 
not only will more human actions be explained, 
but the  explanations will go into greater detail. 
The ideal of complete explanation may never in 
fact be attained: but it is theoretically attainable. 
Well, this may be so:  and certainly it is impossi(cid:173)
ble to show a priori that it is not so:  but equally 
it cannot be shown that it is. This will not, how(cid:173)
ever, discourage the scientist who, in the field of 
human behaviour, as elsewhere, will continue to 
formulate  theories  and  test  them  by  the  facts. 
And  in  this  he  is justified. For since he  has  no 
reason  a priori  to  admit that there  is  a limit  to 
what he can discover,  the fact  that he  also can(cid:173)
not be sure that there is no limit does not make 
it unreasonable for him  to  devise  theories,  nor, 
having  devised  them,  to  try  constantly  to  im(cid:173)
prove them. 

But now  suppose it to be claimed that,  so far 
as men's actions are concerned, there is a limit: 
and  that  this  limit  is  set  by  the  fact  of human 
freedom.  An  obvious objection is  that in  many 
cases in which a person feels  himself to be free 
to do, or not to do, a certain action, we are even 
now  able  to  explain,  in causal  terms,  why  it is 
that he  acts  as  he does.  But it might be  argued 
that even if men are  sometimes mistaken in be(cid:173)
lieving  that  they  act  freely,  it  does  not  follow 
that they are always so mistaken. For it is not al(cid:173)
ways the case that when a man believes that he 
has  acted  freely  we  are  in fact  able  to  account 
for  his  action  in  causal  terms.  A  determinist 
would say that we should be able to account for 
it  if we  had  more  knowledge  of  the  circum(cid:173)
stances,  and  had  been  able  to  discover  the  ap(cid:173)
propriate natural laws. But until those discover(cid:173)
ies  have  been  made,  this  remains  only  a pious 
hope. And may it not be true that, in some cases 
at least,  the reason  why  we  can  give  no  causal 
explanation  is  that  no  causal  explanation  is 
available;  and  that  this  is  because  the  agent's 
choice  was  literally  free,  as  he  himself felt  it 
to be? 

The  answer  is  that  this  may  indeed  be  true, 
inasmuch as it is open to anyone to hold that no 
explanation  is  possible  until  some  explanation 
is  actually  found.  But even  so  it does  not give 
the moralist what he wants. For he is anxious to 
show  that  men  are  capable  of acting  freely  in 
order to infer that they can be morally responsi-

ble for what they do. But if it is a matter of pure 
chance that a man should act in one way rather 
than  another, he  may be free  but he can hardly 
be  responsible.  And  indeed  when  a  man's  ac(cid:173)
tions  seem  to  us  quite  unpredictable,  when,  as 
we say, there is no knowing what he will do, we 
do not look upon him as a moral agent. We look 
upon him rather as a lunatic. 

To  this  it  may  be  objected  that  we  are  not 
dealing  fairly  with  the  moralist.  For  when  he 
makes  it  a  condition  of my  being  morally  re(cid:173)
sponsible  that  I  should  act  freely,  he  does  not 
wish to imply that it is purely a matter of chance 
that I act as I do. What he wishes to imply is that 
my actions are the result of my own free choice: 
and it is  because they  are  the result of my own 
free choice that I am held to be morally respon(cid:173)
sible for them. 

But now we must ask how it is  that I come to 
make  my choice.  Either it is  an  accident that I 
choose to act as  I do or it is not. If it is an acci(cid:173)
dent,  then it is  merely a matter of chance that I 
did not choose otherwise;  and if it is  merely  a 
matter  of chance  that  I  did  not  choose  other(cid:173)
wise,  it is  surely  irrational to  hold  me  morally 
responsible for choosing as I did. But if it is not 
an accident that I choose to  do one thing rather 
than  another,  then  presumably  there  is  some 
causal  explanation  of my  choice:  and  in  that 
case we are led back to determinism. 

Again,  the  objection  may  be  raised  that  we 
are  not doing justice to the moralist's case.  His 
view  is  not  that  it  is  a  matter  of chance  that  I 
choose to act as  I do,  but rather that my choice 
depends  upon  my  character.  Nevertheless  he 
holds that I can still be free in the sense that he 
requires;  for  it is I who am responsible for  my 
character. But in what way am I responsible for 
my  character?  Only,  surely,  in  the  sense  that 
there is  a causal connection between what I do 
now and what I have done in the past. It is only 
this that justifies the statement that I have made 
myself what I am:  and  even  so this  is  an  over(cid:173)
simplification,  since  it  takes  no  account  of the 
external  influences  to  which  I  have  been  sub(cid:173)
jected. But, ignoring the external influences, let 
us  assume  that it is  in fact  the  case  that I have 
made  myself what  I am.  Then  it  is  still  legiti(cid:173)
mate to ask how it is  that I have come to make 
myself one  sort of person  rather  than  another. 
And if it be  answered  that it  is  a matter of my 
strength of will, we can put the same question in 
another form  by  asking  how  it  is  that  my  will 
has  the  strength  that it has  and  not some  other 
degree of strength. Once more, either it is an ac-

664 

MISCELLANEOUS 

cident or it is not. If it is an accident, then by the 
same argument as  before,  I am not morally re(cid:173)
sponsible, and if it is not an accident we are led 
back to determinism. 

Furthermore,  to  say that my  actions  proceed 
from  my  character or,  more colloquially,  that I 
act in  character,  is  to  say  that  my  behaviour is 
consistent  and  to  that  extent  predictable:  and 
since it is,  above  all,  for  the  actions  that I per(cid:173)
form  in character that I  am held  to  be  morally 
responsible, it looks as if the admission of moral 
responsibility,  so  far  from  being  incompatible 
with determinism, tends rather to presuppose it. 
But how can this be so if it is a necessary condi(cid:173)
tion of moral responsibility that the person who 
is held responsible should have acted freely? It 
seems that if we are to retain this idea of moral 
responsibility,  we  must  either  show  that  men 
can be held responsible  for  actions  which they 
do not do freely, or else find some way of recon(cid:173)
ciling determinism with the freedom of the will. 
It is  no doubt with the object of effecting this 

reconciliation that  some philosophers  have  de(cid:173)
fined freedom as the consciousness of necessity. 
And by so doing they are able to say not only that 
a  man  can  be  acting  freely  when  his  action  is 
causally  determined,  but  even  that  his  action 
must be causally determined for it to be possible 
for him to be acting freely. Nevertheless this def(cid:173)
inition has the serious disadvantage that it gives 
to the word  'freedom' a meaning quite different 
from any that it ordinarily bears. It is indeed ob(cid:173)
vious  that  if we  are  allowed  to  give  the  word 
'freedom' any  meaning that we  please,  we  can 
find  a meaning that will reconcile it with deter(cid:173)
minism:  but  this  is  no  more  a  solution  of our 
present  problem  than  the  fact  that  the  word 
'horse' could be arbitrarily used to mean what is 
ordinarily  meant  by  'sparrow'  is  a  proof  that 
horses have wings.  For suppose that I am com(cid:173)
pelled  by  another  person  to  do  something 
'against my will.' In that case, as the word 'free(cid:173)
dom' is ordinarily used, I should not be said to be 
acting freely:  and the fact that I am fully  aware 
of the constraint to which I am subjected makes 
no difference to the matter. I do not become free 
by becoming conscious that I am not. It may, in(cid:173)
deed, be possible to  show that my being aware 
that my action is causally determined is  not in(cid:173)
compatible with my  acting  freely:  but it  by  no 
means follows  that it is  in this that my freedom 
consists. Moreover, I suspect that one of the rea(cid:173)
sons why people are inclined to define freedom 
as  the  consciousness  of necessity  is  that  they 
think  that  if one  is  conscious  of necessity  one 

may somehow be able to  master it. But this is  a 
fallacy. It is like someone's saying that he wish(cid:173)
es he could see into the future, because if he did 
he  would know  what calamities lay in  wait for 
him and so would be able to avoid them.  But if 
he avoids the calamities then they don't lie in the 
future  and  it is  not  true  that  he  foresees  them. 
And similarly if I am able to master necessity, in 
the  sense of escaping the operation of a neces(cid:173)
sary law,  then  the  law in  question is  not neces(cid:173)
sary. And if the law is not necessary, then neither 
my freedom nor anything else can consist in my 
knowing that it is. 

Let it be granted, then, that when we speak of 
reconciling  freedom  with  determinism  we  are 
using the word 'freedom' in an ordinary sense. It 
still remains for us to make this usage clear: and 
perhaps the best way to make it clear is to show 
what it is that freedom, in this sense, is contrast(cid:173)
ed with. Now we began with the assumption that 
freedom  is  contrasted  with  causality:  so  that  a 
man cannot be said to be acting freely if his ac(cid:173)
tion is causally determined. But this assumption 
has led us into difficulties and I now wish to sug(cid:173)
gest  that  it  is  mistaken.  For  it  is  not,  I  think, 
causality that freedom is  to be contrasted with, 
but  constraint.  And  while  it  is  true  that  being 
constrained to do an action entails being caused 
to do it, I shall try to show that the converse does 
not hold. I shall try to show that from the fact that 
my action is causally determined it does not nec(cid:173)
essarily follow that I am constrained to do it: and 
this is equivalent to saying that it does not nec(cid:173)
essarily follow that I am not free. 

If I am constrained, I do not act freely.  But in 
what circumstances can I legitimately be said to 
be constrained? An obvious instance is the case 
in which I am compelled by another person to do 
what he wants. In a case of this sort the compul(cid:173)
sion  need  not be  such  as  to  deprive  one  of the 
power of choice. It is not required that the other 
person  should  have  hypnotized  me,  or that  he 
should make it physically impossible for me  to 
go against his will. It is enough that he should in(cid:173)
duce me to do what he wants by making it clear 
to me that, if I do not, he will bring about some 
situation that I regard as even more undesirable 
than the consequences of the action that he wish(cid:173)
es me to do. Thus, if the man points a pistol at my 
head I may still choose to disobey him:  but this 
does not prevent its being true that if I do fall in 
with  his  wishes  he  can  legitimately  be  said  to 
have compelled me. And if the circumstances are 
such that no reasonable person would be expect(cid:173)
ed to choose the other alternative, then the action 

FREEDOM AND NECESSITY 

665 

that I am made to do  is  not one for which I am 
held to be morally responsible. 

A similar, but still somewhat different, case is 

that in which another person has obtained an ha(cid:173)
bitual  ascendancy  over  me.  Where  this  is  so, 
there  may  be  no  question of my  being induced 
to  act as  the other person wishes by being con(cid:173)
fronted  with  a  still  more  disagreeable  alterna(cid:173)
tive:  for if I am  sufficiently under his influence 
this special stimulus will not be necessary. Nev(cid:173)
ertheless I do not act freely,  for the reason that I 
have been deprived of the power of choice. An:d 
this means that I have acquired so strong a habit 
of obedience  that  I  no  longer  go  through  any 
process  of deciding  whether or not to  do  what 
the  other  person  wants.  About  other  matters  I 
may still deliberate; but as regards the fulfilment 
of this other person's wishes, my own delibera(cid:173)
tions have ceased to be a causal factor in my be(cid:173)
haviour. And it is in this sense that I may be said 
to  be  constrained. It is  not,  however,  necessary 
that such constraint should take the form of sub(cid:173)
servience to another person. A kleptomaniac is 
not  a free  agent,  in  respect  of his  stealing,  be(cid:173)
cause he does not go through any process of de(cid:173)
ciding  whether  or not  to  steal.  Or rather,  if he 
does go through such a process, it is irrelevant to 
his  behaviour.  Whatever  he  resolved  to  do,  he 
would steal all  the  same. And it is  this  that dis(cid:173)
tinguishes him from the ordinary thief. 

But now it may be asked whether there is any 
essential  difference  between  these  cases  and 
those in which the agent is commonly thought to 
be  free.  No  doubt  the  ordinary  thief does  go 
through a process of deciding whether or not to 
steal, and no doubt it does affect his behaviour. If 
he  resolved  to  refrain  from  stealing,  he  could 
carry his resolution out. But if it be allowed that 
his  making  or  not  making  this  resolution  is 
causally  determined,  then  how  can  he  be  any 
more free than the kleptomaniac? It may be true 
that  unlike  the  kleptomaniac  he  could  refrain 
from stealing if he chose: but if there is a cause, 
or set of causes, which necessitate his choosing 
as he does, how can he be said to have the power 
of choice? Again, it may be true that no one now 
compels me to get up and walk across the room: 
but  if my  doing  so  can  be  causally  explained 
in  terms  of my  history  or  my  environment,  or 
whatever it may be, then how am I any more free 
than if some other person had compelled me? I 
do  not have the feeling of constraint that I have 
when a pistol is  manifestly pointed at my head; 
but the chains of causation by which I am bound 
are no less effective for being invisible. 

The  answer  to  this  is  that  the  cases  I  have 
mentioned  as  examples  of constraint  do  differ 
from the others: and they differ just in the ways 
that I have tried to bring out. If I suffered from a 
compulsion  neurosis,  so  that  I  got  up  and 
walked across the room, whether I wanted to or 
not, or if I did so because somebody else com(cid:173)
pelled  me,  then  I  should  not  be  acting  freely. 
But if! do it now, I shall be acting freely, just be(cid:173)
cause  these  conditions  do  not  obtain;  and  the 
fact  that  my  action  may  nevertheless  have  a 
cause is, from this point of view, irrelevant. For 
it is not when my action has any cause at all, but 
only when it has a special sort of cause, that it is 
reckoned not to be free. 

But here it may be objected that,  even if this 
distinction  corresponds  to  ordinary  usage,  it is 
still  very irrational.  For why  should we  distin(cid:173)
guish,  with  regard  to  a  person's  freedom,  be(cid:173)
tween  the  operations  of one  sort of cause  and 
those of another? Do not all causes equally ne(cid:173)
cessitate? And is it not therefore arbitrary to say 
that a person is  free  when he is  necessitated in 
one  fashion  but not when he  is  necessitated in 
another? 

That all causes equally necessitate is indeed a 
tautology,  if  the  word  'necessitate'  is  taken 
merely as equivalent to 'cause': but if, as the ob(cid:173)
jection requires, it is taken as equivalent to 'con(cid:173)
strain' or  'compel,' then I do not think that this 
proposition is true. For all that is needed for one 
event to  be  the  cause  of another is  that,  in  the 
given circumstances, the event which is  said to 
be  the effect would not have  occurred if it  had 
not been for the occurrence of the event which is 
said to be the cause, or vice versa, according as 
causes  are  interpreted  as  necessary,  or  suffi(cid:173)
cient,  conditions:  and  this  fact  is  usually  de(cid:173)
ducible from some causal law which states that 
whenever an event of the one kind occurs then, 
given  suitable conditions,  an event of the  other 
kind will occur in a certain temporal or spatio(cid:173)
temporal relationship to  it.  In  short,  there is  an 
invariable concomitance between the two class(cid:173)
es of events; but there is  no compUlsion, in any 
but a metaphorical sense. Suppose, for example, 
that a psycho-analyst is able to account for some 
aspect of my behaviour by referring it to  some 
lesion  that  I  suffered  in  my  childhood.  In  that 
case,  it  may be said that my childhood experi(cid:173)
ence, together with certain other events, neces(cid:173)
sitates my behaving as  I do.  But all that this  in(cid:173)
volves is that it is found to be true in general that 
when  people  have  had  certain  experiences  as 
children,  they  subsequently  behave  in  certain 

666 

MISCELLANEOUS 

specifiable ways; and my case is just another in(cid:173)
stance  of this  general law.  It is  in  this  way  in(cid:173)
deed that my behaviour is  explained.  But from 
the  fact  that  my  behaviour is  capable  of being 
explained, in the sense that it can be subsumed 
under some natural law, it does not follow that I 
am acting under constraint. 

If this is correct, to say that I could have acted 
otherwise is to say, first, that I should have acted 
otherwise if I had so chosen; secondly, that my 
action  was  voluntary in the  sense  in which the 
actions,  say,  of the  kleptomaniac  are  not;  and 
thirdly,  that nobody compelled me to choose as 
I did:  and these three conditions may very well 
be  fulfilled.  When  they  are  fulfilled,  I  may  be 
said to  have  acted freely.  But this  is  not to  say 
that it was  a matter of chance that I  acted  as  I 
did, or, in other words, that my action could not 
be explained. And that my actions should be ca(cid:173)
pable of being explained is all that is required by 
the postulate of determinism. 

If more than this seems to be required it is,  I 

think,  because the use of the very word  'deter(cid:173)
minism'  is  in  some  degree  misleading.  For  it 
tends to suggest that one event is somehow in the 
power  of another,  whereas  the  truth  is  merely 
that they are factually correlated. And the same 
applies  to  the  use,  in  this  context,  of the  word 
'necessity' and even of the  word  'cause' itself. 
Moreover, there are various reasons for this. One 
is the tendency to confuse causal with logical ne(cid:173)
cessitation, and so to infer mistakenly that the ef(cid:173)
fect is contained in the cause. Another is the un(cid:173)
critical use of a concept of force which is derived 
from primitive experiences of pushing and strik(cid:173)
ing. A third is the survival of an animistic con(cid:173)
ception of causality, in which all causal relation(cid:173)
ships  are  modelled  on  the  example  of  one 
person's exercising authority over another. As a 
result we tend to form an imaginative picture of 
an unhappy effect trying vainly to escape from 

the clutches of an overmastering cause. But, I re(cid:173)
peat, the fact is simply that when an event of one 
type occurs, an event of another type occurs also, 
in a certain temporal or spatio-temporal relation 
to the first.  The rest is  only metaphor. And it is 
because of the metaphor, and not because of the 
fact,  that we  come  to  think that there  is  an  an(cid:173)
tithesis between causality and freedom. 

Nevertheless,  it may  be said,  if the  postulate 
of determinism is  valid,  then  the  future  can be 
explained in  terms  of the  past:  and  this  means 
that  if  one  knew  enough  about  the  past  one 
would be able to predict the future.  But in  that 
case  what  will  happen  in  the  future  is  already 
decided. And how then can I be said to be free? 
What is going to happen is going to happen and 
nothing that I do can prevent it. If the determin(cid:173)
ist is right, I am the helpless prisoner of fate. 

But what  is  meant  by  saying  that  the  future 
course of events  is  already  decided?  If the  im(cid:173)
plication  is  that  some  person  has  arranged  it, 
then  the  proposition  is  false.  But  if all  that  is 
meant is  that it is  possible,  in  principle,  to  de(cid:173)
duce  it from  a set  of particular facts  about  the 
past, together with the appropriate general laws, 
then, even if this  is true, it does not in the least 
entail that I am  the helpless prisoner of fate.  It 
does  not  even  entail  that  my  actions  make  no 
difference  to  the  future:  for  they  are  causes  as 
well  as  effects;  so  that  if they  were  different 
their  consequences  would  be  different  also. 
What it does entail is  that my behaviour can be 
predicted:  but to  say  that my  behaviour can be 
predicted  is  not  to  say  that  I  am  acting  under 
constraint. It is indeed true that I cannot escape 
my destiny if this is taken to mean no more than 
that I shall do what I shall do.  But this is  a tau(cid:173)
tology, just as it is a tautology that what is going 
to happen is going to happen. And such tautolo(cid:173)
gies  as  these  prove  nothing  whatsoever  about 
the freedom of the will. 

