Using	Corpora	to	Explore	Syntactic	Variation	
		In	this	exercise,	we	will	try	to	gain	some	hands-on	experience	in	working	with	
corpora	in	order	to	explore	syntactic	variation.	Here	is	what	you	need:	
	
•  You	will	be	working	in	groups.	Each	group	needs	at	least	one	computer	
which	is	able	to	run	AntConc:	
http://www.laurenceanthony.net/software/antconc/	
•  You	will	need	access	to	one	or	several	of	the	International	Corpus	of	English	
(ICE)	national	subcorpora:	
https://www.dropbox.com/sh/pwwvnanhlh5suda/AACfTfToRruQMJftNeGJ
u-eka?dl=0	
These	corpora	are	divided	into	discrete	text	types	(e.g.	private	conversations,	
news	writing,	academic	writing,	etc.)	according	to	the	same	standard	and	
proportions,	so	comparisons	of	different	text	types	within	one	ICE	corpus	
and	of	general	tendencies	across	different	ICE	corpora	are	reliable	and	can	be	
taken	as	representative.	
Unfortunately,	since	different	research	teams	compiled	the	different	ICE	
corpora,	the	format	in	which	they	are	available	can	be	slightly	different.	Each	
subcorpus	comes	with	a	manual	that	explains	how	the	different	text	types	
are	coded.	
•  Finally,	there	is	a	document	on	StudIP	which	describes	some	currently	
ongoing	changes	in	the	syntax	of	English.	
	First,	take	a	look	at	the	document	and	read	the	outlines	of	the	different	processes	of	
change.	Most	of	these	are	well	documented	for	British	and	American	English,	but	not	
necessarily	for	the	linguistic	reality	in	smaller	English-speaking	countries	like	
Jamaica,	Nigeria,	or	sometimes	even	New	Zealand.	So	there	is	a	real	chance	that	
today	you	may	discover	something	no-one	has	ever	discovered	before.	
	Think	about	what	change	you	find	most	interesting	for	a	little	analysis	project.	
Maybe	there	is	just	something	about	a	certain	grammatical	construction	that	makes	
it	generally	interesting	to	you,	maybe	you	feel	like	searching	for	one	type	of	
construction	in	a	corpus	will	be	easier	than	searching	for	another.	Whatever	the	
case,	settle	on	one	and	start	thinking	about	how	you	might	go	about	researching	it.	
Some	of	the	questions	to	consider	include:	
•  Does	one	variant	occur	more	in	spoken	or	in	written	language?	
•  Does	formality	play	a	role?	How	could	this	be	measured	in	a	corpus?	
•  Are	there	any	purely	linguistic	effects	that	constrain	or	promote	the	feature	
(e.g.	are	there	certain	types	of	verb	or	constructions	the	progressive	aspect	
likes	or	doesn’t	like)?	
•  How	do	two	different	varieties	compare	in	terms	of	the	overall	frequency	of	
the	phenomenon	you	are	interested	in,	and	is	the	distribution	of	the	
phenomenon	by	text	type	the	same	in	both	varieties?	

	

1	

• 

In	texts/varieties	with	higher	frequencies	of	the	phenomenon,	does	it	occur	
in	new	contexts	(e.g.	do	we	find	the	progressive	with	stative	verbs	in	
conversation,	but	not	in	written	English)?	
•  Are	there	any	other	notable	patterns?	
	This	seems	like	a	set	of	pretty	big	and	complicated	questions,	but	the	point	of	this	
exercise	is	that	it	is	possible	for	a	clever	student	with	access	to	a	corpus	to	at	least	
begin	answering	some	of	them	(though	probably	not	establish	the	last	word	on	all	of	
them).	The	first	thing	you	need	to	think	about	is	how	you	can	tell	AntConc	to	search	
for	precisely	the	construction	you	are	interested	in.	So	now	is	probably	a	good	time	
to	open	the	program	and	play	around	with	it	a	little	bit.	
	Once	you	have	familiarized	yourself	with	AntConc	and	its	search	functionality,	think	
about	how	you	could	write	searches	that	target	the	feature	you	are	interested	in.	
Two	considerations	are	important:	
•  Precision:	you	want	the	search	to	capture	as	few	things	that	are	not	actual	
instances	of	the	phenomenon	you	are	looking	at	(“false	positives”)	as	
possible.	
•  Recall:	You	want	to	find	as	many	of	all	the	relevant	features	in	the	corpus	as	
possible,	and	ideally	all	(any	ones	that	are	not	found	are	called	“false	
negatives”)	
An	example:	if	you	were	to	look	at	the	progressive	aspect,	you	might	search	for	
different	inflectional	forms	of	the	verb	be	combined	with	a	word	ending	in	*ing.	This	
will	capture	many	progressive	forms,	but	will	also	give	you:	
•  False	positives:	“He	is	king.”	
•  False	negatives:	“We	are	surely	doing	the	right	thing.”	
For	the	purposes	of	today’s	class,	we	do	not	expect	to	achieve	100%	accuracy,	so	as	
long	as	you	can	figure	out	a	good	way	to	approximate	your	feature	with	one	or	a	
couple	of	search	expressions,	that	will	be	fine.	
	Next,	think	about	one	or	two	dimensions	of	variation	your	group	would	like	to	
analyze	in	regard	to	the	feature.	Maybe	you	want	to	simply	compare	written	and	
spoken	English	in	one	variety.	Maybe	a	comparison	of	two	national	varieties	on	the	
whole	is	what	you	are	interested	in.	Or	you	could	restrict	yourself	just	to	written	
English	and	tease	apart	different	text	types	within	that	modality	(e.g.	to	what	extent	
do	news	writing,	academic	prose	and	personal	letters	behave	differently).	Finally,	
perhaps	you	just	want	to	use	the	corpus	to	collect	examples	and	analyze	those	‘from	
within’,	i.e.	paying	attention	to	what	kind	of	linguistic	or	semantic	factors	affect	the	
choice	of	a	construction.	
	Once	you	have	decided	as	a	group	what	the	broad	question	is	you	want	to	focus	on,	
start	planning	the	project	in	a	bit	more	detail:	will	it	be	enough	to	write	one	search	
expression	or	do	you	need	several	to	capture	all	(or	most)	cases	of	your	feature	of	
interest?	Is	there	a	way	to	divide	the	work	clearly,	so	different	group	members	can	
	

2	

simultaneously	work	on	different	searches,	or	do	you	just	want	to	work	as	a	whole	
group	on	one	search	at	a	time?	
	Finally:	start	exploring!	Note	down	any	interesting	patterns	you	detect.	Think	of	
possible	explanations.	Explore	further.	No	formal	report	of	findings	will	be	required	
at	the	end	of	the	session,	but	it	would	be	great	if	groups	had	something	interesting	
to	share.	
		

	

3	

