Inspection Report 
for the 2014 FIFA World Cup™

30 October 2007

B R A Z I L   B I D
Inspection Report 
for the 2014 FIFA World Cup™

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

B R A Z I L   B I D
Inspection Report
for the 2014 FIFA World Cup™

2

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

3

Contents

Brasil

1. Letter from the chairman

2. Key dates of the bidding procedure

3. Overall executive summary

4. Executive summary of Brazil

5. Analysis of the bidding country, Brazil

6. Annexes

-  Stadium construction costs

-  General data on stadiums

-  General data on transport

-  General data on stadium media facilities

-  Composition of the inspection team

4

6

8

10

12

38

38

39

42

46

51

4

1

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

Letter from the chairman

Dear President,
Dear Executive Committee members,

Let me begin by writing that it has been an honour and pleasure to chair an
extraordinary 2014 FIFA World Cup™ inspection team. I can confirm to you
with absolute certainty that the individuals on this team have made every effort
to provide you and your colleagues from the FIFA Executive Committee with
the most comprehensive and reliable information on which to base your 
decision regarding the hosting of the 2014 FIFA World Cup™. Having carried
out a balanced review with great diligence, we present this report.

We commenced our work with the basics, namely a review of all documentation
from the Bid Book to establish compliance by the bid committee with all the
requirements outlined in the Bidding Agreement.

Our next step, conducting the site visit, was an important part of our work,
insomuch as it exposed the inspection team first-hand to what, up to that
point, had simply been ink on paper.

The Bid Book and other documentation were submitted by the deadline 
of 31 July 2007 and our inspection visit began on 23 August 2007. The 
Brazilian football association (CBF) arranged dates for our tour of five cities.
We also met representatives from a further 13 potential host cities whilst on
our visit to Rio de Janeiro. The presentations from the 13 cities were both 
professional and passionate, allowing us to acquire a good sense of the 
potential for success of each prospective host city.

It is clear that Brazil’s recent economic development will be further enhanced
by awarding the country the right to host the 2014 FIFA World Cup™. Our site
visit allowed us to see for ourselves that the proposed financial investment 

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

5

in  the  country’s  infrastructure  will  not  only  benefit  the  population  as  a 
whole, but will also leave Brazil’s footballers and football fans alike with an
indelible monument to the country’s great sporting and cultural heritage. Our
visit left us in no doubt as to Brazil’s commitment to fulfil the guarantees made
in the Bid Book.

The staging of the FIFA World Cup™ is a formidable challenge for any country.
It is the goal of this inspection team to provide you with the basis upon which
you may wish to make your final decision.

We wish to thank the CBF, the Brazilian government and each of the potential
18 host cities for their professionalism and genuine hospitality. We thank our
FIFA colleagues who contributed in all phases of this reporting process. Lastly,
we are also grateful to the citizens of Brazil for their palpable love of and
passion for football.

I will close with both a professional and heartfelt thank you to the members
of our inspection team. Their hard work, careful observations, suggestions
and willingness to contribute to the team have produced an exceptional report.

To the President and the other members of the FIFA Executive Committee, 
I submit to you this inspection report and I take this opportunity to thank you
all on behalf of an outstanding team for the confidence you have shown in
entrusting us with this report.

Hugo Salcedo
Chairman of the inspection team
for the 2014 FIFA World Cup™

6

2

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

7

Key dates of the bidding procedure

The staging of the FIFA World Cup™ is a formidable challenge for 
any country. Brazil started its preparations in 2003 – as soon as 
FIFA’s Executive Committee confirmed that South America would
organise the 2014 FIFA World Cup™. After winning the hearts 
of CONMEBOL’s executive committee, Brazil knew that it would 
be depending on itself in its bid to host the FIFA World Cup™.

3 August 2000 

The FIFA Executive Committee agrees on the principle 
of FIFA World Cup™ rotation

5 August 2000

This decision is ratified by the 52nd Ordinary FIFA Congress
in Zurich

15 March 2001

The FIFA Executive Committee decides that the rotation
will begin in Africa

7 July 2001

This decision is ratified by the Extraordinary FIFA Congress
in Buenos Aires

6 March 2003

The FIFA Strategic Studies Committee gives its full backing
to CONMEBOL’s request that South America be conferred
the right to host the 2014 FIFA World Cup™

7 March 2003

The FIFA Executive Committee decides that South America
will organise the 2014 FIFA World Cup™

22 December 2006

The FIFA Executive Committee confirms the interest of
Colombia and Brazil in hosting the 2014 FIFA World Cup™

1 February 2007

FIFA  sends  the  Form  of  Hosting  Agreement  for  the 
2014  FIFA  World  Cup™  to  the  countries  interested 
in organising the 2014 FIFA World Cup™

16 April 2007

FIFA’s  deadline  to  the  interested  member  associations 
to submit a fully executed Bidding Agreement to FIFA

31 July 2007

FIFA’s  deadline  to  the  interested  countries  to  confirm 
their  interest  by  submitting  a  fully  executed  copy  of 
the Hosting Agreement for the 2014 FIFA World Cup™ 
and the effective government guarantees

23 August-
1 September 2007

29 October 2007

Inspection visit to Brazil

Final  presentation  of  the  bidding  association  at  the 
Home of FIFA

30 October 2007 

The FIFA Executive Committee decides which member
association will host the 2014 FIFA World Cup™

8

3

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

9

Overall executive summary

Brazil’s commitment to host the 2014 FIFA World Cup™ 
has been demonstrated at all levels of government, by the 
bid LOC and by the public as a whole.

It  is  the  consensus  of  the  inspection  team  that  Brazil  is  an 
appropriate choice to host the 2014 FIFA World Cup™. Brazil
has shown the potential and demonstrated itself to be more than
capable of hosting an exceptional FIFA World Cup™.

Additionally, it is the consensus of the inspection team that to
ensure the ultimate success of the event, FIFA must work very
closely with the LOC from the date of the final decision to the
final whistle. Brazil has a rich history of hosting sporting and
other international events, but the standards and demands of
the FIFA World Cup™ will far surpass those of any other event
staged  in  the  history  of  Brazil  in  terms  of  magnitude  and
complexity. FIFA should therefore work hand-in-hand with the
LOC  in  order  to  monitor  all  organisational  matters  –  both
centrally as well as in each of the potentially ten host cities.

The FIFA World Cup™ in Brazil will bring long-lasting changes
for the benefit of the entire country. Both the football community
and the population as a whole will gain considerably from the
hosting of the 2014 FIFA World Cup™ in Brazil in terms of 
the economy, transport, communication, public services and 
facilities, safety and the enhancement of sporting facilities.

Brazil’s commitment to host the 2014 FIFA World Cup™ has
been demonstrated at all levels of government, by the bid LOC
and by the public as a whole. The inspection team was able to
see first-hand the desire and willingness of all groups to come
together for the successful staging of the event.

k Brazilian president Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva

is a passionate football fan.

In conclusion, in the considered opinion of the inspection team, Brazil is well
placed to stage an exceptional 2014 FIFA World Cup™.

10

4

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

11

Executive summary of Brazil

Country commitment

Government: 

Totally committed to hosting the 2014 FIFA World Cup™

Public: 

Huge enthusiasm

Football

Stadiums: 

Eighteen stadiums for the 2014 FIFA World Cup™* 
submitted for consideration
- 14 to be renovated
- 4 to be built

*Definitive number of host cities and stadiums to be decided

Training facilities: 

Excellent facilities; although some would require 
improvements

Standard of football: 

Best football history – five-time FIFA World Cup™ winners

General country infrastructure

Transportation: 

Air and urban transport infrastructure would comfortably
meet the demands of the 2014 FIFA World Cup™

Media and 
telecommunications: 

Excellent facilities to handle the
2014 FIFA World Cup™ 

Hotels: 

Safety and security: 

Good hotel infrastructure exists in a sufficient number of
the prospective host cities. Care will have to be taken not
to overburden certain host cities by allocating later matches
or designating them to host key events or facilities such as
the FIFA Congress or the International Broadcast Centre

Lack of security in certain parts of the country, but the
authorities have the know-how and resources to improve 
the situation before 2014 and would have the determination
to manage it during the 2014 FIFA World Cup™

Medical centres: 

Adequate network to fulfil the medical needs of 
a FIFA World Cup™

Finance

Budget for the
2014 FIFA World Cup™:  Well prepared

Ticketing: 

Legacy

Country: 

Football: 

The representations made by the bid LOC in the Bid Book
are indicative of a clear understanding of FIFA’s ticketing
policy and operations plan and the supporting role 
the LOC would play in their implementation

The 2014 FIFA World Cup™ will stimulate investment in
transport and accommodation infrastructure and will bring
many outdated football facilities up-to-date

In a country with a very strong football culture, the hosting
of the 2014 FIFA World Cup™ might help the member
association to improve attendances at football matches

Some of the stadiums will not be built or renovated if the
2014 FIFA World Cup™ is not awarded to Brazil.

12

5

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

13

Analysis of the bidding country, Brazil

5.01 General information on the bid 

and inspection visit

The exceptional organisation of the bid LOC and the 
professional presentations by the prospective host cities
ensured that the group received the accurate information 
it needed to carry out its duties.

The Brazilian candidature was excellent. All the cities bidding to become World
Cup  host  cities  presented  exceptional  stadium  projects  that  meet  the
requirements stipulated by FIFA.

The inspection team visited Brazil between 23 August and 1 September 2007.
The visit was extremely well organised by the bid LOC. During its three-day
stay in Rio de Janeiro, the group received thorough information from 13 cities:
Fortaleza, Recife, Salvador, Maceio, Natal, Florianopolis, Curitiba, Cuiaba,
Campo Grande, Goiania, Manaus, Rio Branco and Belem. On 27 August 
the group visited Brasilia and was honoured to meet the president of Brazil,
Mr Lula da Silva. In the following four days the inspection team visited Belo
Horizonte, Sao Paulo, Porto Alegre and Rio de Janeiro. In most of the cities
the delegation was welcomed by the state governor and the mayor.

5.01

5.02

5.03

5.04

5.05

5.06

General information on the bid and inspection visit 

Information about the country

General standard of football in Brazil

Country’s commitment

Budget for hosting the tournament

Ticketing

5.07 Marketing for the bid

5.08

5.09

Stadiums

Training facilities

5.10 Media

5.11

5.12

5.13

5.14

5.15

Congress and events

Safety and security in the country

Telecommunications

Transport

Accommodation

5.16 Medical services

13

14

16

18

19

21

24

25

26

27

29

30

31

32

34

37

14

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

15

5.02 Information about the country

Brazil, officially denominated the Federative Republic of Brazil (Brasil or
Republica Federativa do Brasil), is the fifth-largest country (with a total area
of 8,514,877km2) and the fifth most populous country in the world with an
estimated population of 190 million inhabitants. The capital is Brasilia. The
official language is Portuguese. The currency is the real (current exchange rate
is approx. USD 1.00 = BRL 1.92). The main religion is Roman Catholicism. 
Brazilian law is based on Roman-Germanic traditions. Thus, civil-law concepts
prevail over common-law practices.

Bounded by the Atlantic Ocean on the east, Brazil has a coastline of over
7,367km. It borders Uruguay to the south, Argentina and Paraguay to the
south-west, Bolivia and Peru to the west, Colombia to the north-west and
Venezuela, Suriname, Guyana and French Guiana to the north.

Brazil  was  discovered  by  Portugal  in  1500  –  by  Pedro  Alvares  Cabral, 
a Portuguese navigator and explorer – and remained Portuguese until its 
independence in 1822. Its current constitution defines Brazil as a federative
republic.  The  federation  is  formed  by  the  association  of  the  states,  the 
Brazilian federal district and the municipalities. There are currently 26 states
and 5,564 municipalities. The president is the head of state and head of
government  and  is  elected  for  a  four-year  term,  with  the  possibility  of 
re-election for a second successive term. The current president of Brazil, Luiz 
Inacio Lula da Silva, was elected on 27 October 2002, and re-elected on 
29 October 2006. The classic tripartite division of power, encompassing the
executive, legislative and judiciary branches, is formally established by the
constitution.

The Brazilian topography is varied and includes mountains, plains, highlands,
scrublands, savannas, rainforests and a long coastline. The extensive Amazon
Rainforest covers most of Brazil’s terrain in the north, while small hills and low
mountains occupy the south. Along the Atlantic coast there are several 
mountain ranges, with the highest altitude being 2,900 metres. Major rivers
include the Amazon, the second-longest in the world and the largest in terms
of volume of water, the Parana and its major tributary the Iguazu River, 
where the Iguazu Falls are located.

The Brazilian winter is from June to August, with average winter temperatures
in the coldest southern states of between 10°C and 18°C. Brazil has five climatic
regions: equatorial, tropical, semi-arid, highland tropical and subtropical.
Temperatures along the equator are high, with average lows of around 25ºC.
Southern Brazil has subtropical temperate weather, normally with frost in the
winter and occasional snow in mountainous areas such as Rio Grande do Sul
and Santa Catarina. Temperatures in the cities of Sao Paulo, Belo Horizonte
and Brasilia are moderate, usually ranging between 15ºC and 30ºC. Rio de
Janeiro, Recife and Salvador, located on the coast, have warm climates with
average temperatures ranging from 23ºC to 27ºC.

Precipitation levels fluctuate widely. They are higher in the humid Amazon
basin and lower in the more arid landscapes of the north-east. Most of Brazil
has moderate rainfall of 1,000 to 1,500 millimetres a year, with most of the
rain falling in the summer (i.e. between December and April) south of the
equator.

Brazil’s GDP (gross domestic product) is the highest in Latin America with 
large and developed agricultural, manufacturing, mining and service sectors.
According to the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, Brazil has
the ninth-largest economy in the world in terms of purchasing power parity
and the tenth-largest in terms of market exchange rates. Most large industry
is agglomerated in the south-eastern and southern states. The north-east is
the poorest region of Brazil.

16

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

17

5.03 General standard of football in Brazil

The Brazilians are masters of technique, but 
most importantly, they love the game.

Brazil is football.

As the only nation to have participated in every FIFA World Cup™ and a five-time winner
of the competition, it is evident that Brazil has the richest tradition of footballing excellence
in the world. On a global scale, both the trained football expert and the general football
fan are full of admiration and appreciation for Brazilian football. “Samba football” as it 
is sometimes referred to, is like no other in the world. The Brazilians are masters of 
technique, but most importantly, they love the game. Perhaps just as famous around the
world, Brazilian football supporters are world-class. The entire country is enamoured with
the game and will be vocal and vibrant supporters during the 2014 FIFA World Cup™.

Main honours

National team

FIFA World Cup™
(18 appearances – first time in 1930)
Winners in 1958, 1962, 1970, 1994 and 2002

FIFA Confederations Cup
(6 appearances – first time in 1997)
Winners in 1997 and 2005

Copa America
(31 appearances – first time in 1916)
Winners in 1919, 1922, 1949, 1989, 1997,
1999, 2004 and 2007

FIFA U-20 World Cup
(9 appearances – first time in 1977)
Winners in 1983, 1985, 1993 and 2003

FIFA U-17 World Cup
Winners in 1997, 1999 and 2003

South American U-20 Championship
Winners in 1974, 1983, 1985, 1988, 1991, 1992, 1995, 2001 
and 2007

South American U-17 Championship
Winners in 1988, 1991, 1995, 1997, 1999, 2001, 2005 and 2007

Club level

FIFA Club World Cup
Brazilian clubs have won all three previous tournaments:
Corinthians, 2000
Sao Paulo, 2005
Internacional, 2006

Copa Libertadores winners
Santos, 1962 and 1963
Cruzeiro, 1976 and 1997
Flamengo, 1981
Gremio, 1983 and 1995
Sao Paulo, 1992, 1993 and 2005
Vasco da Gama, 1998
Palmeiras, 1999
Internacional, 2006

South American Cup Winners’ Cup
Sao Paulo, 1993 and 1994
Gremio, 1996
Cruzeiro, 1998

Brazilian football can also boast outstanding achievements in women’s football
(finalists of the FIFA Women’s World Cup China 2007), futsal (three-time
winners of the FIFA Futsal World Cup) and beach soccer (winners of the 
FIFA Beach Soccer World Cup Rio de Janeiro 2006).

18

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

19

5.04 Country’s commitment

5.05 Budget for hosting the tournament

The  inspection  team  believes  that  Brazil  is  totally  committed  to  the 
2014 FIFA World Cup™. This was evident from the meetings held with the
President of the Republic, various government ministers, state governors and
the mayors of the prospective host cities. The interest of the media during the
inspection visit was huge and the inspection team was greeted during the
various trips with spontaneous manifestations of joy and hope.

The bid LOC representatives were able to demonstrate 
that they had applied a sound methodology in preparing 
the preliminary budget.

The FIFA Finance Division assisted the inspection team with the review of the
budget submitted.

Expenditure budget for hosting the 2014 FIFA World Cup™
and the FIFA Confederations Cup 2013

The 2014 FIFA World Cup™ bid LOC submitted revised preliminary LOC
budgets for the 2014 FIFA World Cup™ and the FIFA Confederations Cup
2013 in September 2007. Representatives of the bid LOC presented the
preliminary expenditure budget for the 2014 FIFA World Cup™ and separately
the total budgeted costs for the FIFA Confederations Cup 2013.

The bid LOC representatives were able to demonstrate that they had applied
a sound methodology in preparing the preliminary budget that systematically
addressed all of the requirements of the Hosting Agreement regarding the
hosting and staging of the final competition of the 2014 FIFA World Cup™.
The assumptions made in the preparation of the preliminary budget were well
explained and documented and the level of supporting detail is sufficient to
permit a detailed examination of the preliminary budget for the 2014 FIFA
World Cup™ for all cost categories.

The  incremental  costs  of  the  FIFA  Confederations  Cup  2013  have  been
calculated as a percentage of the total 2014 FIFA World Cup™ costs without
further supporting details. The preliminary budget for the FIFA Confederations
Cup 2013 will have to be further developed by the LOC.

20

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

21

5.06 Ticketing

Revenues for the 2014 FIFA World Cup™ and the 
FIFA Confederations Cup 2013

The  2014  FIFA  World  Cup™  bid  LOC  has  made  a  preliminary  estimate 
of ticketing revenues based on the average face value of tickets in previous
FIFA World Cups™, a total ticket inventory consisting of a total of three million
purchasable tickets and the need to give special consideration to ensure 
a proportion of the local fans can access the competitions at significantly lower
than market value prices.

Other revenue items that have been considered but not quantified include
sponsorship and value-in-kind contributions. The bid LOC has not included
any contribution from FIFA in the income projections.

In view of the fact that the ticketing policy for the competitions has still to be
developed by FIFA and all revenue rights are currently held by FIFA, the overall
financing  of  the  preliminary  expenditure  budget  will  have  to  be  agreed
between FIFA and the LOC.

With regard to the bid LOC’s ticket inventory and revenue 
projections, the inspection team is of the opinion that the 
anticipated number of purchasable tickets is feasible based 
on the capacities of the prospective venues.

Through the Bid Book, the bid LOC has demonstrated an understanding 
and acceptance of the ticketing arrangements FIFA anticipates making for the
2014 FIFA World Cup™, principally that FIFA shall retain the exclusive rights
to conduct the ticketing operations for the 2014 FIFA World Cup™, the 
FIFA Confederations Cup 2013 and all ancillary events.

The bid LOC has identified the areas of FIFA’s ticketing operations where 
the LOC shall be assigned specific responsibilities, namely: (a) securing legal
clearance for FIFA to conduct ticketing operations and sales in accordance
with its policies; (b) the enforceability of the Ticket Terms & Conditions, 
particularly  with  regard  to  data  protection,  payment  exclusivity  and  the 
prohibition of unauthorised transfer of tickets; (c) the timely delivery of CAD
diagrams and seat data in electronic form and hard copy; (d) the provision of
sufficient space at the venues for the FIFA service provider to conduct on-site
matchday and non-matchday operations; (e) the enforcement of the Ticket
Terms & Conditions inside the stadiums in accordance with and at the direction
of FIFA; (f) the assignment of all rights to FIFA with regard to ownership of
ticketing data; and (g) bearing all costs of the VIP tribune of which 50% shall
be reserved by FIFA for its exclusive purpose.

The bid LOC has correctly outlined the organisational structure FIFA plans 
to install through: (a) the FIFA Ticketing Sub-Committee, which shall be
responsible for the executive oversight of ticketing, including the determination
of  certain  ticketing  policy  decisions  delegated  to  it  by  the  Organising
Committee for the FIFA World Cup™; (b) MATCH, the service company
appointed by FIFA to deliver a turnkey ticketing solution for the 2010 and
2014 FIFA World Cups™ and related events; and (c) the LOC.

22

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

23

With regard to the bid LOC’s ticket inventory and revenue projections, the
inspection team is of the opinion that the anticipated number of purchasable
tickets is feasible based on the capacities of the prospective venues; however,
achieving the revenue target will necessitate practically all matches being sold
out at significantly higher prices than those the Brazilian public are accustomed
to paying for football matches. To achieve this goal, Brazilian fans would have
to embrace and respond to the high sense of occasion that a FIFA World Cup™
match generates, take this once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to watch a FIFA
World Cup™ match in their city and by doing so, turn up in large numbers to
watch all 32 teams and not just Brazil.

The gross capacity of the proposed 18 stadiums for 2014 range from 40,000
(at the Verdao in Cuiaba and the Serra Dourada in Goiania) to 86,100 (the
Maracana in Rio de Janeiro). This compares to 44,106 at Rustenburg and
87,469 at Johannesburg Soccer City for 2010. Once the host cities have been
selected and the match schedule has been announced, we anticipate that the
gross capacity of a 2014 FIFA World Cup™ in Brazil would be comparable to
that for 2010 in South Africa, where the anticipated gross capacity for the
event is 3.7 million seats and the purchasable number of tickets is just over 
three million tickets, which is the number anticipated by the bid LOC in its
revenue projections.

The current plans for the 18 stadiums as provided in the Bid Book show widely
divergent numbers of VIP seats (sky box and other seats with special attributes)
– from 300 at Rio Branco to 8,914 at Goiania. Interestingly, the Maracana in
Rio de Janeiro and the Morumbi in Sao Paulo are among the stadiums with
the smallest number of VIP seats, with 500 and 565 respectively. To the extent

that most of these so-called VIP seats are sky box seats, the numbers available
at Belo Horizonte (5,000), Goiania (8,914), Natal (7,300) and Recife and Olinda
(8,020) are far too large to avoid challenges in the implementation of FIFA’s
seat assignment and seat allocation protocols and in the delivery of a unique
and exclusive sky box inventory of seats to the 2014 hospitality rights holder
(as was the case for 2006).

In stadiums where the number of sky box seats is significantly lower than that
required by FIFA to meet its contractual obligations to the hospitality rights
holder, temporary structures (hospitality tents) will have to be erected. This
will require space and facilities which may not always be available within the
security perimeter of the venue. A detailed study of the logistics would have
to be conducted, particularly at key venues such as the Maracana and the
Morumbi, to determine how best to reconcile the existing facilities with the
demands of the 2014 hospitality programme.

As for the media, based upon the 2010 ticket model, a total of 82,560 tickets
have been allocated to the media tribunes for the 64 matches. This number
excludes  a  significant  number  of  seat  kills  resulting  principally  from  the
installation of the TV and radio commentary positions. The TV and radio
commentary positions, the press seats with desks and the seats allocated as
media seats in the Bid Book vary significantly from stadium to stadium and do
not correspond to the 2014 requirements. This is not an issue as FIFA expects
stadiums to be reconfigured to meet the specific requirements of the media
tribune for the FIFA World Cup™ in order to accommodate the required 
number of TV/radio commentary positions, press desks, observer seats and
photographer seats for each stage of the tournament. In fact, ideally the media
tribune should be configured at a match level rather than at a venue level to
maximise the number of purchasable seats at all stages of the competition
(based on the assumption that commentary positions and desks can be 
installed and dismantled during the tournament and that the “flow” works
perfectly to minimise the size of the tribune (which is not always possible due
to the flow requirements (i.e. exclusive entrance to the media tribune) and
special seat attributes of this constituent group).

24

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

25

5.07 Marketing for the bid

5.08 Stadiums in Brazil

(190 million inhabitants, 18 bidding cities, 18 stadiums)

Unlike most previous bids, there is no evidence of corporate support through
sponsorship of the bid. It may be that this is intentional and that the bid LOC
has not sought financial support from corporate Brazil. Nevertheless, the bid
LOC appears to have been well funded by the bidding member association.

The nature of the 2014 bid has been different due to the lack of competing
bids. This has altered the bid LOC’s strategy, which has centred on successfully
securing universal approval and support from all parties in Brazil.

A comprehensive list of all stadiums can be found as an
annexe at the end of this document.

In the opinion of the inspection team, none of the stadiums in Brazil would
be suitable to stage 2014 FIFA World Cup™ matches in their current state.
Nevertheless, almost all the refurbishment and construction plans presented
to the inspection team are highly professional. The presentations of new
stadiums  or  remodelled  stadiums,  with  the  exception  of  the  Maracana,
included all final plans. However, the inspection team wishes to point out that
if Brazil were to be awarded the 2014 FIFA World Cup™, FIFA would have 
to pay special attention to the projects in general, and specifically to plans for
the media, sky boxes and other hospitality areas, parking and players’ areas.

The inspection team considers that special mention should be made of the
Maracana stadium, as the city of Rio de Janeiro would be expected to stage
some of the key matches in the 2014 FIFA World Cup™ in the event it is 
awarded  to  Brazil.  The  stadium,  in  its  current  state,  does  not  meet  the
standards required to stage a FIFA World Cup™ match. A more comprehensive
renovation project would have to be envisaged if it were finally chosen to
become a FIFA World Cup™ stadium.

Regarding the financing of the construction of the stadiums, which will 
be dealt with separately, it should be noted that the football clubs, the 
state governors, the city mayors and additional private partners are fully 
committed to meeting any FIFA requirement regarding the building and 
renovation of stadiums. Furthermore, the current competition among the 
prospective host cities to become a host city for the 2014 FIFA World Cup™
will contribute to the successful completion of the stadium projects – as 
there are 18 bidding cities from which a maximum of eight to ten host cities
will ultimately be selected.

As there will be only eight to ten host cities and venues, the inspection team
is confident that the stadium infrastructure will be well prepared to host the
2014  FIFA  World  Cup™.  Also,  the  inspection  team  considers  that  this
important capital investment will be a legacy that will serve future generations
in Brazil well and will help to continue developing football in the country.

26

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

27

5.09 Training facilities

5.10 Media

There is no doubt that all basic infrastructure is available and
can easily be upgraded to meet FIFA World Cup™ standards.

Given Brazil’s very strong football culture, there are numerous training centres
and football stadiums belonging to local clubs that may be assigned to or used
as team base camps. Although the inspection team does not anticipate 
problems for teams in this respect, special attention must be given to the need
for a programme to upgrade some of the training grounds, a programme that
will leave a lasting legacy for local clubs and communities after the 2014 FIFA
World Cup™. Some of the facilities will need to be improved, especially with
regard  to  the  quality  of  the  turf,  the  dressing  rooms  and  the  possible 
installation of floodlights, but there is no doubt that all basic infrastructure is
available and can easily be upgraded to meet FIFA World Cup™ standards.

As football is the most popular sport and form of
entertainment in Brazil, newspapers give significant daily
coverage to all football-related matters.

As far as the media situation in Brazil is concerned, it is interesting to note
that there are 232 newspapers (national, regional and local) in the country.
As football is the most popular sport and form of entertainment in Brazil, all 
of those newspapers give significant daily coverage to all football-related 
matters. Of these 232 newspapers, ten newspapers based in the big cities 
(Sao Paulo, Rio de Janeiro and Brasilia) provide national coverage and a 
further four national agencies, six magazines, two TV channels, one radio 
station and two internet websites cover the whole country.

Sao Paulo state has the largest number of newspapers (51), followed by the
state of Minas Gerais (27), whereas Rio de Janeiro state has 20. There is also
significant news coverage in states such as Bahia (14 newspapers), Parana 
(17 plus one internet site), Santa Catarina (7) and Rio Grande do Sul (15). 
As for TV and radio stations the numbers are also impressive, with 130 TV 
stations and 1,365 radio stations transmitting on AM and 296 on FM across
the country.

28

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

29

5.11 Congress and events

Various representations were made to the inspection team during their stay
in Brazil concerning the award of the opening match to Sao Paulo and the
final to Rio de Janeiro should the 2014 FIFA World Cup™ be awarded to 
Brazil. If FIFA were to assign the opening match to Sao Paulo, then in all 
probability, the Congress would take place in Sao Paulo. Sao Paulo is one of
the great cities of the world and as such, it has all the necessary function 
space, transport and accommodation infrastructure to accommodate the FIFA
Congress. The inspection team has identified over 200 hotels with more than
30,000 hotel rooms in Sao Paulo. However, it has to be said that to date, the
hotel community of Sao Paulo has committed fewer than 300 hotel rooms to
the FIFA World Cup™. This is in marked contrast to significantly smaller 
prospective host cities such as Campo Grande where the 1,600 contracted
rooms illustrates a total commitment to being part of the 2014 FIFA World
Cup™ should it be awarded to Brazil.

There is no question that Brazil has a number of options among the 18 
prospective  host  cities  that  could  comfortably  host  the  FIFA  Congress; 
however,  given  its  traditional  association  with  the  opening  match,  the 
number of possible venues is likely to be restricted to two, possibly three, 
and therefore every effort should be made to secure the necessary room 
inventory  at  these  venues  prior  to  any  decision  by  the  FIFA  Executive 
Committee to award the rights to host the 2014 FIFA World Cup™ to Brazil.

With regard to media needs for a FIFA World Cup™, we wish to point out
that this analysis of the media facilities and media infrastructures is based on
the  stadium  projects  of  the  prospective  host  cities  for  2014.  Of  the  18 
prospective host cities presented by the bid LOC, only four require brand-new
stadiums: the Zagallo Arena (Maceio), the Estrela dos Reis Magos (Natal), 
the Recife/Olinda Arena (Recife) and the Bahia Arena (Salvador). All the other
stadiums  will  be  rebuilt  or  renovated.  In  fact,  this  is  the  only  way  to 
guarantee all the FIFA requirements, since the current stadiums, despite some
renovation work in the past few years, lack the necessary media and other
infrastructure to host a FIFA World Cup™ match.

The  projects  for  new  or  renovated  stadiums  are  most  impressive.  One 
important element that is common to almost all of them is the huge amount
of space inside and around the arenas, which enables the facilities to meet all
media requirements. However, one cannot ignore the fact that all the projects
are pending the final decision in October.

With the exception of the Baixada Arena in Curitiba (Atletico Paranaense), the
Orlando Scarpelli in Florianopolis (Figueirense), the Beira Rio in Porto Alegre
(Internacional) and the Morumbi in Sao Paulo (Sao Paulo), all the stadiums
belong to the respective federal states. This means that almost all of them are
used by two or three local football clubs, which is the average number of major
clubs in each state.

As for training ground facilities for the media, there should be no problems
since many of them have the necessary space and requirements to receive
media representatives. Nevertheless, this should also be reviewed at a later
stage because most if not all of them will need important work to adapt to
the needs of a FIFA World Cup™.

A detailed report of the media facilities needed for hosting a FIFA World Cup™
can  be  found  as  an  annexe  at  the  end  of  this  document.  Nevertheless, 
suffice to say that the projects presented clearly demonstrate that Brazil would
be able to meet the media requirements of the 2014 FIFA World Cup™.

30

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

31

5.12 Safety and security in the country

5.13 Telecommunications

Brazil has significant relevant experience of major events which
will help it address security concerns.

Security is a concern, particularly in certain venues. However, the inspection
team believes that the general public perception is perhaps worse than the
reality. Although certain state capitals do have a security problem, most of the
bidding host cities do not.

To combat crime in certain areas of Brazil, on 20 August 2007 the government
launched a national plan based on two main aspects: additional police forces
and preventive social programmes. The government has launched a national
campaign – and will invest more than USD 3.3 billion by 2012 – to reduce
crime in the affected areas. This impressive programme will help to reduce the
current difficulties in certain areas of Brazil.

With regard to organising security for a possible 2014 FIFA World Cup™ in
the country, the inspection team received an excellent, comprehensive work
schedule from government experts covering all main areas such as stadiums,
media centres and main hotels that will doubtless satisfy every requirement
for the event. Brazil has significant relevant experience of major events which
will help it address security concerns.

With 42.382 million landlines and 105 million mobile phones, Brazil is currently
the fifth most important telecommunications market in the world, just behind
China, the United States, Russia and India.

The privatisation of the telecommunications industry in 1997 was crucial for
development and prompted some of the biggest companies in the world to
install their operations in Brazil, companies such as Siemens, Tropico, Alcatel,
NEC and Ericsson and mobile giants Nokia, Motorola, LG, Nortel Ericsson and
many others.

Several long-distance companies, such as Telecom Italia, Portugal Telecom,
America Movil and others, maintain a very competitive market, forcing a 
continuous reduction of rates and service improvement.

In Brazil the number of computers has reached 30 million, of which 7.5 million
are  workstations.  According  to  the  IBGE  (Brazilian  National  Institute  of
Geography and Statistics), in 2005 Brazil had 32.1 million internet users.

The main means of access is through ADSL using conventional telephone lines,
although cable TV and microwave operators are also offering their services in
large urban centres.

Brazil has more than 130 TV stations, 1,365 radio stations transmitting on AM
and 296 on FM. Even pay TV now reaches 4.7 million subscribers.

Also, according to the latest statistics, almost 26 million people in Brazil 
regularly use the internet. An Ibope/Net Ratings international survey from April
2007 shows that Brazil continues to be the country with the highest average
time spent on the internet, i.e. 21 hours and 44 minutes per month.

There is no doubt that Brazil has first-class modern technology, capable 
of supporting the huge amount of media people that would be present and
working during the 2014 FIFA World Cup™. Digital and fibre optics will be
crucial for communication with all the prospective host cities.

All the stadium projects seem to meet the requirements for hosting an event
of the magnitude of the FIFA World Cup™.

32

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

33

5.14 Transport

The inspection team reviewed the information provided 
in the Bid Book and in the presentations made by the
prospective host cities during the inspection trip. Additional
sources of information were independently sought in order 
to confirm compliance and assess the viability of the 
transport logistics of a 2014 FIFA World Cup™ in Brazil.

Having reviewed this comprehensive information with complete objectivity,
the inspection team concluded that the existing air and ground transport
infrastructure would enable Brazil to host an excellent 2014 FIFA World Cup™.
To support this view, we have summarised below the findings on which it is
based.

All 18 prospective host cities have ‘good’ airports. This is particularly relevant
in  that  not  all  prospective  host  cities  have  the  necessary  hotel  room 
inventory, in terms of capacity and quality, to accommodate all the visitors
who may wish to attend particularly well-subscribed matches. The final draw
could  easily  produce  group  matches  where  the  level  of  interest  and 
anticipated number of travelling supporters and working groups may easily
surpass  the  total  room  inventory  found  within  the  host  city  or  satellite 
accommodation nodes located within reasonable travel distance by road or
rail. Consequently, the inspection team decided to investigate the feasibility
of having to airlift large numbers of spectators and working groups to attend
matches in any one of the prospective host cities, but in particular, those with
smaller numbers of rooms.

Following the inspection trip, enquiries were made of all of the airports 
located in the prospective host cities to ascertain their current status. At 
the  time  of  writing  this  report,  it  has  not  been  possible  to  complete  a 
comprehensive analysis, although from the research conducted thus far, the
inspection team can confirm with confidence that the airport infrastructure
would be able to cope with large numbers of passengers attending matches
on day-return trips.

Based on the research conducted by the inspection team, the inspection team
concluded that Brazil has the necessary air transport infrastructure to handle
the anticipated number of international visitors as well as the number of
spectators  and  working  groups  that  may  wish  to  travel  from  venue  to 
venue to attend matches. Given the large distances between the different 
prospective host cities, the desire by most international spectators to follow
the team of their choice and the need, in certain cases, to supplement the
hotel  room  inventory  of  certain  host  cities  with  hotel  rooms  in  satellite 
accommodation nodes, Brazil’s air transport infrastructure is a key and effective
element of its bid.

With regard to urban transport, the Brazilian bid consists of a sufficient 
number of prospective host cities with good urban transport infrastructures
to accommodate the anticipated number of spectators wishing to attend the
matches. There is a small number of prospective host cities where it may be
difficult to meet the ground transport challenge posed by an event of the 
magnitude  of  a  FIFA  World  Cup™  match  and  given  the  large  distances
between some of these smaller host cities and the nearest major city, it would
be difficult to supplement their existing transport fleets. However, the Brazilian
bid is still left with a sufficient number of host cities where there are urban
transport infrastructures of sufficient quality.

As for rail transport, other than urban transport and the Rio-Sao Paulo high-
speed service that will connect the two cities and reduce the journey time 
to less than two hours, the inspection team did not believe that rail would
play a major role in a 2014 FIFA World Cup™ in Brazil.

For additional data on transport, please review the general data on transport
provided in the annexe at the end of this document.

34

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

35

5.15 Accommodation

From an accommodation perspective, Brazil is capable of 
hosting the 2014 FIFA World Cup™. However, the LOC, 
state and municipal governments, hoteliers and others will
have to support FIFA to make up the shortfall that still exists.

FIFA states in the bidding agreement that “Securing a sufficient number of
suitable hotel rooms in the host country of a FIFA World Cup™, even before
the announcement of the host country, is one of FIFA’s highest priorities.” The
bidding association is therefore required to fully cooperate with FIFA, the FIFA
inspection team and the bid LOC in the selection and procurement of the 
official hotels.

FIFA has established that for the 2014 FIFA World Cup™ there is a need to
contract under the 2014 FIFA World Cup™ hotel agreement (the “Hotel
Agreement”) a minimum of 55,000 hotel rooms spread across all host cities of
appropriate standard and at reasonable prices. The required 55,000 hotel rooms
equate to approximately 1.5 million hotel room nights over the tournament.
This is considered by FIFA to be the minimum number of hotel rooms required
to meet the accommodation and office space requirements of: (a) the FIFA
delegation; (b) the LOC, the participating member associations and their teams;
(c) the match officials; (d) the commercial affiliates; (e) the media; (f) the
hospitality rights holder; (g) MATCH; and (h) should FIFA elect to set up an
official tour operator programme, authorised tour operators or spectators. The
Hotel Agreement is designed to deliver fair prices and reasonable terms; it also
facilitates the management of a huge centrally controlled hotel room inventory
under FIFA World Cup™ conditions.

The Hotel Agreement is a standard form of contract provided by FIFA to the
bidding association to secure hotel room nights for occupancy during the 2014
FIFA World Cup™ competition period and which may be entered into by the
bidding  association,  FIFA  or  MATCH,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  hotel
owner/operator on the other.

The inspection team has sought an independent legal opinion on the validity
and enforceability of the hotel agreement in Brazil and can confirm that
properly completed hotel agreements are valid and enforceable in Brazil.

If the rights to host the 2014 FIFA World Cup™ are awarded to Brazil, Rio
de Janeiro and Sao Paulo are the most likely host cities to be designated
to  accommodate  any  one  or  more  of  the  following  accommodation
requirements:  (a)  the  FIFA  World  Cup™  headquarters  (the  operational
headquarters of the FIFA delegation) or a FIFA venue hotel; (b) the referee
headquarters; (c) the IBC (International Broadcast Centre for the competition);
and (d) the IMC (the principal International Media Centre for the competition).
In this regard, there exists a sufficient inventory of hotel rooms in Sao Paulo
and  Rio  de  Janeiro  to  accommodate  these  requirements,  although  the
inspection team wishes to draw attention to the fact that currently, the
number of rooms contracted under the Hotel Agreement is not sufficient;
this is of particular concern in the case of Sao Paulo.

Every prospective host city has to have, or must be located within reasonable
travel distance from, hotel infrastructure of sufficient quantity and quality to
meet the following essential accommodation requirements: (a) one FIFA venue
hotel (where the principal office and accommodation space for members of
the FIFA delegation will be located in each host city during the competition
periods);  (b)  two  venue-specific  team  hotels  (“VSTHs”)  per  prospective 
host  city;  (c)  media  hotels;  (d)  commercial  affiliate  designated  hotels; 
(e) hospitality rights holder designated hotel(s); and (f) hotels of different 
standards to accommodate spectators who are not from within the host
communities and require overnight accommodation. On the basis of these
essential accommodation requirements, the inspection team took the view
that from an accommodation standpoint, at least four of the 18 prospective
host cities would face great difficulties/challenges to stage FIFA World Cup™ 
matches at the standard that is required, this notwithstanding the enthusiasm
and unquestionable commitment of their inhabitants and the state and 
municipal government.

Additionally, there is a need to contract in excess of 60 suitable potential team
base camps which may operate as the headquarters of a team during the 
competition period to present the participating member associations with a
sufficiently  wide  range  of  options.  Given  the  strength  in  depth  of  the 
accommodation infrastructure in Brazil, the inspection team takes the view
that this should be possible.

36

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

37

5.16 Medical services

A large complement of private and public hospital centres
equipped with state-of-the-art technology will be ready to 
provide all forms of health care.

Brazil’s hospitals have become an international reference point for important
medical areas and as such, we do not foresee Brazil having any problems
meeting the high standards set by FIFA for everyone involved in the 2014 FIFA
World Cup™.

Each one of the proposed 18 prospective host cities has a large network of
hospitals and some of the most important ones were relatively near the 
stadiums. The inspection team wishes to draw particular attention to the Albert
Einstein Hospital in Sao Paulo because of its importance in Latin America and
in the world. This hospital combines the features of a large general hospital
with those of a highly specialised institute. It was the first hospital outside the
United  States  to  be  approved  by  the  Joint  Commission  of  International 
Accreditation, an organisation with headquarters in Chicago (USA) that is 
currently active in more than 60 countries.

A large complement of private and public hospital centres equipped with 
state-of-the-art technology will be ready to provide all forms of health care to
the FIFA family, participating member association teams and the general public.

FIFA requires evidence that MATCH (the accommodation provider) will have
the full support and cooperation of the LOC, the hotel association, the 
national tourism association and the authorities; in this regard the bidding
association has secured the support of ABIH (the Brazilian hotel association),
FB&CVB (the Brazilian convention and visitors bureaux federation), Resorts
Brazil, FOHB (the forum of hotel operators of Brazil) and other lodging 
associations  and  with  this  support  MATCH  has  engaged  the  hotel 
communities in all the prospective host cities through a series of workshops
and other activities with the objective of contracting the required number of
hotel rooms. This initiative has already secured a comparable number of hotel
rooms under contract to those that were contracted by the successful bid LOCs
for the 2006 and the 2010 FIFA World Cups™. However, as indicated in this
report, there are still critical gaps, principally the very small number of rooms
contracted in Sao Paulo that must be dealt with.

The official bid proposal, the Hosting Agreement and all executed Hotel 
Agreements had to be delivered to FIFA no later than 31 July 2007. At the
time, no executed Hotel Agreements were available. Instead, MATCH was 
invited to provide an interim status report which was included in the Bid Book.

The information provided by the prospective bid LOC in the Bid Book and 
received from the prospective host city representatives following the MATCH
interim status report is comprehensive and, based on extensive research by
the inspection team, found to be reliable. Furthermore, in order to produce
this report with complete objectivity, the inspection team has sought to 
establish the exact number of hotels and the corresponding hotel rooms that
have been contracted to confirm compliance with the Bidding Agreement and
the Hosting Agreement and check the progress that has been achieved since
July 2007. In this regard the inspection team can confirm that much progress
has been made, with over 23,000 hotel rooms already contracted.

From an accommodation perspective, Brazil is capable of hosting the 2014
FIFA World Cup™. However, the LOC, state and municipal governments, 
hoteliers and others will have to support FIFA and MATCH in their efforts to
make up the shortfall that still exists between the minimum requirement of
55,000 hotel rooms and the current contract number, particularly given the
fact that in the two key prospective host cities of Sao Paulo and Rio de Janeiro,
the numbers are significantly below the required number.

38

6

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

Annexes

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

39

General data on
stadiums

Stadium construction costs

The Brazilian model for the 2014 FIFA World Cup™ is to give priority to private
finance in the construction and remodelling of the stadiums through long-
term  concessions  and  eventually  public  private  partnerships  (PPPs).  The
objective is to build modern stadiums that will meet FIFA’s requirements while
public funds will be allocated towards basic infrastructure, particularly security,
airports, roads and hospitals. Only a few prospective host cities have provided
information on the amount of public funds to be allocated for infrastructure
investments.

Eighteen cities have been identified as potential host cities. This number will
be reduced through the host city bid selection process that will address the
financial commitments secured by the bidding cities.

The CBF currently estimates the investments related to construction and/or
remodelling of stadiums at USD 1.1 billion. This estimate will however be
significantly influenced by the cities that are finally selected to host the 
FIFA World Cup™.

The inspection team is of the opinion that it would be important for FIFA
experts to carefully review the process and progress of host city selection to
ensure that adequate financing is committed and secured by the time of the
deadline for the selection of the host cities and the related stadium facilities
or potential stadium construction sites.

11

Manaus

13
Belem

Rio Branco

12

Fortaleza

1

5

Natal

2

Recife

4

Maceio

Cuiaba

8

Brasilia
14

Salvador

3

Belo Horizonte

15

18

Rio de Janeiro

10
Goiania

Campo Grande

9

Sao Paulo
16

Curitiba

7

6

Florianopolis

Porto Alegre
17

40

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

41

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Fortaleza
Population
Stadium
Prospective stadium capacity
Situation

Recife
Population
Stadium
Prospective stadium capacity
Situation

Salvador
Population
Stadium
Prospective stadium capacity
Situation

Maceio
Population
Stadium
Prospective stadium capacity
Situation

Natal
Population
Stadium
Prospective stadium capacity
Situation

Florianopolis
Population
Stadium
Prospective stadium capacity
Situation

Curitiba
Population
Stadium
Prospective stadium capacity
Situation

Cuiaba
Population
Stadium
Prospective stadium capacity
Situation

Campo Grande
Population
Stadium
Prospective stadium capacity
Situation

2.4 million
Castelao
60,000
Built in 1973, 
renovated in 1980 and 2000

1.5 million
Recife-Olinda Arena
45,500
To be newly built 
(to be finished in 2011)

2.7 million
Bahia Arena
44,100
To be newly built 
(to be finished in 2011)

922,000
Zagallo Arena
45,337
To be newly built 
(to be finished in 2011)

750,000
Estrela Dos Reis Magos
65,100
To be newly built 
(to be finished in 2011)

410,000
Orlando Scarpelli
41,700
Built in 1978, will be completely 
refurbished (to be finished in 2010)

1.8 million
Kyocera Arena (Baixada Arena)
41,375
Built in 1999, is undergoing
refurbishing

545,000
Verdao
40,000
Built in 1974, will be completely 
refurbished (to be finished in 2012)

770,000
Morenao
44,355
Built in 1971, will be completely 
refurbished

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

Goiania
Population
Stadium
Prospective stadium capacity
Situation

Manaus
Population
Stadium
Prospective stadium capacity
Situation

Rio Branco
Population
Stadium
Prospective stadium capacity
Situation

Belem
Population
Stadium
Prospective stadium capacity
Situation

Brasilia
Population
Stadium
Prospective stadium capacity
Situation

Belo Horizonte
Population
Stadium
Prospective stadium capacity
Situation

Sao Paulo
Population
Stadium
Prospective stadium capacity
Situation

Porto Alegre
Population
Stadium
Prospective stadium capacity
Situation

1.225 million
Serra Dourada
40,000
Built in 1975, renovated in 2005, 
will be refurbished again to meet 
the requirements

1.65 million
Vivaldao
40,550
Built in 1970, will be 
completely refurbished

310,000
Forest Arena
41,264
Inaugurated in 2006, will be 
renovated and its capacity increased

2.1 million (Greater Belem)
Mangueirao
43,788
Built in 1971, renovated in 2005, 
will be refurbished again to meet 
the requirements

2.4 million
Mane Garrincha
76,232
Built in 1974, will be completely 
refurbished (to be finished in 2010)

2.45 million
Mineirao
74,300
Built in 1965, will be completely 
refurbished (to be finished in 2010)

11 million
Morumbi
66,952
Built in 1960, will be completely 
refurbished

1.45 million
Beira Rio
60,000
Built in 1969, will be completely 
refurbished (to be finished in 2012)

Rio de Janeiro
Population
Stadium
Prospective stadium capacity
Situation

6.15 million
Maracana
86,100
Built in 1950, will be renovated

42

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

General data on transport
Airports

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

43

Proposed host city

Airport name/runway length and width (in feet)

Proposed host city

Airport name/runway length and width (in feet)

Belem

Julio Cesar (SBJC), runway length 4,921, width 98.

Val De Case Int'l (SBBE), runway length 9,180, width 148. Domestic and international flights,
located within 12km of Belem city centre. No night flight prohibition.

Belo Horizonte

Lagoa Santa Air Force Base (SBLS), runway length 6,031, width 98, 
usually does not allow civilian flights.

Pampulha (SBBH), runway length 8,333, width 148. Domestic flights, located 8km from 
Belo Horizonte city centre. No night flight prohibition.

Tancredo Neves otherwise known as Confins (SBCF), runway length 9,843, width 148.
International flights, located 45km from Belo Horizonte city centre. No night flight prohibition.

Carlos Prates (SNCH), runway length 3,035, width 59.

Brasilia

J Kubitschek International (SBBR), runway 10,500, length 148. International and domestic
flights, located 11km from Brasilia city centre. No night flight prohibition.

Campo Grande

Campo Grande Int'l (SBCG), runway length 8,541, width 141. International and domestic
flights, located 4km from Campo Grande city centre. No night flight prohibition.

Estancia Santa Maria (SSKG), runway length 3,652, width 75.

Teruel Ipanema Est (SSIE), runway length 4,921, width 98.

Cuiaba

Curitiba

Marechal Rondon (SBCY), runway length 7,546, width 148. International and domestic flights,
located 8km from Cuiaba city centre. No night flight prohibition.

Bacacheri (SBBI), runway length 4,560, width 98.

Afonso Pena (SBCT), runway length 7,267, width 148. International and domestic flights, 
located 15km from Curitiba city centre. No night flight prohibition.

Florianopolis

Hercilio Luz (SBFL), runway length 7,726, width 148. International and domestic flights located
12km from Florianopolis city centre. No night flight prohibition.

Fortaleza

Goiania

Maceio

Manaus

Pinto Martins International (SBFZ), runway length 8,350, width 148. International and domestic
flights, located 6km from Fortaleza city centre. No night flight prohibition.

Adrom Nacle De Aviaca (SWNV), runway length 3,730, width 75.

Santa Genoveva (SBGO), runway length 8,202, width 148. Domestic flights, located 8km from
Goiania city centre. No night flight prohibition.

Campo Dos Palmares (SBMO), runway length 7,218, width 148. International and domestic
flights, located 19km from Maceio city centre. No night flight prohibition.

Eduardo Gomes Int'l (SBEG), runway length 8,858, width 148. International and domestic
flights, located 9km from Manaus city centre. No night flight prohibition.

Manaus

Natal

Porto Alegre

Recife

Rio Branco

Rio de Janeiro

Salvador

Sao Paulo

Ponta Pelada Air Force Base (SBMN), runway length 7,605, width 148, 
usually does not allow civilian flights.

Augusto Severo (SBNT ), runway length 8,531, width 148. International and domestic flights,
located 18km Natal city centre. No night flight prohibition.

Canoas Air Force Base (SBCO), runway length 9,026, width 145, usually does not allow civilian
flights.
http://www.the-airport-guide.com/airport_print.php?airports_id=7938

Salagado Filho (SBPA), runway length 7,443, width 140. International and domestic flights,
located 10km from Porto Alegre city centre. No night flight prohibition. 
http://www.infraero.gov.br/usa/aero_prev_home.php?ai=226

Recife Guararapes (SBRF), runway length 9,846, width 148. International and domestic
flights, located 11km from Recife city centre and 15km from Olinda. No night flight 
prohibition.

Presidente Medici (SBRB), runway length 7,080, width 148. International and domestic
flights, located 18km from Rio Branco city centre. No night flight prohibition.

Afonsos Air Force Base (SBAF), runway length 6,562, width 171.
http://www.the-airport-guide.com/airport.php?airports_id=7908

Jacarepagua (SBJR), runway length 2,900, width to be advised.
http://www.infraero.gov.br/usa/aero_prev_home.php?ai=214

Santos Dumont (SBRJ), runway length 4,341, width 138. Domestic flights, located in the 
city centre. No night flight prohibition.
http://www.infraero.gov.br/usa/aero_prev_home.php?ai=212

Rio De Janeiro Int'l (SBGL), runway length 13,123, width 148. International and domestic
flights, located 18km from Rio de Janeiro city centre. No night flight prohibition. 
http://www.infraero.gov.br/usa/aero_prev_home.php?ai=213

Int’l de Salvador (SBSV), runway length 9,859, width 148. International and domestic flights,
located 30km from Salvador city centre. No night flight prohibition.

Campo De Marte (SBMT), runway length 5,250, width 148.
http://www.infraero.gov.br/usa/aero_prev_home.php?ai=218

Congonhas Int'l (SBSP), runway length 6,365, width 161. Domestic flights, located 8km
from Sao Paulo city centre. Night flight prohibition.
http://www.infraero.gov.br/usa/aero_prev_home.php?ai=219

Guarulhos Int'l (SBGR), runway length 12,140, width 148. International and domestic flights,
located 25km from Sao Paulo city centre. No night flight prohibition.
http://www.infraero.gov.br/usa/aero_prev_home.php?ai=217

NB: A Boeing 747 with maximum passenger and fuel loads needs between 8,000 and 10,000 feet to land; the airport also needs sufficient fire
cover and adequate PCN (runway strength) and facilities (aircraft steps and terminal facilities) to handle these aircraft. Cuiaba, Curitiba,
Florianopolis, Maceio and Rio Branco may therefore not be able to accommodate Boeing 747s but would be able to handle 757s (220 to
230 passengers) and 767s (260-280 passengers). Often one of the constraints is a lack of aircraft steps, which limits the types of aircrafts
that can be handled to those with integral steps, or the number of piers available at the terminals.

44

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

General data on transport
Urban transport

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

45

Proposed host city

Urban transport

Proposed host city

Urban transport

Belem

Belo Horizonte

Brasilia

Public transport consists principally of affordable buses and minibuses which provide 
an extensive network of metropolitan and municipal public routes and taxis. There are plans 
to improve access to the Mangueirao stadium with improved road infrastructure and traffic
control/management. There is ample parking capacity within reasonable distance of the
stadium (6,000+ spaces).

Public transport consists principally of a city tram network (which is expected to expand) and 
an affordable integrated urban bus system. Other options include taxi pools that follow the
same route as the buses. There are plans to improve access to the Mineirao stadium with
improved road infrastructure and traffic control/management. There is ample parking capacity
within reasonable distance of the stadium (7,000+ spaces).

Public transport consists principally of the Brasilia underground and an integrated urban bus
system. Other options include taxis. There are plans to improve access to the Mane Garrincha
stadium. There is ample parking capacity within a radius of 1.5km of the stadium (16,000+
spaces).

Campo Grande*

Public transport consists principally of affordable buses and executive minibuses. Other options
include motorcycle taxis. There is ample parking capacity within a 2km radius of the stadium
(9,700+ spaces).

Cuiaba*

Curitiba

Florianopolis*

Fortaleza

Goiania

Maceio*

Manaus

Public transport consists principally of affordable buses, minibuses and taxis. There are plans 
to improve access to the Verdao stadium with improved road infrastructure. Parking capacity 
is limited (700+ spaces within a 500m radius).

Public transport consists of an integrated and affordable urban bus system consisting of over
1,800 vehicles and a fleet of 2,300 taxis. There are plans to improve access to the Arena de
Baixada stadium with improved road infrastructure and traffic control. There is ample parking
capacity within a 2km radius (8,000+).

Public transport consists principally of affordable buses and minibuses. There are a number 
of places within a 2km radius for installing large parking areas.

Public transport consists principally of a train system connecting the three main municipalities 
in the Fortaleza metropolitan region and all 13 municipalities are served by an affordable urban
bus system. Other options include taxis. There are plans to improve access to the Castelao
stadium. There is ample parking capacity within a radius of 500m of the stadium (4,000 with
plans to increase to 7,000+ spaces).

Public transport consists principally of the Anhanguera Axle, an affordable bus service with 
a fleet of over 1,300 buses operating 252 bus routes. Other options include taxis. There are
plans to improve access to the Serra Dourada stadium. There is ample parking capacity for
10,000 vehicles.

Public transport consists principally of affordable buses. There are plans to improve the
transport infrastructure of Maceio through the implementation of a light railway and cultural
train project.

Public transport consists principally of affordable buses, special buses, double-cabin buses and
minibuses providing an extensive network of metropolitan and municipal public routes, as well
as taxis. There are plans to improve access to the Vivaldo Lima stadium which include the
construction of a tram system with improved road infrastructure and traffic control/management.
There is ample parking capacity within reasonable distance of the stadium (9,000+ spaces).

Natal*

Porto Alegre

Recife

Rio Branco*

Rio de Janeiro

Salvador

Sao Paulo

Public transport consists principally of affordable buses and taxis.

Public transport consists principally of an underground system connecting Porto Alegre 
with a handful of cities within the metropolitan area of Porto Alegre. Additionally the
metropolitan area is served by an affordable regular bus and special minibus system. 
Other options include a large fleet of taxis. There are plans to introduce a bus rapid transit
corridor. There is ample parking capacity within the proximity of the stadium (6,000 with
expansion plans to increase to 10,000+ spaces).

Public transport consists principally of the underground which is integrated in part with 
the city’s extensive urban bus network using conventional buses and double-cabin, mini- 
and microbuses. Other options include taxis. There are plans to improve access to the
Recife/Olinda Arena with improved road infrastructure and traffic control/management.
There is ample parking capacity within reasonable distance of the stadium (11,000+ spaces).

Public transport consists principally of affordable buses and taxis. There are 10,000 parking
spaces in arenas adjacent to the stadium.

Public transport consists principally of an extensive underground train system which includes
a station at the Maracana stadium as well as a commuter train system with a station at the
stadium. Additionally the municipal bus network comprises a fleet of 8,000 buses, 10,000 vans
and 300 luxury minibuses for tourists. Other options include a large fleet of taxis. There are
plans to extend the underground and introduce a Light Vehicle on Rail system. There is
ample parking capacity within the proximity of the stadium (6,000 with expansion plans to
increase to 10,000+ spaces). A significant development is the construction of the Rio-Sao
Paulo high-speed train that will connect both cities and reduce the journey time to less than
two hours.

By 2008 public transport will consist of an underground line which shall be integrated with
the city’s extensive urban transport network of conventional buses, executive buses,
minibuses, trains and boats. There are plans to increase the underground system to include 
a second line. Ample parking capacity is planned for the stadium (7,000+ spaces).

Public transport consists principally of an extensive underground system as well as a commuter
train system. Additionally the metropolitan bus network comprises a fleet of 15,000 buses
and 30,000 taxis. A significant development is the construction of the Rio-Sao Paulo high-
speed train that will connect both cities and reduce the journey time to less than two hours.

* These cities do not currently have adequate capacity to become a host city.

46

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

General data on
stadium media facilities

Media tribune
With only four exceptions – Fortaleza, Recife, Belo Horizonte and Rio de
Janeiro, and according to the project managers even those can be adapted –
all the requirements are more than satisfied. Only the media tribune location
at the Mineirao stadium (Belo Horizonte) must be reviewed, since it woud not
appear to be located in front of the halfway line (its customary position).
Despite this, it has around 3,000 seats available to the press, distributed across
two levels. In general, the number of press seats is above the 600 required for
group stage matches.

We currently do not have any information for the Maracana stadium. The
current number of press seats ranges from 600 to 3,500 (Bahia Arena). The
Morumbi (Sao Paulo) has 2,002 press seats available. A sufficient number of
those seats are well equipped and include desks, wireless broadband and
telephone connectivity. All the media tribunes are provided with bars, catering
and restaurants.

Pitch area/photographers
All the projects meet the necessary requirements to accommodate more than
200 photographers. Since most of the stadiums which are to be renovated or
rebuilt are aiming to maintain their current structure, in most cases there would
be a huge space between the stands and the pitch area. In any case, many of
the projects involve the redevelopment of a stadium’s track and field facilities.

Mixed zone (MZ)
Currently, only two of the 18 stadiums satisfy the 600m2 space requirement:
Estrela dos Reis Magos (Natal) with 900m2 and Forest Arena (Rio Branco) with
an incredible 2,700 m2. Another interesting situation is that the MZ concept
is totally new for all of them. The concept of a MZ has never been introduced,
despite the fact that Brazil are five-time world champions. Nevertheless, all
the MZs in the new projects are very well located on the way from the dressing
rooms to the team buses.

According to the plans and projects, there are a lot of annexe room solutions
available to increase the space for a MZ without moving the actual functional
location.

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

47

Studios and post-match interviews
Facilities for post-match activities are not specifically mentioned in the stadium
projects. However, all of them provide more than five or six spare rooms next
to the dressing room areas which have the necessary space for use as TV
studios.

Regarding the flash interviews area, all the details are mentioned in the
projects. Like the mixed zone, a flash area has not traditionally been part of
the media facilities in Brazilian football stadiums and is therefore also a new
concept. In addition to their good location, these areas would all appear to
provide the necessary space.

Press conference room (PCR)
The projected locations – next to the teams’ dressing rooms and the mixed
zone – are excellent. According to the projects, they would all appear to have
more than enough space for at least 150 seated journalists, platforms for
cameras and capacity for more than three interpreting booths.

Stadium media centre (SMC)
The SMCs range in size from 150m2 (Porto Alegre) to 7,500m2 (Rio Branco),
with 4,000m2 in Brasilia and 2,700m2 in Belem. Some of them, like the
Maracana in Rio de Janeiro, which has only 300m2, or the Morumbi in Sao
Paulo (unspecified), need to be reviewed. The space problem can be solved,
however, and it was agreed on our inspection visit to increase the size as
necessary.

The SMCs are all inside the perimeter of the stadium and better still, some of
them are inside the stadium and very close to the media main tribune. They
are all equipped with the required facilities, such as working areas with desks
and chairs, electricity power outlets, computer terminals, telephone and
broadband internet connections, public telephones, telecommunication areas
equipped with individual telephone cabins and fax machines, medical facilities,
toilet facilities, air conditioning, storage rooms, etc.

48

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

49

International media centre (IMC)
As stated in the bid, the future LOC will propose a location for the IMC to FIFA
for approval no later than 1 June 2011.

However, the potential locations of the future IMC (Brasilia, Sao Paulo and Rio
de Janeiro) have already identified existing buildings or sites of more than
5,000m2 that would meet all the requirements. The potential sites range from
five minutes’ walking distance to the corresponding stadium to 20 or 30 minutes
by car or direct public transport.

International broadcast centre (IBC)
The same applies to the IBC as to the IMC. It would probably be in the same
host city as the FIFA World Cup™ headquarters or FIFA Confederations Cup
headquarters. The IBC could be located in the same building or facility as the
IMC, but the surface area of the IBC would have to be at least 30,000m2.

Once more the candidate cities, which are the same as for the IMC, meet the
necessary requirements concerning space and base infrastructures.

TV broadcast compound
Some of the projects still have to determine the space available, while other
projects currently lack space, although in all cases the size can be increased. For
now, the size ranges from 5.5m2 in the Belo Horizonte stadium to 5,000m2 in
the Mane Garrincha stadium in Brasilia and the Zagallo Arena in Maceio.

TV commentary positions
Significant improvements are planned, not only for the 2014 FIFA World Cup™
but also for general future use. Surprisingly, most of the stadiums are not
equipped for TV commentators. In fact, many of them will use TV commentary
positions  for  the  first  time  thanks  to  the  projects  and  the  necessary  FIFA
requirements for staging a FIFA World Cup™.

The figures range from five TV commentary positions (Manaus) to up to 500 in
Natal with an option to increase the number of positions available in all cases.
Even in Manaus the project provides for an increased number if necessary. All
the proposed stadiums have the right solutions for this important media facility.

Radio cabins
The same applies here as for TV. Despite the importance of radio stations in
Brazilian football, many of the stadiums do not provide facilities for radio
reporters. Up until now, the arrangements have been chaotic. For the new
projects, the situation will be completely different and will be completely
different for future national league matches. There will be stadiums with
capacity for between ten and 241 (in the case of the Morumbi in Sao Paulo)
radio cabins, with 200 in Recife. All of the stadiums will meet the minimum
requirements for hosting a FIFA World Cup™ in terms of radio facilities
because there is enough capacity to increase the number of cabins as required.

Parking areas and transport
As we have mentioned, space is not a problem for the majority of the stadium
projects. As far as parking areas are concerned, there will be more than enough
availability for media and especially for the big TV trucks. Most of them are
located in prime positions and near to the main entrance. The trucks can park
in exclusive areas in order to facilitate support of the broadcast transmission
with the necessary cables and tackle other logistical issues. The Maracana
stadium project in Rio de Janeiro is the only one so far that has not given all
the required information about this item and needs to be reviewed.

All other media parking requirements can be fulfilled, particularly those of
photographers, who have to carry heavy material to the stadium.

All the projects have media parking areas of between 50 and 540 spaces at a
distance of 0-250m. Some of them have installed the media parking inside
the stadium.

To complete the information about parking areas and transport, it is also
important to mention that in many cases the managers of the projects for
some of the 18 candidate host cities intend to create a special 24-hour media
shuttle service from the media hotels to the stadium.

50

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

51

Stadium media facilities

Composition of the inspection team

Stadium

City

Press
seats

Mixed
zone

TV

SMC

compound

TV com.
positions

Radio
cabins

Parking/
distance

The FIFA Executive Committee approved the composition of the
inspection team for the 2014 FIFA World Cup™ as follows:

Mangueirao

Belem

942

554.4m2

2,700m2

TBD

Mineirao

Belo H.

3,000

TBD

TBD

5.5m2

M. Garrincha

Brasilia

Morenao

Campo G.

Verdao

Cuiaba

Arena da Baixada

Curitiba

Orlando Scarpelli

Floria.

Castelao

Fortaleza

Serra Dourada

Goiania

790

620

TBD

891

200

600

190

Zagallo Arena

Maceio

1,000

200m2

TBD

5,000m2

Vivaldao

Manaus

150

260m2

510m2

TV Bus

Estrela dos Reis M. Natal

1,500

900m2

1,400m2

400m2

Beira Rio

Porto Al.

150

TBD

150m2

TBD

Recife/Olinda A.

Recife/Ol.

1,200

300m2

1,230m2

800m2

Forest Arena

Rio Branco

350

2,700m2

7,500m2

75m2

Maracana

R. Janeiro

TBD

40m2

300m2

2x100m2

Bahia Arena

Salvador

3,500

400m2

2,000m2

40m2

Morumbi

S. Paulo

2,002

TBD

Level0/TBD

1,600m2

NB: Figures based on appendices B and C from the Brazilian Bid Book. 

In order to fulfil FIFA’s media requirements, all data provided shall be reviewed. 

200m2

4,000m2

5,000m2

260m2

510m2

70m2

250m2

250m2

428m2

75m2

30m2

25m2

230m2

450m2

120m2

500m2

1,900m2

500m2

TBD

TBD

TBD

TBD

TBD

150/10m

208

120

48

13

20

20

30

14

540/50m

TBD

300/250m

48

16

10

16

50

294/30m

307/30m

175/30m

150/0m

250/50m

20

50

5

500

TBD

120

14

220

250

60

34

150/100m

150

224/30m

16

50

24

150/30m

400/70m

50/0m

200

150/30m

18

22

30

650/200m

TBD

250/30m

241

400/200m

Chairman
Hugo Salcedo (USA)

Members
Jaime Byrom (Mexico)
Jorge Baptista (Portugal)
Walter Gagg (Switzerland – FIFA)

Coordination:
Jaime Yarza (Spain – FIFA)

Sources

Form of Hosting Agreement for the 2014 FIFA World Cup™
Bidding Agreement for the 2014 FIFA World Cup™
Bid Book, Brazil’s CBF bid document

On the internet

www.FIFA.com

www.conmebol.com

http://cbfnews.uol.com.br

www.ibge.gov.br

www.bndes.gov.br

www.worldbank.org

www.state.gov

Websites of the European Commission

www.dree.org

www.ilo.org

www.sambafoot.co.uk

www.distritofederal.df.gov.br

52

INSPECTION REPORT FOR THE 2014 FIFA WORLD CUP™

In the event of a difference in interpretation between the various language
versions of this text, the English version shall be deemed authoritative.

100 YEARS FIFA  1904 - 2004
Fédération Internationale de Football Association 
FIFA-Strasse 20    P.O. Box    8044 Zurich    Switzerland
Tel.: +41-(0)43-222 7777    Fax: +41-(0)43-222 7878    www.FIFA.com

For the Game. For the World.

N
G

I

S
E
D

R
E
L
L
Ü
M

N
E
V
S

