INFANCY, 7(2),  183-206 
Copyright 0 2005, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc. 

The Developmental Trajectory 

of Nonadjacent Dependency Learning 

Rebecca G6mez 

Department of Psychology 

University of Arizona 

Jessica Maye 

Depurtment of Communication Sciences and Disorders 

Northwestern  University 

We investigated the developmental trajectory of nonadjacent dependency learning in 
an artificial language. Infants were exposed to  1 of 2 artificial languages with utter- 
ances of the form [aXc or bXd] (Grammar 1) or [aXd or bXc] (Grammar 2). In both 
languages, the grammaticality of an utterance depended on the relation between the 
1 st and 3rd elements, whereas the intervening element varied freely. High variability 
of the middle element is known to contribute to perception of nonadjacent dependen- 
cies (Gbmez, 2002). but the developmental trajectory of such learning is unknown. 
Experiment  1 replicated the study of Gbmez with a younger age group and a more 
subtle variability manipulation. Twelve-month-olds failed to track nonadjacent de- 
pendencies under conditions tested here (Experiments 2a and 2b), but by  15 months, 
infants are beginning to track this structure (Experiment 3). Such learning has impli- 
cations for understanding how infants might begin to acquire similar structure in nat- 
ural language. 

Much work has focused on how infants might learn adjacent dependencies in se- 
quential  structure. For instance, Kirkham, Slemmer, and Johnson  (2002) showed 
that by 2 months of age, infants can track co-occurrence frequencies in streams of 
visually presented objects. By 8 months, infants can track conditional probabilities 
in running speech ( A s h ,  Saffran, & Newport,  1998; Saffran, A s h ,  & Newport, 
1996) and in visually presented scenes (Fiser & A s h ,  2002). By  12 months, they 

Requests for reprints shouId be sent to Rebecca GCtmez, Department of Psychology, University of 

Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721LOo68. E-mail: rgomez@u.arizona.edu 

184 

G6MEZ AND MAYE 

track sequences of words in strings (Gcimez & Gerken, 1999; Mintz,  1996; Saffran 
& Wilson,  2003). Thus, infants are adept at processing  associative  structure.  In- 
deed, much of this work is reminiscent of themes found in early associationist ap- 
proaches  to language acquisition  (e.g., Harris,  1955). However,  criticisms  of the 
early associationist  work centered on the argument that the hierarchical  structure 
underpinning  language could not be learned from associations  between  adjacent 
elements (Chomsky,  1957). 

Researchers have begun investigating how infants might learn nonadjacent  se- 
quential  dependencies (Gcimez, 2002;  Santelmann  & Jusczyk,  1998)’  Such de- 
pendencies  (also referred  to as discontinuous  or remotely  connected  dependen- 
cies) are extremely difficult to acquire (see Newport & A s h ,  2000,2004), but play 
an important role in language. In English, linguistic  material intervenes between 
morphosyntactically  dependent auxiliaries  and  inflectional  morphemes (e.g.,  is 
happily  singing, has hurriedly  walked) and between  nouns and verbs in number 
and tense agreement  (e.g., the birds in the trees are singing, the one who crosses 
the line first is the winner). As such, learning dependencies between nonadjacent 
words and morphemes is fundamental in acquiring the syntax of the language. This 
study examines when and how infants detect such structure. 

Previous research with natural language shows that by  18 months infants track 
nonadjacent  dependencies  over  as  many  as  three  intervening  morphemes 
(Santelmann  & Jusczyk,  1998). Infants this age were able to distinguish  phrases 
like “is running” from “can running” and “is quickly running” from “can quickly 
running.”  Gdmez (2002) replicated  the Santelmann and Jusczyk (1998) findings 
with 18-month-olds in an artificial language paradigm and also explored a mech- 
anism  by  which 
infants  acquire  nonadjacent  dependencies.  She  exposed 
18-month-olds to one of two artificial languages: In Grammar 1 (Gl), sentences fol- 
lowed the patterns uXc or hXd (e.g..  pel-wadim-jic,  vot-kicq-rud, vot-wadim-rud), 
whereas in Grammar 2 (G2), the relation between the first and third elements was 
reversed to aXd or bXc, such that pel sentences ended with rud, and vot sentences 
ended with jic (e.g., pel-wadim-rud, vot-kicey-jic, vot-wudim-jic). Thus, in both 
languages, a and b elements were restricted to initial position, whereas c and d ele- 
ments were restricted to final position. The two languages differed only in the rela- 
tion between  initial and final elements; for example, in G1, pel sentences ended 
withjic, whereas in G2, pel sentences ended with rud. The same set of X elements 
occurred in both grammars, and X elements varied freely without restriction. This 
resulted in identical relations between adjacent elements in the two grammars; in 
both G1 and G2, pel and vot could each be followed by any of the X elements, and 
any of the X  elements could  precede  rud or jic.  Because the two grammars are 

‘Researchers have also investigated such learning with adults (see G6rnez. 2002; Newport & A s h ,  
2000, 2004; Onnis, Christiansen, Chater, & G6rnez.  2003; Peiia,  Bonatti, Nespor,  & Mehler, 2002; 
Permchet, Tyler, Galland, & Peerernan. 2004). 

NONADJACENT IEPENDENCY LEARNING 

1 85 

identical with respect to absolute position of elements and adjacent dependencies, 
they can only be distinguished by noting the relation between the nonadjacent first 
and third elements. 

Furthermore, 

in  natural  language,  the  intervening  categories  are  often 
open-class  items comprising  much  larger sets than  the function  morphemes  as- 
sociated with nonadjacent structure. Hypothesizing that these set size differences 
might  aid  learning,  Gcimez (2002) manipulated  the  size of  the  set  from which 
she drew the middle element (set size = 2,  12, or 24) while holding frequency of 
exposure  to particular  nonadjacent  dependencies  constant.'  She found  that high 
variability led to better perception  of nonadjacent  dependencies  even though the 
nonadjacent  dependencies were equally frequent  in small and large set-size con- 
ditions.  Eighteen-month-olds  were  able to acquire  the  nonadjacent  dependency 
when  the  intervening  element  came  from  a  set  of  24  possible  words,  but  not 
when  the  intervening  set  size  was  smaller  (2 or  12). She replicated  this  same 
finding  with  adult  participants  using  a  slightly  more  complex  grammar. 

At first glance, it might seem paradoxical  that variability  can aid learning. In- 
deed, by most accounts high variability  should result in increased noise and thus 
decreased  learning.  However,  G6mez  (2002) argued  that  high  variability  in  the 
large  set-size  condition  acted  to  increase  the  salience  of  the  nonadjacent  ele- 
ments  compared to  the  middle  element, and  in this  way  facilitated  learning.  In 
particular,  because  certain  kinds  of  structure  might  be  perceptually  salient  or 
easier to process,  infants may  be biased  to prefer  this  information.  However. o n  
the assumption  that  learning  involves  a tendency  to seek  out  invariant  structure 
(structure  remaining  constant  across  varying  contexts:  E. J.  Gibson,  1969; J. J. 
Gibson, 1966), if the statistical probability of preferred  structure decreases suffi- 
ciently, learners should begin to seek out other forms of information  (Gomez, in 
press).  Consistent  with  this  argument,  infants  in  G6mez (2002) appeared  to be 
focusing  on  different  types  of  dependencies  as  a  function  of  their  statistical 
properties.  When  the  conditional  probabilities  of  adjacent  elements were  rela- 
tively  high  (in  the  small  set-size  conditions)  infants'  patterns  of  response  indi- 
cated that  they  were computing  the  statistical  relations  between  adjacent  as op- 
posed  to  nonadjacent  dependencies.  They  were  focused  on  local  rather  than 
remote  statistical  structure.  However,  when  adjacent  conditional  probabilities 
were  sufficiently  low (when  the set  size was  24) adjacent  dependencies  are not 
reliable  sources  of  structure,  leading  infants  to  focus  instead  on  nonadjacent 
relations. 

?Examples of function morphemes are prepositions, articles, auxiliary verbs. inflections. and inter- 
rogative words. Functors are frequent in language and convey important syntactic cues. In natural lan- 
guage, for example, auxiliaries such as i s  or M'(IS  and inflectional endings like -irig tend to be fairly sta- 
ble relative to the set of intervening verbs, a set much larger in size than the functors that occur on either 
side. 

186 

G6MEZ AND MAYE 

More important, Mintz (2002) recently proposed that the statistical properties 
of nonadjacent dependencies might lead learners to group the intervening elements 
as members of  a category (see also Onnis, Monaghan, Christiansen, & Chater, 
2004). Mintz (2003) analyzed what he termedfrequentframes,  defined as “ordered 
pairs of  words that frequently co-occur with exactly one word position interven- 
ing” (p. 93), in a corpus analysis of child-directed speech and found that words em- 
bedded  in frequent frames tend to be from the same category (e.g., noun, verb, 
preposition, adjective, adverb). Furthermore, the frames he identified in individual 
corpora do not appear to be corpus specific. Rather than being idiosyncratic to a 
corpus for a particular child, the same frames occur in different children’s corpora. 
In related research, Mintz (2002,2004b) also showed that adults and children cate- 
gorize words in artificial languages as a function of their co-occurrence patterns 
within frequent frames. 

Mintz’s  (2003)  findings  are  important  for  suggesting  how  frequent  frames 
might help infants begin to categorize words in speech. Categorization is an im- 
portant linguistic milestone because once a word is identified by  syntactic cate- 
gory, a child may  extend it in novel syntactic contexts. Onnis, Monaghan, et al. 
(2004) used the example of a child learning to group words like play, drink, and 
eat in the context of frames like “I  am-X-ing,” “don ’t-X-it,” and “Let S-X-now.” 
What happens when  the child encounters a new  word, hide,  in the context of  a 
frame such as  “I  am-hide-ing”? A  child who has  grouped play,  drink, and eat 
should easily extend hide to a frame like “don’t-hide-it.” Indeed, this idea is sup- 
ported in the empirical finding that 2-year-olds more readily acquire novel verbs 
when  they  are  encountered  in  the  context  of  frequent  frames  (Childers  & 
Tomasello, 2001). 

It  is no great leap to see the relation between the frequent frames referred to 
by  Mintz and the nonadjacent dependency learning identified by Gdmez (Mintz. 
2003; Onnis, Monaghan, et al., 2004). In  both cases, learners have acquired de- 
pendencies  between  words  from  small  categories  (e.g.,  closed-class  function 
morphemes) relative  to  the  varying  context  created  by  larger categories  (e.g., 
open-class  lexical  morphemes).  As  pointed  out  by  Mintz  (2003)  and  Onnis, 
Monaghan, et al. (2004), the Gdmez (2002) studies add to the puzzle the demon- 
stration that high variability of context may be instrumental in the identification 
of  frequent  frames.  In  turn,  such frames  may  be  useful  for  infemng  syntactic 
categories. 

The primary objective of the studies reported here was to investigate the devel- 
opment of  nonadjacent dependency learning in an artificial language paradigm. 
Although 18-month-olds can track nonadjacent dependencies over up to three in- 
tervening elements in natural language, Santelmann and Jusczyk (1998) found no 
evidence that younger  15-month-olds were tracking such structure. Yet,  infants 
this age do appear to be sensitive to the specific forms functors take, as well as their 

NONADJACENT DEPENDENCY LEARNING 

187 

order and distributions  in  sentences.  For  instance,  by  1 1  months,  infants distin- 
guish  phrases  like “There  was once a little kitten  who was born  in  a dark cozy 
closet” from “There ki once gu little kitten who ki born in gu dark cozy closet,” in 
which  the  functors are  replaced  by  nonwords  (Shady,  1996;  Shafer,  Shucard, 
Shucard, & Gerken. 1998). By 15 months, they are more likely to segment stems of 
nonsense words that occur with a function morpheme during familiarization than 
stems that do not, suggesting that functional elements can facilitate the discovery 
of  novel  information  (Mint7, 2004a).  By  16 months, infants distinguish  phrases 
like  “The large cake is baking”  from “Zs large cake the  baking”  (Shady,  1996). 
Thus, between  11 and  18 months, infants become increasingly  sensitive to func- 
tors, their distributional characteristics in speech, and the relations between them. 

One explanation  for increased  sensitivity to relations between  functional  ele- 
ments is that the amount of information infants can process over time (their pro- 
cessing  window)  increases  with  development  (Newport,  1988;  Santelmann  & 
Jusczyk,  1998; see also Elman, 1993). By this view, although  15-month-olds are 
sensitive to function morphemes (Shady, 1996), because of their smaller process- 
ing  windows  they  have  greater  difficulty  tracking  them  over time  compared  to 
older infants. If this account is correct, infants should show emerging sensitivity to 
nonadjacent dependencies leading up to 18 months. We tested this hypothesis by 
presenting infants between  12 and 17 months of age with artificial language stim- 
uli containing nonadjacent dependencies that were designed to be somewhat less 
complex than the natural language stimuli used by Santelmann and Jusczyk. If in- 
fants’ processing windows (and their ability to track information in time) increase 
with  age, we would  expect  to  see some sensitivity  to  nonadjacent  structure  in 
younger infants, albeit in a less robust form. 

In addition, a question raised by the initial G6mez (2002) findings is whether 
there  is  something  unique  about  the  number  24,  or  whether  a  slightly  smaller 
set-size condition-yet  one that would still result in high variability  of the middle 
element-might 
also result in nonadjacent dependency  learning. Thus, in Experi- 
ment  1, we exposed  17-month-olds to strings with middle elements drawn from a 
set size of 18 to determine whether this amount of variability would be sufficient to 
facilitate nonadjacent dependency learning. 

Skeptics of artificial language  paradigms  often question  the  relevance  of  this 
methodology  for studying  natural  language  acquisition.  Consequently,  we  were 
eager to see how  our results  would  map onto those reported  by  Santelmann  and 
Jusczyk (1998). Although there are important differences between natural and arti- 
ficial language learning, having to do with extended versus brief  learning experi- 
ences and exposure  to heterogeneous  versus  homogeneous  materials,  if  we  see 
similar developmental trends in the two types of studies, it will suggest that we are 
in fact tapping into related sensitivities (Gomez & Gerken, 1999; Morgan & New- 
port,  1981). 

188 

G6MEL AND MAYE 

EXPERIMENT 1 

Experiment  1  was  conducted  as a replication  and extension  of  Experiment  2 in 
Gdmez ( 2 0 2 )  with slightly younger infants (17- vs.  18-month-olds). To examine 
the effect of increasing variability of the middle element, we presented infants with 
middle elements chosen from sets of  18 versus  12. 

Method 

Participants 
Forty-eight infants were tested, 24 in each set-size condition. There were 8 boys 
and  16 girls in set size  18. The average  age was  17 months 6 days (range = 16 
months 13 days-18  months 25 days). Eleven additional infants were tested in this 
condition but were not included due to fussiness during familiarization ( n  = 10) or 
completing  fewer than two G1 and two G2 test trials ( n  = 1). There were  15 boys 
and 9 girls  in  set size  12. The average  age was  16 months  29 days (range = 16 
months  10 days-17  months  18 days). Eighteen  additional  infants were tested  in 
this condition  but  were not  included  for the following  reasons:  fussiness  during 
familiarization  ( n  = 1 I), insufficient number of test trials ( n  = 6), and chronic ear 
infections ( n  = I). 

Materials 
Participants  listened to strings of words produced by one of two artificial lan- 
guages. GI strings took the form aXc and bXd. G2 strings took the form aXd and 
bXc. Strings in both grammars contained the same vocabulary in the first, second, 
and third elements and the same adjacent dependencies, but differed in the depend- 
encies between  the  first  and third  elements. A  femafe speaker recorded  sample 
strings. To eliminate talker-induced differences in individual strings and to ensure 
that there would be no idiosyncrasies as a function of different pronunciations used 
in  the  two languages,  word  tokens  were  spliced  from the  recorded  strings and 
pasted  together  into new  strings for both  GI and G2. The interword  interval be- 
tween the three words forming a string was 250 msec, whereas the between-string 
interval  was  750 msec,  so  that  the  speech  stream  was  clearly  segmented  into 
three-element strings separated by pauses. Strings were approximately 2 sec in du- 
ration. Variability was manipulated by varying the size of the pool from which we 
drew X elements such that IXI  = ( 12 or  18). 

Training stimuli.  The a and b elements were instantiated as pel and vot; c and 
d, as rud and jic. The 18 X elements were wudim, kicey, coomo, fengle, loga, puser; 
gople, taspu, h@um, deecha, vamev, skiger; benez, gensim, feenam, laeljeen, chilu, 
and roosa. The set of  12 X elements consisted of the first  12 words in the list. 

NONADJACENT DEPENDENCY LEARNING 

189 

Infants exposed to set size 18 heard each of the 2 x 18 = 36 strings produced by 
their  training language two  times  during training, for a total  of  72 strings. We 
equated frequency of exposure to the nonadjacent dependencies across conditions. 
Therefore, infants exposed to set size  12 heard each of  the 2 x  12 = 24 training 
strings three times to result in  exposure to 72  strings. Training lasted  approxi- 
mately 3 min. 

Test stimuli.  Twenty-four strings in each language were used in the two test 
conditions (the subset of strings used for the set size 12 condition). G 1 strings were 
presented in two separate sets in two random orders (1 2 G 1 strings were in G 1 -set 1 
and 12 were in GI-set2; see Table 1). G2 strings were also distributed over two sep- 
arate test sets. The four resulting sets (Gl-setl, G1-set2, G2-set1, G2-set2) were 
each presented three times during the test (once in each of three test blocks), for a 
total of  12 test trials. Thus, in each block infants familiarized to each grammar (G1 
or G2) received two test trials that conformed to their training grammar and two tri- 
als that violated it. Each test trial was approximately 30 sec in duration. 

Procedure 
Each infant was tested individually while seated on the caregiver’s lap in an en- 
closed booth using the head-turn preference procedure (see Kemler Nelson et al., 
1995). An observer outside the test booth monitored the infant’s looking behavior 
using a button box connected to an Apple PowerMac. The experimental control 

TABLE 1 

Test Strings Used With 17-Month-Olds (Experiment 1) 

and 12-Month-Olds (Experiment 2a) 

Grammur I 

Grammar 2 

GI-set1 

vot kicey jic 
pel puser rud 
vot vamey jic 
pel wadim rud 
vot taspu jic 
pel skiger rud 
vot gople jic 
vot hifam jic 
pel fengle rud 
vot coomo jic 
pel loga rud 
pel deecha rud 

GI-set2 

pel kicey rid 
vot pusrr jic 
pel vumty rud 
vot wadim jic 
pel taspu rud 
vot skiger jic 
pel gople rud 
pel hijtam rud 
voi fengle jic 
pel coomo rud 
vot loga jic 
vot deecha jic 

G2-set1 

w t  kicey rud 
pel puser jic 
vot vumey rud 
pel wudim jic 
vot taspu rud 
pel skiger jir 
w t  gople rud 
vot hijtum rud 
pel fengle jic 
vot coomo rud 
pel loga jic 
pel deecha jic 

G2-set2 

pel kicey jic 
vot puser rud 
pel vamey jic 
vot wudim rud 
pel taspu jic 
vot skiger rud 
pel gople jic 
pel hiftam jic 
rot fengle rud 
pel coomo jic 
vot loga rud 
rot deecha rud 

Note.  Twelve strings from a particular language were presented during a test trial in randomized 

order. The discriminations required of infants are extremely subtle. 

190  G6MEZ AND MAYE 

program initiated trials and scored head-turn responses. To eliminate bias, both 
caregiver and observer listened to masking stimuli over headphones. During train- 
ing, stimuli were presented simultaneously from two loudspeakers located on ei- 
ther side of the infant. The infant's gaze was directed first toward a blinking middle 
light then toward one of  two blinking sidelights (one below each loudspeaker). 
When the infant looked away from the side light for 2 sec, his or her gaze was again 
directed toward the middle. There was no relation between lights and sound during 
training. 

During the test, each trial began with the light blinking at center. Once the infant 
fixated on the center light, the experimenter pressed a button to extinguish it. This 
action initiated blinking of one of the side lights (the one associated with the source 
of sound for that trial). When the infant turned his or her head in the direction of the 
side light by 30", the test set for that trial played from the speaker located above the 
flashing light until the infant looked away for 2 sec (or until the trial played out af- 
ter 30 sec). The observer recorded the direction of  the infant's  head turns. The 
computer program tracked looking times, tracked the amount of time looking away 
from the source of  sound (terminating trials after 2 consecutive sec), and con- 
trolled the randomization and presentation of stimuli. 

The dependent measure was the amount of time an infant oriented toward the 
test stimulus. A significant difference in listening time to trained versus untrained 
strings averaged across trials would indicate that infants have acquired some sensi- 
tivity to the nonadjacent dependencies defined by their training language. We can- 
not predict the direction of  preference with  absolute  certainty (whether toward 
novel or familiar structure), but orienting reliably longer to one stimulus type or 
the other would suggest that infants have become sensitive to the relations between 
nonadjacent elements. 

Results and Discussion 
Average listening times to trained and untrained strings are presented in Figure 1 .3 
There are many false starts in head-turn data (trials on which infants begin to look 
in  the direction of  the  light, but  then turn  past  to look  at their mothers or im- 
mediately look away). Infants rarely actually fixate on the stimulus on these trials, 
and because they are so brief (often less than 1 sec), they tend to distort the data. In 
accord with the criterion for extinguishing a trial (looking away from the stimulus 
for 2 sec), we operationally defined false starts as initial fixations of less than 2 sec. 
An  additional reason for adopting this criterion was that strings lasted approxi- 

'Learning  is defined operationally as discrimination of two stimulus types, measured by a signifi- 
cant difference in listening time to one stimulus versus the other. This measure gives no indication of 
the magnitude of  learning, as would, for example, percentage correct. 

NONADJACEWI DEPENDENCY LEARNING 

191 

Set-size 18  Set-siie  I ?  

Set-sire 18  Set-si/e  24 

Set-sizc 24 

Exp. 1 

17-month-olds 

Exp. 2 

12-month-olds 

Exp. 3 

15-month-olds 

FIGURE 1 
Experiments  I  through  3. 

Mean listening times in seconds (and standard error of the mean) for infants in 

indtely 2 sec. Under the assumption that infants must register a minimum of one 
string in a condition to determine grammaticality, only listening times of 2 sec or 
greater  would be useful for this discrimination.  Approximately  14% of the trials 
(36 of  288) in set size 18 were discarded  by this criterion. and about  16% (39 of 
288) were discarded  in set size  12. 

The probability of a Type I error was set at .05 for all analyses. For effect size 
we report Cohen's d, where effect sizes of .2, 3, and .8 are considered to be small. 
medium, and large, respectively (Cohen,  1988). 

Preliminary analyses comparing the difference in listening time to trained  and 
untrained  strings in the two languages  showed that there were  no differences  in 
performance  as a function of training  language  (i.e., GI  vs. (32).  ts I 0.14, p s  2 
386, d 5 .06, thus the data were combined over this variable. 

Mean listening times in set size 18 were 6.05 sec to the training language (SEM 
= .44) and 7.6 1 sec to the novel language (SEM = .64). A dependent t test on listen- 
ing times to trained versus untrained  strings showed that infants listened  signifi- 
cantly longer to strings from the novel language, t(23) = -2.140.  p  = .043, d = .44. 
Seventeen of 24 infants showed this pattern. As in G6mez (2002), infants exposed 
to set size 12 showed no discrimination, t(23) = -0.158, p  = ,876, d = .03. Mean lis- 
tening times were 7.68 sec to the training language (SEM = 32) and 7.83 sec to the 
novel language (SEM = .98). Thirteen of 24 infants listened longer to the novel lan- 
guage. We next compared performance  across the two conditions.  An  independ- 
ent-sample t test comparing difference scores for listening times to strings from the 
training language and strings from the other language failed to show greater learn- 

192 

GOMEL AND MAYE 

ing for set size  18 versus set size  12 infants, t(46) = 1.126, p = .266, d = .34, sug- 
gesting that infants this age are transitional between set sizes  12 and  18. More im- 
portant, we replicated the pattern of findings observed in G6mez’s (2002) earlier 
study that infants in the larger set-size condition showed greater learning. 

These results provide additional support for the idea that learners seek out the 
sources of  greatest  statistical  regularity  in  their  input.  Infants’  failure  to  learn 
nonadjacent  dependencies  in  the  smaller  set  size  12 condition  presumably  re- 
flects their focus on the conditional  probabilities between adjacent words, which 
are higher in this condition than in the larger set size 18 condition, but do not en- 
able them  to distinguish  the  two grammars.  However,  when  adjacent  probabili- 
ties  were  low  (in  the  set  size  18 condition),  infants  were  able to  focus on  the 
more stable nonadjacent structure, and thus the easier learning task. The fact that 
infants  discriminated  in the larger set-size condition  shows that there  is nothing 
special about a set size of 24 (used by  Gbmez, 2002).  Rather, what is critical  is 
that there be  sufficient variability  in the  middle  element before  learners will  fo- 
cus on nonadjacent dependencies  in sequential structure. What constitutes “suffi- 
cient”  presumably  varies as a function  of  infant age and other factors contribut- 
ing  to  task  difficulty. 

We  also showed  nonadjacent  dependency  learning  in  a  slightly  younger  age 
group (17- vs.  18-month-olds). Infants showed discrimination after very short ex- 
posure  ( 3  min).  and the discrimination  required  was extremely  subtle (e.g.,  pel 
kicey rud vs. pel kicey jic). Thus, the learning is impressive. The failure to discrimi- 
nate in the smaller set size in combination  with discrimination  in the larger one 
suggests  that  infants  may  process  adjacent  dependencies  as  the  default,  only 
switching their focus to nonadjacent dependencies when conditional probabilities 
between adjacent elements are sufficiently low. Having replicated G6mez’s (2002) 
original findings, we next tested  12-month-olds to begin investigating the develop- 
mental trajectory of this learning. 

EXPERIMENT 2 

To establish a lower limit on nonadjacent  dependency  learning, in Experiment  2 
we tested infants several  months younger  (12 months). Given their success at 12 
months  at  tracking  adjacent  dependencies in  artificial  grammars, where  infants 
readily  learn associations  between  words in sentences (G6mez & Gerken, 1999; 
Saffran  &  Wilson,  2003),  it  seems  reasonable  to  expect  that  12-month-olds 
might  atso  be  able  to  track  nonadjacent  structure.  Although  Santelmann  and 
Jusczyk ( 1998) failed  to find sensitivity to nonadjacent  dependencies in infants 
younger  than  18 months,  we  wondered  whether  12-month-olds  would  be  suc- 
cessful with simpler artificial language materials. The natural language materials 

NONADJACENT DEPENDENCY LEARNING 

1 93 

used  by  Santelmann  and  Jusczyk  were  potentially  more  difficult because  the 
nonadjacent  dependencies  were  embedded  in  relatively  complex  passages. 

EXPERIMENT 2A 

Method 

Participants 
Twenty-four infants were tested (1 6 boys and 8 girls) with an average age of  12 
months  10 days (range = 11 months  15 days-12  months 27 days). Eleven addi- 
tional infants were tested but not included for the following reasons: fussiness dur- 
ing familiarization (n = 4), insufficient number of test trials (n = 4), technical prob- 
lem running the procedure (n = l), gestational term less than 37 weeks (n = l), and 
stroke at birth (n = 1). Half of the infants were exposed to G 1. and the other half 
were exposed to G2 during familiarization. 

Materials and Procedure 
The stimuli and procedure were the same as in Experiment 1, with the exception 

that infants were run only in the set size 18 condition. 

Results and Discussion 
As in Experiment 1.  we discarded trials less than 2 sec in duration. By this crite- 
rion, 9.58% (or 23 of 288) trials were discarded. Preliminary analyses comparing 
listening time differences to strings from the training language versus the other 
language showed that there was no effect of training language (GI or G2): thus, the 
data were combined over this variable, t(22) = -0.381, p  = .707, d = .15. In the 
comparison  of  listening times  to  trained and  untrained strings,  mean  listening 
times were 6.66 sec to the training language (SEM = 3 3 )  and 7.64 sec to the other 
language (SEM = .61), but this comparison failed to reach significance, t(23) = 
-1.449, p  = .161, d = .30. Only 14 of 24 infants listened longer to strings from the 
novel language versus the training language. 

These results suggest that  12-month-olds are not yet able to track nonadjacent 
dependencies in the materials used here, or at the most are only beginning to do so. 
If  12-month-olds are in a transitional period with respect to tracking nonadjacent 
dependencies, perhaps a larger intervening set size would enable them to focus on 
these  relations. To  investigate this  possibility,  in  Experiment  2b  we  presented 
12-month-olds with an intervening set size of 24. 

1 94  GOMEL AND MAYE 

EXPERIMENT 26 

Method 
Instead of  using the materials from Experiments  1 and 2a, we  used those from 
G6mez (2002). These materials differed in the number of X elements (there were 
24) and in the number of strings used during the test. 

Partkipan is 
We tested twenty-four 12-month-old infants (1 2 boys and 12 girls), with an av- 
erage age of  12 months 16 days (range = 1 1 months 18 days-13  months 17 days). 
Twelve additional infants were tested but were not included for the following rea- 
sons: fussiness during familiarization (n = 3), gestational term less than 37 weeks 
(n = 3), birth weight less than 5 1 b 8 oz (2,495 g; n = 5), and ear infection at time of 
testing ( n  = 1). 

Materials 
The two languages were identical to those used in Experiments 1 and 2a such 
that  the  a  and  b  elements  were  instantiated  as pel  and  vot, and  c  and  d  were 
instantiated as rud andjic. In addition to the 18 X elements used in Experiments 1 
and 2a (waclim, kicey, coomo, fengle,  logu, pusel; gople,  tuspu, hftam, deechu, 
vamey, skiger; henez, gensim, feenam, laeljeen, chila, and room), we added plizet, 
balip, malsig, suleb, nilbo, and wifle for a total of  24 X elements. Infants heard 
each of the 2 x 24 = 48 strings produced by their training language one time during 
training. Instead of  a gap of  750 msec between strings there was a gap of  1,000 
msec. As in the previous experiments, strings were 2 sec in duration. Training 
lasted approximately 2.5 min. 

Because G6rnez (2002, Experiment 2)  tested  a lower set siLe of  3 with  two 
nonadjacent dependencies, there were only six test strings associated with each 
language in the set size 3 condition. These were used as test stimuli in the three 
set-size conditions (3, 12, and 24) in that study. The same strings were used as test 
stimuli in this study (see Table 2). GI  and G2 strings were presented in separate 
sets in each of two random orders. The four resulting sets (Gl-order], G1-order2, 
G2-orderl, G2-order2) were each presented twice during the test (once in each of 
two test blocks), for a total of eight test trials. Each test trial was 17 sec in duration. 

Procedure 
The procedure was identical to that used in Experiments 1 and 2a. 

NONADJACENT DEPENDENCY LEARNING 

1 95 

TABLE 2 

Test Strings Used With  12- and 

15-Month-Olds (Experiments 2b and 3) 

C~rummur I 

pel rcadim rud 
vot wadim jic 
pel kicey rud 
vot kicev jic 
pel puser rud 
vot puser jic 

Grummur 2 

pel wudim jic 
vot wudim rud 
pel k i c q  jic 
vot kicev rud 
pel puser jic 
vot puser rud 

Note.  All  six strings from a particular language were pre- 

sented during a test trial in one of  two randomized orders. 

Results and Discussion 
Approximately  12% of the trials (23 of  192) were discarded for being less than 2 
sec in duration. Preliminary analyses showed that there were no differences in lis- 
tening time to trained and untrained strings as a function of training language (G 1 
or G2); thus, data were combined over this variable, t(22) = -0.063, p  = .950, d = 
.02. Mean listening times were 6.86 sec to the training language (SEM = .49) and 
6.49 sec to the other language (SEM = S O ) .  A dependent t test comparing listening 
times to trained and untrained strings showed no discrimination, t(23) = 0.523, p = 
.606, d = .11.  Fifteen of the 24 infants  listened  longer to the training  language. 
Thus, even with greater variability in the middle element, 12-month-olds showed 
no evidence of tracking nonadjacent dependencies  in sequential structure, at least 
under our specific testing conditions. 

The a, b, c, and d elements in  our artificial  languages  mimic  function  mor- 
phemes  in  that  they  consist  of  a  much  smaller set of  items than  the  set of  X 
elements.  Whereas  12-month-olds  are clearly  beginning  to  show  sensitivity  to 
function morphemes in natural language (Shady, 1996; Shafer et al., 1998), Exper- 
iments 2a and 2b suggest that infants this age are not readily tracking the relations 
between functor-like elements in sequential structure, or else they may be in a tran- 
sitional state with respect to this ability. These findings are consistent with those 
reported  by  Shady,  who  found  that  10.5-month-olds  distinguish  phrases  like 
little kitten”  from “There  ki once gu  little kitten”  (in  which 
“There  was once 
functors  are replaced  by  nonwords)  but  do not  distinguish  sentences  like  “The 
large cake is baking” from ‘‘Is large cake the baking” (in which real functors appear 
in  inappropriate  locations).  Although  these  young infants  are familiar  with  the 
phonetic form of functors in their language, they have not yet learned how these 
functors fit into sentential structure. 

196 

G6MEZ AND MAYE 

There are at least three potential explanations for  12-month-olds’ difficulty in 
tracking nonadjacent dependencies. First, perhaps younger infants are less adept 
than older ones at noting elements that change at a slower rate (the functors) relative 
to those that change at a fasterrate (the lexical items). This is unlikely, however, given 
the precision much younger infants exhibit in their sensitivity to statistical structure 
(Aslin et al., 1998; Fiser & A s h ,  2002; Saffran et al., 1996). Second, perhaps infants 
this age need greater variability in the middle element before they will begin to notice 
nonadjacent dependencies. This also seems unlikely, given the high variability in the 
set size 24 condition. Third, perhaps younger learners have a shorter processing win- 
dow than older ones and thus are more restricted in their ability to process informa- 
tion over time (Elman, 1993; Newport, 1988; Santelmann & Jusczyk, 1998). Re- 
gardless ofthe reason for 12-month-olds’ failure at this task, infants’ ability to focus 
on nonadjacent dependencies appears to be fairly well established by  17 months. 
Still looking to establish a lower age limit on nonadjacent dependency tracking, in 
Experiment 3 we tested  15-month-old infants. 

EXPERIMENT 3 

The results of  Experiments 2a and 2b suggest that  12-month-old infants are not 
tracking the particular nonadjacent relations relevant for distinguishing the two ar- 
tificial languages, whereas Experiment 1 indicated that at 17 months infants are 
able  to  acquire  this  structure.  What  might  we  expect  for  intermediate-aged 
15-month-olds? According to Shady (1996), by  16 months infants appear to track 
functors, their positions in strings, and possibly their sequential relations. These 
findings are at odds with those reported by  Santelmann and Jusczyk (1998), who 
found that  15-month-olds showed no discrimination for sentences like “The boy 
was running” versus “The boy cun running.” These inconsistencies may be indica- 
tive of a transitional state in which infants are just beginning to track the sequential 
structure of words in sentences. Consistent with this hypothesis, Santelmann and 
Jusczyk reported that a subset of their 15-month-olds (those with more advanced 
language abilities) were able to track nonadjacent structure. These indications that 
15-month-olds are beginning to track the sequential relations between words in 
strings suggest that infants at this age may be at the lower age limit for tracking 
nonadjacent relations in our relatively simplistic artificial languages. Because we 
expected this task to be difficult for the infants, we presented them with a large set 
size of intervening elements ( n  = 24). 

Method 

Participants 
We tested twenty-four 1 S-month-old infants (1 2 boys and 12 girls) with an aver- 
age age of  15 months 3 days (range = 14 months  19 days-15  months 21  days). 

NONADJACENT DEPENDENCY LEARNING 

197 

Eleven additional infants were tested but were not included for the following rea- 
sons: fussiness during familiarization (n = 6), gestational term less than 37 weeks 
(n = 3), low birth weight (n = l), and insufficient number of test trials (n = 1). 

Materials 
The stimuli were the same as those used in Experiment 2b (set size = 24). 

Procedure 
The procedure  was identical to that used in Experiments  1 and 2. 

Results and Discussion 
Approximately  7% of the trials (1 3 of  192) were discarded for being less than 2 
sec in duration.  There were no differences  in  listening  times to trained  and  un- 
trained  strings  as a  function  of  training  language  (G1  or G2); thus,  data  were 
combined over this variable, t(22) = 0.914, p  = .37, d = .37. Mean listening times 
were 8.55 sec to the training language (SEM = .58) and 7.25 sec to the other lan- 
guage (SEM = .42). This comparison  resulted in a significant listening time dif- 
ference,  t(23) = 2.080, p  = .049, d = .42. Seventeen of  the  24 infants  showed  a 
familiarity  preference. 

The fact that the  15-month-olds in this experiment produced significantly lon- 
ger looks for strings that were drawn from their own training  language  indicates 
that they could discriminate the two artificial languages, and thus shows sensitivity 
to the  nonadjacent  dependencies.  However,  the  17-month-olds  in  Experiment  I 
showed the opposite pattern, as did the  18-month-olds in Gdmez (2002), demon- 
strating discrimination by looking longer for strings from the novel language. Con- 
sistent with this, a 2 (age: 17- vs. 15-month-olds) x 2 (trained vs. untrained) mixed 
analysis of variance on listening time differences to trained and untrained strings 
resulted in a significant crossover interaction, F( 1,46) = 8.870, p  = .005, Cohen’sf 
= .40, where effect sizes of  .lo, .25, and .40 are taken  to be small, medium,  and 
large (Cohen,  1988). 

Although  both  patterns of preference  (whether  toward familiarity  or novelty) 
demonstrate discrimination, it is interesting that the younger infants show a rever- 
sal. Looking times have been hypothesized  to be linked to the complexity of the 
stimuli (Hunter & Ames, 1988), with infants preferring familiar patterns when the 
stimuli are relatively  complex, but preferring  novel patterns  for simpler stimuli. 
Because complexity  is relative.  the same stimuli that are somewhat complex  ini- 
tially may become simpler across development as infants’ processing capacity and 
linguistic  competence increase.  Previous  studies have found reversals of  prefer- 
ence  that  follow  the  predictions  of  this  complexity  hypothesis.  Saffran  and 
Thiessen (2003) found a familiarity effect for more complex stimuli but a novelty 
effect  for  stimuli  that  were  less  complex  for the  same age learners.  Similarly, 

198 

G ~ M E Z  AND MAYE 

Chambers, Onishi, and Fisher (2004) reported a switch from novelty to familiarity 
effects for conditions requiring infants to process simpler versus more complex 
phonotactic regularities. If  15-month-olds are indeed in a transitional state with re- 
spect to tracking nonadjacent structure we would expect the task in these experi- 
ments to be more difficult (or more effortful) at this younger age than at 17 months. 
if so, it provides a plausible explanation for the younger infants showing a famil- 
iarity effect in contrast to the older infants who showed a novelty effect. 

Although the direction of preference is not critical for establishing learning (any 
significant difference in means indicates a sensitivity to the properties differentiat- 
ing the test items), the particular preference reversal observed here makes sense if 
what is easier for older learners is more difficult for younger ones. Indeed, as previ- 
ously noted, lesser complexity has been associated with novelty preferences and 
greater complexity with familiarity (Chambers et al., 2004; Hunter & Ames, 1988; 
Saffran & Thiessen, 2003), thus providing some precedent for this line of reasoning. 
However, regardless of the direction of preference, 15-month-olds do appear to dis- 
criminate the nonadjacent dependencies with a set size of 24. 

GENERAL DISCUSSION 

The primary aim of these studies was to investigate the developmental trajectory of 
nonadjacent dependency learning. Understanding such learning is important be- 
cause key syntactic relations are separated by intervening morphemes, words, and 
phrases. In addition, nonadjacent dependencies may be instrumental in the acqui- 
sition of syntactic category structure (Mintz, 2002,2003; Onnis, Monaghan, et al., 
2004). Indeed, criticisms of  early  associationistic approaches pointed out their 
limits with respect to explaining how  learners would track remotely connected 
structure (Chomsky, 1957). 

It  is  clear  that  nonadjacent dependencies  are  extremely difficult to  acquire 
(Newport & A s h ,  2000.2004),  possibly because learners are so adept at tracking 
adjacent structure. This preference for tracking adjacent elements is especially ap- 
parent when one considers the relative conditional probabilities between adjacent 
versus nonadjacent elements in these studies. In the set size 12 condition the proba- 
bility that the initial word (vot or pel) will be followed by any particular X element 
is .083 (or 1 in 12). This probability decreases to .056 and .042 with set sizes of  18 
and 24, respectively. However, in all conditions the probability that the initial ele- 
ment will be followed by  a given third element (e.g., that vot will be followed by 
rud) is 1.0. Despite the enormous difference in the predictability of adjacent versus 
nonadjacent elements, in that nonadjacent elements were always perfectly predict- 
able, learners appeared to track the less reliable adjacent probabilities in all but the 
highest set-size conditions (n = 18, 24). It is interesting that learners do not track 
nonadjacent dependencies with set size 12 but they do with set size 18, given that 

NONADJACENT DEPENDENCY LEARNING 

199 

the predictive probability of .083 between the first two elements is already low in 
set size 12 and only decreases to ,056 in set size 18. It is as if learners are attracted 
by adjacent probabilities long past the point that such structure is useful. 

Increased variability of intervening material does appear to lead learners to fo- 
cus attention on nonadjacent structure (Gbmez, 2002). In natural  language, inter- 
vening elements are typically open-class words comprising much larger sets than 
the function morphemes  associated with nonadjacent  structure, and so the role of 
variability in such learning is plausible. Of note is the fact that adult and infant per- 
formance in  the  Gbmez  (2002)  study  did  not  increase  proportionally  with  in- 
creases in variability  (and the accompanying  decrease  in adjacent probabilities). 
Instead  the  shift  from  adjacent  to  nonadjacent  dependency  tracking  occurred 
abruptly,  and only after exposure to extremely high variability  in the intervening 
element. This suggests that learners  were focused on local information  long past 
the point that such information might be useful, but with a sufficient decline in the 
usefulness of this information they were able to switch their focus. 

Experiment  1 replicated Gbmez (2002) and extended the findings by showing 
that there was nothing unique about a set size of 24. Seventeen-month-olds were as 
proficient at tracking nonadjacent dependencies when the intervening set size was 
only 18 as 18-month-olds were when the intervening words were drawn from a set 
of  24 (GBmez, 2002).  Consistent  with  the earlier  Gbmez study, infants  did  not 
track nonadjacent dependencies in the lower variability condition, indicating that 
learners do not track nonadjacent structure unless variability of the middle element 
is  sufficiently  high.  Although  12-month-olds  did  not  appear able  to  track  the 
nonadjacent  dependencies tested here (Experiments  2a and 2b), by  IS months of 
age infants begin to show sensitivity to this structure (Experiment 3). 

Why should there be age limitations  on this learning?  One possibility  is that 
younger infants are unable to capitalize on the stable nonadjacent structure occur- 
ring in the context of high variability, but this is unlikely given work with younger 
infants who show exquisite  sensitivity to statistical  structure  (Aslin et a]., 1998; 
Fiser & Aslin, 2002; Saffran et al., 1996). Another possibility is that high variabil- 
ity distracts younger learners, resulting in no learning whatsoever. However, ongo- 
ing research with younger infants in Gbmez’s lab suggests that high variability aids 
learning of anchor position  in two-element  strings (Gbmez, Ohala.  & Speranzo, 
2005). A third possibility is consistent with the “less is more” hypothesis, the idea 
that developmental  limitations  on children’s processing  might aid acquisition  by 
focusing young learners on fine-grained aspects of structure (Newport, 1988). Rel- 
evant  to  the  learning  explored  here,  younger  learners  might  have  limits  on  the 
amount of  information  they  can process  in  time  (Elman,  1993; Santelmann  & 
Jusczyk, 1998), and thus may be confined to processing information over shorter 
durations.  If  so, shortening  the duration  of the  strings  should  make  it easier  for 
younger  infants  to  track  the  nonadjacent  structure.  Infants  might  also be  con- 
strained  with  respect  to the number  of  intervening  elements that  may  occur be- 

200  G6MEZ AND MAY E 

tween dependent elements. Because the intervening elements in this study were al- 
ways two-syllable nonsense words, younger infants might fare better with only one 
syllable intervening. It will be important to tease apart the contributions of these 
two effects. 

One caveat arises from the choice of stimuli used in these artificial languages. 
In particular, all X elements were two-syllable words with initial stress. forming a 
trochaic stress pattern that  infants find especially attractive (Allen & Hawkins, 
1978). An  alternate explanation for the developmental change in performance is 
that younger infants were simply distracted by the appealing trochaic item, which 
may have diverted attention away from the critical first and third elements. In other 
words, it may be the case that younger infants are as capable as older ones at track- 
ing nonadjacencies, but only older infants are able to override their trochaic bias.4 
In future research we will need to vary the prosodic structure of the elements to ad- 
dress this issue. If, for example, the developmental pattern we report still obtains 
with strings composed of trochaic initial and final elements (e.g., kicfy rud wadim, 
kicey pel wudim, puser vot fengle, puser rud fengle) it would rule out this potential 
alternate explanation for these findings. 

Comparisons With Other Studies 
Why do infants in our studies succeed in learning nonadjacent dependencies be- 
tween arbitrary words when adults in Newport and A s h  (2004) failed to learn 
nonadjacent dependencies between arbitrary syllables? One key difference is that 
learners in their task had the added difficulty of segmenting words from continu- 
ous streams, whereas our strings were already segmented. This alone makes the 
task required of learners very different. However, when all other aspects of the two 
tasks are equated, the results are the same: Like Newport and Aslin (Experiment 
I), G6mez (2002) failed to find learning in her set size 3 condition. Another key 
difference was the variability manipulation in Gomez. Newport and Aslin subse- 
quently found nonadjacency learning when they replaced arbitrary syllables with 
segments of the same type (e.g., vowels) separated by elements of a different type 
(e.g., consonants), a condition that should make the task of learning nonadjacent 
dependencies easier (Newport & A s h ,  2004, Experiments 2 and 3). Unlike learn- 
ers in Newport and Aslin, ours have no a priori reason to treat remotely connected 
elements as the same type. In our case, however, high variability enabled the in- 
fants to detect nonadjacent relations. 

Our results might also appear discrepant with those reported by Peiia, Bonatti, 
Nespor, and Mehler (2002), who found that learners could acquire nonadjacent de- 
pendencies with low variability in the middle element. However, the Peiia et al. 
stimuli contained cues to grouping that may have inadvertently led to learning. In 

4We thank an anonymous reviewer for bringing this alternate explanation to our attention. 

NONADJACENT DEPENDENCY  LEARNING 

201 

particular, their materials contained stop consonants in the first and third positions, 
whereas the middle elements were of a different type (liquids and fricatives). New- 
port and A s h  (2004) found no evidence of nonadjacent learning when all sylla- 
bles contained stop consonants and suggested that such learning is facilitated by 
low-level  grouping cues. Indeed Onnis, Monaghan, Richmond, and  Chater (in 
press) were only able to replicate PeAa  et al. when grouping cues were present, 
confirming this hypothesis. 

In  addition, why do  12-month-olds fail to track nonadjacent structure when 
7-month-olds in previous reported studies appear able to do so (Marcus, Vijayan, 
Bandi  Rao,  & Vishton,  1999; see Gdmez & Gerken,  1999, Experiment 4, for 
similar but  more complex learning with  12-month-olds)? We  would  argue that 
Marcus et al. (and Gdmez & Gerken, 1999) were tapping into a different learn- 
ing  mechanism,  namely  sensitivity to  repetition  structure  (Gdmez  & Gerken, 
2000;  Gdmez,  Gerken,  &  Schvaneveldt, 2000).  Identity  is  highly  salient  for 
learners. According to  the Gestalt principle of  similarity, items  that are physi- 
cally similar tend to be  grouped together. The perceptual tendency to group by 
similarity could have resulted in very different learning than that observed here. 
In  discriminating  ABB  versus  ABA  patterns  for  instance,  infants  could  have 
generalized these as “close” versus “far” repetitions. When discriminating AAB 
versus ABB patterns, infants could have encoded these as repetitions occumng 
at  string beginning or  ending. 

Mechanisms of  Learning 
The findings reported here provoke interesting theoretical questions and pose ave- 
nues for future empirical work. One question has to do with the statistic underlying 
learning. G6mez (2002, in press) suggested that learners attend to adjacent de- 
pendencies under small set-size conditions when dependencies between adjacent 
elements are still informative, but switch their focus to nonadjacent structure under 
conditions of high variability when conditional probabilities between adjacent ele- 
ments are low. Another possible statistic is the ratio of the frequency of occurrence 
of beginning and end elements to middle ones. By this view, learners keep track of 
frequencies of elements in particular positions, but have memory limitations on the 
number of elements they can count across utterances. With a small number of ele- 
ments, all the element frequencies can be encoded with sufficient fidelity that adja- 
cent statistics are computed. However, as the number of elements increases, only 
the high-frequency elements can be encoded (and the others are treated as noise), 
leading learners to extract dependencies between these elements, which in  these 
studies happen to be nonadjacent.5 In contrast with our original account suggesting 
that  learners attend to  adjacent dependencies as  a default and  that  this  affects 

sWe thank Richard Adin for suggesting this statistic. 

202  G ~ M E I .  AND MAYE 

whether they encode adjacent or nonadjacent dependencies, this latter account im- 
plies that memory limitations on frequencies of individual elements affect encod- 
ing. Although the statistic on these two accounts may differ, the importance of high 
variability for focusing learners on stable structure is unchanged. 

Another question provoked by this line of research is whether learning for both 
adjacent and nonadjacent dependencies is similar in nature, or as PeAa et al. (2002) 
proposed,  whether  the  learning  involves  fundamentally different  mechanisms. 
Onnis, Destrebecqz, Christiansen, Chater, and Cleeremans (2004) provided evi- 
dence suggesting that a single associative mechanism will do. Using a simple re- 
current network (Elman, 1990), they show an increase in sensitivity to nonadjacent 
dependencies with an increase in the variability of intervening elements. One ca- 
veat is that the Onnis. Destrebecqz, et al. network shows a gradually increasing 
sensitivity to nonadjacent dependencies with increasing set size. Rather than grad- 
ually increasing sensitivity, G6mez (2002) reported performance close to chance 
for smaller set sizes, with an abrupt increase in performance for the highest vari- 
ability condition, suggesting a qualitative change in performance with increasing 
set size. What seems to be missing from the model is learners’ apparent focus on 
one  source  of  information  to  the  exclusion of  another. It  may  be  that  Onnis, 
Destrebecqz, et al. are correct in proposing a single mechanism, but until the model 
can mimic behavior more closely, the possibility of two mechanisms is viable. 

The findings reported here are consistent with a proposed mechanism for how 
learners might choose among multiple kinds of structure. Gomez (in press) argued 
that infants may be biased to prefer certain kinds of  structure that are particularly 
salient or easy to process. On the assumption that learning involves a tendency to 
seek out the most stable (or invariant) forms of  structure in given contexts (E. J. 
Gibson, 1969; J. J. Gibson, 1966). learners would need good evidence to switch to 
another form of structure. Such evidence could come in the form of low statistical 
probabilities for the preferred structure. The findings reported here were consistent 
with this hypothesis. In particular, infants in Experiment  1  appeared to focus on 
different types of dependencies as a function of  their statistical properties. When 
local probabilities were relatively high  (in the small set-size condition) infants’ 
pattern of response indicated that they were focused on these rather than the re- 
mote patterns reflected in the nonadjacent structure. However, when local proba- 
bilities were low (when the set size was 18) adjacent dependencies were no longer 
reliable sources of structure. leading infants to focus instead on nonadjacent rela- 
tions. Although the evidence for the interpretation that learners will track local de- 
pendencies under low  variability conditions is indirect in these studies, work in 
progress provides direct support for this interpretation (see Gbmez, in press). 

The current findings underscore the utility of artificial language approaches for 
understanding natural language acquisition. Such utility is sometimes questioned, 
due to the fact that although artificial languages provide experimental control not 
present in natural language, they are highly simplified. Although there are impor- 

NONADJACENT DEPENDENCY LEARNING 

203 

tant differences between natural language learning, which involves extended, het- 
erogeneous exposure, and artificial language learning, which occurs with  brief, 
homogenous exposure, it is informative to find developmental parallels in the two 
(G6mez & Gerken, 1999; Morgan & Newport, 1981). The developmental trajec- 
tory observed in these studies is consistent with findings emerging using natural 
language (e.g., Santelmann & Jusczyk, 1998; Shady, 1996). In addition, the use of 
artificial languages provides a level of control that permits a more delicate exami- 
nation of  issues for which natural language studies provide unclear results. The 
highly controlled patterns used in these studies enable us to account for the seem- 
ingly  conflicting  findings  regarding  IS-  to  16-month-olds’ sensitivity to  non- 
adjacent  structure  in  natural  language  (Santelmann  & Jusczyk,  1998; Shady, 
1996). In particular, this study suggests that previous failures to find consistent be- 
havior  at  this  age  are  due  to  the  fact  that  at  15  months  the  ability  to  track 
nonadjacent structure is emerging, but not yet robust. 

The findings reported here suggest several avenues for future empirical work. 
For instance, a stronger test of nonadjacent dependency learning would be to pres- 
ent infants with strings that conform to the training dependency but contain novel 
middle elements. With novel middle elements there is no way that memory for spe- 
cific strings can  contribute to  discrimination of  strings that  conform to  versus 
violate the training pattern. Such discrimination is essential if nonadjacent depend- 
ency  learning is  to  be  instrumental in  frame-based categorization proposed by 
Mintz (2003). Preliminary data in G6mez’s lab show that infants are capable of this 
discrimination (G6mez & Maye, 2004). Another question is at what point infants 
become able to process dependencies across distances greater than one intervening 
element. This question is particularly relevant for languages such as German in 
which dependencies between functional elements are separated by large distances 
(Santelmann, 2003). In investigating this question, Hohle, Schmitz, Santelmann, 
and Weissenborn (in press) discovered that the particular internal structure of the 
material intervening in remote dependencies can either aid or hinder learning. A fi- 
nal important issue is that nonadjacent dependencies in natural language can occur 
over abstract categories. For example, in verb agreement, it is thought to be the plu- 
ral subject that controls agreement rather than the overt -s marking the noun. Thus, 
in future work, it will be important to begin examining nonadjacent dependencies 
of a more abstract kind. Studies investigating these issues are currently underway, 
promising additional insights into our understanding of  how  infants decode the 
complexities of language structure. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

This research was funded by National Institute of Child Health and Human Devel- 
opment  Grant  HD42170-01  and  by  National  Science Foundation Grant  SES- 

204 

G ~ M E L  AND MAYE 

99 10203 awarded  to Rebecca  Gbmez. We thank three anonymous reviewers for 
comments as well as the parents and children who participated  in this research. 

REFERENCES 

Allen, G .  D., & Hawkins, S. (1978). The development  of  phonological  rhythm. In  A. Bell  & J.  B. 

Hooper (Eds.), Sdlahles and .segments (pp.  173-1 85). Amsterdam: North-Holland. 

Aslin, R. N., Saffran, J. R., & Newport, E. L. (1998). Computation of conditional probability statistics 

by 8-month-old infants.  f.sy%olrigical Science, 9, 321-324. 

Chambers, K. E., Onishi, K. H., & Fisher, C. L. (200.1, May). Constraints on ph~~notactic 

learning in in- 

fancy Paper presented at the  14th Biennial International Conference on Infant Studies, Chicago. 

Childers, J. B., & Tomasello, M. (2001). The role of pronouns in young children’s acquisition of the 

English transitive construction. Developmental  f,syrholog.v, 37, 739-748. 

Chomsky, N. A. (19.57). Svntactic structures. The Hague, The Netherlands: Mouton. 
Cohen, J.  (1988). Statistical  pou’er analwisfor the behavioral sciences (2nd ed.). New  York: Aca- 

Elman, J. I..  (1990). Finding structure in time. Cognitive Science, 14, 179-21  I .  
Elman, J. L. (1993). Learning and development in neural  networks: The importance of starting small. 

demic. 

C(ignition, 48, 7 1-99, 

Fiser. J.,  & A s h ,  N. (2002). Statistical learning of  new visual feature combinations by  infants. fro- 

ceeding.7 qf  the National Aradetnv ofSciences, YY,  15822-1 5826. 

Gibson, E. J. ( 1969). Principles  of perceptual learning and development. New York: Meredith. 
Gibson, J. J. ( 1966). The sense.$ considered as perceptual systems. Boston: Houghton-Mifflin. 
G6mez,  R.  L.  (2002).  Variability  and  detection  of  invariant  structure.  Psycholrigical Science,  13, 

43 1 4 3 6 .  

G6mez. R. I,.  (in press). Dynamically guided learning. In Y.  Munakata & M. Johnson (Eds.), Attention 

& performance  XXI. New  York: Oxford University  Press. 

G6mez. R. L., & Gerken, L. A. (1999). Artificial grammar learning by one-year-olds leads to specific 
Ghmez, K. L., & Gerken, L. A. (2000). Infant artificial language learning and  language acquisition. 

and abstract knowledge. Cognition, 70,  109-135. 

Trends in Cognitive Sciences. 4, 178-1 86. 

learning. Memory  & Cognition, 28, 253-263. 

G6mez. R. L., Gerken, L., & Schvaneveldt, R. W. (2000). The basis of  transfer in artificial grammar 
G6mez. R.  L., & Maye, J.  (2004, May).  The developmmtal  trajectory of nonadjacent  dependency 
learning. Paper presented at the 14th Biennial International Conference on Infant Studies, Chicago. 

G6mez. R. L., Ohala, D., & Speranzo, G. (2(x).5). [The role of variability in determining anchor posi- 

tion]. Unpublished raw data. 

Harris.  Z. (195.5). From phoneme to morpheme. Language. 3l. 190-222. 
Hohle. B.,  Schmitz, M., Santelmann, L., & Weissenborn, J. (in press). The recognition of discontinuous 
dependencies  by  German  19-month-olds: Evidence for lexical  and  structural  influences  on  chil- 
dren’s early processing capacities. Language Learning and Ile,dopment. 

Hunter. M. A.. & Ames, E. W. ( 1988). A multifactor model of infant preferences for novel and familiar 

stimuli. Advances in Infancy Research, 5, 69-95. 

Kemler Nelson, D. C., Jusczyk, P. W., Mandel, D. R., Myers, J., Turk, A., & Gerken, L. A. (1995). The 
head-turn preference procedure for testing auditory perception. Infant Behavior und Development. 
18.  I  11-116. 

Kirkham, N. Z., Slemmer, J. A,, & Johnson. S. P. (2002). Visual statistical learning in infancy: Evidence 

of a domain general learning mechanism. Cognition, 8.7.  B35-B42. 

NONADJACENT DEPENDENCY LEARNING 

205 

Marcus, G. F,, Vijayan, S., Bandi Rao, S., & Vishton, P.  M. (1999). Rule learning by  seven-month-old 

infants. Science, 283, 77-80. 

Mintz, T. ( I  996). The m1e.r oflinguistic input and innate mechanisnis in children 6 acquisition of grum- 

matical categories. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Kochester, Rochester, NY. 

Mintz, T. (2002). Category induction from distributional cues in an artificial language. Memory & Cog- 

Mintz, T. (2003). Frequent frames as a cue for grammatical categories in child directed speech. Cogni- 

nition, 30, 678-686. 

tion. 90. 91-1  17. 

Mintz, T. (2004a). Morphological segmentation in  15-month-old infants. In A. Rrugos. L.  Micciulla, & 
C. Smith (Eds.), Proceedings <$the 28th Annual Boston University Conference on Language Devel- 
opment (pp. 363-374).  Somerville, MA: Cascadilla. 

Mintz, T. (2004b, May). Tu~elve-month-old.s cutegorize n o r d  words using distributional  information. 

Poster presented at the  14th Biennial International Conference on Infant Studies, Chicago. 

Morgan, J. L., & Newport. E. L. (198 I). The role of constituent structure in the induction of an artificial 

language. Journal of Verbal Learning and  Verbal Behuvioc 20, 67-85. 

Newport, E. L. (1988). Constraints on learning and their role in language acquisition: Studies of the ac- 

quisition of American Sign Language. Lmgicage Sciences,  10, 147-1 72. 

Newport, E. I*,, & Aslin, R. N. (2000). Innately constrained learning: Blending old and new approaches 
to language acquisition. In S. C. Howell, S. A. Fish, & T. Keith-Lucas (Eds.), Proceedings ofthe 24th 
Annual  Boston  University Conference  on  Language  Ilevelopment  (pp.  1-21 ).  Somerville,  MA: 
Cascadilla. 

Newport, E. L., & A s h .  R. N. (2004). Learning at a distance: I. Statistical learning of non-adjacent de- 

pendencies. Cognifive Psychology, 48, 127- 162. 

Onnis, L., Christiansen, M. H., Chater, N., & G6mez, R. (2003). Reduction of uncertainty in human se- 
quential  learning: Preliminary evidence from Artificial Grammar Learning. In  Proceedings  .f the 
25th Annual  Conference of  the Cognitive Science Society  (pp. 886-89 I).  Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates, Inc. 

Onnis.  I*.,  Destrebecqz,  A,, Christiansen, M.  H.,  Chater,  N., & Cleeremans, A. (2004). Processing 
nonadjacent  dependencies: A graded, a.ssociutii~e account. Manuscript submitted for publication. 
Onnis, L., Monaghan, P., Christiansen, M. H., & Chater, N. (2004). Variability is the spice of learning, 
and a crucial ingredient for detecting and generalizing in nonadjacent dependencies. In Proceedings 
($the  26th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1047-1052). Mahwah, NJ: Law- 
rence Erlbaum Associates, Inc. 

Onnis, L., Monaghan, P., Richmond, K., & Chater, N. (in press). Phonology impacts segmentation in 

speech processing. Jorrrnal of  Memory and Language. 

Peiia, M., Bonatti, L.. Nespor, M., & Mehler. J. (2002). Signal-driven computations in speech process- 

ing. Science, 298, 604-607. 

Permchet. P., Tyler, M. D., Galland, N., & Peereman, R. (2004). Learning nonadjacent dependencies: 
No  need  for  algebraic-like  computations. J " ~ r n a 1  of  E.xperimental  Psychology:  Generrrl.  133, 
5 7 3-5  8 3. 

Saffran, J. R.. A s h ,  R. N., & Newport, E. L. (1996). Statistical learning by  eight-month-old  infants. 

Science. 274, 19261928. 

Saffran, J. R., & Thiessen, E. D. (2003). Pattern induction by infant language learners. Developmental 

Psycholog.y, 39, 484-494. 

Saffran,  J.  R.,  & Wilson.  D.  P.  (2003). From  syllables  to syntax: Multilevel  statistical  learning  by 

12-month-old infants. Infancy, 4, 273-284. 

Santelmann, 1..  M. (2003). Infants'  processing of  relationships  across language: Comparing  English 
and  German. In  R.  Beachley,  A.  Brown,  & F.  Conlin  (Eds.),  Proceedings  of the  27th  Annual 
Boston  Unii,ersity Conference  on  Language  Development  (Vol. 2, pp.  704-7  15). Medford,  MA: 
Cascadilla. 

206 

G6MEZ AND MAYE 

Santelmann, I,.  M., & Jusczyk, P.  W.  (1998). Sensitivity  to discontinuous dependencies in  language 

learners: Evidence for limitations in processing space. Cognition, 69,  105-1 34. 

Shady, M. E. (1996). Infants' sensitivity  to function  morphemes. Unpublished  doctoral dissertation, 

State University of New York at Buffalo. 

Shafer, V. L., Shucard, D. W., Shucard, J. L., & Gerken, L. A. (1998). An electrophysiological  study of 
infants' sensitivity to the sound patterns of English speech. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hear- 
ing Research, 41, 874-886. 

