FIVE

Solidifying affect: Structures of feeling, 

habitus and emotional capital

We are talking about characteristic elements of impulse, restraint and 
tone; specifically affective elements of consciousness and relationships: 
not feeling against thought, but thought as felt and feeling as thought: 
practical consciousness of a present kind, in a living and interrelating 
continuity. We are then defining these elements as a ‘structure’: as a set, 
with specific internal relations, at once interlocking and in tension. Yet 
we are also defining a social experience which is still in process, often 
indeed not yet recognized as social but taken to be private, idiosyncratic, 
and  even  isolating,  but  which  in  analysis  (though  rarely  otherwise) 
has its emergent, connecting, and dominant characteristics, indeed its 
specific hierarchies. These are more often recognizable at a later stage, 
when they have been (as often happens) formalized, classified, and in 
many cases built into institutions and formations. By that time the case 
is different; a new structure of feeling will usually already have begun 
to form, in the true social present. (Raymond Williams, 1977, p. 132)

… personality has to be seen as social practice and not as an entity 
distinct  from  ‘society’.  Personality  is  what  people  do,  just  as  social 
relations  are  what  people  do,  and  the  doings  are  the  same.  (Robert 
Connell, 1987, p. 220)

In the previous chapter I looked at affective practice as a lively, situated communi-
cative act. I was trying to elucidate the performative patterns in affective episodes 
and  their  moment-by-moment  organisation.  The  multimodal  flows  involved 
in  Lori’s  road  rage  studied  by  Jack  Katz  (1999)  were  a  good  illustration,  as  she 
screwed up her face, wagged her finger, and then stifled her display, afraid of the 
consequences. I noted the kinds of social and material configurations that make 
affective moments like these possible, but my main concern was with the here-
and-now of affective action and affective–discursive meaning-making. 

In  this  chapter  I  want  to  pay  more  attention  to  persistence,  repetition  and 
power, and the continuities threading through these kinds of situated moments. 

05-Wetherell-4313-Ch-05.indd   102

30/11/2011   10:01:44 AM

This chapter and the next are paired. In this one I am concerned with how affec-
tive practices sediment in social formations. How, for example, do characteristic 
distributions  or  profiles  of  affective  practices  arise  which  distinguish  members 
of dominant social classes, reinforcing their privilege? How do workplaces, insti-
tutions  or  historical  periods  acquire  distinctive  affective  flavours?  In  the  next 
chapter, I will be concerned with questions about the sedimentation of affective 
practices  in  individual  lives.  How  does  a  personal  affective  order  emerge  over 
time, and the potentially large colour-wheel of affectivity reduce down to com-
pose individually distinctive repertoires? 

As Connell notes above, these two sets of questions about social formations and 
personal histories reflect different standpoints on the same psychosocial matter. 
They are inseparably linked. One angle produces social history, the other social 
psychology. This typically doubled relation between personal affective habits and 
affective social conventions – between personal history and social history – can be 
seen in the ruminations below from the crime novelist P.D. James. At the age of 
89, James was reflecting back on her own emotional preferences in an interview 
conducted by journalist Penny Wark:

‘One faces things by oneself and there they are. You deal with it’, she says, 
baffled by the 21st-century taste for sharing pain and eschewing privacy. ‘I feel 
that I have a responsibility to the dead, for what my husband might not want 
to be told. I don’t think that I should make money by writing details of private 
pain or private difficulties which my children will find hurtful’ …. ‘We now 
have a world in which people write their diaries on Facebook for millions of 
other people. To me that is incomprehensible. There is something rather sad 
about children who may not be making relationships at school getting home 
and blogging. When a child is run over you see all these toys and flowers pil-
ing up, then they have counsellors to deal with their grief and you see them 
all hugging each other and crying on each other’s shoulders.’

She remembers a day during the war when a recently married colleague heard 
that her husband had been killed. James said she was sorry and suggested to 
her supervisor that the girl might like to go home. ‘She said, “No, she’s got a 
job to do. She won’t want to do that.” I felt if she went home she’d have her 
mother or somebody to comfort her and I still think she should have been 
allowed to go home, but I don’t think that woman was callous. I think that 
she thought that’s what she wanted, to get on with the job.

‘But the idea that we’d all go up to her and hug her – I do find it a bit creepy. 
I like emotional reticence. I accept that for many people who have appalling 
experiences psychologically they are probably better if there is someone they 
can  share  them  with,  but  I  can’t  imagine  myself  getting  any  comfort  from 
being counselled.’ (Wark, 2009, pp. 4–5)

James is recalling here an affective life rather different from the affective life of 
many contemporary middle-class British citizens. As Ian Craib notes, ‘there are 
fashions in emotions and … people come to talk about the fashionable ones’ 
(1994, p. 90). What ‘feels right’ at the time turns out to be historically quite 
specific.

 

SOLIDIFYING AFFECT 

103

05-Wetherell-4313-Ch-05.indd   103

30/11/2011   10:01:44 AM

The connections between personal affective histories and social histories are 
obvious  but  this  doesn’t  make  them  easy  to  investigate.  I’ll  be  arguing  in  the 
course of this chapter and the next that the same types of theoretical problems 
plague attempts to analyse both personal affective order and social affective order. 
Raymond  Williams,  writing  in  the  1970s,  was  clear  on  the  key  challenges.  He 
argued that any patterns (his preferred concept was ‘structures of feeling’) effer-
vesce and are difficult to detect. Affective solidifications are slippery, first, because 
social and personal life flows on and is endlessly evolving, so that it is often only 
when a structure or pattern is changing and disappearing that its grip becomes 
evident.  Second,  as  P.D.  James  describes,  structures  of  feeling  are  embedded  in 
practical consciousness and usual streams of activity. Feeling routines are simply 
what people do, Williams argued. This doing can be in broad daylight. But in an 
important sense, too, we live our practices quite obscurely, often not fully know-
ing the choices made and the implications. 

For these reasons, the identification and stabilising of persistent affective pat-
terns in a social or personal formation can require a lot of retrospective construc-
tive work. But this work is also constitutive of the phenomena it describes and 
inevitably over-simplifying. When a psychotherapist, for instance, traces out the 
affective repetitions in an individual life, or when a sociologist or historian traces 
out the structures of feeling for a generation or community, they risk constituting 
and solidifying the practice as they describe it. The narrative of affect emerging 
from the reconstructive work becomes itself a template and guide for organising 
future practice. It creates (and can institutionalise) what it tries to describe.

One  of  the  central  challenges  confronted,  then,  in  this  and  the  next  chap-
ter,  concerns  how  much  neatness  to  attribute  to  affective  configurations.  How 
tidy and robust are the patterns in personal and social affective practice? To what 
extent do individual lives, social affiliations and affective practices line up in a 
determining  gestalt?  If,  and  when,  they  align,  how  do  these  regularities  come 
about? Williams’ preferred term ‘structure’ in fact seems infelicitous once we have 
grasped the import of his other arguments. ‘Practice’ seems a better rubric for the 
kind of open, flowing articulations he proposes. But, how are practices stitched 
together and with what levels of inconsistency, movement and heterogeneity?

In contemplating these questions, I will discuss a number of theoretical leads. 
I will focus on affective practice and social class because some kind of selection is 
necessary, and such interesting and important lines of work are becoming available 
in this area. There is so much that could be covered in this chapter, from the gender-
ing of affective practices, and changing patterns in emoting femininities and emot-
ing masculinities, to much less frequently explored issues around, for instance, the 
affective practices of colonisation, whiteness and migration. My concern is less with 
documenting the changing particularities of different affective practices, or what 
Reddy (2001) calls ‘emotional regimes’, than finding useful ways of theorising the 
distributions of affective practices in social formations for future empirical research. 
In this chapter I will take up Bourdieu’s (1984, 1990, 1998) work on habitus 
as a dominant and generalised answer to questions about how the social order-
ing of affective phenomena might occur. I will look in detail at recent work from 

104 

AFFECT AND EMOTION

05-Wetherell-4313-Ch-05.indd   104

30/11/2011   10:01:44 AM

feminist scholars such as Diane Reay (2004, 2005) and Beverley Skeggs (2004a, 
2004b) on emotional capital and the relationship between affective performance, 
social class and social value which extends Bourdieu’s thinking. This sociological 
research explores who is affectively privileged, who is able to ‘bank’ large amounts 
of  ‘emotional  capital’,  and  who  ‘naturally’  seems  to  produce  valued  affective 
styles, avoiding abjection and contempt. 

I will be arguing, though, that the concept of habitus assumes too much affec-
tive order and I will be advocating instead what could be called an ‘affective inter-
sectional’ approach. I will also suggest that analysis is being impeded, even in the 
most recent sociological research, because the implicit psychology of the affective 
social actor underpinning this work is incomplete. The chapter begins, however, 
with Bourdieu’s classic concepts (see Burkitt, 1999; Crossley, 2001; Jenkins, 1992; 
Reed-Danahay, 2005; Swartz, 1997, for useful reviews).

Habitus and Embodied Dispositions

Following his general take on social practice, Bourdieu maintained that social life 
is simultaneously subjective and objective, driven forward by human activity but 
in an ordered rather than random or arbitrary fashion. Social action, he argued, 
is both a scene of agency, improvisation and strategy and a scene of repetition, 
constraint and routine. This dual logic reproduces and also gradually transforms 
existing social relations and power figurations. As Norbert Elias (2000) and Marcel 
Mauss (1979) had concluded before him, Bourdieu saw the concept of ‘habitus’ as 
the key to understanding the paradoxical combination of openness and structure. 
He argued that past practice becomes embodied in social actors so they acquire 
a kind of sediment of dispositions, preferences, tastes, natural attitudes, skills and 
standpoints. These dispositions then guide future conduct. In this way, the past 
becomes  carried  forward,  flexibly  but  inexorably,  into  the  future.  Except  under 
conditions  of  severe  social  and  material  restraint,  social  actors  are,  potentially, 
mostly free to act differently; but our socialised inclinations and available knowl-
edge drive us to do what comes most easily, and thus rework and reproduce what 
has been done before. As some possible lines of action are practised, and other 
possibilities atrophy, habitus takes shape. Potential lines of action and reaction 
that are not socially supported or resourced recede, becoming less and less avail-
able, and no longer even imaginable. Means and the perception of ends become 
in this way organically tied together and self-entailing.

Children acquire habitus partly through direct conditioning and training in homes 
and schools, in part through observation and modelling. As Andrew Sayer (2005) 
argues, however, habitus can’t result just from a process of conditioning. Habitus 
also arises through intelligent and reflexive adaptation to new circumstances. It is 
reinforced by the churning over of internal conversations inside the head (Archer, 
2003), as people ponder and suffer angst over the patterns in their lives, make resolu-
tions and resist the forces that seem to be moving them in what feels like the wrong 

 

SOLIDIFYING AFFECT 

105

05-Wetherell-4313-Ch-05.indd   105

30/11/2011   10:01:44 AM

directions. New members of social formations such as children and migrants must 
practise in order to accomplish locally recognised ways of life and turn them into 
habits. Habits can harden over time and often become so taken for granted that their 
very existence disappears from view. Then it will seem that the world is just like this, 
always has been like this, and should always be like this. But, habitus is both the 
‘weight of the world’, in Bourdieu’s terms, and a process of active self-creation and 
new instantiation. The social actor can lightly touch on what is usual, play with it, 
cite it but not act it, inflect it, combine it with other practices, and so on. As con-
temporary psychological studies also make clear, socialisation is life-long and thus 
the scope for acquisition of new ways of being and the disappearance of old ways.

For Bourdieu, the dispositions of habitus were reflective and unreflective, cor-
poreal, practical and cognitive. As noted, the ‘feel for the social game’, what he 
called the illusio (1990, pp. 66–7), can be so encompassing, so total, and feel so 
natural, that the investments and identifications are not even apparent. Crucially, 
Bourdieu argued that habitus becomes written into the body. It is as much a physi-
cal as a mental process. 

Habitus is indicated in body hexis, for instance. That is, it is evident in posture, 
familiar gestures and mannerisms, looks, ways of inhabiting space, accents, and so 
on. Past practice and social location are embodied in an over-developed muscle, 
in the callous on a writing finger, in a cringe and timorous stoop, or in a confident 
stride and a braying voice in a London street. But, the habituated body is more 
than a list of modifications to individual parts. It is a set of integrated coordina-
tions and patterns. It is a set of ‘complexes’ in Bourdieu’s terms (cf. also Burkitt, 
2002). As Bourdieu describes, these patterns are tied into social prompts.

There is no better image of the logic of socialization, which treats the body as 
a ‘memory jogger’, than those of complexes of gestures, postures and words – 
simple interjections or favourite clichés – which only have to be slipped into, 
like a theatrical costume, to awaken, by the evocative power of bodily mime-
sis, a universe of ready-made feelings and experiences. (1984, p. 474)

As  a  result  of  the  connection  between  the  complexes  of  the  body  and  social 
prompts the body becomes mimetic. Just as I apparently cannot help myself from 
opening and closing my own mouth when guiding a mouthful of food towards 
the mouth of a baby in a high chair, the body cannot help itself rehearsing what 
Bourdieu describes above as a ‘universe of ready-made feelings and experiences’ 
when prompted by a familiar situation. The body, Bourdieu states, is a ‘memory-
jogger’ and in this way an ‘accomplice’ of social reproduction, encouraging and 
moving the individual towards some imagined futures but muting others. 

Affect and Habitus

This  emphasis  on  mimesis  suggests  that  Bourdieu  saw  emotion  and  affect  as 
mainly conservative forces. This is an interesting hypothesis and worth exploring 

106 

AFFECT AND EMOTION

05-Wetherell-4313-Ch-05.indd   106

30/11/2011   10:01:44 AM

further. Emotions are conservative in Bourdieu’s view because they force the indi-
vidual  back  into  established  practice,  and  reinforce  the  power  of  past  practice. 
Thus, when faced with a situation threatening a social trajectory and the ongoing 
projects favoured by the dispositions of habitus, an individual might feel intense 
anxiety. This anxiety imagines the failure of these projects and rehearses an antici-
pated outcome. In this way, it massively increases the push of habitus and peo-
ple’s obedience to the social world their affect has presumed. 

Emotion  anticipates  and  thus  increases  the  likelihood  that  the  past  will  be 

reproduced.

Emotion, the extreme case of such anticipation, is a (hallucinatory) ‘present-
ing’ of the impending future, which, as bodily reactions identical to those of 
the real situation bear witness, leads a person to live a still suspended future as 
already present, or even already past, and therefore necessary and inevitable – 
‘I am a dead man’; ‘I am done for.’ (Bourdieu, 1990, p. 292)

For  Bourdieu,  emotions  more  than  anything  seem  to  carry  the  unreflective  or 
non-conscious aspects of habitus. They present the crunch point at which social 
agents discover they cannot help themselves, and re-enact past practice without 
knowing why, or without necessarily being willing to do so. Bourdieu maintains 
that emotion is not representational knowledge that can be ‘brandished’, or the 
self-conscious following of a script from memory. Affect is something the body 
does;  it  is  pure  action.  As  Nick  Crossley  (2001)  points  out,  for  Bourdieu,  social 
actors ‘are bound to social fields by a strong affective grip’ and feel the ‘weight’ 
of the cares and concerns generated by these social fields ‘with a great emotional 
intensity’ (p. 102). Furthermore, those who transgress the boundaries set by habi-
tus can provoke ‘visceral, murderous horror, absolute disgust, metaphysical fury’ 
(Bourdieu, 1984, p. 475, cited in Reed-Danahay, 2005, p. 111).

Bourdieu’s account of affect remains sketchy (see Probyn, 2004b, and Reed-
Danahay,  2005,  for  thoughtful  exegeses  of  his  few  direct  statements).  Exactly 
how affect operates is left for the most part unelaborated. As Probyn points out, 
Bourdieu ignores the potentially disruptive quality of emotion. Affect can also 
jolt us into a new scene, she suggests, as well as into repetitions of old scenes. It is 
not clear when affect reinforces habitus and when it might bring about change. 
Reed-Danahay  argues  that  Bourdieu  blurs  distinctions  between  cognition  and 
affect (knowledge and feeling) in his work. In this way we could say he antici-
pates and he is commensurate with some of the new directions in psychobiology 
and  neuroscience  discussed  in  Chapter  2.  But  as  Reed-Danahay  also  describes, 
Bourdieu pretty much uncritically endorsed the bio-cultural model of emotion 
dominant in his period. Affect for Bourdieu seemed to divide into a set of raw 
and  universal  biological  responses  –  part  of  the  natural  human  bedrock  –  and 
something which in its more complex amalgams such as love and honour was 
culturally conditioned. 

This impression is confirmed by Bourdieu’s general position on ‘libido’ as dis-
sected  by  Crossley  (2001).  Bourdieu  (1998,  p.  78)  saw  libido  as  biological.  It  is 
an  ‘undifferentiated  impulse’  which  becomes  differentiated  and  organised  in 

 

SOLIDIFYING AFFECT 

107

05-Wetherell-4313-Ch-05.indd   107

30/11/2011   10:01:44 AM

social fields. Biological libido pushes people to care, invest, identify and generates 
passionate feelings. But what they care about will be given by their habitus. As 
Crossley points out, this unspecified biological impulse is vague in the extreme. 
He proposes to replace it instead with the ‘desire for recognition’ (2001, p. 102). 
To my mind, though, this is not much better. An effective and elaborated social 
psychology of affective embodied practice is needed to fill this gap. 

I will come back to this missing social psychology later. For now, I want to fol-
low a little further the relationships between affect, habitus, class and social value, 
first again in Bourdieu’s own work, but then in more recent sociological research. 

Cultural Capital and Social Distinction 

At the heart of Bourdieu’s approach is his exploration of the ways in which the 
embodied dispositions of habitus are tied to social relations, social class and social 
positions, and thus to forms of distinction and opportunities:

Habitus are generative principles of distinct and distinctive practices – what 
the worker eats, and especially the way he eats it, the sport he practices and the 
way he practices it, his political opinions and the way he expresses them are 
systematically different from the industrial owner’s corresponding activities. 
But habitus are also classification schemes, principles of classification, prin-
ciples of vision and division, different tastes. They make distinctions between 
what is good and bad, between what is right and what is wrong, between what 
is distinguished and what is vulgar, and so forth, but the distinctions are not 
identical. Thus, for instance, the same behavior or even the same good can 
appear distinguished to one person, pretentious to someone else, and cheap 
and showy to yet another. (Bourdieu, 1998, p. 8)

People  display  their  social  value  through  their  habitus.  In  particular,  Bourdieu 
argued, it carries their cultural capital. 

He saw cultural capital as a kind of privileged aesthetic sense, appreciation and 
understanding, as sets of tastes and preferences. Cultural capital is objectified in 
forms of property (books, works of art, CDs), and usually marked and validated by 
credentials (university degrees and specialist skills). Parents who possess cultural 
capital typically have a keen investment in passing it on to their children (Reay, 
2004).  Bourdieu  argued  that  like  other  forms  of  capital,  cultural  capital  has  an 
exchange value. Thus higher education certificates usually translate into differen-
tial positions in job markets. 

Bourdieu  assumed  a  strong,  unifying  relationship  between  types  of  cultural 
capital and social class. As a result, the working class, for example, would be dis-
tinguished by a set of shared communal dispositions, values, cultural tastes, forms 
of expertise, and so on which would be relatively sharply distinguished from the 
habitus of the middle classes. In effect, habitus and cultural capital operate rather 
like a self-fulfilling prophecy (Swartz, 1997). Distinction is there in part because 
it is imagined to be there and thus the prophecy is made reality. Bourdieu had 

108 

AFFECT AND EMOTION

05-Wetherell-4313-Ch-05.indd   108

30/11/2011   10:01:44 AM

a clear vision of the relative arbitrariness of social distinction and its relational 
basis. The important thing about beer versus champagne, for example, is not so 
much the intrinsic qualities of each but their relation to each other and the cir-
cuits of value, scarcity, difference and social distinction created. 

Bourdieu’s  (1984)  own  empirical  research  in  the  1960s  in  France  supported 
his predictions about the relationship between social class, habitus and cultural 
capital to the extent that he felt able to draw maps of the contemporary social 
and symbolic space. He drew connections, for instance, between drinking ordi-
nary red wine, liking football and accordion playing and being a skilled worker or 
farmer. This nexus could be contrasted with being a technician, liking light opera, 
and voting for the left, or with being a university professor, liking chess, piano 
and  whiskey,  or  contrasted  with  being  an  industrialist,  liking  horse  riding  and 
champagne and voting for the right. These different kinds of habitus constituted 
distinctive social, material and psychological spaces. The first group (of men) had 
low volumes of both economic and cultural capital; the second group were mid-
level on economic capital and on cultural capital; the third group had high levels 
of  overall  capital  but  a  much  greater  extent  of  cultural  capital  than  economic 
capital; while the last group were also high on overall levels of capital but, unlike 
the professors, were high on economic capital and short on cultural capital. 

As Bourdieu makes these links between habitus and social location, what is hap-
pening to affect? Again, it seems likely that affect will solidify the social relations of 
class just as these relations solidify forms of affect into embodied habitus. Bourdieu 
highlighted relatively non-intimate correlates of class such as occupation, voting 
histories and leisure pursuits. In recent years, however, a number of social research-
ers, in particular feminist scholars, have extended Bourdieu’s work and developed 
rich accounts of affect, social class and social value demonstrating that it is not just 
cultural goods which are unevenly distributed but perhaps also affective practices 
(cf. Charlesworth, 2000; Illouz, 1997; Kirk, 2007; Lawler 1999, 2000, 2004, 2005; 
Layton, 2006; Lucey and Reay, 2000; Lucey et al., 2003; Reay, 2004, 2005, 2008; 
Reay  et  al.,  2011;  Reay  and  Lucey,  2003;  Rogaly  and  Taylor,  2009;  Sayer,  2005; 
Skeggs,  2004a,  2004b,  2005,  2010;  Tyler,  2008;  Walkerdine,  1991,  2009,  2010; 
Walkerdine and Lucey, 1989; Walkerdine et al., 2001).

Affect and Social Value

This work has deepened our understanding of the broad relation between affect 
and social value sketched in very general terms by Bourdieu. Illuminating research 
from relational psychoanalyst Lynne Layton, for instance, begins to paint a much 
more specific picture of how emotion and social value might lock together in eve-
ryday experiences. She starts with an anecdote: 

I needed a garden hose and took a friend shopping with me to a store called 
Ocean  State  Job  Lot.  As  we  left  the  store,  my  upper-middle-class  friend 
looked utterly disgusted and said, ‘That place gives me the heebie jeebies.’ 

 

SOLIDIFYING AFFECT 

109

05-Wetherell-4313-Ch-05.indd   109

30/11/2011   10:01:44 AM

I tried to find out what she meant, what emotion ‘heebie jeebies’ describes 
for  her,  but  as  I  asked  and  it  became  clear  that  the  emotion  had  to  do   
with a disdain not only for the lower-class goods in the store but for the 
lower-class shoppers, shame set in and she refused to keep talking. (Layton, 
2006, p. 51)

Exploring this further and interrogating the experiences of others, Layton begins 
to highlight the kind of affective grip involved in habitus and its power. An emo-
tion like the ‘heebie jeebies’ indicates how taste, distinction, social position and 
affect intertwine. The origins of people’s investments and powerful likes and dis-
likes often remain obscure, yet these prove deeply motivating, propelling us in 
and out of life-styles and consumption patterns, leading us to flinch away from 
some situations while gravitating towards others.

The affects involved are anything but banal. As Imogen Tyler (2008) has dem-
onstrated, differences and distinctions between ‘people like us’ and ‘people not 
like  us’  can  evoke  intense  affects  of  disgust  and  contempt,  provoking  extreme 
emotions  of  shame  and  humiliation  among  the  dominated  and  those  made 
abject. Beverley Skeggs gives this example of a rant from Germaine Greer against 
‘chavs’ and ‘Essex girls’:

She used to be conspicuous as she clacked along the pavements in her white 
plastic stilettos, her bare legs mottled patriot red, white and blue with cold, 
and her big bottom barely covered by a denim mini-skirt. Essex girls usually 
come in twos, both behind pushchairs. Sometimes you hear them before you 
see them, cackling shrilly or yelling to each other from one end of the street to 
the other, or berating those infants in blood-curdling fashion … The Essex girl 
is tough, loud, vulgar and unashamed. Her hair is badly dyed not because she 
can’t afford a hairdresser, but because she wants to look brassy. Nobody makes 
her wear an ankle chain; she likes the message it sends … she is not ashamed 
to admit that what she puts behind her ears to make her more attractive is 
her ankles. She is anarchy on stilts, when she and her mates descend upon 
Southend for a rave, even the bouncers grow pale. (Greer, 2001, p. 8, cited in 
Skeggs, 2005, p. 966–7)

Greer constructs a scary, incomprehensible and unseemly femininity. She seems 
to envy the anarchic energy she imputes to the ‘Essex Girl’ but also reproduces 
long histories of middle-class fear and disgust directed at the working-class woman 
figured as vulgar and out of line. Skeggs (2005, 2010) has documented how white 
working-class women often figure in this way, defining what she calls a ‘constitu-
tive limit’ – constructed to mark the boundaries of middle-class propriety, demure 
affect and good sense. As Stephanie Lawler (2004) has argued, any ‘affective good’ 
seems to be achieved through repudiation. The ‘good’ can often only be identi-
fied and claimed as one’s own distinguishing characteristic if some other group 
is assigned the ‘bad’. This is perhaps most evident in the relational ordering of 
masculinities and femininities (cf. Hollway, 1984), but is now coming into view 
for social class relations also.

110 

AFFECT AND EMOTION

05-Wetherell-4313-Ch-05.indd   110

30/11/2011   10:01:44 AM

Affect and Social Class

The experience of class in a country like the UK, then, is not just about the kind of 
classic territories which Bourdieu mapped: going to the dogs versus riding to the 
hunt; shopping at Fortnums versus shopping at Aldi; voting Labour versus vot-
ing Tory. Class, recent research maintains, is lived at the level of the gut, through 
what  Reay  (2005)  calls  its  ‘psychic  economy’.  Indeed,  the  affective  patterning 
of  class  and  material  inequality  might  well  end  up  being  more  persistent  and 
important in maintaining difference than any other associated regularity such as 
voting preference or leisure habits. Because class is relational, the psychic econo-
mies in Reay’s sense are intertwined. Affect follows, regulates and composes social 
relations and social value. Hinterlands of exclusions, vicious differentiations and 
pockets of pride, fear and envy are created (Sayer, 2005) along with sets of com-
parisons and subjectifications blighting life chances (Charlesworth, 2000; Rogaly 
and Taylor, 2009; Walkerdine et al., 2003). 

Class  position  generates  a  specific  affective  style.  Reay,  drawing  on  Andrew 

Sayer’s work, proposes, for instance:

We  can  map  out  a  psychic  economy  of  class  where  a  combination  of  arro-
gance, satisfaction, contempt and pride constitute an exclusivist middle-class 
position in the social class field and a mix of guilt, defensiveness, empathy 
and  conciliation  go  to  make  up  the  ‘middle-class  egalitarian’  (Sayer,  2005). 
Similarly a varying combination of resentment, envy, pride and anger consti-
tute the solidarist fractions of the working classes while their more individu-
alist peers are characterized by a mix of deference, envy and shame … (Reay, 
2005, pp. 913–14)

In recent years new empirical work has focused particularly on the affective styles 
composing  the  habitus  of  the  British  white  middle  classes.  For  Skeggs  (2004a, 
2004b) the affects of this group reflect the ethos of ‘possessive individualism’. She 
argues that the middle class is marked out by a deep-seated commitment to self-
improvement, deferred gratification and to accruing more and more ‘property in 
the self’. These ambitions are particularly evident in middle-class parents’ prac-
tices in relation to their children who are encouraged to acquire a wide range of 
qualifications, forms of knowledge and experiences found in music lessons, gap 
years, private school education and multiple ‘A Level’ qualifications which can 
then be ‘banked’, setting them up for life. This acquisitive attitude is taken to be 
normal and moral, used as the standard for judging other social groups. 

It is not only the middle class, however, who generalise their very particular 
affective practices as a universal ethical prescription. Skeggs (2004a) argues that 
recent social theory makes this mistake also. She suggests that recent sociological 
research on individualisation, for instance, mis-recognises the basic middle-class 
model of self just described, and its typical affective practices, as a general trend. 
This work (e.g. Giddens, 1991) claims that the historical trend in late modernity 
is towards more emotionally open, exploratory, reflexive and ‘worked over’ selves, 

 

SOLIDIFYING AFFECT 

111

05-Wetherell-4313-Ch-05.indd   111

30/11/2011   10:01:44 AM

and is thus moving away from more traditional, older communal identifications 
and the more stoical and controlled affective practices of previous generations. 
Skeggs (see also Walkerdine and Bansel, 2010) argues that what might appear to be 
the emergence of a new kind of ‘late modern’ individual and affective subjectivity 
is in fact just the usual middle-class self, and thus theory once again rewrites the 
working class as deficit. 

Other  new  research  on  social  class  and  affective  styles  has  examined  more 
closely the class fraction Reay (2005) described as ‘middle-class egalitarian’. Reay 
et  al.  (2011)  examined  a  large  sample  of  white  middle-class  parents  in  the  UK 
who had made ‘against the grain’ school-choices for their children. An ‘against 
the grain’ school-choice involves sending children to local comprehensives with 
comparatively poor positions in school league tables as opposed to following the 
more usual ‘fortress’ middle-class strategies of choosing private education, mov-
ing house into up-market school catchment areas, or searching out schools where 
children would be ‘at home’. Reay et al. argue that these middle-class ‘fish out 
of water’ ended up, however, often reproducing key aspects of their own habitus 
despite their best intentions. 

For this group, the cultural property acquired for their children and accumu-
lated in the self came to include cosmopolitanism and familiarity with the ‘exotic 
multicultural  other’,  fitting  their  children  for  more  global  futures.  Reay  et  al. 
report that the result was a greater social mix in schools but little social mixing. 
These  researchers  describe,  too,  how  discourses  of  ‘brightness’  found  through-
out the school system became a kind of affective defence for the parents. The 
privilege and distinction which middle-class children carried into their new envi-
ronments ensuring their success were typically understood as due to the ‘special-
ness’ of the child and their intrinsic talents. This research, then, suggests how 
entrenched and persistent cultural capital can be. It also paints a vivid picture 
of the affects of the middle-class going along with that – the anxieties, desires, 
defences, the conscientiousness, the competitive jostling and the sense of entitle-
ment to feelings of contempt.

Emotional Capital

Does it make sense, then, to add ‘emotional capital’ to the growing list of capitals 
in the social sciences (economic capital, cultural capital, social capital and sym-
bolic capital)? Would this be a useful way of capturing the sedimentation of affec-
tive practices in social formations and its uneven consequences? Are there affective 
practices that add value and which could be exchanged for other kinds of capital 
such as greater material wealth? Do some affective styles offer a leg up just like 
owning a house in London or New York or a big bundle of shares? 

A concept like ‘emotional capital’ suggests that some affective styles (made up 
of particular combinations of affective practices) offer some groups an advantage. 
It  raises  the  perturbing  possibility  of  potential  affective  ‘arms  races’,  as  socially 

112 

AFFECT AND EMOTION

05-Wetherell-4313-Ch-05.indd   112

30/11/2011   10:01:44 AM

disadvantaged groups struggle to attain the affective styles of the ‘distinguished’, 
only to discover that some other forms of affective manners have become the new 
emotional capital.

In a thoughtful analysis Reay (2004) argues that if emotional capital exists, it 
operates in a rather more complex way than other kinds of capital. Reay attributes 
the first use of the term to Nowotny (1981). Nowotny suggested that emotional 
capital  (e.g.  love,  care,  affection,  patience,  empathy)  is  something  that  women 
possess  and  that  men  and  children  appropriate.  Like  Arlie  Hochschild’s  (1983) 
notion of ‘emotional labour’, it is not necessarily the individual possessor of the 
capital or the emotional labourer who benefits, and who can convert expertise and 
emotional productivity into other gains. Instead, employers, men and children 
who can draw on the emotional investment of workers, wives and mothers may 
be often more clearly the winners. Reay argues that mothers’ emotional invest-
ments in their children are in fact exceedingly complex. Reviewing findings from 
her own research, she suggests that ‘seemingly positive emotions could sometimes 
have  negative  repercussions  for  children,  while  apparently  negative  emotional 
involvement could spur children on academically’ (2004, p. 62). Mothers’ anger 
and anxiety could push their children to succeed, while in other cases it simply 
produced highly anxious children. Mothers were treading what Reay describes as 
a fine line between empathy and over-identification. 

Perhaps, then, as Illouz (1997) argues, emotional capital lies in the capacity to 
manage emotions and navigate calmly through emotional storms, as opposed to 
being overwhelmed by distress and strong affect? Illouz associates this capacity 
with the new middle classes who have become familiar with psychological tech-
nologies and skilled in working on the self. Again, Reay suggests, it may not be 
this simple. She reports data from her research with UK-based, black mothers. This 
suggests that these women’s experience of racism in schools encouraged strong 
angry affects that were, in fact, beneficial in supporting their children. Here, being 
calm in the face of intense provocation would not have been effective. 

Reay’s conclusion is that emotional capital is not defined by the affect itself 
and its routine methods of unfolding. It will be a complex outcome of situated 
patterns, and thus highly dependent on who is doing the emoting, the context, 
local  norms  and  expectations.  It  is  these  things  that  determine  whether  a  par-
ticular affective practice accumulates value, other forms of capital and privilege. 
Reay notes that class is relevant here in a broad way: it will be more difficult for 
those without cultural and economic capital to marshal what may be required to 
turn strong affect into something positive and beneficial, while those with many 
cultural and economic resources are likely to be able to better tolerate short-term 
emotional suffering in the service of some long-term goal to realise the benefits 
of  deferred  gratification.  The  working-class  mothers  Reay  studied  tended  to  be 
more concerned with their children’s immediate emotional well-being. They were 
less willing to compromise this for later potential gains that might be difficult to 
realise or may never eventuate.

In general, as Skeggs (2004a, 2004b) points out, Bourdieu’s notion of cultural 
capital is unhelpful as a description of working-class life and affect. His theory of 

 

SOLIDIFYING AFFECT 

113

05-Wetherell-4313-Ch-05.indd   113

30/11/2011   10:01:44 AM

working-class habitus mainly stresses lack and deficit. The notion of emotional 
capital is likely to intensify this. For Skeggs (2004b, p. 87), Bourdieu provides 
an  excellent  description  of  how  the  middle  classes  make  themselves  through 
possessive individualism, and ‘how the game is played to middle-class advan-
tage’.  But,  ‘[a]re  the  working  class  always  lack,  beyond  value,  without  value, 
resigned and adjusted to their conditions, unable to accrue value to themselves?’ 
Skeggs argues that Bourdieu’s theory recapitulates middle-class positionings of 
the working class. For both Bourdieu, and for the middle classes, working-class 
affective culture is seen as a mix of ‘bad choices’, failure, pathology, and as signs 
of ‘moral lack’ according to the standards of the middle-class individualised self 
(2004b, p. 91). 

Skeggs  suggests  that,  unacknowledged  by  Bourdieu  and  other  recent  social 
theory, the working class might experience a different relation to affect and to 
self compared to the middle class. This could not be described as building emo-
tional capital in any conventional sense because there is no ‘trading up’ to create 
surplus value. For the middle classes, Skeggs argues, affects are mobilised as part 
of exchange relations. Affect and identity are caught up in complicated strategic 
work  to  create  and  maintain  a  valued  self  that  might  achieve,  and  then  hold 
on to, valued social locations. For the working classes, in contrast, affect is pure 
‘use-value’  rather  than  exchange-value.  This  is  emotion  for  its  own  end  in 
authentic response to social conditions. Features of working-class life such as anti-
authoritarianism, humour, rage, indignation at unfairness, and communal loyalty 
are  forms  of  affective  energy  performed  not  to  accrue  value  but  for  their  own 
sake as responses to social injustice due to accidents of birth and social location. 
I think, however, the division Skeggs makes here between authentic and reactive 
practice contrasted with inauthentic and managed practice is problematic. I will 
come back to this point below.

An Overview and Some Problems

This  chapter  began  at  the  point  at  which  ethnomethodology  and  the  other 
approaches considered in the last chapter started to fall silent. My focus was on 
persistent patterns in affective practice found across social formations and how 
best to theorise these. The research I have examined in this chapter has pursued 
two related lines of enquiry. Investigators have looked at how affective practice 
enters into social relations, regulating, mediating, conserving and disrupting the 
status  quo.  We  can  see  that  affect  can  maintain,  increase  and  diminish  power, 
influence and social value. Affect can function, too, to construct and mark bound-
aries  and  reject  the  ‘other’.  It  can  work  to  keep  people  in  line  as  their  anxiety 
and fear, for instance, push them to conform. Here affective practice is studied as 
social activity, woven in with other social practices, with potentially mixed effects 
and impacts.

114 

AFFECT AND EMOTION

05-Wetherell-4313-Ch-05.indd   114

30/11/2011   10:01:44 AM

The  second,  intertwined,  line  of  enquiry  followed  the  territory  originally 
sketched  out  by  Raymond  Williams.  This  is  the  notion  that  affective  practices 
sediment so that, for a generation, a social class, a gender, a national or regional 
group, a particular period of social history, etc. one can find ways of performing 
affect, or an affective habitus, which have become characteristic, and which define 
the flavour, relations and habits of that group. Here, affect is seen in some ways 
as more like a possession embedded in the individual, as part of their unthinking 
everyday repertoire. 

For both kinds of research, but particularly for the latter line of work on habitus, 
it is worth exploring, first, in a bit more detail the social psychology implied here. 
What is being assumed about affect and the emotional social actor? The second 
challenging issue concerns the complexity and heterogeneity of people’s actual 
social locations and affiliations. Does the research do justice to these? Examining 
these two problems will lead me to try to move in the last section of the chapter 
to an alternative ‘affective intersectional’ approach.

The social psychology of affective practice

I want to argue that sociological research on affect and emotion is in danger of 
developing a model of affect and the emotional social actor that is too static and 
bound up with traditional, 20th century, psychobiological accounts. Social actors 
are presented as operating like jukeboxes. Press the right buttons and the affec-
tive tunes appropriate to status, position and habitus will blare out. Middle-class 
competitiveness  will  burst  discordantly  into  life  while  for  some  factions  of  the 
working class the only tunes are deference, envy and shame. People are treated as 
affect automatons, emoting and being taken over by affect, not being able to help 
responding, but not quite understanding why. 

Affective practices (like the range of affective tunes in the jukebox) are assumed 
to come in neat, recognisable, standard, basic emotion-style packages. Particularly 
for Bourdieu, these emotion packets are reactions rather than actions, fixed bio-
logical  patterns  rather  than  assemblages  or  recruitments.  These  are  responses 
rather  than  practical  methods  for  performing,  re-animating  and  re-configuring 
social relations. Skeggs reinforces this jukebox tendency when she divides affec-
tive practice into authentic and inauthentic types and then conflates these with 
social divisions. 

Bourdieu,  especially,  carries  over  a  particular  legacy  from  biology.  Indeed,  it 
is  easy  to  read  emotion  as  ‘natural’  and  corporeal.  It  is  then  also  easy  to  treat 
it as rather different from other kinds of social practice. Affect is presented as a 
kind of practice that is always unreflective and non-conscious, and which is never 
planned, self and other regulated, narrated, agentic and negotiated. The famous 
duality of practice – it is subjective and objective, open and evolving, constraining 
and ‘could be otherwise’ – gets forgotten.

I want to suggest that research on affective practice and social formations needs 
to  move  to  a  more  elaborated  and  complex  account  of  the  nature  of  affect  and 

 

SOLIDIFYING AFFECT 

115

05-Wetherell-4313-Ch-05.indd   115

30/11/2011   10:01:44 AM

the emotional social actor – treating affect actually as practice. A more promising 
starting point is appreciating that the palette of affect is likely to be highly varied. 
Affective actors are not social dopes, knowing just a few tunes, or pushed and pulled 
by  basic  emotions,  as  theories  of  habitus  often  seem  to  imply.  Sometimes  it  will 
be the case that an affective performance is best described in jukebox terms as the 
unfolding and reiteration of an unbidden, long-term, embodied habit. Sometimes 
instead, though, people’s affective practice will be highly self-regulated and mod-
ulated.  Probably  more  usually  it  will  move  variably  along  these  dimensions  in  a 
complex changing mix as an affective episode is put together in concert with the 
performances of others. Similarly, everyday affective practice will bear a variable rela-
tion to judgements of authenticity. Sometimes affect will be deeply felt, and some-
times it will be more obviously ‘performed’. It is unlikely that just one social group 
knows how to be strategic and only one social group knows how to be authentic.

The  affective  canon,  then,  which  becomes  characteristic  of  a  community,  a 
social group, an institution, or a social formation, is likely to be a mix of different 
manifestations of affective practice as well as varying in content and in typical 
distributions. Some of the canon composing a particular habitus may work, for 
example, through aspirations, regulating through setting ideals of self-control or 
dramatic display. It may include playful affective routines involving ironic and 
reflexive mimicry, and sometimes core distinguishing affective practices will just 
operate in the expected, taken-for-granted, unarticulated and self-evident ways. 
As Andrew Sayer (2005) argues, and Chapter 4 demonstrated, affective practice 
will usually be open to moral and normative assessment, and thus will be woven 
together in subtle ways with people’s usual communal methods for describing, 
accounting for, and judging self and others. 

A more complex social psychology of affect, and more attention to affect as 
practice, will enrich sociological work on the ways in which social formations are 
configured, come to power and dissolve. The second challenge I want to raise is 
perhaps not so easily tackled. 

Heterogeneity and plurality

Habitus as a concept is tied to social groups and social categories. In this way it 
predates  the  growing  emphasis  on  complexity  of  positioning  which  is  increas-
ingly becoming a staple of identity studies. Can habitus (habituses perhaps) be 
plural? What would that look like? As a white, middle-class, able-bodied, female 
academic in her 50s, a migrant to the UK from New Zealand, how many different 
types of habitus do I move through in a typical day? Is there a habitus or struc-
ture of feeling that goes with each distinct social position? Or, is my habitus, and 
its characteristic affective practices, singular but a particular, partly idiosyncratic, 
partly shared composite or amalgam of my diverse range of social locations? If it 
becomes too particular then how much do I still share with others as a collective 
structure of feeling? How fragmented and heterogeneous can a habitus get and 
still count as a habitus?

116 

AFFECT AND EMOTION

05-Wetherell-4313-Ch-05.indd   116

30/11/2011   10:01:44 AM

One recent, large-scale investigation of British cultural tastes and social class 
(Bennett  et  al.,  2009)  suggested  that  habitus  is  more  complex  than  Bourdieu’s 
theory  predicted.  This  study  emulated  Bourdieu’s  attempts  to  map  social  class, 
tastes, preferences and leisure activities. It discovered that cultural capital in the 
contemporary  UK  is  more  overlapping  and  less  differentiated  than  Bourdieu 
found  for  1960s  France.  Habitus  is  now  less  likely  to  be  automatically  unified, 
coherent and homogeneous. It is not clear, though, whether the social world is 
just more fragmented than it used to be in the 1960s, or whether the theory was 
wrongly pitched in the first place. Surveying the patterns in their data, Bennett 
et al. (2009, p. 2) emphasise that they are left in no doubt that ‘class counts’ but 
they go on to say ‘we are equally certain that class does not always count more 
than gender or ethnicity’. These days ‘distinctive forms of cultural capital are also 
associated with gender, ethnic, and age divisions, which interact with each other 
and with class-based forms’.

We need to add to Bennett et al.’s list other regularities in positioning, not just 
those  based  on  the  standard  identity  categories.  Particular  workplaces,  occupa-
tions,  peer  groups  and  various  institutional  affiliations,  for  example,  are  likely 
to add further layering to affective practices and to possess their own noticeable 
and distinctive ways of being. As many have noted, one of the difficulties with 
Bourdieu’s notion of habitus is that it can seem over-deterministic. As Sayer (2005, 
p. 3) argues, if there is a ‘logic’ to the social patterning of something like class-
based styles, this is ‘as likely to involve slippages, blockages, non-sequiturs and 
wishful thinking’. In fact, I want to predict that affective practices will routinely 
effloresce  over  the  conventional,  demographic  boundary-lines  of  class,  gender, 
ethnicity, religion and nation, communal life and personal life. The associations 
between organised affective practices and social groupings will not be tidy, and 
this lack of neatness will be important in understanding the ways in which affec-
tive practices travel and change.

It must be the case, indeed, that as soon as identity got complicated in both 
theory and in life (Wetherell, 2010), habitus would lose any simple classificatory 
power. As mobility and globalisation have increased, it has become more evident 
that many social actors, even those traditionally seen as the most fixed in place 
such as the English, white, working class (Rogaly and Taylor, 2009), live within 
a  nexus  of  exceedingly  complicated  intersections  between  resources,  histories, 
futures, investments and identifications.

There is also the challenge of understanding and creating room for what Lauren 
Berlant (2000) calls ‘minor affect’ (see also Probyn, 2004b). The concept of affec-
tive practice stretches to encompass both conventionality and unconventionality. 
It is not just about the hegemonic, or the most powerful conventions, and not just 
about ‘winning ways’ and ‘winning feelings’. Berlant posits in her writing on inti-
macy a ‘wild energy’, ‘drive’ or ‘mobile attachment’ that can create a wide range 
of affective spaces. Some of these, she argues, are predictable, conventional and 
concrete. These are the spaces and practices people can return to again and again, 
which can be controllable and can seem to be built ‘just for us’ (pp. 5–6). Here, 
she states, we can feel at the centre of own lives and can feel as if we ‘have a life’. 

 

SOLIDIFYING AFFECT 

117

05-Wetherell-4313-Ch-05.indd   117

30/11/2011   10:01:44 AM

Other figurations of affect, however, do not enjoy such solidity: 

these have no alternative plots, let alone few laws or stable places of culture 
in which to clarify and cultivate them. What happens to the energy of attach-
ment when it has no designated space? To the gestures, glances, encounters, 
collaborations or fantasies that have no canon? ‘Minor’ intimacies have been 
forced to develop aesthetics of the extreme to push these spaces into being 
by way of small and grand gestures, the wish for normalcy heard everywhere 
these days. (2000, p. 5)

As  Chapter  3  argued,  there  are  problems  with  ‘wild’  definitions  of  affect.  But 
Berlant  compellingly  describes  how  affective  practice  can  be  dominating  and 
stupefying  and  also  creative.  Affective  practice  can  disempower  in  the  guise  of 
empowering, but it can also be genuinely novel and generative, as Deleuze (1994) 
suggests, enriching and enlarging and renewing. In some way analyses of affec-
tive practice over long historical durations must keep open all these possibilities.

Affective Intersectionality 

It  seems  clear  that  the  study  of  affect  in  social  formations  needs  to  go  ‘inter-
sectional’  just  as  the  study  of  identity  has  gone  intersectional  (Phoenix  and 
Pattynama, 2006). For identity, this has involved focusing research on the ways in 
which different threads of social relations, points of identification, and identity-
making practices meet and wind together. This intertwining may be either in the 
context of an individual life, in a particular site, in an institutional scene, or in a 
moment of trouble and conflict, or to sustain privilege or create abjection. It may 
produce either ‘liveable’ or ‘unliveable’ conjunctions.

A  similar  intersectionality  for  affective  practices  and  social  formations  will 
involve recognising that people are likely to be able to mobilise (and be mobilised 
by) quite wide-ranging and diverse repertoires of affective practices closely linked 
to context. There are likely to be complicated mixes of affective repertoires avail-
able to any one individual or social group at any one moment, including some 
affective  practices  that  are  widespread,  for  instance,  and  which  are  very  stable, 
and  some  which  are  very  local  and  exceedingly  transient,  specific  to  particular 
workplaces, to some families, to a few streets for just a few months, and to quite 
particular historical moments. Just as with identity, however, this doesn’t mean 
that people do not get stuck, or differ in their positions in relation to circuits of 
affective value. I suspect this ‘sticking’ will be strongly site- and context-specific. 
The affective positioning around middle-class, ‘against-the-grain’ school choices 
investigated  by  Reay  et  al.  (2011),  for  instance,  looks  like  one  site  and  context 
where this happens par excellence. 

Like ‘structure’ for Raymond Williams, ‘intersection’ is not quite the right word 
for  what  I  am  advocating.  It  is  too  static  a  description  of  the  complex  mixing 
of  affective  practices  found  in  social  formations  and  individual  lives  which  we 

118 

AFFECT AND EMOTION

05-Wetherell-4313-Ch-05.indd   118

30/11/2011   10:01:44 AM

need to investigate. Stabilised affective practice and affective necessities emerge 
as fragmented and heteroclite subjectivities form and engage in the plurality and 
polyphony  of  shifting  social  relations.  Social  psychologists  (Billig  et  al.,  1988; 
Wetherell  and Potter,  1992) have  argued that,  in  fact, it  is  this  polyphony  and 
the dilemmatic nature of contemporary ideologies that keep people in line and 
preserve social order. In other words, contemporary common sense naturalising 
and justifying privilege is a patchwork or kaleidoscope of contradictions and frag-
ments that refuse to cohere. People navigate this patchwork, customising it for 
their own purposes, sliding from one repertoire to another. This, Billig et al. sug-
gest, is how common sense works rather than the meek trotting out of singular 
and coherent belief systems pre-dumped in people’s heads. 

If, as many studies of discursive practices have demonstrated (e.g. Wetherell and 
Potter, 1992), sense-making in classic ideological territories such as justifications 
of inequality and racism is organised patchily in this way, then it is also likely to 
be the case for affective practice and the particular knotty forms of its sedimen-
tation  we  need  to  investigate.  Dilemma,  trouble  and  contradiction  in  affective 
practice might prove good starting points for discovering consequential patterns 
in practical distributions. A focus on plural affective practices will perhaps offer a 
more encompassing way of understanding the combinations, competitions and 
exclusions that result in the affective styles of those who are entirely confident 
of their power, the styles of those whose ‘lives [are] devoid of social consecration’ 
(Charlesworth, 2000, p. 6), and those who are somewhere in between.

I am not wanting to claim, however, that it is always wrong to begin, as research 
on habitus typically seems to do, with a sample based on a social group, on one 
identity, a social class, one nation, etc., or a combination of two or three of these 
things. Sometimes the editing down of the complexity of affiliations and social 
locations to answer specific research questions about affective solidification, struc-
tures of feeling, and persistent affective practice is crucial. The research I reviewed 
above on social class and affect shows how this editing of identity can work. It 
can be revelatory to try to line up identity, affect and social location. But perhaps 
it is time now, after a generation of thinking about habitus and structures of feel-
ing, to re-consider solidifying affective patterns in ways that also focus on sites, 
scenes, actual practices and contexts of use, and the messiness of social life. The 
next chapter will pursue some of this thinking further. 

 

SOLIDIFYING AFFECT 

119

05-Wetherell-4313-Ch-05.indd   119

30/11/2011   10:01:45 AM

