Singapore

1 Arts Link, Singapore

117570
Singapore
HenryYeung@nus.edu.sg

Henry Wai-chung

Yeung

Department of Geography
National University of

Neil M. Coe
Department of

Geography

National University of

Singapore

1 Arts Link, Kent Ridge

117570
Singapore
geonmc@nus.edu.sg

Key words:
global production

networks

global value chains
theory
ﬁrms
nonﬁrm actors
competitive dynamics
strategy
economic development

Toward a Dynamic Theory of Global
Production Networks

and

capture

through

t Global production networks (GPN) are organiza-
c
tional platforms through which actors in different
a
regional and national economies compete and coop-
r
erate for a greater share of value creation, transfor-
t
mation,
geographically
s
b
dispersed economic activity. Existing conceptual
a
frameworks on global value chains (GVC) and what
we term GPN 1.0 tend to under-theorize the origins
and dynamics of these organizational platforms and
to overemphasize their governance typologies (e.g.,
modular, relational, and captive modes in GVC
theory) or analytical categories (e.g., power and
embeddedness in GPN 1.0). Building on this expand-
ing literature, our article aims to contribute toward
the reframing of existing GPN-GVC debates and the
development of a more dynamic theory of global
production networks that can better explain the emer-
gence of different ﬁrm-speciﬁc activities, strategic
network effects, and territorial outcomes in the
global economy. It is part of a wider initiative—GPN
2.0 in short—that seeks to offer novel theoretical
insights into why and how the organization and coor-
dination of global production networks varies sig-
niﬁcantly within and across different
industries,
sectors, and economies. Taking an actor-centered
focus toward theory development, we tackle a sig-
niﬁcant gap in existing work by systematically con-
ceptualizing the causal drivers of global production
networks in terms of their competitive dynamics
(optimizing cost-capability ratios, market impera-
tives, and ﬁnancial discipline) and risk environments.
These capitalist dynamics are theorized as critical
independent variables that shape the four main strat-
egies adopted by economic actors in (re)conﬁguring
their global production networks and, ultimately, the
developmental outcomes in different
industries,
regions, and countries.

I

E
C
O
N
O
M
C
G
E
O
G
R
A
P
H
Y

29

9
1
(
1
)
:
2
9
–
5
8

.

©
2
0
1
4
C
l
a
r
k
U
n
v
e
r
s
i
t
y

i

.

i

.

w
w
w
e
c
o
n
o
m
c
g
e
o
g
r
a
p
h
y
o
r
g

.

ECONOMIC GEOGRAPHY

Acknowledgements

We are grateful to Yuko
Aoyama for handling the
editorial review of this
article and her excellent
guidance for three rounds of
revisions. The constructive
comments from three
anonymous reviewers on
different drafts of this article
were also most useful.
While we have not been
able to incorporate all their
suggestions, we would like
to thank them and will
endeavor to use their
insights to beneﬁt our future
work. All errors and
shortcomings are of course
our own. The research for
this work is supported by
the National University of
Singapore (Grant Nos.
R-109-000-173-646 and
R-109-000-148-133,
respectively).

30

Since the early 1990s, global production has
become much more organizationally fragmented and
spatially dispersed, a process often associated with
the economic globalization so eloquently analyzed in
Dicken’s (2011) Global Shift. Arguably, however,
most commentators in the social sciences, including
economic geographers, remain unable to provide a
comprehensive and dynamic theory explaining how
these globalization processes are actually organized.
In its World Investment Report 2013,
the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development
(UNCTAD 2013) estimated that some 80 percent of
international trade was now organized through global
production networks coordinated by lead ﬁrms invest-
ing in cross-border productive assets and trading
inputs and outputs with partners, suppliers, and cus-
tomers worldwide. Empirically, there is now no doubt
that global production networks (GPN)1 and global
value chains (GVC) are the most critical organiza-
tional platforms
through which production in
primary, manufacturing, and service sectors is coor-
dinated and organized on a global basis. A 2010
World Bank report on the post-2008 world economy
further claimed that “given that production processes
in many industries have been fragmented and moved
around on a global scale, GVCs have become the
world economy’s backbone and central nervous
system” (Cattaneo Gerefﬁ, and Staritz 2010, 7). As
noted in Gerefﬁ (2014), these cross-border produc-
tion networks and value chains have recently received
very signiﬁcant empirical and policy attention in
major international organizations, with a range of
widely circulated reports produced between 2010 and
2013 (Cattaneo et al. 2010; Elms and Low 2013;
OECD-WTO-UNCTAD 2013; UNCTAD 2013). To
analysts in many such international organizations,
global value chains and global production networks
now constitute the long-term structural architecture
of the global economy.

These rapid and profound developments within the
global economy over the past two decades have posed
signiﬁcant challenges to theorization. For us, the most
productive lines of enquiry within the critical social
sciences during that time have shifted the analytical
focus from trade in ﬁnished goods between national

1 In this article, we use the acronym “GPN” to denote theory or
literature, and “global production networks” to refer to the
empirical phenomenon. The same distinction applies to “GVC”
and “global value chains.”

Vol. 91 No. 1 2015

economies to the tightly coordinated global chains or networks of ﬁrms engaging in
cross-border value activity in the production of these goods and services. Since its
inception in the early 1990s, sustained academic research into global value chains and
global production networks has gathered signiﬁcant momentum and achieved wide
circulation and analytical adoption (see comprehensive reviews in Bair 2008, 2009; Hess
and Yeung 2006a; Coe, Dicken, and Hess 2008a; Coe 2009, 2012; Parrilli, Nadvi, and
Yeung 2013). The two strands of research are closely related and connect across the
cognate social science ﬁelds of economic geography, economic sociology, development
studies, regional studies, international economics, and international business. In GVC
research, leading scholars, such as Gerefﬁ (1994) and Humphrey (1995), developed their
pioneering work in the early-to-mid 1990s and were later joined by others (Bair and
Gerefﬁ, 2001; Gibbon 2001; Humphrey and Schmitz 2002; Sturgeon 2002; Gerefﬁ,
Humphrey, and Sturgeon 2005). Meanwhile, the GPN literature has been closely asso-
ciated with the so-called Manchester school of economic geographers since the early
2000s (Dicken et al. 2001; Henderson et al. 2002; Coe et al. 2004, 2008a; Yeung 2009).
These parallel strands of an increasingly vast literature, however, have arguably provided
only limited theoretical development beyond the analysis of value chain governance
structures (Gerefﬁ 1994; Gerefﬁ et al. 2005; Sturgeon 2009), relational network con-
ﬁgurations (Dicken et al. 2001; Henderson et al. 2002; Yeung 2005), and industrial
upgrading and the strategic coupling of clusters and regions (Humphrey and Schmitz
2002; Smith et al. 2002; Coe et al. 2004; Yeung 2009; MacKinnon 2012).

failure to theorize competitive dynamics and evolutionary processes

More speciﬁcally, the explanatory power of the two interrelated and evolving concep-
tual frameworks in GVC research—Gerefﬁ’s (1994) pioneering distinction between
producer-driven and buyer-driven commodity chains and Gerefﬁ et al.’s (2005) ﬁvefold
interﬁrm governance typology—has been limited by the authors’ dyadic and static
conception of industrial governance, their relative neglect of territorial organization, and
their
in
multicommodity or multi-industry production networks. As Dussel Peters (2008, 14) has
argued, “most research on global commodity chains [GCC] approaches the GCC frame-
work as a ‘methodology’ and not a ‘theory’. The result of this is vast quantities of
empirical work on particular chains and the experiences of particular ﬁrms and regions
in them, and relatively little theoretical work attempting to account for these ﬁndings in
a systematic and integrated way.”2 Building on elements of the GCC approach and other
cognate approaches (e.g., actor-network theory and the varieties of capitalism approach),
the initial GPN 1.0 framework in economic geography and international political
economy emphasizes the complex ﬁrm networks and territorial institutions involved in
all economic activity, and how these are structured both organizationally and geographi-
cally. Despite its aim “to provide a more generally applicable conceptualisation of the
GPN” (Henderson et al. 2002, 444) and its inﬂuential role as a heuristic framework in
economic-geographic research and the wider social sciences (Hess and Yeung 2006b;
Coe, Hess, and Dicken 2008b; Coe 2009, 2012; Neilson, Pritchard, and Yeung 2014),
GPN 1.0 in many ways remains an inadequately developed theory of global production
networks. Though the initial GPN 1.0 has speciﬁed three interrelated “conceptual cat-

2 One indication of this theoretical deﬁcit in the GCC-GVC literature more generally is that, despite two
well-known edited volumes explicating GCCs (Gerefﬁ and Korzeniewicz 1994; Bair 2009), none of its key
proponents has advanced further GCC-GVC theorization in a single book-length publication. Indeed in the
GCC-GVC literature more broadly, the leading and most cited conceptual frameworks have tended to be
developed in book chapters (Gerefﬁ 1994, 2005) and journal articles (Humphrey and Schmitz 2002;
Sturgeon 2002, 2009; Gerefﬁ et al. 2005).

31

G
P
N
T
H
E
O
R
Y

32

ECONOMIC GEOGRAPHY

egories” of value, embeddedness, and power, it has not explicitly developed and speciﬁed
the causal mechanisms linking these elements to the dynamic conﬁgurations of global
production networks. This state of inadequate theory development in the GVC literature
and the still nascent stage of GPN theorization in economic geography have led Hudson
(2008), Sunley (2008), and Starosta (2010) to argue critically that existing conceptual
approaches are not explanatory and causal enough to provide a coherent theory of global
production networks.

In this article, we seek to contribute toward the reframing of the existing GPN-GVC
debates (e.g., away from industry-level generalizations) and the development of a more
dynamic theory of global production networks by focusing on the structural competitive
dynamics and actor-speciﬁc strategies shaping these networks and their organizational
conﬁgurations within and across different industries and localities. We deﬁne a global
production network as an organizational arrangement comprising interconnected eco-
nomic and noneconomic actors coordinated by a global lead ﬁrm and producing goods
or services across multiple geographic locations for worldwide markets. These actors
include different types of ﬁrms as well as nonﬁrm actors, such as the state, international
organizations, labor groups, consumers, and civil society organizations, in diverse locali-
ties. Our choice of conceptual terminology vis-à-vis mostly industry- or commodity-
oriented GVC approaches reﬂects our commitment to a theoretical approach that does
justice to the multiactor and geographically complex contemporary global economy. Our
analytical focus is clearly on the actors and their organizational relationships that
constitute global production networks in different industries, with a lead ﬁrm being a
central and necessary prerequisite, and on the multiple locations that are bound together
by the economic relations between those actors.

Given the strong interest in global production networks in the academic literature and
the international policy arena, we believe the epistemological context is now ripe to
embark on a more ambitious round of theoretical innovation—which we term GPN
2.0—that seeks to break signiﬁcant new conceptual ground and inform subsequent
rounds of empirical research.3 It may also, we hope, represent a theoretical contribution
and potential export from the ﬁeld of economic geography to the wider social sciences
(cf. Dicken 2004; Yeung and Lin 2003). In a nutshell, our conceptualization aims to
explain why and how three competitive dynamics—optimizing cost-capability ratios,
sustaining market development, and working with ﬁnancial discipline—interact with
ﬁrms and nonﬁrm actors under uncertain market conditions to produce four different
actor-speciﬁc strategies for organizing global production networks: intraﬁrm coordina-
tion, interﬁrm control, interﬁrm partnership, and extraﬁrm bargaining. Each of these
ﬁrm-level strategies is dependent on a unique combination of competitive dynamics. In
short, competitive dynamics are the independent variables driving ﬁrm strategies, as
dependent variables, which in turn lead to different network conﬁgurations and organi-
zational outcomes. As these competitive dynamics are themselves geographically varie-
gated within and across different global industries—a historic consequence of capitalist
restructuring and global transformations—their causal outcomes on actor strategies and
network organization are geographically speciﬁc.

3 This theory article draws on a much larger manuscript project that focuses on the organization, dynamics,
and strategies of global production networks and their causal relations with economic development (Coe
and Yeung, forthcoming). While some recent book-length monographs on global value chains and global
production networks have a strong empirical component (Gibbon and Ponte 2005; Lane and Probert 2009;
Neilson and Pritchard 2009; Posthuma and Nathan 2011; Milberg and Winkler 2013), they do not have
theory development as the central goal.

Vol. 91 No. 1 2015

In this GPN conceptualization, geographically situated actors are likely to adopt and
pursue different strategies even within the same global industry or regional/national
economy, a phenomenon largely undertheorized in the existing GVC and GPN literature.
This approach to GPN theory therefore allows for an actor-centered conceptualization of
the causal mechanisms shaping the differentiated organization of global production
networks in diverse industries and territories. Its theoretical foundations extend beyond
the industry approach commonly found in the existing frameworks of value chain
governance and the microlevel analysis of actor practices found in many studies of
industrial upgrading and local development. When fully developed through collective
conceptual efforts that will inevitably extend beyond a single article, GPN theory can
ultimately provide a powerful
framework for explaining patterns of uneven
development—both between and within countries—in the contemporary global
economy. In this article, we focus our theoretical efforts on explicating the three inde-
pendent variables that shape four actor-speciﬁc strategies, leaving the ultimate dependent
variable—uneven development—to future conceptual work.

Echoing Ponte and Sturgeon’s (2014) recent call for modular theory-building in
GVC-GPN research, this article is not intended as a rebuttal of, or competing alternative
to, the existing GVC theory of industrial governance (Gerefﬁ et al. 2005; Sturgeon 2009)
or the GPN conception of value, power, and strategic coupling (Henderson et al. 2002;
Coe et al. 2004; Yeung 2009). Rather, we build on these earlier conceptual perspectives
and seek to reframe them into a more extensive theoretical apparatus for explaining the
evolutionary dynamics of global production networks.4 As such, we hope to make three
distinct contributions toward theory development in GPN 2.0 that are both necessary for
conceptual advancement and useful for further empirical studies. First, our emphasis on
the dynamic competitive drivers shaping actors in global production networks allows us
to account for the emergence and evolution of these networks. Going beyond the narrow
focus on already existing interﬁrm governance structures in the GVC typology, we take
a crucial step (backward) in developing a dynamic theory of network formation so that
we will eventually be able to move (forward) to analyze more effectively the diverse
industrial and territorial outcomes of these capitalist processes.

Second, our conceptualization offers a more explicit set of explanatory tools for
explaining network conﬁgurations and their differentiated outcomes in the global
economy. By theorizing the competitive dynamics and risk environments of global
production networks and by mapping actor-speciﬁc strategies onto these structural
imperatives, we offer a coherent conceptualization of causal mechanisms—that is, struc-
tural dynamics as causality and ﬁrm-speciﬁc strategies as mechanisms—that extends
beyond the existing GVC typology of industrial governance as interﬁrm organizational

33

G
P
N
T
H
E
O
R
Y

4 In Gerefﬁ et al. (2005), arguably the most inﬂuential GVC theory article measured in terms of citations on
Google Scholar, theory development actually takes up no more than ﬁve pages (pp. 84–88). The rest of the
article is devoted to several antecedents of their GVC theory (e.g., GCC work and transaction cost theory
of industrial organization) and four sectoral case studies (i.e., bicycles, apparel, fresh vegetables, and
electronics). In their desire for a parsimonious GVC theory “to be useful to policymakers,” Gerefﬁ et al.
(2005, 82; emphasis added) prefer to “to create the simplest framework that generates results relevant to
real-world outcomes.” In doing so, they have knowingly and invariably underplayed the role of “history,
institutions, geographic and social contexts, the evolving rules of the game, and path dependence matter;
and many factors [that] will inﬂuence how ﬁrms and groups of ﬁrms are linked in the global economy.”
Here, in devoting the entire length of a journal article to theory development, we will theorize at a relatively
high level of abstraction and focus only on the core dynamics and major strategies. Where possible, we will
draw on recent empirical studies in different global industries to illustrate brieﬂy our theoretical arguments.

34

ECONOMIC GEOGRAPHY

outcomes, and the GPN 1.0 conception of value, power, and embeddedness as framing
categories and elements.

Third, our theorization of the causal role of cost-capability, markets, and ﬁnance as
competitive dynamics within the broader risk environments in shaping ﬁrm strategies
helps to specify and deepen the existing analytical scope of GPN 1.0. These dynamic
variables are also mostly neglected or undertheorized in the GCC or GVC frameworks,
which have focused primarily on industry-speciﬁc variables such as complexity and
codiﬁability of interﬁrm transactions, technology and knowledge capabilities within the
supply base, and so on. In what follows, the next two substantive sections will theorize
the broader competitive dynamics confronting actors in global industries and analyze
their ﬁrm-speciﬁc strategies in (re)conﬁguring global production networks. In the con-
cluding section, we will sketch a brief economic-geographic research agenda for future
studies of territorial development in global production systems.

Competitive Dynamics and Risk Environments

What accounts for the historic origin and dynamic evolution of global production
networks over time? This is a key question left mostly unanswered in existing GVC
theories of industrial governance and the GPN 1.0 framework with its notions of terri-
torial and network embeddedness. Here, we theorize the dynamic drivers of value activity
in global production networks. We intentionally choose to focus on the capitalist dynam-
ics that matter for economic actors in global production networks, eschewing the
industry-level approach in earlier theorizations of GVC governance (Gerefﬁ 1994;
Gerefﬁ et al. 2005) or the international focus in economic models of outsourcing (Antràs
and Helpman 2004; Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg 2008). In GPN theory, capitalist
dynamics are the raison d’être of global production networks, prompting actor-speciﬁc
strategies in different regional and national economies. Our contribution in this section
is to identify several such capitalist dynamics rather than to prioritize any single one; the
latter is necessarily an empirical issue. In building a general theory of global production
networks, the point here is that the origin and evolution of global production cannot be
logically and realistically reduced to one dynamic condition.

In theorizing abstractly these capitalist imperatives within the general competitive
context of time-space compression, we recognize three particularly crucial dynamic
forces in the form of optimizing cost-capability ratios (e.g., labor, technology, know-
how, and capital), sustaining market development (e.g., reach and access, dominance,
time-to-market, customer behavior, and preferences), and working with ﬁnancial disci-
pline (e.g., access to ﬁnance, and investor and shareholder pressure). Couched in differ-
ent combinations, these three dynamic forces are the necessary causal conditions for
explaining actor-speciﬁc strategies in conﬁguring these networks, which in turn produce
diverse empirical outcomes. They are the independent variables for us to explain why
global production networks are organized and governed in certain ways, with multifari-
ous consequences for industrial change and territorial development. While the existing
GCC/GVC literature has paid much attention to cost-reduction rationalities in governing
buyer-driven commodity chains and the importance of technological leadership in
producer-driven commodity chains, few studies have brought together these two consid-
erations and integrated them in a dynamic concept such as the cost-capability ratio. Even
fewer studies in this literature have placed sufﬁcient explanatory emphasis on market
development and ﬁnancial discipline in their analyses of global production in different
industries and sectors (for some exceptions, see Hamilton, Petrovic, and Senauer 2011;
Gibbon 2002; Milberg 2008; Milberg and Winkler 2013).

Vol. 91 No. 1 2015

Optimizing Cost-Capability Ratios

Since Gerefﬁ and Korzeniewicz’s (1994) seminal work, two decades of empirical
research into the governance of global commodity/value chains have clearly conﬁrmed
the importance of cost-based competition in driving the globalization of production
organized around spatially dispersed networks of lead ﬁrms and their global suppliers.
The incessant competitive pressure in advanced capitalist economies to lower the prices
of goods and services in end markets led many lead ﬁrms, mostly vertically integrated
through to the late 1970s, to reconsider their cost structures. These structures were
reﬂected in both direct and indirect costs: direct costs comprising material inputs, labor
wages, ﬁxed assets, and other production-related payments; and indirect costs relating to
transaction costs with customers and suppliers, payments for goodwill and trademarks,
investment in proprietary know-how, and costs associated with raising ﬁnance.5 Direct
costs associated with production, particularly wages, became the most obvious arena for
optimization. Internationalization to lower wage cost locations, through establishing
direct subsidiaries or subcontracting to third party suppliers, opened an entirely new
window of locational opportunity for vertically integrated lead ﬁrms from advanced
industrialized economies.6 This focus on cost as the fundamental driver of global pro-
duction, however, overlooks the other side of the same coin—the capabilities of the ﬁrm.
In lieu of an explicit theory of the ﬁrm in existing GVC and GPN frameworks, it is useful
to observe here that a ﬁrm necessarily incurs costs in acquiring and mobilizing resources
to complete its productive activity. A resource-based view of the ﬁrm allows us to
appreciate better its inherent role as a capable and strategic organizer of productive assets
and value activities (Barney 2001; Teece 2009). In short, cost alone does not give us
enough analytical purchase to deﬁne the ﬁrm as the key actor in a production network;
cost must be theorized alongside capability to form a complete and actor-oriented view
of the ﬁrm. A ﬁrm can therefore be thought of as a managerial device to optimize the
accumulation and deployment of its available resources, deﬁned as its core capability, at
the lowest possible cost.

In GPN theory, we develop the dynamic concept of the cost-capability ratio to
describe this optimization process that allows different ﬁrms in global production net-
works to achieve greater ﬁrm-speciﬁc capabilities and value capture over time. We argue
that while cost reduction is clearly an important capitalist dynamic compelling lead ﬁrms
to engage in outsourcing and subcontracting to independent suppliers both at home and
abroad, cost is a relative concept. It must be conceptualized in combination with the
actor-speciﬁc capabilities of these lead ﬁrms and their suppliers in order to arrive at a
complete picture of its causal inﬂuence on the formation and evolution of global pro-
duction networks. The dynamics of optimizing the cost-capability ratio can help us
understand why certain value activities are outsourced to independent suppliers by global
lead ﬁrms and why the mix of these activities changes over time in speciﬁc global
production networks. This optimization process is highly contingent on a ﬁrm’s existing

5 Neoclassical economic models of international outsourcing tend to attribute causal effects to falling costs
associated with improvements in communication and transportation technologies (Arndt and Kierzkowski
2001; Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg 2008) and speciﬁcation of property rights (Antràs and Helpman
2004; Antràs and Chor 2013). In GPN theory, these cost improvements are conceptualized as enabling
factors rather than causal conditions for the emergence of global production networks because they do not
generally accrue to particular ﬁrms and actors.

6 This is the phenomenon ﬁrst identiﬁed as the New International Division of Labor (NIDL) in the seminal
work by Fröbel, Heinrichs, and Kreye (1980). Their analysis was based on detailed empirical work on the
international relocation of German-owned textile and garment production over the period from 1960 to
1975 both within Europe and beyond to North Africa and Asia.

35

G
P
N
T
H
E
O
R
Y

ECONOMIC GEOGRAPHY

Table 1

A Matrix of Cost-Capability Ratios in Global Production Networks [Color table can be viewed in the online
issue, which is available at wileyonlinelibrary.com.]

Lead Firm

Capability

Low

High

Supplier

Capability

36

Low

High

Cost

Low

High

C: Market follower with weak long-term

D: Market follower facing immediate exit

survival prospect

A: Highly competitive industrial leader

B: Industrial leader but subject to serious

competitive pressures

Cost

Low

High

A: clear price taker with no or little

bargaining power

B: Highly competitive and may evolve into
a strategic partner or even a lead ﬁrm
(A or B)

D: No prospect of securing value activity

in global production networks

C: No prospect of securing value activity
in global production networks, except
those supplying highly specialized
modules and components (e.g., platform
leaders) and essential services

resource endowment and strategic direction in current and/or new markets. The optimal
cost-capability ratio also varies from one ﬁrm to another. Some ﬁrms can achieve optimal
ratios through either cost reduction or building new capabilities, while others can accom-
plish improvements in both dimensions.

In Table 1, we present four stylized scenarios of cost-capability ratios confronting both
lead ﬁrms and their suppliers (domestic and abroad). In general, a lead ﬁrm or a supplier
is most competitive if it enjoys a low cost-capability ratio achieved through combining
low costs with high capabilities (e.g., lead ﬁrm A or supplier B). High ﬁrm-speciﬁc
capabilities in productivity, technology and know-how, and/or organizational routines
require very substantial investments that tend to drive up overall costs. Market leaders in
most globalized industries invest heavily in research and development (R&D), human
resources, and marketing to sustain their cutting-edge products and/or services. A low
cost-capability ratio is therefore much harder to achieve when all value activity, including
manufacturing production, takes place in the home economy because labor-related direct
production costs in advanced economies tend to be high. More recently, emerging lead
ﬁrms from newly industrialized economies have begun to experience higher cost-
capability ratios due to growing domestic costs and the inherent limits placed on their
ﬁrm-speciﬁc capabilities (a function of their weaker national innovation systems). The
successful establishment of a lead ﬁrm-speciﬁc global production network through the
internationalization of value activity (e.g., manufacturing and R&D) will allow a lead
ﬁrm (B) to reduce production costs or increase ﬁrm-speciﬁc capabilities and to move
toward a more optimal ratio, characterized by lower overall costs and higher capabilities,
which enables it to become a highly competitive industrial leader (A). With low produc-
tion costs (e.g., economies of scale and stringent cost controls) and high capabilities
(e.g., innovation in production and management), a supplier (B) of intermediate or ﬁnal

Vol. 91 No. 1 2015

products tends to be highly competitive and may be able to succeed in taking over
production-related value activity outsourced by lead ﬁrms in global production networks.
A highly competitive strategic partner (B) may even take on the role of becoming a global
lead ﬁrm when it ventures successfully into market deﬁnition through new brand devel-
opment and product innovation.

Overall, this dynamic concept of the cost-capability ratio can illuminate an important
coevolutionary process in successful global production networks in which both lead ﬁrms
and their partners and suppliers manage to reduce their cost-capability ratios over time. By
optimizing their ratios through international production and outsourcing arrangements,
lead ﬁrms may be able to maintain or regain their industrial leadership in end markets. By
articulating into the global production networks of these lead ﬁrms and enhancing their
own ﬁrm-speciﬁc capabilities, independent suppliers can also optimize their ratios over
time. Through interﬁrm learning and deepening transactional relationships, these suppli-
ers can evolve further to become the strategic partners of global lead ﬁrms (Yeung 2007,
2009; Appelbaum 2008; Sturgeon, Humphrey, and Gerefﬁ 2011; Gerefﬁ 2014). Cost
reduction alone, therefore, cannot be the fundamental driver of evolving global production
networks. Rather, both costs and ﬁrm-speciﬁc capabilities are relative and subject to
change over time under global competition. Only by continuously optimizing cost-
capability ratios can lead ﬁrms and their suppliers engage in the recursive process of
sustaining or improving their competitive positions in the global economy.

Sustaining Market Development

The causal effects of the market imperative on the geographic dynamics of global
production were recognized in Gerefﬁ’s (1994) original formulation of buyer-driven
GCCs in labor-intensive industries such as apparel, footwear, and toys. In that formula-
tion, market forces in advanced capitalist economies were embodied in the rise of large
buyers—such as retailers, merchandisers, and their purchasing intermediaries—that in
turn drove the internationalization of production and their overseas supplier networks.
The nature of this market imperative, however, has not been adequately theorized in the
subsequent GCC or GVC literature because much of its analytical focus tends to be
placed on cost-saving practices of these large buyers and their implications for interﬁrm
or value chain governance. In GPN theory, we argue that the dynamics of market
development are not just about large buyers or producers bringing durable goods or
services to mass consumers for their ﬁnal consumption in preexisting or externally
deﬁned end markets. On the contrary, GPN theory conceptualizes the market imperative
confronting ﬁrms as a negotiated outcome through which both producers and customers
are actively involved in market creation—producers in seeking greater revenues and
proﬁts through market expansion and customers through creating different markets by
becoming more demanding for better products/services at lower prices. The emergence
and changing conﬁguration of global production networks represents an organizational
outcome of this iterative process of market development. The market is not an externally
imposed structure in which producers and customers react and behave passively. Rather,
through their actor-speciﬁc practices, these economic agents create and shape market
structures (Fligstein 2001; Berndt and Boeckler 2009; Caliskan and Callon 2010). To
understand the enduring dynamics of the market development process, we need to know
as much about customers and their behavior as about producer strategies, across the full
range of ﬁrms from merchandisers to manufacturers and distributors. Market creation
entails developing new demand conditions and supplier capabilities that are mutually
reinforcing and geographically mutable. GPN theory thus focuses on both producers and
customers in their making of global production networks.

37

G
P
N
T
H
E
O
R
Y

38

ECONOMIC GEOGRAPHY

In general, a market for a product or service is measured in terms of the volume or size
of demand, the rate of growth, and the nature of demand with respect to quality,
standards, innovation, differentiation, and so on. Developing and sustaining market reach
imposes strong competitive pressures on global lead ﬁrms, irrespective of their cost-
capability ratios and producer roles in global production networks (e.g., buyers or
manufacturers of goods or providers of services). Lead ﬁrms with high cost-capability
ratios are more compelled to reconﬁgure their production networks in order to maintain
and/or redeﬁne their market position. As market makers, lead ﬁrms with low cost-
capability ratios continue to develop access to new markets and beneﬁt from their
ﬁrst-mover advantages in terms of market creation. Meanwhile, international suppliers of
intermediate or ﬁnished goods/services are subject to the same competitive pressure
because access to markets in advanced economies through lead ﬁrms brings potentially
larger orders, upgrading opportunities, and, ultimately, better value capture.

Once a new market is created through ﬁrm-speciﬁc entrepreneurial innovations (e.g.,
new or recombinant technologies, products, or services), lead ﬁrms tend to seek market
domination in order to capture as much value as possible from their proprietary products
or services. This capitalist impulse toward market domination is evident even in the most
globalized industries such as automobiles and electronics. Lead ﬁrms that succeed in
optimizing their cost-capability ratios through reconﬁguring their global production
networks are likely to be dominant players with respect to market creation and domina-
tion in these industries. These markets are often characterized by oligopolistic compe-
tition among a few leading players (e.g., in automobiles and electronics). Increasing
supplier capabilities also contribute to greater market concentration in the global supply
base. From the perspective of both lead ﬁrms and their major suppliers, the dynamics of
market dominance clearly provide a strong incentive to develop and (re)conﬁgure global
production networks.

The market imperative of global production networks, nevertheless, should not be
deﬁned entirely from the perspective of these producers of ﬁnal goods or services (lead
ﬁrms, suppliers, and so on). Customers can be just as critical in deﬁning this market
imperative. In general, customer refers to corporate users and individual consumers of
goods and services in end markets. This simple distinction between intermediate and end
markets points to substantially different customer pressures confronting producers. In
intermediate markets, corporate customers tend to possess more specialized know-how
and ﬁrm-speciﬁc demands for ﬁnished goods or services. On the other hand, end markets
are ﬁercely competitive and fast moving precisely because of the extremely diverse
nature of consumer demand and preferences. The market impulse of this diverse con-
sumer behavior is transmitted to producers through their corporate and noncorporate
clients. In addition to economic factors such as price and quality, consumers are now
better informed and take into account other noneconomic considerations such as ethical
and social responsibility and environmental impact in their consumption decisions.
These diverse consumer preferences have increasingly become a deﬁning feature of the
market imperative in shaping how producers develop and organize their global produc-
tion networks (see their causal impact on ﬁrm strategies in the next section).

What is missing in this consideration of sustaining market development, however, is
the possibility of new markets and emerging consumers beyond the home markets of
global lead ﬁrms. The rise of new markets in developing economies and the partial shift
of end markets to the so-called Global South in the 2000s has unleashed a signiﬁcant new
market
to the earlier retail revolution in advanced
economies—the home markets for most global lead ﬁrms. It also creates a unique basis
for the emergence of new global lead ﬁrms from these large developing markets and

imperative that

is different

Vol. 91 No. 1 2015

economies that can capitalize on their home advantages as national ﬁrms with favorable
access to domestic markets and production networks. Speciﬁcally, this new market
imperative entails a massive increase in domestic consumption of ﬁnished goods and
services; a demand structure skewed toward commodities, infrastructure, and light
manufactured goods; and lower concern for product standards and quality levels. Since
the 1990s, the rapid growth of the world’s most populated economies—most notably
China and India—has provided a low cost global supply base for lead ﬁrms from
advanced economies. More importantly, it has also created new demand from literally
billions of ﬁnal consumers for goods and services previously destined for consumption
only in advanced economies (Kaplinsky and Farooki 2011; Yang 2014). To capitalize on
this new market imperative, global lead ﬁrms and their network partners and suppliers
have recognized that the nature of this demand imperative is substantially different from
that in advanced economies. Competitive success in tapping into this vast market,
however, requires not just tweaking global products or services to fulﬁll this demand at
lower costs, but rather a fundamentally new understanding of the nature of demand and
a corresponding system of production networks. Some of the national ﬁrms or industrial
groups in these large developing economies (e.g., Huawei from China and Tata from
India) are particularly well placed to take advantage of their home markets and to emerge
concomitantly as global lead ﬁrms in their respective industries (i.e., information and
communications technology [ICT] solutions and automotive engineering).

Working with Financial Discipline

The dynamics of optimizing cost-capability ratios and sustaining market development
in GPN theory have profound causal effects on economic actors in conﬁguring their
global production networks. But these interrelated cost and market effects do not form a
complete explanation of the evolution of ﬁrm-speciﬁc strategies and global production
networks. From being a relatively obscure consideration in the early GCC literature
during the 1990s, ﬁnancial discipline has come to the forefront of accounting for the
evolutionary dynamics of these actors and networks in the 2010s (Gibbon 2002; Milberg
2008; Milberg and Winkler 2013). Just as production fragmentation and cross-border
supplier networks since the 1980s have fascinated researchers interested in interﬁrm
governance and industrial development, a parallel and, in retrospect, perhaps much more
signiﬁcant phenomenon has dramatically transformed many of the world’s dominant
economies, with the United States and the United Kingdom being at the forefront of
change. This is the transformative imperative of ﬁnancialization, deﬁned by Davis (2009,
93) as a powerful process
through which “[f]inancial considerations—market
valuation—would drive choices about the boundaries and strategies of the ﬁrm. Firms
would focus on doing one thing well, and that one thing was often determined by the
stock market.” A complete GPN theory must take into account the causal role of ﬁnance
in disciplining the organization of capitalist production in the global economy.

We argue that the pressures and opportunities associated with ﬁnancialization impinge
on lead ﬁrms and compel their strategic shift toward developing and expanding their
global production networks. In tandem with optimizing cost-capability ratios and sus-
taining market development, the causal dynamics of ﬁnancial discipline work through
actor-speciﬁc strategies and responses that in turn produce different spatial and organi-
zational conﬁgurations of these networks. Lead ﬁrms that succeed in meeting the
demands of ﬁnancial discipline through globalizing production tend to perform well in
the ﬁnancial markets in terms of stock prices and executive rewards, prompting a further
shift in their strategic emphasis toward a ﬁnance-driven approach to corporate growth
and governance (see empirical details in Krippner 2011; Milberg and Winkler 2013). In

39

G
P
N
T
H
E
O
R
Y

40

ECONOMIC GEOGRAPHY

this iterative sense, ﬁnancialization works hand-in-hand with global production network
formation and ongoing reconﬁguration to sustain capitalist accumulation. While the
powerful disciplining effects of ﬁnancialization on lead ﬁrm strategies have been better
known since the 2000s, it is important to recognize that the process started as early as the
1970s, particularly in the United States. As more savings and credit are channelled into
ﬁnancial markets and investment products through mutual funds and ﬁnancial asset
management, lead ﬁrms do not need to depend exclusively on banks and other lending
institutions to ﬁnance their investment and production. They can now turn to capital
markets to meet their investment requirements and to access ﬁnance on favorable terms,
albeit with a catch—namely, that they have to fulﬁll the ﬁnancial objectives of their
investors, and these shareholders are singularly interested in higher and, often, short-term
stock prices.

This growing alignment of interests between nonﬁnancial lead ﬁrms and their dispa-
rate shareholders is increasingly underpinned by corporate reengineering focusing on
lead ﬁrms’ core competences, the globalization of their production relations, and chang-
ing corporate governance norms. Since the 1980s, this ﬁnancialization of nonﬁnancial
lead ﬁrms has produced profound incentives for, and pressures on, corporate strategies
and decisions. In terms of incentives, lead ﬁrms have begun to realize that more proﬁts
can be generated through short-term ﬁnancial reengineering of their existing operations
than through longer-term industrial investment in new plants, equipment, technology,
and products. Corporate ﬁnancial ofﬁcers ﬁnd more proﬁt sources in portfolio income on
ﬁnancial assets. This ﬁnancial transformation has put immense pressures on nonﬁnancial
lead ﬁrms to optimize cost-capability ratios and to engage in global production. Divest-
ment of high-cost manufacturing operations to increasingly capable international sup-
pliers has allowed lead ﬁrms to increase their shareholder values and yet maintain their
dominant market positions. These strategic partners and suppliers have shouldered the
ﬁnancial investment necessary to supply to global lead ﬁrms so that the latter could focus
on extraction of ﬁnancial value from their proprietary assets (e.g., branding, technology,
and know-how) and ﬁnancial assets (e.g., newly acquired or merged businesses).

As suppliers strive to reduce their cost-capability ratios and take on more value activity
in lead ﬁrms’ global production over time, they are inadvertently subject to the same
ruthless ﬁnancial discipline as their lead ﬁrm customers. To begin with, the sheer
ﬁnancial costs to suppliers increase exponentially when they upgrade from subcontrac-
tors to full package producers and contract manufacturers. Under the disguise of supply
chain rationalization, lead ﬁrms driven by ﬁnancial considerations are inclined to source
from fewer, but larger, suppliers in order to achieve greater economies of scale and lower
unit purchase prices. Lead ﬁrms also tend to adopt more aggressive price-reduction
policies with these suppliers. In many global industries (e.g., apparel, electronics, and
agrofood), the phenomenon of lead ﬁrms passing on ﬁnancial exposure to their suppliers
is pervasive. Moreover, ﬁnancial pressures on international suppliers can be transmitted
through trade ﬁnance, comprising a number of ﬁnancial instruments whose role in
spreading the cascading effects of ﬁnancial shocks becomes much greater because of the
heightened sensitivity of lead ﬁrms to ﬁnancial volatility and the closely interconnected
organization of their global production networks (see examples in Staritz, Gerefﬁ, and
Cattaneo 2011).

Managing Risks

In a global economy characterized by rapid technological shifts, massive production
fragmentation and international outsourcing, and the rise of new markets and competi-
tors, global lead ﬁrms and their suppliers are confronted with a greater sense of uncer-

Different Forms of Risk in Global Production Networks

Table 2

Vol. 91 No. 1 2015

Nature

Causal Effects on Actors

Recent Examples

Form

Economic risk

Product risk

Systemic shifts in
markets—new
technologies and
innovations, changing
demand, ﬁnancial
disruptions, exchange rate
ﬂuctuations, and so on

Quality, safety, branding, and

efﬁciency considerations

Loss of competitive position in

Decline of Canada’s RIM

cost and/or market
leadership; reduction in
ﬁnancial returns and
proﬁtability; lower income
and structural volatility to
localities and regions

(BlackBerry) and Finland’s
Nokia in smartphone devices,
2013

Negative views of goods or

The demise of Arthur Anderson

services by consumers and
customers; greater demand
for corporate social
responsibility

Regulatory risk

Political, public-to-private

governance, and changing
standards and norms

Disruption or termination of
global production, existing
industrial practices and
organizational arrangements

Labor risk

Struggles over working

conditions and
employment practices

Environmental

Natural hazards or

risk

human-made disasters

Resistance and industrial action
by employees; disruptions to
global production and
employment prospects; and
potentially greater
reputational risk

Accentuating the above four

forms of risk and their causal
effects

LLP in 2002 because of its
criminal involvement in the
Enron ﬁasco

Toyota’s quality issues with its
“sticky pedals” in the United
States, 2009–11

European Union’s tough

regulation of genetically
modiﬁed organisms (GMOs)
since 2003 and impact on
GM crop growers (e.g.,
Monsanto’s MON810 maize)

Strikes in Foxconn’s plants in

China, maker of Apple’s
iPhones, due to workers
demanding for better terms
and working conditions,
2012–13

Japan’s 2011 Fukushima

earthquake and production
stoppage in automobile
manufacturing due to parts
shortage

41

G
P
N
T
H
E
O
R
Y

tainty and unpredictability. Managing these challenges successfully requires the entire
spectrum of actors in global production network to develop a fuller understanding of
changing risk circumstances and to create corresponding coping strategies and plat-
forms. Much more so than the existing GVC or GPN literature, an enhanced GPN theory
must internalize this causal importance of risk and its management in understanding the
dynamics of actor-speciﬁc strategies in these networks. In this sense, global production
networks are fundamentally an organizational architecture wherein economic actors can
mitigate and manage different forms of risk inherent in the above three sets of competi-
tive dynamics. Clearly the impact of risk on different ﬁrm and nonﬁrm actors varies. Due
to substantial institutional variations, the geography of this impact is also highly variable
in different locations and regions articulated into speciﬁc global production networks.
Table 2 details that this risk can primarily take ﬁve forms: economic (e.g., shifting market
or technological conditions), product (e.g., brand damage associated with quality and
other issues), regulatory (e.g., shifting rule regimes), labor (e.g., struggles over wages
and conditions), and environmental (e.g., pollution or natural disaster).

These risk forms require further theorization. First, risk is generally produced beyond
the control or conﬁnes of individual actors and refers therefore to a common environment

42

ECONOMIC GEOGRAPHY

confronting actors collectively. While an economic actor (e.g., a lead ﬁrm) can actively
participate in the creation of the initial condition underpinning a particular form of risk
(e.g., a new technology or an industrial pollutant), the translation of this initial condition
into a risk requires the enrollment of other economic and noneconomic actors into the
same global production network. For a lead ﬁrm’s new technology to be market-
transformative and risky to other lead ﬁrms in the same industry, it must be well
supported by its strategic partners (e.g., contract manufacturers or service providers) and
key customers. Similarly, for an environmental risk to be efﬁcacious, the initial condition
(e.g., industrial pollution by a lead ﬁrm) must be identiﬁed and taken up by one or more
social actors (e.g., environmental groups). Identifying the causal effects of risk in global
production networks thus requires both actor- and structural-level analyses.

Second, the qualitative nature and causal effects of risk play out differently in the
context of global production networks such that we can term it GPN risk. While all ﬁve
risk forms existed in the earlier era of vertically integrated mass production (Fordism),
their nature and effects have a much broader geographic scope and faster temporal
transmission in today’s era of widely distributed global production networks. Geographi-
cally, these risks can spread across the entire range of geographically dispersed actors
articulated into a particular global production network. For example, when a lead ﬁrm in
one location is susceptible to rapid shifts in end-market demand in another location, its
suppliers in yet more locations are also exposed to the same ﬁnancial risk taken on
between receiving orders and ﬁnal payments from this lead ﬁrm. Because of their tightly
interlocked network connections and the tendency of value chain actors to exhibit what
Lee, Padmanabhan, and Whang (1997) call the bullwhip effect of information distortion
and overampliﬁcation, market risk and supply chain insecurity can occur and be trans-
mitted very quickly, and its negative ramiﬁcations for value activity can be very serious.7
Third, mitigating risk is not necessarily a zero sum process where the gain by one
economic actor must entail the loss to another actor. In some circumstances (e.g.,
demand shift or technological change in market conditions), such a zero sum scenario is
possible among different lead ﬁrms or their suppliers. But in many other cases (e.g.,
ﬁnancial crisis or race to the bottom cost competition), most, if not all, economic actors
can suffer from negative consequences of economic risk. Similarly, regulatory and
environmental risks often affect all actors in the same industry. For example, post-9/11
counterterrorism measures in the United States require more stringent checks on cross-
border movements of all goods (e.g., the mandatory inspection of all sea-borne contain-
ers by the U.S. Customs and Border Protection agency; see Gattorna 2013). This
differential effect of risk under changing circumstances in turn explains why some risks
are more causally efﬁcacious in shaping ﬁrm-speciﬁc strategies because more value can
be captured or losses minimized through the mitigation of these risks. It also underscores
why national and international institutions, through their regulatory practices, can make
a signiﬁcant difference to global production—a conceptual lacuna in the existing GVC
conception of industrial governance.

7 This GPN risk is particularly visible in the global electronics industry (see Yeung 2007; Sturgeon and
Kawakami 2011). For example, a ﬁre in SK Hynix’s DRAM production plant in China’s Wuxi on
September 4, 2013, led to substantial disruption in the global supply chain of memory chips for electronics
devices. Chip prices increased by 19 percent within days of the ﬁre. With a third of the global market share
in memory chips, SK Hynix from South Korea is the world’s second largest producer, after Samsung
Electronics. Its Wuxi plant produces about half of SK Hynix’s total production (http://blogs.wsj.com/
digits/2013/09/09/chip-supply-concerns-linger-after-hynix-factory-ﬁre).

Vol. 91 No. 1 2015

Strategies of (Re)conﬁguring Global Production Networks
Theorized in the historic sequence of their evolving importance, the above capitalist
dynamics collectively constitute the three-pronged causal explanation of why global
production networks emerge and evolve. In turn, this GPN theory is incomplete without
a nuanced consideration of the diverse and substantial risks associated with global
production. As global lead ﬁrms engage more in international outsourcing, and as their
foreign partners and suppliers actively develop their own ﬁrm-speciﬁc capabilities, these
economic actors from drastically different territorial formations are confronted with an
operating environment that is much less certain and predictable than their home econo-
mies and domestic markets. This theorization paves the way for future empirical studies
of these networks and their formations because the relative importance and mutual
interaction of these competitive dynamics varies across different networks and risk
environments. Our approach becomes necessary and useful because existing GVC and
GPN approaches have not adequately theorized these chain/network dynamics and their
organizational variations beyond their primary focus on chain governance or network
embeddedness.

In this section, we continue with our theory development and conceptualize how
economic and noneconomic actors develop, organize, and govern their global production
networks in order to respond effectively to the causal challenges inherent in these
competitive dynamics. While the above three sets of competitive dynamics provide the
structural properties of causality and emergence, the actor-speciﬁc strategies depicted in
this section serve as the corresponding mechanisms for organizing production networks.
These dynamics and strategies collectively coconstitute the causal mechanisms of global
production networks, in turn explaining empirical economic development outcomes
(e.g., ﬁrm growth, technological acquisition and innovation, industrial upgrading and
sectoral transformation, and local and regional development).

While focusing almost exclusively on interﬁrm relationships as modes of industrial
governance, the GVC literature does recognize that the dynamics of these relationships
are not spontaneous, automatic, or even systematic. In their most recent work, Ponte and
Sturgeon (2014, 200) argue that “these [governance] processes are ‘driven’ by the
strategies and decisions of speciﬁc actors. The relevance of GVC governance is that it
examines the concrete practices, power dynamics, and organizational forms that give
character and structure to cross-border business networks.” In their bid to develop a
broad-brush analytical tool for characterizing an entire global value chain or even a
global industry, however, these concrete practices and power dynamics are frequently
subsumed under different modes of chain governance. The strategic thrust behind these
competitive dynamics and actor-speciﬁc practices becomes invisible or assumed, giving
way to broader industry- and chain-level characterizations such as modular, relational,
and captive interﬁrm relationships.

As a corrective to this top-down conceptualization of chain characteristics and gov-
ernance practices, we rebuild the analytical causality in favor of the four types of
ﬁrm-level strategy that explain the particular conﬁgurations of global production net-
works in speciﬁc historic and geographic contexts. Our approach thus improves on the
existing GVC characterizations because we allow for the possibility of actors in the same
global production networks exercising all four types of ﬁrm-level strategy. The precise
combination of these strategies can only be ascertained through empirical investigations.
To reiterate, chains and networks are merely organizational devices, providing different
windows of opportunity for actor-speciﬁc learning, practice, and upgrading. Their
empirical efﬁcacy depends critically on the strategic choices made by different actors—

43

G
P
N
T
H
E
O
R
Y

44

ECONOMIC GEOGRAPHY

economic and noneconomic—who constitute and, in turn, are embedded in these chains
and networks. Our theoretical focus on actors as the unit of analysis and their strategies
in conﬁguring networks also does not contradict the heterarchical conception of net-
works; the latter can be useful when networks become the unit of analysis for under-
standing market competition and industrial change (Yeung 1994; Dicken et al. 2001).

The key challenge for GPN theory, then, is to incorporate a broader consideration of
ﬁrm-speciﬁc strategies (Mathews 2006). This is where variability becomes one of the
most critical attributes of strategizing by actors in global production networks. By
focusing on diverse ﬁrm actors, GPN theory can analyze the diversity of interests and
strategies in the different functional segments associated with the same or different
global value chains and global industries. Taking this initial step of differentiating ﬁrms
on the basis of their roles and functions in a global production network, we identify in
Table 3 a range of ﬁrm types, namely, lead ﬁrms, strategic partners, specialized suppliers
(industry-speciﬁc or multi-industrial), generic suppliers, and customers. This approach to
deﬁning diverse ﬁrm-speciﬁc roles in the same or different networks and industries
allows us to overcome one of the shortcomings in the existing GVC model of industrial
governance, namely, that it often fails to explain how a model of dyadic interﬁrm
exchange can translate beyond the interﬁrm nexus or even within the same value chain.8
In this section, four strategies are explicitly theorized in relation to the above three
competitive dynamics.

Intraﬁrm Coordination

This strategy is particularly important because the existing GVC and outsourcing
literature tends to focus exclusively on interﬁrm relationships. Despite the rich interdis-
ciplinary literature on transnational corporations (Dicken 2011; UNCTAD 2013), we
know surprisingly little about how ﬁrms in global production networks reorganize their
internal value activity to meet the competitive challenges of the three structural dynamics
identiﬁed above. In general, we can deﬁne intraﬁrm coordination as the internalization
and consolidation of value activity within the lead ﬁrm, the strategic partner, and/or the
supplier ﬁrm within and across national borders in order to achieve greater ﬁrm-speciﬁc
efﬁciencies such as lower inventories and cost control, greater market responsiveness,
and higher-quality products or services. To Kaplinsky and Morris (2001), this coordina-
tion goes beyond the ﬁrm’s strategic repositioning in a global production network to
incorporate its management and logistics of production, its integration of design and
R&D into supply chains, and its monitoring of quality standards and production out-
comes. Through greater attention to intraﬁrm coordination, a ﬁrm can identify and
capture more value from its current bundles of ﬁrm-speciﬁc resources and organizational
capabilities.

Table 4 summarizes the causal interaction between the competitive dynamics and risk
environment and the adoption of intraﬁrm coordination strategy by different actors, and
their implications for the organizational conﬁgurations of global production networks.

8 For example, the reformulated theory of GVC governance (Gerefﬁ et al. 2005) places its analytical
emphasis on characterizing the governance of the entire value chain on the basis of discrete and dyadic
(network) coordination relations between lead ﬁrms and their immediate (ﬁrst-tier) suppliers. The trans-
actional characteristics and ﬁrm capabilities shaping these discrete governance relations are also assumed
to be applicable to the entire value chain and, by interference, the entire global industry. As pointed out
critically by Bair (2008, 354), what characterizes this dyadic coordination relation in one part of the value
chain (e.g., “relational governance” between a lead ﬁrm and its ﬁrst-tier supplier in the automobile
industry) may not necessarily be applicable to other interﬁrm relations further down the same chain (e.g.,
“captive governance” between the ﬁrst-tier supplier and other tiers of suppliers).

)
t
r
o
p
s
n
a
r
t
(

l

y
g
o
o
n
h
c
e
t

i

s
n
o
i
t
a
c
n
u
m
m
o
c

d
n
a

)
s
e

l
i

b
o
m
o
t
u
a
(

a
t
o
y
o
T

;
)
]
T
C

I
[

s
e
i
r
t
s
u
d
n

I

e
c
i
v
r
e
S

n

i

l

s
e
p
m
a
x
E

g
n
i
r
u
t
c
a
f
u
n
a
M
n

i

l

s
e
p
m
a
x
E

y
t
i

v

i
t
c
A
e
u
l
a
V

l

e
o
R

s
e
n

i
l
r
i
A
e
r
o
p
a
g
n
S

i

i

;
)
g
n
k
n
a
b
(

C
B
S
H

n
o
i
t
a
m
r
o
f
n
i
(

g
n
u
s
m
a
S

d
n
a

l

e
p
p
A

n
o
i
t
i
n
ﬁ
e
d

t
e
k
r
a
m
d
n
a

t
c
u
d
o
r
P

l

o
r
t
n
o
c

d
n
a

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
d
r
o
o
C

s
r
o
t
c
A
N
P
G

s

m
r
ﬁ

d
a
e
L

l

3
e
b
a
T

k
r
o
w
t
e
N
n
o
i
t
c
u
d
o
r
P

l

a
b
o
G

l

a

n

i

s
r
o
t
c
A

s
a

s

m

r
i
F

r
o

i

g
n
e
o
B

i

;
)
g
n
k
n
a
b
(

i

g
n
k
n
a
B
M
B

I

F
Z

;
)
T
C

I
(

i

s
c
n
o
r
t
x
e
F

l

r
o

i
a
H
n
o
H

)
t
r
o
p
s
n
a
r
t
(

s
u
b
r
i
A

)
s
e

l
i

b
o
m
o
t
u
a
(

d
e
c
n
a
v
d
a

r
o

g
n
i
r
u
t
c
a
f
u
n
a
m

n

i

t
n
e
m
p
o
e
v
e
d

l

d
n
a

n
g
i
s
e
d
o
C

s
e
c

i

v
r
e
s

s

m
r
ﬁ

d
a
e

l

o
t

s
n
o
i
t
u
o
s

l

l

e
t
e
p
m
o
c

r
o

l
a
i
t
r
a
P

s
r
e
n
t
r
a
p

c

i
g
e
t
a
r
t
S

s
u
e
d
a
m
A

i

;
)
g
n
k
n
a
b
(

s
r
e
d
o
r
h
c
S

)
t
r
o
p
s
n
a
r
t
(

)
s
e

l
i

b
o
m
o
t
u
a
(

s
t
c
u
d
o
r
p

r
o

s
r
e
n
t
r
a
p

r
i
e
h
t

r
o
/
d
n
a

s

m
r
ﬁ

r
o

y
t
i
l

e
d
F

i

;
)
T
C

I
(

t
f
o
s
o
r
c
i
M

o
s
n
e
D
d
n
a

i

l

h
p
e
D

;
)
T
C

I
(

l

e
t
n
I

,
s
t
n
e
n
o
p
m
o
c

l

,
s
e
u
d
o
m
e
u
l
a
v

h
g
i
H

d
a
e

l

t
r
o
p
p
u
s

o
t

s
e

i
l

p
p
u
s

d
e
t
a
c
d
e
D

i

i

)
c
ﬁ
c
e
p
s
-
y
r
t
s
u
d
n
i
(

s
r
e

i
l

p
p
u
s

d
e
z
i
l
a
i

c
e
p
S

s
c
i
n
o
i
v
A
c
i
n
o
s
a
n
a
P

i

;
)
g
n
k
n
a
b
(

L
H
D

e
v

i
t
o
m
o
t
u
A
c
n
o
s
a
n
a
P

i

;
)
T
C

I
(

L
H
D

s
d
o
o
g

e
t
a
i
d
e
m
r
e
t
n

i

l
a
i
r
t
s
u
d
n
i
-
s
s
o
r
C

r
o

s

m
r
ﬁ

d
a
e

l

o
t

s
e

i
l

p
p
u
s

l
a
c

i
t
i
r
C

s
r
e

i
l

p
p
u
s

d
e
z
i
l
a
i

c
e
p
S

)
t
r
o
p
s
n
a
r
t
(

)
s
e

l
i

b
o
m
o
t
u
a
(

s
e
c

i

v
r
e
s

r
o

s
r
e
n
t
r
a
p

)
l
a
i
r
t
s
u
d
n
i
-
i
t
l
u
m

(

t
r
o
p
s
n
a
r
t

d
n
a

i

g
n
k
n
a
b

n

i

i

g
n
n
a
e
C

l

e

l
i

b
o
m
o
t
u
a

d
n
a

T
C

I

n

i

s
c

i
t
s
a
l
P

e
u
l
a
v
w
o

l

d
n
a

d
e
z
i
d
r
a
d
n
a
t
S

s
e

i
l

p
p
u
s

f

o

i

s
r
e
d
v
o
r
p

h
t
g
n
e
l
-
s
’

m
r
A

s
r
e

i
l

p
p
u
s

c

i
r
e
n
e
G

45

G
P
N
T
H
E
O
R
Y

Vol. 91 No. 1 2015

s
e
c
i
v
r
e
s

g
n
i
r
u
t
c
a
f
u
n
a
m

s
e
c

i

v
r
e
s

r
o

s
t
c
u
d
o
r
p

s
r
e
m
u
s
n
o
c

r
o

s

m
r
ﬁ

d
a
e

l

r
e
h
t
O

s
r
e
m
u
s
n
o
c

r
o

s

m
r
ﬁ

d
a
e

l

r
e
h
t
O

n
o
i
t
p
m
u
s
n
o
c

l
a
n
ﬁ

r
o

e
t
a
i
d
e
m
r
e
t
n
I

s

m
r
ﬁ

d
a
e

l

o
t

e
u
l
a
v

f

o

r
e
f
s
n
a
r
T

s
r
e
m
o
t
s
u
c

y
e
K

ECONOMIC GEOGRAPHY

Table 4

Firm-Speciﬁc Strategies and Organizational Outcomes in Global Production Networks

Strategy as

Competitive Dynamics

Risks

GPN

Actor Practice

Intraﬁrm coordination
(e.g., pharmaceuticals and

retail)

Interﬁrm control
(e.g., automobiles and

information technology
services)

Interﬁrm partnership
(e.g., electronics and

logistics)

46

Extraﬁrm bargaining
(e.g., resources and

agrofood)

Cost-capability

Ratio

Low

Market

Imperative

Financial
Discipline

High

Low

High

High

Low

High

Medium

Structure as Organizational

Outcomes

Domestic expansion and/or
foreign direct investment
and mergers and
acquisitions; high level of
network integration

Outsourcing but dependent

integration of suppliers

High

High

High

High

Outsourcing, joint

Medium

High

High

High

development with
partners and platform
leaders

Differentiated integration
into global production
systems

Firms with efﬁcient internal cost control and high proprietary capabilities are likely to
engage in intraﬁrm coordination to capitalize on their lower cost-capability ratios. Out-
sourcing to third-party suppliers is less necessary because it may not signiﬁcantly lower
the costs of producing goods or services, but instead may increase the ﬁrm’s risk of
capability reduction due to the potential leakage of highly proprietary knowledge or
codiﬁable technology to those independent suppliers. In adopting intraﬁrm coordination,
these ﬁrms are also more driven by the higher market imperative since product cycles
stay dynamic, the industry remains unsaturated, and new market segments continue to
emerge. Internalization through domestic expansion and/or internationalization provides
the optimal organizational platform to create and capture value in this market condition.
As most of these ﬁrms are not subject to intense ﬁnancial discipline, they are not yet
compelled to externalize their value activity to third-party suppliers or to generate large
short-term ﬁnancial returns for their shareholders. In terms of risk, intraﬁrm coordination
is effective in helping ﬁrms navigate risky technological and/or market environments. It
allows the ﬁrm to gain control of critical technological or marketing resources in the face
of such environments. This strategy of intraﬁrm coordination is likely to produce highly
integrated global production networks in which corporate headquarters exercise tight
control over their subsidiaries and afﬁliates.

To illustrate brieﬂy how intraﬁrm coordination works, we can look at the global retail
industry. Leading transnational retailers such as Wal-Mart (United States), Carrefour
(France), Metro (Germany), and Tesco (United Kingdom) all pursue intraﬁrm coordina-
tion with respect to their global store operations, which often number several thousands
of stores across tens of countries. This strategy allows for greater value creation and
capture. In their global operations, these giants tend to internalize most, if not all, their
retail outlets, in order to achieve economies of scale in dealing with suppliers, brand and
quality consistency, and efﬁciency in logistical support. This pattern of intraﬁrm coor-
dination applies also to their increasing presence in new and emerging markets outside

Vol. 91 No. 1 2015

their home countries. While we can generalize to a degree about the strategies of leading
global retailers in buyer-driven global value chains, such an account would conceal
signiﬁcant intraindustry variations in their implementation of ﬁrm-speciﬁc coordination
and organizational relationships with non–brand-name or generic suppliers in different
markets.

For example, we can usefully compare Wal-Mart and Tesco. Building on its success
and dominance in the home market—the United States—Wal-Mart is known for rolling
out its sui generis business model at all costs. In this model, Wal-Mart insists on buying
from generic suppliers offering the lowest price and establishing its own retail outlets,
wherever possible in nonunionized locations. By pushing input and wage costs to the
lowest level possible, Wal-Mart captures value through massive throughput and econo-
mies of scale in its retail sales, described by Abernathy et al. (1999, 3) as “lean retailing.”
This intransigence has led to several high-proﬁle exits from host markets, most notably
Germany and South Korea, both in 2006 (Christopherson 2007). Tesco, on the other
hand, comes from a much smaller home country, the United Kingdom. It does not have
Wal-Mart’s large home market to cross-subsidize its global operations. Tesco thus adopts
a much more ﬂexible and communicative strategy toward its intraﬁrm coordination.
Unlike Wal-Mart, it does not insist on replicating its home-base model in its foreign
subsidiaries and joint ventures. In South Korea, for example, Tesco works with its
strategic partner, Samsung, to penetrate into an otherwise difﬁcult retail market charac-
terized by highly competitive conditions, distinctive and demanding consumer prefer-
ences, and a strong local supply base (Coe and Lee 2006, 2013). Overall, these two
contrasting examples help us understand why and how intraﬁrm coordination can be
adopted as a key strategy to organize global production networks in the retail industry.
Meanwhile, these transnational retailers work closely with a large number of brand-
name suppliers that are lead ﬁrms in their respective industries such as health care
products (e.g., Johnson & Johnson and Unilever), food (e.g., Kraft Foods and Nestlé),
and beverages (e.g., Coca-Cola and Diageo). To safeguard the quality and standards of
their products, these brand-name producers themselves tend to engage in intraﬁrm
coordination of their global production networks, establishing production facilities near
major markets. This strategy also allows them to be responsive to market demand and
consumption patterns. When the brand-name producers’ distribution channels articulate
into the expanding networks of global retailers, these lead ﬁrm producers of consumer
goods perform a crucial role as independent suppliers. Through technological platforms
(e.g., real-time sales data interchange) and joint marketing activity (e.g., cross-ﬁrm
promotion), their highly internalized production networks are integrated with those
coordinated by global retailers. In these interindustry intersections of global production
networks—a dynamic phenomenon not theorized in the existing GVC model of indus-
trial governance—power relations are often balanced between brand-name suppliers and
global retailers. Both groups also share the various risks inherent in their intertwined
global production networks. A major product recall due to safety or quality defects, for
example, will harm the brand-name supplier as much as the global retailer. Intraﬁrm
coordination becomes an effective strategy for them to mitigate these GPN risks.

Interﬁrm Control

This strategy represents a highly managed externalization strategy through which a
lead ﬁrm outsources a very signiﬁcant portion of its value activity to independent
suppliers and contractors, and exercises strong control over their production processes
and product/service quality. This outsourcing applies to key components or services,
complete modules or service packages, and systems and subsystems. The high levels of

47

G
P
N
T
H
E
O
R
Y

48

ECONOMIC GEOGRAPHY

explicit control of its suppliers and contractors are deemed necessary by a lead ﬁrm in
order to gain collective competitiveness in its entire global production network. The
GVC literature terms this a captive form of chain governance (Gerefﬁ et al. 2005), but it
tends to generalize at the level of the entire industry (e.g., automobiles or apparel).

In general, high cost-capability ratios tend to prompt ﬁrms to engage external suppli-
ers in order to regain their cost advantage in different industries. In some cases, this
process of externalization entails exiting lower value-added activities so that the ﬁrm can
focus on building and sustaining its higher-order and more costly dynamic capabilities
(Teece 2009). These evolutionary processes underpin why the concept of cost-capability
ratios is useful in explaining network dynamics. Table 4 notes that external sourcing
makes sense only when a lead ﬁrm suffers from higher costs in relation to its existing
capabilities, and its suppliers enjoy substantial cost advantage through access to cheaper
production inputs (e.g., labor, land, and material costs) and less-stringent regulatory
regimes and institutional frameworks (e.g., labor standards and environmental con-
straints). Moreover, externalization may be feasible if the market for a product or service
is generally mature and saturated. The lack of signiﬁcant new market opportunities
hinders a lead ﬁrm’s desire to compete solely on the basis of its higher cost-capability
ratio and to engage in intraﬁrm coordination with more capital investment. In addition,
ﬁnancial discipline tends to be high and induces ﬁrms to focus only on their core
competence. This discipline imposes serious pressure on ﬁrms to extract greater ﬁnancial
returns from their current assets or investments in order to satisfy their shareholders.
Finally, the risks associated with technological change and market shifts cannot be too
high for outsourcing to take place because suppliers and contractors are less likely or
willing to take on this risk. Without these external actors, a lead ﬁrm’s outsourcing
strategy will not work.

This theorization of the causal role of market, ﬁnancial discipline, and risk in engen-
dering interﬁrm control strategy allows us to provide a more nuanced analysis of the role
of different actors (lead ﬁrms, strategic partners, suppliers, and so on) and their power
relations in evolving global production networks. Our approach deepens the existing
GVC analysis of the captive form of governance. More importantly, it transcends the
identiﬁcation of this governance form and provides a crucial explanation of why these
actors are causally shaped by dynamic imperatives that go well beyond industry-speciﬁc
transactional and technological conditions. Despite its explicit desire to control and lock
in suppliers, for example, a lead ﬁrm may also be keen to develop supplier capabilities
because of the potential for improving collective efﬁciency at the level of the global
production network. In the global automobile industry, for instance, the strategy of
interﬁrm control is frequently deployed by global lead ﬁrms, deﬁned as brand-name
assemblers, to ensure cost competitiveness, rapid time-to-market, and quality consis-
tency.9 Lead ﬁrms in this industry not only outsource signiﬁcant levels of component,
module, and subsystem manufacturing to independent auto suppliers, but the lead ﬁrms
also increasingly pressure these suppliers to establish production and supply facilities
near to lead ﬁrms’ ﬁnal assembly plants in different locations. These ﬁrst-tier suppliers,

9 In the GVC literature, these brand-name assemblers are commonly known as producers because of their
capability of producing an entire automobile. However, in today’s highly globalized automobile industry,
all producers require very substantial inputs from external and multiple tiers of suppliers. These lead ﬁrms
are really assemblers of different components, modules, and sub-systems into a ﬁnished product. In terms
of value activity, their R&D, marketing, distribution and sales are often as signiﬁcant as their assembly
facilities in different geographic locations.

Vol. 91 No. 1 2015

in turn, compel second- or third-tier suppliers to follow suit or to make the appropriate
locational adjustments (Sturgeon, Van Biesebroeck, and Gerefﬁ 2008).

This brief case of interﬁrm control in the automobile industry, nevertheless, conceals
substantial intraindustry variations in the national origins and corporate cultures of
different lead ﬁrm assemblers. Lead ﬁrms from the United States, for example, are much
more dependent on market-based price mechanisms for controlling their different tiers of
suppliers who have often become captive to these American assemblers. Japanese auto-
mobile ﬁrms, on the other hand, are more likely to coinvest in their suppliers and develop
closer interlocking relationships in these production networks that approximate the
relational interﬁrm partnerships to be explained in the next section. The presence of
dense business networks (i.e., keiretsu or groups) and industry associations in Japan also
reinforces the promulgation of common standards and dispute resolution between lead
ﬁrm assemblers and their tiers of suppliers. In terms of network conﬁgurations, lead
ﬁrms from different national origins may also develop production platforms in the same
geographic location but with drastically different market orientation. This market differ-
ence can seriously alter their relationships with local suppliers, rendering industry-level
generalizations misleading and problematical. In China, for example, some American
and European assemblers are more likely to engage in localization through local design,
engineering, and regional headquarters facilities (Liu and Dicken 2006; Van Biesebroeck
and Sturgeon 2010). Partly due to their relationship-based corporate cultures, Japanese
and South Korean automakers are much more cautious in taking this localization
approach for fear of losing control over their local suppliers and thus risking poor product
quality and brand damage. In short, the strategy of interﬁrm control can help lead ﬁrms
cope with intense competitive pressures, but its operationalization in the same global
industry can vary substantially in relation to ﬁrm-speciﬁc and country-of-origin
attributes.

Interﬁrm Partnership

49

G
P
N
T
H
E
O
R
Y

Not all interﬁrm relationships are characterized by lead ﬁrms tightly controlling their
suppliers and contractors. In the above example of Japanese and South Korean automo-
bile assemblers, cooperative relationships can also be formed between lead ﬁrms and
their strategic partners and specialized suppliers. In Gerefﬁ et al. (2005, 86), this coop-
erative form of industrial governance is known as “relational” or “modular” chains. But
our conception goes beyond these broad governance relationships within the same
industry, as ﬁrms may also enter into interindustry partnership relationships with other
ﬁrms, most notably with advanced producer service ﬁrms providing ﬁnancial, legal,
accountancy, information technology, management consultancy, advertising, and logis-
tics services, among others. The level of interdependency in these relations, however, is
not as intense as with ﬁrms in the same sector—producer service ﬁrms tend to be
multi-industry players.

Taking a network rather than an industry approach, we describe this cooperative
strategy as interﬁrm partnership, deﬁned as the collaboration, coevolution, and joint
development of a lead ﬁrm and its strategic partner(s) or key suppliers in the same global
production network in order to compete against other lead ﬁrms and their network
partners. While differential cost-capability ratios can partially account
the
externalization of production of goods or services from a lead ﬁrm (high ratio) to its
strategic partner (low ratio) and independent suppliers (low ratios), it is the simultaneous
presence of the other three competitive pressures—high-market
imperative, high-
ﬁnancial discipline, and high-risk environment—that turns this externalization strategy
from strong interﬁrm control into cooperative partnership (see Table 4). The market

for

50

ECONOMIC GEOGRAPHY

imperative is clearly very signiﬁcant for all ﬁrms in a cooperative global production
network. The prospect of an expanding and unsaturated market assures a lead ﬁrm and its
partners and suppliers that they can collectively beneﬁt from their cooperative value
creation process. Even though the capture of this value is unlikely to be evenly distrib-
uted among these network actors, partnership provides a more mutually beneﬁcial
competitive strategy for them to thrive in the global marketplace. The risk environment
in which all cooperative partners operate tends to be high. These risks range from market
volatility to technological shifts and supply chain disruptions. To reduce their exposure
to these risks and to capitalize quickly on rapid market changes, the lead ﬁrm and its
partners enter into cooperative arrangements underpinned by ﬁnely organized divisions
of labor and mutual dependency.

To understand fully the peculiar conﬁgurations of a cooperative global production
network, we need to analyze how each of these ﬁrm actors adopts the strategy of interﬁrm
partnership. Because of the cooperative nature of their interﬁrm divisions of labor, the
power relations among these actors are not as hierarchical as in the case of a lead ﬁrm
pursuing an interﬁrm control strategy. As argued by Whitford (2005, 17; emphasis in
original), “[n]eeding to improve interﬁrm cooperation and information transfer, OEMs
[lead ﬁrms] give more business to fewer suppliers, and forge closer relationships with a
core strategic group that they hope to align with their own goals. Importantly, these key
suppliers are not envisioned as mere satellites orbiting a dominant but benevolent patron,
dependent and beholden.” While a lead ﬁrm in an interﬁrm partnership retains its
effective control over market and production deﬁnition (e.g., through marketing and
R&D capabilities), it cannot fulﬁll market demand without the cost-effective production
support from its strategic partners and the provision of platform-leading components or
modules by its specialized suppliers.

To cite a brief example, the world of global electronics is characterized by an increas-
ing separation between the design and manufacturing of cutting-edge electronics prod-
ucts due to immense pressures from the above-mentioned competitive dynamics (Yeung
2007). Firm-level specialization in the electronics division of labor is rendered particu-
larly effective by the strategy of interﬁrm partnership. The case of Apple Inc.’s iconic
iPhone brings together several intersecting global production networks comprising one
of the world’s leading brand-name lead ﬁrms (Apple); its manufacturing partner and the
world’s largest provider of electronics manufacturing services (Hon Hai Precision from
Taiwan); and three specialized suppliers that are the world’s leading integrated semicon-
ductor manufacturer (Samsung from South Korea), a leading fabless smartphone chip
design ﬁrm (Qualcomm from the United States), and a top semiconductor foundry
(TSMC from Taiwan). In this intersection of multiple production networks across several
segments in the ICT sector, we witness the signiﬁcance of interﬁrm partnerships in
creating the unprecedented market success of one major consumer product.

Extraﬁrm Bargaining

The role of nonﬁrm actors, such as the state, international organizations, labor groups,
consumers, and civil society organizations, has so far been assumed in this article as
generally supportive and cooperative. The existing GVC frameworks also offer little
explanatory power to these nonﬁrm actors in shaping interﬁrm governance; they are
often seen as outside the analytical parameters of industry-speciﬁc value chains. A
growing body of empirical evidence suggests, however, that they have signiﬁcant inﬂu-
ence on global production network dynamics. For example, ethical and fair trade initia-
tives in developed countries, strongly advocated by the state and civil society
organizations, are generally seen as effective in inﬂuencing sourcing strategies of certain

Vol. 91 No. 1 2015

kinds of lead ﬁrms such as major retailers and their domestic and foreign suppliers in the
agrofood and apparel industries (Freidberg 2004; Hughes, Wrigley, and Buttle 2008;
Barnett et al. 2011). In other industries, such as electronics and automobiles, these
initiatives have much less purchase in shaping how lead ﬁrms conﬁgure their global
production networks. Instead, we are witnessing the growing importance of what Büthe
and Mattli (2011) term the new global rulers through the privatization of regulation.
These nonstate global setters of standards and norms in global industries play an increas-
ingly vital role in the governance of inter and extraﬁrm relations. For example, the
inﬂuence of the credit rating agencies extends far beyond that of ﬁnancial institutions
such as banks, affecting global lead ﬁrms and their strategic partners seeking funding in
different capital markets. Private associations and consortiums in high-tech industries are
also highly crucial in setting new industrial standards and technological parameters that
profoundly inﬂuence the value activities of lead ﬁrms, their strategic partners, and
customers.

In practice, this highly diverse group of nonﬁrm actors is often driven by a large
number of possible rationalities that go beyond any simple classiﬁcation. The strategy of
extraﬁrm bargaining is critical because it provides the crucial analytical nexus for
understanding how economic processes, embodied in ﬁrms, intersect with noneconomic
issues (e.g., political reforms, social justice and security, environmental sustainability,
and so on). As such, we deﬁne the strategy as a contested two-way process of negotiation
and accommodation between ﬁrms and nonﬁrm actors in order to reach a mutually
satisfactory outcome in the creation and capture of value through global production
networks. We argue that this concept of extraﬁrm bargaining enriches GPN theory
because actor-speciﬁc interaction in these networks represents more than a set of power
relations along the interﬁrm value chains in the same industry or sector, as commonly
conceived in the GVC literature. It sheds crucial light on the institutional underpinning
of the strategic coupling of regional economies with global production networks in the
GPN 1.0 framework (Coe et al. 2004; Yeung 2009).

Firm and nonﬁrm actors pursue extraﬁrm bargaining strategies to achieve three inter-
related objectives: (1) market power, (2) proprietary rights, and (3) social and political
legitimacy. These broader objectives are over and above the cost-speciﬁc gains derived
from bargaining with state and nonstate institutions (e.g., maximizing ﬁnancial returns
through tax concessions, externalizing the costs of labor training to state agencies,
avoiding environmental costs through lower regulatory enforcement). The ﬁrst objective
stipulates that global lead ﬁrms shaped by a strong market imperative are likely to be
more interested in gaining market power from extraﬁrm bargaining relations with state
actors who, for the most part, remain the key regulators of uneven market access even in
an interconnected world economy. As Table 4 describes, the tensions confronting global
lead ﬁrms and nation-states should be understood as differentiated integration into global
production networks. For lead ﬁrms, high competitive pressures generate dual tenden-
cies, namely, to globalize operations in order to achieve greater efﬁciencies while also
localizing operations in order to ensure a certain degree of autonomy and responsiveness.
For nation-states, conditions of accelerating globalization have been associated with
far-reaching forms of institutional and functional reorganization, as “the pressures
towards certain kinds of putative supranational organization at one extreme are counter-
poised against a pressure toward greater degrees of local political autonomy at the other”
(Dicken 1994, 122). The bargaining relationships between global lead ﬁrms and domes-
tic state institutions for market access are therefore situated within these complex
global-local tensions. These intense bargaining relationships are particularly evident in
industries subject to strong state regulation such as resource extraction, automobiles,

51

G
P
N
T
H
E
O
R
Y

52

ECONOMIC GEOGRAPHY

petrochemicals, retail, telecommunications, and ﬁnance. Network outcomes in these
industries are often mediated by (geo)political imperatives (Glassman 2011; Smith 2014;
Yeung 2014).

The second motive prompting ﬁrms to adopt an extraﬁrm bargaining strategy is
related to the quest for proprietary rights in the context of technological and market
innovation. This bargaining process is prominent in industrial segments characterized
by high levels of ﬁnancial discipline and high risk of technological or market shifts
(e.g., digital media and biotechnology). In this competitive environment, domestic
ﬁrms tend to seek strong regulatory regimes and codiﬁcation of standards in order to
protect their ﬁrm-speciﬁc R&D investments and intangible assets (e.g., brand names,
patents, and trademarks). These lead ﬁrms enter into robust negotiations with relevant
domestic nonﬁrm actors such as state authorities, standards organizations, and industry
associations. As local ﬁrms acquire or develop greater technological and market capa-
bilities, they may bargain with home institutions for preferential access to resources
and ﬁscal incentives given to foreign lead ﬁrms. Over time, successful technological
and market innovations are underpinned by strong extraﬁrm bargaining between lead
ﬁrms and nonﬁrm actors in different geographic locations. The rapid growth of indus-
trial and technological capabilities in Taiwan’s ICT sector is a clear example of
extraﬁrm bargaining between global lead ﬁrms and nonﬁrm actors such as state insti-
tutions and business associations (Amsden and Chu 2003; Breznitz 2007; cf. Yeung
2009, 2014). In many other industries (e.g., agrofood and apparel), state institutions
and international organizations also seek to establish conventions, regulations, and
standards as extraﬁrm actors in governing bargaining and negotiation relations in
global production networks. As deﬁned by Ponte, Gibbon, and Vestergaard (2011, 1),
this extraﬁrm governance refers to “the shaping of the conduct of others through
network forms of organization involving a wide range of non-state actors but also
government, mainly through exchange and negotiation rather than through traditional
state-led regulation.”

Third, the noneconomic goals of ﬁrms and nonﬁrm actors can be a powerful impera-
tive for pursuing extraﬁrm bargaining strategies. Even though all capitalist ﬁrms seek
to create and capture value through their proﬁt-oriented activity, not all of them view
proﬁt making as their only raison d’être. In fact, a number of today’s global lead ﬁrms
have social and political goals embedded in their corporate mantra. One speciﬁc way
for these ﬁrms to attain these noneconomic goals is to gain broad social and political
legitimacy through developing sustainable extraﬁrm relations with nonﬁrm actors. This
strategy is particularly relevant to ﬁrms with multinational operations. Confronted with
a much more diverse global economy constituted by different political-economic
systems and sociocultural practices, many transnational corporations realize that their
economic goals cannot be achieved unless they are legitimized as a responsible actor in
different markets and territories. While private and voluntary in nature, the Roundtable
on Sustainable Palm Oil, for instance, is an international organization and certiﬁcation
scheme established through the participation of multiple stakeholders such as ﬁrms,
advocacy groups, and local communities. Under certain circumstances, notably
where there is active local participation and a strong collective sense of ownership,
actors in local communities in the Global South can beneﬁt from these governance
initiatives in the sense that their value activities are not driven entirely by the capitalist
imperative of global lead ﬁrms located elsewhere. In short, the extraﬁrm bargaining
relations between ﬁrms and state actors are signiﬁcantly dependent on ﬁrm-speciﬁc
interests and pressures as well as the institutional capacity and priorities of these state
actors.

Vol. 91 No. 1 2015

Conclusion

As an initial contribution toward a more dynamic theory of global production net-
works, this article has theorized three critical competitive dynamics and their risk
environment, and connected their structural properties with actor-speciﬁc strategies to
arrive at the causal mechanisms of global production network formation and operation.
Reframing and going beyond the conventional wisdoms of GVC frameworks and the
disparate conceptual categories in GPN 1.0, our conceptualization of global production
networks has explained why and how ﬁrms adopt diverse strategies to cope with different
sets of competitive dynamics and risk environments. By mapping these structural
dynamics and risks onto four actor-level strategic choices, we have demonstrated that not
only are there different possible trajectories to competitive success within and across
global industries, but also this multiplicity in strategic choices and network conﬁgura-
tions deﬁes the parsimonious typologies commonly found in the GVC literature. A more
dynamic GPN theory not only accounts for the origins of these networks but also
speciﬁes their changing conﬁgurations over time. While for analytical purposes we have
necessarily theorized these four strategies in isolation, the reality for many ﬁrms in global
production networks is that they are usually actively combining two or more such
strategies across their various operations and activities.

At face value, this theoretical mapping may appear to be generic and categorical.
However, we explicitly conceptualize the importance of variability in understanding how
ﬁrms, originating from different home economies and endowed with different ownership
structures and corporate cultures, might respond differently to these competitive dynam-
ics and risks, thereby pursuing contrasting ﬁrm-speciﬁc strategies in conﬁguring their
global production networks. The variable strategic choices made by intentional actors
offer strong support for our nuanced analysis of a highly complex and interdependent
global economy characterized by a diverse range of ﬁrms and nonﬁrm actors operating
at different geographic scales, from the global to the local. They shed critical analytical
light on the much-discussed governance modes in global value chains and global pro-
duction networks. Linking actors, dynamics, strategies, and the organizational modes of
global production networks into one coherent explanation, our theoretical reframing
helps to identify the explanatory mechanisms to inform future studies of the effects of
these networks on the ultimate dependent variable—development outcomes (UNCTAD
2013). It also provides, we hope, an effective response to Sunley’s (2008, 20) challenge
that network thinking in economic geography should “develop theory that is more
problem driven and focused on identifying causal economic mechanisms and processes.”
Looking forward, we envisage some critical questions for a research agenda under the
general rubric of GPN 2.0. In particular, more theoretical work is needed to explain how
and why the diverse actors and varied strategies proﬁled above shape developmental
outcomes at different geographic scales. While the notion of strategic coupling in GPN
1.0 (after Coe et al. 2004) has provided a useful conceptual tool linking industrial
upgrading and territorial transformations in regional and national economies with the
dynamic conﬁgurations of global production networks, these (de/re)coupling processes
can have profound and yet contrasting implications for their developmental trajectories.
What our article has provided for is a set of causal mechanisms that can explain the
speciﬁcities in coupling, decoupling, and recoupling. The peculiar combination of terri-
torial outcomes arising from these processes remains an empirical question (Neilson and
Pritchard 2009; Bair and Werner 2011; MacKinnon 2012; Bair et al. 2013; Horner 2013).
For example, how might we explain the impact of intraﬁrm coordination on regional
development? There are clearly sectoral- and ﬁrm-speciﬁc differences. In sectoral terms,

53

G
P
N
T
H
E
O
R
Y

ECONOMIC GEOGRAPHY

such a strategy for conﬁguring global production networks might be less positive for
territorial development in the global retail industry compared to regional economies
hosting lead ﬁrms in the global high-tech industries. This sectoral approach to territorial
development, however, also needs to be cognizant of substantial ﬁrm-speciﬁc differences
in the world of global production. Coupling processes and their development outcomes
can be much differentiated by types of ﬁrm (origin, ownership, capabilities, and
resources) and their pursuit of intraﬁrm coordination mechanisms. These differences are
likely to be even more accentuated in the case of interﬁrm control or partnership
strategies (Yeung 2009; Coe and Hess 2011). In short, our efforts in this theory article
can provide the causal mechanisms to bridge such an analytical impasse in the coupling/
decoupling literature in GPN-GVC studies. It initiates a more dynamic approach to
theorizing global production networks as a dominant organizational platform through
which actors in different regional and national economies compete and cooperate for a
greater share of value capture in global production.

54

s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
R

2204.

80.

Press.

Abernathy, F. H., Dunlop, J. T., Hammond, J. H., and Weil, D. 1999. A stitch in time: Lean
retailing and the transformation of manufacturing—Lessons from the apparel and textile
industry. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Amsden, A. H., and Chu, W. 2003. Beyond late development: Taiwan’s upgrading policies.

Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Antràs, P., and Chor, D. 2013. Organizing the global value chain. Econometrica 81:2127–

Antràs, P., and Helpman, E. 2004. Global sourcing. Journal of Political Economy 112:552–

Appelbaum, R. P. 2008. Giant transnational contractors in East Asia: Emergent trends

in global supply chains. Competition and Change 12:69–87.

Arndt, S. W. and Kierzkowski, H., eds. 2001. Fragmentation: New production patterns in

the world economy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Bair, J. 2008. Analysing global economic organization: embedded networks and global

chains compared. Economy and Society 37:339–64.

——, ed. 2009. Frontiers of commodity chain research, Stanford, CA: Stanford University

Bair, J., and Gerefﬁ, G. 2001. Local clusters in global chains: the causes and conse-
quences of export dynamism in Torreon’s blue jeans industry. World Development
29:1885–1903.

Bair, J., and Werner, M. 2011. Commodity chains and the uneven geographies of global

capitalism: A disarticulations perspective. Environment and Planning A 43:988–997.

Bair, J., Berndt, C., and Werner, M., eds. 2013. Theme issue: Critical perspectives on

commodity chain studies, Environment and Planning A 45:2544–2699.

Barnett, C., Cloke, P., Clarke, N., and Malpass, A. 2011. Globalizing responsibility: The

political rationalities of ethical consumption. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.

Barney, J. B. 2001. Resource-based theories of competitive advantage: A ten-year

retrospective on the resource-based view. Journal of Management 27:643–50.

Berndt, C., and Boeckler, M. 2009. Geographies of circulation and exchange: Con-

structions of markets. Progress in Human Geography 33:535–51.

Breznitz, D. 2007. Innovation and the state: Political choice and strategies for growth in Israel,

Taiwan, and Ireland. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Büthe, T., and Mattli, W. 2011. The new global rulers: The privatization of regulation in the

world economy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Caliskan, K., and Callon, M. 2010. Economization, part 2: A research programme for

the study of markets. Economy and Society 38:369–98.

Vol. 91 No. 1 2015

Cattaneo, O., Gerefﬁ, G., and Staritz, C. 2010. Global value chains in a postcrisis world:
Resilience, consolidation, and shifting end markets. In Global value chains in a postcrisis world: A
development perspective, ed. O. Cattaneo, G. Gerefﬁ, and C. Staritz, 3–20. Washington, DC:
World Bank.

Christopherson, S. 2007. Barriers to “US style” lean retailing: The case of Wal-Mart’s failure in

Germany. Journal of Economic Geography 7:451–70.

Coe, N. M. 2009. Global production networks.

In The international encyclopedia of human

geography, ed. R. Kitchin and N. Thrift, vol. 4, 556–62. Oxford: Elsevier.

——. 2012. Geographies of production II: A global production networks A-Z. Progress in Human

Geography 36:389–402.

Coe, N. M. and Hess, M. 2011. Local and regional development: A global production network
approach. In Handbook of local and regional development, ed. A. Pike, A. Rodríguez-Pose, and J.
Tomaney, 128–38. London: Routledge.

Coe, N. M., Dicken, P., and Hess, M. 2008a. Global production networks: Realizing the potential.

Journal of Economic Geography 8:271–95.

Coe, N. M., Hess, M., and Dicken, P., eds. 2008b. Theme issue: Global production networks:

Debates and challenges. Journal of Economic Geography 8:267–440.

Coe, N. M., Hess, M., Yeung, H. W. C., Dicken, P., and Henderson, J. 2004. “Globalizing” regional
development: A global production networks perspective. Transactions of the Institute of British
Geographers 29:468–84.

Coe, N. M., and Lee, Y. 2006. The strategic localization of transnational retailers: The case of

Samsung-Tesco in South Korea, Economic Geography 82:61–88.

——. 2013. “We’ve learnt how to be local”: The deepening territorial embeddedness of

Samsung–Tesco in South Korea. Journal of Economic Geography 13:327–56.

Coe, N. M., and Yeung, H. W. C. Forthcoming. Global production networks: Theorizing economic

development in an interconnected world. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Davis, G. F. 2009. Managed by the markets: How ﬁnance reshaped America. New York: Oxford

University Press.

Geography 70:101–28.

Dicken, P. 1994. Global-local tensions: Firms and states in the global space-economy. Economic

——. 2004. Geographers and “globalization”: (Yet) another missed boat? Transactions of the

Institute of British Geographers 29:5–26.

——. 2011. Global shift: Mapping the changing contours of the world economy. 6th ed. London: Sage.
Dicken, P., Kelly, P., Olds, K., and Yeung, H. W. C. 2001. Chains and networks, territories and
scales: Towards an analytical framework for the global economy, Global Networks 1:89–112.
Dussel Peters, E. 2008. GCCs and development: A conceptual and empirical review. Competition

and Change 12:11–27.

Organization.

Elms, D. K., and Low, P., eds. 2013. Global Value chains in a changing world. Geneva: World Trade

Fligstein, N. 2001. The architecture of markets: An economic sociology of twenty-ﬁrst-century capitalist

societies. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Freidberg, S. 2004. French beans and food scares: Culture and commerce in an anxious age. New

York: Oxford University Press.

Cambridge University Press.

Fröbel, F., Heinrichs, J., and Kreye, O. 1980. The new international division of labour. Cambridge:

Gattorna,

J. 2013. The inﬂuence of customer buying behaviour on product ﬂow patterns
between trading countries, and the implications for regulatory policy. In Global Value Chains in
a Changing World, ed. D. K. Elms and P. Low, 221–44. Geneva: World Trade Organization.
Gerefﬁ, Gary. 1994. The organization of buyer-driven global commodity chains: How U.S.
retailers shape overseas production networks. In Commodity chains and global capitalism, ed. G.
Gerefﬁ and M. Korzeniewicz, 95–122. Westport, CT: Praeger.

——. 2005. The global economy: Organization, governance, and development. In The handbook
of economic sociology, ed. N. J. Smelser and R. Swedberg, 2nd ed., 160–82. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.

55

G
P
N
T
H
E
O
R
Y

ECONOMIC GEOGRAPHY

——. 2014. Global value chains in a post-Washington consensus world: Shifting governance
structures, trade patterns and development prospects. Review of International Political Economy
21:9–37.

Gerefﬁ, G., Humphrey, J., and Sturgeon, T. 2005. The governance of global value chains. Review

of International Political Economy 12:78–104.

Gerefﬁ, G., and Korzeniewicz, M., eds. 1994. Commodity chains and global capitalism. Westport,

Gibbon, P. 2001. Upgrading primary production: A global commodity chain approach. World

CT: Praeger.

Development 29:345–363.

——. 2002. At the cutting edge? Financialisation and UK clothing retailers’ sourcing patterns and

practices. Competition and Change 6:289–308.

Gibbon, P., and Ponte, S. 2005. Trading down: Africa, value chains, and the global economy.

Philadelphia: Temple University Press.

Glassman, J. 2011. The geo-political economy of global production networks. Geography Compass

5:154–64.

Grossman, G., and Rossi-Hansberg, E. 2008. Trading tasks: A simple theory of offshoring.

American Economic Review 98:1978–97.

56

Hamilton, G. G., Petrovic, M., and Senauer, B., eds. 2011. The Market makers: How retailers are

reshaping the global economy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Henderson, J., Dicken, P., Hess, M., Coe, N. M., and Yeung, H. W. C. 2002. Global production
networks and the analysis of economic development. Review of International Political Economy
9:436–64.

Hess, M., and Yeung, H. W. C. 2006a. Whither global production networks in economic

geography? Past, present and future. Environment and Planning A 38:1193–1204.

——, eds. 2006b. Theme issue: Global production networks. Environment and Planning A

38:1193–1305.

Horner, R. 2013. Strategic decoupling, recoupling and global production networks:

India’s

pharmaceutical industry. Journal of Economic Geography doi: 10.1093/jeg/lbt022.

Hudson, R. 2008. Cultural political economy meets global production networks: A productive

meeting? Journal of Economic Geography 8:421–40.

Hughes, A., Wrigley, N., and Buttle, M. 2008. Global production networks, ethical campaigning,
Journal of Economic Geography 8:345–

and the embeddedness of responsible governance.
68.

Humphrey, J. 1995. Industrial reorganization in developing countries: From models to trajecto-

ries. World Development 23:149–62.

Humphrey, J., and Schmitz, H. 2002. How does insertion in global value chains affect upgrading

in industrial clusters? Regional Studies 36:1017–27.

Kaplinsky, R., and Farooki, M. 2011. What are the implications for global value chains when the
market shifts from the North to the South? International Journal of Technological Learning,
Innovation and Development 4:13–38.

Kaplinsky, R., and Morris, M. 2001. A handbook for value chain research, Prepared for the IDRC.
Available online: http://asiandrivers.open.ac.uk/documents/Value_chain_Handbook_RKMM
_Nov_2001.pdf.

Krippner, G. R. 2011. Capitalizing on crisis: The political origins of the rise of ﬁnance. Cambridge, MA:

Harvard University Press.

Lane, C., and Probert, J. 2009. National capitalisms, global production networks: Fashioning the value

chain in the UK, US, and Germany. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Lee, H. L., Padmanabhan, V., and Whang, S. 1997. Information distortion in a supply chain: The

bullwhip effect. Management Science 43:546–58.

Liu, W., and Dicken, P. 2006. Transnational corporations and “obligated embeddedness”:
Foreign direct investment in China’s automobile industry. Environment and Planning A 38:1229–
47.

MacKinnon, D. 2012. Beyond strategic coupling: Reassessing the ﬁrm-region nexus in global

production networks. Journal of Economic Geography 12:227–45.

Vol. 91 No. 1 2015

Mathews, J. A. 2006. Strategizing, disequilibrium and proﬁt. Stanford, CA: Stanford University

Press.

Milberg, W. 2008. Shifting sources and uses of proﬁts: Sustaining US ﬁnancialization with global

value chains. Economy and Society 37:420–51.

Milberg, W., and Winkler, D. 2013. Outsourcing economics: Global value chains in capitalist devel-

opment. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Neilson, J., and Pritchard, B. 2009. Value chain struggles: Institutions and governance in the plantation

districts of south India, Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.

Neilson, J., Pritchard, B., and Yeung, H. W. C. 2014. Special issue: Global value chains, global
production networks and the role of the state. Review of International Political Economy
21:1–274.

OECD-WTO-UNCTAD. 2013. Implications of global value chains for trade, investment, development
and jobs/. Report Prepared for the G-20 Leaders Summit, September. Available online:
http://unctad.org/en/PublicationsLibrary/unctad_oecd_wto_2013d1_en.pdf.

Parrilli, M. D., Nadvi, K., and Yeung, H. W. C. 2013. Local and regional development in global
value chains, production networks and innovation networks: A comparative review and the
challenges for future research. European Planning Studies 21:967–88.

Ponte, S., Gibbon, P., and Vestergaard, J. 2011. Governing through standards: An introduction.
In Governing Through standards: origins, drivers and limitations, ed. S. Ponte, P. Gibbon, and J.
Vestergaard, 1–24. Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan.

Ponte, S., and Sturgeon, T. 2014. Explaining governance in global value chains: A modular

theory-building effort. Review of International Political Economy 21:195–223.

Posthuma, A., and Nathan, D. 2011. Labour in global production networks in India. Oxford: Oxford

University Press.

Smith, A. 2014. The state,

institutional

frameworks and the dynamics of capital

in global

production networks. Progress in Human Geography doi: 10.1177/0309132513518292.

Smith, Adrian, Rainnie, Al, Dunford, Mick, Hardy, Jane, Hudson, Ray and Sadler, David. 2002.
Networks of value, commodities and regions: reworking divisions of labour in macro-regional
economies. Progress in Human Geography 26:41–63.

Staritz, C., Gerefﬁ, G., and Cattaneo, O., eds. 2011. Special issue: Shifting end markets and
Journal of Technological Learning,

International

upgrading prospects in global value chains.
Innovation and Development 4:1–259.

Starosta, G. 2010. Global commodity chains and the Marxian law of value. Antipode 42:433–65.
Sturgeon, T. J.. 2002. Modular production networks: A new American model of industrial

organization. Industrial and Corporate Change 11:451–96.

——. 2009. From commodity chains to value chains: interdisciplinary theory building in an age
of globalization. In Frontiers of commodity chains research, ed. J. Bair, 110–35. Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.

Sturgeon, T., Humphrey, J., and Gerefﬁ, G. 2011. Making the global supply base. In The market
makers: How retailers are reshaping the global economy, ed. G. G. Hamilton, M. Petrovic, and B.
Senauer, 231–54. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Sturgeon, T. J., and Kawagami, M. 2011. Global value chains in the electronics industry: Char-
acteristics, crisis, and upgrading opportunities for ﬁrms from developing countries. Interna-
tional Journal of Technological Learning, Innovation and Development 4:120–49.

Sturgeon, T. J., Van Biesebroeck, J., and Gerefﬁ, G. 2008. Value chains, networks and clusters:

Reframing the global automobile industry. Journal of Economic Geography 8:297–321.

Sunley, P. 2008. Relational economic geography: A partial understanding or a new paradigm?

Teece, D. J. 2009. Dynamic capabilities and strategic management: Organizing for innovation and

UNCTAD. 2013. World investment report 2013: Global value chains:

Investment and trade for

Economic Geography 84:1–26.

growth. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

development. New York: United Nations.

Van Biesebroeck, J., and Sturgeon, T. J. 2010. Effects of the 2008–09 crisis on the automotive
industry in developing countries: A global value chain perspective. In Global value chains in a

57

G
P
N
T
H
E
O
R
Y

ECONOMIC GEOGRAPHY

postcrisis world: A development perspective, ed. O. Cattaneo, G. Gerefﬁ, and C. Staritz, 245–302.
Washington, DC: World Bank.

Whitford, J. 2005. The new old economy: Networks, institutions, and the organizational transformation

of American manufacturing. Oxford University Press: Oxford.

Yang, C. 2014. Market rebalancing of global production networks in the Post-Washington
Consensus globalizing era: Transformation of export-oriented development in China. Review
of International Political Economy 21:130–56.

Yeung, H. W. C. 1994. Critical reviews of geographical perspectives on business organisations
and the organisation of production: towards a network approach. Progress in Human Geogra-
phy 18:460–90.

——. 2005. Rethinking relational economic geography. Transactions of the Institute of British

Geographers 30:37–51.

Asia Paciﬁc Viewpoint 48:1–25.

——. 2007. From followers to market leaders: Asian electronics ﬁrms in the global economy.

——. 2009. Regional development and the competitive dynamics of global production networks:

An East Asian perspective. Regional Studies 43:325–51.

58

——. 2014. Governing the market in a globalizing era: Developmental states, global production
International Political Economy

networks, and inter-ﬁrm dynamics in East Asia, Review of
21:70–101.

Yeung, H. W. C., and Lin, G. C. S. 2003. Theorizing economic geographies of Asia. Economic

Geography 79:107–28.

